822acssdChemical ReviewsChem RevPMC1132800411328004113280043905260610.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00629Shining New
Light on Biological Systems: Luminescent
Transition Metal Complexes for Bioimaging and Biosensing Applications
LeeLawrence
Cho-Cheung LoKenneth Kam-Wing †Department
of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong, P. R. China‡Laboratory
for Synthetic Chemistry and Chemical Biology Limited, Units 1503−1511, 15/F, Building 17W, Hong Kong Science Park, New
Territories, Hong Kong, P. R. China§State
Key Laboratory of Terahertz and Millimeter Waves, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong, P. R. China*Tel: (852) 3442 7231. Fax: (852) 3442 0522. E-mail: bhkenlo@cityu.edu.hk.
25720241241588258825–90141782024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Luminescence imaging is a powerful and versatile technique
for
investigating cell physiology and pathology in living systems, making
significant contributions to life science research and clinical diagnosis.
In recent years, luminescent transition metal complexes have gained
significant attention for diagnostic and therapeutic applications
due to their unique photophysical and photochemical properties. In
this Review, we provide a comprehensive overview of the recent development
of luminescent transition metal complexes for bioimaging and biosensing
applications, with a focus on transition metal centers with a d6, d8, and d10 electronic configuration.
We elucidate the structure–property relationships of luminescent
transition metal complexes, exploring how their structural characteristics
can be manipulated to control their biological behavior such as cellular
uptake, localization, biocompatibility, pharmacokinetics, and biodistribution.
Furthermore, we introduce the various design strategies that leverage
the interesting photophysical properties of luminescent transition
metal complexes for a wide variety of biological applications, including
autofluorescence-free imaging, multimodal imaging, organelle imaging,
biological sensing, microenvironment monitoring, bioorthogonal labeling,
bacterial imaging, and cell viability assessment. Finally, we provide
insights into the challenges and perspectives of luminescent transition
metal complexes for bioimaging and biosensing applications, as well
as their use in disease diagnosis and treatment evaluation.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Sep 5; Accepted 2024 Apr 11; Revised 2024 Apr 9; Collection date 2024 Aug 14.

1.

## Introduction
Luminescence imaging is
a powerful tool for studying biological
species and their biochemical processes at the subcellular level with
high spatial and temporal resolution. − It has provided valuable insights into the roles and functions of
biomolecules in various physiological and pathological processes.
The success of this imaging technique is attributed to the advances
in imaging instrumentation and the rapid development of fluorescent
probes. Recent breakthroughs in super-resolution microscopy techniques such as structured illumination microscopy (SIM), stimulated emission depletion (STED) microscopy, and stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy
(STORM), as well as the development of
small-molecule fluorescent probes with high brightness and photostability, have allowed the visualization of biomolecules
and cellular structures at the nanometer scale. This has enabled the interrogation of their spatial organization
and temporal dynamics in cells with unprecedented resolution, revolutionizing
our understanding of the biological systems. Further advancements
in luminescence imaging are focused on noninvasive in vivo imaging in small animals with subcellular resolution, which is instrumental
to life science research, clinical diagnosis, and drug development.
To achieve this goal, new designs have been introduced for both imaging
instrumentation and reagents to make them compatible with photoexcitation
using near-infrared (NIR) light, which effectively reduces cell autofluorescence
background and facilitates deeper penetration into biological tissues.
Additionally, NIR light excitation significantly minimizes photobleaching
of the probes and photodamage to biological samples, allowing for
long-term and real-time imaging. Two-photon microscopy that utilizes
NIR light as the excitation source and
fluorescent probes with large two-photon absorption (TPA) cross-sections has enabled cellular imaging in vivo with high contrast and resolution at increased tissue depths. Furthermore,
the development of fluorescent probes with absorption and emission
profiles in the NIR region opens up exciting opportunities for disease
diagnosis and treatment evaluation in preclinical and clinical settings. − 
Over the past decade, there has been a rapidly emerging interest
in luminescent transition metal complexes for diagnostic and therapeutic
applications. − In particular, luminescent complexes of transition metals such as
rhenium, ruthenium, osmium, iridium, platinum, and gold have received
the most significant attention. These heavy metal atoms induce significant
spin–orbit coupling (SOC) and facilitate intersystem crossing
(ISC) to access the triplet excited states, giving rise to their intriguing
photophysical and photochemical properties. Typically, these complexes
display strong phosphorescence in solution at room temperature with
lifetimes in the submicrosecond to microsecond time regime, which
are much longer than those of organic fluorophores that are on the
nanosecond timescale. The long emission lifetimes allow the use of
time-resolved techniques such as phosphorescence lifetime imaging
microscopy (PLIM) and time-gated luminescence microscopy (TGLM) to
reduce interference from the short-lived cellular autofluorescence,
enabling background-free imaging in living cells and animals. The emission of these complexes is also characterized
by large Stokes’ shifts, which can avoid self-quenching and
reduced brightness at high local concentrations, a problem that is
often encountered with organic fluorophores, and offer the possibilities
for multiplex imaging. Additionally, the metal–ligand coordination
leads to the formation of various excited states with charge-transfer
(CT) nature. These allow the complexes to exhibit enhanced nonlinear
optical (NLO) properties compared to organic chromophores, facilitating
their utilization in multiphoton luminescence imaging. Furthermore, many transition metal complexes
show high photostability, which enables their continuous exposure
to irradiation, promoting their applications in long-term and real-time
imaging in living systems. The long-lived triplet excited states of
these complexes also favor the photosensitization of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) such as singlet oxygen (1O2),
which has been exploited to induce cell death by causing oxidative
damage to adjacent biomolecules and subcellular organelles. This renders
them promising photosensitizers for photodynamic therapy (PDT), representing
a paradigm shift from diagnostics to therapeutics. − A prominent
example is TLD1433, a ruthenium(II)-based PDT agent undergoing phase
II clinical trials (NCT03945162) for treating nonmuscle invasive bladder
cancer. 
In this Review, we provide
a comprehensive overview of the recent
development in luminescent transition metal complexes for bioimaging
and biosensing applications. The scope of this Review is confined
to the triplet emitters derived from transition metal complexes with
a d6, d8, and d10 electronic configuration
due to their interesting photophysical and photochemical behavior.
We first provide a brief introduction to the photophysics and photochemistry
of luminescent transition metal complexes. We then describe the designs
of luminescent transition metal complexes with a d6 (rhenium(I),
ruthenium(II), osmium(II), rhodium(III), and iridium(III)), d8 (rhodium(I), platinum(II), and gold(III)), and d10 (copper(I) and gold(I)) electronic configuration for biological
imaging. We also discuss the structure–property relationships
of these complexes, with an emphasis on how the lipophilicity, formal
charge, and molecular size of the complexes affect their cellular
uptake and localization properties. We then introduce how the cellular
uptake, localization, biocompatibility, pharmacokinetics, and biodistribution
of transition metal complexes can be manipulated through conjugation
to biomolecules, polymers, and nanomaterials. Furthermore, we summarize
the various strategies used in the design of luminescent transition
metal complexes for a range of applications, including autofluorescence-free
imaging, multimodal imaging, organelle imaging, biological sensing,
microenvironment monitoring, bioorthogonal labeling, bacterial imaging,
and cell viability assessment. Finally, we discuss the current challenges
and future outlook of luminescent transition metal complexes as bioimaging
reagents for cell biology and chemical biology research, as well as
their use in disease diagnosis and treatment evaluation.

2.

## Photophysics and Photochemistry of Luminescent
Transition Metal Complexes
The photophysics and photochemistry
of transition metal complexes
have been an important area of research for decades. The diverse electronic
configurations, oxidation states, and coordination numbers of transition
metals and the various structural, electronic, and coordinating properties
of ligands allow the complexes to establish manifold excited states
such as metal-to-ligand charge-transfer (MLCT), ligand-to-metal charge-transfer
(LMCT), ligand-to-ligand charge-transfer (LLCT), intraligand (IL),
and intraligand charge-transfer (ILCT) states, as well as excited
states associated with metal–metal interactions such as metal–metal-to-ligand
charge-transfer (MMLCT) states, giving rise to their rich photophysical
and photochemical properties. Of particular
interest are the luminescent complexes of transition metals such as
rhenium, ruthenium, osmium, rhodium, iridium, platinum, and gold.
Compared to 3d transition metals, these 4d and 5d transition metals
typically induce a larger ligand field splitting and shift the nonradiative
metal-centered (MC) excited states to higher energies. The MC states
can be further destabilized through the strategic incorporation of
strong σ-donor and/or π-acceptor ligands to favor the
population of the low-lying CT and IL states, facilitating the formation
of luminescent and photostable complexes. Additionally, the presence
of a heavy metal center with a large SOC constant in these complexes
enables efficient ISC from the singlet excited states to the triplet
excited states upon photoexcitation ( ). The spin-forbidden transition between
the lowest triplet excited state (T1) and the singlet ground
state (S0) results in phosphorescence. Modulation of the
energy levels of the excited states allows efficient thermal upconversion
of excitons from T1 to a higher-lying triplet excited state
(T2) via spin-allowed reverse internal conversion (RIC)
or to the lowest singlet excited state (S1) via spin-forbidden
reverse intersystem crossing (RISC), realizing thermally stimulated
delayed phosphorescence (TSDP) , and thermally activated
delayed fluorescence (TADF), − respectively. Furthermore, the long-lived triplet excited states
of transition metal complexes enable them to function as catalysts
in various photochemical reactions, for example, the photosensitization
of 1O2. Through a rational molecular design
to manipulate their excited-state properties, luminescent transition
metal complexes have been exploited for a wide variety of light-driven
applications including organic light-emitting diodes, − light-emitting electrochemical cells, dye-sensitized solar cells, photoredox
catalysis, − chemosensing, bioimaging, − and PDT. − 
 
3.

## Luminescent Transition Metal Complexes for Bioimaging
The development of luminescent transition metal complexes as cellular
probes and bioimaging reagents has focused on second- and third-row
transition metals with a d6, d8, and d10 electronic configuration. − The interest stems from the fact
that in d6 and d8 metal complexes, the nonemissive 3MC excited states can be easily shifted to higher energy levels
than the emissive 3CT and 3IL excited states,
while in d10 metal complexes, these nonemissive states
are absent due to the complete filling of the d orbitals, providing
a facile access to luminescent and photostable complexes for imaging
applications.
3.1.

## d6 Transition Metal Complexes
Since the initial investigation on the classical ruthenium(II)
complex [Ru(bpy)3]2+ (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine), , extensive research has been conducted to study the photophysical
and photochemical properties of d6 transition metal complexes
such as rhenium(I), ruthenium(II), osmium(II), rhodium(III), and iridium(III)
complexes. The coordination of these heavy metal ions with strong
field ligands leads to the formation of low-spin octahedral complexes
characterized by low rates of ligand dissociation, rendering them
attractive luminophores for bioimaging applications.
3.1.1.

## Rhenium(I) Complexes
Among different
types of rhenium(I) complexes, rhenium(I) tricarbonyl diimine complexes
[Re(N∧N)(CO)3(L)]n (L = anionic or neutral monodentate ligand; n = 0 or +1) are the best studied and are known for their strong emission
in fluid solution. The emission primarily
originates from a 3MLCT emissive state, in which the lowest
π* orbital is localized on the diimine ligand. These complexes
have attracted significant interest as bioimaging reagents, as modulating
the functionalization of the monodentate ligand allows for tailored
cellular targeting and localization while retaining their favorable
photophysical behavior. − 
Coogan and co-workers have
developed a series of luminescent rhenium(I) complexes (1) ( ) as imaging
reagents for various biological models including mammalian cells (e.g., human breast adenocarcinoma MCF-7 cells) and microorganisms
(e.g., the diplomonad fish parasite (Spironucleus
vortens (S. vortens)) and yeasts (Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces
pombe (S. pombe))). − As revealed
by laser-scanning confocal microscopy (LSCM), the cationic and lipophilic
complexes 1a–1g display efficient
cellular uptake and high affinities for hydrophobic organelles in
the cytoplasm such as the mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum (ER),
and Golgi apparatus. In contrast, the anionic complexes 1h–1j either localize in the exterior membrane
(1h and 1i) or exhibit negligible uptake
(1j). These findings indicate that the positive charge
of cationic complexes facilitates their interaction with the negatively
charged cell membrane, resulting in their enhanced cellular uptake
compared to neutral or anionic complexes. Similar subcellular distribution
has been observed for related rhenium(I) dipyrido[3,2-a:2′,3′-c]phenazine
(dppz) complexes (2). Wilson
and co-workers have examined the influence of the axial ligand on
the photophysical and biological properties of rhenium(I) complexes
coordinated with different monodentate nitrogen-donor ligands (3). While the axial ligand has
minimal impact on the photophysical behavior of these complexes, it
plays a significant role in their cellular uptake efficiencies. Among
these complexes, only the pyridine complex 3d is efficiently
taken up by live human cervical adenocarcinoma HeLa cells, suggesting
that the modification of the axial ligand holds promise for biological
applications of these complexes. Lo and co-workers have incorporated
an isothiocyanate moiety and a perfluoroalkyl pendant into the pyridine
ligand of rhenium(I) complexes to afford bifunctional reagents (4) for bioconjugation and cellular imaging. , These amine-reactive complexes have been applied to label biomolecules
such as bovine serum albumin (BSA) and glutathione (GSH) to prepare
luminescent bioconjugates. The perfluoroalkyl unit enables the facile
isolation of the resultant bioconjugates with fluorous solid-phase
extraction. Studies on the cellular uptake and intracellular localization
of the thiourea products in HeLa cells show that the complexes specifically
accumulate in the mitochondria due to their cationic charge and high
lipophilicity.
 Rajendran, Rajagopal, and co-workers have investigated
the biological
activity of rhenium(I) complexes appended with an alkyl chain. Among the complexes studied, complex 5 bearing long alkyl chains on both the monodentate and bidentate
ligands ( ) shows
the highest deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) affinity and cytotoxicity
toward MCF-7 cells, demonstrating that the hydrophobic alkyl chains
promote the cellular internalization of the complex and its interaction
with DNA, resulting in its high cytotoxic activity. Hallett, Dervisi,
Fallis, and co-workers have examined the uptake of rhenium(I) complexes
coordinated with a substituted imidazole or thiazole ligand (6) in S. vortens and S. pombe. The long alkyl chain on the imidazole
ligand of complexes 6b–6e assists
in their internalization across the plasma membrane via passive diffusion.
However, the cytotoxicity of the complexes also increases with the
length of the alkyl chain. Furthermore, the localization of these
complexes in S. vortens varies from the nucleus (6b) to the cell wall (6d) depending on their
lipophilicity. In contrast, complexes 6g–6i display efficient uptake with negligible cytotoxicity.
Carreño, Fuentes, and co-workers have also explored the use
of luminescent rhenium(I) complexes (7) as bioimaging
reagents for walled cells such as yeasts and bacteria. Notably, the cellular internalization of the
cationic complex 7f coordinated with an ancillary Schiff
base ligand is more efficient than its charge-neutral counterpart 7e. The strong colocalization with the nucleus stain 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) shows that complex 7f is preferentially enriched
in the cell nucleus. These findings illustrate that both the formal
charge and lipophilicity play crucial roles in the cellular uptake
and localization properties of transition metal complexes.
 Neutral rhenium(I) complexes such as [Re(N∧N)(CO)3(L)] (L = Cl or Br) have received
less attention compared
to their cationic counterparts due to their relatively low emission
quantum yields and short emission lifetimes. Rigby, Massi, and co-workers
have examined the photophysical and biological behavior of three neutral
rhenium(I) complexes coordinated with a thioalkyl-functionalized 1,10-phenanthroline
(phen) ligand (8) ( ). Notably, the tetrazolato
complex 8c exhibits more intense and longer-lived emission
as well as enhanced cellular uptake compared to the chloro complexes 8a and 8b. However, prolonged irradiation of
complex 8c leads to increased cytotoxicity due to the
generation of cytotoxic 1O2, resulting in extensive
membrane blebbing. The cellular behavior of rhenium(I) tetrazolato
complexes with different substituents attached to the phenyl ring
in conjugation to the tetrazole ligand (9) has also been
investigated. As revealed by flow cytometry
and LSCM, complex 9a shows a low degree of cellular internalization
and punctate staining in live murine macrophage RAW264.7 cells, whereas
complexes 9b–9d are efficiently taken
up by the cells and diffusely distributed in the cytoplasm, indicating
that the cellular uptake and localization properties of these complexes
are sensitive to the nature and position of the substituents on the
5-phenyltetrazolato ligand. Czerwieniec, Kowalski,
and co-workers have developed three neutral rhenium(I) carboxylato
complexes (10) with different emission properties as
cellular imaging reagents. Complexes 10a and 10b are strongly emissive in solution,
while complex 10c is nonluminescent due to the presence
of a ferrocene (Fc) moiety that quenches the emission. However, intense
intracellular emission has been detected in the mitochondria of live
HeLa cells for all three complexes. This observation suggests that
the ancillary carboxylate ligand dissociates from the complexes inside
cells, producing the cationic [Re(phen)(CO)3]+ species that reacts with cellular matrix molecules to yield luminescent
products targeting the mitochondria. Fernández-Moreira and
Sastre-Martín have utilized a ditopic mercaptopyridine
ligand to prepare luminescent rhenium(I) complexes (11) for cellular imaging. The neutral
complex 11b predominantly resides in the perinuclear
region of live human lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells, which appears
to be the mitochondria. Kowalski, Czerwieniec, and co-workers have
conjugated a rhenium(I) complex with a chromone derivative using a
strong σ-donor alkynyl ligand as a linker. The resulting neutral complex (12) efficiently
penetrates into mouse myoblast C2C12 cells and localizes in the perinuclear
region with negligible nuclear uptake. Additionally, the complex is
highly resistant to photobleaching in cells under continuous intense
irradiation (405 nm, 0.8 W cm–2, 30 min), highlighting
its applicability in long-term cellular imaging.
 Coogan, Pope, and co-workers have developed a
series of binuclear
rhenium(I) complexes (13) ( ) as cellular imaging reagents. These complexes are efficiently internalized
into live MCF-7 cells via an energy-independent pathway. Interestingly,
the cellular uptake and localization properties of the complexes are
influenced by the length and chemical nature of the linker. Among
these complexes, the cellular uptake of the diester complex 13c is the most efficient, giving rise to diffuse cytoplasmic
staining along with some localization in the nucleoli. Coogan and
co-workers have also designed a trinuclear rhenium(I) complex (14) that can serve as a molecular vessel for transporting
metal ions into cells. This neutral complex
is impermeable to the plasma membrane of live MCF-7 cells. However,
upon Ag+ sequestration, the resultant cationic adduct is
efficiently internalized into the cells and enriched in the nucleoli.
The complex can also encapsulate Cu2+, which makes bimodal
imaging with its radioactive isotope possible.
 Luminescent rhenium(I) tricarbonyl complexes
with tridentate ligands
[Re(N∧N∧N)(CO)3]+ are known for their interesting photophysical behavior and
high stability. One notable example is the rhenium(I) complexes coordinated
with a bis(2-quinolylmethyl)amine ligand. Metzler-Nolte and co-workers have developed
three rhenium(I) complexes coordinated with a phenanthridine-derived
tridentate ligand (15) ( ) as cellular imaging reagents. The symmetric complex 15a displays
both ligand-centered and 3MLCT emission, whereas the asymmetric
complexes 15b and 15c exhibit single 3MLCT emission but at longer wavelengths. All these complexes
show high cellular uptake efficiencies and specific accumulation in
the ER of various human cancer cell lines, including pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (IMIM-PC2 and PT45), colorectal adenocarcinoma (HT-29),
hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2), and breast adenocarcinoma (MCF-7),
highlighting their potential in examining the role of the ER in maintaining
the physiological functions of cancer cells.
 Studies on the photophysical properties of rhenium(I)
tricarbonyl
complexes have indicated that the high-frequency C≡O stretching
modes (> 2,000 cm–1) contribute to the rapid
nonradiative
decay from the lowest-lying 3MLCT state in these complexes. Thus, there has been increasing interest in
rhenium(I) dicarbonyl complexes such as cis-[Re(N∧N)(L∧L)(CO)2]+ (L∧L = neutral bidentate ligand) and trans,cis-[Re(N∧N)(L)2(CO)2]+ (L = neutral monodentate ligand), wherein the
removal of a carbonyl ligand results in emission at lower energies
with longer emission lifetimes. Liu, Tunik, Koshevoy, Chou, and co-workers
have designed a rhenium(I) dicarbonyl complex (16) ( ) for O2 sensing. Compared to its tricarbonyl
counterpart, the complex displays red-shifted emission with an increased
emission quantum yield and lifetime (λem = 583 nm, Φem = 0.34, τo = 4.05 μs) and possesses a larger
TPA cross-section (δ800nm = 300
GM) in aqueous solution. The anionic sulfonate groups on the phosphine
ligands allow the complex to interact with collagen in the extracellular
matrix after extravasation, facilitating the visualization of tissue
ischemia and tumor hypoxia in vivo using two-photon
excitation PLIM (TP-PLIM).
 
3.1.2.

## Ruthenium(II) Complexes
The photophysics
and photochemistry of ruthenium(II) polypyridine complexes have been
extensively studied. Manipulation of
their excited states, particularly the 3MLCT and 3MC states, has opened up diverse possibilities for their biological
applications. Luminescent ruthenium(II) complexes that exhibit emission
originating from a low-lying 3MLCT excited state have proven
valuable as bioimaging reagents. − However, the presence
of a close-lying 3MC state can lead to photosubstitution
reactions. This feature has been exploited to develop photoactivated
chemotherapy agents capable of releasing biologically active molecules
upon irradiation, thereby expanding the
applications of ruthenium(II) complexes from diagnostics to therapeutics.
Ruthenium(II) dppz complexes are well-known for their “light-switch”
effect. These complexes are nonluminescent
in aqueous solution but show intense emission when bound to double-stranded
DNA due to the shielding of the phenazine nitrogen atoms from water
molecules. Barton and Puckett have investigated the cellular uptake
behavior of ruthenium(II) dppz complexes with different formal charge,
size, and lipophilicity (17) ( ) in live HeLa cells using LSCM and flow
cytometry. The lipophilicity of the complexes
(log Po/w = −2.50 to 1.30) increases
with the hydrophobicity of the ancillary ligands. Among these complexes,
only the most lipophilic complex 17e (log Po/w = 1.30) is efficiently taken up by the cells, giving
rise to intense emission in the cytoplasmic region. Studies on the
cellular uptake mechanism reveal that the complex is internalized
into the cells through passive diffusion. Svensson, Lincoln, and co-workers have investigated the cellular
uptake and localization properties of ruthenium(II) dppz complexes
carrying alkyl chains of different lengths (18) in Chinese
hamster ovary (CHO)-K1 cells. The cellular
uptake of these complexes is limited in live cells but increases upon
irradiation. The least lipophilic complex 18a mainly
resides in the nucleus, while the most lipophilic complex 18c is preferentially enriched in membrane-rich structures such as the
ER. In contrast, the intermediate lipophilic complex 18b is distributed in both the nucleus and cytoplasm. The difference
in cellular localization of the complexes can be corroborated with
their binding preference, which is tuned from DNA (18a) to ribonucleic acid (RNA) and lipid membranes (18b and 18c) upon substitution of the dppz ligand with
alkyl chains of increasing length. The
diastereomeric interaction of the two enantiomers of complex 18b in cells have also been examined by LSCM and PLIM. Both isomers localize in the cell nucleus and
cytoplasm, but they demonstrate substantial differences in their emission
intensities and lifetimes. The Δ-isomer displays a higher emission
intensity and a longer emission lifetime in the nucleus compared to
the cytoplasmic region, while the Λ-isomer exhibits more intense
emission in the cytoplasm but shows a longer emission lifetime in
the nucleus. Since the affinities of both enantiomers for DNA are
similar, the large difference in cellular staining is associated with
the different emission quantum yields and lifetimes of the resultant
DNA-bound complexes.
 Vogel, Dyson, and co-workers have examined the
cellular uptake
and localization behavior of a series of ruthenium(II) complexes with
different lipophilicity (19) ( ) in human ovarian carcinoma A2780 and its
cisplatin-resistant variant A2780cisR cells. Among these complexes, the most lipophilic complex 19e (log Po/w = 0.55) preferentially accumulates
in the plasma membrane, while the other complexes are either membrane-impermeable
(19a; log Po/w = −1.21)
or internalized into the cells and enriched in small organelles in
the cytoplasm (19b–19d; log Po/w = −0.99 to −0.28). Additionally,
the cytotoxic activity of complex 19e is substantially
higher (IC50 < 1 μM) compared to the other complexes
(IC50 ≥ 85 μM), as its binding to the plasma
membrane triggers cell death via necrosis. Brindell and co-workers
have investigated the cellular uptake properties of nonintercalative
ruthenium(II) complexes (20). The dicationic complex 20d displays the most efficient
cellular uptake in live murine mammary carcinoma 4T1 cells, primarily
due to its high lipophilicity (log Po/w = 1.11). Surprisingly, despite having the highest lipophilicity
(log Po/w = 1.86), the monocationic complex 20c exhibits the lowest cellular accumulation. These findings
emphasize the important roles of both the formal charge and lipophilicity
in the cellular uptake of these complexes.
 The photophysical and biological behavior of
ruthenium(II) complexes
can be modulated by modification of the ligands with functional pendants.
Keyes and co-workers have developed ruthenium(II) complexes containing
an alkyl chain of different lengths (21) ( ) as membrane-permeable probes
for cellular imaging. These complexes
self-assemble into nanoaggregates in aqueous solution and enter mammalian
cells such as HeLa and CHO cells via endocytosis. Interestingly, the
intracellular localization of the complexes varies with the alkyl
chain length and cell lines used. Complex 21c preferentially
localizes in the Golgi apparatus and endosomes in HeLa and CHO cells,
respectively, while complex 21d is enriched in the hydrophobic
organelles such as mitochondria and lipid droplets (LDs). Estalayo-Adrián,
Gunnlaugsson, and co-workers have investigated the effect of alkyl
chain length on the photophysical, photochemical, and photobiological
properties of ruthenium(II) complexes modified with an alkyl chain
of different lengths (22). Notably, the presence of a heneicosanyl chain in complexes 22c and 22f promotes their self-aggregation into
micellar species, influencing their photophysical and 1O2-photosensitization behavior. Increasing the length
of the alkyl chain also enhances the lipophilicity and thereby the
cellular uptake efficiencies of the complexes. Among these complexes,
the most lipophilic complexes 22c and 22f (log Po/w = 1.07 and 0.49, respectively)
show the most efficient uptake in HeLa cells and significant cytotoxic
activity under both dark and light conditions. Williams, Quinn, Gunnlaugsson,
and co-workers have examined the photophysical and biological properties
of mono- and bis-1,8-naphthalimide-conjugated ruthenium(II)
complexes (23). Selective
excitation of the 1,8-naphthalimide moiety results in 3MLCT emission from the ruthenium(II) unit. The mono-1,8-naphthalimide
complex 23a binds to DNA and induces DNA photocleavage
upon irradiation, whereas the bis-1,8-naphthalimide complex 23b displays negligible interaction with DNA as the second
1,8-naphthalimide moiety displaces the complex from the
DNA backbone. Both complexes reside in the perinuclear region of HeLa
cells after uptake, and their differential DNA binding affinity leads
to different photocytotoxicity. Bhat, Revankar, and co-workers have
developed two ruthenium(II) complexes appended with a quinolinone
unit (24). These complexes
are rapidly internalized into live HeLa cells and distributed throughout
the cells. Núñez and co-workers have developed a bis(o-methylserotonin)-modified ruthenium(II)
complex (25) for cellular imaging. The emission intensity of the complex remains stable in
the presence of other metal ions. Its biodistribution has been studied
in live freshwater fish (Carassius auratus), revealing
that the complex localizes in the cytoplasm of erythrocytes, liver
cells, gills, and gonads.
 The use of N-heterocyclic carbene
(NHC) ligands
in the development of luminescent complexes is attractive, as their
strong σ-donor strength effectively destabilizes the nonemissive
MC states, facilitating the formation of stable complexes with high
emission quantum yields and long emission lifetimes. Also, the N-substituents of the NHC ligands
can be used to manipulate the physical, chemical, and biological behavior
of the resultant complexes. Chiu, Wong, and co-workers have developed
a ruthenium(II) NHC complex (26) ( ) as a cellular imaging reagent. This complex is essentially noncytotoxic toward
both MCF-7 and human retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE) cells. The
complex is internalized into the cells via endocytosis, which enables
the examination of the endocytic processes in live cells.
 Williams, Gunnlaugsson, and co-workers have examined
the photophysical
and biological properties of two binuclear ruthenium(II) complexes
featuring a 1,8-naphthalimide Tröger’s base ligand connecting
the two ruthenium(II) moieties (27) ( ). These complexes exhibit rapid cellular uptake in live HeLa cells,
primarily residing in the cytoplasm with negligible effect on the
cell viability. Similar cytoplasmic localization has also been observed
in other binuclear ruthenium(II) complexes (28 and 29). , Lincoln and co-workers have
studied the subcellular distribution of the stereoisomers of two binuclear
ruthenium(II) complexes (30) in fixed CHO-K1 cells and
found that while both the ΔΔ- and ΛΛ-isomers
of the complexes show prominent nuclear staining, the ΛΛ-isomers
exclusively accumulate in the nucleoli. However, no significant difference is observed in the cellular uptake
and localization of the complexes in live cells, where they are entrapped
in the endosomes after endocytic uptake. Chao and co-workers have
developed a series of binuclear ruthenium(II) complexes (31) as two-photon luminescence imaging reagents. These complexes possess large TPA cross-sections in the
NIR region (δ = 322 to 386 GM at 800 or 830
nm) due to the extensive π-conjugation of the bridging ligand.
Monitoring the cellular uptake of the complexes using two-photon microscopy
reveals that the complexes are taken up by live HeLa cells via an
energy-dependent, nonendocytic pathway and enriched in the cytoplasm.
Alexander and co-workers have examined the cellular localization of
mono-, di-, and trinuclear ruthenium(II) complexes (32) in live cells. These hydrophilic
complexes (log Po/w = −1.46 to
−0.53) display efficient cellular uptake and cytoplasmic localization.
Notably, the nuclear membrane penetration ability of the complexes
increases with their nuclearity. Furthermore, Chao and co-workers
have developed a series of multinuclear ruthenium(II) complexes (33–36) ( ) as trackable nonviral gene vectors. − These complexes can condense plasmid DNA, facilitating its internalization
into cells. Additionally, the intracellular trafficking process of
plasmid DNA can be monitored in real time using LSCM due to the luminescence
properties of the complexes.
 
3.1.3.

## Osmium(II) Complexes
Osmium(II)
complexes possess similar photophysical behavior as their ruthenium(II)
counterparts. These complexes typically
exhibit MLCT absorption and emission at lower energies due to the
higher-lying dπ orbital of the osmium(II) center. Additionally,
the increased ligand field splitting in osmium(II) complexes restricts
the thermal accessibility of the 3MC states. These properties
render osmium(II) complexes highly promising for applications as bioimaging
reagents.
Zhang, Zhang, Chao, and co-workers have developed
an NIR luminescent osmium(II) complex (37) ( ) for cellular imaging
and PDT applications. Compared to its
ruthenium(II) counterpart (log Po/w =
−2.23) that shows high mitochondria specificity, complex 37 (log Po/w = −1.24) preferentially
accumulates in the lysosomes of live A549 cells after cellular uptake,
suggesting that the lipophilicity of the complexes is influenced by
the nature of the metal centers. Additionally, complex 37 displays negligible dark cytotoxicity but high photocytotoxic activity
upon red-light irradiation (λex =
633 nm) due to 1O2 generation, highlighting
the potential applications of osmium(II) complexes in NIR imaging
and NIR light-induced PDT.
 Osmium(II) complexes with terdentate ligands
also exhibit luminescence
in solution, in contrast to the ruthenium(II) terpyridine analogues
that are nonemissive at room temperature due to the presence of low-lying 3MC states. Elliott and co-workers have developed a 1,2,3-triazole-based
bis(terdentate) osmium(II) complex (38) ( ). The use of 1,2,3-triazole-derived ligands allows for tailored derivatization
through click chemistry, enabling the optimization of the cellular
uptake and organelle specificity of the complexes. Complex 38 is preferentially enriched in the mitochondria of live HeLa and
human osteosarcoma U2OS cells with negligible dark cytotoxicity. Bryant,
Elliott, and co-workers have developed a series of luminescent 1,2,3-triazole-based
tris(bidentate) osmium(II) complexes (39) that show intense
emission in aqueous solution at room temperature. These complexes display efficient cellular uptake in live
HeLa and human bladder carcinoma EJ cells with apparent localization
in the endosomal/lysosomal compartments. Additionally, the complexes
exhibit low cytotoxic activity toward the cells under both dark and
light conditions. Notably, complex 39d shows antimicrobial
activity against methicillin- and ampicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (S. aureus), with the meridional
isomer displaying higher uptake and greater efficacy than its facial
isomer. Super-resolution imaging using
SIM reveals the binding of both isomers to intracellular DNA of the
bacteria.
 
3.1.4.

## Rhodium(III) Complexes
Rhodium(III)
complexes have received much less attention compared to other d6 transition metal complexes due to the lack of luminescence
at room temperature, resulting from the presence of a thermally accessible 3MC excited state. However, the
luminescence properties of these complexes can be significantly improved
by incorporating a strong σ-donor cyclometalating
ligand, which raises the energy level of the nonemissive 3MC state and introduces a lower-lying emissive 3IL state. 
Lo and co-workers have developed luminescent
cyclometalated rhodium(III) bis(pyridylbenzaldehyde)
complexes that exhibit extraordinarily long emission lifetimes of ca. 4.2–8.7 μs in solution at room temperature. These complexes have been exploited as biological
labeling reagents. Modification of these complexes with a biotin pendant
leads to the development of a luminescent biotinylation reagent (40) ( ). The cellular uptake and localization
properties of this complex have been studied in live HeLa cells, showing
that after cellular internalization, the complex resides in the perinuclear
region with negligible nuclear uptake. Torbati, Lutz, Amirnasr, and
co-workers have developed biscyclometalated
rhodium(III) complexes (41) using benzothiazole derivatives
as the diimine ligand. Among these complexes,
complexes 41a and 41c show emission in the
visible region, whereas complex 41b is nonluminescent.
Monitoring the cellular uptake of complex 41c in MCF-7
cells with LSCM reveals its efficient cellular internalization due
to its high lipophilicity (log Po/w =
8.28) and apparent localization in the perinuclear region. Additionally,
the complex displays relatively higher cytotoxicity toward MCF-7 cells
compared to the nonmalignant human embryonic lung fibroblast MRC-5
cells, suggesting its potential development as a theranostic agent.
 
3.1.5.

## Iridium(III) Complexes
Cyclometalated
iridium(III) complexes have gained significant attention for a range
of light-driven applications. Typically, these complexes exhibit strong
luminescence, primarily due to the limited thermal accessibility of
the nonemissive 3MC states caused by the presence of the
cyclometalating ligand. Furthermore, their emission color can be readily tuned from blue
to NIR through the utilization of ligands with different electronic
properties or degrees of π-conjugation while maintaining high
emission quantum yields. These attractive properties have led to their
rapid development as bioimaging reagents. − 
The seminal work on the utilization of luminescent biscyclometalated
iridium(III) complexes as bioimaging reagents was presented by two
independent research groups in 2008. , Li and co-workers
have examined the cellular uptake, intracellular localization, and
cytotoxic activity of two iridium(III) complexes (42)
( ). These complexes undergo facile internalization
into live HeLa cells, resulting in exclusive cytoplasmic staining
with negligible nuclear uptake. Additionally, the complexes are essentially
noncytotoxic (IC50 > 100 μM; 24 h) and highly
photostable,
suggesting their potential use for long-term tracking of cellular
events. Lo and co-workers have investigated the cellular uptake and
distribution of a series of iridium(III) complexes appended with an
alkyl chain (43). These
complexes are taken up by live HeLa cells via an energy-dependent
mechanism and enriched in the perinuclear region. The cellular uptake
efficiencies of the complexes follow the order: 43b (log Po/w = 5.34) > 43a (log Po/w = 2.01) > 43c (log Po/w = 9.89). The lowest cellular uptake of the
most lipophilic complex 43c is possibly due to its largest
molecular size and/or self-aggregation in aqueous solution. Lo and
co-workers have also examined the cellular uptake and localization
behavior of iridium(III) complexes carrying a hydrophobic indole pendant
(44). The most lipophilic
complex 44c shows the highest uptake in HeLa cells and
perinuclear localization, most likely resulting from its binding to
hydrophobic organelles such as the Golgi apparatus, ER, and mitochondria.
 Li and co-workers have developed a series of
biscyclometalated
iridium(III) complexes with different ancillary ligands (45) ( ) as multicolor
cellular probes. The emission energies
of the complexes can be readily tuned from blue to red by extending
the π-conjugation of the ancillary ligand. Notably, complex 45d emits in the NIR region (λem = 712 nm), making it particularly suitable for in
vivo applications. As revealed by LSCM, all the complexes
primarily localize in the cytoplasm of live HeLa cells with negligible
nuclear uptake. Li, Liu, Qiao, and co-workers have developed three
NIR luminescent iridium(III) complexes (46) using phenylbenzo[g]quinoline as the cyclometalating ligand. These complexes display NIR emission (λem = 698 nm) with moderate quantum yields
(Φem = 0.029 to 0.035). Modulating
the hydrophobicity of the ancillary diimine ligands allows the manipulation
of the lipophilicity and thus the cellular uptake efficiencies of
the complexes. Complexes 46a and 46b (log Po/w = 0.13 and 0.18, respectively) exhibit facile
cellular internalization and exclusive cytoplasmic staining in live
human embryonic kidney HEK293T cells. However, the cellular uptake
of complex 46c (log Po/w =
0.88) is negligible due to its high lipophilicity and poor solubility
in aqueous solution. Lima and co-workers have developed two red luminescent
iridium(III) complexes (47) as bioimaging reagents. The carboxylate groups on the diimine ligand
endow the complexes with high aqueous solubility and biocompatibility.
Live-cell imaging shows that the complexes are internalized into CHO-K1
cells and enriched in the cytoplasm. Li, Fan, and co-workers have
developed iridium(III) complexes appended with a triethylene glycol
pendant (48) for imaging Schistosoma japonicum. This modification endows the complexes
with high aqueous solubility while maintaining high membrane permeability.
Kozhevnikov, Bryant, and co-workers have designed a cationic binuclear
iridium(III) complex (49) using pyridazine as a bridging
ligand. Compared to mononuclear complexes,
multinuclear iridium(III) complexes usually display red-shifted absorption
and emission properties, which are advantageous to their use as cellular
imaging reagents with reduced autofluorescence background. The complex
is compatible with both one- and two-photon microscopy, showing that
the complex enters HeLa cells and accumulates in the mitochondria.
Su, Liao, and co-workers have developed a cationic iridium(III) complex
bearing dendritic carbazole moieties (50) that shows
aggregation-induced emission (AIE). This
complex is nonluminescent in solution but becomes strongly emissive
in the solid state due to restricted distortion of the excited-state
structure upon aggregation. Incubation of live human hepatocellular
carcinoma SMMC-7721 cells with the complex gives rise to intense emission
in the perinuclear region, indicating its aggregation in the intracellular
environment.
 Bian, Bian, and co-workers have studied the cellular
uptake properties
of a series of zwitterionic iridium(III) complexes (51) ( ) in both
live and fixed human cervical carcinoma KB cells. The cellular uptake efficiencies of the complexes increase
with their lipophilicity (log Po/w = −1.89
to 1.39) ( ),
which is in accordance with the hydrophobicity of the cyclometalating
ligands. Chao and co-workers have investigated the cellular uptake
and localization behavior of iridium(III) complexes (52) with different lipophilicity. The
less lipophilic complexes 52a–52c (log Po/w = −0.51 to −0.16)
are predominantly enriched in the lysosomes of HeLa cells, whereas
the more lipophilic complexes 52d and 52e (log Po/w = 0.70 and 1.09, respectively)
preferentially accumulate in the mitochondria. Temperature dependence
studies suggest the involvement of an energy-requiring pathway in
the uptake of complexes 52a–52d but
not for complex 52e. These findings highlight the significance
of lipophilicity in governing the cellular uptake and intracellular
localization properties of these complexes. Zhao, Zhang, and co-workers
have developed four iridium(III) complexes modified with an ester
or amide group (53) as cellular imaging reagents. These complexes have the same formal charge
(+1) and similar lipophilicity (log Po/w = 1.45 to 2.14) and molecular size, with structural variations limited
to one or two atoms. While complexes 53b–53d specifically accumulate in the mitochondria with negligible
nuclear uptake, the distribution of complex 53a between
the cell nucleus and mitochondria is similar. Additionally, the complex
localized in the nucleus emits with a longer emission lifetime (156
ns) than that in the cytoplasm (93 ns). Temperature dependence and
chemical inhibition experiments indicate that the nuclear uptake of
complex 53a is mediated by clathrin and microtubules,
and it is more efficient in the mitotic phase than in the interphase
during cell division.
 Mixed-ligand iridium(III) complexes [Ir(N∧N∧N)(N∧C)(L)]+ (L
= anionic
monodentate ligand) have emerged as an interesting class of luminophores. The incorporation of a tridentate ligand improves
the stability of the complexes, while the bidentate and monodentate
ligands allow independent tuning of the photophysical properties of
the complexes. Cao, Ye, Ward, and co-workers have developed two isomeric
luminescent iridium(III) complexes (54) ( ), where the ambidentate naphthalene-based
cyclometalating ligand is coordinated to the iridium(III) ion in a
five- or six-membered ring chelating mode. These complexes display distinct luminescence and self-assembly
properties. Complex 54a exhibits strong emission at 581
nm, whereas complex 54b shows weaker and red-shifted
emission at 612 nm. Furthermore, complex 54a undergoes
efficient self-assembly in aqueous solution via strong intermolecular
π–π interaction to form monodispersed nanoparticles
(NPs), which is not observed in complex 54b due to its
more twisted structure. These complexes have been used for cellular
imaging. A stronger emission signal is detected in HeLa cells treated
with complex 54a due to its higher emission quantum yield
and lipophilicity. Colocalization studies show that complex 54a preferentially accumulates in the lysosomes.
 Similar to diimine ligands, diamines can also
serve as a coordinating
ligand for the iridium(III) center, leading to the development of
robust complexes that display intense emission. The use of diamines
as a ligand offers a high degree of control over the emission energy
of the complexes since the π* orbitals are localized on the
cyclometalating ligand. Lo and co-workers have developed a series
of luminescent iridium(III) complexes coordinated with an ethylenediamine
ligand (55) ( ) as imaging reagents. The emission color of these complexes can be tuned across the visible
region from blue to red using different cyclometalating ligands. The
cellular localization properties of these complexes have been examined
using complex 55e as a model, which is specifically enriched
in the mitochondria of live HeLa cells. Additionally, these complexes
can be developed as transfection agents when poly(ethyleneimine) (PEI)
is used as the diamine ligand. Related iridium(III) ethylenediamine
complexes functionalized with polar ester or carboxylate groups (56) have also been developed. Among them, the cationic complexes 56a and 56b are readily taken up by live HeLa cells via an energy-requiring
process and enriched in the endosomes and mitochondria, respectively
( ). In contrast,
the anionic complexes 56c and 56d exhibit
limited cellular uptake, resulting from the charge repulsion between
the complexes and the phospholipid bilayers of the cell membrane that
restrains them from further internalization. Furthermore, complex 56c has been utilized as a visualization reagent for zebrafish.
The membrane impermeability of the complex has enabled efficient imaging
of the circulation system in zebrafish.
 Iridium(III) solvato complexes have been reported
as luminescence
turn-on probes for histidine (His) and His-rich proteins. Li and co-workers have developed a related
iridium(III) solvato complex [Ir(ppy)2(DMSO)2]+ (Hppy = 2-phenylpyridne) (57) ( ) as the first reaction-based
nuclear stain. The complex shows significant
emission enhancement (I/Io > 300) upon incubation with His and His-rich proteins. Upon cellular
internalization, the complex is enriched in the nucleus within minutes
and retained in this organelle for a long period of time (> 24
h).
The specific nuclear staining is due to the substitution reaction
of the complex with His or His-rich proteins inside the nucleus following
its cellular uptake and nuclear accumulation. Structure–property
relationship analysis on related complexes (58) shows
that variations in the counteranion (e.g., PF6– and CF3SO3–) and the solvent ligand (e.g., H2O,
DMSO, and CH3CN) of the complexes does not have a significant
effect on their cellular uptake and localization properties. However, increasing the length of the carbon
side chains or branched chains in the cyclometalating ligands leads
to the translocation of the complex from the nucleus (58a and 58b) to the cytoplasm (58d and 58e) ( ). These results suggest that the molecular size of the complexes
is critical to their nuclear uptake, which is controlled by the nuclear
pore complexes in the nuclear envelope. However, Ma and co-workers
have demonstrated a related iridium(III) complex (59a) that gives rise to diffuse cytoplasmic staining with negligible
nuclear uptake in both live and fixed cells. Zhao, Wong, and co-workers have developed iridium(III) solvato complexes
(59b–59h) as multicolor probes for
cellular imaging. All these complexes
are cell-permeable and localize in the cytoplasm after uptake via
passive diffusion.
 Zhou and co-workers have developed iridium(III)
NHC complexes (60) ( ) as cellular imaging reagents. The
lipophilicity of the neutral complexes 60a–60c (log Po/w = 1.28 to 1.57)
is higher than the cationic complexes 60d and 60e (log Po/w = 0.56 and 0.89, respectively).
These complexes enter cells via an energy-dependent pathway and reside
in the cytoplasm following cellular uptake. Che and co-workers have
developed a series of stable luminescent cyclometalated iridium(III)
complexes using bis-NHC as the ancillary ligands. These complexes display intense emission in
solution at room temperature with emission quantum yields up to 0.89
and emission lifetimes up to 96 μs. Furthermore, these complexes
are highly photostable under continuous visible-light irradiation.
Live-cell imaging shows that complexes 61a–61e exhibit efficient cellular uptake and specific ER accumulation
in various cell lines including HeLa, human lung adenocarcinoma NCI-H1975,
and normal human colon mucosal epithelial NCM460 cells. Barnard and
co-workers have developed various bidentate NHC ligands based on imidazolylidene
and triazole/triazolylidene using copper(I)-catalyzed azide–alkyne
cycloaddition (CuAAC) reaction to prepare luminescent iridium(III)
complexes. Two of the complexes (62) have been studied in a biological context due to their
good aqueous solubility. These cationic complexes are efficiently
taken up by live A549 cells and specifically enriched in the mitochondria.
 Zhao, Huang, and co-workers have developed neutral
iridium(III)
complexes (63a–63c) ( ) using 3-hydroxypicolinic
acid as the ancillary ligand. Notably,
the introduction of a BF2 moiety to the 3-hydroxypicolinic
acid ligand significantly perturbs the excited-state properties of
the complexes. The resultant heteronuclear complexes (63d–63f) display similar cellular uptake efficiencies
but substantially improved biocompatibility compared to their mononuclear
counterparts. Zheng, He, and co-workers have developed two iridium(III)
complexes incorporating l-alanine as the ancillary ligand
(64). These complexes exhibit
high aqueous solubility while retaining high emission quantum yields.
Both complexes show efficient cellular uptake in human gastric cancer
SGC-7901 cells and primarily localize in the cytoplasm. Chowdhury,
Laskar, and co-workers have developed an AIE-active neutral iridium(III)
complex (65) as bioimaging reagents. The intense emission observed in the mitochondria of human
osteosarcoma cells indicates the specific accumulation and aggregation
of the complex in the mitochondria after cellular uptake. Palamà,
Di Maria, and co-workers have demonstrated that neutral iridium(III)
complexes such as 63a, 66a, and 66b can self-assemble into supramolecular nanostructures through nanoprecipitation. Compared to the free complexes, these NPs exhibit
red-shifted emission with longer emission lifetimes. Furthermore,
the NPs show reduced cytotoxic activity and enhanced cellular uptake
efficiency in both 2D monolayer cells and 3D spheroids.
 Plush, Brooks, Massi, and co-workers have
studied the intracellular
localization and cytotoxic activity of a series of iridium(III) tetrazolato
complexes (67) ( ). Among these complexes,
the neutral complexes 67a–67e preferentially
reside in hydrophobic organelles such as the ER and LDs of rat embryonic
cardiomyoblast H9c2 cells, while the cationic analogues 67f, 67g, and 67i specifically accumulate
in the mitochondria. The high mitochondria specificity of complex 67g has enabled its use for staining the mitochondria in cardiac
and skeletal muscle tissue samples. The
complex has also been utilized as a cathodoluminescent probe for cathodoluminescence
imaging of cellular structures. Complexes 67b and 67d have also been demonstrated as bacterial
imaging reagents, displaying rapid internalization in Bacillus
cereus (B. cereus) and high specificity
for lipid vacuoles without inhibiting the bacterial growth. 
 Triscyclometalated iridium(III) complexes such
as [Ir(ppy)3] are attractive as biological probes due to
their high emission
quantum yields. However, these charge-neutral
complexes usually exhibit limited solubility in aqueous solution.
Chen, Zhao, and co-workers have developed a water-soluble triscyclometalated
iridium(III) complex (68) ( ) for cellular imaging. The complex forms NPs that show intense red emission (Φem = 0.13) and TPA (δ800nm = 33 GM) in aqueous solution, facilitating two-photon
luminescence imaging at an ultralow effective concentration (0.5 μM).
 Iridium(III) porphyrins represent an interesting
class of triplet
emitters. These complexes typically display intense red to NIR phosphorescence
in solution at room temperature, with emission lifetimes in the microsecond
time regime. Unlike square-planar palladium(II)
and platinum(II) porphyrins, the octahedral geometry of the iridium(III)
center allows the introduction of two axial ligands in iridium(III)
porphyrins, offering possibilities to manipulate their photophysical
properties and biological behavior. However, iridium(III) porphyrins
remain scarce as the synthesis and chemistry of these complexes are
more difficult than those of the corresponding palladium(II) and platinum(II)
porphyrins. Hua, Lo, and co-workers have developed a series of iridium(III)
porphyrins (69) ( ) as NIR luminescent biological probes. The cationic complexes 69c and 69d exhibit emission properties similar to their neutral counterparts 69a and 69b, but their emission maxima are blue-shifted
due to the axial pyridine ligands. Additionally, the cationic complexes 69c and 69d show higher cellular uptake efficiencies
compared to the neutral complexes 69a and 69b, and they are enriched in the perinuclear region of HeLa cells with
negligible nuclear uptake after cellular internalization. Furthermore,
the carboxyl-containing complex 69d has been used to
label BSA via an amidation reaction to produce a luminescent protein
conjugate. The conjugate displays similar photophysical properties
and cellular behavior to its parent complex. These results suggest
that cationic iridium(III) porphyrins are promising candidates as
NIR luminescent probes for bioimaging applications.
 The strategic modification of iridium(III) complexes
can lead to
the development of photofunctional complexes for various biological
applications. Dual-emissive complexes are highly attractive for the
development of ratiometric probes for bioimaging and biosensing in
living systems. Lo and co-workers have developed a series of iridium(III)
complexes (70) ( ) that exhibit interesting environment-sensitive dual
emission under ambient conditions. , The dual-emissive
behavior of the complexes results from the interruption of the electronic
communication between the higher-lying 3IL and the lower-lying 3CT states by a triplet amine-to-ligand charge-transfer (3NLCT) state. These complexes have been utilized as ratiometric
biological probes and bioimaging reagents. The intracellular localization
properties of these complexes vary depending on their lipophilicity:
the less lipophilic complexes primarily localize on the surface of
HeLa cells, whereas the more lipophilic complexes reside in the perinuclear
region. The cellular uptake and localization
properties of related iridium(III) fluorous complexes (71) have also been examined. Interestingly,
despite their similar cellular uptake efficiencies, the biotin complexes
show punctate staining while the biotin-free complexes display diffuse
staining in the perinuclear region. These findings suggest that the
intracellular localization of the complexes is influenced not only
by their lipophilicity but also by their molecular structures. Weinstein,
Ward, and co-workers have developed a heterobimetallic iridium(III)–europium(III)
complex (72), where the iridium(III) unit functions as
a sensitizer for the emissive 5D0 excited state
of europium(III) ion. Upon two-photon
excitation of the iridium(III) unit (λex = 780 nm), the complex undergoes partial d → f energy
transfer, resulting in both iridium(III)-based green phosphorescence
(τo = 1,070 and 380 ns) and europium(III)-based
red luminescence (τ = 0.46 ms) in aqueous solution.
The dual emission with different lifetimes of the complex has enabled
the use of LSCM and PLIM, revealing both punctate and diffuse cytoplasmic
staining in human dermal fibroblast (HDF) cells.
 Sun, Tian, and co-workers have designed a noncentrosymmetric
iridium(III)
complex with a donor–acceptor structure (73) ( ) for application
in second-harmonic generation (SHG) imaging. In SHG imaging, two incident photons are converted to a single photon
of twice the frequency after interacting with the probe. Since SHG
only involves virtual energy transition, the probes are not excited
and thus the problem of photobleaching can be effectively circumvented. Crystallization of the complex produces two
types of single crystals with distinct morphology and photophysical
and NLO properties, resulting from their different intermolecular
packing. The yellow and red crystals exhibit an emission band at 500–600
nm and 600–700 nm, respectively. Both crystals show two-photon-induced
emission upon photoexcitation at 820 nm; however, the yellow crystal
displays an additional sharp SHG emission peak at 410 nm (bandwidth
= ca. 7 nm), and the emission wavelength varies with
the excitation wavelength in the range of 800–900 nm. Live-cell
imaging shows that the complex is enriched in the lysosomes at low
concentrations (e.g., 5 μM) and in the nucleus
at high concentrations (e.g., 30 μM). The tunable
excitation wavelength and narrow emission wavelength of SHG emission
of the complex have facilitated multicolor imaging, enabling the simultaneous
detection of the complex with intracellular DNA (DAPI), RNA (SYTO
9), and mitochondria (MitoTracker Red) with no signal crosstalk ( ). The strong SHG
signals of the complex have also allowed imaging of mouse liver tissues
with a higher contrast compared to two-photon luminescence imaging
at a depth down to 200 μm.
 Yi, Tian, and co-workers have developed two iridium(III)
complexes
conjugated with a photochromic diarylethene (DAE) moiety (74) ( ) as photoswitchable
luminescent probes for cellular imaging. Under visible-light excitation, the DAE moiety adopts a ring-opened
form that exhibits weak absorption in the visible region, and thus
complexes 74a and 74b show intense yellow
emission (λem = 568 and 574 nm,
respectively). However, upon UV irradiation, the DAE moiety is converted
to the ring-closed form, which displays increased absorption in the
visible region (λabs = 480–647
nm). The increased spectral overlap with the emission of the iridium(III)
unit facilitates Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET),
resulting in efficient emission quenching. The photoswitchable emission
behavior of the complex is retained in biological contexts, highlighting
that the complex can be used for super-resolution microscopy such
as STORM that depends on stochastic switching of single molecules.
 

3.2.

## d8 Transition Metal Complexes
Compared to octahedral d6 transition metal complexes
that are coordinatively saturated, d8 transition metal
complexes such as rhodium(I), platinum(II), and gold(III) complexes
adopt a square-planar molecular geometry and possess vacant axial
coordination sites that allow for supramolecular self-assembly to
occur via noncovalent metal–metal interactions, leading to
the formation of excimers or aggregates with interesting spectroscopic
and luminescence properties. This provides an additional and orthogonal
dimension to tune their excited-state behavior for the construction
of luminescent supramolecular self-assembled functional materials
for various applications. 
3.2.1.

## Rhodium(I) Complexes
Square-planar
rhodium(I) complexes are known to exhibit interesting photophysical
properties attributed to the presence of Rh···Rh interaction. A typical example of such complexes is the
homoleptic tetrakis(isocyanido)rhodium(I) complexes, in which the
short Rh···Rh distance is crucial to the formation
of oligomers showing interesting spectroscopic behavior. − 
Lu, Che, and co-workers have demonstrated that the amphiphilic
tetrakis(2,6-xylylisocyanide)rhodium(I) complexes such as 75 ( ) can self-assemble
in water through Rh···Rh and hydrophobic interactions
into ultralong crystalline nanowires, and in turn hierarchically organize
into various ordered micro- and macrostructures. These solution-processable superstructures are luminescent
in the NIR region, originating from an excited state associated with
close Rh···Rh contacts. Yu, Bu, and co-workers have
utilized complex 75 to fabricate stable rod-like polymeric
nanomicelles with the negatively charged block copolymer poly(ethylene
oxide)-block-poly(sodium acrylate) through electrostatic
interaction. The nanomicelles are stable
in solution and display intense NIR phosphorescence, and the emission
intensity increases with the increasing molecular weight of the poly(sodium
acrylate) block, which assists in the hierarchical organization of
the rhodium(I) complex through extended Rh···Rh interaction.
The NIR emission has allowed in vivo imaging in mice
bearing 4T1 tumor xenografts, which shows that the nanomicelles selectively
accumulate at the tumor sites with a long retention time (> 48
h),
enabling the precise induction of cancer cell apoptosis in the tumor
tissues without injuring other healthy organs.
 
3.2.2.

## Platinum(II) Complexes
The development
of luminescent platinum(II) complexes has been largely focused on
those coordinated with a rigid multidentate ligand containing strong
σ-donor atoms. The strong σ-donor
strength and high rigidity of the ligand scaffold can effectively
raise the energy of the dissociative 3MC states and thereby
minimize excited-state structural distortion and nonradiative decay.
One of the typical examples is the platinum(II) complexes supported
by a tridentate ligand derived form 1,3-di(2-pyridyl)benzene (Hdpyb), which show intense emission in solution at
room temperature, rendering this class of complexes highly suitable
for the development of light-emitting materials and bioimaging reagents. 
Haycock, Weinstein, Williams, and co-workers have utilized the luminescent
cyclometalated platinum(II) complex [Pt(dpyb)Cl] (76a) ( ) in live-cell
imaging. The complex preferentially
resides in the cell nucleus in a range of mammalian cell lines including
HDF, human melanoma C8161, and CHO cells. It is retained in this cellular
compartment for several hours, which could be associated with its
covalent binding to nuclear structures. High-resolution cellular imaging
under two-photon excitation reveals the specific accumulation of the
complex in the nucleoli. Additionally, the long emission lifetime
of the complex has allowed the use of time-resolved emission imaging
microscopy (TREM) to remove the short-lived emission from cell autofluorescence
or other fluorescent labels to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio.
Since coordination with a thiolate ligand would shift the emission
of the complexes to lower energies, the intracellular emission of
complex 76a in mouse embryonic fibroblast NIH/3T3 cells
in both the green and red channels has been monitored, confirming
the reaction of the complex with the protein thiols in the mitochondria. Background-free, lifetime-based imaging of
live cells and histological tissues with complex 76a has
been demonstrated using two-photon TREM. The emission lifetime of the complex is highly sensitive to its
local environment and varies from nanoseconds to several microseconds
due to the varying levels of protection from O2 quenching.
Thus, the complex has been used to monitor changes in the cellular
viscosity upon induction of DNA damage by UV-A irradiation or X-ray,
showing that the viscosity in the cell nucleus changes more significantly
than that in the cytoplasm. A related
platinum(II) complex (76b) has been used for lifetime
mapping of live cells and histological tissues over a timeframe of
50 microseconds using a laser on/off “beam blanking”
approach, which allows the cell nuclei and matrix proteins to be readily
distinguished in both structured and homogeneous tissue sections. Complex 76b has also been used
as a photosensitizer to induce irreversible DNA single strand breaks
that are unable to be repaired in cells upon visible-light irradiation,
causing significant cell death of a range of cancer cell lines including
cisplatin-resistant bladder carcinoma EJ-R cells. Haycock and co-workers have utilized the water-soluble
analogue (76c) to examine the variations in O2 concentration in 3D multicellular tumor spheroids (MCTSs) using
PLIM, allowing real-time O2 mapping across live human melanoma
C8161 MCTSs with high spatial resolution. Dragonetti, Mauro, De Cola, and co-workers have developed three
cyclometalated platinum(II) complexes (77) bearing a
hydrophilic (oligo)ethylene glycol chain to increase their aqueous
solubility and biocompatibility. These
complexes are rapidly internalized into live HeLa cells via a diffusion-controlled
uptake mechanism. The uptake of complex 77b is fastest
(< 1 min) among the three complexes, probably due to its smallest
molecular size, indicating that the internalization kinetics depends
on both the length of the ethylene glycol chain and the ancillary
ligand. Upon internalization, the complexes are distributed throughout
the cells with localization in both the cytoplasm and nucleus.
 Che and co-workers have developed a cyclometalated
platinum(II)
complex (78) ( ) for protein staining and cell imaging. This complex is weakly emissive in aqueous
solution, but exhibits a 26-fold increase in emission intensity upon
binding to BSA. Treatment of HeLa cells with the complex leads to
intense emission in the perinuclear region, suggesting that the complex
interacts with hydrophobic organelles such as the ER and Golgi apparatus.
Lam and co-workers have developed a bioaccumulative cyclometalated
platinum(II) complex (79) for live-cell imaging. The strong two-photon-induced emission of the
complex has enabled time-lapse imaging of its cellular internalization
process using two-photon microscopy, revealing its rapid accumulation
in live HeLa and NIH/3T3 cells. Yang and co-workers have developed
a platinum(II) complex (80) displaying remarkable three-photon
absorption properties (σ1400nm =
3 × 10–81 cm6 s2 photon–2). Additionally, the
complex exhibits selective cytotoxicity toward cancerous HeLa cells
(IC50 = 7.2 μM) over normal human embryo liver fibroblast
(HELF) cells (IC50 = 52 μM), attributed to its specific
localization in the lysosomes after cellular uptake.
 Platinum(II) complexes chelated by a tetradentate
ligand usually
show higher emission quantum efficiencies due to increased molecular
rigidity. Huang, Sadler, and co-workers have studied the photophysical
and biological properties of a series of platinum(II) complexes supported
by an N,N’-bis(salicylidene)phenylenediamine
(salophen) ligand (81) ( ). These complexes
display a broad absorption band in the visible region (at ca. 400–600 nm) and intense phosphorescence at ca. 625 nm. The emission intensities and lifetimes of these
complexes are sensitive to O2 and viscosity, suggesting
that the complexes can be used to examine intracellular microenvironment.
As revealed by LSCM, the complexes localize in the cytoplasm of A549
cells, with higher affinities for the mitochondria and lysosomes but
not the nucleus. Additionally, the complexes are noncytotoxic in the
dark, but exhibit significant photocytotoxicity upon green-light irradiation
due to 1O2 generation.
 Shi, Zhao, Huang, and co-workers have examined
the photophysical
properties and cellular uptake of a series of cyclometalated platinum(II)
β-diketonate complexes (82) ( ). The emission color of the complexes can be tuned from blue-green
to yellow by changing the degree of conjugation of the β-diketonate
ligands due to their low triplet-state energy levels. All the complexes
show low cytotoxic activity, high membrane permeability, and exclusive
cytoplasmic staining. Shafikov, Czerwieniec, and co-workers have developed
a cyclometalated platinum(II) complex (83) that displays
both green fluorescence (λem = 495
nm) and red phosphorescence (λem = 660 nm) upon photoexcitation at a single wavelength (λex = 445 nm) due to slow ISC. The interesting dual emission can be detected in HeLa cells, showing
that the complex resides in the perinuclear region. Additionally,
the complex exhibits efficient 1O2 photosensitization
(ΦΔ = 0.84) upon irradiation.
The interesting dual emission behavior and high 1O2 generation efficiency of the complex are expected to offer
new opportunities for theranostic applications.
 Square-planar platinum(II) complexes have been
demonstrated to
self-assemble into supramolecular nanostructures via Pt···Pt
and π–π interactions, which is accompanied by the
emergence of the characteristic MMLCT absorption and emission bands
at lower energies. The unique supramolecular
self-assembly behavior of platinum(II) complexes has provided a new
paradigm for the construction of functional supramolecular architectures
with interesting spectroscopic and photophysical properties, where
Pt···Pt interaction plays a key role in guiding the
self-assembly process and maintaining the assembled structures. These supramolecular assemblies can allow the
molecules to be closely packed in a fixed structure and provide a
better shielding from the environment, while shifting both the excitation
and emission to the biological windows, specifically the red to NIR
regions, which are advantageous to bioimaging and biosensing applications. 
Che and co-workers have examined the
self-assembly behavior of
a cationic alkynylplatinum(II) complex (84) ( ) in water. This complex forms supramolecular structures
in aqueous solution through Pt···Pt and π–π
interactions, which gives rise to a new absorption band at ca. 500 nm and an emission band at 677 nm. It can also form
stable nanoaggregates in the intracellular environment, resulting
in intense red emission in the cytoplasmic region of live HeLa cells. Mauro, De Cola, and co-workers have demonstrated
that neutral platinum(II) complexes (85) can self-assemble
into nanosized aggregates, showing the characteristic 3MMLCT emission in live cells. These
luminescent aggregates primarily localize in the cytoplasm of HeLa
cells, but those formed from complex 85b also display
a high tendency to reside in the nucleus, in particular the nucleoli,
indicating that the tridentate ligand of the complex plays a role
in dictating the affinities of the assemblies toward different cellular
compartments. A related platinum(II) complex (86) has
been encapsulated into a redox-sensitive, disulfide-bridged organosilica
nanocage to control its dynamic self-assembly process. This nanocage can serve as a carrier to facilitate
the transport of the complex into live HeLa cells. Upon cellular internalization,
the nanocage slowly decomposes due to the reductive intracellular
environment and releases the platinum(II) complex, which self-assembles
into thermodynamically stable, blue-emissive microscopic fibers. Song,
Qu, Wong, and co-workers have developed an AIE-active alkynylplatinum(II)
complex (87), where an AIE luminogen tetraphenylethylene
is introduced to strengthen its intermolecular interaction in the
aggregated state, and an oligo(ethylene glycol) (OEG) pendant to increase
its solubility and biocompatibility. This complex self-assembles into nanoaggregates in aqueous solution
through Pt···Pt and π–π interactions,
giving rise to intense emission in the NIR region (λem = 730 nm). The complex has been encapsulated with a
nonionic copolymer Pluronic F127 to increase its stability, and the
resultant NPs are enriched in the lysosomes of HeLa cells after uptake.
 Bonnet and co-workers have examined the intracellular
dynamics
of two platinum(II) complexes (88) ( ), which form stable, deep
red-emissive nanorods via Pt···Pt interaction in serum-containing
media. Most of the complexes are internalized
into live A549 cells in the form of NPs via clathrin- and dynamin-mediated
endocytosis and reach the mitochondria without being trapped in the
lysosomes, while a smaller portion of the complexes pass through the
cell membrane as monomeric species via an energy-independent pathway
(e.g., passive diffusion), accumulate in the mitochondria,
and self-assemble to form larger and emissive nanostructures.
 Xu, Xie, Zhao, and co-workers have developed
two biscyclometalated
platinum(II) complexes (89) ( ) for cell imaging. These complexes are nonluminescent in solution but exhibit
intense red emission (λem = ca. 630 nm) upon aggregation. Cellular imaging shows that
the complexes are specifically enriched in the LDs of live HeLa cells.
Qian, Wong, and co-workers have developed a luminescent soft salt
(90) based on two cyclometalated platinum(II) complexes
of opposite charges. The soft salt shows
intense NIR emission (λem = 718
nm, Φem = 0.17) in the solid state,
where Pt···Pt and π–π interactions
take place to bring the two complexes into close proximity. The favorable
NIR emission has allowed the complex to be used in in vivo imaging.
 
3.2.3.

## Gold(III) Complexes
Compared to
the isoelectronic d8 platinum(II) complexes, luminescent
gold(III) complexes have received comparatively less attention in
the field of bioimaging, since many gold(III) complexes are nonluminescent
in solution due to rapid nonradiative decay via the low-lying 3MC states. However, through
the strategic incorporation of strong σ-donating alkyl and aryl
ligands into the complexes to raise the energy of the 3MC states, gold(III) complexes can
be made luminescent in solution at room temperature, providing new
opportunities for the development of luminescent gold(III) complexes
for diverse applications. 
Che
and co-workers have developed a cyclometalated gold(III) complex functionalized
with a biotin pendant (91) ( ) for coupling to avidin. The resultant luminescent gold(III)–avidin conjugate
displays strong interaction with DNA and BSA, which results in a up
to 45-fold increase in emission intensity. The cellular uptake of
the conjugate has been examined in live HeLa cells, showing that the
conjugate localizes in the cytoplasm with negligible nuclear uptake.
Che and co-workers have also developed a luminescent gold(III) complex
modified with a poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) pendant (92). This amphiphilic complex self-assembles
into nanosized micelles with a long emission lifetime of 84 μs
in aqueous solution. Live-cell imaging shows that the complex primarily
resides in the cytoplasm of HeLa cells. Notably, the complex exhibits
low dark cytotoxicity, high photocytotoxic activity, and selective
tumor accumulation in vivo.
 

3.3.

## d10 Transition Metal Complexes
In d10 transition metal complexes, the complete filling
of the d orbitals eliminates the possible emission quenching pathways
associated with the dissociative MC states. Similar to the d8 transition metal complexes, the low-dimensional coordination geometry
of d10 transition metal complexes allows for weak metallophilic
interactions between closed-shell d10 metal centers. Thus,
there has been significant interest in polynuclear d10 metal
complexes, in which metal–metal interactions are often observed
and play an important role in the luminescence properties of these
complexes. 
3.3.1.

## Copper(I) Complexes
Copper(I) complexes
are attractive in the development of bioimaging reagents due to their
high abundance and low cost. Copper(I) complexes such as [Cu(N∧N)2]+ and [Cu(N∧N)(P∧P)]+ with sterically bulky substituents
on the bidentate ligands have been demonstrated to show emission with
a long lifetime of several microseconds at room temperature due to
minimized Jahn–Teller distortion in the excited state. 
Li, Li, and co-workers have developed
four binuclear copper(I) complexes (93) ( ) for cellular imaging. While these complexes display very weak emission
in organic solvents such as dichloromethane, they exhibit intense
and long-lived phosphorescence (τ = 2.51 to
9.26 μs) in the solid state. Thus, upon the addition of an aqueous
buffer to the DMSO solution, the complexes form aggregates and show
aggregation-induced phosphorescence. Incubation of live HeLa cells
with the complexes results in punctate intracellular staining, indicating
that the luminescent aggregates can be internalized into the cells.
 
3.3.2.

## Gold(I) Complexes
Luminescent gold(I)
complexes have attracted significant attention for supramolecular
and optoelectronic applications due to their aurophilicity. The low
dimensionality of gold(I) complexes allows for weak intermolecular
attractive interaction between the gold(I) centers. Manipulation of
the Au···Au interaction in these complexes enables
a high degree of control over their emission properties.
Baker,
Berners-Price, and co-workers have studied the intracellular distribution
of a luminescent binuclear gold(I) NHC complex (94a)
( ). The rigid cyclophane-derived bidentate NHC
ligands support a close intramolecular Au···Au contact
(ca. 2.9 Å), resulting in emission in the visible
region (λex = 355 nm, λem = 496 nm). The complex exists in both cis and trans configurations, depending on the localization
of the phenyl rings. Both isomers display identical absorption and
emission profiles. The cis-isomer has been used for
cellular imaging due to its higher aqueous solubility. Live-cell imaging
shows that complex cis-94a is preferentially
enriched in the lysosomes of RAW264.7 cells. Related binuclear gold(I)
complexes (94b–94d) featuring a short
intramolecular Au···Au distance (ca. 2.9–3.3 Å) have also been developed. Compared to complex cis-94a, complex cis-94c exhibits more efficient
cellular uptake and accumulation due to its higher lipophilicity.
Monitoring the characteristic emission resulting from Au···Au
interaction in complex cis-94c in human
breast adenocarcinoma MDA-MB-231 cells shows that the complex is highly
stable within the cellular environment for a period of at least 6
h.
 The d10···d10 metallophilic
interaction between the nonemissive cations [Au(NHC)2]+ and anions [MX2]− (M = Au or
Cu; X = halide, cyanide, or arylacetylide) has shown to drive the
formation of luminescent complex salts [Au(NHC)2][MX2]. The emission originates from
an emissive state of ligand (anion)-to-ligand (cation) charge-transfer
character. Chen, Wang, Zhou, and co-workers have exploited the d10···d10 metallophilic interaction
to induce the assembly of a cationic gold(I) complex (95) ( ) with
an anionic copper(I) (96a) or gold(I) complex (96b) inside cancer cells for cancer-selective imaging and
PDT. The cationic complex 95 is loaded onto hyaluronic acid (HA) for targeting the HA receptors
overexpressed on cancer cells. Thus, the bioorthogonal assembly between
complexes 95 and 96a specifically occurs
in cancer cells (A549 and HeLa) but not in normal cells (human liver
LO2 and human ovarian epithelial IOSE80) ( ), switching on both the luminescence and 1O2-generation properties of the assembles to realize
cancer-selective imaging and PDT.
 Liu, Zhang, and co-workers have demonstrated aggregation-induced
conversion from TADF to phosphorescence in gold(I) complexes (97) ( ). These complexes display weak blue
TADF with lifetimes of 31.79–64.26 μs in CH3CN, but exhibit intense orange-red phosphorescence with lifetimes
up to 2.31–3.40 ms upon aggregation in aqueous solution. The
complexes have been applied in cellular imaging, and all of them give
intense intracellular emission in A549 cells. Additionally, complexes 97b and 97c show high cytotoxicity toward A549
cells, suggestive of their potential development as theranostic agents.
 

4.

## Luminescent Transition Metal Conjugates for
Bioimaging
Luminescent transition metal complexes have demonstrated
great
success as cellular probes and bioimaging reagents. However, these
complexes often encounter challenges such as low aqueous solubility,
nonspecific in vivo biodistribution, and potential
systemic toxicity, which impede their effectiveness in clinical applications.
Thus, various strategies have been developed to improve the performance
of transition metal complexes for bioimaging and biosensing. Among
these strategies, the conjugation of transition metal complexes to
biomolecules, polymers, and nanomaterials has emerged as the most effective approach, offering promising solutions
to overcome these limitations.
4.1.

## Transition Metal–Biomolecule Conjugates
Biomolecules are the fundamental building blocks of living organisms,
playing indispensable roles in various life processes. Given their
natural occurrence, the conjugation of luminescent transition metal
complexes to biomolecules offers significant advantages such as enhanced
aqueous solubility, cellular uptake efficiency, and biocompatibility,
while preserving the favorable photophysical properties of the complexes.
Furthermore, luminescent labeling of biomolecules allows for the tracking
and visualization of these substances in living systems, providing
valuable information about their localization, activities, and functions
in diverse biological processes. This advancement is crucial to the
development of innovative diagnostic and therapeutic agents.
4.1.1.

## Nucleosides
Nucleosides are involved
in various important biological processes, ranging from cellular metabolism
to signaling. Serving as precursors
for nucleotides, nucleosides are essential for nucleic acid synthesis.
Synthetic fluorescent nucleobases, which can be incorporated into
nucleic acids alongside their natural counterparts, have emerged as
a valuable tool for probing nucleic acid structures, activities, and
interactions, facilitating the development
of nucleoside and nucleotide analogues as therapeutics for treating
cancer and viral infections. 
Chattopadhyay,
Das, and co-workers have designed two ruthenium(II) complexes conjugated
with the nucleobase uracil (98a) or its derivative 5-fluorouracil
(98b) ( ) as cellular imaging reagents. These luminescent conjugates are readily internalized into live
MCF-7 cells via endocytosis and enriched in lipid dense regions such
as the ER, which is different from their nucleobase-free counterpart
[Ru(bpy)3]2+ that displays poor cellular uptake
and nonspecific staining. Notably, upon cell fixation that dissipates
the lipid bodies, the conjugates migrate to the nucleus due to their
high affinities for DNA, enabling the visualization of nuclear DNA
at various stages of cell division.
 Berdis, Gray, and co-workers have modified an
iridium(III) complex
with a deoxyribose to afford a luminescent nucleoside analogue (99) ( ) for investigating enzymatic nucleoside transport in cells. , Competition assays and gene knockdown experiments reveal the involvement
of human equilibrative nucleoside transporters (hENTs), in particular
hENT1, in the cellular uptake of the conjugate in KB-3-1 cells, suggesting
that the conjugate can serve as a substrate for hENT1 and monitor
its activity in real time. After cellular internalization, the conjugate
primarily localizes in the cytoplasm, and it migrates to the nucleus
and mitochondria after 24 h. The specific accumulation of the conjugate
in these two organelles induces cell cycle arrest in the G2/M phase
and mitophagy, respectively, suggesting that the conjugate can function
as both an imaging tool and an anticancer agent.
 Doyle, Zobieta, and co-workers have studied the
cellular behavior
of a luminescent rhenium(I)–thymidine conjugate (100) ( ). Blocking and temperature dependence experiments
indicate that the cellular uptake of the conjugate is not mediated
by the thymidine receptor, and it primarily occurs via passive diffusion.
However, the involvement of nonspecific endocytosis cannot be ruled
out, given the localization of the conjugate in the endosomal/lysosomal
compartments after cellular internalization. Kowalski and co-workers
have utilized a binuclear rhenium(I) 1,2-diazine complex as a linker
to replace the canonical phosphodiester backbone of dinucleoside phosphates. The resulting luminescent dinucleoside phosphate
mimics (101) predominantly reside in the membrane-rich
compartments of HeLa cells. The intracellular localization properties
of the conjugates have also been examined in bacterial cells, demonstrating
uniform staining in both Gram-positive S. aureus and
Gram-negative Escherichia coli (E. coli), but with more efficient cellular uptake in the former species.
 
4.1.2.

## Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
4.1.2.1.

## Amino Acids
Amino acids are essential
building blocks of proteins and play pivotal roles in various biological
processes. The incorporation of fluorescent
amino acids into proteins provides opportunities to examine protein
localization, trafficking, and interactions in live cells. Amino acids have also been utilized in the
development of prodrugs with improved physicochemical properties such
as enhanced solubility, permeability, and metabolic stability. 
Velders and co-workers have conjugated
[Ir(ppy)3] with three different amino acids including glycine
(Gly), alanine (Ala), and lysine (Lys). The cellular uptake of the resulting amino acid conjugates (102) ( ) varies with the number of amino acid substituents, with the monosubstituted
conjugates 102a, 102d, and 102g showing the highest cellular uptake efficiencies due to their higher
lipophilicity. Among the three types of amino acids, the Lys conjugates 102g–102i display the most efficient cellular
uptake and thus higher cytotoxic activity. In particular, the monosubstituted
Lys conjugate 102g is internalized into live 4T1 cells
via an energy-dependent pathway and diffusely distributed in the cytoplasm.
In contrast, the bi- and trisubstituted Lys conjugates 102h and 102i primarily localize in the lysosomes after
cellular uptake. The viability of the cells decreases with the number
of Lys substituents from 71 and 70% to 39%. Gimeno and co-workers
have developed a series of pyridyl amino acid derivatives for direct
coordination to the rhenium(I) core to produce luminescent amino acid
conjugates (103). These
conjugates are rapidly taken up by live MCF-7 cells and mainly enriched
in the cytoplasm with partial mitochondrial accumulation. Notably,
the para-substituted conjugates 103a–103c can induce the formation of amino acid
radicals, resulting in significant damage to the cell structures and
cell death.
 Glutamine is crucial to cancer cell survival
and growth by serving
as an alternative energy source, supporting macromolecular synthesis,
and maintaining redox homeostasis. Yapp,
Storr, and co-workers have prepared two rhenium(I)–glutamine
conjugates (104) ( ) to investigate glutamine uptake in live HT-29 cells,
a cell line that depends on both glucose and glutamine metabolism
for proliferation. Compared to conjugate 104a, conjugate 104b exhibits more efficient
cellular uptake and it is evenly distributed throughout the cells
after internalization. The inhibited cellular uptake observed in the
presence of excess glutamine suggests that the conjugate is primarily
taken up by the cells via a receptor-mediated uptake pathway. Remarkably,
both conjugates are essentially noncytotoxic toward the cells (IC50 > 1,360 μM; 48 h), offering opportunities for long-term
imaging of glutamine metabolism in cells.
 Tryptophan serves as a precursor for serotonin,
a neurotransmitter
involved in a wide range of neurological processes, and its metabolism
has implications in various neurodegenerative disorders and cancer. Colombo and co-workers have designed three
iridium(III) complexes appended with a tryptophan moiety (105) ( ) for
neuroimaging. These tryptophan conjugates
preferentially stain neuronal cells in ex vivo thin
sections of rat cerebellum tissues. Among the three complexes, complex 105c shows the highest affinity for cerebellar granule and
purkinje cells, and it is mainly distributed in the cytoplasmic region
after cellular uptake.
 
4.1.2.2.

## Peptides
Peptides are versatile
biopolymers composed of about 2 to 50 amino acid residues, showing
a wide range of biological functions and holding great potential as
therapeutics for numerous diseases. Their
ease of synthesis, efficient tissue penetration, and high binding
affinity and specificity toward their targets make them attractive
candidates in drug development.
Cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs)
are a class of peptides that can penetrate cellular membranes and
facilitate the transmembrane transport of bioactive cargos such as
oligonucleotides, proteins, and therapeutics into cells for various
biological and medical applications. The most extensively studied CPPs are the cationic Tat peptides,
which are derived from the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 Tat
protein. Zhou, Fei, and co-workers have
modified the Tat49–57 peptide with a His residue
at the N-terminus (HRKKRRQRRR) for conjugation with the iridium(III)
solvato complex [Ir(ppy)2(CH3CN)2]+. The resultant luminescent
peptide conjugate (106) ( ) is efficiently internalized into live
HeLa cells and primarily enriched in the nucleoli and vesicular structures.
Che and co-workers have developed an iridium(III) complex featuring
an electron-deficient alkynoic amide moiety for selective conjugation
to cysteine (Cys)-containing peptides and proteins. The complex has been tethered to a Tat48–60 peptide modified with a Cys residue at the C-terminus (GRKKRRQRRRPPQC),
producing a luminescent peptide conjugate (107) that
displays efficient cellular uptake and cytoplasmic localization. Tzakos
and co-workers have also developed a ruthenium(II) complex conjugated
with a Tat48–60 peptide (108) to promote
its cellular internalization, resulting in punctate cytoplasmic staining
in live HeLa cells. 
 Given the high abundance of basic amino acid
residues in the protein-derived
CPPs, homopolymers of arginine (Arg), Lys, ornithine, and His have
been examined as CPPs. Among these cationic
homopeptides, polyarginines, specifically those composed of 7 to 20
Arg residues, exhibit the highest cellular uptake. Keyes and co-workers
have conjugated a membrane-impermeable ruthenium(II) complex with
an octaarginine peptide to increase its cellular uptake for cellular
imaging. The resulting peptide conjugate
(109a) ( ) efficiently enters murine nonsecreting myeloma SP2/0 cells
and human blood platelets via an energy-dependent pathway. Notably,
the length of the polyarginine peptide is critical to transmembrane
transport, as the octaarginine conjugate shows more efficient cellular
uptake compared to its pentaarginine counterpart. A related osmium(II)–octaarginine
conjugate (109b) has been developed for cellular imaging. This conjugate has a higher propensity to penetrate
the nuclear membrane compared to its ruthenium(II) counterpart and
enter the nucleoli upon irradiation. Importantly, both conjugates
display negligible cytotoxicity toward SP2/0 and CHO cells under both
dark and light conditions. A ruthenium(II) dppz complex has been conjugated
with an octaarginine peptide to afford a cell-permeable probe (109c) for multimodal luminescence and resonance Raman imaging. Incubation of SP2/0 cells with the conjugate
results in intense emission in both the outer and internal membrane
structures, attributed to the emission enhancement brought about by
the hydrophobic local environment. This argument is supported by resonance
Raman spectroscopy, which indicates the preferential accumulation
of the conjugate inside the cells rather than in the membranes.
 Yoshihara and co-workers have designed a series
of NIR luminescent
iridium(III) complexes conjugated with an oligo(arginine) peptide
of different lengths (110) ( ) for in vivo vascular
imaging. Interestingly, while the free
complex and the tetraarginine conjugate 110a reside in
the intracellular space, conjugates 110b–110d with a longer Arg chain exhibit selective staining of
the vascular endothelium due to increased interaction with the proteoglycans
on the surface of vascular endothelial cells. Compared to the fluorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC)-modified lectin that circulates in the bloodstream,
the oligo(arginine) conjugates show higher retention, enabling long-term
imaging of the vascular network. Additionally, the long emission lifetimes
of the conjugates have allowed imaging of the blood vessel structures
without interference from background autofluorescence using time-gated
measurements. These properties have enabled in vivo imaging of the microvasculature in various organs and tissues including
the kidney, liver, pancreas, and tumor tissues. Dual-color imaging
of normal and fatty liver in live mice with a LD-specific fluorescent
probe PC6S has revealed distortion of the sinusoid network in the
hepatic tissue of mice fed with a high-fat diet.
 Barton and Puckett have conjugated a ruthenium(II)
complex with
a d-octaarginine peptide, which displays higher metabolic
stability than its l-counterpart. The resultant peptide conjugate (111a) ( ) exhibits punctate cytoplasmic
staining in HeLa cells at low concentrations (≤ 10 μM).
However, it preferentially accumulates in the nucleus, specifically
in the nucleoli at 20 μM. The nucleolar staining is further
enhanced when a lipophilic fluorescein unit is introduced to the C-terminus
of the peptide. The increased nucleolar localization of the resulting
conjugate (111b) results from its enhanced interaction
with the plasma membrane, which facilitates its cellular uptake via
a nonendocytic pathway and thus promotes its access to the nuclear
import machinery in the cytosol. In contrast, no comparable nuclear
staining is observed when a shorter d-tetraarginine peptide
is used, and the conjugate remains confined to vesicular structures
within the cytoplasm. Keyes and co-workers
have modified a membrane-impermeable osmium(II) complex with two d-tetraarginine or d-octaarginine peptides to increase
its membrane permeation for cellular imaging. The resultant bis-tetraarginine conjugate 112a shows efficient cellular uptake and accumulation in live
cells via an energy-dependent pathway. Interestingly, it primarily
resides in the lysosomes of cancerous A549 cells, while it is found
in the cytoplasm and nucleoli of noncancerous CHO cells. Furthermore,
the conjugate displays efficient membrane permeation in human pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cell MCTSs with intense emission being observed deep
into the spheroid core. In contrast, the bis-octaarginine
conjugate 112b remains impermeable to the cell membrane
in both 2D monolayer cells and 3D multicellular spheroids. These findings
indicate that the high membrane permeability of the octaarginine peptide
does not require a contiguous arrangement of the amino acids, and
a longer Arg chain does not further improve membrane permeation.
 Peptide nucleic acids (PNAs) are synthetic counterparts
of DNA
and RNA, featuring a unique pseudo-peptide backbone composed of N-(2-aminoethyl)glycine units replacing
the conventional phosphate-ribose structure. This substitution endows PNAs with enhanced chemical and thermal
stability and increased resistance to nucleases and proteases, while
maintaining high binding affinity and specificity toward complementary
nucleic acid strands. These remarkable characteristics have facilitated
their successful application in nucleic acid sensing and cancer therapy. D’Alfonso, Licandro, and co-workers
have conjugated a neutral binuclear rhenium(I) complex with a homothymine
PNA decamer. The resultant conjugate
(113a) ( ) can recognize and bind to the complementary homoadenine
single-stranded DNA oligonucleotide, forming stable PNA–DNA
duplexes. Treatment of HEK293 cells with the conjugate gives rise
to intense emission in the nuclear region. Notably, the nuclear emission
is blue shifted with respect to that in the cytoplasm due to the reduced
mobility and increased hydrophobicity of the nuclear environment.
A related PNA conjugate (113b) also exhibits preferential
enrichment in the cell nucleus. However,
the introduction of four additional Lys residues at the C-terminus
of the homothymine PNA decamer leads to the localization of the conjugate
(113c) in small globular endosome-like compartments with
negligible nuclear uptake. Gasser, Metzler-Nolte, and co-workers have
conjugated a rhenium(I) complex with a PNA oligomer complementary
to the messenger RNA expressing the enhanced green fluorescent protein
(EGFP). The resultant luminescent conjugate
(114) primarily resides in the perinuclear region of
HeLa cells upon electroporation. Notably, incubation of EGFP-expressing
HeLa cells with the conjugate reduces EGFP expression by 18%, suggesting
the potential use of the conjugate as an antisense agent.
 
4.1.2.3.

## Proteins
Proteins, as the fundamental
building blocks of life, are involved in a multitude of essential
cellular functions. For example, serum proteins are crucial to the
transport of various endogenous and exogenous compounds, serving as
vital carriers within the intricate network of biological processes.
Owing to their high biocompatibility and biodegradability, excellent
pharmacokinetic properties, and efficient accumulation in cancer tissues,
serum proteins have been exploited as carriers to deliver diagnostic
tools and therapeutic drugs to cancer cells. 
Albumin is the most abundant protein in blood plasma, playing
an important role in maintaining the plasma oncotic pressure and in
the transport of hydrophobic molecules such as fatty acids, hormones,
bilirubin, and drugs. Shcheslavskiy,
Tunik, and co-workers have utilized the cyclometalated platinum(II)
complex [Pt(ppy)(PPh3)Cl] (115a) ( ) for site-selective
labeling of human serum albumin (HSA). The complex is nonluminescent in solution but shows emission turn-on
upon substitution of the chloride ligand with His via imidazole coordination,
offering a new route for peptide and protein modification that is
orthogonal to the common bioconjugation techniques that target the
Lys or Cys residues. Labeling of HSA with the complex at a stoichiometric
ratio of 1:1 yields a water-soluble, nonaggregated luminescent conjugate
with a long emission lifetime (15.6 μs) in aerated aqueous solution.
Simultaneous mapping of the autofluorescence from cellular metabolic
components such as nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (phosphate) (NAD(P)H)
using fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) and the phosphorescence
of the platinum(II)–HSA conjugate using PLIM allows monitoring
changes in both cellular metabolism and microenvironment. The results
show that upon cellular internalization, the platinum(II)–HSA
conjugate is distributed in the cytoplasm of live HeLa cells with
negligible effect on the cell metabolism. Related platinum(II) complexes
(115b–115d) have also been developed
for preparing luminescent protein conjugates with different photophysical
properties. Among the various platinum(II)–HSA
conjugates formed, the one derived from complex 115b displays
both strong TPA and high O2 sensitivity, facilitating its
application in O2 sensing using TP-PLIM. The substantial
differences in the emission lifetimes recorded within a single cell
indicate significant variations in the O2 levels across
different cellular compartments. Chelushkin and co-workers have designed
a water-soluble platinum(II) complex (116) for the preparation
of nonaggregated HSA conjugates with enhanced cellular internalization
capabilities. 
 Zhang, Zhang, and co-workers have utilized BSA
as a platform to
prepare a biocompatible and biodegradable protein hydrogel for imaging
and therapeutic applications. The hydrogel
is synthesized by mixing BSA with a carboxyl-bearing ruthenium(II)
complex (117) ( ), followed by crosslinking of the ε-amino groups of the Lys residues of BSA using glutaraldehyde. The
hydrogel shows BSA-based green fluorescence and ruthenium(II)-based
red phosphorescence upon excitation at 405 and 488 nm, respectively.
The hydrogel enters cells via endocytosis and, upon enzymatic digestion
in the lysosomes, releases the ruthenium(II) complex to the mitochondria.
Remarkably, the incorporation of the complex into the hydrogel results
in selective cytotoxic activity toward liver cancer HepG2 cells (IC50 = 15.6 μg mL–1) over normal liver
LO2 cells (IC50 = 106.2 μg mL–1).
 Transferrin is a glycoprotein that is involved
in mediating the
transport of iron through blood plasma. Donnelly and co-workers have developed ruthenium(II) and iridium(III)
complexes functionalized with a thiol-reactive maleimide moiety (118) ( ) for conjugation to transferrin. Treatment
of HeLa cells that overexpress transferrin receptors with the luminescent
transferrin conjugates results in punctate staining throughout the
cytosol. The strong colocalization of the conjugates with early endosomal
antigen 1 but not with the late endosomal mannose-6-phosphate receptor
indicates that the conjugates are internalized into the cells via
a pathway that is similar to native transferrin, which is trafficked
to early endosomes to release iron, suggesting that the luminescent
transferrin conjugates can be used to monitor transferrin uptake and
trafficking and examine cellular iron metabolism.
 

4.1.3.

## Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are
essential for key biological processes including cell proliferation,
differentiation, and immune response. , Monitoring
the cellular uptake and distribution of carbohydrates is important
to disease diagnosis. For example, the 18F-labeled 2-deoxy-d-glucose (18F-FDG) is used with positron emission
tomography in clinical settings for diagnosing, staging, and monitoring
the recurrence of cancer based on the increased glucose metabolism
of cancer cells. 
Gottschaldt,
Hilger, and co-workers have modified [Ru(bpy)3]2+ with six d-glucose, d-galactose, or d-mannose moieties, and investigated the cellular uptake of the resultant
conjugates in live HepG2 cells using LSCM and flow cytometry. Among the three sugar conjugates, the d-glucose conjugate 119 ( ) displays the most efficient cellular internalization
and accumulation. Lo and co-workers have designed iridium(III) complexes
appended with an N-methylaminooxy group as luminescent
labeling reagents for reducing sugars. The resulting β-glucose conjugate (120a) is taken
up by live HeLa cells via an energy-requiring pathway and enriched
in the perinuclear region. Notably, the β-glucose conjugate
exhibits higher cellular uptake efficiency compared to its β-galactose
(120b), α-galactose (120c), β-lactose
(120d), and β-maltose counterparts (120e). These findings suggest the involvement of glucose transporters
(GLUTs) in the uptake of the glucose conjugates. Stagni, Plush, and
co-workers have developed a neutral rhenium(I) complex bearing an
alkyne handle for conjugation with azide-modified glucose, galactose,
mannose, and maltose using click chemistry. The cellular uptake and localization of the resulting conjugates
(121) have been studied in H9c2 cells, a cell line known
for its high dependence on carbohydrate metabolism and proliferation.
These conjugates are primarily enriched in the late endosomes/lysosomes
of the cells. Among the four conjugates, the glucose conjugate 121a shows the highest cellular uptake. Interestingly, the
addition of d-glucose does not affect the uptake of the conjugates,
indicating that the sugar conjugation does not specifically target
the conjugates to GLUTs but rather influence their localization following
uptake. Mauro, Panigati, and co-workers have investigated the cellular
uptake and localization properties of luminescent glyco-functionalized
neutral binuclear rhenium(I) complexes (122). Conjugates 122a–122c are readily internalized into live HeLa cells and enriched in the
ER. Interestingly, the more hydrophilic maltose conjugate 122c displays higher cellular uptake efficiency compared to the glucose
conjugates 122a and 122b, suggesting that
the uptake of conjugates is associated with an active transport mechanism.
However, incubation of the cells with the trivalent glycoconjugate 122d results in negligible intracellular emission.
 Glucose plays a critical role in cellular metabolism,
serving as
a vital energy source for cell growth. The transportation of glucose across the plasma membrane is mediated
by the membrane-bound GLUTs. The overexpression
of GLUTs has been linked to the increased glucose uptake and metabolism
in cancer cells. Lo and co-workers have
developed a rhenium(I)–glucose conjugate (123)
( ) as a luminescent
glucose uptake indicator to examine glucose uptake in cells. The conjugate exhibits similar and competitive
uptake behavior to d-glucose and accumulates in the mitochondria
after cellular internalization. Remarkably, the conjugate shows more
efficient uptake in transformed cell lines (HeLa and MCF-7) compared
to nontransformed cell lines (HEK293T and NIH/3T3) due to the overexpression
of GLUTs in transformed cells. A related iridium(III)–glucose
conjugate (124) also displays similar cell line-dependent
uptake and selective cytotoxicity toward transformed cells. This conjugate can serve as a luminescent glucose
uptake indicator that is responsive toward hormonal and metabolic
stimulation and inhibition, allowing for monitoring cellular metabolism.
Related rhenium(I) (125) and iridium(III)–glucose conjugates (126) also exhibit efficient cellular uptake in cancer
cells.
 The members of GLUTs show different substrate
specificity, transport
kinetics, and tissue expression profiles. Among them, GLUT5 is recognized
for its high specificity for fructose and overexpression in breast
cancer tissues. Lo and co-workers have
designed a rhenium(I) complex bearing a d-fructose unit (127) ( ) as a fructose uptake indicator and a selective breast cancer imaging
reagent. This conjugate displays selective
accumulation in human breast adenocarcinoma cell lines (MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231) while exhibiting limited uptake in nonbreast cancer (A549
and HepG2) and nontransformed cell lines (NIH/3T3 and HEK293T) ( ). The inhibited
cellular uptake of the conjugate in the presence of exogenous fructose
but not glucose or glucose-uptake inhibitors indicates the involvement
of fructose transporters in the uptake process. Furthermore, the conjugate
shows higher cytotoxic activity toward breast cancer cells (MCF-7
and MDA-MB-231 cells; IC50 = 9.6 and 4.9 μM, respectively)
compared to nonbreast cancer cells (A549 and HepG2 cells; IC50 = 26.8 and 33.9 μM, respectively). Related iridium(III)–fructose
conjugates (128) display increased uptake in MCF-7 cells
and exhibit high photocytotoxicity (IC50 = 5.0 and 11.2
μM) due to photoinduced 1O2 generation. Additionally, a related ruthenium(II)–fructose
conjugate (129) shows selective enrichment in the plasma
membrane of cancerous MCF-7 and HeLa cells while displaying minimal
uptake in noncancerous Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) and 3T3 cells
due to its binding to the overexpressed GLUT5. These findings highlight the potential of fructose conjugates
as innovative diagnostics and therapeutics for breast cancer.
 O-Linked-N-acetylglucosaminylation
(O-GlcNAcylation) is a posttranslational modification
that involves the addition of O-linked β-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc)
to the serine or threonine residues of nuclear or cytoplasmic proteins
by O-GlcNAc transferase. It is invovled in the regulation of diverse cellular processes including
transcription, translation, signal transduction, and metabolism. Xiao
and co-workers have developed a ruthenium(II) complex conjugated with
an O-GlcNAc derivative (130) ( ) for cellular imaging. The conjugate localizes in the cytoplasm of
live MCF-7 cells with negligible nuclear uptake, suggesting its potential
use to examine the expression and dynamics of O-GlcNAc-modified
proteins in cells.
 
4.1.4.

## Fatty Acids and Lipids
Fatty acids
are essential components of lipids and play important roles in biological
systems. They serve as a major source of energy and are integral to
the structure of membrane lipids. Additionally, fatty acids function
as signaling molecules, exerting significant influence on the development
and progression of metabolic disorders and cancer. Massi and co-workers have studied the photophysical and
biological behavior of neutral iridium(III) tetrazolato complexes
modified with a fatty acid of different chain lengths and saturation
(131) ( ). The length and degree of
unsaturation of the fatty acid chains do not significantly impact
the photophysical properties, lipophilicity, and cytotoxic activity
of the conjugates. Upon cellular internalization, conjugates 131a–131c reside in the ER of live HeLa
cells. In contrast, conjugates 131d and 131e exhibit much less efficient cellular uptake due to their longer
chains that lead to a higher degree of aggregation.
 Cholesterol is an essential lipid aiding in maintaining
the stability
and permeability of cell membranes. Additionally, it acts as a building
block for hormones and is involved in signal transduction and lipid
metabolism. Disruptions in cholesterol
homeostasis have been linked to various human diseases. Brooks and co-workers have studied the biodistribution
of a rhenium(I) complex conjugated with a cholestanol unit (132) ( ) in four prostate cell lines including a nonmalignant cell line
(PNT1a) and three malignant cell lines (22Rv1, LNCaP, and PC3) that
show distinct lipid profiles and lipid metabolism. In nonmalignant PNT1a cells, the conjugate primarily accumulates
in late endosomal/lysosomal compartments, whereas in prostate cancer
cells, it is enriched in early endosomes and multivesicular bodies.
Notably, the accumulation of the conjugate in androgen-independent
PC3 cells is higher compared to androgen-sensitive 22Rv1 and LNCaP
cells, which is associated with the increased lipid metabolism and
altered cholesterol biology in malignant cells.
 Squalene is a natural, polyunsaturated triterpene
that acts as
a biochemical precursor for the synthesis of cholesterol and other
steroids. Dosio and co-workers have
conjugated a ruthenium(II) complex with squalene to afford a self-assembling
lipophilic probe (133) ( ) for cellular imaging. The conjugate self-assembles into nanosized aggregates
in aqueous solution. These nanoaggregates are efficiently transported
across the plasma membrane of HT-29 and MCF-7 cells and distributed
throughout the whole cells including the cell nucleus. The nanoaggregates
also exhibit effective penetration into MCTSs. Interestingly, the
squalene conjugate can undergo coassembly with drugs such as gemcitabine
and paclitaxel, suggesting its potential application as carriers for
drug delivery.
 
4.1.5.

## Estrogens
Estrogens are steroid
hormones that have a significant impact on the development and maintenance
of normal sexual and reproductive function. The sex hormone 17β-estradiol is of particular interest due
to its crucial role in the growth and progression of estrogen receptor-positive
breast cancer cells. 
Lo and co-workers
have examined the cellular uptake of a ruthenium(II) complex conjugated
with a 17α-ethynylestradiol moiety (134) ( ) in live cells. This conjugate shows enhanced emission upon
binding to the estrogen receptor. The conjugate is taken up by HeLa
cells via an energy-requiring process and enriched in the perinuclear
region following cellular uptake. Panigati, Sungi, and co-workers
have studied the cellular uptake of binuclear rhenium(I) 17α-ethynylestradiol
conjugates (135) in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells that exhibit
different expression levels of estrogen receptors. The similar cellular uptake efficiency of conjugate 135a in MCF-7 (estrogen receptor-positive) and MDA-MB-231
cells (estrogen receptor-negative) suggests passive diffusion as the
major mechanism responsible for the cellular internalization of the
conjugate. The conjugate has also been used to stain Ciona
intestinalis embryos and larvae at different stages of development.
 
4.1.6.

## Vitamins
Vitamins such as biotin
(vitamin B7), folic acid (vitamin B9), and cobalamin
(vitamin B12) are essential for cell growth, proliferation,
and differentiation. Cancer cells often display elevated expression
of receptors for these vitamins to meet their increased demands for
rapid cell proliferation. 
Lo and
co-workers have examined the cellular uptake and localization properties
of a rhenium(I) complex conjugated with a biotin unit (136) ( ). The conjugate is taken up by HeLa cells via
an energy-dependent pathway and enriched in the perinuclear region,
which appears to be the Golgi apparatus. Related iridium(III) (137) and rhodium(III) complexes (40) also localize
in the perinuclear region with minimal uptake in the nucleus, but
their internalization occurs via energy-independent passive diffusion. However, rhenium(I) (138) and iridium(III) complexes (139) bearing multiple biotin moieties
exhibit more punctate cytoplasmic staining.
 Doyle and co-workers have investigated the cellular
uptake of a
rhenium(I) complex conjugated with a folic acid moiety (140) ( ). This conjugate is efficiently internalized
into A2780/AD cells that overexpress folate receptors (FRs). However,
no cellular uptake of the conjugate is observed when an excess of
folic acid is added to the cell culture medium or when CHO cells that
do not express FRs is used. Related rhenium(I) complexes have also
been conjugated with cobalamin (vitamin B12) to afford
luminescent probes (141) targeting the cubilin receptor. , The cellular uptake of these conjugates occurs via a cubilin receptor-mediated
pathway, facilitated by the presence of intrinsic factor. This unique
cellular uptake mechanism allows for the detection of the cubilin
receptor in live cells and enables the examination of its expression
in both cancerous and normal cell types, providing a valuable tool
for characterizing the expression of the cubilin receptor in various
cellular contexts.
 

4.2.

## Transition Metal–Polymer Conjugates
When developing imaging reagents using transition metal complexes,
their low aqueous solubility and high cytotoxicity often pose challenges
to their use in living systems. Thus, there has been significant interest
in attaching these complexes to hydrophilic polymers. This modification
provides a facile means to enhance their aqueous solubility and biocompatibility,
expanding their potential applications in bioimaging and clinical
diagnosis.
4.2.1.

## Poly(ethylene glycol)
Poly(ethylene
glycol) (PEG) is a synthetic polymer that has found important applications
in pharmaceuticals due to its high hydrophilicity and biocompatibility. The attachment of PEG chains to bioactive molecules
such as peptides, proteins, and antibodies offers several benefits
by minimizing their nonspecific interactions with biological components,
prolonging their blood circulation time, and reducing their clearance
rate. These properties render PEG a valuable tool in optimizing the
performance of pharmaceutical compounds.
Lo and co-workers have
designed a series of iridium(III) complexes appended with a PEG pendant
(142) ( ). This modification substantially
increases the aqueous solubility of the complexes (> 0.3 M) while
significantly reducing their cytotoxic activity (IC50 =
287 to 1,180 μM) without compromising their high cellular uptake
efficiencies. The aldehyde-bearing complex 142c has been
utilized as a luminescent PEGylation reagent for modification of BSA
and PEI. The resulting PEGylated PEI conjugate shows efficient condensation
of plasmid DNA, allowing it to serve as a transfection reagent. Related
iridium(III) complexes modified with a nondiscrete PEG pendant (143) have also been developed. Similar to their discrete PEG counterparts, these complexes display
negligible cytotoxicity toward HeLa cells in the dark (IC50 > 300 μM). However, upon continuous irradiation, complexes 143a–143d exhibit significantly increased
cytotoxic activity (IC50 = 3.4 to 23.2 μM) due to
the photoinduced generation of 1O2, resulting
in efficient oxidative damage to the mitochondria and induction of
necrosis. Additionally, the in vivo toxicity of the
PEG complexes is substantially reduced compared to their PEG-free
counterparts, making them suitable for use as visualizing reagents
for zebrafish ( ). Related rhenium(I) complexes (144) also display increased
aqueous solubility and biocompatibility upon the covalent attachment
of a PEG pendant. Additionally, the
amino group of these complexes can be activated with thiophosgene,
producing amine-reactive isothiocyanate derivatives for PEGylation
purposes. Furthermore, Lo and co-workers have developed photosensitive
(145) and thiol-responsive
PEG complexes (146) as
activatable cytotoxic agents. The incorporation of a 2-nitrobenzyl
moiety or a disulfide linkage between the iridium(III) core and the
PEG pendant enables the complexes to exhibit substantially increased
cytotoxicity in response to light and biothiols, respectively, due
to the release of the biocompatible PEG unit. Sun, Li, and co-workers
have demonstrated that iridium(III) PEG complexes (147) self-assemble into nanosized micelles. The introduction of a longer PEG chain reduces the nonspecific interactions
of the complexes with proteins, prolonging their blood circulation
time and increasing their tumor accumulation in vivo, enabling tumor-specific imaging and PDT.
 
4.2.2.

## Poly(amidoamine)
Poly(amidoamine)s
(PAMAMs) are a class of amphoteric polymers synthesized through the
polyaddition of amines to bisacrylamides. They show remarkable properties such as high aqueous solubility,
biocompatibility, and biodegradability. Additionally, PAMAMs with
different charge distribution profiles display distinct structural
and conformational behavior depending on the pH of their environment.
These unique attributes render PAMAMs useful for a wide range of biomedical
applications.
Maggioni, Ranucci, and co-workers have incorporated
rhenium(I) or ruthenium(II) complexes into a zwitterionic PAMAM to
afford water-soluble and biocompatible metallopolymers (148a and 148b) ( ). The ruthenium(II)-containing
polymer 148b is internalized into live HEK293 cells via
an endocytic pathway and distributed in the cytoplasm. A related iridium(III)-containing
polymer (148c) has been developed for imaging and PDT
applications. Compared to the monomeric
complex, the polymer exhibits similar subcellular distribution but
remarkably lower (photo)cytotoxicity. Salvati, Maggioni, and co-workers
have utilized a cationic PAMAM as the backbone for attaching ruthenium(II)
complexes for PDT applications. , The resultant
metallopolymer (149) shows more efficient cellular uptake
in live HeLa cells compared to its zwitterionic counterpart 148b. It enters cells via an active uptake mechanism and undergoes
trafficking along the endosomal/lysosomal compartments. Upon irradiation,
the photogenerated 1O2 triggers membrane damage,
enabling the polymer to escape from the endosomes/lysosomes and gain
access to the cell nucleus, facilitating the induction of cell death.
 Furthermore, PAMAMs can be prepared as dendrimers
with branched
and layered architectures. The high degree of control over the size,
shape, branch length and density, and surface amino groups of PAMAM
dendrimers enables them to hold significant potential in various biomedical
applications including gene transfection, drug delivery, and imaging. Lo and co-workers have utilized a generation
1 PAMAM dendrimer as the backbone to develop two dendritic, octanuclear
iridium(III) complexes (150) ( ). At equimolar
concentrations, these dendritic complexes display higher emission
intensities compared to their monomeric counterparts, distinguishing
them from dendrimers decorated with organic fluorophores that often
experience self-quenching effects. However, the dendritic complexes
exhibit reduced cellular uptake efficiencies due to their higher cationic
charge and larger molecular size. These complexes are internalized
into live HeLa cells via an energy-requiring pathway and enriched
in the Golgi apparatus ( ), whereas the mononuclear complexes are taken up by the cells
through an energy-independent pathway and enriched in the perinuclear
region. Velders and co-workers have developed two dendritic ruthenium(II)
complexes of opposite charges (151) using a generation
2 PAMAM dendrimer that possesses a cystamine core and sixteen amino
groups on the surface. These dendritic
complexes localize in the lysosomes of live murine colon carcinoma
CT26 cells after cellular internalization via endocytosis. Upon continuous
irradiation, the cationic complex 151a escapes from the
lysosomes to the cytoplasm and migrates to the nucleoli. In contrast,
the anionic complex 151b is retained in the lysosomes
upon irradiation, suggesting a lack of photocytotoxicity.
 

4.3.

## Transition Metal–Nanomaterial Conjugates
Over the past two decades, there have been significant advancements
in the development of nanomaterials for the diagnosis and treatment of cancer and other diseases. The size, shape, and surface chemistry
of nanomaterials play a crucial role in determining their cellular
interaction as well as pharmacokinetic and biodistribution profiles.
Furthermore, nanomaterials often show prolonged circulation times
in the bloodstream, enabling their preferential accumulation in tumor
tissues due to the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect.
4.3.1.

## Polymeric Nanomaterials
Polymer-based
nanomaterials have been developed as promising nanocarriers for biomedical
applications. The high diversity of
polymers allows for the construction of nanomaterials with different
architectures such as polymeric nanoparticles (PNPs), polymeric micelles,
and polymersomes. The encapsulation of therapeutic agents in polymeric
nanocarriers can significantly prolong their circulation times, thereby
reducing the side effects of the treatment without compromising the
therapeutic efficacy.
Shi, Li, and co-workers have developed
a simple and effective method to prepare luminescent PNPs for cellular
imaging. A hydrophobic osmium(II) complex
(152) ( ) is embedded into hydrophilic polyacrylamide-coated polystyrene
through emulsion polymerization. The resultant PNPs display efficient
cellular uptake and exclusive staining of the cytoplasm in live KB
cells, in sharp contrast to the free complex that is impermeable to
the plasma membrane of live cells. This indicates that the incorporation
of the complex into PNPs alters its cellular uptake behavior. Using
the same preparation method, water-insoluble iridium(III) (153) and platinum(II) complexes (154) with interesting AIE behavior
have also been encapsulated into polyacrylamide-coated polystyrene
to develop luminescent PNPs for imaging applications. Further modification
of the amino groups on the surface of these PNPs with targeting moieties
such as folic acid enables selective targeting of cancer cells that
overexpress FRs. Pu, Li, and co-workers
have utilized the emulsion polymerization method to incorporate a
luminescent iridium(III) complex (155) and a photochromic
DAE derivative (DAE-CHO) into PNPs to afford photoswitchable
luminescent PNPs for bioimaging applications. The PNPs show photoswitchable emission both in solution
and in live cells upon sequential exposure to UV- and visible-light
irradiation. Cellular imaging shows that the PNPs are internalized
into live KB cells via an energy-dependent pathway and enriched in
the cytoplasmic region. Hildebrandt, Charbonnière, Reisch,
and co-workers have coencapsulated a phosphorescent rhenium(I) complex
(156) and an NIR fluorescent cyanine derivative 1,1′-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′-tetramethylindodicarbocyanine
(DiD) as a FRET pair into PNPs to prepare NIR luminescent PNPs for
cellular imaging with high constrast. 
 Choudhury, Alemany, Jana, Laskar, and co-workers
have utilized
a biodegradable block copolymer PEG–PLA (PLA = poly(lactic
acid)) to encapsulate an AIE-active monocyclometalated iridium(III)
complex (157) ( ) for cellular imaging. The amphiphilic block copolymer self-assembles into micelles in
aqueous solution, with the hydrophobic PLA block located inside and
hydrophilic PEG block outside. The complex aggregates inside the micelles,
resulting in intense green emission. Live-cell imaging in HeLa cells
reveals the binding of the PNPs to the cell surface and their cytoplasmic
localization after uptake. Lepeltier, Monnereau, and co-workers have
encapsulated an AIE-active carbazole-substituted iridium(III) complex
(158) into PNPs for two-photon luminescence imaging of
cerebral vasculature. Feng, Wang, Zeng,
and co-workers have utilized an amphiphilic block copolymer PDMAEMA-b-poly(PEGMA)-b-PDMAEMA (PDMAEMA = poly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl
methacrylate); PEGMA = poly(ethylene glycol) methacrylate) as an encapsulating
agent to deliver a water-insoluble rhenium(I) complex (159) into live cells. The resulting core–shell
structured PNPs are permeable to HEK293T cells and distributed throughout
the whole cells. Additionally, the PNPs display strong interaction
with DNA, which allow them to serve as gene transfection agents. Chai,
Zhang, Tang, and co-workers have utilized polymeric nanocapsules to
encapsulate the iridium(III) complex 66b for two-photon
luminescence imaging of neural stem cells. The complex is loaded into the PEG–PLGA (PLGA = poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)) nanocapsules using a double emulsion
method. The resultant luminescent nanocapsules efficiently stain mouse
neural stem cells, and the labeled stem cells can be monitored in
live mice for up to 21 days after subcutaneous injection, offering
exciting opportunities for real-time tracking of the transplanted
stem cells in vivo.
 Yang, Yang, and co-workers have developed a three-component
self-assembly
approach to prepare water-soluble luminescent PNPs using an iridium(III)
complex (160) ( ), the block copolymer P4VP-b-PEG
(P4VP = poly(4-vinylpyridine)), and methanesulfonic acid. Methanesulfonic acid is introduced to form
the pyridinium methanesulfonate salt with P4VP-b-PEG
through proton transfer, facilitating hydrogen bonding formation with
the hydroxyl groups of the iridium(III) complexes. The resultant PNPs
show exclusive cytoplasmic staining in live 4T1 cells, and induce
significant cell death upon continuous irradiation. Core-stabilized
luminescent PNPs have also been developed by complexation of the pyridine
blocks in P4VP-b-PEG with chloride-bridged iridium(III)
dimers (161). These PNPs
display high stability in aqueous solution and cell media for at least
7 days. They also exhibit efficient cellular uptake with minimal dark
cytotoxic activity, enabling effective cellular imaging and PDT. Modification
of P4VP-b-PEG with a folic acid moiety allows the
resultant PNPs to selectively target HeLa cells that overexpress FRs. Importantly, upon cellular internalization,
the intracellular His can react with the iridium(III) moieties in
the PNPs, triggering their release from the PNPs and facilitating
their nuclear entry. This innovative mechanism offers a controlled
delivery approach for iridium(III) complexes to reach the cell nucleus.
 Massi, Lowe, and co-workers have prepared luminescent
metallopolymers
(162) ( ) using well-defined tetrazole-functionalized acrylamide copolymers
as a macromolecular ligand for iridium(III) and rhenium(I) complexes. The incorporation of a macromolecular ligand
does not significantly affect the photophysical properties of the
iridium(III) tetrazolato complexes. However, FRET occurs in the copolymers
containing both the iridium(III) and rhenium(I) species. The metallopolymers
have been used for lipid imaging in brain tissues. The strong affinity
of the metallopolymers for the myelin lipids leads to intense staining
of the cerebellar white matter tracts, while their interaction with
intracellular lipids within individual granule neurons results in
the staining of the granular layer of the cerebellum.
 Shakirova, Tunik, and co-workers have designed
a series of rhenium(I)
dicarbonyl complexes (163) ( ) as a hydrophobic block for the synthesis
of water-soluble metal-containing copolymers. These complexes feature an alkenyl group on the phosphine
ligand, which allows copolymerization with poly(N-vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) via reversible addition–fragmentation
chain-transfer polymerization. Compared to the monomeric complexes,
the resultant metallopolymers show blue-shifted emission, longer emission
lifetimes, and reduced cytotoxicity. Furthermore, while the monomeric
complexes display high specificity for the mitochondria, the metallopolymers
primarily reside in the endosomal/lysosomal compartments of live CHO-K1
cells after uptake due to their different internalization pathways.
Additionally, the emission of the metallopolymers is relatively insensitive
to O2 due to the effective shielding provided by the polymeric
matrix, minimizing the production of ROS upon irradiation. Proetto,
Gianneschi, Strassert, and co-workers have developed a norbornene-modified
platinum(II) complex (164) as a monomer for direct incorporation
into amphiphilic block copolymers via ring-opening metathesis polymerization. This method provides precise control over the
position of the complexes, either distal or adjacent to the hydrophilic
block, allowing their selective loading into the core or the shell
of the resultant micelles, respectively. Interestingly, when the platinum(II)
complexes are confined to the shell, the smaller volume of the shell
compared to the core promotes Pt···Pt interaction,
resulting in the characteristic 3MMLCT emission. These
luminescent micelles have been used for bimodal imaging of HeLa cells
with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and LSCM. Tunik, Tennikova,
and co-workers have designed a platinum(II)–Cys conjugate (165) for the synthesis of amphiphilic polypeptides. This conjugate acts as an initiator for the
ring-opening polymerization of α-amino acid N-carboxyanhydrides to attach the luminescent
platinum(II) complex to the C-terminus of the polypeptide chain. The
resultant polypeptdies have been utilized to prepare luminescent PNPs
using the phase inversion method. Live-cell imaging in human histiocytic
lymphoma U937 cells shows that the PNPs are rapidly taken up by the
cells due to their small size and cationic surface charge, and they
are primarily distributed in the cytoplasm after cellular internalization.
 Tunik and co-workers have examined the cellular uptake of a series
of NIR luminescent core–shell structured PNPs in different
cell lines. These PNPs are prepared
by the nanoprecipitation of hydrophobic polymers such as poly(d,l-lactic acid), poly(ε-caprolactone),
and poly(ω-pentadecalactone), followed by the
covalent modification with poly(l-lysine) labeled with iridium(III)
and platinum(II) complexes bearing an amine-reactive N-hydroxysuccinimide ester moiety (166) ( ). The
resultant PNPs are stable in aqueous solution and show NIR emission
characteristic to the unconjugated complexes. Furthermore, the PNPs
display efficient cellular internalization in various cell types,
including cancer cells (A549), stem cells (human adipose tissue-derived
mesenchymal stem cells), and fibroblasts (NIH/3T3). Notably, the cellular
uptake efficiency of the PNPs increases when the surface of the PNPs
is further modified with heparin to reverse their surface charge from
positive to negative, which reduces their nonspecific interactions
with proteins in the culture medium.
 
4.3.2.

## Glyconanomaterials
Glyconanomaterials
derived from glycopolymers offer unique advantages for biomedical
applications such as biocompatibility, biodegradability, and cellular
recognition due to their resemblance to natural glycoproteins. 
Sun, Huang, and co-workers have developed
water-soluble glyconanoparticles by self-assembling a luminescent
iridium(III) complex (167) ( ) with a water-soluble glycopolymer (poly(glucose))
or polysaccharide (β-1,3-glucan). These glyconanoparticles are efficiently internalized into live
HepG2 cells and distributed throughout the whole cytoplasm. In vivo biodistribution studies in live mice reveal significant
accumulation of the NPs in the liver, indicating their potential as
luminescent probes for tissue imaging. Furthermore, the NPs induce
effective apoptosis of cancer cells upon continuous irradiation, highlighting
their theranostic capabilities. Luminescent core–shell structured
glyconanoparticles have been developed by crosslinking an amine-reactive
glycopolymer with an amine-modified ruthenium(II) terpyridine complex
(168). The complex is confined
to the crosslinked core of the resultant NPs, while the glycopolymer
forms the hydrophilic corona. The glyconanoparticles have
been used for one- and two-photon luminescence imaging of live KB
cells, revealing their localization in both the cytoplasm and nucleus.
 Cyclodextrins (CDs) are water-soluble carbohydrate
oligomers consisting
of six to eight glucose units arranged in a ring structure. The amphiphilic cup-like structures of CDs
allow them to form host–guest inclusion complexes with hydrophobic
guest molecules such as pharmaceuticals, improving their stability
and bioavailability. Liu, Feng, and co-workers have developed a ruthenium(II)
complex conjugated with a β-CD moiety (169) ( ) as a luminescent
DNA carrier. Upon interaction with DNA,
the complex induces DNA aggregation, hindering DNA topoisomerization
and cleavage by enzymes. The complex has been used to deliver a plasmid
DNA encoding EGFP to live HEK293T cells, with its luminescence properties
enabling real-time tracing of DNA translocation into the cells. Liu
and co-workers have leveraged the strong host–guest interaction
between β-CD and adamantane to develop photoresponsive NPs.
These NPs are constructed by the supramolecular assembly of a β-CD-modified
ruthenium(II) complex (170) and an adamantane-modified
DAE derivative (DAE-Ad) in the presence of two other
amphiphilic substances, Pluronic F127 and cetrimonium bromide. The strong spectral overlap between the emission
of the ruthenium(II) complex and the absorption of the ring-closed
form of DAE-Ad (λabs = 366 and 620 nm) but not the ring-opened form (λabs = 317 nm) results in photocontrollable FRET, enabling
the NPs to show photoswitchable emission. These NPs have been used
as a photoresponsive label for live A549 cells.
 Zysman-Colman, Ravoo, and co-workers have utilized
β-CD vesicles
as a carrier to deliver iridium(III) complexes (171)
( ) to live
cells for imaging applications. Complexes 171a and 171b are bound to the surface of the
CD vesicles with high affinities (Ka =
0.9 and 2.8 × 106 M–1 s–1, respectively), where the less polar local environment results in
an increase in their emission intensities and a blue shift in their
emission maxima. Live-cell imaging shows that the complex-containing
β-CD vesicles are internalized into human umbilical vein endothelial
cells (HUVECs) via an endocytic pathway. Importantly, the inclusion
of complex 171b into CD vesicles significantly enhances
its cellular uptake. By labeling the CD vesicles with rhodamine, it
is observed that complex 171b dissociates from the CD
vesicles upon entry into the cells. Monitoring the intracellular dynamics
of complex 171b reveals that the complex primarily localizes
in the early endosomes during endosomal maturation and then migrates
to the mitochondria due to its cationic charge and high lipophilicity.
 
4.3.3.

## Lipid Nanoparticles
Lipid-based
NPs such as liposomes and phospholipid micelles are important delivery
systems used for biomedical applications. Liposomes are vesicles with
an aqueous core surrounded by a phospholipid bilayer. They were the
first nanocarriers used in clinical settings. The covalent conjugation of polymers such as PEG to phospholipids
can lead to the formation of phospholipid micelles with a protective
hydrophilic layer on the surface, preventing self-fusion and nonspecific
interactions with other particles.
Prasad and co-workers have
developed an optical probe for in vivo tumor imaging
by encapsulating PtTPTNP (H2TPTNP = meso-tetraphenyl-tetranaphthoporphyrin)
(172) ( ) into phospholipid micelles. These micelles are formed through the self-assembly of 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine and the PEGylated 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphorylethanolamine (DSPE-PEG2000). Upon intravenous injection into live mice bearing human pancreatic
cancer PANC-1 tumor xenografts, these nanomicelles display efficient
tumor accumulation, allowing for the effective visualization of the
tumors even during their early stages of development (i.e., one week after cancer cell inoculation). Xie and co-workers have
utilized folic acid-conjugated liposomes as a carrier for [Ru(phen)2(dppz)]2+ for cancer imaging and photoinduced inactivation. The specific interaction of folic acid with
FRs enables selective targeting of the liposomes to FR-overexpressing
cancer cells and their enrichment in the plasma membrane. Upon exposure
to laser irradiation, the liposomes rupture and release the complex
into the cells. The complex then migrates to the nucleus and intercalates
into DNA, leading to photoinduced cell death. Franchini and co-workers
have designed a cholesterol-based nanocarrier for specific imaging
of glioma cells using an iridium(III) complex (173). The nanocarrier is formed through the self-assembly
of a PEGylated cholesterol using a nanoprecipitation method. The complex
is either physically entrapped in the core or covalently linked to
the shell of the nanocarrier. To enable specific targeting, the surface
of the nanocarrier is further modified with chlorotoxin, a peptide
known for its specific binding to matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2)
overexpressed in glioma cells. Both types of nanocarriers exhibit
efficient internalization into Uppsala 87 malignant glioma (U-87 MG)
cells, with no significant difference observed for their cellular
uptake efficiencies and cytotoxic activity.
 Tunik, Urtti, and co-workers have developed
two iridium(III) complexes
containing a long aliphatic chain (174) ( ) as lipid mimics to prepare
luminescent metalloliposomes for imaging retinal pigment epithelium in vitro and in vivo. The metalloliposomes are formulated using 1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine, DSPE-PEG2000, and the iridium(III) complexes. Notably, the incorporation
of the complexes into the rigid bilayer structure of the liposomes
enables effective shielding of the excited states from interaction
with O2 and partial suppression of nonradiative decay,
resulting in improved luminescence properties. These luminescent liposomes
show efficient cellular uptake and cytoplasmic localization in human
retinal pigment epithelium ARPE-19 cells. The liposomes have also
been administered into rat eyes through intravitreal injection and
imaged using optical coherence tomography and funduscopy. Luminescent
metalloliposomes derived from ruthenium(II) complexes
such as 175( ) and 176( ) have also been developed as nanocarriers
for therapeutic agents and genetic materials.
 
4.3.4.

## Graphene Oxide
Graphene has gained
significant attention in the field of nanomedicine. It is an ideal carrier for efficient drug delivery due
to its high drug loading capability and minimal cytotoxicity. Among
the different graphene-based nanomaterials, reduced graphene oxide
(rGO) has received increasing attention as it can absorb NIR light
and generate localized heat, rendering them highly effective photothermal
therapy (PTT) agents.
Tan, Mao, and co-workers have loaded a
ruthenium(II) PEG complex (177) ( ) onto rGO sheets for lysosome-targeted
imaging and phototherapy. The rGO sheets
function as both a carrier to deliver the complex to cancer cells
and a photothermal transduction agent to convert light to heat for
PTT. The release of the complex from the rGO sheets is pH-sensitive
and accelerated under acidic conditions (pH = 5) due to the protonation/deprotonation
of carboxyl groups on rGO. The resultant nanohybrid is efficiently
taken up by live A549 cells and enriched in the lysosomes, facilitating
the release of the complex. The nanohybrid is also compatible with
photothermal imaging, showing that it specifically accumulates at
the tumor site of mice bearing A549 tumor xenografts after subcutaneous
injection. Furthermore, since the nanohybrid exhibits photothermal
effect and 1O2 generation upon irradiation at
808 and 450 nm, respectively, it effectively inhibits the tumor growth
through a combined PTT–PDT treatment.
 
4.3.5.

## Carbon Dots
Carbon dots (Cdots)
are luminescent nanomaterials with particle sizes of less than 10
nm. These nanomaterials show intrinsic
upconversion luminescence (UCL) properties, enabling the use of NIR-light
irradiation for imaging or therapeutic purposes. Additionally, they
display excellent photostability, high aqueous solubility and biocompatibility,
and ease of surface modification.
Wu, Zhu, and co-workers have
developed a facile approach for the preparation of ruthenium(II)-containing
Cdots using an amine-modified ruthenium(II) complex (178) ( ) and
citric acid as the starting materials. The ruthenium(II)-modified Cdots exhibit high solubility and stability
in aqueous solution and show intense red phosphorescence (Φem = 0.21, τ =
0.65 μs) upon photoexcitation with NIR light. These remarkable
properties have enabled the application of the modified Cdots as probes
for bioimaging in live HeLa cells and zebrafish embryos. Additionally,
the modified Cdots induce DNA cleavage upon irradiation through the
generation of ROS, highlighting their potential as PDT agents.
 
4.3.6.

## Silica Nanoparticles
Silica nanoparticles
(SiNPs), particularly mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs), have
attracted considerable interest due to their straightforward synthesis,
tunable pore size, high surface area, large pore volume, and facile
surface modification. Furthermore, SiNPs
display high biocompatibility and stability in cellular environments,
making them promising candidates for various biomedical applications.
Besic Gyenge and co-workers have examined the cellular uptake and
intracellular behavior of a series of [Ru(bpy)3]2+-encapsulating SiNPs with distinct surface modifications in head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Bimodal
imaging with LSCM and TEM shows that both the positively and negatively
charged SiNPs are efficiently internalized into human head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma UMB-SCC 745 cells and preferentially enriched
in the membrane-bound vesicles in the cytoplasm. Notably, the SiNPs
are propagated during cell division, allowing them to be traced over
five cell passages without significant impact on cell morphology and
viability. The long intracellular retention of these SiNPs can be
exploited to improve cancer diagnosis and treatment strategies. Huang
and co-workers have utilized [Ru(bpy)3]2+ in
the development of aptamer-labeled luminescent SiNPs for specific
imaging of cellular prion protein. The
ruthenium(II) complex is incorporated into the SiNPs using the reverse
microemulsion method. The SiNPs are then labeled with an aptamer that
binds to prion protein with high affinity and selectivity. This modification
allows the luminescent SiNPs to selectively stain human neuroblastoma
SK-N-SH cells that express high levels of prion protein on their cell
surface, while exhibiting negligible staining of HeLa cells with minimal
prion protein expression. Che and co-workers have incorporated a platinum(II)
pincer complex (179) ( ) into MCM-41-type MSNs for two-photon luminescence
imaging of cancer cells. The complex
shows favorable photophysical properties such as good TPA and intense
emission (Φem = 0.99); however,
its poor aqueous solubility due to the hydrophobic pincer ligand has
limited its biological applications. The incorporation of the complex
into MSNs allows it to enter live HeLa cells for cellular imaging
with LSCM, showing that the complex-loaded MSNs are entrapped in the
endosomes following their uptake via endocytosis.
 Yuan, Guan, and co-workers have prepared luminescent
SiNPs using
a ruthenium(II) complex modified with three alkoxysilyl units (180) ( ). The alkoxysilyl moiety enables the
covalent immobilization of the complex in the silica matrix of the
SiNPs, minimizing its leakage. The covalent conjugation also results
in a significant increase in the emission lifetime of the complex
(from ca. 0.77 to 2.28 μs), making the SiNPs
suitable for time-gated luminescence imaging. The luminescent SiNPs
have been conjugated to streptavidin and utilized for the detection
of Giardia lamblia. Menu and co-workers have incorporated
an alkoxysilyl-modified ruthenium(II) complex (181) into
SiNPs of various sizes and surface modifications to examine their
penetration and distribution in Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms. As revealed by LSCM, the
hydrophilic SiNPs penetrate into the biofilm regardless of their sizes,
with smaller SiNPs displaying greater diffusion compared to the larger
ones; whereas the hydrophobic SiNPs preferentially accumulate at the
periphery of the biofilm. These findings suggest that the spatial
distribution of SiNPs in bacterial biofilms is more influenced by
their hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity rather than their size. Zhao and
co-workers have utilized a similar approach to immobilize iridium(III)
complexes (182) in MSNs. The surface of the MSNs is then modified with folic acid for targeting
cancer cells. The resultant MSNs exhibit efficient cellular uptake
and cytoplasmic localization in live HeLa cells that overexpress FRs.
Larráyoz, García-Martínez, Berenguer,
and co-workers have developed a one-pot synthetic approach for the
preparation of well-defined luminescent MSNs with different surface
functionalizations. This method utilizes
an alkoxysilyl-modified iridium(III) complex (183) as
the precursor, which not only allows for efficient and homogeneous
incorporation of the complex into the silica matrix but also enables in situ surface functionalization of the MSNs. The resultant
MSNs show spherical structures with high specific surface area (up
to 1,120 m2 g–1) and enhanced emission
compared to MSNs with the iridium(III) complex grafted onto their
surface. These MSNs are internalized as aggregates into live A549
and HeLa cells and enriched in the cytoplasmic region.
 Zhao, Shi, Huang, and co-workers have developed
a luminescent nanoprobe
by immobilizing alkoxysilyl-modified iridium(III) (184a) and europium(III) complexes (184b) ( ) in porous SiNPs. The appropriate energy gap between the T1 state of the iridium(III) complex and the 5D0 level of Eu3+ enables efficient energy transfer,
resulting in intense europium(III)-based luminescence in aqueous solution
upon visible-light excitation. The resultant nanoprobe is efficiently
internalized into live HeLa cells via an energy-dependent pathway,
resulting in intense intracellular emission in the cytoplasmic region
with a high signal-to-noise ratio of up to 400. Additionally, the
long lifetime of lanthanide luminescence has enabled time-gated luminescence
imaging with a time delay of 1,500 ns, effectively eliminating interference
from the short-lived autofluorescence background. Sábio and
co-workers have developed a dual-emissive nanoprobe by covalently
immobilizing an alkoxysilyl-modified heterobimetallic ruthenium(II)–ytterbium(III)
complex (185) onto the surface of SiNPs. Upon photoexcitation at 455 nm, the nanoprobe
exhibits both ruthenium(II)- and ytterbium(III)-based luminescence
centered at ca. 610 and 980 nm, respectively. The
nanoprobe has been used for luminescence imaging of murine melanoma
B16-F10 cells and neonatal HDF cells, demonstrating their efficient
cellular uptake in both cell lines. Shi, Li, and co-workers have utilized
an in situ coordination approach to prepare europium(III)-based
luminescent NPs. The in situ coordination reaction between the precursor iridium(III) complex
and Eu3+ yields a water-insoluble heterobimetallic iridium(III)–europium(III)
complex (186) within MSNs, significantly increasing the
loading efficiency compared to physical adsorption. These NPs show
intense europium(III)-based red luminescence in aqueous solution with
a high quantum yield (Φem = 0.16)
and a long lifetime (τ = 904.7 μs), facilitating
their use for luminescence imaging of live HeLa cells and lymphatic
imaging in live mice. The radioactive 153Sm3+ can also be incorporated into the NPs due to its similar atomic
radius and chemical properties to Eu3+, allowing for single-photon
emission computed tomography (SPECT)/CT imaging.
 Lemercier, Gary-Bobo, Cunin, and co-workers have
conjugated an
alkyne-appended ruthenium(II) complex (187) ( ) to porous SiNPs
for two-photon-induced luminescence imaging and PDT of cancer cells. The complex is covalently attached to the surface
of the SiNPs through hydrosilylation of its terminal alkyne moiety
with the Si–H groups on the surface of the SiNPs. The surface
of the SiNPs is also modified with PEG and mannose moieties to enhance
their biocompatibility and cancer-targeting ability, respectively.
The modified SiNPs are efficiently taken up by live MCF-7 cells and
effectively induce cancer cell death upon two-photon excitation (λex = 800 nm). Li, Li, and co-workers have
modified fluorescent SiNPs with a carboxyl-bearing ruthenium(II) complex
(188) for NIR light-mediated cancer imaging and PDT. The SiNPs display UCL at 490 nm upon NIR-light
irradiation; thus, modification of the SiNPs with the ruthenium(II)
complex allows them to exhibit intense red phosphorescence and generate 1O2 upon photoexcitation at 800 nm due to FRET from
the SiNPs to the complex. The SiNPs have been further modified with
folic acid on the surface to enable selective targeting of FR-overexpressing
HeLa cells both in vitro and in vivo. Remarkably, the SiNPs induce a remarkable decrease in HeLa cell
viability upon irradiation, highlighting their potential as cancer
theranostics.
 
4.3.7.

## Polyhedral Oligomeric Silsesquioxanes
Polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSSs) are nanosized materials
characterized by their cage-like structure and well-defined chemical
formula (RSiO1.5)n (n = 8, 10, 12). Among them,
cubic octasilsesquioxane is the most extensively
studied due to its high symmetry and ease of modification with various
corner functional groups. In addition to their common advantages shared
with dendrimers such as multiple functionalities and 3D macromolecular
scaffolds, POSSs possess unique properties including high thermal
stability, rigidity, and hydrophobicity. These distinctive characteristics
make them highly versatile as building blocks for innovative hybrid
nanocomposites, supramolecular assemblies, and functional materials.
Tang, Lo, and co-workers have developed a series of luminescent
molecular hybrids (189) ( ) through grafting eight iridium(III) complexes
onto a POSS unit. The attachment of
the iridium(III) complexes to a POSS unit renders them AIE-active,
showing increased emission intensities upon increasing water fraction.
The modification also substantially reduces the dark cytotoxic activity
and photocytotoxicity of the complexes. Live-cell imaging shows that
these octanuclear complexes are internalized into live HeLa cells
via caveolae-mediated endocytosis and enriched in the cytoplasm, in
contrast to their POSS-free counterparts that specifically accumulate
in the mitochondria. Molecular hybrids composed of an iridium(III)
core and a POSS pendant (190) have also been developed. These complexes display distinctive internalization
mechanisms compared to their POSS-free counterparts and target different
intracellular organelles such as the mitochondria, LDs, and lysosomes
( ). In particular,
the bipyridine complex 190a is taken up by HeLa cells
via a pathway involving both clathrin-mediated endocytosis and macropinocytosis
and enriched in the mitochondria, whereas its POSS-free counterpart
is internalized into the cells through passive diffusion and is enriched
in the ER. Additionally, the POSS complexes are relatively noncytotoxic
in the dark, but exhibit high photocytotoxic activity under both normoxia
and hypoxia due to their capabilities to generate both 1O2 and superoxide anion radical (O2•−) upon irradiation. These findings indicate that the conjugation
of a POSS unit to transition metal complexes can modulate their cellular
uptake, organelle specificity, and (photo)cytotoxicity.
 
4.3.8.

## Nanoscale Metal–Organic Frameworks
and Nanoscale Coordination Polymers
Nanoscale metal–organic
frameworks (NMOFs) and nanoscale coordination polymers (NCPs) are
hybrid nanomaterials constructed through the coordination of metal
ions or clusters to organic linkers. Generally, NMOFs are referred to as porous crystalline nanomaterials,
while NCPs are considered as amorphous NPs. The high chemical flexibility
and synthetic tunability of these nanomaterials allow for facile manipulation
of their properties such as size, shape, and loading capacities. Additionally,
the relatively labile metal–ligand coordination bonds endow
the nanomaterials with intrinsic biodegradability, making them attractive
for biomedical applications.
Lee and co-workers have incorporated
[Ru(bpy)3]2+ into zirconium-based UiO-67 NMOFs
to develop a theranostic nanoplatform for two-photon-induced imaging
and PDT. Loading of the complex into
NMOFs substantially enhances the emission quantum yield and lifetime,
TPA cross-section, 1O2 generation efficiency,
and photostability of the complex. The modified NMOFs also show high
water dispersibility and stability in biologically relevant media.
Two-photon luminescence imaging of live A549 cells shows that the
luminescent NMOFs are internalized into the cells via endocytosis
and enriched in the cytoplasm. Furthermore, these NMOFs display high
biocompatibility in the dark and induce significant cell death upon
white-light irradiation due to 1O2 generation.
Lin and co-workers have developed luminescent NCPs using Zr2+ as the connecting point and a luminescent dicarboxylic acid-modified
ruthenium(II) complex (191) ( ) as the bridging unit. The NCPs are further stabilized with a silica coating functionalized
with PEG and anisamide as a tumor-targeting unit. Live-cell imaging
shows that the resultant nanomaterials exhibit efficient uptake in
human non-small-cell lung cancer H460 cells, highlighting the potential
of functionalized NCPs for targeted imaging and drug delivery.
 
4.3.9.

## Gold Nanoparticles
Gold nanoparticles
(AuNPs) are widely used in biological and medical applications due
to their advantageous properties such as high biocompatibility and
optical absorption tunability. Luminescent
labeling of AuNPs allows for multimodal detection, combining optical
signatures and gold-based density detection. Additionally, AuNPs can
serve as an excellent scaffold for sensing applications, offering
stability, tunability, and multifunctionalization
for selective binding and detection of targets. These interesting
properties make them valuable tools in biomedical research and diagnostics.
Williams, Gunnlaugsson, and co-workers reported on the first application
of ruthenium(II) complex-functionalized AuNPs as cellular imaging
reagents. The ruthenium(II) complexes
(192) ( ) are modified with a terminal alkyl thiol group to facilitate
their conjugation to the surface of AuNPs. The AuNPs are synthesized
and functionalized with the ruthenium(II) complexes using the two-phase
Brust–Schiffrin method, which gives rise to small, spherical
NPs with an average diameter of 3–4 nm. Monitoring the uptake
of the AuNPs in HeLa cells using LSCM and TEM shows that the AuNPs
localize in both the cytoplasm and nucleus. The ruthenium(II) complexes
have also been tethered to AuNPs with a larger diameter of ca. 15–20 nm. The larger
size of the AuNPs allows their cellular uptake to be followed by TEM,
which shows that these AuNPs accumulate in single membrane vesicles
in the cytoplasm. This, together with the LSCM images, shows that
the AuNPs are internalized into the cells via endocytosis and migrate
to the nuclear membrane over time. The ruthenium(II) complexes have
also been conjugated to silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) to develop lysosome-targeting
theranostic agents. The AuNPs can also
be functionalized using binuclear ruthenium(II) complexes that are
linked with a disulfide bond (193). The resultant nanoconjugates show higher retention in HeLa
cells than the free complexes after cellular internalization.
 Hodges, Pikramenou, and co-workers have demonstrated
the coating
of AuNPs of a diameter of ca. 100 nm with ca. 105 ruthenium(II) complexes. The nanoconjugates are prepared using a ruthenium(II)
complex that contains two thiol groups (194) ( ) for attachment
to the AuNP surface that is precoated with a nonionic fluorinated
surfactant. The use of a surfactant enables a high loading of metal
complexes on AuNPs of different sizes while inhibiting flocculation
induced by the cationic complexes. The high loading of complex has
allowed luminescence imaging of the interaction of the NPs with nuclear
chromatin in A549 cells at single-nanoparticle resolution. Furthermore,
the luminescence properties of the complexes have allowed quantification
and tracking of the cellular uptake and localization of the AuNPs
in cells. Bimodal imaging with LSCM and TEM reveals that the complex 195-labeled AuNPs are enriched in the early endosomes after
uptake, and at later time points, in the lysosomes and autophagosomes. This accumulation leads to organelle swelling
and breakdown of the surrounding membranes, resulting in the endosomal
release of the NPs into the cytoplasm without inducing detectable
cytotoxicity. Pikramenou and co-workers have also exploited the characteristic
emission lifetimes of an iridium(III) complex (196) and
AuNPs for multiphoton lifetime imaging with multichannel detection. The TPA cross-section of the complex (δ760 nm = up to 2 × 103 GM) is significantly enhanced by the surface plasmon resonance of
AuNPs. The intense two-photon-induced emission has facilitated the
use of two-photon excitation FLIM and PLIM to monitor the surface
plasmon resonance of the AuNPs and the emission of the iridium(III)
complex, which are in the tens of picosecond and hundreds of nanosecond
range, respectively. Additionally, the long-lived iridium(III) emission
is sensitive to the cellular environment, providing local information
that can be used to examine biomolecular interactions. The AuNPs mainly
reside in the cytoplasm of the cells after cellular uptake, with some
of them also accumulating in the nucleus. Related AuNPs coated with
an iridium(III) complex (197) have been used for the
visualization and monitoring of microvascular blood flow. 
 La Deda and co-workers have encapsulated transition
metal complexes
into gold–silica nanoparticles (GSNPs) using a one-pot microemulsion
method. The GSNPs doped with a hydroxy-containing
ruthenium(II) complex (198) ( ) exhibit efficient uptake and cytoplasmic
localization in cancer cells. Remarkably, the GSNPs show a larger
increase in cytotoxicity upon irradiation compared to the free complex,
highlighting their enhanced therapeutic potential.
 
4.3.10.

## Upconversion Nanoparticles
Upconversion
luminescence (UCL) is an anti-Stokes process that emits high-energy
photons by absorbing two or more low-energy photons. It can be achieved through two main approaches: lanthanide-based
upconversion and triplet−triplet annihilation (TTA)-based upconversion.
Lanthanide-based upconversion requires high excitation intensity and
suffers from low upconversion efficiencies in aqueous solution due
to the low absorption of lanthanide ions and water quenching. On the
other hand, TTA-based upconversion involves energy transfer from a
sensitizer with high molar absorptivity in the biological windows
to an annihilator, enabling efficient upconversion even under low
excitation intensity.
Li and co-workers have developed water-soluble
TTA-based upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) by embedding PdOEP (H2OEP = octaethylporphyrin) (199) ( ) and 9,10-diphenylanthracene into
SiNPs. Upon selective photoexcitation
of PdOEP (λex = 532 nm), the UCNPs
display blue UCL at 433 nm (Φem =
0.045) in aqueous solution, originating from 9,10-diphenylanthracene
via TTA. The efficient UCL has allowed imaging in live HeLa cells
with negligible background interference. The UCNPs have also been
used for real-time UCL imaging of lymph node in live Kunming mice
with a high signal-to-noise ratio at low excitation power density
(8.5 mW cm–2). Nagai, Siegwart, and co-workers have
developed a UCL system (200) using cellulose as a template. The sensitizer, PtTPP (H2TPP = meso-tetraphenylporphyrin),
and the emitter, rhodamine B, are functionalized with an alkyne moiety
for conjugation to the azide-modified cellulose using the CuAAC click
reaction. The attachment of PtTPP on cellulose induces the formation
of J-aggregates, giving rise to a broad absorption band in the NIR
region (λabs = ca. 800 nm). Selective excitation of the J-aggregate absorption band
with NIR light (λex = 850 nm) results
in orange fluorescence (λem = 595
nm) with a large anti-Stokes’ shift (> 250 nm). This system
has been used for tumor imaging in vitro and in vivo through formulation into NPs. Li and co-workers
have examined the in vivo biodistribution and toxicity
of TTA-based upconversion nanocapsules (UCNCs), which are prepared
by coloading PtTPTBP (H2TPTBP = meso-tetraphenyl-tetrabenzoporphyrin)
(201) and a BODIPY derivative (BODIPY-TPS) into BSA-stabilized soybean oil droplets. The UCNCs exhibit excellent stability under physiological conditions
with no apparent leakage of the dyes, and show efficient UCL at 558
nm upon excitation at 635 nm. Whole-body UCL imaging shows that the
UCNCs are mainly enriched in the liver and spleen of mice after intravenous
injection, and rapidly excreted from the mice within 24 h. Importantly,
analyses on the body weight, histology, hematology, and blood biochemistry
of the mice indicate that the UCNCs display no apparent toxicity at
a dose as high as 1,200 mg kg–1 over a period of
60 days. Nevertheless, TTA-based upconversion suffers from triplet
excited state quenching by O2, which leads to the loss
of UCL. Bonnet and co-workers have demonstrated the use of biocompatible
antioxidants to reduce the O2 sensitivity of TTA-based
UCNPs. The UCNPs are prepared by doping
PdTPTBP and 2,5,8,11-tetra(tert-butyl)perylene
into the hydrophobic membrane of polymersomes derived from an amphiphilic
block copolymer poly(isobutylene)-block-poly(ethylene
glycol). The UCNPs can efficiently convert red light into blue light
under aerobic conditions in the presence of O2 scavengers.
 

5.

## Luminescent Transition Metal Complexes for Autofluorescence-Free
Imaging
Luminescence imaging has offered exciting opportunities
to study
biological processes at the cellular level with unprecedented spatial
and temporal resolution. However, conventional imaging techniques
rely on external light sources for real-time excitation of the probes,
restricting the effectiveness of luminescence imaging in vivo due to the unavoidable background autofluorescence and limited light
penetration depth in biological tissues. Thus, there has been emerging
interest in autofluorescence-free imaging modalities that utilize
self-illuminating probes to eliminate the need for real-time excitation. This approach allows for the sensitive detection
of biological events in deep tissues with minimal background interference,
overcoming the challenges associated with conventional luminescence
imaging techniques.
5.1.

## Cherenkov Luminescence Imaging
Cherenkov
luminescence imaging is an imaging technique that utilizes the Cherenkov
radiation emitted from high-energy charged particles during the decay
of clinical radionuclides (e.g., 18F, 64Cu, 68Ga, 89Zr, 90Y, and 131I) in biological tissues as an internal excitation source. This self-illuminating phenomenon eliminates
the need for real-time external excitation, enabling in vivo luminescence imaging with a high signal-to-noise ratio.
Wang,
Yang, Yang, and co-workers have utilized 18F-FDG as an
internal radioactive source to excite an iridium(III) complex (202) ( ) for radiopharmaceutical-excited phosphorescence imaging (REPI). The iridium(III) complex acts as a transducer
to convert the UV-to-blue Cherenkov radiation emitted by 18F-FDG into orange-red phosphorescence. This method overcomes the
limited penetration depth of Cherenkov radiation, allowing background-free
imaging with improved penetration depth in vivo.
As shown in , REPI has enabled in vivo tumor imaging with a
significantly improved signal-to-noise ratio compared to traditional
phosphorescence imaging and Cherenkov luminescence imaging.
 
5.2.

## Chemiluminescence Imaging
Chemiluminescence
is a phenomenon in which light is generated as a result of chemical
reactions. Since chemiluminescence does
not require an external excitation source, it does not suffer from
interference caused by autofluorescence or light scattering, and thus
it can offer a high signal-to-noise ratio and deep imaging depth that
are difficult to achieve with conventional luminescence imaging techniques.
Common chemiluminescent substrates such as luminol, Cypridina luciferin analogues, and peroxyoxalates generate light following
reaction with an oxidant. In contrast, Schaap’s dioxetanes
undergo a chemically initiated electron exchange luminescence (CIEEL)
process via phenol deprotection, yielding an electronically excited
benzoate ester that emits light upon returning to the ground state.
The ease of incorporating various stimuli-responsive moieties as a
protecting group for the phenol allows Schaap’s dioxetanes
to detect a wide range of analytes in living systems. Lippert and co-workers have developed chemiluminescent
iridium(III) complexes (203) ( ) by conjugating the iridium(III) polypyridine
core with an acrylic acid-modified 1,2-dioxetane via a piperazine
linker. Upon CIEEL under physiological
conditions (pH = 7.4), chemiluminescence resonance energy transfer
(CRET) takes place from the chemiexcited benzoate unit to the O2-sensitive iridium(III) polypyridine core, enabling excitation-free,
ratiometric O2 sensing in vitro and in vivo ( ). Two related chemiluminescent iridium(III) complexes (204) have also been developed, with complex 204b displaying an unusual sulfur ligation. The direct conjugation of the 1,2-dioxetane scaffold to iridium(III)
complexes allows more efficient energy transfer, giving rise to single
red chemiluminescence. The cationic complex 204b has
been used for in vivo chemiluminescence imaging due
to its higher aqueous solubility.
 Transition metal complexes such as [Ru(bpy)3]2+ can generate chemiluminescence upon reduction
reactions. Eppinger, Reiner, and co-workers
have utilized
[Ru(bpy)3]2+ as a chemiluminescent agent for
intraoperative chemiluminescence imaging in live mice. In the presence of an oxidizing agent such
as ceric ammonium nitrate, [Ru(bpy)3]2+ is oxidized
to [Ru(bpy)3]3+, which can then be reduced by
biological tissues or serum to [Ru(bpy)3]2+*,
resulting in the characteristic red phosphorescence upon returning
to the ground state. Biodistribution studies with intraoperative chemiluminescence
imaging reveal that the complex primarily accumulates in the kidneys
and liver, suggesting renal clearance as the major elimination pathway.

5.3.

## Afterglow Luminescence Imaging
Afterglow
luminescence imaging has emerged as a promising technique for in vivo imaging. It monitors
the persistent luminescence emitted from chemical defects after the
cessation of light irradiation. This imaging approach effectively
reduces autofluorescence interference from biological tissues, enabling
deep tissue imaging with high detection sensitivity.
Typically,
afterglow luminescent probes consist of three components: a 1O2 photosensitizer as an afterglow initiator, a 1O2-reactive molecule as an afterglow substrate, and a
luminophore as an afterglow emitter. However, the physical mixing
of these components often leads to inefficient intermolecular energy
transfer, resulting in weak afterglow luminescence. Liu, Xu, Li, and
co-workers have leveraged both the luminescence and 1O2-photosensitization behavior of iridium(III) complexes to
design a unimolecular afterglow luminescent probe (205) ( ) for
autofluorescence-free imaging in vivo. The probe features an iridium(III) complex
conjugated with the afterglow substrate 1,4-oxathiin, serving as both
an afterglow initiator and an afterglow emitter. Upon short-term irradiation,
the iridium(III) moiety sensitizes the production of 1O2, oxidizing the 1,4-oxathiin unit to form an unstable 1,2-dioxetane
derivative that rapidly decomposes to yield an electronically excited
dicarbonyl species. This CIEEL process activates the iridium(III)
moiety via intramolecular CRET, giving rise to iridium(III) emission
persisting for ca. 3 s after ceasing the excitation
light source. The complex has been encapsulated into Pluronic F127
for in vivo imaging, realizing autofluorescence-free
imaging with a signal-to-noise ratio of up to 189 ( ).
 

6.

## Luminescent Transition Metal Complexes for Multimodal
Imaging
While luminescence imaging is a powerful technique
for direct visualization
of cells and subcellular structures with high resolution, it poses
challenges in providing quantitative information due to its high sensitivity
to light scattering, instrumental parameters such as laser power,
and local concentration and environment of the probes. Additionally,
luminescence imaging in biological tissues is limited by the penetration
depth. Thus, the combination of luminescence imaging and other molecular
imaging modalities with complementary advantages can allow biological
imaging at increased tissue penetration depth while maintaining high
sensitivity and spatial resolution, improving disease diagnosis and
treatment. 
6.1.

## Vibrational Imaging
Vibrational imaging
is a label-free and noninvasive method for direct visualization of
molecular species inside cells through probing the inherent vibrations
of chemical bonds in forms of infrared (IR) absorption and Raman scattering.
This imaging approach enables the mapping of different molecular species
such as nucleic acids, proteins, and lipids that are characterized
by a specific set of chemical bonds without the need for exogenous
labels, offering opportunities to elucidate their intricate interactions
in the complex biological milieu. 
Rhenium(I) tricarbonyl complexes are promising probes for IR imaging
due to their characteristic C≡O absorption bands at ca. 1,920 (antisymmetric stretching, E band) and 2,020 cm–1 (symmetric stretching, A1 band), a specific
region that is free from interference caused by other functional groups
commonly found in biological molecules. , Policar and co-workers have designed a luminescent rhenium(I) tricarbonyl
complex featuring a 4-(2-pyridyl)-1,2,3-triazole ligand (206) ( ) as the
first single-core multimodal probe for imaging (SCoMPI) that can be
visualized inside cells using both fluorescence microscopy and synchrotron
radiation Fourier transform IR (SR-FTIR) microspectroscopy. The mapping of the E and A1 bands
of the complex with the asymmetric stretching of phosphate at 1,240
cm–1, one of the IR signatures of the cell nucleus,
indicates the enrichment of the complex in the perinuclear region
of MDA-MB-231 cells ( ). These observations coincide with those obtained in luminescence
imaging. Further colocalization studies confirm that the complex specifically
accumulates in the Golgi apparatus. This bimodal imaging approach
has also been used to examine the effect of alkyl chain lengths on
the cellular uptake and cytotoxicity of rhenium(I)-based SCoMPIs (207). Quantification of the
cellular uptake of the complexes based on their characteristic IR
absorption reveals that a longer chain can enhance the cellular permeation
and cytotoxic activity of the complexes. The cellular uptake of complex 207c in live MDA-MB-231 cells has been monitored in real time
using a microfluidic device to limit water absorption while keeping
the cells alive, showing that the intracellular concentration of the
complex reaches a plateau within 1 h. This lipophilic complex has also been incorporated into bicosomes
to promote its skin penetration for dermatological applications. A related rhenium(I) 1-(2-pyridyl)-1,2,3-triazole
complex (208) has also been developed for cellular imaging. This complex displays stronger emission compared
to its 4-(2-pyridyl)-1,2,3-triazole counterpart, facilitating its
sensitive detection in cells.
 Policar and co-workers have conjugated a SCoMPI
to mestranol, a
prodrug of 17α-ethynylestradiol and an estrogen component of
some oral contraceptive formulations, to monitor its uptake and localization in two breast cancer cell
lines (MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells) using a correlative multimodal
imaging approach. The resultant conjugate
(209) ( ) enters cells via an active transport mechanism that involves
mestranol recognition, and specifically localizes in the Golgi apparatus
after uptake. Hyaluronic acids (HAs), a natural glycosaminoglycan
that can be used as a dermal filler to reduce the appearance of facial
wrinkles, have also been modified with a SCoMPI to examine their penetration
into human skin biopsies. Bimodal imaging
of the resulting conjugates (210) shows that the skin
penetration of HAs is dependent on their size and confined to the
upper layer of the skin. Additionally, SCoMPIs have been used to label
a nonaarginine peptide to study its interaction with membranes both in vitro and in live cells. Conjugate 211a exhibits substantially higher emission
intensity in the presence of lipid vesicles compared to conjugate 211b due to the different sensitivity of the SCoMPIs to their
local environment. Thus, incubation of CHO cells with conjugate 211a leads to more intense intracellular emission than with
conjugate 211b. The comparable intracellular IR signals
observed from the conjugates suggest that their concentrations are
similar within cells. A related nonaarginine conjugate (211c) has been utilized for imaging of human skin biopsies using the
bimodal approach. Quantification of
the conjugate in skin biopsies indicates that its transdermal penetration
is time-dependent and the diffusion of the conjugate occurs via the
extracellular matrix. Furthermore, Zobi and co-workers have investigated
the uptake and localization of a rhenium(I)–cyanocobalamin
conjugate (212) in 3T3 cells using FTIR spectromicroscopy. The conjugate is unsuitable for luminescence
imaging as its emission is quenched by FRET from the rhenium(I) core
to the cyanocobalamin moiety. However, the IR signatures of the rhenium(I)
core allow the examination of its cellular localization by FTIR spectromicroscopy,
which shows that the conjugate resides in the cytoplasm in close proximity
to the nucleus but not to lipid-rich organelles.
 
6.2.

## X-Ray Fluorescence Imaging
Synchrotron
radiation X-ray fluorescence (SXRF) imaging is a noninvasive imaging
technique that allows for the quantitative determination of trace
elements in biological samples. This
method enables the simultaneous mapping of multiple elements with
high accuracy and specificity, providing valuable insights into the
concentration and distribution of both essential and exogenous metals
in cells and tissues.
Rhenium(I) complexes are suitable for
SXRF imaging due to the low natural abundance of rhenium, which results
in a high signal-to-noise ratio. The rhenium center shows two characteristic
signals at ca. 8.6 and 10.28 keV, corresponding to
its L-bands. Harris, Massi, and co-workers have examined the cellular
uptake and localization properties of a luminescent rhenium(I) tetrazolato
complex (213) ( ) using epifluorescence and SXRF microscopy. The iodo substituent is introduced onto the
axial tetrazole ligand to investigate the stability of the complex
in the intracellular environment via elemental mapping. The strong
colocalization of rhenium and iodine in the XRF elemental distribution
map confirms that the tetrazole ligand remains bound to the rhenium
center within the cellular context after uptake. The complex is preferentially
enriched in the perinuclear region but not inside the nucleus, based
on the high cell-to-nuclear content ratios for both rhenium and iodine.
Additionally, quantitative measurements of cellular elemental contents
suggest that the complex disrupts the homeostasis of several biologically
relevant elements such as selenium, chlorine, zinc, and potassium.
Wilson and co-workers have utilized a similar approach to examine
the intracellular stability of a rhenium(I) isonitrile complex that
induces cancer cell death via ER stress. 
 
6.3.

## Nuclear Imaging
Nuclear imaging is
a medical technique that utilizes a radioactive tracer to observe
structures deep inside tissues. Technetium-99m is the most commonly
used radioisotope in clinical diagnosis, as it is a pure γ-emitter
(Eγ = 140 keV) with a half-life
of 6 h. This half-life is long enough
for the preparation of radiopharmaceuticals and in vivo accumulation in target tissues for image acquisition, while also
being short enough to minimize radiation dose to the patient. These
characteristics make technetium-99m ideal for nuclear medical scans
that use SPECT to detect gamma rays.
Since technetium-99m is
a congener of rhenium, both of them share similar coordination chemistry,
allowing for the use of the same set of ligand scaffolds to prepare
isostructural complexes with similar physical and chemical properties.
By combining the use of these compounds, it is possible to bridge
the gap between cellular imaging and in vivo imaging,
obtaining information on the cellular uptake, intracellular localization, in vivo biodistribution, and pharmacokinetics of the complexes.
Zubieta, Valliant, and co-workers have designed a bifunctional single
amino acid chelate using a Lys derivative. The chelate contains: (1) a tridentate bis(2-quinolylmethyl)amine
ligand at the side chain for coordination to the [M(CO)3]+ core to prepare stable rhenium(I) and technetium-99m
complexes; and (2) a Fmoc protecting group at the N-terminus that
can be cleaved for incorporation into short peptide sequences during
solid-phase peptide synthesis. The resultant luminescent rhenium(I)
conjugate (214) ( ) displays both ligand-centered fluorescence (λem = 425 nm) and metal-based phosphorescence
(λem = 580 nm), and has been conjugated
with the peptide fMLF to target the formyl peptide receptors (FPRs)
expressed on neutrophils for monitoring the trafficking of white blood
cells. Luminescence imaging shows that conjugate 214 localizes
in the cytoplasm of human leukocytes after uptake. The conjugate has
also been modified with the CPP GRKKRRQRRR derived from the Tat48–57 domain to enhance its cellular uptake. The resulting peptide conjugate (215a) mainly resides in the cell nucleus, with significant association
with the nuclear envelope. Its radioactive technetium-99m counterpart
(215b) has also been prepared and utilized to label neurospheres
and monitor cell transplantation in mice.
 Valliant and co-workers have developed isostructural
luminescent
and nuclear probes based on the [M(N∧N)(CO)3(L)]+ scaffold, which allows for the facile preparation
of the complexes in high yields using a two-step procedure. Structure–property relationship analysis
indicates that the plasma stability of the technetium-99m complexes
increases with the basicity of the monodentate ligand. By using N-alkylated imidazole
derivatives as the monodentate ligand, stable rhenium(I) and technetium-99m
complexes (216–218) ( ) have been developed for
luminescence and nuclear imaging. As
revealed by SPECT/CT imaging, the sulfonate complex 216b is rapidly excreted through the kidneys and bladder with negligible
liver uptake, while the bisphosphonate complexes 217b and 218b are enriched in regions of high calcium turnover
such as the knee and shoulder joints. However, complex 217b exhibits more significant liver accumulation compared to complex 218b, which is attributed to the dissociation of the monodentate
imidazole ligand. Related rhenium(I) and technetium-99m complexes
(219) have been prepared using bathophenanthroline
disulfonate (bpds) as the bidentate ligand to reduce nonspecific
binding in vivo. Luminescence imaging indicates that
the rhenium(I) complex 219a is predominantly distributed
in the cytoplasm of MCF-7 cells. Furthermore, SPECT/CT imaging shows
that the radioactive technetium-99m complex 219b is distributed
in the gall bladder and intestine along with the knee and shoulder
joints at 6 h postinjection ( a,c), and its accumulation in the joints and spine
is still evident at 24 h ( b,d).
 Benoist and co-workers have designed a rhenium(I)
complex featuring
a tridentate chelating iminodiacetic acid clamp for coordination to
the [M(CO)3]+ core to construct bimetallic complexes
(220) ( ) as multimodal imaging reagents. The ester group is introduced for conjugation to a targeting vector.
The homobimetallic rhenium(I) complex 220a shows efficient
uptake by A549 cells with negligible cytotoxicity (IC50 > 300 μM), highlighting the potential use of its radioactive
counterpart 220b in in vivo imaging.
 
6.4.

## Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) is a noninvasive imaging technique that produces
three dimensional anatomical images with high spatial resolution based
on differences in longitudinal (T1) and
transverse (T2) relaxation and proton
density in tissues under a magnetic field. It allows for the visualization of organs and deep-seated tissue
structures without using ionizing radiation, making it a useful tool
for medical diagnosis in clinics. However, its intrinsically low sensitivity
requires the use of contrast agents for improved detection. Positive
contrast agents reduce the T1 relaxation
time of protons to give a brighter image in T1-weighted MRI, whereas negative contrast agents shorten the T2 relaxation time of protons to produce a darker
image in T2-weighted MRI. Combining luminescence
imaging and MRI offers complementary advantages, with luminescence
imaging providing high sensitivity while MRI offering depth penetration
and spatial visualization.
Gadolinium(III) chelates are commonly
used as positive contrast agents for MRI due to the large magnetic
moment arising from the seven unpaired electrons and long electron
spin relaxation time of Gd3+. Li, Yang, and co-workers have designed a heterobimetallic iridium(III)–gadolinium(III)
complex (221) ( ) as a bimodal probe for luminescence imaging and MRI. The intense emission from the iridium(III)
unit allows the visualization of the cellular uptake and localization
of the complex using LSCM, revealing the specific accumulation of
the complex in the mitochondria. Additionally, the complex displays
high T1 relaxivity (r1 = 3.36 mM–1 s–1),
which is comparable to the gadolinium(III) chelates such as [Gd(DTPA)(OH2)]2– and [Gd(DOTA)(OH2)]− (H4DTPA = diethylenetriaminepentaacetic
acid; H4DOTA = 1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7,10-tetraacetic
acid) (r1 = 3 to 5 mM–1 s–1) that are commonly used for clinical MRI,
facilitating its application in T1-weighted
MRI in live mice. As shown in , the complex serves as an excellent positive contrast
agent for liver imaging, highlighting its potential use for diagnosing
liver diseases. A related heterobimetallic ruthenium(II)–gadolinium(III)
complex (222) has been developed for luminescence imaging
in live cells and Daphnia magna (D. magna) and T1-weighted MRI in live mice. The complex exhibits high aqueous solubility
and biocompatibility, and more importantly, it has a long retention
time in living bodies, facilitating its use as a bimodal imaging agent
for tracking biological targets in vitro and in vivo. Ward and co-workers have designed a rigid ligand
framework for the construction of stable heteronuclear d–f
complexes (223 and 224) for dual modal imaging. − This design effectively inhibits the free rotation of Gd3+ and reduces the water exchange rates, resulting in increased relaxivities
(r1 = 6.2 to 14.0 mM–1 s–1). Monitoring the cellular uptake of these
complexes using LSCM and PLIM reveals that the complexes are efficiently
taken up by cancer cells such as HeLa and MCF-7 cells and enriched
in the perinuclear region. The conjugated ligand architecture also
facilitates efficient d → f energy transfer to sensitize the
luminescence of lanthanide ions such as Nd3+, Eu3+, and Yb3+. This gives rise to both transition metal-
and lanthanide-based luminescence under single-wavelength excitation,
which can be exploited for the development of ratiometric probes.
Pope and co-workers have also developed a water-soluble heterobimetallic
platinum(II)–gadolinium(III) complex (225) as
a bimodal imaging reagent. Notably,
the conjugation of the gadolinium(III) complex with the platinum(II)
complex results in a remarkable increase in the T1 relaxivity (r1 increases
from 3.8 to 7.1 mM–1 s–1). The
favorable luminescence and relaxivity properties of the complex render
it an excellent candidate for luminescence imaging and MRI.
 Compared to designing a single molecule that integrates
both luminescence
imaging and MRI capabilities, which typically requires multi-step
organic synthesis, the use of nanomaterials to accommodate different
metallic species enables the independent tuning of their concentrations
to optimize the imaging sensitivity for the corresponding imaging
technique. Seshadri, Prasad, and co-workers have designed a luminescent
nanomicelle for bimodal imaging of head and neck tumor xenografts. The NIR luminescent platinum(II) porphyrin
PtTPTNP is encapsulated in a phospholipid nanomicelle with the surface
being modified with gadolinium(III) chelates. The nanomicelle is small
in size (ca. 100 nm) and specifically accumulates
in the tumors due to the EPR effect. The strong absorption and emission
in the NIR window (λabs = ca. 700 nm, λem = ca. 900 nm) and high T1 relaxivity
(r1 = 10.4 mM–1 s–1) of the nanomicelle have facilitated tumor imaging
with a high optical and MR contrast, respectively. Yang, Yang, and
co-workers have developed magneto-luminescent NCPs via the self-assembly
of magnetic Gd3+ with dicarboxylic acid-functionalized
luminescent iridium(III) complexes (226 and 227) ( ). , Additionally, PVP is introduced to endow the NCPs with high dispersity,
aqueous solubility, and biocompatibility. These NCPs exhibit intense
red emission, high T1 relaxivity (r1 = 8.0 and 29.5 mM–1 s–1), efficient 1O2 photosensitization,
and rapid cellular internalization, highlighting their potential use
as a three-in-one theranostic platform for luminescence imaging, MRI,
and PDT.
 Lechevallier and co-workers have grafted gadolinium(III)
chelates
on the surface of luminescent SiNPs incorporating a silylated ruthenium(II)
complex (228) ( ) for the development of bimodal imaging agents. The content of both metallic species can be
adjusted to optimize the luminescence and magnetic properties of the
NPs for cell tracking both in vitro and in
vivo. The preferential localization of the NPs in the lysosomes
of live human colorectal carcinoma HCT-116 cells suggests the possible
involvement of an endocytic pathway in their cellular internalization.
Yi, Li, and co-workers have designed a multifunctional nanoprobe with
an iridium(III) complex (229), a gadolinium(III) chelate,
and an RGD peptide conjugated onto SiNPs for targeted luminescence
imaging and MRI. The RGD peptide allows
the nanoprobe to specifically target integrin-overexpressing cancer
cells. The more intense emission and MR signals at the tumor site
in tumor-bearing mice highlight the potential of the nanoprobe for
cancer diagnosis via bimodal luminescence imaging and MRI. Yin and
co-workers have developed MSNs that are codoped with Gd3+ and Al3+ and loaded with [Ru(bpy)3]2+ for in vivo bimodal imaging. The mesoporous structure of MSNs provides a large surface
area for loading of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and improves
the water exchange rate, while codoping with Al3+ enhances
the loading of Gd3+ onto the MSNs. In vivo luminescence imaging and T1-weighted
MRI in Kunming mice show that the nanoprobe is enriched in the liver
and spleen after intraperitoneal or intravenous injection, and eliminated
via renal excretion. Fedorenko and co-workers have prepared SiNPs
codoped with a paramagnetic manganese(II) complex and [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as a dual contrast agent. The incorporation of the manganese(II) complex into the
shell of the SiNPs substantially enhances its magnetic relaxivity
by 10 fold, while codoping [Ru(bpy)3]2+ into
the core of SiNPs effectively minimizes the leaching of the manganese(II)
complex. The SiNPs show intense red emission and high magnetic relaxivity,
enabling the investigation of their biodistribution in mice via ex vivo luminescence imaging and in vivo MRI. Hsiao, Chou, and co-workers have developed uniform NPs comprising
a manganese oxide nanocrystal core and a mesoporous silica shell functionalized
with an iridium(III) complex (230). The worm-like nanochannels in the mesoporous silica shell
not only enable the free diffusion of O2 for effective
PDT but also increase water permeability to the interior hollow MnO
core for T1 signal enhancement. Functionalization
of the mesoporous silica shell with folic acid allows specific targeting
of cancer cells that overexpress FRs (HeLa) over those that are FR-deficient
(human pancreatic carcinoma MIA PaCa-2), enabling localized PDT of
targeted cells while minimizing collateral damage to nontargeted cells. 
 Iron oxide NPs have attracted significant attention
as negative
contrast agents for MRI due to their superparamagnetism and biocompatibility. Zeng, Sun, and co-workers have coupled a ruthenium(II)
complex (231) ( ) to Fe3O4 NPs using a block
copolymer to afford a bimodal probe for biological imaging. The polymer coating separates the ruthenium(II)
complex from the magnetic Fe3O4 NPs to minimize
emission quenching by the Fe3O4 NPs. Lu and
co-workers have developed luminescent magnetic NPs for targeted imaging
of human breast cancer. The core of
the NPs is composed of Fe3O4 and coated with
a silica shell doped with [Ru(phen)3]2+, while
the surface of the NPs is modified with the RGD peptide for specific
targeting of cancer cells overexpressing integrin αvβ3 (e.g., MDA-MB-231). The high T2 relaxivity (r2 = 61.67 mM–1 s–1) of the NPs
has enabled their use as a negative contrast agent for T2-weighted MRI. The specific tumor accumulation of the
NPs in MDA-MB-231 tumor-bearing mice after tail vein injection indicates
their potential for breast cancer detection. Xu, Luo, Ma, and co-workers
have developed a dual-modal nanoprobe based on attapulgite nanorods. The surface of the attapulgite nanorods is
loaded with Fe3O4 NPs and coated with PEI for
covalent conjugation with an aldehyde-bearing ruthenium(II) complex
(232). The nanocomposite can function as a negative contrast
agent due to its high T2 relaxivity (r2 = 120.81 mM–1 s–1) and distinguish between tumor and normal tissues in vivo due to its efficient tumor accumulation. Chou, Chi, Hsiao, and co-workers
have designed iridium(III) complex-functionalized Fe3O4/SiO2 core–shell structured NPs as a trifunctional
agent for luminescence imaging, MRI, and PDT applications. The iridium(III) complex (233)
is encapsulated within the porous SiO2 nanoshell, which
provides sufficient space for O2 diffusion for efficient 1O2 photosensitization to induce apoptosis. Maggioni
and co-workers have developed a multifunctional nanocomposite consisting
of a Fe3O4 core and a compact silica shell functionalized
with a luminescent rhenium(I) complex (234). The nanocomposite is readily taken up by A549
cells and localized in the perinuclear region, effectively inducing
cell death upon continuous irradiation.
 Paramagnetic lanthanide(III) ions such as Dy3+ and Ho3+ have been utilized to develop efficient
contrast agents
for T2-weighted MRI at high magnetic fields
due to their large magnetic moments and short electronic relaxation
time. Du, Yang, and co-workers have
developed hollow bimetallic iridium(III)–holmium(III) NCPs
for trimodal imaging and PDT. These
NCPs are prepared by the coordination assembly of an iridium(III)
dicarboxylate complex (235) ( ) and holmium acetate in the presence of
PVP. The luminescence nature and high T2 relaxivity (r2 = ca. 160 mM–1 s–1) of the NCPs allow
for luminescence imaging in live cells and T2-weighted MRI in vivo, respectively. The
NCPs are also compatible with ultrasound imaging due to their stable
cavity structure, demonstrating their potential for multimodal image-guided
PDT. Zhou, Liao, and co-workers have utilized NaDyF4 nanorods
to develop multifunctional contrast agents that enable both efficient T1- and T2-weighted
MRI. The oleic acid-coated NaDyF4 nanorods are self-assembled with α-CD for conjugation
with gadopentetic acid, and the luminescent iridium(III) complex 236 is loaded into the resultant NPs through hydrophobic interaction.
The resultant NPs display intense orange emission, good X-ray attenuation
(Hounsfield unit = 158 at 10 mg mL–1), and high T1 and T2 relaxivities
(r1 = 4.65 mM–1 s–1, r2 = 7.68 mM–1 s–1). These remarkable features have enabled luminescence
tracking of the NPs in live HeLa cells, as well as CT imaging and
both T1- and T2-weighted MRI of the tumor in mice bearing HeLa tumor xenografts,
providing complementary information that is not achievable with a
single type of contrast agent.
 

7.

## Luminescent Transition Metal Complexes as Probes
for Specific Organelles
The cell serves as the fundamental
unit responsible for the structure
and function of living organisms. Eukaryotic cells are surrounded
by a plasma membrane and characterized by the presence of a nucleus
and other membrane-bound organelles such as the mitochondria, lysosomes,
ER, Golgi apparatus, and LDs in the cytoplasm, all of which are held
in place by the cytoskeleton. These organelles are essential for cellular
processes and their malfunctions are frequently linked to a range
of disorders and diseases. Thus, the development of luminescent transition
metal complexes that can target specific organelles will enhance our
understanding of their biological roles and improve therapeutic outcomes. 
7.1.

## Nucleus
In eukaryotic cells, the
nucleus is separated from the cytosol by the nuclear envelope, a double
lipid bilayer decorated with nuclear pore complexes that regulate
the transport of substances between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. , The nucleus contains most of the genetic material (i.e., DNA) of the cell and plays a crucial role in controlling gene expression
to regulate various cellular processes. 
One common approach for staining the nucleus is to target
specific biomolecules that are abundant in this organelle. Li and
co-workers have demonstrated that the iridium(III) solvato complex 57 can serve as a reaction-based nuclear stain through targeting
nuclear His or His-rich proteins. Upon
internalization into cells, the complex is rapidly enriched in the
nucleus and retained in this organelle for a long period of time (>
24 h), allowing for the long-term monitoring of nuclear dynamics in
live cells. Notably, the complex displays selective staining of the
nucleus of live cells over fixed cells, enabling the rapid and sensitive
differentiation between live and dead cells. Yang, Gao, and co-workers
have developed mono-, di-, and tetranuclear iridium(III) complexes
(237) ( ) that can stain the nucleus with two different emission colors. These complexes undergo hydrolysis in aqueous
solution, releasing the solvato complex [Ir(ppy)2(OH2)2]+ that can coordinate with His or
His-rich proteins. The iridium(III)–His coordination leads
to a change in the emission color of the complexes from orange to
green, allowing the real-time tracking of ligand release in live cells.
Monitoring the two emission channels reveals that the complexes are
taken by the cells via an energy-dependent pathway, initially localizing
in the cytoplasm and gradually migrating to the nucleus over time.
Notably, the release of ligand can be accelerated by GSH, and thus
the intracellular ligand release kinetics is faster in cancerous HeLa
cells than in normal human lymphatic fibroblast (HLF) cells due to
the more reductive intracellular environment of cancer cells. An alternative
target for staining the nucleus is nuclear DNA, which will be discussed
in a separate section (see below).
 Another effective approach to target the cell
nucleus involves
the conjugation of the complexes with a nuclear localization sequence
(NLS) to promote their nuclear uptake. Devocelle, Keyes, and co-workers
have conjugated membrane-impermeable ruthenium(II) complexes with
the peptide sequence VQRKRQKLMP, which
is an NLS responsible for transporting nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB)
into the nucleus. The resulting peptide
conjugates (238) ( ) exhibit efficient cellular and nuclear
uptake in live CHO cells. While both conjugates specifically accumulate
in the cell nucleus, the more lipophilic conjugate 238b preferentially localizes in the nucleolar region ( ). Pope and co-workers have
conjugated a deep red luminescent iridium(III) complex with the NLS
PAAKRVKLD, which is critical for the
nuclear localization of the human c-Myc protein. This modification enhances the nuclear accumulation of
the conjugate (239) in live human skin fibroblast cells
compared to its peptide-free counterpart, which exclusively resides
in the cytoplasm. In addition to the
protein-derived NLS, the short synthetic peptide RrRK has also shown
high effectiveness in delivering the attached cargos to the cell nucleus. Barton and Puckett have conjugated a ruthenium(II)
dppz complex with this short peptide. The resultant peptide conjugate (240) displays punctate
cytoplasmic staining in live HeLa cells at low concentrations (≤
20 μM) but preferential accumulation in the nucleus at higher
concentrations (e.g., 100 μM).
 Despite these strategies, other transition metal
complexes have
also been reported to specifically target the cell nucleus. Sun, Mei,
and co-workers have developed a ruthenium(II) complex (241) ( ) that
shows enantioselective cellular staining. The Λ-isomer of the complex specifically stains the nucleus
of MDA-MB-231 cells, whereas the Δ-isomer exclusively resides
in the cytoplasmic region ( ). The specific nuclear uptake of the Λ-isomer
occurs via an adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-dependent active transport
mechanism following cellular internalization through endocytosis.
Additionally, both enantiomers can bind to and stabilize G-quadruplex
DNA. , However, they exhibit enantioselectivity
in the self-assembly of c-myc G-quadruplex DNA. The
Λ-isomer promotes the self-assembly of c-myc G-quadruplex DNA into a nanowire structure, while the
Δ-isomer induces DNA condensation into G-quadruplex aggregates.
These enantiomers have been utilized as luminescent nonviral DNA carriers
to deliver the c-myc G-quadruplex structures into
different cellular compartments of HepG2 cells. In particular, the
nucleus-targeting Λ-isomer can facilitate the transportation
of DNA to the nucleus of live cells, enabling DNA release and functional
expression. Ruthenium(II) complexes coordinated with a 6-chloro-5-hydroxylpyrido[3,2-a]phenazine ligand (242) also display efficient
cellular uptake and nuclear staining in live cells. These complexes have been used to track the dynamic changes
in the nucleus of cancer cells including HepG2, HeLa and MCF-7 cells.
Zhao, Huang, and co-workers have developed an iridium(III) complex
(243) that exhibits specific nuclear staining in a wide
range of cell lines, in a sharp contrast to its binuclear counterpart
that shows diffuse cytoplasmic staining. Since the emission intensity and lifetime of the complex is sensitive
to O2, the complex has been used for monitoring the O2 levels in the nucleus. Laskar and co-workers have developed
an AIE-active cyclometalated platinum(II) diphosphine complex (244a) that displays exclusive staining of the nucleus of live
human hepatocellular carcinoma Hep3B cells. Its water-soluble ethylenediamine counterpart (244b) has also been developed for bioimaging. The complex is specifically enriched in the nucleus of both cancer
(HeLa, U-87 MG, and mouse neuroblastoma Neuro-2a) and normal cells
(CHO-K1 and 3T3-L1), with more efficient cellular uptake observed
in cancer cells compared to normal cells.
 
7.2.

## Nucleolus
Nucleolus is the largest
substructure in the nucleus, serving as the site of ribosome biogenesis. It is also involved in the regulation of mitosis,
cell cycle progression, stress response, and biogenesis of ribonucleoproteins.
Lo, Yam, and co-workers have developed a guanidinium-functionalized
alkynylplatinum(II) complex (245) ( ) for the specific imaging
of nucleolus through targeting RNA. The
guanidinium moiety is essential to facilitate hydrogen bonding and
electrostatic interactions between the complex and RNA, which bring
the complex monomers into close proximity. This strengthens the Pt···Pt
and π–π interactions between the monomers and induces
their self-assembly into supramolecular nanostructures, switching
on the characteristic 3MMLCT emission (λem = 670 nm). In comparison, the complex shows much smaller
emission changes upon treatment with single- and double-stranded DNA.
The specific interaction of the complex with RNA has enabled the selective
visualization of nucleolus in HeLa and CHO-K1 cells. Monitoring changes
in the nucleolar dynamics reveals that the RNA synthesis inhibitor
actinomycin D induces significant nucleolar reorganization, suggesting
that the complex can be utilized for the development of cell-based
luminescence assays for inhibitor screening.
 Lam, Lo, and co-workers have developed iridium(III)
dipyridoquinoxaline
complexes (246) ( ) that display emission turn-on upon binding
to proteins. These complexes specifically
localize in the nucleoli of MDCK cells. The specific nucleolar staining
is attributed to their binding to nucleolar proteins, as evidenced
by the fact that the complexes do not show any significant change
in their emission profiles in the presence of RNA, and pretreatment
of the cells with ribonuclease (RNase) does not significantly affect
the nucleolar staining of the complexes. Lam, Lam, and co-workers
have also developed a two-photon-active cyclometalated platinum(II)
complex (247) that exhibits specific enrichment in the
nucleoli of HeLa and 3T3 cells due to its interactions with nucleolar
proteins. However, this complex induces
rapid cell death in live cells due to potent transcription inhibition.
Nevertheless, the complex has been used as a nuclear stain for various
thick mouse tissues. Imaging the mouse ileum samples at different
depths with multiphoton confocal microscopy has enabled the 3D reconstruction
of optical sections and visualization of the structures in detail.
 
7.3.

## Mitochondria
Mitochondria play a
pivotal role in producing energy in the form of ATP via oxidative
phosphorylation for various cellular processes such as biomolecular
synthesis, metabolism, and cell proliferation and differentiation. These organelles are also involved in the production
of ROS for intracellular signaling. Furthermore, mitochondria play
an important role in the regulation of apoptosis, the programmed cell
death that eliminates damaged or unwanted cells. 
One common approach to direct transition metal complexes
to the mitochondria is to functionalize them with a cationic and lipophilic
triphenylphosphonium (TPP+) moiety, which aids in the transport
and accumulation of the complexes in the mitochondria resulting from
the negative membrane potential across the inner mitochondrial membrane
(ca. −180 mV). Zhou and co-workers have developed
two iridium(III) complexes modified with a TPP+ unit (248) ( ) for targeted imaging of the mitochondria. These complexes specifically localize in the mitochondria of live
HeLa cells, which is different from their TPP+-free counterparts
that are diffusely distributed in the cytoplasm without any apparent
organelle specificity. Additionally, these complexes exhibit higher
photostability than commercial mitochondrial stains such as MitoTracker
Green FM and MitoTracker Red FM, indicative of their potential in
long-term imaging in live cells. García, Bertrand, and
co-workers have developed three TPP+-appended rhenium(I)
complexes (249) as multimodal probes for specific imaging
of the mitochondria. The introduction
of methyl groups to the TPP+ unit enhances the lipophilicity
of the complexes. Luminescence and XRF imaging in A549 cells shows
that complexes 249b and 249c preferentially
reside in the mitochondria, suggesting that these complexes can be
used as bimodal imaging probes for the mitochondria. Quantification
of the rhenium content in the stained cells using XRF spectroscopy
shows that the cellular uptake of the complexes increases with increasing
lipophilicity, with complex 249c showing ca. 2.5-fold higher accumulation in cells than complex 249b. Chan and co-workers have developed a series of cationic platinum(II)
complexes coordinated with a triphenylphosphine ligand as live-cell
imaging reagents. Two of these complexes
(250a and 250b) display high lipophilicity
(log Po/w = 4.0 and 5.5, respectively),
rapid cellular internalization through an energy-dependent pathway,
and specific enrichment in the mitochondria.
 Another approach is to conjugate transition metal
complexes with
a mitochondria-targeting peptide sequence, which can efficiently direct
the attached cargos to the mitochondria due to its cationic charge
and lipophilic character. Zhou, Fei, and co-workers have modified
an iridium(III) complex with a CPP RKKRRGRRR derived from the Tat49–57 domain to increase its cellular uptake, and a
mitochondria targeting sequence MLAKGLPPKSVLVKG derived from the mitochondrial
protein cytochrome P450 to facilitate its mitochondrial accumulation. The resultant peptide conjugate (251) ( ) is
readily taken up by HeLa cells and enriched in the mitochondria. Keyes
and co-workers have conjugated a membrane-impermeable osmium(II) complex
with two mitochondria-penetrating peptides (MPPs) FrFKFrFK for imaging
and therapeutic applications. The resulting
conjugate (252) primarily localizes in the mitochondria
of HeLa and MCF-7 cells at low incubation concentrations (≤
30 μM), but becomes diffusely distributed throughout the cells
including the nucleus and nucleoli upon increasing the concentration.
This shift in intracellular localization results in a change in the
mechanism of inducing apoptosis, switching from causing mitochondrial
membrane depolarization to activating caspases.
 Cationic and lipophilic transition metal complexes
can also be
directed to the mitochondria without the need of introducing a targeting
vector. Chao and co-workers have developed a series of cationic and
lipophilic ruthenium(II) (253) and iridium(III) complexes (254–259) − ( ) that
specifically target the mitochondria while exhibiting high resistance
to changes in mitochondrial membrane potential, enabling the real-time
tracking of the morphological changes of mitochondria over long periods
of time. These interesting features have been exploited to visualize
the mitochondrial morphological changes that occur during early apoptosis
induced by carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone
(CCCP), revealing the gradual transformation of mitochondria from
their typical reticular structure into numerous smaller, scattered
fragments ( ). Cationic mixed-ligand iridium(III) complexes (260) also show high mitochondria specificity in a range of mammalian
cell lines. These complexes possess
large TPA cross-sections (δ750nm = 84 to 450 GM), enabling the effective visualization of mitochondria
in HeLa MCTSs with a penetration depth of up to ca. 120 μm using two-photon microscopy (λex = 750 nm). Additionally, complex 260b has
been used for real-time tracking of mitochondrial fission and fusion
in live cells and Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) ( ). Furthermore, luminescent transition metal complexes
have been developed as mitochondria-targeting theranostic agents (261–266) ( ) that can simultaneously induce mitochondrial
dysfunction in cancer cells and monitor mitochondrial morphological
and metabolic changes. − For example, Tan, Mao, and co-workers have developed two iridium(III)
complexes (263) that specifically reside in the mitochondria
and induce mitophagy. Monitoring the
mitochondrial morphological changes at different time intervals has
revealed the autophagosomal engulfment of the damaged mitochondria
and the fusion of the autophagosome-engulfed mitochondria with lysosomes.
 To facilitate imaging with lower background interference,
Chao
and co-workers have designed a series of iridium(III) complexes (267) ( ) featuring NIR emission (λem =
672 to 702 nm) with large TPA cross-sections (δ730nm = 69.4 to 279.6 GM) for imaging the mitochondria
in live cells, MCTSs, and hippocampus slices. Super-resolution imaging of the mitochondria with complex 267c using SIM has allowed the clear visualization of their
ultrastructures in live cells with resolution up to 80 nm. It shows that the length and width of mitochondria
are ca. 2.0 and 0.7 μm, respectively, whereas
the lamellar cristae are visible with a thickness of ca. 105 nm. The high photostability of the complex has also enabled
the monitoring of the mitochondrial dynamics, in particular, the interactions
between mitochondria and lysosomes in live cells under SIM. Shen,
Pei, Chao, and co-workers have designed two mitochondria-targeting
iridium(III) complexes (268a and 268b) with
interesting three-photon absorption properties (σ980nm = 1.88 and 2.63 × 10–78 cm6 s2 photon–2, respectively). The use of three-photon excitation (λex = 980 nm) allows imaging at deeper
penetration, resulting in a significant increase in the maximum imaging
depth for zebrafish and hippocampus slices to ca.
1,000 and 500 μm, respectively, compared to ca. 200 and 250 μm with two-photon excitation (λex = 750 nm). These enhanced imaging capabilities have
enabled superior penetration depth and resolution for in vivo imaging of mouse brain vasculature ( ). Liu, Song, and co-workers have developed
three AIE-active iridium(III) complexes (269) for specific
mitochondria imaging and tracking. Their
long emission lifetimes in the solid state (τ = 3.23 to 7.07 ms) are advantageous to avoid interference from the
background autofluorescence via time-resolved luminescence imaging.
 The immobilization of luminescent probes in the
mitochondria allows
monitoring of the mitochondrial microenvironment under different conditions
irrespective of changes in the mitochondrial membrane potential. Lo, Lam, Cheng, and co-workers have developed
an iridium(III) isothiocyanate complex (270) ( ) for labeling
mitochondrial proteins. The introduction
of an isothiocyanate unit enables modification of mitochondrial proteins
under the alkaline mitochondrial environment (pH ≈ 8.0). Incubation
of live mammalian cells such as 3T3, HeLa, and RPE cells with the
complex results in efficient and specific labeling of the mitochondria.
Proteomic analyses indicate the covalent conjugation of the complex
to mitochondrial proteins such as voltage-dependent anion channel
1, 14-3-3 protein ε, and peroxiredoxin 1. Coogan and co-workers
have developed a thiol-reactive rhenium(I) complex featuring a chloromethyl
unit (1g) that undergoes nucleophilic substitution with
the reactive thiol groups present in mitochondrial proteins for specific
mitochondria targeting. Cao, Mao, and
co-workers have demonstrated that the mitochondrial immobilization
of a related rhenium(I) complex (271) results in selective
and significant cancer cell death. The
O2-sensitive emission lifetime of the complex has allowed
the real-time monitoring of the mitochondrial metabolism using PLIM,
revealing that the complex induces more effective repression of mitochondrial
respiration than its mitochondria-nonimmobilized counterparts. Related
iridium(III) complexes (272) have also been developed
as theranostic agents targeting mitochondrial metabolism. 
 
7.4.

## Lysosomes
Lysosomes are membrane-bound
organelles that contain numerous hydrolytic enzymes for the degradation
of macromolecules. They are involved
in various crucial cellular processes such as endocytosis, autophagy,
and plasma membrane repair. Lysosomes also engage in interactions
with other organelles such as mitochondria, ER, and LDs to regulate
cellular homeostasis. Additionally, lysosomes serve as signaling centers
that govern cell growth, division, and differentiation. Lysosomal
dysfunction has been associated with the development of various diseases
such as lysosomal storage disorder, cancer, neurodegenerative diseases,
and aging.
Since lysosomes are characterized by an acidic internal
environment (pH ≈ 4.5–5.5), modification of transition
metal complexes with a pH-sensitive ligand is a common approach to
achieve effective lysosomal targeting. A typical example is morpholine
(pKa = 5–6), which is protonated
in lysosomes to facilitate the retention of the attached cargos inside
these acidic organelles. Chao and co-workers have developed a triscyclometalated
iridium(III) complex modified with three morpholine moieties (273) ( ) for specific imaging of the lysosomes. The emission intensity of the complex increases with decreasing
pH due to inhibition of photoinduced electron transfer (PET) quenching
by the morpholine unit. Additionally, the complex possesses a large
TPA cross-section (δ750nm = 69.5
GM), allowing for the visualization of lysosomes in live cells and
MCTSs using two-photon microscopy (λex = 750 nm). Notably, the complex is specifically enriched in the
lysosomes for more than 4 days without escape, compared to LysoTracker
Red that loses its lysosomal specificity after 48 h. The excellent
lysosomal specificity and high photostability of the complex have
enabled long-term lysosomal tracking during cell migration and apoptosis
( ). Pu, Ma,
and co-workers have also developed an iridium(III) complex bearing
a morpholine moiety (274) for specific lysosome staining. The introduction of an additional pH-sensitive
hydroxyl group to the complex enables a larger increase in emission
intensity under acidic conditions. Furthermore, a water-soluble iridium(III)
complex carrying two morpholine units (275) has been
developed for lysosome-targeted imaging and PDT. Kielar and co-workers have demonstrated that iridium(III)
complexes containing a pH-sensitive aminoalkyl moiety (276 and 277) can also specifically target the lysosomes. − 
 Transition metal complexes containing N-heterocycle-based
ligands such as imidazole, pyrrole, and pyridine exhibit acid–base
equilibrium in aqueous solution, influencing the photophysical properties
of the complexes in response to pH. Shandala, Massi, and co-workers
have examined the intracellular localization of a neutral rhenium(I)
tetrazolato complex (278) ( ) in live human adipose 3T3-L1 cells and
insect Drosophila larval adipose tissues. The protonatable pyridine ring endows the complex
with high affinity for organelles such as the late endosomes and lysosomes
that are characterized by an acidic environment. Williams and co-workers
have studied the photophysical properties and cellular behavior of
two iridium(III) complexes coordinated with a 2-pyridylbenzimidazole
ligand (279). These complexes
are a pair of conjugate base and acid, showing green emission at high
pHs and red emission at low pHs. Cellular imaging shows that these
complexes predominantly localize in the lysosomes of live CHO cells.
Solomatina, Porsev, Tunik, and co-workers have developed a series
of pH-sensitive iridium(III) complexes bearing two phenantroimidazole-based
cyclometalating ligands (280). The imidazole rings in these complexes remain uncoordinated and
accessible for protonation in acidic environments, enabling the complexes
to display emission changes in response to pH. Cellular imaging shows
that complexes 280c and 280d primarily reside
in the endosomes/lysosomes. Ma, Lam, and co-workers have designed
two binuclear platinum(II) complexes (281) as lysosome-specific
two-photon luminescence imaging probes. These complexes feature a bridging diphosphine ligand connecting
the two platinum(II) units, which promotes close intramolecular Pt···Pt
contact and thus facilitates 3MMLCT emission. However,
the deprotonation of the pyrazole ring in the terdentate ligand at
high pHs induces electrostatic repulsion between the ligands, disrupting
Pt···Pt interaction and diminishing 3MMLCT
emission. The pH-sensitive 3MMLCT emission has enabled
the real-time tracking of the rapid transportation of lysosomes between
the cell body and axons in live primary adult mouse dorsal root ganglion
neurons and acute brain slices ( ).
 Tan, Mao, and co-workers have developed two theranostic
iridium(III)
complexes coordinated with a pH-sensitive pyridyl-β-carboline
ligand (282) ( ) that can simultaneously induce autophagy and monitor
autophagic lysosomes. The emission intensities
of complexes 282a and 282b are pH-sensitive
due to deprotonation/protonation of the indole ring in the β-carboline
ligand, and they increase by ca. 35 and 30 fold,
respectively, upon decreasing the pH from 8.2 to 3.0. Complexes 282a and 282b also exhibit increased TPA under
acidic conditions (δ810 nm =
958 and 972 GM at pH 3.4, respectively). Remarkably, these complexes
specifically accumulate in the lysosomes and induce autophagy. Real-time
tracking of the lysosomes using complex 282b has revealed
their fusion with the autophagosomes during autophagic processes ( ). Complex 282b has also been loaded onto polydopamine NPs functionalized
with cyclic RGD peptides for targeted multimodal imaging and therapy. The pH-sensitive emission lifetime of complex 282b has enabled the monitoring of the specific lysosomal
damage induced by the NPs in integrin-overexpressing U-87 MG cells
using TP-PLIM. Related iridium(III) β-carboline complexes (283 and 284) have been developed for cancer-
and lysosome-targeted imaging and PDT. , These complexes
show higher 1O2 generation efficiencies under
acidic conditions and thus higher photocytotoxicity toward cancer
cells over normal cells. The high lysosome specificity of these complexes
also offers opportunities to monitor the therapeutic outcomes in situ by real-time tracking the changes in lysosomal integrity
during photoinduced cell death. Tan, Mao, and co-workers have conjugated
a pH-sensitive ruthenium(II) β-carboline complex (285) to Cdots for lysosome-targeted imaging and therapy. This modification results in increased cellular
uptake of the complex and TPA cross-section (δ810nm = 1,118 GM), which allows the imaging of cancer
cells, MCTSs, and zebrafish at a higher penetration depth as well
as the more effective inhibition of cancer cell growth in both 2D
cells and 3D MCTSs upon two-photon excitation.
 The manipulation of the self-assembly/disassembly
processes of
transition metal complexes in response to pH has been demonstrated
as an effective means for lysosomal imaging. Yam and co-workers have
studied the pH-induced self-assembly/disassembly behavior of alkynylplatinum(II)
terpyridine complexes featuring a pH-responsive phenol or carboxyl
group (286) ( ). , In aqueous solution at low pHs,
these complexes undergo efficient self-assembly via Pt···Pt
and π–π interactions, resulting in intense 3MMLCT emission in the NIR region (λem = 760 to 795 nm). However, the emission intensity decreases
with increasing pH due to the deprotonation of the phenol or carboxyl
groups on the alkynyl ligand, which reduces the propensity of the
complexes to aggregate by increasing their hydrophilicity and favors
emission quenching by PET. The significant differences in their NIR
emission intensities (up to 1,350-fold) at different pHs have enabled
the facile differentiation of acidic lysosomes from other cellular
compartments. Che and co-workers have developed a series of cyclometalated
platinum(II) isocyanide complexes (287) that display
pH-dependent emission properties. At
high pHs, the deprotonated pyrazole ring in the terdentate ligand
inhibits intermolecular Pt···Pt interactions. Increasing
the pH induces self-assembly of the complexes and thus a drastic change
in their emission colors from green to orange. These complexes specifically
target the lysosomes and induce cell death by increasing lysosomal
membrane permeability, resulting in potent cytotoxic activity against
a range of cancer cell lines including primary bladder cancer cells.
Chao and co-workers have conjugated an iridium(III) complex with two
pH-sensitive self-assembling peptides Nap-FFK-taurine (Nap = naphthalene)
for long-term tracking of lysosomes. The resultant conjugate (288) undergoes self-assembly
in aqueous solution, and the resulting self-assemblies transform from
large nanoaggregates (at pH 7–8) to smaller particles (at pH
6) and jointed networks (at pH 4–5) upon decreasing the pH
from 8 to 4 due to increased lipophilicity. This morphological transformation
has led to the long-term retention of the conjugate in acidic lysosomes
for more than 15 cell generations. The strong lysosomal retention
ability and high photostability of the conjugate have facilitated
the monitoring of lysosome dynamics using SIM, enabling the clear
visualization of mitochondria–lysosome contacts under starvation
conditions with high resolution ( ).
 Zhang, Tian, Tian, and co-workers have developed
three cyclometalated
platinum(II) complexes (289) ( ) that specifically target lysosomes through
interacting with lecithin, one of the major components of lysosomal
membrane. These complexes feature strong
four-photon absorption with a large four-photon absorption cross-section
of up to 1.52 × 10–81 cm8 s3 photon–3 at 1,600 nm. Live-cell imaging
shows that the complexes exhibit weak emission in normal cells (HELF)
but show intense intracellular emission in cancer cells (A549, HeLa,
and HepG2). Furthermore, the complexes specifically stain the lysosomes
of cancer cells, attributed to their enhanced emission upon binding
to lecithin. Notably, complex 289b exhibits selective
cytotoxicity toward HeLa cells (IC50 = 0.63 μM) over
HELF cells (IC50 > 50 μM), suggesting the potential
development of these complexes as cancer theranostics.
 
7.5.

## Endoplasmic Reticulum
The ER is an
interconnected network of flattened sacs and branching tubules that
spreads throughout the cytoplasm. It
is responsible for protein synthesis, folding, modification, and transportation
to the Golgi apparatus. Additionally, it plays a critical role in
maintaining calcium homeostasis, synthesizing lipids and steroid hormones,
and metabolizing xenobiotics.
Battaglia, Smythe, Thomas, and
co-workers have developed a binuclear ruthenium(II) complex (290) ( ) that shows specific staining of the ER. The complex is nonluminescent in aqueous solution but displays substantial
emission enhancement upon binding to DNA or interacting with liposomes.
The high lipophilicity of the complex (log Po/w = 1.52) facilitates its interaction with the hydrophobic
membranes of the ER, resulting in intense intracellular emission and
specific ER staining. Similar observations have been found for related
binuclear iridium(III) complexes (291). Ray, Gupta, and co-workers have reported an iridium(III)
complex (292) that exhibits specific ER staining in MCF-7
cells. Structure–property relationship
analysis indicates that the high ER specificity of the complex is
associated with: 1) the strong intramolecular hydrogen bonding interaction
between the hydroxyl group in the appended phenyl ring and the amino
group in the imidazole ring of the diimine ligand; and 2) intermediate
lipophilicity (log Po/w = 1.12) of the
complex. Brooks and co-workers have developed a neutral rhenium(I)
tetrazolato complex (293) that is enriched in the ER
and nuclear membrane of cells after cellular uptake through passive
diffusion. The high photostability and
low cytotoxic activity of the complex have allowed real-time monitoring
of biological events that occur in these cellular compartments, including
the formation of nuclear membrane-derived phagosomes and the release
of small vesicles from the cell surface. Related neutral iridium(III)
tetrazolato complexes (67a–67e) also
preferentially localize in the ER of cells. 
 Keyes and co-workers have conjugated a membrane-impermeable
ruthenium(II)
complex with penetratin (RQIKIWFQNRRMKWKK) to afford a luminescent
probe (294) ( ) for the ER. Penetratin
is a CPP derived from the DNA-binding domain of Antennapedia, and
it can facilitate the membrane translocation of the attached cargos
and deliver them to the ER. Thus, the
peptide conjugate specifically resides in the ER after cellular internalization,
enabling super-resolution imaging of the tubular structure of smooth
ER using STED microscopy. Lo and co-workers have developed an iridium(III)–peptide
conjugate containing a peptide sequence KDEL (295), a specific signal that causes proteins to be
retained in the ER. The peptide conjugation
directs the localization of the complex to the ER, resulting in increased
photocytotoxicity compared to the conjugate lacking the KDEL sequence.
 
7.6.

## Golgi Apparatus
The Golgi apparatus
is a membrane-bound organelle composed of a stack of flattened cisternae.
It is responsible for the processing and packaging of proteins and
lipids into vesicles for transporting to their targeted destinations. 
Lo and co-workers have reported two dendritic
iridium(III) complexes (150) that show specific accumulation
in the Golgi apparatus of live HeLa cells following their cellular
internalization. Ho, Wong, and co-workers
have developed a neutral iridium(III) complex (296) ( ) that displays
strong two-photon-induced emission due to its large TPA cross-section
(δ750nm = 340 GM). The complex is specifically enriched in the Golgi apparatus
and remains confined to this organelle for a long period of time (>
6 h) without migration to other cellular compartments.
 Wu and co-workers have designed a ruthenium(II)
complex modified
with a sphingosine unit (297) ( ) as a luminescent ceramide mimic for Golgi
apparatus-targeted imaging and PDT. This
complex is taken up by cells via an energy-dependent pathway and specifically
enriched in the Golgi apparatus in multiple cancer cell lines (HeLa,
A549, and MCF-7). Additionally, the complex is noncytotoxic toward
HeLa cells in the dark (IC50 > 100 μM) but exhibits
high photocytotoxic activity (IC50 = 3.45 μM) upon
prolonged irradiation due to 1O2 generation.
Monitoring the morphological changes of the Golgi apparatus during
PDT treatment reveals Golgi apparatus dispersal.
 
7.7.

## Lipid Droplets
Lipid droplets (LDs)
are dynamic subcellular organelles composed of a neutral lipid core
surrounded by a phospholipid monolayer. They are crucial for intracellular lipid storage and metabolism
and are involved in various physiological processes such as energy
homeostasis, lipid metabolism, and protein degradation. The dysfunction of LDs can lead to several
diseases including obesity, diabetes, neurodegenerative disorders,
and cancer.
Shandala, Massi, and co-workers have developed a
neutral rhenium(I) tetrazolato complex (298) ( ) that specifically
accumulates in the LDs of live 3T3-L1 cells and insect Drosophila larval adipose tissues. Measurement
of the IR signatures of the complex using FTIR microspectroscopy reveals
that the complex is preferentially enriched in the core of LDs due
to its higher affinity for polar lipids such as phosphatidylcholine,
phosphatidylethanolamine, lysophosphatidic acid, sphingosine, and
sphingomyelin, compared to neutral lipids like triglycerides. The complex has been used to monitor the trafficking
of polar lipids in Drosophila larval adipose tissues,
which shows that polar lipids migrate from the LDs to the autophagic
compartments under complete starvation conditions and during larval
to adult metamorphosis. The strong association
of the complex with polar lipids has also enabled its use with other
lipid-specific fluorescent stains such as Filipin III for cholesterol
and BODIPY 493/503 for cholesteryl esters and triglycerides to examine
the lipid profile of prostate cancer cells. The elevated staining of polar lipids in human prostate cancer cell
lines (DU145, 22RV1, and LNCaP) compared to the nonmalignant human
prostatic cell line (PNT1a) highlights a significant difference in
the lipid profile of prostate cancer cells. These probes can also
facilitate the identification of alternations in lipid content and
distribution in cells. Neutral iridium(III) tetrazolato complexes
(67a–67e) also show a high affinity
for LDs. 
 Mao and co-workers have developed two lipophilic
neutral iridium(III)
β-diketonate complexes (299) ( ) for LDs imaging. The neutral charge and lipophilic nature (log Po/w = 2.15 and 2.19, respectively) of complexes 299a and 299b have led to their specific accumulation
in the LDs in a wide range of cell lines such as A549, HepG2, HeLa,
and LO2 cells. Additionally, the complexes possess large TPA cross-sections
(δ810nm = 232 and 220 GM, respectively),
which allows for the visualization of LDs and examination of their
dynamics in live cells and in vivo using two-photon
microscopy (λex = 810 nm). Complex 299a has been used to monitor oleic acid-induced LDs accumulation
in live cells and lipid metabolism in live zebrafish larvae ( ). Related iridium(III)
complexes (300) have been developed as LD-targeting luminescent
probes and PDT agents. These complexes
efficiently generate 1O2 upon continuous visible-light
irradiation, which causes elevated levels of lipid peroxidation inside
cells, resulting in high photocytotoxicity.
 Tang, Lo, and co-workers have developed three neutral
iridium(III)
complexes featuring a hydrophobic POSS unit (301) ( ) for specific
staining of the LDs. Complex 301c has been utilized to examine various LDs-related biological events
in live cells including the accumulation of LDs under oleic acid stimulation,
the movement of LDs, and the differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocyte.
The complex has also been used to visualize LDs in different cell
lines, revealing that the number of LDs is upregulated in cancer cells
(HeLa, MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, HepG2, A549, and Neuro-2a) compared to normal
cells (HEK293T, MRC-9, and 3T3-L1) ( ). The differential staining preference
of the complexes indicates their potential applications in cancer
diagnosis. Additionally, complex 301c exhibits negligible
dark cytotoxic activity (IC50 > 200 μM) but very
high photocytotoxicity (IC50 = 2.1 μM) toward HeLa
cells due to the induction of apoptosis and lipid peroxidation-mediated
ferroptosis upon continuous irradiation.
 
7.8.

## Cytoskeleton
The cytoskeleton of
eukaryotic cells is a complex and interconnected network of filamentous
proteins that are critical for the mechanical properties and shapes
of cells. Two major components of the cytoskeleton are microtubules
and actin filaments, which have unique roles in various cellular processes. Microtubules are assembled from dimers of α-
and β-tubulin and they play a crucial role in the intracellular
transport of vesicles and organelles, as well as in the separation
of chromosomes during mitosis; while actin filaments are formed in
a helical arrangement by the polymerization of monomeric globular
actin and they are responsible for controlling cell shape and movement.
Zhang, Tian, Battaglia, and co-workers have developed an iridium(III)
complex (302) ( ) for imaging microtubules. Binding of the complex to tubulin αβ and βα
sites induces a ca. 8-fold increase in its emission
intensity, which is not observed in the presence of other biomolecules
such as actin. The emission enhancement not only allows real-time
monitoring of tubulin polymerization into microtubules but also specific
staining of the microtubules in both live and fixed cells. Probing
the microtubule dynamics throughout mitosis reveals that microtubules
polymerize through the centriole (in prophase) to mitotic spindles
(in metaphase). Correlative light–electron microscopy and energy-filtered
transmission electron microscopy indicate a periodic distribution
of the iridium element along the microtubule structures with an average
interspace of 4.1 nm. Additionally, the complex has been utilized
to image the microtubule networks in the hippocampus region of brain
tissues using STED microscopy, which has enabled the visualization
of neuronal subunits including the nascent neuritis, growth cone,
and spines at high spatial resolution.
 Ruiz-Pérez, Battaglia, Tian, and co-workers
have utilized
a related iridium(III) solvato complex (303) ( ) for imaging
intracellular actin. The complex specifically
binds to the exposed His40 residue of the actin protein through iridium(III)–His
coordination, resulting in ca. 10-fold emission enhancement.
This emission response has facilitated the imaging of actin in cytoskeleton-rich
human lung fibroblasts HFL1 and mouse heart tissues. The complex can
label different actin species such as β- and γ-actin that
are mainly located in the cell boundary and cytosol, respectively,
as well as actin in different intracellular compartments including
lamellipodium, filopodium, and stress fibers. The high photostability
of the complex has enabled the use of STED nanoscopy, allowing the
visualization of actin with higher resolution (fwhm = ca. 60 nm) than conventional LSCM (fwhm = ca. 160
nm). Additionally, the complex is compatible with the use of correlative
light–electron microscopy and liquid-phase electron microscopy,
revealing the component unit and periodicity of actin filaments at
spatial resolution of ca. 8 nm.
 
7.9.

## Plasma Membrane
The plasma membrane
is a phospholipid bilayer embedded with proteins, which separates
the interior of a cell from the extracellular environment. It is involved in various cellular processes,
including nutrient transport, signal transduction, and cell recognition. , Abnormalities in the plasma membrane, such as overexpression of
specific cell-surface proteins, are potential biomarkers for certain
diseases such as cancer. 
The introduction
of long aliphatic chains to cationic transition metal complexes can
facilitate their enrichment in phospholipid membranes through assisting
hydrophobic interaction with the hydrophobic tails of phospholipids.
Zhao, Huang, and co-workers have examined the plasma membrane staining
properties of iridium(III) complexes appended with two alkyl chains
of different lengths (304) ( ). The affinities
of the complexes for the plasma membrane increase with the length
of the aliphatic chains, indicating that a longer alkyl chain can
more effectively inhibit the internalization of the complexes into
the cells due to increased hydrophobic interaction with the lipid
bilayer. Complex 304c has been used to detect and distinguish
between exogenous and endogenous analytes due to its similar distribution
in the plasma membrane and cytoplasm. Iridium(III) complexes carrying
two decyl chains (305a–305c) also
display exclusive plasma membrane staining, which is not observed
for their counterparts that contain shorter isopentyl pendants (305d and 305e). The differential staining further supports the importance of a long
alkyl chain in facilitating the accumulation of the complexes in the
plasma membrane. Zhao and co-workers have developed a ruthenium(II)
complex featuring two nonyl chains (306) for targeting
the plasma membrane. Interestingly,
the complex exhibits selective staining of the plasma membrane of
cancer cells (A549) over noncancerous cells (human skin fibroblast
and 3T3), indicating that the complex can distinguish cancer cells
that are characterized by negative surface charges from normal cells.
Li, Tian, Li, and co-workers have developed a platinum(II) complex
bearing two long alkyl chains (307) as a two-photon probe
for the plasma membrane. Upon two-photon
excitation (λex = 860 nm), the complex
shows intense emission at 627 nm, which originates from the 3MMLCT state where Pt···Pt interaction plays an important
role. Lam and co-workers have designed an amphiphilic cyclometalated
platinum(II) complex (308) with two-photon-induced emission
properties for plasma membrane staining. The complex features a long hydrophobic octadecanyl chain for inserting
into the cellular membrane, and an anionic p-trisulfonated
triphenylphosphine ligand for preventing cellular internalization.
It is rapdily and efficiently enriched in the plasma membrane of live
HeLa cells and retained in the membrane without internalization over
a long period of time (> 3 h).
 van Leeuwen and co-workers have designed a luminogenic
probe (309) ( ) that allows specific membrane staining with fluorescence
turn-on. The complex is nonluminescent
in aqueous solution
due to efficient energy transfer from [Ir(ppy)3] to Cy5
and from the singlet excited state of Cy5 to its triplet manifold
as facilitated by the SOC effect induced by the iridium atom. However,
interaction of the complex with the plasma membrane of cells induces
a conformational change that makes SOC less efficient, selectively
switching on Cy5 fluorescence. Shao, Chen, and co-workers have developed
a ruthenium(II)–coumarin complex (310) to prepare
a nanoprobe for cell membrane imaging. The complex self-assembles into NPs with a spherical structure and
an average diameter of 56 nm upon nanoprecipitation. The resultant
NPs show dual emission at 520 and 660 nm in aqueous solution. However,
the NPs disassemble upon interacting with the plasma membrane, accompanied
by the disappearance of the red emission and thus a change in the
emission color from red to green. The NPs show long retention in the
plasma membrane and high photostability, enabling long-term membrane
imaging.
 Furthermore, specific staining of the plasma
membrane allows for
the examination of various biological events that occur at the membrane
interface. Wang, Li, and co-workers have reported a heterobimetallic
ruthenium(II)–rhenium(I) complex (311) ( ) that displays
different emission response toward pH and anions such as F–, OAc–, and H2PO4–. The complex resides in the plasma
membrane of live HeLa cells, offering the possibilities to examine
related biological events at the membrane interface. Pan, Shen, Su,
and co-workers have developed a metal–organic cage (MOC) by
coordinating Pd2+ with a pH-responsive ruthenium(II) complex
(312) for cellular tracking. The MOC is retained on the plasma membrane of various cell lines
through electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions. This membrane
retention has enabled the monitoring of changes in extracellular pH,
which is useful for cancer cell detection. Additionally, the MOC has
been used for two-photon-induced cell membrane imaging in both live
cells and tissues due to its large TPA cross-section (δ820nm = 798 GM). Zhao, Liu, Huang, and co-workers have
developed conjugated polyelectrolytes (CPEs) (313) that
can be used for ratiometric and lifetime sensing of heparin. , The CPEs exhibit specific plasma membrane staining with high contrast
in difference cell lines such as KB and A549 cells, providing opportunities
to examine heparin interaction with the plasma membrane and internalization
using LSCM and PLIM.
 

8.

## Luminescent Transition Metal Complexes as Probes
for Biological Species
Biological systems encompass a diverse
range of chemical entities,
including metal ions, anions, carbohydrates, thiols, reactive oxygen
and nitrogen species (RONS), nucleic acids, and proteins. These biological
species play distinct roles in regulating normal cellular functions,
and thus their aberrant expression and functions are often linked
to the onset and progression of diseases. Therefore, the development
of transition metal complexes that allow for the sensitive and selective
detection of specific biological species in the complex cellular milieu
will comprehend their respective roles in various physiological and
pathological processes, and foster the development of innovative approaches
for disease diagnosis and treatment. 
8.1.

## Metal Ions
Metal ions play crucial
roles in a wide range of physiological and pathological processes.
Sodium and potassium ions are essential to osmoregulation, the generation
of action potentials, and signal transduction, while calcium ion is vital for intracellular signaling. Heavy metal ions such as iron(II)/iron(III),
zinc(II), and copper(I)/copper(II) ions are involved in modulating
intracellular signaling and contribute to the production of ROS. However, certain heavy metal ions such as mercury(II),
cadmium(II), and lead(II) ions that are widely used in industries
are toxic to living organisms. The disruptions in metal ion homeostasis
can lead to aging and various disorders including cancer, neurodegenerative
diseases, and diabetes.
8.1.1.

## Iron(II) and Iron(III) Ions
Iron
is the most abundant transition metal in the human body. It primarily
exists as Fe2+ and Fe3+, and plays a crucial
role in the functions of numerous proteins and enzymes that are involved
in a wide range of metabolic processes including O2 transport,
cellular respiration, and DNA synthesis. Additionally, it can generate ROS such as hydroxyl radicals via
Fenton reaction, which cause oxidative damage to proteins, lipids,
and nucleic acids. Thus, the dysregulation
of iron homeostasis has been associated with various diseases including
anemia, atherosclerosis, neurodegenerative diseases, and cancer. 
He, Wang, and co-workers have developed
a manganese dioxide (MnO2) nanosheet-based sensor that
enables sensitive and label-free detection of Fe2+ using
[Ru(bpy)3]2+ as a signaling unit. The emission of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ is efficiently quenched when the complex is loaded onto single-layer
MnO2 nanosheets via electrostatic interaction. However,
it is rapidly restored upon reduction of MnO2 nanosheets
by Fe2+ to Mn2+. The nanosensor has been used
to detect Fe2+ in live HeLa cells, where the cells are
pretreated with N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) to remove
GSH that can also reduce MnO2 and interfere with the detection
process. A related nanoplatform based on an amphiphilic iridium(III)
complex (314) ( ) has been utilized to detect Fe2+ in drugs
and live cells. 
 Chen, Chao, and co-workers have designed a lysosome-targeting
iridium(III)
complex (315) ( ) as a Fe3+-activatable theranostic agent
for imaging and treatment of gastric cancer. Reaction of the complex with Fe3+ induces the oxidative
hydrolysis of the catechol moiety, releasing a highly cytotoxic iridium(III)
complex [Ir(ppy)2(bpy-NH2)]+ (bpy-NH2 = 4-amino-2,2′-bipyridine) and a ROS generator 2-hydroxybenzoquinone.
Complex 315 displays high cytotoxicity toward human gastric
adenocarcinoma cells (AGS and MKN-28) (IC50 = 9.2 and 11.3
μM, respectively) due to the high levels of labile iron pools
present in the lysosomes of these cells. Furthermore, the reaction
with Fe3+ leads to a substantial increase in the emission
intensity of the complex as PET from the catechol unit is inhibited.
The emission changes have enabled the monitoring of the intracellular
reaction using LSCM, revealing that the complex is selectively activated
in the lysosomes of AGS cells and gradually migrates to the mitochondria.
Remarkably, the selective activation of the complex in mice bearing
AGS tumor xenografts results in effective inhibition of tumor growth
with minimal side effects.
 
8.1.2.

## Zinc(II) Ion
Zinc is the second
most abundant transition metal within living organisms. The majority
of Zn2+ is bound to proteins, where it plays an important
role in maintaining structural stability and regulating catalytic
activity. A smaller fraction of Zn2+ exists as labile ions, participating in signaling events
that are associated with various physiological and pathological processes. Aberrant levels of Zn2+ have been
implicated in pathological conditions such as diabetes, immune dysfunction, and neurological disorders. 
Lo and co-workers have designed three rhenium(I) complexes appended
with a di-(2-picolyl)amine (DPA) moiety (316) ( ) for detecting
Zn2+. The binding of Zn2+ to the DPA unit inhibits PET from the DPA moiety, resulting
in increased emission intensities and lifetimes of the complexes.
Similar changes are not observed in the presence of other transition
metal ions such as Fe2+ and Cu2+ that are also
abundant in biological systems, enabling the specific imaging of Zn2+ in live HeLa cells. These complexes can also detect Cd2+ due to its similar binding properties as Zn2+. Iridium(III) complexes functionalized with a DPA unit (317) have also been developed for Zn2+ sensing. The direct attachment of the DPA moiety to
the phen ligand leads to more drastic photophysical changes upon Zn2+ binding. Live-cell imaging shows that complex 317c is enriched in the perinuclear region of HeLa cells. You, Nam, Lippard,
and co-workers have developed a related iridium(III) complex (318a) as a luminescent probe for Zn2+, where the
DPA moiety is introduced to the 4-position of the phen ligand via
a methylene linker. The binding of Zn2+ to the DPA unit suppresses PET and destabilizes the nonemissive 3ILCT (π(DPA) → π*(phen)) state, allowing
for efficient radiative decay from the emissive 3MLCT (dπ(Ir)
→ π*(phen)) state. The substantial increase in the emission
intensity and lifetime of the complex has enabled the visualization
of Zn2+ in A549 cells using LSCM and PLIM. Structure–property
relationship analysis of related complexes (318b–318g) indicates that PET plays a dominant role in the emission
response of the complexes toward Zn2+, and the use of cyclometalating
ligands with a high oxidation potential would allow for a greater
emission enhancement. Complex 318b has been used to visualize intracellular Zn2+ distribution in HeLa cells using LSCM and PLIM. Zhang, Liu, He,
and co-workers have utilized an iridium(III) DPA complex (319) for phosphorescence lifetime imaging of endogenous labile Zn2+ in live cells. The high mitochondria
specificity of the complex has enabled the monitoring of changes in
the labile Zn2+ levels in the mitochondria of MCF-7 cells
using PLIM, which shows that S-nitrosocysteine stimulates
intracellular Zn2+ release in mitochondria. Ma, Wong, and
co-workers have developed an iridium(III) complex (320) that shows ratiometric response toward Zn2+. Upon Zn2+ binding, the intensity
of the emission band at 435 nm decreases whereas a new band at 495
nm appears, increasing the ratio I495nm/I435nm by ca. 6 fold.
This ratiometric response is specific toward Zn2+ over
other metal ions including Cd2+, enabling the specific
visualization of Zn2+ distribution in live zebrafish.
 Tang and co-workers have developed a ruthenium(II)
complex modified
with a tetraazamacrocycle (321) ( ) for Zn2+ recognition. Similar to the DPA-based probes, the coordination
of Zn2+ to the tetraazamacrocycle inhibits PET quenching
and induces emission turn-on. This complex shows high sensitivity
and selectivity toward Zn2+, enabling the visualization
of Zn2+ in live HepG2 cells.
 However, the Zn2+ chelators such as
DPA and tetraazamacrocycles
could also bind to other metal ions such as Cu2+, interfering
with Zn2+ detection. As an alternative approach, Li, Xu,
and co-workers have developed an iridium(III) complex (322) ( ) that
features two phosphonate groups as the recognition units for Zn2+. The interaction between the
phosphonate group and Zn2+ reduces the solubility of the
complex and induces the aggregation of the complex in aqueous solution,
resulting in emission enhancement with a blue shift in the emission
maximum from 590 to 550 nm. The emission response is highly specific
toward Zn2+ over other metal ions including Cu2+, and it is reversible upon the addition of the Zn2+ chelator N,N,N’,N’-tetrakis(2-pyridylmethyl)ethylenediamine
to remove the bound Zn2+ from the complex. The complex
has been used to monitor endogenous Zn2+ release upon hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2) stimulation, revealing an increase
in the cytosolic Zn2+ levels under oxidative stress.
 
8.1.3.

## Copper(II) Ion
Copper, as a redox-active
metal, serves as a key catalytic cofactor for numerous enzymes involved
in cellular metabolic processes. However,
an excessive accumulation of Cu2+ can induce oxidative
stress and perturb normal cellular functions. It can also trigger
cuproptosis upon binding to lipoylated proteins in the tricarboxylic
acid cycle. Thus, the dysregulation
of Cu2+ homeostasis has been associated with various pathological
conditions such as Menkes and Wilson diseases, neurodegenerative disorders,
cardiovascular disease, and cancer. 
You, Nam, Lippard, and co-workers have modified a dual-emissive triscyclometalated
iridium(III) complex [Ir(ppy)2(btp)] (Hbtp = 2-(2′-benzo[b]thienyl)pyridine) with a DPA unit to afford
a ratiometric probe (323) ( ) for Cu2+ detection. In the absence of Cu2+, the complex
exhibits dual phosphorescence at 486 (τ = 0.53
μs) and 648 nm (τ = 4.16 μs), originating
from the emissive states associated with the ppy and btp ligands,
respectively. However, the binding of Cu2+ to the DPA unit
selectively quenches the red phosphorescence, increasing the ratio I486nm/I648nm by ca. 4 fold. The ratiometric response is highly specific
toward Cu2+ over other metal ions, allowing ratiometric
imaging of Cu2+ in HeLa cells ( ). Yu and co-workers have also developed
biscyclometalated iridium(III) DPA complexes (324) for
the detection of Cu2+ in live HeLa cells. , The binding of Cu2+ to the DPA unit on the diimine ligand
results in efficient emission quenching. Li and co-workers have utilized
a related ruthenium(II) complex (325) for the sequential
and specific detection of Cu2+ and Cys/His in live cells
and zebrafish. The in situ generated nonluminescent complex 325–Cu2+ ensemble can function as a sensor for Cys and His, which
induce emission turn-on by displacing Cu2+ from the ruthenium(II)
complex due to their higher affinities for Cu2+. This “On–Off–On”
response has allowed sequential imaging of Cu2+ and Cys/His
both in live bone mesenchymal stem cells and zebrafish. Wu and co-workers
have embedded an NIR luminescent ruthenium(II) DPA complex (326) into large-pore mesoporous silica nanoparticles (LPMSNs)
for the sensitive detection of Cu2+ in live HeLa cells
and zebrafish. The introduction of the
complex to the pores of LPMSNs can protect the complex from O2 quenching, resulting in emission enhancement and thus a more
drastic emission response upon Cu2+ recognition. The nanoprobe
shows different tissue affinities in zebrafish and has been used to
monitor Cu2+ distribution in vivo.
 Chao and co-workers have developed a luminescent
binuclear ruthenium(II)
complex (327) ( ) as a two-photon probe for Cu2+ detection. This complex features a 2,6-bis(imidazol-2-yl)pyridine
unit that serves as both a linker between the two ruthenium(II) moieties
[Ru(bpy)2(phen)]2+ and a recognition site for
Cu2+. Additionally, the extended π-conjugation in
the bridging ligand results in enhanced TPA (δ850nm = ca. 400 GM), enabling imaging
in live HeLa cells and zebrafish at increasing depths using two-photon
microscopy (λex = 850 nm). Ruthenium(II)
complexes bearing an imidazole-derived ligand such as 328( ) and 329( ) have been used for imaging Cu2+ in live A549
cells and pea aphids, respectively. Wang, Xu, and co-workers have
designed an iridium(III) complex bearing a 3-(2-pyridyl)pyrazole ligand
(330) that enables the rapid and reversible detection
of Cu2+ and Cys in the mitochondria of live HeLa cells
and zebrafish. Anandan and co-workers
have developed a binuclear ruthenium(II) complex (331) for sensing Cu2+ and sulfide. The two ruthenium(II) units are connected to a p-tert-butyl calix[4]arene through a triazole linker.
The emission of the complex is quenched upon binding of Cu2+ to the N2O2 core of the triazole-modified
calix[4]arene, and is restored in the presence of sulfide which displaces
Cu2+ to form stable CuS, allowing the sequential imaging
of these two species in live A549 cells. A triazole-appending ruthenium(II)
complex (332) has been used to detect Cu2+ in live MCF-7 cells. Kou, Xiao, and
co-workers have incorporated a salen ligand into [Ru(bpy)2(phen)]2+ to develop a luminescent probe (333), where the N2O2 core of the salen ligand
is involved in Cu2+ recognition, for sequential imaging
of Cu2+ and His in live B16 cells. Yu and co-workers have also developed a ruthenium(II) complex
with a Schiff base ligand (334) that enables rapid and
sensitive sensing of Cu2+ in live rat adrenal medullary
pheochromocytoma PC-12 cells. 
 Yu and co-workers have designed a ratiometric
nanoprobe for Cu2+ detection using SiNPs doped with [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and coated with PEI, which serves as a template
for in situ synthesis of silver nanoclusters (AgNCs)
on the
NPs. The nanoprobe exhibits dual emission
bands at 500 and 602 nm, which originate from the AgNCs and [Ru(bpy)3]2+, respectively. The binding of Cu2+ to PEI induces efficient quenching of the green emission of AgNCs
and thus a decrease in the ratio I500nm/I602nm, facilitating the ratiometric
imaging of Cu2+ in HeLa cells.
The development of
luminogenic probes for Cu2+ based
on Cu2+-binding is a challenging task due to the paramagnetic
nature of Cu2+, which facilitates emission quenching through
electron or energy transfer. Sun and
co-workers have modified [Ru(phen)3]2+ with
a phenylazo moiety and an amino group to develop a phosphorogenic
probe (335) ( ) for detecting Cu2+ taking advantage of
its oxidizing capability. The complex
is nonluminescent in solution due to the electron-deficient azo unit.
However, upon the addition of Cu2+, the azo unit is converted
to a nonquenching benzotriazole derivative through a Cu2+-mediated oxidative cyclization reaction, resulting in ca. 80-fold emission turn-on. This remarkable enhancement has enabled
the visualization of Cu2+ in live cells and pea aphid.
 
8.1.4.

## Aluminum(III) Ion
Aluminum is one
of the most abundant metals in the Earth’s crust and has found
applications in numerous aspects of life, ranging from food packaging
and kitchen utensils to transportation and construction work. However,
Al3+ can compete with essential metal ions such as Ca2+, Mg2+, and Fe3+ due to their similar
atomic size and electric charge, and
thus excessive exposure to Al3+ can lead to its accumulation
in various organs, causing harmful effects on human health. In particular,
elevated levels of Al3+ within brain tissues can cause
damage to the central nervous system (CNS), contributing to the development
of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). 
Leung, Ma, and co-workers have designed an iridium(III) complex (336) ( ) that incorporates an o-phenolsalicylimine moiety
as a receptor for detecting Al3+. The complex is weakly emissive in solution (Φem = 0.0082), but its binding to Al3+ induces
a 13.5-fold increase in emission intensity. The emission enhancement
is specific toward Al3+ over other common metal ions, enabling
the sensitive and selective detection of Al3+. The complex
has been used to detect Al3+ in live HepG2 cells. The increased
intracellular emission intensity observed upon exposure of the cells
to Al3+ indicates that the complex is membrane-permeable
and can react with Al3+ in the intracellular environment.
 
8.1.5.

## Mercury(II) Ion
Mercury(II) ion
is one of the most toxic environmental pollutants that poses a significant
threat to human health. The high toxicity
of Hg2+ arises from its high affinity for sulfhydryl groups. Elevated levels of Hg2+ can result
in irreversible damage to multiple vital systems in the body including
the digestive, endocrine, immune, nervous, and cardiovascular systems. 
Li and co-workers have introduced a Hg2+-responsive ruthenium(II) complex (337) ( ) to the surface
of an upconversion nanophosphor NaYF4:Yb,Er,Tm to develop
UCNPs as a ratiometric nanoprobe for Hg2+. The coordination of the NCS group of the complex
to Hg2+ induces a significant blue shift in the absorption
maximum from 541 to 485 nm. The increased spectral overlap enhances
the efficiency of FRET from the nanophosphor to the complex, reducing
the intensity of the UCL at 541 nm. The UCL from Tm3+ at
801 nm is insensitive to Hg2+ and used as a reference signal
to generate ratiometric UCL. The nanoprobe has been used to monitor
changes in Hg2+ in live HeLa cells. A related nanoprobe
has been developed using the core–shell structured UCNPs NaYF4:Yb,Er,Tm@NaGdF4 and the Hg2+-responsive
ruthenium(II) complex 338 for UCL imaging in live cells
and mice. The probe can also function
as a T1-weighted contrast agent for MRI in vivo due to the Gd3+ doped in the NaGdF4 shell.
 Zhao, Li, and co-workers have developed a neutral
iridium(III)
complex [Ir(bt)2(acac)] (Hbt = 2-phenylbenzothiazole; Hacac
= acetylacetonate) (339) ( ) as a ratiometric probe for Hg2+. The binding of Hg2+ to
the sulfur atom on the bt ligand rapidly induces the departure of
the acac ligand and the formation of the solvato complex [Ir(bt)2(solv)2]+. This structural transformation
leads to a significant blue shift in the emission maximum from ca. 560 to 520 nm and an increase in the ratio I520nm/I560nm, enabling the
ratiometric detection of Hg2+. The complex has been used
to detect Hg2+ in live KB cells, where it is distributed
in the cytoplasm. Incubation of the cells with Hg2+ increases
the ratio I515nm/I570nm from ca. 0.1 to > 0.6 ( ).
 Cho, Kim, and co-workers have developed a platinum(II)
complex
conjugated with a rhodamine derivative (340) ( ) for detecting
Hg2+ in live cells. The Hg2+-induced desulfurization triggers the opening of the rhodamine
spirolactam, resulting in 23-fold emission enhancement. Additionally,
the TPA cross-section of the complex increases in the presence of
Hg2+ (δ780nm = 55 GM).
These properties have enabled two-photon luminescence imaging of Hg2+ in live HeLa cells. Tang, Wang, Liu, and co-workers have
developed ruthenium(II) (341) , and iridium(III) complexes (342) , bearing a 1-(2-aminoethyl)-3-phenylthiourea pendant for the detection
of Hg2+. Upon the Hg2+-induced desulfurization
of the thiourea unit, an intramolecular cyclization reaction occurs,
giving rise to an imidazoline derivative. This structural transformation
substantially increases the emission intensities and lifetimes of
the complexes. Interestingly, the iridium(III) complex 342a, where the thiourea-containing pendant is introduced to the 4-position
of the phen ligand, displays ratiometric response toward Hg2+. The emission intensity of the complex
at 560 nm decreases while that at 610 nm increases in the presence
of Hg2+. These photophysical changes are attributed to
the difference in emissive states between the thiourea complexes and
their imidazoline counterparts. The complexes have been used to image
Hg2+ in live SMMC-7721 cells.
 
8.1.6.

## Silver(I) Ion
Silver has gained
widespread usage in modern industries, encompassing fields such as
electronics and pharmaceuticals. However, the release of Ag+ into the environment has led to significant environmental pollution.
Since Ag+ can deactivate sulfhydryl enzymes and form complexes
with a range of metabolites containing amino, carboxyl, and imidazole
groups, excessive exposure to Ag+ can result in various
health issues. 
Khatua and co-workers
have developed a ruthenium(II) complex coordinated with a benzothiazole-substituted
pyridyl-1,2,3-triazole ligand (343) ( ) that enables specific detection
of Ag+. The complex exhibits
weak emission in solution due to the presence of a low-lying nonemissive 3MC excited state. However, the binding of Ag+ to
the triazole ring forms a silver(I)–triazolide complex, which
destabilizes the 3MC state and facilitates the population
of the emissive 3MLCT state, resulting in 80-fold emission
enhancement. The binding occurs faster at pH > 9 as basic media
can
assist in the deprotonation of the acidic triazole C–H proton
for the formation of the silver(I)–triazolide complex. The
complex has been used to image Ag+ in live HeLa cells.
 
8.1.7.

## Gold(III) Ion
Gold has found important
applications in diverse fields such as catalysis and nanomaterials. While
metallic gold is stable and biocompatible, it can be oxidized to Au+ and Au3+ in the presence of strong oxidants in
biological environments. These ions are highly reactive and can cause
damage to organs such as the liver, kidneys, and peripheral nervous
system. 
Hong, Sun, and co-workers
have developed a luminescent ruthenium(II) complex (344) ( ) for
detecting Au3+. The emission
of the complex is quenched upon binding to Au3+, which
is not observed in the presence of other metal ions. The complex has
been used to monitor changes in Au3+ levels in inflamed
RAW264.7 cells and zebrafish, revealing the generation of Au3+ as an intermediate metabolite of the anti-rheumatoid agent sodium
aurothiomalate in inflamed models. Wang, Wang, Leung, and co-workers
have designed an NIR luminescent iridium(III) complex functionalized
with an alkynyl moiety (345) for imaging of Au3+ in live cells. The alkyne unit facilitates
the reduction of Au3+ into zerovalent AuNPs and the simultaneous
anchoring of the complex to the surface of the AuNPs during their
formation, which leads to efficient emission quenching. Upon cellular
internalization, the complex specifically accumulates in the mitochondria
of HeLa cells. Incubation of the stained cells with Au3+ reduces the intracellular emission intensity, indicating that the
complex can specifically image mitochondrial Au3+ in live
cells.
 
8.1.8.

## Palladium(0) and Palladium(II) Ion
Palladium is widely used in catalysis to promote a myriad of organic
transformations that are important to the synthesis of natural products,
pharmaceuticals, and agrochemicals. − However, its extensive
use has resulted in environmental and health concerns. Inorganic palladium
can disrupt mitochondrial respiration in the liver and kidney, while
palladium ions can bind to biomolecules such as DNA and proteins,
impairing normal cellular function and causing diseases. 
Wang, Leung, Wang, and co-workers have
developed an NIR luminescent iridium(III) complex (346) ( ) for
detecting palladium species. The emission
of the complex is quenched in the presence of palladium species including
palladium(0) and palladium(II) ions. The complex has been used to
detect palladium species in live HeLa cells. The high mitochondria
specificity of the complex has allowed the imaging of various palladium
species in the mitochondria.
 

8.2.

## Anions
Anions are crucial components
in living organisms, playing fundamental roles in various biological
processes such as intracellular pH homeostasis, cell volume regulation,
and cellular signaling. However, certain anions such as cyanide and
perchlorate are toxic and pose significant threats to human health.
Thus, accurate detection and monitoring of anions are essential for
understanding their roles and assessing their impact on human health. 
8.2.1.

## Chloride
Chloride is the most abundant
anion in living organisms and plays a crucial role in numerous physiological
processes such as the regulation of ion balance, cell volume, and
membrane potential. Imbalances in Cl– homeostasis have been implicated in several diseases
including myotonia, osteopetrosis, and cystic fibrosis. 
Cao, Mao, and co-workers have utilized
the cyclometalated platinum(II) complex [Pt(ppy)(bpy)]+ (347) ( ) as a phosphorogenic probe for halide ions. This complex is nonluminescent in aqueous solution;
however, the addition of halide ions (e.g., Cl–, Br–, and I–)
to the solution triggers its self-assembly via Pt···Pt
and π–π interactions, switching on the 3MMLCT emission in the deep red region (λem = 655 nm). The emission turn-on has allowed the complex
to monitor changes in intracellular Cl– levels in
live MCF-7 cells. Dorazco-González and co-workers have also
developed a cyclometalated platinum(II) complex (348)
for selective sensing of Cl–. The Cl– recognition involves the formation
of a Pt–Cl bond and two convergent C–H···Cl
interactions, which rigidify the complex and induces emission enhancement.
The cooperative three-point recognition results in higher binding
affinity and selectivity toward Cl– (Kb = 1.5 × 105 M–1) over
other halide ions (Kb = 5.75 × 102, 3.67 × 103, and 1.42 × 104 M–1 for F–, Br–, and I–, respectively). Treatment of Jurkat cells,
an immortalized cell line derived from human acute T cell leukemia,
with the chloro-substituted complex results in intense emission in
the nuclear region.
 Wang and co-workers have developed a nanosensor
for quantitative
imaging of intracellular Cl– concentration. The nanosensor is constructed using core–shell
structured SiNPs, where [Ru(phen)3]2+ serves
as a reference dye and is physically entrapped in the SiNPs, while
the Cl– indicator lucigenine is covalently attached
on the surface of the SiNPs. The nanosensor shows efficient uptake
and specific localization in the lysosomes of live HeLa cells, primarily
attributed to the residual positively charged amino groups present
on the surface of the SiNPs. The long emission lifetime of [Ru(phen)3]2+ has enabled the quantification of intracellular
Cl– levels using a time-domain dual-lifetime referencing
approach, unveiling that the Cl– concentration in
lysosomes exceeds 80 mM. The nanosensor has been further utilized
for long-term monitoring of changes in intracellular Cl– levels in response to alternations in extracellular Cl– concentration.

8.2.2.

## Fluoride
Fluoride is well-known
for its use as an additive in drinking water and toothpastes to prevent
dental caries. However, excessive intake
of F– can result in the development of dental and
skeletal fluorosis and damage to nonskeletal tissues in the gastrointestinal,
cardiovascular, and nervous systems. 
Liu, Zhao, and co-workers have developed a luminescent iridium(III)
complex modified with two F–-sensitive tert-butyldiphenylsilyl (TBDPS) moieties
(349) ( ) for detecting F– in live cells. Reaction of the complex with F– induces the cleavage of the TBDPS unit, generating an electron-rich N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)amino group that efficiently quenches
the emission of the complex through PET and intramolecular rotation.
This leads to a decrease in the emission intensity and lifetime of
the complex, enabling the monitoring of changes in intracellular F– levels using LSCM and PLIM, respectively. A related
TBDPS-modified iridium(III) complex has been incorporated into the
polymer backbone of a fluorescent polyfluorene-based CPE
for ratiometric detection of F–. The modified CPE (350) self-assembles into
well-dispersed and ultrasmall semiconducting polymer dots (Pdots)
with a diameter of < 10 nm in aqueous solution due to its amphiphilic
nature. The Pdots display both polyfluorene fluorescence (λem = ca. 420 nm) and
iridium(III) phosphorescence (λem = ca. 600 nm). Reaction of the Pdots with F– selectively reduces the intensity and lifetime of
the red phosphorescence. These photophysical changes have enabled
the visualization of F– in live HeLa cells using
LSCM and PLIM, showing that incubation of the stained cells with F– reduces the ratio Ired/Iblue from 1.12 to 0.29 ( a) and the emission lifetime
from 36.0 to 6.8 ns ( b).
 
8.2.3.

## Bisulfite and Sulfite
Sulfur dioxide
(SO2), which dissociates into bisulfite and sulfite in
water, is an air pollutant that is detrimental to human health through
causing DNA damage in multiple organs. However, SO2 can be generated from the metabolism of
sulfur-containing amino acids in mammals, functioning as a gaseous
signaling molecule to regulate various physiological and pathological
processes in the cardiovascular system. 
Transition metal complexes have been developed as probes for
detecting HSO3–/SO32– through nucleophilic addition reaction. Chao and co-workers have
designed binuclear iridium(III) complexes (351) ( ) featuring an
electron-deficient azo bridge as both a linker and a recognition site
for HSO3– and SO32–. , The nucleophilic addition of HSO3–/SO32– to the azo
unit inhibits PET quenching, resulting in a substantial increase in
the emission intensities (I/Io = 8 to 27) and lifetimes of the complexes. Among these complexes,
complex 351d exhibits the strongest two-photon-induced
emission in the presence of SO32– due
to the large TPA cross-section (δ750nm = 141.0 GM) and high emission quantum yield (Φem = 0.28) of the resultant adduct, facilitating the detection
of HSO3– and SO32– in live cells using two-photon microscopy. Owing to the cationic
charge and high lipophilicity, the complex shows high mitochondria
specificity, enabling the specific detection of these SO2 derivatives in the mitochondria ( a). It has been used to visualize the endogenous
production of HSO3– and SO32– mediated by thiosulfate sulfurtransferase (TST),
which catalyzes sulfur transfer from thiosulfate to GSH and cyanide,
respectively, in the mitochondria of live HepG2 cells ( b), as well as the production
of HSO3–/SO32– in live RAW264.7 cells upon stimulation with the bacterial endotoxin
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) ( c). The complex has also been used for two-photon luminescence
imaging of HSO3–/SO32– in C. elegans and rat hippocampal tissue slices.
 Li and co-workers have developed an iridium(III)
complex conjugated
with an indolium unit (352) ( ) for the sensitive detection of HSO3–. The 1,4-addition
of HSO3– to the unsaturated C=C bond
of the complex disrupts the π-conjugation between the iridium(III)
polypyridine core and the indolium moiety, resulting in an increase
in emission intensity. The emission enhancement has facilitated the
visualization and tracking of HSO3– in
live HepG2 cells. Wang, Li, Cao, and co-workers have developed an
iridium(III) complex functionalized with two malononitrile units (353) as a two-photon probe for HSO3–. The high mitochondria specificity
of the complex has enabled the specific detection of mitochondrial
HSO3– in live A549 cells. A related iridium(III)
complex (354) has also been developed for two-photon
luminescence imaging of SO2 derivatives. The complex displays a substantial increase in the emission
intensity (I/Io = 69)
and lifetime (from 110 to 254 ns) upon reaction with HSO3–, enabling the sensitive detection of mitochondrial
HSO3– in live cells and zebrafish using
LSCM and PLIM.
 Qi, Qi, and co-workers have utilized an aldehyde-bearing
iridium(III)
complex (355) ( ) for the detection of HSO3–. Incubation of the complex with HSO3– results in an increase in emission intensity
due to inhibited PET in the resultant aldehyde–HSO3– adduct, enabling the imaging of HSO3– in live MCF-7 cells. Liu, Ma, and co-workers
have used a related iridium(III) complex bearing two aldehyde units
(356) to visualize HSO3– in live LO2 cells and zebrafish. Since
treatment of the aldehyde–HSO3– adduct with H2O2 can regenerate the aldehyde
unit, Qi and co-workers have utilized a related iridium(III) complex
(357) to monitor the HSO3–/H2O2 redox cycles in live HeLa cells with
a reversible “Off–On–Off” emission response. 
 Luo, Yang, Gao, and co-workers have developed
cyclometalated palladium(II)
complexes that undergo self-assembly through Pd···Pd
interaction in the presence of specific anions driven by electrostatic
interaction. The cyclometalating ligand
of the complexes plays an important role in anion recognition. One
of the complexes (358) ( ) has been demonstrated to exhibit emission
turn-on (I/Io = ca. 31.8) in the presence of HSO3–. It primarily resides in the lysosomes of live HeLa cells following
uptake via endocytosis.
 
8.2.4.

## Pyrophosphate
Pyrophosphate (PPi),
the dimeric form of inorganic phosphate, is a by-product of cellular
hydrolysis of ATP. It plays a crucial role in biological processes
such as gene regulation, energy storage, and signal transduction.
Aberrant intracellular PPi levels have been associated with several
diseases including calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystal deposition
disease, chondrocalcinosis, arthritis, and cancer. 
Khatua and co-workers have developed an iridium(III)
complex coordinated with a benzimidazole-substituted 1,2,3-triazole
ligand (359) ( ) for sensitive, selective, and rapid detection of
PPi. The emission of the complex is
enhanced in the presence of PPi, as the multiple hydrogen bonding
interactions between the benzimidazole-substituted 1,2,3-triazole
ligand and PPi increases the energy gap between the 3MC–3MLCT states. The emission response is rapid (< 24 s) and
selective toward PPi over other phosphates with similar structures
(e.g., H2PO4– and adenosine mono-, di-, and triphosphate). The complex has been
used to image PPi in live HeLa cells. A ruthenium(II) complex bearing
two aminoethanol pendants (360) that can detect PPi through
a similar recognition mechanism has also been used to visualize PPi
in live HeLa cells. 
 
8.2.5.

## Cyanide
Cyanide is one of the most
toxic anions to living organisms. It shows a strong binding affinity
for the heme unit in cytochrome c oxidase, an important
enzyme in the mitochondria responsible for the electron transport
chain, inhibiting cellular respiration. Additionally, CN– has been associated with the
generation of ROS within the mitochondria, which leads to oxidative
damage.
Li and co-workers have designed an iridium(III) complex-modified
UCNP for ratiometric detection of CN–. This nanoprobe is comprised of a lanthanide-doped
upconversion nanocrystal NaYF4:Yb,Er,Tm and a CN–-responsive iridium(III) complex (361a) ( ). The nanocrystal
displays two UCL bands at 540 and 800 nm, with the green UCL exhibiting
substantial spectral overlap with the absorption of the complex (λabs = 505 nm), resulting in efficient
FRET. However, the addition of CN– to the α,β-unsaturated
carbonyl unit of the complex reduces its visible absorption and suppresses
FRET, allowing for the ratiometric detection of CN– using the UCL at 800 nm as a reference signal. The complex has been
used for ratiometric imaging of CN– in live HeLa
cells. A related complex (361b) has been loaded into
the hollow space of UCNPs with a yolk–shell structure, consisting
of NaLuF4:Yb,Er,Tm as the inner yolk and porous silica
as the shell. The resultant nanocomposite
has been used to detect intracellular CN– in live
KB cells. Xu, Jin, Yao, and co-workers have utilized the iridium(III)
complex 355 to detect CN– through a
cyanohydrin reaction. The reaction converts
the aldehyde moiety to a nonquenching cyanohydrin derivative, resulting
in a 15-fold increase in emission intensity. The complex has been
used to detect CN– in live A549 cells.
 Ghosh, Das, and co-workers have developed a heterobimetallic
iridium(III)–copper(II)
complex (362) ( ) for the detection of CN– based
on a metal displacement approach. The
complex is weakly emissive (Φem =
0.0047) in aqueous solution due to efficient quenching by the paramagnetic
Cu2+. However, the addition of CN– to
the solution induces the decomplexation of the copper(II) DPA unit
and the formation of copper(II) cyanide complexes [Cu(CN)n](n−2)– (n = 2 or 4) due to the strong affinity of CN– for Cu2+, resulting in emission turn-on.
The complex has been used to monitor the uptake of CN– in live HeLa cells. It has also been utilized to develop a luminescence
assay to examine the activity of hydroxynitrile lyase, an enzyme that
catalyzes the conversion of cyanohydrins into their corresponding
aldehyde or ketone derivatives and CN–.
 Leung, Ma, and co-workers have utilized an iridium(III)
complex
(363) ( ) and Ag@Au core–shell structured NPs to develop a
sensing platform specific for CN–. The Au shell protects the Ag core from interactions with
other possible interferants (e.g., I–). The complex is adsorbed onto the Au surface via electrostatic
interaction, which induces efficient emission quenching. However,
upon the addition of CN–, the Au shell of Ag@Au
NPs dissolves and the complex is released from the Ag@Au NPs, resulting
in substantial emission enhancement. The sensing platform has been
applied to monitor CN– in drinking water and in
live HeLa cells.
 
8.2.6.

## Perchlorate
Perchlorate is one
of the major environmental pollutants due to the widespread industrial
and commercial use of perchlorate salts. Its presence in the environment
can be harmful to human health as it can substitute iodide in the
body and inhibit iodine uptake in the thyroid gland due to their similar
ionic radii. 
Zhu, Su, Bryce, and
co-workers have developed an AIE-active binuclear iridium(III) complex
(364) ( ) that enables specific detection of ClO4–. The complex is nonluminescent in
aqueous solution (Φem = 0.29 ×
10–3); however, the addition of ClO4– to the solution leads to a 430-fold increase in the
emission quantum yield (Φem = 0.12)
with a blue shift of 25 nm in the emission maximum. These changes
are attributed to the specific interaction between the complex and
ClO4–, which induces trans-to-cis isomerization of the complex and subsequent
aggregation of the cis-isomer due to its lower aqueous
solubility. The complex has been used to detect ClO4– in live HeLa cells. Chao and co-workers have also
developed two AIE-active iridium(III) complexes (365 and 366) that can selectively detect ClO4– in aqueous solution and in live cells, where the presence of ClO4– induces the formation of emissive NPs
and thus substantial emission enhancement. , 
 
8.2.7.

## Periodate
Periodate is a versatile
oxidizing agent used in organic synthesis for various chemical transformations. It is particularly useful for modifying biomolecules
like carbohydrates due to its unique reactivity and selectivity toward
1,2-diols. However, excess exposure to IO4– can be toxic, causing kidney toxicity and uremia. Additionally,
IO4–-induced iodine increase in the thyroid
may lead to thyrotoxicosis.
Leung, Wong, Ma, and co-workers
have developed an iridium(III) complex bearing a sulfide group (367) ( ) for the detection of IO4–. Oxidation of the sulfide group by IO4– to a sulfoxide derivative induces significant
emission quenching of the complex. The emission response is specific
toward IO4– over other iodine sources
(e.g., I– and IO3–) and common oxidizing agents (e.g., H2O2 and hypochlorous acid (HClO)). The complex
has been used to image IO4– in live HeLa
cells.
 

8.3.

## Amino Acids
Amino acids possess diverse
functional side chains that contribute to their various biochemical
properties and functions. In addition
to their involvement in protein synthesis, amino acids play crucial
roles in gene expression, cell signaling, neurotransmission, redox
balance, and immune response. Aberrant amino acid metabolism has been
linked to various diseases such as diabetes, neurological disorders,
cardiovascular disease, and cancer.
8.3.1.

## Histidine
As an essential amino
acid, His is crucial for human growth and development. Additionally, it serves as a precursor for
histamine that plays an important role in mediating immune response and neurotransmission. Abnormal levels of His and His-rich proteins have been
associated with pathological conditions including rheumatoid arthritis,
liver cirrhosis, thrombotic disorders, and chronic kidney disease.
Tian, Tian, and co-workers have developed an iridium(III) complex
(368) ( ) as a two-photon probe for His sensing. The complex shows a weak emission band centered at 593
nm (Φem < 0.01) in aqueous solution.
However, a strong emission band emerges at 493 nm upon the addition
of His or His-rich proteins such as BSA. The substantial emission
enhancement is attributed to the secondary bonding interactions between
the complex and His that effectively inhibit nonradiative decay. The
complex has been used to visualize His in HepG2 cells ( ). Incubation of the cells
with the complex gives intense nuclear emission, which disappears
when the cells are pretreated with histidine decarboxylase (HDC) and
is restored when the cells are further incubated with His. Similar
nuclear staining is observed in other cancer cell lines such as A549
and HeLa cells but not in normal HELF cells, suggesting that the complex
can differentiate between cancer cells and normal cells based on its
specific recognition of nuclear His. The complex has also been utilized
to image His using STED microscopy, which enables the visualization
of nuclear His at a high signal-to-noise ratio.
 Ye and co-workers have designed a heterobimetallic
ruthenium(II)–nickel(II)
complex (369) ( ) as a selective probe for His. This complex displays weak emission due to the paramagnetic
nature of Ni2+. Since His exhibits high binding affinity
for Ni2+, treatment of the complex with His triggers the
release of Ni2+ from the complex, resulting in an 11-fold
increase in emission intensity that is not observed for other amino
acids and His-containing proteins such as BSA. The complex has been
applied to visualize endogenous His in live HeLa cells. The intense
emission observed in the nuclear region indicates the high specificity
of the complex toward nuclear His. The complex has also been used
to image His in living organisms such as zebrafish larvae and D. magna.
 Iridium(III) solvato complexes have been demonstrated
as promising
probes for His detection through iridium(III)–His coordination. − Wang and co-workers have developed an iridium(III) solvato complex
(370) ( ) as a phosphorogenic probe for His or His-containing proteins. This complex shows substantial emission enhancement
upon specific coordination with His or His-rich proteins. The complexes
have been used to visualize endogenous His or His-containing proteins
in live HepG2 cells and rat brain tissue slices. Hu and co-workers
have utilized a related iridium(III) solvato complex (371) for tracking His or His-containing proteins in fixed HeLa cells,
which gives rise to intense emission in the nuclear region. 
 You and co-workers have developed a platinum(II)
solvato complex
(372) ( ) that displays ratiometric response toward histamine. Treatment of the complex with histamine induces
a large blue shift in the emission maximum from 635 to 567 nm, resulting
in a substantial increase in the ratio I567nm/I635nm from 0.26 to 1.90. The lifetime
of the emission at 567 nm also increases from 21 to 435 ns in the
presence of histamine. These photophysical changes are specific toward
histamine over His as the binding affinity of the complex for histamine
(Kd > 1.2 pM) is 6 orders of magnitude
higher than His (Kd > 1.2 μM),
enabling
the selective visualization of histamine in live RAW264.7 cells. Furthermore,
the complex has been utilized to monitor the progress of the de novo synthesis of histamine in RAW264.7 cells ( ).
 Cash and Clark have utilized the platinum(II) porphyrin
PtTPFPP
(373) (H2TPFPP = meso-tetrakis(2,3,4,5,6-pentafluorophenyl)porphyrin)
( ) and diamine
oxidase to develop a phosphorescent nanosensor for tracking histamine
levels in vivo. The
enzyme catalyzes the oxidative deamination of histamine to imidazole-4-acetaldehyde,
ammonia, and H2O2, leading to a decrease in
the local O2 concentration and thus an increase in the
emission intensity of PtTPFPP. The nanosensor has been used to monitor
changes in histamine levels in live mice, revealing rapid histamine
clearance with an elimination half-life of ca. 7.6
min.
 
8.3.2.

## Tryptophan
Tryptophan is an essential
amino acid that is needed for protein synthesis in humans. Additionally,
its metabolite serotonin plays an important role in neurotransmission
and immune response. The metabolism
of tryptophan has been implicated in a wide range of diseases, including
neurodegenerative diseases such as AD and Parkinson’s disease
(PD), infectious diseases, autoimmune diseases, and cancer.
Song and co-workers have reported a luminescent iridium(III) complex
(374) ( ) that enables the specific detection of tryptophan via noncovalent
interactions. The emission of the complex
is effectively quenched in the presence of tryptophan due to PET.
This emission quenching is not observed for other amino acids, highlighting
the selectivity of the complex toward tryptophan. The complex has
been used to detect tryptophan in live HepG2 cells. The complex is
distributed throughout the cells, and the intracellular emission intensity
diminishes upon increasing tryptophan concentration. These findings
indicate that the complex can specifically recognize and interact
with tryptophan in the intracellular environment.
 
8.3.3.

## Glutamine
Glutamine is a vital
amino acid that plays multiple roles in living organisms. It is involved
in protein synthesis, regulation of intracellular processes, support
of cell proliferation, and maintainance of acid-base balance. Glutamine also serves as a versatile nutrient,
contributing to energy production, macromolecule synthesis, and signaling
in cancer cells.
Yang, Chen, Mao, and co-workers have developed
an iridium(III) solvato complex [Ir(pba)2(DMSO)2]+ (Hpba = 4-(2-pyridyl)benzaldehyde) (375) ( ) for
detecting glutamine. This complex undergoes
solvent ligand substitution upon binding with glutamine, leading to
the formation of a glutamine-bound iridium(III) complex. The interaction
between the aldehyde unit of the pba ligand and the amide group of
glutamine stabilizes the complex through hydrogen bonding. Furthermore,
this intramolecular interaction perturbs the p−π conjugation
within the pba ligand, resulting in 200-fold emission enhancement.
The emission response is specific toward glutamine over other amino
acids and glutamine-containing peptides such as GSH, allowing for
the selective imaging of glutamine in live HeLa cells. Additionally,
the complex preferentially accumulates in the mitochondria, providing
opportunities to investigate mitochondrial glutamine metabolism.
 
8.3.4.

## Proline
Proline is a nonessential
amino acid that can be endogenously produced from glutamate (Glu)
or ornithine. It plays an important role in energy production, redox
balance, and apoptosis. Proline metabolism
is also closely linked to normal brain function and various neurological
and psychiatric disorders. For example,
impaired proline metabolism leading to the accumulation of proline
in the blood can result in hyperprolinemia, which is associated with
symptoms such as seizures, intellectual disability, and schizophrenia.
Proline metabolism has also been implicated in cancer cell survival,
proliferation, and metastasis. 
Liu, Ma, and co-workers have utilized the iridium(III) complex 355 to detect proline through a proline-mediated aldol reaction. In the presence of proline, the quenching aldehyde
unit reacts with acetone to form a nonquenching aldol unit, resulting
in ca. 8-fold emission enhancement. No similar increase
in emission intensity is observed for other amino acids. The complex
has been used to detect proline in live A2780 cells, and the intense
intracellular emission observed when the cells are treated with acetone
indicates that the complex can detect endogenous proline.

8.3.5.

## Tyrosine
Tyrosine is categorized
as a nonessential amino acid as it can be endogenously synthesized
from phenylalanine. It is the precursor for the production of catecholamines
such as dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine that play important
roles as neurotransmitters in the nervous system and as hormones in
the endocrine system. Tyrosine is also a precursor for the production
of melanins for skin and hair pigmentation. 
Tian, Tian, and co-workers have developed an AIE-active heterobimetallic
iridium(III)–organotin(IV) complex (376) ( ) that can recognize
endogenous tyrosine. The complex shows
multiphoton absorption behavior (δ920nm = 9.95 GM, σ1500nm = 2.29 ×
10–81 cm6 s2 photon–2) and significant emission enhancement upon interaction with tyrosine
through secondary bonding interactions. The complex has been used
to visualize endogenous tyrosine in live A549 cells. The intense nuclear
emission observed indicates that the complex specifically recognizes
tyrosine or tyrosine-containing proteins in the cell nucleus. The
complex has also been applied to super-resolution imaging due to its
high photostability, which allows the visualization of the nucleus
structure with an increased signal-to-noise ratio using STED microscopy.
 

8.4.

## Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are vital
biomolecules that play crucial roles in essential biological processes
such as cell proliferation and differentiation. , As a result, their detection is of high importance for disease diagnosis
and treatment. One notable example is the association between abnormal
glucose levels in the blood and diabetes. Accurate detection of blood
glucose levels is useful for the effective management of diabetes
and improving patient outcomes.
Phenylboronic acid (PBA) derivatives
have received significant attention as recognition units for carbohydrates
due to their rapid and reversible reaction with 1,2- or 1,3-diols
at physiological pH. Pikramenou and
co-workers have developed an iridium(III) complex modified with two
PBA moieties as the recognition sites (377) ( ) for detecting
saccharides. Binding of the complex
to glucose and fructose via phenylboronate ester formation results
in a substantial decrease in its emission intensity. Live-cell imaging
shows that increasing the glucose or fructose concentration in the
cell culture media leads to a reduction in the intracellular emission
intensity, which is ascribed to both the lower emission intensities
and cellular uptake efficiencies of the resultant sugar conjugates
compared to the free complex.
 Sialic acids are a family of negatively charged,
nine-carbon monosaccharides
derived from neuraminic acid. They are
commonly located at the terminal position of N- and O-linked glycans attached to the cell surface, playing an
important role in mediating cell–cell interactions, signaling,
and immune response. Increased sialylation on the surface of cancer
cells has been linked to the progression, invasion, and metastasis
of cancer. Lo and co-workers have designed
three iridium(III) complexes functionalized with a PBA moiety (378) ( ) as luminescent probes for sialic acids. The PBA moiety recognizes N-acetylneuraminic acid
(Neu5Ac), the most prevalent form of sialic acid, through phenylboronate
ester formation with the vicinal diol of Neu5Ac. Furthermore, the
introduction of an aminomethyl group at the meta position
of the PBA unit facilitates electrostatic interaction with the carboxylate
group of Neu5Ac, enhancing the stability of the resultant conjugate
under physiological conditions. This cooperative binding mode significantly
increases the binding affinities of the complex for Neu5Ac (log Kb = 3.61 to 3.85), surpassing those for other
monosaccharides that are commonly found in glycoproteins such as d-glucose, d-galactose, and d-mannose (log Kb = 1.68 to 3.34). Among the three complexes,
complex 378c can specifically recognize the sialic acid
residues on the surface of live HepG2 cells ( ), as the ionized carboxylate groups efficiently
suppress the internalization of the complex and facilitate its reaction
with sialic acids. The absence of plasma membrane staining in cells
coincubated with exogenous Neu5Ac or pretreated with neuraminidase
further confirms the specific interaction of the complex with sialic
acids. Remarkably, the specific recognition of cell-surface sialic
acid residues has enabled the complex to distinguish between cancerous
HepG2 cells and noncancerous HEK293T cells, highlighting its potential
use in cancer diagnosis.
 
8.5.

## Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and its phosphate ester (NADP)
serve crucial roles as coenzymes in intracellular redox reactions. The NAD+/NADH and NADP+/NADPH redox couples are important to maintaining intracellular redox
homeostasis and regulating various cellular processes such as energy
metabolism, calcium homeostasis, gene expression, and immunological
functions. Imbalances in these two redox couples have been linked
to various pathological conditions including aging, neurodegenerative
diseases, cardiovascular diseases, and cancer.
Suresh, Maiti,
and co-workers have designed an iridium(III) complex featuring two N-methylquinolinium moieties (379) ( ) as an NADH-activatable
theranostic agent. Reduction of the
electron-deficient quinolinium moiety by NADH through hydride transfer
increases the emission intensity of the complex due to inhibited PET
quenching. Additionally, the reaction can weaken the interaction between
the complex and AuNPs, leading to a reduction in the surface-enhanced
Raman scattering signal. These signal changes offer the possibilities
for the detection of NADH using a bimodal approach. The complex has
been used to detect endogenous NADH in cancer cells under different
metabolic stimulation. Furthermore, the intracellular reaction of
the complex with NADH not only induces NADH depletion but also increases
the efficiency of the complex in generating 1O2 and NAD* upon irradiation, resulting in redox imbalance to trigger
apoptosis.
 
8.6.

## Biothiols
Biothiols are crucial in
preventing oxidative stress and maintaining intracellular redox homeostasis
for normal cellular functions. Alternations in intracellular biothiol
levels can serve as an indicator of different pathological states.
For example, Cys regulates protein structure and function, and its
dysregulation has been associated with various syndromes such as neurotoxicity,
liver damage, muscle and fat loss, skin lesions, and slowed growth. Homocysteine (Hcy), an intermediate from the
metabolism of methionine, is a risk factor for cardiovascular and neurodegenerative disease when its levels are elevated. The most abundant biothiol
in mammalian cells is GSH (ca. 1–10 mM), which
is crucial in maintaining redox homeostasis, metabolizing xenobiotics,
and modulating immune response. Increased
intracellular GSH levels have been implicated in cancer development
and resistance to chemotherapy. 
Transition metal complexes have been designed as phosphorogenic probes
for biothiols based on nucleophilic aromatic substitution, which separates
an emission quencher from the luminophore to induce phosphorescence
turn-on. Zhao and co-workers have designed a ruthenium(II)-based phosphorogenic
probe (380) ( ) for biothiols through the functionalization of [Ru(phen)3]2+ with a 2,4-dinitrophenyl (2,4-DNP) moiety via
a thiol-responsive sulfonamide linker. This complex is nonluminescent in solution due to efficient emission
quenching by PET from [Ru(phen)3]2+ to the electron-deficient
2,4-DNP unit. However, it displays up to 90-fold emission enhancement
upon reaction with biothiols that cleaves the sulfonamide linker and
separates the 2,4-DNP moiety from the [Ru(phen)3]2+ core. The complex has been used to detect endogenous biothiols in
human small-cell lung carcinoma NCI-H446 cells, and its specific reaction
with intracellular biothiols is supported by the reduced emission
intensity when the cells are pretreated with the thiol scavenger NEM.
Lo and co-workers have designed a series of rhenium(I) complexes appended
with a 2,4-DNP moiety (381) as thiol-activatable probes
and photosensitizers. The intracellular
reaction of the complexes with biothiols switches on their phosphorescence
and 1O2-photosensitization properties, resulting
in higher emission intensity and photocytotoxic activity in cells
with a higher concentration of biothiols (e.g., HeLa
cells). Additionally, complex 381c is specifically enriched
in the mitochondria of the cells after celluar uptake due to the cationic
charge and high lipophilicity, while complex 381d preferentially
localizes in the ER due to the appended tosylamide moiety.
 Zhang, Yuan, and co-workers have also developed
a ruthenium(II)
complex (382) ( ), where the luminophore is conjugated with the 2,4-DNP
unit via a sulfonate ester linkage, for the detection of intracellular
thiols. Modification of a related ruthenium(II)
complex with a morpholine unit yields a phosphorogenic probe (383) that enables the specific detection of biothiols in the
lysosomes of cells. Furthermore, the
complex has been used to image biothiols in D. magna. The complex is transported to their body through feeding, and its
reaction with biothiols present in the digestive system results in
intense emission in the esophagus and gut regions. Zheng, Ge, and
co-workers have utilized 2,4-DNP-functionalized mono- and binuclear
ruthenium(II) complexes such as 384( ) and 385( ) that
exhibit rapid and selective emission turn-on in response to biothiols
for imaging endogenous biothiols in live Glioma cells. The steric
interactions between the 1H-imidazo[4,5-f][1,10]phenanthroline ligand and the 2,4-DNP moiety facilitate the
reaction with thiols, allowing the reaction to complete within 10
min. Zhao, Li, Huang, and co-workers have developed an iridium(III)
2,4-DNP complex (386) that shows high selectivity toward
Cys and Hcy over GSH. The emission intensity
of the complex significantly increases in the presence of Cys and
Hcy, while incubation with GSH results in negligible changes due to
the steric hindrance around its sulfhydryl group that hinders its
reaction with the complex. Ruthenium(II) (387) and iridium(III) complexes (388) functionalized with a 2,4-DNP unit
via a (thio)ether linker have also been developed as thiol-responsive
probes and used for imaging biothiols in live cells and organisms.
 Zhang, Yuan, Zhang, and co-workers have designed
a ruthenium(II)
complex (389) ( ) that can detect total biothiols and differentiate
between Cys and Hcy from GSH both in vitro and in vivo. The molecular design
features the conjugation of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ with
7-nitro-2,1,3-benzoxadiazole (NBD) via an ether linkage, which enables
efficient quenching of the luminescence of both [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and NBD through PET and O-substitution at the 4-position,
respectively. The reaction of complex 389 with Cys and
Hcy produces a red phosphorescent ruthenium(II) complex (λem = 628 nm) and a green fluorescent NBD derivative NBD-NHR
(R = Cys and Hcy) (λem = 540 nm).
The amine-substituted NBD derivative NBD-NHR is generated from the
intermediate NBD-SR through an intramolecular S → N rearrangement. However, reaction of the complex with GSH
only switches on the red phosphorescence as the intramolecular rearrangement
reaction is not feasible in NBD-S(GSH). The drastic difference in
the emission colors of the reaction products has facilitated the facile
discrimination of Cys and Hcy from GSH in live cells, zebrafish, and
mice ( ).
Furthermore, the long emission lifetime of the complex (> 300 ns)
has allowed for the detection of changes in total biothiols in live
cells with increased sensitivity by using time-gated techniques to
remove the shorter-lived fluorescence from the cells and NBD-NHR (0.80
ns).
 Liu, Huang, Zhao, and co-workers have developed
an iridium(III)
complex (390) ( ) that enables selective GSH sensing. The introduction of two electron-deficient N-alkylpyridinium moieties enables efficient emission quenching by
PET. However, the electron transfer from GSH to the pyridinium moiety
increases its susceptibility to nucleophilic attack and promotes the
substitution reaction by hydroxide in aqueous solution, resulting
in substantial emission enhancement (I/Io = 12.5) and lifetime extension (from 84.7 to 690.5 ns)
that are not observed when the complex is incubated with Cys, Hcy,
or H2S. The high selectivity of the complex toward GSH
has allowed for the differentiation of cancer cells (HeLa, A549, and
HepG2) from noncancerous cells (3T3-L1 and HL-7702) by detecting intracellular
GSH levels using LSCM and PLIM ( ). Additionally, the reaction with GSH increases
the 1O2 photosensitization efficiency of the
complex, resulting in higher photocytotoxicity toward cancer cells
than normal cells due to different intracellular GSH levels.
 Phosphorogenic probes that detect biothiols based
on azo or disulfide
reduction have also been developed. Chao and co-workers have designed
an azo-bridged binuclear iridium(III) complex (391) ( ) to visualize
biothiols in live cells. The complex
is nonluminescent due to the quenching azo unit. However, reduction
of the azo unit by biothiols via a two-electron transfer process yields
a nonquenching azo anion, resulting in substantial emission enhancement
(I/Io = 30 to 38). Interestingly,
the mononuclear complex does not exhibit a similar reaction, implying
that the reactivity and selectivity of the recognition unit can be
significantly altered by conjugation to a metal center. A related
binuclear ruthenium(II) complex (392) has been developed
as a thiol-activatable photosensitizer for two-photon-induced PDT
in cancer cells and MCTSs. The complex
shows strong TPA (δ810nm = 210 GM),
increased emission intensity (I/Io = 50), and high 1O2 generation
efficiency (ΦΔ = 0.40) upon
reduction of the azo bridge by GSH to a hydrazo derivative.
 Yu, Lo, and co-workers have designed a rhenium(I)
complex conjugated
with a perylene diimide (PDI) moiety through a disulfide linker (393) ( ) for detecting biothiols in live cells. The complex displays very weak emission in aqueous solution due
to efficient quenching of rhenium(I) phosphorescence (λem = 557 nm) by FRET and PDI fluorescence (λem = 661 nm) by aggregation. Reductive cleavage of the
disulfide bond by thiols separates the two luminescent entities, resulting
in a substantial increase in the intensity (I/Io = 14.7 to 29.2) and lifetime (from < 10
ns to 1.08 μs) of rhenium(I) phosphorescence. Additionally,
the complex exhibits high specificity for mitochondria, making it
a valuable tool for specific detection of biothiols in these organelles.
Yi, Liang, and co-workers have developed a self-assembling ruthenium(II)
complex (394), where [Ru(bpy)3]2+ is conjugated with a thiol-responsive self-assembling motif C(StBu)K-CBT (CBT = 2-cyanobenzothiazole), for imaging cancer
cells and tumors with long-lasting emission. Reductive cleavage of the disulfide bond by the high levels of intracellular
biothiols in cancer cells exposes the 1,2-aminothiol group on the
Cys motif, which initiates its intermolecular CBT-Cys click reaction
and leads to the formation of oligomers that self-assemble into NPs.
Thus, the complex shows enhanced retention and persistent emission
in live HepG2 cells and tumor-bearing mice compared to [Ru(bpy)3]2+ ( ).
 Transition metal complexes have also been designed
for the detection
of biothiols based on 1,4-addition reactions. Zhao, Huang, and co-workers
have developed an iridium(III) complex bearing two α,β-unsaturated
ketone moieties (395) ( ) for imaging biothiols in live cells. The complex displays an increase in emission
intensity and lifetime upon incubation with Cys but not in the presence
of Hcy or GSH, enabling the selective visualization of Cys in live
cells using LSCM and PLIM. The photophysical changes are associated
with the suppression of nonradiative decay from the 3LLCT
state upon the addition of Cys to the α,β-unsaturated
ketone unit, as suggested by time-dependent density functional theory
(TD-DFT) calculations. The complex has also been adsorbed onto the
shell of core–shell structured MSNs, where the core is doped
with the thiol-insensitive iridium(III) complex 184a,
to construct a nanoprobe for detecting Cys with ratiometric response.
Zhao and co-workers have developed a luminescent soft salt (396) for ratiometric detection of Cys and Hcy. In the absence of thiols, the soft salt exhibits
long-lived blue-green emission (λem = 485 and 505 nm) originating from the anionic, thiol-insensitive
complex. Incubation of the soft salt with Cys substantially and selectively
increases the emission intensity and lifetime of the cationic thiol-responsive
complex (λem = 560 nm), allowing
the detection of Cys and Hcy in live cells by ratiometric response
and lifetime changes. Related iridium(III) complexes incorporating
the α,β-unsaturated ketone moieties in the diimine ligand
(397) have also been developed for selective imaging
of Cys and Hcy in live cells, zebrafish, and mice. , Li and co-workers have developed two related NIR luminescent iridium(III)
complexes (398) as probes for biothiols. Interestingly, treatment of the complexes with
GSH induces a larger increase in their emission intensities than Cys
and Hcy, enabling the sensitive detection of GSH in live HeLa cells.
The complexes have also been used for PDT due to their increased 1O2 generation efficiencies upon reaction with GSH.
Li and co-workers have reported on an analogous ruthenium(II) complex
(399) that can differentiate Cys from Hcy and GSH in
live cells and zebrafish. Incubation
of the complex with Cys results in a 30-fold increase in emission
intensity, but negligible photophysical changes are observed with
Hcy and GSH. The high selectivity of the complex toward Cys arises
from its relatively smaller steric hindrance and stronger electrostatic
attraction with the complex at physiological pH compared to the other
two biothiols.
 Chao and co-workers have designed iridium(III)
complexes bearing
two α,β-unsaturated nitroolefin moieties as the recognition
sites (400) ( ) for detecting biothiols in live cells. These complexes are weakly emissive due to
PET from [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+ to the nitroolefin
unit. However, the addition of thiols to the nitroolefin unit suppresses
the PET process, resulting in substantial emission enhancement. Zhang,
Zhang, Yuan, and co-workers have developed an iridium(III) nitroolefin
complex (401) that is selective toward Cys over Hcy and
GSH. Notably, the addition reaction
with Cys triggers the elimination of the quenching nitro group, resulting
in substantial emission enhancement within a short incubation time
(< 30 min). In contrast, exposure of the complex to Hcy and GSH
for more than 2 h only results in a minor increase in emission intensity.
The different response time allows the complex to distinguish Cys
from the other two biothiols, facilitating the selective imaging of
Cys in live cells, D. magna, zebrafish larvae, and
mice. Furthermore, the complex shows high specificity for mitochondria
and has been utilized to examine Cys-mediated mitochondrial redox
activities in murine macrophage J774A.1 cells, revealing a reduction
in the mitochondrial Cys levels during inflammation.
 Transition metal complexes have also been designed
to selectively
detect Cys and Hcy based on their cyclization reaction with aldehydes
that forms thiazolidine and thiazinane derivatives, respectively.
Chen, Li, and co-workers have developed an iridium(III) complex [Ir(pba)2(bpy)]+ (402) ( ) that displays ratiometric
response toward Cys and Hcy. The complex
exhibits a structured emission band at 547 nm with a shoulder at 586
nm in aqueous solution. Upon reaction with Cys and Hcy, the intensity
of the emission band at 547 nm decreases, giving rise to a broad and
structureless band with a maximum at 586 nm. As suggested by TD-DFT
calculations, the cyclization reaction perturbs the p−π
conjugation within the pba ligand, resulting in a conversion of the
excited-state nature from 3IL (π → π*)
(pba) to an admixture of 3MLCT (dπ(Ir) → π*(bpy))
and 3LLCT (π(N∧C) → π*(bpy)).
The ratiometric response has enabled the selective detection of Cys/Hcy
in live KB cells. Related iridium(III) complexes modified with a quaternary
ammonium group (403), a
poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
(PNIPAM) chain (404 and 405), , or an alkoxysilyl group for conjugation to MSNs (406) to increase their aqueous solubility
and biocompatibility for imaging Cys and Hcy in live cells. Interestingly,
Li and co-workers have developed an iridium(III) complex (407) that can discriminate between Cys and Hcy by introducing two additional
amino groups to the bpy ligand. Treatment
of the complex with Cys leads to a moderate decrease in the emission
intensity at ca. 585 nm and a small blue shift of ca. 10 nm. In contrast, incubation with Hcy not only reduces
the emission intensity at 585 nm but also substantially increases
the emission intensity at ca. 495 nm, enabling the
ratiometric detection of Hcy in live cells. Hu, Wu, and co-workers
have developed an iridium(III) complex (408) for two-photon
luminescence imaging of Cys and Hcy in living systems. The reaction with Cys and Hcy changes the excited-state
nature of the complex from 3ILCT (π(phenylamine)
→ π*(terpyridine)) to an admixture of 3MLCT
(dπ(Ir) → π*(terpyridine)) and 3LLCT
(π(N∧C) → π*(terpyridine)), resulting
in 12- and 18-fold emission enhancement, respectively. It has been
used to visualize mitochondrial Cys and Hcy in live cells, MCTSs,
zebrafish, and mouse tissue slices due to its high mitochondria specificity.
Shi, Fan, and co-workers have designed an iridium(III) complex (409) that shows emission enhancement in the NIR region (λem = 684 nm) upon reaction with Cys and
Hcy in live cells and mice. Li, Qi,
and co-workers have developed an iridium(III) complex modified with
an aldehyde unit (410) that is selective toward Hcy over
Cys. The complex displays enhanced emission
upon reaction with Hcy but not with Cys, which is attributed to the
larger pKa of Hcy-derived thiazinane (>
8.0) compared to Cys-derived thiazolidine (> 5.0), which renders
PET
quenching not favorable at physiological pH.
 Zhang and co-workers have developed an AIE-active
platinum(II)
complex (411) ( ) as a Cys-selective theranostic agent. The coordination of the complex with Cys induces
a significant increase in the two-photon (δ900nm increases from 187.3 to 4,140.23 GM) and three-photon
absorption cross-sections (σ1200nm increases from 0 to 3.41 × 10–74 cm6 s2 photon–2) and emission intensity,
which are not observed in the presence of Hcy and GSH. Upon cellular
internalization, the complex specifically resides in the lysosomes
of cells. It has been used to examine Cys-related cellular processes,
indicating that cystine can be absorbed in cells through the cystine/glutamate
transporter and is then converted to Cys by enzymes. Furthermore,
treatment of cancer cells (HeLa and HepG2) with the complex results
in more intense intracellular emission than normal cells (HUVEC and
MH-S) due to the high levels of Cys in cancer cells, indicating that
the complex can distinguish cancer tissues from normal tissues based
on different Cys levels. Thus, the complex can effectively target
the tumor tissues and inhibit the tumor growth in vivo.
 Chao and Zhang have conjugated an iridium(III)
complex with a copper(II)
terpyridine complex for the detection of Hcy in aqueous media. Upon reduction of copper(II) by Hcy to copper(I),
complex 412 ( ) aggregates to form NPs due to reduced aqueous solubility.
This results in 1,500-fold emission enhancement within 2 min, which
is not observed for Cys and GSH. The complex localizes in the cytoplasm
of HeLa cells and the intracellular emission intensity diminishes
when the cells are pretreated with NEM and recovers when the treated
cells are further incubated with Hcy, confirming that the emission
originates from its reaction with Hcy.
 Leung, Ma, and co-workers have developed a MnO2 nanosheet-assisted
sensing platform for label-free detection of GSH. The emission of the iridium(III) complex 413 ( ) is
quenched in the presence of the MnO2 nanosheet, but it
is restored upon reduction of the MnO2 nanosheet by GSH
into Mn2+. The emission response is selective toward GSH
over common cellular reductants (e.g., Cys, Hcy,
NAD(P)H, and ascorbic acid). The nanoplatform has been applied to
monitor the GSH levels in live HeLa cells and zebrafish. Song and
co-workers have designed a nanoprobe, where [Ru(bpy)3]2+ is adsorbed onto the surface of MnO2 nanosheets,
for bimodal luminescence imaging and MRI of GSH. The GSH-induced reduction of MnO2 nanosheets
results in remarkable enhancement in both emission and MR signals
due to the release of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and Mn2+, respectively, enabling luminescence imaging and MRI of
GSH in live cells, zebrafish, and tumor-bearing mice. Chao and co-workers
have modified AuNPs with an amine-containing ruthenium(II) complex
(414) for two-photon luminescence imaging of thiols in
live cells and tissues. In the presence
of thiols, the complex is displaced from the surface of the AuNPs,
resulting in an increase in the emission intensity (I/Io = ca. 30) and TPA
cross-section (δ800nm = up to 350
GM). These photophysical changes have allowed two-photon luminescence
imaging of thiols in live cells and tissues at depths of 80–170
μm.
 
8.7.

## Gasotransmitters
Gasotransmitters
are a class of gaseous molecules that mediate cellular signaling processes. Nitric oxide (NO), carbon monoxide (CO), and
hydrogen sulfide (H2S) are three endogenous gasotransmitters
that play crucial roles in regulating a wide range of physiological
and pathological processes. These gaseous molecules also possess significant
therapeutic potential, prompting the
development of stimuli-responsive gasotransmitter prodrugs that enable
controlled release at the target site. 
8.7.1.

## Nitric Oxide
Nitric oxide (NO)
is the first identified gasotransmitter and recognized for its role
as an endothelial-derived relaxation factor. In mammalian cells, NO is endogenously produced by three different
isoforms of NO synthases (NOSs), including neuronal NOS, endothelial
NOS, and inducible NOS. These enzymes
catalyze the conversion of l-arginine to l-citrulline
and NO in the presence of O2 and NADPH. At low concentrations,
NO plays an important role as a gasotransmitter in regulating vasodilation,
neurotransmission, and immune response. However, high levels of NO
can trigger the formation of reactive nitrogen species (RNS), which
have been associated with cardiac diseases, inflammation, neurodegenerative
disorders, and cancer. 
Lippard
and co-workers have pioneered the development of copper(II) complexes
as fluorogenic probes for the visualization of NO in live cells. The paramagnetic Cu2+ functions
as both an emission quencher for the fluorescent ligand and a recognition
unit for NO. The reduction of Cu2+ to diamagnetic Cu+ by NO is concomitant with nitrosylation of the ligand, resulting
in ligand dissociation from the reduced copper(I) center and thus
fluorescence turn-on. This seminal work has stimulated the development
of copper(II) complexes as fluorogenic probes for NO, − offering valuable tools for investigating the physiological and
pathological functions of NO in living systems.
Phosphorescent
transition metal complexes have also been developed
as phosphorogenic probes for NO using an indirect approach based on
the reaction of o-phenylenediamine derivatives with
N2O3, the autoxidation product of NO. Ye, Yuan,
and co-workers have designed a ruthenium(II) complex (415) ( ) for
imaging NO production in live cells. The introduction of an electron-rich o-diaminophenyl
group effectively quenches the phosphorescence of the complex by PET.
Upon reaction with NO under aerobic conditions, the o-diaminophenyl group is converted to a nonquenching triazole derivative,
resulting in substantial emission enhancement. The emission response
is rapid (< 2 min) and specific toward NO over other ROS and RNS.
The complex has been used to image exogenous NO in live murine macrophage
cells and endogenous NO in gardenia cells. Lo and co-workers have
developed rhenium(I) complexes containing an o-diaminoaromatic
unit (416) for the detection of NO. However, these complexes could not be converted to their
triazole counterparts in the intracellular environment due to their
low reactivity toward NO. Thus, Lo and co-workers have designed another
class of rhenium(I) complexes (417), wherein an electron-donating
methoxy group is introduced to the o-diaminoaromatic
unit to enhance the electron density and thus the reactivity of the
diamino group toward NO. Additionally,
an insulating methylene linker is introduced to separate the o-diaminoaromatic unit from the electron-withdrawing rhenium(I)
center. These modifications have enabled the successful sensing of
exogenous and endogenous NO in live HeLa and RAW264.7 cells, respectively.
Related iridium(III) complexes (418) have also been developed
for intracellular NO sensing. 
 Zhang, Yuan, and co-workers have developed a
ruthenium(II) complex
coordinated with a 5,6-diamino-1,10-phenanthroline ligand (419) ( ) as
a bimodal probe for NO. The complex
undergoes rapid reaction with NO and the reaction completes within
20 s, inhibiting the PET process and thus switching on both the phosphorescence
and electrochemiluminescence of the complex. The emission enhancement
has enabled the visualization of NO production in live tobacco cells
and in onion inner-layer epidermal peels. Chao and co-workers have
developed an iridium(III) complex (420a) as a two-photon
probe for specific imaging of NO in the mitochondria. The rapid emission response (< 10 s) and
high mitochondria specificity of the complex have allowed real-time
monitoring of NO generation in the mitochondria upon stimulation.
The strong TPA (δ730nm = 65.0 GM)
and intense emission (Φem = 0.149)
of the resultant triazole complex have enabled the visualization of
endogenous NO in live HeLa cells, MCTSs, and zebrafish at an increased
imaging depth using two-photon microscopy (λex = 730 nm). A related iridium(III) complex (420b) has also been developed for imaging NO in live cells. Chao and co-workers have designed a related
iridium(III) complex modified with a lysosome-targeting morpholine
moiety (421) for selective imaging of lysosomal NO. Additionally, the introduction of a benzyl
unit to the o-diaminoaromatic unit increases the
resistance of the complex to changes in pH in the range of 4–10.
Reaction of the complex with NO results in a significant increase
in the emission intensity (I/Io = ca. 350) and lifetime (from 200.1 to 619.6
ns) and the TPA cross-section (δ730nm = 60 GM), enabling the visualization of NO production in live RAW264.7
cells and zebrafish in response to inflammation using LSCM and PLIM.
Furthermore, the use of PLIM can provide a dynamic read-out of the
ratio of the unreacted (100–300 ns) and reacted probe (500–700
ns) in living systems based on their different emission lifetimes,
revealing the continuous generation of NO in inflamed cells and zebrafish.
 Chao and co-workers have designed an NIR luminescent
iridium(III)
complex (422) ( ) that enables the simultaneous detection and differentiation
of N2O3 and peroxynitrite (ONOO–), the two downstream products of endogenous NO. The complex exhibits significant emission enhancement and
lifetime extension upon reaction with N2O3 and
ONOO–. Notably, the emission lifetimes of the complex
(69.87 ns) and its reaction products with N2O3 (697.3 ns) and ONOO– (783.6 ns) differ significantly,
allowing for their facile detection and differentiation in live cells
and zebrafish using PLIM and TGLM ( ).
 
8.7.2.

## Carbon Monoxide
Carbon monoxide
(CO) is endogenously generated in mammalian cells as a by-product
of heme catabolism catalyzed by heme oxygenases. The endogenous CO serves as an important signaling molecule,
particularly in the cardiovascular and nervous systems. Abnormal metabolism
and dysregulated function of CO have been implicated in diseases such
as inflammation, hypertension, heart failure, and neurodegenerative
disorders.
Chang and co-workers have pioneered the design of
palladium(II) complexes as fluorogenic probes for selective imaging
of CO in live cells. , The presence of palladium quenches
the fluorescence of its appended ligands due to the heavy atom effect.
However, the binding of CO to the metal center triggers a carbonylation
reaction, leading to the release of palladium(0) and subsequent fluorescence
turn-on. Palladium(II) complexes have also been developed for imaging
CO in live cells and tissues based on a different sensing mechanism,
where the interaction of palladium with CO results in protonolysis
of the Pd–C bond. − Alongside these developments, Wilton-Ely and co-workers have designed
ruthenium(II) − and osmium(II) vinyl complexes as fluorogenic probes that enable rapid, selective,
and sensitive detection of endogenous CO. The binding of CO to the
metal center dissociates the fluorescent ligand, leading to substantial
fluorescence enhancement. The development of these metal-based probes
offers new opportunities to unveil the roles of CO and its implications
in a wide range of biological processes.
In a therapeutic viewpoint,
CO can serve as a potential treatment
for human diseases such as cardiovascular diseases, inflammatory disorders,
and tissue injury due to its anti-inflammatory and cytoprotective
effects. This has led to the development
of CO-releasing molecules (CORMs) that allow controlled CO release
in living systems. Extensive research
on CORMs has primarily focused on metal carbonyl complexes due to
the strong but modifiable binding of CO to transition metals. Some
of these complexes have been employed as an exogenous source of CO
to examine its biological activity. Of particular interest are photoactivatable
CORMs (photoCORMs) that utilize light to provide precise spatial and
temporal control over CO release. Among
the various photoCORMs, luminescent rhenium(I) tricarbonyl complexes
show significant promise as theranostic photoCORMs as their cellular
uptake and subsequent CO photorelease can be followed by LSCM. − 

8.7.3.

## Hydrogen Sulfide
Hydrogen sulfide
(H2S) is endogenously produced in mammals from the metabolism
of Hcy by cystathionine-β-synthase, cystathionine-γ-lyase,
and 3-mercaptopyruvate sulfurtransferase. It plays an important role in various biological processes such
as vasodilation, neurotransmission, and anti-inflammation. Abnormal levels of H2S have been
implicated in several pathological conditions such as inflammation,
hypertension, diabetes, cirrhosis, neurodegenerative diseases, and
cancer. 
Transition metal complexes
have been developed as probes for H2S by exploiting its
high nucleophilicity under physiological conditions. Zhang, Zhang,
Yuan, and co-workers have developed a ruthenium(II) complex modified
with a 2,4-DNP moiety via an ester linkage (423) ( ) for the detection
of H2S. The ester linker
is susceptible to nucleophilic attack by H2S and thus upon
incubation with H2S, it is cleaved through a H2S-mediated thiolysis reaction, resulting in ca.
86-fold emission enhancement due to the separation of the quenching
2,4-DNP moiety from [Ru(bpy)3]2+. The absence
of a similar increase in emission intensity upon treatment of the
complex with biothiols indicates the high selectivity of the complex
toward H2S. The complex has enabled the monitoring of H2S generation in the lysosomes of inflamed J774A.1 cells and
the visualization of H2S in living organisms such as D. magna, zebrafish, and mice ( ). Li, Tang, Zhang, and co-workers have
made similar modifications on a mitochondria-targeting iridium(III)
complex (424a) for imaging H2S in live cells
and mice. A related iridium(III) complex
(424b) has been developed as a mitochondria-targeting,
H2S-responsive theranostic agent. Since H2S can stimulate GSH production and suppress oxidative
stress in mitochondria, the specific reaction of complex 424b with H2S lowers intracellular and mitochondrial GSH levels.
Thus, the complex efficiently catalyzes the oxidation of NADH to NAD+ and generates H2O2 upon continuous
irradiation, resulting in very high photocytotoxic activity (IC50 = 0.011 to 0.016 μM). Lo and co-workers have utilized
the iridium(III) 2,4-DNP complexes 388 that display substantial
emission enhancement upon thiolysis of the 2,4-DNP unit to visualize
H2S in live cells. Yuan,
Zhang, and co-workers have conjugated [Ru(bpy)3]2+ with an NBD unit to develop a phosphorogenic probe (425) for imaging H2S in living systems. The complex is weakly emissive in aqueous solution (Φem = 0.0003) due to efficient quenching by PET. Reaction of
the complex with H2S triggers the thiolysis of the NBD
moiety, resulting in > 65-fold emission enhancement. The complex
has
been used to visualize H2S in live HeLa cells, D. magna, and zebrafish. Additionally, since the complex
is an efficient photosensitizer for 1O2, both
before and after H2S activation, it has been utilized to
self-report changes in H2S levels in response to the PDT
treatment, revealing a gradual increase in intracellular H2S levels during photoinduced cell death. 
 Chao and co-workers have developed an iridium(III)
complex appended
with two acrylate ester units (426) ( ) that enables the sensitive
detection of H2S in live cells. The cleavage of the acrylate ester moieties by H2S induces
a 120-fold increase in the emission intensity of the complex, which
is not observed for Cys, Hcy, and GSH due to the higher pKa and larger size of the biothiols than H2S.
Zhao, Huang, and co-workers have developed a nanosensor for ratiometric
and lifetime imaging of H2S. The nanosensor is constructed by embedding a H2S-responsive
merocyanine derivative (MC) and a H2S-insensitive
iridium(III) complex (427) into MSNs. In the absence
of H2S, the nanosensor exhibits two emission bands at 500
and 596 nm, originating from complex 427 and MC, respectively. Incubation of the nanosensor with H2S
selectively quenches the merocyanine fluorescence as the nucleophilic
addition of HS– to the indolenium C-2 atom of MC disrupts the conjugated system, resulting in a change in
the emission color (from red to blue) and lifetime (from 215.0 to
135.0 ns). These photophysical changes have enabled ratiometric and
lifetime imaging of H2S in live HepG2 cells.
 In addition to its high nucleophilicity, H2S is also
known for its strong ability to reduce electron-withdrawing azide
and nitro groups to electron-donating amino groups. Ma and co-workers
have developed an iridium(III) complex coordinated with a 5-nitro-1,10-phenanthroline
ligand (428) ( ) for detecting H2S through nitro reduction. The complex is nonluminescent due to efficient
quenching through PET from the iridium(III) core to the electron-deficient
nitro unit. However, PET is inhibited upon reduction of the nitro
unit by H2S to an electron-donating amino group, resulting
in a substantial increase in the emission intensity (I/Io = ca. 38). The emission
turn-on has enabled the sensitive detection of H2S in live
HeLa cells and zebrafish.
 Nagano and co-workers have pioneered the exploitation
of copper(II)
chelates as both an emission quencher for fluorescent ligands and
a recognition site for H2S to develop fluorogenic probes
for selective imaging of H2S in live cells. These probes show remarkable fluorescence turn-on
in the presence of H2S due to its high affinity for Cu2+ that leads to CuS precipitation. Based on this metal displacement
approach, a number of copper(II) complexes have been developed as
luminogenic probes for imaging H2S in vitro and in vivo. − Zhang, Xu, and co-workers have designed a luminescent nanosensor
for ratiometric detection of H2S. The nanosensor is constructed by loading the ruthenium(II) DPA complex 325 into the pores of MSNs that are modified with fluorescein
as a reference unit. The introduction of Cu2+ to the NPs
selectively quenches the ruthenium(II) phosphorescence (λem = 600 nm) without affecting the fluorescein fluorescence
(λem = 520 nm), enabling the detection
of H2S with ratiometric response. Treatment of the nanosensor
results in a substantial increase in the ratio I600nm/I520nm within 5 s due to
CuS precipitation. The nanosensor has been used for ratiometric imaging
of H2S in live MCF-7 cells. Monitoring of the H2S levels in cells reveals that the H2S levels increase
upon LPS treatment and then decrease when the inflamed cells are incubated
with dexamethasone, indicating the role of dexamethasone as an anti-inflammation
drug to inhibit cystathionine-γ-lyase expression and H2S production.
Liu, Lee, Leung, Ma, and co-workers have utilized
an iridium(III)
complex (429) ( ) and Fe3+ to develop a sensing platform
for the sensitive and selective detection of H2S with “Off–On–Off”
emission response. The emission of the
complex is quenched in the presence of Fe3+ but restores
upon reaction of Fe3+ with S2– to give
Fe2S3. The probe can detect H2S with
high sensitivity and selectivity even in the presence of a high thiol
background. It has been used to visualize the enzymatic production
of H2S in live HeLa cells and zebrafish using Cys or GSH
as the substrate.
 

8.8.

## Reactive Oxygen and Nitrogen Species
Reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (RONS) constitute a group of
free radicals and reactive small molecules such as O2•–, HO•, alkoxy radicals, peroxy
radicals, H2O2, HClO, 1O2, NO, nitroxyl, and ONOO–. These highly reactive
entities serve diverse roles and functions within cells. However, the excessive production of these
reactive species can lead to severe oxidative stress, which has been
implicated in the development and progression of aging and various diseases. 
8.8.1.

## Superoxide Anion Radical
Superoxide
anion radical (O2•–) is an important
precursor of most RONS. It is generated through one-electron reduction
of O2 and can be converted by superoxide dismutase (SOD)
into H2O2, or react with NO to form ONOO–. It plays an important role as a cellular signaling
molecule involved in various physiological and pathological processes
including cellular defense, metabolic homeostasis, and gene expression
regulation. However, the overproduction
of O2•– can lead to oxidative
stress and is implicated in diseases such as inflammation, neurodegeneration,
and cancer. 
Kim, Kim, and co-workers
have designed a nanosensor for afterglow imaging of acute kidney injury in vivo using an O2•–-responsive iridium(III) complex (430) ( ). The complex is weakly emissive (Φem = 0.01) due to the electron-deficient triflate groups. Upon exposure
to O2•–, the emission intensity
of the complex increases as the triflate groups are susceptible to
nucleophilic attack by O2•–. The
complex has been used to monitor the endogenous O2•– levels in HEK293 cells and mice, revealing
the overproduction of O2•– in
kidney cells upon cisplatin-induced injury. It has also demonstrated
the protective effect of l-carnitine, an amino acid that
can reduce the level of lipid peroxidase and enhance the activities
of GSH, glutathione S-transferase (GST), and SOD,
against cisplatin-induced oxidative stress. Using complex 430 as an afterglow initiator and relay unit, and rubrene as an afterglow
substrate and luminophore, an O2•–-specific nanosensor that displays intense and long-lasting afterglow
luminescence (> 10 min after preexcitation) with deep-tissue penetration
has been developed, enabling the background-free in vivo imaging of O2•– overproduced
in mice with acute kidney injury.
 
8.8.2.

## Hydrogen Peroxide
Hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2) is endogenously generated through various
enzymatic reactions, including the dismutation of O2•– by SOD and the oxidation of various substrates
by oxidases and peroxidases. It is an
important signaling molecule involved in the regulation of cell proliferation,
migration, and differentiation. It also plays a key role in host defense
and immune response. However, excessive production of H2O2 has been linked to various pathological conditions
such as cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and neurodegenerative
disorders. 
Ma and co-workers have
developed a nanosensor for sensitive detection of H2O2. The nanosensor utilizes AgNPs
as a responsive unit and an iridium(III) complex (431) ( ) as
a signaling unit. The emission of the complex is effectively quenched
upon adsorption onto the AgNPs due to efficient energy transfer. However,
in the presence of H2O2, the AgNPs are oxidized
to Ag+, releasing the complex and thus resulting in emission
enhancement. This nanosensor can be generated in situ in live HeLa cells through simultaneous treatment of the cells with
the AgNPs and the complex. The enhanced intracellular emission upon
increasing the exogenous H2O2 concentration
indicates that the nanosensor can react with H2O2 in the intracellular environment.
 
8.8.3.

## Hypochlorous Acid
Hypochlorous
acid (HClO) is a nonradical ROS that partially dissociates into hypochlorite
(ClO–) at physiological pH. It is endogenously produced
from the oxidation of Cl– by H2O2 catalyzed by myeloperoxidase (MPO), which primarily localizes
in leukocytes such as macrophages, monocytes, and neutrophils in response
to inflammation, playing a pivotal role in host defense against microbial
invasions. However, excessive levels
of HClO can lead to oxidative stress and contribute to the development
of various pathological conditions, including neurodegenerative disorders,
cardiovascular diseases, and cancer.
Zhao, Huang, and co-workers
have utilized two luminescent iridium(III) complexes with different
responsiveness toward HClO and core–shell structured SiNPs
to develop a luminescent nanoprobe for ratiometric detection of HClO. The iridium(III) complex 432 ( ) contains two
oxime moieties that provide a facile nonradiative deactivation pathway
through photoinduced isomerization of the C=N group. Reaction of the
complex with HClO leads to oxidative hydrolysis of the oxime unit
to a carboxyl group, resulting in an increase in the emission intensity
(I/Io = ca. 9.2) and lifetime (from 265 to 410 ns) at 598 nm. This HClO-responsive
complex is incorporated into the mesoporous silica shell of SiNPs
for efficient HClO recognition, whereas the HClO-inert iridium(III)
complex 184a (λem =
479 and 500 nm) is immobilized in the solid core as an internal standard.
Incubation of the nanoprobe with HClO selectively switches on the
red emission of complex 432, resulting in an increase
in the ratio I598nm/I500nm (from 0.42 to 2.40) and the lifetime of the red
emission (from 265 to 406 ns). These photophysical changes have allowed
imaging of exogenous and endogenous HClO in live RAW264.7 cells via
ratiometric and lifetime imaging. Zhao, Huang, and co-workers have
also designed an iridium(III) complex (433) that exhibits
relatively similar distribution in the plasma membrane and cytoplasm,
which not only facilitates the detection of both exogenous and endogenous
HClO but also enables their differentiation from each other. Zhang, Lv, and co-workers have developed an
iridium(III) complex (434) for two-photon luminescence
imaging of endogenous HClO in live cells. Monitoring of endogenous HClO generation has allowed the differentiation
between macrophage RAW264.7 cells and epithelial A549 cells due to
the their different levels of HClO production during inflammation.
This behavior has facilitated the visualization of the spatial distribution
of macrophage cells in tissues obtained from an inflamed mouse model
using two-photon microscopy. Lv and co-workers have developed an iridium(III)
complex (435) that enables multimodal imaging of HClO
in living systems. The complex shows
a substantial increase in emission intensity and lifetime upon reaction
with HClO, which enables the detection of HClO in live cells and tissues
using LSCM and PLIM, respectively. Additionally, the complex displays
strong chemiluminescence due to the generation of high-energy intermediates
during the HClO-induced oxidative deoximation process, enabling the
background-free imaging of endogenous HClO production in live mice
during inflammation. A related iridium(III) complex (436) exhibiting chemiluminescence in the NIR region has also been developed. This complex has been encapsulated into Pluronic
F127 to afford a nanoprobe with extended chemiluminescence time (>
20 min), increased water dispersibility, and enhanced biocompatibility
for chemiluminescence imaging of HClO in live mice.
 Chao and co-workers have developed iridium(III)
complexes functionalized
with a diaminomaleonitrile moiety (437a–437e) ( ) for the detection of HClO based on a de-diaminomaleonitrile
reaction. , Treatment with HClO increases
the emission intensities of the complexes (I/Io = up to 43) due to the oxidative cleavage
of the diaminomaleonitrile unit by HClO, which inhibits emission quenching
associated with photoinduced isomerization of the C=N group. The complexes
show high mitochondria specificity, enabling the selective imaging
of mitochondrial HClO in live cells. The increased TPA cross-section
of complex 437e (δ750nm = 78.1 GM) in the presence of HClO allows for two-photon luminescence
imaging of HClO in zebrafish at increased imaging depth, revealing
increased HClO production in the liver upon LPS-induced liver injury
( ). A related
two-photon-active iridium(III) complex (437f) that exhibits
NIR emission (λem = 663 nm) in the
presence of HClO has been used for imaging of HClO in live cells,
tissues, and mice, revealing increased HClO production in response
to inflammation. A related ruthenium(II)
complex (438) has been used to examine the role of HClO
in AD development. Both in vivo and ex vivo imaging indicate that the complex shows
substantially higher emission intensity in the brain tissues of AD
mice compared to the healthy mice, and the emission intensity increases
when the mice aged, indicating elevated HClO production during AD
development ( ). Furthermore, the complex has been used to develop a cell-based
platform for high-throughput screening of anti-AD drugs using live
human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells as an in vitro AD
model.
 Hou and co-workers have developed iridium(III)
complexes modified
with two tosylhydrazone (439) or isoniazide moieties (440) ( ) for
visualizing HClO in live cells. The presence of HClO induces oxidative
hydrolysis of the hydrazone linkage, leading to a rapid and substantial
increase in the emission intensities of the complexes. Notably, complex 440 specifically accumulates in the mitochondria of 4T1 cells,
enabling the selective imaging of mitochondrial HClO. Hou, Wang, and
co-workers have developed a water-soluble iridium(III) complex (441) for HClO detection. The
hydrolytic cleavage of the methacrylate units by HClO results in efficient
emission quenching with a fast response time. Zhang, Pu, and co-workers
have developed an iridium(III) complex (442) that incorporates
two pentafluorobenzenesulfonyl units as HClO-recognition sites and
a morpholine group as a lysosome-targeting unit. Cleavage of the pentafluorobenzenesulfonyl unit upon nucleophilic
attack by HClO induces efficient emission quenching. Live-cell imaging
indicates that the complex specifically accumulates in the lysosomes
after cellular uptake, facilitating the detection of lysosomal HClO.
 Zhang, Yuan, and co-workers have designed a ruthenium(II)
complex
modified with a Fc unit via a HClO-sensitive hydrazine linkage (443) ( ) for the detection of HOCl in living systems. The introduction of an electron-rich Fc unit results in
efficient emission quenching through PET. Reaction of the complex
with HClO leads to oxidative hydrolysis of the hydrazine linker, separating
the Fc quencher from the ruthenium(II) core and inducing a up to 60-fold
increase in emission intensity. The complex is taken up by live MDA-MB-231
and human glioblastoma U-343MGa cells via caveolae-mediated endocytosis
and specifically enriched in the lysosomes after internalization,
enabling the selective imaging of lysosomal HClO in live cells. The
complex has also been used to visualize HClO in living organisms such
as D. magna and zebrafish. A related iridium(III)
complex (444a) has also been developed for specific imaging
of mitochondrial HClO . This complex
has been used to visualize the endogenous HClO production in live
HepG2 cells and zebrafish during drug stimulation, as well as in mouse
liver tissues during ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury. Qi, Zhang,
and co-workers have utilized the same design approach to develop an
iridium(III) complex (444b) for detecting HClO in live
cells. 
 Ye, Yuan, and co-workers have also designed two
ruthenium(II) complexes
modified with a quenching 2,4-DNP moiety through a HClO-responsive
amide linkage (445a and 445b) ( ) for imaging
HClO. Oxidative cleavage of the linker
by HClO leads to the departure of the 2,4-DNP moiety, resulting in
significant emission enhancement (I/Io = 190 and 1,100, respectively) within seconds. The remarkable
emission enhancement and fast response time of complex 445b have enabled the sensitive detection of HClO in live HeLa and RAW264.7
cells. This complex has been used to monitor HClO production in the
phagosomes of RAW264.7 cells during phagocytosis of zymosan particles.
The complex has also been loaded onto NaYF4:Yb,Tm UCNPs
using an α-CD-assisted self-assembly method to develop a ratiometric
nanoprobe for background-free detection and visualization of HClO
in live cells and mice. The blue UCL
of the UCNPs (λem = 450 and 475
nm) is quenched in the presence of the complex due to its large spectral
overlap with the absorption band of the complex (λabs = 478 nm). The energy transfer from the UCNPs to the
complex can be modulated by the reaction with HClO, which is accompanied
by a blue shift in the absorption band of the complex, resulting in
an increase in the intensity of the blue UCL. This emission enhancement
enables ratiometric detection of HClO using the NIR UCL at 800 nm
as a reference signal. The ratiometric response has allowed the measurement
of HClO levels in live MDA-MB-231 and J774A.1 cells and the visualization
of endogenous HClO production at the inflammation site of live mice
with negligible background interference using NIR-light excitation
(λex = 980 nm). Ye, Yuan, and co-workers
have conjugated [Ru(bpy)3]2+ with a quenching
2,4-DNP moiety through a HClO-sensitive thioether linkage (446). Reaction of the complex with HClO
results in a ca. 190-fold increase in emission intensity,
enabling the sensitive detection of exogenous HClO in HeLa cells and
endogenous HClO generation in macrophage cells.
 Yuan and co-workers have developed a phosphorogenic
probe (447) ( ) for HClO through the modification of a ruthenium(II)
complex with
an electron-rich 4-amino-3-nitrophenyl unit. The reaction with HClO triggers the cleavage of the quenching 4-amino-3-nitrophenyl
unit via the formation of an unstable benzofurazan-1-oxide intermediate,
resulting in a 110-fold increase in the emission intensity of the
complex. The complex has been used to visualize the endogenous HClO
generation in porcine neutrophils. A related iridium(III) complex
(448) has been developed for the detection of HClO in
live HeLa cells. Liu, Huang, Zhao, and
co-workers have encapsulated a related HClO-responsive, red luminescent
iridium(III) complex (449a) (λem = 600 nm) and a HClO-insensitive, NIR luminescent iridium(III)
complex (449b) (λem = 680 nm) with an amphiphilic polymer DSPE-PEG5000 to
develop a dual-luminescent nanoprobe. Incubation of the nanoprobe with HClO selectively increases the
intensity (I/Io = 3.2)
and lifetime (from 280 to 670 ns) of the red emission, facilitating
the detection of HClO in live cells via ratiometric and lifetime imaging.
The nanoprobe has been used to monitor changes in endogenous HClO
levels in HeLa cells and tumor-bearing mice, showing that treatment
with the anticancer drug elesclomol that induces cancer cell apoptosis
through enhancing oxidative stress results in a significant increase
in HClO levels. Song, Yuan, and co-workers have utilized the 4-amino-3-nitrophenyl
moiety as a linker to conjugate [Ru(bpy)3]2+ with a gadolinium(III) complex to afford a heterobimetallic complex
(450) for bimodal imaging of HClO. Reaction of the complex with HClO triggers the cleavage
of the linker and separates the two imaging modalities, resulting
in a remarkable increase in emission intensity (I/Io = 7.4) and a decrease in r1 relaxivity (from 4.65 to 1.87 mM–1 s–1). The complex has been used to monitor the
endogenous HClO production in inflamed RAW264.7 cells and in mice
with rheumatoid arthritis. Furthermore, the complex has been used
to visualize endogenous HClO production in mice with LPS-induced acute
liver and kidney injury via bimodal luminescence imaging and MRI.
The observed significant reduction in T1 signals in the liver and kidney upon LPS stimulation indicates an
elevation in local HClO levels. Ex vivo luminescence
imaging of the main organs harvested from the treated mice reveals
strong emission signals in the liver and kidney, which are up to 6.5-
and 3.3-fold higher in intensity than those of the untreated mice
( a,b). Luminescence
images of the cryosectioned liver and kidney slices from the treated
mice also display increased emission intensities compared to the untreated
mice ( c).
These results suggest that monitoring the HClO level can serve as
a promising approach for the early diagnosis of inflammation-induced
acute kidney and liver injury.
 Sun and co-workers have developed a ruthenium(II)
complex (451) ( ) that detects HClO based on phenothiazine oxidation. Oxidation of the phenothiazine moiety by HClO
to a sulfoxide derivative inhibits PET quenching, resulting in an
increase in emission intensity. Incubation of the complex with H2S regenerates the phenothiazine unit, leading to a decrease
in the emission intensity. The reversible emission response has allowed
the complex to monitor the HClO/H2S redox cycles in live
mice.
 Sun and co-workers have designed a binuclear
ruthenium(II) complex
(452) ( ), where the two ruthenium(II) units [Ru(phen)3]2+ are conjugated with an azo bridge, for visualizing
HClO in live cells and mice. Incubation
of the complex with HClO induces the oxidative cyclization reaction
of the o-azoaniline ring to a nonquenching benzotriazole
derivative, resulting in a > 50-fold increase in the emission intensity
of the complex. Notably, the emission response is highly selective
toward HClO over other ROS and cations, which is different from its
mononuclear counterpart complex 335 that is more sensitive
to Cu2+ compared to HClO.
 Khatua and co-workers have developed a ruthenium(II)
pyridyl-1,2,3-triazole
complex (453) ( ) for HClO detection. This complex is nonluminescent due to the presence of a low-lying 3MC state. Reaction of the complex with HClO leads to an unusual
C(sp2)–H hydroxylation at the 1,2,3-triazole
ring, which occurs via anti-Markovnikov addition of HClO to the C=C
bond followed by β-elimination of HCl. The hydroxylation of
the triazole ring increases the σ-donation ability of the ligand
and destabilizes the 3MC state, resulting in an increase
in the emission intensity (I/Io = ca. 9) and lifetime (from 14.63 to 79.30
ns) of the complex. These photophysical changes are highly specific
toward HClO over other RONS. The complex has been applied to imaging
HClO in HEK293T cells. A related ruthenium(II) complex (454) has been developed for sensitive, selective, and rapid detection
of HClO in live cells via C(sp2)–H
chlorination. 
 Peng, Huang, and co-workers have developed platinum(II)
complexes
(455) ( ) that can detect HClO through an oxidative addition reaction,
which converts the luminescent platinum(II) complexes into nonluminescent
platinum(IV) derivatives. , The emission of the
complexes can be restored upon reduction of the metal center from
platinum(IV) to platinum(II) by biothiols, suggesting their potential
to monitor the changes of both HClO and biothiol levels in cells and
to examine intracellular redox processes. The complexes have been
used to detect exogenous HClO in live HeLa cells and endogenous HClO
in stimulated RAW264.7 cells.
 
8.8.4.

## Singlet Oxygen
Singlet oxygen (1O2) is the lowest excited electronic state of O2. It can be generated through various processes, including
enzymatic reactions and photochemical
reactions. The oxidation of biomolecules
such as proteins, lipids, or nucleic acids by 1O2 plays a crucial role in cell signaling. However, excessive oxidation
caused by 1O2 can lead to severe oxidative damage
and disrupt cellular homeostasis, ultimately resulting in cell death. The unique properties of 1O2 have made it a key component in PDT where 1O2 is harnessed to induce cell death when the target cells are
exposed to light in the presence of a photosensitizer. 
You and co-workers have designed a molecular
dyad (456) ( ) composed of an iridium(III) complex and a coumarin
314 derivative for efficient photosensitization and visualization
of 1O2. Upon α-dehydrogenative
oxidation of the julolidine unit in coumarin 314 by 1O2 to an iminium form, the characteristic coumarin absorption
(λabs = 445 nm) disappears, leading
to an enhancement in both the coumarin fluorescence (λem = 441 nm) and iridium(III) phosphorescence (λem = 526 nm) due to the suppression of
triplet–triplet energy transfer back to the coumarin unit.
The 1O2-mediated oxidation reaction results
in a significant increase in the ratio I460nm/I561nm from 0.0048 to 2.16. The ratiometric
response of the complex has allowed the visualization of endogenous 1O2 in stimulated RAW264.7 cells and the monitoring
of therapeutic doses of 1O2 during photoinduced
cell death.
 Zhang, Zhao, and co-workers have developed iridium(III)
complexes
functionalized with an anthracene derivative (457) ( ) for the detection
of 1O2. The introduction
of an anthracene unit quenches the iridium(III) emission by PET. Oxidation
of the anthracene unit by 1O2 to an endoperoxide
derivative results in a 20- and 15-fold increase in the emission intensities
of complexes 457a and 457b, respectively,
which is not observed when the complexes are incubated with other
ROS. Complex 457b specifically resides in the mitochondria
after uptake, allowing the monitoring of 1O2 generation in these organelles upon irradiation.
 Tian and co-workers have developed a ruthenium(II)
complex (458) ( ) that can specifically detect 1O2 in the mitochondria
of cells. The complex is nonluminescent
in solution and its emission is switched on upon oxidation of the
C=C bond linking the 8-hydroxyquinoline and N,N-diethylaniline units by 1O2. The
complex has been used to visualize the endogenous generation of 1O2 in live cells and monitor the morphological
changes of mitochondria during photoinduced cell death.
 
8.8.5.

## Peroxynitrite
Peroxynitrite (ONOO–) is formed through the diffusion-controlled reaction
between NO and O2•–. At physiological
concentrations, it serves as a signaling molecule and an antimicrobial
agent. However, excessive generation
of ONOO– can result in uncontrolled oxidation of
proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids, contributing to the development
of various pathologies such as cardiovascular diseases, neurodegenerative
disorders, and cancer.
Transition metal complexes have been
designed for detecting ONOO– through oxidative hydrolysis.
Zhao and co-workers have developed a series of iridium(III) complexes
containing a phenylboronate ester moiety for the detection of ONOO–. Reaction of the complexes
with ONOO– induces the cleavage of the phenylboronate
ester unit, releasing a pyridinol group that quenches the emission
of the complexes by PET. One of the complexes (459a)
( ) that
exhibits blue emission (λem = 474
nm) and the largest emission quenching has been loaded into the pores
of MSNs embedded with an ONOO–-insensitive, red
luminescent iridium(III) complex (459b) (λem = 605 nm) to develop a nanosensor for ratiometric detection
of ONOO–. Incubation of the nanosensor with ONOO– reduces the ratio I474nm/I605nm by 6 fold and the emission lifetime
at 474 nm from 517 to 275 ns. Notably, the ratiometric emission response
is highly specific toward ONOO– over other RONS,
particularly H2O2 that can also cleave the phenylboronate
ester unit. The photophysical changes have enabled the visualization
of the endogenous production of ONOO– in live RAW264.7
cells, zebrafish, and mice in response to inflammation using LSCM
and PLIM.
 Wu, Fan, Wong, and co-workers have modified an
iridium(III) complex
with a quenching 2,4-DNP unit via an amide linkage to afford a phosphorogenic
probe (460) ( ) for ONOO–. The amide linker is prone to oxidative hydrolysis; thus,
reaction of the complex with ONOO– triggers its
cleavage and separates the quencher from the iridium(III) center,
resulting in substantial emission enhancement (I/Io = 12). The emission response is highly specific
toward ONOO– over other ROS and RNS, particularly
O2•– and HClO (I/Io < 2) that can also trigger the
oxidative cleavage of the amide bond. The complex has been used to
image endogenous ONOO– produced in inflamed MCF-7
cells and mice. Wang, Tang, and co-workers have developed a ruthenium(II)
complex modified with a malononitrile moiety (461) for
detecting ONOO– in liver cells subjected to drug-induced
liver injury (DILI). Reaction of the
complex with ONOO– induces the oxidative hydrolysis
of the malononitrile moiety to an aldehyde derivative, resulting in
a shift of the excited state character from 3ILCT to 3MLCT and thus substantial emission enhancement. The complex
specifically accumulates in the mitochondria of live HepG2 cells and
has been used to visualize acetaminophen (APAP)- and tolcapone-induced
ONOO– production in cells. Zhang, Yuan, and co-workers
have designed a ruthenium(II) complex conjugated with a fluorescein
derivative (462) for ratiometric imaging of ONOO–. The phenylhydrazine
moiety on the spirolactam ring of fluorescein functions as an ONOO–-specific recognition unit. Oxidative hydrolysis of
the phenylhydrazine moiety by ONOO– induces ring-opening
of the fluorescein spirolactam to give strong green fluorescence (λem = 512 nm), resulting in a 140-fold
increase in the ratio I512nm/I635nm. The complex is specifically enriched in the lysosomes
of live HeLa cells after cellular uptake, enabling the selective and
ratiometric imaging of lysosomal ONOO–.
 Phosphorogenic probes have also been designed
to detect ONOO– through an oxidative N-dearylation
reaction. Chao and co-workers have developed an iridium(III) complex
modified with an electron-rich N-(4-methylphenyl)amino
group (463) ( ) for visualizing ONOO–. This modification not only imparts the complex
with increased reactivity and selectivity toward ONOO– but also enables efficient emission quenching through PET. The preferential
localization of the complex in the lysosomes has enabled the visualization
of the NO/O2•– crosstalk in this
specific organelle in live HepG2 cells. The complex has also been
used to visualize DILI in live LO2 cells and mice by monitoring changes
in ONOO– levels, showing that excessive intake of
APAP induces hepatotoxicity via increased production of ONOO–. Liu, Zhao, and co-workers have developed iridium(III) complexes
bearing an N-(4-hydroxylphenyl)amino group as phosphorogenic
probes for ONOO–. One
of the complexes, displaying NIR phosphorescence (λem = 680 nm), has been further modified with an electron-donating
methoxy group on the phenol ring to increase its reactivity toward
ONOO– and enhance emission quenching efficiency.
This complex has been incorporated with a red luminescent, ONOO–-insensitive iridium(III) complex (λem = 605 nm) into a PVP backbone to develop a dual-emissive
polymeric probe (464) for ratiometric imaging of ONOO–. Reaction of the polymeric probe with ONOO– selectively enhances the intensity and lifetime of the NIR emission,
enabling the visualization of endogenous ONOO– generation
in live RAW264.7 cells and mice during inflammation via ratiometric
and lifetime imaging. The probe has also been utilized to monitor
changes in the ONOO– levels in vivo, revealing the elevated ONOO– levels in the liver
of mice with APAP- or ketoconazole (KTZ)-induced liver injury and
demonstrating the protective effects of the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine (NAC) on hepatocytes.
 Zhang, Zhang, Yuan, and co-workers have developed
a ratiometric
probe (465) ( ) for ONOO– through conjugating [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and Cy5 with a piperidine linker. Upon photoexcitation (λex = 450 nm), the probe exhibits intense Cy5 fluorescence
(λem = 660 nm) due to efficient
FRET from the [Ru(bpy)3]2+ core to the Cy5 unit.
Reaction of the complex with ONOO– triggers the
oxidative cleavage of the polymethine bridge and interrupts the FRET
process, resulting in a decrease in the Cy5 fluorescence (λem = 660 nm) and an increase in the ruthenium(II)
phosphorescence (λem = 610 nm).
This dual emission response enables the sensitive and selective detection
of ONOO– using a ratiometric approach. The probe
has been used to visualize ONOO– in live HeLa cells,
and its preferential mitochondrial accumulation has enabled the specific
imaging of mitochondrial ONOO–. Using a similar
design approach, an iridium(III) complex conjugated with an ONOO–-responsive benzopyrylium derivative (466) has been developed as a FRET-based ratiometric probe for imaging
ONOO– in the brain of rat models of epilepsy. In the absence of ONOO–,
the complex shows red fluorescence (λem = 633 nm) due to FRET from the iridium(III) core to the benzopyrylium
derivative. Upon reaction with ONOO–, the benzopyrylium
unit is oxidized and cleaved, recovering the green phosphorescence
of the iridium(III) complex (λem = 550 nm) and increasing the ratio I550nm/I633nm by > 100 fold. The probe has
been used to monitor alternations in ONOO– levels
in live SH-SY5Y cells and in the brain of rats, unveiling the elevated
production of ONOO– upon epilepsy induced by lithium
pilocarpine (LI-PC) ( ). Treatment of the epilepsy models with the antiepileptic
drug sodium valproate (VPA) or natural extracts such as curcumin (Cur)
and ginkgo biloba extract (GBE) with strong free radical scavenging
capabilities results in a significant reduction in ONOO– levels. Similar results have been found in two-photon luminescence
imaging of the rat brain slices, highlighting that the probe can be
used for the diagnosis of epileptic disorders and high-throughput
screening of antiepileptic drugs.
 Chao and co-workers have designed an NIR luminescent
iridium(III)
complex functionalized with a redox-responsive hydroquinone moiety
(467) ( ) for monitoring the ONOO–/GSH redox cycles. Oxidation of the hydroquinone moiety by ONOO– results in the formation of a quinone derivative,
which induces emission quenching through PET. However, addition of
GSH to the solution regenerates the hydroquinone moiety, resulting
in a substantial increase in emission intensity. This “On–Off–On”
emission response of the complex has enabled effective monitoring
of the reversible redox cycles between ONOO– and
GSH in living systems.
 

8.9.

## Reactive Carbonyl Species
Reactive
carbonyl species (RCS) is a group of highly reactive aldehydes that
can be present in both endogenous and exogenous sources. While RCS are involved in the regulation of
biological processes such as gene expression, signal transduction,
and immune response, increased levels of RCS can lead to carbonyl
stress, which contributes to the development of several diseases such
as cardiovascular disease and AD. 
8.9.1.

## Formaldehyde
Formaldehyde, recognized
as an environmental toxin, is the simplest RCS. Inhalation or ingestion
of exogenous formaldehyde poses a significant risk to human health.
However, formaldehyde can also be generated endogenously through different
metabolic pathways, including one-carbon metabolism and the demethylation
of proteins and nucleic acids. Elevated levels of endogenous formaldehyde
have been associated with the development of cancer and neurodegenerative
diseases. 
Zhang, Zhang, Yuan,
and co-workers have designed a ruthenium(II) complex (468) ( ) using
a “dual-key-and-lock” approach for formaldehyde detection. The ruthenium(II) polypyridine unit is connected
to a 2,4-DNP moiety via an allylamine linker, which plays an important
role in allowing 2-aza-Cope rearrangement to occur after condensation
reaction with formaldehyde (first key). The subsequent hydrolytic
cleavage of the 2,4-DNP moiety under an acidic environment (pH = 3.0–6.0)
(second key) results in significant emission enhancement. This design
has enabled the selective imaging of formaldehyde in the lysosomes
of live cells. Furthermore, the complex can specifically visualize
and monitor endogenous formaldehyde derived from tumors in live mice
( ) due to
the higher intracellular formaldehyde levels and lower lysosomal pH
in cancer cells (pHL = 4.5–5.5) compared to normal
cells (pHL = 5–6). The formaldehyde-responsive allylamine
linker has also been exploited to conjugate a ruthenium(II) complex
with a 7-(diethylamino)coumarin derivative to afford a ratiometric
probe (469) for formaldehyde detection. Both the green fluorescence and red phosphorescence are
restored upon reaction of the probe with formaldehyde under acidic
conditions, resulting in a 419-fold increase in the ratio I505nm/I610nm. The
complex has been used to visualize endogenous lysosomal formaldehyde
in live SH-SY5Y cells and in the brain tissues of AD mice.
 
8.9.2.

## Methylglyoxal
Methylglyoxal is
an RCS generated as a by-product of glycolysis. It can induce the glycation of proteins, nucleotides, and
phospholipids, resulting in the formation of advanced glycation end-products
(AGEs). The increased accumulation of AGEs has been implicated in
various pathological conditions such as aging, diabetes, renal failure,
neurodegenerative diseases, and cancer. 
Zhang, Zhang, and co-workers have utilized ruthenium(II) (419) and iridium(III) 5,6-diamino-1,10-phenanthroline complexes
(470) ( ) for detecting methylglyoxal through the condensation–cyclization
reaction of o-diaminoaromatics with methylglyoxal. The reaction converts 5,6-diamino-1,10-phenanthroline
to 2-methylpyrazino[2,3-f][1,10]phenanthroline, which
inhibits PET and results in substantial emission enhancement (I/Io = 29.4 and 14.1, respectively)
that is greater than those observed with other RCS such as glyoxal.
The complexes have been used to visualize methylglyoxal in live RAW264.7
cells and D. magna. Importantly, while the complexes
also exhibit reactivity toward NO, this reaction is not expected to
interfere with methylglyoxal detection in cellular settings due to
the shorter half-life and lower intracellular concentration of NO
(typically in the low- to mid-nanomolar range) under physiological
conditions.
 

8.10.

## Intracellular Redox Status
Intracellular
redox homeostasis is crucial for maintaining normal cell function. The imbalance between intracellular ROS and
antioxidants has been linked to the development of various diseases.
For example, cancer cells display increased production of antioxidants
to accommodate higher levels of ROS for activating signaling pathways
that regulate cellular proliferation while scavenging excess ROS to
prevent cell death caused by oxidative stress.
Zhao and co-workers
have modified an iridium(III) complex with two 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl
(TEMPO) units to afford a redox-sensitive luminescent probe (471) ( ) for assessing the intracellular redox status. The emission intensity and lifetime of the complex increase
upon reduction of the paramagnetic TEMPO radical by GSH or ascorbic
acid to a hydroxylamine derivative. These emission changes have allowed
for the visualization of the intracellular redox environment in HeLa
and 3T3 cells using LSCM and PLIM. The intracellular emission intensity
and lifetime are higher and longer in HeLa cells compared to 3T3 cells,
indicating a more reducing intracellular environment in cancerous
HeLa cells compared to normal 3T3 cells. Cao, Mao, and co-workers
have developed TEMPO-functionalized ruthenium(II) complexes (472) that function as both a ROS photosensitizer and an oxidative
stress indicator. These complexes exhibit
increased emission intensities upon reaction with radical species
such as •CH3 and O2•–, which converts the paramagnetic TEMPO unit into a diamagnetic nonradical
species. Among the two complexes studied, complex 472a shows significantly higher photocytotoxicity due to its more efficient
cellular uptake. Monitoring the intracellular emission of the complex
has revealed the induction of oxidative stress in cells upon exposure
to irradiation. Related iridium(III) complexes (473)
have been developed for simultaneously inducing and monitoring oxidative
stress in cells. These complexes specifically
reside in the mitochondria following cellular uptake and display enhanced
emission intensities and lifetimes when the cells are pretreated with
phorbol myristate acetate or H2O2 to induce
oxidative stress. Remarkably, the cytotoxic activity of the complexes
substantially increases upon irradiation. Monitoring the changes in
intracellular emission intensities and lifetimes of the complexes
shows that the complexes induce mitochondrial oxidative stress during
PDT, which can be attenuated by the use of NAC ( ). Additionally, the enhanced
intracellular emission has enabled the real-time monitoring of morphological
changes in the mitochondria, showing that the mitochondria swell during
photoinduced cell death.
 Yang, Gao, and co-workers have developed a series
of ruthenium(II),
iridium(III), and platinum(II) complexes (474) ( ) that are sensitive
to the intracellular reductive microenvironment. These complexes undergo dissociation of their monodentate
imidazole ligands when exposed to high levels of GSH, resulting in
a substantial decrease in their emission intensities. Among these
complexes, the platinum(II) complex 474c shows the fastest
rate of ligand release, primarily due to its square-planar molecular
geometry that offers smaller steric hindrance. Monitoring the ligand
dissociation process in live A549 cells using LSCM reveals that a
reduction in intracellular GSH levels not only leads to increased
emission intensities of the complexes but also triggers their translocation
from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, offering a potential means to distinguish
cancer cells from normal cells.
 Liang, Liu, Roberts, and co-workers have utilized
three ruthenium(II)
complexes with distinct reactivity toward GSH (382),
HClO (443), and H2O2 (475) ( ) to
construct a two-photon sensing platform for monitoring cellular oxidative
stress in the liver of live mice subjected to APAP-induced liver injury
and hepatic I/R injury. These complexes
display a substantial increase in emission intensities and lifetimes
upon specific reactions with their respective target species, enabling
the simultaneous use of both LSCM and PLIM to provide accurate measurements
of changes in ROS and GSH levels within the liver at single-cell resolution.
 
8.11.

## Nucleic Acids
Nucleic acids are
biomacromolecules that store, transmit, and express genetic information,
playing vital roles in the growth, development, and reproduction of
all living organisms.
8.11.1.

## Deoxyribonucleic Acids
Deoxyribonucleic
acid (DNA) carries the genetic information in the form of a double-stranded
helix. It is predominantly located within the nucleus and mitochondria
of mammalian cells. However, DNA is vulnerable to damage, and defects
in DNA repair mechanisms can lead to an increased risk of developing
various diseases such as neurodegenerative disorders and cancer. 
Ruthenium(II) dppz complexes such as
[Ru(bpy)2(dppz)]2+ and [Ru(phen)2(dppz)]2+ have long been recognized as molecular “light
switches” for DNA due to their significant emission turn-on
upon DNA intercalation. , However, their poor
cellular uptake has limited their use in intracellular DNA sensing. To address this limitation, Zhu and co-workers
have developed an ion-pairing approach for delivering these membrane-impermeable
complexes to the nucleus of live cells. Both the cellular and nuclear uptake of the complexes are significantly
enhanced in the presence of hydrophobic weak acid counteranions such
as perchlorophenolate, enabling the visualization of nuclear DNA in
different cell lines using LSCM and SIM. The enantioselective imaging
of nuclear DNA with the Δ-isomers of the complexes, which exhibit
higher affinities for the right-handed DNA duplex, has been achieved
in live cells for the first time using this approach. This ion-pairing
approach is universal to improve the cellular and nuclear uptake of
other membrane-impermeable ruthenium(II) complexes such as [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and [Ru(phen)3]2+. This
approach has also been used to deliver [Os(phen)2(dppz)]2+ to cells for imaging nuclear DNA, enabling the observation
of chromosome condensation and decondensation during mitosis using
correlative light–electron microscopy. The Λ- and Δ-isomers of the complex can differentiate
the nucleolus from the nucleus in live and fixed cells, respectively,
using PLIM, based on the different emission lifetimes between the
nucleoli and others parts of the nucleus. Monitoring the changes in the emission lifetime of the two enantiomers
has revealed the alterations in the cellular microenvironment upon
treatment with metabolic inhibitors for nuclear protein synthesis
and the dynamic changes in the architecture of the nucleolus, chromosome,
and spindle apparatus during the cell cycle process.
The increased
cellular and nuclear uptake of the membrane-impermeable
complexes is attributed to the formation of charge-neutral, lipophilic,
and relatively stable ion-pair complexes with the hydrophobic weak
acid counteranions, which facilitate cellular internalization via
passive diffusion. Structure–property relationship analysis
reveals that a high binding affinity between the cationic complex
and the counteranion, as well as low lipophilicity of the resultant
ion-pair complex, are both important to minimize nonspecific interactions
with hydrophobic proteins and membranes in the cytoplasm of the cells,
facilitating the nuclear enrichment of the complexes. , However, upon incubation in a fresh culture medium, the complexes
are effluxed out of the cell nucleus by the ATP-binding cassette transporters
and relocated to the mitochondria. High-resolution
imaging with SIM and STED microscopy shows that [Ru(phen)2(dppz)]2+ localizes at the center of the mitochondrion
and intercalates into mitochondrial DNA, revealing that each mitochondrion
contains 1 to 8 DNA molecules distributed throughout the entire mitochondrial
matrix. Furthermore, the complex can
induce enantioselective apoptotic cell death upon continuous visible-light
irradiation, with the Δ-isomer showing higher photocytotoxicity
due to its strong binding with mitochondrial DNA. Notably, the complex
is translocated from the mitochondria back to the nucleus during apoptotic
cell death, offering a direct method for in situ self-monitoring
of cell apoptosis. The ion-pairing approach is also effective to redirect
[Ru(Ph2-phen)2(dppz)]2+ (Ph2-phen = 4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline), which can enter cells
via passive diffusion, from the cytoplasm to the cell nucleus. This cytoplasm-to-nucleus translocation is
specific for the Δ-isomer, which enables enantioselective induction
of DNA damage and apoptosis upon visible-light irradiation. The ion-pairing
approach has also been utilized to increase the photocytotoxic activity
of [Ru(Me4-phen)3]2+ (Me4-phen = 3,4,7,8-tetramethyl-1,10-phenanthroline). 
Other strategies have also been developed to enhance
the cellular
uptake of these membrane-impermeable complexes. For example, Feng
and co-workers have encapsulated [Ru(bpy)2(dppz)]2+ and [Ru(phen)2(dppz)]2+ into apoferritin to
improve their cellular uptake and biocompatibility. The uptake of the nanocomposites by MCF-7 cells can be
further improved by surface modification with folic acid, which enables
specific targeting of FRs overexpressed on the cancer cell surface.
Other carriers such as cucurbit[7]uril and MSNs have also been used to facilitate
the transport of these complexes across the cell membrane to stain
DNA. Shen and co-workers have encapsulated [Ru(phen)2(dppz)]2+ into liposomes to develop a theranostic platform that displays
high nuclear uptake and tumor accumulation, allowing for the induction
of efficient DNA damage and cancer cell apoptosis to inhibit tumor
growth in vivo. Wu,
Wang, Mei, and co-workers have leveraged the strong DNA binding affinities
of ruthenium(II) dppz complexes to prepare nanoprobes as tumor-targeting
imaging agents. The binding of [Ru(phen)2(dppz)]2+ and its derivative (476)
( ) to oligonucleotides
induces the formation of NPs with enhanced emission. These NPs exhibit
facile uptake in live MDA-MB-231 cells and selective tumor accumulation
in zebrafish bearing MDA-MB-231 tumor xenografts, suggesting their
potential development as tumor-specific agents for cancer diagnosis
and therapy. Xie, He, and co-workers have utilized [Ru(phen)2(dppz)]2+ to label vaccinia virus nucleic acid. The labeled virions show strong emission and
can be imaged at the single-virion level, enabling the examination
of their invasion into the host cells.
 Metzler-Nolte and co-workers have conjugated
these membrane-impermeable
complexes with the CPP Xentry (LCLRPVG), which is a neutral peptide
derived from the N-terminal region of the X-protein found in the hepatitis
B virus, to increase their cellular
uptake efficiencies. Compared to their
peptide-free counterparts, these peptide conjugates (477a and 477b) ( ) display lower binding affinities for DNA due to the
steric hindrance caused by the peptide on the dppz ligand. However,
these conjugates are efficiently taken up by live HeLa cells, and
the cellular uptake is more efficient than a related Tat49–57 peptide conjugate (477c) that gives negligible intracellular
emission. Keyes and co-workers have developed ruthenium(II) dppz complexes
conjugated with an NLS (VQRKRQKLMP; 478a) and an MPP
(FrFKFrFK; 478b) to enhance its cellular uptake for specific
imaging of nuclear and mitochondrial DNA, respectively. The peptide conjugation increases the binding
affinities of the conjugates for DNA (Kb = 3.6 and 2.8 × 107 M–1, respectively)
by an order of magnitude compared to their peptide-free counterpart
(Kb = 5.04 × 106 M–1) due to enhanced electrostatic interaction. Multimodal
imaging involving LSCM, PLIM, and resonance Raman spectroscopy confirms
the specific staining of nuclear and mitochondrial DNA in HeLa cells
by these conjugates. Furthermore, the high specificity of conjugate 478a for nuclear DNA has enabled the visualization of chromosomes
with high resolution using STED microscopy, facilitating the observation
of the process of cell division ( ). 
 Gunnlaugsson, Williams, and co-workers have studied
the biological
properties of a series of ruthenium(II) complexes bearing an extended
aromatic unit on the dppz ligand (479) ( ). , The phen complexes 479a–479c exhibit
the typical “light switch” effect upon binding to DNA.
Live-cell imaging shows that these complexes primarily localize in
the cytoplasm of cells. In contrast, the 1,4,5,8-tetraazaphenanthrene
(TAP) complexes 479d–479f show emission
quenching when bound to DNA due to photooxidation of the guanine residues,
resulting in significant photodamage to DNA and high photocytotoxicity.
These findings indicate that ruthenium(II) dppz-like complexes can
be developed as either imaging or therapeutic agents, depending on
the specific ancillary ligands used in their design. Simpson, Scattergood,
Elliott, Quinn, and co-workers have developed two osmium(II) complexes
(480) as NIR luminescent metallointercalators for DNA. In contrast to [Ru(TAP)2(dppz)]2+ that displays emission quenching upon binding to guanine-containing
DNA, the osmium(II) complexes 480a and 480b exhibit substantial emission enhancement in the NIR region (λem = 761 and 740 nm, respectively). These
complexes are membrane-impermeable and have been encapsulated into
polymeric micelles derived from Polysorbate 80 to promote their cellular
uptake. Upon cellular internalization, these complexes are enriched
in the nuclear membrane and nucleoli of live HeLa cells. Bhat, Revankar,
and co-workers have incorporated a triptycenyl unit into ruthenium(II)
(481) and iridium(III)
dppz complexes (482) as
a molecular clip to induce DNA condensation, enabling the complexes
to function as gene transfection agents. Ruthenium(II) complexes featuring
a glycoluril unit (483–485) have
also been developed as nonviral DNA carriers. − 
 Yam and co-workers have demonstrated that the
rhenium(I) dppz complex
[Re(dppz)(CO)3(py)]+ (py = pyridine) shows a
lower binding affinity for DNA and a smaller increase in emission
intensity upon DNA binding compared to the ruthenium(II) dppz complexes,
but it effectively induces DNA cleavage upon irradiation. Thomas, de la Serna, and co-workers have conjugated
rhenium(I) and ruthenium(II) dppz complexes, [Re(dppz)(CO)3(py)]+ and [Ru(tpm)(dppz)(py)]2+ (tpm = tris(1-pyrazolyl)methane),
using different linkers. , The emission of the
resultant heterobimetallic complexes (486) ( ) predominantly
originates from the 3MLCT (dπ(Ru) → π*(dppz))
excited state due to energy transfer from the rhenium(I) center to
the ruthenium(II) center, enabling the complexes to exhibit significant
emission turn-on upon binding to DNA. Notably, the choice of linker
plays a significant role in controlling the excited-state properties
of the complexes. While complex 486a shares similar DNA
photocleavage properties to [Re(dppz)(CO)3(py)]+, complex 486b does not induce DNA cleavage even after
prolonged irradiation. Additionally, complex 486b shows
superior photostability compared to complex 486a, allowing
for the precise tracking of its temporal dynamics within cells using
STED microscopy. This nanoscopic imaging technique has unveiled the
rapid migration of the complex from the mitochondria and lysosomes
to the cell nucleus after its cellular internalization. Thomas, Elliott,
and co-workers have developed iridium(III) dppz complexes (487) that display “light switch” effect upon DNA intercalation. In contrast to their ruthenium(II) and osmium(II)
counterparts that are unable to penetrate the plasma membrane, the
iridium(III) complexes exhibit efficient cellular uptake and specific
mitochondrial localization in live MCF-7 and A2780 cells.
 Thomas and co-workers have developed ruthenium(II)
complexes coordinated
with a tetrapyrido[3,2-a:2′,3′-c:3′′,2′′-h:2′′′,3′′′-j]phenazine (tpphz) ligand (488) ( ) that show “light
switch” effect upon intercalative binding to DNA. These complexes enter live MCF-7 cells by active
transport and reside in the cell nucleus, which are different from
their dppz counterparts that display limited cellular and nuclear
uptake. The efficient nuclear accumulation of these complexes has
enabled the visualization of nuclear DNA in a cellular context. Additionally,
these complexes exhibit cytotoxic activity comparable to cisplatin
in various cancer cell lines. Studies on the mechanism of action of
complex 488b in p53-deficient oesophageal squamous cell
carcinoma OE21 cells show that this metallointercalator targets DNA
replication. The tpphz ligand has also
been utilized as a bridging ligand to develop homobinuclear complexes
(489). Compared to the
mononuclear complexes (Kb = 105 to 106 M–1), these binuclear complexes
bind to DNA through a nonintercalative mechanism with stronger affinities
(Kb > 107 M–1). Complex 489b shows specific nuclear staining in both
live and fixed cells due to its binding to nuclear DNA. This is supported
by emission lifetime analysis using TP-PLIM, which reveals that the
emission in the nucleus is longer-lived (> 160 ns) than that in
the
cytoplasm. The complex has been utilized
to monitor structural changes in nuclear DNA during the cell cycle
progression. When coupled with super-resolution
imaging techniques such as SIM and STED microscopy, the complex has
enabled the visualization of chromatin DNA in live cells with enhanced
resolution. Three-dimensional images
of nuclear chromatin have also been obtained using 3D STED microscopy.
In contrast, the lower cellular uptake of complex 489a has limited its use to image nuclear DNA in fixed cells. However, it can be delivered into live cells
using a PEGylated DNA–AuNP conjugate as a nanocarrier, which
displays high stability and resistance against nonspecific adsorption
and enzymatic degradation. Interestingly,
the cellular uptake and localization properties of the two binuclear
complexes can be modulated by encapsulation in polymersomes, which
enter cells via endocytosis and relocate the complexes to the mitochondria
to target mitochondrial DNA. The cellular
uptake of heterobinuclear ruthenium(II)–iridium(III) complexes
(490) have also been examined in both live and fixed
cells. Complexes 490a and 490b exhibit improved cellular uptake without the loss of
nuclear localization compared to the homobinuclear ruthenium(II) complexes
due to the lower formal charge and increased lipophilicity. However,
complex 491 shows limited uptake in live cells with negligible
nuclear staining due to its strong interaction with serum proteins,
which restrains it from targeting the nucleus. Meijer, Dietzek-Ivanšić, Thomas, and co-workers
have also developed a related binuclear osmium(II) complex (492) featuring NIR emission (λem = 780 nm), excellent photostability, and low (photo)cytotoxicity
for imaging nuclear DNA using STED microscopy. 
 Other transition metal complexes containing planar
aromatic ligands
have also been explored for their applications in DNA sensing in live
cells. Bhat, Revankar, and co-workers have examined the photophysical
and biological properties of ruthenium(II) complexes that incorporate
a [1,2,5]-thiadiazolo-[3,4-f]-[1,10]-phenanthroline
ligand (493) ( ). These complexes display
specific nuclear staining in live HeLa cells due to their binding
to nuclear DNA. Wu, Tian, and co-workers have developed a ruthenium(II)
complex appended with an N-hexyl phenothiazine unit
(494) that enables the specific targeting of mitochondrial
DNA. The complex possesses a large TPA
cross-section (δ760nm = 236.5 GM),
facilitating its visualization in live cells and tissues using two-photon
microscopy. The complex is rapidly internalized into live HepG2 cells
via endocytosis and specifically enriched in the mitochondria due
to its high affinity for mitochondrial DNA. Lu, Che, and co-workers
have studied the DNA-binding and intracellular localization properties
of platinum(II) allenylidene complexes (495). These complexes exhibit a 17- and 5-fold increase
in their emission intensities, respectively, upon binding to DNA.
Live-cell imaging in HeLa cells shows that complex 495a predominantly resides in the cell nucleus, while complex 495b is mainly distributed in the cytoplasm. The smaller emission enhancement
and negligible nuclear uptake of complex 495b are attributed
to the bulky tert-butyl groups that impede the intercalation
of the complex into DNA and refrain its nuclear entry. Mishra and
co-workers have developed a binuclear platinum(II) complex (496) that shows strong binding affinity for DNA, resulting
in its specific accumulation in the nucleus. 
 The selective recognition of mismatched DNA is
important to cancer
diagnosis and therapy. However, most of the luminescent probes display
nondiscriminative intercalative binding interactions with DNA, posing
a significant challenge to the specific detection of intracellular
mismatched DNA. Che and co-workers have developed a series of luminescent
platinum(II) complexes that enable selective recognition of mismatches
in DNA. The incorporation of bulky groups
into the NHC or diphosphine ligand plays a crucial role in introducing
steric hindrance, which weakens the interaction between the complex
and matched DNA while maintaining high affinity for mismatched DNA.
Thus, these complexes exhibit a more significant increase in their
emission intensities upon binding to mismatched DNA than matched DNA,
as the larger pockets present in the mismatched sites provide better
protection to the complex from the surrounding aqueous environment.
Additionally, the complexes can effectively detect abasic sites in
DNA, which are another type of thermodynamically unstable DNA defects.
Among the complexes studied, the binuclear platinum(II) complex 497 ( ) shows up to 13.5-fold higher emission enhancement upon binding
to mismatched DNA compared to matched DNA, taking advantage of its
unique molecular geometry and environment-sensitive emission. It has
been used to detect DNA mismatches in human colorectal carcinoma HCT116
cells, a cell line that is defective in mismatch repair (MMR). Remarkably,
the complex shows substantially higher emission intensity in HCT116
cells than HCT116N cells ( a), a cell line that is modified to restore MMR activity.
The complex can also differentiate between tumor and normal tissues
based on the different levels of mismatches in their DNA extracts
( b).
 Sun, Peng, and co-workers have utilized graphene
oxide as a platform
for loading [Ru(phen)3]2+ for DNA detection. Upon loading onto graphene oxide, the emission
of the complex is quenched. However, upon interaction of the nanosensor
with DNA, the complex is released from the graphene oxide, resulting
in emission turn-on. Live-cell imaging shows that the nanosensor can
enter the nucleus and stain nuclear DNA in MCF-7 cells, indicating
that the graphene oxide serves as a nanovector to direct the complex
to the cell nucleus for DNA detection.

8.11.2.

## Ribonucleic Acids
Ribonucleic
acid (RNA) is a single-stranded nucleic acid structure synthesized
from DNA through transcription. It is primarily present in the nucleoli
and cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells. Within the cell, the nucleolus
serves as the primary site for the synthesis and assembly of ribosomal
RNA (rRNA), which constitutes ca. 70–80% of
the total RNA content.
Turro and co-workers have designed a
ruthenium(II) complex containing a phenanthridine derivative (498) ( ) for the detection of RNA. The two
luminescent moieties are located in close proximity to facilitate
spin-forbidden resonance energy transfer from the 3MLCT
state of [Ru(bpy)2(phen)]2+ to the singlet excited
state of phenanthridine. The delayed phenanthridine fluorescence is
quenched in aqueous solution but restored upon binding to RNA which
shields phenanthridine from the aqueous environment, resulting in
substantial emission enhancement. This complex has been used to visualize
RNA in live MDA-MB-231 cells, with strong emission observed in both
the nucleoli and cytoplasm. Sun, Peng, and co-workers have developed
a dual-emissive heterobimetallic ruthenium(II)–iridium(III)
complex (499) for imaging rRNA in live cells. The complex displays two emission bands at
523 and 615 nm and the ratio I523nm/I615nm increases upon interaction with the secondary
and tertiary structures of RNA but not DNA. Incubation of live MCF-7
cells with the complex results in intense emission in the nucleoli
with weaker emission in the cytoplasm. The nucleolar emission is significantly
reduced in intensity upon treatment with RNase but not with deoxyribonuclease
(DNase), further supporting the specific interaction of the complex
with RNA in the nucleoli.
 Khatua and co-workers have developed an AIE-active
ruthenium(II)
complex (500) ( ) that enables selective detection of rRNA through
an rRNA-induced aggregation mechanism. In the presence of rRNA, the complex exhibits increased emission
intensity due to aggregate formation via π–π stacking
and C–Cl···O halogen bonding interactions with
rRNA. The complex has been used to image rRNA in live HeLa cells,
resulting in specific staining of the nucleolus. An AIE-active iridium(III)
complex coordinated with a benzimidazole-substituted 1,2,3-triazole
ligand (501) has also been reported for the selective
detection of rRNA and nucleolar staining in live cells. The enhanced emission of the complex in the
presence of rRNA is attributed to the supramolecular π–π
interactions between the benzimidazole unit and the secondary structures
of rRNA that facilitate aggregation. A related ruthenium(II) complex
(454) has been demonstrated to show selective detection
of rRNA in live cells in the presence of Ag+. The complex displays ca. 8-fold
emission enhancement in the presence of Ag+ due to the
formation of a silver(I)–triazolide complex. Upon incubation
of the cells with Ag+, intense emission has been observed
in the nucleoli and cytoplasm, which diminishes in intensity upon
the addition of RNase but not DNase. The intracellular emission is
believed to be a consequence of the interaction of the complex with
the duplex structures of rRNA formed upon the binding of Ag+ to the guanine and cytosine bases in single-stranded RNA.
 MicroRNA (miRNA) is a class of small, noncoding
RNAs that regulate
gene expression in a sequence-specific manner. The aberrant expression of specific miRNAs has been implicated
in the initiation and progression of various types of human cancer. Zhang, Jiang, and co-workers have developed
luminescent metal nanoshells for imaging single miRNA in cells. These metal nanoshells consist of a silica
sphere core encapsulating [Ru(bpy)3]2+, and
a thin silver layer serving as the shell. The single-stranded oligonucleotide
5′-CTCGGGGCAGCTCAGTACAGGA-3′
is covalently attached to the metal nanoshells to facilitate specific
recognition of its target miRNA-486 in cells. The metal nanoshells
have been used to examine miRNA-486 expression in various lung cancer
cell lines, revealing elevated levels of miRNA-486 in NCI-H1944 and
NCI-H460 cells compared to A549 cells. Wu and co-workers have developed
a ratiometric nanoprobe for imaging intracellular miRNAs. This nanoprobe is constructed using a SiNP
core encapsulating [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and a polydopamine
shell, with the fuel DNA and fluorescein-labeled signal DNA coassembled
on the outer surface. In the absence of target miRNA, the fluorescence
of fluorescein is effectively quenched by the polydopamine shell in
close proximity and thus the nanoprobe only exhibits the characteristic
ruthenium(II)-based red phosphorescence at 650 nm. However, in the
presence of the target miRNA let-7a, the signal DNA is displaced from
the nanoshell, leading to the recovery of fluorescein fluorescence
at 524 nm. Further amplification of the signal can be achieved upon
NIR irradiation, which promotes the release of the fuel DNA due to
localized temperature increase and thus facilitates the displacement
of let-7a via a strand migration reaction. The nanoprobe has been
used to monitor alternations in let-7a expression in live A549 cells,
revealing the up- and down-regulation of let-7a expression when the
cells are pretreated with let-7a mimics and let-7a inhibitors, respectively.

8.11.3.

## G-Quadruplexes
G-Quadruplexes
are one of the most important higher-order structures formed from
the stacking of guanine tetrads through hydrogen bonding in guanine-rich
DNA and RNA molecules. These noncanonical structures play an important
role in various biological processes, including replication, transcription,
translation, and telomere maintenance. The stabilization of G-quadruplexes in nontelomeric regions, such
as proto-oncogenes and promoter regions, has been regarded as a promising
anticancer strategy. 
Vilar and
co-workers have developed a cyclometalated platinum(II) complex (502) ( ) that acts as a “light switch” for G-quadruplex DNA. The introduction of an ethyl piperidine unit
prevents the complex from intercalating into the base pairs of duplex
DNA and thereby imparts G-quadruplex selectivity to the complex. Thus,
the complex shows substantial emission enhancement in the presence
of G-quadruplex DNA (e.g., c-Myc and 6183 NT) but
not with duplex DNA. However, live-cell imaging shows that the complex
is impermeable to the membrane of U2OS cells. To overcome this limitation,
the complex has been encapsulated into a supramolecular coordination
cage to facilitate its delivery into live cells. Upon cellular internalization,
the complex is released from the cage and enriched in the nucleoli.
A related platinum(II) complex (503) has been developed
for imaging G-quadruplex DNA structures in cells. Binding of the complex to DNA promotes its aggregation,
resulting in a significant increase in its emission lifetime from
75 ns to ca. 0.75 μs (for duplex DNA) and 1.42–1.90
μs (for G-quadruplex DNA), with the magnitude of the increase
depends on the DNA topology. This remarkable feature has enabled the
selective visualization of G-quadruplex DNA in U2OS cells using PLIM.
The longest emission lifetime is detected in the nucleoli, followed
by the whole nucleus, whereas the shortest emission lifetime is observed
in the cytosol ( ). The relatively low amplitude of the long emission lifetime
component (ca. 1–2%) aligns with the low abundance
of G-quadruplex DNA in cells. The complex has been used to develop
a lifetime-based assay for investigating the competitive interactions
of other G-quadruplex DNA binders in cells.
 The interaction of platinum(II) salophen complexes
(504) ( ) with
G-quadruplex DNA has also been examined. Complex 504a contains an additional ethyl piperidine
unit to maximize the interactions with G-quadruplex DNA, while complex 504b is modified with a sulfonate group to reduce nonspecific
interactions with DNA. The cellular uptake and localization of the
complexes vary in different cell lines. Complex 504a localizes
in the cell nucleus and nucleoli in CHO and HeLa cells, respectively,
while residing in small pockets outside the nucleus in HepG2 cells.
In contrast, complex 504b displays slower cellular uptake
due to the negatively charged sulfonate group, and it localizes in
both the cell nucleoli and cytoplasm in all three of these cell lines.
A related platinum(II) complex conjugated with a DOTA ligand has been
radiolabeled with 111In to examine its in vivo biodistribution and clearance using SPECT imaging. The 111In-labeled complex (505)
exhibits rapid renal clearance in mice bearing B16-F10 tumor xenografts,
and it accumulates in the tumor and is retained for a long time (>
72 h). Lewis, Vilar, and co-workers have utilized rotaxanes as a triggerable
cage for platinum(II) salophen complexes (506) to regulate
their binding with G-quadruplex DNA and to aid their controlled release
inside cells. The G-quadruplex binding
activity of complexes 506a and 506b is hindered
in the presence of a bipyridine-based macrocycle due to the significant
steric bulk surrounding them, but it is restored upon enzymatic cleavage
or light irradiation to release the macrocycle. These rotaxanes show
increased cellular uptake compared to the free complex, and display
punctate staining in live U2OS cells. Additionally, the light-responsive
rotaxane exhibits substantially increased cytotoxic activity upon
continuous irradiation, resulting from the translocation of the platinum(II)
salphen complex to the cell nucleus and its binding to DNA. Vázquez,
Vilar, and co-workers have developed dimeric platinum(II) salophen
complexes linked with different peptide sequences (507) for targeting multimeric G-quadruplex DNA. The peptide linker plays an important role in the binding
affinity and selectivity of the complexes toward different G-quadruplex
DNA topologies. Upon cellular internalization, the peptide conjugates
reside in both the nucleoli and cytoplasm of U2OS cells.
 Liu and co-workers have developed a ruthenium(II)
complex (508) ( ) that can target G-quadruplex DNA with higher affinity
and selectivity
than duplex DNA. Both enantiomers of
the complex bind to G-quadruplex DNA, but the Λ-isomer stabilizes
human telomeric G-quadruplex DNA to a greater extent compared to the
Δ-isomer. The Λ-isomer shows selective enrichment in the
nucleus of cancerous HepG2 cells after uptake via an energy-dependent,
nonendocytic pathway but negligible nuclear accumulation in noncancerous
HUVECs. In contrast, the Δ-isomer displays limited nuclear uptake.
Keyes and co-workers have designed a ruthenium(II) complex (509) that integrates the DNA “light switch”
properties of [Ru(phen)2(tpphz)]2+ and the G-quadruplex-binding
ability of the G-quadruplex stabilizer phen-DC3 to visualize G-quadruplex
DNA. The complex remains nonluminescent
in aqueous solution but exhibits emission turn-on upon binding to
G-quadruplexes. The complex shows high affinity and specificity for
G-quadruplex DNA over duplex DNA, but it exerts strong disruptive
effect on G-quadruplex structures. The complex enters A549 cells via
an energy-dependent pathway and displays distinctive punctate staining
due to its association with the membranes of the endosomal/lysosomal
compartments. Although the complex cannot reach the G-quadruplex DNA
in the nucleus, its high affinity and specificity toward G-quadruplex
DNA and strong disruptive effect on G-quadruplex structure indicate
its potential as a theranostic agent targeting G-quadruplexes.
 Shao and co-workers have developed two platinum(II)
complexes coordinated
with an aza-bridged N,N-bis-(1,10-phenanthroline-2-yl)amine
ligand (510) ( ) that exhibit substantial emission enhancement upon
binding to G-quadruplex RNA. Complex 510a has been used to visualize G-quadruplex RNA in live cells,
resulting in luminescent foci in the cytoplasm. Real-time monitoring
of the quantity and folding dynamics of intracellular G-quadruplex
RNA in various cancer and normal cell lines shows that G-quadruplex
RNA is more abundant and less frequently unfold in cancer cells. A
redox-active platinum(IV) complex (511) has been obtained
through oxidation of complex 510a. The axial ligands regulate the G-quadruplex binding activity
of the complex by impeding potential π–π interaction,
allowing the complex to show emission turn-on only upon binding to
G-quadruplexes after reduction by intracellular GSH. Furthermore,
these lipophilic ligands facilitate the cellular and nuclear uptake
of the complex, enabling the simultaneous detection of both G-quadruplex
RNA in the cytoplasm and G-quadruplex DNA in the nucleus. Additionally,
the complex displays potent cytotoxicity after a long incubation time,
highlighting its potential as a theranostic agent.
 Mao, Zhou, and co-workers have developed an iridium(III)
complex
functionalized with two G-quadruplex-binding pyridostatin derivatives
PDP (512) ( ) as an imaging probe for G-quadruplexes. The emission lifetime of the complex increases
upon binding to G-quadruplex DNA and RNA, which are not observed for
single- or double-stranded nucleic acid structures. The emission lifetime
changes have enabled the examination of intracellular dynamics of
G-quadruplex RNA using TP-PLIM, which shows that G-quadruplex RNA
is more active in normal MCF-10A cells than cancerous MCF-7 cells.
These results highlight the different regulatory roles G-quadruplex
RNA plays in cancer and normal cells.
 Moucheron, Demeunynck, Monchaud, and co-workers
have developed
two ruthenium(II) complexes bearing a π-extended acridine-based
ligand (513) ( ) for selective labeling of G-quadruplex DNA and RNA. These complexes exhibit up to 330-fold emission
enhancement in the presence of G-quadruplexes, but less than 60-fold
increase in their emission intensities upon interaction with duplex
DNA. The large difference in their emission intensities has enabled
the sensitive and selective detection of G-quadruplexes even in the
presence of an excess amount of duplex. Treatment of B16-F10 cells
with complex 513b results in luminescent foci in the
nucleolar and perinuclear region, which has been ascribed to the labeling
of G-quadruplex RNA embedded in the nucleoli and cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein
complexes, respectively.
 

8.12.

## Proteins
Proteins are involved in
numerous cellular functions, and maintaining their homeostasis is
crucial for normal cellular metabolism. Aberrant protein expression
has been implicated in promoting cancer progression and development. Furthermore, the accumulation of misfolded
or aggregated proteins is closely associated with various human diseases
such as diabetes and neurodegenerative disorders like AD and PD. 
8.12.1.

## G-Protein-Coupled Receptors
G-Protein-coupled
receptors (GPCRs) constitute the largest group of integral membrane
proteins in eukaryotic cells. These
proteins are responsible for the transduction of extracellular signals
from agonist binding into intracellular signaling pathways, mediating
cellular processes such as neurotransmission, hormone release, cardiovascular
functions, and immune response. Their aberrant expression and activation
in cancer cells stimulate their associated signaling networks to promote
tumor growth, angiogenesis, and metastasis. 
8.12.1.1.

## Dopamine Receptors
Dopamine
receptors are a class of GPCRs that are prominent in the vertebrate
CNS. These receptors are classified into D1- and D2-like subtypes
according to their biochemical, physiological, and pharmacological
characteristics. The D1-like receptors are involved in the activation
of adenylate cyclase, while the D2-like receptors trigger the inhibition
of adenylyl cyclase, phosphatidyl inositol turnover, and intracellular
Ca2+ mobilization. They are frequently upregulated in different
types of cancer; , for example, the overexpression
of D1-like receptors in breast cancer tissues has been linked to more
advanced tumor stages and grades, as well as a higher incidence of
nodal metastasis. 
Kwong, Tan,
Leung, Ma, and co-workers have modified iridium(III) complexes with
a dopamine agonist to develop luminescent probes (514) ( ) for
imaging intracellular dopamine receptors. Incubation of live A549 cells, a human non-small-cell lung cancer
cell line with dopamine receptor expression, with the complexes results
in intense intracellular emission, which substantially decreases in
intensity when the cells are treated with small interfering RNA (siRNA)
to knockdown dopamine receptor gene expression or pretreated with
an excess of dopamine to compete for the dopamine receptors. These
observations confirm the specific binding of the complexes to the
dopamine receptors inside cells. Complex 514b has been
used to monitor the internalization of dopamine receptors in cells,
a process that is important in maintaining cellular homeostasis.
 
8.12.1.2.

## Gastrin-Releasing Peptide Receptor
Gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) is involved in many physiological
functions such as regulating gastrin release and subsequent gastric
acid secretion. It has also been recognized as a growth factor for
cancer cells. The receptor for GRP, gastrin-releasing peptide receptor
(GRPR), is overexpressed in a variety of cancer tissues, while its
expression in normal tissues is relatively limited. 
Leung, Ma, and co-workers have conjugated an iridium(III)
complex with the peptide-based GRPR antagonist JMV594 for imaging
GRPR in GRPR-positive A549 cells. The
specific binding of the resulting conjugate (515) ( ) to GRPR on the
cell surface is confirmed by the GRPR antagonist (e.g., JMV594 and RC-3095) competition and GRPR gene knockdown experiments.
Thus, the conjugate can discriminate cancerous A549 cells from normal
LO2 cells due to the different GRPR expression levels. Additionally,
the binding of the conjugate to GRPR in RAW264.7 cells reduces the
secretion of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, indicating that
the conjugate can modulate the functions of GRPR in immune cells.
 
8.12.1.3.

## CXC Chemokine Receptor 4
Chemokine
receptors constitute a family of GPCRs predominantly present on the
surface of leukocytes. Among these receptors, the CXC chemokine receptor
4 (CXCR4) plays a crucial role in various physiological processes
including development, hematopoiesis, organogenesis, and vascularization. It serves as the primary physiological receptor
for stromal cell-derived factor 1 (SDF-1). The interaction between CXCR4 and SDF-1 initiates a cascade of intracellular
signaling transduction pathways that govern essential cellular processes
such as cell survival, proliferation, chemotaxis, migration, and adhesion.
The upregulated expression of CXCR4 in cancer cells has been implicated
in cancer progression and metastasis.
Velders, van Leeuwen,
and co-workers have conjugated [Ir(ppy)3] with the cyclic
peptide Ac-TZ14011, a derivative of the CXCR4 antagonist T140, for
targeting CXCR4. The resultant peptide
conjugates (516) ( ) bind to CXCR4 with high affinity (Kd = 66.3 to 254.4 nM), which enables them to
visualize CXCR4 expression in cells. Live-cell imaging demonstrates
that upon incubation at 4°C to inhibit the occurrence of endocytosis,
the conjugates are enriched in the plasma membrane of MDA-MB-231 cells
that are transfected to overexpress CXCR4 (MDA-MB-231CXCR4+). Furthermore, the conjugates show increased accumulation in MDA-MB-231CXCR4+ cells compared to MDA-MB-231 cells that express CXCR4
at basal levels. These findings illustrate the high specificity of
the conjugates toward CXCR4 expressed on the cell surface.
 
8.12.1.4.

## Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone Receptors
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) receptors, also known as
luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone receptors, are GPCRs that play
a key role in reproductive function. The binding of GnRH, which is released from the hypothalamus, to
these receptors in the anterior pituitary regulates the synthesis
and secretion of luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone.
There has been increasing evidence that GnRH receptors are overexpressed
in various cancer tissues, which makes them an attractive molecular
target for the treatment of endocrine-related cancers. 
Tzakos and co-workers have examined the
cellular uptake of a ruthenium(II) complex conjugated with a GnRH-derived
decapeptide (517) ( ) in bladder cancer T24 cells, which displays
a high expression level of GnRH receptors. The cellular internalization of the conjugate remains low for an
incubation period of 4 h, but it gradually increases upon extending
the incubation time to 24 h. In contrast, the cellular uptake of the
conjugate is negligible in HeLa cells, which lack endogenous expression
of GnRH receptors, highlighting the role of the receptors in mediating
the cellular internalization of the conjugate.
 
8.12.1.5.

## Formyl Peptide Receptor 2
Formyl
peptide receptors (FPRs) constitute a small group of GPCRs that recognize
chemotactic signals to mediate inflammatory and immune response. Within the human FPR family, FPR2 is the most
intriguing member due to its interaction with a wide range of endogenous
or exogenous ligands. It plays an important role in regulating angiogenesis,
which is crucial for wound healing and tissue regeneration. However,
uncontrolled angiogenesis is central for tumor growth, progression,
and metastasis.
Leung, Ma, and co-workers have developed a luminescent
probe (518) ( ) for imaging FPR2 in live cells. The probe features the conjugation of an iridium(III) complex
with a synthetic hexapeptide WKYMVm that acts an agonist of FPR2.
The conjugate exhibits specific binding to FPR2, which has enabled
the visualization of FPR2 in live HUVECs. Competition assays with
the FPR2 antagonist, WRW4, and siRNA knockdown experiments confirm
that the observed intense intracellular emission is a result of the
specific binding of the conjugate to FPR2. Additionally, the conjugate
reduces the motility of HUVECs both in the absence and presence of
the FPR2 agonist lipoxin A4, indicating that the conjugate can regulate
FPR2 signaling in live cells.
 

8.12.2.

## Integrins
Integrins are a large
family of heterodimeric transmembrane receptors composed of an α-subunit
and a β-subunit. They are responsible
for mediating biological processes involving cell–cell and
cell–extracellular matrix adhesion, playing a key role in various
diseases. One prominent member is the
platelet integrin αIIbβ3, which
is expressed at high levels on circulating platelets. Activation of
integrin αIIbβ3 plays a vital role
in platelet aggregation, leading to thrombosis. Another member sharing
the same β3 subunit is integrin αvβ3, which is often overexpressed in cancer cells,
contributing to the promotion of tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis.
Keyes and co-workers have conjugated ruthenium(II) complexes with
an RGD-containing peptide that shows a high affinity for integrin
αIIbβ3. The resultant conjugates (519) ( ) display substantial emission
enhancement upon binding to integrin αIIbβ3, which are attributed to the changes in the local environment
surrounding the metal complexes. Among the two conjugates, conjugate 519a binds to a single site on the protein with high affinity
(Kd = 0.09 μM), whereas conjugate 519b binds to the protein via a two-step binding mechanism
involving hydrophobic interaction along with RGD recognition. However,
the binding affinity of conjugate 519b is much lower
(Kd = 0.25 and 4.37 μM) due to its
larger size and higher lipophilicity. The conjugates have been used
to visualize integrin αIIbβ3 in
CHO cells that are transfected to increase their expression of this
transmembrane protein. The conjugates reside in the plasma membrane
of the cells and colocalize with the αIIb-specific
monoclonal antibody SZ22 ( ), confirming the specific binding of the conjugates
to integrin αIIbβ3 expressed on
the cell surface. Fei and co-workers have utilized an iridium(III)
solvato complex [Ir(ppy)2(OH2)2]+ to staple a modified RGD peptide with two additional His
residues at its two ends to produce a luminescent cyclic RGD peptide
conjugate (520). The cyclic
RGD peptide exhibits substantially increased stability and binding
affinity for integrin αvβ3 due to
its structural constraint, resulting in more efficient internalization
in αvβ3-positive A549 cells compared
to its linear counterpart. In contrast, there is no comparable uptake
observed for the conjugate in MCF-7 cells that express αvβ3 at lower levels. The conjugate has been
further tethered with the apoptosis-inducing peptide KLA at the C-terminus.
This modification has enabled the conjugate to show cancer-selective
cytotoxic activity, particularly toward A549 cells (IC50 = 4.5 μM) compared to MCF-7 cells (IC50 = 37.7
μM) due to their different levels of αvβ3 expression.
 
8.12.3.

## Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
Human epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a transmembrane
glycoprotein that belongs to the ErbB family of receptor tyrosine
kinases. The binding of epidermal growth
factor (EGF) to this receptor results in receptor dimerization and
autophosphorylation, activating the signaling pathways that are involved
in cell differentiation and proliferation. It is overexpressed on
the plasma membrane of various types of cancer cells to promote tumor
growth, invasion, and metastasis. 
Leung, Ma, and co-workers have conducted a cell-based screening of
a series of iridium(III) complexes modified with the EGFR kinase inhibitor
tyrphostin 1, which identifies complex 521 ( ) as a theranostic
agent that enables both the visualization and inhibition of EGFR in
live cells. Incubation of human epidermoid
carcinoma A431 cells that display a high level of EGFR expression
with the complex results in strong intracellular emission. The intracellular
emission intensity significantly decreases when the cells are pretreated
with tyrphostin 1 to inhibit EGFR activity or siRNA to suppress EGFR
gene expression, indicative of the specific binding of the complex
to EGFR. The complex has also been used to examine EGFR activity in
LO2 cells that exhibit a lower level of EGFR expression, and the negligible
emission observed indicates that the complex can discriminate cancer
cells from normal cells based on their different levels of EGFR expression.
Furthermore, the complex shows higher cytotoxicity toward A431 cells
(IC50 = 37.4 μM) compared to LO2 cells (IC50 > 50 μM) due to effective EGFR inhibition (EC50 = 1.18 μM), which deactivates its downstream targets such
as extracellular signal-regulated kinase, mitogen-activated protein
kinase, and transcription factor activator protein-1.
 Odysseos, Georgiades, and co-workers have developed
two ruthenium(II)
complexes (522) ( ) as EGFR probes through the incorporation
of an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor selected from a focused library
of aminoquinazoline derivatives. The bis-quinazoline conjugate 522b displays specific
enrichment in the mitochondria of U-87 MG cells after uptake, which
has been attributed to its association with EGFR that undergoes translocation
to the mitochondria. Wang and co-workers have developed platinum(II)
quinazoline complexes (523) that serve as both EGFR probes
and anticancer agents. Interestingly,
the quinazoline pendant not only allows complexes 523a and 523b to exhibit potent EGFR inhibitory activity
(IC50 = 103.3 and 86.2 nM, respectively) but also increased
DNA binding affinity. As revealed by secondary-ion mass spectrometry
(SIMS) imaging and inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)
measurements, these complexes localize in both the plasma membrane
and nucleus of HeLa cells due to their binding to EGFR and DNA, respectively.
Remarkably, the complexes show high cytotoxic activity toward various
cancer cell lines including A431, A549, HeLa, and MCF-7 cells, particularly
demonstrating the selective inhibition of EGF-stimulated growth in
MCF-7 cells. Related ruthenium(II) quinazoline complexes (524) have also been developed as cancer theranostics. Multimodal imaging with LSCM and SIMS shows that complex 524a primarily resides in the cytoplasm, while complex 524b predominantly accumulates in the nucleus. These complexes
display enhanced cytotoxicity toward cancer cells upon irradiation
due to 1O2 generation.
 Lam, Lo, and co-workers have developed iridium(III)
complexes bearing
a heteroaromatic methylsulfone moiety for selective modification of
Cys-containing peptides and proteins. One of these complexes has been conjugated with the dodecapeptide
GE11, which binds to EGFR with high affinity and selectivity. The
resultant conjugate (525) ( ) exhibits selective enrichment in the
plasma membrane of cancerous MDA-MB-231 and A431 cells but not in
noncancerous HEK293T cells due to its specific binding to the EGFRs
expressed on the surface of cancer cells. The cancer-selective accumulation
of the conjugate results in potent photocytotoxic activity toward
MDA-MB-231 and A431 cells (IC50 = 1.01 and 0.49 μM,
respectively) compared to HEK293T cells (IC50 = 10.09 μM).
 
8.12.4.

## Prostate-Specific Membrane Antigen
Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) is a type II transmembrane
glycoprotein expressed in all types of prostatic tissue. Notably, it shows increased expression in most
prostate cancer cells, making it a valuable target for diagnosing
and treating prostate cancer. 
Liu, Leung, Wang, and co-workers have designed an iridium(III) complex
conjugated with a PSMA inhibitor (526) ( ) for imaging PSMA in prostate
cancer microenvironments. The complex
displays high binding affinity for PSMA (Kd = 9.49 nM), which is over 1,000-fold stronger than a Glu–urea-based
PSMA inhibitor (Kd = 12.4 μM). The
complex has been used to visualize LNCaP cells in both 2D and 3D cultures,
resulting in intense emission on the plasma membrane of the cells.
The membrane staining results from the binding of the complex to PSMA
overexpressed on the cell surface, as evidenced by the significantly
reduced emission intensity in cells pretreated with siRNA to knockdown
PSMA gene expression. The strong and specific binding of the complex
to PSMA has enabled facile discrimination of prostatic cancer cells
expressing high (LNCaP), medium-to-low (22RV1), and negligible levels
of PSMA (PC3). The high specificity of the complex toward PSMA has
also enabled the visualization of 22Rv1 tumors in live mice.
 
8.12.5.

## Bromodomain-Containing Protein 4
Bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4) belongs to the mammalian
bromodomain and extra-terminal domain (BET) family of proteins. It functions as an epigenetic reader that specifically
recognizes acetylated histone and nonhistone proteins to regulate
gene transcription. It also plays a crucial role in cell cycle progression,
embryogenesis, and immune response. The
dysregulation of BRD4 functions has been associated with various diseases
such as inflammation, viral infection, neurological disorders, and
cancer. 
Ma, Wang, Leung, and co-workers
have developed a luminescent probe for BRD4 (527) ( ) by conjugating
an iridium(III) complex to the BRD4 inhibitor K197. The complex specifically binds to BRD4 in the cytoplasm
of A375 cells over other BET family members such as BRD2 and BRD3.
The complex has been used to establish a cell-based platform for screening
a library of FDA-approved drugs for BRD4 inhibitors. This approach
has led to the identification of Azelastine, an FDA-approved histamine
1 antagonist, as a potential BRD4 inhibitor that prevents BRD4 translocation
into the nucleus, and suppresses cancer cell growth and migration.
 
8.12.6.

## Nuclear Factor-κB
Nuclear
factor-κB (NF-κB) is a ubiquitous transcription factor
that regulates the expression of genes involved in inflammatory and
immune response, as well as those in cell survival, proliferation,
and differentiation. It exists as a
homodimer or heterodimer that is located in the cytoplasm in an inactive
form, and upon stimulation, it translocates to the nucleus to regulate
gene expression.
Tan, Leung, Ma, and co-workers have developed
a luminescent probe (528) ( ) for NF-κB by conjugating an iridium(III)
complex with the natural product oridonin that specifically binds
to active NF-κB dimers (i.e., p50/p50 homodimer
or p50/p65 heterodimer). The complex
shows specific binding to intracellular NF-κB in live HeLa cells.
Monitoring of NF-κB trafficking shows that it translocates from
the cytoplasm to the nucleus upon stimulation with TNF-α. Additionally,
the complex displays minimal inhibitory effects on the NF-κB
transcriptional activity and cell viability (IC50 >
100
μM), suggesting that the complex can be used to monitor NF-κB
activity in live cells without influencing its normal functions.
 Tian, Tian, and co-workers have developed a theranostic
platinum(II)
complex (529) ( ) that can hijack endogenous NF-κB translocation
to induce cancer cell death. The complex
is nonluminescent in aqueous solution but exhibits intense emission
upon binding to NF-κB. The specific binding of the complex to
NF-κB has enabled the visualization of the intracellular localization
of NF-κB in live cells, revealing that it localizes in the nucleus
of cancer cells (HepG2, HSS5787, HeLa, MCF-7, H460, SH-SY5Y, MDA-MB-231,
A549, and U2O3), but resides in the cytoplasm of normal cells (HELF,
mouse Astrocyte, mouse brain endothelium bEND3, HEK293T, and NIH/3T3).
It has also revealed the translocation of NF-κB from the cytoplasm
to the nucleus in RAW264.7 cells upon inflammation. The distinctive
intracellular localization of NF-κB has allowed the complex
to hijack endogenous NF-κB translocation to enter the nucleus
of cancer cells to induce apoptosis, while remaining inactive in the
cytoplasm of normal cells. Thus, the complex exhibits significantly
higher cytotoxic activity toward HepG2 cells (IC50 = 0.28
μM) compared to HELF cells (IC50 > 50 μM).
This cancer-selective cytotoxicity has led to effective inhibition
of tumor growth in mice bearing 4T1 tumor xenografts with negligible
side effects.
 
8.12.7.

## Nucleolin
Nucleolin is one of
the most abundant nonribosomal phosphorylated proteins in the nucleolus. It is involved in cellular processes such as
DNA and RNA metabolism, chromatin remodeling, ribosome biogenesis,
and nucleocytoplasmic transport. This
protein is also found in the cytoplasm and on the plasma membrane,
and its expression on the surface of cancer cells is upregulated to
promote tumor growth and angiogenesis. 
Chen, Chen, and co-workers have modified an iridium(III) complex
(530) ( ) with the aptamer AS1411, a 26-mer guanosine-rich DNA oligonucleotide
(5′-d(GGTGGTGGTGGTTGTGGTGGTGGTGG)-3′) that has a high
affinity for nucleolin, for cancer-selective imaging and therapy. The conjugate is efficiently taken up by nucleolin-overexpressing
cancer cells (HeLa, MCF-7, A549, and HepG2) through endocytosis and
enriched in the mitochondria, while showing minimal uptake in normal
cells (LO2 and HEK293T) ( ). The selective uptake has allowed the conjugate to
induce mitochondrial dysfunction and caspase-3/7-dependent apoptosis
in cancer cells while displaying much lower cytotoxicity toward normal
cells. Furthermore, the conjugate can specifically target MCTSs, demonstrating
excellent tumor penetration and effective inhibition of cancer cell
proliferation and tumor regrowth. Zeng, Wang, Mei, and co-workers
have utilized the interaction between a ruthenium(II) complex (531) and AS1411 to develop a nucleolin-targeting nanoprobe. The interaction between the complex and AS1411
induces the self-assembly of AS1411 through liquid–liquid phase
separation (LLPS). The resulting nanoprobe recognizes nucleolin overexpressed
on the membrane of cancerous MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells and enters
the cell nucleus via an ATP-dependent endocytic pathway. In contrast,
it exhibits lower cellular uptake in normal MCF-10A cells where nucleolin
is mainly confined to the cell nucleus and deficient in the plasma
membrane. This differential uptake has allowed for the rapid and selective
differentiation of cancer cells from normal cells. The nanoprobe also
shows efficient accumulation and retention in tumor tissues in transgenic
MMTV-PyMT mouse models of breast cancer for an extended period (>
48 h). Furthermore, it can distinguish different grades of invasive
ductal carcinoma in human breast cancer patient pathological sections
based on different levels of nucleolin expression, providing a convenient
and effective method for breast cancer diagnosis in a clinical setting.
Zhao, Chen, and co-workers have loaded a luminescent ruthenium(II)
complex (532) into a cervical cancer-targeted DNA cage
for the rapid diagnosis of cervical and endocervical cancer tissues. The DNA cage is constructed using the aptamer
AS1411 in combination with another aptamer that targets mucin-1, which
is overexpressed in patients with cervical and endocervical cancer.
The resulting nanoprobe specifically distinguishes cancer tissues
from noncancer specimens and diagnoses different grades of cervical
cancer, demonstrating high potential for clinical pathological grading
and surgical judgment in cervical and endocervical cancer.
 
8.12.8.

## Amyloid β
Amyloid precursor
protein (APP) is a transmembrane glycoprotein that plays an important
role in synaptic structure and functions. The proteolytic cleavage of APP by β- and γ-secretases
leads to the production of amyloid β (Aβ) peptides, primarily
consisting of 40 residues (Aβ1–40) and, to
a lesser extent, 42 residues (Aβ1–42). The accumulation of Aβ, particularly
as plaques in the brain parenchyma, plays a key role in AD pathogenesis.
Yu, Wang, Yu, and co-workers have developed a luminescent ruthenium(II)
complex (533) ( ) that binds to all forms of Aβ, including monomers,
oligomers, and fibrils, without disrupting their aggregation behavior. This unique binding behavior has allowed for
the visualization of the whole process of Aβ self-aggregation,
including nucleation, oligomerization, and fibrillation, at the single-fibril
level. This observation is unattainable with the fluorescent Aβ
probe thioflavin T that only stains Aβ fibrils. Real-time monitoring
of fibril growth reveals that Cu2+ accelerates Aβ
self-aggregation, promoting the formation of amorphous oligomers at
high Aβ concentrations and fibers at low Aβ concentrations.
Remarkably, the complex can specifically detect Aβ1–40 in live PC-12 cells ( ). Histological staining shows that the complex can
also differentiate Aβ plaques in brain slices obtained from
APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Notably, the complex can induce effective
photocleavage of Aβ aggregates upon continuous irradiation.
Carlos and co-workers have also developed two luminescent ruthenium(II)
complexes (534) for monitoring Aβ self-aggregation. The long emission lifetimes of the complexes
have enabled real-time imaging of Aβ self-aggregation using
PLIM, allowing the direct observation of the structural evolution
of Aβ monomers to protofibrils (Aβ1–40) and globular oligomers (Aβ15–21) in aqueous
solution. Live-cell imaging shows that these complexes display efficient
uptake and cytoplasmic localization in live Neuro-2a cells.
 Sarantseva, Tunik, and co-workers have conjugated
platinum(II)
complexes with a bifunctional peptide that contains a CPP sequence
(R9) and an Aβ aggregation-inhibiting peptide sequence
(RHVLPKVQA) through His coordination. One of the resulting luminescent peptide conjugates (535) ( ) exhibits
efficient blood-brain barrier penetration and homogenous distribution
in the brains of Drosophila melanogaster showing
the major clinical and pathomorphological characteristics of AD, highlighting
its potential in AD diagnosis and treatment.
 
8.12.9.

## α-Synuclein
α-Synuclein
is an abundant neuronal protein that is predominantly expressed at
presynaptic terminals, where it interacts with synaptic vesicles and
participates in neurotransmitter release, synaptic vesicle pool homeostasis,
and vesicle trafficking. However, the
aberrant aggregation of α-synuclein is associated with PD and
other neurodegenerative diseases such as dementia with Lewy bodies,
multiple system atrophy, and pure autonomic failure. 
Martí and co-workers have
utilized [Ru(phen)2(dppz)]2+ to detect α-synuclein
both in vitro and in cells. The complex displays an 18-fold increase in emission intensity
upon binding to fibrillar α-synuclein, which enables the real-time
monitoring of the formation of α-synuclein fibrils. The complex
has been used to detect αS aggregation in human neuroglioma
H4 cells. Increased intracellular emission has been observed in cells
that are treated with the proteasomal degradation inhibitor MG-132
to induce α-synuclein aggregation. The emission enhancement
becomes more dramatic in H4/α-syn-GFP cells, where the cells
are transfected to overexpress α-synuclein that is fused with
green fluorescent protein (GFP) as a reporter. The large overlap of
the ruthenium(II) emission with GFP fluorescence further confirms
the binding of the complex to α-synuclein aggregates.

8.13.

## Enzymes
Enzymes are essential for
catalyzing biological transformations and maintaining cellular homeostasis.
Aberrant enzyme activity is often implicated in diseases such as cancer,
which exhibits different enzyme activity profiles compared to normal
cells for promoting cell proliferation, invasion, and metastasis. , 
8.13.1.

## Cyclooxygenases
Cyclooxygenases
(COXs) are membrane-bound, heme-containing peroxidases that catalyze
the conversion of arachidonic acid to prostaglandins, which play a
key role in inflammatory response. They
exist in two distinct isoforms: the constitutive isoform COX-1 that
is ubiquitously expressed in mammalian tissues and is responsible
for the production of prostaglandins with homeostatic function, and
the inducible isoform COX-2 that plays the predominant role in prostaglandins
production during pathological states such as inflammation and tumorigenesis. The expression of COX-2 is usually upregulated
in inflamed and neoplastic tissues. 
Tan, Leung, Ma, and co-workers have conjugated an iridium(III)
complex with a structural analogue of the COX-2 inhibitor indomethacin
to develop a luminescent probe (536) ( ) for monitoring COX-2 activity
in live cells. Incubation of HeLa cells
that show a high level of COX-2 expression with the complex gives
intense emission, which is not observed in LO2 cells with minimal
COX-2 expression. The intracellular emission intensity substantially
decreases when the cells are treated with curcumin to inhibit COX-2
expression, indicating that the complex can report COX-2 expression
in cells due to its high specificity toward COX-2.
 
8.13.2.

## Tyrosinase
Tyrosinase is a copper-containing
oxidase that is crucial for melanin biosynthesis. It catalyzes the hydroxylation of l-tyrosine to
3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine and its oxidation
to dopaquinone. However, overproduction and accumulation of melanin
can lead to various hyperpigmentation-related dermatological disorders
such as melasma, lentigines, excessive freckles, and nevi. The overexpression of tyrosinase is an important
biomarker for melanoma. Abnormal expression
levels of tyrosinase are also related to other diseases such as vitiligo
and PD.
Zhang, Yoon, and co-workers have modified a platinum(II)
complex with a 3-hydroxybenzyloxy moiety to
develop a tyrosinase-activatable theranostic agent (537) ( ) for
imaging and PDT of melanoma. This modification
facilitates hydroxylation at the 4-position vacancy by tyrosinase,
which is followed by the removal of the resultant hydroxylation product
via a spontaneous 1,6-rearragement–elimination reaction, resulting
in an increase in the emission intensity and 1O2 generation efficiency of the complex. The complex has been used
to image A375 cells that overexpress tyrosinase, and it induces apoptosis
upon continuous white-light irradiation. Remarkably, it can efficiently
detect early-stage melanoma in A375 tumor-bearing mice and suppress
tumor growth upon irradiation with no obvious side effects.
 
8.13.3.

## Quinone Reductases, Nitroreductases, and
Azoreductases
Hypoxia, a condition characterized by low O2 levels, has been implicated in the development of several
human diseases, including metabolic disorders, chronic kidney diseases,
cardiovascular diseases, and cancer. In solid tumors, the reduced
O2 concentration leads to an increase in reductive stress,
which is accompanied by the upregulation of various reductases such
as quinone reductases, nitroreductases, and azoreductases. Thus, the
overexpression of these enzymes has been recognized as an important
biomarker for cancer diagnosis and
therapy. 
Quinone reductases are
enzymes that catalyze the reduction of quinones to their hydroquinone
derivatives using NAD(P)H as an electron donor. Chao and co-workers
have developed three ruthenium(II) complexes modified with a redox-sensitive
anthraquinone moiety (538) ( ) for hypoxia imaging. These complexes display extremely weak emission due to
efficient quenching through PET. However, upon incubation with reductases
and NADPH under hypoxic conditions, the emission intensities of the
complexes substantially increase, resulting from the enzymatic reduction
of the anthraquinone moiety to a nonquenching dihydroanthraquinone
derivative. Furthermore, the dihydroanthraquinone
complexes can be readily reoxidized back to their anthraquinone counterparts
upon exposure to air, resulting in efficient emission quenching. This
reversible emission response has allowed for two-photon luminescence
imaging of cycling hypoxia in live cells and zebrafish. Related ruthenium(II)
(539) and iridium(III)
complexes (540) have been
developed as theranostic agents that enable the visualization of hypoxic
cancer cells and inhibition of their growth in both 2D monolayer and
3D spheroid cell cultures. Iridium(III) complexes incorporating two
anthraquinone moieties (541) have also been developed
for hypoxia imaging. The high mitochondria
specificity of the complexes has enabled the visualization of hypoxic
mitochondria in live A549 cells and MCTSs as well as in zebrafish
using two-photon microscopy.
 Nitroreductases are flavin-containing enzymes
that catalyze the
reduction of nitroaromatics to their corresponding hydroxylamines
or amines using NAD(P)H as a cofactor. Ma and co-workers have utilized
the iridium(III) 5-nitro-1,10-phenanthroline complex 428 as a phosphorogenic probe for nitroreductase. The emission intensity of the complex increases in the
presence of nitroreductase and NADH due to the reduction of the quenching
nitro unit to a nonquenching amine derivative. The complex has been
used to examine the nitroreductase activity in live HeLa cells, showing
that the enzyme activity substantially increases upon hypoxia induction.
Additionally, the complex has been utilized to monitor hypoxia in
live zebrafish. Suzenet, Brindell, and co-workers have utilized the
ruthenium(II) 2-nitroimidazole complex 20e for cancer
imaging and treatment. The reduction
of the 2-nitroimidazole unit by intracellular nitroreductases results
in the formation of a hydroxylamine derivative. This derivative reacts
with biomolecules inside the cells, leading to increased retention
of the complex in hypoxia cancer cells. Thus, the complex exhibits
higher cytotoxic activity toward hypoxic A549 cells compared to the
normoxic cells. Donnelly and co-workers have developed rhenium(I)
and technetium-99m complexes modified with a nitrobenzyl or nitroimidazole
unit (542–545) ( ) for targeting tumor hypoxia. The luminescent rhenium(I) complexes 542a–545a show substantially higher accumulation
in hypoxic SH-SY5Y cells compared to normoxic cells, highlighting
their potential as hypoxia-selective imaging and therapeutic agents.
The radioactive technetium-99m complex 545b has been
used to visualize hypoxic tumors in mice bearing human renal cell
carcinoma SK-RC-52 tumor xenografts with different volumes (400, 600,
and 1,100 mm3). Among the three mouse models, the complex
displays the most significant accumulation in the tumor with a volume
of 600 mm3.
 Azoreductases are enzymes that catalyze the reductive
cleavage
of azo compounds into their corresponding amines using NAD(P)H as
an electron source. Chao and co-workers have developed a series of
iridium(III) complexes incorporating an azo group as an azoreductase-responsive
unit (546) ( ) for monitoring azoreductase activity in living systems. These complexes are nonluminescent due to
the photoinduced isomerization of the azo group that causes efficient
emission quenching. However, when incubated with reductases and NADPH
under hypoxic conditions, the complexes exhibit a substantial increase
in their emission intensities (I/Io = 11.4 to 58.8) due to the reduction of the azo unit
to a nonquenching amine derivative. No similar increase in emission
intensity is observed upon incubation of the complexes with biothiols.
The complexes have been utilized to image hypoxic HeLa cells ( ). The intense
intracellular emission indicates increased azoreductase activity under
hypoxic conditions (1% O2). However, the enzyme activity
remains low when the cells are pretreated with the flavoprotein inhibitor
diphenyliodonium chloride (DPI) or incubated under normoxic
conditions (21% O2). Furthermore, the complex has been
used to visualize hypoxia in HeLa MCTSs, revealing a hypoxic core
in tumor spheroids. A related iridium(III) azo complex modified with
a thiol-terminated alkyl chain (547) has been conjugated
to gold nanorods (AuNRs) to develop a mitochondria-targeting theranostic
nanoagent for hypoxia imaging and PTT. Enzymatic cleavage of the azo linker separates the complex and AuNRs,
resulting in substantial emission enhancement (I/Io = 80) within 30 s due to inhibited FRET. Additionally,
the nanoagent induces a significant increase in temperature from ca. 25 to 60°C upon NIR-light irradiation (808 nm)
due to the photothermal effect of AuNRs. These properties have enabled
the successful visualization of hypoxic tumor and effective inhibition
of tumor growth in mice bearing A549 tumor xenografts.
 
8.13.4.

## Glutathione S-Transferases
Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are a class
of enzymes with an important function in cellular metabolism and xenobiotic
detoxification by catalyzing the conjugation of GSH to electrophilic
substrates. These enzymes are abundant
in the liver where they are responsible for drug metabolism and elimination.
However, abnormal expression levels of GSTs have been linked to various
liver diseases, neurodegenerative disorders, and cancer. 
Zhang and co-workers have developed
a ruthenium(II) complex appended with a 3,4-DNP moiety (548) ( ) as
an activity-based probe for detecting GST activity in mice with DILI. The complex is very weakly emissive due to
efficient PET quenching. However, treatment of the complex with GST
in the presence of GSH results in substantial emission enhancement,
as GST catalyzes a nucleophilic aromatic substitution reaction whereby
GSH substitutes one of the quenching nitro groups on the 3,4-DNP unit.
This emission response has enabled the sensitive and selective detection
of GST activity in live HepG2 cells. The large TPA cross-sections
of both the complex (δ752nm = 118
GM) and its GSH adduct (δ765nm =
248 GM) have enabled the use of two-photon microscopy to examine GST
activity in mouse liver tissue slices, which shows that mice treated
with brufen, APAP, and diclofenac sodium (SDDL) show substantially
lower GST activity in the liver than untreated mice ( a). The decrease in GST concentration
in liver tissues upon drug treatment is accompanied by an increase
in GST concentration in the sera ( b), corresponding to the release of GSTs
from liver cells into the blood plasma during DILI due to increased
liver cell membrane permeability. Ex vivo luminescence
imaging of the main organs of mice supports that GSTs are abundant
in mammalian livers ( c), and their activity decreases upon DILI ( d). These findings suggest
that monitoring of GST activity in liver tissues is a promising approach
for diagnosing DILI.
 Wang, Leung, and co-workers have conjugated an
iridium(III) complex
with the GST inhibitor ethacrynic acid to afford an affinity-based
probe (549) ( ) for GSTs. This complex
displays a ca. 4-fold increase in emission intensity
upon incubation with GST-pi, the most abundant member of cytosolic
GSTs in mammalian cells that is also overexpressed in a wide range
of cancers. The complex has been used to visualize GST-pi in MDA-MB-231
cells, a triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell line characterized
by elevated GST-pi expression. Remarkably, the complex specifically
resides in the mitochondria of the cells and binds to mitochondrial
GST-pi. Notably, the interaction of the complex with intracellular
GST-pi is independent of the presence of GSH in live cells, which
is different to most existing GST-pi probes that rely on enzyme-catalyzed
nucleophilic substitution reaction and require the presence of GSH
for the reaction to occur. The complex has been utilized to examine
GST-pi expression in four TNBC cell lines (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468,
4T1, and BT549), a non-TNBC breast cancer cell line (MCF-7), and a
normal breast cell line (MCF-10A) ( ). The different emission intensities of
the complex in different breast cell lines correlate with their respective
GST-pi expression levels at both the transcriptional and translational
levels, indicating that the complex can differentiate between various
types of breast cells and tissues based on their GST-pi expression
levels.
 
8.13.5.

## β-Galactosidase
β-Galactosidase
is a glycoside hydrolase that catalyzes the hydrolysis of the glycosidic
bond in β-galactosides. Its overexpression is an important biomarker
for primary ovarian cancer cells and
senescent cells. 
Leung, Ma, and
co-workers have developed an iridium(III) complex bearing a galactose
moiety (550) ( ) for monitoring β-galactosidase activity. The emission intensity of the complex increases
upon enzymatic cleavage of the galactose unit since the binding of
the resultant cleavage product to the enzyme offers protection from
the aqueous surrounding. The complex has been used to examine β-galactosidase
activity in different cell lines and it can differentiate between
ovarian cancer cells (SKOV3 and OVCAR3) and noncancerous cells (HUVEC
and HEK293T) based on different β-galactosidase expression levels
( ).
 
8.13.6.

## Carboxylesterases
Carboxylesterases,
belonging to the serine hydrolase superfamily, catalyze the hydrolysis
of ester, thioester, carbamate, and amide bonds in substrates. They play a crucial role in maintaining lipid
balance and metabolizing xenobiotics. The two major isoforms expressed
in human tissues are human carboxylesterase 1 (hCE1) and human carboxylesterase
2 (hCE2), which exhibit different tissue distribution and substrate
specificity. Abnormal levels of hCE1 and hCE2 have been linked to
various metabolic disorders such as hyperlipidemia, obesity, nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis, diabetes, atherosclerosis, and cancer.
Yam
and co-workers have designed a ruthenium(II) complex functionalized
with a coumarin 343 derivative (551) ( ) for sensing esterases. The complex shows both coumarin fluorescence
(λem = 485 nm) and ruthenium(II)
phosphorescence (λem = 620 nm) in
aqueous solution. Cleavage of the ester linkage by esterases separates
the two luminescent moieties, suppressing FRET and thereby leading
to a substantial increase in the intensity of coumarin fluorescence.
The complex is readily taken up by HepG2 cells and reacts with intracellular
esterases, resulting in a change in the emission color from blue to
red. Qiao, Zhang, and co-workers have developed an iridium(III) complex
(552) for specific detection and imaging of hCE2 in live
cells. Upon cleavage of the ester bond
by hCE2, the emission lifetime of the complex increases from 338 to
625 ns due to a reduction in nonradiative decay pathways associated
with intramolecular vibrational relaxation. However, when the complex
is incubated with other enzymes such as hCE1, acetylcholinesterase,
and butyrylcholinesterase, there are only
minor changes in the emission lifetime. Monitoring hCE2 activity in
live HepG2 cells using PLIM shows that hCE2 activity decreases when
the cells are treated with the hCE inhibitor bis(p-nitrophenyl)phosphate (BNPP) ( ).
 
8.13.7.

## Caspases
Caspases are a family
of aspartate-specific cysteine proteases that hydrolyze peptide bonds
at the C-terminus of aspartic acid residues in substrates, with the
reaction requiring the catalytic Cys residue in the active site. They
play a critical role in regulating cell death and inflammation. They also contribute to cell differentiation,
cell proliferation, tissue regeneration, tumorigenesis, aging, and
neural development.
Lee, Lo, and co-workers have developed a
phosphorogenic probe (553) ( ) for caspase-3/7, which are key executors
in apoptosis. The probe is comprised
of the emission quencher QSY-7 and a rhenium(I) complex conjugated
to the N-terminus and the π-clamp sequence, respectively, of
a caspase-3/7-cleavable peptide DEVDFCPF. The probe is weakly emissive
in aqueous solution due to FRET; however, the specific cleavage of
the DEVD sequence by caspase-3/7 separates the quencher from the rhenium(I)
unit, resulting in a remarkable increase in the emission intensity.
It has been used to examine caspase-3/7 activity in esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma KYSE-510 cells, demonstrating that the enzyme activity
increases when the cells are treated with cisplatin to induce apoptosis
( ).
 
8.13.8.

## Matrix Metalloproteinases
Matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a group of zinc-dependent endopeptidases
responsible for the turnover and degradation of the extracellular
matrix. They play an important role in the regulation of tissue remodeling
to maintain tissue homeostasis. However,
MMPs are overexpressed in many types of cancer and implicated in tumor
progression, invasion, metastasis, and angiogenesis. 
van Leeuwen and co-workers have developed
a luminogenic probe (554) ( ) for MMP-2/9, which is overexpressed in
breast cancer tissues and plays a key role in lymph node metastasis. The probe is comprised of [Ir(ppy)3] and a Cy5 derivative conjugated to the two ends of an MMP-2/9-cleavable
peptide eeeeeGPLGLArrrrrrrrk. The Glu and Arg residues in the peptide
sequence facilitate a hairpin conformation that brings the two luminescent
moieties into close proximity, allowing efficient quenching of the
iridium(III) phosphorescence and the Cy5 fluorescence by FRET and
heavy atom effect, respectively. The use of d-amino acids,
except for the cleavage sequence, prevents nonspecific cleavage by
other proteases. Cleavage of the peptide conjugate by MMP-2/9 separates
the two luminescent moieties, resulting in an increase in the intensity
of both iridium(III) and Cy5 emission, as well as an increase in the
lifetime of iridium(III) phosphorescence from 30 to 94 ns. The conjugate
has been used to examine MMP-2/9 activity in SKOV3 cells that overexpress
MMP-2/9. The observation of both iridium(III) and Cy5 emission in
SKOV3 cells confirms the successful cleavage of the conjugate by MMP-2/9.
 
8.13.9.

## Carbonic Anhydrases
Carbonic anhydrases
(CAs) are metalloenzymes that catalyze the reversible hydration of
carbon dioxide to bicarbonate and proton, which is crucial in regulating
intra- and extracellular pH and ion transport. Among the various active isoforms expressed in human tissues,
the membrane-associated isoforms CA-IX and CA-XII are overexpressed
in cancer cells in response to hypoxia to counteract acidosis through
regulating intracellular pH for promoting cell survival and growth. 
Delsuc, Policar, and co-workers have
modified a rhenium(I) complex with the CA inhibitor benzenesulfonamide
via an N-acyl imidazole linker to afford a SCoMPI
probe (555) ( ) for CA detection. This
design allows for the traceless labeling of endogenous CAs through
ligand-directed acyl imidazole chemistry, where the binding of the
benzenesulfonamide unit to the specific enzymes facilitates acyl transfer
to a nucleophilic amino acid in the vicinity on the enzyme surface,
resulting in the covalent attachment of the complex to the enzyme.
The complex has been used to label endogenous CAs in A549 cells. As
revealed by SXRF microspectroscopy, the rhenium signal derived from
the SCoMPI is concentrated in the cell nucleus, which disappears when
the cells are treated with the competitive CA inhibitor ethoxyzolamide,
indicative of specific labeling of intracellular CAs. Yang, Gao, and
co-workers have developed NIR luminescent platinum(II) complexes modified
with a benzenesulfonamide unit (556) as theranostic agents. Live-cell imaging demonstrates that the intracellular
localization of complex 556b varies with the cell lines
used. In particular, the complex gradually translocates from the cytoplasm
to the nucleus in HeLa cells after uptake, while it is predominantly
enriched in the lysosomes of MDA-MB-231 cells. Notably, the complex
displays higher cytotoxicity toward cancer cells (HeLa, A549, and
MDA-MB-231) (IC50 = 3.37 to 5.72 μM) compared to
normal cells (HLF and LO2 cells) (IC50 = 9.21 and 61.37
μM, respectively).
 

9.

## Luminescent Transition Metal Complexes as Probes
for Microenvironment
The intracellular microenvironment is
governed by various factors,
including O2 levels, pH, polarity, viscosity, and temperature.
These factors play a crucial role in controlling the physical and
chemical behaviors of cellular components such as their diffusion,
transportation, and intermolecular interactions. Disturbances in these
factors can lead to cellular dysfunction and are closely linked to
the development of severe diseases. Thus, the development of luminescent
probes capable of providing insights into the pathophysiological microenvironments
holds great potential for aiding in the diagnosis and treatment of
clinical diseases. , 
9.1.

## Oxygen
The intracellular O2 level is a key indicator of cellular metabolism and health status.
Inadequate O2 supply can lead to hypoxia, which is a characteristic
feature of many diseases including solid tumors. Conversely, excessive inhalation of O2 can result
in hyperoxia, which generates an excessive amount of ROS. The accumulation of ROS can cause oxidative
damage to cells, tissues, and organs, leading to their dysfunction.
Phosphorescent transition metal complexes are promising candidates
for monitoring O2 levels in a nondestructive, real-time,
and reversible manner. The emission
intensities and lifetimes of these complexes are highly sensitive
to the O2 levels of their local surroundings, allowing
for accurate and precise measurement of O2 levels in living
systems. This particular feature is challenging to achieve with organic
fluorophores.
9.1.1.

## Palladium(II) and Platinum(II) Porphyrins
Phosphorescent palladium(II) and platinum(II) porphyrins represent
an important class of O2 sensors due to their intense and
long-lived red to NIR emission. Their long emission lifetimes (in
the range of 10–1000 μs) have allowed for the use of
various lifetime-based imaging techniques to examine changes in O2 levels in vitro and in vivo. For example, Becker and co-workers have developed a lifetime imaging
approach that combines FLIM and PLIM for simultaneous detection of
both fluorescence and phosphorescence lifetime changes in cells. Monitoring of the fluorescence of NAD(P)H
and the phosphorescence of PdTCPP (H2TCPP = meso-tetra(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin) (557) ( ) in HEK293 cells
indicates a decrease in the fluorescence lifetime upon hypoxia induction
due to reduced oxidative phosphorylation. Savitsky and co-workers
have utilized the time-correlated single photon counting method to
measure the dynamics of tissue oxygenation in vivo. Monitoring of the emission lifetime
of a palladium(II) porphyrin (558) in live mice bearing
sarcoma S37 tumors indicates that the O2 level in tumors
is lower compared to normal tissues, and the intratumoral O2 level decreases upon PDT due to O2 consumption during
the treatment.
 However, most of the metalloporphyrins typically
suffer from poor
aqueous solubility due to their hydrophobic nature, limiting their
applications in biological systems. Wilson and co-workers have incorporated
PdTPP and PdTPTBP into a poly(l-glutamic acid) dendrimer
to afford two water-soluble O2 probes, Oxyphor R2 (559a) and G2 (559b) ( ), which have
been used to examine the O2 profiles in different murine
tumor models. , Related dendritic probes featuring
a higher generation of dendritic skeleton with surface coating with
PEG (560 and 561) have also been developed. − The dendrimer encapsulation allows a high degree of control of O2 diffusion and interaction with the triplet excited states
of the complexes, while the peripheral PEGylation imparts high aqueous
solubility and minimizes interactions with albumin and other biomolecules.
These dendritic complexes have been used to measure the O2 distribution in various areas of live mice, including the interstitial
space of normal skeletal muscle, the
cortical vasculature, and tumors. Kamachi and co-workers have examined the O2 sensitivity and biomolecular interactions of a series of
dendritic platinum(II) porphyrins, which consist of PtTPP as the core,
poly(l-lysine) as the dendrons, and various amino acids as
the surface functional groups. The
dendritic skeleton plays an important role in suppressing the nonspecific
interactions between the complex and biomolecules, facilitating their
accumulation in cells for intracellular O2 sensing.
 Pogue and co-workers have introduced a new in vivo O2 imaging approach termed Cherenkov-excited
luminescence
imaging (CELI) that utilizes X-ray radiation to generate Cherenkov
radiation in tissues to excite the administrated O2 probe. − In CELI, the platinum(II) derivative of the dendritic probe 561b is used as its long emission lifetime (τo = 47 μs) is amendable to the time-gated techniques
used to record the Cherenkov radiation-induced luminescence. The CELI approach has allowed for in vivo mapping of tumor O2 distribution with
spatial resolution close to 0.1 mm at tissue depths of several millimeters
even with nanomolar concentrations of the probe. The high spatial resolution is crucial to accurate quantification
of the hypoxic fraction in tumors. Since
this imaging technique enables the evaluation of spatial O2 distribution in tumors at the time of the radiation dose delivery,
it offers a noninvasive method to track the response of tumors to
fractionated radiotherapy. The probe
can also be loaded into an agarose matrix to afford an implantable
O2 sensor for local CELI of intratumoral O2 during
the course of radiotherapy. 
Considering
that palladium(II) and platinum(II) porphyrins typically
possess small TPA cross-sections, Vinogradov and co-workers have modified
a dendritic platinum(II) porphyrin with multiple coumarin 343 moieties
as a two-photon light-harvesting antenna for sensitizing PtTPP phosphorescence
under two-photon excitation through FRET. The resultant probe (562) ( ) is compatible with TP-PLIM, which allows
noninvasive high-resolution imaging of O2 gradients in vivo. Remarkably, the probe has enabled the direct measurement
of local O2 concentration in the bone marrow of live mice,
revealing a unique hypoxic environment mediated by its dense vascularity
and high cellularity. The balance between
O2 supply and consumption can be altered by stress such
as radiation and chemotherapy. The imaging approach has also been
applied to measure the O2 levels in mouse cerebral vasculature
and tissues, − offering exciting opportunities to examine brain metabolism. A related
probe (563) with improved performance including increased
FRET efficiency, emission quantum yield, and signal dynamic range
has been developed using platinum(II) tetracyclohexenoporphyrin as
the core and coumarin 307 moieties as the antenna. The probe has been utilized with TP-PLIM to measure the
intravascular O2 level in the bone marrow of live mice.
Weber, Vinogradov, and co-workers have also designed an antenna-free,
two-photon-active O2 probe Oxyphor 2P (564) with a larger TPA cross-section (δ960nm = ca. 650 GM), longer emission wavelength (λem = 758 nm), and higher brightness, enabling
O2 imaging at higher speeds and deeper depths. This complex has been used to monitor O2 levels in the cortex of awake mice using TP-PLIM. − 
 Although these metalloporphyrins are useful for
examining O2 concentration in blood as their large molecular
sizes prevent
them from sequestering into surrounding cells or tissues, their poor
cellular uptake hinders their applications in determining intracellular
O2 levels. Papkovsky and co-workers have conjugated platinum(II)
coproporphyrin I derivatives with CPPs to afford cell-permeable probes
for intracellular O2 sensing. Among the various CPP conjugates, the nonaarginine conjugate (565a) ( ) displays the most efficient cellular uptake. The conjugate
has been used to examine the intracellular O2 levels in
various cell lines. A related conjugate bearing a bactenecin 7 peptide
fragment (565b) has also been developed and utilized
for the measurement of intracellular O2 levels, revealing
significant cell deoxygenation in response to mitochondrial uncoupling
and external hypoxia. Studies on a
series of oligoarginine conjugates of platinum(II) coproporphyrin
I shows that the tetrasubstituted conjugate (566a) exhibits
uniform distribution across the cell including the nucleus, enabling
efficient measurement of cell oxygenation and metabolic response. Its palladium(II) counterpart (566b), which shows a longer emission lifetime and higher O2 sensitivity, has also been prepared and used for monitoring changes
in intracellular O2 levels under hypoxia. Papkovsky and
co-workers have also modified PtTPFPP with glucose moieties to yield
a water-soluble and cell-permeable O2 probe (567) for the detection of O2 distribution in live neurospheres
and brain tissue slices. Heterosubstituted
bifunctional probes (568) which contain one glucose unit
for cell targeting and three polar cysteamine or PEG moieties for
forming a hydrophilic shell with variable formal charges have also
been prepared. Structure–property
relationship analysis shows that the positive charge of cysteamine
can enhance the membrane penetration of the complexes for intracellular
O2 sensing, while PEGylation prevents the complexes from
entering the cells due to the negative charges and large molecular
size, facilitating extracellular O2 sensing.
 The encapsulation of palladium(II) and platinum(II)
porphyrins
into NPs has proven to be an effective means to prepare optical O2 nanosensors. Li and co-workers have designed an O2 nanoprobe by encapsulating PdTPTBP into phospholipid micelles. The substantial changes in the emission lifetime
of the nanoprobe in response to O2 levels allow for quantitative
mapping of O2 distribution in vivo via
wide-field phosphorescence lifetime imaging, which offers a faster
imaging rate than traditional PLIM. This imaging approach has been
used for real-time quantification of changes in O2 concentration
in the livers of mice afflicted with hepatic I/R injury and mice bearing
orthotopic liver tumors. Papkovsky and co-workers have formulated
PtTPFPP into a cationic polymer to afford cell-penetrating PNPs for
intracellular O2 sensing. , The PNPs
have been used for monitoring metabolic response of cells under ambient
and hypoxic microenvironment. Further introduction of an O2-insensitive fluorophore polydioctylfluorene (PFO) as both an energy
donor and a two-photon light-harvesting antenna for PtTPFPP affords
a new nanosensor for ratiometric and lifetime imaging of intracellular
O2 levels under one and two-photon excitation. The nanosensor has been used for time-lapse
imaging of intracellular O2 levels at the single-cell level
in response to hypoxia, metabolic inhibition, and mitochondrial cytochrome-c release. Related nanoprobes
developed using an anionic polymer have been used for sensing O2 levels in neural cells and tissues, uncovering heterogeneous
O2 distribution in embryonic brain tissues that correlates
with the localization of specific progenitor cell populations. Papkovsky and co-workers have utilized platinum(II) meso-tetra(4-fluorophenyl)tetrabenzoporphyrin (569) ( ), which
can be excited at a longer wavelength compared to PtTPFPP, to develop
a cell-penetrating nanoprobe for in vivo imaging
of O2 in the mouse brain following peripheral sensory stimulation,
showing that sensory stimulation leads to changes in oxygenation of
activated areas of the barrel cortex. 
 The O2-insensitive fluorescence of
polyfluorene derivatives
renders them ideal candidates for integration with phosphorescent
palladium(II) and platinum(II) porphyrins to develop ratiometric O2 sensors. McNeill and co-workers have doped PtOEP into polyfluorene-based
Pdots for O2 sensing. The
resulting Pdots display efficient cellular uptake in live J774A.1
cells, suggesting their potential applications in imaging intracellular
O2 concentration. Rao and co-workers have developed an
O2 nanoprobe, composed of PdTPTBP and a semiconducting
polymer poly[2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)-alt-4,7-bis(thiophen-2-yl)benzo-2,1,3-thiadiazole]
(PFO-DBT), for quantitative, longitudinal imaging of tumor hypoxia
dynamics during radiotherapy. Upon
red-light irradiation (λex = 630
nm), the nanoprobe exhibits both PFO-DBT fluorescence (λem = 685 nm) and PdTPTBP phosphorescence (λem = 795 nm), allowing ratiometric O2 imaging
in the NIR region. The nanoprobe shows efficient tumor accumulation in vivo and effective penetration into the tumor including
the hypoxic region, enabling quantitative mapping of hypoxia across
the tumor. Monitoring tumor hypoxia dynamics over 7 days during fractionated
radiotherapy reveals that a high fractional dose (10 Gy) is more effective
in improving tumor reoxygenation than a low dose (2 Gy), and the effect
tends to persist longer in smaller or more radiosensitive tumors.
Chen and co-workers have developed functionalized Pdots that enable
simultaneous imaging of intracellular O2 levels and pH
through the coassembly of PtTPFPP and PFO with fluorescein-modified
polystyrene using a nanoprecipitation method. The resultant Pdots display triple emission upon single-wavelength
excitation, enabling the ratiometric sensing of O2 and
pH in live cells.
Wu and co-workers have incorporated PtTPFPP
into the PFO backbone
to afford a dual-emissive polymer (570) ( ), which forms compact Pdots
upon nanoprecipitation with poly(styrene-co-maleic
anhydride). These Pdots are highly
sensitive to O2 levels at the single-particle level, enabling
the imaging of hypoxia–normoxia cycles in live MCF-7 cells
and tumor hypoxia in live mice bearing MCF-7 tumor xenografts. Zhao,
Li, Huang, and co-workers have incorporated PtTPP into the backbone
of a fluorene-based CPE, which yields an amphiphilic dual-emissive
CPE (571) that self-assembles into ultrasmall Pdots (size
= ca. 5 nm) in aqueous solution. These Pdots have been used for ratiometric and lifetime
imaging of intracellular O2 levels in live HepG2 cells
and tumor-bearing mice. Dmitriev, Borisov, and co-workers have also
developed conjugated polymer nanoparticles (CPNs) using dual-emissive
CPEs (572) for high-resolution imaging of O2in vitro and in vivo. The CPNs formed are of different cationic,
anionic, or zwitterionic structures, and all of them exhibit efficient
staining in a broad range of 2D and 3D cell and tissue models. Notably,
the zwitterionic CPNs exhibit efficient intracellular staining and
deep penetration across multiple cell layers in 3D models of HCT116
and PC-12 cells. Furthermore, Zhao, Huang, and co-workers have developed
branched CPEs (573 and 574) for tumor hypoxia
imaging and PDT. , The branched structures of
the CPEs can reduce their aggregation, which in turns enhances their
O2 sensitivity and 1O2 generation
efficiency. These features have enabled efficient tumor detection in vivo and almost complete tumor ablation upon irradiation.
 Guo, Zhu, and co-workers have incorporated PtTPP
into a PVP backbone,
which gives an unprecedented monochromophoric ratiometric probe (575) ( ) for hypoxia imaging. The amphiphilic
polymer self-assembles to form micelle-like NPs with an average diameter
of 118 nm in aqueous solution. In addition to the characteristic long-lived
phosphorescence (λem = 760 nm, τo = ca. 40 μs)
from the PtTPP unit, the polymeric probe shows a short-lived fluorescence
band at 660 nm (τo = ca. 7 ns) originating from the assembled clusters of the PVP chain.
The probe specifically accumulates in the tumor region of tumor-bearing
mice due to the EPR effect, enabling the visualization of the hypoxic
tumor tissues with high spatiotemporal resolution. Ye, Fan, Wong,
and co-workers have developed an NIR-II luminescent platinum(II) porphyrin
(576) for imaging tumor hypoxia. The complex displays intense emission at > 1,000 nm
in
the solid state due to the formation of J-aggregates. Encapsulation
of the complex into Pluronic F127 induces J-aggregation within the
resulting PNPs, giving rise to O2-sensitive NIR-II phosphorescence
with a long emission lifetime of 35.33 μs when excited at 500
nm. However, upon excitation at 808 nm, the PNPs exhibit O2-insensitive NIR-II fluorescence with a short lifetime of 2.89 ns,
arising from the J-aggregates of the ligand. The PNPs have been used
for imaging hypoxia in live 4T1 cells and tumor-bearing mice. Monitoring
of both NIR-II fluorescence and phosphorescence using different excitation
wavelengths shows that the PNPs are preferentially enriched in the
tumor and liver tissues in vivo, with the NIR-II
phosphorescence signal mainly observed in the tumor tissues.
 Chen and co-workers have designed water-dispersible
supramolecular
polymer nanoparticles (SPNPs) for ratiometric O2 sensing
in live cells. The SPNPs are prepared
from the coassembly of three ureidopyrimidinone-based
quadruple hydrogen-bonded supramolecular polymers, which contain a
palladium(II) porphyrin (577) ( ) as a phosphorescent O2 indicator,
a difluoroboron diketonate derivative as a fluorescent reference dye
(BF2-bis-UPy), and a 9,10-diphenyl
anthracene derivative (DPA-bis-UPy)
as a skeleton scaffold. Related SPNPs comprising a ureidopyrimidinone-modified
platinum(II) porphyrin (578) as the energy acceptor and
the ureidopyrimidinone-modified 9,10-diphenyl
anthracene derivative DPA-bis-UPy as
the energy donor have been developed for ratiometric hypoxia imaging
and PDT. The efficient energy transfer
between the two dyes in the SPNPs leads to emission enhancement and
lifetime extension, facilitating O2 detection and 1O2 photosensitization. Fukumura, Bawendi, Jain,
Duda, Nocera, and co-workers have utilized lipid micelles to encapsulate
the supramolecular assemblies of a palladium(II) porphyrin (579) with quantum dots (Qdots) for the quantification of O2 levels in vivo. Since Qdots possess a large TPA cross-section, two-photon excitation
of the Qdots results in efficient FRET to the palladium(II) porphyrin
bound to the surface of Qdots, enabling ratiometric O2 sensing.
The micelle-encapsulated supramolecular assemblies have been used
for multiphoton imaging and lifetime-based O2 measurements
in mice with chronic dorsal skinfold chambers or cranial windows.
 Kopelman and co-workers have developed luminescent
PNPs as O2 nanosensors for intracellular O2 measurements. The nanosensors are prepared by the incorporation
of Oxyphor G2 and a fluorescent dye into polyacrylamide hydrogel NPs,
followed by surface modification with CPPs (Tat) or tumor-specific
peptides (F3). The resulting nanosensors have enabled real-time monitoring
of O2 levels in live cancer cells under normoxic and hypoxic
conditions. Alves, Resch-Genger, Schäferling, and co-workers
have developed tumor-targeting polystyrene NPs for imaging tumor hypoxia in vivo. The polystyrene
NPs are doped with PdTPTBP and an O2-insensitive cyanine
dye, with the NP surface coated with PEG and functionalized with the
human epidermal growth receptor 2 (HER2)-targeting monoclonal antibody
trastuzumab. This design enables the NPs to show selective accumulation
in cancer cells overexpressing HER2, facilitating ratiometric imaging
of tumor hypoxia in live mice bearing human pancreatic adenocarcinoma
AsPC-1 tumor xenografts. Peng, Teng, and co-workers have utilized
PNPs doped with PtTPFPP to develop three different kinds of phosphorescent
O2 nanosensors that specifically detect extracellular,
intracellular, and mitochondrial O2 levels. Monitoring of the mitochondrial O2 levels in HepG2 and LO2 cells reveals that the mitochondria in cancer
cells display reduced activity compared to normal cells due to their
altered glucose metabolism and physical defects in the respiratory
chain. Related mitochondria-targeting NPs have been developed as theranostic
agents for both O2 sensing and PDT. Zhao, Huang, and co-workers have developed a core–shell
structured silica-based nanoprobe for ratiometric and lifetime imaging
of O2 levels. The red luminescent
platinum(II) porphyrin (580) ( ) is physically entrapped in the porous
shell to increase its interaction with O2, whereas the
blue luminescent iridium(III) complex 184a is covalently
immobilized in the solid core to protect it from O2 quenching.
This design enables sensitive detection and quantitative measurement
of intracellular O2 levels. Additionally, the long emission
lifetime of the nanoprobe allows the use of time-resolved techniques
to improve the signal-to-noise ratio.
 Wang, Wolfbeis, and co-workers have designed
a dual-emissive nanosensor
for imaging intracellular O2 levels and pH. This nanosensor features a core–shell
structure, where the O2-sensitive probe PtTPTBP and the
reference dye H2TPFPP are encapsulated in the hydrophobic
core, while the pH-sensitive probe fluorescein is covalently attached
to the PEG end-group on the shell. The nanosensor exhibits excellent
stability in aqueous solution and shows rapid response toward both
O2 and pH in the physiological range. Tian and co-workers
have developed core–shell structured PNPs as a ratiometric
sensor for simultaneous monitoring of intracellular O2 and
glucose concentration. A PtTPP derivative
(581) and a rhodamine B derivative (Rh-MA) ( ) are
incorporated into the hydrophobic core using a microemulsion polymerization
approach, while the glucose sensor (AnBA-NHS) is grafted
onto the hydrophilic shell. The nanosensors are distributed in the
cell cytoplasm, enabling effective intracellular O2 and
glucose measurements even at the single-cell level. Xie and co-workers
have utilized poly(dimethylsiloxane) as a host material for PdTPFPP
and a Cl– sensor to produce a dual functional nanoprobe
capable of simultaneous monitoring of O2 and Cl–. Upon cellular internalization, the
probe specifically localizes in the lysosomes of live HeLa cells.
Measurement of the intracellular emission intensity reveals an average
Cl– concentration of ca. 85.7 mM
in the lysosomes, and the Cl– level decreases upon
O2 and glucose deprivation. Wang and co-workers have designed
a biodegradable nanosensor that displays excellent response to O2 levels, pH, and temperature in the physiological range. The nanosensor is constructed using BSA as
a scaffold for the covalent immobilization of four different luminophores,
including PtTCPP as an O2 probe, fluorescein as a pH indicator,
a europium(III) complex as a temperature sensor, and rhodamine B as
a reference dye. The nanosensor has been used for real-time imaging
of intracellular O2 levels, pH, and temperature in live
HeLa cells.
 Babilas and co-workers have immobilized PtOEP
in a polystyrene
matrix to afford a transparent planar sensor for imaging O2 distribution in the tumor and normal tissues based on a dorsal skinfold
chamber model of live mice with amelanotic melanoma. This method has enabled the mapping of surface
O2 distribution with high temporal (ca. 100 ms) and spatial resolution (> 25 μm). Furthermore,
the
transparent sensor has allowed the simultaneous visualization of the
underlying microvasculature and the corresponding O2 levels.
Liu, Austin, Qu, and co-workers have utilized poly(perfluoroether)
as a gas-permeable polymer matrix for loading PtTPFPP to fabricate
a lifetime-based O2 sensor film. The sensor has been used for real-time monitoring of O2 levels in microfluidic or conventional in vitro cell culture. Ingram and co-workers have embedded a PtOEP derivative
(582) ( ) and nanocrystal Qdots into an inert polymer matrix to develop
a biocompatible nanosensor that enables real-time and quantitative
measurements of extracellular O2 levels in living tissues. The sensor has been used to measure the interstitial
O2 concentration in various microdomains of active brain
tissues with temporal resolution of several hundred milliseconds .
 Zhang and co-workers have utilized PtTCPP and
Zr6 cluster
as the building blocks to construct O2-responsive NMOFs. Functionalization of the NMOFs with a cancer
cell membrane endows them with homotypic targeting and immune escape
abilities. This modification has enabled real-time monitoring of O2 fluctuation in cancer cells, offering opportunities for cancer
treatment evaluation. Lin and co-workers have developed a dual-emissive
NMOF for ratiometric O2 sensing in live cells. The NMOF is constructed using platinum(II)
5,15-di(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin (583) and quaterphenyldicarboxylic
acid (H2QPDC-NH2) ( ) as the bridging units for
Hf4+, followed by modification with rhodamine B isothiocyanate.
The NMOF exhibits excellent ratiometric emission response toward O2 and efficient cellular uptake, allowing quantitative measurement
of O2 in live CT26 cells with ratiometric readouts. Wang,
Yu, Huang, Stang, and co-workers have designed a dual-emissive platinum(II)
metallacage using PtTCPP, 9,10-di(pyridin-4-yl)-anthracene,
and cis-(PEt3)2Pt(OTf)2 as the building blocks. The
metallacage has been encapsulated into PNPs to improve its circulation
time and tumor accumulation. The resultant PNPs can not only sensitively
detect tumor hypoxia in vivo but also effectively
inhibit the tumor growth, highlighting its potential as a cancer theranostic.
 
9.1.2.

## Ruthenium(II) Complexes
Phosphorescent
ruthenium(II) complexes such as [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and [Ru(phen)3]2+ have been established as
promising candidates for O2 measurements in live cells − and tissues. − These complexes show negligible interaction
with serum albumin, which allows reliable measurement of O2 levels in the blood stream, in the intra- and extracellular space,
and in live cells. Kalinina, Rück,
and co-workers have demonstrated the simultaneous imaging of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ with PLIM and NAD(P)H with FLIM in cells under
different hypoxic conditions, which provides valuable information
about the correlation of intracellular O2 tension and cell
metabolism. This correlated FLIM–PLIM
imaging approach has also been used to monitor the cellular response
upon PDT treatment with TLD1433. , Hille and
co-workers have utilized the FLIM–PLIM technique to monitor
changes in the emission lifetimes of oxidized flavin adenine dinucleotide
and a ruthenium(II) complex (584) ( ) in insect salivary glands
to characterize the metabolic state, showing that dopamine stimulation
increases the cellular metabolic activities and thus pericellular
O2 consumption. Compared
to palladium(II) and platinum(II) porphyrins, ruthenium(II) complexes
display significantly lower photocytotoxicity. The low photocytotoxic activity of [Ru(phen)3]2+ toward endothelial cells has been ascribed to the
fact that the complex is internalized into the cells via endocytosis
and then redistributed toward the peroxisomes and other endosomal
and secretory vesicles before elimination via exocytosis. 
 Various strategies have been adopted to improve
the photophysical
and biological behavior of ruthenium(II) complexes for O2 sensing. Modification of [Ru(bpy)2(phen)]2+ with Hoechst 33258 and an MPP sequence (FrFKFrFK) has afforded O2 probes 585( ) and 586( ) ( ) that specifically target the nucleus
and the mitochondria of cells, respectively, for monitoring variations
in the O2 levels in these organelles in response to stimulation
with mitochondrial uncouplers and inhibitors. Rosenzweig and co-workers
have utilized a ruthenium(II) complex bearing a pyrene pendant (587) for intracellular O2 measurements. The incorporation of a pyrene unit not only
enhances the O2 sensitivity of the complex by prolonging
its triplet excited-state lifetime but also increases the cellular
uptake efficiency of the complex due to its high hydrophobicity. Thus,
the complex is cell permeable and has been used to examine changes
in intracellular O2 levels in live J774 cells in response
to hypoxia induced by glucose oxidase. Tanabe and co-workers have
also developed pyrene-appended ruthenium(II) complexes (588) for imaging hypoxia in live cells. , One of these
complexes has been utilized to visualize ischemia-induced hypoxia
in live mice. Furthermore, Tanabe and
co-workers have developed a ruthenium(II) complex modified with a
hypoxia-sensitive 2-nitroimidazole moiety (589) for examining
the O2 status in tumor tissues. The increased accumulation of the complex in hypoxic cells has facilitated
the real-time monitoring of the fluctuations in O2 levels
in hypoxic cancer cells and tumor tissues. A maleimide-functionalized
ruthenium(II) complex (590) has been incorporated into
an oligodeoxynucleotide modified with pyrene and nitroimidazole units
for imaging O2 levels in tumor tissues. The resulting conjugates form aggregates exhibiting enhanced
cellular uptake and accumulation in a hypoxia-selective manner, facilitating
the imaging of O2 fluctuation in tumor tissues.
 Lloyd and co-workers have embedded [Ru(bpds)3]4– (bpds = bathophenanthroline
disulfonate)
in polyacrylamide-coated NPs for biological imaging of intracellular
O2 tension. − Wolfbeis and co-workers have
encapsulated [Ru(Ph2-phen)3]2+ into
polystyrene NPs for two-photon luminescence imaging of O2 levels in live MCF-7 cells and tissues. This complex has also been doped into nonporous solid SiNPs. The nonporous silica matrix of the NPs has
good O2 permeability, while the surface of the NPs can
been functionalized with a morpholine or TPP+ unit for
targeting the lysosomes and mitochondria, respectively. The resultant
NPs show uniform performance in different cell lines, including cancerous
HeLa and MCF-7 cells and normal MCF-10A cells. The mitochondria-targeting
nanoprobe has also been utilized to monitor intracellular O2 concentration over time using PLIM. Kondo, Tanabe, and co-workers
have functionalized MSNs with complex 590 for monitoring
O2 levels in live cells and in vivo. , The covalent immobilization of the ruthenium(II) complex in the
pore of MSNs attenuates the dark cytotoxicity of the complex by reducing
its interaction with intracellular biomolecules as well as its photocytotoxic
activity by deactivating the photogenerated 1O2 back to O2 before leaking out from the pores. Dutta and
co-workers have incorporated [Ru(bpy)3]2+ into
siliceous zeolite for sensing O2 in macrophage cells. It shows that the intracellular O2 concentration decreases upon stimulation with zymosan to induce
oxidative burst.
Tanabe and co-workers have developed a dual-emissive
ruthenium(II)
complex (591) ( ), where [Ru(bpy)2(phen)]2+ is
conjugated with an O2-insensitive fluorescent coumarin
unit via an alkyl linker. The alkyl
linker plays an important role in increasing the cellular uptake of
the complex for ratiometric sensing of O2 levels in live
cells. The ratiometric response has allowed the visualization of oxygenation
and deoxygenation inside cells induced by valinomycin and antimycin
A, respectively. Keyes and co-workers have developed a bichromophoric
ruthenium(II)–BODIPY complex (592) that displays
solvent-switchable emission. Both ruthenium(II)
phosphorescence and BODIPY fluorescence are observed from the complex
in organic solvents; however, the BODIPY fluorescence is switched
off in aqueous media, indicating that the complex is useful for ratiometric
O2 sensing in nonaqueous environments such as lipid membranes.
As revealed by LSCM, the complex is readily taken up by CHO cells
and enriched in the cytoplasm and nucleoli.
 Kopelman and co-workers have immobilized [Ru(Ph2-phen)3]2+ and an O2-insensitive
fluorophore
Oregon Green 488–dextran into a sol–gel matrix to prepare
an optical nanosensor for ratiometric O2 imaging in live
rat glioma C6 cells. The entrapment
of the luminophores in the inert matrix can protect them from nonspecific
interactions with proteins inside cells and minimize their cytotoxicity,
enabling reliable measurement of intracellular O2 levels.
Choi, Stroock, and co-workers have incorporated a ruthenium(II) complex
(593) ( ) and coumarin 540 into PNPs for quantitative measurements
of O2 concentration in 3D microfluidic tumor models and
in mouse vasculature. A ruthenium(II)
complex (594) and a BODIPY derivative (BODIPY-NaPy) have been coencapsulated into the core of poly(l-lysine)-coated
polystyrene NPs to protect them from external environment effects. Both luminophores can be directly excited
at a single wavelength for ratiometric O2 measurement without
the requirement for FRET. The PNPs are internalized into cancer cells
such as HeLa and A549 cells via an energy-dependent pathway but impermeable
to normal CHO cells. Remarkably, the PNPs remain intact in the intracellular
environment with no sign of probe leakage, facilitating the ratiometric
detection of late-endosomal O2 levels. Heise, Keyes, and
co-workers have developed a core–shell structured PNPs using
a ruthenium(II)-containing block copolymer (595) that
acts as an emulsifier in the miniemulsion polymerization of BODIPY-loaded
styrene NPs. The spatial separation
of the ruthenium(II) complex and BODIPY into the poly(l-lysine)
shell and polystyrene core of the NPs, respectively, ensures a stable
reference signal unaffected by the external environment. The PNPs
adhere to the plasma membrane of live CHO cells, and their uptake
increases when the cells are treated with a cationic surfactant, resulting
in their localization in the lysosomes. Peng and co-workers have developed
an O2 nanosensor based on a ruthenium(II)-containing metallopolymer
(596a) for real-time monitoring of intracellular oxygenation
and deoxygenation. The metallopolymer
is doped into PNPs using a reprecipitation method, followed by surface
modification with TPP+ moieties to target the mitochondria.
The polymer has also been mixed with an O2-insensitive,
terbium(III)-based metallopolymer to afford a ratiometric nanoprobe
for intracellular imaging in live HeLa cells and MCTSs. Related PNPs have been developed with metallopolymers
bearing extended π-conjugated ligands (596b and 596c). The increased π-conjugation
of the diimine ligands of the ruthenium(II) unit increases the O2 sensitivity of the PNPs, facilitating the visualization of
O2 levels in 2D and 3D cell cultures.
 Guan, Xie, Qu, and co-workers have conjugated
a carboxyl-modified
ruthenium(II) complex (597) ( ) to O2-insensitive Cdots, followed
by PEGylation to induce aggregation of the resultant polymeric probe
in aqueous solution to from a nanosized O2 sensor. This design enables excitation of the complex
with NIR light via the UCL of Cdots. The nanosensor is distributed
in the cytoplasm of live HeLa cells and has been used to monitor changes
in the intracellular O2 levels. It has also been utilized
to detect hypoxia in vivo and image tumor in mice
bearing HeLa tumor xenografts. Leach and co-workers have developed
SiNPs containing [Ru(Ph2-phen)3]2+ and the O2-insensitive fluorophore Nile blue for mapping
O2 concentration in live bacterial biofilms and 3D microfabricated cell cultures. Bu, Shi, and co-workers have designed an ultrasensitive
O2 nanosensor based on NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4 UCNPs core–hollow mesoporous silica shell NPs. The encapsulation of [Ru(Ph2-phen)3]2+ into the hollow cavity of the NPs enables efficient
energy transfer from the UCNPs to [Ru(Ph2-phen)3]2+ upon NIR-light excitation (λex = 980 nm). The nanosensor has been used to detect changes
in O2 levels in live cells and zebrafish. A related nanoprobe
that allows for dual imaging of O2 and temperature in live
cells has also been developed using NaYF4:Yb,Er@NaYF4 UCNPs. Lin and co-workers
have designed luminescent nanoscale metal–organic layers (NMOLs)
for ratiometric O2 and pH imaging. As a monolayered version of NMOFs, NMOLs allow hierarchical
functionalization and facile access to analytes. The NMOLs are built
from the solvothermal reaction of Hf12 secondary building
units with a dicarboxylic acid-functionalized ruthenium(II) complex
(598), followed by surface modification with pH-sensitive
fluorescein and pH-independent rhodamine B. After cellular internalization,
the nanosensor escapes from the endosomes/lysosomes and accumulates
in the mitochondria, enabling real-time quantitative measurements
of O2 and pH in the mitochondria of live CT26 cells.
 
9.1.3.

## Cyclometalated Iridium(III) and Platinum(II)
Complexes
Cyclometalated iridium(III) and platinum(II) complexes
have emerged as a new class of O2 sensors. One notable
example is the cyclometalated iridium(III) β-diketonate complex
[Ir(btp)2(acac)] (599) ( ) developed by Tobita and
co-workers, which exhibits intense phosphorescence at 616 nm with
a lifetime of 5.8 μs. The complex
shows intense emission in a range of cell lines including CHO, HeLa,
mouse oral squamous carcinoma SCC-7, and human glioblastoma U251 cells
that are incubated at low O2 levels (5%) but not in those
under normoxic conditions (20%). Costaining experiments indicate that
the complex is preferentially enriched in the ER of the cells. Real-time
monitoring of changes in the intracellular O2 levels with
complex 599 indicates that mitochondrial respiration
determines the induction of intracellular hypoxia and the activation of prenylated proteins. Additionally, complex 599 specifically
localizes in the LDs of 3T3-L1 adipocytes due to its neutral and lipophilic
character, allowing real-time monitoring of O2 tension
in LDs upon different metabolic stimulations. The complex has been used for simultaneous imaging of the
LD structure and O2 status in vivo, revealing
that hepatic tissue hypoxia in mice with nonalcoholic fatty liver
is associated with the structural distortions of the sinusoidal microvasculature
caused by the increased and enlarged LDs. Furthermore, complex 599 has been used to image tumor hypoxia in live mice bearing
tumor xenografts. Intense emission
is only observed in the tumor region after intravenous injection of
the complex due to the hypoxic nature of tumor tissues. The possibility
of selective accumulation of the complex in the tumor sites is ruled
out on the basis of the longer emission lifetime detected in the tumor
region over the extratumoral tissues. The hypoxia-sensitive emission
has enabled the monitoring of the tumor hypoxic microenvironment in vivo to evaluate the chemotherapeutic effects of cisplatin. The complex has also been coencapsulated with
AuNPs and poly(iohexol) to give a nanoprobe for bimodal imaging. The AuNPs can enhance the phosphorescence
of the complex and improve the image contrast due to the metal-enhanced
luminescence effect, while poly(iohexol) functions as a CT contrast
agent, enabling imaging with dual luminescence and CT outputs. Wu
and co-workers have developed a related iridium(III) complex coordinated
with poly(n-butyl cyanoacrylate) (600) for the fabrication of core–shell structured NPs with chitosan. Remarkably, these NPs display prolonged retention
in tumor tissues in vivo for over 24 h, surpassing
complex 599 that only remains in tumor tissues for 4
h. This extended retention significantly enhances the effectiveness
of tumor imaging while minimizing nonspecific accumulation in normal
tissues.
 To realize quantitative measurement of intracellular
O2 concentration, Tobita and co-workers have conjugated
iridium(III)
complexes with coumarin 343 , or 7-diethylaminocoumarin via a peptide linker to construct ratiometric
probes (601 and 602) ( ) for O2 sensing
in live cells. Xiao and co-workers have also developed a ratiometric
O2 probe (603) using green fluorescent naphthalimide
as the energy donor. The complex exhibits
high specificity for the ER, which enables the visualization of changes
in the O2 levels in this organelle in live MCF-7 cells,
showing that the O2 levels in the ER increases upon stimulation
with rotenone (an inhibitor of the mitochondrial respiratory chain)
or thapsigargin (an irreversible inhibitor of calcium ATPase in the
ER).
 Tobita and co-workers have modified complex 599 with
a TPP+ moiety to afford a mitochondria-targeting O2 probe (604) ( ) for detecting changes in O2 levels in this organelle. Iridium(III)
complexes modified with a basic amino or dimethylamino group (605) have also been developed for intracellular O2 sensing and hypoxia imaging. These
structural modifications facilitate the cellular uptake of the complexes
and direct them to the lysosomes of the cells. Additionally, these
modifications change the in vivo biodistribution
of the complexes; complex 605b predominantly localizes
in the liver and kidney of tumor-bearing mice, while complex 599 is mainly enriched in the spleen and lung. Complex 605b has been employed for the visualization of intracellular
O2 distribution in the hepatic lobules and on the renal surface of live mice with high spatiotemporal resolution using PLIM. Quantitative
analysis shows that the intracellular O2 concentration
in renal tissues decreases in response to acute ischemia, hypoxemia,
and anemia. Additionally, a lower level
of O2 is detected in the kidney subjected to I/R injury
compared to the contralateral kidney in live mice. The complex has
also been used to interrogate the metabolic and O2 states
of tumors in mice bearing CT26 tumor xenografts via FLIM–PLIM
using an implantable fiber-optic probe, revealing that the reduced
O2 concentration in tumors increases glycolytic metabolism. A related green luminescent iridium(III) complex
(606a) has been utilized with a red luminescent iridium(III)
complex (606b) for multicolor imaging of intracellular
and intravascular O2 levels in pancreatic tissues. Measurements of the emission lifetimes of
the two complexes with PLIM indicate that the average pO2 in pancreatic acinar cells and capillaries is almost equal at ca. 30 mmHg.
 To facilitate O2 imaging at deeper
depths, Tobita and
co-workers have developed an NIR luminescent iridium(III) complex
(607) ( ) (λem = 720 nm) by increasing
the π-conjugation of the btp ligand. This complex can image tumors located 6–7 mm below the surface
of the abdominal skin. Additionally, the complex shows TPA across
800–1,200 nm, rendering it compatible with two-photon excitation
using a femtosecond Yb-doped fiber laser operating at 1,030 nm. Huang, Gao, and co-workers have encapsulated
the complex within the hydrophobic pocket of β-CD labeled with
cyanine 7 to construct a ratiometric O2 probe. The probe not only allows quantitative measurement
of O2 levels in live cells and in vivo but also noninvasive mapping of the hypoxia microenvironment of
solid tumors. Jiang and co-workers have modified the complex with
a PVP pendant to increase its tumor retention by the EPR effect. The resultant conjugate (608)
can accurately report the hypoxic tumor microenvironment in various
cancer models including metastatic tumors in vivo, and even detect a small amount of cancer cells (> 103 cells) before tumor formation based on the increased O2 consumption during cancer cell proliferation. The PVP conjugate
has been further functionalized with a rhodamine or cyanine derivative
to yield dual-emissive probes 609a and 609b, respectively, where the organic dye functions as both an internal
standard for assessing the local probe concentration and an O2-insensitive fluorophore for ratiometric O2 measurement.
These findings indicate that the conjugates can be used for monitoring
tumor development and treatment response involving hypoxia-targeted
therapeutics. The PVP conjugate 608 has also been combined
with an amphiphilic block copolymer poly(ε-caprolactone)-block-poly(N-vinylpyrrolidone) to generate
nanosized comicelles for tracking cancer cell metastasis in
vivo. A related PVP conjugate
(610) that can differentiate inflammatory and healthy
tissues based on different O2 levels has been used to detect
hypoxia-associated inflammation. It
has been incorporated into a polyurethane thin film for long-term
monitoring of would inflammation and healing in mice. Qiu and co-workers
have developed a nanomicelle that consists of an iridium(III) complex
(611) as a hypoxia-sensitive probe and an indocyanine
green derivative (ICG-PEG) as a PTT agent. Sequential excitation of these two components
allows for precise tumor diagnosis and treatment.
 Tobita and co-workers have developed a series
of low-energy-emitting
iridium(III) complexes (612) ( ) for O2 sensing in live cells. Among these complexes, complexes 612c, 612d, 612g, and 612h display
intense NIR emission (λem = 686
to 711 nm) with relatively high emission quantum yields (0.14 to 0.24).
All the complexes exhibit efficient cellular uptake and specific mitochondrial
localization in live HeLa cells. Related NIR luminescent iridium(III)
complexes (613) have also been developed for intracellular
O2 sensing. These complexes
either reside in the mitochondria (613a) or lysosomes
(613b) of live CHO-K1 cells after cellular internalization.
Yoshihara and co-workers have developed an iridium(III) complex coordinated
with a π-extended meso-mesityl dipyrromethene
ligand (614) that shows long-lived emission in the NIR
region (λem = 773 nm, τo = 18.5 μs). The
complex is efficiently taken up by live cells and enriched in the
ER. The O2-sensitive emission lifetime of the complex has
enabled O2 imaging in tissues up to ca. 100 μm from the liver surface of anesthetized mice and quantification
of O2 gradients in hepatic lobules with cellular-level
resolution using PLIM. Tao, Wang, Wong, Zhao, and co-workers have
developed an isomer engineering approach to manipulate the excited-state
properties of lepidine-based iridium(III) complexes. This method has led to the identification
of complex 615 featuring far-red emission (λem = 660 nm) with a long emission lifetime (τo = 1.60 μs) for hypoxia imaging in live HeLa cells,
zebrafish, and mice. The complex also displays efficient 1O2 photosensitization (ΦΔ = 0.73), resulting in efficient cancer cell death upon irradiation.
The construction of binuclear complexes is another strategy to lower
the emission energy of the complexes. Shi, Yuan, Zhao, and co-workers
have utilized 2-pyrimidine-benzimidazole as a bridging ligand to afford
a single-anion-based cationic binuclear iridium(III) complex (616) for intracellular O2 sensing. This complex exhibits emission at a longer
wavelength with a higher emission quantum yield and a longer emission
lifetime (λem = 619 and 659 nm, Φem = 0.35, τo = 806.4 ns) compared to its mononuclear counterpart (λem = 574 nm, Φem = 0.29, τo = 511.8 ns).
Zhao and co-workers have developed a binuclear iridium(III) complex
(617) for intracellular O2 imaging. Compared to its mononuclear counterpart (λem = 540 nm, τo = 591.6 ns), the complex shows red-shifted and longer-lived
emission (λem = 626 nm, τo = 1076.8 ns). Chou, Chelushkin, and
co-workers have leveraged the self-assembly behavior of a square-planar
platinum(II) complex (618) to construct an NIR luminescent
probe for O2 sensing. Encapsulation
of the complex into the hydrophobic core of polymeric micelles promotes
close intermolecular Pt···Pt contact and thus induces 3MMLCT emission in the NIR region (λem = ca. 790 nm). The luminescent micelles
have been used to monitor the intracellular O2 levels in
CHO-K1 cells under normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Papkovsky and
co-workers have modified an iridium(III) porphyrin with two CPPs to
afford cell-penetrating NIR probes for intracellular O2 sensing. In particular, the bis-tetraarginine conjugate (619) displays
efficient cellular internalization and accumulation in a wide range
of cell lines, facilitating the monitoring of changes in intracellular
O2 levels in response to hypoxic conditions and metabolic
stimulation.
 A long emission lifetime is advantageous to monitoring
intracellular
O2 levels as it can not only increase the O2 sensitivity of the probes but also allow the use of time-resolved
techniques to eliminate the short-lived autofluorescence background
to improve the signal-to-noise ratio. Liu, Zhao, Huang, and co-workers
have tuned the excited-state properties of iridium(III) complexes
through the incorporation of a carbazole or 1,2,3-trifluorobenzene
group into the diimine ligand. This
approach has led to the identification of complex 620 ( ) that
exhibits emission originating from a long-lived 3ILCT excited
state, which endows the complex with increased O2 sensitivity
and thus enables more sensitive O2 detection in live cells
via lifetime imaging. Yan, Zhao, Huang, and co-workers have demonstrated
that the introduction of an electron-withdrawing o-carborane unit to iridium(III) complexes induces a significant blue
shift of over 70 nm in the emission maxima concomitant with a substantial
increase in the emission quantum yields and lifetimes. For example, the iridium(III) complex functionalized
with a hydrophilic nido-o-carborane
moiety (621) shows intense emission (Φem = 0.57) with a long lifetime (τ = 4.38 μs) in aqueous solution and high sensitivity toward
O2, enabling its application in intracellular O2 imaging. Related iridium(III) o-carborane complexes
(622 and 623) have also been used for endocellular
hypoxia imaging. , 
 In addition to the emission properties, the aqueous
solubility
of the complexes is an important consideration. Chou, Tunik, and co-workers
have developed a water-soluble iridium(III) complex containing a sulfonated
diphosphine ligand (624) ( ) that is suitable for O2 mapping. The complex is efficiently taken up by live
HeLa cells despite its negative net charge. The O2-sensitive
emission lifetime and the large TPA cross-section of the complex (δ800 nm = 627 GM) have allowed the
monitoring of changes in intracellular O2 levels in vitro and in vivo using TP-PLIM, revealing
a lower level of oxygenation in tumors compared to the surrounding
muscle tissues. Tunik and co-workers have also developed iridium(III)
complexes modified with short “double-tail” OEG pendants
(625–627) as water-soluble and biocompatible
O2 probes. – The OEG corona surrounding the complexes
increases their aqueous solubility and shields them from side interaction
with components in biological media while preserving their high cellular
internalization efficiencies, enabling mapping of O2 distribution
in live cells and mice.
 The encapsulation of transition metal complexes
into PNPs is another
effective approach to protect them from interacting with the components
of physiological media while maintaining their sensitive lifetime
response toward O2 variations. Chelushkin, Chou, Tunik,
and co-workers have embedded an NIR luminescent iridium(III) complex
(628) ( ) into polymeric micelles to develop a luminescent nanoprobe
for O2 sensing in live CHO-K1 cells. Xu, Zhu, Zhao, Yang, and co-workers have utilized a TADF
polymer (PCzDP-20) to encapsulate iridium(III) complexes
(629) for constructing luminescent PNPs with enhanced
emission quantum yields and lifetimes for intracellular O2 sensing. The use of a TADF polymer
as an energy donor to sensitize the emission of iridium(III) complexes
allows the exploitation of both singlet and triplet excitons, enabling
efficient FRET (> 80%) even at a low doping ratio of the iridium(III)
complexes (2.5%). Bochkarev and co-workers have developed norbornene-modified
iridium(III) complexes for the preparation of water-soluble luminescent
polymeric probes (630) for imaging O2 levels
in biological tissues in vivo. A related membrane-permeable polymeric probe (631) has been used to examine the correlation between metabolic state
and O2 levels in live cancer cells and tumor-bearing mice,
revealing a high level of cellular heterogeneity in both metabolism
and O2 distribution in vivo. 
 Zhao and co-workers have developed three anionic
iridium(III) complexes
(632) ( ) for monitoring intracellular O2 levels. The red luminescent complex 632c has been paired with a cationic, blue fluorescent, and O2-insensitive polyfluorene-based CPE (633) or zinc(II) complex (634) to give water-soluble dual-emissive soft salts
for ratiometric and lifetime imaging of O2 in live cells.
Iridium(III) and platinum(II) complexes have also been covalently
conjugated with polyfluorene to develop dual-emissive CPEs (635 and 636). , These amphiphilic
polymers self-assemble into ultrasmall Pdots with a particle size
down to 10 nm in aqueous solution. The resulting Pdots have been used
for monitoring O2 levels in live cells via ratiometric
and lifetime imaging. Wang, Zhao, and co-workers have developed a
luminescent hyperbranched conjugated polymer (637) with
an iridium(III) complex as the core and polyfluorene units as the
branches. Coprecipitation with poly(styrene-co-maleic anhydride) endows the resulting Pdots with high
aqueous solubility and biocompatibility. The Pdots have been used
for ratiometric and lifetime imaging of intracellular O2 variations. Furthermore, the Pdots can induce effective cancer cell
death upon continuous irradiation due to 1O2 generation, realizing image-guided PDT.
 Zhao, Li, Huang, and co-workers have developed
a phosphorescent
nanoprobe for hypoxia imaging, where an iridium(III) complex (638) ( ) is attached to the outer silica shell of mesoporous silica-coated
lanthanide-doped UCNPs. This design
allows the use of both NIR light excitation and time-resolved techniques
to effectively minimize cell autofluorescence interference, enabling
the sensitive detection of hypoxia in live cells. Liu, Huang, Zhao,
and co-workers have utilized emissive gold nanoclusters as both an
O2-insensitive luminophore and a nanocarrier for an iridium(III)
complex (639) to construct a nanoprobe for ratiometric
and lifetime imaging of changes in O2 levels in live cells
and zebrafish. Wu and co-workers have
utilized glycerol monoolein cubic-phase NPs as a platform to prepare
a nanoprobe for ratiometric O2 imaging. A red phosphorescent iridium(III) complex (640) and O2-insensitive, NIR fluorescent Qdots are incorporated
into the hydrophobic and hydrophilic channels of the NPs, respectively,
to avoid interference between the two components. Notably, the nanoprobe
exhibits prolonged tumor accumulation time compared to the free complex,
enabling long-term monitoring of O2 level changes in tumors in vivo. Chelushkin, Chou, Tunik, and co-workers have developed
a dual O2- and pH-responsive sensor through covalent modification
of HSA with an iridium(III) complex (641) and FITC. The drastic changes in the phosphorescence
and fluorescence lifetimes of the protein conjugate in response to
O2 and pH, respectively, have allowed the spatial and temporal
tracking of both O2 levels and pH in live cells using a
dual FLIM–PLIM imaging technique. The conjugate has also been
used for O2 and pH sensing inside the endolysosomes of
human endometrial mesenchymal stromal cells in both 2D and 3D cultures. 
 Zhao, Lo, Huang, and co-workers reported the
first molecular probe
(642) ( ) that can differentiate hypoxia, normoxia, and hyperoxia
in living systems. The nonconjugated
amino groups introduce a new 3NLCT (n →
π*) excited state that inhibits internal conversion between
the 3IL and 3CT states, resulting in dual emission
at ca. 520 and 620 nm, respectively. Owing to the
different O2 sensitivity of the two triplet emissive states,
the complex shows naked-eye distinguishable green, orange, and red
emission in aqueous solution under an atmosphere of 0, 21, and 100%
O2, respectively ( ). The sensitive spectral response has enabled the
detection of both hypoxia and hyperoxia in live cells, zebrafish,
and mice. This design strategy has further been exploited to develop
a dual-emissive complex (643) that allows for the simultaneous
detection of O2 and Cu2+. The increase in local O2 concentration results
in the selective quenching of the longer-lived 3IL emission
at 490 nm, whereas Cu2+ binding induces the selective quenching
of the 3CT emission at 620 nm. The orthogonal emission
response has enabled the sensitive and independent detection of changes
in intracellular O2 and Cu2+ concentrations
in live HeLa cells without crosstalk. Shi, Li, Zhao, Yuan, and co-workers
have developed a platinum(II) complex (644) that displays
dual emission under hypoxia. The introduction
of a strong electron-donating N-embedded π-conjugation unit
leads to weak SOC (ξ = 5.26 cm–1) and thus an inadequate ISC process, resulting in both fluorescence
and phosphorescence at 552 and 610 nm, respectively. The complex has
been used to examine intracellular O2 levels by monitoring
the ratiometric emission response and phosphorescence lifetime.
 In the aforementioned wavelength-based ratiometric
probes, the
luminophores are designed to emit at different wavelengths for spectral
separation. However, it is difficult to avoid spectral overlap and
possible energy transfer between the luminophores. Additionally, variations
in the absorption and scattering of light of different wavelengths
in biological samples can significantly reduce the detection efficiency.
Notably, the use of time-resolved techniques allows the separation
of multiple emission signals with varying emission lifetimes at the
same wavelength, enabling the analysis of the individual emission
spectrum of the luminophores. Zhao, Zhang, and co-workers have developed
a lifetime-based polymeric probe (645) ( ) for time-resolved ratiometric
O2 imaging. The probe is
composed of a fluorescent phenoxazine derivative and a phosphorescent
iridium(III) complex, both of which emit at ca. 550
nm in deaerated aqueous buffer but with lifetimes of ca. 2.9 and 931 ns, respectively. Upon increasing the O2 content to 100%, the phosphorescence lifetime is reduced to 251
ns, with the phosphorescence/fluorescence ratio decreasing from 4.49
to 1.08. The different emission lifetimes of the two luminophores
allow spectral separation using time-resolved techniques, enabling
quantitative measurement and mapping of intracellular O2 levels in live HeLa cells. This design strategy also opens up the
possibilities of multiplex imaging and sensing. Zhang, Huang, Zhao,
and co-workers have designed a polymeric probe (646)
for simultaneous sensing of O2 and HClO via time-resolved
analysis. The probe is comprised of
an O2-sensitive phosphorescent iridium(III) complex and
a HClO-responsive fluorescent phenothiazine derivative. The phosphorescence
of the probe is efficiently quenched upon increasing the O2 level, while the fluorescence is substantially enhanced upon oxidation
of phenothiazine by HClO to its sulfoxide derivative. The probe has
been applied to cellular imaging with PLIM, and its independent emission
response toward O2 and HClO in separated time intervals
has enabled simultaneous quantitative determination of O2 and HClO levels in cells. These findings illustrate that the long
emission lifetimes of transition metal complexes are not only advantageous
to background-free imaging but also provide exciting opportunities
for multiplex imaging and sensing.
 

9.2.

## pH
Intracellular pH plays an important
role in regulating cell survival, metabolism, and proliferation. It varies significantly among different compartments,
ranging from ca. 4.7 in lysosomes to 8.0 in mitochondria
in normal mammalian cells. Dysregulation of pH homeostasis in both
the cytoplasm and intracellular organelles has been implicated in
various pathological conditions such as cancer and AD. 
Zhou and Zhang have designed an NIR
luminescent iridium(III) complex conjugated with a fluorescein diacetate
unit (647) ( ) for ratiometric imaging of intracellular pH. Upon cellular internalization, fluorescein
diacetate, which is nonfluorescent, is converted by intracellular
esterase into fluorescein that shows pH-sensitive fluorescence. The
ratio Igreen/Ired decreases upon decreasing intracellular pH, enabling quantitative
pH measurements. Zhao, Wong, and co-workers have developed a luminescent
soft salt (648) for ratiometric and lifetime imaging
of intracellular pH variations. This
soft salt is comprised of a cationic, pH-sensitive iridium(III) complex
appended with two pyridyl moieties (λem = 625 nm) and an anionic, pH-insensitive iridium(III) cyanide complex
(λem = 451 and 475 nm). Increasing
the pH from 2.03 to 7.94 increases the ratio I625nm/I451nm from 0.18 to 2.86
due to selective quenching of the emission of the cationic complex
upon protonation of the pyridyl units. Additionally, the lifetime
of the red emission increases from 73 ns (at pH 3.99) to 328 ns (at
pH 7.94). These photophysical changes have enabled the detection and
quantitative measurements of intracellular pH fluctuations induced
by oxidative stress ( ). Liu, Zhao, and co-workers have designed a water-soluble
polymeric probe (649) for ratiometric pH sensing in vitro and in vivo. This probe is composed of a pH-responsive iridium(III)
complex (λem = 580 nm) and a pH-insensitive
iridium(III) complex (λem = 470
nm) tethered on a hydrophilic PVP backbone. Under acidic conditions,
both the uncoordinated pyridine ring on the cyclometalating ligand
and the amide group on the diimine ligand of the pH-responsive complex
are protonated, inhibiting intramolecular oxidative quenching. Thus,
upon changing the pH from 7.34 to 3.01, the ratio I470nm/I580nm increases from
0.36 to 0.87, and the emission lifetime at 580 nm decreases from 1,073
to 530 ns. The probe has been used to measure pH fluctuations in subcellular
organelles and examine the effects of pH modifiers on the pH of the
intestinal juice in zebrafish digestive tracts. Zhang, Zhao, and co-workers
have developed a dual-emissive polymeric probe (650)
for simultaneous and independent sensing of intracellular pH and HClO. This probe is comprised of a pH-sensitive
phosphorescent iridium(III) complex and a HClO-responsive fluorescent
anthracene carboxamide derivative. The phosphorescence of the probe
is quenched upon protonation of the pyridyl groups on the iridium(III)
complex under acidic conditions, while the fluorescence is quenched
upon oxidation of the thioether group on the anthracene carboxamide
by HClO. Time-resolved luminescence imaging with the probe has allowed
for independent, simultaneous, and quantitative measurement of both
phosphorescence and fluorescence in cells and their response toward
pH and HClO due to different emission lifetimes.
 Diao, Chao, and co-workers have developed mitochondria-targeting
iridium(III) complexes modified with two morpholine moieties (651) ( ) for monitoring pH variations in the mitochondria. Protonation of the morpholine groups under
acidic conditions results in efficient emission quenching through
PET. These complexes have been utilized to track changes in the mitochondrial
pH in HeLa cells upon CCCP treatment, revealing that the mitochondrial
pH decreases from ca. 8.0 to 7.1 during apoptosis
( ). Hao,
Li, and co-workers have developed an iridium(III) complex (652) capable of simultaneously inducing mitophagy and quantitatively
monitoring mitochondrial pH changes. The emission intensity and lifetime of the complex increase with
decreasing pH due to protonation of the imidazole moieties. Upon specific
accumulation in the mitochondria, the complex induces mitochondrial
depolarization and mitophagy. Monitoring the emission lifetime of
the complex using TP-PLIM has allowed quantitative measurement of
mitochondrial pH changes in a real-time manner, revealing mitochondrial
acidification during mitophagy due to the fusion of mitochondria with
autophagosomes and lysosomes. Zhang, Zhang and co-workers have developed
two pairs of isomeric iridium(III) complexes (653) that
show different emission response upon protonation of the benzimidazole
ring and carboxyl group. In particular,
complexes 653a and 653c display a more significant
decrease in emission intensities (23- and 25-fold, respectively) and
a considerable shift in emission maxima (41.4 and 40.9 nm, respectively)
compared to complexes 653b and 653d. The
higher pH sensitivity of complexes 653a and 653c has enabled them to self-report mitochondrial pH changes during
apoptosis caused by the photogenerated 1O2.
Qi and co-workers have utilized an aldehyde-modified iridium(III)
complex (654) to monitor intracellular pH fluctuations
under external stimuli. The emission
intensity of the complex decreases upon decreasing pH due to protonation
of the aldehyde groups. The complex resides in the mitochondria of
HeLa cells and has been utilized to monitor pH fluctuations upon stimulation
with phorbol myristate acetate and ultrasound.
 Yu, Yu, and co-workers have developed an NIR luminescent
ruthenium(II)
complex (655) ( ) that can detect pH fluctuations in the lysosomes. The emission of the complex is pH-sensitive
due to the deprotonation/protonation of the imidazole rings. This
complex is nonluminescent under neutral and basic conditions; however,
upon decreasing the pH from 7.16 to 1.88, it exhibits substantial
emission enhancement (I/Io = ca. 400) at 680 nm. The complex specifically
localizes in the lysosomes of live U251 cells and has been utilized
to monitor lysosomal pH fluctuations upon treatment with bafilomycin
A1. A related binuclear ruthenium(II) complex (656) also
shows intense NIR emission at ca. 700 nm under acidic
conditions. Remarkably, the complex
selectively labels the acidic lysosomes of cancerous HeLa cells over
normal HEK293 cells even under a coculture environment ( ), indicating that
the complex can differentiate between cancer and normal cells based
on pH and can be used for cancer diagnosis. Leung and co-workers have
utilized an iridium(III) complex that can detect lysosomal pH changes
(657) to establish a cell-based platform for time-resolved
high-throughput screening of lysosomotropic compounds. Screening from 400 FDA-approved drugs has
revealed five compounds that can modulate the lysosomal pH in cancer
cells, with mitoxantrone identified as the most potent lysosomotropic
agent.
 Bacteria have evolved various mechanisms to maintain
their cytoplasmic
pH within a narrow range. , The pH homeostasis
is crucial for their survival and growth under various forms of environmental
stress. One notable example is E. coli, a kind of
enteric bacteria that can thrive and colonize in the acidic environment
of human gastrointestinal tracts through regulating their cytoplasmic
pH. Mallick, Gupta, and co-workers have developed three water-soluble,
pH-responsive heterobimetallic iridium(III)–platinum(II) complexes
(658) ( ) for staining bacterial cells. The square-planar platinum(II) unit is crucial to the aggregation
behavior of the complexes in aqueous solution. The propensity of the
complexes to aggregate increases upon changing the pH from 7.08 to
1.25, resulting in a significant increase in the 3MMLCT
emission intensity at 666 nm (I/Io = ca. 175 to 220). These complexes
have been applied to measure the intracellular pH of E. coli grown in the pH range of 1.2 to 6.8. Complexes 658a and 658b exhibit efficient staining of E. coli at pH = 1.2 and 3, while complex 658c shows staining
at pH < 7. Qi, Qi, and co-workers have developed a carboxyl-modified
iridium(III) complex (659) as a dual photoluminescent
and electrochemiluminescent probe for quantitative pH measurements
under acidic conditions. Upon decreasing
the pH from 7.0 to 2.0, the complex displays a substantial decrease
in its emission quantum yield and lifetime, facilitating the detection
of intracellular pH fluctuations in E. coli under
different external pH conditions.
 Shakirova, Tunik, and co-workers have designed
a polymeric pH probe
(660) ( ) that can overcome the inherent sensitivity of phosphorescent
transition metal complexes toward O2, which can result
in crosstalk between pH and O2 measurements. The pH-sensitive iridium(III) complex is embedded
in a polymer that is permeable to H+ but impermeable to
O2. This is achieved by conjugating the iridium(III) complex
to a water-soluble block copolymer poly(N-vinylpyrrolidone)-block-poly(vinylamine), followed by crosslinking
the residual amino groups on the polymer chains with glutaraldehyde.
This design protects the complex from O2 quenching while
retaining the protonation/deprotonation equilibrium, eliminating the
crosstalk between pH and O2 measurements. The emission
lifetime of the polymeric probe is highly sensitive to pH variations
in the physiological range, allowing the monitoring of changes in
both intra- and extracellular pH in CHO-K1 cells using PLIM.
 Nevertheless, the simultaneous measurement of
pH and O2 levels can provide valuable insights into cellular
processes such
as cellular growth, metabolism, and signaling. Jiang and co-workers
have designed an iridium(III) complex (661a) ( ) for imaging
tumor acidity and hypoxia. The emission
of this complex is activated upon successive exposure to two distinct
stimuli: (1) an acidic environment, which triggers the cleavage of
the imine bond, leading to a significant red shift in the absorption
(from 410 to 520 nm) and emission bands (from 610 to 705 nm); and
(2) hypoxia, which results in significant emission enhancement. The
dual-sensitive emission of the complex has enabled in vivo imaging of primary tumors with a high tumor-to-normal tissue ratio.
Furthermore, the complex can detect metastatic liver lesions as small
as 1 mm in mice with orthotopic breast tumors and monitor cancer cell
metabolism in vivo. A related iridium(III) complex
with emission extended to the NIR region (661b) has been
developed. The specific response of
the complex toward pH and O2 has allowed the sensitive
detection of tumors of different cancer types in vivo. Notably, the extension of the imaging window to the NIR region
significantly improves the tumor-to-normal tissue ratio, enabling
the ultrasensitive visualization of hundreds of tumor cells and small
tumors with a size of 260 μm in vivo as well
as metastatic lesions in the lungs with sizes down to 115 μm.
 Chen, He, Guo, and co-workers have developed
an iridium(III) complex
(662) ( ) for synergistic imaging of tumor acidity and hypoxia. The phenol group conjugated to the complex
via an ethynyl linker renders the emission of the complex pH-sensitive,
and its deprotonation under alkaline conditions results in efficient
emission quenching through PET. Upon decreasing the pH from 7.4 to
6.4 and lowering the O2 concentration from 21 to 0%, the
emission intensity of the complex increases by 3.13 fold and the emission
lifetime increases from 85 to 161 ns. The complex has been used to
monitor pH and O2 levels in live MCF-7 cells. Incubation
of the cells under an acidic (pH 6.4) and hypoxic (0% O2) environment results in a substantial increase in the emission intensity
and lifetime of the complex compared to those under normal physiological
conditions (pH 7.4 and 21% O2). The complex has also been
used to visualize the microenvironment of MCF-7 MCTSs using PLIM.
The emission lifetime detected at the center of the spheroids is longer
(ca. 120 ns) than that at the edge (ca. 90 ns), and decreasing the pH of the culture medium from 7.4 to
6.4 extends the emission lifetime of the whole spheroids to ca. 120–140 ns. These findings highlight the potential
of the complex in in vivo imaging of solid tumors
based on its synergistic response toward both tumor acidity and hypoxia.
 
9.3.

## Polarity
Cellular polarity plays
an important role in controlling the physical and chemical properties
of surrounding molecules, regulating protein folding, enzyme activities,
and membrane dynamics. Each organelle has an optimal polarity for
its specific functions. Aberrant changes in polarity can lead to organelle
dysfunction and contribute to pathological conditions such as cancer. 
Yan, Lu, Zhao, and co-workers have developed
an iridium(III) complex featuring an o-carborane
moiety (663) ( ) for monitoring mitochondrial polarity. The electron-deficient o-carborane
unit increases the transition dipole moment of the complex, which
renders the emission of the complex highly sensitive to solvent polarity.
Thus, the complex exhibits a considerable red shift in the emission
maximum from 535 to 577 nm and a substantial decrease in the emission
quantum yield and lifetime from 0.80 to 0.21 and from 794.5 to 185.2
ns, respectively, upon changing the solvent from less polar toluene
(0.36 D) to more polar DMSO (3.96 D). The complex has been used to
examine the difference in mitochondrial polarity between cancer and
normal cells. The more intense and longer-lived emission observed
in cancerous HepG2 cells compared to noncancerous human liver HL-7702
cells indicates that cancer cells are characterized by a less polar
intracellular environment. Furthermore, the complex has been applied
to monitor changes in mitochondrial polarity during apoptosis using
PLIM. The emission lifetime of the complex varies with the health
status of cells, allowing the differentiation of live, apoptotic,
and dead cells based on mitochondrial polarity ( ).
 Huang, Zhang, Zhang, and co-workers have developed
an iridium(III)
complex (664) ( ) for real-time monitoring of changes in ER polarity. This complex shows substantial emission enhancement
upon decreasing solvent polarity, with the emission quantum yield
increasing from 0.001 to 0.243 upon changing the solvent from water
to CHCl3. The complex is specifically enriched in the ER
in a range of mammalian cell lines, including both cancerous (A549
and HepG2) and normal (MRC-5 and HL-7702) cells. Real-time monitoring
of changes in the ER polarity in cells indicates that treatment with
tunicamycin induces a rapid increase in ER polarity during ER stress.
Furthermore, the complex has been used to examine variations in polarity
between fresh blood samples from normal and diabetic mice. The results
indicate that the polarity of blood in diabetic mice is lower than
normal mice, serving as a useful indicator for diabetes detection.
 
9.4.

## Viscosity
The viscosity inside cells
plays an important role in the regulation of diffusion-mediated cellular
processes that depend on intracellular hydrodynamics, such as interactions
between macromolecules, transport of nutrients and metabolites, and
intra- and intercellular transmission of signals. Abnormalities in intracellular viscosity have been linked
to various disorders and diseases, such as diabetes, cardiovascular
diseases, neurodegenerative diseases, and cancer. 
Liu, Chen, Sun, and co-workers have designed a binuclear
iridium(III) complex (665) ( ) for ratiometric detection of viscosity. This complex features a long and flexible
linker to connect the two iridium(III) moieties with different emission
colors. Upon increasing the viscosity of the solution from 1.1 to
950 cP, the intensities of the emission bands at 521 and 711 nm increase
by 16.9 and 2.5 fold, respectively, due to the restriction of molecular
rotation that minimizes nonradiative decay. The complex has been used
for ratiometric monitoring of intracellular viscosity, which reveals
higher viscosity in cancerous HepG2 cells compared to normal HL-7702
cells ( ).
Similar observations have also been found between other cancerous
(MCF-7 and A549) and noncancerous (HEK293T) cell lines, indicating
that the complex can distinguish between cancer and normal cells based
on intracellular viscosity. Additionally, the complex has been used
for real-time monitoring of changes in viscosity in cells in response
to the etoposide treatment, revealing an increase in intracellular
viscosity during apoptosis.
 Tan, Mao, and co-workers have developed six iridium(III)
diphosphine
complexes (666) ( ) as viscosity probes for monitoring mitochondrial
viscoisty. Among these complexes, complex 666f displays the largest increase in emission intensity (I/Io = 6.4) and lifetime (from
0.54 to 2.17 μs) upon increasing the viscosity of a methanolic
glycerol solution from 0.55 to 259 cP, resulting from the inhibited
free rotation of the phenyl rings on the diphosphine ligand and the
aldehyde group on the cyclometalating ligands in viscous media. Upon
cellular internalization, the complex specifically localizes in the
mitochondria, inducing apoptosis through causing mitochondrial dysfunction.
On the basis of its viscosity-sensitive emission lifetime and large
TPA cross-section (δ750nm = 444
GM), complex 666f has been utilized for real-time monitoring
and quantitative measurements of changes in mitochondrial viscosity
using TP-PLIM, which shows that dysfunctional mitochondria experience
a significant but heterogeneous increase in viscosity ( ). Tian and co-workers have
developed an iridium(III) complex bearing a long and flexible alkyl
chain (667) that can monitor apoptosis by tracking mitochondrial
viscosity. Additionally, the complex
has been used to examine the differences in the microenvironment of
tumor and normal tissues in a mouse model, revealing a higher viscosity
level in the tumor microenvironment. Zhang, Zhang, and co-workers
have developed two mitochondria-targeting viscosity-responsive iridium(III)
complexes (668) for PDT applications. Complex 668b exhibits a significant increase
in emission intensity (I/Io = 1,311.6)
and lifetime (from 0.27 to 4.47 μs) upon increasing the glycerol
content in an aqueous solution from 0 to 99%. Both complexes show
higher photocytotoxic activity toward cancer cells (A549 and HepG2)
compared to normal cells (MRC-5 and LO2) due to more efficient 1O2 photosensitization in viscous media. Tian and
co-workers have developed a viscosity-responsive iridium(III) complex
(669) for lifetime image-guided PDT. The complex possesses large two-photon (δ725nm = 369 GM) and three-photon absorption cross-sections
(σ1200nm = 9 × 10–81 cm6 s2 photon–2) in the
NIR region, offering opportunities to monitor viscosity changes in
complex cellular environment using multiphoton microscopy. The complex
has been used to monitor changes in mitochondrial viscosity during
apoptosis via lifetime imaging, which enables the real-time self-assessment
of PDT outcomes. The high 1O2 generation efficiency
of the complex has enabled effective inhibition of tumor growth in vivo upon exposure to NIR-light irradiation (730 nm).
A viscosity-sensitive iridium(III) complex featuring uncoordinated,
rotatable pyridine rings (670) has also been developed
for lifetime image-guided PDT. Remarkably,
the complex can differentiate cancer stem cells from the surrounding
cancer cells in the same tumor tissue due to its longer emission lifetime
in cancer stem cells. This feature highlights its potential in imaging-guided
PDT for eradicating cancer stem cells.
 Zhang, Chao, Zhang, and co-workers have developed
a binuclear iridium(III)
complex (671) ( ) that can measure lysosomal viscosity in live cells. The emission intensity and lifetime of the
complex increase with the viscosity of the medium due to the restriction
of free rotation of the aliphatic linkers between the two iridium(III)
units. As revealed by PLIM, the complex displays a longer emission
lifetime in cancerous HepG2 and A549 cells compared to normal HL-7702
cells ( a– c, g), indicative of a
more viscous intracellular environment in cancer cells. The complex
has also been used to monitor changes in lysosomal viscosity under
different stimulations. The lysosomal viscosity in HepG2 cells increases
upon treatment with dexamethasone that stabilizes the lysosomal membrane
and inhibits the release of lysosomal enzymes, but remains relatively
unaffected by chloroquine that increases lysosomal pH ( d– f, h). Additionally, the complex
has been employed to detect variations in viscosity between fresh
blood samples collected from normal mice and those with diabetes,
revealing that the blood of diabetic mice has a higher viscosity level.
Tao and co-workers have reported an iridium(III) complex coordinated
with a bithiazole ligand (672) that can detect viscosity. The high lysosome specificity of the complex
suggests its potential for monitoring changes in lysosomal viscosity.
 Li, Yu, and co-workers have designed a purine-based
iridium(III)
complex (673) ( ) that allows for selective determination of ER viscosity. The complex exhibits an increase in the emission
intensity (I/Io = 22.6)
and lifetime (from 380 to 1,120 ns) at 550 nm upon increasing the
viscosity of the medium from 1.01 to 76.78 cP. Monitoring the changes
in ER viscosity in A549 cells via lifetime imaging shows that the
ER viscosity increases under ER stress induced by tunicamycin due
to the generation of unfolded proteins. Tan, Mao, and co-workers have
developed a neutral iridium(III) complex featuring two rotatable aldehyde
groups (674) for quantitative tracking of ER viscosity. Real-time tracking of changes in ER viscosity
in MCF-7 cells using TP-PLIM reveals that the viscosity increases
during erastin-induced ferroptosis, which is attributed to the accumulation
of lipid peroxides in the ER. A rhenium(I) complex coordinated with
a BODIPY-based molecular rotor (675) has been reported
as both a photoinducer and tracker of ER-to-lysosome-associated degradation
(ERLAD), a pathway that targets misfolded proteins from the ER to
the lysosomes for degradation. This
complex can induce ERLAD upon continuous irradiation and monitor morphological
changes in the ER during ERLAD. Real-time monitoring of changes in
the viscosity of ER buds during ERLAD with TP-PLIM shows that ER viscosity
initially increases due to the gradual accumulation of unfolded proteins
in the ER buds and then decreases, which is not observed when the
cells are treated with 3-methyladenine to inhibit autophagy by blocking
autophagosome formation, indicating that ERLAD is responsible for
the removal of misfolded proteins to alleviate ER stress.
 Xu and co-workers have developed a viscosity-sensitive
ruthenium(II)
complex (676) ( ) for monitoring viscosity changes in LDs. The complex shows substantial emission enchantment
with increasing viscosity due to the inhibited rotation of the C=C
bonds. The high specificity of the complex toward LDs has enabled
real-time monitoring of viscosity changes in these organelles in live
cells and zebrafish, which shows that the LDs viscosity increases
under ER stress.
 The development of viscosity probes has allowed
for the examination
of LLPS in cells, a process that is responsible for the formation
of membraneless organelles, paving the way to understand its roles
in human health and disease. Qiao,
Li, Zhang, and co-workers have developed a viscosity-sensitive iridium(III)
complex (677) ( ) to monitor LLPS in live cells. Upon increasing the viscosity of the solution from 1.45
to 165.47 cP, the emission lifetime of the complex substantially increases
from 163.39 to 1,023.90 ns. The drastic changes in the emission lifetime
have enabled the monitoring of fused in sarcoma (FUS) phase separation
in live NIH/3T3 cells using PLIM. In cells that are transfected to
express modified FUS protein that undergoes light-activated phase
transition, the emission lifetime of the complex progressively increases
with the time of irradiation, indicating an increase in size and viscosity
of the photogenerated protein droplets, which ultimately leads to
the formation of solidified aggregates. Tan, Zhang, Li, Mao, and co-workers
have developed a ruthenium(II) dppz complex modified with two TPP+ units (678) that can induce and monitor DNA
phase separation. The cationic and
lipophilic TPP+ moieties increase the interactions of the
complex with DNA, leading to DNA aggregation. The emission lifetime
of the complex increases upon DNA condensation ( ), allowing the real-time
visualization of DNA phase separation in the nucleus of live A549
cells using TP-PLIM. Additionally, the complex can alter the gene
expression profile and the chromatin state of the cells, resulting
in potent anticancer activity in vitro and in vivo.
 
9.5.

## Temperature
Temperature is an important
physical parameter that plays a crucial role in regulating biochemical
reactions within live cells to maintain intracellular homeostasis
and normal cellular functions. The temperature distribution within
a cell provides valuable insights into the thermodynamics and functions
of cellular components. Intracellular temperature can also serve as
an indicator of pathological conditions, which often lead to higher
temperature due to increased metabolic activities. Thus, intracellular
temperature mapping is important to understanding cellular events
and diagnosing diseases. However, this is a challenging task since
it necessitates a thermoresponsive probe with both high temperature
resolution and spatial resolution.
Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
(PNIPAM) is a temperature-sensitive polymer that undergoes reversible
phase transition in aqueous media in response to temperature. Sun,
Huang, and co-workers have incorporated an AIE-active platinum(II)
complex into the PNIPAM backbone to afford a luminescent polymeric
thermometer (679) ( ) for intracellular temperature sensing. Upon increasing the temperature, the polymer
changes from an extended structure to an aggregated state. This conformational
rearrangement increases the hydrophobicity and rigidity of the local
environment of the complex, resulting in substantial emission enhancement.
The probe has been used to visualize the intracellular temperature
distribution in HepG2 cells, revealing variations in temperature in
different regions of the cell. Zhao, Huang, and co-workers have introduced
two iridium(III) complexes with different emission colors to the PNIPAM
backbone to construct a dual-emissive thermoresponsive probe (680) for temperature mapping. Upon increasing the temperature from 10 to 40°C, the high-energy
emission (λem = 470 nm) experiences
a more significant increase in its intensity and lifetime compared
to the low-energy emission (λem =
590 nm), resulting in a ca. 18.2-fold increase in
the ratio I470nm/I590nm. The ratiometric response enables temperature sensing
with high temperature resolution of ca. 0.4–0.6°C
over a wide temperature range. The probe has been used for temperature
sensing in live cells and zebrafish ( a,b). Additionally, the long emission lifetime
of the probe has enabled more accurate temperature detection in vivo while minimizing interference from autofluorescence
via time-resolved luminescence imaging ( c,d). A related dual-emissive probe (681) featuring an iridium(III) complex as the response unit
and a europium(III) complex as the reference unit has been developed
for in vitro and in vivo temperature
sensing. The presence of the iridium(III)
complex is critical to the efficient sensitization of the europium(III)
complex under visible-light excitation, allowing temperature sensing
with ratiometric response. Additionally, the long emission lifetime
of the europium(III) complex in the millisecond time regime makes
the probe more favorable for lifetime-based temperature sensing.
 

10.

## Luminescent Transition Metal Complexes as Bioorthogonal
Probes
Bioorthogonal chemistry, pioneered by Carolyn R. Bertozzi
in the
early 2000s, encompasses a class of high-yielding chemical reactions
that can occur rapidly and selectively in biological settings without
disrupting natural biological processes. This strategy has been honored with the Nobel Prize in Chemistry
in 2022 as a recognition of its significant impact and potential in
various fields. One of the key applications of these chemoselective
reactions is the labeling of specific biomolecules in living systems,
paving the way for studying the localization, dynamics, and functions
of the biomolecules in their native environments. Bioorthogonal chemistry has also been successfully applied
in activity-based protein profiling for drug discovery and the development of in vivo pretargeting strategies for imaging and therapy. These achievements have stimulated considerable interest
in the development of photofunctional transition metal complexes as
bioorthogonal reagents for bioimaging and therapeutic applications. 
10.1.

## Copper(I)-Catalyzed and Strain-Promoted Azide–Alkyne
Cycloaddition
Azides and alkynes are useful bioorthogonal
handles due to their small size, bioinertness, and nonnative nature,
which make them ideal for incorporation into biomolecules without
interfering with the normal functions of the biomolecules. However,
the traditional Huisgen 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition reaction between
azides and alkynes is often too slow for practical use in biological
systems. To overcome this limitation, two strategies have been developed
to accelerate the reaction kinetics, which involve the introduction
of a copper(I) catalyst (CuAAC) , or the incorporation
of ring strain into the alkynes (strain-promoted azide–alkyne
cycloaddition; SPAAC). These modifications
enable efficient and selective formation of triazoles under physiological
conditions, providing versatile approaches for a wide range of applications
such as bioconjugation, imaging, and drug delivery. , 
Lo and co-workers have developed the first phosphorescent
bioorthogonal probes based on iridium(III) complexes appended with
a dibenzocyclooctyne (DIBO) moiety (682) ( ). These complexes have been used to label CHO
cells that are pretreated with 1,3,4,6-tetra-O-acetyl-N-azidoacetyl-d-mannosamine (Ac4ManNAz),
a metabolic substrate that introduces azide units into the terminal
sialic acid residues of membrane-bound glycans. While complexes 682a and 682b are efficiently taken up by the
cells and enriched in the mitochondria, incubation of the cells with
complex 682c leads to intense emission on the cell surface,
indicating successful labeling of the azide-modified sialoglycans.
This highlights the significance of the ionized carboxylate groups
in suppressing the internalization of the complex and facilitating
its SPAAC reaction with the membrane-bound azide moieties. Related
rhenium(I) (683) and ruthenium(II)
DIBO complexes (684) have
also been developed for imaging cell-surface sialoglycans. Monitoring
the intracellular trafficking of the labeled glycans has revealed
the involvement of endosomes, the Golgi apparatus, and lysosomes in
their internalization and subsequent recycling processes. 
 Zhang, Zhao, Huang, and co-workers have introduced
a novel “labeling
after recognition” (LaR) approach to visualize caspase-3 activity
in cells. This method involves three
major components: an iridium(III) DIBO complex (685),
a rhodamine–tetrazine conjugate (Rh–Tz), and a caspase-3-cleavable
peptide (Az-DEVDGK-Nor) ( ). The recognition and cleavage of the peptide substrate
by caspase-3 produces two fragments, Az-DEVD and GK-Nor, which are
then labeled with complex 685 and Rh–Tz, respectively,
via two independent bioorthogonal reactions. As a result, the enzymatic
reaction separates the two luminophores and inhibits FRET between
them, resulting in an increase in the emission lifetime of the iridium(III)
complex. Compared to the traditional “labeling before recognition”
(LbR) approach where the two luminophores are attached to the peptide
substrate before enzyme recognition, the LaR approach generates faster
and more significant emission lifetime response due to the smaller
size of Az-DEVDGK-Nor, which effectively reduces steric hindrance
and/or nonspecific interaction and facilitates its recognition by
caspase-3. The LaR sensing approach has enabled the visualization
of caspase-3 activity in apoptotic HeLa cells with high spatial resolution
using PLIM ( ), offering new opportunities to examine the roles of caspase-3 in
cellular processes related to apoptosis.
 Qiao, Zhang, and co-workers have utilized an alkyne-bearing
iridium(III)
complex (686) ( ) for imaging newly synthesized proteins in cells. The emission lifetime of the complex decreases
from 530 to 116 ns upon the CuAAC reaction with l-azidohomoalanine
(AHA). Since AHA serves as a surrogate for methionine and can be incorporated
into proteins during protein synthesis, the substantial difference
in the emission lifetime before and after the bioorthogonal reaction
has allowed the use of PLIM for wash-free and real-time tracking of
newly synthesized proteins in live HeLa cells ( ), providing valuable insights into the
dynamics of protein synthesis in a cellular context.
 Ball and co-workers have developed three iridium(III)
azide complexes
(687) ( ) as phosphorogenic bioorthogonal probes for alkyne-modified
biomolecules. The emission of these
complexes in solution is very weak (Φem = 0.0013 to 0.0018) due to effective quenching by the azide unit.
However, upon the CuAAC or SPAAC reaction with alkynes, the complexes
display a substantial increase in their emission intensities, resulting
from the conversion of the quenching azide moiety to a nonquenching
triazole derivative. The complexes have been used to image U2OS cells
that are modified with the strained alkyne (1R,8S,9s)-bicyclo[6.1.0]non-4-yne (BCN). Their
phosphorogenic properties have enabled the clear visualization of
the labeled cells while minimizing background interference from the
unreacted probes.
 
10.2.

## Strain-Promoted Alkyne–Nitrone Cycloaddition
Nitrones are a class of 1,3-dipoles that can undergo strain-promoted
alkyne–nitrone cycloaddition (SPANC) reaction with cyclooctynes
under physiological conditions, resulting in the formation of isoxazolines. In contrast to azides, nitrones offer multiple
sites for modification, providing greater control over their electronic
properties and reaction kinetics and allowing for the incorporation
of various functional handles.
Lo and co-workers have leveraged
nitrones, for the first time, as both a bioorthogonal handle and an
emission quencher to develop phosphorogenic probes (688) ( ) for
bioorthogonal labeling and imaging. , The incorporation
of the nitrone moiety into iridium(III) complexes leads to significant
emission quenching (Φem ≤
0.023), primarily due to the photoinduced isomerization of the nitrone
unit that provides an efficient nonradiative decay pathway for the
complexes. However, upon reaction of the complexes with BCN, the nitrone
moiety is transformed into a nonquenching isoxazoline derivative,
resulting in a substantial increase in their emission intensities
(I/Io = up to 135). Additionally,
the direct coordination of the nitrone ligand (k2 = 4.0 × 10–2 M–1 s–1) to the cationic iridium(III) center greatly
enhances its reactivity toward BCN (k2 = 11.6 to 27.0 × 10–2 M–1 s–1). The high phosphorogenicity and bioorthogonal
reactivity of the nitrone complexes have enabled selective imaging
of BCN-modified decane (BCN-C10) and
SNAP-tag proteins using BCN-modified O6-benzylguanine (BCN-BG) as a substrate in live CHO-K1 cells. Notably, the nitrone unit also suppresses
the 1O2 photosensitization efficiencies of the
complexes. Thus, upon the SPANC reaction,
the 1O2 generation quantum yields of complexes 688d–688g increase substantially from
0.19–0.26 to 0.42–0.91. Through the combination of protein
tag technology and bioorthogonal chemistry, the iridium(III) complexes
selectively accumulate in cells that are transfected to express the
SNAP-tag protein and labeled with BCN-BG, enabling targeted photoinduced
cell death upon irradiation.
 Related ruthenium(II) nitrone complexes (689) ( ) have also been
developed as phosphorogenic bioorthogonal reagents for cellular labeling. Notably, the reactivity of the N-phenyl nitrone complex 689e toward BCN (k2 = 3.06 M–1 s–1)
is significantly higher compared to its N-methyl
nitrone counterparts 689a–689d (k2 = 7.8 to 8.6 × 10–2 M–1 s–1) due to the presence
of an electron-deficient phenyl ring at the N position of the nitrone
moiety. These complexes have been utilized to image live HeLa cells
that are pretreated with BCN-C10. Interestingly, the different lipophilicity
and bioorthogonal reactivity of the complexes have led to regioselective
cellular labeling ( ). In particular, complexes 689a and 689c with low lipophilicity (log Po/w = −1.84
and −1.49, respectively) exhibit limited cellular uptake and
punctate staining on the plasma membrane, whereas the most lipophilic
complex 689d (log Po/w =
1.40) is efficiently internalized into the cells and diffusely distributed
in the cytoplasm. However, complexes 689b and 689e are exclusively enriched in the cell surface despite their different
lipophilicity (log Po/w = 1.32 and −1.16,
respectively). The membrane accumulation of complex 689b is ascribed to the presence of n-butyl chains,
which assist in hydrophobic interaction with the phospholipid bilayers
of the plasma membrane and hence facilitate reaction with the membrane-bound
BCN-C10; while that of complex 689e is due to the high
bioorthogonal reactivity of the complex, which allows efficient labeling
of the cell surface without significant internalization. Notably,
complex 689d shows higher cytotoxicity toward BCN-C10-pretreated
cells compared to other complexes in the series, attributed to the
generation of a more lipophilic isoxazoline adduct that induces extensive
cell death through enhanced nonspecific interactions with intracellular
components. These findings illustrate the significance of the cellular
localization of the complexes in determining their cytotoxic activity.
 
10.3.

## Strain-Promoted Sydnone–Alkyne Cycloaddition
Sydnones are stable mesoionic 5-membered heterocyclic compounds
that can undergo strain-promoted sydnone–alkyne cycloaddition
(SPSAC) reaction with cyclooctynes under physiological conditions,
resulting in the formation of pyrazoles. The use of sydnones as a bioorthogonal handle offers advantages
over azides. One distinctive feature is their tunable reactivity,
which can be easily modulated by modifying the substituents at the N-3 and C-4 positions of the mesoionic
ring without compromising their stability in biological media.
Lo and co-workers have developed iridium(III) complexes modified
with a sydnone moiety (690) ( ) as a new class of phosphorescent bioorthogonal
probes. These complexes display increased
emission intensities and lifetimes (I/Io = up to 7.9; τ = 0.10 to 0.25
μs) with a blue shift in their emission maxima upon the SPSAC
reaction with BCN in aqueous solution, as the conversion of the dipolar
mesoionic sydnone ring to a less polar pyrazole derivative increases
the hydrophobicity of the local environment. Complex 690b, which exhibits the largest emission changes, has been utilized
to visualize BCN-modified ceramide (BCN-Cer) in live HeLa cells. The
intracellular SPSAC reaction produces a luminescent pyrazole adduct
that specifically localizes in the mitochondria. This bioorthogonal
reaction also enhances the photocytotoxicity of the complex by increasing
its efficiency in generating 1O2. Rhenium(I)
complexes coordinated with a 4-(4-pyridyl)sydnone ligand (691) have also been developed as phosphorogenic bioorthogonal probes. The increased π-conjugation between
the sydnone unit and the pyridine ligand leads to significant emission
quenching (Φem ≤ 0.0017),
allowing the complexes to show more substantial emission enhancement
(I/Io = 8.8 to 17.3)
upon the SPSAC reaction with BCN. Complex 691a has been
used to detect BCN-modified morpholine (BCN-Mor) in live HeLa cells,
which enables the selective staining of lysosomes with phosphorogenic
response.
 
10.4.

## Inverse Electron-Demand Diels–Alder
Reaction
The inverse electron-demand Diels–Alder (IEDDA)
reaction between 1,2,4,5-tetrazine and strained alkenes or alkynes
has emerged as a highly promising bioorthogonal reaction due to its
rapid kinetics, high selectivity, and excellent biocompatibility. Additionally, tetrazines possess the unique
ability to quench the emission of attached luminophores, allowing
for the development of luminogenic bioorthogonal probes for labeling
and imaging applications both in cells and in vivo.
Lo and co-workers have modified rhenium(I) complexes with
a tetrazine moiety to afford phosphorogenic bioorthogonal probes (692) ( ) for dienophile-labeled biomolecules. The close proximity and large spectral overlap between the rhenium(I)
center (λem = 513 to 556 nm) and
the tetrazine unit (λabs = ca. 520 nm) enable efficient quenching of the rhenium(I)
emission through FRET, resulting in the low emission quantum yields
of the complexes (Φem ≤ 0.049).
However, the complexes display a remarkable increase in their emission
intensities upon the IEDDA reaction with dienophiles such as 5-norbornen-2-ol
(NBO; I/Io = 1.1 to 8.0)
and BCN (I/Io = 8.0 to
181.1). The smaller emission enhancement observed for NBO is due to
the formation of a dihydropyridazine moiety that effectively quenches
the emission of the complexes through PET. Notably, the direct coordination
of the tetrazine ligand to the rhenium(I) complexes not only perturbs
their emission properties but also enhances their bioorthogonal reactivity.
The binuclear complexes 692e and 692f exhibit
significantly higher reactivity toward BCN (k2 = 407.2 and 537.0 M–1 s–1, respectively) compared to the mononuclear complexes 692a–692d (k2 = 52.4
to 69.7 M–1 s–1) and the free
tetrazine ligands (k2 = 20.1 to 50.3 M–1 s–1) due to the cationic rhenium(I)
center. Complex 692f has been utilized to track the intracellular
distribution of BCN-modified BSA in live HeLa cells, demonstrating
the potential applications of these complexes in examining the biological
functions and spatiotemporal dynamics of biomolecules in living cells
and organisms.
 Related iridium(III) tetrazine complexes (693) ( ) have also been
developed as phosphorogenic bioorthogonal probes for biological labeling
and imaging. These complexes, including
complexes 693c and 693d that emit in the
orange-red to red region, show very weak emission in solution (Φem ≤ 0.010), primarily due to PET
acting as an additional emission quenching pathway alongside FRET.
However, upon reaction with BCN, the complexes display substantial
emission enhancement (I/Io = 19.5 to 121.9). Complex 693c has been used to visualize
azide-modified sialoglycans on the surface of live CHO-K1 cells using
a homobifunctional crosslinker bearing two BCN moieties (bis-BCN). Tetrazine has also been incorporated into iridium(III) complexes
through direct conjugation to the diimine ligand. The weak emission of the resultant tetrazine complexes
(694) in solution (Φem ≤ 0.0202) is due to a dual quenching mechanism involving
FRET and PET. Additionally, the reactivity of the complexes toward
BCN (k2 = 20.9 to 83.1 M–1 s–1) and trans-cyclooct-4-en-1-ol
(TCO; k2 = 634.6 to 1,471.3 M–1 s–1) is remarkably higher compared to the free
tetrazine ligand (k2 = 29.1 and 188.0
M–1 s–1, respectively) due to
the cationic iridium(III) center. Although the reaction of the tetrazine
complexes with TCO is fast, the resulting dihydropyridazine products
exhibit lower emission intensities, shorter emission lifetimes, and
lower 1O2 generation efficiencies than the pyridazine
products formed in the reaction with BCN due to PET quenching, indicating
that the emission and 1O2-photosensitization
properties of the tetrazine complexes can be controlled by the use
of different bioorthogonal reaction partners. Complex 694b has been used for phosphorogenic labeling of lysosomes and the ER
in live HeLa cells using BCN-Mor and BCN-modified phospholipid (BCN-DPPE),
respectively. It has also been utilized for selective imaging and
photoactivated killing of HeLa cells transfected with HaloTag proteins
using a BCN-modified chloroalkane substrate (BCN-C6-Cl).
 The phosphorogenic tetrazine complexes mentioned
above are designed
based on a bichromophoric approach, where the luminophore is connected
to the tetrazine unit through either an aliphatic or π-conjugated
linker. However, the efficiency of emission quenching in these systems
is significantly influenced by factors such as the donor–acceptor
separation and spectral overlap integrals in FRET, and the thermodynamics
of electron transfer in PET. To overcome these limitations, Lo and
co-workers have developed monochromophoric iridium(III) complexes
with a built-in tetrazine motif (695) ( ) as phosphorogenic bioorthogonal
probes. These complexes are very weakly
emissive in solution (Φem ≤
0.0084) due to the electron-deficient tetrazine ligand, but exhibit
substantial enhancement in their emission intensities (I/Io = 23.1 to 96.1) upon the IEDDA reaction
with BCN. Notably, the metal coordination significantly enhances the
reactivity of the tetrazine moiety (k2 = 23.0 to 780.4 M–1 s–1) compared
to the uncoordinated tetrazine ligand (k2 = 12.9 M–1 s–1). Complex 695c has been used for labeling and visualizing BCN-modified
HaloTag proteins in transfected HeLa cells. Lo and co-workers have
also designed a two-step targeting approach that allows for selective
accumulation and controllable activation of related ruthenium(II)
tetrazine complexes (696) in cancer cells. This strategy involves the use of a BCN-modified
self-assembling peptide Nap-FFK(BCN)Yp, which forms large supramolecular
assemblies upon dephosphorylation by alkaline phosphatase (ALP). The
enzyme-instructed self-assembly of the peptide enables the accumulation
of BCN moieties in ALP-overexpressing cancer cells for the IEDDA reaction
with the tetrazine complexes, switching on their emission and 1O2-photosensitization properties for cancer-selective
imaging and therapeutic applications. Interestingly, the cellular
localization of the ruthenium(II) complexes can be controlled by varying
the peptide concentration, which dictates the site of formation of
the supramolecular assemblies in cells from the plasma membrane (at
[Nap-FFK(BCN)Yp] = 200 μM) to the mitochondria (at [Nap-FFK(BCN)Yp]
= 100 μM) ( ), offering opportunities to track different extracellular
and intracellular events. Notably, the photocytotoxicity of the ruthenium(II)-containing
supramolecular assemblies is higher in intracellular regions as the
photogenerated 1O2 causes direct oxidative damage
to proximal organelles instead of diffusing across the plasma membrane
or extracellular space, indicating the importance of cellular localization
in determining their photocytotoxic activity. Iridium(III) complexes
featuring two tetrazine units (697) have also been developed
as phosphorogenic bioorthogonal probes for bis-cyclooctynylated
substrates. These complexes show extremely
weak emission (Φem = 0.0001 to 0.0009)
and 1O2 generation (ΦΔ = 0.02 to 0.07). However, upon reaction with bis-BCN, these complexes are converted to their respective bis-pyridazine counterparts, resulting in a significant
enhancement in their emission intensities (I/Io = 1,008.2 to 3,885.7) and 1O2 photosensitization efficiencies (ΦΔ = 0.62 to 0.77). These changes have enabled selective
imaging and photocytotoxicity toward cells pretreated with bis-BCN. Additionally, one of the complexes has been utilized
for constructing luminescent nanogels for cargo delivery applications.
 Bioorthogonal cleavage reactions have emerged as
a new subfield
of bioorthogonal chemistry that goes beyond typical ligation reactions. , These dissociative reactions have allowed the in situ manipulation of protein activities and controlled activation of
small-molecule prodrugs in live cells and animals. One example is
the IEDDA reaction between a methylene carbamate-substituted tetrazine
and a TCO, which induces carbamate cleavage and liberates a secondary
amine. Lo and co-workers have utilized
this “click-to-release” strategy to develop rhenium(I)
tetrazine complexes (698) ( ) as bioorthogonally activatable photosensitizers. These complexes display weak emission (Φem = 0.029 to 0.039) and 1O2 photosensitization (ΦΔ = 0.22 to 0.48) due to the quenching tetrazine moiety. Incubation
of the complexes with TCO induces the bioorthogonal cleavage reaction,
increasing both the emission intensities and 1O2 generation efficiencies of the complexes. Notably, the PEG complex 698d exhibits relatively low dark cytotoxicity (IC50 = 51.1 to 73.7 μM) but substantially enhanced cytotoxic activity
toward TCO-pretreated cells upon irradiation (IC50 = 0.6
to 4.6 μM), resulting from the synergistic release of the more
cytotoxic rhenium(I) aminomethylpyridine complex and increased 1O2 generation. The treatment efficiently induces
lysosomal dysfunction, autophagy suppression, and immunogenic cell
death. This is the first example of using bioorthogonal cleavage reactions
to realize photoinduced immunogenic cell death, opening up new avenues
for the development of innovative therapeutic agents for photoimmunotherapy.
 

11.

## Luminescent Transition Metal Complexes as Probes
for Bacterial Cells
Bacterial infections have long presented
a significant global public
health challenge, being the second leading cause of death worldwide.
Although antibiotics have been effective in treating these infections,
the excessive and widespread use of antibiotics has led to the emergence
of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. This has made the treatment of bacterial
infections, especially multidrug-resistant strains, increasingly challenging.
Thus, the selective detection of pathogenic bacteria is of high clinical
significance for accurate diagnosis and treatment of bacterial infections. 
11.1.

## Bacterial Envelope
Bacteria can
be categorized into two groups: Gram-negative bacteria, characterized
by a thin layer of peptidoglycans and an outer membrane containing
LPS, and Gram-positive bacteria, distinguished by a thick layer of
peptidoglycans decorated with teichoic acids and lipoteichoic acid
(LTA) but lacking an outer membrane. The cell membrane of bacteria is also rich in anionic phospholipids,
which are primarily located in the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane
of mammalian cells. The abundance of anionic components in the bacterial
cell envelope sets it apart from mammalian cell membranes, which are
predominantly zwitterionic. This distinction in membrane composition
offers a straightforward and efficient method for detecting and differentiating
bacteria.
Ding, Yu, and co-workers have utilized a cationic
platinum(II) complex (699) ( ) for LPS detection and rapid discrimination
of pathogenic bacteria. The binding
of the complex to LPS enhances intermolecular Pt···Pt
and π–π interactions and switches on the 3MMLCT emission in the deep-red region (λem = 650 nm). The specific recognition of LPS has allowed for
the rapid and wash-free differentiation between Gram-negative E. coli and Gram-positive S. aureus and Bacillus subtilis (B. subtilis). Cationic
AIE-active iridium(III) complexes appended with a quaternary ammonium
group (700) have also been used for the rapid detection
of LPS and wash-free imaging of bacteria. 
 Xu, Wang, and co-workers have designed three
AIE-active iridium(III)
complexes (701) ( ) that enable the selective discrimination,
imaging, and elimination of Gram-positive bacteria. These complexes form large luminescent aggregates upon
binding to LTA, giving rise to strong emission in Gram-positive bacteria
such as B. subtilis, S. aureus,
and methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) ( a,b). The specific emission turn-on has allowed for the selective
discrimination of Gram-positive S. aureus from Gram-negative E. coli and the fungus Candida albicans (C. albicans) ( c). Furthermore, complex 701a displays potent antibacterial activity toward Gram-positive bacteria
with minimal inhibitory concentrations ranging from 0.9 to 1.9 μg
mL–1. The activity is substantially enhanced upon
irradiation due to the generation of 1O2. Notably,
the complex is highly biocompatible with mammalian cells with minimal
cytotoxic and hemolytic activity under both dark and light conditions.
These remarkable properties have led to its successful application
in treating S. aureus-infected wounds on mice, resulting
in almost complete wound healing and scar disappearance after the
treatment. A related ruthenium(II) complex (702) also
exhibits specific interaction with LTA, enabling the simultaneous
detection and photodynamic inactivation of Gram-positive bacteria in vitro and in vivo. 
 Sasmal and co-workers have developed three cationic
AIE-active
iridium(III) complexes (703) ( ) for simultaneous detection and elimination
of drug-resistant bacteria. In the
presence of bacteria, these complexes bind to LTA or LPS through electrostatic
and hydrophobic interactions, resulting in blue-shifted and enhanced
emission. The complexes also show potent antibacterial activity toward
antibiotic-resistant bacteria such as carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii and MRSA. Other AIE-active iridium(III)
complexes (704 and 705) have also been reported
for simultaneous imaging and inactivation of bacteria. , Strassert, Vida, Perez-Inestrosa, and co-workers have developed
a dendritic platinum(II) complex (706) for labeling bacteria. The terminal amino groups of the dendritic
skeleton are critical to the binding of the complex to the anionic
bacterial cell surface via hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions.
 Wang, Zhou, and co-workers have designed a ruthenium(II)
complex
bearing two alkyne moieties (707) ( ) for targeted imaging and
PDT of Gram-positive bacteria. This
complex can specifically recognize aminophospholipids such as phosphatidylethanolamine
and lysyl-phosphatidylglycerol that are abundant on the outer membrane
of Gram-positive bacteria via the amine–yne click reaction.
The specific targeting of aminophospholipids has enabled the efficient
labeling and photodynamic inactivation of Gram-positive bacteria such
as S. aureus and MRSA while leaving mammalian cells
unaffected.
 
11.2.

## Bacterial Enzymes
Bacterial enzymes
play an important role in the development of antibiotic resistance. For example, β-lactamases are often
expressed at high levels in antibiotic-resistant bacteria. These enzymes
can cleave the β-lactam ring present in antibiotics such as
penicillin and cephalosporin, rendering them ineffective against the
bacteria. Thus, the development of luminescent probes that can specifically
target bacterial enzymes will provide a valuable tool for the detection
of pathogenic bacteria.
Xing and Shao have designed a β-lactamase-responsive
ruthenium(II) complex (708) ( ) for selective imaging and photodynamic
inactivation of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. This complex incorporates cephalosporin as a linker to
connect the ruthenium(II) unit and the emission quencher BHQ3. Hydrolytic
cleavage of the cephalosporin linker by β-lactamases separates
the two moieties and disrupts FRET, resulting in an increase in both
the emission intensity and 1O2 photosensitization
efficiency of the complex. The high specificity of the complex toward
β-lactamase has allowed the selective discrimination of drug-resistant
bacteria such as penicillin G-resistant B. cereus and two clinical isolates of MRSA (BAA39 and BAA44) over S. aureus ( ), and enabled effective photodynamic inactivation of these
bacteria due to their higher expression levels of β-lactamase.
 
11.3.

## Bacterial Biofilms
Bacterial biofilms
are communities of bacteria that are attached to a surface and embedded
in a self-generated matrix composed of extracellular polymeric substances
including proteins, polysaccharides, and nucleic acids. This matrix protects the bacterial cells against
adverse conditions such as pH changes, oxidative stress, and antibiotic
treatment. Since bacteria in biofilms are more resistant to antibiotics
than their planktonic counterparts, the rapid and selective detection
of biofilms is crucial for effective treatment of biofilm-associated
infections.
Strassert, Faust, and co-workers have developed
a series of platinum(II) complexes (709) ( ) as luminescent
probes to examine the microenvironment of bacterial biofilms. These complexes possess various structural
features that facilitate their interaction with bacteria. In particular,
complex 709a is modified with two adamantane units to
enhance its affinity for bacteria through nonspecific hydrophobic
interaction, while complexes 709b–709d are functionalized with a maltohexaose moiety to promote their specific
recognition by maltodextrin transporters on the bacterial membrane.
In S. aureus biofilms, complexes 709a and 709b display increased emission intensities and
lifetimes due to their interactions with the extracellular matrix
surrounding the bacteria, resulting in the selective staining of the
biofilms over their planktonic counterparts. However, in E.
coli biofilms, only complex 709d stains the
agglomerated bacteria in the biofilms, while complexes 709a–709c preferentially interact with individual
cells dispersed throughout the biofilms. The differential staining
behavior suggests that the substituents on both the tridentate and
monodentate ligands play a significant role in dictating the interactions
of the complexes with bacterial biofilms.
 

12.

## Luminescent Transition Metal Complexes as Probes
for Cell Viability
Cell death is a complex process that can
occur through different
mechanisms such as apoptosis, necrosis, and autophagy, depending on
the specific conditions. Evaluating cell viability is an important
aspect of biological, pathological, and medical research. While traditional
methods rely on the use of colorimetric reagents, fluorescent probes
can offer more precise and comprehensive information about the health
status of cells. These probes can be
coupled with fluorescence microscopy for real-time monitoring of cell
viability at the single-cell level, or with flow cytometry for quantitative
measurement of cell viability and identification of sub-populations
of cells with different health statuses. These techniques have enabled
the facile differentiation between live, apoptotic/necrotic, and dead
cells, providing valuable insights into the underlying mechanisms
of cell death and aiding in the development of new therapeutic strategies
for various diseases.
Orellana and co-workers have developed
a luminescent ruthenium(II)
complex (710) ( ) that can distinguish between live and dead cells. This complex cannot pass through the intact
membrane of live cells, but it can penetrate the compromised membrane
of dead cells and accumulate in the nucleus. The differential cellular
uptake behavior has allowed the complex to serve as a specific indicator
of dead cells within a cell population. The staining performance of
the complex is comparable to the commercial dead cell stain PI when
applied in cell viability measurement using flow cytometry. Additionally,
the emission lifetime of the complex is sensitive to the health status
of cells, which increases from 0.45 μs in viable cells to 0.82
μs in dead cells. This interesting feature can be exploited
to develop novel time-resolved assays for cell viability measurement
with minimal autofluorescence interference. Selective staining of
the nucleus of dead cells has also been observed for [Ru(phen)2(dppz)]2+, which has enabled its use as a nuclear
stain in the comet assay to measure DNA damage in cells. A related ruthenium(II) complex (711) is also impermeable to live cells but can stain both the cytoplasm
and nucleus of dead cells, allowing the facile differentiation between
live and dead cell populations. Vaidyanathan,
Nair, and co-workers have developed a membrane-impermeable platinum(II)
complex (712) that selectively stains the nucleus of
cells with compromised membranes. This
complex has been utilized to image cells undergoing apoptosis induced
by plumbagin, visualizing various apoptotic features such as membrane
blebbing and nuclear fragmentation.
 Li and co-workers have designed an iridium(III)
solvato complex
(713) ( ) as a luminescent indicator of cell death. This complex displays selective labeling of the nucleus
of dead cells as a result of its increased cellular and nuclear uptake
when the membranes are permeabilized, allowing the differentiation
between live, early apoptotic, and dead cells using LSCM and flow
cytometry based on their distinct plasma and nuclear membrane permeability
( ). Notably,
the complex outperforms conventional commercial apoptosis kits, which
typically require the combined use of two different fluorescent stains
such as Annexin V–FITC and PI to differentiate apoptotic cells
from dead cells.
 Chao and co-workers have developed a dual-emissive
platinum(II)
complex (714) ( ) for two-photon bioimaging. This complex exhibits both fluorescence (λem = 445 nm) and phosphorescence (λem = 573 nm) in aqueous solution, originating from the
monomeric species and the supramolecular self-assembled nanostructures,
respectively. The loss of plasma membrane integrity during cell death
promotes the cellular uptake and accumulation of the complex, inducing
its intracellular self-assembly and increasing the ratio I573nm/I445nm. This ratiometric
response can reflect the degree of membrane damage, enabling the differentiation
between live, apoptotic, and necrotic cells and the monitoring of
the inflammation process in zebrafish. Li, Yam, and co-workers have
designed a platinum(II) complex (715) that allows for
the monitoring of cell viability based on its distinct subcellular
localization in live and dead cells. At increasing concentrations, the complex undergoes supramolecular
self-assembly into well-defined aggregated nanostructures via Pt···Pt
and π–π interactions, resulting in a change in
the emission color from green (λem = 490 and 520 nm) to red (λem =
550–800 nm). In healthy cells, the complex is internalized
and enriched in the lysosomes as monomeric species with green emission.
However, when the nuclear membrane permeability is lost during cell
death, the complex readily migrates to the nucleus and self-assembles
into red-emissive aggregates. This unique lysosome-to-nucleus translocation,
along with the different emission response, has enabled the real-time
tracking of acid-induced necrosis in HeLa cells ( ).
 
13.

## Conclusions and Outlook
In this Review,
we provide a comprehensive overview of the recent
development of luminescent transition metal complexes with a d6, d8, and d10 electronic configuration
for applications in bioimaging and biosensing. The metal–ligand
coordination allows these complexes to establish new excited states
such as MLCT, LLCT, and MMLCT states that are not accessible to organic
fluorophores. The presence of a heavy metal center in these complexes
enhances ISC, leading to the efficient population of the triplet manifolds
that contribute to their interesting photophysical properties. Most
of these complexes display phosphorescence with long emission lifetimes,
rendering them compatible with time-resolved luminescence imaging
microscopy. The facile differentiation between long-lived and short-lived
emission signals not only enables the effective elimination of interference
from background autofluorescence but also allows their simultaneous
analysis for multiplex imaging and sensing. Furthermore, the CT excited
states of these complexes enhance their NLO properties, making them
suitable for multiphoton microscopy that enables high-resolution imaging
at increased tissue depths. Luminescent transition metal complexes
have also been used for super-resolution microscopy, allowing the
visualization of cellular structures with nanometer resolution. Compared
to the organic fluorophores that are commonly used in super-resolution
imaging such as rhodamine and its derivatives, transition metal complexes
exhibit superior photostability, making them advantageous for super-resolution
microscopy such as SIM and STED microscopy. Additionally, their larger
Stokes’ shifts allow for multicolor super-resolution imaging
when combined with other luminescent probes. However, most of these
complexes are not suitable for single-molecule localization microscopy
such as STORM that utilizes the stochastic blinking of luminescent
molecules to improve spatial resolution. Thus, the development of
transition metal complexes with photoswitchable luminescence properties
(i.e., reversible switching between a dark state
and an emissive state) is anticipated to strengthen their applications
in super-resolution imaging. The presence of a transition metal center
in these complexes also confers unique coordination chemistry and
molecular geometry, offering new sensing mechanisms that involve changes
in the metal coordination environment and metal–metal and ligand–ligand
interactions, which are not typically observed in organic fluorophores.
The strategic manipulation of the intriguing properties of transition
metal complexes has led to their successful applications in studying
biological processes in various cell cultures and small animal models,
enhancing our understanding of cell physiology and pathology. These
advancements have also contributed to the identification of important
biomarkers and disease hallmarks, aiding in the diagnosis of diseases
such as bacterial infections, inflammation, kidney and liver diseases,
neurodegenerative diseases, and cancer. Furthermore, the long-lived
triplet excited states of the complexes allow them to show efficient
ROS photosensitization. The controlled activation of their ROS generation
behavior in response to specific biomarkers has enabled them to function
as theranostic agents to “see” and to “treat”
the diseases in a more precise and personalized manner.
However,
to translate these exciting results into clinical settings,
several major challenges need to be addressed. One of the primary
challenges is sensitivity, as most of the complexes developed to date
display absorption and emission profiles in the visible region, which
are susceptible to interference from cell autofluorescence and light
scattering in biological tissues. Thus, it would be highly advantageous
to focus on the development of new complexes with absorption and emission
profiles centered in the far-red to NIR region or compatible with
multiphoton excitation techniques. Long-wavelength light offers benefits
such as reduced autofluorescence background and increased penetration
depth, enabling deep-tissue imaging in vivo. However,
the design of luminescent transition metal complexes exhibiting red
to NIR emission with high quantum efficiencies is a longstanding challenge
due to the higher nonradiative decay rates governed by the energy
gap law. A judicious choice of metal
centers and ligands with different electronic properties can lead
to the development of more effective NIR luminescent probes. For example,
the use of an electron-rich nitrogen-containing ancillary ligand for
cyclometalated iridium(III) complexes has demonstrated an effective
means to destabilize the dπ orbital of the iridium(III) center
and reduce the energies of the MLCT excited states, resulting in red
to NIR luminescent iridium(III) complexes but still with very high
emission quantum yields. The exploration
of transition metal complexes as chemiluminescent and afterglow luminescent
probes also holds promise for background-free imaging in vivo.
Another challenge is specificity and selectivity of the complexes
toward their targets within complex biological environments. One approach
to address this issue is to incorporate targeting moieties into the
complexes for recognizing specific molecular signatures present on
target analytes, organelles, and cell surfaces to minimize their interactions
with nontargeted components. For example, transition metal complexes
can be conjugated to biomolecules such as peptides and antibodies
(active targeting) or formulated into nanomaterials (passive targeting)
to selectively target cancer cells. The use of bioorthogonal chemistry
as a pretargeting strategy has become a valuable approach in achieving
target specificity and selectivity within living systems, as it can
not only facilitate the accumulation of transition metal complexes
at the desired target sites but also enable controlled activation
of their phosphorescence and ROS-photosensitization properties. Furthermore,
masking of transition metal complexes with responsive moieties using
a dual-locked approach can lead to the development of probes that
can only be activated in the copresence of two target analytes, precluding
nonspecific activation and improving detection accuracy and reliability.
While these new design strategies hold promise for the development
of more effective reagents, structural optimization is often required
to fine-tune their properties for clinical applications, which can
be a tedious and laborious process. Studies on the structure–property
relationships in luminescent transition metal complexes have revealed
that both the metal center and ligands play crucial roles not only
in the photophysical and photochemical properties of the complexes
but also in their lipophilicity, formal charge, and molecular size,
which strongly influence their biological behavior such as cellular
uptake, localization, biocompatibility, pharmacokinetics, and biodistribution.
Recent advancements in artificial intelligence, machine learning,
and deep learning offer cutting-edge computational tools that are
expected to enhance our understanding of the structure–property
relationships of these complexes and provide new insights to guide
the design of novel complexes and facilitate high-throughput screening
of lead compounds, thereby accelerating the discovery of complexes
with desirable properties for clinical applications.
In conclusion,
luminescent transition metal complexes hold great
promise for bioimaging and biosensing applications. Their intriguing
photophysical and photochemical properties offer exciting prospects
for the development of innovative theranostics. Further research and
advancements in their design will overcome current challenges and
pave the way for their successful translation from the laboratory
to clinical settings.

## Acknowledgments
We thank the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (Project
No. CityU 11302820, CityU 11301121, CityU 11317022, C6014-20W, and
C7075-21GF) and the Hong Kong Research Grants Council, National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Project No. N_CityU104/21) for financial
support. We also acknowledge the funding support from “Laboratory
for Synthetic Chemistry and Chemical Biology” under the Health@InnoHK
Program launched by the Innovation and Technology Commission, The
Government of Hong Kong SAR, P. R. China.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
18F-FDG18F-labeled
2-deoxy-d-glucose
Aβamyloid β
Ac4ManNAz1,3,4,6-tetra-O-acetyl-N-azidoacetyl-d-mannosamine
ADAlzheimer’s disease
AGEadvanced glycation end-product
AgNCsilver nanocluster
AgNPsilver nanoparticle
AHAl-azidohomoalanine
AIEaggregation-induced
emission
Alaalanine
ALPalkaline phosphatase
APAPacetaminophen
APPamyloid precursor
protein
Argarginine
ATPadenosine triphosphate
AuNPgold nanoparticle
AuNRgold nanorod
BCN(1R,8S,9S)-bicyclo[6.1.0]non-4-yne
BETbromodomain and
extraterminal domain
BNPPbis(p-nitrophenyl)phosphate
bpdsbathophenanthroline
disulfonate
bpy2,2′-bipyridine
bpy-NH24-amino-2,2′-bipyridine
BRD4bromodomain-containing
protein
4
BSAbovine serum
albumin
CAcarbonic
anhydrase
CBT2-cyanobenzothiazole
CCCPcarbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone
CDcyclodextrin
Cdotcarbon dot
CELICherenkov-excited luminescence
imaging
CHOChinese
hamster ovary
CIEELchemically initiated electron
exchange luminescence
CNScentral nervous system
CORMcarbon monoxide-releasing molecule
COXcyclooxygenase
CPEconjugated polyelectrolyte
CPNconjugated polymer nanoparticle
CPPcell-penetrating peptide
CRETchemiluminescence resonance
energy
transfer
CTcharge-transfer
CuAACcopper(I)-catalyzed
azide–alkyne
cycloaddition
Curcurcumin
CXCR4CXC chemokine receptor 4
Cyscysteine
DAEdiarylethene
DAPI4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
DIBOdibenzocyclooctyne
DiD1,1′-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′-tetramethylindodicarbocyanine
DILIdrug-induced liver
injury
DNAdeoxyribonucleic
acid
DNasedeoxyribonuclease
DNPdinitrophenyl
DPAdi-(2-picolyl)amine
DPIdiphenyliodonium
chloride
dppzdipyrido[3,2-a:2′,3′-c]phenazine
DSPE1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphorylethanolamine
EGFepidermal growth factor
EGFPenhanced green fluorescent
protein
EGFRepidermal
growth factor receptor
EPRenhanced permeability and retention
ERendoplasmic reticulum
ERLADER-to-lysosome-associated
degradation
Fcferrocene
FITCfluorescein isothiocyanate
FLIMfluorescence lifetime
imaging microscopy
FPRformyl peptide receptor
FRfolate receptor
FRETFörster resonance energy
transfer
FUSfused
in sarcoma
fwhmfull width at half maximum
GBEginkgo biloba extract
GFPgreen fluorescent protein
Gluglutamate
GLUTglucose transporter
Glyglycine
GnRHgonadotropin-releasing
hormone
GPCRG-protein-coupled
receptor
GRPgastrin-releasing
peptide
GRPRgastrin-releasing
peptide receptor
GSHglutathione
GSNPgold–silica nanoparticle
GSTglutathione S-transferase
H2OEPoctaethylporphyrin
H2TCPPmeso-tetra(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin
H2TPFPPmeso-tetrakis(2,3,4,5,6-pentafluorophenyl)porphyrin
H2TPPmeso-tetraphenylporphyrin
H2TPTBPmeso-tetraphenyl-tetrabenzoporphyrin
H2TPTNPmeso-tetraphenyl-tetranaphthoporphyrin
H4DOTA1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7,10-tetraacetic
acid
H4DTPAdiethylenetriaminepentaacetic
acid
HAhyaluronic
acid
Hacacacetylacetonate
Hbt2-phenylbenzothiazole
Hbtp2-(2′-benzo[b]thienyl)pyridine
hCE1human carboxylesterase 1
hCE2human carboxylesterase 2
Hcyhomocysteine
HDChistidine decarboxylase
HDFhuman dermal fibroblast
Hdpyb1,3-di(2-pyridyl)benzene
HEKhuman embryonic
kidney
HELFhuman
embryo liver fibroblast
hENThuman equilibrative nucleoside
transporter
HER2human epidermal growth receptor
2
Hishistidine
HIVhuman immunodeficiency
virus
HLFhuman
lymphatic fibroblast
Hpba4-(2-pyridyl)benzaldehyde
Hppy2-phenylpyridne
HSAhuman serum albumin
HUVEChuman umbilical vein endothelial
cell
I/Rischemia-reperfusion
ICP-MSinductively
coupled plasma-mass
spectrometry
IEDDAinverse electron-demand Diels–Alder
ILintraligand
ILCTintraligand charge-transfer
IRinfrared
ISCintersystem crossing
KTZketoconazole
LaRlabeling after
recognition
LbRlabeling before recognition
LDlipid droplet
LI-PClithium pilocarpine
LLCTligand-to-ligand charge-transfer
LLPSliquid–liquid phase separation
LMCTligand-to-metal charge-transfer
LPMSNlarge-pore mesoporous
silica nanoparticle
LPSlipopolysaccharide
LSCMlaser-scanning confocal microscopy
LTAlipoteichoic acid
Lyslysine
MCmetal-centered
MCTSmulticellular tumor spheroid
MDCKMadin-Darby canine kidney
Me4-phen3,4,7,8-tetramethyl-1,10-phenanthroline
miRNAmicroRNA
MLCTmetal-to-ligand charge-transfer
MMLCTmetal–metal-to-ligand charge-transfer
MMPmatrix metalloproteinase
MMRmismatch repair
MOCmetal–organic
cage
MPOmyeloperoxidase
MPPmitochondria-penetrating
peptide
MPS5-((S)-(+)-2-(methoxymethyl)pyrrolidino)sulfonylisatin
MRImagnetic resonance
imaging
MRSAmethicillin-resistant S.
aureus
MSNmesoporous silica nanoparticle
NACN-acetylcysteine
NADnicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide
NADPnicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate
Napnaphthalene
NBD7-nitro-2,1,3-benzoxadiazole
NBO5-norbornen-2-ol
NCPnanoscale coordination
polymer
NEMN-ethylmaleimide
Neu5AcN-acetylneuraminic
acid
NF-κBnuclear factor-κB
NHCN-heterocyclic
carbene
NIRnear-infrared
NLCTamine-to-ligand
charge-transfer
NLOnonlinear optical
NLSnuclear localization sequence
NMOFnanoscale metal–organic
framework
NMOLnanoscale
metal–organic
layer
NOSnitric
oxide synthase
NPnanoparticle
O-GlcNAcO-linked β-N-acetylglucosamine
OEGoligo(ethylene glycol)
PAMAMpoly(amidoamine)
PBAphenylboronic acid
PDParkinson’s disease
PDIperylene diimide
PDMAEMApoly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl
methacrylate)
Pdotpolymer dot
PDTphotodynamic therapy
PEGpoly(ethylene glycol)
PEGMApoly(ethylene glycol) methacrylate
PEIpoly(ethyleneimine)
PETphotoinduced electron
transfer
PFOpolydioctylfluorene
PFO-DBTpoly[2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)-alt-4,7-bis(thiophen-2-yl)benzo-2,1,3-thiadiazole]
Ph2-phen4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline
phen1,10-phenanthroline
PIpropidium iodide
PLApoly(lactic acid)
PLGApoly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
PLIMphosphorescence lifetime imaging
microscopy
PNApeptide
nucleic acid
PNIPAMpoly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
PNPpolymeric nanoparticle
POSSpolyhedral oligomeric
silsesquioxane
PPipyrophosphate
PSMAprostate-specific membrane antigen
PTTphotothermal therapy
PVPpoly(N-vinylpyrrolidone)
pypyridine
Qdotquantum dot
RCSreactive carbonyl species
REPIradiopharmaceutical-excited
phosphorescence
imaging
rGOreduced
graphene oxide
RICreverse internal conversion
RISCreverse intersystem crossing
RNAribonucleic acid
RNaseribonuclease
RNSreactive nitrogen species
RONSreactive oxygen and nitrogen species
ROSreactive oxygen
species
RPEretinal
pigmented epithelium
rRNAribosomal ribonucleic acid
salophenN,N′-bis(salicylidene)phenylenediamine
SCoMPIsingle-core
multimodal probe
for imaging
SDDLdiclofenac sodium
SDF-1stromal cell-derived factor 1
SHGsecond-harmonic generation
SIMstructured illumination microscopy
SIMSsecondary-ion
mass spectrometry
SiNPsilica nanoparticle
siRNAsmall interfering RNA
SOCspin–orbit coupling
SODsuperoxide dismutase
SPAACstrain-promoted azide–alkyne
cycloaddition
SPANCstrain-promoted alkyne–nitrone
cycloaddition
SPECTsingle-photon emission computed
tomography
SPNPsupramolecular polymer nanoparticle
SPSACstrain-promoted sydnone–alkyne
cycloaddition
SR-FTIRsynchrotron radiation Fourier
transform Infrared
STEDstimulated emission depletion
STORMstochastic optical reconstruction
microscopy
SXRFsynchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescence
TADFthermally activated delayed fluorescence
TAP1,4,5,8-tetraazaphenanthrene
TBDPStert-butyldiphenylsilyl
TCOtrans-cyclooct-4-en-1-ol
TD-DFTtime-dependent density functional
theory
TEMtransmission
electron microscopy
TEMPO2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl
TGLMtime-gated luminescence microscopy
TNBCtriple-negative
breast cancer
TNBS2,4,6-trinitrobenzenesulfonate
TNFtumor necrosis factor
TPAtwo-photon absorption
tpmtris(1-pyrazolyl)methane
TPP+triphenylphosphonium
tpphztetrapyrido[3,2-a:2′,3′-c:3′′,2′′-h:2′′′,3′′′-j]phenazine
TP-PLIMtwo-photon excitation phosphorescence
lifetime imaging microscopy
TREMtime-resolved emission imaging
microscopy
TSDPthermally stimulated delayed phosphorescence
TSTthiosulfate sulfurtransferase
TTAtriplet−triplet
annihilation
U-87 MGUppsala 87 malignant glioma
UCLupconversion luminescence
UCNCupconversion nanocapsule
UCNPupconversion nanoparticle
VPAsodium valproate

## Biographies
Lawrence Cho-Cheung Lee obtained his BSc and PhD
degrees at City
University of Hong Kong in 2014 and 2020, respectively. He is currently
working as a Postdoctoral Fellow under the supervision of Prof. Kenneth
Lo. His research interests focus on the design of photofunctional
transition metal complexes as biological reagents for bioconjugation,
bioimaging, and (photo)therapeutic applications.

Kenneth Kam-Wing Lo obtained his BSc and PhD degrees
at The University
of Hong Kong in 1993 and 1997, respectively. He then worked as a Croucher
Foundation Postdoctoral Research Fellow in the Inorganic Chemistry
Laboratory of the University of Oxford. In 1999, he joined the Department
of Biology and Chemistry (currently Department of Chemistry) of City
University of Hong Kong as an Assistant Professor and has been a Chair
Professor since 2023. His research interest is the utilization of
luminescent inorganic and organometallic transition metal complexes
as biomolecular probes, cellular imaging reagents, and photocytotoxic
agents.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Special Issue
Published
as part of Chemical Reviewsvirtual special issue “Fluorescent Probes in Biology”.

## References