3079cmghCellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and HepatologyCell Mol Gastroenterol HepatolElsevierPMC1259698412596984125969844093524610.1016/j.jcmgh.2025.101629Metabolic Syndrome Develops Cardia Cancer via Nuclear Factor-E2-related Factor 2-Programmed Death-Ligand 1 Signaling
KusanoKeisuke UnoKaname TamaharaToru AsanoNaoki SudoKoichiro TanabeMizuki OgasawaraKoya KannoTakeshi KoikeTomoyuki ShimizuRitsuko MasamuneAtsushi 1Division of Gastroenterology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan2Division of Promotion for Gastroenterological Medical Innovation, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan3Tohoku Medical Megabank Organization, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan4Division of Carcinogenesis and Senescence Biology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan5Division of Cancer Stem Cell, Miyagi Cancer Center Research Institute, Miyagi, Japan∗Correspondence Address correspondence to: Kaname Uno, MD, PhD, Division of Gastroenterology, Division of Promotion for Gastroenterological Medical Innovation, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan 980-8574; tel: +81-22-717-7171. kaname.uno.c3@tohoku.ac.jp
99202520110162910162910112025© 2025 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract

## Background & Aims
The incidence of gastric cardia adenocarcinoma (GCA) and metabolic syndrome (MetS) have increased concurrently. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) may be a biomarker for GCA development and treatment resistance of immune checkpoint inhibitors. We aimed to elucidate whether high-fat diet (HFD)-related endotoxemia progresses GCA via programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) signaling.

## Methods
We studied K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice fed HFD or control diet with or without systemic administration of Escherichia coli LPS ± clodronate liposomes (CLs). To clarify the role of nuclear factor E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) in tumorigenesis, we generated Nrf2-deficient K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice. We performed further experiments using MKN7 and THP-1 cells.

## Results
In the HFD + LPS group of K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice, tumor growth with increase in tumor cell proliferation and macrophage infiltration was observed with gut dysbiosis, gut mucosal barrier damage, endotoxemia, and insulin resistance. The expression of 8-OHdG, NAD(P)H quinone oxidoreductase 1 (Nqo1), Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a, phosphorylated nuclear factor-kappa B (p-NFκB), and PD-L1 was upregulated in tumors. TNF-α expression was observed in tumor cells and stromal macrophages. These effects were abolished in the HFD + LPS + CL group. In the Nrf2-deficient K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice, tumors shrank as TNF-α and PD-L1 expression decreased, without improvement of gut barrier damage and endotoxemia. LPS stimulation of phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate-treated THP-1 cells induced the expression of TNF-α, which activated NFκB-PD-L1 signaling in cocultured MKN7 cells. LPS stimulation of MKN7 cells increased the expression of NQO1, phosphorylated NFκB, and PD-L1, and NRF2 directly regulated CD274 transcription.

## Conclusions
HFD-related metabolic endotoxemia may promote GCA progression via PD-L1 induction in tumor cells directly through Nrf2 signaling activated by LPS and through NFκB signaling by TNF-α from LPS-activated macrophages in tumor microenvironment.

Keywords: Gastric Cardia Adenocarcinoma, Metabolic Endotoxemia, Nuclear Factor E2-related Factor 2, Programmed Death-Ligand 1

## Graphical abstract
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Oct 24; Accepted 2025 Aug 26; Collection date 2026.

## Summary
A high-fat diet with systemic lipopolysaccharide administration to K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice induced metabolic endotoxemia, which may advance gastric cardia adenocarcinoma via programmed death-ligand 1 induction in tumors directly through nuclear factor E2-related factor signaling by lipopolysaccharide and through nuclear factor-kappa B signaling by tumor necrosis factor alpha derived from lipopolysaccharide-activated macrophages.

The prevalence of esophagogastric junction (EGJ) adenocarcinomas, including Barrett’s adenocarcinoma and gastric cardia adenocarcinoma (GCA), has increased. Notably, Sawas et al proposed that, among EGJ adenocarcinomas, non-Barrett’s adenocarcinomas, including GCA, may grow more aggressively than Barrett’s adenocarcinomas does. As the EGJ site is an anatomical site where tiny lesions can be missed on conventional endoscopic examination, new technologies for detection based on biomarkers of GCA carcinogenesis are needed to improve its clinical outcomes.
Previous studies have demonstrated that local exposure of the EGJ mucosa to bile acids, which are pathogenic components of gastroesophageal reflux (GER), may induce Barrett’s carcinogenesis via reactive oxidative stress (ROS), suggesting that frequent GER related to obesity-related intra-abdominal pressure might increase Barrett’s cancer risk. However, the latest studies have not reached a consensus on the correlation between EGJ adenocarcinoma and simple obesity. Epidemiological studies have demonstrated that recent increase in the morbidity of EGJ adenocarcinoma might be linked with a lifestyle-related disease called metabolic syndrome (MetS); notably, MetS has received increasing attention as a risk factor for EGJ adenocarcinoma. , However, the mechanism underlying the relationship between GCA and MetS has not been clarified.
Gut dysbiosis has been suggested to be related to carcinogenesis in several organs. , Yang et al demonstrated that in Apcmin/+ mice, a high-fat diet (HFD) induced gut dysbiosis and gut barrier damage, leading to colorectal tumor progression via the cyclin D1 signaling pathway. Munch et al reported that, although an HFD promoted tumor growth with an immune-suppressive reaction to tumors and gut dysbiosis in L2-IL1B mice of a Barrett`s cancer model, these effects were not observed in germ-free mice. But the mechanism by which HFD-derived dysbiosis promotes GCA carcinogenesis remains unclear.
Metagenomic analysis of serum samples from patients with esophageal adenocarcinoma revealed that serum Escherichia coli (E coli) may serve as a useful biomarker for early diagnosis and prognosis prediction. Gram-negative E coli contains the endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS), whose histological presence in cancer lesions has been reported to be a predictor of resistance to immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) treatment. The interaction between programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expressed on antigen-presenting cells and tumor cells and programmed death 1 (PD-1) expressed on immune cells inhibits effector T cells and activates regulatory T cells, leading to the suppression of the immune response against the tumor. , , , In the clinical setting, ICIs have been widely used to treat EGJ adenocarcinoma and gastric adenocarcinoma. However, how LPS can induce PD-L1 signaling during GCA progression has not been elucidated.
In this study, we investigated the mechanism underlying the relationship between MetS and GCA to assess whether HFD-related dysbiosis and systemic endotoxemia promote GCA progression by inhibiting antitumor immunity via PD-L1 induction. In vivo, we used K19-Wnt1/C2mE (transgenic) mice, which are model mice with spontaneous and simultaneous activation of cyclooxygenase-2/prostaglandin E2-signaling and Wnt1-signaling, leading to the development of inflammation-associated carcinogenesis; tumors in this model resemble well-differentiated human adenocarcinomas that occur around the squamocolumnar junction (SCJ). Ishimoto et al revealed that prostaglandin E2-mediated inflammatory signaling and Wnt-signaling cooperatively trigger the expansion of CD44+ slow-cycling stem-like cells in SCJ tumors, leading to tumor development in K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice. Next, we conducted an in vitro study using cell lines to investigate how PD-L1 expression is induced in tumors at the SCJ site. Finally, we compared tumorigenesis between K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice and nuclear factor E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)-deficient K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice, which were generated by crossing Nrf2-deficient mice with K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice, to assess the role of antioxidative Nrf2-signaling in altering PD-L1-induced tumor progression.

## Results

## An HFD and E coli LPS Promote Tumor Progression at the SCJ in K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice Through PD-L1 Induction in the Inflamed Microenvironment
From 6 to 20 weeks of age, K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice were fed either a control diet or an HFD with free access to water. During the same period, E coli LPS was injected intraperitoneally twice a week at a dose of 0.25 mg/g body weight in the HFD + LPS group of mice ( A). Body weight (BW) and the Homeostatic Model Assessment for Insulin Resistance (HOMA-IR) score, a hallmark indicator of metabolic syndrome, were significantly greater in K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice in the HFD + LPS group than those in the other groups at 20 weeks of age ( B). All K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice developed granular and nodular tumors around the SCJ site by 20 weeks of age, although neither invasion nor metastases were observed ( C). The ratio of the tumor area to the whole stomach area was significantly greater in the HFD + LPS group than in the control group ( D). Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis revealed that the Ki-67 labeling index (LI) in tumor cells, as well as the numbers of CD3-, CD4-, CD8-, and FOXP3-positive lymphocytes and ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule 1 (Iba1)-positive inflammatory cells in the tumor stroma, were significantly greater in the HFD + LPS group than in the control group ( A–B). The protein expression of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and PD-L1 were detected in the cytoplasm of tumor cells and inflammatory cells in the stroma, whereas PD-1 protein expression was detected in inflammatory cells in the stroma. The IHC scores of the HFD + LPS group were significantly greater than those of the control group ( C). Notably, TNF-α staining colocalized with F4/80-positive monocytes in the stroma, suggesting that TNF-α may be produced by M1-type macrophages ( D). To identify candidate genes involved in tumor growth in the HFD + LPS group, comprehensive analyses were performed. First, Gene Ontology (GO) functional analysis revealed that the epithelial cell proliferation-related pathways in the tumors of the HFD + LPS group were significantly greater than those in the control group and that the humoral immune response, antimicrobial humoral response, and defense response to bacterium-related pathways in the tumors of the HFD + LPS group were significantly greater than those in the HFD group and the LPS group ( A). Next, on the basis of the gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) results, we explored the upregulation of the interferon (IFN)-γ pathways, inflammatory response pathways, and TNF-α signaling pathways in the HFD + LPS group compared with the control group ( B–C). Compared with those in the control group, the protein expression levels of Toll-like receptor (TLR)-4, TNF-α, phosphorylated NFκB (p-NFκB) p65 and PD-L1 in the HFD + LPS group significantly increased. Additionally, the mRNA expression levels of Cxcl9, Ifng, Nqo1, and Cd274 and the level of 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) were significantly greater than those in the control group ( A–D).
 

## An HFD With LPS Administration Induces Metabolic Endotoxemia With Gut Barrier Dysfunction and Dysbiosis
We assessed metabolic endotoxemia of the animal models and observed that the values of the HOMA-IR score and serum LPS concentration in the HFD + LPS group were greater than those in the HFD group and the LPS group and were significantly greater than those in the control group ( B; A). Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining revealed atrophy and disruption of the villous architecture of the ileal mucosa with rich infiltration of inflammatory cells in the HFD + LPS group compared with the control group ( B–C). The inflammatory cells in the stroma of tumor and gut mucosa in the HFD + LPS group were positive for Iba1 and TNF-α and negative for CD163, suggesting that they were M1-type macrophages ( D). The expression of the tight junction protein zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1), whose expression on the surface of the cytoplasm of ileal mucosal cells was immunohistochemically observed, was decreased in the HFD + LPS group according to Western blot analyses ( B, E–F). Increases in TLR4 and LPS expression in the liver as well as the serum LPS concentration were observed in the HFD + LPS group, suggesting barrier damage in the colon mucosa ( A, E–F). When the mini-Ussing chamber system (mUCs) was used to investigate minute barrier dysfunction in the ileal mucosa in response to short-term E coli LPS stimulation, the decrease in mucosal impedance was significantly greater in the HFD + LPS group than in the control group ( G).
 Metagenomic analysis of the β-diversity of ileal excrement revealed a significant difference in the gut microbiome prolife as the phenotype between the HFD + LPS group and the control group, whereas no change in α-diversity was detected ( A–B). In the HFD + LPS group, there was an increase in the abundance of the phylum Firmicutes and a decrease in the abundance of the phylum Bacteroidetes, resulting in a higher Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio ( C) (Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio (median): control vs HFD + LPS = 37.6 vs 112.4). At the genus level, the ratio of Caproicibacterium to the whole microbiome markedly decreased ( D). In the predicted metabolic pathway analysis via PICRUSt2, significant alterations in 13 pathways at the level 4 classification were observed in the HFD + LPS group compared with those in the control group, whereas 11 and 14 pathways were identified in the LPS group and the HFD group, respectively ( E). We focused on the degradation pathways of vanillin and vanillate, which have anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties, and the degradation pathway of syringate, which might control intestinal mucosal permeability. Pathways with significant differences based on the Wilcoxon rank sum test revealed an increase in butanediol biosynthesis, associated with the suppression of butyrate production, and a decrease in reductant biosynthesis and norspermidine biosynthesis, both of which play a role in maintaining intestinal homeostasis, in the HFD + LPS group compared with the control group ( F).
 

## Macrophage Depletion Suppresses Tumor Growth Through NFκB-PD-L1 Signaling and Attenuates Gut Barrier Damage
To clarify the role of macrophages in tumor progression, we administered clodronate liposome (CL), a macrophage scavenger, along with the HFD + LPS treatment to K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice. CL cotreatment decreased the ratio of infiltrating macrophages in the nontumor spleen tissue and the tumor. Flow cytometric analysis of the spleen tissue revealed that CL coadministration effectively depleted approximately 59.2% of the macrophages infiltration evoked by HFD + LPS treatment ( A). The BW and the HOMA-IR score of the HFD + LPS + CL group of mice were significantly lower than those of the HFD + LPS group of mice ( B). At 20 weeks of age, the tumor area ratio in the HFD + LPS + CL group was significantly lower compared with those in the HFD + LPS group ( C). Additionally, a decrease in the tumor area ratio in the HFD + LPS + CL group at 10 weeks of age was observed, similar to that at 20 weeks of age, suggesting that CL coadministration may slow tumor growth ( D). The IHC analysis on the tumor tissues revealed decreases in the Ki-67 LI of tumor cells and stromal infiltration of CD8-positive cells and Iba1-positive cells compared with those in the HFD + LPS group ( E). The protein expression levels of TLR4, p-NFκB p65, and PD-L1, as well as the mRNA expression levels of Tnfa, Cxcl9, Ifng, and Cd274, in the tumor significantly decreased ( A–C).
 In the HFD + LPS + CL group, remission of disease features in the HFD + LPS group, such as disruption of the villous structure with a decrease in ZO-1 protein expression in the ileal mucosa and the accumulation of LPS in the liver as well as serum LPS concentration, were observed ( A–C). The α-diversity analysis did not show a difference between the 2 groups, whereas the β-diversity analysis and the comparison of the bacterial communities at the class level revealed significant differences in microbiome characteristics between the 2 groups ( D–F). In the predicted metabolic pathway analysis via PICRUSt2, significant alterations in 51 pathways (increase in 45 pathways and decrease in 6 pathways) at the level 4 classification were observed in the HFD + LPS + CL group compared with the HFD + LPS group ( G). In detail, the syringate degradation, norspermidine biosynthesis, and meta-cleavage pathways of aromatic compounds were increased in the HFD + LPS + CL group.
 

## E coli LPS and TNF-α-induced Activation of NFκB-PD-L1 Signaling in MKN7 cells
On the basis of the findings of the in vivo study, we hypothesized that LPS in systemic circulation can act on tumor cells directly and indirectly through TNF-α secreted by inflammatory cells in the tumor stroma. To investigate this hypothesis, we conducted an in vitro study. In MKN7 cells, stimulation with either LPS or TNF-α induced the protein expression of p-NFκB p65 and PD-L1, and the levels of both proteins were reduced by costimulation with BAY11-7082, an NFκB inhibitor ( A–D). However, increases in the protein expression of TLR4 and TNFR1 were observed only under LPS stimulation.
 

## E coli LPS Activated PMA-treated THP-1 cells, Leading to an Increase in TNF-α Secretion, Which May Activate NFκB-PD-L1 Signaling in Cocultured MKN7 cells
To assess whether macrophages stimulated by LPS from the leaky gut play an important role in tumor growth, we applied a coculture system with MKN7 cells and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)-treated THP-1 cells ( A). PMA-treated THP-1 cells were spindle-shaped and adherent cells with F4/80 expression and exhibited an increase in protein expression of TLR4 and TNF-α, but not CD163, under LPS stimulation, suggesting that these cells are M1-type macrophages ( E–G). We transferred PMA-treated THP-1 cells prestimulated with LPS to an Alvetex system for coculture with MKN7 cells, which significantly increased the TNF-α concentration in the supernatant and the protein expression of p-NFκB p65 and PD-L1 in MKN7 cells ( B–D). The addition of a TNF-α-neutralizing antibody to the medium decreased the levels of both proteins.
 

## Suppression of the Nrf2 Signaling-induced Tumor Regression via the Inhibition of PD-L1-Signaling Without Improving Gut Dysbiosis
To assess the role of the Nrf2-ROS signaling in tumor growth by HFD + LPS treatment, we compared Nrf2-knockout (KO)-K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice with K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice. In the Nrf2-KO-K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice, the tumor area ratio was significantly lower than that in the K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice ( A). The IHC analysis revealed decreases in Ki-67 LI in tumor cells and infiltration of CD8-positive cells and Iba1-positive cells in the tumor stroma ( B). The 8-OHdG level and Nqo1 mRNA expression were reduced in the tumor of the Nrf2-KO-K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice ( C, A). The mRNA expression levels of Cxcl9, Tnfa, and Ifng, which are cytokines related to macrophage and lymphocyte migration, as well as that of Cd274, were significantly lower in the tumor of the Nrf2-KO-K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice than those of the K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice ( A). Compared with those in the K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice, the protein expression levels of TLR4, p-NFκB p65, and PD-L1 were significantly decreased in the Nrf2-KO-K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice ( B–C).
 However, barrier dysfunction of the ileal mucosa and LPS expression in the liver as well as serum LPS concentration were similar in the Nrf2-KO-K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice with HFD + LPS treatment and the K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice with HFD + LPS treatment, but the HOMA-IR score of the former was significantly less than that of the latter ( A–D). HFD + LPS treatment diminished CD163-positive M2 macrophages infiltrating into the stroma of the ileal mucosa, independent of the Nrf2-condition of the K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice. Metagenomic analysis revealed no difference between the 2 groups ( A–C). According to the results of the predicted metabolic pathway analysis using PICRUSt2, a significant decrease in 25 pathways at the level 4 classification was observed in the Nrf2-KO-K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice compared with the K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice. In the Nrf2-KO-K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice, the meta-cleavage pathways of aromatic compounds were decreased ( D).
 

## E coli LPS Induces PD-L1 Expression in MKN7 cells Through NRF2 Signaling
An increase in ROS production was observed under LPS stimulation, but not TNF-α stimulation ( A). The expressions of nuclear NRF2 protein and NQO1 and CD274 mRNA in MKN7 cells was significantly increased by LPS stimulation ( B–C). NRF2 siRNA was transfected into MKN7 cells, resulting in the suppression of NRF2, NQO1, and CD274 mRNA expressions under LPS stimulation ( D). To further investigate the involvement of the NRF2-signaling pathway, we evaluated the binding of the NRF2 protein to the promoter region of the CD274 (PD-L1) gene. A chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay revealed that, in MKN7 cells stimulated with LPS, NRF2 was enriched at CD274 promoters but not in the CD274 exon region (negative control) ( E). These results indicate that NRF2 binds directly to the CD274 promoter region and mediates CD274 expression in MKN7 cells.
 

## Association Among NQO1 Protein and PD-L1 Protein Expression in GCA cells and Stromal Macrophage Infiltration in IHC Study of Clinical Samples
To elucidate the association among the protein expression of NAD(P)H quinone dehydrogenase 1 (NQO1), a downstream of NRF2 gene, and PD-L1, macrophage infiltration in the tumor stroma and systemic MetS condition at a more clinical level, we conducted an IHC study in patients with GCA with or without MetS ( ). The cohort included 10 patients with MetS and 10 without MetS. The body mass index score and mortality associated with hypertension were significantly greater in patients with GCA with MetS than in those without MetS. Cytoplasmic NQO1 and PD-L1 expression in tumor cells and cytoplasmic Iba1 expression in stromal inflammatory cells were significantly greater in patients with GCA with MetS than those in patients without MetS ( A). The immunoreactivity of Iba1, NQO1, and PD-L1 were identified in 20, 18, and 18 of the 20 cases, respectively. The PD-L1 index, the NQO1 index, and the numbers of infiltrating Iba1-positive macrophages in patients with MetS were significantly greater than those in patients without MetS ( B). There were statistically positive correlations between the PD-L1 index and the degree of macrophage infiltration and between the PD-L1 index and the NQO1 index ( C) (Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient value (ρ): Iba1 vs PD-L1: ρ = 0.54; P = .013; NQO1 vs PD-L1: ρ = 0.76; P = .0001).
 

## Discussion
We demonstrated that coadministration of an HFD and LPS to K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice may systemically cause metabolic endotoxemia with insulin resistance and gut dysbiosis and locally promote the SCJ tumor progression through PD-L1 induction in tumor cells, which could be caused directly by Nrf2 signaling via exposure to LPS or by NFκB signaling via TNF-α secreted from LPS-activated macrophages. Previous studies reported that exposure of the tumor microenvironment to abnormal components and metabolites derived from HFD-evoked dysbiosis might lead to inflammation-associated carcinogenesis of colorectal, liver, and pancreatic cancers. , , However, no study has investigated how HFD-related dysbiosis promotes GCA.
First, we discuss a role of HFD-induced dysbiosis and barrier damage of the gut in tumor progression. In this study, coadministration of an HFD and LPS caused tumor growth and increases in the serum endotoxin level and the HOMA-IR score, compared with those induced by treatment with either an HFD or LPS alone. The carcinogenic pathways in the tumors identified by GSEA and GO functional analysis and the gut microbiome profile as the phenotype identified by 16S rRNA analysis revealed distinctive characteristics in the HFD + LPS group, but not in the HFD or LPS groups. In the HFD + LPS group, the metagenomic analysis of ileal excrement revealed a reduction in Caproicibacterium, which may be associated with gut barrier damage. Caproicibacterium can produce short-chain fatty acids (caproic acid and butyrate), which play a multifaceted role in maintaining and strengthening barrier function. , In particular, butyrate reportedly suppresses inflammation-associated colorectal carcinogenesis by maintaining the barrier through the induction of tight junction proteins and immune inactivation due to its anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties. , The predicted metabolic pathway involves alterations in the following components: (1) vanillin, which has anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects ; (2) syringate, which reduces intestinal permeability , ; (3) butanediol, which suppresses butyrate production; and (4) reducing agents and norspermidine, which maintain gut homeostasis. , , As previous studies have described, , , these changes may cause barrier dysfunction in the dysbiotic gut, leading to permeation of pathogenic components and metabolites into systemic circulation for tumor growth at the SCJ site.
Furthermore, we assessed whether the administration of CL or an antibiotic cocktail affects dysbiosis and barrier damage in the gut. CL administration to the K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice induced alterations in the gut microbiome, resulting in an increase in syringate degradation and norspermidine biosynthesis, both of which were suppressed in the HFD + LPS group, as well as an increase in the meta-cleavage pathways of aromatic compounds. It has been reported that some metabolites of aromatic compounds, such as polyphenols, produced by gut microbiome have anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and antiobesity effects, and also promote short-chain fatty acid production, which helps maintain and strengthen the intestinal mucosal barrier. , Along with improvement in the gut barrier, these changes might lead to tumor shrinkage. On the other hand, oral administration of antibiotics simplified the microbiome, with no remission in gut barrier damage or tumor size ( ). Therefore, gut barrier damage may have a greater impact on tumor growth than gut dysbiosis does, although Yu et al proposed “a common ground hypothesis” that the interaction between the gut microbiome/metabolites and the gut mucosa might maintain inflammation and the barrier function of the gut mucosa. Our results were not consistent with those of Münch et al, who reported that Barrett’s dysplastic lesions in L2-IL-1B mice are significantly diminished in germ-free mice with improved gut dysbiosis, possibly because they did not investigate whether tumorigenesis may be affected by alterations in gut condition due to treatment with CLs or antibiotics. Previous studies reported contradictory results: although additional administration of antibiotics might shrink colonic tumors along with change in the gut microbiome profile as the phenotype in HFD-fed mice, , the colonic tumor size of mice with treatment of a fasting-mimicking diet and antibiotics was significantly greater than that of those with a fasting-mimicking diet alone, along with alteration in the gut microbiome. However, no study has revealed the effect of the oral administration of antibiotics on tumorigenesis at the SCJ. Clinically, a recent epidemiological study revealed an association between a prior history of oral antibiotic administration and an increase in EGJ adenocarcinoma incidence, so further studies concerning interactions between the gut condition and GCA development are needed.
 We next investigated whether macrophages play a crucial role in the production of mediators of GCA progression. The IHC analysis of clinical samples revealed a possible association between PD-L1 protein expression in tumor cells and the stromal macrophage infiltration in human GCA tissues. In the HFD + LPS group of the K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice, tumor tissues exhibited increased Ifng, Cxcl9, and Tnfa expression, along with increased infiltration of inflammatory cells. The IHC analysis revealed that the TNF-α protein was expressed in F4/80-positive macrophages and that coadministration with CLs induced tumor shrinkage by inhibiting the mRNA expression of Cxcl9, Infg, Tnfa, and Cd274, and the protein expression of TNF-α, p-NFκB p65, and PD-L1. In an in vitro study, stimulation with LPS increased TNF-α secretion from THP-1-derived M1 macrophages into the medium, resulting in the induction of p-NFκB p65 and PD-L1 protein expression in MKN7 cells cocultured with activated macrophages. Therefore, LPS, which can translocate from the leaky gut with HFD-related dysbiosis into the circulation, may activate macrophages in the tumor microenvironment, leading to the activation of NFκB‒PD-L1 signaling in tumor cells. Previous studies described each step in PD-L1 induction in cancer cells under stimulation with LPS or TNF-α, , , , but in this study, we comprehensively evaluated the interaction between LPS-stimulated macrophages and tumor cells via in vivo and in vitro experiments. In addition, C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 9 (Cxcl9), a chemokine induced by IFN-γ, is expressed not only in inflammatory cells, such as macrophages and dendritic cells, but also in tumor cells. It may function in recruiting immune cells to promote tumor progression through immune evasion via PD-L1 induction via Cxcr3-signaling. , , Therefore, Cxcl9 and IFN-γ may collectively contribute to tumor growth at the SCJ site by facilitating macrophage recruitment and PD-L1-related immune evasion.
Next, we investigated the involvement of direct exposure of tumor cells to LPS in PD-L1 induction during tumor progression. In this study, direct exposure of MKN7 cells to E coli LPS activated NFκB-PD-L1 signaling. Yin et al demonstrated that gut-derived LPS might induce PD-L1 expression in PANC-1 cells via the TLR4/AKT/NFκB signaling pathway. Li et al reported that stimulation of AGS cells with LPS activated NFκB-PD-L1 pathway. As mentioned in a previous study, the interaction between NFκB signaling and NRF2 signaling may be involved in the tumorigenesis. Importantly, in an in vivo study with the K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice and the Nrf2-KO-K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice, we demonstrated that administration of HFD and E coli LPS induced PD-L1 expression through Nrf2 signaling in the SCJ tumors. In addition, we demonstrated via an in vitro study that the stimulation of MKN7 cells with LPS increased PD-L1 expression via the activation of NRF2 signaling, and these effects were inhibited by treatment with transient transfection with NRF2 small interfering RNA (siRNA). Furthermore, a ChIP assay revealed that the binding of NRF2 to the promoter region of the CD274 gene increased under LPS stimulation. Notably, NRF2, an endogenous gene with antioxidant properties, can function as a double-edged sword in carcinogenesis. Our results are compatible with Duan’s report that NRF2 is involved in PD-L1 induction in lung squamous cell carcinoma cells and that NRF2 activation is linked to tumor growth via resistance to ICI treatment in humans in a clinical setting. We also showed association between the NQO1 expression, a representative downstream target of NRF2 gene, and the PD-L1 expression in the IHC analysis in human GCA tissues. Previously, it was unclear whether Nrf2-antioxidant response element signaling pathway play tumorigenic or antitumorigenic roles at the SCJ site. However, we demonstrated that NRF2 may play a tumorigenic role in directly controlling PD-L1 induction during GCA development.
This study has several limitations. First are the parameters, such as dose and duration of the LPS stimulation, which may impact on the mechanism of how MetS affects GCA carcinogenesis. Systemic endotoxemia related to MetS, so-called ‘metabolic endotoxemia,’ has been emphasized as a pathogen of various lifestyle-related diseases. , An HFD and systemic E coli LPS administration have been widely applied to imitate endotoxemia related to MetS-derived gut barrier disruption. , In this study, coadministration of an HFD and E.coli LPS, which was administered at a low-moderate dose for physiological activity but for a shorter duration than that used in Münch’s study, to the K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice caused tumor growth with a distinctive phenotype of carcinogenic pathways, metabolic endotoxemia, and gut dysbiosis, which were not observed in the HFD or LPS group. Previous studies have reported that high serum LPS activity might be strongly associated with MetS severity and that the synergetic effect of HFD-indued metabolic endotoxemia and systemic E.coli LPS administration may activate immunometabolic mechanisms to worsen the MetS condition in mice. Therefore, we propose that an SCJ tumor mouse model with HFD + LPS treatment may mimic relatively severe metabolic endotoxemia. Although available endotoxin assays cannot identify causable microbiomes of serum endotoxin, both of the LPS derived from a dysbiotic gut and that from other sites in the human body may synergically play important roles in the pathology of MetS-related diseases. As another origin of the LPS, the oral cavity is considered as the most diverse microbial communities in the human body, and the LPS of the oral microbes may disseminate into circulation after daily tooth brushing and through the damaged mucosa of the dysbiotic gut affected by microbes swollen from the oral cavity. In addition, a daily diet containing proinflammatory pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), such as minced meat, can cause MetS-complicated diseases via TLR-related innate immunity. , As coadministration of E coli LPS in HFD-induced SCJ tumor model mice in this study may mimic the synergetic effects of HFD-induced metabolic disorders and the other origin of systemic LPS derived from periodontitis and a PAMPs-rich diet, the ‘second attack’ of the LPS may activate the immunometabolic mechanism to promote MetS-associated tumorigenesis. Another limitation concerns the physical significance of LPS treatment. We showed that, although serum LPS level in the HFD + LPS group was significantly greater than the others, the hepatic LPS expression in the HFD group and the HFD + LPS group were much greater than that in the LPS group. Considering that the liver gets a dual blood supply from the systemic circulation (20%) and from the enteric portal vein (80%), the intrahepatic LPS accumulation from the dysbiotic gut may be greater than that in the systemic circulation. Therefore, our results may be reliable and help to explain how LPS diffuses from the dysbiotic gut and how the systemically injected LPS affects the liver. Third, we did not evaluate the effects of fecal transplantation or the administration of synbiotics or postbiotics on tumor progression or gut microbiome profile as the phenotype, although we revealed that alteration in the gut environment caused by the administration of CL or antibiotic cocktails and Nrf2 gene deletion might affect tumor growth. Fourth, we did not assess whether the improvement in insulin resistance caused by macrophage depletion with CL administration or by Nrf2 gene deletion can shrink tumors. These issues remain subjects for future investigations.
In conclusion, metabolic endotoxemia with gut dysbiosis may cooperatively promote GCA in the K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice by increasing PD-L1 expression in tumor cells directly through Nrf2 signaling activated by the LPS exposure and through NFκB signaling by the stimulation with TNF-α from LPS-activated macrophages in the tumor microenvironment. Controlling NRF2 signaling in tumors as well as barrier disruption of the leaky gut may be important for inhibiting GAC progression. Further studies are needed to develop new strategies for the prevention or suppression of GAC progression, which may be closely associated with lifestyle-related MetS.

## Materials and Methods

## Reagents
We purchased a control diet (D16042904B: protein 17%, carbohydrate 73%, fat 10%, total 4685 kcal/kg) and an HFD (D12079B: protein 17%, carbohydrate 43%, fat 41%, total 4686 kcal/kg) from Research Diets, E coli LPS from Sigma‒Aldrich, CLs from FormuMax Scientific, TNF-α from Fujifilm Wako Pharmaceuticals, and the inhibitor BAY 11-7082 from AdipoGen Life Sciences, Inc. E coli LPS was dissolved in distilled water, sterilized, and prepared at a concentration of 5 μg/mL in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for intraperitoneal administration to mice. The antibiotic cocktail was prepared by dissolving 0.2 g of ampicillin sodium (016-23301, FujiFilm Wako Pure Chemical Co), 0.2 g of neomycin sulfate (146-08871, FujiFilm Wako Pure Chemical Co), 0.2 g of metronidazole (132-18061, FujiFilm Wako Pure Chemical Co), and 0.1 g of vancomycin hydrochloride (226-01301, Fujifilm Wako Pure Chemical Co) in 1 L of distilled water, and it was administered orally to mice ad libitum from 6 to 20 weeks of age.

## Animal Models
K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice were provided by Professor Masanobu Oshima (Kanazawa University). At 6 weeks of age, male K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice were divided into 6 groups: the control diet + oral distilled water group (control group) (n = 8), the control diet + intraperitoneal E coli LPS group (LPS group) (n = 5), the HFD + oral distilled water group (HFD group) (n = 9), the HFD + intraperitoneal LPS group (HFD + LPS group) (n = 7), the HFD + intraperitoneal LPS + oral antibiotic cocktail group (HFD + LPS + Abx group) (n = 5), and the HFD + intraperitoneal LPS + intraperitoneal CL group (HFD + LPS + CL group) (n = 5). The mice were housed under specific pathogen-free conditions until they reached 20 weeks of age. For animal models for metabolic syndrome, Kaliannan et al demonstrated that serum endotoxin levels were much higher in mice fed an HFD alone and in those injected intraperitoneally (i.p.) with E.coli LPS alone than in those subjected to no treatment. In human studies, the serum endotoxin level in patients with MetS, which is equivalent to the sum of that in HFD-fed mice and that in E.coli LPS-injected mice, is greater than those in healthy controls. In this study, we used additional systemic injection of E.coli LPS, the dosage of which may be appropriate for diseased condition but not for healthy condition. For CLs treatment, according to the manufacturer’s recommendation, we used a 150-μL i.p. injection of CL-encapsulated liposomes in an initial dose of 0.05 mg/g BW, followed by a subsequent dose of 0.03 mg/g BW, once a week from 6 weeks of age until euthanization at 10 weeks of age or 20 weeks of age. We assessed the effects of CL or LPS treatment on the mice, although neither obvious side effects nor BW loss was observed. Additionally, Nrf2-KO-K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice were generated via the crossbreeding of K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice with nuclear Nrf2-KO mice. These mice were housed under the same conditions as K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice. They were treated with or without a HFD and i.p. injections of LPS (Nrf2-KO control group [n = 8], Nrf2-KO HFD + LPS group [n = 8]). At 20 weeks of age, all the mice were euthanized via cervical dislocation. The forestomach, glandular stomach, liver, ileum, and cecum were dissected. The collected samples were washed with PBS and stored. The stomach samples were weighed and sectioned as follows: (1) The section containing the highest macroscopic tumor height was embedded in paraffin for histopathological analysis. (2) Tissue samples of the tumor and background mucosa were separated, frozen at −80°C, and later used for DNA, RNA, and protein extraction. The ratio of the tumor area to the whole stomach area was assessed via ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health). Liver and ileum samples were stored similarly, and fecal samples from the cecum were collected and stored. This study was approved by the animal experiment committee of Tohoku University, based on the Animal Research: Reporting of In Vivo Experiments guidelines.

## Cell Culture
The human well-differentiated adenocarcinoma cell line MKN7 was purchased from the American Type Culture Collection. The human monocytic leukemia cell line THP-1 was purchased from the Cell Bank at the Tohoku University Institute of Development, Aging, and Cancer. THP-1 cells were treated with 200 nM PMA for 3 days to differentiate them into macrophage-like cells. THP-1 cells are typically small and round, but after PMA treatment, they become larger, flatter, and more adherent, resembling macrophages. These macrophage-like cells are widely used in studies related to inflammation-induced carcinogenesis. , All the cell cultures were maintained at 37°C in a 5% carbon dioxide atmosphere. MKN7 and PMA-treated THP-1 cells were cultured in serum-free medium for 24 hours, followed by incubation at 37°C for 24 hours in medium containing 1 μg/mL E coli LPS or 100 ng/mL TNF-α. , For MKN7 cell treatment, the NFκB inhibitor BAY 11-7082 was prepared at a concentration of 10 μM. Pretreatment with BAY 11-7082 was performed 30 minutes before LPS stimulation, followed by coincubation with LPS at 37°C for 24 hours. MKN7 cells and macrophages pretreated for 24 hours with or without LPS were cocultured with the Avlatex 3D culture model (Reprocell). To assess the role of TNF-α in promoting the NFκB-PD-L1 signaling pathway, cells were pretreated for 1 hour with either a TNF-α-neutralizing antibody (AB_2536391, Invitrogen) or human IgG1 antibody (No. P01857.1, R&D Systems). Neither the reagents nor the antibodies affected percentage of viable cells.

## Mini-Ussing Chamber System
Electrophysiological studies were conducted using the mUcs to evaluate ileal mucosal barrier dysfunction under short-term stimulation. The samples were quickly mounted on chamber slides, and the mucosal side and the serosal side were bathed in Krebs buffer solution and oxygenated with a 95% O2/5% CO2 gas mixture. After equilibration, the mucosal mixture was replaced with Krebs buffer containing 1 μg/mL E coli LPS. The mucosal impedance, induced by a constant current of 10 μA, was measured every 15 minutes for a total of 120 minutes using a measuring device (VCC MC2, Physiologic Instruments).

## IHC Analysis for Animal Studies
After 4-μm-thick tissue sections were prepared, the sections were deparaffinized and rehydrated, followed by antigen retrieval using Target Retrieval Solution (Agilent). Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked, and nonspecific protein binding was subsequently blocked. The sections were then incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C ( ). The secondary antibody reaction was performed using the Vectastain Elite ABC kit (Vector Laboratories), and the target proteins were detected via DAB substrate (Dako, Agilent Technologies, Inc). For multicolor staining, the sections were incubated overnight at 4°C with a primary antibody against TNF-α, followed by washing and secondary antibody incubation. The signal was developed using Impact SG substrate (Vector Laboratories). After the sections were washed and blocked, a second primary antibody (anti-F4/80 antibody) incubation step was performed overnight at 4°C. The secondary antibody was applied, and the signal was developed with DAB substrate. Hematoxylin was used for nuclear counterstaining. Known positive and negative tissue sections were stained in parallel. Immunostaining results were evaluated by a single evaluator (K.K.), who was blinded to any information about the mice. At least 3 randomly selected high-power fields (HPFs) were evaluated using an optical microscope (BX43, DP74, Olympus). The staining results were scored in the following manner. The numbers of positive cells for immunostaining of Ki-67, Iba1, CD3, CD4, CD8, and FOXP3 were analyzed semi-quantitatively. The intensity and extension of immunostaining for TNF-α, PD-L1, and PD-1 was scored as 0 (negative), 1 (weak), 2 (moderate), or 3 (strong). The percentage of positive tumor cells was divided into 5 grades (percentage scores): 0 (0%), 1 (1%–25%), 2 (26%–50%), 3 (51%–75%), and 4 (76%–100%). The overall score of each sample was determined using the following formula: overall score = intensity score × percentage score, and a total score ranged from 0 to 12 points. 
 

## IHC Study in a Clinical Setting
A total of 20 patients with GCA (17 males and 3 females; mean age, 66.7 ± 11.8 years) contributed samples for the IHC analyses, and all the tissue samples were obtained by surgical resection or endoscopic submucosal dissection at Tohoku University Hospital between 2020 and 2022. The MetS condition was determined on the basis of the Adult Treatment Panel III criteria, such as abnormalities in triglycerides, high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol (HDL-C), blood pressure, and fasting glucose level, and body mass index ≥ 25 kg/m2., , , The exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) treatment history of abdominal surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or medication with steroids, immunosuppressive drugs, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; (2) inappropriate cases for this study, due to insufficient samples and clinical data; and (3) patients without a definitive diagnosis of GCA. This study protocol was performed with opt-out consent, in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and was approved by the Ethics Committee of Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine. Sections stained without primary antibodies consistently yielded negative staining. As described above, one investigator (K.K.), without any clinical information, independently inspected at least 3 microscopic views and semi-quantitatively assessed the intensity and extent of the immunostaining. Immunostaining for PD-L1 and NQO1 was evaluated with the same scoring method as described for the animal model, which was based on both staining intensity (0–3) and the percentage of positive tumor cells (0–4). Iba1-positive cells were quantified by counting the number of positive cells.

## Protein Extraction and Western Blot Analysis
Protein was extracted using M-PER mammalian protein extraction reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific), a protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and a phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Nacalai Tesque). A total of 20 mg of each sample was loaded into each lane of a 4% to 12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris Gel (Invitrogen) and subjected to electrophoresis. The proteins were then transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane, Immobilon-P (Millipore). After blocking, the membranes were incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies ( ). Following the secondary antibody reaction, the bands were detected using a Chemi DOC MP imaging system (Bio-Rad). The secondary antibodies used were anti-rabbit (1:1000, 7074S, Cell Signaling Technology), anti-mouse (1:1000, 7076S, Cell Signaling Technology), and anti-goat (1:1000, sc-2354, Santa Cruz). Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) or β-actin was used as a loading control, and the integrated optical density of each band was calculated using Image Lab (Bio-Rad) and normalized to that of the band for GAPDH or β-actin.

## RNA Extraction and Quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction
RNA was extracted from mouse samples using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen). Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized through reverse transcription using the SuperScript VILO cDNA synthesis kit (Invitrogen). Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) was then performed using a Step One Plus Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) with TaqMan Fast Advanced Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) and specific primers (Gene Expression Assays, Applied Biosystems) ( ). The reaction cycles consisted of initial denaturation at 50°C for 2 minutes and 95°C for 10 minutes, followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 seconds and 60°C for 60 seconds. GAPDH was used as the endogenous control, and gene expression levels were calculated via the comparative Ct method.
 

## siRNA Targeting the NRF2 Gene
siRNA was used to suppress NRF2 gene expression in MKN7 cells. The cells were cultured at a density of 20,000 cells per well in a 6-well plate. A solution containing Opti-MEM medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific), Lipofectamine 3000 Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and either Silencer Select NRF2L2 siRNA (Silencer select, s9493, #ASO02L01O, Ambion, Invitrogen) or Negative Control #1 siRNA (4390843, #ASO2HPJK, Ambion, Invitrogen) was added to the wells. The cells were then incubated at 37°C for 24 hours.

## ChIP Assay
The ChIP assay was performed using the ChIP-IT Express Kit (Active Motif) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. MKN7 cells were cultured in 100-mm dishes until they reached 70% to 80% confluence and then stimulated with E coli LPS (1 μg/mL) for 24 hours. After stimulation, the cells were fixed with 37% formaldehyde, collected, lysed in lysis buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors, and homogenized with a Dounce homogenizer. Input DNA was collected as a control for PCR analysis. The fragmented chromatin was diluted with buffer, and anti-NRF2 antibody (ab137550, Abcam) was added to the magnetic beads. The immune complexes were captured via magnetic beads, washed, and eluted. The obtained DNA was purified using the Chromatin IP DNA Purification Kit (Active Motif). The immunoprecipitated DNA and input DNA were analyzed by qPCR using primers specific to the CD274 (PD-L1) promoter region or exon region (Eurofins Genomics) ( ). The region from chromosomes 5,449,879 to 5,450,018 on human chromosome 9 by these primers corresponds to the CD274 promoter on the basis of genomic information obtained from the NCBI database (GRCh38 assembly). qPCR was conducted with PowerTrack SYBR Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) using a Step One Plus Real-Time PCR System. The reaction cycle included initial denaturation at 95°C for 10 minutes, followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 seconds and 60°C for 60 seconds. Melt curve analysis was then performed from 60°C to 95°C to confirm specific amplification, and samples showing nonspecific amplification were excluded.
 

## 8-OHdG Measurement
DNA was extracted from mouse tumor samples using the DNA Extractor TIS Kit (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation) and used for analysis. The 8-OHdG levels were measured using the High-Sensitivity 8-OHdG Check Kit (Japan Institute for the Control of Aging) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The absorbance at 450 nm was measured using a microplate reader (SpectraMax M2e, Molecular Devices), and the 8-OHdG levels were normalized to the DNA concentration of each sample.

## ROS Analysis
ROS activity was assessed using the 2,7-Dichlorofluoroscin Diacetate Cellular ROS Detection Assay Kit (Abcam) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The fluorescence was measured at an excitation wavelength of 485 nm and an emission wavelength of 535 nm.

## TNF-α Concentration Analysis
The TNF-α concentration in the supernatant was quantified using a human TNF-α assay ELISA kit (Proteintech) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The fluorescence was measured at 450 nm.

## Serum Endotoxin Levels
Serum LPS concentrations were measured with a mouse lipopolysaccharide enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit (Assay Genie) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The absorbance was read at 450 nm.

## Fasting Blood Glucose Level, Serum Insulin Level, and Insulin Resistance
Twenty-week-old male mice were subjected to a 4-hour fast and euthanized under isoflurane inhalation anesthesia. Blood was collected from the heart via a cardiac puncture. Serum was separated from whole blood via centrifugation at 15,000 × g for 10 minutes at 4°C and stored at −20°C. Fasting blood glucose levels were measured using a LabAssay Glucose kit (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation). Serum immunoreactive insulin levels (IRI) were measured using an Ultra-Sensitive Insulin ELISA Kit (Morinaga Institute of Biological Science) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The HOMA-IR score was calculated via the following formula: HOMA-IR = fasting plasma glucose (mg/dL) × fasting plasma insulin (μU/mL)/405. 

## Flow Cytometry
After the anesthetization of mice, nontumorous spleen tissues were collected to prepare single-cell suspensions. The tissues were minced and sieved with a 70-μm cell filter, followed by red blood cell lysis using ammonium chloride lysis buffer. The cells were washed and resuspended in FACS buffer (PBS containing 2% fetal bovine serum [FBS] and 0.1% sodium azide), and nonspecific binding was blocked with anti-mouse CD16/CD32 (Fc block). Cellular suspension was added to a 10-mL tube and centrifuged at 400 × g for 30 minutes. Then, 2 × 106 cells were incubated at 4°C for 30 minutes with fluorochrome-conjugated anti-mouse F4/80 antibody (28463-1-AP, Proteintech). After fixation and permeabilization, intracellular staining was carried out, F4/80-positive cells were identified as macrophages using BD FACS CantoII (BD Biosciences), and data were analyzed using FlowJo software (FlowJo, LLC).

## GSEA
GSEA was performed using RNA extracted from the tumors of Gan mice in the control group and the HFD + E coli LPS group. The Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) v7.5.1 was used for the analysis. The data were summarized and normalized according to the signal space transformation-robust multichip analysis (SST-RMA) method implemented with Affymetrix Power Tools. We exported the results of the gene level SST-RMA analysis and performed differentially expressed gene analysis. The statistical significance of differences in the expression data was determined using the fold change. Gene enrichment and functional annotation analyses for the significant probes were performed via the GO (http://geneontology.org) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG; http://kegg.jp) websites. All data analysis and visualization of differentially expressed genes were conducted via R 3.3.2. The data acquired from the microarray analysis were deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/; accession number: GSE279280). Data supporting the findings of this study will be available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## Analysis of the Fecal Microbiome (Metagenomic Analysis)
Fecal retention samples from the ileum and cecum were collected at the time of dissection, and DNA was extracted using the DNeasy PowerSoil Pro Kit (Qiagen GmbH). The V3-V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified using a 2-step PCR method as previously described. The amplicon sequence data were analyzed via QIIME2 version 2023.2 to generate an amplicon sequence variant (ASV) dataset. The ASV datasets were aligned using MAFFT, and a phylogenetic tree was constructed via FastTree2. Alpha and beta diversity metrics were estimated from the processed ASV dataset, and taxonomy was assigned via the Greengenes2 database (doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.19.520774). The functional composition of bacterial enzymes and metabolic pathways was predicted via PICRUSt2, and the pathway composition was analyzed via the analysis of composition of microbiomes with bias correction (ANCOM-BC) package. The raw sequencing data have been deposited in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive under BioProject ID PRJNA1271031. The sequencing data for each sample are available under the following Sequence Read Archive accession numbers: SRR33790151-SRR33790192.

## Statistical Analysis
The results are presented as the means (standard deviations [SDs]) or the median (interquartile range [IQR]) of at least three independent experiments. Statistical analyses were performed via JMP Pro 16.0.0 (SAS Institute). Statistical significance was calculated using an unpaired Student t-test, Tukey-Kramer test, or Steel-Dwass test. Spearman`s rank correlation test was used to assess the correlation between the PD-L1 protein expression and the NQO1 protein expression or the Iba1-positive macrophage infiltration in the tumor. Statistical analysis of the metagenomic data was conducted via Python and R 4.3.3 scripts (R Core Team 2024). Statistical analysis of α-diversity was performed using the Wilcoxon test, whereas metabolic pathways predicted via PICRUSt2 were analyzed using either the Wilcoxon test or ANCOM-BC. Pairwise permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) was applied for β- diversity analysis. A P value or Q value of less than .05 was considered to indicate statistical significance. All authors had access to the study data and had reviewed and approved the final manuscript.

## Acknowledgments
The authors thank the Biomedical Research Unit of Tohoku University Hospital for their technical support. The authors also thank Professor Masanobu Oshima (The Cancer Research Institute of Kanazawa University) for the kind gift of K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice and Professor Masayuki Yamamoto (Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Tohoku University School of Medicine) for the kind gift of Nrf2-knockout mice. This manuscript has been edited by a professional English editing service (American Journal Experts, Inc).

## CRediT Authorship Contributions
Keisuke Kusano, MD (Conceptualization: Lead; Data curation: Lead; Formal analysis: Lead; Investigation: Lead; Methodology: Lead; Resources: Equal; Validation: Equal; Writing – original draft: Lead)
Kaname Uno, MD, PhD (Conceptualization: Lead; Data curation: Supporting; Formal analysis: Supporting; Funding acquisition: Lead; Investigation: Supporting; Project administration: Lead; Resources: Equal; Visualization: Equal; Writing – original draft: Equal)
Toru Tamahara, DDS, PhD (Formal analysis: Equal; Investigation: Equal; Software: Lead)
Naoki Asano, MD, PhD (Methodology: Supporting; Writing – review & editing: Equal)
Koichiro Sudo, MD (Data curation: Supporting; Investigation: Supporting; Validation: Equal)
Mizuki Tanabe, MD (Data curation: Supporting; Investigation: Supporting; Validation: Equal)
Koya Ogasawara, MD (Data curation: Supporting; Investigation: Supporting; Validation: Equal)
Takeshi Kanno, MD, PhD (Methodology: Supporting)
Tomoyuki Koike, MD, PhD (Project administration: Supporting; Visualization: Equal; Writing – review & editing: Equal)
Ritsuko Shimizu, MD, PhD (Methodology: Supporting; Writing – review & editing: Equal)
Atsushi Masamune, MD, PhD (Supervision: Lead)

## Footnotes
Conflicts of interest The authors disclose no conflicts.
Funding This work was supported by the JSPS KAKENHI (Grant Numbers 19K08434 and 23K07368) and the Division of Promotion for Gastroenterological Medical Innovation endowed by Towada City in Aomori Prefecture, Japan.

## References