pmcEnviron Health (Wash)Environ Health (Wash)4646envhealth9918646069906676ehEnvironment & Health2833-8278American Chemical SocietyPMC11503957PMC11503957.111503957115039573947405210.1021/envhealth.3c001321ReviewRecent Advances
and Mechanism of Nanomaterials Promoting
Tumor Metastasis
WangWeiyi PangXinlong DongMengzhen LiRui LiuZiyan LiangYubo LiuHui NiNengyi ChenDawei https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6506-1574SunXiao †School
of Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Engineering, Medical Science and Technology
Innovation Center, Shandong First Medical
University and Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jinan 250000, China‡Shandong
Cancer Hospital and Institute, Shandong
First Medical University and Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jinan 250117, China§Department
of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117585, Singapore*E-mail: dave0505@yeah.net.*E-mail: sunxiao@sdfmu.edu.cn.091120231512202316473579367382310820232310202321102023091120232910202430102024© 2023 The Authors. Co-published by Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and American Chemical Society2023The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/Permits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). 
Tumor
metastasis is one of the most significant biological
characteristics
of malignant tumors. Advances in nanotechnology provide a new direction
for tackling malignant tumors. Unlike previous studies that focused
on the use of nanomaterials to eliminate tumors and avoid metastasis,
this work focuses on summarizing the mechanisms by which some nanomaterials
promote tumor metastasis in some cases. In this Review, we summarized
recent research about various nanomaterials promoting tumor metastasis.
The mechanisms of nanomaterials in this process have been highlighted,
including the induction of epithelial–mesenchymal transition
in tumor cells by nanomaterials, the interaction of nanomaterials
with the vasculature, and the induction of inflammation by nanomaterials.
Elucidating the mechanism of nanomaterials promoting tumor metastasis
is beneficial to guide the development and application of safe and
efficient nanomaterials, which can effectively reduce the incidence
of tumor metastasis in the future.

NanomaterialsTumor metastasisEMTVasculatureInflammationpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDdocument-id-old-9eh3c00132document-id-new-14eh3c00132ccc-price1

## Introduction
1.1

## Mechanisms
and Influencing Factors of Tumor
Metastasis
Tumor metastasis refers to the process by which
cancer cells spread from the primary site to the secondary site, which
is one of the most significant biological characteristics of malignant
tumors. Due to the systemic and drug resistance
of disseminated tumor cells, despite the rapid development of tumor
treatment methods, the treatment of metastatic tumors is still a major
challenge, and more than 90% of malignant tumor patients die of tumor
metastasis. , Tumors can metastasize through a variety
of routes, such as transcoelomic spread, lymphatic spread, hematogenous
spread, and canalicular spread. We will
elucidate the process of tumor metastasis by describing hematogenous
metastasis. It is worth noting that tumor metastasis is not an efficient
process, and most of the cancer cells entering the systemic circulation
are eliminated. Whether a primary tumor
with metastatic potential can metastasize depends on many influencing
factors. (1) Cells within tumors are morphologically, biochemically,
and genetically heterogeneous, and such differences may arise from
genetic, epigenetic, positional, or temporal variations. , The epigenetic variations refer to no change in the DNA sequence
of a tumor cell but a heritable change in the function of a gene.
For example, Gameiro and Struhl found that nutrient deprivation can
affect the translation process of mRNA in breast cancer cells through
mTOR and eIF2 α signaling, increasing cell migration and thus
enhancing the malignant phenotype of breast cancer cells. (2) The metastasis cascade refers to the process
of tumor metastasis in distant organs, which includes local invasion,
intravasation, survival in circulation, arrest at a distant organ
site, extravasation, micrometastasis formation, metastatic colonization,
etc. , Influencing factors that can play a role
in the tumor metastasis cascade largely affect tumor metastasis. For
example, there are two phenotypic plasticity processes that can profoundly
affect tumor metastasis. The first is dynamic phenotypic changes that
occur on metastasis-initiating cells (MICs). For example, dissociation of epithelial structures can induce phenotypic
plasticity in MICs, thereby obtaining L1CAM-dependent growth reinitiation
capacity, exhibiting the phenotype of regenerative progenitors, and
driving distant tumor metastasis. Another
phenotypic plasticity process associated with metastasis is the epithelial–mesenchymal
transition (EMT). Some tumor cells can reduce adhesion and increase
invasiveness through EMT, which helps tumor cells detach from the
primary site, and then, this part of the tumor cells can grow at a
secondary site through the reverse process of mesenchymal–epithelial
transition (MET). The vasculature not
only provides nutrients for tumors but also is a way for tumors to
metastasize to distant organs. The permeability of the vasculature
affects the invasion process of the tumor to a large extent. A highly
permeable vasculature will lead to an increase of tumor cells entering
the circulation and increase the possibility of distant metastasis. Inflammation can also produce a series of effects
that promote tumor metastasis, mainly including inducing EMT of tumor
cells, participating in the remodeling
of tumor stroma, inducing angiogenesis,
and increasing the colonization of tumor cells in target organs. In addition, there are many influencing factors
that can affect tumor metastasis, as shown in , such as metastasis-promoting genes, senescent
cells, polymorphic microorganisms, tumor-associated macrophages, etc.
 
1.2

## The Application of Nanomaterials in Tumor
Therapy
Although, in addition to traditional treatment methods
such as surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy, a large number of
new technologies have emerged such as immunotherapy, targeted therapy,
gene therapy, etc., the survival rate of patients with advanced malignant
tumors is still low. On the one hand,
this is related to the high malignancy of the patient’s systemic
metastatic tumors; on the other hand, it is related to the increased
drug resistance of tumor cells and the accumulation of systemic toxicity
of therapeutic drugs during long-term treatment. For example, chemotherapy
drugs cannot kill tumor cells while simultaneously avoiding damage
to other normal tissues, which greatly limits the use of current treatment
methods. Nanotechnology, which has gradually
emerged in the past two decades, has provided new ideas for tumor
treatment. People began to try to combine various nanomaterials with
traditional technologies and discovered the huge potential of nanomaterials
in tumor prevention, detection, diagnosis, imaging, and treatment. − Nanomaterials are any organic, inorganic, or organometallic materials
that possess unique chemical, physical, and/or electrical properties
that are typically observed at the nanometer scale. Nanomaterials have good biocompatibility and unique optical,
thermodynamic, magnetic, and mechanical properties. , First of all, nanomaterials can be directly applied to tumor therapy
as drugs. Due to their own antigenicity and cytotoxicity, some nanomaterials
can kill tumor cells with the help of the immune system or directly. , New therapies based on the special properties of nanomaterials have
also emerged, such as photothermal and photodynamic therapies as well
as magnetic nanoparticle hyperthermia. Nanomaterials can also act as drug carriers or additives to enhance
the effect of tumor treatment, such as liposomal drug delivery, radiotherapy
sensitization, radiofrequency ablation (RFA), etc. − The role of
some nonmetallic nanomaterials in tumor treatment has also been gradually
discovered, such as C60, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphene,
chitosan nanoparticles, etc., which shows great potential in the field
of tumor therapy. It is worthy of recognition
that nanomaterials have developed very rapidly in the field of tumor
treatment in recent years, providing many new ideas and methods for
tumor treatment. However, most studies
are only in the laboratory stage, and the clinical transformation
is seriously insufficient. Currently, only liposomal drug delivery
and magnetic iron oxide nanoparticle-based magnetic fluid hyperthermia
are approved for clinical application in antitumor nanodrugs. The
reason for this problem is, on the one hand, the oversimplification
and overemphasis of the models of physiology and cancer biology on
the passive delivery process of nanoparticles. On the other hand,
due to the limitations of experimental techniques, most studies on
nanomedicines are conducted on immune deficient mouse models bearing
crossspecies tissue grafts, which cannot simulate the complex interactions
of nanoparticles with host biology and immune function. , Moreover, the physicochemical properties of nanomaterials determine
whether they can be used for tumor therapy or to promote tumor metastasis.
Li et al. found that titanium dioxide nanoparticles (Nano-TiO2) can inhibit the EMT of the A549 cell line by blocking the
transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) signaling pathway, while Leong et al. found that Nano-TiO2 can promote the EMT of the SW480 cell line by activating the TGF-β
and Wnt signaling pathways. The size
of Nano-TiO2 used by Li et al. was 50 nm, while the size
of Nano-TiO2 used by Leong et al. was 21 nm. Therefore,
the nanomaterials’ size may be a factor that determines their
role. In addition, the surface modification of the nanomaterials also
determines their role. For example, Zhou et al. used chitosan modified
graphene oxide (GO) to inhibit the progression of melanoma, while Liu et al. found that unmodified GO can
induce EMT in lung cancer cells and increase the invasive ability
of them. Such completely different results
further illustrate the complex mechanism of the interaction between
nanomaterials and cells, tissues, and organisms, so it is difficult
to promote the clinical transformation of nano-antitumor drugs only
by relying on a single angle of research. In addition, the development
of nanotechnology in recent years has greatly increased human exposure
to nanomaterials, which further enhances the importance of nanotoxicology.
Therefore, we sorted out the related studies on the promotion of tumor
metastasis by nanomaterials in recent years and classified them from
the perspective of EMT, vascular system interaction, and promotion
of inflammation as shown in . It aims to provide guidance for the formulation of
future research plans and analysis of experimental results, promote
the development and clinical transformation of efficient and safe
nanomedicines, and reduce the incidence of tumor metastasis.
 

2

## Various
Mechanisms Involved in Nanomaterials
Promoting Tumor Metastasis
2.1

## Inducing EMT in Tumor Cells
by Nanomaterials
EMT is a dynamic, often reversible cellular
process in which epithelial
cells are downregulated with epithelial features and able to acquire
a mesenchymal phenotype and behavior. This process is manifested through
a loss of epithelial cell apical-basal polarity, regulation of the
cytoskeleton, and reduced cell–cell adhesive properties. Ultimately
epithelial cells can acquire mesenchymal properties individually or
collectively and increase the motility and invasive capacity. Oncology-related
EMT is the most popular field of EMT-related research in recent years. After EMT, the morphology of tumor cells changes
from polygonal to spindle, and the adhesion between cells and cell
polarity decrease significantly. The motility, dissemination ability,
and resistance to apoptosis of tumor cells increase, and finally,
the ability to invade and metastasize tumors is significantly improved.
It is worth noting that not all metastases are necessarily related
to EMT. Some cancer cells may be able to migrate locally without activating
EMT. However, whether primary cancer cells can have distant metastases
without activating EMT remains to be further studied. It can be considered
that the malignant progression of all types of cancer is related to
the activation of EMT. The current view is that the morphological
and functional changes in tumor cells during EMT are mainly due to
changes in gene expression, most of which are driven by EMT transcription
factors (EMT-TFs). Typically, the activation of EMT is mainly directly
or indirectly activated by one or several core EMT-TFs, including
the zinc finger E-box binding homeobox factors ZEB1 and ZEB2, SNAIL
(also known as SNAI1), SLUG (also known as SNAI2), and the basic helix–loop–helix
factors TWIST1. In addition, studies
have shown that the amounts of other EMT-TFs, numerous microRNAs,
and long noncoding RNAs also play important roles in cellular EMT. The process of EMT-TFs regulating the expression
of genes related to the epithelial state and mesenchymal state of
tumor cells is an epigenetic process that does not depend on changes
in the DNA sequence of tumor cells; therefore, the occurrence of EMT
cannot be determined by sequencing cancer cell genomes. It has been
argued that the occurrence of EMT can be judged by comprehensive analysis
of changes in cellular properties and molecular markers, such as changes
in cell morphology, activation of EMT-TFs, and changes in the expression
of different proteins (such as E-cadherin, certain cytokeratin, N-cadherin,
vimentin, fibronectin, and β1 and β3 integrin). When tumor cells are exposed to specific signals
in the tumor microenvironment (TME), the corresponding signaling pathways
are activated to generate EMT-TFs, inducing tumor cells to develop
EMT. Common signaling pathways include the transforming growth factor-β
(TGF-β) pathway, WNT signaling pathways, the NOTCH pathway,
etc. These signaling pathways function not only alone but also crosstalk
between each other, forming a complex signal network. For example,
when the Notch signaling pathway of small intestinal stem cells is
inhibited, the suppressed Wnt signaling pathway will be activated,
resulting in misexpression of presecretory genes. As shown in , in recent years, more and more research has been conducted
on the effect of nanomaterials on EMT of tumor cells. These studies
focus on the inhibitory effect of nanomaterials on tumor EMT, and
there are few studies on the promotion of tumor metastasis by nanomaterials.
In order to promote the development of this field, we summarized the
nanomaterials that can induce EMT in tumor cells and promote tumor
metastasis from the perspective of activation of different signaling
pathways.
 The TGF-β family mainly includes TGF-βs,
activins,
bone morphogenetic proteins, and growth and differentiation factors. They play an important role in normal physiological
activities of the human body, such as controlling cell proliferation
and differentiation, regulating cell metabolism, promoting or protecting
against cell death, promoting extracellular matrix protein expression,
and so on. In normal tissues, the TGF-β signaling pathway dynamically
regulates the homeostasis of the body’s internal environment
and has a certain degree of inhibitory effect on the early stage of
tumor formation, such as inhibiting cell proliferation, promoting
apoptosis and autophagy, inhibiting inflammation, and blocking angiogenesis. , However, with further tumor progression, the inhibitory effect of
the TGF-β signaling pathway on tumors is weakened, and it may
show the opposite effect compared to normal tissue, which can induce
tumor EMT and promote tumor invasion and metastasis, promoting tumor
progression to a certain extent. This is mainly due to changes in
the TME during tumor development and the disruption or mutation of
regulators of TGF-β signaling. The TGF-β signaling pathway
is a double-edged sword, where it can not only inhibit tumor growth
but also promote tumor progression under different circumstances.
The activation of the TGF-β signaling pathway is one of the
important reasons for the production of EMT-TFs to promote EMT, which
has been widely studied. This process is mediated by receptors and
downstream intracellular effectors, mainly Smad proteins (Smads).
The TGF-β signaling pathway is further divided into a classical
pathway with Smads participation and a nonclassical pathway without
Smads participation (non-Smad signaling pathways). As shown in A, in the classical
pathway involving Smads, TGF-βs bind and interact with transforming
growth factor-β receptor type 2 (TGF-βR2). TGF-βR2
can activate transforming growth factor-β receptor type 1 (TGF-βR1),
and then, TGF-βR1 recruits and phosphorylates Smad2 and Smad3.
Phosphorylated Smad2 and Smad3 can combine with Smad4 to form these
trimeric SMAD complexes, which will then be transferred to the nucleus
as transcription factors to regulate various activities, including
cellular EMT. With further research,
our understanding of the canonical pathway of TGF is also expanded.
Recently, the team led by Hill found that TGF-β can also induce
the phosphorylation of Smad1 and Smad5 and that the combined signaling
of this pathway and the Smad2/3 pathway is indispensable for TGF-β
to induce a complete EMT process. In
addition to the canonical pathway, activated receptors can also conduct
cell signaling through other pathways; these pathways are called non-Smad
signaling pathways, and the common ones are the mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) pathways, including the extracellular signal
regulated kinases (Erks), c-Jun amino terminal kinase (JNK), and p38
MAPK as well as IkB kinase, phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K),
Akt, Rho family GTPases, etc. These pathways can be activated directly
through ligand-occupied receptors and can modulate downstream cellular
responses independently or by affecting the Smad pathway. Studies have shown that nanomaterials can activate
the TGF-β signaling pathway with or without the involvement
of Smad in tumor cells in different ways, thereby inducing EMT in
tumor cells and ultimately promoting tumor metastasis.
 In 2019, a research team led by
Liu found that
a low dose of GO
could interact with cancer cells to increase the concentration of
TGF-β receptor (TGF-βR), thus activating the classical
pathway of TGF-β signaling pathway, inducing tumor cells to
produce EMT, and finally promoting tumor metastasis. The team demonstrated the increase in the TGF-β receptor
concentration mainly by detecting an increase in the level of TGF-βR1
and a decrease in the level of CD109 in tumor cells after GO treatment.
CD109 is a coreceptor of TGF-β and a partner of TGF-βR,
which has been shown to negatively regulate TGF-βR by promoting
the internalization and degradation of TGF-βR, so the decrease
of CD109 concentration can further confirm the increase of TGF-βR
concentration. For the investigation
of signaling pathways through which GO promoted tumor metastasis,
the team detected the content of phosphorylated Smad2/3 (P-Smad2/3),
Smad2, and Smad3 and found that P-Smad2/3 in GO-treated tumor cells
increased over time, while the levels of Smad2 and Smad3 were relatively
stable, which to some extent proved the opening of the canonical pathway
of the TGF-β signaling pathway. However, this study did not
expand on the demonstration of different pathways in the TGF-β
signaling pathway and did not conduct further experiments to exclude
noncanonical pathways, such as detecting markers associated with activation
of noncanonical pathways. We believe that there may also be activation
of noncanonical pathways in this process, as some research teams have
indeed found that nanomaterials can induce EMT in tumor cells through
some nonclassical pathways. In 2018, Leong et al. studied the effect
of Nano-TiO2 on the EMT process of intestinal epithelial
cancer cells and found that Nano-TiO2 could induce the
continuous production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in colorectal
cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner and activate the noncanonical
pathway of the TGF-β signaling pathway: the JNK and p38 MAPK
signaling pathways, thereby upregulating the expression of Slug and
Twist transcription factors, inducing EMT in cancer cells, and enhancing
the invasiveness and migration ability of cancer cells. In the team’s experiments, it was found
that the content of P-Smad3 in the Nano-TiO2-treated group
did not increase, indicating that Nano-TiO2 did not activate
the classical TGF-β signaling pathway. Subsequently, the activation
of p38 and ERK pathways existed in the Nano-TiO2 treated
group by detection of phosphorylation events that were detected on
ERK at two residues, Thr 202 and Tyr 204, and on residue Tyr 182 of
p38.
Wnts are a class of secreted glycoproteins that act by
autocrine
or paracrine pathways, which were cloned in mouse breast cancer cells
by Nusse and Varmus in 1982. If they
are stimulated by the corresponding external environment or the key
proteins in the signal pathway are abnormally mutated, abnormal activation
of the Wnt signal pathway can occur and induce tumor EMT, thus promoting
tumor invasion and metastasis. For example, the team led by Jacks
found that the activation of the Wnt signaling pathway promoted the
proliferation and metastasis of lung adenocarcinoma. The Wnt signaling pathway is mainly operated through the
binding of 19 distinct WNT ligands to the Frizzled family of cell
surface receptors. Currently, three different Wnt signaling pathways
have been found, namely, the canonical WNT signaling pathway, the
noncanonical WNT–calcium pathway, and planar cell polarity
pathway. The canonical WNT signaling pathway is one of the key signaling
pathways to activate EMT in tumor cells and has been extensively studied.
After activation of this pathway, a series of signaling events are
triggered, leading to the nuclear translocation of β-catenin,
resulting in the production of nuclear β-catenin, which can
act as a transcriptional cofactor to induce the expression of genes
related to cellular EMT. , As shown in B,C, the mechanism
can be divided into two states of the signaling pathway for elaboration.
First, (1) Wnt signaling is inactive, where in this state, loss of
the Wnt ligand results in the phosphorylation of β-catenin by
the construction complex consisting of the scaffold protein Axin,
APC, and the kinases GSK3β and casein kinase (CK1α), in
which GSK3β plays a major role. β-Catenin is then ubiquitinated
by β-TrCP200 and targeted for proteasomal degradation. In the
absence of the nuclear translocation of β-catenin, a repressive
complex containing T-cell factor (TCF) or lymphoid enhancer factor
(LEF) and transducing-like enhancer protein (TLE/Groucho) recruits
HDACs to repress target genes. Second, (2) Wnt signaling is active
when Wnt ligands, such as Wnt3a and Wnt1, bind to Frizzied (Fzd) receptors
and LRP coreceptors, and the classical pathway will be activated.
LPR receptors are phosphorylated by CK1α and GSK3β, resulting
in the aggregation and activation of Dishevelled (Dvl) proteins at
the plasma membrane. The Dvl polymers can lead to the inactivation
of the construction complex through sequestration in multivesicular
bodies, etc., resulting in the stabilization and accumulation of β-catenin,
thereby promoting the nuclear translocation of β-catenin and
producing nuclear β-catenin. In the nucleus, β-catenin
forms an active complex with LEF and TCF proteins by displacing TLE/Groucho
complexes and recruiting histone modifying coactivators such as CBP/p300,
BRG1, BCL9, and Pygo. This transcriptional
switch leads to a change of multiple cellular processes. In addition to the classical pathway, two other
nonclassical pathways have also been shown to promote tumor EMT. For
example, it has been reported that the high expression of the Wnt
receptor Fzd2 and its ligands Wnt5a/b in metastatic liver, lung, colon,
and breast cancer cell lines is closely related to the EMT process
of tumor cells. Blocking Fzd2 with specific antibodies can effectively
inhibit the process of tumor EMT and reduce tumor metastasis. In addition, in a study on prostate cancer,
ABI1 loss was found to unblock FYN-STAT3 downstream of noncanonical
WNT signaling, thereby activating this signaling pathway and inducing
EMT in tumor cells. 
When studying
the effect of Nano-TiO2 on the EMT process
of intestinal epithelial cancer cells, Leong et al. not only observed
the activation of the TGF-β signaling pathway without Smad participation
but also analyzed the Wnt1 mRNA level under cellular Nano-TiO2 exposure. After that, a series of experiments were carried
out to explore the content and location of β-catenin and its
binding partner TCF4 in tumor cells. The
expression level of Wnt1 mRNA in the Nano-TiO2 treatment
group increased 4-fold, and the content of β-catenin increased
by 1.5 times and was mainly located in the cytoplasm and nucleus,
rather than concentrated on the cell membrane as in the control group.
In addition, the increase of TCF4 content and the combination of β-catenin
and TCF4 were observed, which revealed that the Wnt signal pathway
was also involved in the process of tumor cell EMT induced by Nano-TiO2. In this experiment, it is suggested that the activation
of the Wnt signal pathway may be due to the inhibition of GSK3 β-phosphorylation
of β-catenin by Nano-TiO2, which changes the Wnt
signal pathway from an inactive state to active state. This study
found that there is crosstalk between the TGF-β signal pathway
and Wnt signal pathway, which coincides with the previous results
that TGF-β/MAPK pathways can inhibit GSK3 β activity against
β-catenin, Slug, and Twist. , At present,
there are few studies on tumor cell EMT induced by nanomaterials by
activating the Wnt signaling pathway, and the Wnt signaling pathway
has many potential targets of nanomaterials. Hence, the exploration
of effects of nanomaterials on different aspects of the Wnt signaling
pathway in tumor cells could be a potential subsequent research interest.

2.2

## Interacting with Vasculature by Nanomaterials
Regardless of the route, such as intravenous injection, skin absorption,
inhalation, or ingestion, most nanomaterials entering the human body
will eventually enter the vasculature and interact with the body.
The interaction between nanomaterials and vasculature can have an
extensive and comprehensive impact on the body, which will not only
affect the effect of nanodrugs, which could make drugs with good performance
in vitro difficult to perform in vivo, but also give rise to certain
toxic effects on the body, affecting a variety of normal physiological
functions, of which the more serious is to accelerate the progress
of the tumor and promote tumor invasion and metastasis. Tumor metastasis
is a very complex process, and current research has not been able
to clearly explain the full extent of the mechanism of tumor metastasis. However, the vasculature has a very close relationship
with tumor metastasis, being involved in all aspects of tumor metastasis.
Endothelial integrity and molecular characteristics, the number of
microvessels, etc. will have a great impact on tumor metastasis. Endothelium is a single-layer structure composed
of endothelial cells, mainly distributed in the inner cellular lining
of the blood vessels (arteries, veins, and capillaries) and lymphatic
system. It plays a very important role in controlling the entry and
exit of substances into and out of the vascular system, regulating
blood fluidity, platelet aggregation, and vascular tension, and participating
in immune response and inflammatory response. Endothelium is also
an important metabolic and endocrine organ that can participate in
various physiological processes of the body. Solutes and cells must
pass through the endothelium to enter or leave the vasculature. The
barrier function of endothelial cells is the prerequisite for the
body to perform various life activities. There are abundant cell connections
between endothelial cells, and they are important for the endothelium
to play a barrier function and control the entry and exit of substances.
It is currently believed that tight junctions and adhesive junctions
are mainly involved in the maintenance and regulation of the endothelial
barrier function. Although studies have shown that gap junctions are
involved in the formation of endothelial barrier function in some
cases, the specific mechanism still needs further research, and there
is some controversy; there is no current mainstream understanding. Tight junctions form close focal contacts in
the plasma membrane of adjacent cells in the form of hemifusions.
Tight junctions are the meshwork of fibrils composed of rows of transmembrane
particles, which are considered as the diffusion barriers, mainly
including claudins protein, occluding protein, tricellulin protein,
MARVEL domain-containing protein 3, etc. , Tight junctions also contain an electron-dense junctional plaque
composed of cytosolic proteins, mainly including zonula occludens
1 (ZO-1) and adapter proteins such as ZO-2 and ZO-3, the membrane-associated
guanylate kinase inverted proteins, etc. , Adhesion junctions are mainly composed of vascular endothelial cells
cadherin (VE-cadherin) and β-catenin, p120-catenin, and γ-catenin,
etc. VE-cadherin, as the main component, can form Ca2+-dependent
and homologous interactions between adjacent endothelial cells, which
play an important role in maintaining the endothelial barrier. Under physiological conditions, endothelial
cells mainly rely on mechanical and humoral factors to maintain endothelial
barrier function and avoid the loss of body fluids and solutes. However, a series of pathological processes,
such as inflammation, tumor, infection, trauma, etc. will lead to
the weakening of endothelial barrier function and the increase of
vascular permeability, resulting in a series of harmful effects. Due to the special TME and growth characteristics
of the tumor site, the shape of blood vessels formed in the tumor
site is often irregular, and the gaps between vascular endothelium
are large. The tumor itself can also activate a series of complex
processes to destroy the endothelial barrier and induce vascular endothelial
leakage. For example, tumor cells can destroy the VE-cadherin-β-catenin
complex by secreting vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) or
TGFβ1, thus destroying the connection between endothelial cells. , The combined action of a variety of factors can cause more tumor
cells to enter the vascular system through the endothelial barrier
to prepare the cells for the next step of metastasis. Tumor cells
pass through the endothelium in different ways under different conditions
but generally similar to the way white blood cells pass through the
endothelium and are summarized as two ways: transcellular and paracellular. The transcellular pathway means that tumor cells
pass through the endothelial barrier directly through endothelial
cells. There are relatively few examples of supporting this pathway,
and it is not considered to be the main way for tumor cells to pass
through the endothelium. It is the current
mainstream understanding that tumor cells pass through the endothelium
through the paracellular pathway in vivo, which is related to the
destruction of endothelial cell junction. It has been found that some nanomaterials can directly or indirectly
destroy the connection of endothelial cells, reducing the barrier
effect of endothelial cells and inducing endothelial leakage. Although
endothelial leakage is generally thought to result only in the weakening
of the endothelium’s control over solute entry and exit with
the participation of nanomaterials, micron-scale gaps will form sufficiently
for cells to pass through. Therefore,
when this effect occurs uncontrollably in the tumor site and the potential
metastatic target site of the tumor, as shown in , it may cause more tumor cells
to enter the vascular system through the endothelial barrier and enter
the target site from the vasculature. To a large extent, it will promote
the metastasis of the tumor with serious potential harm. We summarize
the nanomaterials that have been found to break the endothelial barrier,
induce endothelial leakage, and promote tumor metastasis. The aim
is to avoid the potential harm of nanomaterials to tumor metastasis
and to play a greater role in targeted transportation and disease
treatment through a reasonable application.
 In 2013, a team led by Leong found that Nano-TiO2 could
bind to adhesion through physical interaction in situ, leading to
phosphorylation of the intracellular domain of VE-cadherin at its
Y658 and Y731 residues. As a result, the interaction between VE-cadherin,
β-catenin, and p120-catenins is lost. Actin remodeling is activated,
resulting in a widening of the intercellular space and increased endothelial
leakage. Ultimately, more secondary metastases to the lungs of B16F10
mouse melanoma cells were observed in the mouse models. In this study,
nanomaterial-induced endothelial leakiness (NanoEL) is defined for
the first time, that is, endothelial leakage caused by nanomaterials,
which creates a precedent for endothelial leakage induced by nanomaterials. In subsequent studies, it has been found that
nanomaterials such as Ag, SiO2, Au, and ZnO2 have similar effects to Nano-TiO2, and its mechanism
is mainly focused on the remodeling of cytoskeleton and the destruction
of VE-cadherin, which is mainly determined by the diameter, charge,
and density of nanoparticles. − More recently, a study by Peng et al. also
found that the injection of nanoparticles such as Nano-TiO2, silica, and gold in animal models will induce NanoEL, which will
significantly accelerate the infiltration and extravasation of breast
cancer cells and promote tumor metastasis. The mechanism is mainly
due to the disruption of the VE-cadherin–VE-cadherin homophilic
interactions at the Adherin junctions by nanoparticles. In addition, some nanomaterials can induce
NanoEL through indirect action, which refers to endothelial leakage
caused by secondary events generated by the interaction of nanomaterials
with endothelial or endothelial cells. For example, nanodiamonds can
cause an increase in intracellular ROS and Ca2+, resulting
in loss of cell junctions and remodeling of the cytoskeleton leading
to NanoEL. Other examples of NanoEL
caused by the indirect action of nanomaterials are discussed in this
excellent review. In these studies on
NanoEL caused by the indirect effect of nanomaterials, the promoting
effect on tumor metastasis was not clearly pointed out. However, the
endothelial space caused by NanoEL can allow tumor cells to pass through,
so this indirectly caused NanoEL has a certain potential to promote
tumor metastasis, which is worthy of further study. In addition, in
the field of exosomes that has emerged in recent years, some teams
have also found that exosomes can destroy the integrity of the vascular
endothelium to promote tumor metastasis. For example, Lin et al. found
that exosomes derived from HeLa cells can trigger endoplasmic reticulum
stress in endothelial cells and reduce tight junction-related proteins,
such as ZO-1 and CLDN5, to disrupt the integrity of vascular endothelium
and ultimately promote tumor metastasis. In a similar study, Cen et al. also found that the expression of
VE-cadherin and ZO-1 in human umbilical vein endothelial cells treated
with exocrine secreted by metastatic breast cancer cells decreased
significantly, thus increasing the number of cancer cells migrating
across the endothelial cell layer and promoting tumor metastasis to
a certain extent. Nanoplastics have
also been reported to be exogenous substances that induce endothelial
leakage. With more production and use, the probability of nanoplastics
entering the body and interacting with blood vessels has been greatly
increased and may have a certain role in tumor metastasis. Song, Ke
and co-workers have found that the nanoplastic forms of anionic polystyrene
and poly(methyl methacrylate) can destroy the vascular endothelial
cadherin junctions in a dose-dependent manner. This is the first time
that nanoplastics have been shown to induce NanoEL. Although the related research on tumor metastasis has not
been carried out, this study suggests that nanoplastics have a certain
potential in promoting tumor metastasis, and further research is needed.

2.3

## Inducing Systemic Inflammation of TME by Nanomaterials
At present, inflammation has been regarded as one of the two enabling
characteristics to acquire a series of abilities in the process of
tumor progression and has received more attention in recent years. In this context, inflammation refers both to
tumor-promoting immune cell infiltration (that is, most tumors are
infiltrated by a variety of cells of the immune system, including
subtle infiltrations, which can only be detected with specific antibodies)
and to general inflammation, which can be detected using standard
histochemical staining techniques. With
continuous improvement in understanding of inflammation, there is
a growing belief that inflammation is not only a failed attempt by
the body to eradicate tumors but also a double-edged sword that may
promote tumor progress. The promoting effect of inflammation on tumors
is mainly based on the role of tumor-promoting inflammatory cells,
including macrophage subtypes, mast cells, and neutrophils, as well
as T and B lymphocytes and so on. These
inflammatory cells can secrete a series of signaling molecules such
as epidermal growth factor, VEGF, fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF2),
chemokines, and cytokines that amplify the inflammatory state, etc.
They can also produce proangiogenic or proinvasive matrix-degrading
enzymes, including matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other matrix
metalloproteinases, cysteine cathepsin proteases, and heparinase.
Under the action of various secretions, inflammation can finally show
the promotion of tumor progression, such as inducing tumor angiogenesis,
promoting cancer cell proliferation, promoting cancer cell invasion
and metastasis, etc. In addition, it
has been found that inflammatory cells can release chemicals and notably
reactive oxygen species, which can induce genetic evolution toward
states of heightened malignancy of nearby cancer cells. In general, with the continuous improvement
of people’s understanding, the infiltrating cells of the immune
system in the tumor site are more accepted as one of the components
of the TME, and these infiltrating cells have certain antitumor functions.
However, they can also promote tumor progress, including tumor metastasis,
and play a very important role in various tumor activities. In recent
years, with the continuous development of nanoscience, the potential
hazards of nanomaterials have been continuously discovered. Studies
have shown that nanomaterials can not only activate or enhance the
role of various tumor-promoting inflammatory cells in the TME but
also cause systemic inflammation, leading to immune dysfunction. As
shown in ,
these effects of nanomaterials can lead to the continuous acceleration
of tumor progression, such as promoting tumor angiogenesis and ultimately
tumor invasion and metastasis, which has very serious consequences
and deserves attention.
 In 2019, Zhu et al. conducted a study on the effects
of long-term
multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) exposure in the lungs on breast
cancer. In this study, they found that
long-term exposure to MWCNTs in the lungs will lead to chronic inflammation
in the lungs, leading to changes in gene expression, which help shape
the TME and systemic environment suitable for breast cancer metastasis
and ultimately promote the colonization and growth of breast cancer
cells from in situ to the lungs. The main mechanisms consist of: (1)
increased angiogenesis, mainly manifested as CNT exposure in the lungs
leading to increased levels of pro-angiogenic and pro-transfer factors
in mouse lung tissue, serum, and/or breast cancer cells, including
VEGFA, basic fibroblast growth factor, and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2),
and (2) the formation of a premetastatic niche and metastatic niche,
mainly manifested by the increased expression of COX-2, chemokine
(C-X-C motif) ligand 2, S100 calcium-binding protein A9, MMP9, and
Fibronectin 1 in CNT-exposed lung tissue, which may establish a TME
favorable for colonization and metastasis. NOD-like receptor protein
3 (NLRP3) inflammasome is a multiprotein platform composed of NLRP3
and caspase-1. Its activation is closely related to the formation
of ROS. After activation, the secretion of interleukin-1β will
increase, thus causing a series of inflammatory reactions. Fu et al. found that PEI-CyD and 25 kDa polyethylenimine-based
polymeric nanoparticles can activate the immune response in vivo and
promote the phagocytosis of macrophages and the secretion of proinflammatory
cytokines. It can also promote the production of ROS and the activation
of NLRP3 inflammasome in the liver and ultimately promote the metastasis
of breast cancer in the liver and lung, which may be related to the
immune imbalance of the body as a whole. Soenen et al. obtained similar results in a study of aluminum oxide
nanomaterial, where it can activate NLRP3 inflammasome to promote
the release of inflammatory factors and ultimately promote distant
metastasis of the tumor. 

3

## Conclusion, Discussion, and Future Perspective
This
Review first summarizes several nanomaterials that promote
tumor metastasis by inducing EMT of tumor cells, focusing on describing
the mechanism of nanomaterials affecting the properties of tumor cells
themselves. Second, it summarizes how nanomaterials promote tumor
metastasis from the perspective of the interaction between nanomaterials
and vasculature, focusing on describing the impact of nanomaterials
on the tumor metastasis process. We propose that nanomaterials may
play a promoting role in the tumor metastasis process by disrupting
the connection between the vascular endothelium at the primary tumor
site and potential metastasis sites. Finally, the mechanism by which
different nanomaterials cause inflammation in the body and promote
tumor metastasis is summarized, and the impact of nanomaterials on
the TME is described from a relatively holistic perspective. Through
comparison, it can be found that these three perspectives, respectively,
represent the three parts of tumor metastasis, namely, the tumor itself,
the tumor metastasis process, and the driving factors of tumor metastasis.
The properties of tumor cells themselves play a decisive role in tumor
metastasis, and the driving factors that affect the process of tumor
metastasis and change tumor metastasis can inhibit or promote tumor
metastasis. Therefore, we believe that nanomaterials can have a greater
impact on tumor metastasis by inducing the EMT in tumor cells. With
the continuous enrichment of research, in addition to EMT, vasculature,
and inflammation, the specific content of these three perspectives
will have a more comprehensive development. The study of the mechanism
of nanomaterials promoting tumor metastasis is helpful to arouse people’s
attention to the biosafety of nanomaterials and avoid nano exposure.
In addition, it is conducive to the design and production of safe
and efficient nanomaterials, which are of great significance to the
development of nanotechnology.
Due to the obvious advantages
in improving performance, reducing
cost, and providing convenience, nanomaterials have been widely used
in various fields of daily life. For example, Nano-TiO2 is used in sunscreens and paints, and iron oxide nanoparticles are
used in groundwater treatment. Silica nanoparticles are used in the
electronics industry; graphene is used as electrodes, and so on. The massive global use of nanomaterials has
greatly increased the human body’s exposure to nanoparticles.
Research shows that the skin can prevent micrometer-sized particles
from entering the body; however, it is unable to do so at the nanoscale.
This results in nanoparticles inevitably entering the body’s
circulation system when using skin care products, sunscreen, and other
products, which will have some potential effects. The respiratory tract is another route for nano exposure.
Some nanoparticles can enter the body through the respiratory tract,
such as asbestos, graphene, etc. Some of them can be cleared through
the beating of lung cilia and the phagocytosis of macrophages, but
some will be deposited in the lungs and enter the circulatory system,
causing various harmful effects on the body. Nanoparticles can also enter the body through the digestive system.
In daily life, food and water intake are essential, and it is highly
likely that large amounts of nanoparticles will be ingested during
this process. For example, it is reported that the detection rate
of microplastics in human feces exceeds 95.8% and the content is as
high as 138.9 items/g. Based on the
characteristics of the digestive tract itself, the possibility of
nanoparticles being absorbed into the circulatory system is obviously
higher than the above two pathways, and they are more likely to have
an impact on human health. The increasing
exposure of nanomaterials continues to drive the development of nanotoxicology,
and more nanomaterials have been shown to have varying degrees of
negative effects on the body, such as neurotoxicity, vascular toxicity,
liver toxicity, etc. , In the face of nano exposure,
we can remove nanomaterials based on their own properties such as
charge and diameter, and we can also intervene in the process of promoting
tumor metastasis by nanomaterials from a mechanism perspective, such
as adjusting the inflammatory state of the body and developing specific
inhibitors for different links of nanomaterials promoting tumor metastasis.
Although some progress has been made in the mechanisms by which
nanomaterials promote tumor metastasis, there are still many issues
that need to be further investigated. There is a complex network of
EMT-related signaling pathways in tumor cells; thus, can nanomaterials
induce EMT in tumor cells by activating signaling pathways other than
TGF-β and Wnt signaling pathways? Through the optimization design
of nanomaterials, can the currently observed ability to promote tumor
metastasis be transformed into a positive effect of tumor inhibition?
Recent research advances have shown that EMT is not a binary process,
but it occurs in a progressive manner, which allows cells undergoing
EMT to exhibit varying degrees of epithelial and mesenchymal states,
an intermediate state known as partial, incomplete, or hybrid EMT
states. Cells in different intermediate
states can express different levels of epithelial and mesenchymal
markers and can show morphological, transcriptional, and epigenetic
characteristics between epithelial and mesenchymal cells. At present, many studies have shown that there
are different degrees of the EMT intermediate state in all kinds of
tumor cells, showing different functional characteristics, which can
affect tumor cell proliferation, reproduction, plasticity, invasion,
and metastasis and play a very important role in tumor progression. For example, in pancreatic tumors with KrasG12D/p53cKO
gene alteration, hybrid EMT cancer cells have a stronger proliferation
ability than mesenchymal cells. Different
from judging whether EMT occurs in tumor cells only by the loss of
epithelial marker E-cadherin and the increased expression of mesenchymal
marker vimentin, the recognition of distinct EMT transition states
is mainly through cell surface markers and single-cell RNA-sequencing.
It is worth noting that recent studies have found that tumor cells
have the highest metastatic potential when they are in a hybrid EMT
state. Some studies have also shown that tumor cells in the hybrid
EMT state have higher proliferation potential and are more clonogenic. In addition, the hybrid EMT phenotype has a
stronger ability to enter the blood circulation and can further increase
metastasis. The hybrid EMT state is
the result of the coordination of tumor cells in increasing the ability
of invasion and colonization so that tumor cells can enter the most
suitable state of metastasis. Therefore, intervening and preventing
tumor cells from entering the hybrid EMT state is an excellent way
to avoid tumor metastasis and cause serious harm. Due to their unique
properties, nanomaterials have broad application prospects in regulating
the EMT process of tumor cells. Therefore, we propose that, on the
one hand, nanomaterials can block the process of tumor EMT and make
it stay in the early EMT stage with less invasiveness but, on the
other hand, nanomaterials can also further induce tumor EMT to enter
the late EMT stage with poor colonization ability. For example, overexpression
of the paired-related homeobox transcription factor (Prrx1 TF) can
induce tumor cell EMT derived from renal epithelial cells to make
it more invasive. However, it is only when PRRXTF is silenced that
the tumor cells revert to an epithelial phenotype and gain the ability
to colonize at a distance. This study suggests that, if EMT inducers
are used correctly, the inhibitory effect of them on tumors can be
achieved to some extent. At present,
nanodrugs have been developed to inhibit tumor cell EMT. For example,
Wang et al. developed an etoposide loaded layered double hydroxide
nanocomposite, which can significantly reduce the stemness of tumorigenic
glioma stem cells (GSC) and reverse its EMT process, allowing it to
restore the epithelial cell morphology, thereby overcoming drug resistance
and inhibiting GSC metastasis. However,
there is no related research on using nanomaterials to make tumor
cells stay in the late EMT state to inhibit tumor metastasis. Therefore, based on summarized studies on the
induction of tumor cell EMT by nanomaterials to promote tumor metastasis,
we propose that it may be possible to further design nanomaterials
to fix tumor cells in a late EMT state and inhibit tumor metastasis,
turning the promotion effect of nanomaterials on tumor metastasis
into an inhibitory effect and further expanding the application scope
of nanomaterials in the field of tumor therapy.
In the field
of nanomedicine, the abnormal vascular system formed
by the tumor derived enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect
in solid tumors shows a leaky characteristic, which is the mainly
regarded method for many powerful nano-anticancer drugs to enter the
tumor through the vasculature of the tumor site. Although the EPR
effect has been used as the “gold standard” for the
design of most cancer-targeted drugs, there are still many controversies
and deficiencies. A study by Chan et al. showed that up to 97% of
nanoparticles are not passively transported through the leaky endothelium
into the tumor site by paracellular transport but are transported
by an active process through endothelial cells. This calls into question
the true role of the EPR effect in nanodrug delivery. In addition, the EPR effect has also been found
to have problems such as low delivery efficiency, restrictions by
the nature of the tumor itself, poor controllability, susceptibility
to TME, and insufficient clinical translation of drugs. Although NanoEL can promote tumor metastasis
to a certain extent, this endothelial leakage has a very broad application
prospect in solving the problems of the EPR effect and improving the
targeting of nanodrugs. Through the reasonable design of nanomaterials
in terms of size, surface charge, density, and exposure time, as well
as the continuous understanding of its mechanism and results, the
realization of controllable and adjustable NanoEL has gradually become
a reality, which provides the possibility to further improve the delivery
efficiency of nanomaterials and clinical transformation. In the process
of NanoEL’s clinical transformation, it is of great significance
to avoid its promotion effect on tumor metastasis, which requires
more rigorous animal experiments and the development of reasonable
delivery strategies.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
We acknowledge
the funding provided by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (22104073), Natural Science Foundation of Shandong
Province (ZR2021QB119, 2022HWYQ-079), and the Youth Innovation Science
and Technology Program of Shandong Provincial Universities (2021KJ100).