pmcEMBO JEMBO J78emboj8208664EMBJThe EMBO Journal0261-41891460-2075Nature Publishing GroupPMC10183832PMC10183832.110183832101838323698833410.15252/embj.2022111806EMBJ20221118061ArticleArticlesThe EGFR phosphatase RPTPγ is a redox‐regulated suppressor of promigratory signaling
Maitreyi S Joshi et al
JoshiMaitreyi Shttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-1200-0062 StanoevAngelhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6478-7496 HuebingerJanhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-0225-4472 SoetjeBirgahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-6724-1314 ZorinaVeronika RoßmannekLisaweta MichelKirsten MüllerSven AH BastiaensPhilippe IHhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-8873-6909 philippe.bastiaens@mpi-dortmund.mpg.de

1

Department of Systemic Cell Biology
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Physiology
Dortmund
Germany

2

Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Biology
TU Dortmund
Dortmund
Germany

3
Present address:
Janelia Research Campus
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Ashburn
VA
USA

*Corresponding author. Tel: +49 0231 1332200; E‐mail: philippe.bastiaens@mpi-dortmund.mpg.de

†
These authors contributed equally to this work
293202352023421043577510.1002/embj.v42.10e111806
2022023
0262022
2322023
290320231605202331052024© 2023 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 license.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## Abstract
Spatially organized reaction dynamics between proto‐oncogenic epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and protein tyrosine phosphatases determine EGFR phosphorylation dynamics in response to growth factors and thereby cellular behavior within developing tissues. We show that the reaction dynamics of mutual inhibition between RPTPγ phosphatase and autocatalytic ligandless EGFR phosphorylation enable highly sensitive promigratory EGFR signaling responses to subnanomolar EGF levels, when < 5% receptors are occupied by EGF. EGF thereby triggers an autocatalytic phospho‐EGFR reaction by the initial production of small amounts of phospho‐EGFR through transient, asymmetric EGF‐EGFR2 dimers. Single cell RPTPγ oxidation imaging revealed that phospho‐EGFR induces activation of NADPH oxidase, which in turn inhibits RPTPγ‐mediated dephosphorylation of EGFR, tilting the autocatalytic RPTPγ/EGFR toggle switch reaction towards ligandless phosphorylated EGFR. Reversibility of this reaction to EGF is maintained by the constitutive phosphatase activity of endoplasmic reticulum‐associated TCPTP. This RPTPγ/EGFR reaction at the plasma membrane causes promigratory signaling that is separated from proliferative signaling induced by accumulated, liganded, phosphorylated EGF‐EGFR in endosomes. Accordingly, loss of RPTPγ results in constitutive promigratory signaling from phosphorylated EGFR monomers. RPTPγ is thus a suppressor of promigratory oncogenic but not of proliferative EGFR signaling.

RPTPγ is coupled to autocatalytic ligandless EGFR phosphorylation by a ROS mediated toggle‐switch that enables ultrasensitive EGFR activation at the plasma membrane.
 

EGFR‐PTP interactiononcogenic signaling networkPTP oxidationreactive oxygen speciestoggle‐switch dynamics

## Subject Categories
Membranes & TraffickingPost-translational Modifications & ProteolysisSignal TransductionEC | European Research Council (ERC)ERC AdG 322637 Inhibition of EGFR's kinase activity by gefitinib (10 μM) in both WT, and RPTPγ KO MCF7 cells abolished the phosphorylation of EGFR as well as that of down‐stream Akt and Erk (Figs  and ). This demonstrates that EGFR phosphorylation in RPTPγ KO MCF7 cells was dependent on EGFR's intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity. Furthermore, homo‐FRET fluorescence anisotropy microscopy on an EGFR‐QG‐mCitrine construct (Baumdick et al,  ) ectopically expressed in MCF7 cells showed that EGFR in unstimulated WT and RPTPγ‐KO cells was predominantly monomeric, whereas cells that were stimulated with 160 ng/ml exhibited a higher steady state level of receptor dimers (Fig  ). Unstimulated RPTPγ KO cells, therefore, contain phosphorylated, monomeric EGFR. These results thereby show that RPTPγ is a major PTP that suppresses spontaneous trans‐phosphorylation of EGFR in the absence of stimulus. Furthermore, they show that ligandless, phosphorylated EGFR‐monomers can engage down‐stream Erk and Akt signaling from the PM.
As unliganded EGFR monomers in the absence of EGF in RPTPγ‐KO cells reached the same maximally attainable phosphorylation levels as WT MCF7 cells stimulated with 20 ng/ml EGF for 5′, we questioned whether this dose is saturating EGFR binding sites and thereby generating 2:2 EGF2‐EGFR2 dimers. To assess this, we related EGFR phosphorylation to the fraction EGFR that is bound by EGF (αL: EGF‐EGFR/EGFR) for a given EGF dose within this 5′ time frame. To estimate αL in the lowly EGFR expressing WT MCF7 cells (Imai et al,  ; Roos et al,  ; Charafe‐Jauffret et al,  ), we administered 20, 40, 80, and 160 ng/ml fluorescent EGF‐Alexa647 for 5′ to WT MCF7 cells together with Hoechst33342 to mark the nucleus of each cell. After rapidly washing the excess EGF‐Alexa647 from the medium, the integrated fluorescence of bound EGF‐Alexa647 per cell was measured (Figs  and ). This provides a measure of the total amount of EGF that has bound over 5′ to each cell. An average αL per cell for a given EGF‐Alexa647 concentration was then estimated by normalizing the integrated fluorescence of EGF‐Alexa647 per nucleus of a confluent layer of MCF7 cells to that at 160 ng/ml EGF‐Alexa647, where EGFR is saturated with EGF under equilibrium conditions (Hajdu et al,  ). We found that at 20 ng/ml, a concentration at which EGFR phosphorylation was maximal (~92% of that at 160 ng/ml), only ~20% of receptors were bound to EGF with respect to 160 ng/ml (Fig  ). The phosphorylation level at 20 ng/ml EGF can thus not be explained by transphosphorylation within 2:2 EGF2‐EGFR2 dimers. Instead, the maximal phosphorylation at αL = 0.2 supports a catalytic mechanism that generates phosphorylated EGFR monomers via transient dimer reaction intermediates (Tischer & Bastiaens,  ; Chung et al,  ).

## The EGFR phosphorylation switch at the PM
To relate EGFR phosphorylation to αL at the PM of live MCF7 cells, EGF‐Alexa647 was step‐wise increased on MCF7 cells co‐transfected with the fluorescent fusion constructs EGFR‐mCitrine and PTB‐mCherry (phosphotyrosine‐binding domain fused to mCherry) that exhibit FRET when PTB‐mCherry is bound to phospho‐tyrosines on EGFR‐mCitrine (pY1086/ pY1148; Offterdinger et al,  ; Baumdick et al,  ; Masip et al,  ; Stanoev et al,  ; Fig  ). EGFR‐mCitrine expression elevated total EGFR‐expression of MCF7 cells by an average factor of ~34 ± 5.5 (mean ± SEM) to that of the related MCF10A cells (~105 receptors/cell; Basolo et al,  ; Stanoev et al,  ; Fig  ). These 2.6 ± 0.35 × 105 (mean ± SEM) EGFR‐mCitrine expressing MCF7 cells are referred to as EmCit_MCF7. The fraction of phosphorylated EGFR‐mCitrine for a given EGF‐Alexa647 dose was derived at each pixel from the TCSPC‐FLIM (time correlated single photon counting ‑ fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy) decay profiles of the FRET donor EGFR‐mCitrine (Fig  ). The pixel‐by‐pixel fraction of EGFR‐mCitrine that exhibits FRET to PTB‐mCherry was computed by encoding a priori knowledge about the spatial invariance of the excited state lifetime of the EGFR‐mCitrine/PTB‐mCherry complex (τDA) and EGFR‐mCitrine alone (τD) in a global analysis (Verveer et al,  , ; Grecco et al,  ; Fig  ). The fraction of phosphorylated EGFR‐mCitrine per cell (αp) was then obtained by averaging the pixel‐by‐pixel fraction of EGFR‐mCitrine that exhibits FRET to PTB‐mCherry at the PM as defined by EGF‐Alexa647 fluorescence. The corresponding average fraction of EGFR that is bound by EGF (αL) in the same cell was obtained by normalizing the average ratiometric fluorescence of EGF‐Alexa647/EGFR‐mCitrine at the PM for each cumulative EGF dose to that at saturating EGF‐Alexa647 dose (Reynolds et al,  ; Stanoev et al,  ; Fig  ). A parametric αL‐αp plot for each individual cell could thereby be obtained (Fig  ). These αL‐αp dose–response experiments relate receptor phosphorylation response to the fraction of EGFR whose extracellular domain is conformationally activated by EGF. EGF‐Alexa647 was increased every 1.5′ to a new cumulative dose. This short time in between EGF administrations relative to the maximal half‐time of endocytosis (t1/2 ~ 10′, for the highest EGF dose and given EGFR expression of 2.6 × 105 receptors), combined with the vesicular recycling of ligandless EGFR monomers (Baumdick et al,  ) resulted in a net EGFR internalization during the cumulative dose–response experiment that was less than 11 ± 5% for αL < 0.4 at which maximal EGFR phosphorylation is reached, and maximam 19 ± 9% at αL = 1 (Fig  , top).
 The average αL‐αp response (N = 3, n = 13 cells) of EmCit_MCF7 cells that overexpress EGFR‐mCitrine by more than two orders of magnitude with respect to endogenous RPTPγ was hyperbolic, with ~50% of EGFR‐mCitrine being phosphorylated at ~13% EGF‐receptor occupancy (EC50 = 0.10–0.15; Figs  , red line and ). This receptor phosphorylation that exceeds EGF‐receptor occupancy was similar to that of the endogenous EGFR response (Fig  ), as was the high level of phosphorylated EGFR‐mCitrine (αp = 0.63 ± 0.12 for αL = 0) in RPTPγ KO EmCit_MCF7 cells (Figs  , blue line, and ). Again, similar to WT MCF7 cells (Fig  ), p22phox KO EmCit_MCF7 cells exhibited a strongly dampened EGFR‐mCitrine phosphorylation response (αp = 0.28 ± 0.12 for αL = 1), substantiating that NOX1‐3 activity is necessary for an EGF‐induced phosphorylation response (Figs  , green line and ). RPTPγ rescue by ectopic expression of RPTPγ‐mTFP in RPTPγ KO EmCit_MCF7 cells resulted in EGFR‐mCitrine phosphorylation to be reset to low basal levels (αp = 0.07 ± 0.04 for αL = 0). This rescue shows that high EGFR phosphorylation in RPTPγ KO cells was not an off‐target effect of the CRISPR‐Cas9 gene editing (Fig  , yellow line and C) and substantiates that RPTPγ phosphatase activity suppresses spontaneous EGFR phosphorylation. Furthermore, the phosphorylation response to EGF was restored, now with a switch‐like, ultrasensitive instead of a steep hyperbolic response with a defined threshold at 13% receptor occupancy (HC = 2.34; EC50 = 0.13).
To assess how EGFR phosphorylation response is affected by EGFR expression, we compared αL‐αp response in WT MCF7 (8 ± 0.1 × 103 receptors; mean ± SEM) to that in EmCit_MCF7 (2.6 ± 0.35 × 105 receptors) that express the same level of endogenous RPTPγ. The αL‐αp response in WT MCF7 cells was reconstructed by relating the average measured αL in EmCit_MCF7 to the corresponding αp obtained from western blot analysis of WT MCF7 cells stimulated for 5′ with EGF (0.5–80 ng/ml). αL is independent of receptor expression level since soluble EGF‐Alexa647 was in large excess with respect to the total amount of receptors expressed on the cells (Fig  ). EGFR phosphorylation was normalized to the maximally attainable phosphorylation after inhibition of PTPs with pervanadate for 5′ (0.33 mM; Baumdick et al,  ). Alike EmCit_MCF7 RPTPγ KO rescue cells, WT MCF7 cells exhibited an ultrasensitive EGFR phosphorylation response with lower αL threshold (Figs  and , left panel), indicating that the relative RPTPγ/EGFR expression determines the response and not absolute EGFR levels. The ultrasensitive phosphorylation response with low EGF receptor occupancy threshold was also transduced to the early (5′) down‐stream EGF‐dependent activation of Akt and Erk (Fig  , right and middle panels). The corresponding EGF concentration at which this switch occurs (EGFR: 3.7–9.3 ng/ml; Akt: 1.2–3.7 ng/ml; Erk < 1.3 ng/ml) is in the physiological regime between the concentrations found in blood serum (Joh et al,  ; Birk et al,  ; Rich et al,  ) and wound fluid (Sheardown & Cheng,  ).
In order to relate EGFR phosphorylation response to relative RPTPγ/EGFR expression, we made use of cell‐to‐cell expression variability in order to relate RPTPγ‐mTFP/EGFR‐mCitrine expression ratio to the corresponding Hill Coefficient of the αL‐αp responses in single cells. Hill Coefficients (HC) were obtained by fitting αL‐αp responses of single EmCit_MCF7 RPTPγ‐KO rescue cells to the Hill equation. From the HC versus RPTPγ‐mTFP/EGFR‐mCitrine fluorescence ratio scatterplot three HC‐molecular ratio clusters could be identified, for which the HC and EC50 were determined from the cumulative single cell dose response data (Fig  ). To convert fluorescence into molecular ratios, we normalized background‐corrected fluorescence to the background measured in untransfected cells in both fluorescence channels. This normalized fluorescence is directly proportional to the number of fluorescent molecules and is independent on the instrument and settings used, except for excitation and emission wavelength. However, each fluorescent protein has its associated proportionality factor based on its molecular brightness. We transfected a construct in which mTFP in RPTPγ‐mTFP was exchanged for mCitrine (RPTPγ‐mCitrine) together with EGFR‐mCherry to determine the ratio of RPTPγ‐mCitrine in these cells over EGFR‐mCitrine expressed in EmCit_MCF7 cells (0.4 ± 0.06, mean ± SEM). Using this, the proportionality factor between normalized mTFP and number of mTFP molecules and thus the ratio between EGFR‐mCitrine and RPTPγ‐mTFP in EmCit RPTPγ KO rescue cells were determined (see ). While the molecular numbers can also be calculated using the previously known number of EGFR per MCF10A cells as reference point, the fluorescence background normalization procedure alone yields RPTPγ‐mTFP/EGFR‐mCitrine molecular ratios that are independent of absolute molecular numbers. This procedure was validated by the very similar molecular distributions obtained for RPTPγ‐mCitrine and RPTPγ‐mTFP transfections (Fig  ) and yielded an average RPTPγ/EGFR molecular ratio of 0.1 ± 0.05, 0.4 ± 0.1 and 0.7 ± 0.2 for the three clusters (mean ± SD; Fig  ). Using the ratio of RPTPγ‐mCitrine stably expressed in MCF7 cells to endogenous RPTPγ obtained by western blot (100 ± 15; mean ± SEM, N = 3, n = 7, Fig  ), we could also estimate that WT MCF7 cells express 1 ± 0.2 × 103 RPTPγ/cell corresponding to 13 ± 3% of endogenous EGFR expression (8 ± 1 × 103/cell; mean ± SEM).
Going from endogenous RPTPγ in EmCit_MCF7 cells (RPTPγ/EGFR‐mCitrine = 4 ± 0.7 × 10−3) to the cluster with highest (0.7 ± 0.2) RPTPγ‐mTFP/EGFR‐mCitrine expression ratio in Em_Cit RPTPγ KO rescue cells, a clear progression from hyperbolic to ultrasensitive switch‐like EGFR‐mCitrine αL‐αp response was apparent (Fig  ). This correlation between RPTPγ/EGFR ratio and ultrasensitivity of the phosphorylation response corroborates that qualitative phosphorylation response properties are determined by the relative expression of RPTPγ over EGFR and emerge from EGFR‐RPTPγ interaction dynamics. Because at the highest RPTPγ‐mTFP/EGFR‐mCitrine ratio RPTPγ‐mTFP dephosphorylating activity is dominant with respect to other PTPs, the ultrasensitive response indicated a dynamical signature of a mutual inhibition motif (toggle switch) between EGFR and RPTPγ.
The hyperbolic phosphorylation response at RPTPγ‐mTFP/EGFR‐mCitrine ratios below 0.1, however, indicated that other PTPs modulated the response dynamics of the RPTPγ/EGFR toggle switch. We, therefore, investigated whether another EGFR PTP, TCPTP (PTPN2), had an effect on the phosphorylation response dynamics of the RPTPγ/EGFR system. Knock‐out of this ER‐associated PTP (Fig  ) resulted in a clear increase in basal EGFR‐mCitrine phosphorylation (αp = 0.35 ± 0.13 for αL = 0) in EmCit_MCF7 cells, while maintaining a relatively steep residual phosphorylation response to EGF (EC50 = 0.19 (0.11–0.33); Hill Coeff = 1.01 (0.71–1.91); Figs  , blue line and ). Ectopic expression rescue of TCPTP‐mTFP in these KO‐cells restored the low basal EGFR phosphorylation (αp = 0.09 ± 0.08 for αL = 0), showing that TCPTP activity plays a role in maintaining a low basal EGFR phosphorylation level in the absence of growth factor stimuli. However, this rescue also resulted in a more gradual hyperbolic phosphorylation response (EC50 = 0.41 (0.26–0.48); Hill Coeff = 0.93 (0.8–1.24); Figs  , yellow line and ), indicating a constitutive suppressive dephosphorylation activity that dampens the ultrasensitive EGFR phosphorylation response.

## The EGF‐induced RPTPγ oxidation switch at the PM
To experimentally assess whether RPTPγ catalytic cysteine oxidation to cysteine sulfenic acid by NOX‐generated H2O2 (Bae et al,  ; Denu & Tanner,  ; Meng et al,  ; Reynolds et al,  ) constitutes an inhibitory link from EGFR to RPTPγ, we developed a live cell assay to measure the fraction of oxidized RPTPγ (αox) as function of receptor EGF‐occupancy (αL; Fig  ). For this, the dimedone warhead derived DYn2 (Paulsen et al,  ) was coupled to Atto590‐azide by Cu‐based click chemistry (Rostovtsev et al,  ) to obtain a cell permeable mCitrine‐FRET acceptor probe DyTo that specifically binds to the sulfenic acid form of oxidized cysteines (Appendix Fig  A). To image RPTPγ catalytic cysteine oxidation, MCF7 cells ectopically expressing RPTPγ‐mCitrine and EGFR‐mTFP (EmTFP_MCF7, 2.6 ± 0.35 × 105 receptors/cell, Fig  ) were stimulated with different doses of EGF for 5′, followed by 5′ incubation with DyTo (Fig  and Appendix Fig  B). TCSPC FRET‐FLIM of the donor mCitrine was used to specifically map the fraction of RPTPγ‐mCitrine that is in molecular proximity and thus bound to DyTo (αox). By encoding a priori knowledge about the spatial invariance of the excited state lifetime of the RPTPγ‐mCitrine bound by DyTo (τDA) and RPTPγ‐mCitrine alone (τD) in a global analysis, αox could be determined in each pixel exhibiting RPTPγ‐mCitrine fluorescence. Treatment with 8 mM H2O2, as positive control for the assay, resulted in a pronounced average fraction of RPTPγ‐mCitrine that exhibited FRET to DyTo throughout the cells (αox = 0.86 ± 0.07; Fig  , right panel). Specificity of the assay was apparent from the fact that H2O2 treated EmTFP_MCF7 cells expressing RPTPγC1060S–mCitrine mutant where the catalytic cysteine has been replaced by serine, exhibited average αox values close to zero (negative control; αox = 0.07 ± 0.04). Donor‐based mCitrine‐DyTo FRET‐FLIM molecular proximity imaging (Bastiaens & Squire,  ; Grecco et al,  ), thus, specifically detects the oxidation of the catalytic cysteine of RPTPγ, despite DyTo binding to all oxidized cysteines on proteins (Fig  and Appendix Fig  B). To obtain spatial information about where RPTPγ is oxidized, we morphologically distinguished the PM appearing as elongated continuous structures (like the serpentine structures of ruffles) from endosomal vesicles that appear as distinct round objects within the boundaries of the PM structures.
 Imaging αox as function of EGF dose (5–160 ng/ml; Fig  , right panel) showed a similar switch‐like response for RPTPγ catalytic cysteine oxidation at the PM as observed for EGFR phosphorylation in EmCit_MCF7 RPTPγ KO rescue cells (Fig  , yellow line). In these RPTPγ‐mCitrine expressing EmTFP_MCF7 cells, RPTPγ‐mCitrine oxidation also switched below a ~20% EGF‐receptor occupancy (~20 ng/ml EGF‐Alexa647) from a ~10% basal level to ~60% RPTPγ‐mCitrine oxidation (Fig  , orange symbols). This EGFR‐activity‐coupled oxidative impairment of RPTPγ catalytic activity occurred at the PM, whereas RPTPγ‐mCitrine was in its enzymatically active, reduced catalytic cysteine state in endocytic structures (Fig  , blue symbols). This indicates that EGF‐induced catalytic cysteine oxidation to sulfenic acid was mostly restricted to RPTPγ‐mCitrine on the PM. Consistent with the dampened phosphorylation response (Fig  , green line), p22phox‐KO EmTFP_MCF7 cells exhibited no RPTPγ‐mCitrine oxidation response to increasing EGF doses, whereas 8 mM H2O2 treatment resulted in full RPTPγ‐mCitrine oxidation on the PM as well as in endocytic structures (Fig  ).
We similarly assessed catalytic cysteine oxidation of ER‐associated TCPTP in EmTFP_MCF7 cells that ectopically express TCPTP‐mCitrine. Imaging TCPTP‐mCitrine oxidation as function of EGF dose (5–160 ng/ml) showed a basal (~30%) and spatially even oxidation along the ER reticular structures independent of EGF stimulus. Only at the highest doses of EGF (160 ng/ml) a slight but significant oxidation increase in the PM‐proximal pool (Liou et al,  ; Haj et al,  ) of ER‐associated TCPTP‐mCitrine could be detected (Fig  ). This indicates that the EGF‐induced H2O2 gradient that is produced by PM associated NOX1‐3 activity is confined to the immediate vicinity of the PM, likely due to the highly reducing environment of the cytoplasm that contains antioxidant systems like peroxiredoxin‑thioredoxin (Rhee,  ; Rhee et al,  ; Woo et al,  ). On the other hand, the overall low but significant level of TCPTP‐mCitrine catalytic cysteine oxidation throughout the ER indicates constitutive ER‐associated NOX activity (Jagnandan et al,  ). These results show that TCPTP maintains its constitutive dephosphorylating activity on EGFR during growth factor stimulation, exhibiting a low level of oxidation that is largely uncoupled from EGF‐induced EGFR activity. The EGF‐induced steep H2O2 gradient that emanates from the PM, thus, constrains catalytic cysteine oxidation mostly to the pool of RPTPγ at the PM.

## Recycling RPTPγ‐EGFR generates a growth factor responsive spatial redox cycle
We next investigated whether differential vesicular trafficking of EGFR and RPTPγ has a function for redox‐dependent EGF sensing and signaling at the PM. We first measured the intracellular redistribution over time of ectopically expressed RPTPγ‐mCitrine and EGFR‐mCherry in EE, recycling (RE) and LE compartments after a receptor saturating EGF stimulus (160 ng/ml). Endosomal compartments were immunostained against markers for early‐(EEA1), recycling‐(Rab11a) and LEs (Rab7) after 0′, 15′, 30′ and 60' EGF stimulus and fixation of cells. Prior to EGF stimulus, RPTPγ‐mCitrine and EGFR‐mCherry exhibited significant co‐localization on the PM as well as endosomal structures containing Rab11 (Fig  , top panel and B, left panels), indicating constitutive vesicular recycling of both proteins. After receptor saturating (160 ng/ml) EGF stimulus, RPTPγ remained at the PM and RE (Fig  , bottom panel and B, left panels), whereas EGFR separated from RPTPγ, trafficking towards the LE via the EE (Figs  , and ). This is consistent with constitutive recycling of EGFR being disrupted upon the generation of EGF‐induced EGFR complexes that unidirectionally traffic from the PM, via EEs to the LE (Baumdick et al,  ), whereas vesicular recycling of RPTPγ continued. In contrast to RPTPγ‐mCitrine expressing MCF7 cells, only a small fraction of EGFR‐mCitrine was depleted from the PM upon receptor saturating EGF stimulation in RPTPγ‐KO cells. These did not reach the LE, possibly due to vesicular recycling as apparent from co‐localization with EEs and REs (Fig  , dotted profiles). The altered EGFR‐trafficking upon RPTPγ‐KO, thus, maintains a substantial fraction of active, phosphorylated EGFR on the PM, irrespective of EGF stimulus, hindering efficient lysosomal degradation of liganded EGFR complexes. Furthermore, deregulated post‐translational EGFR trafficking in RPTPγ‐KO cells was also apparent from substantial colocalization of EGFR with the ER (Fig  ) and other endomembrane structures as well as strong enrichment on PM ruffles. This shows that EGFR trafficking to the PM after its biosynthesis and ER‐insertion as well as its vesicular dynamics is deregulated in the absence of RPTPγ, indicating a strong functional coupling between EGFR and RPTPγ.
 In order to investigate whether RPTPγ is dynamically maintained at steady‐state at the PM by Rab11‐activity‐driven vesicular recycling, we enhanced the biogenesis of RE structures by ectopic BFP‐Rab11a expression (Fig  ). This caused the distribution of RPTPγ‐mCitrine to be rebalanced towards large perinuclear BFP‐Rab11 positive endocytic structures in dependence on the level of BFP‐Rab11a expression. Continuous vesicular recycling that sustains RPTPγ at the PM was apparent from the time‐dependent equilibration of photoactivated paGFP‐RPTPγ at the PM after photoactivation on BFP‐Rab11‐positive RE or mCherry‐RPTPγ‐positive endosomal structures (Figs  , and ). The fraction of photoactivated paGFP‐RPTPγ at the PM was thereby strongly dependent on BFP‐Rab11 expression. RPTPγ levels at the PM are, thus, dynamically maintained at steady‐state by Rab11‐activity‐mediated vesicular recycling.
To investigate if the change in trafficking upon receptor saturating EGF stimulus is reflected in the nanoscale organization of EGFR and RPTPγ, super resolution radial fluctuation microscopy of Alexa647‐SNAP‐EGFR and RPTPγ‐mCitrine stably expressed in MCF7 cells was applied after ultra‐rapid cryo‐arrest on a microscope (Huebinger et al,  ). This showed a co‐organization of Alexa647‐SNAP‐EGFR nanoclusters within larger RPTPγ‐mCitrine patches along the PM in serum‐starved cells (Fig  ). However, after 15′ 100 ng/ml EGF stimulus, EGFR clusters were segregated from RPTPγ at the PM as well as in endocytic structures. This change in EGFR‐RPTPγ nanoscale organization upon close‐to‐receptor‐saturating EGF stimulus indicates an interaction between EGFR and RPTPγ at the PM that is disrupted upon formation of EGF‐EGFR at receptor‐saturating EGF doses.
We, therefore, examined whether a constitutive interaction of RPTPγ with EGFR monomers exists that is disrupted upon the generation of liganded EGFR. For this, we carried out immunoprecipitation of RPTPγ‐mCitrine and measured the extent of EGFR pull‐down as function of EGF concentration in MCF7 cells co‐transfected with EGFR and RPTPγ‐mCitrine (Fig  ). An interaction between EGFR and RPTPγ‐mCitrine was apparent in the absence of stimulus as well as at doses of EGF (5 and 20 ng/ml) that occupied a low percentage of available receptors (5 ± 2 and 19 ± 4%, respectively; Fig  ). Under these conditions, phosphorylated EGFR monomers predominate at the PM (Fig  ), indicating that RPTPγ constitutively interacts with EGFR monomers. However, this interaction did not occur upon treatment for 5′ with EGF doses that saturate EGFR binding sites (160 and 320 ng/ml), indicating that RPTPγ does not interact with liganded receptors. Neither catalytic cysteine to serine mutation (RPTPγC1060S‐mCitrine) nor catalytic cysteine oxidation by 8 mM H2O2 affected the amount of co‐immunoprecipitated EGFR, showing that the oxidation state of RPTPγ does not affect its constitutive interaction with ligandless EGFR.
To next relate EGF dependent RPTPγ‐EGFR vesicular trafficking to RPTPγ inactivation dynamics, we compared temporal profiles of catalytic cysteine oxidation for a receptor‐saturating (160 ng/ml) EGF‐Alexa647 stimulus to a receptor sub‐saturating (αL = 19 ± 4%, Fig  ) but strongly EGFR‐phosphorylating (Fig  ) stimulus (20 ng/ml). At both EGF concentrations, RPTPγ attained the maximally oxidized, inactive state at the PM within the timescale of maximal EGFR‐phosphorylation (~10′; Figs  and ). However, whereas the 160 ng/ml sustained EGF‐stimulus caused RPTPγ oxidation to fall back to basal levels in ~20′ (Fig  , green), the 20 ng/ml sustained EGF‐stimulus caused the dynamic equilibration to a high steady‐state oxidation level (Fig  , magenta). In order to relate these RPTPγ oxidation profiles for different EGF concentrations to RPTPγ‐EGFR trafficking dynamics, we obtained high‐resolution radial spatial–temporal maps (STMs; Stallaert et al,  ; Stanoev et al,  ) of EGFR‐mCherry/RPTPγ‐mCitrine from 2‐h CLSM (confocal laser scanning microscopy) time‐lapse imaging (Fig  ). These STMs confirmed that a receptor‐saturating (160 ng/ml) EGF stimulus rapidly depleted EGFR, while RPTPγ density at the PM increased over time (Fig  ). This causes levels of phosphorylated EGF‐EGFR at the PM to drop to a level that cannot sustain the necessary activity of NOX1‐3 enzymes. In contrast, the continuous generation and internalization of only a small fraction of liganded EGF‐EGFR upon a receptor sub‐saturating (20 ng/ml) EGF stimulus removes only a small fraction of EGFR from the PM. Afterwards, a steady‐state of relatively high fraction of EGFR is dynamically maintained by recycling EGFR monomers (Fig  ). In this steady‐state, re‐phosphorylation of recycled EGFR‐monomers at the PM sustains Nox1‐3 activity, which in turn re‐oxidize and inactivate recycled RPTPγ (Fig  ), enabling prolonged signaling of monomeric EGFRp at low EGF levels.

## Autocatalytic RPTPγ‐EGFR‐TCPTP toggle switch dynamics
To investigate how EGFR phosphorylation responses at low‐receptor occupancy arise from PTP‐EGFR reactions at the PM, the experimentally obtained αL‐αp responses (Fig  ) were globally fitted to a RPTPγ‐EGFR‐TCPTP autocatalytic toggle switch network model that reaches steady state (Fig  ). The three ordinary differential equations (ODEs) in Fig  describe the dynamics of the symmetric autocatalytic toggle switch reaction scheme with all the possible causal links depicted in Fig  . The ODEs have been normalized (λEE = EGFRT, λp = k1) to obtain reactant fractions (EGF‐EGFRp/EGFRT, EGFRp/EGFRT, RPTPγA/RPTPγT), yielding comparable parameters that describe maximal rate of dephosphorylation by RPTPγ (Γ1,3 = γ1,3. RPTPγΤ/EGFRT) or constant rate of dephosphorylation by TCPTP (Γ2,4 = γ2,4.TCPTP/EGFRT) of ligandless EGFRp (Γ1, Γ2) or liganded EGF‐EGFRp (Γ3, Γ4), as well as the maximal rate of oxidative RPTPγ inhibition over reactivation (Β = β EGFRT/k1). The catalytic (second‐order rate constants: ε1–ε4) and autocatalytic (second‐order rate constants: α1–α4) EGFR phosphorylation reactions are based on evidence that extracellular domain symmetric (EGFR2, EGF2‐EGFR2: ExSym), and asymmetric (EGF‐EGFR2: ExAsym) dimers are transient (t1/2 ~ 1–10 s) reaction intermediates (Chung et al,  ; Low‐Nam et al,  ; Salazar‐Cavazos et al,  ) that (auto‐)catalytically generate phosphorylated ligandless (EGFRp) and liganded (EGF‐EGFRp) monomers (Fig  ; Verveer et al,  ; Reynolds et al,  ; Ichinose et al,  ; Stanoev et al,  ). Physical invariant parameters were linked among the responses of the four expression perturbations groups (RPTPγ, TCPTP, p22Phox, and EGFR) during iterative parameter estimation at steady state (dEGFR
p/T/dt = dEGF‐EGFR
p/T/dt = dRPTPγ
A/T/dt = 0), improving model testing and definition of error space (Beechem,  ; ). The goodness of fit to the multi‐dimensional αL‐αp data surface is shown in Fig  , and the obtained parameters as well as their linkage among expression perturbation experiments are listed in Fig  .
 Catalysis (ε
i
, i = 1,4) occurs when unliganded (ε1), or liganded ExSym (ε4) as well as ExAsym (ε2,3) unphosphorylated dimers generate liganded (EGF‐EGFRp) or unliganded (EGFRp) phosphorylated monomers. Autocatalysis (α
i
, i = 1–4) occurs when EGFRp or EGF‐EGFRp monomers generate more EGFRp or EGF‐EGFRp via ligandless (α1) or liganded ExSym (α4) dimers as well as ExAsym (α2,3) dimers (Fig  ). The expression invariant second‐order rate constants of catalysis (ε1–ε4) and autocatalysis (α1–α4) were linked among the fits of all αL‐αp responses (Fig  ). Comparison of the catalysis rate constants shows the expected efficient catalytic EGFR phosphorylation via ExSym (EGF2‐EGFR2) dimers, whereas catalysis via ExAsym dimers (EGF‐EGFR2) is an order of magnitude less efficient and via unliganded (EGFR2) dimers three orders of magnitude less efficient. However, when unliganded EGFR is phosphorylated, it increases kinase activity for unphosphorylated ligandless EGFR by three orders of magnitude (compare ε1 to α1, Fig  ), to a similar level as that in the catalysis through liganded ExSym dimers. Also kinase activity in the ExAsym dimer reactions was increased to a similar level by phosphorylation of EGFRp or EGF‐EGFRp (Fig  ). This is consistent with regulatory tyrosine phosphorylation, such as pY845 (Sato et al,  ), causing a conformational change on intracellular kinase domains that enhances EGFR dimerization as well as its intrinsic kinase activity (Shan et al,  ; Baumdick et al,  ). In order to determine the relative contribution of the four catalytic and four autocatalytic reactions to the steady state EGFR phosphorylation (EGF‐EGFRp + EGFRp) for a given αL, we multiplied the kinetic rate constants (ε1–ε4, α1–α4) with the computed abundances of the reaction substrates (EGFR, EGFRp, EGF‐EGFR, EGF‐EGFRp) that form the eight possible transient EGFR dimeric reaction intermediates (Fig  ). This showed that the autocatalytic reaction by ligandless EGFRp‐EGFR dimer transients, associated with the rate constant α1, dominates the EGFR phosphorylation reaction in the physiological EGF receptor occupancy range (αL = 0.01–0.1; Fig  ), where the major phosphorylated reaction product is EGFRp (Fig  ). However, in order to initiate this autocatalytic reaction, the much less abundant catalytic ExAsym (ε2) reaction has to generate EGFRp, whereas the remaining catalytic ExAsym (ε3) and ExSym (ε4) reaction generate EGF‐EGFRp and, therefore, can only trigger the ligandless autocatalytic reaction (α1) via ExAsym autocatalysis (α2; Fig  , inset). The autocatalytic reaction by ligandless EGFR dimer transients (α1) is, thus, causing ultrasensitive phosphorylation responses at low (αL < 0.1) EGF receptor occupancy that occurs at physiological EGF concentrations. At αL > 0.3 autocatalytic ExAsym reactions (α2 + α3) mostly cause EGFR phosphorylation, to be taken over by catalytic liganded ExSym dimer reactions (ε4) at αL above 0.5 (Fig  ).
The maximal dephosphorylation rates by RPTPγ (Γ1, Γ3) and constant dephosphorylation rates by TCPTP (Γ2, Γ4) are relative to catalytic and autocatalytic EGFR phosphorylation rates and were estimated in an unshared fashion among the corresponding expression perturbations and linked in the complementary (invariant) cases. Similarly, the EGFRp‐mediated oxidative RPTPγ inhibition maximal rate (Β) was linked among EmCit_WT and TCPTP KO and corresponding rescue because of RPTPγ and EGFR expression invariance and set to 0 for RPTPγ KO and p22Phox KO. The EGFRp‐ and EGF‐EGFRp‐independent basal ratio of active (reduced) over inactive (oxidized) RPTPγ was measured and fixed among all experiments (k2/k1 = 0.08, Fig  ). However, Γ1–Γ4 as well as Β were left free for the fit of the endogenous EGFRp response in WT MCF7 that express an order of magnitude less EGFR relative to EmCit_MCF7 cells (8 ± 0.1 × 103 vs. 2.6 ± 0.35 × 105 EGFR/cell). The maximal EGFRp (Γ1) and EGF‐EGFRp (Γ3) dephosphorylation rates show that RPTPγ dephosphorylates ligandless EGFRp two‐to‐three orders of magnitude more efficient than liganded EGF‐EGFRp (Fig  ) in WT as well as in EmCit_MCF7 cells (Fig  ). RPTPγ, thus, primarily suppresses autocatalytic phosphorylation of ligandless EGFR, in line with our biochemical finding that RPTPγ interacts with unliganded monomeric EGFR and not liganded EGF‐EGFR (Fig  ). The constitutive TCPTP activity was 10‐fold lower on ligandless EGFRp (Γ2) with respect to RPTPγ and exhibited a similar trend of less efficiently dephosphorylating EGF‐EGFRp (Γ4). Liganded receptors will, thus, be persistent in their phosphorylation at the PM, while phosphorylation among ligandless receptors can only be maintained by EGFRp‐mediated oxidative RPTPγ inhibition (Β). Both maximal RPTPγ activity Γ1 and maximal EGFRp‐mediated oxidative RPTPγ inhibition (Β) increased with RPTPγ expression, demonstrating that the mutual inhibition between RPTPγ and EGFR is enhanced when their expression level becomes similar (Fig  ). These results enable to construct the autocatalytic toggle switch reaction network that generates an ultrasensitive EGFR phosphorylation response at physiological EGF receptor occupancies < 0.1 (Fig  ). The core of the system is the autocatalytic reaction among ligandless EGFR and EGFRp that generates more EGFRp that couples to NOX to oxidatively inhibit RPTPγ activity on EGFRp, further amplifying the autocatalytic phosphorylation of ligandless EGFRp once triggered by the EGF‐dependent ExAsym catalytic reaction.
To assess how the steady‐state EGFR phosphorylation response is established by the non‐linear dynamics of the RPTPγ‐EGFR‐TCPTP system, 3D αp (EGFRp + EGF‐EGFRp) bifurcation profiles were reconstructed from the estimated parameters of the four expression variation groups (RPTPγ, TCPTP, p22Phox, and EGFR) as function of Γ1 = γ1 RPTPγ/EGFR and αL input (Fig  ; ). The bifurcation profile of EmCit_MCF7 cells that largely overexpress EGFR‐mCitrine with respect to RPTPγ (RPTPγ/EGFR‐mCitrine = 4 ± 2 × 10−3, EGFRT = 2.6 ± 0.35 × 105) still exhibited a narrow S‐shaped bistable dynamical signature of the toggle switch (Reynolds et al,  ) and poising of the system at the criticality edge (Stanoev et al,  ) of this narrow bistable region. This S‐shape was lost upon RPTPγ or p22Phox KO. In the former case, the system was poised in a high pre‐activated monostable state despite auxiliary PTP activity, showing that the dominant high activity of very lowly expressed RPTPγ (1 ± 0.2 × 10−3 molecules/cell) maintains the low EGFR phosphorylation level in the absence of growth factor triggers. That is why in the latter p22Phox KO case, where RPTPγ cannot be inhibited, the system is poised in an inactivated monostable state that only slightly increased with αL. The RPTPγ KO RPTPγ‐mTFP rescue to 40 ± 9‐fold (mean ± SEM) that of endogenous level (RPTPγ‐mTFP/EGFR‐mCitrine = 0.1 ± 0.05), yielded a bifurcation profile with an enhanced bistable region as compared to EmCit_MCF7 cells and poising of the system close to criticality. Despite a 40‐fold higher RPTPγ expression, Γ1 (Maximal RPTPγ activity) and Β (maximal oxidative RPTPγ inhibition) were only slightly elevated, which points to a concentration dependent inhibitory RPTPγ mechanism, possibly dimerization (Kd ~ 3 μM; Barr et al,  ). This RPTPγ density dependent inhibition might convey robustness in the EGFR phosphorylation response to RPTPγ expression level. At even higher RPTPγ‐mTFP overexpression (140 ± 28 or 180 ± 38 fold (mean ± SEM) with respect to endogenous), leading to RPTPγ‐mTFP approaching EGFR‐mCitrine expression (RPTPγ‐mTFP /EGFR‐mCitrine = 0.4 ± 0.1 and 0.7 ± 0.2), both Γ1 and Β strongly increased (Fig  ). In these cases, RPTPγ's dominant overall dephosphorylating activity with respect to other PTPs together with a more effective EGFRp‐coupled oxidative RPTPγ inhibition, accentuates RPTPγ‐EGFR toggle switch dynamics, poising it close to the enlarged bistable region leading to a steep ultrasensitive response (Fig  ). On the other hand, TCPTP KO poised the system in the preactivated monostable state at the boundary of a slightly enlarged bistable region of EmCit_MCF7 cells. Upon TCPTP‐mTFP rescue, however, the bistable region vanished, poising the system away from criticality in the monostable regime (Figs  and ). This shows that constitutive phosphatase activity of the PM‐proximal pool of ER‐associated TCPTP is essential to maintain RPTPγ/EGFR toggle switch dynamics in the inactive state at the PM. MCF7 cells that endogenously express RPTPγ/EGFR = 0.13 ± 0.03 with only 8 ± 1 × 103 receptors/cell exhibited a bifurcation profile with a pronounced S‐shaped bistable dynamical signature of the toggle switch reminiscent of that of the RPTPγ‐mTFP/EGFR‐mCitrine = 0.1 ± 0.05 rescue cells. The poising of the system at the criticality edge enables a low threshold ultrasensitive response, generating responsiveness to very low‐growth factor concentrations (Fig  ). The robustness to preactivation at this sparse EGFR‐RPTPγ expression is likely due to their interaction (Fig  ) thereby matching maximal PTP activity to the overall autocatalytic phosphorylation rates. In addition, the effective EGFRp‐mediated oxidative inhibition of RPTPγ (Β = 5, Fig  ) that causes the low threshold ultrasensitive response at this sparse expression, points at nanoscale EGFRp‐RPTPγ‐NOX clusters (Fig  ) that effectively oxidize RPTPγ within the complex by molecular proximity to the ROS source (NOX1‐3). Numerical KO of TCPTP activity clearly poises the RPTPγ/EGFR toggle switch system in the bistable region causing irreversible EGFR phosphorylation responses to growth factor triggers. RPTPγ‐EGFR‐TCPTP network dynamics is, thus, poised at the edge of bistability to respond highly sensitive to low level EGF stimuli in a reversible manner while being robust to noise.

## 
RPTPγ is a suppressor of EGFR promigratory signaling response
In order to investigate how the RPTPγ‐EGFR growth factor sensing network affects cellular phenotype in relation to EGF dose, we compared short‐term (1 h) morphodynamic and signaling parameters to long‐term migratory and proliferative parameters (12 h) in MCF7 WT, RPTPγ‐KO, and p22phox‐KO cells.
We first compared the growth factor dependent morphodynamics of individual MCF7 WT cells to those in which either RPTPγ or p22phox was knocked out. EGF‐induced PM shape‐changes were measured over a period of an hour by time‐lapse fluorescence microscopy of the PM marker BFP‐tkRas (Schmick et al,  ; Fig  ). The ratio of the perimeter of an equiareal circle to the actual perimeter of the cell (Pcircle/Pcell) was used as measure of cellular morphology. This morphometric parameter approaches one for a circular shape and lowers in case of enhanced overall curvature generated by protrusions. The distribution of (Pcircle/Pcell) over time and all cells for a given condition allows the comparison of the ensemble of manifested morphologies between conditions.
 In MCF7 WT cells, a low, physiological (1 ng/ml) EGF‐stimulus caused the cells to switch from a relatively static to a highly dynamic morphing behavior with many protrusions (Fig  ). This is consistent with promigratory signaling from EGF‐triggered autocatalytically phosphorylated EGFRp monomers at the PM. In contrast, a high, receptor saturating EGF‐stimulus (160 ng/ml) caused retraction and rounding, pointing towards onset of proliferation as previously described for high EGF stimulus (Brüggemann et al,  ). RPTPγ‐KO cells, however, exhibited already in the absence of stimulus highly dynamic morphing behavior with more protrusions as compared to WT (Fig  ). This dynamic behavior was only slightly enhanced upon 1 ng/ml EGF‐stimulus and was similar to that of WT cells stimulated with 1 ng/ml EGF. This is in agreement with constitutive promigratory signaling from constitutively autocatalytically phosphorylated EGFRp monomers at the PM in RPTPγ‐KO cells. A high (160 ng/ml) receptor saturating EGF‐stimulus still maintained the dynamic morphing behavior (Fig  ), while additionally causing some retraction and rounding (Fig  ). This is in agreement with the altered EGFR‐trafficking in RPTPγ‐KO cells that maintains a substantial fraction of liganded phosphorylated EGF‐EGFRp on the PM that engage promigratory effectors (Brüggemann et al,  ). As apparent from the higher median Pcircle/Pcell and narrower distribution, p22phox‐KO cells exhibited less membrane protrusions as compared to WT cells (Fig  ), consistent with RPTPγ constitutively suppressing EGFR phosphorylation (Fig  ). However, 1 ng/ml EGF stimulus caused retraction and rounding in contrast to the very dynamic morphing behavior of WT cells (Fig  ). This points towards onset of proliferation, similar to WT cells stimulated with 160 ng/ml EGF. This retraction persisted at high (160 ng/ml) stimulus, which corroborates the low dephosphorylating activity of RPTPγ on liganded EGF‐EGFRp (Fig  ) that can engage proliferative Erk signaling from EEs (Brüggemann et al,  ). Indeed, a receptor non‐saturating 20 ng/ml EGF stimulus generated a delayed Erk response at 30′ as compared to WT cells that exhibit a strong Erk activation peak at 5′ caused by autocatalytically phosphorylated ligandless EGFR at the PM (Fig  ).
To assess if internalized EGF‐EGFRp in p22phox‐KO cells indeed affects proliferative signaling, we measured phosphorylation of the S‐phase blocker retinoblastoma protein (pRb) by immunofluorescence (Fig  ). This showed a gradual increase of Rb phosphorylation in MCF7 WT cells with increasing EGF. In comparison to MCF7 WT cells, however, p22phox‐KO cells exhibited a hyperproliferative signaling response already at 1 ng/ml EGF, whereas RPTPγ‐KO cells exhibited hypoproliferative signaling over the whole range of EGF stimuli (0–160 ng/ml). To directly measure the effect of p22phox‐or RPTPγ‐KO on cell proliferation, clonogenic assays under sustained EGF (20 ng/ml and 0.5% FCS; Figs  and ) or in complete serum growth medium with 10% FCS at three linear increasing cell seeding densities (1, 2, and 3‐fold) were performed (Fig  ). By renormalizing the area occupied by cell colonies after 7 days to the cell seeding density, a measure of average colony size and thereby proliferation of cells was obtained (Klein et al,  ). As evident from the normalized area occupied by cell colonies and in agreement with proliferative signaling (Fig  ), p22phox‐KO and RPTPγ‐KO cells exhibited significant hyper‐ and hypo‐proliferative behavior with respect to WT cells, respectively (Fig  ).
 To next investigate how the EGFR‐RPTPγ sensory system coordinates the balance between migration and proliferation in tissue regeneration, we used a simple unicellular MCF7 model system of wound healing (Cappiello et al,  ; Brüggemann et al,  ). For this, invasion of confluent monolayers of RPTPγ‐KO and p22phox‐KO cells into a cell‐free gap was monitored over 12 h after removal of a barrier (Figs  and , Movie  ). The evolution of gap closure by the invading cell mass was determined by quantifying cell density in lateral bins (Fig  , second column, top; ). WT MCF7 cells showed virtually no migration into the gap under serum starvation conditions, whereas RPTPγ‐KO cells exhibited autonomous migration into the gap in agreement with constitutive promigratory signaling from autocatalytically phosphorylated EGFRp monomers at the PM. However, whereas p22phox‐KO MCF7 cells showed virtually no migration into the gap, constitutive RPTPγ oxidation by 0.5 mM H2O2 in these cells phenocopied the autonomous migration of unstimulated RPTPγ‐KO cells. This corroborates that EGFRp mediated oxidative inhibition of RPTPγ is a requisite for promigratory signaling via autocatalytic EGFR phosphorylation.
Upon constitutive stimulation with 1 ng/ml EGF the coordinated migration and proliferation of MCF7 WT cells filled and closed the gap within 12 h (Fig  ). In contrast, a constitutive receptor saturating (160 ng/ml) EGF stimulus resulted in minor movement of the cell front and did not lead to gap closure, as previously described (Brüggemann et al,  ; Fig  and Movie  ). The latter minor cell front progression is due to predominantly proliferative signaling (Fig  ) from rapidly endocytosed EGF‐EGFRp and only weak promigatory signaling from residual EGFRp at the PM.
The constitutive migration of RPTPγ KO cells was only slightly enhanced by 1 ng/ml EGF, with more individual cells being released from the migrating monolayer front (Fig  ). This likely originates from additional promigratory signaling from liganded EGF‐EGFRp that remains at the PM because of deregulated endocytosis and unidirectional trafficking of EGF‐EGFR to LE's in these cells (Figs  and ). That this disordered gap invasion was due to migration and not proliferation was further apparent from the virtual absence of Alexa647‐labeled EdU‐ (5‐ethynyl‐2′‐deoxyuridine‐) incorporation into newly synthesized DNA after 16 h of migration into the gap (Fig  ). In other words, proliferative EGF‐EGFRp signaling from endosomes is minor in RPTPγ KO cells due to the deregulated endosomal trafficking of EGF‐EGFRp (Figs  and ). On the other hand, p22phox‐KO cells failed to consistently initiate a coordinated migratory response upon stimulation with 1 ng/ml EGF, maintaining the monolayer front at its original position from which individual cells migrated into the gap. This residual migration possibly occurs due to loss in cell–cell contact after cell rounding, which usually precedes proliferation in this hyperproliferative tissue. The defect migratory response of p22Phox KO cells is also apparent from the temporal average cell profile (Fig  , left profiles) that exhibits a sustained discontinuity at the barrier position in contrast to that of RPTPγ KO cells. Furthermore, the average cell count before the barrier position was hardly affected in p22Phox KO cells, whereas it decreased for RPTPγ KO cells. This indicates that solely migrating RPTPγ KO cells decrease the bulk cell mass before the barrier position, whereas proliferating p22Phox KO cells sustain this cell mass despite individual cells escaping into the gap. EdU staining after 16 h clearly confirmed the hyperproliferative behavior of these cells already at 1 ng/ml EGF around and within the gap, increasing the number of cells over time that are, however, unable to close the cell‐free gap within up to 16 h (Fig  ). Due to strong proliferative signaling from endocytosed liganded receptors at 160 ng/ml EGF, a disordered p22Phox KO cell front protruded further into the gap from which individual cells escaped to migrate into the gap. The slightly enhanced proliferative signaling of RPTPγ KO cells at this high EGF concentration (Fig  ), combined with enhanced promigratory signaling from liganded receptors that are sustained at the PM due to deregulated EGFR trafficking, also caused a disordered cell front to further protrude into the gap. These results thus demonstrate the role of RPTPγ in suppressing autonomous migration by suppressing autocatalytic EGFR phosphorylation at the PM in the absence of EGF (Figs  and ) but not proliferation originating from endosomal EGF‐EGFRp signaling at physiological EGF levels that result in < 5% receptor EGF‐occupancy.

## Discussion
We provide evidence that the ROS‐mediated toggle switch coupling of RPTPγ to autocatalytic EGFR monomer phosphorylation enables promigratory ultrasensitive phosphorylation responses at the PM to physiological EGF stimuli at which a very minor fraction of EGFR is bound by EGF (< 5%). The short lived (1–10s) EGFR dimer reaction intermediates (Chung et al,  ; Low‐Nam et al,  ; Koseska & Bastiaens,  ; Salazar‐Cavazos et al,  ) enable this dynamic reaction system to be sensitive to such low EGF concentrations. The phosphorylation response largely exceeds the number of liganded EGF‐EGFR and is driven by the autocatalytic ligandless EGFR phosphorylation reaction (EGFRp‐EGFR‐> 2EGFRp; Reynolds et al,  ; Baumdick et al,  ; Stanoev et al,  ; Koseska & Bastiaens,  ) that we found to be three orders of magnitude more efficient than the catalytic ligandless reaction (EGFR‐EGFR‐> EGFRp). The high catalytic activity of RPTPγ that we have shown to specifically interact and fully dephosphorylate ligandless EGFRp, necessitates EGFRp‐mediated NOX1‐3 activation to oxidatively inhibit RPTPγ in order to induce an autocatalytic phosphorylation response. We could show that low level EGF triggers this autocatalytic reaction via the catalytic formation of EGFRp by asymmetric (EGF‐EGFR2; Alvarado et al,  ; Liu et al,  ) dimer transients. Once initial EGFRp exceeds a threshold, the system approaches a new steady state of amplified EGFRp phosphorylation, now keeping RPTPγ in its oxidized, inactive form. Experimental bifurcation analysis of linked expression perturbations experiments revealed that constitutive activity of PM‐proximal ER‐associated TCPTP poises RPTPγ/EGFR toggle switch dynamics at the critical edge of bistability (Stanoev et al,  ) to respond highly sensitive to low level EGF stimuli in a reversible manner while being robust to noise. EGFR‐RPTPγ vesicular recycling through the reducing cytoplasm thereby closes the coupled redox‐ and dephosphorylation–phosphorylation cycles, enabling reset of the system to basal levels when growth factor levels decline (Fig  , yellow curved arrows).
 This autocatalytic EGFR toggle‐switch signaling system at the PM is distinct from the liganded EGF‐EGFRp monomers that form the more stable homotypic complexes that accumulate in clathrin coated pits. Due to the orders of magnitude lower catalytic activity of RPTPγ on EGF‐EGFRp with respect to EGFRp (Fig  ), these EGF‐EGFRp clusters are preferentially ubiquitinated by the ubiquitin ligase cbl (Levkowitz et al,  ; Soubeyran et al,  ; Baumdick et al,  ), endocytosed and engage proliferative signaling from endosomes via the soluble Erk pool (Stallaert et al,  ; Brüggemann et al,  ; Fig  , green curved arrows). This branch of internalized proliferative EGFR signaling depletes the recycling EGFR pool in dependence on EGF concentration and EphR‐mediated cell–cell contact signals that redistribute EGFR to EEs, enabling context dependent proliferative responses (Stallaert et al,  ) in an evolving tissue. This EGF‐EGFRp signaling from endosomes is neither dependent on NOX activity nor on interaction with RPTPγ and the temporal signaling response is determined by ER‐associated TCPTP and PTP1B phosphatase activities while EGF‐EGFR receptor complexes unidirectionally traffic to the LE (Haj et al,  ; Yudushkin et al,  ; Stanoev et al,  ). RPTPγ is, thus, a suppressor of oncogenic migratory EGFR signaling from the PM but not that of proliferative signaling of endocytosed ubiquitinated receptor complexes. Our results provide support that the reaction dynamics of spatial–temporally organized tyrosine‐kinase/PTP networks enable paracrine communication at physiological growth factor levels necessary for the regulation of collective tissue behavior.

## Materials and Methods

## Antibodies

## Primary antibodies
rabbit anti‐RPTPγ (rb‐RPTPγ‐P4: gift from C. Sorio, Department of Pathology, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, (Sorio et al,  )), mouse anti‐TCPTP (MAB1930, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), mouse anti‐p22phox (ab80896, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), anti‐cysteine sulfenic acid 2‐thiodimedone (ABS30, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), living colors mouse anti‐GFP (632381, Clontech, Mountain View, CA), goat anti‐GFP (ab5450, Abcam), rabbit anti‐phospho EGFR Y1068 (3777, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA), mouse anti‐phospho EGFR Y1068 (2236, Cell Signaling Technology) rabbit anti‐EGFR (4267, Cell Signaling Technology), goat anti‐EGFR (AF231, R&D Systems), rabbit anti‐phospho‐ERK‐1/2 Thr/Tyr 202/204 (9101, Cell Signaling Technology), mouse anti‐ERK1/2 (ab366991, Abcam), rabbit anti‐phospho‐Akt Ser473 (9271, Cell Signaling Technology), mouse anti‐Akt (pan) (2920, Cell Signaling Technology), rabbit anti‐EEA1 (3288, Cell Signaling Technology), rabbit anti‐Rab7 (9367, Cell Signaling Technology), rabbit anti‐Rab11a (2413, Cell Signaling Technology), rabbit phospho‐Rb Ser807/811 (8516, Cell Signaling Technology), mouse anti‐GAPDH (CB1001, Merck), mouse anti‐α‐Tubulin (T6074, Merck), mouse anti‐Na+/K+ ATPase‐α3‐subunit (BML‐SA247‐0100, Enzo Life Sciences, NY).

## Secondary antibodies
IRDye 680 donkey anti‐mouse IgG, IRDye 800 donkey anti‐rabbit IgG, (LI‐COR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE); Alexa Fluor 647 chicken anti‐rabbit IgG, Alexa Fluor 647 donkey anti‐goat IgG, Alexa Fluor 568 donkey anti‐rabbit IgG (Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany).

## Plasmids
The constructs, PTPRG‐mCitrine/‐mTFP/‐mCherry, PTPN2‐mCitrine/‐mTFP, and EGFR‐mCitrine/‐mTFP/‐mCherry, PTB‐mCherry were generated previously (Stanoev et al,  ). To create the PM‐marker BFP‐tkRas, the fluorescent protein BFP was fused to the ‘tail of KRas’, i.e. the C‐terminal hypervariable region responsible for the PM‐localization of Kras (KRas4B amino acids 169–188; Hancock et al,  ; Schmick et al,  ).

## Cell culture and transfections
MCF7 cells (86012803, ECACC) were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM; PAN‐Biotech GmbH, Aidenbach, Germany) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; PAN‐Biotech GmbH), 2 mM L‐Glutamine and 1% nonessential amino acids (NEAA, PAN‐Biotech GmbH). Cells were transfected 24 h prior to the experiment with cDNA of interest with Fugene6 following the protocol of the manufacturer (Roche Diagnostics, Burgess Hill, UK). MCF10A cells (CRL‐10317, ATCC) were grown in DMEM/F12 (PAN‐Biotech GmbH) supplemented with 5% horse serum (Sigma–Aldrich Chemie GmbH, Munich, Germany), 20 ng/ml EGF, 500 ng/ml hydrocortisone (Sigma–Aldrich Chemie GmbH), 100 ng/ml cholera toxin (Sigma–Aldrich Chemie GmbH), 10 μg/ml insulin (Sigma–Aldrich Chemie GmbH). HT29 cells (HTB‐38, LGC Genomics GmbH) were cultured in Ham's F12 culture medium (PAN‐Biotech GmbH) supplemented with 2 mM L‐Glutamine, 1% (NEAA) and 10% FBS. Cells were transfected with Lipofectamine 3000 following the protocol of the manufacturer (Life Technologies). The culture medium was exchanged 7 h after transfection. All cells were grown at 37°C in 5% CO2 and regularly checked for mycoplasma (MycoAlert mycoplasma detection kit, Lonza, Basel, Switzerland). Identity of all cell lines was confirmed by STR analysis (Leibniz Institute DSMZ GmbH, Braunschweig, Germany). Cells were serum starved for at least 6 h prior to the experiment with respective culture media containing 0.5% FBS. The consistency of plasmid expression throughout different experiments was ensured by transfecting 80 ng of each plasmid per well of an 8‐well Lab‐Tek™ chambered cover glass slides (0.8 cm2 surface area, ThermoFisher), and the amount of plasmid was scaled up proportional to the culture‐well surface area for other culture‐plates used. EGFR and PTPs were co‐transfected with 1:1 DNA ratio. In PTB‐FLIM experiments, a ratio of 1:2 was used for EGFR‐mCitrine:PTB‐mCherry.

## Generation of gene knock‐outs using CRISPR/CAS9

pSpCas9(BB)‐2A‐GFP (PX458) was a gift from Feng Zhang (Addgene plasmid #48138; http://n2t.net/addgene:48138; RRID:Addgene_48138). The oligonucleotides containing CRISPR guide RNA sequences (sgRNA) were designed (https://portals.broadinstitute.org/gppx/crispick/public) and synthesized (Sigma–Aldrich Chemie GmbH). sgRNA sequences used to create CRISPR KO cell lines are: PTPRG exon 7: 5'‐TCCACTATTTCGCTACACGG‐3′; PTPN2 exon 6: 5'‐AGGGACTCCAAAATCTGGCC‐3′; CYBA exon 2: 5'‐GTAGGCACCAAAGTACCACT‐3′. The sgRNAs were cloned into the BbsI site of the pX458 expression vector as described previously (Ran et al,  ). MCF7 cells were plated on six well tissue culture dishes (SARSTEDT AG & Co. KG, Nümbrecht, Germany) and transfected with 2 μg of each pX458 construct using Fugene6. Cells were FACS sorted 24 h post‐transfection using GFP expression, and single cells were sparsely seeded on 15 cm dishes to form separated clonal colonies. Single clone derived colonies were picked, expanded, and evaluated for knockout by western blot analysis.

## EGF‐Alexa647 and EGF‐DyLight405
The His‐CBD‐Intein‐(Cys)‐hEGF‐(Cys) plasmid was kindly provided by Prof. Luc Brunsveld, University of Technology, Eindhoven. Human EGF was purified from E. coli BL21 (DE3) and N‐terminally labeled with Alexa647‐maleimide or DyLight405‐Maleimide as described previously (Sonntag et al,  ) and stored at −20°C in PBS.

## Synthesis and purification of DyTo

DyTo was formulated by labeling DYn2 with atto‐590azide by azide‐alkyne Huisgen cycloaddition (Rostovtsev et al,  ). The reaction was performed by mixing the following reagents at the mentioned final concentrations to obtain 1 ml reaction volume. atto‐590azide (6 mM, ATTO‐TEC GmbH, Siegen, Germany) dissolved in DMSO was mixed with aqueous solution of click‐chemistry grade CuSO4 (40 mM, Jena Bioscience GmbH, Germany) and TCEP (40 mM, Sigma–Aldrich Chemie GmbH) for 5′. TBTA (20 mM, Sigma–Aldrich Chemie GmbH) was added to the mixture followed by the addition of DYn2 (18 mM, Cayman Chemical, MI, USA) dissolved in DMSO. The reaction was allowed to proceed overnight at room temperature in dark on a rocking platform.
DyTo was separated from the unreacted reagents and by‐products by mass‐directed preparative HPLC (infinity prep II, Agilent Series 1260, LC‐MSD) using reversed‐phase C18 column (VP10/125 5 μm) with a constant flow of 20 ml/min. Water/Acetonitrile (H2O + 0.1% v/v TFA, CH3CN + 0.1% v/v TFA) system was used as eluent. The product identity was verified on mass spectrometer integrated with HPLC system. The DyTo fraction obtained from the HPLC was subject to reduced‐pressure evaporation, and the final product was obtained as dry‐powder that was stored at −20°C.

## Immunoprecipitation and western blots
Cells grown in 6‐well tissue culture plates (SARSTEDT) were treated as per the experimental requirement and lysed using RIPA cell lysis buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.9, 150 mM NaCl, 1% IGEPAL, 0.5% Na‐deoxycholate, 20 mM NEM) supplemented with Complete Mini EDTA‐free protease inhibitor (Roche Applied Science, Heidelberg, Germany) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3 (1:100, P5726 and P0044, Sigma–Aldrich). For immunoprecipitation (IP), equal amounts of protein lysates were incubated with pull‐down antibody overnight at 4°C followed by 2 h treatment with Dynabeads Protein G magnetic beads (10004D, ThermoFisher, MA) for pull down. Total and IP protein were prepared in XT Sample Buffer (1610791, Bio‐Rad, CA) supplemented with 0.05 M DTT. The protein bands were resolved by SDS/PAGE using NuPAGE Novex 4–12% Bis‐Tris gels (ThermoFisher) in MOPS‐SDS running buffer (ThermoFisher) at 200 V constant voltage, blotted to polyvinylidene difluoride membrane by wet‐tank transfer for 1.5 h at 100 V constant voltage and blocked with intercept (TBS) blocking buffer (LI‐COR Biosciences) for 1 h.
Primary antibody incubation was performed over night at 4°C, followed by washing with TBS/T and incubation with the respective secondary antibodies for 1 h in the dark. After final washing with TBS/T, the blot was scanned using an Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (LI‐COR). The integrated intensities of the protein bands on western blots were measured using the gel analyzer tool in Fiji (Schindelin et al,  ), and signals of phosphorylated proteins were normalized to the integrated intensity of the corresponding total protein bands. Protein bands of RPTPγ and RPTPγ‐mCitrine were normalized to a loading control (Na+/K+‐ATPase).
co‐IP of EGFR upon RPTPγ‐mCitrine (1st row: lanes 1–6) or RPTPγC1060S‐mCitrine (lane 7) pull‐down was performed with a goat anti‐GFP antibody (ab5450, Abcam) from lysates of MCF7 cells co‐transfected with EGFR and RPTPγ‐mCitrine or RPTPγC1060S‐mCitrine. Total protein concentrations of RPTPγ‐mCitrine and EGFR in the lysate were measured by western blot as input control for the Co‐IP. Co‐immunoprecipitated EGFR was ratiometrically quantified over pulled down RPTPγ‐mCitrine or RPTPγC1060S‐mCitrine protein bands.

## Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM)
Cells were cultured and transfected (as described above) for confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) experiments on 4 or 8‐well Lab‐Tek™ chambered cover glass slides (ThermoFisher). Before imaging, the culture media was replaced with phenol red‐free DMEM supplemented with 25 mM HEPES (PAN‐Biotech GmbH). Confocal images were acquired using a Leica TSC SP8 microscope (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany), equipped with an environment‐controlled chamber (Life Imaging Services) set to 37°C, a 405‐nm diode laser and a white light laser (white light laser Kit WLL2, NKT Photonics). Imaging was done with HC PL APO CS2 63×/1.4NA oil immersion objective and pinhole between 1 and 1.7 airy units. Following excitation wavelengths were used for proteins with fluorescent fusion tags/labels: BFP/DyLight 405 (405 nm), TFP (458 nm), mCitrine (514 nm), mCherry/Alexa Fluor 568 (561 nm), Atto‐Tec 590 (593 nm), Alexa Fluor 647 (640 nm). Fluorescence emission was detected by hybrid detectors (HyD) restricted at: BFP/DyLight 405 (415–450 nm), TFP (468–485 nm), mCitrine (524–560 nm), mCherry/Alexa Fluor 568 (571–620 nm), Atto‐Tec 590 (605–630 nm), Alexa Fluor 647 (655–690 nm). About 12‐bit images were recorded by frame‐by‐frame sequential scanning at 512 × 512 pixels, with 80 Hz scanning frequency.

## Immunofluorescence
Cells grown in 4 or 8‐well Lab‐Tek™ chambered cover glass slides (ThermoFisher) were fixed with 4% PFA (15710, EM‐grade, EMS, Hatfield, PA) in TBS (v/v) for 10′. Cells were permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X‐100 (v/v) for 8′. Background staining was blocked by 1 h incubation with Intercept (TBS) Blocking Buffer at room temperature. Samples were incubated with primary antibodies at 4°C overnight and secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. Antibodies were diluted in Intercept (TBS) Blocking Buffer. All washing steps following fixation, permeabilization, primary, or secondary antibody incubation were performed with TBS.
The extent of co‐localization in CLSM images of the endosomal marker proteins (EMP): Rab11a, EEA1, or Rab7 with the protein of interest (POI): RPTPγ‐mCitrine or EGFR‐mCherry was computed in Fiji (Schindelin et al,  ) by defining ROIs in EMP and POI channels by intensity thresholding in background‐subtracted images. The EMP mask was converted to a binary mask and multiplied with the thresholded POI image. The integrated intensity from this overlapping area was normalized to the total integrated intensity of POI in the whole cell to obtain the fraction of POI co‐localized to the EMP.
To determine the fraction of cells positive for Rb phosphorylation, cell nuclei stained with anti‐phospho‐Rb and Hoechst 33342 were detected with cellular segmentation algorithm Cellpose (Stringer et al,  ) from the confocal images of respective staining. The number of cell nuclei positive for anti‐phospho‐Rb was normalized to the total number of nuclei detected with Hoechst 33342.

## Fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM)
TCSPC FLIM of EGFR‐mCitrine/PTB‐mCherry or PTP‐mCitrine/DyTo was performed at 37°C on the Leica SP8 laser‐scanning microscope equipped with a fast lifetime contrast module (FALCON, Leica Microsystems) using the 63×/1.4NA oil objective. mCitrine was excited using the white light laser at a frequency of 20 MHz and wavelength of 514 nm, and fluorescence emission was collected between 525 to 560 nm on HyDs. The photon collection was split among 2–3 HyDs with an AcoustoOptical Beam Splitter (AOBS). Photons were integrated for a total of approximately 15–20 s per image (~300–600 photons/pixel, sum of all detectors) using the FALCON system.
The donor (mCitrine) count images were thresholded above the background fluorescence. Global analysis was performed as described previously (Grecco et al,  , ) by a custom script implemented in Python to deduce the spatial distribution of the fraction of FRET‐exhibiting donor for EGFR‐phosphorylation (PTB‐mCherry bound fraction of EGFR‐mCitrine: αp) and PTP‐oxidation (DyTo‐bound fraction of PTP‐mCitrine: αox).

## Quantification of EGF‐binding to WT MCF7 cells
WT MCF 7 cells were seeded in Lab‐Tek™ chambered cover glass slides (ThermoFisher) with 105 cells per well 1 day before the experiment, to reach a confluent layer of cells at the day of the experiment. The cells were starved for 6 h in DMEM supplemented with 2 mM L‐Glutamine and 1% nonessential amino acids but only 0.5% FCS. Before the start of the experiment, this medium was replaced with phenol red‐free DMEM supplemented with 25 mM HEPES (PAN‐Biotech GmbH). Cells were then stimulated at 37°C with different concentrations (0, 20, 80, 160 ng/ml) of EGF‐Alexa647 plus Hoechst33342 (4 μM) in the same medium for 5′. They were washed 2× quickly with the same medium without EGF and Hoechst at 37°C and directly transferred to the microscope. Three to five fields of view were recorded with 5′ after stimulation using a 60×/1.35NA oil immersion objective at an Olympus IX81 widefield epifluorescence microscope (Olympus GmbH, Hamburg, Germany) equipped with a LED‐illumination system (Spectra3; Lumencor, Beaverton, OR, USA) and an Orca™‐Quest qCMOS™ camera (Hamamatsu Photonics K.K., Hamamatsu City, Japan). Hoechst33342 was imaged with 395/25‐ and 440/20‐nm bandpass filters for excitation and emission light, respectively. Alexa647 was imaged using 635/22‐ and 680/42‐nm bandpass filters for excitation and emission light. The fluorescence intensity in each Alexa647‐image was quantified using Fiji (Schindelin et al,  ) and normalized by the number of nuclei in each corresponding Hoechst33342 image. The mean background fluorescence value obtained from samples treated without EGF‐Alexa647 was subtracted.

## Fluorescence photoactivation microscopy
Fluorescence photoactivation microscopy was carried out at 37°C on a Leica SP8 microscope using a 63×/1.4NA oil objective. Cells were transfected with photoactivatable paGFP‐RPTPγ and RPTPγ‐mCherry, with or without co‐expression of BFP‐Rab11a. Pre‐and post‐photoactivation images were acquired for paGFP‐RPTPγ and RPTPγ‐mCherry using 488 and 561 nm laser excitation, respectively. For photoactivation, paGFP‐RPTPγ was excited with the 405 nm diode laser at 80% transmission in three frames on a perinuclear region of interest (ROI) exhibiting RPTPγ‐mCherry fluorescence. In the post‐activation step, fluorescence images for paGFP‐RPTPγ and RPTPγ‐mCherry were acquired with a time interval of 30″, using the 488 nm and 561 nm WLL laser at 10% power. At the end of the experiment an image of BFP‐Rab11a was acquired with 5% 405‐laser power.
Following background correction, fluorescence gain on the PM was quantified by the ratio of local (cell periphery) paGFP‐RPTPγ to RPTPγ‐mCherry fluorescence using Fiji (Schindelin et al,  ).

## 
Spatial–Temporal maps
CSLM images obtained from WT MCF7 cells expressing EGFR‐mCherry, RPTPγ‐mCitrine and CBL‐BFP at 1′ interval were background corrected prior to further processing. PM and nuclei in individual cells were masked using RPTPγ‐mCitrine and CBL‐BFP fluorescence, respectively. For each pixel in the cell space, the normalized radial localization (r) was calculated as follows:
r=rPMrPM+rNM
where rPM and rNM are the shortest Euclidean distances from each pixel to the PM and NM, respectively. The pixels were segmented in 10 radial bins based on their normalized distances. The mean fluorescence intensities were calculated in each segment for RPTPγ‐mCitrine, EGFR‐mCherry, and EGF‐Alexa647 to obtain their spatial distribution profiles at each time point for individual cells. The spatial profiles obtained at consecutive time‐points were concatenated to form 3D STMs and then combined to yield an average STM (Stanoev et al,  ).

## Fluorescence anisotropy microscopy
Fluorescence anisotropy microscopy was performed before and during EGF stimulation (160 ng/ml) in WT or RPTPγ‐KO MCF7 cells ectopically expressing EGFR‐QG‐mCitrine (Baumdick et al,  ). Cells were incubated in cell culture medium with 0.5% FCS for at least 6 h before the experiment. The microscope consisted of an Olympus IX‐81 body equipped with a MT20 illumination system, a 20×/0.7NA objective and CellR software (Olympus GmbH, Hamburg, Germany). A linear dichroic polarizer (Meadowlark Optics, Frederick, Frederick, CO, USA) was placed in the illumination path of the microscope, and two identical polarizers in an external filter wheel were used to measure parallel (I
II) and perpendicular (I
⊥) polarized emitted light in two separate images. Steady state anisotropy (r

i
) was calculated in each pixel i:
ri=IIIi−GiI⊥iIIIi+Gi2I⊥i

The G factor (G
i) was determined by acquiring the ratio of the intensities at perpendicular and parallel orientations for fluorescein in solution, which has a steady‐state anisotropy close to zero due to its fast rotation. Quantification of anisotropy was performed using Fiji (Schindelin et al,  ).

## Super‐resolution radial fluctuation (SRRF) under ultrarapid cryo‐arrest
Ultra‐rapid cryo‐arrest of a stable MCF7 cell line expressing SNAP‐EGFR and RPTPγ‐mCitrine was done as recently described (Huebinger et al,  ). For this, the cells were grown on fibronectin‐coated (5 μg/cm2, F0895, Sigma–Aldrich) circular microscopy cover slides (No.1; ∅ 4 mm) that were mounted to chambers from biocompatible silicone (4‐well micro‐Inserts; ibidi GmbH, Gräfelfing, Germany). Before the experiment, Snap‐EGFR was labeled with 0.5 μM Snap‐Surface Alexa647 (New England Biolabs GmbH, Frankfurt, Germany) for at least 60′. The cover slides were mounted to the ultra‐rapid cryo‐arrest device (Huebinger et al,  ), which was placed on top of an epifluorescence microscope. The cells were cryo‐arrested during observation on the microscope. The microscope consisted of an IX‐83 microscope body equipped with a 40×/0.95NA objective (UPlanApo) and a MT20 illumination system (Olympus Deutschland GmbH, Hamburg, Germany) as well as an Orca‐R2 camera (Hamamatsu Photonics, Hamamatsu, Japan). Series of 100 widefield fluorescence images were acquired for SRRF reconstructions of mCitrine (excitation: 470/40 nm; dichroic mirror 495 nm; emission 520/35 nm) and Alexa647 (excitation: 620/60 nm; dichroic mirror 640 nm; emission 700/75 nm) with pixel length of 163 nm and a frame rate of 1 frame/s. SRRF reconstruction was done using the NanoJ plugin (Laine et al,  ) to Fiji (Schindelin et al,  ).

## Quantification of relative and absolute EGFR‐ and RPTPγ‐expressions
Relative expression of EGFR in WT MCF7, EmCit_MCF7, and MCF10A cells was measured by EGF‐Alexa647 binding to these cells (Stanoev et al,  ). For this, cells were serum starved (0.5% FCS) for 6 h and subsequently treated for 5 min with 160 ng/ml EGF‐Alexa647 and imaged by CLSM. The measured Alexa647 intensity was background subtracted and normalized to the background of untreated cells and reflects relative abundances of EGFR in individual cells of these three cell lines (Fig  ). Since expression of EGFR in MCF10A (~105 receptors/cell) is known from the literature (Basolo et al,  ), the relative expressions can be translated into absolute number of molecules. The simultaneously measured EGFR‐mCitrine intensity in EmCit_MCF7 cells, thus, yields number of EGFR molecules per EGFR‐mCitrine fluorescence (2.6 ± 0.3 × 105, mean ± SEM).
To get RPTPγ/EGFR ratios and molecular numbers out of fluorescence intensities, we used this information and a normalization procedure of the measured fluorescence intensity (I) of a fluorescently labeled cell subtracted and normalized by the mean background fluorescence of untransfected cells (BG). The fluorescence stemming only from the fluorophores (I−BG) is produced by a number of fluorophores (n) that emit fluorescence based on their intrinsic molecular brightness, for the given excitation wavelength and corrected for the fraction of photons collected by emission filter settings (mb) and as a factor of instrument settings (k) that include excitation intensity and photon collection efficiency. BG contains the same factor with intrinsic cellular fluorophores n

BG
, that have a molecular brightness mb

BG
, which is different from mb, but in the same channel share k with (I−BG). By normalizing (I−BG) by BG we get:
I−BGBG=kmbnkmbBGnBG=mbnmbBGnBG

Using this normalization procedure, the instrument factor k cancels out and normalized fluorescence is independent on the instrument used, except for excitation wavelength and emission wavelength filtering. In the case of EmCit_MCF7 cells, we have determined the average number of EGFR (n
EGFR) by the above‐mentioned EGF‐Alexa647‐labeling in relation to MCF10A to be 2.6 ± 0.3 × 105 (Fig  ). Together with the measured average values for (I−BG)/BG on a large sample (59 ± 6, mean ± SEM; n = 102), we can determine the factor (mb−1
mb

BG

n

BG
) to be n
EGFR/59 = 4.4 × 103 ± 0.6 × 103 (mean ± SEM). Thus, we get for the mCitrine channel independent on other instrument settings then excitation and emission wavelengths
ImCit−BGmCitBGmCit4.4*103=nmCit

This allows not only to calculate the number of EGFR in a smaller sample EmCit‐MCF7 cells but also to deduce the average number of transiently transfected RPTPγ‐mCitrine (1.0 ± 0.1 × 105, mean ± SEM) measured by widefield microscopy, but similar excitation and emission wavelength (widefield excitation: 461–489 nm, emission: 502–538 nm; confocal excitation: 514 nm, emission: 524–560 nm). Using this number and the measured (I

mTFP
−BG

mTFP
)/BG

mTFP
 for RPTPγ‐mTFP, we can determine the factor (mb−1
mb

BG

n

BG
) for the TFP channel to be 4.7 ± 0.9 × 103.
ImTFP−BGmTFPBGmTFP4.7*103=nmTFP

The close matching of the correction factor for mCitrine and mTFP shows that the factor (mb−1
mb

BG

n

BG
) is actually very small for mTFP and mCitrine, which have very comparable molecular brightnesses, in the excitation and emission wavelength used. With this, we can derive the number of RPTPγ‐mTFP molecules per cell (1.0 ± 0.2 × 105, mean ± SEM). This number matches very closely the number of RPTPγ‐mCitrine (Fig  ), which is the same construct with exchange fluorescent protein that has been transfected in the same way, validating the normalization procedure. Endogenous RPTPγ per cell was estimated from the ratio of RPTPγ‐mCitrine to endogenous RPTPγ expression obtained by western blot (100 ± 15‐fold; mean ± SEM; N = 4, n = 7; Fig  ).

## Single cell morphodynamics
WT, RPTPγ‐KO, and p22phox‐KO MCF7 cells were seeded on Lab‐Tek™ chambered cover glass slides (ThermoFisher), transfected with EGFR‐mCitrine or BFP‐tkRas and incubated in cell culture medium with 0.5% FBS for at least 6 h before the experiment. Cells were stimulated with sustained doses of EGF‐Alexa647 (1 or 160 ng/ml), and CLSM images were obtained every 2′ for 60′.
For the analysis of single cell morphodynamics, cells within dense colonies were excluded. Temporal stacks from EGFR‐mCitrine or BFP‐tkRas fluorescence images were segmented to binary masks: If necessary, a local contrast normalization (40 px, Integral Image Filters plugin (Schindelin et al,  )) was performed, and an Otsu automated intensity threshold applied. Masks were manually checked and corrected, cleaned, and split into single cell masks, from which area, and perimeter were measured. Morphometric changes were calculated using a Perimeter‐Ratio:
PerimeterCirclePerimeterCell=2π×AreaCell÷πPerimeterCell

Shape change of cells over time is displayed using the temporal color coder plugin (developed by Kota Miura, Centre for Molecular and Cellular Imaging, EMBL Heidelberg, Germany) on the bare outlines of cell masks.

## Wound healing assay
WT, RPTPγ‐KO, and p22phox‐KO MCF7 cells were seeded onto fibronectin‐coated (1.85 μg/cm2) 24‐well culture plates containing two‐well silicone culture inserts (IBIDI) to create a cell‐free gap. After the culture insert was removed, cells were stimulated either with H2O2 (0.5 mM) or with EGF‐Alexa647 (1 or 160 ng/ml) and imaged immediately. Transmission images were acquired on the Leica SP8 confocal microscope with the environment‐controlled chamber maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2 using transmitted light of the white light laser and a 10×, 0.3NA air objective for 12 h at a time interval of 10′.
To analyze cell‐migration, segmentation was performed using Trainable Weka Segmentation Plugin in Fiji (Arganda‐Carreras et al,  ). For each experiment, one image from the transmission stack was chosen to manually label the pixels in three classes: cell‐free gap, inner part of the cells, and cell boundaries. Considering the best trade‐off between precision and recall for a single class, Bayes Net Classifier was trained on the labeled data and then applied to the whole image stack to obtain masks for each class for the time series. The cell‐count was quantified with MATLAB/Python by size thresholding the detected particles for noise removal, finding geometric centers of the objects, dividing every 512 × 512 image on 16 × 16 bins of size 32 × 32 pixels and calculating the number of cells in the constructed bin. The boundary bin position was detected via the largest drop of cell density on the first frame. The bins in the gap and in the bulk were defined with respect to the position of the initial gap boundary (Fig  : schematic in inset). The number of cells in indicated spatial bins were calculated at acquired temporal‐frames (imaged at 10′ intervals) for each image‐stacks and averaged over 4–5 experimental repeats.

## Clonogenic assay
WT, RPTPγ‐KO, and p22phox‐KO MCF7 cells were uniformly seeded in linear increment (100, 200 or 300 cells per well) in 6‐well tissue culture plates (SARSTEDT), incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2 in DMEM growth media supplemented with 2 mM L‐Glutamine, 1% NEAA and either 10% FBS or 0.5% FBS + 20 ng/ml EGF. The growth medium was exchanged every alternate day. After 7 days, the plates were washed with PBS, fixed with 4% (v/v in PBS) PFA (EM‐grade, EMS) for 10′ and stained with 0.05% (v/v in PBS) crystal violet (Sigma‐Aldrich Biochemie GmbH) for 10′. The excess crystal violet was removed by washing three times with PBS. The lids were removed for 3–4 h to dry the plates before imaging. Plates were scanned on Typhoon TRIO+ variable mode imager (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK) with the following settings: Cy5 filter (ex. 633 nm, em. 670 band‐pass and PMT 530), pixel size 50 μm, and focal plane +3 mm.
To quantify the occupied culture‐well area by proliferated cell‐colonies, the image of the scanned well was intensity thresholded for the pixels occupied by colonies and a binary mask was obtained. By using Analyze Particles command in Fiji (Schindelin et al,  ), the area of the mask was calculated and normalized to the area of the culture well. For a given cell type, assuming the direct proportionality between the final cell number and the initial number of seeded cells, the final percent area occupied by the cell colonies was normalized by the factor of linear proportion (1, 2, or 3 for 100, 200, or 300 initial cells, respectively). Thereby, the percent occupied areas from all the treated culture‐wells from an individual cell type were combined together for a given growth media condition.

## Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed with the test specified in the figure legends, with the number of independent experiments (N) and analyzed cells (n).

## Computational modeling and data fitting
To capture the interactions between EGFR and the PTPs across the different conditions, the following model of differential equations was used, as schematized by the general symmetric autocatalytic toggle switch model in Fig  :
1λEdEGFRp/Tdt=EGFRnp/Tε1EGFRnp/T+ε2EGF−EGFRnp/T+α1EGFRp/T+α2EGF−EGFRp/T−γ1RPTPγTEGFRTRPTPγA/TEGFRp/T−γ2TCPTPTEGFRTEGFRp/T

1λPdRPTPγA/Tdt=RPTPγOx/T−κ2κ1RPTPγA/T−βEGFRTκ1RPTPγA/TEGFRp/T+EGF−EGFRp/T

1λEdEGF−EGFRpTdt=EGF−EGFRnpTε3EGFRnpT+ε4EGF−EGFRnpT+α3EGFRpT+α4EGF−EGFRpT−γ3RPTPγTEGFRTRPTPγATEGF−EGFRpT−γ4TCPTPTEGFRTEGF−EGFRp/T

Here, EGFRp/T, RPTPγA/T, and EGF−EGFRp/T describe the fractions of active (phosphorylated) proteins, relative to the respective total protein concentration, while EGFRnp/T=1−EGF−EGFRTEGFRT−EGFRp/T, PTPOx/T=1−PTPA/T and EGF−EGFRnp/T=EGF−EGFRTEGFRT−EGF−EGFRp/T describe the fractions of inactive (non‐phosphorylated or oxidized) proteins, where EGF−EGFRTEGFRT is the fraction of liganded EGFR molecules that is provided as an input parameter, analogous to the experimental procedure. Parameters ε1−ε4 and α1−α4 represent the different rate constants in the second‐order phosphorylation reactions (Fig ) of the non‐phosphorylated EGFR species (EGFRnp and EGF−EGFRnp/T). These EGFR activation parameters are assumed to be dependent on the properties of EGFR only; therefore, their values are shared across the different conditions, while the remaining parameters on the right side (with the exception for k2/k1, which depends on the intrinsic properties of RPTPγ only) are fitted in condition‐specific manner, i.e., they differ between the conditions according to the performed experimental perturbations. The rest of the rate constants depict: γ1 and γ3 – second‐order RPTPγ‐specific dephosphorylation, γ2 and γ4 – second‐order (TC)PTP‐dependent dephosphorylation, k2/k1 – intrinsic PTP deactivation/activation ratio, β – second‐order EGFR‐dependent oxidation. Parameters EGFRT, RPTPγT, and TCPTPT depict the respective total protein concentrations, they appear due to the normalization procedure, where active protein concentrations are mapped to active fractions by dividing with the total protein concentrations. The bracketed parameter groups (Γ1=γ1RPTPγTEGFRT;Γ2=γ2TCPTPTEGFRT;Γ3=γ3RPTPγTEGFRT;Γ4=γ4TCPTPTEGFRT;Β=βEGFRTk1; k21=k2k1) were estimated as single parameters during the fitting procedure, and the ones containing protein concentrations were allowed to vary according to the respective experimental conditions, typically involving protein knockout or rescue perturbations (see table in Fig  ). Values of Γ1, Γ3, and Β were estimated in an unshared fashion for perturbations of RPTPγ expression (Β was set to zero for the knockout condition), values of Γ2 and Γ4 were also estimated separately for the perturbations of TCPTP expression, while Γ1−Γ4, and Β values were estimated separately for the WT condition where the EGFR expression differed. Parameters λE (EGFRT) and λP (κ1) appear due to the normalization procedure (to generate fractions of active proteins), they only contribute to the relative kinetics and do not affect the steady state values, hence they were not estimated.
For a given parameter set and condition, a bifurcation profile was calculated depicting the dependence of the fraction of phosphorylated EGFR (EGFRp/T+EGF−EGFRp/T) on the input fraction of EGF‐bound EGFR (EGF−EGFRTEGFRT) in steady state, using a custom‐made continuation algorithm. The resulting profiles were compared (using sum‐of‐squares) with the corresponding dose–response dependencies from the experimental data points of the respective condition (Fig  ; each blue circle is measured steady state αL−αp dependency in a cell or western blot for a given dose; offsets were removed except for the conditions with pre‐activation). Finally, using these comparisons for all conditions as a cost function, a custom‐made Metropolis Hastings algorithm was employed to perform iterative parameter estimation of all the parameters (shared and non‐shared) together, until no marked improvement of the cost function was detected.
Subsequently, bifurcation diagrams were generated depicting the dependence of the fraction of phosphorylated EGFR (EGFRp/T+EGF−EGFRp/T) on the RPTPγ‐dependent dephosphorylation rate Γ1=γ1RPTPγTEGFRT for multiple different values of fraction of EGF‐bound EGFR (EGF−EGFRTEGFRT), to compile the 3D bifurcation surfaces (Fig  ). The corresponding dose–response profiles were overlayed (red lines) on these surfaces at the previously estimated Γ1 values and are matching the profiles shown in Fig  .
All data fitting procedures and bifurcation diagram calculations were performed using a custom‐made code in MATLAB (MATLAB and Statistics Toolbox Release R2022a, The MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA, USA).

## Author contributions

Maitreyi S Joshi: Formal analysis; investigation; visualization; methodology; writing – original draft. Angel Stanoev: Software; formal analysis; investigation; visualization; methodology. Birga Soetje: Formal analysis; visualization; methodology. Jan Huebinger: Formal analysis; investigation; visualization; methodology; writing – original draft; writing – review and editing. Veronika Zorina: Formal analysis; visualization; methodology. Lisaweta Roßmannek: Methodology. Kirsten Michel: Methodology. Philippe IH Bastiaens: Conceptualization; formal analysis; supervision; funding acquisition; investigation; visualization; methodology; writing – original draft; project administration; writing – review and editing. Sven AH Müller: Methodology.

## Disclosure and competing interests statement
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

## Supporting information
Appendix
Click here for additional data file.
Expanded View Figures PDF
Click here for additional data file.
Movie EV1
Click here for additional data file.
PDF+
Click here for additional data file.
Source Data for Figure 1
Click here for additional data file.
Source Data for Figure 2
Click here for additional data file.

## Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr. A. Krämer for critically reading the manuscript, M. Reichl for cell culture work, and Dr. M. Schulz for FACS (all at Systemic Cell Biology, MPI for Molecular Physiology). We thank Dr. C. Sorio, Department of Pathology, University of Verona, Verona, Italy for the generous gift of rabbit anti‐RPTPγ. The project was partly funded by the European Research Council (ERC AdG 322637) to PIHB. Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.

## Data availability
All data is available in the figures and source data files. Correspondence and request for materials should be addressed to Philippe IH Bastiaens. pSpCas9(BB)‐2A‐GFP (PX458) (Addgene plasmid # 48138) plasmids require a material transfer agreement from Addgene. The custom code used for global fitting of the dose response data is available in a github repository under the link: https://github.com/astanoev/EGFR‐PTP‐Dynamics

 Reviewer Report