pmcJ Am Chem SocJ Am Chem Soc822acssd7503056jaJournal of the American Chemical Society0002-78631520-5126pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC11404482PMC11404482.111404482114044823918648110.1021/jacs.4c067161ArticleVisualization of Brain
Tumors with Infrared-Labeled
Aptamers for Fluorescence-Guided Surgery
ZamayGalina KoshmanovaAnastasia NarodovAndrey GorbushinAnton VoronkovskiiIvan GrekDaniil LuzanNatalia KolovskayaOlga ShchugorevaIrina ArtyushenkoPolina GlazyrinYury FedotovskayaVictoriya KuziakovaOlga VeprintsevDmitry BeluginKirill LukyanenkoKirill NikolaevaElena KirichenkoAndrey https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5736-3791LapinIvan KhorzhevskiiVladimir SemichevEvgeniy MohovAlexey KirichenkoDaria TokarevNikolay ChanchikovaNatalia KratAlexey ZukovRuslan BakhtinaVarvara ShnyakinPavel ShesternyaPavel TomilinFelix KosinovaAleksandra https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3935-0871SvetlichnyiValery ZamayTatiana KumeikoVadim MezkoVasily https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0514-599XBerezovskiMaxim V. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0690-7837KichkailoAnna †Prof.
V.F. Voino-Yasenetsky Krasnoyarsk State Medical University, Krasnoyarsk 660022, Russia‡Aptamerlab
LLC, Krasnoyarsk 660042, Russia§Federal
Research Center “Krasnoyarsk Science Center of the Siberian
Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences”, Krasnoyarsk 660036, Russia∥Krasnoyarsk
Inter-District Ambulance Hospital Named after N.S. Karpovich, 17 Kurchatova, Krasnoyarsk 660062, Russia⊥A.V.
Zhirmunsky National Scientific Center of Marine Biology, Far Eastern Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, Vladivostok 690041, Russia#School of
Medicine and Life Sciences, Far Eastern
Federal University, Vladivostok 690922, Russia¶Federal
Siberian Research Clinical Centre under the Federal Medical Biological
Agency, Krasnoyarsk 660130, Russia∇Laboratory
of Advanced Materials and Technology, Tomsk
State University, Tomsk 634050, Russia○Krasnoyarsk
Regional Pathology-Anatomic Bureau, Partizana Zheleznyaka, Krasnoyarsk 660022, Russia⧫Krasnoyarsk
Regional Clinical Cancer Center, 16 1-ya Smolenskaya, Krasnoyarsk 660133, Russia††Kirensky Institute of Physics, Krasnoyarsk 660036, Russia‡‡Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular
Sciences, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1N 6N5, Canada*Email: maxim.berezovski@uottawa.ca.*Email: annazamay@yandex.ru.260820241109202414636470838249892500416052024160820241508202426082025260820251709202426082025© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2024The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
Gliomas remain challenging
brain tumors to treat due
to their infiltrative
nature. Accurately identifying tumor boundaries during surgery is
crucial for successful resection. This study introduces an innovative
intraoperative visualization method utilizing surgical fluorescence
microscopy to precisely locate tumor cell dissemination. Here, the
focus is on the development of a novel contrasting agent (IR-Glint)
for intraoperative visualization of human glial tumors comprising
infrared-labeled Glint aptamers. The specificity of IR-Glint is assessed
using flow cytometry and microscopy on primary cell cultures. In vivo
effectiveness is studied on mouse and rabbit models, employing orthotopic
xenotransplantation of human brain gliomas with various imaging techniques,
including PET/CT, in vivo fluorescence visualization, confocal laser
scanning, and surgical microscopy. The experiments validate the potential
of IR-Glint for the intraoperative visualization of gliomas using
infrared imaging. IR-Glint penetrates the blood–brain barrier
and can be used for both intravenous and surface applications, allowing
clear visualization of the tumor. The surface application directly
to the brain reduces the dosage required and mitigates potential toxic
effects on the patient. The research shows the potential of infrared
dye-labeled aptamers for accurately visualizing glial tumors during
brain surgery. This novel aptamer-assisted fluorescence-guided surgery
(AptaFGS) may pave the way for future advancements in the field of
neurosurgery.

Skolkovo Foundation10.13039/100030863G 30/22Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian FederationNAFWES-2022-0005Federal Medical-Biological AgencyNA122041800132-2Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation10.13039/501100017638123031000006-4Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada10.13039/501100000038ALLRP 586199 23pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9ja4c06716document-id-new-14ja4c06716ccc-price1

## Introduction
Gliomas are malignant
primary brain tumors that primarily occur
in adults. By cell origin, they are currently classified as astrocytomas
(grades 2–4), oligodendrogliomas (grades 2–3), and IDH1-wildtype
glioblastoma (grade 4) (GB). The latter
is considered the most common and aggressive. GB exhibits substantial
heterogeneity at the cytopathological, transcriptomic, and genomic
levels. Its aggressive nature is attributed to uncontrolled cellular
proliferation, resistance to programmed cell death (apoptosis), heightened
angiogenesis, progressive infiltration into the surrounding healthy
brain tissue, and genomic instability.
Neurosurgery is one of
the critical steps in glioma therapy; its
subtotal resection is highly important. Accurate delineation of the
true tumor boundaries is challenging due to its diffusely infiltrative
nature. Moreover, the extent of brain involvement, as visualized through
contrast enhancement, merely represents a macroscopic view and does
not reveal the complete magnitude of tumor invasion. To enhance patient survival rates and minimize tumor recurrence,
it is imperative to meticulously excise all malignant cells dispersed
within healthy tissue, distant from the primary tumor focus during
surgical interventions.
Several methods of intraoperative visualization
have been proposed
to accurately determine the localization of tumor cells, which can
provide real-time visualization of neoplasms using specific or nonspecific
fluorescent dyes and a surgical fluorescent microscope. One of the
most commonly used substances that can passively accumulate in tumor
tissue is indocyanine green (760–820 nm), which has been utilized
in neurosurgery since 2003 for intraoperative assessment of aneurysms,
arteriovenous malformations, and cortical perfusion. Despite their wide application and proven effectiveness,
drugs that passively accumulate in tissues have significant drawbacks, such as(1)The nonspecific cellular uptake of
the drug can result in areas of tissue with increased metabolism (e.g.,
inflammatory foci, edema zones) emitting fluorescence similar to that
of tumor tissue.
(2)Due
to the angiogenesis and vascularization
of solid tumors, which lead to the proliferation and entanglement
of blood vessels, the access of the drug to cancer cells may be hindered,
resulting in them remaining unstained.

To overcome the aforementioned issues, nonspecific fluorophores
should be conjugated with tumor-specific ligands such as antibodies,
peptides, or aptamers. , Analysis of the scientific literature
and products undergoing preclinical and clinical trials has revealed
a wide array of agents for intraoperative tumor visualization based
on infrared (IR) fluorophores conjugated with monoclonal antibodies.
One such agent is Cetuximab-IRDye800CW (NCT02855086), which combines
the IR dye IRDye800CW, recommended by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), with an antibody against the human epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR).
EGFR/ErbB-1/HER1 is a transmembrane protein
belonging to the ErbB
receptor family, increased expression of which is observed in various
types of cancers such as glioblastoma, nonsmall-cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, breast cancer, and head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Cetuximab-800CW
has been tested on nine HNSCC patients (NCT01987375) and is currently
in phase I/II clinical trials for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma,
malignant gliomas, and HNSCC (NCT02736578, NCT02855086, and NCT03134846).
One more drug based on an antibody to EGFR and IRDye800CW is Panitumumab-IRDye800
(NCT03510208). ABX-EGF Monoclonal Antibody binds EGFR with high affinity
(5 × 10–11 M), blocks
the binding of both EGF and transforming growth factor-α (TGF-α)
to various EGFR-expressing human carcinoma cell lines, and inhibits
EGF-dependent tumor cell activation. Another IR fluorophore, BLZ-100,
based on a chlorotoxin peptide specific to annexin A2, is in the early
stages of clinical trials. 
The key
advantage of monoclonal antibodies is their high specificity
toward target cells, minimizing damage to healthy cells and resulting
in fewer side effects compared to traditional small organic molecule-based
drugs. However, antibodies also have some drawbacks. For instance, the crystallizable fragment of antibodies
can interact with Fc receptors expressed on the surface of various
cell types, increasing their cross-reactivity and promoting retention
in the bloodstream. Other limitations are associated with the complexity
of production, as therapeutic antibodies require large-scale mammalian
cell culture and subsequent stringent purification under good manufacturing
practices. Furthermore, monoclonal antibodies developed in animals
need to be specially prepared for administration into the human body
in clinical settings. In addition, antibodies
have a short shelf life, and although they can be chemically modified,
site-specific modifications are extremely difficult. , 
These constraints have led to the development of aptamers
that
are characterized by ease of production, chemical synthesis, and modification.
The aptamers, small (5–30 kDa) single-stranded DNA or RNA molecules,
carry a nucleotide-based code in their primary sequence, allowing
for easy synthesis and modification. They fold into unique three-dimensional
structures, exhibit high affinity for targets, and can be used for
inhibiting or activating specific proteins. Aptamers are often referred
to as “synthetic antibodies”, but in many aspects, they
surpass antibodies in the following aspects: (1)Synthesis costs of aptamers are 1000
times lower than obtaining antibodies.
(2)Aptamers are easily synthesized and
modified.
(3)Aptamers
are low immunogenic and low
toxic.
(4)Small size allows
better tissue penetration
and clearance from the body.

Aptamers
offer a promising alternative to antibodies
with advantages
in terms of synthesis, modification, immunogenicity, and toxicity,
making them a valuable tool for various applications in biotechnology
and medicine. Currently, specific near-infrared dyes based on antibodies
and peptides are emerging for the intraoperative diagnosis of glial
tumors. However, today, no aptamer-based contrasting agent is still
available worldwide for the intraoperative visualization of glioma.
Nowadays, diverse aptamers specific to glial tumor markers have
been selected. For instance, a systematic review by Nuzzo et al. in
2020 describes thirty-eight aptamers, 17 of which have already been
used in diagnostic studies, and twenty-one for glioblastoma therapy. Among them are DNA and RNA aptamers specific
to nucleolin, EGFR, VEGF, PDGFR, and Tenascin-C.
However, aptamer
usage in clinical practice is still limited by
its sensitivity to nucleases in body fluids and the likelihood of
not penetrating the blood–brain barrier (BBB). These issues
can be solved through chemical modifications and the selection of
aptamers with the ability to overcome the BBB. Another solution to
the problem of aptamer penetration through the BBB and their conjugates
can be their direct application to the tumor site during surgery.
Although aptamers are attractive for targeted therapy, they have
not yet been used for intraoperative tumor staining. In this study,
we have, for the first time, developed a contrasting agent based on
DNA aptamers, named IR-Glint, and a commercially available infrared
fluorophore Cy7.5 for intraoperative visualization of glioma and Aptamer-assisted
Fluorescence-Guided Surgery (AptaFGS).
IR-Glint demonstrates
a high tumor-to-background ratio (TBR), does
not exert any toxic effects on mice, and is eliminated through renal
filtration and biliary excretion.

2

## Results
2.1

## Modification of Gli-233 and Gli-55 Aptamers
Previously,
we reported Gli-233 and Gli-55 aptamers that selectively
bind to glial tumor cells. According to
the mass spectrometry analyses, these aptamers have different binding
partners, which is why, in order to increase the intensity of the
fluorescent signal during surgery, both of them were chosen for developing
a new contrasting agent. Originally, these aptamers were selected
from the 100 nt Harvard library against
glial tumor tissues taken after the surgical resection. The aptamers
were truncated. The secondary and tertiary structures have been found
by using the combination of small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and
molecular modeling. Gli-233 has a “hairpin” shape with
a rather big single-stranded loop maintained by five base pairs ( A). Considering the
size of the loop and helix parts, four nucleotides at the 5′
end were considered nonessential for both binding and structure-maintaining
functions. Moreover, the more nucleotides, the more options for aptamer
folding. In order to avoid the formation of other undesirable structures
of Gli-233, two modified options of the aptamer were proposed. The
single-stranded part at the 5′ end was removed, and one base
pair was added to enhance the stability of the aptamer structure in
the solution. Thus, the resulting two aptamers, Glint2-1 and Glint2-2,
were modeled. The secondary and tertiary structures of the aptamers
are presented in B,C.
 Aptamer Gli-55 consists of 60 nucleotides ( D). Thus, there is
a need to reduce its size,
considering the cost of the synthesis and the future possibility of
using this aptamer as a part of a new bivalent or multivalent aptamer.
First, the aptamer Gli-55 had 13 nucleotides removed from the 5′
end. The aim of the truncation was to remove a free strand of nucleotides,
consisting of 4 nucleotides, that would not be able to provide binding
specificity with the protein target. However, removing this strand
would have led to the disruption of a short double-stranded region,
which would have resulted in the formation of a longer single-stranded
segment. Therefore, the first hairpin at the 5′-end of aptamer
Gli-55 was completely removed from the structure, while three stem-loops
at the 3′ end remained unchanged compared to the original aptamer
Gli-55 ( E).
Then, the next stem-loop from the 5′ end was truncated to simplify
the structure. According to F, two stem-loops at the 3′ end also remain
unchanged. Thus, two truncated sequences of Gli-55 with three hairpins
(Glint5-1) and two hairpins (Glint5-2) were modeled ( E,F).
For all new aptamers,
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were
carried out to imitate the in vitro environment: solvent, temperature,
and presence of the ions. Secondary and tertiary structures of the
aptamers obtained as a result of clustering analysis of 200 ns MD
trajectories are shown in .

2.2

## Molecular Profiling of
Primary Cell Cultures
Two primary cultures with high proliferation
activity were used
to estimate the utility of IR-Glint on xenotransplanted glial tumor
models. Primary cell cultures were evolved from surgically resected
and histologically verified glioblastoma ( A1) and anaplastic astrocytoma G4 ( B1). Cell cultures
contain disseminating cells and oncospheres ( A2,B2). Molecular profiling was performed
to gain a deeper understanding of the nature of the tumors. Hotspots
in IDH1, IDH2, and TP53 were identified using Sanger sequencing. These
specific genes were selected because they provide valuable information
about glioma proliferation and migration patterns. Mutations in IDH1
and IDH2 are associated with higher overall survival rates and are
more commonly found in low-grade gliomas (LGG). TP53 mutations, on
the other hand, play a role in the transformation from LGG to high-grade
gliomas (HGG). According to data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
and recent publications, pathogenic mutations in TP53 are frequently
observed in glioblastomas but are far less common in LGG. These mutations
are also associated with poor survival rates in patients. 
 Sanger sequencing analysis revealed that the astrocytoma
used in
the human astrocytoma model harbors two heterozygous mutations in
TP53: p.W146* (c.437G > A), which leads to a loss of p53 protein
function,
and p.R280K, which results in increased cell migration and invasion
and increased cell survival. , This is a reason for
the increase in the astrocytoma’s degree up to grade 4. In
contrast, glioblastoma does not carry mutations in the studied areas
( C).
The primary cell cultures were used for flow cytometry analyses
and animal models of glial tumors.

2.3

## Flow
Cytometric Aptamer Affinity Analysis
The binding of Gli-233,
Glint2-1, Glint2-2, Gli-55, Glint5-1, and
Glint5-2 aptamers was evaluated by using flow cytometry. Primary glial
tumor cell cultures derived from tissues of 5 different patients,
primary breast cancer cell cultures derived from 2 different patients,
and cells isolated from the brain of a healthy mouse were used to
estimate the binding affinity and specificity of the aptamers ( ). Modified aptamers
Glint2-1 and Glint5-1 showed the best binding to primary human glial
tumor cell culture compared with the initial aptamers, other modified
sequences, and 40 nt nonspecific randomized oligonucleotides. Glint2-1
and Glint5-1 demonstrated much lower binding with controls such as
human breast cancer cells and cells isolated from the brain of a healthy
mouse ( A).
 C,D represents
dot plot histograms obtained for a nonspecific oligonucleotide and
Glint2-1, compared with a nonspecific randomized oligonucleotide used
as a control in binding experiments for human glial tumor cells and
for breast cancer cells. The primary glial cell culture consisted
of two cell types ( B2): cells forming oncospheres (Population 1) and adherent
cells (Population 2) (depicted in C,D). Population 2 initially exhibited a
higher level of autofluorescence and demonstrated a lower binding
rate ( D).
The obtained data show that compared to the other aptamers, Glint2-1
and Glint5-1 aptamers exhibited a higher binding percentage to human
glioma cells and a lower binding percentage to human breast cancer
cells and cells isolated from the brain of a healthy mouse. Glint2-1
and Glint5-1 were specific to glial tumor cells and thus have been
chosen for further experiments and the development of a Cy 7.5-based
spray for intraoperative staining.

2.4

## Evaluation
of Aptamer Binding Ex Vivo
FAM-labeled Glint2-1 and Glint5-1,
at concentrations of 50 nM each,
were pooled together (FAM-Glint) and used to stain the tissues ex
vivo. Histological analysis demonstrated that FAM-Glint indeed stained
glial tumors ( A,B), compared to the FAM-labeled 40 nt nonspecific randomized oligonucleotide,
which did not stain ( C) the glial tumor cells (black arrows in Hematoxylin and
eosin (H&E) adjacent section) and blood vessels (black circles
in H&E adjacent section). The aptamers specifically bind to glial
tumor cells (black arrows in H&E adjacent section), as shown by
the distinct staining pattern of the glioblastoma multiforme region
( A), as well
as the tumor cells (black arrows in H&E adjacent section) in the
sarcomatoid region of the glial tumor ( B), which can be clearly observed. Overall,
these results demonstrate the specific binding capabilities of the
aptamers to human glial tumor cells in glioblastoma tissues regardless
of their histological features, as confirmed by both FAM-Glint staining
and H&E analysis. This concentration was sufficient for confocal
microscopy; however, for ex vivo and in vivo tissue staining, the
concentration was optimized.
 The optimal concentration of the IR-Glint for fluorescent-guided
surgery was evaluated on-site using a Fluor i In Vivo imaging system
(South Korea) with a red excitation laser, an infrared-emitting filter,
and a Zeiss Kinevo 900 fluorescent surgical microscope (Carl Zeiss,
Germany). Figure S1A shows IR-Glint at
0, 1, and 2 μM in a tube, which was diluted in DPBS. As seen
in the images, both concentrations are visible under the IR fluorescent
module of the surgical microscope. To determine the optimal concentration
for specific visual guidance during tumor surgery, freshly resected
glioma tissues were stained with individual Cy7.5-labeled Glint2-1
and Glint5-1 (Figure S1B) or a 1:1 mixture
of Cy7.5-labeled Glint2-1 and Glint5-1 called IR-Glint at various
concentrations ( and S1C). Using the fluorescence imaging
system, we demonstrated that IR-Glint is capable of staining similar
glial tissue samples in a reproducible and dose-dependent manner (Figure S1C). The mixture of the scrambled sequences
of Glint2-1 and Glint5-1 did not bind to a glial tumor, while IR-Glint
stained a glial tumor well (Figure S1D).
The best imaging using an infrared-emitting filter on the fluorescent
surgical microscope Zeiss Kinevo 900 (Carl Zeiss, Germany) with the
infrared module IR800 was performed with 5 μM IR-Glint ( ).
 
2.5

## Simulation
of Aptamer-Assisted Fluorescence-Guided
Surgery in Mice
The main goal of the AptaFGS simulation experiment
was to choose a strategy for administering the IR-Glint: intravenous
injection or surface application. The surface application reduces
aptamer dose usage, potential toxic effects on the patient, and the
decreased risk of oligonucleotide degradation in the blood due to
nucleases. Intravenous administration allows for staining of the entire
tumor site just before surgery, which can assist the surgeon in removing
the tumor. However, there is a risk that the aptamer may not cross
the blood–brain barrier.
We used healthy mice and mice
with human orthotopically transplanted glioma to determine the optimal
strategy for administering the IR-Glint, or nonspecific oligonucleotide
or indocyanine green, a contrasting agent used in clinics. Fluorescence
of IR-Glint in mice was evaluated using the Fluor i In Vivo imaging
system (South Korea).
Before intravenous administration of IR-Glint,
healthy mice and
noninjected mice with transplanted tumors in the brain showed no background
infrared fluorescence (Figures S2A and S4). Five minutes after the tail vein injection, the bodies of the
mice also did not emit fluorescent light (Figure S2B). However, after 40 min, IR-Glint distributed all around
the body (Figure S2C). Ninety minutes after
injection, the dye became visible in the abdominal cavity (Figure S2D), and it can be seen that IR-Glint
accumulates in the liver, gallbladder, kidneys, and intestines (Figure S2F) 5 h after administration. Residual
fluorescence was visualized after 24 h, only in the tail in case a
vein bursts during injection (Figure S2E).
In healthy mice with the trepanation hole of the skull,
intracranially
applied IR-Glint was visualized in the head at the site of inoculation
for at least 90 min (Figure S3A–C). It is also metabolized in the liver and spleen, filtered through
the kidneys, and excreted through the intestines. After 2 h, it can
still be seen at the site of its application (Figure S3D).
Mice with orthotopically xenotransplanted
gliomas exhibited a similar
distribution of this contrasting agent when administered intravenously
( ) and intracranially
( ). 40 minutes
after tail vein injection, IR-Glint could be visualized in the infrared
spectra in the brain at the location where the tumor was transplanted.
After 90 min, the tumor remained visible and became visible in the
abdominal cavity ( D2). It could be observed that IR-Glint accumulated in the
brain tumor, liver, gallbladder, kidneys, and intestines ( E2 and E2).
 Cy7.5-labeled nonspecific
oligonucleotides did
not accumulate in
the brain tumor regardless of where it was administered (Figure S5).
The commercially available
tumor contrast agent indocyanine green,
injected intraperitoneally 2 h before visualization, showed similar
results and accumulated in the transplanted glial tumor (Figure S6B). The mice skin with background fluorescence
in the same wavelengths as indocyanine green did not allow in vivo
imaging (Figure S6A).
The experiments
described above were conducted using an in vivo
imaging system; however, it is essential to evaluate the potential
application of the same technique for visualization under a surgical
microscope. We simulated the fluorescence-guided surgery (FGS) procedure
by directly applying IR-Glint to the exposed brain, followed by two
subsequent brain rinses after a 2 min interval. After a 30 min period
following the manipulation, the mice were sacrificed, the brains and
organs fixed with formalin, and further examined using a surgical
microscope equipped with an infrared module.
The mouse brain
with orthotopically xenotransplanted glioma, tumor
inside the skull, and organs did not show any background IR fluorescence
without IR-Glint administration (Figure S7).
 presents
the brains and organs of mice subjected to FGS with surface-applied
aptamers ( A)
and intravenous injection ( B). As seen in the figures, the surface application
of IR-Glint is sufficient for visualization under the surgical microscope
with an IR module. It allowed for the visualization of tumor sites
( A2) with good
contrast. Additionally, in cross-section, it can be observed that
the IR-Glint penetrated 3–4 mm into the brain within 3 min.
It also accumulated in the liver ( C2).
 
2.6

## Toxicity Testing of Aptamers
in Mice
The acute toxicity of IR-Glint was assessed by monitoring
changes
in various blood biochemical parameters, including the total protein
level, cholesterol level, bilirubin level, alanine aminotransferase
activity, alkaline phosphatase activity, and alpha-amylase activity.
These specific parameters were chosen as they provide insights into
the functionality of crucial organs, such as the pancreas, kidneys,
and liver.
The total protein level indicates protein metabolism
within the body, reflecting the overall health of the liver and kidneys.
By measuring cholesterol levels, we can gain information about lipid
metabolism and assess potential effects on cardiovascular health.
Bilirubin, a bile pigment produced during the breakdown of heme-containing
proteins such as hemoglobin, myoglobin, and cytochrome, is useful
in determining the extent of red blood cell destruction and impaired
bilirubin excretion, such as in cases of hemolytic jaundice (Figure S8).
Moreover, the activities of
alanine aminotransferase, alkaline
phosphatase, and alpha-amylase were monitored. Alanine aminotransferase
is an enzyme primarily found in the liver, and changes in its activity
may indicate liver damage or dysfunction. Alkaline phosphatase is
an enzyme produced by the liver, bones, and other tissues, and its
altered activity can signify liver- or bone-related disorders. Alpha-amylase,
on the other hand, is a digestive enzyme mainly secreted by the pancreas
and salivary glands, with smaller amounts present in other tissues.
Changes in alpha-amylase activity can provide insights into poisoning,
pancreatic and salivary gland issues, and renal insufficiency. By
evaluating these blood biochemical parameters, we can assess the potential
toxicity of IR-Glint and its impact on various vital organs and metabolic
processes (Figure S8).
Alanine aminotransferase
is a cytosolic enzyme found in hepatocytes,
and an increase in its activity indicates liver cell damage. Alkaline
phosphatase is an enzyme present in almost all tissues of the body,
with a predominant localization in the liver, bones, and placenta.
Total alkaline phosphatase activity increases when liver tissue, bone,
or kidney damage occurs. Cholesterol is an important metabolite synthesized
in the liver and is involved in the production of hormones, bile acids,
and vitamin D. It also regulates the cell membrane permeability. The
concentration of cholesterol reflects the liver’s condition
and impacts a wide range of metabolic pathways (Figure S8). Studies have demonstrated that all investigated
blood serum biochemical parameters in mice in the control and experimental
groups were within the normal range (Figure S8). 
Therefore, it has been shown
that IR-Glint does not exert acute
toxic effects on the mouse organism and can simplify the tumor resection
procedure for the surgeon.

2.7

## In Vivo Visualization of
Human Xenotransplantated
Glioma and AptaFGS in a Rabbit
The study aimed to verify
the potential use of Glint aptamers labeled with an infrared dye as
an intraoperative dye for human glial tumors. Here, we used a tumor
model developed in rabbits. For this purpose, the rabbits were first
subjected to drug-induced immunosuppression, and then primary cultures
evolved from the human anaplastic astrocytoma G4, which harbors two
heterozygous mutations making it highly aggressive, were transplanted
into their brains through intracranial windows ( A1,A2 and S9A).
 To monitor the development of orthotopically xenotransplanted
human
glioma in the rabbits’ brains, PET/CT imaging with 11C-methionine was used ( A3). The accumulation of 11C-methionine was observed
in the area of the trepanation openings in the rabbit brain, specifically
at both sites of the transplanted glioma ( A3).
Furthermore, the brain tissue,
unaffected by glioma, and the region
of the brain with the growing tumor were stained with IR-Glint and
fixed in formalin for analysis using a surgical fluorescent microscope
( B). The analysis
revealed the infrared fluorescence of the rabbit tumor under a surgical
fluorescent microscope. On the other hand, the unstained brain tissue
and healthy brain tissue stained with IR-Glint did not emit fluorescence
in this wavelength range ( D). However, brain tissue with gliomas stained with
aptamers exhibited stable fluorescence in the infrared region of the
spectrum.
H&E staining was performed to confirm the presence
of glial
tumor formation in the rabbits’ brains and skulls, and the
results were validated ( C).
The tumor-to-background ratio (TBR) was determined
by comparing
the level of fluorescence in the tumor focus to the background fluorescence.
This was further tested on postoperative rabbit brain tissues with
human glioma xenografts. The rabbit brain was stained with IR-Glint
at a concentration of 5 μM, and the fluorescence was evaluated
using an infrared module of a Zeiss Kinevo 900 surgical microscope. Figure S7 shows the region of the rabbit skull
affected by the tumor under visible and infrared fluorescence.
The TBR value was calculated as the average ratio of the fluorescence
levels. In the tumor, focus on the adjacent (unstained) tissues using
the ZEN software (Carl Zeiss). Therefore, the calculated TBR value
was 24.
To estimate the practical utility and convenience of
AptaFGS, we
used it on rabbits (Figure S9). The procedure
is very simple and fast and does not require intravenous administration.
The aptamers Glint2-1 and Glint5-2 exhibited different stability
profiles in fresh mouse blood serum (Figure S11). Glint2-1 remained stable for at least 1 h, whereas Glint5-2 began
to degrade after 30 min of incubation in blood serum.
Overall,
these findings confirm the potential utility of tumor-specific
aptamers labeled with an infrared dye as an intraoperative reagent
for detecting and visualizing human glioma in a rabbit model. This
technique could significantly improve surgical precision and tumor
removal in human patients.

3

## Discussion
Here, we propose a strategy
for fluorescence-guided surgery with
infrared-labeled aptamers. These tumor-specific aptamers are a good
alternative for the visualization of malignant brain tissues, which
makes the surgeon more confident during tumor resection. The infrared-labeled
aptamers, IR-Glint, have several advantages that make them attractive
to neurosurgeons. The high specificity of IR-Glint to glial tumor
tissues and the absence of background fluorescence allow for a high-contrast
and bright image, distinguishing the tumor tissue from the healthy
brain.
During the investigation, new aptamers, Glint2-1 and
Glint5-1,
were developed. They exhibited a higher degree of binding to glioma
cells while demonstrating a lower level of binding to breast cancer
cells and cells derived from a healthy mouse brain. Analysis of histological
tissue sections proves the aptamer’s specificity for malignant
brain cells.
A commercially available infrared fluorophore,
Cy7.5, an analogue
of the commonly used indocyanine green, was selected for intraoperative
staining. A 5 μM 1:1 mixture of Glint2-1 and Glint5-1 with a
Cy7.5 label, called IR-Glint, demonstrated an even better tumor-to-background
ratio than that of indocyanine green and does not require intravenous
administration. IR-Glint can be made by the robotic synthesis of the
DNA oligonucleotides and simultaneous chemical modification by Cy7.5,
providing an easy approach to creating an intraoperative spray.
Intraoperative staining and surgery were simulated on postoperative
tissues and animal models. Healthy mice and mice with orthotopically
transplanted human gliomas were used to determine the optimal strategy
for administering the aptamers. It was shown that when administered
intravenously, the drug was completely eliminated from the mice’s
bodies within 24 h. After 90 min, the drug was distributed throughout
the body, and after 5 h, it accumulated in the kidneys, liver, and
intestines.
When administered intracranially, the aptamers were
visualized
at the site of application for at least 90 min. IR-Glint was also
metabolized in the liver and spleen, filtered by the kidneys, and
excreted through the intestines. Even after 2 h, it could still be
seen in the brain at the application site, although the fluorescence
was weak.
When administered intravenously, mice with orthotopically
xenotransplanted
gliomas showed a similar distribution of IR-Glint. 40 minutes after
drug injection, it could be visualized in the infrared spectra of
the brain at the site where the tumor was transplanted. After 120
min, the tumor remained visible, and fluorescence was also visible
in the abdominal cavity. The aptamers were accumulated in the liver,
gallbladder, kidneys, and intestines.
Thus, renal filtration
and biliary excretion are the presumed mechanisms
of elimination of IR-Glint in intracranial or intravenous application
cases. Both approaches, intracranial or surface application and intravenous
administration, present their own set of benefits and drawbacks. For
intracranial or surface applications, the advantages include reducing
medication dosage, which could lead to decreased toxicity and costs.
It also minimizes the risk of the medication failing to penetrate
the blood–brain barrier and degradation by nucleases. However,
it necessitates additional handling by the surgeon during the procedure
and runs the risk of the drug not reaching distant, nonstained “tentacles”
of the tumor. On the other hand, intravenous administration has the
benefit of staining the entire tumor before surgery, thus reducing
the likelihood of missing any cells. Nevertheless, this method poses
a risk of aptamer degradation by blood nucleases and increases the
drug’s dosage, cost, and potential toxicity.
Currently,
there are a few developments regarding the intraoperative
staining of gliomas. The most widely used drug in surgical practice
is Gliolan, which is based on 5-aminolevulinic acid, a precursor to
protoporphyrin IX (PP) in the human body. The fluorescence spectrum of PP IX is characterized by two peaks
at 635 and 710 nm, with excitation occurring at 405 nm. One drawback
of the drug is the lack of targeted delivery, which can lead to false-positive
and false-negative results and increased background noise due to the
accumulation of 5-aminolevulinic acid in areas with increased metabolism.
Indocyanine green accumulates in neoplastic regions due to its
enhanced permeability and retention effect. In regions of the normal
brain where the endothelium is intact, it stays within the blood vessels
and washes away. In tumors with damaged permeable endothelium, this
dye penetrates into the surrounding tissue and persists for an extended
period. 
Another drug, Petuximab-IRDye800CW
(NCT02855086), based on the
near-infrared dye RDye800CW and recommended by the US Food and Drug
Administration, along with an antibody to human epidermal growth factor,
can serve as an analogue to IR-Glint. provides a comparative characteristic of
the known drugs with IR-Glint.
 The presented findings and comparative
analysis of
the medications
used for intraoperative glioma visualization, as presented in the
table, underscore the potential of incorporating IR-Glint alongside
the approved drugs. Undoubtedly, the research will persevere, delving
into the properties and mechanisms of action of IR-Glint with the
aim of seamlessly integrating it into clinical practice and ensuring
that patients can reap the benefits of scientific knowledge and advancements.

4

## Conclusions
The brain application of
the aptamer-based formulation allows for
noticeable visualization of the tumor, which can significantly improve
the surgeon’s task during brain tumor resection. The results
of this study confirm the potential of IR-Glint for intraoperative
visualization of gliomas, opening up new avenues in the field of neurosurgery
and improving the outcomes of surgical treatment for this tumor disease.

5

## Methods
5.1

## Molecular Modeling
Secondary structures
of the aptamers were predicted using the mFold program, which considered experimental parameters such
as folding temperature and the presence of ions in the solution. Tertiary
structures of the aptamers were modeled with SimRNA and VMD programs. , Molecular dynamic simulations
of 200 ns were carried out using the GROMACS 2019.8 package. The Amber14sb force field and the TIP3P model for water
were used for simulations. The aptamer was solvated in a periodic
cubic box of water. The negative charge of the aptamers was neutralized
with Na+ ions. Additional Na+ and Cl– ions were placed in the system to reach the concentration of 0.15
M. MD simulations were performed with the NPT (at
constant number of particles N, pressure P, and temperature T) ensemble at 310 K
and 1 atm (atm) using the velocity-rescaling thermostat and at 1 bar pressure using the Parrinello–Rahman
barostat. The clustering analysis of
the obtained trajectories was performed using the quality threshold
algorithm implemented in the VMD program. 

5.2

## Patient-Derived Tumor Samples
The
research we conducted obtained ethical approval from the Local Committee
on Ethics in Krasnoyarsk Inter-District Ambulance Hospital, named
after N.S. Karpovich, Krasnoyarsk, Russia (Approval #20/11/2016).
To collect tumor tissues, we selected patients with glioma who had
previously undergone complete curative resection of their disease
at Krasnoyarsk Inter-District Ambulance Hospital named after N.S.
Karpovich. Prior to the specimens being obtained, written informed
consent was obtained from all patients, ensuring their commitment
to participate in the study. The solid tumors were handled with the
utmost care, maintaining aseptic conditions and immediately placed
in an ice-cold colorless DMEM medium supplemented with 1000 U mL–1 penicillin G and 1000 mg L–1 streptomycin.
The samples were then transported on ice to the laboratory within
2–4 h after resection to ensure their viability and optimal
condition for subsequent analysis.

5.3

## Cell
Isolation and Culturing
Primary
cultures of human brain tumors or breast cancer were obtained from
postoperative material. The tumor tissues, after surgical resections,
were placed in a sterile 15 mL Falcon tube with 5 mL of cold Hank’s
balanced salt solution (HBSS) containing 10% antibiotic–antimycotic.
In a laminar flow hood, the excess Hank’s solution was removed
from the tube containing the glial tumor by a dispenser. The tissues
were washed three times with 5 mL of cold DPBS to remove blood cells
and transferred to a Petri dish filled with 1–2 mL of cold
DPBS. Necrotic tissues and blood clots were removed using forceps
and a scalpel blade. The remaining tissues were minced into 1 mm3 pieces and placed in culture flasks with a nutrient medium
for spheroid formation (for glial cells only) or minced into a suspension
and filtered through a 70 μm cell strainer into a sterile 15
mL centrifuge tube, followed twice washing by centrifugation at 2000
rpm for 5 min with DPBS.
The resulting pellet, suspended in
2 mL of DPBS, was layered on
lymphocytes separation media (3 mL) and centrifuged for 10 min at
2000 rpm. Thereafter, a “cloud” of cells at the border
of lymphocyte separation media and DPBS was collected and transferred
to a sterile tube with DPBS followed by centrifugation for 5 min at
2000 rpm. The pellet was transferred to a culture flask or a nutrient
medium. Cultivation was maintained in a 5% atmosphere of CO2 at 37 °C.
To remove cells, the culture was washed with
DPBS without Ca2+ and Mg2+, then poured with
3–5 mL of fresh
DPBS solution and held for 2–3 min. The cells were removed
with a jet of solution using a dispenser. To separate the attached
cells, 2–4 mL of Versen’s solution was poured into the
flasks and incubated for 5–15 min. Next, the cell suspension
was centrifuged for 3 min at 2500 rpm and washed with DPBS containing
Ca2+, Mg2+.

5.4

## Flow
Cytometric Aptamer Affinity Analysis
Aptamers were synthesized
by LLC Lumiprobe (Russia) using the standard
phosphoramidite (aminophosphate) method. For the flow cytometry analyses,
we used FAM-labeled aptamers. DNA aptamer sequences are given below:
Gli233: 5′-ACT ATT CCA CTG CAA CAA CTG AAC GGA CTG GAA-3′.
Glint2–1: 5′-TTC CAC TGC AAC AAC TGA ACG GAC TGG
AA-3′.
Glint2–2: 5′-ATT CCA CTG CAA CAA
CTG AAC GGA CTG
GAA T-3′.
Gli55: 5′-GTC CGG TTC ACC TCT AGC ATT
CCT GGC GTT ATT AAC
GGA GCA GTC CTG TGG AGT GGG TGA-3′.
Glint5–1:
5′-CTA GCA TTC CTG GCG TTA TTA ACG GAG
CAG TCC TGT GGA GTG GG-3′.
Glint5–2: 5′-TGG
CGT TAT TAA CGG AGC AGT CCT GTG
GAG TGG GT-3′.
Briefly, glioma primary cell cultures
from 5 different patients,
breast cancer primary cell cultures from 2 different patients, or
brain cells isolated from one healthy mouse were incubated with yeast
RNA (1 ng μL–1) in 300 μL of DPBS for
30 min at room temperature in a shaker to reduce nonspecific binding.
Thereafter, the samples were incubated with 20 nM of FAM-labeled aptamers,
FAM-ssDNA library, or FAM-nonspecific randomized sequence as a control
for 30 min at room temperature in a shaker. Three technical replicates
were done for each cell culture. The affinity of aptamers was measured
by flow cytometry using an FC-500 flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter,
Inc., USA). Using a blue laser and an FL1 detector capable of registering
FAM. The data were analyzed with the help of Kaluza 2.1 software (Beckman
Coulter, Inc., USA).

5.5

## Staining of Postoperative
Glioma Tissues
Staining of postoperative glioma samples was
performed by using
the Cy7.5-labeled aptamers Glint2-1 and Glint5-1. Glioma tissues were
obtained from surgical resection, washed with phosphate buffer, and
treated with aptamers. Thereafter, the tissues were incubated for
2 min, washed with DPBS, and analyzed using a fluorescent operative
microscope, the Zeiss Kinevo 900 (Carl Zeiss, Germany), with the infrared
module IR800. The data were analyzed by ZEN 2011 (Carl Zeiss).

5.6

## Orthotopic Xenotransplantation of Human Glial
Tumors
This study was conducted in strict accordance with
the National Institute of Health Guidelines’ recommendations
for the care and use of laboratory animals. The protocol was approved
by the Local Committee on the Ethics of Experiments on Animals of
the Krasnoyarsk State Medical University (number #95/2020 from January
29, 2020). All operations were performed under anesthesia, and every
effort was made to minimize the animals’ suffering.
5.6.1

## Mouse Model
Six-week-old laboratory
male ICR mice weighing 28–33 g were maintained in sterile,
individually ventilated cages. Mice were immunosuppressed using cyclosporine
(20 mg/kg subcutaneously), cyclophosphamide (60 mg/kg subcutaneously),
and ketoconazole (10 mg/kg orally) 7 days before and 2 days after
transplantation. 
Under the inhalation
anesthesia, mice hair was removed with hair removal cream, the skin
was dissected in a sterile condition, and the cranial window was made
using an electro trypan. The formation of the human glial tumor model
was carried out by the intracranial injection of primary patient-derived
cell cultures. One 1 mm oncosphere and 106 tumor stroma cells in 6
μL of the hydrogel medium (GrowDex/DMEM, 1:1) were placed into
a Hamilton syringe between 2 μL of hydrogel medium (GrowDex/DMEM,
2:1). Tumor cells were inoculated into the mice brain through the
2 mm cranial window, the puncture was covered with 5 μL of hydrogel
medium (GrowDex/DMEM, 2:1), and the skin incision was sutured.

5.6.2

## Rabbit Model
The work was performed
on 4 male rabbits (silver breed), weighing 1800–2000 g, with
a health certificate. Rabbits were immunosuppressed with cyclosporine
(20 mg/kg intramuscularly), cyclophosphamide (20 mg/kg intramuscularly),
and ketoconazole (5 mg/kg orally with water) every second day for
21 days before and 2 days after tumor transplantation. Anesthesia
in rabbits was carried out with a single intravenous injection of
Zoletil-100 solution (manufactured by Virbac, France) at the rate
of 0.05 mL per kg of body weight of the experimental animal in combination
with the drug Xylavet (manufactured in Hungary) at the rate of 0.15
mL per kg of body weight of the experimental animal. Intravenous administration
of drugs in rabbits was carried out after catheterization of the veins
on the dorsal surface of the ear with a 24G catheter (mainly the large
ear vein was used for catheterization). After reaching the stage of
surgical anesthesia, hair was removed from the rabbits using shaving
cream, the skin was dissected in the area of the sagittal cross (or
temporal line), which must be confirmed with doctors under sterile
conditions, and 2 cranial windows with a diameter of 3 mm were made
using an electro trypan. The formation of a human glial tumor model
was carried out by stereotactic transplantation into the right and
left hemispheres of the brain of primary cell cultures of a patient
with a glial brain tumor [2 × 106 cells and 5 oncospheres
in 40 μL of GrowDex/DMEM medium (1:1)] using a syringe Hamilton
with a volume of 40 μL into each cranial window with a diameter
of 3 mm. The injection site was covered with skin, and sutures were
placed. To avoid the development of a bacterial infection, the animals
were intravenously administered the antibacterial drug “Tylosin
50” (manufactured by Nita-Pharm, Russia) within 3 days after
surgery.

5.7

## In Vivo Fluorescence Visualization
of IR-Glint
in Mice
To determine the optimal strategy for administering
IR-Glint (5 μM 1:1 mixture of Glint2-1 and Glint5-1 with a Cy7.5
label) and its distribution, we used healthy mice and mice with human
orthotopically transplanted gliomas.
IR-Glint or nonspecific
oligonucleotide (50 μL, 5 μM) was administered to healthy
mice, healthy mice with trepanation holes in the skull, and mice with
transplanted glial tumors by intravenous injection or surface application
(subcutaneous injection into mice with a trepanation hole). Intact
noninjected mice with the transplanted glial tumors were taken as
control ones. IR fluorescence in mice under inhalation anesthesia
was evaluated by using a Fluor i In Vivo imaging system (South Korea)
with a red excitation laser and infrared-emitting filter with the
same settings for all experimental mice. All experiments were performed
in three replicates.

5.8

## AptaFGS
Glial
tumor staining in mice
was performed by intravenous injection or direct staining by spraying
a 5 μM 1:1 mixture of Glint2-1 and Glint5-1 with a Cy7.5 label.
In the first case, 200 μL of aptamers were injected into a tail
vein for 30 min before brain removal. In the second case, 200 μL
of aptamers were powered on the mouse brain under anesthesia and incubated
for 3 min.
Mice organs were put in 10% formalin and then analyzed
with the help of an operative microscope with an IR800 Zeiss Kinevo
900 infrared module (Carl Zeiss, Germany).
Intraoperative staining
of the glioma in rabbits was performed
using pooled Glint2-1 and Glint5-1 labeled with Cy7.5 (IR-Glint) at
a concentration of 5 μM. Anesthesia was induced using Zoletil-100
solution (manufactured by Virbac, France) at the rate of 0.05 mL per
kg of body weight of the experimental animal in combination with the
drug Xylavet (manufactured in Hungary) at the rate of 0.15 mL per
kg of body weight of the experimental animal. After surgery and staining,
an excess amount of Zoletil was administered to the animal, and the
brain was removed. The tissues were fixed in 10% neutral formalin
and then analyzed using a surgical fluorescence microscope with an
IR800 Zeiss Kinevo 900 infrared module (Carl Zeiss, Germany).

5.9

## Toxicity Testing of Aptamers in Mice
To determine toxicity,
changes in cholesterol, serum alanine aminotransferase
(ALT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), bilirubin, total protein, and alpha-amylase
were evaluated.
Hepatotoxicity assessment was carried out in
healthy male and female mice injected with 200 mL of 5 μM IR-Glint
into tail veins. One week after the injection, blood was harvested
and submitted to a clinical laboratory for analysis.

5.10

## Evaluation of Aptamers Stability in Blood
Serum
The stability of the aptamers Glint2-1 and Glint5-1
in undiluted fresh mouse blood serum was assessed through 2% agarose
horizontal gel electrophoresis. A 5 μL FAM-labeled Glint2-1
or Glint5-1 was mixed with undiluted blood serum and, after incubation
at 37 °C for 0, 5, 30, 60, 120 min, and 24 h, was loaded into
the wells on the agarose gel. The intact FAM-labeled Glint2-1 and
Glint5-1 aptamers in PBS were the reference molecules. The gel was
then subjected to electrophoresis in a gel electrophoresis system
(Advance Mupid-One, Belgium) for 20 min at 100 V, and the fluorescence
levels were analyzed using a fluorescent gel documentation system
G-Box (Syngene, Cambridge, UK). Degradation was assessed by monitoring
the decrease in the band intensity over time in mouse blood serum.

5.11

## In Vivo Visualization of Human Glioma Xenotransplantation
in a Rabbit Using PET/CT
Tumor location in rabbits was monitored
using PET/CT. Rabbits were injected into an ear vein with 11C methionine for 40 min before visualization. The animals were immobilized
using a single intravenous injection of Zoletil-100 solution (manufactured
by Virbac, France) at the rate of 0.05 mL per kg of body weight of
the experimental animal in combination with the drug Xylavet (manufactured
in Hungary) at the rate of 0.15 mL per kg of body weight of the experimental
animal. PET/CT scanning was performed using a Discovery PET/CT 600
scanner (General Electric, USA). Data were analyzed using PET VV software
at an AW Volume Share 5 workstation and Hounsfield densitometry scale.

5.12

## Histological and Confocal Laser Scanning
Microscopy Analysis of Tissues
Human postoperative tissues
were incubated with 1 ng mL–1 yeast RNA for 30 min
on a shaker. Thereafter, it was washed two times and incubated with
50 nM FAM-labeled Glint2-1 or Glint5-1 for 30 min on a shaker and
fixed at 10% buffered formalin solution. The volume of a fixative
was 10 times greater than the size of the immersed tissue. The samples
underwent a standard histological treatment based on isopropyl alcohol
with further paraffin impregnation. Sections made from paraffin blocks
were applied to positively charged adhesive glasses. One part of the
section was left for confocal microscopy analysis without additional
staining; the next one was stained with hematoxylin and eosin dyes
to confirm tissue morphology.
Histological tissue sections of
mice and rabbit brains were fixed in a formalin solution stained with
hematoxylin and eosin dyes to confirm the tissue morphology.
A Nexcope NIB900 (Ningbo Yongxin Optics Co., Ltd., China) and LSM
780 NLO Confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Germany) were used for confocal
imaging; images were processed with ZEN2 software.

5.13

## Statistical Analyses
Blood serum
biochemical parameters were compared using an ANOVA. A two-tailed t-test was used to compare the group means. A Bonferroni
correction was applied to the p values. The differences
were considered significant at a level of significance of p ≤ 0.05.

5.14

## Molecular Profiling
The PCR assays
were performed using Readymix Screenmix (Evrogen, Russia) in a total
volume of 25 μL. Primers used for PCR and cycle sequencing are
presented in . PCR amplicons were purified by the Biolabmix Kit (Biolabmix, Russia)
to isolate DNA and RNA from the reaction mix.
 Sanger sequencing was performed using Nimagen BrilliantDye
Terminator
(v1.1) chemistry and an Applied Biosystems 3500 genetic analyzer based
on capillary electrophoresis (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Sequencing
products were purified with the D-pure DyeTerminator Cleanup Kit (Nimagen,
Netherlands), and sequences were assembled with SnapGene software
(Dotmatics, USA).

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/jacs.4c06716.Additional figures about
fluorescent images of IR-Glint
in the solution of DPBS and glial tumor tissues; distribution of IR-Glint
in healthy mice after intravenous injection and subcutaneous injection;
infrared background fluorescence of noninjected mice; distribution
of Cy7.5-labeled nonspecific oligonucleotide in mice; accumulation
of indocyanine green in brain tumor; background IR fluorescence of
orthotopically xenotransplanted glioblastoma in mice; blood biochemical
parameters of mice injected with IR-Glint; in vivo visualization of
human xenotransplantated glioma and AptaFGS in a rabbit; region of
the rabbit skull affected by glioma is shown in visible light and
infrared fluorescence; and stability of the IR-Glint aptamers in mice
blood serum (PDF)

## Supplementary Material
ja4c06716_si_001.pdf

Molecular modeling,
drug formulation, mice, and tissue experiments were funded by Skolkovo
grant no. MG 30/22, starting from 5.12.2022 (V.M.). The development
of the glioma tumor model on immunosuppressed rabbits and mice was
supported by the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation
project 123031000006-4 (A.K.). Fluorescence imaging on mice, tissues,
and cultures was funded by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education
of the Russian Federation project FWES-2022-0005 (A.K.). The confocal
imaging by the Tomsk Regional Core Shared Research Facilities Center
was supported by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the
Russian Federation, grant no. 075-15-2021-693 (no. 13.RFC.21.0012).
PET/CT visualization was funded by the Federal Medical Biological
Agency, project 122041800132-2. (N.C.). The aptamer development was
supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
of Canada, project ALLRP 586199-23 (M.V.B.).
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
Technical
and instrumental support was provided
by the Krasnoyarsk Inter-District Ambulance Hospital, named after
N.S. Karpovich, the Shared Core Facilities of Molecular and Cell Technologies
and Central Scientific-Research Laboratory at Krasnoyarsk State Medical
University, the Krasnoyarsk Regional Center for Collective Use at
the Federal Research Center “KSC SB RAS”, and the Federal
Siberian Research Clinical Center of the Federal Medical Biological
Agency. The Tomsk Regional Core Shared Research Facilities Center
of the National Research Tomsk State University provided access to
the LSM 780 NLO Confocal Microscope. The authors express their gratitude
to the JCSS Joint Super Computer Center of the Russian Academy of
Sciences for providing supercomputers for computer simulations. The
authors extend their appreciation to Technoinfo company for the generous
provision of the “Fluor i In Vivo” used for animal in
vivo fluorescence imaging.