822acssdMolecular PharmaceuticsMol PharmPMC1161593911615939116159393955610110.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.4c00875Polyinosinic/Polycytidylic
Lipid Nanoparticles Enhance
Immune Cell Infiltration and Improve Survival in the Glioblastoma
Mouse Model
BrüßelerMelanie
M T ZamAlaa Moreno-ZafraVíctor M RouatbiNadia HassunehOsama W M MarrocuAlessia Liam-OrRevadee Abdel-BarHend Mohamed WaltersAdam Alexander Al-JamalKhuloud T †Institute
of Pharmaceutical Science, King’s
College London, Franklin-Wilkins Building 150 Stamford Street, London SE1 9NH, U.K.‡Ludwig
Maximilians University, Bayern, Munich, München 80539, Germany§Department
of Pharmacology and Pharmacy, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Hong Kong 999077, China∥Department
of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmacy, University
of Sadat City, P.O. Box 32958, El Sadat, Egypt*Email: khuloud.al-jamal@kcl.ac.uk.
18112024211263396339–63525122024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Glioblastoma (GBM) immunotherapy is particularly challenging
due
to the pro-tumorigenic microenvironment, marked by low levels and
inactive immune cells. Toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists have emerged
as potent immune adjuvants but failed to show improved outcomes in
clinical trials when administered as a monotherapy. We hypothesize
that a combined nanoparticulate formulation of TLR agonist and immunogenic
cell death-inducing drug (doxorubicin) will synergize to induce improved
GBM immunotherapy. Lipid nanoparticle (LNP) formulations of the TLR
agonists CpG and polyinosinic/polycytidylic (pIpC), with and without
Dox, were first prepared, achieving an encapsulation efficiency >75%
and a size <140 nm. In vitro studies identified that LNP pIpC was
superior to CpG at activating bone marrow-derived immune cell populations
(dendritic cells and macrophages) with minimal toxicity. It was also
observed that the pIpC formulation can skew macrophage polarization
toward the antitumorigenic M1 phenotype and increase macrophage phagocytosis
of cancer cells. Upon intratumoral administration, pIpC Dox LNPs led
to significant immune cell infiltration and activation. In survival
models, the inclusion of Dox into pIpC LNP improved mice survival
compared to control. However, addition of Dox did not show significant
improvement in mice’s survival compared to singly formulated
pIpC LNP. This study has illustrated the potential of pIpC LNP formulations
in prospective GBM immunotherapeutic regimes. Future studies will
focus on optimizing dosage regimen and/or combination with other modalities,
including the standard of care (temozolomide), immune checkpoint blockade,
or cancer vaccines.
Keywords: doxorubicin, pIpC, CpG, glioblastoma, lipid nanoparticle

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Aug 4; Accepted 2024 Nov 7; Revised 2024 Nov 7; Collection date 2024 Dec 2.

1.

## Introduction
Despite extensive research,
glioblastoma (GBM) remains one of the
most devastating and prevalent types of brain cancer, constituting
approximately half of all brain tumors. Even with the current standard of care, the prognosis remains poor,
with a median overall survival of only 14.6 months and a 5-year survival
rate of less than 10%. 
In the era
of immunotherapy, immunogenic cell death (ICD)-inducing
drugs are gaining momentum for their use in cancer treatment. Many conventional therapies have already been
shown to induce ICD while others are currently
being tested for their potential to do so. ICD occurs when certain types of chemotherapies, such as anthracyclines,
are given at high dosages. Mechanistically, ICD is mediated through
the release of damage-associated molecular patterns from dying cancer
cells, causing activation of antigen-presenting cells (APC), such
as macrophages and dendritic cells. Through
this process, ICD-inducing drugs have been shown to modulate the tumor
microenvironment toward an anti-tumor landscape. Among the most potent ICD-inducing drugs is doxorubicin
(Dox), and preclinical studies have shown reduced tumor progression
and prolonged survival in brain tumor-bearing rats treated with Dox. However, a phase II clinical trial using intravenously
administered PEGylated liposomal Dox either alone or in combination
with orally administered Tamoxifen showed only moderate success in
clinical GBM. 
This low efficacy
may be due to the profound immunosuppression
associated with GBM, limiting the ICD effect of Dox. Immune adjuvants offer an elegant solution to this challenge.
Among immune adjuvants, Toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists have shown
great potential for cancer immunotherapy, but few have entered clinical
trials. In general, most studies focus
on their use in vaccines. − However, this approach fails
to acknowledge their endogenous anti-tumoral potential. Notably, the National Cancer Institute listed
them among the 12 immunotherapeutic agents with potential to cure
cancer. Particularly, the TLR3 agonist
polyinosinic/polycytidylic acid (pIpC) has been shown to be effective
against GBM in animal studies. Due to
promising results, a phase I/II trial was set out to determine the
effectiveness of pIpC in combination with radiotherapy. In this study
it was demonstrated that pIpC was well tolerated and may be a suitable
candidate for use in combined regimes. Another promising agent against GBM is the TLR9 agonist CpG, which
entered a phase I clinical trial for patients with recurrent GBM. 
Combining drugs is an established means
to enhance efficacy; however,
it is likely that different modalities will have distinct kinetics
and distribution dependent on molecular properties. This is especially
relevant with combinations of drug and adjuvant, which are typically
small and hydrophobic and large and hydrophilic, respectively. Through
coformulation, it is possible to combine these disparate molecules
and ensure simultaneous delivery to the same cell. Over the last decades,
lipid-based nanoparticles (LNPs) have emerged as an effective delivery
platform for both hydrophilic and hydrophobic molecules. 
A key advantage of lipid nanoparticles
is their ability to increase
cellular uptake of various anticancer agents by immune cells. , Facilitating cellular uptake is particularly important with regards
to endosomal active TLRs such as TLRs 3, 7/8, and 9 and cytosolically
restricted RIG-I-like receptors (RLR) such as the retinoic acid-inducible
gene I (RIG-I) and the melanoma differentiation-associated protein
5 (mda-5). Though lipid nanoparticles
have shown promising results as delivery platforms for multiple types
of tumors, , there is little evidence of their
application in the treatment of GBM. A significant hurdle in the development
of therapies for GBM is the presence of the blood-brain barrier, which
excludes many drug candidates. , Direct intracranial
injection into the tumor is the best means to achieve high local drug
concentration; however, this technique has yet to be translated. While
technically challenging, this approach is clinically feasible and
can be performed via a biopsy needle or simultaneously with tumor
resection. Such an approach may offer hope for otherwise poorly treated
disease.
This study seeks to develop a safe single drug delivery
system
for the simultaneous local delivery of a TLR agonist as an immune
adjuvant and the chemotherapeutic drug Dox for GBM therapy. We selected
lipid nanoparticles as a delivery platform and will test the therapy
in vitro on GBM and immune cell cultures and in vivo in an orthotopic
GBM mouse model. The changes in tumor microenvironment will be characterized
by flow cytometry, and LNPs will be tested therapeutically in tumor-bearing
mice. We hypothesize that the combination of an ICD-inducing drug
and an immune adjuvant in an LNP formulation will result in the establishment
of an antitumorigenic state marked by increased immune cell infiltration.
When administered in vivo, this formulation will result in tumor regression
and prolonged survival.

2.

## Materials and Methods
2.1.

## Materials
Quant-it Ribogreen was
purchased from Thermofisher. Amicon Ultra 30KDa MWCO filter units
were purchased from Merck Millipore. siRNA duplexes with the siNEG
sequence UGCGCUACGAUCGACGAUG were obtained from Eurogentec. Poly inosinic/polycytidylic
acid (pIpC) was purchased from Bio Techne. The lipids used for LNP
preparation were purchased as follows:1,2-Dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (DOPE) from Lipoid, cholesterol from
Sigma-Aldrich, Dlin-MC3-DMA from Bybit, and N-palmitoyl-sphingosine-1-succinyl
[methoxy (polyethylene glycol) 2000] (C16 PEG 2000 Ceramide) from
Avanti. Fisherbrand Sterile Cell strainer 70 μm mesh size and
StemPro Accutase were purchased from FisherScientific. Antimouse fluorophore
conjugated antibodies CD45 PB (30-F11), CD86 BV421 (PO3), MHCII –
BV605 (M5), CD11c BV785 (N418), CD206 FITC (C068C2), CD40 PE (3/23),
F4/80 PerCP (QA17A29), CD11b APC (M1/70), MHC I APC (SF1- 1.1), CD45
APC Cy7 (30-F11), Zombie Aqua fixable viability dye, TruStain FcX
PLUS, Precision Count Beads, granulocyte- macrophage colony- stimulating
factor (GM-CSF), macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF), Interleukin
4 (IL 4), and Interferon gamma (IFNγ) were obtained from BioLegend.
Compensation for multicolor flow cytometry was performed utilizing
UltraComp eBeads and ARC amine reactive beads (both Thermofisher).
Tissue culture reagents: fetal calf serum|fetal calve serum (FCS),
Trypsin EDTA, GlutaMAX, Advanced RPMI 1640 media, RPMI 1640 media,
phosphate buffer saline (PBS), and penicillin–streptomycin
were from Gibco, ThermoFisher Scientific. Unless stated otherwise,
all chemical reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.

2.2.

## Methods
2.2.1.

## Cancer Cell Line Culture
GL261
murine GBM cells expressing luciferase were cultured in advanced RPMI
media containing 10% of total volume FCS, 1% GlutaMAX, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin
antibiotics. All cells were maintained in an incubator at 37 °C
in humidified air containing 5% CO2.

2.2.2.

## Animals
All animal experiments
were conducted in agreement with the existing personal and project
licenses granted by the UK Home Office and in accordance with the
UKCCCR Guidelines (1998). For in vivo experiments, mice were purchased
from Charles River, UK. For bone marrow isolation, 3–6 week
old male mice were used. For immune modulation and therapy studies,
4–6 week old male mice were used.

2.2.3.

## LNPs Preparations
LNPs were prepared
using the ethanol dilution method, as described in . Dlin MC3 DMA, cholesterol,
DOPE, and C16PEG2000 stock solutions were prepared by dissolving the
lipids in absolute ethanol to a final concentration of 2 mg lipid/ml
ethanol. C16 PEG2000 concentration was 4 mg/mL. To prepare the LNPs,
a lipid solution and an aqueous solution were made in separate tubes.
For the lipid solution, Dlin MC3 DMA, cholesterol, DOPE, and C16PEG
2000 stock solutions were mixed together before 10% of total lipid
volume citrate buffer (20 mM, pH4) was added. The molar percentages
of each component were 42.1%, 39.1%, 13.45%, and 5.28%, respectively.
For the aqueous solution, 5 μg nucleic acid was added to 100
μL citrate buffer (20 mM, pH4). The ionizable lipid: nucleic
acid ratio was 10:1 w/w. After prewarming the lipid solution to 60
°C and the aqueous solution at 40 °C for 5 min, 10 μL
of the lipid solution was added to the aqueous one. The aqueous phase
was then strongly vortexed for 10s before both solutions were again
incubated at 60 and 40 °C, respectively, for 30s. The cycle was
repeated until all the lipid solution was consumed. The new solution
was then incubated at 40 °C for 1 h before the ethanol was removed
under nitrogen flush to a final volume of 100 μL.
 
2.2.4.

## Dox Loading of LNPs
For buffer
exchange, LNPs incorporating nucleic acids were transferred to an
Amicon Ultra 30 K MWCO filter unit and centrifuged for 45 min at 14,000
rpm and 4 °C. LNPs were resuspended in 200 μL of sodium
bicarbonate buffer (0.5 M, pH8) and transferred to an Eppendorf tube.
In a second Eppendorf tube, Dox (1:10 Dox: total lipid mass ratio)
was added to 200 μL of HEPES buffer (pH7). Dox solution was
transferred to LNPs suspension, vortexed, and incubated for 42 min
at 28 °C and 225 rpm. Free DOX was removed via centrifugation
in a 30 K MWCO Amicon tube at 14,000 rpm and 4 °C. LNPs were
resuspended in citrate buffer or HEPES buffer (0.5 M, pH7) for in
vitro and in vivo studies, respectively.

2.2.5.

## Determination of Physicochemical Characteristics
of LNPs
LNPs were characterized with the Zetasizer Nano ZS
Series (Malvern Instruments, Southborough, MA) at 25 °C using
dynamic light scattering. After preparation of SNALPs, 20 μL
of sample was added to 1 mL of 0.15X PBS. The suspension was transferred
to a disposable capillary Zeta cell. The results are averages of 10
runs, each of which was performed in triplicate. Mean particle size
is represented by Zeta Average (d.nm), and size distribution is represented
by Polydispersity Index (PDI).

2.2.6.

## Determination of RNA/DNA Encapsulation Efficiency
The encapsulation efficiency of the nucleic acid was quantified
indirectly using the Quant-iT RiboGreen assay following the manufacturer’s
protocol. For LNP sample analysis, 2 μL LNPs were suspended
in either 48 μL PBS or 48 μL 5% Triton X- 100/PBS solution
and mixed by gently pipetting up and down. Simultaneously, standard
curves were constructed ranging from 1.25 to 20 ng/μL soluble
nucleic acid in PBS or 5% Triton X- 100/PBS solution. LNPs and standards
in PBS were then incubated for 45 min at room temperature, while standards
and LNPs in Triton X-100 were incubated at 37 °C. After incubation
time, RiboGreen reagent was added to each well as per manufacturer
instructions. Both the standard curves and samples were analyzed by
measuring the fluorescence with a plate reader at excitation and emission
480 m and 520 nm, respectively (BMG LABTECH, FLUOstar Omega). The
coefficient of determination (R2) of the
standard curves was ≥0.95 for all nucleic acids.
The
encapsulation efficiency was then calculated using the formula
 
2.2.7.

## EE % of Dox
To determine the EE
% of Dox. EE % was calculated indirectly by measuring the amount of
unencapsulated Dox in the supernatant. A calibration curve, ranging
from 2.61 to 20.88 μg/μL, was constructed by making a
serial dilution of Dox in Tris buffered saline in a 96-well plate.
The absorbance was measured via UV–vis spectrofluorometer plate
reader (BMG LABTECH, FLUOstar Omega) at excitation and emission of
300 and 590 nm, respectively.
The encapsulation efficiency was
then calculated by using the following formula
 
2.2.8.

## MTT Assay
The MTT assay was performed
to assess cell metabolic activity as a measure of their viability.
On day 0, 5k GL261.luc cells in 100 μL of media were seeded
in a 96 well plate and incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2. After 24 h, media was replaced with media containing nucleic acid
or Dox at a range of concentrations: 0.01–100 μg/mL (for
nucleic acids) or 0.01–100 μM (for Dox), and cells were
incubated for 48 h. Media was removed and replaced with 120 μL
of MTT at a final MTT concentration of 0.83 mg/mL. Following 4 h incubation,
MTT solution was exchanged for 200 μL of DMSO, and absorbance
was measured at 570 nm using a UV–vis spectrofluorometer (BMG
LABTECH, FLUOstar Omega).
Cell viability was expressed using
the following formula
 
2.2.9.

## Dendritic Cell and Macrophage Culture from
Bone Marrow
On day 0, cells were isolated from the femur
and tibiae of 3–6 w old mice. After removing all tissue from
the bones, both epiphyses were cut off with a scalpel to expose the
marrow. The bone marrow was then flushed with RPMI 1640 media, containing
10% FCS, 1% Glutamax, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin, referred to
as complete RPMI media, until the bones appeared translucent. The
flow through was filtered using a cell strainer before being centrifuged
at 700rcf at 4 °C for 5 min to collect cells. The supernatant
was discarded, and 500 μL of 1x red cell lysis buffer was added
to the cell pellet. The solution was then resuspended in 5 mL of complete
RPMI to stop further lysis before centrifugation as above. Cell pellets
were resuspended in complete RPMI media containing 10 ng/mL M- CSF
(for macrophage differentiation) or GM-CSF (for DC differentiation).
Cells were seeded into 24 well plates at a seeding density of 500000
cells/well in 500 μL of complete RPMI media. On day 3, media
was supplemented with the following cytokines depending on the cell
phenotype to be obtained: (i) no additional cytokines to obtain M0
macrophages, (ii) 50 ng/mL IL 4 to obtain M2 macrophages, or (iii)
50 ng/mL IFN-γ to obtain DCs and M1 macrophages. On day 4, different
treatments were added to cells at a concentration of 1 μg/μL
and incubated for further 48 h before analysis.

2.2.10.

## Assessment of Differentiation Markers on
Immune Cells by Flow Cytometry
Cells were analyzed for changes
in surface marker expression in response to immune adjuvant treatment
using flow cytometry. Cells were detached from the plates by the addition
of 500 μL of ice-cold cell dissociation buffer to each well
and repeated pipetting before being transferred to Eppendorf tubes.
After centrifugation at 1750 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C, the supernatant
was discarded, and cells were washed once with 100 μL of PBS.
Pellets were resuspended in 100 μL PBS and transferred to a
96 well plate. To assess viability, cells were stained with 50 μL/well
Zombie Aqua Fixable Viability Kit (diluted 1:250 with 1xPBS) for 20
min at room temperature in the dark. After washing as above, cells
were incubated with 50 μL of TruStain FcX PLUS (1:200 antibody/PBS
dilution ratio) for 30 min on ice. Following one washing step, samples
on the 96 well plate were incubated with antibodies of interest at
1:200 dilution in 50 μL for 30 min on ice. After two additional
washing steps, cells were resuspended in 200 μL of PBS and transferred
to FACS tubes before 10 k viable cells were acquired with a BD FACSCelesta
Cell Analyzer. The data was analyzed using the FlowJo Software (TreeStar,
Inc.). The plots were analyzed after excluding debris using forward–sideward
scatter gating, then selecting singlets through forward scatter gating
and a selection of viable cells based on Zombie Aqua intensity. CD86
and CD40 cell surface expression was analyzed using the Mean Fluorescent
Intensity (MFI) of each marker, while the M2 → M1 switch was
assessed through gating for percentage positive cells (M1: F4/80+, CD11b+, MHCII+, CD206– M2: F4/80+, CD11b+, MHCII+, and
CD206+).

2.2.11.

## Assessment of MHC Class I Upregulation
on Gl261 Cells In Vitro by Flow Cytometry
GL261 luc cells
were seeded on day 0 on a 24 well plate at a seeding density of 75,000
cells per 500 μL of media. After 24 h of incubation, media was
discarded, cells were washed with PBS, and different formulations
containing the TLR9 agonist pIpC soluble in LNP, with and without
addition of Dox, were added to the cells at a concentration of 7.5
μg/mL of nucleic acid and 0.18 μM, respectively. As a
control, siNEG LNP with and without Dox was used at equivalent nucleic
acid and Dox concentrations as controls. Following 48 h incubation,
cells were trypsinized and analyzed via flow cytometry, as described
for the immune cell analysis. Following one washing step, cells were
stained with MHC class I (1:200 dilution) and incubated for 30 min
at 4 °C in the dark. After incubation and washing, cells were
transferred to FACS tubes and 20,000 viable cells acquired by a BD
FACSCelesta Cell Analyzer. FlowJo Software (TreeStar, Inc.) was used
for the analysis. After excluding debris by FSC vs SSC gating, single
cells were chosen based on FSC-A vs FSC-H gating. Viable cells were
chosen based on the intensity of ZombieAqua. MHC class I expression
was assessed through the mean fluorescence intensity on viable cells
only.

2.2.12.

## GL261 glioblastoma/J774 Macrophage Coculture
On day 0, 70 k cells GL261 or J774 were seeded on a 24 well plate
in 500 μL media. In the case of GL261, cells were stained with
5 μmol of DiD dye prior to seeding. 24 h later, media was discarded,
cells were washed, and different formulations were added at nucleic
acid and Dox concentrations of 7.5 μg/mL and/or 0.18 μM
Dox, respectively. Following 48 h incubation, J774 macrophages were
added to GL261 cells at a 1:1 number ratio. After 6 h of coculture,
cells were detached using StemProAccutase and gentle scraping. For
flow cytometric analysis, cells were centrifuged at 1750 rpm for 5
min, washed once with PBS, and transferred to a 96 well plate in 100
μL of PBS. For viability assessment, 50 μL of Zombie Aqua,
diluted 1:250 with PBS, was added to each well and incubated in the
dark at room temperature. Following one washing step, cells were stained
with 50 μL of F4/80 antibody, diluted 1:200 with PBS. After
30 min incubation at 4 °C in the dark and washing once with PBS,
cells were transferred to the FACS tube, and 20 k viable cells were
acquired via a BD FACSCelesta Cell Analyzer. FlowJo Software (TreeStar,
Inc.) was used for analysis. After excluding debris by FSC vs SSC
gating, single cells were selected based on FSC-A vs FSC-H gating.
Viable cells were determined based on the intensity of ZombieAqua.
After selection of J774 macrophages, based on high F4/80 expression,
MFI was used to determine engulfment of GL261 cancer cells.

2.2.13.

## Preparation of the Orthotopic GL261.luc
Mouse Model
Mice were injected stereotactically with 200,000
GL261.luc cells suspended in 2 μL of PBS using a Hamilton Syringe
(Harvard Apparatus, UK) with a 26-gauge needle. The consistency was
ensured by following a precise intracranial injection technique. Animals
were first anesthetized through isoflurane inhalation before the skull
was opened and the bregma was identified. Based on this anatomical
landmark, the stereotactic coordinates for injection were 0.5 mm anterior,
1.5 mm lateral, and 2.5 mm deep. After opening the skull with a drill,
the cell suspension was injected at a rate of 0.2 μL of cell
suspension/min. The injection volume and speed were kept constant
for all mice to avoid variability in the dispersion of the formulation
within brain tissue. Additionally, our LNP formulations were prepared
consistently before each injection, following a standard protocol.
Size, PDI, zeta potential, and %EE were checked to ensure uniform
dosing. To monitor tumor growth, mice were imaged on days 3, 6, 9,
12, and 14 after tumor inoculation using quantitative in vivo bioluminescence
imaging (IVIS Lumina III, PerkinElmer, UK). During anesthesia with
isoflurane inhalation, mice were injected subcutaneously with 150
mg/kg D-luciferin. The images were recorded 10 min after injection
and analyzed using living Image software (PerkinElmers, UK). The bioluminescence
signal is expressed as total flux (photon/s).

2.2.14.

## In Vivo Studies
After confirmation
of tumor growth via in vivo bioluminescence imaging, mice were injected
intracranially with LNP in a total volume of 10 μL of HEPES
buffer (0.5 M, pH7). Following anesthesia via isoflurane inhalation,
the skull was reopened and the injection site identified. The same
burr hole was used for the treatment injection at an injection rate
of 0.2 μL/min.

2.2.15.

## Immune Infiltration and Activation Studies
Mice (n = 3 per group) received 5 μL of
one i.t. injection of HEPES buffer (sham), siNEG LNP, siNEG Dox LNP,
CpG LNP, pIpC LNP, or pIpC Dox LNP at nucleic acid or Dox doses of
375 μg/kg and 1180.5 μg/kg, respectively. Three days later,
the mice were sacrificed. After intraperitoneal lethal injection of
pentobarbital sodium and loss of consciousness, mice were subjected
to transcardiac perfusion with a total of 25 mL of 0.5% saline to
remove red blood cells from the brain, which may hinder later flow
cytometry analysis. Tumors were then extracted and incubated for 1
h at 37° in 6 μL/mg digestion buffer. After 2x washing
in PBS, 100 μL of cell suspension in PBS was transferred to
a 96 well plate. Zombie Aqua was used as a viability dye at a dilution
ratio of 1:250 with PBS. 50 μL of the diluted dye was added
to each well and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 30
min. Following one washing step, cells were stained with 50 μL
of antibody mix, each of which antibody was diluted 1:200 with PBS.
After 30 min of incubation at 4 °C in the dark and washing once
with PBS, 175 μL of cell suspension from each well was transferred
to the FACS tube. After addition of 25 μL Precision Count Beads
to each tube, 500,000 viable cells were acquired via BD FACSCelesta
Cell Analyzer. FlowJo Software (TreeStar, Inc.) was used for analysis.
After excluding debris by FSC vs SSC gating, single cells were selected
based on FSC-A vs FSC-H gating. Viable cells were determined based
on the intensity of ZombieAqua. Immune cells were identified as CD45+
cells. From those, tumor-associated macrophages were selected as the
CD45high/CD11b high population, dendritic cells
as CD45high/11c high and T Cells as CD45high/CD3 high. After selection of T cells, this
population was further gated for CD4+ T helper cells as CD45high/CD3 high/CD4 high/CD8low, while
CD8+ cytotoxic T cells were chosen based on CD45high/CD3 high/CD8 high/CD4low expression levels.
Activation marker expression was analyzed through median fluorescence
intensity on all immune cell subpopulations.

2.2.16.

## Survival Studies
5–6 weeks
old C57BL/6 mice (5–6 weeks old) were implanted with GL261,
as described above. Seven and 14 days after tumor implantation, mice
(n = 8 per group) received 5 μL of i.t. injection
of HEPES buffer (sham), soluble pIpC, pIpC LNP, siNEG/Dox LNP, or
pIpC/Dox LNP at nucleic acid or Dox doses of 0.45 and 1.53 mg/kg,
respectively. Mice were monitored for tumor growth via BLI imaging
and changes in body weight twice a week. Mice were sacrificed when
body weight loss exceeded 20%, experienced any signs of stress for
over 24 h, or experienced 15% weight loss and any stress signs combined.
Kaplan–Meier survival curves were obtained for mice with and
without treatments.

2.2.17.

## Statistical Analysis
GraphPad
Prism 9 was used for the numerical analysis. Statistical analysis
was carried out utilizing one-way ANOVA followed by a Tukey test.
For survival analysis, the Mantel–Cox test was used. The statistical
test used is indicated in each figure caption. For each group, apart
from the macrophage polarization and survival studies, n = 3 samples or mice were used. For macrophage polarization, n = 4 mice per group were used. For survival studies, n = 8 mice per group were utilized. Flow cytometry data
was analyzed using FlowJo Software (Version 10.8, TreeStar).

3.

## Results
3.1.

## In Vitro Studies
3.1.1.

## RNA/DNA Dox Combination Can be Successfully
Encapsulated in Lipid Nanoparticles and Shows Favorable Physicochemical
Characteristics
LNPs were prepared according to a previously
reported method for encapsulation of siRNA together with mRNA. For encapsulation of Dox, a pH gradient method
was employed. As shown in , all formulations were <150
d.nm, the largest being pIpC Dox LNPs (Figure S1). The smallest particle was CpG LNP. In general, an increase
in size was observed after encapsulating Dox in particles which already
contained a nucleic acid (CpG LNP < pIpC LNP < CpG Dox LNP <
pIpC LNP). The physicochemical analysis further showed that all particles
were monodisperse, indicated by PDI <0.2.
 To confirm the successful encapsulation of nucleic
acid and Dox,
the encapsulation efficiency (EE %) was calculated using standard
curves presented in Figure S2. shows the encapsulation
efficiencies for the different formulations. CpG, a molecule that
is smaller in size compared to pIpC, showed the highest encapsulation
efficiency of ∼100%. pIpC encapsulation efficiency reached
approximately 80%. Encapsulation efficiency for Dox was consistently
above 75%. For CpG Dox LNP, the encapsulation efficiency was ∼80%,
while pIpC Dox LNP resulted in ∼75% encapsulation. Dox was
demonstrated to be stably incorporated into LNP with minimal leakage
after 6 h and <20% release after 24 h dialysis at 37 °C with
stirring (Figure S3).

3.1.2.

## Nucleic Acid Immune Adjuvants Show Dose-Dependent
Cytotoxicity in the Cancer Cell Line and Bone Marrow-Derived Immune
Cells
In the next step, cell viability upon the addition
of different formulations to GL261 and immune cells was assessed.
For all cell types, a serial dilution between 0.001 and 10 μg/mL
of nucleic acid was prepared. The range was chosen based on the dosages
that would be used in subsequent in vitro and in vivo studies. In
general, neither a significant difference between cancer and immune
cell cytotoxicity nor significant differences between treatments were
observed (Figures S4–S6). Even at
dosages as high as 10 μg/mL, viability remained at approximately
70% in all cases. GL261 brain tumor cells showed the lowest cell viability
of all cell lines, where the addition of 10 μg/mL pIpC LNP decreased
to ∼70%. The lowest reduction in cell viability was observed
in dendritic cells after addition of 10 μg/mL siNEG LNP, where
viability remained at ∼85%. In contrast to GL261 brain tumor
cells, dendritic cells were most sensitive to CpG LNP, showing a decrease
to ∼78% cell viability. Similar to GL261 brain tumor cells,
M0 macrophages were sensitive to treatment with pIpC (∼76%),
while at dosages of 10 μg/mL the lowest toxicity was observed
in treatment with soluble CpG (∼82%).

3.1.3.

## pIpC LNP Results in Potent Activation of
Immune Cells In Vitro
To assess the effect of LNP formulations
on macrophages and dendritic cells, bone marrow cells were cultured
in the relevant cytokine cocktail, as described in the methods. After
3 days of incubation with the treatments, cells were analyzed for
successful differentiation into the desired cell type via flow cytometry
(Figure S7). Dendritic cells were identified
through high expression of CD11c, M0 as low expression of MHCII and
CD206, M1 as MHCII high and CD206 low, and M2 as MHCII and CD206 high.
The highest obtained percentage of the desired cell type was M1 macrophages,
where on average 92% of the cells showed a high expression of MHCII
and low expression of CD206. Dendritic cells showed a similarly high
percentage of differentiation, as on average, 82% of the cells were
DCs. In contrast, the least efficient differentiation protocol was
used for M2 macrophages. Here, only 28% of the viable population acquired
the M2 macrophage phenotype. Where no cytokines were added to obtain
M0 macrophages, ∼52% of the viable population showed the expression
of markers characteristic of M0 macrophages.
The immune cell
populations were incubated with 10 μg/mL of either pIpC or CpG
in soluble or LNP format for 48 h prior to analysis via flow cytometry.
siNEG LNP was used as a negative control at the same concentration
of nucleic acid to confirm that activation does not result from the
LNP but from the nucleic acid immune adjuvants. pIpC LNP achieved
the highest increase in MFI of CD86 and CD40 activation marker expression
for all cell types ( A–D). In DC, both pIpC soluble and pIpC LNP increased
the MFI, with 6-fold and 4-fold increases observed for CD86 (pIpC
LNP > pIpC soluble) and CD40 (pIpC soluble ≈ pIpC LNP),
respectively
( A). M0 macrophages,
which are nondistinguished, showed the highest upregulation of all
bone marrow-derived immune cells after addition of pIpC LNP, resulting
in ∼25- and ∼4-fold increases in CD86 and CD40 expression
compared to control ( B). Other treatments did not significantly increase CD86/CD40
expression. The antitumorigenic M1 macrophages, unlike other immune
cells, showed a marked increase in CD40 and CD86 upon treatments with
CpG LNP as well as pIpC LNP ( C). Interestingly, both CpG soluble and CpG encapsulated
in LNP were able to increase activation marker expression with no
significant difference found between them. Like M0 macrophages, only
pIpC LNP treatment resulted in CD40 and CD86 expression change in
protumorigenic M2 macrophages, increasing expression by 12- and 2.7-fold,
respectively ( D).
 
3.1.4.

## Nucleic Acid Immune Adjuvants Favor M1 Macrophage
Polarization
In addition to activation of macrophages and
DC, the TLR3 and TLR9 agonists have been reported to induce differentiation
from M0 to M1 macrophages. , Similar to the activation
results, the highest differentiation from M0 to M1 macrophages was
observed after treatment with 10 μg/mL pIpC LNP ( A and S8).
 In this group, addition of pIpC LNP resulted in
nearly a 7-fold
increase in differentiation to M1 macrophages compared to no treatment.
pIpC soluble, CpG soluble, and CpG LNP also resulted in higher percentages
of M1 macrophages compared to no treatment, but the effect was approximately
half that of pIpC LNP treatment. Interestingly, it was also observed
that macrophages that had been differentiated into M2 macrophages
could be repolarized to M1 macrophages, with CpG LNP having the strongest
effect, followed by pIpC LNP, and then CpG soluble ( B). After CpG LNP treatment,
M1 macrophages constituted over 15% of all macrophages, while culture
in media resulted in only 1% M1 macrophages.

3.1.5.

## pIpC in an LNP Formulation Leads to Highest
Increase in MHC I Expression
MHC class I plays a pivotal
role in antigen presentation but is downregulated in various types
of cancer, such as GBM. A recent study
found that MHC class I could be upregulated through liposomal Dox
in a melanoma mouse model as well as
through pIpC in a Gl261 cell culture. This study set out to determine whether Dox would also lead to upregulation
on GBM cells and whether the effect could be further heightened by
the addition of pIpC. GL261 cells were treated for 48 h before MHC
class I expression assessment by flow cytometry. To allow incubation
with Dox without causing complete cell death, 0.18 μM Dox was
chosen as a dosage, as this molarity represents the IC50 value, determined by the previously performed MTT assay. The amount
of nucleic acid was 10 μg/mL. Only pIpC LNP and Dox pIpC LNP
significantly increased the MHC class I MFI with no difference observed
between the two formulations ( ). Considering that siNEG Dox LNP did not show increased
MHC class I expression, these findings indicate that the observed
upregulation was due to the presence of pIpC.
 
3.1.6.

## pIpC LNP with and without Doxorubicin Increase
GL261 Engulfment by Macrophages
The dynamic between cancer
cells and macrophages was assessed in a DiD-labeled GL261 and J774
macrophage coculture. Either of the cell types were treated with one
of the formulations, Dox LNP, pIpC LNP, or pIpC Dox LNP, or the appropriate
controls, for 24 h before cells were mixed at a 1:1 ratio, mimicking
the GBM tumor microenvironment, for another 6 h. Overall, pretreatment
of J774 cells as opposed to GL261 led to more efficient uptake of
cancer cells by macrophages, as indicated by higher MFI values in . Comparing the different
treatments, pIpC Dox LNP followed by pIpC LNP resulted in the highest
cancer cell phagocytosis by J774 cells. pIpC soluble and siNEG Dox
LNP also resulted in GL261 cell phagocytosis, yet less efficiently
compared to pIpC Dox LNP and pIpC LNP groups.
 
3.1.7.

## pIpC Dox LNP Results in Highest Immune Cell
Activation in the Tumor Microenvironment In Vivo and Improved Mice
Survival
After promising in vitro results, the different
formulations were intracranially injected into GL261 brain tumors
on day 9 post tumor inoculation, mice were sacrificed 3 days later,
and changes in the tumor microenvironment were assessed by flow cytometry
(Figure S9).
As shown in , the pIpC LNP resulted
in an increase in CD8 and total T cell numbers but did not affect
any other immune cells. In contrast to these findings, the addition
of Dox to pIpC LNP achieved an increase in all immune cells that were
assessed; this is apparent when cell subsets as a percentage of leukocytes
are analyzed (Figure S10).
 Interestingly, CD4 T cells did not show any changes
upon treatment
( D). CpG LNP
only affected the CD4/CD8 T cell ratio, which was lowered after treatment
with the formulation ( F).
In keeping with these findings, only the pIpC Dox
LNP was able
to increase the MFI of all activation markers on all immune cells
( ). When looking
at dendritic cells, all treatments apart from siNEG Dox and the negative
control siNEG LNP caused an increase in the activation marker CD40
( A). The CD86
increase on DC illustrates the efficiency of pIpC Dox LNP, as only
this treatment group showed increased activation, with an average
MFI of 1100 (control group MFI <200). The efficacy of pIpC Dox
in activating immune cells was further highlighted by the increased
CD40 MFI on TAMs, and this treatment showed a significant difference
compared to all other treatments ( B). While for the in vitro studies, CD86
had shown the highest overall change in comparison to CD40, greater
effects were seen for CD40 in the in vivo studies: CD86 increased
approximately 5.5-fold, while CD40 showed an increase of nearly 10-fold
when looking at pIpC Dox treatment in comparison to the control group.
This effect was notably heightened on TAMs: CD40 MFI increased ∼20-fold,
while CD86 increased ∼10-fold in TAMs in pIpC Dox treatment
compared to the control group.
 To investigate how the functionality of T cells
changes following
treatment, we chose the frequently used molecule CD69 as an activation
marker. In line with the findings from TAMs and DCs, T cells equally
showed upregulation after treatment with pIpC Dox LNP ( C). Unexpectedly, CD4+ T helper
cells showed no significant difference, independent of the treatment
(Figure S11). In contrast, in CD8+ cytotoxic
T cells, CD69 MFI was increased in both the pIpC and pIpC Dox groups,
with an average MFI of approximately 1200 and 1250, respectively,
while the control group reached only an MFI of approximately 560 ( D).
A follow-up
survival study was performed to establish the effect
of the different therapeutics on mouse survival ( and S12). Both plpC LNPs (15.5 days) and plpC Dox LNPs (15 days) showed
significant improvement in survival compared to sham (12.5 days).
Despite the significant improvement in immune cell infiltration observed
in plpC Dox LNPs, this improvement did not translate to an improvement
in survival compared to the plpC LNPs group. In the absence of plpC,
siNEG Dox LNPs (14 days) also showed significant improvement in survival
compared to sham (p < 0.05).
 

4.

## Discussion
In this study, the nucleic
acid-based immune adjuvant pIpC and
the ICD-inducing drug Dox were successfully coformulated in lipid
nanoparticles and administered intracranially for the first time.
The lipid nanoparticles display favorable physicochemical characteristics
that showcase their suitability as a therapeutic delivery platform.
Cytotoxicity studies revealed that the nucleic acid immune adjuvants,
whether LNP-formulated or in their soluble form, only decreased immune
cell viability by approximately 25%, even at the highest dosages tested
(10 μg/mL), highlighting their potential to be administered
safely without causing major cytotoxicity. The antitumoral effect
of pIpC and CpG has been known for decades, and both have made it
into clinical trials for GBM therapy. , pIpC was tested
in combination with radiotherapy as an intramuscular injection and
demonstrated a survival benefit over historical studies without chemotherapy. CpG was likewise evaluated for its therapeutic
potential and showed an improved overall survival when administered
around the surgical cavity. Though the
outcomes were generally positive, the studies raise questions about
how immune adjuvant therapy can be further improved.
Formulation
with lipids increases the hydrophobicity of the TLR
agonists, which in turn facilitates cellular uptake and activation.
A recent study tested bone marrow-derived dendritic cell and macrophage
activation following treatment with pIpC and CpG in both soluble and
liposomal form and found no clear superiority of either CpG or pIpC. In contrast with these findings, our study observed
significant superiority of pIpC in activating different macrophage
subtypes, DCs, and T cells. This may be due to the higher doses used
in our study (10 vs 2 μg/mL). It may also be due to the differences
in formulation, where Bayyurt et al. developed a liposome based on l-α-phosphatidylcholine and cholesterol, and we developed
an LNP based on ionizable lipid. Ionizable lipid LNPs have surpassed
liposomes in the nucleic acid delivery field due to their improved
safety profile and also their efficient endosomal escape and subsequent
cytosolic delivery of cargo. It may be possible to speculate that
liposomes facilitate delivery to the endosome only, where TLR9 and
TLR3 are expressed. LNPs, on the other hand, enable targeting of cytosolic
RNA sensors, such as Mda-5, in addition to endosomal sensors, thus
lending themselves to RNA-based adjuvant delivery.
While activating
the innate immune system remains pivotal in the
antitumoral immune response, previous clinical trials underscore the
necessity for a multifaceted strategy to successfully eradicate GBM.
In this respect, MHC class I emerges as a key player, as this molecule
facilitates the crucial identification of cancer cells by CD8+ cytotoxic
T cells. Given that one of the major mechanisms of immune escape in
GBM is in fact the loss of MHC class I, reversing this effect should
facilitate elimination. Several studies
have shown that pIpC and its derivatives increase the expression of
MHC class I on cancer cells. , Interestingly, as Song,
Han et al. have shown, Dox appears to be able to do so also. In keeping with the literature, our studies
show increased median fluorescent intensity of MHC class I on GL261
brain cancer cells after incubation with pIpC LNP and pIpC Dox LNP,
whereas neither siNEG Dox LNP nor CpG soluble or its LNP formulation
was able to increase its expression significantly. It is likely that
the absence of elevation using siNEG Dox LNP treatment is a result
of the comparatively lower dosage of Dox used in this study.
After demonstrating that LNPs augment activation of immune cells
as well as MHC class I expression on brain cancer cells in vitro,
a coculture phagocytosis assay was performed to determine the dynamics
between these two cell types. In keeping with the previous in vitro
studies, the engulfment of GL261 cancer cells by J774 macrophages
was enhanced after incubation with both pIpC LNP and pIpC Dox LNPs,
independent of which cell type was treated. Interestingly, heightened
phagocytosis was also observed when GL261 cancer cells and J774 macrophages
were treated with pIpC-soluble and siNEG Dox LNP, respectively. These
results suggest a common underlying mechanism through which both pIpC
and Dox elicit pro-phagocytotic functions. Calreticulin could be responsible
for this phenomenon, as it has been shown to be the pivotal factor
in cellular uptake. In fact, both the
anthracycline Dox as well as the TLR3 agonist pIpC have been shown
to increase levels of the chemokine CXCL8, which in turn heightens
calreticulin surface expression. , Cancer cells
seem to be specifically susceptible to anthracyclines, whereas macrophages
have been shown to increase calreticulin expression after immune adjuvant
treatment. Of particular significance
is the consistent observation of the highest phagocytosis levels following
pIpC Dox treatment across both treated cell lines. This pattern underpins
the synergistic effect that both Dox and pIpC exert on cellular uptake.
Future work might assess the underlying mechanisms that immune adjuvants
and Dox elicit on calreticulin expression. Apart from increased calreticulin
expression, the observation of highest phagocytosis upon pretreatment
of J774 could also be explained by reprogramming into the M1 phenotype,
as the previous results of this study have shown.
To test the
formulations in vivo, we used an orthotopic GL261 GBM
mouse model. In this study, the infiltration and activation of APC
and T cells were assessed. Intratumoral pIpC Dox LNP administration
proved to be the most effective treatment, significantly increasing
the numbers of nearly all immune cell types except CD4+ T cells. Similar
findings have been reported by Weng et al. in hepatocellular carcinoma
in mouse models. These findings are mostly
likely due to increased MHC class I expression, as a strong correlation
with T cell infiltration has been found in melanoma. While the cause for the unchanged CD4+ T cell numbers remains
unknown, the decreased CD4+/CD8+ T cell ratio holds immense significance.
CD8+ T cells are also known as cytotoxic T cells, given their function
of eradicating malignant or infected cells. Consequently, a decreased
CD4+/CD8+ T cell ratio directly and strongly correlates with favorable
clinical outcome. Another major component
of the tumor microenvironment consists of tumor-associated macrophages.
In fact, up to 30% of the TME consists of these TAMs. Historically, TAMs have been linked to tumor progression
and poor outcomes in patients suffering from GBM. However, this perspective has proven to be oversimplified,
as there are not only pro-tumorigenic M2 macrophages but also antitumorigenic
M1 macrophages. Numerous studies have shown that it is feasible to
reprogram TAMs into M1 macrophages, thereby inhibiting glioma growth. − This study confirmed these previous findings, as pIpC LNP skews
macrophages toward the M1 phenotype in vitro, independent of whether
undifferentiated M0 macrophages were treated or differentiated M2
macrophages. Heightened levels of immune cells are only one part of
the breakthrough that was achieved with pIpC Dox LNP combination therapy.
As mentioned earlier, eradicating GBM also demands successful activation
of immune cells, as several studies have found that a hallmark of
GBM is T cell exclusion and exhaustion. Immunotherapy with pIpC Dox LNP overcomes this challenge, enabling
the immune system to recognize and fight GBM. A pivotal factor for
T cell activation is APC activation, which was observed in vitro upon
immune adjuvant treatment as well as in vivo upon pIpC Dox LNP treatment.
Once activated, APC display tumor-derived antigens as well as costimulatory
molecules on their cell surface to T cells and secrete T cell chemotactic
chemokines, enriching the tumor microenvironment
with cytotoxic T cells. Despite the abundant evidence supporting the
findings of this study and reinforcing the effectiveness of pIpC LNP
treatment, an eminent absence of data exists concerning intracranial
Dox treatment. The reason for this is simple: To date, there have
been no studies evaluating the effects of Dox on brain tumors following
intratumoral administration. Nevertheless, studies employing different
modalities of delivery point toward a favorable outcome. As such,
a recent study investigated the effects of Dox in combination with
shockwaves that were used to disrupt the blood-brain barrier and found
inhibition of tumor growth together with prolonged overall survival. The underlying mechanisms remained unknown, but
this study suggests that increased activation of APC could be responsible
for the findings. Another rationale for selecting pIpC over CpG for
combination therapy with Dox in glioma stems from the observation
that CpG can trigger the STAT3 signaling pathway, leading to the proliferation
of glioma stem-like cells. These cells
represent a significant obstacle in therapeutic efficacy and are currently
under investigation as a focal point for research efforts. Despite the clear effectiveness of pIpC LNP
and siNEG Dox LNP treatment, the highest immune cell infiltration
and activation was observed upon pIpC Dox LNP combination therapy.
Most interestingly, Dox and pIpC may exert some of their function
through a common signaling pathway, as it has been shown that lack
of TLR3 abrogated anthracycline response. Synergistically targeting the TLR3 receptor seems to be able to
elicit the strongest immune cell response among all treatments.
The final study performed aimed to evaluate the long-term effects
that resulted from the different treatments. Dox has been found to
eradicate myeloid-derived suppressor cells and inhibit the function
of remaining ones in a murine mammary cancer model. MDSCs cause downregulation of immune responses and have
been studied as potential targets in GBM. The potential eradication and inhibition of MDSCs in combination
with the observed activation and infiltration of immune cells may
instigate an immune response of sufficient potency to autonomously
eliminate GBM. In contrast to the changes in the tumor microenvironment,
where pIpC Dox LNP showed superior changes, pIpC Dox LNP did not show
improvement in mice survival over pIpC LNP or Dox LNP formulations.
Future combinatory studies with other types of treatments, e.g., immunotherapies
(immune checkpoint blockade or cancer vaccines) or temozolomide chemotherapy,
will establish if Dox addition results in therapeutically relevant
outcomes. Moving forward, the study’s focus should be on optimizing
the dosage regimen of the pIpC LNP formulation, refining the frequency,
timing, and concentration to maximize therapeutic benefits while minimizing
toxicity. Additionally, combining this therapy with other modalities
holds promise, such as the standard GBM treatment of temozolomide,
immune checkpoint inhibitors (e.g., anti-PD-1 or anti-CTLA-4 antibodies), and cancer vaccines, to potentially
enhance the immune response. Since doxorubicin did not significantly
improve survival compared to pIpC alone, future studies could explore
other immune-activating agents or chemotherapeutics that may work
synergistically. Further preclinical testing in diverse GBM models,
including patient-derived xenografts, will be crucial to assess the
broader applicability. Ultimately, successful optimization would set
the stage for translational studies in larger animal models and subsequent
clinical trials in humans.

5.

## Conclusions
In conclusion, this study
has shown that encapsulation of plpC
into LNP offers an advantage compared to soluble plpC such as increased
MHC class I expression on the cancer cells, enhanced DCs, M0, M1,
and M2 activation, and M2 to M1 macrophage reprogramming leading to
efficient clearance of cancer cells by the activated macrophages in
vitro. The addition of Dox into plpC LNP showed extended benefits
such as enhanced DCs, TAM, and CD8 cell infiltrations, in their active
form, into the orthotopically implanted GBM compared to plpC LNP.
Dox LNP, pIpC LNP, and pIpC Dox LNP offered improved survival profiles
in vivo. This study is another showcase of the advantages LNPs can
offer for GBM immunotherapy and chemotherapy as standalone treatments
or in combination with other therapeutics in the future.

## Acknowledgments
A.A.W. is the grateful recipient of a Maplethorpe
Fellowship. A.Z. is a Cara (the Council for At-Risk Academics) fellow.
H.A. is a recipient of Newton Musharafa and Schlumberger Faculty for
Future Fellowships. A.M. is a Wellcome Trust funded student within
the Neuro-Immune Interactions in Health & Disease PhD programme.
MMTB was funded through the Erasmus + Scholarship. This project has
received funding from the Brain Tumour Charity (GN-000398), Institutional
Link- British Council (IL4337313), Wellcome Trust (WT103913), Brain
Research UK (202021-30), and Cancer Research UK King’s Health
Partners Centre at King’s College London. Graphical abstracts
and schemes were created on Biorender.com.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.4c00875.
Details of LNP characterization, in vitro behavior of
LNPs, flow cytometric gating strategies, and addition in vivo data
(PDF)

## Author Contributions
# M.M.T.B., A.A.W,
and A.Z. Equal contribution to the work. MMTB, AAW,
and AZ devised the concept, performed, designed the experiments, and
wrote the manuscript. VZ, NR, OH, AM, RLO, and HA provided experimental
support. KAJ devised the concept, supervised the work, provided funding,
and contributed feedback to the manuscript.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Special Issue
Published
as part of Molecular Pharmaceuticsspecial issue “Intratumoral Immunotherapy with
Nanoparticles”.

## Supplementary Material
mp4c00875_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
mp4c00875_si_001.pdf