822acssdACS NanoACS NanoPMC1184104711841047118410473991261110.1021/acsnano.4c18636Ionizable
Lipids with Optimized Linkers Enable Lung-Specific,
Lipid Nanoparticle-Mediated mRNA Delivery for Treatment of Metastatic
Lung Tumors
Somu NaiduGonna RampadoRiccardo SharmaPreeti EzraAssaf KundoorGovinda Reddy BreierDor PeerDan †Laboratory
of Precision Nanomedicine, Shmunis School of Biomedicine and Cancer
Research, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv-Yafo 69978, Israel‡Department
of Materials Sciences and Engineering, Tel
Aviv University, Tel Aviv-Yafo 69978, Israel§Center
for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Tel
Aviv University, Tel Aviv-Yafo 69978, Israel∥Cancer
Biology Research Center, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv-Yafo 69978, Israel⊥Department
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
Padova, Padova 35131, Italy*Email: peer@tauex.tau.ac.il.
62202519665716571–65872122025© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Lipid nanoparticles
(LNPs) have emerged as a groundbreaking delivery
system for vaccines and therapeutic mRNAs. Ionizable lipids are the
most pivotal component of LNPs due to their ability to electrostatically
interact with mRNA, allowing its encapsulation while concurrently
enabling its endosomal escape following cellular internalization.
Thus, extensive research has been performed to optimize the ionizable
lipid structure and to develop formulations that are well tolerated
and allow efficient targeting of different organs that result in a
high and sustained mRNA expression. However, one facet of the ionizable
lipids’ structure has been mostly overlooked: the linker segment
between the ionizable headgroup and their tails. Here, we screened
a rationally designed library of ionizable lipids with different biodegradable
linkers. We extensively characterized LNPs formulated using these
ionizable lipids and elucidated how these minor structural changes
in the ionizable lipids structure radically influenced the LNPs’
biodistribution in vivo. We showed how the use of amide and urea linkers
can modulate the LNPs’ pKa, resulting
in an improved specificity for lung transfection. Finally, we demonstrated
how one of these lipids (lipid 35) that form LNPs entrapping a bacterial
toxin [pseudomonas exotoxin A (mmPE)] in the form of an mRNA reduced
tumor burden and significantly increased the survival of mice with
lung metastasis.
Keywords: ionizable lipids, lipid nanoparticle, mRNA
delivery, biodegradable linkers, lung delivery, genetic medicines

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Dec 23; Accepted 2025 Jan 31; Revised 2025 Jan 31; Collection date 2025 Feb 18.

## Introduction
Messenger RNA (mRNA) delivery has emerged
as an innovative approach
to prevent and treat a variety of pathological conditions such as
cancers, infections, and hereditary genetic diseases. − The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)’s recent approval
of three mRNA vaccines (Spikevax, Comirnaty, and mRESVIA) for COVID-19
and respiratory syncytial virus prevention significantly enhanced
research efforts in this field. , Furthermore, several
other mRNA-based therapeutics have been developed and are currently
under clinical evaluation for preventing and treating various diseases. , 
However, the clinical success of these transformative therapeutics
relies heavily on developing safe, effective, and highly selective
delivery systems for targeted mRNA delivery to specific tissues and
cell types. − LNPs are the most advanced and clinically approved
platforms developed to this end. , − Typical LNPs are formulated using ionizable lipids, phospholipids,
cholesterol, and polyethylene glycol (PEG)-conjugated lipids. , Among these components, ionizable lipids play a critical role in
encapsulating, protecting, and transfecting the mRNA cargo into cells.
Ionizable lipids are characterized by their environment-responsive
behavior. Indeed, they assume a positive charge at acidic pH, a feature
that promotes their interactions with negatively charged mRNAs during
LNP formation and that can destabilize cellular membranes, facilitating
endosomal escape after LNPs undergo cellular internalization. On the
other hand, at physiological pH, ionizable lipids retain a neutral
charge that is useful to minimize the particle’s interactions
with anionic cell membranes, limiting LNP toxicity and immunogenicity,
as well as improving their pharmacokinetic properties. The structure of ionizable lipids typically
consists of a hydrophilic headgroup, two hydrophobic tails, and a
linker connecting these components ( A). In general,
the amino/hydroxyl groups have been used as hydrophilic head groups,
linoleyl, and branched aliphatic carbon chains have been used as hydrophobic
tails, and ester bonds have been often selected as linkers to design
ionizable lipids for efficient mRNA delivery. 
 Despite rapid progress
in optimizing LNP formulations, delivering
mRNA beyond the liver and to specific cells is still considered a
significant challenge as the majority of mRNA-LNPs still accumulate
in the liver upon systemic administration. Several efforts have focused
on developing mRNA-LNPs using surface-modifying active targeting moieties
such as peptides, antibodies (or their fragments), and natural ligands. − However, modifying the surface of LNPs by adding targeting moieties
can require extensive effort in recombinant protein expression or
chemical conjugation and subsequent purification, resulting in a very
cumbersome process that is not easily scalable, and could also lead
to LNP instability and immunogenicity issues. , 
Another important breakthrough includes the development of
organ-selective
LNPs for tissue-specific mRNA delivery obtained by modifying the LNPs’
zeta potential (ζ) with charged lipid molecules. − This strategy is conceptually simpler but is based on radical changes
in the LNPs’ composition that might require additional characterization.
A different approach is based on pretreating the patient with “decoy”
nanoparticles to saturate the liver’s clearing capacity; however,
this requires the administration of a high amount of decoy particles,
leading to safety concerns. , 
Considering the
unique accessibility granted by lung anatomy, the
use of topical delivery routes such as nebulization or intratracheal
instillation has also been employed for direct delivery to the lungs. However, these approaches require the careful
modulation of the LNP composition that would enable them to reach
into the deep segments of the respiratory tract and adhere to the
alveoli, and the bioavailability of the currently used formulations
is still limited. 
Other than these
strategies, a few reports have shown that the
structure of ionizable lipids could lead to relevant changes in the
resulting LNP organ and cellular tropism. − For instance, piperazine-containing lipids have demonstrated preferential
delivery to a wide range of immune cell populations in both the liver
and spleen, as well as various cell types in the placenta. , Furthermore, we recently reported cell-type-specific mRNA delivery
to CD11bhi macrophages using specific ionizable lipids,
without any additional targeting moiety. Another interesting study showed the change of organ selectivity
from the liver to the lung by using ester and amide-containing tails. Recently, multicomponent synthetic approaches
have been shown to enable spleen-selective mRNA delivery. , These detailed studies highlight how the structure of ionizable
lipids plays a significant role in governing the delivery of mRNA
to specific organs and cell types. However, predicting the specificity
of new ionizable lipids based solely on their chemical structure is
still a challenge and requires extensive study, and the impact of
different lipid linkers on LNP stability, biodistribution, and mRNA
delivery remains poorly understood. , 
To address
this knowledge gap, we designed and synthesized a library
of 11 ionizable lipids using different biodegradable linkers, including
ester, carbonate, amide, and urea moieties ( B). By extensively screening the LNPs produced
with these new lipids, we demonstrated how amide and urea linker-containing
lipids resulted in enhanced chemical stability under storage, making
them suitable for large-scale production and formulation. Furthermore,
we gained insights into the structure–activity relationship
of ionizable lipids, showing how the presence of amide and urea groups
in the lipid can fine-tune the LNPs’ pKa, resulting in improved LNP lung tropism. Finally, we showed
how LNPs formulated with lung-targeting lipids improve the therapeutic
efficacy of mRNA encoding for the pseudomonas exotoxin A (mPE-A) in
reducing lung tumor metastasis progression compared to particles containing
the commercially available SM-102 lipid, resulting in improved survival.
This work provides innovative insights that are useful for the
future design of organ-specific LNP formulations to achieve selective
mRNA delivery.

## Results and Discussion

## Ionizable Lipid Design,
Characterization, and Stability
Our primary objective was
to design and synthesize new biocompatible
ionizable lipids for extrahepatic delivery of mRNA. Over the past
few years, we have developed several ionizable lipids for various
RNA-based therapeutic and vaccine applications. , − Lipid 14 stood out as one of the top-performing lipids in our library,
with its ester-branched aliphatic tails enabling the development of
COVID-19 and bacterial vaccines. − However, lipid 14 could
be susceptible to hydrolytic degradation in ethanol and aqueous environments
due to its ester linker, which hinders its utility following long-term
storage. Thus, the use of different linkers could provide more stability
to the structure of the ionizable lipid. Therefore, keeping lipid
14 with its backbone, we designed a combinatorial library of ionizable
lipids using different biodegradable linkers ( B). In particular, for lipid 14 and lipid
34, an ester linker was used, whereas a reverse-ester linker was employed
for lipid 32 and lipid 38. In the case of lipid 33 and lipid 39, a
carbonate linker was selected, while an amide linker was used for
lipid 34 and lipid 40. For lipid 35 and lipid 41, a urea linker was
employed, whereas a reverse-amide linker was used for lipid 36 and
lipid 42. All lipids were synthesized using standard organic synthesis
procedures and underwent characterization by NMR and mass spectroscopic
techniques (see the Supporting Information).
Upon synthesizing the lipids, we investigated their stability
in different solvents. To this end, we dissolved the lipids in either
ethanol or a water/ethanol mixture (1:3) and monitored their stability
for 3 months using a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
device equipped with a charged aerosol detector (CAD). We observed
that while the amide (lipid 34), urea (lipid 35), and reverse-amide
(lipid 36) linkers were stable and did not undergo hydrolysis in both
solvent systems, the ester (lipid 14), reverse-ester (lipid 32), and
carbonate (lipid 33) linkers rapidly degraded in the water–ethanol
mixture as compared ethanol ( C,D, respectively).

## LNP Preparation and Characterization
LNPs’ composition
was optimized by performing a small design of experiment (DoE)-based
screening. Briefly, different lipid critical process parameters (CPPs)
and critical quality attributes (CQAs) were used to generate a custom
design (Figure S1A) containing 20 formulations.
After formulating and characterizing these LNPs, statistical analysis
elucidated how the CPPs influencing LNPs’ features were the
different lipid proportions as well as the ionizable lipids’
identity (Figure S1B). We used these CPPs
to interpolate a mathematical model correlating them to CQAs and simulated
10,000 theoretical formulations using a Monte Carlo simulation. Among
these LNPs, a series of thresholds were applied to select the formulations
with the highest theoretical performance (top 10%). As shown in Figure S1C, the best-performing theoretical formulations
presented a very similar composition, with the average composition
being ionizable lipid, cholesterol, DSPC, and PEG-DMG in molar ratios
of 40:48.5:10:1.5, respectively. Thus, LNPs were formulated with these
molar ratios using the synthesized lipids. As model cargo, firefly
luciferase mRNA (mLuc) was encapsulated using the NanoAssemblr microfluidic
mixing device, as described in the Experimental Section.
The
pKa of LNPs formulated with different
lipids was also estimated by using a 6-(p-toluidino)-2-naphthalenesulfonic
acid (TNS)-based fluorometric assay. Most of the new lipids had a
pKa between 5.9 and 6.5, which is considered
suitable for most ionizable lipid-based LNP formulations (Figure S2). Interestingly,
LNPs formulated with lipids containing either urea or reverse-amide
linkers (lipids 35, 36, 41, and 42) had a pKa close to or higher than 7, suggesting that the number and
orientation of the amide linkers can influence the lipid environmental
response.
Noticeable variations were observed in the hydrodynamic
diameter
and zeta potential (ζ) of the produced LNPs ( E,F). The N-methylpiperazine head-containing lipids (lipid 37–lipid 42)
yielded higher-sized LNPs as compared to dimethylamine head lipids
(lipid 14 and lipid 32–lipid 36). Also, LNPs formulated with
ester, reverse-ester, and carbonate linker-containing lipids (lipid
14, lipid 32, lipid 33, and lipid 37–39) had a negative ζ,
whereas LNPs consisting of amide, urea, and reverse-amide-containing
lipids had a positive ζ (lipid 34–lipid 36 and lipid
40–lipid 42). The polydispersity index (PDI) was less than
0.1 for all LNPs, making the formulations monodisperse. The encapsulation
efficiency was >95% for all the LNP formulations ( G), and mRNA encapsulation
as well as retention of its integrity was further confirmed by agarose
gel electrophoresis (Figure S3).

## In Vitro
LNP Transfection Efficiency
Upon confirming
the LNPs’ physio-chemical properties, we screened the formulations’
transfection efficiency in HeLa, RAW 264.7, and HepG2 cell lines by
encapsulating mLuc as model cargo ( ). HepG2 and RAW 264.7 cells were selected
to represent the liver and the mononuclear phagocytic system as compartments
that are often targeted by nanoparticles after systemic administration.
In addition, HeLa cells were selected as a more general, fibroblast-like
cell line.
 Looking at individual lipids, in HeLa cells ( A), all of the LNPs
formulated with amide
or urea linkers were the best-performing ones. Conversely, in RAW
264.7 cells ( B), the best-performing LNPs were the ones formulated with lipid
36, lipid 38, and lipids 40–42, while HepG2 cells ( C) were transfected
best by lipids 33–36 and lipids 40–42.
However,
to elucidate the structure–activity relationship
of the new ionizable lipids, it is important to account for how these
molecules can influence the LNP features, which in turn can change
the particles’ biological behavior, constituting noise factors.
Thus, accounting for the effect of ionizable lipids on particles’
properties such as size, apparent pKa,
and ζ would help us to discern the direct effect of these molecules
on the LNP activity.
Since it is technically challenging to
control for these variables
in an experimental setting, we assessed the possible correlations
between LNP size, ζ, and Luc signal from the tested cell lines,
demonstrating how there was no correlation between the LNP size and
their Luc signal in vitro (Pearson’s correlation coefficient
(PCC) < 0.4 for all cell lines, Figure S4A).
However, the data demonstrated a positive correlation between
the
ζ and the Luc signal in HeLa and HepG2 cells (PCC = 0.69 and
0.65; p = 0.0132 and 0.0220, respectively) with positively
charged LNPs (lipids 34, 35, 36, 40, 41, 42) showing slightly higher
transfection efficacy (Figure S4B). These
observations are reinforced by a similar positive correlation between
these two cell lines and the LNPs’ pKa (PCC = 0.74 and 0.72 and p = 0.0064 and
0.0079, respectively, Figure S4C). This
can be explained by the higher electrostatic interaction of positive
LNPs with the cellular surface, leading to higher uptake. Interestingly, all the lipids with N-methyl-piperazine groups yielded particles with slightly higher
transfection efficiency, although the difference was not significant
compared to the dimethylamine head lipids (Figure S4D–F).
Overall, these in vitro studies allow
us to elucidate some fundamental
interactions between LNPs and different cell lines, providing an inkling
for further in vivo studies.

## In Vivo Screening of LNPs for mRNA Delivery
To test
these ionizable lipids in vivo, C57BL/6J mice were systemically injected
with a volume of particles corresponding to 10 μg of mLuc per
animal via retro-orbital injection. The luminescence signal in major
organs was assessed after 6 h ( A). Once again, to account for the presence of possible
correlations between LNP features and organ biodistribution, we performed
the same correlation analysis discussed in the previous section.
 Notably, the size of LNPs was reversely correlated with the liver
Luc signal, underlining how smaller particles tended to accumulate
more in this tissue (PCC = −0.6741, p = 0.0162, Figure S5A). Conversely, LNPs with positive ζ
(lipids 34–36 and lipids 40–42) showed higher luminescence
in the lung (PCC = 0.6345, p = 0.0267) and lower
luminescence in the liver (PCC = −0.5815, p = 0.0474) and kidneys (PCC = −0.7378, p =
0.0062, Figure S5B). Furthermore, the apparent
TNS-measured LNPs’ pKa values had
a strong positive correlation with the lungs’ expression (PCC
= 0.8417, p = 0.0006) and a negative correlation
with the kidneys’ signal (PCC = −0.6978, p = 0.0116, Figure S5C).
When looking
at the possible correlations between in vitro and
in vivo results, it is interesting to note how the Luc signal in RAW
264.7 cells and the one detected in the animal spleens were positively
correlated with each other (PCC = 0.7746, p = 0.0031, Figure S5D). From a biological standpoint, this
observation could be attributed to the presence of phagocytic cells
in the spleen that have somewhat similar behavior to the RAW 264.7
macrophage-like cells. It is also important to note how both the behaviors
of HeLa and HepG2 hepatocyte cells were positively correlated with
the lung signal (PCC = 0.8843 and 0.8428 and p =
0.0006 and p = 0.0001, respectively, Figure S5E,F). Ultimately, these correlations
can be easily explained by the LNP positive ζ that increases
both cellular expression and lung expression.
Despite these
correlations, the positive ζ LNPs formulated
using ionizable lipids with amide and urea linkers behaved heterogeneously
for both head groups. Lipids 40–42 were not well tolerated
by the animals, and some of them displayed obvious behavioral signs
of discomfort and had to be sacrificed soon after injection for ethical
reasons. This acute adverse reaction could be attributed to the combination
of larger LNP size (above 200 nm) derived from the N-methylpiperazine headgroup and positive ζ, which could have
resulted in LNP aggregation after injection, causing embolism in the
mice. Thus, lipids 40–42 were excluded from further studies.
The other positively charged ionizable lipids (lipids 34–36)
were well tolerated by animals and showed high lung specificity, with
lipids 35 and 36 showing both a slightly higher lung signal ( C) and high lung/liver
and lung/spleen ratios when compared with ester, reverse-ester, and
carbonate linkers ( F,G). Since the particles formulated with these three lipids
had analogous size and surface charge, the difference between lipid
34 and lipids 35 and 36 can be strictly attributed to the lipid structures
themselves. Indeed, the presence of amide groups in the lipid linker
resulted in increased LNPs ζ and, therefore, lung transfection.
However, lung tropism is further improved by either positioning this
nitrogen closer to the dimethyl-amine head (lipids 36) or having nitrogen
on both sides of the linker (lipid 35), suggesting the nuanced effect
of even minor structural changes on LNP tropism. Thus, lipids 35 and
36 were selected as lead lipids for delivery of mRNA to the lungs.
Lipid 33, despite showing a similar Luc signal in the liver ( D) to lipid 14, displayed
much lower signals in other organs, especially the lungs and spleen,
resulting in a higher specificity in the liver, as highlighted by
the low lungs/liver and the high liver/spleen ratios ( F,H). Comparing the behavior
of lipid 33 to lipids 14, 32, and 37–39, for each of these
lipids with dimethylamine heads, their N-methyl-piperazine
equivalent always resulted in a lower liver signal ( D). This corroborates the effect
of LNP size on liver biodistribution since all the piperazine lipids
yielded bigger particles than their counterparts. Similarly, lipid
38 displayed higher spleen specificity in the form of a slightly better
spleen luminescence ( E) and Lung/spleen ratio ( G). Thus, lipids 33 and 38 were selected,
respectively, as lead lipids for the liver and spleen.
It is
especially notable to observe how the combination of a carbonate
linker and an N-methylpiperazine head in lipid 39
seems to abolish lipid activity in all the tested cell lines and organs,
making it the worst-performing lipid. The mechanism behind this could
warrant further investigation and the study of additional organs.
Finally, the heart and kidney signal measured was barely detectable
compared to the background radiance, and no clear trend was visible
among ionizable lipids (Figure S6A,B, respectively).
As presented in Figure S7, in which
the different lipids are arranged in a ternary plot based on their
different proportions of organ radiance, also allows us to evidence
some clear trends: all the lipids with ester, reverse-ester, or carbonate
linkers are mostly clustered between the liver and spleen, with the
dimethylamine lipids among these being the ones oriented toward the
liver while the N-methyl-piperazine clustered toward
the spleen. All the lipids having amide, reverse-amide, or urea linkers
were distributed between the lungs and spleen, with the N-methyl-piperazine lipid accumulation proportionally higher in the
spleen compared to the dimethylamine lipids. Furthermore, this graphical
summary helps us observe how lipid 33, lipids 35–36, and lipid
38 have the highest proportional signal for the liver, lungs, and
spleen, respectively, since they are the ones closer to the vertex
of each organ, representing higher luminescence signal. These data
make them the most selective lipids in our library for these tissues,
confirming them as lead compounds to deliver mRNA toward them for
further investigation.
Taken together, these results show how
small differences in the
linker structure of ionizable lipids can have radical effects on the
resulting particles’ transfection and tropism in different
organs.

## LNPs’ Cellular Transfection Profile and Biodistribution
In Vivo
We next investigated the cellular specificity of
LNPs’ transfection formulated with the selected leads lipid
35 and lipid 36. To elucidate this, we formulated LNPs with Cre recombinase
mRNA (mCre) and injected them in Ai9-tdTomato mice as previously described
(Figure S8). , As can be
seen in Figure S9A,B, the mCre-LNPs displayed
analogous size distribution and mRNA encapsulation compared to their
mLuc-loaded equivalents. We quantified the functional mRNA delivery
as a percentage of tdTomato+ cells in different organs
72 h post-systemic administration ( A). Using flow cytometry, we quantified successful
mRNA transfection and expression in different cell types, including
myeloid immune cells (CD45+ CD326– CD11b+), dendritic cells (CD45+ CD326– CD11c+), endothelial cells (CD45– CD11b– CD326– CD31+), and epithelial
cells (CD45– CD326+).
 In concurrence with the
in vivo mLuc expression data, the lungs
of mice treated with lipids 35 and 36 resulted in significantly more
tdTomato+ cells than the lungs of mice injected with lipids
14, 33, and 38. Comparing lipids 35 and 36 for their transfection
efficiency in different lung cells, we observed that lipid 35 efficiently
reached nonimmune cells, with >60% of endothelial cells and ∼40%
of epithelial cells expressing tdTomato ( B,C). Albeit to a lesser extent, this lipid
also showed higher transfection levels in myeloid cells and dendritic
cells ( D,E).
It should be noted that despite lipids 35 and 36 having similar physicochemical
properties and mLuc expression profiles, lipid 35 displayed a significantly
higher transfection efficiency in all the analyzed lung cell populations.
The lung specificity of lipids 35 and 36 is further confirmed by the
complete absence of tdTomato+ cells in the spleen and the
liver (Figure S10E–M) of mice injected
with these LNPs. Therefore, we decided to focus our efforts on further
assessment of lipids 35 and 36 as lead lipids for mRNA delivery to
the lungs. However, lipids 33 and 38 did not confirm their liver and
spleen selectively in this model (Figure S10).
When comparing the mLuc results with the Cre-tdTomato murine
models,
lipids 35 and 36 strongly validated the previous mLuc results by showing
efficient transfection in all of the lung cell populations analyzed,
with lipid 35 showing a remarkably higher transfection compared to
all other formulations and across all of the lung cells.
When
focusing on the lead formulations, LNPs with higher pKa resulted in LNPs with higher ζ, which
in turn appeared to have higher lung tropism. Indeed, the lung transfection
observed in vivo mLuc expression starts to significantly increase
only for LNPs with pKa values above 6.5
and seems to reach a plateau for mLuc transfection of the lungs at
a pKa of 7.2 (lipid 36, E). However, when comparing
the mLuc results with tdTomato expression, the percentage of positive
cells steeply increased among cell populations for LNPs containing
lipid 35 (pKa = 7.6), compared to ones
formulated with lipid 36. Thus, there seems to be a threshold value
for the pKa above which the transfection
efficiency in lung cells significantly improved as reported previously. 
We also analyzed the biodistribution of
LNPs loaded with fluorescently
labeled RNA, assessing the possible correlations between the transfection
efficiency observed in the tdTomato model and simple particle accumulation.
In this instance, we investigated lipid 14 as a benchmark and lipids
35 and 36 as our main leads for lung targeting. As summarized in Figure S11A–D, lipids 35 and 36 accumulated
more than lipid 14 in all the lung cell populations analyzed but with
a percentage of positive cells that was significantly lower compared
to the tdTomato model. Furthermore, unlike the lung data in , there was no clear
difference between lipids 35 and 36. Thus, lipid 35 and lipid 36 particles
had similar lung targeting capacity. However, lipid 35 displayed higher
transfection efficiency in tdTomato animals, suggesting a possible
alternative mechanism behind lipid 35 specificity that is not strictly
dependent on particle accumulation. When considering instead the LNP
biodistribution in the liver (Figure S11E–H) and spleen (Figure S11I–M), we
observed an overall similar accumulation for all three lipids, with
lipids 35 and 36 accumulating slightly more in the liver endothelial
cells, and at the same time significantly less in the spleen B-cells.
Despite these small differences, the different ionizable lipids yielded
LNPs with overall similar biodistribution, in contrast with the data
in Figure S10. This reinforces the possible
contribution of a different, perhaps intracellular, mechanism behind
the observed transfection selectivity. Furthermore, the comparable
liver deposition allows us to exclude first-pass lung accumulation
as the mechanism behind transfection in these organs.
Taken
together, these results underline how minor changes in the
structure of ionizable lipids can radically affect the resulting LNP
organ transfection. In particular, the addition of nitrogen atoms
to the lipid linker enables the fine-tuning of the LNPs pKa, which can be leveraged to achieve not only high levels
of protein expressions selectively in the lungs without using additional
targeting moieties but also a more widespread transfection across
all the major lung cell populations. Based on these results, we selected
lipid 35 as the definitive lead for lung targeting.

## Safety Profile
of Lipid 35
Focusing on the best-performing
lipid 35, we extensively tested its biocompatibility after a single
bolus intravenous injection. To this end, a volume of LNPs equivalent
to 10 μg of mRNA was injected through the retro-orbital vein.
To assess a possible acute immune response to LNP injection, mice
blood was collected at 2 and 24 h after injection and the concentrations
of Monocyte Chemoattractant Protein-1 (MCP-1), interleukin 6 (IL-6),
tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), and interleukin 10 (IL-10)
in mice plasma were measured by ELISA ( A). As a control, we selected the clinically
approved SM-102 ionizable lipid.
 At 2 h postinjection, all cytokines were slightly elevated
in the
serum. Pro-inflammatory MCP-1, IL-6, and TNF-α were similarly
elevated compared to the control SM-102 ( B,D,F). The elevation was comparable between
lipid 14 and lipid 35 and resulted in significantly higher levels
of IL-6 compared to SM-102 but not for any other cytokine. Conversely,
the immunomodulatory cytokine IL-10 was only slightly induced by lipid
35 ( H). Nevertheless,
the increase in serum cytokines was transient as all cytokines dropped
to the level of untreated animals within 24 h postinjection, with
only a very small amount of MCP-1 detectable ( C,E,G,I).
After 24 h of injection,
we also measured the concentration of
key serum markers, including alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and liver
transaminases: serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine
transaminase (ALT). All markers were comparable between the untreated
mice, SM-102, and lipid 35-treated animals. AST and ALT were slightly
not significantly increased by lipid 14 ( J–M).
Finally, we investigated
whether any tissue damage is caused by
the different lipids in the lungs, the livers, and the spleens of
injected animals. To this end, we harvested these organs 24 h post-systemic
administration and performed histological assessment using hematoxylin/eosin-stained
sections. As shown in N, no visible sign of tissue inflammation, infiltration of
leukocytes, necrosis, or fibrosis was detectable in any treatment
group.
Taken together, these results highlight that lipid 35
after bolus
injection is well tolerated with no liver or other major organ damage
detected, as confirmed by blood markers and histological analysis.

## Assessment of Lipid 35-LNPs as an mRNA Carrier in a Murine Model
of Metastatic Lung Cancer
The therapeutic potential of LNPs
formulated with lipid 35 was tested in a murine model of metastatic
lung cancer. To this end, C57BL/6J mice were intravenously injected
with B16F10.9 melanoma cells (as detailed in the Experimental Section
in A). LNPs
loaded with mRNA encoding for domain III of the pseudomonas exotoxin
A domain (mmPE), a toxic subunit produced by the bacteria Pseudomonas aeruginosa were systemically administrated
(as detailed in the ). As a control group for these experiments, we
used lipid SM-102 as a commercial benchmark ionizable lipid formulated
with mmPE.
 We first assessed the mmPE-A-loaded LNPs’
(mPE-A LNP) tolerability
after systemic administration. Interestingly, the treatment with SM-102
mPE-A LNPs caused an increase in the serum levels of AST, ALT, and
ALP 24 h of injection ( B,C and S12A) that remained elevated
at 72h, possibly because of accumulation of particles in the liver.
However, enzyme levels in lipid 35 mPE-A LNP-treated individuals,
despite being elevated in the first 24 h, went down to baseline levels
after 72 h from treatment, and ALP levels were not affected by lipid
35. Similarly, blood chemistry 72 h after injection (Figure S12B–E) displayed a slight increase of total
protein and urea levels only for SM-102 mPE-A LNP. This could be attributed
to the increased lung specificity of lipid 35, which reduces its off-target
accumulation compared to the benchmark and results in improved tolerance
of the treatment.
Next, the therapeutic efficacy of the LNPs
was assessed. As shown
in C, after
sacrifice, tumor-bearing animals treated with lipid 35 LNPs loaded
with the mock mLuc mRNA did not show any decrease in lung weight or
number of metastases. However, treatment with mmPE-loaded LNPs did
result in a decrease of lung weight for both SM-102 (124 ± 17%)
and lipid 35, which was slightly, albeit not significantly, more effective
than the benchmark (69 ± 7%). Similarly, the number of metastases
was decreased further by lipid 35 (12 ± 2) than SM-102 (21 ±
5) compared to both untreated (47 ± 6) and mLuc LNP-treated mice
(42 ± 9), albeit the difference was not statistically significant.
When animal survival was assessed after treatment ( D), both SM-102 and lipid 35
mmPE LNPs displayed a protective effect. However, animals injected
with lipid 35 mm PE LNPs had a remarkably higher median survival of
34 days compared to the 24 days of those injected with SM-102 mmPE-LNPs.
Taken together, these results show how the use of lung-targeting
lipid 35 can be translated to a significant improvement in the therapeutic
profile of LNPs.

## LNP Stability under Storage
To determine
whether lipid
35 provided LNPs with improved colloidal stability and reliable transfection
efficiency, we tested LNPs when stored in mild conditions and dispersed
in 1× PBS at 4 °C. As summarized in A, all of the tested LNPs retained their
average size distribution over 2 months of storage. The PDI of lipid
14 gradually increased over time, while lipid 35 showed only a small
increase in PDI (around 0.1) on day 63 ( B). Thus, positively charged lipid 35 provided
a high ζ, preventing LNP aggregation by electrostatic repulsion.
The ζ of the LNPs formulated with lipid 14 decreased over time,
going from an average of −6 mV to almost −20 mV at day
63 ( C). This
phenomenon could be attributed to the aggregation of LNP. Of note,
there were no changes in the mRNA encapsulation efficiency in both
tested formulations ( D).
 In summary, these results indicate that using lipid 35 provides
the resulting LNPs with colloidal stability. Combined with the longer
chemical stability discussed above, this lipid appears very suitable
to produce a stable LNP.

## Conclusions
In the present work,
we performed a combinatorial screening on
ionizable lipids with different biodegradable linkers with the aim
of formulating LNPs for organ-specific mRNA delivery. To the best
of our knowledge, most studies on ionizable lipid design so far have
focused on the comparison of different head groups or on using hydrophobic
lipid tails with different structures, overlooking the linkers as
a potential space for ionizable lipid optimization.
After ionizable
lipids with different biodegradable linkers were
synthesized, their chemical stability was assessed in ethanol or a
water and ethanol mixture, showing how amide, reverse-amide, and urea
linkers provided these molecules with increased stability.
Subsequently,
LNPs were formulated using the new lipids and were
extensively characterized, highlighting how the structure of ionizable
lipids could have a stark effect on LNP features. Specifically, when
introducing N-methyl-piperazine head groups, the
particles displayed larger size compared to their relative formulations
with dimethyl-amine heads. Furthermore, LNPs formulated with lipids
presenting amide, reverse-amide, or urea linkers were positively charged
at neutral pH. Nevertheless, all LNPs were homogeneous in size and
had optimal mRNA encapsulation efficiency. The in vitro results yielded
some evidence in favor of the use of positively charged lipids, most
likely due to improved electrostatic interaction with cell membranes.
These trends partially translated the in vivo results, in which
mLuc transfection was especially efficient in the lungs for the amide-
and urea linker-containing lipids, especially for lipids 35 and 36.
Conversely, the carbonate lipid 33 resulted in higher liver-specific
mLuc expression, and the N-methyl-piperazine head
and reverse ester structure of lipid 38 resulted in selective spleen
transfection.
Notably, despite being very structurally similar
to lipid 36, lipid
35 displayed a much higher transfection efficiency in the lungs of
Cre-TdTomato mice, possibly due to the pivotal effect of the LNPs
pKa on their in vivo biodistribution.
Leveraging this lung tropism, we demonstrated how lipid 35 mmPE-LNPs
induced a reduction of tumor burden and remarkably increased the survival
of lung metastasis-bearing mice.
Despite the promising results
discussed, further studies would
be required to elucidate the mechanism behind the observed trends
and the potential of lipid 35. In particular, the observed relevance
of pKa in radically increasing the LNP
lung transfection efficiency across different cell populations suggests
a common, underlying mechanism driving this phenomenon that is not
both independent from LNP accumulation and specific cell lineage and
therefore likely receptor-independent. Thus, we hypothesized that
a higher pKa could lead to improved transfection
by improving intracellular trafficking and endosomal escape. On the
other hand, the presence of the amide end urea linkers makes the ionizable
lipids more resistant to hydrolysis but also slows down their biodegradation.
Thus, further studies could address the long-term biocompatibility
of lipid 35, with particular attention to repeated administrations
that could lead to the accumulation of this lipid in the organism.
This study lays the groundwork for further investigations into
the structure of ionizable lipids to achieve more specific organ transfection
efficiency with particular attention to the molecular and cellular
mechanisms involved in these processes.

## Experimental
Section

## Chemicals and Cell Culture
1,2-Distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DSPC, cat. no. 850365P-1g), cholesterol
(cat. no. 700000P-5g), and 1,2-dimyristoyl-rac-glycero-3-methoxypolyethylene glycol-2000 (PEG-DMG 2000, cat. no. 880151P-5g)
were purchased from Avanti Polar lipids. Ethanol absolute (cat. no.
000525052100) and 2-propanol (cat. no. 001626052100) were provided
by Bio-Lab. DPBS 1× was purchased from Gibco (Cat# 14190–169),
PBS 10X from Hylabs (Cat# BP507/500D), DEPC-treated water from BioPrep
(Cat# DPH20-500 ML), and 0.5 M citrate buffer solution from Thermo
Scientific (pH = 4.5, Cat# J60024.AK).
Fetal bovine serum was
purchased from Biowest (FBS, heat-inactivated, EU origin, Cat# S140H-500). l-Glutamine 200 mM (100×, cat. no. 25030-024), 0.25% trypsin–EDTA
(1×, cat. no. 25200-114), penicillin–streptomycin solution
(10,000 U/mL of penicillin +10,000 μg/mL of streptomycin, cat.
no. 15140-122), DMEM (1×, cat. no. 41965-039), and RPMI Medium
1640 (1×, cat. no. 21875-034) were provided by Gibco.
RAW264.7
cells (cat. no. TIB-71), HeLa cells (cat. no. CCL-2),
and HepG2 cells (cat. no. HB-8065) were provided by ATCC. Cell cultures
were maintained in an incubator at 37 °C in a controlled atmosphere
(5% CO2, 95% humidity) using the culture media required
by the producer using T25 and T75 flasks.

## Ionizable Lipid Synthesis
See the Supporting Information.

## mRNAs
Chemically modified mRNAs encoding firefly luciferase
(62 kDa) and Cre recombinase (39 kDa) were provided by BioNTech or
purchased from TriLink Biotechnologies. Custom mRNA encoding mmPE-A
was acquired from Trilink with the following open reading frame:
5′-ATGgccgaagaagctttcctcggcgacggcggcgacgtcagcttcagcacccgcggcacgcagaactggacggtgg
agcggctgctccaggcgcaccgccaactggaggagcgcggctatgtgttcgtcggctaccacggcaccttcctcgaagc
ggcgcaaagcatcgtcttcggcggggtgcgcgcgcgcagccaggacctcgacgcgatctggcgcggtttctatatcgcc
ggcgatccggcgctggcctacggctacgcccaggaccaggaacccgacgcacgcggccggatccgcaacggtgccct
gctgcgggtctatgtgccgcgctcgagcctgccgggcttctaccgcaccagcctgaccctggccgcgccggaggcggc
gggcgaggtcgaacggctgatcggccatccgctgccgctgcgcctggacgccatcaccggccccgaggaggaaggcg
ggcgcctggagaccattctcggctggccgctggccgagcgcaccgtggtgattccctcggcgatccccaccgacccgcg
caacgtcggcggcgacctcgacccgtccagcatccccgacaaggaacaggcgatcagcgccctgccggactacgcca
gccagcccggcaaaccgccgcgcgaggacctgaagTAA-3′

## Lipid Stability
The stability of lipids was assessed
by HPLC (Agilent, 1260 Infinity II) equipped with Thermo Fisher’s
CAD using a Poroshell 120 EC-C18 (2.7 μm, 3 × 150 mm) column
following the reverse phase method (Solvent-A: 0.1% TFA in 55% MeOH,
15% IPA and 30% water; solvent-B: 0.1% TFA in 70% MeOH and 30% IPA).
Briefly, 3 mg of lipid was dissolved in 1 mL of ethanol and a water–ethanol
mixture (1:3) solvent and then filtered into Agilent scintillation
vials. Three μL of the sample was injected into the HPLC-CAD
instrument each time. The study was carried out over a period of 90
days at specific intervals (days 0, 1, 2, 3, 7, 14, 21, 28, 35, 60,
and 90). The samples were stored at room temperature throughout the
study. The stability study graph was plotted by taking time (days)
on the x-axis and the percentage of lipid purity
on the y-axis.

## Design of Experiment-Based
Screening
The screening
was designed by using JMP Pro. The CPP ranges selected were: 30 to
45% ionizable lipid molar proportion; 20% to 45% cholesterol molar
proportion, 5% to 45% helper lipid molar proportion; PEG-DMG/PEG/OME
ratio from 0 to 1; total lipid concentrations between 1 mM and 7 mM;
formulation temperature between 20 and 60 °C; as possible previously
published ionizable lipids; as helper lipids DSPC or DOPE, and an
N/P ratio between 5 and 12 (Figure S1A).
These ranges were used to create a custom design with 20 experimental
runs, including center points and repeated measures. The selected
CQAs were the particle size, PDI, and zeta potential measured by DLS,
mRNA encapsulation measured by RiboGreen, as well as in vitro and
in vivo Luc expression. After formulating and characterizing these
formulations, JMP Pro was used to understand which CPPs were statistically
significant in determining the CQAs. Then, the critical CPPs were
selected to simulate in silico 104 possible formulations
and their relative projected features and transfection efficiency
using Monte Carlo Simulation. Finally, ad hoc quality thresholds were
applied (Figure S1C) to select a small
range of possible optimal formulations.

## LNP Formulation
LNPs were formulated using a NanoAssemblr
Benchtop device (catalog no. NIT0055) equipped with a heating block
(catalog no. NIT0026) and relative cartridges (catalog no. NIS0009,
Precision Nanosystems). The lipids were dissolved in absolute ethanol
and kept at 55 °C. mRNA was diluted in a 25 mM citrate buffer
(pH 4.5, Thermo Scientific, Cat# J60024.AK). To prepare the LNP organic
phase, lipids were mixed in the following molar ratios: 40% ionizable
lipid, 48.5% cholesterol, 1.5% PEG-DMG, and 10% DSPC to a final concentration
of 6 mM. The N/P ratio of ionizable lipids to mRNA was 9. The lipid
and aqueous phases were loaded in the NanoAssemblr in 1 and 3 mL syringes,
respectively. The particles were assembled at 45 °C, using a
flow rate ratio (FRR) of 3:1 (aqueous: ethanol), a total flow rate
(TFR) of 12 mL/min, using a pre- and postwaste of 50 μL. Particles
were subsequently dialyzed using MAXI GeBaFlex-tubes, 14 kDa MWCO
(Gene Bio-Application LTD, cat. no. D050-100), against 1× PBS
(Hylabs, cat. no. BP507/500D), which was replaced after 4 h. Particles
were recovered after dialysis the next day.

## Size and Zeta-Potential
Analysis of LNPs
The nanosize
and ζ-potential of prepared mRNA-LNPs were analyzed by dynamic
light scattering (DLS) using a Malvern Zetasizer (Malvern Instruments).
Briefly, mRNA-LNPs were diluted in double-distilled water (1:50, volume
ratio) and PBS (1:50, volume ratio) for ζ-potential and size
measurements, respectively.

## RNA Encapsulation and Quantification
The Quant-iT RiboGreen
RNA assay kit (Life Technologies) was used to measure the mRNA encapsulation
in LNP. In summary, 2 μL of LNPs was diluted in a final volume
of 350 μL of TE buffer (20 mM EDTA, 10 μM Tris–HCL)
with or without Triton X-100 (0.5%, Sigma-Aldrich). The samples with
Triton were incubated at 55 °C for 5 min. Following this, 100
μL of each sample was added in triplicate to a black 96-well
plate (Costar, Corning), and 100 μL of TE buffer (0.5% v/v,
RiboGreen reagent) was added to each well. The fluorescence was detected
using a microplate reader (Biotek Industries) following the manufacturer’s
protocol. To estimate the percentage of encapsulated RNA, was used
1 where E is the
encapsulation
percentage of mRNA; FluoLNPs and FluoLNPTr are the fluorescence signals
without and with Triton, respectively; Blank and BlankTr are the fluorescence
signals of blanks without and with Triton, respectively.

## pKa Measurement
As previously
described, the pKa values of LNPs were
measured using the 2-(p-toluidino)-6-naphthalenesulfonic
acid (TNS) assay. Briefly, the master
buffer was prepared using 10 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid (HEPES), 10 mM 4-morpholineethanesulfonic acid (MES), 10 mM ammonium
acetate, and 130 mM sodium chloride (NaCl). Sixteen buffers with pH
ranging from 2.5 to 10 were prepared using 1.0 M sodium hydroxide
and 1.0 M hydrochloric acid based on the master buffer. The TNS reagent
was prepared as a 0.1 mM stock solution in Milli-Q water. 90 μL
of each buffer was added in triplicate to a black 96-well plate, and
then 6 μL of 0.1 mM total lipid LNPs were added to each well.
Then, 5 μL of the TNS stock solution was added to each well
and kept on the shaker to mix properly for 10 min by covering the
plate with aluminum foil. Fluorescence intensity was measured using
excitation and emission wavelengths of 322 and 431 nm, respectively.
pKa curves were prepared by plotting the
pH values on the x-axis and the normalized fluorescence
values on the y-axis. Estimation of the pKa values was performed using GraphPad Prism
to perform nonlinear regression with variable slope.

## LNP In Vitro
Testing
HeLa, HepG2, and RAW 264.7 cells
were cultured according to the producer’s instructions, periodically
checked to ensure the absence of Mycoplasma infections, and kept below
passage 10. To test LNP activity in vitro, these different cell lines
were seeded at a density of 10,000 cells per well in a 96-well plate.
The day after seeding, cells were treated with LNPs at an mLuc mRNA
concentration of 0.5 μg/mL, 0.25 μg/mL, and 0.125 μg/mL
diluted in a complete cell culture medium. Every treatment was performed
in quadruplicate. 24 h after treatment, cells were lysed using 50
μL of passive lysis buffer 1× (Promega) per well. Afterward,
30 μL of the cell lysates was pipetted in a white 96-well plate
(Costar, White flat bottom, nontreated no lid, cat. no. 3912) and
their luminescence was read using a GloMax plate reader equipped with
dual injectors. 50 μL of the Luciferase Assay System (Promega)
substrate was injected per well and the exposure time was set to 10
s.

## Animal Studies
All animal studies were performed in
accordance with ethical guidelines and were approved by the Tel Aviv
University Ethics Committee (Protocol # TAU-LS-IL—2201-108-3).

## LNP In Vivo Organ Biodistribution
Healthy, 8–10
weeks old, female C57BL/6J mice were injected retro-orbitally with
a volume of LNPs loaded with luciferase-encoding mRNA (mLuc) corresponding
to 10 μg of mRNA. 6 h after the injection, mice were injected
intraperitoneally with 200 μL of 15 mg/mL of IVISbrite D-luciferin
diluted in 1× PBS (PerkinElmer Cat#122799). After 5 min, mice
were anesthetized with isoflurane and sacrificed by cervical dislocation.
Their hearts, lungs, livers, spleens, and kidneys were harvested,
and the Luc signal was measured using an IVIS Lumina device with automatic
settings. For analysis, the pictures were processed using the Living
Image Software (version 4.1) to measure the average radiance (measured
in photons/sec/cm2/sr) within ad hoc defined ROIs. Every
experimental group included 4 mice. Mice that displayed obvious signs
of discomfort after LNP injections were sacrificed for ethical reasons
and removed from the experiment.

## LNPs’ In Vivo Cellular
Transfection
For this
application, LNPs were loaded with mRNA encoding the Cre recombinase
enzyme (GeneScript). Female, 8–10 weeks old B6g.Cg-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm9(CAG-tdTomato)/Hze/j
mice (referred to as Cre-tdTomato mice) were injected retro-orbitally
with a volume of particles corresponding to 20 μg of Cre mRNA.
After 72 h, mice were anesthetized and sacrificed by cervical dislocation,
and lungs, livers, and spleens were harvested.
Spleens were
ruptured through 70 μm cutoff strainers, and the obtained single-cell
suspension was centrifuged at 300g for 5 min at 4
°C. After pipetting the supernatant, cells were resuspended in
red blood cell lysis buffer (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 min quenched by
adding 10 mL of 1× PBS and centrifuged at 300g for 5 min at 4 °C. After decanting the supernatant again, cells
were resuspended in 0.5 mL of FACS buffer for cell counting and antibody
staining.
Livers and lungs were processed using the Miltenyi
mouse liver
dissociation kit (Cat# 130-105-807) or the Miltenyi mouse lungs dissociation
kit (Cat# 130-095-927), respectively, following the manufacturer’s
instructions.
Cells were then incubated with mouse FcR blocker
reagent (Cat#
130-092-575 Miltenyi) according to manufacturer’s instructions
and then stained with different antibody panels as reported in and .
 After 30 min of incubation at 4 °C, cells were
centrifuged
at 500g for 5 min and finally resuspended in 100
μL of FACS buffer supplemented with DAPI 5 μg/mL before
analyzing them on a Cytoflex Flow cytometer (Beckman) using the gating
strategy summarized in Figures S13 and 14.

## LNPs’ In Vivo Cellular Transfection
To assess
the LNPs’ biodistribution, LNPs were loaded with noncoding
siRNA labeled with Cy5 and nonmodified Luc mRNA in a 50:50 (w/w) ratio.
The particles were then injected IV in 10 week old female C57BL6/j
mice at a dose of 10 μg of total mRNA per mouse. 18 h after
administration, mice were sacrificed and their lungs, livers, and
spleens were harvested and processed for flow cytometry as previously
described. The extracted cells were then stained using the antibody
panels summarized in and and analyzed using the gating
strategies analogous to the ones presented in Figures S13 and 14. LNP accumulation was measured as a percentage
of Cy5-positive cells.
 

## Biocompatibility Studies
Female
8–10 weeks old,
C57BL/6J mice were injected retro-orbitally with a volume corresponding
to 10 μg of mRNA of LNPs loaded with luciferase-encoding mRNA
(mLuc). 2 and 24 h after injection, approximately 300 μL of
blood per mouse was recovered via cheek bleed in a Microtainer SST
Blood collection tube (ref# 365,968, BD). To isolate the plasma from
whole blood, the collection tubes were centrifuged at 3500 rpm for
10 min. The supernatant plasma was recovered in 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes
and stored at −80 °C for future analysis.
The concentrations
of TNF-α, IL-6, MCP-1, and IL-6 in the plasma were measured
using ad hoc ELISA kits from R&D Systems: Mouse CCL2/JE/MCP-1
DuoSet ELISA (ref # DY 479), Mouse IL-6 DuoSet ELISA (ref # DY 406),
Mouse IL-10 DuoSet ELISA (ref # DT 417), Mouse TNF-alpha DuoSet ELISA
(ref # DY410).
The plasma concentrations of alkaline phosphatase
(ALP), serum
glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT), and serum glutamate pyruvate
transaminase (SGPT) were analyzed by AML Lab Services.
24 h
after injection, the livers, spleens, and lungs were also
harvested and fixed in a paraffin solution (Sigma-Aldrich). The tissue
processing, embedding in paraffin, sectioning, and hematoxylin/eosin
staining were performed by Histospek.

## Assessment of LNPs’
Efficacy in a Lung Metastatic Model
The protocols were adapted
from ref ( ). B16F10.9
cells (5 × 105 diluted
in 100 μL of PBS) were administered intravenously into 10- to
12 week old male C57BL/6 mice. Treatment groups (n = 7 mice/group) included (1) mock treatment (1× PBS), (2) mLuc-loaded
lipid 35 LNP, (3) mmPE-loaded SM-102 LNPs, and (4) mmPE-loaded lipid
35 LNP. An additional group of untreated tumor-free mice served as
control (n = 7). The dose in each formulation was
0.09 mg/kg mRNA encoding PE. Treatments
were administered on days 1, 5, and 9 from tumor inoculation. Administration
was by intravenous injection of 100 μL of the selected formulation
to the lateral tail vein using 26-gauge needles.
Two independent
experiments were run: one to evaluate lung metastatic burden and the
other to evaluate survival.
For mmPE-LNP, the general toxicity
was evaluated using liver enzyme
levels (AST and ALT), as well as ALP, urea, bilirubin, total protein,
and creatinine measured in the blood. Mice bearing B16F10.9 tumors
(B16F10.9) received three doses of either PBS, mLuc-loaded lipid 35
LNP, mmPE-loaded SM-102 LNPs, or mmPE-loaded lipid 35 LNPs at a dose
of 0.09 mg/kg mRNA (n = 4 mice/group). AST and ALT
levels were assessed 24 and 72 h from the end of treatment while the
other markers were measured 72 h post-treatment.
For evaluation
of lung metastatic burden, the experiment was terminated
20 days post-tumor injection. The lungs of all animals in the experiment
were removed, weighed, and fixed in Blouin’s solution. The
increase in lung weight was calculated using ( )
2 Surface metastases
were counted, using a dissecting microscope,
by a pathologist blinded to the experimental groups involved. For
evaluation of survival, 7 animals were included in each experimental
group. After the end of treatment, they were monitored every other
day and the experiment was terminated on day 38. Statistical significance
for the difference in survival was assessed using the Log-rank (Mantel–Cox)
Test.

## LNP Stability under Storage
After assembly, LNPs formulated
using the lead lipids (lipids 14, 35, and 36) were stored as suspension
in 1× PBS in sealed 2 mL clear glass vials (Merck, catalog no.
27265) and kept at 4 °C. A small nanoparticle aliquot was withdrawn,
and DLS, Ribogreen, and in vitro Luciferase assay were performed as
previously presented at day 1 and then every 7 days until 2 months.

## Statistical Analysis
Data are presented as the data
mean ± the standard error. Before analysis, normality tests were
performed to assess the data Gaussian distributions. Statistical comparisons
of two different groups were performed using a two-tailed paired t-test. For experiments involving multiple groups, one-way
ANOVA with multiple comparison post-hoc tests was employed instead.
All analyses were performed on Graph Pad Prism version 5.00 (GraphPad
Software, San Diego, California, USA, www.graphpad.com). To elucidate
possible correlations between the LNP sizes, zeta potentials, pKa, and in vitro and in vivo signals, we performed
correlation analysis using GraphPad Prism. The correlations were assessed
by plotting variables in pairs and assessing the function in GraphPad
Prism. P values below 0.05 were considered statistically
significant. Significance intervals for p were designed as follows:
* for p < 0.05, ** for p <
0.01, *** for p < 0.001.

## Acknowledgments
D.P. acknowledges the support from the European
Research Council (ERC Adv. Grant # 101055029), the EXPERT project
(European Union’s Horizon 2020) research and innovation programme
(under grant agreement # 825828), and the ISF grant (2012/20). The
TOC image was entirely Created by G.S.N. using Licensed Biorender.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
ALPalkaline
phosphatase
ALTalanine aminotransferase
ASTaspartate aminotransferase
CADcharged aerosol
detector
CPPcritical
process parameter
CQAcritical quality attribute
HPLChigh-performance liquid chromatography
IL-6interleukin-6
IL-10interleukin 10
LNPlipid nanoparticles
MCP-1monocyte chemoattractant
protein-1
mCreCre-encoding
mRNA
mLucfirefly
luciferase-encoding mRNA
mPE-Apseudomonas exotoxin A-encoding mRNA
PCCPearson’s correlation coefficient
PEGpolyethylene glycol
TNF-αtumor necrosis
factor-α
ζzeta potential.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.4c18636.
DoE-based LNP optimization;
pKa measurements; agarose gel electrophoresis
of LNP formulations;
correlation analysis between LNP features and their in vitro or in
vivo transfection; radiance measure in the mice hearts and kidneys;
proportional signal of LNPs formulated with different lipids among
mice lungs, livers, and spleens; schematic representation of tdTomato
expression; characterization of mCre-loaded LNPs; cellular biodistribution
of LNPs in tdTomato mice; cellular biodistribution of Cy-5-labeled
LNPs in vivo; safety profile of mmPE-A-loaded LNPs; gating strategies
used for flow cytometry; and synthesis and characterization of the
ionizable lipids (PDF)

## Author Contributions
# G.S.N. and R.R.
contributed equally. The manuscript was written through
contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the
final version of the manuscript.

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): D.P. receives
licensing fees (to patents on which he was an inventor) from the following
entities: ART Biosciences, BioNtech SE, Earli Inc., LAND Medicine
Inc.., Kernal Biologics Inc., Newphase Ltd., NeoVac Ltd., RiboX Therapeutics,
Roche, and Teva Pharmaceuticals Inc. He also invested and consults
or serves on the scientific advisory boards or boards of directors
of some of these companies, and lectured (and received a fee) or conducts
sponsored research for the companies. All other authors declare no
competing interests.

## Supplementary Material
nn4c18636_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
nn4c18636_si_001.pdf