pmcSci AdvSci Adv2850sciadv101653440sciadvScience Advances2375-2548American Association for the Advancement of SciencePMC11313869PMC11313869.111313869113138693912121910.1126/sciadv.adn0367adn03671Research ArticleNeuroscienceSciAdv r-articlesBiochemistryNeuroscienceNeuroscienceRemote neurostimulation through an endogenous ion channel using a near-infrared light–activatable nanoagonist
Neurostimulation using NIR-activatable agonisthttps://orcid.org/0009-0009-8489-098XTianWeifengFormal analysisInvestigationResourcesValidationVisualizationWriting - original draftWriting - review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8124-8432JiaQiConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting - original draft LuoJiaminFormal analysisInvestigationResourcesValidation HeDongmeiFormal analysisInvestigationValidationVisualization YangJieConceptualizationProject administrationSupervisionWriting - review & editing GuoTaoInvestigationValidation GuoHuilingInvestigation https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5826-299XGuoYushengInvestigationResourcesValidation ZhangWenjieInvestigation ChenFeiyuInvestigation YeYingInvestigation LiuJingjingInvestigation XuMindongInvestigation DengChengjieInvestigation CuiBoxiangInvestigation https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3287-9518SuDeyuanInvestigation https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1862-8229WangHaoConceptualizationMethodologyValidationWriting - review & editing LuYiFunding acquisitionInvestigationResources https://orcid.org/0009-0009-5742-1539LiuHengInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidationVisualization https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0290-7688YangJianConceptualizationProject administrationSupervisionWriting - review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4600-6160HouZhiyaoConceptualizationFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesVisualizationWriting - original draftWriting - review & editing – ). While neurostimulation techniques like deep brain stimulation and spinal cord stimulation show promise in alleviating symptoms in patients with neurological disorders, they often require invasive implantation of stimulation electrodes or optical devices, leading to permanent tissue damage, chronic immune responses, and increased infection risk ( – ). Therefore, there is a pressing need for noninvasive neurostimulation approaches. Recent technological advancements have explored the use of light or magnetic fields as tissue-penetrating physical cues for remote stimulation of neurons in experimental mammals. These innovations include red-shifted and/or ultrasensitive opsin-mediated optogenetics ( – ), nanotechnology-based optogenetics ( , ) and thermogenetics ( , ), as well as magnetogenetics ( ). Nevertheless, all of these methods require viral delivery and genetic modification of native neurons to express exogenous opsin variants or transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily V member 1 (TRPV1) channels in animals. In contrast, numerous endogenously expressed ion channels are fundamental to generating, propagating, and integrating neural signals within the nervous system ( ). Manipulating these endogenous ion channels can directly modulate neural electrical and chemical signals at the molecular level, enabling neuromodulation and therapeutic intervention. Therefore, a method to target endogenous ion channels for achieving remote, noninvasive neurostimulation in wild-type (WT), nongenetically modified mammals is desired.
In this study, we present an approach for achieving noninvasive neurostimulation via endogenous ion channels in living mice using near-infrared (NIR) light, eliminating the need for genetic modification of native neurons to express exogenous actuator channels. The NIR window allows light to penetrate tissues to greater depths ( ), making it an ideal choice for noninvasive neurostimulation. Our method involves the engineering of NIR-activatable nanoagonists capable of remotely photoactivating endogenous ion channels in native neurons in vivo, achieved by combining photopharmacology and nanotechnology. Photopharmacology (or optopharmacology), which combines photochemistry and pharmacology, has yielded a diverse range of photochemical ligands that confer ultraviolet (UV)/visible light sensitivity to various ion channels, including voltage-gated ion channels, glutamate receptors, nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptors, transient receptor potential (TRP) channels, and others, commonly expressed in the nervous system ( – ). Upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) have the ability to convert NIR light into shorter-wavelength light and have been extensively explored for various biomedical applications ( , , – ). To achieve our goals, we propose to conjugate photochemical ligands to spectrally coupled UCNPs, creating nanohybrid NIR-activatable agonists for specific neuronal ion channels. These hybrid nanoagonists use UCNPs to capture and convert NIR light into UV/visible light, which excites the photochemical ligands conjugated on their surface, leading to photoactivation of the ion channels. By in vivo application of these nanoagonists, it is conceivable to achieve noninvasive NIR neurostimulation by selectively activating endogenous ion channels.
We selected the nonselective cation channel TRP ankyrin-repeat 1 (TRPA1) to test our method based on two main considerations. First, TRPA1’s single-channel conductance is relatively high (∼100 pS at −60 mV) ( ), which suggests a potential for more effective neurostimulation. Second, TRPA1 is expressed in nociceptive neurons and crucial for pain and itch sensation ( – ), which allows for a straightforward assessment of TRPA1-mediated neurostimulation through mouse nocifensive behavior measurements. To synthesize NIR-activatable nanoagonists for TRPA1, we first searched for photopharmacological ligands of mammalian TRPA1 channels. While photopharmacological tools for TRPA1 have been reported ( – ), there is now a lack of available agonists suitable for effectively photoactivating TRPA1 in living mammals. Considering that natural chromophores confer light sensitivity to various photoreceptor proteins across organisms ( ) and that numerous natural ligands have been successfully used to modulate ion channels ( ), we screened natural product libraries to find chromophoric agonists for efficient in vivo photoactivation of mammalian TRPA1. Our screening has identified flavins as UV A (UVA)/visible light–sensitive agonists of TRPA1. Flavin chromophores, including flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) and flavin mononucleotide (FMN), confer UVA/blue light sensitivity to photoreceptor flavoproteins found in plants, algae, fungi, and bacteria ( , , ). We demonstrated that FAD enables in vivo photoactivation of mammalian TRPA1 using UVA/blue light.
Next, we customized UCNPs with an emission spectrum that aligns well with the absorption spectrum of FAD and conjugated FAD to the UCNPs surface, creating a hybrid nanoagonist called UCNP-FAD, which enables photoactivation of TRPA1 using NIR light. Through localized application of UCNP-FAD to both superficial and deep neural structures in mice, targeted NIR irradiation not only activates endogenous TRPA1 in skin nerve terminals, inducing scratching behavior, but also noninvasively penetrates through tissues and bones to activate spinal TRPA1 in an adjustable manner, achieving remote spinal cord stimulation for precise bidirectional control of nociception. This work demonstrates that the strategy of using NIR light and UCNP-coupled photopharmacological tools to stimulate neurons via endogenous channels not only is practical but also holds promise for much broader applications. Given that photopharmacological ligands have been developed for many other ion channels and receptors, the concept and approaches of combining photopharmacology with nanotechnology described here can be adopted for other channels to achieve NIR modulation of other neural activities and processes in physiological or pathological conditions.

## RESULTS

## Target-based screening identifies flavins that confer UVA/visible light sensitivity on TRPA1
While synthetic UV/visible light–sensitive agonists for zebrafish TRPA1 have been documented ( , ) and azobenzene-derived agonists have demonstrated mouse TRPA1 desensitization upon UV illumination ( ), they are inadequate for effectively activating mammalian TRPA1 in vivo. We conducted a search for photoactive agonists of mammalian TRPA1 from natural products. We screened more than 1000 natural molecules via patch-clamp recording of exogenously expressed TRPA1 in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells under light illumination at different wavelengths. We found that flavin chromophores enable photoactivation of human TRPA1 by UVA/blue light. In whole-cell patch-clamp recordings, blue light (460 to 490 nm) in combination with FAD elicited substantial TRPA1 whole-cell currents ( ). In contrast, FAD or blue light did not induce TRPA1 currents separately ( , and fig. S1A). TRPA1 photoactivation depended on light power density and FAD concentration ( ). As little as 3 μM FAD enabled activation of TRPA1 by blue light ( and fig. S1B). We assessed the binding of FAD to purified TRPA1 protein using surface plasmon resonance (SPR) analysis. The resulting equilibrium dissociation constant was determined to be 17.4 μM (fig. S1C), which closely aligns with the functional half maximal effective concentration (EC50; 55 μM) derived from FAD-induced TRPA1 photoactivation ( ). The light power densities required for TRPA1 photoactivation in our experiments are much lower than those required for optogenetic opsins ( ). Notably, even at a much lower power density of 1 mW/cm2, blue light induced notable TRPA1 currents with 100 μM FAD ( and fig. S1D). Stronger blue light generated larger TRPA1 currents, by up to more than 100-fold ( ). Notably, light-induced TRPA1 currents lasted a long time during our recordings, even after light stimulation ceased (fig. S1E), suggesting a very slow reversal of FAD-mediated TRPA1 photoactivation. Shorter-wavelength UVA light (330 to 385 nm) also caused strong activation of TRPA1 in the presence of FAD ( ), but, in contrast, longer-wavelength green light (510 to 550 nm) failed to activate TRPA1 in the presence of FAD ( ). The effective wavelength range for TRPA1 photoactivation is consistent with the light absorption spectrum of FAD ( ). FAD paired with UVA or blue light also activated mouse TRPA1 expressed in HEK 293 cells (fig. S1, F and G). Because UVA/blue light induces photodegradation of flavins in aqueous solution ( ), the stable photoproducts of FAD may be responsible for TRPA1 activation. Subsequently, we investigated the effect of pre-illuminated FAD on TRPA1. Specifically, FAD in the bath solution was subjected to blue light illumination for 30 min before being promptly applied to TRPA1. Pre-illuminated FAD alone did not activate TRPA1 (fig. S1H). However, when combined with simultaneous exposure to blue light, pre-illuminated FAD induced TRPA1 activation, similar to that observed with non–pre-illuminated FAD (fig. S1H). These results indicate that the photodegradation of FAD and the resulting stable photoproducts do not contribute to TRPA1 photoactivation.
 FMN, another flavin chromophore, also conferred UVA/blue light sensitivity on TRPA1 (fig. S2, A and B). FMN with UVA or blue light induced substantial TRPA1 currents, but FMN alone or FMN plus green light did not activate TRPA1 (fig. S2, A and B). The effective wavelengths were within the light absorption spectrum of FMN (fig. S2C). These results indicate that flavin chromophores confer UVA/blue light sensitivity on mammalian TRPA1. We also examined the effect of FAD on TRP cation channel subfamily M member 8 (TRPM8) and TRPV1, well-characterized members of two other TRP subfamilies. FAD plus blue or UVA light failed to activate TRPM8 (fig. S3A) but caused TRPV1 activation (fig. S3B). FAD-mediated TRPV1 photoactivation, however, is much weaker than TRPA1 photoactivation (compare and fig. S3C).

## FAD-mediated TRPA1 photoactivation relies on riboflavin photochemical reactions
Riboflavin, the photoactive component of FAD, undergoes light-induced transitions from its ground state to the singlet state and, subsequently, to the relatively long-lived triplet state ( ). Triplet-state riboflavin drives either type I or type II photoreactions, involving direct interaction with substrates leading to the formation of substrate radicals and a riboflavin radical anion or interaction with oxygen resulting in the generation of singlet oxygen, respectively ( ). A straightforward hypothesis is that the riboflavin-facilitated photochemical reactions serve as the basis for FAD-mediated TRPA1 photoactivation. We investigated the effects of ascorbic acid and sodium azide. Ascorbic acid quenches both triplet riboflavin and singlet oxygen, while sodium azide specifically targets singlet oxygen ( , ). Ascorbic acid completely abolished FAD-induced TRPA1 photoactivation ( ), whereas sodium azide only slowed down the kinetics ( ). Neither compound affected TRPA1 channel opening when applied after TRPA1 photoactivation reached the steady state (fig. S4). These findings emphasize the critical role of the type I mechanism in FAD-induced TRPA1 photoactivation while also suggesting the involvement of type II photosensitization via singlet oxygen ( ). We conducted further investigations to assess the effect of the superoxide anion scavenger MnTBAP, the H2O2 scavenger sodium pyruvate, and the reducing agent dithiothreitol on TRPA1 photoactivation. Even in the presence of these reagents, FAD still induced substantial TRPA1 photoactivation upon exposure to blue light (fig. S5). These observations suggest that riboflavin radical anion–induced superoxide anions and the resulting oxidative stress do not play a critical role in the process.
 The evidence above suggests that both triplet-state FAD-induced free radical reactions and singlet oxygen reactions with amino acid residues in TRPA1 proteins underlie the mechanisms of TRPA1 photoactivation. In addition, TRPA1 is activated by reactive compounds through the covalent modification of reactive amino acid residues ( – ). Thus, we examined whether these residues are important for FAD-mediated TRPA1 photoactivation. Because nonreactive agonists, such as 2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate (2-APB), activate TRPA1 via mechanisms distinct from those of reactive compound–induced channel activation ( , , ), the 2-APB–induced TRPA1 current was used as a control. Selected reactive residues in human TRPA1 were mutated, and the activities of the mutant channels in response to 2-APB as well as blue light plus FAD were examined. 2-APB and the combination of blue light and FAD were sequentially applied to elicit currents in HEK 293 cells expressing WT or mutant TRPA1 channels (fig. S6, A to D), and the ratio of photoactivation-induced current to 2-APB–induced current was calculated (fig. S6E). Mutations of these residues did not significantly attenuate channel responsiveness to blue light plus FAD in comparison to 2-APB (fig. S6, A to E), suggesting a distinct mechanism of FAD-mediated TRPA1 photoactivation. Further mutagenesis studies showed that single mutations of M912L or H983A significantly attenuated photoactivation-induced currents relative to 2-APB–induced control currents ( ). These two residues are located in the pore helix and C-terminal TRP domain of the human TRPA1 channel, respectively ( ) ( ). M912L and H983A mutations have been shown to attenuate the activation of TRPA1 induced by anesthetics and zinc, respectively ( , ). The double mutation M912L/H983A almost completely abolished photoactivation-induced currents without affecting channel responses to 2-APB ( ), indicating a critical role of these two residues in FAD-mediated TRPA1 photoactivation.

## FAD enables UVA/blue light control of behavior via TRPA1 in skin nerve terminals of mice
TRPA1 is highly expressed in a subset of sensory neurons, and, when activated in the skin nerve terminals on the nape of the neck, it elicits scratching behavior in mice ( , ). We performed patch-clamp recordings of cultured dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons of mice, and blue light with FAD elicited TRPA1 antagonist HC030031-sensitive currents in some neurons ( ). Many previously reported photoactive ligands are effective only in cultured cells or tissue slices ( ). Therefore, we examined whether FAD enables photoactivation of endogenous TRPA1 in the skin nerve terminals of living mice ( ). Because UVA and blue light can penetrate skin, we customized wireless, wearable optoelectronic devices containing light-emitting diode (LED) light sources to illuminate the skin of freely moving, untethered mice ( , and fig. S7A). The devices were embedded in polyacrylate pressure-sensitive adhesive (PSA) and thus could be easily attached to the nape skin of the mouse neck with the help of a fixing band ( , and fig. S7A). The devices were wirelessly powered by loop antennae installed around the perimeter of a mouse enclosure chamber that generate an oscillating electromagnetic field ( and fig. S7A). The light output power of the optoelectronic device was relatively uniform across the chamber (fig. S7, B and C), and the maximum temperature increment of the device during wireless operation was less than 2°C under the experimental conditions (fig. S7D). After intradermal injection of FAD into the nape skin, UVA/blue light evoked slowly reversible and repeatable scratching behavior in freely moving mice ( and movies S1 and S2). Genetic ablation of TRPA1 greatly attenuated the scratching behavior ( ), indicating a critical role of TRPA1 in this light-induced response. Light-induced scratching persisted even after cessation of the light stimulation (phase II in ), possibly attributed, at least in part, to the slow reversal of FAD-mediated TRPA1 photoactivation (fig. S1E). Similarly, optogenetic opsins and photosensitive ligands that slowly recover from the photoexcited state after light stimulation ceases have been reported, and this property helps release animals from the light source and is especially beneficial for use on freely moving animals ( , , ). The scratching behavior was barely induced by FAD or UVA/blue light separately ( ). These results indicate that in vivo application of FAD enables reversible and repeatable photoactivation of peripheral TRPA1-dependent behavior with UVA/blue light in living mice.
 

## A rationally designed nanohybrid agonist is capable of NIR activation of TRPA1
To achieve noninvasive activation of TRPA1 within deeper tissues, we next used FAD to engineer a NIR-activatable nanoagonist. We synthesized Nd-sensitized, 808-nm NIR-excited UCNPs with an upconversion emission spectrum aligned to the absorption spectrum of FAD, thereby bridging the spectral gap between NIR emission and FAD absorption ( ). The 808-nm NIR light offers lower biomolecular absorbance and higher tissue penetration ( , ). With an intense absorption cross section at ~800 nm, the Nd3+ ion can serve as a sensitizer for the upconversion process by the energy migration process of Nd3+→Yb3+→Tm3+ ( , ). Core-shell-shell (CSS) UCNPs consisting of NaYF4:40%Yb,0.5%Tm@NaYF4:20%Yb@NaYF4:60%Nd were synthesized via a successive layer-by-layer method ( , ). The energy transition layer (NaYF4:Yb shell) and energy harvesting layer (NaNdF4:Yb shell) were coated on the NaYF4:Yb/Tm cores through stepwise hot injection of the corresponding shell precursors into the high-temperature reaction system without any intermediate. The obtained CSS UCNP nanocrystals had upconversion emissions due to the energy migration process of Nd3+-Yb3+-Tm3+ under 808-nm NIR irradiation (fig. S8). Representative transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the as-prepared NaYF4:40%Yb,0.5%Tm core, NaYF4:40%Yb,0.5%Tm@NaYF4:20%Yb core-shell (CS), and NaYF4:40%Yb,0.5%Tm@NaYF4:20%Yb@NaYF4:60%Nd CSS nanocrystals are shown in , respectively. All of the nanocrystals were monodispersed and had a narrow size distribution with a mean size determined to be ~36, 40, and 77 nm for the core, CS, and CSS nanocrystals, respectively. The x-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns confirmed that the core, CS, and CSS nanocrystals all had hexagonal crystallographic phases ( ). The oleic acid (OA)–capped UCNPs were transferred to the aqueous phase by using a monolayer of carboxyl phospholipids through van der Waals interactions (fig. S9). UCNPs have intrinsically low luminescence efficiency ( ), and previous studies have indicated that UCNPs should be positioned as close as possible to the target photoreceptor proteins to achieve efficient optical stimulation ( ). Thus, FAD, as the photosensing antennae of TRPA1, was covalently bonded to the surface of the UCNPs by the condensation reaction between the carboxyl group and amino group under catalysis by 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide (EDC)/N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) (fig. S9). Successful conjugation between the UCNPs and FAD was confirmed by the Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra ( ) and the zeta potential (fig. S10). The upconversion emissions of UCNPs in the UV (1I6-3F4 and 1D2-3H6 transitions of Tm3+) and blue (1D2-3F4 and 1G4-3H6 transitions of Tm3+) regions overlapped well with the absorption spectra of FAD, leading to efficient energy transfer from UCNPs to FAD ( ).
 This hybrid agonist UCNP-FAD theoretically confers NIR light sensitivity on TRPA1: UCNPs capture NIR light and emit UVA/blue light, which is harnessed by FAD on the surface of UCNPs and bound to TRPA1 to activate the channel ( ). The effect of UCNP-FAD on TRPA1 was experimentally examined. In patch-clamp recordings, 808-nm NIR light paired with UCNP-FAD elicited substantial whole-cell currents in TRPA1-expressing HEK 293 cells ( ). The NIR-induced TRPA1 currents depended on the NIR power density and UCNP-FAD concentration ( ), and NIR light of as low as 50 mW/cm2 induced substantial currents in the presence of UCNP-FAD (4 mg/ml; and fig. S11). In contrast, UCNP-FAD or NIR light separately did not induce TRPA1 currents ( and figs. S11 and S12), and NIR light plus UCNPs also had no effect on TRPA1 (fig. S13). In addition, a mixture of UCNPs and unbound FAD did not enable NIR light to activate TRPA1 notably (fig. S14), which indicates that, at least for the low power densities of NIR light and low doses of UCNPs used in the experiments, bonding of FAD to the UCNP surface is necessary for efficient NIR photoactivation of TRPA1 channels. Together, these results indicate that the hybrid agonist UCNP-FAD endows TRPA1 with NIR light sensitivity, representing a NIR-activatable agonist for ion channels. To further reduce the excitation power of NIR used for TRPA1 photoactivation, we tested pulsed NIR irradiation. When paired with UCNP-FAD, pulsed NIR light (15-ms pulse width, 20 Hz) caused TRPA1 activation similar to that induced by continuous NIR light at the same peak power density ( ).
 We next investigated whether combining 808-nm NIR light with UCNP-FAD could activate endogenous TRPA1 in the skin nerve terminals of living mice, mimicking the effects of UVA/blue light plus FAD on mice. In cultured mouse DRG sensory neurons, the combination of NIR light and UCNP-FAD significantly increased intracellular Ca2+ levels in allyl-isothiocyanate (AITC)–responsive DRG neurons from TRPA1+/+ mice ( ). In contrast, TRPV1 agonist capsaicin (CAP)–responsive neurons from TRPA1−/− mice did not display this response ( ). Neither UCNP-FAD nor NIR light alone induced intracellular Ca2+ increases in AITC-responsive neurons ( ). However, NIR light required higher power densities compared to UVA/blue light for TRPA1 activation (compare and ), which exceeds the capabilities of our wireless optoelectronic system for behavioral studies in living mice. In addition, a stationary, high-power light source faces difficulty in achieving accurate, real-time irradiation on the nape skin of freely moving mice. Therefore, we used a stationary NIR laser source to irradiate restrained mice and then released them to assess their behavioral responses ( ). This approach was chosen because, as observed in , the behavioral responses elicited by FAD-mediated TRPA1 photoactivation persisted long after the light stimulation ended. Thus, it is possible that UCNP-FAD–mediated TRPA1 photoactivation and its associated behavioral responses could also endure beyond the cessation of light stimulation. After intradermal injection of UCNP-FAD into the nape skin, a pulsed 808-nm NIR laser (200 mW/cm2, 15-ms pulse width, 20 Hz) irradiated the nape skin of mice on a restraint device for 20 min ( ). Under this irradiation condition, the maximum temperature increase on the skin was ~2°C (fig. S15). After NIR light stimulation, the mice were released from the restraint device, and their behavior was then recorded for 60 min ( ). Mice that received an injection of UCNP-FAD in the nape skin showed significant scratching behavior after NIR irradiation ( and movie S3). The scratching behavior induced by NIR light was not observed until ~5 hours after UCNP-FAD injection (fig. S16). In contrast, NIR irradiation or intradermal injection of UCNP-FAD separately did not induce scratching behavior ( and movies S4 and S5). In addition, mice that received intradermal injection of UCNPs did not show significant behavioral responses after NIR light irradiation ( ). Genetic ablation of TRPA1 substantially diminished the scratching behavior induced by NIR light plus intradermal UCNP-FAD ( ). These results indicate that UCNP-FAD enables in vivo NIR activation of endogenous TRPA1 in skin nerve terminals, resulting in behavioral responses.
 

## NIR stimulation of spinal TRPA1 using UCNP-FAD enables nociception control in mice
TRPA1 is expressed not only on peripheral terminals but also on the central endings of afferent nociceptive nerve fibers within the spinal cord ( , – ). The impact of activating TRPA1 in the spinal cord in vivo remains controversial ( – , ). Some studies have shown that intrathecal application of TRPA1 activators leads to pain hypersensitivity ( , , ), while other studies have demonstrated antinociceptive effects ( , ). Theoretically, intrathecal administration of UCNP-FAD could potentially allow remote and gradual activation of endogenous spinal TRPA1 using varying intensities of NIR light. This approach would enable a precise examination of the causal relationship between spinal TRPA1 activation and mouse nociceptive behavior, offering greater spatiotemporal precision in contrast to conventional pharmacological stimulation. Thus, we examined the impact of intrathecal UCNP-FAD combined with NIR irradiation on mouse nociception, specifically focusing on the nociceptive responses to noxious heat using the hot-plate test ( ). This test was selected because TRPA1−/− mice exhibit unaffected baseline responses to heat stimuli but not to mechanical or cold stimuli ( ). This makes hot-plate test well suited for using TRPA1−/− mice to assess the involvement of spinal TRPA1 activation in nociception. UCNP-FAD was intrathecally injected into mice at the L5-L6 intervertebral space, followed by pulsed NIR irradiation (750, 350, or 100 mW/cm2; 15-ms pulse width; 20 Hz) at the injection site of restrained mice for 15 min ( ). The 808-nm NIR light can penetrate a mouse’s back and reach the spinal cord (fig. S17). After cessation of NIR stimulation, mice were allowed a 20-min acclimation period in the testing environment, followed by the measurements of nociceptive responses to noxious heat ( ). Simultaneously applying NIR irradiation (750 mW/cm2) and intrathecal UCNP-FAD (30 μg) injection led to a significant and sustained decrease of the latency of nociceptive response to noxious heat in mice, indicating the presence of heat hyperalgesia ( ). Meanwhile, using lower power densities of NIR light (350 and 100 mW/cm2) induced milder heat hyperalgesia, suggesting a proportional connection between NIR intensity and mouse nociceptive behavior ( ). The heat hyperalgesia induced by NIR light was not observed until ~5 hours after intrathecal UCNP-FAD injection (fig. S18). The application of NIR light (750 mW/cm2) resulted in temperature increases below 6°C on mouse skin and less than 1°C within the spinal cord (figs. S19 and S20), yet neither NIR irradiation (750 mW/cm2) nor intrathecal UCNP-FAD alone led to heat hyperalgesia ( ). The combination of NIR light with intrathecal UCNPs also yielded no effect ( ). Genetic ablation of TRPA1 did not alter the baseline responses to noxious heat but significantly attenuated the heat hyperalgesia induced by the combined application of NIR light and intrathecal UCNP-FAD in mice ( ).
 Furthermore, we investigated the impact of NIR light combined with UCNP-FAD on nociceptive C-fiber–evoked field potentials in the superficial spinal dorsal horn of anesthetized mice ( and fig. S21). The field potential is an indicative parameter of nociceptive synaptic transmission within the spinal cord ( ). Following the application of either control saline or UCNP-FAD at the recording site, we used pulsed NIR light (500 mW/cm2, 15-ms pulse width, 20 Hz) for irradiation. The combination of UCNP-FAD and NIR irradiation substantially increased the amplitude of the field potential evoked by electrical stimulation at or above 8 V, resulting in an upward shift of the stimulus-response relationship ( ). This result suggests that the combination of UCNP-FAD and NIR light increased spinal synaptic transmission mediated by afferent C-fibers in vivo. In addition, for assessing spinal neuron activation, c-fos was localized using immunostaining. Notably, the combination of NIR light (750 mW/cm2, 15-ms pulse width, 20 Hz, 15 min) with intrathecal UCNP-FAD (30 μg) induced a significant increase in c-fos expression exclusively within the spinal dorsal horn of TRPA1+/+ mice following the hot-plate test ( and fig. S22). However, this effect was absent in TRPA1−/− mice ( and fig. S22). Neither NIR irradiation nor intrathecal UCNP-FAD alone produced an increase in c-fos expression ( and fig. S22). Collectively, these findings suggest that UCNP-FAD enables remote NIR activation of endogenous TRPA1 within the spinal cord, resulting in increased nociceptive synaptic transmission and heat hyperalgesia in mice.
However, higher NIR intensity (1.5, 1.25, and 1 W/cm2) paired with a higher concentration of intrathecal UCNP-FAD (40 μg) not only failed to decrease but also increased the latency of the nociceptive response to noxious heat in mice ( ). In addition, NIR light at 1.5 W/cm2 in conjunction with intrathecal UCNP-FAD (40 μg) did not significantly increase c-fos expression within the spinal dorsal horn of mice following the hot-plate test ( and fig. S23). These results suggest the presence of an antinociceptive effect. Notably, the antinociceptive effect was significantly attenuated in TRPA1−/− mice ( ), emphasizing the crucial role of spinal TRPA1 activation in this phenomenon. The opposite outcomes observed following NIR irradiation with intrathecal UCNP-FAD likely result from variations in TRPA1 activation levels ( ). The stronger activation of spinal TRPA1, triggered by higher NIR intensity (e.g., 1.5 W/cm2) and a higher concentration of UCNP-FAD (40 μg), likely caused the shift from hyperalgesia to hypoalgesia. This hypothesis is supported by the intensified spinal TRPA1 activation triggered by intrathecal injection of a high dose of the TRPA1 agonist, cinnamaldehyde (4 μg), which effectively reversed the hyperalgesia induced by NIR irradiation (750 mW/cm2) and intrathecal UCNP-FAD (30 μg) into hypoalgesia ( ). At 1.5 W/cm2, NIR irradiation results in an ~8°C temperature rise on the mouse’s skin and a 1.5°C increase within the spinal cord (figs. S24 and S25), aided by a mini electric fan to control the heat accumulation. Neither NIR irradiation (1.5 W/cm2) nor intrathecal UCNP-FAD administration individually elicited such an antinociceptive effect on mice ( ). These results represent a successful implementation of noninvasive spinal cord stimulation with high precision for pain relief in mammals. Therefore, UCNP-FAD enables the remote control of nociception and antinociception in living mice by using NIR light for the photoactivation of spinal TRPA1 in a precise and adjustable manner.
 

## DISCUSSION
To date, there have been no reports of NIR light–operated optogenetic opsins or photopharmacological agonists for neurostimulation ( , ). They typically require UV/visible spectrum illumination ( , ), which has limited tissue penetration ability. Two-photon methods enable the excitation of optogenetic opsins or photopharmacological ligands in deeper neural structures by using the focused beam of high-energy femtosecond pulsed lasers ( , ). However, applying two-photon methods for in vivo neurostimulation remains challenging due to the complex experimental setups and intrinsic technical limitations ( , ). In this study, we present an approach that merges photopharmacology and nanotechnology to enable remote NIR activation of endogenous ion channels using conventional light sources. We validate this approach by successfully engineering a nanohybrid agonist that imparts NIR light sensitivity to nociceptive TRPA1 channel, achieving noninvasive spinal cord stimulation for nociception control with molecular specificity.
UCNPs have recently emerged as nanoscale transducers, converting NIR energy into UV/visible light for diverse biological applications, including UCNP-mediated optogenetics ( , , – ). However, their in vivo utilization faces challenges due to the requirement of two separate components (exogenous gene expression and UCNPs) and their intrinsic limitations in upconversion efficiency ( , , ). For instance, to achieve efficient optical stimulation in UCNP-mediated optogenetics, it is necessary to maintain large amounts of UCNPs in close proximity to the optogenetic opsin-expressing target neurons in brain tissues for extended periods without diffusion ( , ), which presents challenges and potential toxicity concerns ( ). Our approach eliminates the need for UCNPs to illuminate the target tissues, cells, or actuator proteins. Instead, they only need to excite the agonists on their surface. By binding FAD, the photosensing agonist of TRPA1, to the surface of UCNPs, the proximity between them is increased, resulting in enhanced optical stimulation efficiency in our study ( ). Consequently, the required UCNP dosage is also reduced. While the hybrid nanoagonist-mediated neurostimulation achieves molecular specificity in our study, the specificity can be further improved. Recent advancements in nanotechnology have enabled nanoparticles, including UCNPs, to penetrate the blood-brain barrier and selectively target specific neuron populations by incorporating targeting moieties like peptides and antibodies onto their surface ( , ). Therefore, by integrating our method with the selective targeting techniques, the potential emerges for noninvasive delivery of UCNP-hybrid agonists to specific neuron populations, enabling NIR neurostimulation with both molecular and cellular precision.
Although the approach presented here is now demonstrated only with the TRPA1 channel, the concept for designing NIR-activatable nanoagonist could be applied to other types of neuronal ion channels through the combination of photopharmacology and nanotechnology. The field of photopharmacology has produced a diverse range of UV/visible light–sensitive ligands for various ion channels and receptors ( – ). Moreover, through various doping strategies, the emission spectrum of UCNPs can be tailored to different wavelength ranges ( , , – ), enabling proper and efficient matching with various photopharmacological ligands’ absorbance. The conjugation between photopharmacological ligands and UCNPs can be achieved using a variety of established methods commonly used in nanoparticle surface modification and bioconjugation ( , ). Further exploration and optimization of different components of the approach, such as photopharmacological ligands for more ion channels and receptors, the upconversion efficiency and biocompatibility of UCNPs, NIR light sources and stimulation parameters, and nanoparticle delivery and targeting methods, will enhance the utility of this approach. In addition, considering that ion channels and receptors are the largest protein drug targets ( ), our approach exhibits a potential for the development of NIR-controlled drugs with higher spatiotemporal resolution.
FAD and FMN are well established as prosthetic groups in oxidoreductases and as cofactors in blue light–sensing proteins, such as light-oxygen-voltage domains, blue light sensing using flavin domains, and cryptochrome protein families ( , ). Our study found that FAD and FMN also confer ultrahigh light sensitivity to mammalian TRPA1, resulting in several dozen or even hundred-fold increases in TRPA1 basal currents upon UVA/blue light illumination. Even at a low light intensity of 1 mW/cm2 (0.01 mW/mm2), substantial TRPA1 photoactivation occurred in the presence of FAD. Patch-clamp recordings revealed that FAD-mediated TRPA1 photoactivation lasts a long time, even after light stimulation ceased, implying a slow reversal of the TRPA1 channel from FAD-mediated photoactivation. Consistently, the reversal time of the photoexcited flavin photoreceptor proteins varies from seconds to hours after light withdrawal ( , ). The implications of endogenous flavin-induced TRPA1 photoactivation are unknown. Flavins are relatively abundant in ocular tissues, regularly exposed to light ( – ). Studies suggest a potential link between riboflavin-rich diets and increased fragility of photoreceptor outer segments ( ). In addition, TRPA1 in retinal cells mediates responses to oxidative stress and inflammation, potentially leading to cell death in murine models ( ). This evidence raises questions about whether endogenous flavins enable TRPA1 to be activated by light under certain conditions, potentially exacerbating retinal damage. Further research is required to elucidate the physiological or pathological implications of endogenous flavin-induced TRPA1 photoactivation in different settings.
Riboflavin serves as the photoactive component within FAD, initiating photoreactions classified as type I or type II upon photoexcitation. Type I reactions involve direct interaction between the substrate and the triplet-excited state of riboflavin, while type II reactions involve a primary interaction between oxygen and the excited triplet riboflavin to form singlet oxygen ( ). In the type I mechanism, triplet riboflavin directly reacts with amino acid side chains in the proteins via proton-coupled electron transfer or electron transfer, leading to amino acid radicals. Amino acids such as tryptophan, tyrosine, cysteine, methionine, and histidine have been reported to quench triplet riboflavin, resulting in type I photoreaction ( , ). In the type II mechanism, singlet oxygen is a highly reactive electrophile capable of reacting with amines, sulfides, and alkenes ( , ). The experiments investigating the quenching of triplet-state FAD and singlet-state oxygen suggest that both triplet-state FAD-induced free radical reactions and singlet oxygen reactions with TRPA1 proteins underlie the mechanisms of TRPA1 photoactivation. Our mutagenesis study identified methionine residue M912 and histidine residue H983 as critical residues in FAD-mediated TRPA1 photoactivation. Recent studies have reported that TRPA1 pore helix 1 and M912, situated within the pore helix, play a critical role in binding different ligands for TRPA1 activation or inhibition ( , ). Thus, it is possible that excited triplet flavins directly interact and chemically react with M912 during TRPA1 photoactivation. In contrast, H983 resides within TRPA1’s C-terminal TRP-like domain, which directly connects to the pore-forming S6 helix ( , ). TRP-like domain serves as an allosteric regulatory nexus connecting the channel gates and other domains ( ). Hence, the photoactivation deficit in the H983A mutant might indicate an allosteric mechanism involved in TRPA1’s photoactivation. The details of the structural mechanisms underlying flavin-mediated TRPA1 photoactivation require further study.
We substantiated the efficacy of our method for neurostimulation by successfully achieving noninvasive spinal cord stimulation for nociception control in mice. TRPA1 is expressed in both the peripheral and central endings of nociceptive primary afferents ( – ). When activated peripherally in sensory neurons, TRPA1 produces pain or itch, depending on the mode of activation of TRPA1 and TRPA1-expressing neurons involved ( , , – ). On the other hand, the effect of spinal TRPA1 activation has yielded conflicting results, with some studies showing pain hypersensitivity and others demonstrating antinociceptive effects ( – , ). Notably, one study suggests that low doses of these activators intrathecally may induce hyperalgesia, whereas higher doses exhibit antinociceptive properties ( ). The mechanism underlying the antinociceptive effect involves the strong activation of TRPA1, which inhibits voltage-gated calcium and sodium currents in the spinal nerve terminals of sensory neurons ( ). Similarly, the opposite outcomes observed following NIR irradiation with intrathecal UCNP-FAD in and likely result from variations in TRPA1 activation levels. The stronger activation of spinal TRPA1, triggered by higher NIR intensity (e.g., 1.5 W/cm2) and a higher concentration of UCNP-FAD (40 μg), likely caused the transition from hyperalgesia to hypoalgesia. Notably, spinal cord stimulation using implanted electrodes has been clinically used for treating pain conditions ( ). Our study represents a report of noninvasive spinal cord stimulation for pain relief in mammals. In summary, our study may offer a flexible approach for noninvasive NIR modulation of neurobiological functions as well as disorder therapies through endogenous ion channels in vivo.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

## Chemicals
Natural product libraries were purchased from Nanjing Yuxi Biotechnology, Xian Folga Biotechnology, and Shanghai Topscience. OA (technical grade, 90%), 1-octadecene (ODE; technical grade, 90%), yttrium(III) chloride hexahydrate (YCl3·6H2O; 99.99%), ytterbium(III) chloride hexahydrate (YbCl3·6H2O; 99.9%), thulium(III) chloride hexahydrate (TmCl3·6H2O; 99.99%), neodymium(III) chloride hexahydrate (NdCl3·6H2O; 99.9%), EDC, NHS, HC030031, 2-APB, and urethane were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, USA). Menthol was obtained from MedChemExpress (Shanghai, China). FAD, FMN, AMG9810, CAP, and AITC were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Dallas, USA). All other reagents were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd.

## Clones and mutagenesis
Human and mouse TRPA1, TRPV1, and TRPM8 genes were all cloned into pcDNA3.1. Site-directed mutations were constructed by oligonucleotide-based mutagenesis using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with 4,4′-dimethoxytrityl polymerase following the instruction manual of the Fast Mutagenesis System kit (TransGen Biotech, Beijing, China) and were confirmed by DNA sequencing.

## HEK 293 cell culture and transfection
HEK 293 cells (CRL-1573, American Type Culture Collection, Virginia, USA) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM; Biological Industries, Kibbutz Beit-Haemek, Israel) supplemented with 10% newborn calf serum (Gibco, Massachusetts, USA) and penicillin (100 U/ml)/streptomycin (0.1 mg/ml) (Biological Industries). HEK 293 cells were transiently transfected with WT or mutant TRP channels with enhanced green fluorescent protein plasmids using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Massachusetts, USA) and used within 48 hours.

## Patch-clamp recording
All experiments were performed at room temperature (~22°C). Pipettes were fabricated from borosilicate glass (World Precision Instruments, Florida, USA) using a micropipette puller (P-1000, Sutter Instrument, California, USA) and were fire-polished with a microforge (NARISHIGE, Tokyo, Japan) to resistances of 2 to 3 megohms. Whole-cell currents were elicited in HEK 293 cells by 400-ms voltage ramps from −100 to +100 mV at a frequency of 0.5 Hz with a holding potential of 0 mV. Currents were amplified by Axopatch 200B and digitized by Digidata 1440A (Molecular Devices, California, USA). Currents were low-pass–filtered at 2 kHz and sampled at 10 kHz. pCLAMP software (Molecular Devices) was used for data acquisition and analysis. The standard extracellular solution contained 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, and 10 mM Hepes (pH 7.4); the standard intracellular solution contained 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, and 10 mM Hepes (pH 7.2); and the intracellular solution for neuronal recording contained 140 mM CsCl, 2 mM Na2–adenosine 5′-triphosphate, 1 mM MgCl2, 5 mM EGTA, and 10 mM Hepes (pH 7.2).

## Light stimulation in patch-clamp recording
UVA/visible light stimulation of cells was performed using a mercury arc lamp (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) with converging optics. Light at different wavelengths, including UVA (330 to 385 nm), blue (460 to 490 nm), and green (510 to 550 nm) light, was filtered by appropriate light filters (Olympus). NIR stimulation was performed using an 808-nm NIR laser source with an optical fiber (Changchun New Industries Optoelectronics Tech. Co., China). The light power densities were measured and calibrated by a UV meter (Shenzhen Linshang Technology, China), a light meter (Photoelectric Instrument Factory of Beijing Normal University, China), or a laser power meter (Ophir Optronics, USA).

## Protein expression and purification
The Homo sapiens full-length human TRPA1 gene was cloned into the pcDNA3.1(+) vector with a N-terminal Flag affinity tag. For protein expression, HEK 293T cell were transfected with the pcDNA3.1(+)-hTRPA1 using the PEI reagent. Cells were harvested 48 hours after transfection by centrifugation (3000g, 30 min). Cells were resuspended and lysed for 25 min in lysis buffer [20 mM tris (pH 8.0), 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 2 mM MgCl2, leupeptin (0.2 mg/ml), and benzamidine (1 μg/ml)]. Cell membranes were collected by ultracentrifugation (20,000g, 30 min) and solubilized in the buffer [20 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM CaCl2, 20% glycerol, 1% n-Dodecyl-β-D-Maltopyranoside (DDM), 0.2% Cholesteryl Hemisuccinate Tris Salt (CHS), leupeptin (0.2 mg/ml), and benzamidine (1 μg/ml)] at 4°C for 1 hour. Insoluble debris was removed by centrifugation (20,000g, 30 min). The supernatant was subsequently incubated with anti-Flag G1 Affinity Resin (GenScript) at 4°C for 1 hour. The resin was then packed onto a gravity-flow column and washed with 10 column volumes of wash buffer [20 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% DDM, and 0.01% CHS]. The TRPA1 protein was then eluted with 5 column volumes of elution buffer [20 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% DDM, 0.01% CHS, and FLAG peptide (100 μg ml−1)]. Elution fraction was concentration by centrifugation and then loaded onto a Superdex 200 10/300 increase size exclusion chromatography column (GE Healthcare) with the buffer [20 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 0.025% DDM, and 0.005% CHS]. The peak corresponding to tetrameric TRPA1 was collected for subsequent analysis.

## Surface plasmon resonance
The interactions between the TRPA1 protein and FAD were analyzed using SPR with the Biacore T200 system (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden). The purified Flag-tagged TRPA1 protein was immobilized on CM5 sensor chips with the Amine Coupling Kit (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK), and the blank channel was used as the negative control. The FAD solution was diluted to a series of concentrations in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)–P buffer [20 mM phosphate buffer, 2.7 mM KCl, 137 mM NaCl, and 0.05% (v/v) surfactant P20] and flowed over the chip at 30 μl/min with a contact time of 60 s and a dissociation time of 60 s for each cycle. Each measurement was replicated to ensure accuracy. Data analysis was performed using Biacore evaluation software (T200 version 2.0), and the interaction data were fitted to a 1:1 binding model to quantify the binding affinity. All SPR experiments were conducted with technical support at the Natural Drug Activity Screening Center, Kunming Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

## UCNP-FAD synthesis and characterization

## 
Synthesis of the core nanocrystal of NaYF4:40%Yb,0.5%Tm

Typically, 0.595 mmol of YCl3·6H2O, 0.4 mmol of YbCl3·6H2O, and 0.005 mmol of TmCl3·6H2O were mixed with 6 mL of OA and 15 mL of ODE in a 100 mL flask. The resulting mixture was heated to 120°C for 30 min under a nitrogen atmosphere and then maintained at 160°C for another 30 min to yield a transparent yellow solution. The system was then cooled to 50°C under flowing nitrogen. Then, 10 mL of methanol solution containing 4 mmol of NH4F and 2.5 mmol of NaOH was added and stirred at 50°C for 30 min. After degassing for 30 min at 100°C, the reaction solution was heated to 310°C under argon gas and kept at this temperature for 60 min before it was naturally cooled to room temperature. The final product was collected by centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 10 min with the addition of excess ethanol and washed with ethanol/cyclohexane 3 times. Last, the precipitated nanocrystals were dispersed in 10 mL of cyclohexane.

## 
Synthesis of precursors

Briefly, 1.2 mmol of YCl3·6H2O and 0.8 mmol of YbCl3·6H2O were mixed with 4 mL of OA and 6 mL of ODE in a 100 mL flask. The resulting mixture was heated to 120°C for 30 min under a nitrogen atmosphere and then maintained at 160°C for another 30 min. After naturally cooling to room temperature, the Y-Yb-OA precursor solution was obtained. The preparation of the Y-Nd-OA precursor was similar to that of the Y-Yb-OA precursor, except that 0.8 mmol of YCl3·6H2O and 1.2 mmol of NdCl3·6H2O were used instead of 1.2 mmol of YCl3·6H2O and 0.8 mmol of YbCl3·6H2O. The Na–trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)–OA precursor was prepared by mixing 10 ml of OA and 8 mmol of Na-TFA and heating the mixture at 160°C for 30 min before cooling to room temperature.

## 
Synthesis of the CS nanocrystal of NaYF4:40%Yb,0.5%Tm@NaYF4:20%Yb

Five milliliters of the NaYF4:40%Yb,0.5%Tm core nanocrystals was mixed with 8 ml of OA and 12 ml of ODE in a 100-ml flask. The mixture was heated to 100°C for 30 min under a nitrogen atmosphere and then degassed for 20 min before heating to 310°C. Subsequently, 1 ml of Y-Yb-OA and 0.5 ml of the Na-TFA-OA precursors were alternately injected within an interval of 15 min. After five cycles of injection, the reaction solution was maintained for another 15 min. The resulting CS nanocrystals were collected using an identical procedure to that for the NaYF4:40%Yb,0.5%Tm core nanocrystals and lastly dispersed in 10 ml of cyclohexane.

## 
Synthesis of the CSS nanocrystal NaYF4:40%Yb,0.5%Tm@NaYF4:20%Yb@NaYF4: 60%Nd (UCNPs)

The preparation of the CSS nanocrystals, NaYF4:40%Yb,0.5%Tm@NaYF4:20%Yb@NaYF4:60%Nd, was similar to the preparation of the CS nanocrystals, except that 5 ml of NaYF4:40%Yb,0.5%Tm@NaYF4:20%Yb nanocrystals was used instead of 5 ml of NaYF4:40%Yb,0.5%Tm CS nanocrystals, and the Y-Nd-OA precursor was used instead of the Y-Yb-OA precursor.

## 
Modification of the UCNPs with carboxyl groups

Typically, OA-capped UCNPs (0.1 mmol) were precipitated by ethanol, and the precipitate was redispersed in 5 ml of chloroform. A chloroform solution (5 ml) containing 25 mg of DSPE-PEG2000-COOH was slowly added to a 50-ml round bottom flask containing the UCNP chloroform solution. The chloroform was then removed by slow evaporation under a nitrogen atmosphere for 24 hours at room temperature. Then, the hydrophilic UCNPs modified with carboxyl phospholipids were obtained by dissolving in 5 ml of Milli-Q water before washing with Milli-Q water three times.

## 
Bioconjugation of UCNPs with FAD

Briefly, 5 ml of UCNP aqueous solution and 1 ml of FAD aqueous solution were mixed with 80 mg of EDC and 90 mg of NHS. After stirring for 12 hours, the UCNPs conjugated with FAD were obtained by centrifugation (12,000 rpm, 10 min).

## 
Characterization of UCNP-FAD

TEM images were recorded on a JEOL JEM-2010 microscope at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. Powder XRD experiments were performed on a Siemens D500 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 A) from 10° to 80° at a scanning rate of 5°/min. The luminescence spectra of all the samples were measured using an Edinburgh FLS-1000 fluorescence spectrometer equipped with an 808- or 980-nm continuous wave (CW) diode laser. FTIR spectra were recorded using a Nicolet IS5 infrared spectrophotometer. Dynamic light scattering was recorded on a Nano Zetasizer system (Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK). The UV-visible-NIR absorption spectrum was obtained on a UV3600 spectrophotometer.

## Animals
Mice used in this study were housed in a specific pathogen–free environment maintained at constant temperature and humidity with a 12-hour light cycle in the animal services facility of Guangzhou Medical University. C57BL/6 mice were purchased from Charles River Laboratories. TRPA1−/− mice were obtained from D. Julius’ lab (University of California, San Francisco). TRPA1−/− mice were backcrossed to C57BL/6 mice for at least six generations. TRPA1−/− and littermate WT mice were generated from TRPA1+/− mice and were identified by genotyping PCR. Seven- to 9-week-old mice were used, half male and half female. All animal experiments were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee at Guangzhou Medical University (approval number S2020-048), in compliance with National Institutes of Health’s Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.

## Primary neuronal culture
TRPA1+/+ or TRPA1−/− mice (7 to 9 weeks old) were euthanized, and the DRG were dissected out, rinsed with Hank’s buffer (Gibco), and digested in the same solution containing collagenase P (1 mg/ml; Roche Diagnostics) for 30 to 40 min at 37°C. Partially digested tissues were centrifuged, and the pellets were resuspended in 0.25% trypsin-EDTA (Gibco) and digested for an additional 5 min at 37°C. The digested ganglia were spun down, resuspended, and triturated with plastic pipette tips to release neurons. The cells were filtered through a 70-μm cell strainer (Biologix), plated into 96-well plates, and cultured in DMEM/F-12 supplemented with GlutaMAX (Gibco), 10% serum (Gibco), and penicillin (100 U/ml)/streptomycin (0.1 mg/ml) (Biological Industries). Twelve hours after plating, the culture medium was gradually replaced by Neurobasal-A (Gibco) supplemented with B27 (Gibco), penicillin (100 U/ml)/streptomycin (0.1 mg/ml) (Biological Industries), and GlutaMAX (Gibco). Calcium imaging was performed after 48 hours.

## Intracellular Ca2+ imaging
For intracellular calcium imaging of DRG neurons, DRG neurons were plated in 96-well plates and loaded with the fluorescent dye Fluo-4 AM (10 μM) and the surfactant polyol Pluronic F-127 (0.02%; Molecular Probes) at 37°C for 1 hour in a Ca2+-free imaging solution. Subsequently, real-time imaging was performed with an Olympus FV1000 confocal microscope. The standard imaging solution contained 145 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 2 mM CaCl2, and 10 mM Hepes (pH 7.4). All imaging and analyses were performed by researchers blinded to the experimental groups.

## Wireless optoelectronic device
The wireless optoelectronic devices and power transmission antennae are custom-made by Fu’xi Optoelectronics Company (Shenzhen, China). Each optoelectronic device is composed of an LED light source, an inductive copper coil, and a ceramic chip capacitor connected in series. The power transmission antennae consist of a primary loop and an intensifier loop, and both loops are composed of an inductor-capacitor circuit. The primary loop is driven by a high-frequency inverter power supply resulting in an oscillating magnetic field. The intensifier loop is resonantly coupled to the primary loop. The primary loop was placed at 0 cm and the intensifier loop at 3 cm from the bottom of the animal enclosure. For behavioral experiments, the optoelectronic devices were embedded in PSA that was attached on the nape skin of the mouse neck with the help of a fixing band.

## Behavioral studies
Mice were shaved on the sites for light stimulation 1 day before experiments. For the UVA/visible light–induced scratching behavior experiments, mice were acclimated to the experimental chamber for 30 min before testing. Saline or FAD was intradermally injected into the nape skin of the mouse neck, and light stimulation of mouse nape skin was performed by using wireless optoelectronic devices emitting UVA/blue light (358 to 381 and 445 to 488 nm) (Fu’xi Optoelectronics Company, China). Mouse behavior was recorded by a digital video camera. The scratching behavior was quantified by the number of scratching bouts over the recording period. A bout of scratching was defined as continuous scratch movements with hind paws directed at the area around the injection site.
For the NIR light–induced scratching behavior experiments, saline, UNCP-FAD, or UCNPs were intradermally injected into the nape skin of the mouse neck, and NIR stimulation on the nape skin of restrained mice was performed by using an 808-nm NIR laser source (Changchun New Industries Optoelectronics Tech. Co., China). After 20 min of NIR light stimulation, the mice were released from the restraint device, and scratching behavior was recorded and quantified by the number of scratching bouts.
For the hot-plate test, saline, UNCP-FAD, or UCNPs were intrathecally injected into the L5-L6 intervertebral space in mice using a Hamilton syringe (Hamilton, USA). The proper insertion of the needle was verified by quick flicking of the tail of the mouse upon entry of the needle. The injection site of restrained mice was irradiated for 15 min using an 808-nm NIR laser source (Changchun New Industries Optoelectronics Tech. Co., China). After NIR light stimulation, the mice were released and acclimated to the testing environment for 20 min, and, then, heat hyperalgesia in the mice was evaluated using a hot/cold plate (Bioseb, France). Briefly, the mice were placed on a stainless steel plate with a set temperature of 53°C (30-s cutoff time), and the latency time for mice to exhibit nociceptive responses (licking hind paw or jumping from the plate) was recorded.
Behavioral scoring in all experiments was performed while blinded to the mouse genotype and to the treatments. The light power densities were measured and calibrated by a UV meter (Shenzhen Linshang Technology, China), a light meter (Photoelectric Instrument Factory of Beijing Normal University, China), or a laser power meter (Ophir Optronics, USA).

## Evaluation of NIR penetration through the mouse back
Mice were euthanized by isoflurane inhalation and dissected to separate the mouse lower back (from skin to spinal column). The vertebral body, intervertebral disk, and ventral part of the spinal cord were carefully removed by rongeur forceps, and the dorsal part of the vertebrae and spinal cord was retained. NIR light (808 nm) was vertically delivered from a laser fiber (200 μm in diameter) (Changchun New Industries Optoelectronics Tech. Co., China), which was placed above the skin of the intrathecal injection site to ensure that all the NIR light hit the spinal vertebrae. The NIR power that penetrated the spinal cord was measured by a laser power meter (Ophir Optronics, USA) placed under the lumbar spinal cord.

## Temperature measurement on mouse skin upon NIR irradiation
After intradermal or intrathecal injection of UCNP-FAD, mice were restrained with a restraint device, and the injection site was irradiated by NIR light with an 808-nm NIR laser source (Changchun New Industries Optoelectronics Tech. Co., China). Temperature changes at the irradiation site on mouse skin were monitored with an infrared thermal imager (FLIR, USA). When NIR irradiation was at a power density of 1.5 W/cm2, a mini electric fan was used to enhance air flow at the irradiation site.

## Temperature measurement inside the mouse spinal cord upon NIR irradiation
After intrathecal injection of UCNP-FAD at the L5-L6 intervertebral space, mice were euthanized by isoflurane inhalation. The spinal column was transected at a position ~1 cm away from the injection site with scissors to expose the vertebral foramen. A K-type ultrafine thermocouple probe connected to a thermometer (KAIPUSEN, China) was inserted into the spinal cord through the vertebral foramen and was positioned ~5 mm away from the NIR irradiation site. The injection site was irradiated with the NIR laser for various times from 0 to 15 min. At the time of temperature measurement, the NIR laser was turned off to prevent measurement artifacts induced by direct light absorption by the thermocouple probe ( ), and the thermocouple probe was immediately repositioned to the irradiation site inside the spinal canal to measure the temperature.

## Spinal field potential recording
C-fiber–evoked field potentials in the spinal dorsal horn were recorded, according to our method described previously. Briefly, mice were anesthetized with urethane (1.5 g/kg, intraperitoneal). L4-L5 laminectomy was performed, and the left sciatic nerve trunk was explored. Single square pulses (0.5-ms duration, in 1-min intervals) delivered to the sciatic nerve were used as test stimuli. C-fiber–evoked field potentials were recorded in the superficial spinal dorsal horn (L4 and L5 segments) with a glass microelectrode (filled with 0.5 M sodium acetate, impedance of 1 to 3 megohms). The surgical incision on mouse back was covered by mouse back tissues containing skin, fat, muscle, and vertebrae to block out NIR irradiation. The amplitudes of C-fiber–evoked field potentials were recorded and analyzed with WinLTP program (www.winltp.com). The animals were euthanized at the end of the experiments.

## Immunofluorescence analysis
UCNP-FAD or control saline was injected into the L5-L6 intervertebral space of mice, and the injection site was irradiated by pulsed NIR light or control white light for 15 min. After NIR light stimulation, the mice were released from the laser source and acclimated to the testing environment for 20 min, and, then, heat hyperalgesia in the mice was evaluated using a hot/cold plate (Bioseb, France). At 90 min after the test, mice were anesthetized and transcardially perfused with chilled 4% paraformaldehyde (BL539A, Biosharp) in 0.1 M PBS. Spinal segments were immersion fixed in paraformaldehyde overnight and washed with PBS. Then, the spinal segments were dehydrated in sucrose (BGC005, Meilunbio) solutions for 6 hours each with increasing concentrations from 15 to 30% (w/v). After embedding in optimal cutting temperature compound (4583, Tissue-Tek OCT, SAKURA) and freezing at −80°C, the spinal segments were prepared as cryosections with 8-μm thickness on pretreated glass slides (1A5105, CITOTEST) and air-dried for 1 hour. After being permeabilized in PBST (PBS with 0.3% Triton X-100) (T9284, Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at room temperature, samples were blocked with 3% (w/v) BSA in PBS overnight at 4°C. Slides were then incubated with primary antibody (anti–c-fos mouse monoclonal antibody, Servicebio) overnight at 4°C. After washing at least three times, fluorescence-conjugated secondary antibody (donkey anti-mouse, A-31571, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole were incubated with the slides in the dark at room temperature for 2 hours. Images were taken using a Leica TCS SP8 confocal microscope. All imaging and analyses were performed by researchers blinded to the experimental groups.

## Statistics
We used cell/sample/animal sizes that were deemed suitable for statistical analysis and were similar to those in other studies in the field. All experiments used blinding and randomization where possible. Replicates of measurement were taken from distinct cells, samples, or animals. Statistical analysis was performed using pCLAMP, WinLTP program, GraphPad Prism, Origin, and SPSS. Data normality was assessed by the Shapiro-Wilk method. Statistical significance was evaluated using a two-tailed t test or one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey test (for multiple-group comparisons) or two-way ANOVA followed by least significant difference (LSD) post hoc tests (for multiple-group comparisons). Data are presented as the means ± SEM. The exact P values are indicated in table S1, and a P value of 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant. *P or #P < 0.05, **P or ##P < 0.01, ***P or ###P < 0.001, and not significant (ns) indicates P > 0.05.

## Acknowledgments
We thank D. Julius of University of California San Francisco for providing us the TRPA1−/− mice, X.-G. Liu of Sun Yat-sen University for the use of equipment to record spinal field potential, and the Scientific Research Center of Guangzhou Medical University for providing the instrument measurement and analysis.
Funding: This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (32150001, 81302865, 82002838, and 52372078), Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou (2024A03J0787 and 202002030343), the Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation of Guangdong Province (2021A1515011230 and 2019A1515012214), the Basic and Applied Basic Research Project of Department of Education of Guangdong Province (2018KZDXM054), Guangzhou Medical University Startup (B195002002049), Shanghai Youth Science and Technology Talent Sailing Program (20YF1449100), Shanghai Rising-Star Program (23QA1411700), and Special Program for Clinical Research in the Health Industry of Shanghai Municipal Health Commission (20224Y0073).

Author contributions: Conceptualization: S.W., Jian Yang, Z.H., and J.X. Methodology: S.W., Jian Yang, Z.H., H.L., and J.X. Investigation: W.T., Q.J., Jiewen Lin, Jiamin Luo, D.H., Jie Yang, T.G., H.G., Y.G., W.Z., F.C., Y.Y., Jingjing Liu, M.X., C.D., B.C., D.S., H.W., and Y.L. Data curation: W.T., Q.J., Jiewen Lin, Jiamin Luo, D.H., Jie Yang, H.G., and C.D. Visualization: W.T., Q.J., Jiewen Lin, Jiamin Luo, D.H., and Jie Yang. Supervision: S.W., Z.H., and H.L. Writing—original draft: S.W., Jian Yang, Z.H., Q.J., and W.T. Writing—review and editing: S.W., Jian Yang, Z.H., Q.J., J.X., W.T., H.L., and Jiewen Lin. Funding acquisition: S.W., Z.H., Q.J., and J.X.

Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Data availability statement: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials and have been deposited in the Dryad database (https://datadryad.org/stash/share/NCfZqkpNa_X8C5a9sLDOG_wrf82PAM8LjU2DaKTHIRc).

## Supplementary Materials

## This PDF file includes:
Figs. S1 to S25
Table S1
Legends for movies S1 to S5

## Other Supplementary Material for this manuscript includes the following:
Movies S1 to S5