pmcMol Ther Nucleic AcidsMol Ther Nucleic Acids1821mtna101581621Molecular Therapy. Nucleic Acids2162-2531American Society of Gene & Cell TherapyPMC12663631PMC12663631.112663631126636314132379610.1016/j.omtn.2025.102757S2162-2531(25)00311-71027571Original ArticleSCAD: A modular platform for efficient delivery of duplex RNA to the CNS and beyond
KangMoorim LinWei-Hsiang LiYichen XuFeifei ZhouXiaojie SiChunyan DaiJianxiu HeJichao SchachtIan GanZubao HuangVera LiLong-Chenglilc@ractigen.com 1Ractigen Therapeutics, Nantong, Jiangsu, China2Institute of Reproductive Medicine, School of Medicine, Nantong University, Nantong, Jiangsu, China∗Corresponding author: Long-Cheng Li, Ractigen Therapeutics, Nantong, Jiangsu, China. lilc@ractigen.com0912202530102025364497114102757204202528102025301020253011202501122025© 2025 The Author(s)2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Oligonucleotide therapeutics—including antisense oligonucleotides and duplex RNAs such as small interfering RNAs, small activating RNAs, and microRNAs—hold immense potential for treating both genetic and acquired diseases by modulating gene expression in a target-specific manner. However, effective delivery to extrahepatic tissues, particularly the central nervous system, remains a significant challenge. While N-Acetylgalactosamine conjugation has enabled liver-specific delivery of oligonucleotides leading to several approved siRNA drugs for hepatic indications, there remains a significant unmet need for effective treatment options in the CNS space. We have developed the smart chemistry-aided delivery platform that enables duplex RNA delivery by conjugating to an accessory oligonucleotide, which facilitates protein binding and promotes cellular uptake. Through extensive screening, we identified an optimal SCAD architecture that demonstrates enhanced cell-free protein binding and in vitro activity. In rodent models, local administration of SCAD-siRNA conjugates resulted in broad biodistribution throughout the CNS and sustained mRNA knockdown for over 5 months, with a favorable safety profile. The SCAD platform also exhibited efficient delivery to other extrahepatic tissues, including the eye, lung, and joint. The modular design of SCAD can be easily adapted to any duplex RNA, making it a powerful tool for advancing oligonucleotide therapeutics.

## Graphical abstract
 
Li and colleagues present the optimization of the smart chemistry-aided delivery (SCAD) platform technology to tackle the fundamental bottleneck of extrahepatic delivery of double-stranded RNA drug molecules. This work highlights key features of SCAD and its potential broad applications in targeting complex diseases involving the central nervous system and others.

## Keywords
MT: Oligonucleotides: Therapies and Applicationsoligonucleotide therapeuticsdeliverySCADsiRNACNSSOD1-ALSpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Introduction
Oligonucleotide-based therapies have emerged as powerful tools for targeting both genetic and acquired diseases at the molecular level. Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) and duplex RNAs—including small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), small activating RNAs (saRNAs), and microRNAs (miRNAs)—modulate gene expression at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels in a target-specific manner, providing avenues to treat conditions that are challenging to address with traditional small molecules or biologics. However, delivering these molecules to target tissues, particularly beyond the liver, presents significant challenges. , While the liver can be effectively targeted using technologies such as N-Acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) conjugation, achieving similar delivery efficiency to other tissues, especially the central nervous system (CNS), has remained difficult. Various strategies have been explored to overcome these barriers, including lipid nanoparticles, chemical conjugations (such as sugar, lipids, small molecules, peptides, aptamers, and protein moieties), and ligand-targeted nanoparticles, all aimed at targeting specific tissues such as the eye, lung, and CNS. , , In recent years, several conjugation strategies have been developed to enhance siRNA delivery to the CNS by direct administration to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-filled spaces. These include the 2′-O-hexadecyl (C16) lipid-conjugated siRNA, , albumin-binding L2-lipid-conjugated siRNA, and divalent siRNA scaffolds. These conjugates enhance neuronal uptake by promoting CNS retention and broad distribution. Among these delivery approaches, C16 has demonstrated promise in achieving potent and durable target gene silencing in the CNS as shown in preclinical studies and ongoing clinical trials (NCT05231785 and NCT06393712). However, a common limitation of these strategies is the inability to enable systemic delivery to effectively reach deep brain regions due to the restrictive nature of the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Substantial progress has been made with antibody-oligonucleotide conjugates (AOCs) that exploit transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1)-mediated transport to facilitate oligonucleotide delivery across the BBB without invasive procedures. While the TfR-targeted AOC enables uniform biodistribution throughout deep brain structures, major limitations remain: (1) poor solubility requiring high total doses and larger intravenous (i.v.) infusion volumes, (2) complex chemistry, manufacturing, and controls inherent to biological manufacturing process, (3) higher cost of goods, and (4) safety concerns, as anti-TfR1 antibodies have been associated with anemia, reticulocyte count decrease, and TfR1 depletion. 
ASOs have demonstrated effectiveness for neurological disorders, exemplified by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of nusinersen for spinal muscular atrophy and tofersen for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) associated with mutations in the superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene (SOD1-ALS). , These successes demonstrate the potential for localized CNS delivery. , Although ASOs and siRNAs both regulate gene expression, they significantly differ in their delivery mechanisms and molecular structures. Both are inherently negatively charged, which typically impedes cellular uptake. However, phosphorothioate (PS) modifications substantially enhance the distribution and cellular uptake of ASOs and improve their overall biological activity by increasing nuclease resistance, stability, and binding affinity to plasma proteins such as albumin and lipoproteins, which facilitates their cellular entry. , , , , Nevertheless, PS modifications have been associated with increased single-stranded oligonucleotide-related toxicity. Extensive use of PS modifications in siRNAs may also compromise their therapeutic activity by interfering with RNA-induced silencing complex loading and increasing toxicity, thus limiting their applicability in similar contexts.
To overcome the challenges associated with delivering duplex RNA into CNS, we developed the smart chemistry-aided delivery (SCAD) platform. This innovative system utilizes the self-delivery properties of ASOs by conjugating a non-targeting single-stranded oligonucleotide, known as an accessory oligonucleotide (ACO), to the duplex RNA. Our prior published studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of SCAD in delivering an siRNA targeting SOD1 (siSOD1) to the CNS. Local delivery of the siSOD1-ACO conjugate via intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) or intrathecal (IT) injection into SOD1G93A mice slowed disease progression, extended animal survival, and mitigated disease-related motor deficits. In non-human primates, IT administration of the siSOD1-ACO conjugate led to a robust and durable dose-dependent knockdown of SOD1 mRNA in the CNS and a decrease in SOD1 protein in the CSF. These encouraging results have led to the initiation of an investigator-initiated trial (IIT, NCT05903690) and a phase 1 study (NCT06556394) to evaluate the safety and tolerability of RAG-17, a SCAD-siRNA conjugate, in SOD1-ALS patients. In addition, compared to the AOC, the siRNA-ACO conjugate provides simpler and more cost-effective synthesis along with scalability and adaptability. The entire SCAD-siRNA conjugates are synthesized entirely via solid-phase chemistry on controlled pore glass, enabling streamlined, time- and cost-effective manufacturing. 
The present work outlines the development of SCAD technology and presents detailed pharmacodynamic (PD) and pharmacokinetic (PK) analyses of SCAD-siRNA after local administration in the CNS. Additionally, we have investigated SCAD’s capacity to target other extrahepatic tissues including the lung, eye, and joint, highlighting its potential for overcoming barriers of oligonucleotide delivery to tissues beyond the liver.

## Results

## Structure and synthesis of the SCAD architecture
The SCAD delivery system is structured with a single-stranded oligonucleotide, termed an ACO, which is linked via a linker to one of the strands (the passenger strand) in a double-stranded RNA (dsRNA). The passenger strand, the linker, and the ACO were synthesized on solid support as a single strand and annealed with the other strand of the dsRNA to form the final SCAD architecture ( A). The initial ACO was designed to have no significant homology with any human coding sequences and consisted of 18 nucleotides (nt) featuring a universal PS backbone and 2′-O-methoxyethyl (2′-MOE) modifications. 
The concept was initially applied to a Cy3-labeled duplex siRNA with an ACO targeting the mouse Htt gene to generate Cy3-siHtt-ACOMOE18, which was administered intracerebroventricularly to neonatal mice. For comparison, the same Cy3-labeled siRNA without the ACO (Cy3-siHtt) was also administered as a control. Three days post administration, Cy3-siHtt-ACOMOE18 showed positive fluorescence signals in the brain, whereas the fluorescence signal of control siRNA (Cy3-siHtt) was confined to the vicinity of the injection site in the lateral ventricle ( B). Consistent with these observations, Cy3-siHtt-ACOMOE18 achieved a significant reduction in Htt mRNA levels in both the brain and spinal cord, unlike the control siRNA (Cy3-siHtt), which had no significant effect on the mRNA levels ( C and 1D). In our prior work, RNAscope in situ hybridization was employed to evaluate the bioavailability of SCAD-siSod1 in the CNS of rats 14 days following a single IT dose, specifically by detecting the antisense strand of the Sod1-targeting siRNA (RD-12500). Robust antisense signals were observed in the spinal cord, particularly in the lumbar segment, which is proximal to the IT injection site, suggesting effective local delivery. Within the brain regions, elevated levels of the antisense strand of RD-12500 were detected in the olfactory area, hippocampus, and cerebellum compared to other parts, suggesting broad distribution of SCAD-siRNA within the CNS.
To further validate the SCAD concept, we applied the same approach to another siRNA for the mouse App gene (siApp). ACOs of varying lengths (12, 15, and 18 nt) were conjugated to siApp. The 15- and 18-nt ACO variants (siApp-ACOMOE15, siApp-ACOMOE18) effectively knocked down App expression in the brain and spinal cord, whereas the 12-nt ACO (siApp-ACOMOE12) did not ( E and 1F). These results indicate that SCAD is broadly applicable to siRNAs and that the length of the ACO can affect delivery efficiency.
When siHtt-ACOMOE18 was intended to be used for a long-term study, it was noted that all mice succumbed by day 6 post dosing, indicating potential toxicity associated with the chemical composition of the ACO. To further optimize the ACO, we developed a range of ACOs, varying from 8 to 20 nt, based on the original sequence but omitting the 2′-MOE modifications across all nucleotides. These variants were conjugated to an siRNA targeting the mouse Sod1 gene and administered via i.c.v. injection to older mice aged 4–6 weeks. None of the mice displayed mortality before the planned sacrifice on day 5. Subsequent tissue analysis showed that these 2′-MOE-lacking variants exhibited diminished knockdown efficiency in the CNS ( G and 1K) when compared to their 2′-MOE counterparts ( E and 1F). However, among all the variants, the 14-nt ACO variant stood out as the most effective variant across most of the tissues while having minimal activity in the liver ( G and 1L). This finding emphasizes the impact of ACO size and chemical properties on the biodistribution and activities of SCAD, underscoring the need for further optimization of the SCAD architecture.

## Optimization of the SCAD architecture and in vitro evaluation
Having established the benefits of ACO conjugation in delivering duplex RNA in vivo, we developed an in vitro screening method aimed at rapidly evaluating a large library of SCAD designs. Leveraging from the established benefits of chemical modifications in ASOs, such as the PS backbone and 2′-O modifications (2′-O-methyl [2′-OMe] or 2′-MOE), which are known to enhance plasma protein binding and facilitate cellular uptake, we initiated our study by establishing an in vitro protein-binding assay.
In this assay, the duplex RNA siSod1 conjugated to a 14-nt ACO with uniform 2′-MOE modification (siSod1-2-ACOMOE14) or without the ACO was incubated with human plasma for 1 h at 37°C, followed by electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs). The results, as depicted in A, showed that siSod1-2-ACOMOE14 had a significantly lower unbound fraction compared to its unconjugated counterpart, indicating enhanced plasma protein binding attributable to the ACO. This finding supports the notion that ACO conjugation enhances plasma protein interaction. 
We further developed an in vitro assay to assess the delivery efficacy of SCAD-siRNA conjugates using unassisted delivery mechanisms in freshly isolated primary mouse hepatocytes (PMHs). Initially, we compared the knockdown efficiency of siRNA with or without the SCAD, both delivered using the RNAiMAX transfection reagent. As shown in B, there was no significant difference in the knockdown of Sod1 expression between siSod1-2 and siSod1-2-ACOMOE14, suggesting that ACO conjugation does not compromise the in vitro potency of the siRNA.
Subsequently, we directly administered both siSod1-2 and siSod1-2-ACOMOE14 to the PMHs via gymnotic uptake. Twenty-four hours later, Sod1 mRNA expression was measured using quantitative reverse-transcription PCR (RT-qPCR). The results revealed that siSod1-2-ACOMOE14 exhibited significantly stronger knockdown of Sod1 expression compared to non-conjugated siRNA(siSod1-2) ( C). This result validates the robustness of the in vitro free uptake assay for evaluating the delivery performance of SCAD-conjugated siRNAs.

## SCAD library development and structure-activity relationship optimization
To perform structure-activity relationship (SAR) optimization of SCAD structures, we developed an extensive library of ACO sequences varying in sequence context, nucleotide composition, length, and 2′ sugar modifications. This included creating ACOs enriched with different nucleotide bases—adenine, guanine, purine, cytosine, uridine, and pyrimidine—maintained at a constant length of 14 nt with full 2′-MOE and 13 PS backbone modifications. We also varied the lengths of these ACOs from 6 to 14 nt while maintaining full 2′-MOE and PS backbone modifications. We then adjusted the PS content in these 14-nt ACOs, ranging from 2 to 13 PS modifications. Additionally, we experimented with different ratios of 2′-MOE to 2′-OMe in ACOs of a fixed 14-nt length with full PS backbones. Finally, we explored the use of two types of linkers: flat linear spacers (C3, C12, C6, S9, S18) and more rigid, ring-shaped cyclic spacers (TT dinucleotide, dSpacer, UUACA, UUCUU), to connect the 14-nt ACO with universal 2′-MOE and PS backbone modifications to the antisense strand of siSod1-2.
We first assessed the protein-binding capabilities of these SCAD variants. As shown in D and 2E, discernible trends emerged in the impact of various modifications on protein binding. For instance, protein binding decreased with increasing adenine and purine content but increased with higher guanine content, larger ACO sizes, or greater numbers of PS modifications. However, changes in the content of purine, pyrimidine, and the ratio of 2′-MOE to 2′-OMe showed negligible effects on protein binding. Notably, linear spacers facilitated stronger protein binding compared to cyclic spacers.
Next, we evaluated the in vitro knockdown activity of these SCAD variants in PMHs using the free uptake approach. As shown in A and 3B, nucleotide composition significantly affected activity; for example, increasing adenine or guanine content enhanced activity, while an increase in cytosine content had less effect. Among different linkers, TT and S9 provided the siRNA with the highest knockdown activity ( B). 
We then performed correlation analysis between the protein-binding ability and knockdown activity for each variant ( ). As shown in C, there was almost no correlation (R-squared = 0.063) between protein binding and knockdown activity when all variants were combined. However, when subgroup correlation analysis was performed individually for each group of variants, pyrimidine-rich ACOs exhibited the strongest correlation (R-squared = 0.736) between protein binding and activity, followed by guanine-rich ACOs (R-squared = 0.491). PS content and the ratio of 2′-OMe:2′-MOE modifications in the ACOs showed a weaker correlation between protein binding and activity (R-squared = 0.302 and 0.359, respectively) ( ). The correlation between each SCAD design parameter and knockdown activity or protein binding was also analyzed individually. Among the parameters evaluated, purine content, ACO size, PS content, and the OMe:MOE ratio showed statistically significant associations (p < 0.05) with either protein binding or knockdown activity ( and ). Taken together, these findings indicate that the careful selection and optimization of SARs—particularly nucleotide compositions and linker types—are crucial for enhancing the activity of the SCAD system.

## In vivo validation of knockdown activity in the CNS
To determine if the in vitro findings could be replicated in vivo, we administered selected SCAD candidates to mice via i.c.v. injection and assessed Sod1 mRNA expression in CNS tissues 7 days post injection. We included optimal candidates from in vitro work, as well as suboptimal candidates as controls. The optimal candidates all have strong protein binding, which include the following designs: purine-rich (ACOA(6)/G(4)), fully 2′-OMe modified (ACOOme14), uridine-rich (ACOU(7) and ACOU(9)), and ACOMOE14 with spacer 9 (S9-ACOMOE14), with 6-carbon spacer (C6-ACOMOE14), or with spacer 18 (S18-ACOMOE14). The suboptimal candidates have designs that include spacer 9 without ACO (S9), cytosine-rich (ACOC(10)), 14-nt ACO with two PS backbones (ACOMOE14(2PS)), and ACO with a TT linker (TT-ACOMOE14), which has poor protein binding.
As depicted in , optimal candidates (ACOA(6)/G(4), ACOOme14, ACOU(7), ACOMOE14, S9-ACOMOE14, C6-ACOMOE14, and S18-ACOMOE14) in general displayed stronger knockdown activities especially in the spinal cord and the liver compared to suboptimal candidates (S9, ACOC(10), ACOMOE14(2PS), and TT-ACOMOE14) ( A–4G). Notably, reducing the number of PS in the ACO (ACOMOE14(2PS)) almost completely abolished knockdown activity. Among the optimal candidates, uridine-rich ones (ACOU(7) and ACOMOE14) demonstrated substantial knockdown activities in the brain and the spinal cord ( A–4F). Furthermore, ACOMOE14 with different linkers exhibited robust knockdown activities (38.9%, 72.9%, 77.5%, and 76.8%) in the cerebrum ( A). 
These results validate that the combination of cell-free protein-binding assays and in vitro free uptake activity serves as an effective preliminary screening method for identifying efficient SCAD architectures for in vivo delivery. The findings from this in vivo study established the optimized ACO design, particularly ACOMOE14 with the S9 linker (S9-ACOMOE14), as a standard SCAD design for effective siRNA delivery to the CNS with limited systemic exposure.
We reasoned that the stability of the S9-ACOMOE14 design could be compromised in vivo due to the phosphodiester (PO) linkages at both sides of the S9 linker. To address this potential issue, we replaced the PO linkages with PS bonds, resulting in a new variant, S9(PS)-ACOMOE14. Unfortunately, this alteration led to reduced efficacy in the spinal cord and unintended activity in the liver on day 7 post i.c.v. administration ( H). This finding suggests that the additional PS modifications may exacerbate CNS drainage, reducing activity in the spinal cord while increasing unwanted liver activity.

## SCAD enabled broad CNS tissue distribution and profound and durable siRNA activity in the CNS
To evaluate long-term durability and PD/PK relationship of CNS-delivered SCAD-siRNA, a single dose of SCAD-siSod1-3 or duplex siSod1-3 was administered to mice via i.c.v. injection, and tissues were harvested at different time points (1 and 8 h and 1, 3, 14, 30, 61, 92, and 154 days post injection) to assess siRNA tissue concentration by stem-loop PCR (all time points) and Sod1 mRNA expression by RT-qPCR (1, 3, 14, 30, 61, 92, and 154 days) ( ). 
The results, detailed in , , and , and , reveal that SCAD-siSod1-3 exhibited a broader and more sustained distribution in CNS tissues compared to duplex alone (siSod1-3). Notably, SCAD-siSod1-3 concentrations remained higher than those of siSod1-3 over extended period of time in the frontal cortex, motor cortex, and hippocampus, indicating improved retention. The concentration ratio of SCAD-siSod1-3 to siSod1-3 was particularly high in the frontal cortex, somatosensory, and hypothalamus with peak ratios observed at later time points ( ), suggesting sustained retention facilitated by SCAD. The spinal cord showed modest exposure levels of SCAD-siSod1-3, which could be attributed to its anatomical distance from the i.c.v. injection site.
In the plasma, both siSod1-3 and SCAD-siSod1-3 showed an initial peak concentration at 1 h post dosing and then rapidly declined to undetectable levels within 1 day, indicating quick systemic clearance ( L; ). In the kidney and liver, siSod1-3 and SCAD-siSod1-3 reached peak concentration at 8 h and 1 day, respectively, suggesting quicker clearance of siSod1-3 than SCAD-siSod1-3 ( M; ).
The PD assessments showed that, in contrast to the duplex siSod1-3, SCAD-siSod1-3 induced profound knockdown effects across all CNS regions, including deep brain structures such as the brain stem, striatum, hippocampus, and hypothalamus. Peak knockdown activities approached or exceeded 80% between days 14 and 30 ( and ). In comparison, siSod1-3 alone achieved notable knockdown only in regions close to the i.c.v. injection site—the hippocampus and the motor cortex—with effectiveness peaking at 40.4% and 64.7%, respectively.
Remarkably, while the knockdown effects of the duplex siSod1-3 diminished rapidly, SCAD-siSod1-3 maintained substantial activity, with over 30% knockdown persisting in the frontal cortex, cerebellum, brainstem, hippocampus, and hypothalamus as late as day 154 ( A–5K and ). This sustained activity illustrates the robust PD/PK relationship across most CNS tissues, with IC50 values ranging from 0.3 ng/g in the hippocampus to 3.13 μg/g in the frontal cortex ( ), confirming that tissue siRNA concentration reliably predicts in vivo activity.
Overall, these findings demonstrate that SCAD delivery via i.c.v. injection achieves efficient and sustained siRNA delivery to the CNS, resulting in prolonged tissue exposure and persistent PD activity for over five months.

## Cell-type specificity of SCAD-siRNA in the CNS
To assess the cell-type-specific activity of SCAD in the CNS, we synthesized siRNAs targeting genes specifically expressed in mouse astrocytes, microglia, and neurons—namely Glial fibrillary acidic protein (Gfap), allograft inflammatory factor 1 (Iba1), and Tubulin, beta 3 class III (Tubb3). Additionally, we targeted the neuron-specific gene in rat, Microtubule-associated protein 2 (Map2), as previously documented. These siRNAs, featuring uniform chemical modifications and the SCAD architecture, were administered to mice via a single i.c.v. injection and to rats via a single IT injection, and the expression of these target genes was analyzed 14 days after administration.
In mouse CNS, all SCAD-siRNAs effectively reduced the mRNA levels of their respective targets, with the most significant reduction observed in astrocytes, followed by neurons and microglia ( A–6C). For rats, the neuron-specific siRNA targeting Map2 displayed the most profound activity in the spinal cord, with significant but reduced activity throughout most brain regions ( D). This gradient of activity, from the highest in the spinal cord to lower levels in the brain, could be explained by the fact that intrathecally injected SCAD-siRNA moved against the direction of CSF flow, unlike the i.c.v.-injected SCAD-siRNA in mice, which moved with the CSF flow from the brain to the spinal cord. 
Comparing knockdown efficacy across these cell types requires consideration of the intrinsic potency of each siRNA and the baseline expression levels of the target genes. Despite these variables and limitations of intrathecally and intracerebroventricularly delivered oligonucleotide therapy, the results clearly demonstrate that SCAD can effectively deliver siRNA across a broad range of cell types in the CNS.

## SCAD delivered duplex RNA to additional extrahepatic tissues (lung, joint, and eye) via local administration

## Lung delivery by intratracheal instillation
To evaluate the delivery efficacy of SCAD in the lung, mice were administered siSod1-3 or SCAD-siSod1-3 via intratracheal instillation. Sod1 expression was evaluated on day 7 post administration. While siSod1-3 alone led to a slight decrease in Sod1 mRNA expression, SCAD-siSod1-3 achieved statistically significant, dose-dependent reductions in Sod1 levels (p < 0.001 or p < 0.0001), with even the lowest dose of 1 nmol resulting in a 43.6% reduction ( A). 

## Joint delivery by intraarticular injection
The ability of SCAD to target joint tissues was examined in rats that received 7 nmol of siSod1-3 or SCAD-siSod1-3 via intraarticular injection. Fourteen days later, analysis of the synovial membrane revealed that SCAD-siSod1-3 led to a 79.3% reduction in Sod1 mRNA expression, significantly outperforming the 41.9% reduction observed with siSod1-3 alone ( B). Notably, neither form of the siRNA showed detectable activity in the liver, confirming localized action within the joint ( C).

## Eye delivery by intravitreal injection
To evaluate the potential of SCAD for ocular delivery, siSod1-3 and SCAD-siSod1-3 were administered via intravitreal injection to rats at doses of 2.1 and 1.6 nmol, respectively. Fourteen days later, Sod1 mRNA levels in retina tissues were assessed. SCAD-siSod1-3 achieved a 64.9% reduction in Sod1 expression, markedly surpassing the 33.7% reduction seen with siSod1-3 ( D). Most importantly, there were no changes in Sod1 mRNA levels in the un-injected eye ( E) or liver ( F), indicating minimal systemic exposure.
These results collectively confirm the broad applicability of SCAD for efficient RNA therapeutic delivery to a range of extrahepatic tissues, which would open new avenues for treating a wide spectrum of diseases where local delivery is feasible.

## Safety and toxicological evaluation of SCAD
To assess the potential immune-stimulatory activity of SCAD-siRNA in the CNS, we measured the expression levels of two neuroinflammation markers—Iba1 (indicative of microglia activation) and Gfap (indicative of astrocyte activation) , —in the mouse hippocampus. These mice received a single i.c.v. dose of SCAD-siSod1-3 at 21 nmol, and samples were collected at various time points from day 14 to day 154 post administration. As shown in , there were no significant changes in the expression of either marker throughout the duration of the study, indicating that SCAD-siRNA does not elicit immune stimulation in the CNS.
Safety and tolerability of the SCAD-siRNA were further assessed in Sprague-Dawley rats over a 14-day period following a single IT dose of two SCAD-conjugated siRNAs used in our previous publication (siSOD1-005M3-AC1 and siSOD1-047M3-AC1), which did not have conserved target for any rat gene at doses of 1.6 or 4.8 mg. Throughout the observation period, there were no instances of body weight loss or any clinical signs indicative of distress or toxicity in any of the treatment groups compared to the control group treated with aCSF ( ). The comprehensive evaluation revealed no significant observational or statistical deviations across the treatment and control groups in terms of mortality, body weight, and clinical signs ( ).
Laboratory assessments including complete blood count, serum chemistry, and protein levels in the CSF showed no abnormalities ( ), confirming the absence of systemic toxicity. During functional observational battery (FOB) assessments, , a slight decrease in neuromuscular function was noted in 1 out of 10 rats in the high-dose groups at day 1 and day 14, indicating potential test article-related neurotoxicity ( ; ).
Histopathological examinations of the kidney revealed mild inflammation and dilation of the renal pelvis in a few animals, occurrences that were also noted in the control group and displayed no dose-dependent trends ( ). Notably, two animals receiving the lower dose of siSOD1-005M3-AC1 exhibited mild degeneration of the spinal cord, likely related to the specific location of the IT injection site or potentially due to procedural complications during CSF collection. These findings suggest that the observed histopathological changes were incidental and not related to SCAD-siRNA treatment.
To assess the acute toxicity and potential immune stimulation of i.v. administered SCAD-siRNA in ICR mice, we evaluated an AC1 linked with the spacer 9 without duplex siRNA (AC1), a duplex siRNA (siSOD1-005M3), and an SCAD-siRNA (siSOD1-005M3-AC1) at doses of 10 and 40 nmol. We monitored serum chemistry, cytokine levels (interleukin-1β, interferon-γ, and tumor necrosis factor alpha), and mRNA expression for immune-related genes: C-C motif chemokine ligand 2 (Ccl2), C-C motif chemokine ligand 15 (Ccl5), interferon induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1 (Ifit1), interferon induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 2 (Ifit2), C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 10 (Cxcl10), interferon induced with helicase C domain 1 (Ifih1), and ISG15 ubiquitin-like modifier (Isg15) 8 h after dosing. Clinically, one mouse in the low-dose siSOD1-005M3 group exhibited increased heart rate, paralysis, and mortality approximately 1 h post injection, most likely to be procedure related. Serum levels of alanine transaminase test (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase test (AST), and creatinine remained within normal ranges across all groups ( A–S14C), although ALT levels were notably higher in the siSOD1-005M3-AC1 low-dose group compared to saline treatment ( A). None of the treatments induced cytokine production ( D–S14F). There was no significant activation of immune-related genes in the spleen or liver across treatments compared to saline controls ( G and S14H); however, Isg15 was significantly downregulated by siSOD1-005M3-AC1 at low dose in the spleen ( G) and by both AC1 at high dose and siSOD1-005M3-AC1 at low dose in the liver ( H). The absence of dose dependency suggests that this downregulation might be incidental, warranting further investigation.

## Discussion
Despite the FDA approval of six siRNA drugs targeting the liver, no duplex RNA drugs have yet been approved for CNS indications, primarily due to the challenges of delivering these molecules to the CNS effectively. However, CNS delivery has gained momentum in the field in the past few years. For example, ALN-APP was the first CNS clinical program leveraging Alnylam’s C16 lipid conjugated-siRNA delivery platform designed to target the amyloid beta precursor (APP) gene via IT administration for treating early-onset Alzheimer’s disease and cerebral amyloid angiopathy (NCT05231785 and NCT06393712). This is the first time that an RNAi drug has demonstrated robust gene silencing in the CNS. More recently, a second C16-conjugated siRNA (ALN-HTT02) targeting the Huntington (HTT) gene also entered the clinic in 2025 for the treatment of Huntington’s disease (NCT06585449). Within this evolving landscape, SCAD offers a differentiated strategy for delivering duplex RNAs to the CNS and other extrahepatic tissues. The SCAD system utilizes the self-delivery properties of ASOs by incorporating an ACO to enhance the distribution and cellular uptake of duplex RNAs. Our results reveal that SCAD-siRNA facilitates profound and sustained knockdown across various CNS regions when administered locally, while maintaining a favorable safety profile as evidenced in the ongoing SOD1-ALS clinical trials. Compared to C16-based siRNA conjugates, the SCAD platform achieves comparable potency and biodistribution when targeting the SOD1 sequence in both non-human primates (NHPs) and rats, notably at a lower molar dose (unpublished data). Furthermore, local administration enabled effective delivery beyond the CNS, with uptake in the lung, eye, and joint.
A critical factor in the success of SCAD is the optimization of its ACO component. Our work has shown that its sequence context, length, and chemical modifications—particularly the PS backbone—play crucial roles in enhancing SCAD’s delivery efficiency and gene-silencing effect. Additionally, the choice of linkers connecting the ACO to the dsRNA is important, underscoring the necessity for meticulous component design to maximize therapeutic outcomes. Since the actual sequence can impact SCAD activity, we speculate that the ACO may act as an aptamer to interact with specific proteins to facilitate uptake or intracellular trafficking. Identification of ACO-bound proteins by mass spectrometry would be the next step to further characterize this mechanism.
The PK profile of SCAD-siRNA post i.c.v. injection demonstrates effective CNS retention and rapid systemic clearance. SCAD-siSod1-3 achieves peak plasma concentrations within an hour of administration, indicative of swift migration from CNS to systemic circulation, followed by rapid clearance within a day. This rapid transition through systemic pathways minimizes peripheral exposure, thus enhancing safety. Comparing the PK profiles between plasma and liver suggests an initial rapid drainage from the CNS into the systemic circulation, followed by liver absorption, with SCAD-siSod1-3 exhibiting a higher initial concentration than siSod1-3.
In the CNS, SCAD-siRNA maintains higher concentrations compared to conventional duplex siRNA, with substantial knockdown effects lasting over 5 months. This sustained activity across various CNS regions—from cortical areas to deep brain structures—reveals a strong correlation between tissue concentration and PD activity and potentially supports extended dosing intervals in neurodegenerative diseases. Additionally, the minimal systemic exposure and rapid clearance of SCAD-siRNA from peripheral tissues support its favorable safety profile.
Similar to divalent siRNA or albumin-binding dendritic conjugates, SCAD simplifies manufacturing by avoiding the use of high-molecular-weight conjugates. Owing to its modular design, the SCAD architecture can be seamlessly adapted to any duplex RNA, as demonstrated by effective knockdown of cell-type-specific transcripts including Map2, Gfap, and Iba1, thus expanding its potential to address a wide spectrum of neurodegenerative diseases, where the ability to target a broad range of cell types is critical. Our results indicate that SCAD-siRNA not only efficiently targets neurons but also significantly impacts astrocytes and microglia. This capacity is vital as the neuronal microenvironment, which encompasses these cell types, plays a pivotal role in the progression of neurodegenerative diseases. , , In ALS, for instance, the pathogenesis involves not just neuronal dysfunction but also complex interactions within this microenvironment. , The synthesis of mutant SOD1 in motor neurons initiates disease, while its expression in neighboring glial cells accelerates disease progression, highlighting the non-cell-autonomous nature of SOD1-ALS. , In line with this, mutant SOD1-expressing astrocytes have been identified as viable therapeutic targets for slowing the progression of motor neuron degeneration in ALS. , By effectively reducing target mRNA levels in these glia, SCAD-siRNA can directly intervene upstream events of the pathogenesis and potentially mitigate the toxic effects of protein aggregation, thus enabling disease modification. Taken together, the ability of SCAD to enable potent and durable siRNA activity in disease-relevant cell types underscored its utility in the CNS-targeted oligo drug development space.
The final SCAD architecture was carefully evaluated and optimized for safety. Among the parameters evaluated, chemical modifications and the length of the ACO were identified as key factors impacting both efficacy and tolerability. Certain chemistries, such as 2′-OMe, were found to induce undesirable off-target effects, including increased liver accumulation. Consequently, 2′-MOE was incorporated into the final SCAD architecture to balance safety and delivery efficiency. To date, SCAD has shown a favorable safety and tolerability profile and does not rely on hydrophobic conjugates that have been associated with dose-limiting toxicity and potential chronic neurotoxicity at high, repeat doses in NHPs (e.g., ALN-APP ). In rodents, microglial and astrocytic markers (Iba1 and Gfap) remained stable 1 month after i.c.v. administration of SCAD-siRNA, whereas mild and transient elevations in these markers following i.c.v. dosing of divalent siRNA (di-siRNA) have been reported. In Sprague-Dawley rats, a single IT dose of SCAD-siRNA produced no adverse clinical signs, no body-weight loss, and no significant changes in hematology, serum chemistry, or CSF protein relative to controls. A small, low-frequency decrease in neuromuscular function was observed only at the highest dose (1/10 rats; ). Histopathological analysis revealed mild renal changes and isolated spinal cord degeneration, both of which were non-dose dependent. The spinal cord degeneration was considered likely related to the procedure (IT injection), whereas the renal changes appeared incidental and not directly related to the test article. In ICR mice, i.v. administration of SCAD-siRNA showed no significant cytokine induction or immune gene activation, though a minor, incidental increase in serum ALT levels was noted in one group. SCAD-siRNA also demonstrated excellent safety in phase 1/IIT studies without dose-limiting toxicities or serious adverse events. While head-to-head in vivo comparisons with di-siRNA or albumin-binding dendrimer conjugates are not yet available, the present findings support SCAD as a practical and potentially safe alternative platform for CNS delivery.
In conclusion, the SCAD delivery platform represents a potential next-generation approach for the efficient delivery of oligonucleotide therapeutics to challenging target tissues and cell types implicated in complex neurodegenerative diseases, addressing current limitations in extrahepatic delivery. Its key features include improved biodistribution, enhanced cellular uptake, and sustained gene knockdown. The ongoing clinical trial for SOD1-ALS will shed additional light into the safety and efficacy of SCAD-enabled siRNA therapy and pave a way for future clinical applications.

## Materials and methods

## Oligonucleotide synthesis
Single-stranded oligonucleotides were synthesized on a solid-phase support using an HJ-12 synthesizer (Highgene-Tech Automation, Beijing, China) and purified by reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography with an acetonitrile gradient over an UniPS column (NanoMicro Technology, Suzhou, China). Each sequence was then reconstituted in sterile water. Equal amounts of each strand were annealed into duplexes by heating and then cooling to room temperature. Resolution of a single band via gel electrophoresis at the predicted molecular weights was used to evaluate duplex formation. Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry confirmed the duplex identity, while overall purity was analyzed via size-exclusion chromatography high-performance liquid chromatography using an XBridge Protein BEH SEC 125 A column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). Endotoxin levels in each batch were quantified using the endpoint Chromogenic Endotoxin Quant Kit (Bioendo, Xiamen, China) via proenzyme Factor C. The duplex RNAs and ACO-linkers were subjected to mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy analyses to confirm their structural integrity and chemical purity. Oligonucleotide sequences with complete chemical modifications can be found in .

## EMSAs
Oligonucleotides were incubated at 37°C in 50% mouse plasma at a final concentration of 0.5 μM for 1 h. Samples were mixed with the loading buffer (Takara) and loaded onto a 4% agarose gel. Electrophoresis was performed at 120 volts for 60 min. After electrophoresis, the gel was documented using a ChemiDoc XRS+Gel imaging system (Bio-Rad). The intensity of each oligonucleotide band was quantified using Lab 6.1 Software (Bio-Rad). The oligonucleotide band from the plasma-mixed oligonucleotide sample with the same migration rate on the gel as their input was regarded as the unbound fraction. For each sample, a percentage of the unbound fraction was calculated as follows: unbound fraction (%) = (intensity of oligonucleotide band from plasma-mixed sample)/(intensity of oligonucleotide band from input) × 100.

## PMH isolation and oligonucleotide treatment
PMHs were isolated from C57BL/6J mice (4–6 weeks old) using a modified method. Mice were anesthetized and perfused with initial flushing reagent and digestion reagent. The liver was then dissected and mechanically dissociated. The cell suspension was filtered and centrifuged. Cells with at least 80% viability were seeded onto collagen type I (Corning)-coated plates and allowed to reach 90%–95% confluence before the assay. PMH cells were cultured under standard conditions in modified William’s Medium E (Gibco) supplemented with insulin and penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco). Mock (control) and oligonucleotides were added to the medium at 1 mM for 3 days without transfection reagents to facilitate passive uptake.

## Animal procurement
All animal procedures followed local and state regulations and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Ractigen Therapeutics. C57BL/6 mice (4–6 weeks old) were obtained from JOINN Biologics (Jiangsu, China), and Sprague-Dawley rats (4–6 weeks old) were purchased from Nantong University (Jiangsu, China).

## Gene expression analysis via RT-qPCR
Animal tissues were homogenized in RNAVzol (Biosharp, China). RNA was isolated using the MagPure Total RNA Micro LQ kit (Magen, China). RNA concentrations were measured with an Infinite 200 Pro M Plex (Tecan), and reverse transcription was performed using the PrimeScript RT reagent kit (Takara) with gDNA Eraser. cDNA was amplified by real-time PCR using TB Green Premix Ex Taq II (Takara) with gene-specific primers ( ). Real-time PCR was carried out in LightCycler 480 instrument II (Roche). Melting curves confirmed primer specificity. Relative gene expression was calculated using the ΔΔCt method, normalized to an appropriate housekeeping gene.

## Quantification of siRNA in animal tissues
Animal tissues were homogenized using a Bioprep-24 Homogenizer (Allsheng, China) to prepare tissue lysates. Lysates were heated to 95°C for 5 min to inactivate endogenous proteins. A standard curve was generated by spiking untreated lysate with serial dilutions of siSod1 or SCAD siRNA standards. Reverse transcription was performed using PrimeScript RT Reagent Kit (Takara) with custom stem-loop primers specific to siSod1-3 guide strands, followed by RT-qPCR amplification with primers listed in . Absolute siSod1-3 quantities were determined by linear regression against the standard curve. Tissue siSod1-3 concentrations were calculated as the ratio of siSod1-3 mass (ng) to tissue weight (g) used for lysis.

## I.c.v. administration
Following the procedure described by Duan et al., i.c.v. administration was conducted. Briefly, mice were anesthetized and placed in a stereotaxic apparatus. For neonatal mice, an 11.5-mm incision was made in the animal’s scalp, and a 25G needle attached to a Hamilton syringe containing the appropriate siRNA formulation was placed at bregma level. Insulin needles were used for adult mice. The needle was inserted into the lateral ventricle, and 10 μL of solution was injected at a rate of 1 μL/s. The wound was then sutured closed.

## IT administration
IT administration was conducted following the procedure described by Duan et al. Sprague-Dawley rats were anesthetized with isoflurane. The injection site at the base of the tail was shaved and cleaned. A needle was carefully inserted into the intradural space between the L5 and L6 spinous processes until a tail flick was observed. A total volume of 30 μL of solution was injected over 1 min.

## Intratracheal administration
For intratracheal administration, modified from a previous method, anesthetized mice were placed in a supine position. A small incision was made at the neck to expose the trachea. Oligonucleotides (no more than 50 μL) were slowly administered into the lung. The incision was then closed with sutures.

## Intravitreal administration
Intravitreal injections were carried out as previously described by Chiu et al. Sprague-Dawley rats were anesthetized with isoflurane. An anterior chamber paracentesis allowed some aqueous humor to drain. The oligonucleotides, dissolved in 4 μL of normal saline, were loaded into a 30-gauge needle for intravitreal injection at a 45° angle into the posterior chamber. After administration, antibiotics were applied to the injected eye to prevent infection.

## Intra-articular administration
Intra-articular injection was performed in rat knee joints following a modified protocol from a previously described method. After anesthesia and sterilizing the knee area, a needle was inserted into the joint. A standard volume of 30 μL was administered, followed by gentle flexion and extension of the knee joint to aid in the distribution of the injected material. The rats were monitored for any signs of distress or complications post injection.

## Clinical observation and endpoint criteria
Cage-side clinical observations, including signs of ill health or behavioral changes, were recorded at least once daily during the acclimation period and twice daily (a.m. and p.m.) during the treatment period. In the event of abnormal clinical signs, detailed descriptions were documented, and supporting videos or photographs were collected when possible. Examples of abnormal signs include convulsions, seizures, rigidity, muscle tremors, and dyspnea. Animals were observed from the time of injection up to 4 h post injection and subsequently monitored daily until the study endpoint. Body weight was recorded prior to drug administration and at defined intervals thereafter. Animals exhibiting a body-weight loss greater than 20% relative to the baseline or a Neuroscore of 4 were considered to have met humane endpoint criteria.
Acute neurotoxicity signs were monitored by FOB assessments, which are divided into 5 major functional categories: home cage observations, handling observations, open field observations, sensory observations, and neuromuscular observations.

## Fluorescence imaging of siRNA distribution in mouse brain
C57BL/6J mice were administered a single i.c.v. injection of Cy3-labeled siRNA. Three days post injection, brains were harvested, fixed, and cryosectioned into 10-μm sections. Sections were counterstained with DAPI to visualize nuclei and mounted for fluorescence microscopy. Images were acquired using a fluorescence microscope with appropriate filters for Cy3 and DAPI.

## Statistical analysis
Data analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism version 10.1.2 (324). Differences in continuous variables between treatments were assessed by a two-tailed and unpaired Student’s t test (for two treatments) or One-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s test for multiple comparison corrections (for three or more treatments). Significance was defined as follows: ∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗∗p < 0.001; ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001.

## Data and code availability
The authors confirm that the data supporting the findings of this study are available within the article and its supplementary materials.

## Acknowledgments
We would like to thank all the staff at Ractigen Therapeutics who participated in discussions and execution of experimental tasks related to this manuscript. This work was funded by Ractigen Therapeutics.

## Author contributions
M.K. and L.-C.L. conceived the project. W.-H.L., F.X., X.Z., C.S., J.D., J.H., and Z.G. performed the study. M.K., I.S., V.H., and Y.L. analyzed the data. L.-C.L. and V.H. wrote and revised the manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
L.-C.L. and M.K. hold shares in Ractigen Therapeutics and are inventors of patents related to SCAD technology assigned to Ractigen Therapeutics. All authors are current or former employees or consultants of Ractigen Therapeutics.

## Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process
During the preparation of this work, the authors used ChatGPT in order to improve language. After using this tool, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S14

## Document S2. Tables S1–S5

## Document S3. Article plus supplemental information

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtn.2025.102757.