pmcCancer Commun (Lond)Cancer Commun (Lond)3437canccomms101723675CAC2Cancer Communications2523-3548AAAS Science Partner Journal ProgramPMC11947613PMC11947613.111947613119476133972217310.1002/cac2.12644CAC2126441Original ArticleOriginal ArticleOrchestrated desaturation reprogramming from stearoyl‐CoA desaturase to fatty acid desaturase 2 in cancer epithelial‐mesenchymal transition and metastasis
CHEN et al.ChenZhiconghttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-7549-4696 zcchen@gzhmu.edu.cnGongYanqing ChenFukai LeeHyeon Jeong QianJinqin ZhaoJing ZhangWenpeng LiYamin ZhouYihui XuQiaobing XiaYu ZhouLiqun zhoulqmail@sina.comChengJi‐Xin jxcheng@bu.edu

1

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Center for Reproductive Medicine
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Major Obstetric Diseases
Guangdong Provincial Clinical Research Center for Obstetrics and Gynecology
Guangdong‐Hong Kong‐Macao Greater Bay Area Higher Education Joint Laboratory of Maternal‐Fetal Medicine
The Third Affiliated Hospital
Guangzhou Medical University
Guangzhou
Guangdong
P. R. China

2

Department of Biomedical Engineering
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Photonics Center
Boston University
Boston
Massachusetts
USA

3

Department of Urology
Peking University First Hospital
Beijing
P. R. China

4

College of Biomedical Engineering & Instrument Science
Key Laboratory for Biomedical Engineering of Ministry of Education
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou
Zhejiang
P. R. China

5

MOE Key Laboratory of Bioorganic Phosphorus Chemistry & Chemical Biology
Department of Chemistry
Tsinghua University
Beijing
P. R. China

6

State Key Laboratory of Precision Measurement Technology and Instruments
Department of Precision Instrument
Tsinghua University
Beijing
P. R. China

7

Department of Biomedical Engineering
Tufts University
Medford
Massachusetts
USA

*
Correspondence
Zhicong Chen, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Center for Reproductive Medicine, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Major Obstetric Diseases, Guangdong Provincial Clinical Research Center for Obstetrics and Gynecology, Guangdong‐Hong Kong‐Macao Greater Bay Area Higher Education Joint Laboratory of Maternal‐Fetal Medicine, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510150, Guangdong, P. R. China. Email: zcchen@gzhmu.edu.cn
Ji‐Xin Cheng, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Photonics Center, Boston University, Boston 02215, MA, USA. Email: jxcheng@bu.edu
Liqun Zhou, Department of Urology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034, P. R. China. Email: zhoulqmail@sina.com

251220243202545348537610.1002/cac2.v45.3245280
21112024
3012024
06122024
251220242803202517012026© 2024 The Author(s). Cancer Communications published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. on behalf of Sun Yat‐sen University Cancer Center.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## Abstract

## Background
Adaptative desaturation in fatty acid (FA) is an emerging hallmark of cancer metabolic plasticity. Desaturases such as stearoyl‐CoA desaturase (SCD) and fatty acid desaturase 2 (FADS2) have been implicated in multiple cancers, and their dominant and compensatory effects have recently been highlighted. However, how tumors initiate and sustain their self‐sufficient FA desaturation to maintain phenotypic transition remains elusive. This study aimed to explore the molecular orchestration of SCD and FADS2 and their specific reprogramming mechanisms in response to cancer progression.

## Methods
The potential interactions between SCD and FADS2 were explored by bioinformatics analyses across multiple cancer cohorts, which guided subsequent functional and mechanistic investigations. The expression levels of desaturases were investigated with online datasets and validated in both cancer tissues and cell lines. Specific desaturation activities were characterized through various isomer‐resolved lipidomics methods and sensitivity assays using desaturase inhibitors. In‐situ lipid profiling was conducted using multiplex stimulated Raman scattering imaging. Functional assays were performed both in vitro and in vivo, with RNA‐sequencing employed for the mechanism verification.

## Results
After integration of the RNA‐protein‐metabolite levels, the data revealed that a reprogramming from SCD‐dependent to FADS2‐dependent desaturation was linked to cancer epithelial‐mesenchymal transition (EMT) and progression in both patients and cell lines. FADS2 overexpression and SCD suppression concurrently maintained EMT plasticity. A FADS2/β‐catenin self‐reinforcing feedback loop facilitated the degree of lipid unsaturation, membrane fluidity, metastatic potential and EMT signaling. Moreover, SCD inhibition triggered a lethal apoptosis but boosted survival plasticity by inducing EMT and enhancing FA uptake via adenosine monophosphate‐activated protein kinase activation. Notably, this desaturation reprogramming increased transforming growth factor‐β2, effectively sustaining aggressive phenotypes and metabolic plasticity during EMT.

## Conclusions
These findings revealed a metabolic reprogramming from SCD‐dependent to FADS2‐dependent desaturation during cancer EMT and progression, which concurrently supports EMT plasticity. Targeting desaturation reprogramming represents a potential vulnerability for cancer metabolic therapy.

metabolic reprogrammingstearoyl‐CoA desaturasefatty acid desaturase 2epithelial‐mesenchymal transitioncancer metastasisNational Natural Science Foundation of China
10.13039/50110000180982203709821732168237295082372951China Postdoctoral Science Foundation
10.13039/5011000028582022M710895Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation2024A1515013031 It is well established that the dynamic EMT in cancer is closely linked to metastatic potential, which significantly impacts patient outcomes [ ]. High FADS2 expression was associated with advanced clinicopathologic features and unfavorable prognosis in BLCA patients (Supplementary Figure ). IHC analysis of BLCA patients (Supplementary Table ) confirmed that higher FADS2 protein levels were associated with advanced pathological stage and higher histologic grade (Figure  ‐ , Supplementary Table ). Furthermore, elevated FADS2 expression was significantly associated with worse overall survival and metastasis‐free survival in BLCA patients (Figure  ). Additionally, SCD in BLCA did not show significant associations with clinicopathologic features at either the transcriptomic and proteomic levels (Figure  , Supplementary Figure , and Supplementary Table ). In BRCA, opposite expression patterns of FADS2 and SCD were observed in various clinicopathologic and molecular subtypes. FADS2 upregulation was prominent in patients with triple‐negative breast cancer (TNBC) and basal‐like cancers, which are known to exhibit more aggressive behavior and poorer prognosis, whereas SCD expression was increased in non‐triple‐negative (nTNBC) and luminal patients (Supplementary Figure ). IHC validation revealed higher FADS2 expression and lower SCD expression in TNBC compared to nTNBC (Figure  ‐ , Supplementary Figure , Supplementary Table ). Notably, the association between FADS2 and SCD was significantly weaker in TNBC than in nTNBC, with the correlation coefficient decreasing from 0.466 to 0.260 (Figure  ). This decrease in correlation was also validated by IHC, with the correlation coefficient dropping from 0.385 to 0.351 (Supplementary Figure ). These findings suggested metabolic reprogramming between FADS2 and SCD during cancer progression and metastasis.
Using isomer‐resolved lipidomics [ ], we further identified and quantified the FAs desaturated by FADS2 and SCD in BLCA tissues. A range of FAs from FA 12:0 to FA 24:1 was profiled in paired paracancer and cancer tissues. Notably, FA 18:1 and FA 18:3 were reduced in cancer tissues, while FA 20:3 was increased. Only FA 16:1 levels were decreased in advanced pathologic stages and histologic grades (Supplementary Figure ). Subsequently, the C = C bond isomers at FA 16:1, FA 18:1 and FA 18:3 were further detected (Supplementary Figure ). Notably, the proportions of the FADS2 metabolites, FA 16:1 (sapienic acid, n‐10) and FA 18:3 (γ‐Linoleic acid, n‐12), were significantly increased in carcinoma tissues, while SCD metabolites, FA 16:1 (palmitoleic acid, n‐7) and FA 18:1 (oleic acid, n‐9), were decreased (Figure  ‐ and Supplementary Figure ). Additionally, levels of metabolic derivatives from SCD metabolites, such as FA 16:1 (n‐9) and FA 18:1 (vaccenic acid, n‐7), were elevated, indicating the enhanced transformation of SCD metabolites in cancer. Isomer analyses revealed that only FADS2 metabolites, FA 16:1 (n‐10) and FA 18:1 (n‐10), were selectively increased in advanced and mesenchymal subgroups (Figure  ‐ and Supplementary Figure ). Collectively, the isomer analyses validated the reprogramming between FADS2 and SCD during cancer progression, with a marked promotion of FADS2 in cancer.

3.2

## SCD‐to‐FADS2 reprogramming interplay in cancer EMT
Given multiple lines of evidence indicating a metabolic reprogramming from SCD to FADS2 in cancer tissues, we sought to validate these observations in vitro. Tan EMT scores [ ] were utilized to characterize the EMT states of different cancer cells from the CCLE and GDSC databases. Tan EMT states were defined from epithelial (EMT score = ‐1.0) to mesenchymal states (EMT score = +1.0) (Supplementary Figure ). FADS2highSCDlow cell lines exhibited higher EMT scores than did FADS2lowSCDhigh cell lines (Figure  ). Consistent with TCGA results, FADS2 expression was upregulated in mesenchymal‐like (Tan EMT score > 0) cells and was positively correlated with Tan EMT score, while SCD showed the opposite trend (Figure  and Supplementary Figure ). The expression patterns of the ELOVL fatty acid elongases (ELOVL) of PUFAs, ELOVL2, ELOVL4 and ELOVL5 [ ], also resembled that of FADS2 (Supplementary Figure ), suggesting a dominant role of PUFA metabolism in EMT. In addition, decreased SCD:FADS2 ratios were observed in cell lines with advanced features (Figure  ).
 We further validated the SCD‐to‐FADS2 reprogramming in vitro using three EMT‐paired cancer cell lines from various cancer types (Supplementary Figure ). All three mesenchymal cells displayed downregulated SCD:FADS2 ratio compared to their epithelial counterparts (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Monounsaturated metabolites FA 16:1 (n‐10) and FA 16:1 (n‐7) were separated and quantified by GC‐MS, confirming elevated FA 16:1 (n‐10):(n‐7) ratios in mesenchymal cancer cells (Supplementary Figure ). The FA 16:1 (n‐10):(n‐7) ratio of 0.25 in FBS was used to exclude the potential exogenous contributions (Supplementary Figure ). Mesenchymal cells exhibited FA 16:1 (n‐10):(n‐7) ratios greater than 0.25, whereas epithelial cells showed lower ratios (Figure  and Supplementary Figure ). Similar assessments were also performed in TGF‐β1‐induced SW780 cells. TGF‐β1 effectively induced partial EMT in SW780 cells (Supplementary Figure ), followed by increased migration ability (Supplementary Figure ). Similar to VIM expression, FADS2 was upregulated by TGF‐β1 (Figure  ‐ ). Meanwhile, SCD expression was significantly mitigated by TGF‐β1, particularly in RPMI 1640 (Figure  ‐ ), resulting in an increased FA 16:1 (n‐10):(n‐7) ratio (Figure  ). Although TGF‐β is the potent and widely used EMT inducer [ ], it alone was insufficient to induce EMT in all cell types, such as MCF7 [ , ] and BXPC3 cells [ , ]. To drive EMT in all three epithelial cell lines, a robust EMT‐inducing mixture was utilized [ ]. Similar results were obtained for SW780 (Supplementary Figure ). In MCF7 and BXPC3 cells, EMT was activated, with MCF7 showing decreased SCD expression and BXPC3 showing upregulated FADS2 (Supplementary Figure ). To further validate the expression pattern of SCD‐to‐FADS2 reprogramming in EMT, previous datasets of induced EMT models were examined. In GSE49644 [ ], EMT was induced by TGF‐β in three lung cancer cell lines with various EMT scores (Supplementary Figure ). In all three cell lines, SCD was downregulated, but FADS2 expression increased only in H358 cells, which were defined as the epithelial cells with the lowest EMT scores (Supplementary Figure ). In GSE24202 [ ], EMT was triggered in human mammary epithelial (HMLE) cells by genetically altering EMT regulators (Supplementary Figure ). Genetic manipulation of EMT regulators in HMLE cells showed increased FADS2 expression with the downregulation of CDH1 and the upregulation of transforming growth factor‐β1 (TGFB1), twist family BHLH transcription factor 1 (TWIST1), and snail family transcriptional repressor 1 (SNAI1), while SCD downregulation was observed only with CDH1 repression (Supplementary Figure ). These findings confirm the SCD‐to‐FADS2 reprogramming during EMT, though the simultaneous upregulation of FADS2 and downregulation of SCD may not be universally observed in every EMT model. The regulation of FADS2 and SCD during EMT is highly context‐dependent, influenced by basal EMT states and signaling networks.
To assess the functional consequences of FADS2 and SCD interplay, we evaluated the sensitivity profiles of epithelial and mesenchymal cancer cells to SCD and FADS2 inhibitors. Augmented FADS2‐driven desaturation can bypass the SCD pathway, resulting in low sensitivity towards SCD inhibition [ ]. Compared with epithelial cells, mesenchymal cells exhibited significantly lower sensitivity upon treatment with SCD inhibitors A939572 and CAY10566 (Supplementary Figure ). Similar results were observed in the GDSC dataset, where mesenchymal cancer cells had higher IC50 values for CAY10566 (Supplementary Figure ). Importantly, TGF‐β1 treatment effectively reversed the SCD‐mediated inhibition of SW780 cell proliferation (Figure  ). Due to the lower toxicity and solubility of the FADS2 inhibitor SC26196, it was challenging to achieve inhibition solely with SC26196 (Supplementary Figure ). Therefore, we synthesized SC26196‐loaded nanoparticles (NP‐SC26196) to improve the delivery and efficiency (Supplementary Figure ). NP‐SC26196 effectively inhibited cancer cell proliferation through FADS2 inhibition. As expected, T24, EMT‐induced SW780, and BXPC3 cells exhibited lower IC50 values for NP‐SC26196 (Figure  and Supplementary Figure ), demonstrating their increased dependency on FADS2. These results demonstrated the functional reprogramming from SCD to FADS2 in EMT.
Genetic and pharmacologic approaches were then used to explore the effect of FADS2 and SCD on EMT. To minimize the compensatory effect of exogenous FAs, De‐lipid was applied [ ]. Silencing FADS2 with shRNA effectively reduced mesenchymal markers and increased CDH1 expression (Figure  and Supplementary Figure ). VIM repression induced by De‐lipid treatment was enhanced by SC26196 and alleviated by the addition of FA 16:1 (n‐10) in T24 cells (Supplementary Figure ). Notably, the EMT‐inducing effect of TGF‐β1 was significantly mitigated by the knockdown of FADS2 expression in SW780 cells (Figure  and Supplementary Figure ). EMT activation was induced by FADS2 overexpression in both epithelial and mesenchymal cancer cells (Figure  and Supplementary Figure ). Moreover, FADS2 overexpression in SW780 cells robustly restructured the cell to a mesenchymal‐like morphology (Figure  ). Both SCD inhibitors also partially altered EMT marker expression in the three epithelial cancer cell lines (Figure  and Supplementary Figure ), similar to observations in previous dataset GSE41485 (Supplementary Figure ). Furthermore, knocking down SCD in SW780 cells similarly upregulated mesenchymal marker expression (Figure  ). Interestingly, both genetic and pharmacologic inhibition of SCD resulted in the upregulation of FADS2 expression (Figure  ). Concurrently, under De‐lipid culture conditions, FADS2 knockdown led to an increase in SCD expression (Figure  ). This reciprocal regulation confirmed a compensatory mechanism between SCD and FADS2, highlighting the dynamic interplay between these two desaturases in cancer cells. Overall, the comprehensive analysis of EMT induction experiments and previous datasets confirmed the significance and the promotion effect of the SCD‐to‐FADS2 reprogramming in facilitating EMT.

3.3

## SCD inhibition promoted lipid accumulation, while increased FADS2 manipulated lipid unsaturation during cancer EMT
Lipid desaturation is the primary and fundamental function of SCD and FADS2 [ ]. To investigate lipid reprogramming between epithelial and mesenchymal cancer cell lines, we employed hyperspectral SRS microscopy to image the intracellular lipids in individual cells (Supplementary Figure ). By tuning the Raman shift frame by frame in the C‐H vibration region from 2,800 to 3,050 cm−1, 70 images of individual cells were recorded. Coupled with spectral phasor analysis [ ], the hyperspectral SRS images were segmented into specific cellular components corresponding to whole cells and lipids based on spectral properties (Figure  ‐ ). A comparison of SRS images of different cancer cells revealed that the area of visualized lipids was larger in mesenchymal cells compared to epithelial cells (Figure  ‐ ), while TGF‐β1 treatment further increased lipid accumulation in the mesenchymal state (Figure  ‐ ), indicating that lipid accumulation is enhanced during EMT. SCD inhibitors significantly enhanced lipid accumulation and induced mesenchymal‐like morphology in two epithelial cancer cell lines (Figure  ‐ ). However, FADS2 overexpression and knockdown did not significantly alter the lipid accumulation (Figure  ‐ and Supplementary Figure ). To evaluate the composition of LDs, SRS spectra were normalized to 2,930 cm−1 which contributed to the vibration of C‐H bonds in lipids [ ]. Lipids in mesenchymal cells showed a greater proportion of unsaturated bonds, evidenced by a stronger signal at 3,008 cm−1 (Figure  ), which was predominantly derived from = C‐H bonds in unsaturated lipids [ ]. The unsaturation ratio (I3008/I2930) was significantly greater in mesenchymal cells (Figure  ). FADS2 suppression by SC26196 or shFADS2 decreased the unsaturation ratio (Figure  ), while FADS2 overexpression and TGF‐β1 treatment increased it (Figure  ), indicating that mesenchymal cancer cells contain increased levels of FADS2‐generated unsaturated lipids.
 To confirm the observation outlined above, confocal Raman microspectroscopy was employed to analyze individual LDs in mesenchymal cells. All the spectra were normalized to the area of 1,400 cm−1 to 1,500 cm−1, with the ‐CH2 bending vibration peak at 1,445 cm−1. Mesenchymal cells showed characteristic peaks of unsaturated lipids (Supplementary Figure ), including those at 1,265 cm−1 (bending = C‐H), 1,654 cm−1 (C = C), and 3,008 cm−1 (= C‐H) [ ]. To quantify the degree of unsaturation in these mesenchymal cells, we established a calibration curve based on the Raman spectral measurements of FAs with varying numbers of C = C bonds. The height ratio between 1,445 cm−1 and 1,654 cm−1 was used to quantify unsaturation, showing a linear correlation with the number of C = C bonds (Supplementary Figure ). Lipid droplets in mesenchymal cancer cells contained high levels of unsaturated lipids (Figure  ), including polyunsaturated lipids, confirming the role of FADS2 in mesenchymal cells. Because FA 16:1 (n‐10) is the unique and direct metabolite of FADS2, we further acquired the full spectra of pure FA 16:1 (n‐10) and FA 16:1 (n‐9) (Supplementary Figure ). After normalization, the main difference between these two FAs was found in the range of 1,000 to 1,140 cm−1 (Supplementary Figure ), attributed to the vibration of the C‐C stretch [ ]. Raman spectra of LDs from T24 cells treated with FA 16:1 (n‐10) or FA 16:1 (n‐7) revealed similar patterns (Supplementary Figure ), with a significantly higher intensity ratio of I1060‐1073 / I1073‐1086 in FA 16:1 (n‐10) ‐treated T24 cells (Supplementary Figure ). This ratio was also greater in MDA‐MB231 cells (Figure  ), with increased FADS2 expression (Supplementary Figure ) and a higher FA 16:1 (n‐10):(n‐7) ratio (Figure  ). These results confirmed that elevated FADS2 activity contributes to increased lipid unsaturation in mesenchymal cancer cells. Phospholipids are critical derivatives of FAs. To validate the distinct desaturation that occurs during EMT, we profiled major phospholipids in both epithelial and mesenchymal cells. Compared to epithelial cells, mesenchymal and TGF‐β1‐induced SW780 cells exhibited an increase in phospholipids with high level of unsaturation (with C = C number ≥3) and a decrease in phospholipids with a low level of unsaturation (C = C number <3) across the four species of phospholipids (Figure  ). Notably, phospholipids carrying FA 16:1 (n‐10) or FA 16:1 (n‐7) exhibited significant differences between mesenchymal and epithelial cells (Supplementary Figure ). This increase in phospholipid unsaturation in mesenchymal and TGF‐β1‐induced SW780 cells likely resulted from the upregulation of highly unsaturated FAs, predominantly catalyzed by FADS2.
To further elucidate the specific components of lipid accumulation following SCD inhibition, we conducted a lipidomic analysis on SW780 cells treated with A939762. The lipidomic results indicated that triglycerides (TGs) constituted the majority of the differential lipid metabolites, with a significant upregulation of many TGs (Figure  ), confirming the formation of LDs observed in the SRS imaging. Many of the differential lipid metabolites were phospholipids, with significantly increased unsaturation levels of four types of phospholipids after SCD inhibition, likely due to the compensatory FADS2 upregulation (Figure  ). Interestingly, further analysis of TG unsaturation revealed no significant changes (Figure  ), suggesting that the FAs synthesizing TGs might originate from exogenous uptake. Together, these findings indicated that SCD inhibition and FADS2 enhancement contribute to the lipid adaptation during cancer EMT.

3.4

## SCD‐to‐FADS2 reprogramming contributed to cancer metastasis both in vitro and in vivo
The saturation of incorporated FAs contributes to membrane fluidity, and highly unsaturated FAs and their phospholipids play a role in cell property reconstruction and adaptive development [ , ]. Both T24 and TGF‐β1‐induced S780 cells exhibited increased membrane fluidity (Figure  ‐ ). FADS2, which contains a C‐terminal membrane‐spanning desaturase portion [ ], was found primarily in the cytoplasm, with partial localization in the membrane (Figure  ). Notably, membrane‐bound FADS2 was significantly upregulated in mesenchymal cells (Figure  ), potentially contributing to increased membrane desaturation and fluidity. Our findings also showed that FADS2 downregulation led to impaired membrane fluidity, particularly following De‐lipid treatment (Figure  ). Increased membrane fluidity serves as a typical cellular signature of cancer EMT and contributes to high metastatic potential [ ]. Additionally, FA reprogramming has been implicated in cancer metastasis development [ ]. Subsequently, we validated the correlation between SCD‐to‐FADS2 reprogramming and metastasis.
 First, we investigated the migration ability of cancer cells in response to FADS2 manipulation. The FADS2 metabolite FA 16:1 (n‐10) enhanced the migration ability of mesenchymal cells (Figure  ), while NP‐SC26196, a FADS2 inhibitor, significantly suppressed cell migration (Figure  ). Similarly, FADS2 silencing in mesenchymal cells following De‐lipid media pretreatment reduced migration (Figure  ), and FADS2 inhibition effectively reversed the TGF‐β‐induced migration in SW780 cells (Figure  ). Moreover, overexpressing FADS2 in both epithelial and mesenchymal cells significantly promoted cell migration (Figure  ). To further validate the role of FADS2 in cancer metastasis, we employed mouse models of popliteal lymph node metastasis and lung metastasis. In the popliteal lymph node metastasis model, luciferase‐labeled T24‐Luc cells expressing shFADS2 #2 or the control vector were inoculated into the hock of nude mice. After six weeks, the luminescence signals of the primary xenografts in the shFADS2 group were significantly decreased (Figure  ), indicating impaired tumor growth. The harvested popliteal lymph nodes in the shFADS2 group exhibited significantly smaller volumes and fewer invading cancer cells compared to the control group (Figure  ). In the lung metastasis model, a significant reduction in lung metastasis was observed in the FADS2‐silenced group (Figure  ). HE staining of lung sections revealed smaller sizes of the metastatic lesions in the FADS2‐knockdown group (Figure  ) with the tumor/lung area being 16.2% in the shFADS2 compared to 50.7% in the shNC, further confirming the stimulating effect of FADS2 in promoting cancer metastasis both in vitro and in vivo.
Inconsistent findings have been reported regarding the effect of SCD inhibition on cancer metastasis [ , ]. To exclude the potential effect of SCD inhibition on primary xenografts, we generated a tail vein‐lung metastatic mouse model using the murine BLCA cell line MB49, which has low metastatic potential [ ]. Mice were treated with either a control vehicle or the SCD inhibitor A939572 daily for two weeks. While MB49 cells exhibited low invasive capability of lung metastasis, SCD inhibition effectively promoted an increase in lung metastases (Figure  ‐ ). In line with the in vitro findings, SCD inhibition resulted in upregulated FADS2 expression in lung metastatic lesions (Figure  ) and increased lipid accumulation in lung metastatic lesions (Figure  ). These results suggested that SCD inhibition enhances extravasation capability and lipid adaptation during metastasis development. Collectively, our findings provided compelling evidence supporting the role of FADS2 in promoting the metastatic potential of cancer cells, both in vitro and in vivo. Additionally, SCD inhibition appeared to exert a prometastatic effect in the context of lung metastasis, indicating a complex interplay between SCD and FADS2 in cancer metastasis.

3.5

## The FADS2/β‐catenin self‐reinforcing feedback loop facilitated EMT
Having established that FADS2 upregulation promotes lipid desaturation during cancer EMT and metastasis, we sought to elucidate the interaction network of FADS2 in this process. In‐silico transcription factor prediction analyses on the FADS2 promoter identified several EMT‐inducing transcription factors, including TWIST1, zinc finger E‐BOX binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1), lymphoid enhancer binding factor 1 (LEF1), and snail family transcriptional repressor 1/2 (SNAI1/2), along with other EMT‐promoting pathways such as TGF‐β/Smad, Wnt/β‐catenin, NF‐κB, and Hedgehog signaling [ ] (Figure  , Supplementary Figure and Supplementary Table ). Notably, EMT‐TFs (TWIST1, SNAI1) and TGFB1 were shown to significantly upregulate FADS2 expression based on the above analysis (Supplementary Figure ). Correlation analysis across different TCGA cohorts confirmed positive correlations between FADS2 and EMT‐TFs in various cancer types, with the highest overall correlation observed between FADS2 and LEF1 (Figure  ). To explore the regulation of FADS2 by LEF1, we conducted dual‐luciferase assays and found that LEF1 significantly increased luciferase activity in cells with the wild‐type FADS2 promoter, but not in the mutant promoter lacking LEF1‐binding sites (Figure  ‐ ), indicating that FADS2 expression was positively regulated by LEF1. Moreover, the inhibition of EMT‐promoting pathways using specific inhibitors [ , , ] respectively downregulated FADS2 expression in various cancer cells (Figure  ‐ ). Collectively, these findings suggested that FADS2 is upregulated by various EMT‐inducing pathways during cancer EMT.
 To further elucidate the mechanism linking FADS2 to EMT, we performed RNA‐seq of a stable cell line overexpressing FADS2 and identified multiple DEGs, including several associated with EMT (Figure  and Supplementary Table ). Protein‐protein interaction analysis of the upregulated DEGs (log2FC > 1.2, n = 60) identified transforming growth factor‐β2 (TGFB2) as a hub gene with significant relevance to EMT (Supplementary Figure and Supplementary Table ). GSEA revealed significant upregulation of EMT, TGF‐β signaling, and canonical Wnt/β‐catenin signaling in the FADS2 overexpressing group (Figure  and Supplementary Table ), while the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) pathway, a negatively correlated metabolic signature in EMT [ ], was suppressed (Supplementary Table ). Pathway enrichment analysis of upregulated DEGs (log2FC > 1) further confirmed significant enrichment of EMT‐ and cancer metastasis‐associated pathways (Figure  and Supplementary Table ), demonstrating that FADS2 overexpression promoted EMT in cancer. Interestingly, our transcriptomic analysis revealed that upregulating FADS2 slightly downregulated SCD expression (Supplementary Table ), which was further validated using Western blotting (Supplementary Figure ). Guided by the transcriptomic data, RT‐qPCR validation demonstrated that overexpressing FADS2 increased TGFB1 and Thrombospondin 1 (THBS1) expression (Supplementary Figure ). Given that TGF‐β1 could downregulate SCD, we proposed that the mechanism by which FADS2 overexpression downregulates SCD involves activation of the TGF‐β pathway.
Since FADS2 functions as a fatty acid desaturase rather than a transcription factor, we hypothesized that the promotion of EMT by FADS2 is mediated by its fatty acid metabolites and their derivatives. Oxylipins, vital signaling regulators, are functional derivatives of PUFA [ , ]. To explore this possibility, we profiled various oxylipins in FADS2‐knockdown cells and found that only a few metabolites oxygenated by cyclooxygenase significantly decreased after FADS2 inhibition, while several oxylipins catalyzed by lipoxygenase were upregulated. Among these, the levels of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and 13,14‐dihydro‐15‐keto PGD2 were notably reduced (Figure  and Supplementary Figure ). Correspondingly, COX‐2 (PTGS2) was the only typically increased oxygenase after FADS2 overexpression (Supplementary Figure ). Both PGE2 and UFAs have been reported to stabilize β‐catenin [ , ], leading to the induction of EMT directly or sequentially [ ]. The role of Wnt/β‐catenin signaling, highlighted in GSEA, prompted an investigation into the interaction between FADS2 and β‐catenin. De‐lipid culture led to a significant reduction in β‐catenin levels. This effect was effectively diminished by exogenous supplementation with FA 16:1 (n‐10) or PGE2, while further decreases were observed with genetic inhibition of FADS2 (Figure  and Supplementary Figure ). Although SCD‐catalyzed UFAs can also stabilize β‐catenin [ ], we observed stronger associations between β‐catenin activation signatures and FADS2 in comparison with SCD (Supplementary Figure ). According to the RNA‐seq, FADS2 upregulation led to an increase in key regulators of the Wnt/β‐catenin pathway, notably WNT5B and TCF7L1 (Figure  and Supplementary Figure ). Silencing FADS2 effectively mitigated the activation of Wnt/β‐catenin induced by TGF‐β (Figure  ). Remarkably, treatment with the β‐catenin inhibitor XAV‐939 completely annulled the Wnt/β‐catenin‐inducing effect of FADS2 overexpression (Figure  ). These findings collectively underscore the presence of a novel self‐reinforcing FADS2‐UFA/PGE2‐β‐catenin feedback loop during EMT development.

3.6

## SCD inhibition enhanced EMT plasticity and FA uptake by activating AMPK
To further investigate the mechanism behind SCD downregulation during cancer EMT, we performed pathway enrichment analysis on the upregulated DEGs (log2FC > 0.6) obtained from the comparison between FADS2lowSCDhigh patients and FADS2highSCDlow in the TCGA‐BLCA cohort (Figure  and Supplementary Table ). Key pathways identified included epithelial cell differentiation and several FA synthesis pathways, such as sterol regulatory element binding transcription factor (SREBF) and mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (MTORC1) pathways. Since SCD plays a critical role as a desaturase in FA synthesis [ ] and is a downstream target of SREBF and MTORC1 [ ], the enrichment of key regulators and enzymes involved in FA synthesis, including fatty acid synthase (FASN), was observed in FADS2lowSCDhigh patients in TCGA‐BLCA, ESCA, STAD, COAD cohorts (Figure  ). In mesenchymal‐featured cancer cells and EMT‐induced models, a negative correlation was detected between the expression levels of genes involved in FA synthesis (e.g., SREBF1 and FASN) and the extent of EMT (Figure  ‐ and Supplementary Figure ). Notably, FASN expression was increased in the FADS2lowSCDhigh group across multiple cancer types. FASN, a key enzyme in palmitate synthesis, was notably downregulated during TGF‐β1‐induced EMT [ ]. SCD exhibited a stronger correlation with SREBF1/FASN expression than FADS2 across different TCGA cancer cohorts (Supplementary Figure ). To explore FA synthesis modulation, we used an MTORC1 inhibitor (Rapamycin) and glucose‐free media to attenuate FA synthesis (Supplementary Figure ). Strikingly, SCD expression dramatically decreased with FA synthesis suppression, while FADS2 expression remained unchanged in SW780 cells (Figure  ). In line with previous studies [ , ], both Rapamycin and glucose deprivation enhanced mesenchymal marker expression in SW780 cells (Figure  and Supplementary Figure ). In MCF7 cells, glucose deprivation triggered alterations in partial EMT markers, while Rapamycin's ineffectiveness was likely due to its simultaneous suppression of FADS2 (Supplementary Figure ). Taken together, these results indicated that FA synthesis is reprogrammed during cancer EMT and that SCD expression is positively reliant on FA synthesis.
 Mammalian cells obtain FAs either through de novo synthesis or by uptake from the exogenous environment. Alongside FA synthesis reduction, increased expression of key FA transport genes was observed in FADS2highSCDlow patients (Figure  ), mesenchymal cancer cells (Figure  ), and EMT‐induced models (Figure  and Supplementary Figure ). To visualize and assess FA uptake in epithelial and mesenchymal cancer cells, we performed SRS imaging of deuterated FAs. By tuning the beating frequency to be resonant with C‐H and C‐D stretching vibrations at 2,899 cm−1 and 2,168 cm−1 respectively, the signals from C‐H biomolecules and deuterated FA derivatives were acquired. As palmitate is the sole metabolite of FASN, deuterated palmitic acid (PA‐D31) was thus used to investigate the adaptive FA uptake. The C‐D signal from PA‐D31 was significantly stronger in mesenchymal cancer cells (Figure  ‐ ), indicating enhanced FA uptake capability in these cells. Collectively, these results demonstrated that SCD downregulation results from FA acquisition reprogramming, transitioning from FA synthesis to increased reliance on FA uptake during cancer EMT.
To further elucidate the role of SCD inhibition in promoting EMT, we performed RNA‐seq on SW780 and MCF7 cells treated with the SCD inhibitor A939572 (Supplementary Tables ). Consistent with previous findings [ ], enrichment analyses revealed pathways associated with NF‐κB, P53, and cell proliferation, confirming the anticancer effect of the SCD inhibitor. Additionally, cancer metastasis‐related pathways, such as blood vessel development, tissue morphogenesis, cell migration, and EMT, were also observed following SCD inhibition (Figure  , Supplementary Figure , and Supplementary Tables ). Interestingly, at 1 µmol/L A939572, the number of DEGs was significantly lower compared to the 10 µmol/L A939572 treatment group (Supplementary Figure and Supplementary Table ). While the lower concentration induced apoptosis‐related pathways, it did not significantly enhance EMT pathways, as seen with 10 µmol/L treatment (Supplementary Figure and Supplementary Table ). These results collectively indicated a “grow or go” phenotypic reprogramming [ ] in response to 10 µmol/L A939572 treatment. Lipid metabolic pathways, including the repressed MTORC1 signaling pathway and upregulated AMPK signaling pathway, were also identified (Figure  , Supplementary Figure , and Supplementary Tables ). The interplay between mTOR and AMPK is well known as a pivotal sensor and regulator of FA reprogramming, encompassing both FA synthesis and uptake [ ]. Compared with Rapamycin and A769662 (a potent AMPK activator). SCD inhibition significantly increased AMPKα phosphorylation and decreased S6 ribosomal protein (S6) phosphorylation (Figure  ). Silencing SCD also activated AMPKα phosphorylation (Supplementary Figure ). A negative correlation between SCD and AMPK phosphorylation was found among cancer patients in the TCPA cohort, while a positive correlation was found with p70 S6 kinase (P70S6K) phosphorylation (Figure  ). AMPK activation has been shown to facilitate FA uptake [ ] and TGF‐β‐induced EMT [ ]. Consistent with this, AMPK activation via A769662 effectively induced partial EMT and upregulated FA uptake‐associated genes (Figure  ). Moreover, these findings were corroborated by SRS imaging which demonstrated enhanced PA‐D31 uptake, LD accumulation, and mesenchymal morphology in SCD inhibitor‐treated epithelial cancer cells, particularly in SW780 (Figure  ‐ ). To survive the potentially lethal effects induced by SCD inhibition, cancer cells increase their EMT capacity and uptake FA through AMPK activation.

3.7

## TGF‐β2 mediated the interplay between the SCD‐to‐FADS2 reprogramming and EMT
To gain deeper insights into the reprogramming from SCD to FADS2, we identified a total of 32 consistently upregulated DEGs (log2FC > 1, P
adjusted < 0.05) in the SW780 sequencing data (Figure  ). Among them, TGFB2 was identified as a hub gene, with enrichment in pathways related to EMT and metastasis (Figure  ‐ and Supplementary Tables ). Given that TGF‐β2 functions as a potent cytokine that manipulates FA metabolism and promotes EMT [ , ], we further explored its role in SCD‐to‐FADS2 reprogramming. FADS2 upregulation effectively increased TGF‐β2 expression at both mRNA and protein levels, while FADS2 knockdown significantly reduced TGF‐β2 and blocked TGF‐β1‐induced TGF‐β2 autocrine signaling (Figure  ‐ ). The role of TGF‐β2 in EMT induction was also verified (Figure  ). Treatment with the TGF‐β receptor inhibitor SB431542 fully suppressed the EMT‐inducing effect of FADS2 overexpression, as indicated by changes in mesenchymal‐like morphology, migratory capability, and mesenchymal marker expression (Figure  ‐ ). These findings underscored the role of TGF‐β2 as a robust EMT inducer downstream of FADS2. Furthermore, we demonstrated that XAV‐939 decreased TGF‐β2 expression in both epithelial and mesenchymal cancer cells (Figure  ) and completely suppressed FADS2's capacity to promote TGFB2 upregulation (Figure  ), suggesting that FADS2 and its metabolites promote TGF‐β2 expression through β‐catenin. Importantly, TGF‐β2 stimulation increased FADS2 expression (Figure  ), while inhibition of β‐catenin or TGF‐β decreased FADS2 levels (Figure  ‐ ). Correlation analysis across different TCGA cohorts also validated positive correlations between FADS2 and TGFB2 (Figure  ). Collectively, these results demonstrated that the extended FADS2/β‐catenin/TGF‐β2 feedback loop functions in cancer EMT.
 Integrating the transcriptomic results from the SCD inhibitor‐treated SW780 and MCF7, TGF‐β2 was identified as the only significantly upregulated TGF‐β cytokine (Supplementary Tables ). Both SCD inhibitors significantly upregulated TGFB2 expression, as did the AMPK activator A769662 (Figure  ). Similarly, SCD knockdown also increased TGFB2 in SW780 (Figure  ). To further clarify the mechanism by which SCD inhibition upregulates FADS2 expression, we investigated the role of TGF‐β. Before applying the SCD inhibitor, we knocked down both TGF‐β1 and TGF‐β2 in separate experiments. Consistent with the sequencing results, we found that only TGF‐β2 was significantly upregulated following SCD inhibition in both cell lines, while TGF‐β1 was significantly downregulated in MCF7 cells (Figure  ). Knocking down both TGF‐β1 and TGF‐β2 effectively suppressed the SCD inhibition‐induced upregulation of mesenchymal markers. In SW780 cells, knocking down TGF‐β1 and TGF‐β2 counteracted the upregulation of TGF‐β2 and FADS2 induced by the SCD inhibitor. Notably, in MCF7 cells, only TGF‐β2 knockdown was able to counteract the SCD inhibition‐induced upregulation of TGF‐β2 and FADS2 (Figure  ). These data suggest that the upregulation of FADS2 expression by SCD inhibitors occurs through TGF‐β2. Similarly, the upregulation of TGFB2, CDH2, and FADS2 expression resulting from SCD repression was also counteracted by the TGF‐β inhibitor SB431542 (Figure  ). Given the verified role of TGF‐β2 in FA uptake (Figure  ), we found that SB431542 could effectively mitigate the increase in PA‐D31 uptake induced by SCD inhibition (Figure  ). Interestingly, SCD downregulation was not observed after TGF‐β2 treatment (Figure  ). Together, these results demonstrated that SCD inhibition fosters lipid reprogramming and engages in a complex interplay with cancer EMT by activating AMPK and upregulating TGF‐β2.
Finally, we verified that the levels of TGF‐β2 expression were significantly greater in FADS2highSCDlow patients than in FADS2lowSCDhigh patients across various cancer cohorts in TCGA (Figure  ). These findings were subsequently validated at the cancer cell level in the CCLE (Figure  ). Notably, the IC50 of TGF‐β receptor inhibitors was lower in FADS2highSCDlow cancer cells (Figure  ), suggesting that TGF‐β becomes increasingly dependent during the reprogramming from SCD dependence to FADS2 dependence. The aforementioned results demonstrated a novel UFA metabolic reprogramming during cancer EMT and progression that transitions from SCD to FADS2 dependence. Such a reprogramming responsively supports the cancer EMT phenotype, lipid adaptation, and metastatic potential by augmenting TGF‐β2 transcription (Figure  ).
 

4

## DISCUSSION
Guided by integrated bioinformatic analyses from both cancer patients and cell lines, we revealed a significant correlation between the dependencies on SCD/FADS2 and the status of EMT. By integrating RNA, protein, and metabolite data, we unveiled the role of FA desaturation reprogramming in tumor plasticity via EMT functions.
SCD is widely recognized as the classical desaturase governing systemic metabolism, including cancer [ ]. There is no doubt that SCD and its metabolites contribute significantly to altering membrane properties and lipid metabolism in cancer cells, ultimately enhancing tumor survival, proliferation, signal transduction, and adaptation to the tumor microenvironment [ ]. Inhibition of SCD activity has recently been explored as a potential therapeutic strategy to disrupt these processes and impede cancer progression [ ]. However, a recent study [ ] has revealed that low SCD activity can induce invasive and metastatic phenotypes in melanoma, suggesting that lineage‐restricted regulation of SCD controls phenotypic plasticity. Our research did not deny the crucial role of SCD in tumorigenesis but rather suggested an unreported unsaturation reprogramming during tumor progression. Specifically, we observed that patients and cells dependent on SCD exhibited an epithelial signature, while decreased SCD activity was observed in both mesenchymal‐like cancer patients and cells. This downregulation of SCD was linked to the “grow or go” switch and adaptive reprogramming of FA acquisition during cancer EMT. The “grow or go” switch is a hallmark of cellular plasticity in tumors, dynamically regulating EMT and mesenchymal‐epithelial transition. During this switch, decreased proliferation and increased invasion capacity are well‐defined processes that occur during EMT [ , ]. Proliferatively active cells necessitate increased FAs for various functions, such as membrane generation, bioenergetic requirements, and signaling modification. These FAs can be derived from either exogenous dietary sources or de novo lipogenesis. Our results suggested a potential shift from FA synthesis to FA uptake during cancer EMT. In fact, suppressing FA synthesis by Rapamycin or glucose deprivation treatment partially induces EMT. Both FA synthesis and uptake participate in EMT reprogramming [ ] and tumor progression [ ]. While most studies proposed that increased FA acquisition enhances malignant phenotypes during cancer progression, it is noteworthy that Snail1‐mediated inhibition of FA synthesis has been observed in lung cancer cells during TGF‐β‐induced EMT, and FASN knockdown has been shown to induce EMT and stimulated metastasis [ ]. EMT is not a stand‐alone process of cells following TGF‐β signaling but also involves in the overlooked antitumor effects [ ]. Furthermore, FASN was downregulated in circulating cancer cells compared to their primary cancer counterparts [ ]. Compensatory upregulation of FA uptake could be triggered by FASN inhibition [ ]. Our results demonstrated that decreased de novo FA synthesis efficiently diverts limited energy towards the EMT process, resulting in concomitant SCD downregulation and compensatory activation of FA uptake. Interestingly, SCD inhibition was not universally observed in all EMT cases. For instance, SCD inhibition was more pronounced in the RMPI 1640 medium compared to DMEM, suggesting that media composition influences desaturation reprogramming during EMT. High levels of aspartate and glucose in DMEM contribute to increased reliance on OXPHOS in cancer metabolism [ ], while OXPHOS downregulation is associated with EMT and poor clinical outcomes [ ]. High‐energy supplementation in DMEM mitigated the potential inhibition of FA synthesis during EMT induction. Moreover, only the knockdown of CDH1 and not the overexpression of EMT‐TF in HMLE cells suppressed SCD expression. CDH1 knockdown has been shown to suppress OXPHOS [ ], suggesting that SCD downregulation reflects tumor metabolic plasticity during EMT, driven by both genetic and environmental factors.
Undoubtedly, SCD inhibitors can effectively impair tumor growth, but they also disrupt metabolic homeostasis. Previous studies have indicated AMPK activation as a metabolic signature after SCD inhibition [ , ]. Our RNA‐seq data showed that SCD inhibition led to a metabolic reprogramming from mTOR to AMPK. Integrated with the SRS imaging results, we demonstrated that SCD inhibition could promote EMT by reprogramming lipid adaptation both in vitro and in vivo. Due to the metabolic stress induced by SCD inhibitors, tumor cells enhanced FA uptake through AMPK activation, providing an alternative energy source for cancer EMT, where AMPK serves as the central regulator [ , ]. Notably, a previous study showed that glucose‐dependent SCD increases colorectal cancer metastasis by promoting EMT [ ]. Given the plasticity of tumor cells during EMT, they are easily influenced by diverse tumor microenvironments, such as those with high glucose supplementation [ ]. Importantly, versatile tumor cells are prone to developing new compensatory pathways during the lengthy process of stable cell lines, which may explain the stronger reliance on SCD inhibitors rather than knockdown approaches in our study. Collectively, SCD inhibition triggered a series of metabolic reprogramming events driven by tumor plasticity during EMT, requiring comprehensive adjustments to balance tumor suppression and survival mechanisms. These results suggested that when employing SCD inhibitor‐based therapy, it is crucial to balance achieving effective cytotoxicity while minimizing the risk of promoting tumor progression.
FADS2 is another dominant desaturase, and several studies have highlighted its upregulation, including FADS2 circular RNAs, as a contributor to cancer progression and poor survival [ , ]. However, the specific mechanisms underlying FADS2 upregulation in cancer remain less explored. Our results demonstrated that FADS2highSCDlow patients and cell lines exhibited mesenchymal and advanced clinical features, with elevated FADS2 expression, increased metabolic activity, and greater dependency observed in advanced patients and mesenchymal‐like cell lines. This FADS2 activation not only compensates for the loss of SCD‐driven desaturation [ , ], but also arises from a growing dependence on FADS2 itself. FADS2 upregulation could be triggered by multiple EMT‐TFs and EMT‐promoted signaling pathways, such as LEF1 and the Wnt/β‐catenin pathway, during cancer progression. LEF1 is a vital EMT‐TF involved in several EMT‐promoting pathways and extends beyond the canonical Wnt/β‐catenin pathway [ ]. Importantly, FADS2 enhancement was not observed in every EMT‐inducing model, as EMT roles in cancer are often nonredundant and tissue‐specific [ ]. These results can be reconciled by context‐specific EMT or varying EMT status, with partial EMT exhibiting maximal plasticity to adapt to environmental changes [ , ]. Correspondingly, simultaneous upregulation of FADS2 and downregulation of SCD were only observed in the context of partial EMT in SW780 cells. Notably, our study does not suggest that SCD‐to‐FADS2 reprogramming must always involve simultaneous downregulation of SCD and upregulation of FADS2; rather, this process is highly context‐ and cell‐dependent.
Subsequently, increased FADS2‐driven lipid desaturation, including the specific intracellular FA 16:1 (n‐10) signature, was visualized and quantified in mesenchymal cancer cells. This is the first instance that the high unsaturation metabolic characteristics of mesenchymal cells have been demonstrated at the in‐situ level using label‐free imaging. Higher FADS2 levels in the membrane, increased proportions of highly unsaturated phospholipids, and enhanced cell fluidity were observed across different mesenchymal cells. Consistent with these findings, previous studies have shown that FADS2 metabolites are utilized in membrane synthesis, and that FADS2 silencing disrupts the cellular phospholipid composition, particularly leading to a decrease in membrane fluidity [ , ]. Compared to SCD, FADS2 predominantly regulates PUFA synthesis and more efficiently increases the unsaturation level of intracellular lipids in cancer cells. Together, our data indicate that augmented FADS2‐mediated desaturation remodels cell biophysical properties during EMT. Moreover, our RNA‐seq analysis revealed that the overexpression of FADS2 directly triggered multiple EMT‐promoting pathways. UFAs and their metabolites, including prostaglandins and eicosanoids, serve as substrates for lipid signaling molecules and play vital roles in modulating the tumor microenvironment [ ]. Through integrating RNA‐seq and lipidomics data, we identified a FADS2‐UFA/PGE2‐β‐catenin feedback loop that sustains EMT signaling. UFAs, including both SCD and FADS2 metabolites, can inhibit β‐catenin degradation by inactivating FAF1 [ ]. Beyond UFAs, other FADS2 metabolic derivatives like PGE2 also relieve the inhibitory phosphorylation of β‐catenin, activating its signaling pathway [ ], which may explain the greater correlation between β‐catenin signaling and FADS2 observed across multiple cancer cohorts. Furthermore, SCD‐generated FA 16:1 (n‐7) serves in the lipidation of Wnt protein, supporting paracrine or autocrine Wnt signaling [ ]. Given the structural similarity between FA 16:1 (n‐7) and FA 16:1 (n‐10), and the observed upregulation of Wnt5b following FADS2 overexpression, it is possible that there is a novel fatty acylation of Wnt5b by sapienoyl‐CoA. Driven by FADS2, a self‐reinforcing FADS2‐UFA/PGE2‐β‐catenin circuit sustains the reprogrammed cell biophysical properties and activates intracellular EMT signaling, contributing to metastatic potential both in vitro and in vivo.
Significant upregulation of TGF‐β2 was observed in both SCD inhibition and FADS2 overexpression groups, where TGF‐β2 was identified as a hub gene. Notably, TGF‐β2 robustly drove cancer EMT and enhanced the capability of FA uptake. Importantly, FADS2highSCDlow and FADS2lowSCDhigh cancers exhibited distinct expression patterns and dependencies on TGF‐β2, with increased TGF‐β2 expression and dependency found in FADS2highSCDlow patients and cells. TGF‐β2, a well‐established inducer of cancer EMT, is also implicated in the modulation of lipid metabolism during cancer metastasis, particularly in enhancing FA uptake and LD formation [ ]. Consistently, desaturation reprogramming from SCD to FADS2 effectively contributed to similar EMT processes and lipid modifications. Importantly, inhibiting TGF‐β effectively abolished these plastic phenotype alterations. Additionally, only TGF‐β2 was increased in both SCD inhibition and FADS2 overexpression groups. It is well‐known that TGF‐β signaling can have a tumor‐suppressive effect in specific cellular contexts, with most attention given to the roles of TGF‐β1 [ , ]. Moreover, EMT progression is closely related to the ability of cells to survive TGF‐β signaling [ ]. Desaturation reprogramming by enhancing TGF‐β2 maintained ongoing EMT and lipid reprogramming, with minimal inhibition of tumor proliferation. Stronger associations were observed between FADS2 and TGF‐β2 across different cancer cohorts, in comparison to the relationship between FADS2 and TGF‐β1, indicating the imperative feedback loop of FADS2/β‐catenin/TGF‐β2 in cancer. Furthermore, SCD downregulation was not detected after TGF‐β2 treatment, while SCD inhibition led to varying degrees of cell death, suggesting that versatile self‐protective adaptations occur in cancer cells. Notably, SCD inhibition upregulated TGF‐β2, which mediated Fs uptake and FADS2 upregulation, leading to increased accumulation of TG‐rich LDs and enhanced phospholipid unsaturation. Thus, TGF‐β2 plays a critical mediating role in the lipid reprogramming mediated by SCD. Crucially, combination therapies with TGF‐β2‐associated inhibitors not only mitigate the potential EMT‐inducing effect of SCD but also disrupt the self‐reinforcing positive feedback loop of FADS2. This presents a promising therapeutic strategy, as targeting both TGF‐β2 and FADS2 pathways can attenuate tumor plasticity and limit cancer progression.
Our study sheds light on the reprogramming from SCD‐dependent to FADS2‐dependent desaturation as a critical factor in sustaining EMT and enhancing metastatic potential in various cancers. However, several limitations should be acknowledged. Firstly, our clinical validation was primarily conducted on bladder and breast cancer samples, without extending the verification of FADS2 and SCD protein and metabolite levels to a wider range of tumor types. Secondly, while we observed a correlation between EMT and the SCD‐to‐FADS2 desaturation reprogramming in various tumor cell lines, these regulatory characteristics varied among different tumor types, suggesting that the regulatory mechanisms might be specific to certain tumor types or stages. Further detailed studies are needed to elucidate the distinct regulatory networks of EMT and unsaturation reprogramming in different tumor contexts. Thirdly, although our study utilized various mouse models for validation, we did not include tumor organoid models, which could offer better insights into the regulatory mechanisms in human tumors. Integrating organoid models could enhance our understanding of the specific regulatory patterns in humans. Lastly, although SCD and FADS2 are key desaturases, other genes in the desaturase family also play crucial roles. A comprehensive investigation of the entire desaturase gene family in relation to tumor EMT and progression would provide a more complete assessment of the link between unsaturation and cancer dynamics. To date, several SCD inhibitors have been developed and preclinically tested, but only one known inhibitor of FADS2 has been identified. To better overcome desaturation reprogramming during cancer progression, more optimized, cancer‐specific FADS2‐targeted compounds are needed.

5

## CONCLUSIONS
In summary, our results revealed a novel desaturation reprogramming from SCD dependence to FADS2 dependence in cancer EMT and progression. This reprogramming concurrently maintains EMT plasticity by establishing the FADS2‐UFA/PGE2‐β‐catenin feedback loop, activating AMPK and FA uptake, and synergistically enhancing TGF‐β2. Beyond these two classic desaturases, a deeper understanding of the involvement of other desaturases in cancer metabolic plasticity holds promise as a therapeutic strategy to target metabolic vulnerabilities in cancer. Desaturation reprogramming could be utilized for clinical management and as a new target for cancer treatment.

## DECLARATIONS

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Z.C., Y.G., and F.C., designed and performed experiments. Z.C. contributed to bioinformatics, cell line studies, animal experiments, and SRS imaging. Y.G. collected and analyzed clinical samples, performed the animal experiments. F.C. contributed to cell line studies and SRS imaging. H.J.L. and J.Q. conducted animal experiments. H.J.L. and Y.Z. contributed to SRS imaging. J.Z. and W.Z. analyzed fatty acid isomers. Y.L. synthesized nanoparticles. Q.X. provided the platform and technical support for nanoparticle synthesis. Y.X. offered support for fatty acid metabolite analysis. L.Z. supplied clinical samples and supported cell line and animal experiments. J.X.C. and Z.C. conceived and supervised the project. Z.C. and J.X.C. wrote the first draft. All authors edited and approved the final manuscript.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors declare no competing interests.

## ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE
All bladder cancer tissue samples from Peking University First Hospital used in this study were obtained with informed consent from the patients or their legal guardians. The study involving human participants was reviewed and approved by the ethics committee at Peking University First Hospital (PUFH‐2015[977], 2023[482‐001]). Human breast cancer and bladder cancer tissue microarrays were purchased from Guilin Fanpu Biotech, and the ethical approval for these samples was obtained through the Guilin Fanpu Biotech Ethics Committee (Fanpu‐2018[23]). For animal experiments, all procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Boston University (BU‐PROTO201800533) and the Animal Care Committee of Peking University First Hospital (PUFH‐J202145).

## Supporting information
Supporting Information
Supporting Information

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China 82203709 to Z.C., 82372950 to Y.G., 82372951 and 82173216 to L.Z.; and Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation 2024A1515013031, China Postdoctoral Science Foundation 2022M710895 to Z.C. The research reported in this publication was supported by the Boston University Micro and Nano Imaging Facility and the Office of the Director, National Institutes of Health, under award Number S10OD024993. The authors thank Christina Ramires Ferreira from Purdue Metabolomics Facility for her help with lipid measurements.

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The authors declare that the main data supporting the findings of this study are available within the article and its Supplementary files. Sequencing data have been uploaded to the Sequence Read Archive (PRJNA1163522). Extra data are available from the corresponding author upon request.