822acssdACS Applied Nano MaterialsACS Appl Nano MaterPMC1318493313184933131849334216385510.1021/acsanm.6c01014Evaluating NIR-II-Emissive
Graphene Quantum Dot Biodistribution,
Toxicity, and Clearance for In Vivo Fluorescence
Imaging
ValimukhametovaAlina Castro-LopezNatalia SharmaPramita MalkovaKseniia GasimliAli TopkiranUgur Can PaulHimish VashaniDiya ZubOlga WormleyFloyd LJr NaumovAnton V 
†
Department
of Physics and Astronomy, Texas Christian
University, Fort Worth, Texas
76109, United States

‡
Department
of Biology, Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, Texas
76109, United States

§
Department
of Pathology, The University of Texas Medical
Branch, Galveston, Texas
77555, Unites States

∥
Alfa
Radiology Management, Inc, Plano, Texas
75023, United States
*
Email: a.naumov@tcu.edu.
65202691989618961–89772052026© 2026 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyThis article is licensed under CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0

## Abstract
Near-infrared-II (NIR-II) fluorescence has emerged as
a promising
modality for biomedical imaging due to its ability to overcome the
limitations of autofluorescence, scattering, and absorption inherent
to shorter wavelengths. Nanoscale drug delivery platforms can strongly
benefit from such imaging capabilities, facilitating noninvasive therapeutic
tracking and diagnostics through the layers of biological tissue.
Among nanomaterials, graphene quantum dots (GQDs) show the most potential
in intrinsic NIR-II fluorescence imaging due to their photostability,
biocompatibility, and low-cost/straightforward synthesis. This study
for the first time evaluates all essential in vivo parameters for three most emissive GQD types including toxicity,
biodistribution, and clearance. Their NIR-II fluorescence collected
at 1000 nm (RGQDs, Sc-GQDs) and 1050 nm (Nd-NGQDs) noninvasively through
the bodies of sedated Balb/c mice and from their organs and tissue
slices helps evaluate GQD content and their organ compartmentalization.
Within 21 days after injection, all GQDs show no signs of toxicity
in Balb/c mice. GQDs accumulate in the liver, kidneys, spleen, lungs,
heart, and bones. RGQDs mainly undergo renal clearance, while Nd-NGQDs
and Sc-GQDs are excreted predominantly through the hepatobiliary and
splenic systems. This study paves the way for future in vivo applications of biocompatible GQD delivery vehicles, enabling NIR-II
image-guided theragnostics in multiple organs.
Keywords: graphene quantum dots, NIR-II fluorescence, biodistribution study, 
in vivo imaging, 
ex vivo imaging

 
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2026 Mar 7; Accepted 2026 May 4; Revised 2026 Apr 30; Collection date 2026 May 15.

## Introduction
Recently, near-infrared (NIR) fluorophores
received a widespread
scientific interest due to their advantage in biomedical imaging applications. Their fluorescence signal exhibits a higher tissue
penetration depth than that of the visible fluorophores enabling greater
signal-to-noise ratios with minimized biological autofluorescence
in that spectral region. With 820 nm laser
excitation, NIR fluorophores are now routinely applied in clinical
settings for high-resolution imaging of the retina and choroid, sentinel
lymph nodes, and atherosclerosis.
,
 NIR-I dyes
used in preclinical work and in the clinic such as indocyanine green
(ICG) and polymethine dye like IR-1048 demonstrate their advantageous
potential in theragnostics; however, they exhibit rapid photobleaching
preventing long-term or quantitative imaging analysis. ICG is used in clinic at 0.1–0.5 mg/kg concentrations
limited by its toxicity at higher doses. For instance, it is considered
toxic to retinal pigment epithelium cells at a concentration of 5
mg/mL after more than 10 min of exposure. IR-1048 exhibits phototoxicity at 32 μM (or 0.02 mg/mL) yielding
over 95% 4T1 cell death after 6 min of laser irradiation (1064 nm).

Advancements in drug delivery approaches
have led to the development
of nanocarrier platforms facilitating drug transport while tracing
the delivery via their intrinsic fluorescence, bypassing the limitations
of the fluorescent tags. However, very
few of these multifunctional platforms possess highly desired NIR
diagnostic capabilities. The advantages that NIR imaging brings necessitate
the development of biocompatible, photostable NIR imaging agents capable
of supporting both, drug tracking and delivery. And while NIR-I biological window offers substantial improvement
over visible fluorescence imaging, ∼5-fold lower autofluorescence backgrounds can be achieved in the
NIR-II region that has been underdeveloped to date. Nanotechnology
offers a promising solution to these challenges, as the fluorescent
properties and surface functionalization of nanomaterials can often
be tuned to meet these diverse requirements.
NIR-II fluorophores,
such as organic dyes, rare-earth metal
nanoparticles, PbS/CdS
quantum dots (QDs), Ag2S nanoparticles, and carbon nanotubes (CNTs),
−

 have been already introduced
into the biomedical research. Despite the encouraging results of using
these fluorophores in bioimaging, their advancement to the clinic
is still hampered by several limitations, including high photobleaching
rates, insolubility in water, and high toxicity. In addition, there
are many unresolved issues with understanding how these probes interact
with animal models. Liver, spleen, and
kidneys, being primary organs that accumulate nanomaterials, are more
susceptible to their toxic effects. During the first-pass metabolism,
significant accumulation of the nanoparticles is expected in the liver,
as the systemic blood flow is directed there for filtration. Therefore,
the liver is one of the first organs to experience the effect of exogenous
materials. Previous studies demonstrate that PEG-coated rare-earth
metal nanoparticles show accumulation in liver and spleen after intravenous
injection with a retention time of 3 months and only partial excretion facilitating potential toxic effects. An intravenous
exposure to yet another NIR emitter, CdSe QDs, for 2 days to 6 weeks
can induce liver damage in mice, while
the oral exposure to silver nanoparticles without polymer coating
can elevate immune responses in rat spleen. Kidneys facilitate blood filtration while temporarily retaining
contaminants within their tissue. Accumulation of nanoparticles in
kidneys is strongly dependent on their size, shape, surface chemistry,
and biodegradation. For instance, smaller-size CdO quantum dots experience
renal filtration, but degrade within the renal proximal tubule cells
causing renal injury in maternal mice and their offspring. Overall, Cd divalent ions are found to cause
irreversible damage to renal tubules raising concerns regarding the
application of cadmium-based quantum dots in nanomedicine. Metal-free carbon nanotubes and graphene oxide
could be viable alternatives; however, depending on their formulation,
those may exhibit toxicological effects in murine lung and liver tissues
and induce oxidative stress or an immune response. All this calls for the development of more biocompatible
NIR-II fluorescence probes.
Graphene quantum dots (GQDs) have
recently gained recognition as
promising nanoscale theragnostic agents due to their bioimaging capabilities, potential for drug and gene delivery, and most importantly, ultralow toxicity in vitro and in vivo.
 GQDs exhibit fluorescence in the visible due to electronic
quantum confinement within their graphitic platform. This emission is advantageously used in cell imaging and
biosensing in vitro.
 Progression of GQDs to deeper-tissue in vivo imaging
applications relies on the development of NIR-II-emissive structures
that can also be excited in the NIR. One possible solution involves
the use of a two-photon excitation approach with a pulsed 800 nm laser
excitation. However, this technique requires
a complex and high-power setup that may not be easily translatable in vivo. GQDs enabling intrinsic NIR-II fluorescence with
continuous-wave excitation in NIR-I region can be a better fit. These
include RGQD (reduced graphene oxide quantum dots) synthesized top-down
from reduced graphene oxide and emitting broad NIR-I and NIR-II fluorescence
peaking at ∼930 nm
,
 and GQDs synthesized
bottom-up with rare-earth (holmium, neodymium, and ytterbium) metal
doping. These carriers span both NIR-I and NIR-II biological windows
with fluorescence at ∼970 nm and 1050 and 1010 nm excited at
650, 808, and 980 nm, respectively. NIR-emissive
GQDs are effective in delivering drug and gene payloads including
molecular drugs, plasmids, and nucleic acids. They enable cancer gene therapy when delivering small-interfering
RNA or CRISPR Cas 9 to cancer cells. These applications are allowed by exceptionally
high GQD biocompatibility enabling them to effectively load and deliver
substantial amounts of therapeutic agents. Their small (3–12 nm) sizes, substantial water solubility,
stability in suspension, and a plethora of surface functional groups
available for chemical attachment of drugs and targeting agents make
GQDs overall highly attractive theragnostic candidates. To enable
the translation of these nanomaterials into clinic, a number of critical
parameters should be considered in preclinical work including their
optimal administration route, potential acute and chronic toxicity,
metabolic pathways, biodistribution, blood pharmacokinetics, and their
clearance time from the organs. Few in vivo studies
of related nanocarbons showcase the capability of exploring these
parameters while concomitantly performing imaging studies in the visible
and/or NIR-I. For instance, carbon dots labeled with ZW800 and imaged
in the NIR-I demonstrate efficient and rapid excretion from mouse
organs; their excretion timeline is dictated by the injection route
(intravenous (IV) < intramuscular (IM) < subcutaneous (SC)). The carboxylated GQDs demonstrate minimal to
no apparent toxicity in rats at 5 or 10 mg/kg dosages for up to 22
days. Their visible fluorescence observed
in excised organs traces their accumulation in the liver, spleen,
and kidneys at 24 h post IV injection with no apparent histopathological
abnormalities or lesions observed. PEGylated GQDs labeled with Cy7
dye exhibit the capacity for NIR-I imaging-guided biodistribution
analysis with organ accumulation evaluated in the excised tissues. All these studies, however, are accomplished
in the excised organs, since visible and NIR-I dyes may not fully
enable quantitative whole-animal imaging. Furthermore, all shown examples
use either intrinsic GQD fluorescence in the visible that has limited
penetration depth or GQDs labeled with a NIR-I dyes that can experience
cleavage and contribute to the toxicity profile of the formulation. The critical need for whole-animal nontoxic
imaging approaches further translatable to clinic calls for the development
of intrinsic NIR-II probes such as RGQDs and Nd-NGQDs. A pilot study
indicates that their NIR fluorescence can be detected within the bodies
of live sedated mice.
,
 The novelty of this study lies
in the comprehensive evaluation of multiple types of graphene quantum
dots (GQDs) and their in vivo behavior ( ). Unlike limited
previous studies, exploring accumulation in few organs at only a single
time point relying on intrinsic lower
penetration depth VIS/NIR-I fluorescence, we perform a comprehensive temporal analysis at 1, 6, 12, 24, and
48 h postadministration in six major organs using internal NIR-II
fluorescence emission. This expands time-course analysis providing
a complete understanding of GQD biodistribution profiles and clearance
pathways over time. We also explore near-infrared fluorescence imaging
of tissue sections to directly visualize compartmentalization of GQDs.
This approach enables spatial resolution at the tissue level, offering
insights into tissue-specific localization not demonstrated in prior
works. Although NIR-II fluorescence represents a broad imaging modality,
GQDs can be developed into NIR-II contrast agents with specific applications,
including image-guided surgery and brain imaging. We demonstrate their
effectiveness in targeted drug delivery as well as utility in implantable
sensing platforms. Furthermore, we show
their potential in cancer gene therapy,
,
 where real-time
imaging is essential for monitoring treatment delivery and response.
While most carbon nanomaterials exhibit substantial toxicity concerns, the GQDs exhibit minimal toxicity at imaging-relevant
concentrations, supporting their potential for clinical translation.
 

## Material and Methods

## GQDs Synthesis
RGQDs and Nd-NGQDs were prepared following
the synthesis methods developed in our previous works.
,
 In short, for RGQD synthesis, high-porosity reduced graphene oxide
(RGO) (HP-RGO-025G, Graphene Supermarket, Ronkonkoma, NY, USA) was
dispersed in distilled water (20 mL) at a concentration of 0.25 mg/mL
and 1 mL of sodium hypochlorite (LC246364, LabChem, Zelienople, PA,
USA) was added to the aqueous RGO suspension. The vials were shaken,
capped, and allowed to react for 2 days. In order to produce Nd-NGQDs,
an aqueous solution of glucosamine hydrochloride (0.04 m) and Nd­(NO3)3·6H2O (0.008 m, Neodymium­(III)
nitrate hexahydrate 99.9% trace metal basis, Sigma-Aldrich Lot#MKCH8576)
underwent microwave (Hamilton Beach, model: HB-P90D23AP-ST) treatment
for 60 min at 1350 W. Sc-GQDs were synthesized by pyrolyzing precursor
materials under microwave treatment. 2.0 g of sodium cholate was added
into a Petri dish and heated in a commercially available microwave
at 1100 W setting. After 2 h, the organic material darkened, indicating
the formation of GQDs. The material was cooled to room temperature
and dissolved in 40 mL of water followed by magnetic stirring for
20 min. All final products were filtered to remove the unreacted precursors
via 1 kDa molecular weight cutoff bag dialysis (Spectra Por 131090)
for 48 h against DI water, changed every 30 min for the first 3 h
followed by changing the water every 7 h. The purified material was
further filtered using a 0.22 μm syringe filter to eliminate
any aggregates and sterilize the samples. To determine concentrations
and obtain dry samples, the solution was freeze-dried using a FreeZone
4.5 freeze-dryer.

## Morphological and Optical Characterization
The assessment
of Sc-GQD size and structure was performed via TEM and HRTEM (high-resolution
transmission electron microscopy, JEOL JEM-2100). Infrared absorption
was evaluated via the attenuated total reflection (ATR) mode of a
Thermo Nicolet Nexus 670 FTIR to identify functional groups present
on the Sc-GQD surface. Zeta potential was measured to evaluate the
net charge of Sc-GQDs in 1× PBS suspensions by using a NanoBrook
ZetaPALS instrument. NIR fluorescence spectra of RGQDs, Nd-NGQDs,
and Sc-GQDs were measured utilizing Horiba Scientific SPEX NanoLog
spectrofluorometer. The photostability of Sc-GQDs in aqueous suspension
was measured under a continuous 808 nm laser exposure at a power density
of 0.15 W/cm–2. A 1 mm path length quartz cuvette
was utilized for photostability measurements to avoid the diffusion
of the nonexposed to irradiation GQDs. The following formula was used
to calculate the relative quantum yield (QY) of the GQDs:
QYGQDs=QYref×FLIGQDsFLIref×1−10−Aref1−10−AGQDs×(nGQDsnref)2In the above expression, QYref denotes the QY of ICG dye, FLIGQDs and FLIref represent experimentally measured integrated fluorescence intensity
of the GQDs and the ICG, and A
GQDs and A
ref indicate the absorbance of GQDs and ICG
at the excitation wavelength. The refractive index of water is a function
of the wavelength; therefore, the following refraction indexes of
water, based on the GQD and ICG maximum emission peaks, were used
for each sample: n
ref (871 nm) = 1.324
244, n
Sc‑GQDs (918 nm) = 1.323
222. The viscosity of GQDs was measured
at 20 °C using an Anton Paar Lovis 4500 M microviscometer. The
tested concentrations were 0.5 mg/mL for GQDs, 0.25 mg/mL for Sc-GQDs,
and 4 mg/mL for Nd-NGQDs, corresponding to the estimated concentrations
of GQDs in mouse blood upon injection for toxicity study.

## MTT Assay
To assess the biocompatibility of the Sc-GQDs in vitro, MTT (3-(4-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5 diphenyltetrazolium
bromide) assay (Invitrogen M6494, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham,
MA, USA) was used. A total of 5000 cells per 100 μL were seeded
into each well in a 96-well plate and kept in an incubator overnight.
Sc-GQDs were added into different wells in 2-fold serial dilutions
in DMEM. After a 24 h treatment period, the complete medium was replaced
with 100 μL of a 1 mg/mL MTT solution and a 96-well plate was
further incubated at 37 °C for 4 h. Thereafter, the medium was
aspirated and 100 μL of DMSO was added to each well. The microtiter
plate was placed on a shaker for 5 min. After the formazan crystals
had formed, the absorbance was determined spectrophotometrically at
570 nm on an absorption plate reader (μQuant, BioTek Instruments,
Winooski, VT, USA).

## Mice Handling
Male and female BALB/c mice between 6
and 9 weeks old were acquired from Jackson Laboratories and housed
at the vivarium of the Texas Christian University. All animal experiments
were conducted following NIH guidelines for housing and care of laboratory
animals and following all relevant protocols and ethical regulations
for animal testing and research approved by the IACUC (protocol no.
2021-3) of Texas Christian University. Mice were caged in groups of
four or fewer; all animals were fed an animal chow and water ad libitum.

## Administration of GQDs
For the toxicity study, female
mice (n = 3 mice per group) were intravenously administered
with a single dose (100 μL) of GQDs in 1× PBS at the following
concentrations: 16.5 mg/mL or 85 mg/kg (RGQDs), 132 mg/mL or 684 mg/kg
(Nd-NGQDs), and 8 mg/mL or 40 mg/kg (Sc-GQDs). 21 days after the injection,
the mice were sacrificed, and their major organs were harvested for
routine hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. For biodistribution
study, mice were administered with 100 μL of GQDs in 1×
PBS via intravenous (IV) or intraperitoneal (IP) injection, imaged
and further sacrificed at 1, 6, 12, 24, and 48 h postinjection. The
concentrations of GQDs in the IV injection experiments were 16.5 mg/mL
(85 mg/kg) for RGQDs, 33 mg/mL (171 mg/kg) for Nd-NGQDs, and 2 mg/mL
(10 mg/kg) for Sc-MGQDs. In the IP injection experiments, 66 mg/mL
(342 mg/kg) and 8 mg/mL (40 mg/kg) concentrations of Nd-NGQDs and
Sc-GQDs were used, respectively. Control mice were injected with 100
μL of 1× PBS via IV or IP administration. Two males and
two females were used for each time point. Animals were anesthetized
in an isoflurane chamber before imaging and shaved with a hair removal
cream (Nair). The induction of anesthesia was continued during the
imaging with a 1 L per minute flow rate and 2–3% isoflurane
concentration. Animals were sacrificed by inhalation of carbon dioxide
followed by cervical dislocation, and the tissues were excised for
the fluorescence imaging. The organs of interest were sectioned following
the standard protocol for paraffin-embedded tissues. Briefly, the
excised organs were fixed in a 4% paraformaldehyde solution for over
4 h before being transferred to a 70% ethanol solution. The samples
were then sent to the Histology Facility at the University of Texas
Health Science Center at San Antonio, where they were cut into 5 μm
thick sections. These tissue slices were mounted on microscope slides
for subsequent NIR fluorescence microscopy analysis. For a pharmacokinetics
study, the BALB/c mice (n = 2–3 mice per group)
were intravenously administered with 100 μL of RGQDs at 16.5
mg/mL. The mice were then euthanized at 0.25, 1, 3, and 6 h postinjection,
followed by blood collection through cardiac puncture.

## Fluorescence Imaging

In vivo and ex vivo NIR fluorescence imaging of RGQDs, Sc-GQDs, and
Nd-NGQDs was performed using a preclinical hyperspectral mouse imaging
system IR VIVO by Photon. etc. 808 nm excitation laser light was distributed
over the entire mouse with a power density of 143 mW/cm2. For each imaging session, the mice were exposed to NIR excitation
for less than 1 min. Fluorescence emission was filtered via 1000 ±
25 and 1050 ± 25 nm band-pass filters specific to either RGQD
and Sc-GQD or Nd-NGQD emission, respectively. To distinguish GQD NIR
fluorescence in mice and their organs from autofluorescence, the intensity
range was specifically adjusted to zero autofluorescence signal in
controls. For consistency, the integration time and laser power were
kept the same for all control and treated mice within each group.
Fluorescence analysis was performed to assess the fluorescence intensities
of GQDs in kidneys, liver, spleen, lungs, and heart by using the in-house
developed IntraPic image analysis software identifying organ boundaries
and calculating GQD fluorescence intensity per unit organ area. The
fluorescence analysis was performed by subtracting the mean fluorescence
intensity of each organ of the PBS-treated mouse (control) from the
mean fluorescence intensity of the same organ of the GQD-treated mouse
(treated), therefore, accounting for autofluorescence backgrounds.
While not providing absolute GQD amounts in the organ, this method
allows for direct comparison of relative GQD content among those.
NIR fluorescence of the fixed tissue slides was detected by utilizing
the NIR InGaAs Photon etc. (ZephIR 1.7) detector through the hyperspectral
fluorescence imager Photon etc., enabling spectrally resolved image
acquisition in the near-infrared (850–1600 nm). NIR fluorescence
spectra of sedated mice and their organs were collected using an AvaSpec-HS-TEC
spectrofluorometer (Avantes, Apeldoorn, The Netherlands) connected
to a custom bifurcated laser-excitation setup. The system utilized
an 808 nm laser for excitation (808MD-12 V-BL, Q-BAIHE, China) and
an 850 nm long-pass filter (THORLABS, FEL0850) for select emission
range. Spectral analysis was performed by subtracting the control
group spectra from those collected from the organs of GQD-administered
mice to ensure that the presented spectra originated from the GQDs
within the tissue rather than biological autofluorescence. A 3D-printed
cone was attached to the bifurcated tip to ensure a sufficient distance
for full organ coverage.

## Statistical Analysis
The sample size (n = 4 mice per group) was estimated based on the resource equation: E = N – T, where N is the total
number of animals (number of animals per study (n) times the total amount of groups T) E is the number
of degrees of freedom (must be between 10 and 20), and T is the total amount of groups,
which is 4 in this work. Results are presented as mean ± SD,
unless stated otherwise. Statistical significance was determined using
Tukey’s post hoc test following a one-way ANOVA. A P-value of less than 0.05 was considered significant.

## Ethics Statement
All animal experiments were conducted
following NIH guidelines for housing and care of laboratory animals
and in accordance with the protocol approved by the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Texas Christian University
(protocol number 2021-3). To avoid disturbing the circadian rhythm
of the animals, there was no monitoring after 7:00 pm.

## Results and Discussion

## GQD Synthesis and Characterization
Three GQD structures
used in this study are synthesized via different approaches from three
distinct precursors. RGQDs are synthesized top-down by oxidizing high-porosity
reduced graphene oxide, while Nd-NGQDs and Sc-GQDs are produced bottom-up
from glucosamine and sodium cholate precursors, respectively. The
detailed characterization of RGQDs and Nd-NGQDs had been thoroughly
reported in our previously published work. The synthetic reactions yield graphene quantum dots with average
diameters of 4.0 ± 0.7 nm for RGQDs, 3.2 ± 0.8 nm for Sc-GQDs (Figure S1), and with a bimodal distribution of Nd-NGQDs with 5.5 ± 1.1
and 11.0 ± 1.6 nm average sizes. All
GQDs contain oxygen functional groups, while Nd-NGQDs also show the
presence of nitrogen-containing groups (Figure S2a). Several of those addends can be detected in the FTIR.
For RGQDs, Nd-NGQDs, and Sc-GQDs (Figure S2a), the band at 3200–2400 cm–1 corresponds
to hydroxyl groups, while the peak centered at 2937 cm–1 represents a C–H bond stretch. Notably, the C–H stretching
signal in Sc-GQDs is more pronounced than in RGQDs and Nd-NGQDs, which
is consistent with the presence of residual sodium cholate. Nd-NGQDs demonstrate band at 3094 cm–1 that can be attributed to the stretching vibration of N–H
groups. COO– antisymmetric stretching vibration
of sodium deoxycholate manifests in a band seen at 1556 cm–1,
,
 which in part overlaps with the peak from
the absorbed water molecules. Bending
vibration of C–H is detected at 1405 cm–1, while the band at 1042 cm–1 corresponds to the
C–OH vibrations arising from COOH groups. Small GQD sizes and
their water solubility enabled by functional groups are anticipated
to facilitate their efficient renal clearance reducing potential long-term
toxicity effects. All GQDs exhibit NIR-II
fluorescence emission (Figure S2b). Nd-NGQDs
possess sharp peaks at 895 and 1050 nm corresponding to the 4F3/2 → 4I9/2 and 4F3/2 → 4I11/2 ligand field
transitions of Nd3+, respectively. The 1050 nm feature
is shifted from the original 1064 nm transition as Nd emission is
known to be influenced by its local environment, leading to spectral
shifts and broadening. RGQDs and Sc-GQDs
both demonstrate broader fluorescence features peaking at ∼920
nm and with a shoulder beyond 1150 nm. The similarity of their spectra
can be attributed to the presence of identical functional groups on
the surfaces of both RGQDs and Sc-GQDs that are previously deemed
responsible for the NIR GQD fluorescence. To encompass most of their spectral response in the animal studies,
RGQD/Sc-GQD fluorescence is collected with a 1000 ± 25 nm band-pass
filter, while a 1050 ± 25 nm filter is used for Nd-NGQDs. While
all GQDs possess only moderate quantum yields of 1.34% for RGQDs, 0.68% for Nd-NGQDs, and 0.22% for Sc-GQDs (Figure S2 and ), they exhibit remarkably
photostable fluorescence (for at least 4 h under continuous 0.15 W
808 nm laser irradiation) indicating the possibility of enhancing
their signal in vivo through increased accumulation
time with no danger of photobleaching. The viscosities of RGQDs (dynamic
−1.17 mPa s, kinematic −976 mm2/s, and shear
rate −352 1/s) and Sc-GQDs (dynamic −1.18 mPa s, kinematic
−979 mm2/s, and shear rate −351 1/s) appear
to be similar to those of water, with Nd-GQDs being somewhat more
viscous (dynamic −1.34 mPa s, kinematic −1093 mm2/s, and shear rate −307 1/s) due to higher concentration
and potential GQD agglomeration around rare-earth metal ions. However,
for all GQDs explored, the viscosity still appears to be far from
the range causing biological damage.

 

## Toxicity Studies In Vitro and In Vivo

In vitro, over 80% cell viability is achieved
at 0.5 mg/mL for RGQDs, 1 mg/mL for Nd-NGQDs, and 0.063 mg/mL for Sc-GQDs as evaluated via the MTT assay (Figure S2). Lower biocompatibility of Sc-GQDs
can be potentially attributed to some residual sodium cholate precursor,
left even after the dialysis that can disrupt cell membranes by solubilizing
lipids. These in vitro assessments facilitate dose calculations for the in vivo toxicity study, in which mice receive a single intravenous (IV)
dose of RGQDs (85 mg/kg), Nd-NGQDs (684 mg/kg), or Sc-GQDs (40 mg/kg).
In this study, potential in vivo toxic effects of
each GQD type are monitored via the changes in murine body weight
compared to the control mice administered with 1× PBS over a
21-day postinjection period ( a). Throughout this period, no significant differences
in body weight and behavior are observed, suggesting the biocompatibility
of the administered doses ( a). Mild irritation at the injection site is noted
in the Nd-NGQD-treated group (Figure S3), while no irritation is observed with lower 171 and 342 mg/kg doses.
To mitigate this, lower concentrations are selected for the further
biodistribution study with Nd-NGQDs. 21 days postinjection, NIR fluorescence
signals collected from the kidneys, liver, spleen, heart, and lungs
of the sacrificed animals show no GQD signal as compared to untreated
controls. H&E-stained liver, kidney, and spleen tissue slides
reveal no apparent histopathological abnormalities during the monitoring
period of 21 days (Figure S4). There is
no evidence of acute or chronic inflammation, fibrosis, or malignancy.
The murine liver of GQD-treated mice demonstrates multiple portal
regions and central veins, with periportal, midzonal, and centrilobular
zones corresponding to normal liver architecture. Sections of the
spleen in both control and treated mice reveal no pathological changes,
maintaining the normal spleen architecture, including the red pulp,
white pulp, central arteriole without traces of perivascular infiltration,
germinal center, and marginal zones without evidence of necrosis.
Histological sections of the kidney from GQD-treated mice, when compared
to the control, exhibit intact glomerular morphology with no evidence
of capillary tuft collapse, mesangial expansion, or sclerosis. The
tubular epithelium remains well-preserved, showing no signs of degeneration,
vacuolization, or tubular dilatation. Additionally, the absence of
interstitial edema, fibrosis, or mononuclear cell infiltration indicates
that there are no observable nephrotoxic effects.
 

## GQD Biodistribution and Pharmacokinetic Studies
Biodistribution
studies are conducted in Balb/c mice to evaluate organ accumulation
and clearance of the GQDs and to evaluate their potential as NIR-II
fluorophores as well as to find specific organ targets for their bioimaging
applications. Pharmacokinetic studies are conducted to assess GQD
blood circulation times that can aid in evaluating their metabolic
pathways and imaging timelines for developing future theragnostic
approaches with these fluorophores.

## RGQDs
The biodistribution of RGQDs in Balb/c mice is
explored with IV injection of 85 mg/kg RGQDs traced with NIR-II fluorescence
imaging at 1, 6, 12, 24, and 48 h postinjection. The primary advantage
of using NIR-II fluorescence for diagnostic imaging lies in its ability
to facilitate in vivo visualization because of its
high tissue penetration depth. Prior to organ harvesting, all mice
underwent sedation followed by whole-body NIR-II fluorescence imaging
( ). The majority
of NIR-II fluorescence signal was observed from live sedated mice
at the early time points, predominantly localized within the abdominal
region, particularly in the bladder and intestines. This suggests
significant kidney accumulation with further renal excretion pathway
through the bladder. The measured signal from the kidneys does not
appear as the highest in the in vivo images due to
the deep anatomical location of the kidneys within the murine abdominal
cavity, obstructing the signal in the top-view imaging position. Additionally,
NIR fluorescence is detected within the liver and spleen and at the
injection site in the tail. Notably, intense fluorescence is also
observed in the bones of the mice, which is further corroborated by ex vivo imaging (Figure S5).
 RGQD pharmacokinetics is assessed with Balb/c mice
at the imaging
GQD doses via their NIR fluorescence in serum. Serum samples collected
at 0.25, 0.5, 1, 3, and 6 h postinjection exhibit substantial NIR
GQD fluorescence intensity calibrated to yield approximate RGQD concentrations
via a pre-established calibration curve (Figure S6). The temporal variation in RGQD serum concentration at
different time points reveals that RGQDs exhibit substantially for
carbon nanomaterial circulation half-life (t
1/2 ≈ 2.8 h) ( c,d).
Further ex vivo fluorescence analysis of isolated
organs ( b
and ), including kidneys, liver, spleen, heart,
brain, and lungs conducted at each time point, allow for detailed
biodistribution assessment. Throughout the whole study, organ fluorescence
intensity follows the sequence from highest to lowest: kidney >
liver
> spleen ≥ lungs > heart > brain. The kidneys exhibit
the highest
NIR fluorescence as early as 1 h postinjection (Figure S7). Notably, at 1 and 6 h postinjection, male mice
demonstrate lower renal fluorescence compared to females, possibly
due to the accelerated metabolism observed in male mice. This may facilitate substantial RGQD clearance
by the kidneys before the 1 h time point. Between 12 and 48 h, both
male and female mice continue to exhibit statistically significant
renal fluorescence compared to the control group (p ≤ 0.001), further supporting sustained RGQD excretion through
the kidneys (Figure S7). NIR hyperspectral
microscopy is used to identify the location of GQDs in tissue slices
via their characteristic NIR fluorescence signatures with minimal
autofluorescence background from organ tissue or clearance products
typically observed in the visible. A hyperspectral imager coupled
to the NIR InGaAs camera is used to collect spectra at each bright
imaging spot and compare it to the bulk GQD spectra. This comparison
helps verify the presence of a particular GQD type in excised organ
tissues. Kidney tissue images reveal that RGQDs are localized mostly
in the renal cortex, particularly in glomeruli and tubules ( and Figure S8) and less in medulla (Figure S9) at 1 h postinjection. Whole-organ fluorescence
images also reveal widespread NIR emission throughout the liver parenchyma
from 1 to 48 h postinjection, with gradual clearance becoming evident
after 12 h. Statistically significant differences in hepatic fluorescence
between treated and control groups are observed at highest accumulation
time points of 6 and 12 h postinjection (Figure S7). In liver tissue images, RGQDs are observed within hepatocytes,
sinusoids, and the periportal space already at 1 h postinjection ( ). RGQD also accumulate
in the spleen: whole-organ images show NIR fluorescence intensities
consistently above control groups across all time points, however
with no statistically significant variation detected among the treated
groups. This suggests prolonged splenic sequestration of RGQDs. Spleen
tissue images demonstrate that RGQDs are predominantly localized in
red pulp ( )
with a smaller distribution in white pulp at 1 h postinjection (Figure S10). In the heart, GQD NIR fluorescence
is detectable between 1 and 12 h postinjection, with statistically
significant differences at 1 and 6 h between control and treated groups,
indicating early cardiac accumulation during GQD blood circulation
(Figure S7). The lungs exhibit prominent
fluorescence across all time points; however, statistical significance
is observed mainly at 1 and 24 h postinjection (Figure S7). RGQDs localize in pneumocytes within the alveoli
in the lung tissue images ( ). By 48 h, fluorescence intensity in both the heart
and lungs declines, suggesting progressive RGQD clearance from the
circulatory system and these organs. The brain harvested while maintaining
intact blood perfusion also shows noticeable NIR fluorescence emission
in the cortex mostly at 1 h postinjection ( ). Brain tissue images at 1 h postinjection
reveal the presence of RGQDs not only within the blood vessels but
also in their surroundings in the cortex with some emission detected
in neurons (Figure S11). However, these
findings do not provide sufficient evidence to confirm RGQD diffusion
across the blood–brain barrier.
 A cost-effective, portable NIR spectroscopy system
is developed
and used in this work to evaluate spectral signatures and verify the
presence of the tested GQDs within murine organs (Figure S12) and sedated mice (Figure S13). This setup features a bifurcated cable-based excitation/emission
system coupled to both, the AvaSpec-HS-TEC spectrofluorometer and
an 808 nm excitation laser. NIR fluorescence spectra collected from
the organs of mice treated with RGQDs at 6 h postinjection correspond
to bulk RGQD spectra confirming their organ localization. The order
of their relative intensities across the main organs is comparable
to that observed with a preclinical imager at 6 h postinjection ( b) with liver and
kidneys showing the highest RGQD signal. RGQD spectra additionally
collected from bright emission hot spots (liver, bone, and the injection
sitetail) within live sedated animals correspond well to bulk
RGQD emission (Figure S13) suggesting the
possibility of spectral GQD-type identification even in live animal
imaging experiments. While fluorescence is observed in the abdominal
area, no spectral signatures corresponding to RGQDs are detected in
the intestine.

## Nd-NGQDs
The biodistribution study of Nd-NGQDs in Balb/c
mice is first performed with IV administration of Nd-NGQDs at a previously
determined nontoxic dose of 171 mg/kg. NIR-II fluorescence in sedated
mice is localized primarily to the intestinal region and injection
site (Figure S14). The fluorescence intensity
within major organs assessed in the animal imager ex vivo follows the sequence: liver > spleen > kidneys > lungs
≥
heart over a 48 h time period (Figures S14 and S15). Fluorescence imaging reveals predominant accumulation
of Nd-NGQDs in the liver, with maximum intensities observed at 24
h postinjection. The kidneys exhibit some NIR signal from 12 to 24
h postinjection. The spleen demonstrates uptake of Nd-NGQDs, with
statistically significant fluorescence intensity at 24 h postinjection
(Figure S15). Minimal to no fluorescence
is detected in the heart and lungs, indicating limited retention of
Nd-NGQDs in these organs following intravenous (IV) injection. While
fluorescence analysis (Figure S15) exhibits
strong correlation with ex vivo imaging data (Figure S14), the substantial fluorescence variability
among individual mice results in a lack of statistically significant
differences in fluorescence intensities between the control and treated
groups even in the major organs such as the liver, kidneys, heart,
and lungs.
To further investigate biodistribution and address
this issue, the intraperitoneal (IP) administration of Nd-NGQDs is
tested at a higher 342 mg/kg concentration that is still below the
limit of the toxicity studies. While IV injection is generally preferred
in the clinic, IP administration in rodents is a less invasive and
ethically justifiable approach for proof-of-concept evaluations of
novel drug formulations. Fluorescence
imaging of sedated mice reveals substantially brighter NIR-II fluorescence
signals arising from liver, spleen, and the intestinal region for
up to 48 h with some signal seen at the injection site. With IP administration,
the fluorescence intensity in major organs follows a similar sequence
to the IV: liver > kidneys ≥ spleen > lungs > heart
≫
brain ( and a). Ex vivo imaging of excised
organs reveals consistent and more intense NIR fluorescence emission
within each treated group. Compared to the more homogeneous fluorescence
distribution observed with IV administration (Figure S13), IP injection results in some localized bright
fluorescence spots within and on the surface of the organs ( ). Based on ex vivo organ imaging ( ) and fluorescence analysis ( a), fluorescence emission remains
detectable in the liver at all time points, confirming Nd-NGQD accumulation
within hepatic parenchyma. The kidneys exhibit NIR fluorescence with
a progressive increase in intensity at later time points. The spleen
also retains Nd-NGQDs but across all time points, with a gradual decline
in fluorescence at 48 h postinjection, suggesting slow clearance of
Nd-NGQDs from splenic tissue. Only minimal Nd-NGQD fluorescence is
observed in the brain. Given the presence of localized fluorescence
signal in organs following IP injection, tissue slices are prepared
from organs harvested at 6 h postinjection. To avoid the background
from Nd impurities in the glass, a 920 nm feature is used to identify
Nd-NGQD location in the tissues (Figure S16). According to tissue-imaging studies, Nd-NGQDs predominantly localize
in the portal vein region of the liver, while in the spleen, they
are found mostly in the red pulp. In the kidneys, Nd-NGQDs are observed
in the renal cortex next to the glomeruli and within medulla. The
heart exhibits minor Nd-NGQD NIR fluorescence exclusively at 48 h,
while the lungs show continuous fluorescence enhancement at each time
point, indicating gradual accumulation of Nd-NGQDs by 48 h postinjection.
In the lung tissue slices, small localized Nd-NGQD emission regions
are observed within the lung alveoli.
 NIR fluorescence spectra of organs at 12 h postinjection
reveal
relative emission intensities comparable to those detected using a
preclinical imaging system across the primary organs (Figure S12). Although the spectrometer sensitivity
decreases drastically at 1100 nm, a distinct fluorescence peak is
observed at ∼1060 nm (Figure S12­(c)), characteristic of Nd-NGQDs.

## Sc-GQDs
The third type of graphene quantum dots, Sc-GQDs,
is tested and evaluated in vivo and ex vivo for biodistribution analysis with Balb/c mice intravenously injected
with 10 mg/kg of Sc-GQDs. While some NIR fluorescence signal is observed
in the abdominal area of the imaged sedated animals (Figure S17), it is impossible to pinpoint its origin. The
fluorescence intensity in the excised organs still follows the sequence
of spleen > liver ≥ lungs > heart > kidneys within
48 h (Figures S17 and S18). Sc-GQD fluorescence
intensity
observed in the liver exhibits high discrepancy from mouse-to-mouse,
while Sc-GQD uptake in spleen is far more consistent demonstrated
by pronounced NIR fluorescence at each time point with statistically
significant results at 1 and 12 h postinjection. Based on the quantitative
analysis (Figure S18), very minimal fluorescence
is detected in the kidneys relative to that seen in the heart and
lungs throughout most time points. Statistically significant increase
in the NIR fluorescence intensity is observed in the heart at 1 h
postinjection, indicating early Sc-GQD accumulation. Lungs experience
progressive increase in GQD accumulation for up to 6 h postinjection
with further significant reduction in signal, indicating ongoing excretion
from lung tissues. Similarly to Nd-NGQDs, Sc-GQDs provide low and
inconsistent emission with IV administration calling for higher 40
mg/kg yet still nontoxic concentrations to be used via the IP route.
In this scenario, a more prominent NIR fluorescence intensity is observed
within the bodies of live sedated mouse originating within the abdominal
region and maximized at earlier time points ( ). Emission from organs appears to be much
brighter, following the sequence: liver > kidneys > spleen >
lungs
> heart ≫ brain within 48 h ( b and ). Liver and
spleen exhibit substantial Sc-GQD NIR fluorescence emission, which
is statistically different from the control at each time point, suggesting
a prolonged retention of Sc-GQDs in these organs (Figure S19). NIR fluorescence images of liver tissue slices
at the 12 h time point show Sc-GQD fluorescence at 970 nm, which is
primarily localized within the periportal space (Figure S20). However, no NIR fluorescence is observed within
the splenic red or white pulp (Figure S21). IP-injected mice also exhibit consistent NIR fluorescence in the
kidneys at each time point confirming a continued clearance of the
Sc-GQDs through the kidneys. NIR fluorescence images of kidney tissue
slices show Sc-GQD presence in a number of localized regions in the
renal cortex, particularly within the glomeruli, as well as in the
medulla (Figure S22). Lungs demonstrate
Sc-GQD NIR fluorescence with statistically significant results between
6 and 48 h postinjection while in the heart, the statistical significance
is achieved at 1–24 h postinjection, suggesting earlier accumulation
and clearance of Sc-GQDs from the heart. Nearly no Sc-GQD fluorescence
is observed in the brain. NIR fluorescence spectra of the organs taken
at 6 h postinjection demonstrate emission intensities comparable to
those observed with a preclinical imager across the kidneys and heart
(Figure S12) and confirm the presence of
these GQDs within the studied murine organs.
 In this work, single-dose experiments are conducted
with Balb/c
mice to assess toxicity, in vivo imaging capabilities,
biodistribution, clearance, and pharmacokinetic properties of three
types of NIR-II emissive GQDs: RGQDs, Nd-NGQDs, and Sc-GQDs. The consistent
murine body weights between the treated and control groups throughout
21 days of toxicity studies suggest in vivo biocompatibility
of all three GQD types at 85 mg/kg (RGQDs), 684 mg/kg (Nd-NGQDs),
and 40 mg/kg (Sc-GQDs). No histopathological changes in treated animal
tissues are observed compared to the control group, further confirming
this finding. GQD-treated mice show preserved normal tissue architecture
across major organs, with the liver maintaining clear portal and central
vein regions and distinct zonation; the spleen exhibiting intact red
and white pulp, germinal centers, and no signs of necrosis or inflammation;
and the kidneys displaying healthy glomeruli and tubules.
The
concentrations used in the toxicity study are up to an order
of magnitude above the imaging doses used in other studies with GQDs,
which typically range from 5 to 20 mg/kg.
,
 This reflects both the purity of our products and the remarkable
biocompatibility of the GQDs preceding that of various other nanoformulations
developed to date.
,
 This advantage facilitates the
utilization of the GQDs in a variety of biomedical applications including
noninvasive NIR-II imaging explored in this work. GQD clinical translation
can be further aided by a serum biochemistry toxicity assessment (ALT,
AST, ALP, bilirubin, albumin/total protein; BUN and creatinine) with
hematology end points (CBC). Here, we aim to confirm their image-tracking
capabilities in animal models and compartmentalize their internalization
in organs while also studying metabolic pathways.

In
vivo whole-animal imaging performed in live
sedated mice shows the presence of three types of GQDs mostly in the
abdominal area, with highest intensities arising from RGQDs making
those a promising candidate for in vivo imaging in
the clinic. Among all three live animal imaging experimental arms,
RGQDs exhibit the most profound NIR fluorescence emission in liver
and splenic areas and Nd-NGQDs show less intense fluorescence arising
from the liver and left kidney/spleen areas ( and ), while Sc-GQDs
demonstrate only minimal abdominal fluorescence that could not be
consistently attributed to particular organs. Optimizing such live
animal imaging can facilitate real-time monitoring to support diagnostic
and image-guided therapy for a variety of disease targets including
splenomegaly, liver fibrosis and metastases, kidney injury, and renal
carcinoma. Such capability for noninvasive image-tracking in live
animals can eliminate the need to sacrifice mice at each imaging time
point by quantifying the fluorescence originating from imaging targets
detected through the body.
An ex vivo organ
imaging-based study is further
conducted to assess GQD biodistribution at 1, 6, 12, 24, and 48 h
post IV or IP injection. After injection into the tail vein, GQDs
start circulating in the blood and travel to the right atrium and
right ventricle, from where they enter the pulmonary artery and are
distributed throughout the lungs. This route results in the early
accumulation of GQDs both in the heart and the lungs. The heart does
not retain GQDs for a prolonged time, while some retention of all
three GQD types is observed in the lungs at different time points
with noticeable clearance by the 48 h point. Previous studies on graphene
oxide-derived GQDs report even earlier clearance from the lungs by
24 h postinjection. After passing through
the lungs, GQDs can reach the left atrium and left ventricle and then
enter systemic circulation. Bright NIR fluorescence is observed in
kidneys within renal glomeruli and tubules after RGQD administration
as early as 1 h postinjection, suggesting their active retention in
kidneys and further excretion from the body via renal clearance. This
correlates with work by Chong et al., with PEGylated GQDs mainly accumulating
in the kidneys at the first hour postinjection due to their water
solubility and small size, allowing them to pass through the glomerular
capillaries.

Nd-NGQDs do not experience
substantial kidney accumulation, which
can be explained by a greater average size of Nd-NGQDs. While Sc-GQDs
have the same size as RGQDs, they are not observed predominantly in
the kidneys. In the first-pass metabolism, GQDs can also end up in
the liver and undergo hepatic clearance from the body. With its extensive
network of blood vessels and fenestrated sinusoids, the liver is expected
to retain some GQDs within hepatocytes and sinusoids/sinusoidal spaces,
as is confirmed by NIR fluorescence imaging of liver tissue ( ). In contrast to
their fast clearance through the kidneys, the maximum accumulation
of RGQDs and Nd-NGQDs in the liver is observed at later time points
within 6–24 h. This delay could arise from the prolonged uptake
of the GQDs by hepatocytes considering previously explored maximum in vitro internalization times of 6 h for RGQDs and 12 h
for Nd-NGQDs. GQDs can also undergo secondary
accumulation in hepatocytes due to the Kupffer cell-mediated transport
from sinusoids.
,
 While positively charged Nd-NGQDs
(zeta potential is 8.3 ± 0.7 mV)
and Sc-GQDs (zeta potential is 0.448 ± 0.498 mV (Figure S2)) covered by the negatively charged
protein corona can be consistently captured by the Kupffer cells, negatively charged RGQDs (zeta potential is
−49.4 ± 0.4 mV) are not expected
to possess a large corona and may therefore
exhibit lower Kupfer cell uptake. NIR emission in spleen is relatively
high across all three GQD types likely due to their sequestration
by the macrophages residing eventually in the splenic marginal zone
and the red pulp. This is consistent with spleen tissue analysis for
RGQDs showing bright fluorescence observed in the red pulp at 1 h
postinjection. Splenic RGQD fluorescence is also detected in the white
pulp, which opens the route for their potential use in vaccine delivery
and image-tracking. RGQDs exhibit consistent accumulation in the spleen
at all time points, while Nd-NGQDs and Sc-GQDs demonstrate statistically
significant signals at 24 h and 1 and 12 h postinjection, respectively.
The notable accumulation of GQDs in the lung tissue within pneumocytesparticularly
type I and II alveolar epithelial cellspositions these cells
as promising targets for GQD-assisted delivery in treating idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), lung cancer, and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. High-intensity emission observed in the lungs of mice IV-injected
with Nd-NGQDs at the 24 h time point is likely associated with partial
retention and slow accumulation of Nd-NGQDs within the pulmonary capillary
network and resident macrophages for somewhat agglomerated particles,
a phenomenon commonly reported for carbon-based nanomaterials. This
effect is not observed for other GQD types potentially due to lower/negligible
levels of agglomeration in those. Brain tissue slices show RGQD NIR
fluorescence within and outside the blood vessels of the brain cortex
at 1 h postinjection, while some RGQD signals are seen in the neurons.
Although the size of RGQDs falls within the range favorable for blood–brain
barrier (BBB) crossing, these findings
do not provide sufficient evidence to confirm RGQD diffusion across
the BBB. While their negative surface charge may offer additional
benefits in the context of Alzheimer’s disease, which is associated
with BBB disruption, for some applications,
their negatively charged surface may hinder the BBB penetration yielding lower GQD emission signal from the
brain ( ). Surface
modifications to be explored in further studies may facilitate GQD
translocation into brain tissues.
GQD metabolic pathways as
well as their accumulation in murine
organs are influenced significantly by their pharmacokinetics that
is studied in the present work for most fluorescing RGQDs IV-administered
at imaging doses. The temporal analysis of RGQD concentration in serum
indicates a prolonged half-life (t
1/2 ≈ 2.8 h), superior to that of other carbon-based nanomaterials
including nitrogen- and boron-doped GQDs (t
1/2 ≈ 1.5 h) and PEG2000-modified
SWCNTs (t
1/2 ≈ 0.5 h). This extended circulation can enhance the carrier’s
ability to reach the target site, thereby prolonging the therapeutic
effects of the delivered drug. Longer circulation times are also desired
for enhanced tumor accumulation of therapeutic carriers. This positions
RGQDs developed in the present work as advantageous theragnostic candidates
for such complex conditions such as kidney, liver, and lung cancers
or even for vaccine delivery, facilitating longer payload interaction
with immune cells in the spleen. Extended systemic circulation of
nanoparticles allows for continuous and controlled drug dosing, which
is essential for chemotherapy (e.g., doxorubicin) and chronic disease
management therapies (e.g., insulin delivery systems), where maintaining
stable serum concentrations over time improves therapeutic efficacy
and reduces toxicity associated with multiple dosing. Although RGQDs
demonstrate a 2.8 h half-life, in vivo imaging of
mice at 1 h postinjection ( ) does not clearly distinguish the vasculature. This
may be attributed to the substantially stronger emission from major
uptake and clearance organs (e.g., liver, spleen, and kidneys), which
dominates the overall image intensity due to higher GQD concentration
in those. Such a dynamic range effect could reduce visual detectability
of vascular signal. In addition, regions outside the abdominal cavity
were not shaved, which may have increased light scattering and attenuated
the vascular fluorescence signal, particularly in such areas as the
thigh.
Besides the retention in major murine organs, IV-administered
RGQDs
are also observed in the bones, which can be supported by some previous
evidence of the GQD bone marrow accumulation. The bone marrow is hard to access, and it requires high drug doses
due to the rapid metabolism and clearance of the drug carriers. Our study suggests that GQDs, which have already
demonstrated their effectiveness in therapeutic delivery and tracking,
,
 could be utilized to address these limitations via enhancing drug
transport to the bone marrow with concomitant imaging of the delivery
location. Such capability is highly relevant for a number of disease
targets including multiple myeloma and aplastic anemia.
Compared
to RGQDs, Nd-NGQDs and Sc-GQDs do not exhibit consistent
NIR-II fluorescence from mouse-to-mouse when injected intravenously
likely due to their low quantum yields ( ) and low concentrations used. In order to
better describe the biodistribution of Nd-NGQDs and Sc-GQDs while
circumventing the issues of lower signals and mouse-to-mouse variation
in GQD fluorescence, an IP administration of those materials is attempted
at higher yet biocompatible concentrations. Several works indicate
that GQDs exhibit minimal/no difference in biodistribution with IP
and IV injection routes,
,
 suggesting an IP administration
as a viable alternative. Similarly to IV injection, mice IP administered
with Nd-NGQDs and Sc-GQDs demonstrate NIR fluorescence in major internal
organs, but in the following order: liver > kidneys > spleen
> lungs
≥ heart. IP-administered mice demonstrate more consistent NIR
fluorescence emission from mouse-to-mouse, which can be related to
the higher dosage of Nd-NGQDs and Sc-GQDs used. Compared to IV injection,
IP-administered GQDs may undergo a dual-pathway distribution through
both vascular and lymphatic systems. The latter pathway can result
in the early time point GQD accumulation in spleen confirmed by substantial
NIR-II fluorescence arising from it as early as 1 h postinjection
( and ) retained specifically, in red pulp. At 12 h postinjection,
Sc-GQD fluorescence is no longer observed in the spleen likely due
to their early excretion (Figure S21).
Both vascular and lymphatic distribution routes can also lead to the
accumulation of Nd-NGQDs and Sc-GQDs in the liver tissue, reflected
by the brightest NIR-II fluorescence arising from the liver at nearly
all time points. Upon IP injection, the vascular absorption pathway
can lead to a prolonged entrance of Nd-NGQDs and Sc-GQDs into the
bloodstream compared to the IV route resulting in longer organ retention.
Unlike administered IV RGQDs, Nd-NGQDs and Sc-GQDS are found more
within the portal vein and periportal space, respectively. While some
differences in accumulation occur with IP injection, their absorption
into vasculature leads GQDs to the similar routes as with IV administration.
Nd-NGQD and Sc-GQD fluorescence in the heart, lungs, and kidneys is
observed as early as 1 h postinjection, confirming GQDs entrance to
the bloodstream at this time point and highlighting the similarity
in biodistribution between IP and IV-injected GQDs. Similarly to RGQDs,
Sc-GQDs and Nd-NGQDs are also observed within renal cortex and medulla,
but in confined regions. Interestingly, with IP injection of Nd-NGQDs,
murine organs demonstrate concentrated bright NIR-II emission spots
within the liver, spleen, and kidneys. This can be explained by the
formation of loose Nd-NGQD aggregates, showing as bright fluorescence
centers in tissue slices (Figure S16).
At high GQD concentrations, lanthanide ions can serve as a bridge
between oxygen functional groups of several GQDs as is previously
observed with graphene oxide. Murine
liver intravenously administered with Nd-NGQDs at 24 h postinjection
(Figure S14) also shows an inhomogeneous
signal, which may arise from the aforementioned effect along with
detector oversaturation due to strong accumulation of Nd-NGQDs in
specific hepatic regions.
Spectroscopy measurements of RGQD,
Nd-NGQD, and Sc-GQD fluorescence
in excised organs yield semiquantitative GQD organ abundances that
align well with the NIR animal imager analysis of excised tissues
(Figure S12), verifying relative GQD organ
distribution. This method validates the presence of specific GQD types
in organ tissues by identifying their characteristic spectral signatures
and thus confirming the validity of their biodistribution assessment.
Spectral collection performed in sedated live mice allows for deterministic
spectral mapping of GQD fluorescence identifying GQD types via their
fluorescence signatures in the bright intensity hot spots seen in
NIR whole-animal images (Figure S13).
On the basis of the biodistribution study and in vivo imaging, we infer that RGQDs experience most clearance through the
renal pathway, while Nd-NGQDs and Sc-GQDs prefer hepatobiliary and
splenic pathways. Previous in vivo biodistribution
studies of GQDs with diameters less than 10 nm suggest the kidneys
as the main clearance organs.
,
 However, the charge
of quantum dots and their surface functionalization may play an important
role in the adsorption of proteins affecting their hydrodynamic diameter. RGQDs with negative ζ-potential may experience
only minimum adsorption of negatively charged proteins. Nd-NGQDs in
addition to experiencing loose agglomeration through the lanthanide
ions have a positive ζ-potential that can lead to larger protein
corona sizes preventing those from extensive renal filtration. Sc-GQDs
showing only slightly positive ζ-potential in PBS may have minor
leftovers of the sodium cholate precursor absorbed onto their surface
also affecting their hydrodynamic size. While providing some justification
of GQD clearance pathways, this hypothesis needs further in-depth
examination in stand-alone protein corona formation studies to be
explored in our future work.
Given the observed accumulation
and clearance timelines, one can
suggest RGQDs as more effective imaging/delivery agents for kidney
conditions with additional capabilities of image-tracking in liver,
spleen, heart, lungs, and even brain and bones, posing them as unique
candidates for hard-to-access delivery imaging targets including the
brain cortex and bone marrow. Sc-GQDs are capable of preferentially
targeting liver with IP administration suggesting their application
in theragnostics of such diseases as steatohepatitis, liver fibrosis,
and cancer metastases residing in the liver. Nd-NGQDs due to their
apparent spot agglomeration with the IP administration may have potential
in targeted small tumor detection and therapeutic delivery. Finally,
utilizing multiple GQD types with spectrally separated signatures
allows for multiplex imaging that can enable simultaneous delivery
and tracking of combination therapies. This technique offers unparalleled
advantage for the diagnostics and treatment of such complex conditions
as cancer offering, for instance, a capability of simultaneous drug/gene
treatment. This unique advantage is explored via simultaneous IV injection
of RGQDs and Nd-NGQDs imaged with two different channels (1000 ±
25 and 1050 ± 25 nm) of an NIR animal imager in live sedated
mice ( ). In
this proof-of-concept imaging study, each GQD type can be visualized
separately and then overlaid, showcasing the potential of NIR-II GQDs
for multiplex applications.
 

## Conclusions
In this study, three types of unique NIR-II
fluorescent GQDs (RGQDs,
Nd-NGQDs, and Sc-GQDs) are assessed for bioimaging applications by
evaluating their toxicity, biodistribution, pharmacokinetics, and
whole-animal imaging in Balb/c mice. Their fluorescence in the NIR-II
region allows detection of GQDs through the organs and bodies of live
sedated mice with little attenuation or background autofluorescence.
None of the GQDs demonstrate an acute toxic response in mice at or
above the imaging doses (85 mg/kg (RGQDs), 684 mg/kg (Nd-NGQDs), and
40 mg/kg (Sc-GQDs)) within 21 days postinjection as evidenced via
monitoring animal behaviors, weights, and organ tissue pathology.
The biodistribution studies show that all GQD species exhibit retention
in the liver, kidneys, spleen, lungs, and heart at different time
points within 48 h postinjection, regardless of the injection route.
NIR fluorescence analysis of GQD accumulation in organ tissues is
performed using in-house image analysis software identifying organ
boundaries and calculating GQD fluorescence intensity per unit organ
area. A fiber-optic fluorescence spectroscopy setup is constructed
and utilized to verify the spectral signatures of all three GQD species
within live mice and organ tissues to confirm the origin of NIR-II
emission. RGQDs possessing the brightest fluorescence out of all three
species demonstrate high kidney accumulation making them suitable
for theragnostics of such conditions as kidney injury caused by long-term
diabetes, systemic infection, or chemotherapy agents used to treat
renal carcinoma. Their remarkable localization in leg bones and appearance
in the brain make RGQDs unique candidates for therapeutic delivery
and tracking in bone marrow and at least near the brain vasculature,
uncommon for a majority of nanocarriers. Their prolonged, as compared
to most carbon nanomaterials, blood circulation times (t
1/2 = 2.8 h) can allow for enhanced therapeutic accumulation
in cancer tumors and other disease sites. Ex vivo organ analysis helps identify GQD metabolic pathways, suggesting
that RGQDs undergo primarily renal clearance, while Nd-NGQDs and Sc-GQDs
experience most excretion through the hepatobiliary and splenic systems.
This poses the latter GQD species as a potential imaging/therapeutic
delivery agent for liver and spleen targets. While RGQDs show sufficient in vivo and ex vivo imaging intensities
with the IV injection, Sc-GQDs and Nd-NGQDs require IP administration
and higher doses to yield consistent signals within all tested mice.
Compared to RGQDs and Sc-GQDs, Nd-NGQDs can form small agglomerates
upon IP administration, suggesting their potential in the detection
of localized targets including small tumors. Organ tissue slides verify
observed organ accumulation and show the compartmentalization of the
GQDs within the glomeruli and tubules of the kidneys; the red and
white pulp of the spleen; the periportal space, hepatocytes, and sinusoids
of the liver; and pneumocytes in the lungs. All three GQD types enable in vivo imaging in live sedated mice with the highest intensities
residing in the abdominal area at the first hour postinjection. RGQDs
yielding the highest signal-to-noise ratios can be localized in whole-animal
images to animal liver and spleen areas. Their NIR-II fluorescence
detected within the animal bodies enables image tracing without the
need to sacrifice mice at each imaging time point and, thus, saving
animal lives. The development of different GQD species with spectrally
separated emission signatures allows for multiplex imaging in the
NIR-II successfully shown with RGQDs and Nd-GQDs in this work. This
innovation paves the way for simultaneous delivery and multiplex tracking
of combination therapies designed for complex diseases, such as cancer.
Overall, RGQDs, Nd-NGQDs, and Sc-GQDs are shown in this work to be
promising biocompatible candidates for deeper-tissue NIR-II diagnostic
imaging in the liver, kidneys, spleen, lungs, and heart as well as
brain and bone marrow (RGQDs).

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgments
This research was supported by
the NIH NIBIB, grant
no. 1-R15-EB031528-01. The authors thank Sergei V. Dzyba, Professor
at Texas Christian University, for conducting the viscosity measurements.
The authors also thank Ibrahim Bozkurt and Alyssa Dickens, undergraduate
students at Texas Christian University, for their assistance with
the experiment and the analysis of fluorescence images of organs in
the imaging and toxicity studies. The graphical abstract and Figure
1 were generated using BioRender.

Data available
within the article or its Supporting Information

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsanm.6c01014.
Additional experimental results, such as material characterization,
histological analysis, ex vivo/and in vivo fluorescence images (PDF)

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Data Availability Statement
Data available
within the article or its Supporting Information