Environ Health Perspect253envhperEnvironmental Health Perspectives0091-67651552-9924American Chemical SocietyPMC1470055PMC1470055.114700551470055925555410.1289/ehp.97105s46991Research Article12th meeting of the Scientific Group on Methodologies for the Safety Evaluation of Chemicals: susceptibility to environmental hazards.
BarrettJ CVainioHPeakallDGoldsteinB DNational Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA.61997105Suppl 4131348699737010619970106200604092018Erratum
108Suppl 1320001.b11.b1Environmental Health PerspectivesPMC1637784The 12th meeting of the Scientific Group on Methodologies for the Safety Evaluation of Chemicals (SGOMSEC) considered the topic of methodologies for determining human and ecosystem susceptibility to environmental hazards. The report prepared at the meeting describes measurement of susceptibility through the use of biological markers of exposure, biological markers of effect, and biomarkers directly indicative of susceptibility of humans or of ecosystems. The utility and validity of these biological markers for the study of susceptibility are evaluated, as are opportunities for developing newer approaches for the study of humans or of ecosystems. For the first time a SGOMSEC workshop also formally considered the issue of ethics in relation to methodology, an issue of particular concern for studies of susceptibility.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightyespmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articleyespmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 
-IJOI 
 
12th Meeting of the Scientific Group 
on Methodologies for the Safety 
 
Evaluation of Chemicals: Susceptibility 
to Environmental Hazards 
 
J. Carl Barrett,1 Harri Vainio,2 David Peakall,3 and 
Bernard D. Goldstein4 
 
1National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle 
Park, North Carolina; 2Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Helsinki, 
Finland; 3Monitoring and Research Assessment Center, Kings College, 
London, England; 4Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences 
Institute, Piscataway, New Jersey 
 
The 12th meeting of the Scientific Group on Methodologies for the Safety Evaluation of 
Chemicals (SGOMSEC) considered the topic of methodologies for determining human and 
ecosystem susceptibility to environmental hazards. The report prepared at the meeting describes 
measurement of susceptibility through the use of biological markers of exposure, biological 
markers of effect, and biomarkers directly indicative of susceptibility of humans or of 
ecosystems. The utility and validity of these biological markers for the study of susceptibility are 
evaluated, as are opportunities for developing newer approaches for the study of humans or of 
ecosystems. For the first time a SGOMSEC workshop also formally considered the issue 
of ethics in relation to methodology, an issue of particular concern for studies of susceptibility. 
- Environ Health Perspect 1 05(Suppl 4):699-737 (1997) 
 
Key words: susceptibility, biomarkers, exposure assessment, ethics, ecosystems, human 
health, genes, environment, biological monitoring, methods 
 
Introduction number of interacting factors contribute to 
Biological Basis of Human and an individual's risk for disease; these factors 
Ecosystem Susceptibility to include environmental exposures, genetic 
Enxvionmental Hazards factors, diet, socioeconomic status, age, 
 
and gender. The intrinsic susceptibility of 
Individuals vary greatly in their likelihood an individual is altered by inherited muta- 
of developing specific diseases and in their tions in genes involved in predisposition to 
response to environmental hazards. A large specific diseases, genes involved in the 
 
This joint report was developed at the Workshop on Susceptibility to Environmental Hazards convened by the 
Scientific Group on Methodologies for the Safety Evaluation of Chemicals (SGOMSEC) held 17-22 March 1996 
in Espoo, Finland. Manuscript received at EHP 5 November 1996; accepted 18 November 1996. 
 
Address correspondence to Dr. B.D. Goldstein, Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences Institute, 
681 Frelinghuysen Road, PO Box 1 179, Piscataway, New Jersey 08855-1179. Telephone: (908) 445-0205. 
Fax: (908) 445-0131. E-mail: bgold@eohsi.rutgers.edu 
 
Abbreviations used: AAS, atomic absorption spectrophotometry; AHH, aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase; -ALA, 
-aminolevulinic acid; 1-HP, 1-hydroxypyrene; CA, chromosome aberration; CDGE, constant gradient gel elec- 
trophoresis; CYP, cytochrome P450; DGGE, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis; ELISA, enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay; EDTA, ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid; EROD, ethoxyresorufin 0-deethylase; FISH, flu- 
orescent in situ hybridization; GPA, glycophorin A; GSTM1, glutathione Stransferase Ml; GSTT1, glutathione 
Stransferase Ti; HPLC, high performance liquid chromatography; HPRT, hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl-trans- 
ferase; HUGO, Human Genome Project; ICSU, Intemational Council of Scientific Unions; MN, micronuclei; ILO, 
International Labor Organization; IPCS, International Programme on Chemical Safety; MFO, mixed-function oxi- 
dase; MXR, multixenobiotic resistance mechanism; OP, organophosphate; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; 
PCB, polychlorinated biphenyl; PCDF, polychlorinated dibenzofuran; PCDD, polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxin; 
PAH, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PSA, prostate-specific antigen; QC, quak 
ity control; OA, quality assurance; RFLP, restriction fragment length polymorphism; RBP, retinal binding protein; 
RT, reverse transcription; SGOMSEC, Scientific Group on Methodologies for the Safety Evaluation of Chemicals; 
SCOPE, Scientific Committee on Problems of the Environment; SSCP, single-strand conformation polymor- 
phism; SCEs, sister chromatid exchange; TCB, tetrachlorobiphenyl; TCDD, tetrachlorodibenzopdioxin; TEF, toxic 
equivalent factor; WHO, World Health Organization; XRF, X-ray fluorescence; ZPP, zinc protoporphyrin. 
 
metabolic activation or detoxification of 
environmental toxins, and genes control- 
ling the repair of DNA or cellular damage. 
Epigenetic changes in expression of these 
genes can also affect host susceptibility. 
These alterations may be due to inherited 
differences in genes that control the expres- 
sion of other genes, to past environmental 
exposures, to the physiological state of an 
individual, to age-related differences, or to 
developmentally controlled processes. The 
interaction between genes and the environ- 
ment, the cross talk between genes, and the 
interplay of environmental factors, which 
include diet and lifestyle, illustrate the com- 
plexity in understanding the susceptibility 
to environmental hazards. 
 
Recent advances in the understanding 
of molecular biology, the human genome, 
toxicology, and disease mechanisms and 
ecosystem functions have led to significant 
advances in the study of susceptibility fac- 
tors for environmental hazards. These 
methods can be used to identify environ- 
mental causes of human diseases and harm 
to ecosystems; to identify susceptible sub- 
populations; and to understand interindi- 
vidual and interethnic differences in 
response to environmental hazards, which, 
we hope, will lead to disease prevention, an 
important translation of molecular medi- 
cine. The complex interplay between genes 
and environment represents a tremendous 
challenge to scientists but also an impor- 
tant opportunity to reduce the burden of 
disease and dysfunctions to humans and 
the ecosystem. 
 
The number of biomarkers available to 
study responses of biological systems to 
environmental factors is growing rapidly. 
The term "biomarker" is a general term for 
specific measurements of an interaction of a 
biological system and an environmental 
agent (1,2). Biomarkers of exposure mea- 
sure an exogenous substance or its metabo- 
lite and its interaction with a biological 
molecule. Because a number of factors 
determine whether a chemical exposure 
reaches its biological target for a toxic 
response, the most accurate measurement 
of "dose" is the biologically effective dose at 
the target tissue, which can be more reliably 
measured by biomarkers of exposure than 
estimated by measurements of administered 
or ambient chemical exposure. 
 
Biomarkers of effect are measurable 
biochemical, physiological, behavior, or 
other alterations within an organism (1). 
Biomarkers of effect are primarily concerned 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
------------------- 
 
. - ------ I........ .. . ... . - . . ... M - - -- . . . 
 
699 
 
BARRETT ET AL. 
 
it 
 
TII 
 
it 
 
it 
 
Il J1T1 
 
IllllJ 
 
it 
 
TI1 
 
T I 
 
I 
 
l l il 
 
Figure 1. The role of susceptibility in the continuum between biological markers of exposure and of effect. 
 
with adverse effects, although the level of 
evidence varies for the relationship between 
a given measured effect and specific, patho- 
logical responses, which occur often after a 
long period and after chronic exposures. 
There is an overlap between biomarkers of 
exposure and biomarkers of effect, because 
the same biomarker can be used for both 
measurements. Some of the same biomark- 
ers are also used to measure interindividual 
differences in response and thus further 
serve as biomarkers of susceptibility. 
 
There is a continuum between biologi- 
cal markers of exposure and those of effect 
(Figure 1). Exploring the relationship 
between biological markers on this contin- 
uum can be a useful means for detecting 
susceptibility. Biological markers of suscep- 
tibility can be defined as indicators of the 
mechanistic processes that cause variability 
among the compartments in the continuum 
between exposure and effect. 
 
As a simplification, there are five differ- 
ent mechanistic avenues through which fac- 
tors affecting susceptibility can influence the 
interaction between biological systems and 
environmental exposures. These avenues are 
body uptake, metabolism, target cell uptake, 
subcellular or molecular interaction, and the 
baseline status of the individual or ecosys- 
tem. The mechanistic avenues are bounded 
by compartments in which exposure or 
effect can be quantitated. These compart- 
ments are external exposure level, internal 
exposure level, extracellular level of toxic 
agent or metabolite, cellular level of toxic 
agent or metabolite, target cell toxicity, and 
adverse effect to the individual or ecosystem. 
In each case one or more of the mecha- 
nisms responsible for susceptibility produce 
a variation in the relation between compart- 
ments that is potentially detectable through 
use of biomarkers. 
 
In the simplest formulation, susceptibil- 
ity can be defined as a variation in the 
quantity of exposure/effect in a compart- 
ment among individuals or populations 
who have similar levels of exposure/effect in 
the preceding compartment. Of necessity, 
this can only be accounted for by mecha- 
nisms operative in the avenue between 
these two compartments. Examples of 
compartments and mechanistic avenues are 
the following: 
 
* For a given level of external exposure, 
 
there is an interindividual variation in 
the uptake into the body (e.g., 
increased Fe uptake in hemochromato- 
sis; variations in uptake of air pollutants 
related to respiratory rate). 
 
* For a given level of a toxic agent, there 
 
is interindividual variation in the 
uptake into the target cell (e.g., increase 
in radioactive iodine uptake into the 
thyroid in iodine-deficient individuals; 
tumor resistance to chemotherapeutic 
agents). 
 
* For a given level of uptake into the 
 
body, there is interindividual variation 
in the level of a metabolically produced 
active toxic agent (e.g., differing activities 
of metabolic enzymes). 
 
* For a given level of uptake into the tar- 
 
get cell there is a variation in the extent 
of effect (e.g., glucose 6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase deficiency or methemo- 
globin reductase deficiency rendering 
the red cell susceptible to oxidant stress; 
differences in DNA repair). 
 
* For a given level of effect in the target 
 
cell, there is a variation in the impact 
on the individual (organ functional 
reserve capacity variations due to age; 
disease factors). 
 
* For a given level of effect in an organ- 
 
ism, there is a variation in the impact 
 
on communities and ecosystems (e.g., 
shifts in biomass, species diversity, 
energy cycling due to heavy metals or 
organochlorines). 
 
Each mechanistic avenue can have mul- 
tiple inputs in different directions, which 
influence the extent to which a quantity in 
one compartment affects the quantity in 
the next compartment. For example, even 
when the relation between the absorbed 
dose of a xenobiotic and the level of a toxic 
metabolite is the result of a single enzyme, 
the activity of this enzyme in any individ- 
ual may be a function of a genetic poly- 
morphism as well as the presence of other 
pollutants or of dietary factors that affect 
enzyme activity. The potential order of the 
compartments may differ depending upon 
the mechanistic pathways; e.g., metabolism 
may occur in a nontarget cell and precede 
uptake of the toxic metabolite into the tar- 
get cell (reversal of the second and third 
sections in the above example). The rela- 
tionship between compartments can be 
modeled mathematically so as to explore 
the extent of variability in the relationship 
between two compartments among a speci- 
fied population group, i.e., the distribution 
of susceptibility due to this particular 
mechanistic avenue. 
 
In essence, the true distribution of 
susceptibility in a population is the relation 
between the first compartment and the last 
one-between external exposure and 
disease outcome, with the intervening 
mechanistic avenues contributing to this 
distribution. For a given individual it is 
possible that a mechanism that increases 
susceptibility to a disease outcome in one 
avenue may be counterbalanced by a mech- 
anism that decreases susceptibility in 
another avenue. It is thus important to rec- 
ognize that analysis of only one mechanistic 
avenue in the pathway between exposure 
and disease does not necessarily provide 
definitive information on the susceptibility 
of any single individual in the population. 
 
Biomarkers can be divided into those 
that measure compartments, e.g., blood 
levels, DNA adducts, or tissue damage; and 
those that measure mechanisms, e.g., 
enzyme activity levels or gene polymor- 
phisms. Each has its advantages and its 
limitations. Measurement of the compart- 
ment tells little about the reasons for the 
level; measurement of the mechanism is 
not always a definitive indicator of what 
will be happening in the next compart- 
ment. For individuals or populations at 
risk, it is preferable to have measurements 
both from mechanistic avenues and from 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
700 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
related compartments to more effectively 
target prevention strategies. 
Genetic Susceptibility 
 
Individuals may vary in terms of their 
responses to environmental hazards due to 
differences in their genetic constitution. 
The human genome encodes for 50,000 to 
100,000 genes, some of which are key regu- 
lators of biological processes. Mutations 
(heritable alterations in the primary coding 
sequences of genes or their controlling 
elements) in specific genes ("disease genes") 
greatly predispose an individual to a dis- 
ease. For example, mutations that inacti- 
vate the retinoblastoma gene, a central 
regulator of cell growth and division, can 
result in a 105-fold increased probability of 
a rare eye cancer in children (retinoblas- 
toma). Due to recent advances in gene 
mapping and isolation, a number of major 
disease genes have been discovered, includ- 
ing genes involved in cystic fibrosis; 
Huntington's disease; Alzheimer's disease; 
and breast, colon, lung, and many other 
cancers. Mutations in disease genes lead to 
a very high probability of disease develop- 
ment, often approaching a 100% incidence 
of disease in carriers of the mutations. 
 
Mutations in disease genes are usually 
rare; depending on the gene, 1 in 200 to 1 
in a million people are affected. However, 
multiple genes may regulate a specific dis- 
ease, therefore, the percentage of disease 
cases for which there is a genetic compo- 
nent may be high. For example, in certain 
cancers (e.g., colon, breast, and prostate) it 
is estimated that up to 10% of the cancers 
are due to a genetic predisposition. These 
very strong susceptibility genes may not be 
influenced by environmental factors, but 
there is evidence for environmental influ- 
ences in some diseases even with a strong 
genetic predisposition. 
 
Many of the genes in the genome of 
humans and other species influence the 
impact of environmental agents on the 
organism. Genetic controls on the uptake, 
activation, detoxification, or repair of envi- 
ronmental insults are known. The exact 
number of genes involved in the organ- 
ism's response to environmental hazards is 
unknown but could be very large. For 
example, the estimates of the number of the 
individual P450 genes in any mammalian 
species range from 60 to 200 (3). 
 
All genes commonly have variations in 
their sequences that may or may not have 
functional consequences. Changes in 
DNA sequence that occur frequently (in 
> 1% of the population) are called genetic 
 
polymorphisms. Polymorphisms often 
affect the function of a gene but some may 
change the level of expression of a gene or 
change the activity of the gene product, 
for example, an enzyme. Genetic polymor- 
phisms that are functionally significant are 
quite important when the gene controls 
the response of an organism to environ- 
mental hazards. For example, polymor- 
phisms in the genes that metabolize 
carcinogens can affect the response of indi- 
viduals to that carcinogen. Given that a 
large number of genes are involved in 
responses to environmental hazards and 
that a large number of polymorphisms exist 
in these genes, genetic differences are 
important susceptibility factors in environ- 
mental responses. Many of these commonly 
occur in human populations. 
 
Recent advances in the identification 
and cloning of specific genes and methods 
for the detection of mutations and poly- 
morphisms in these genes have led to sig- 
nificant advances in our understanding of 
genetic susceptibility to environmental haz- 
ards. There is an important difference 
between individuals with genetic alter- 
ations that lead to disease susceptibility and 
individuals with genetic susceptibility to 
environmental factors. Individuals who 
inherit a mutation in a disease susceptibil- 
ity gene have a high risk of developing that 
disease regardless of environmental expo- 
sures, although environmental factors may 
increase the incidence or rate of disease 
development. Individuals who have a 
mutation or polymorphism in genes 
involved in response to environmental haz- 
ards will only have an increased risk of dis- 
ease development when they are exposed to 
specific environmental hazards. Therefore, 
risk to these individuals is influenced 
strongly by gene-environment interaction. 
Also, because multiple genes are involved 
in response to the same environmental haz- 
ards, two individuals with the same genetic 
susceptibility and environmental exposure 
may have different risks because of the 
interplay between genes involved in 
response to xenobiotics. For example, two 
individuals may both have a polymorphism 
in a gene that increases the rate of carcino- 
gen activation but different polymorphisms 
in a gene that inactivates the same carcino- 
gen. Because many environmental response 
genes remain to be identified and charac- 
terized and because many mixtures of envi- 
ronmental exposures are present in the 
environment, it is difficult to determine an 
individual's risk. Great advances have been 
made in the identification of susceptibility 
 
factors for subpopulations exposed to 
environmental hazards. 
 
Susceptible Populations versus 
Susceptible Inaividuals 
 
Environmental and occupational medicine, 
like medicine in general, is traditionally 
concerned with individuals and their 
health. It may also seek to identify individ- 
uals who are liable to develop a specific dis- 
ease (predictive medicine). This approach 
implies the possibility of dividing the peo- 
ple into two groups: those who are disease 
prone, and the healthy remainder. This is, 
of course, a considerable oversimplification, 
because susceptibility is rarely confined to a 
distinct high-risk minority and because our 
ability to predict the disease outcome for 
these individuals is therefore weak. 
 
Epidemiology, as a discipline of public 
health, includes the study of the distribu- 
tion of diseases and risk factors in popula- 
tions. Epidemiologic research focuses on 
populations in order to elucidate a broad 
range of risk factors for disease. A distinc- 
tion exists between the populations that 
epidemiologists study and the individuals 
comprising those populations. Within a 
low risk population, there are individuals 
who develop disease, and within high-risk 
populations there are disease-free individu- 
als. An individual's risk will be determined 
by a complex interplay of multiple genes, 
multiple exposures, diet, age, and chance. 
The application of biomarkers of exposure, 
effect, and susceptibility to the assessment 
of an individual's risk from environmental 
hazards is not conceptually different from 
the application of common clinical mea- 
sures in medical practice. For example, 
blood pressure, blood lipids, relative 
weight, and smoking habits are applied to 
the assessment of an individual's risk for 
coronary heart disease in clinical medicine. 
Combining biomarkers with epidemiologi- 
cal study design has led to the development 
of molecular epidemiology, an approach 
that generates a great deal of interest and 
expectation. The use of biomarkers in 
human studies raises challenging ethical 
questions that must be addressed in 
advance of applying new technologies in 
this area. 
 
Susceptible Populations 
and Ecsysems 
 
Ecologists are concerned with understand- 
ing differences in susceptibility among 
individuals within communities of thou- 
sands of species. One important method- 
ological approach is the development of 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
701 
 
BARRETT ET AL. 
 
biomarkers of exposure and effect that are 
applicable across a broad range of species 
that range from invertebrates to birds and 
mammals. However, ecologists also are 
concerned with understanding and predict- 
ing-through the use of biological indica- 
tors-differences in susceptibility of 
communities and ecosystems. Here, vul- 
nerability refers to changes in the structure 
and function of ecosystems. The challenge 
for ecologists is to develop a broad range of 
methodologies from molecular through 
ecosystem measures that can be used to 
assess susceptibility. 
 
In many cases, cellular and molecular 
biomarkers that can be used to assess the 
susceptibility of a range of indicator species 
will be most useful for communities and 
ecosystems as well. Such biomarkers could 
be used to assess both the health of the 
ecosystem and the potential of the ecosys- 
tem to support human populations and 
provide ecological services. 
Ethics 
 
The study of susceptibility in human 
populations and in ecosystems poses a 
number of ethical challenges. Regarding 
humans, both the manner in which infor- 
mation is obtained and the uses to which 
it could be put raise urgent concerns. 
Regarding ecosystems, the ethical duty to 
work towards protecting our shared environ- 
ment and its life support systems requires 
ongoing attention and the development of 
clear guidelines. 
 
Specifically relevant to susceptibility 
studies in humans is the sensitivity of the 
information and the likelihood of labeling 
certain individuals or subgroups in ways 
that could cause unanticipated harm. 
Scientists and public health professionals 
investigating susceptibility or implementing 
related preventive screening programs must 
be aware of the potential for harmful social 
and psychological side effects arising from 
susceptibility studies. For example, denial 
of employment, denial of insurance, fear for 
the premature onset of illness or death, 
social marginalization, reconsideration of 
family planning and of both medium and 
longer term life goals, and the need for psy- 
chological counseling are possible untoward 
effects that may arise from the identification 
of susceptibility in individuals. 
 
Scientists also must remain sensitive to 
cross-cultural differences in perception of 
personal risks associated with susceptibility 
studies and must strive for equity in their 
research and in its potential consequences. 
For example, there may be greater need to 
 
focus resources on populations subjected to 
more severe pollution than on those popula- 
tions experiencing lower levels of exposure. 
 
Scientists must understand ethical 
issues to be able to address the challenges 
presented by susceptibility studies and to 
learn how to resolve them. Preparation 
would include defining the key ethical 
issues, identifying the principles behind 
them, and then attempting to resolve the 
ethical dilemmas that emerge. This objec- 
tive requires a certain amount of formal 
training in ethics as well as ongoing dia- 
logue involving a broad range of stakehold- 
ers who try to anticipate ethical dilemmas. 
Stakeholders include, among others, other 
professionals as well as patient advocates. 
 
Markers of susceptibility are of a 
particularly sensitive nature. Therefore, 
serious attention must be paid to quality 
assurance so that data integrity can be even 
more highly assured than in most other 
types of studies. In addition, existing 
guidelines that protect confidentiality and 
ensure the participants' "right to know" 
must be revisited and made more specific 
in light of the potential consequences of 
susceptibility studies. 
 
Where legal protections are not clearly 
in place to ensure confidentiality of per- 
sonal information gathered in the conduct 
of research into susceptibility, and to pro- 
tect the various stakeholders against retro- 
active actions, the risks associated with 
such studies must be made clear to any 
research participants in advance of their 
commitment to participate. Such risks 
include birth with inherited negative traits, 
and illness induced or associated with envi- 
ronmental/occupational exposures only 
subsequently recognized as having been 
associated with susceptibility traits. 
 
Finally, susceptible ecosystems exist, 
the destruction of which can have both 
direct and indirect negative consequences 
for human health and well-being. For 
example, the susceptibility of the earth's 
atmosphere has consequences for global 
warming associated with, among other 
things, increasing skin cancer rates, coastal 
flooding disasters, and crop failures. 
Scientists engaged in such work must bring 
to the attention of human populations 
their stewardship duty and responsibility to 
protect the ecosphere. 
 
Condusions and Recommendations 
 
The following condusions and recommen- 
dations have been formulated in recogni- 
tion of human and ecosystem vulnerability 
to environmental hazards: 
 
a) Determination of susceptibility to 
chemicals in the workplace and general envi- 
ronment is becoming increasingly feasible 
through rapid advances in biological sci- 
ences, particularly molecular biology. Parallel 
advances have occurred in epidemiology, 
ecology, toxicology, and related sciences 
which have greatly facilitated understanding 
and measurement of susceptibility. 
 
b) Increased understanding of the 
pathways leading to susceptibility of 
individuals, of populations, and of ecosys- 
tems to chemical and physical agents is of 
value in protecting human health and 
the environment. 
 
c) Identification of biological markers of 
exposure and of effect is a useful avenue for 
determining susceptibility. Markers of sus- 
ceptibility in essence operate in the pathway 
between the various compartments of expo- 
sure and effect, reflecting mechanisms 
responsible for variations in response to the 
levels in the previous compartment. 
 
d) There is an important distinction 
between studies of the susceptibility of 
populations at risk and studies of the sus- 
ceptibility of individuals. It is important 
not to misinterpret from population 
studies the risk to an individual. 
 
e) The ethical, legal, and social dimen- 
sions should be recognized in studies of 
individuals, populations, communities, and 
ecosystems at risk. Ethical dilemmas must 
be considered in advance of research activi- 
ties or of any use of susceptibility markers 
in evaluating populations at risk. In some 
cases public debate and legislation will be 
required to clarify social norms and to pro- 
vide legal protection for the participant. 
Ethical issues should be incorporated in the 
development of methodologies to study and 
evaluate communities and ecosystems and 
should be reflected in research proposals. 
 
f) Studies of biomarkers of susceptibil- 
ity should not be undertaken in circum- 
stances in which confidentiality and 
privacy safeguards cannot be assured. 
 
g) Training programs for professionals 
engaging in susceptibility studies of bio- 
markers need to integrate formal ethics 
education. Continuing education should 
include an ongoing discourse through 
ethics workshops, symposia, and discussion 
in the journals of the respective professions. 
 
h) Numerous other methodological 
issues must be taken into account before 
accepting a marker of susceptibility as being 
potentially useful in protecting public 
health and the environment. These issues 
include technical feasibility, cost, quality 
assurance and control, and cultural and 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
702 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
logistic issues related to sample availability, 
collection, and storage. 
 
i) The determination and use of suscep- 
tibility markers pose both technical and 
ethical issues in developing countries. These 
need to be taken into account when design- 
ing studies or applying the use of suscepti- 
bility markers validated in industrialized 
countries. 
 
j) Additional research is needed to 
focus biological advances on increasing 
understanding of factors affecting the sus- 
ceptibility of human and nonhuman com- 
ponents of ecosystems, and to determine 
how best to apply this understanding to 
protect public health and the environment. 
Good science should be tied to good ethics 
and vice versa. 
 
Biological Markers 
of Exposure 
 
Definition of Exposure Markers 
 
In the narrowest sense, biomarkers of expo- 
sure refer to measurement of the specific 
chemical of interest or its specific metabo- 
lite in a body compartment or fluid. In the 
broadest sense, it can refer to any biomarker 
used to estimate current or past exposure 
for either medical, epidemiologic, or risk 
assessment purposes (4). This can even 
include the clinical detection of evidence of 
exposure, although this domain is usually 
excluded from discussion of biomarkers. 
 
Many of the biomarkers of effect are 
used also to assess exposure, and some of 
these will be discussed in this section. Not 
all biomarkers can be used in all settings, 
particularly in developing nations (5). 
Objectives for Using Biomarkers 
of Exposure 
 
Exposure can be viewed as both a population 
and an individual phenomenon. Exposure 
markers can function in several ways. 
a) They may lead to early detection of 
exposure at a point where significant health 
effects have not occurred. This must focus 
attention on external means of reducing 
exposure, i.e., on primary prevention. 
b) They may provide validation of expo- 
sure for use in epidemiologic studies. 
c) They may facilitate comparison of expo- 
sure levels in different compartments 
(external, blood, cellular) to identify 
susceptibility differences. 
 
Criteria for Sereening, Using 
Biomarkers. The application of any 
biomarker approach must be conducted 
within the context of a viable screening and 
prevention program. The World Health 
 
Organization (WHO) has established a set 
of criteria to be met before instituting a 
screening program. These will be discussed 
in relation to exposure markers. 
 
CRITERION 1. The screening must 
be conducted for a condition of public 
health significance. Overall the exposure, 
health status, or susceptibility of popula- 
tions or subpopulations is clearly of public 
health significance. Thus, criterion 1 is 
usually met (but see the section on ethical 
considerations). 
 
CRITERION 2. The natural history of 
the exposure marker must be well under- 
stood, and there must be a distinguishable 
subclinical phase. There is tremendous 
variability in our knowledge regarding the 
natural history of various exposure markers 
and their relation to subsequent effects. 
 
CRITERION 3. There must be a scientifi- 
cally defensible and socially and personally 
acceptable intervention. The usual inter- 
vention when an exposure is detected is to 
remove the hazard and reduce the exposure; 
 
CRITEIUON 4. The tests used must have 
appropriate sensitivity and specificity. 
Usually the sensitivity limitation is 
imposed by the analytic method available. 
Increasingly sophisticated instrumentation 
has allowed the measurement of various 
analytes at infinitesimally small levels, 
although in most cases this sensitivity is not 
required. However, it is essential to choose 
the appropriate tissue or fluid and method- 
ology to assure adequate test sensitivity. 
Sensitivity also depends on the proper 
timing of analysis with respect to exposure. 
 
Measuring the agent of concern is usu- 
ally highly specific. For example, a blood 
lead determination reflects lead exposure. 
However, it may not be specific to the 
source of lead being investigated since 
there are many sources of lead in our envi- 
ronment. Specificity in part depends on 
the question being asked. For example, one 
might be interested in recent exposure or 
historic exposure and would design a dif- 
ferent testing approach for each. In some 
cases, to address specific questions, chemi- 
cal speciation of the agent or analyte is nec- 
essary (e.g., chromium VI vs chromium 
III, methyl vs inorganic mercury, organic 
vs inorganic arsenic) and speciation, in 
turn, may reduce sensitivity. 
 
The metabolites one measures may be 
specific or nonspecific. Thus phenol is 
commonly used as a marker of benzene 
exposure but is not specific (other com- 
pounds are metabolized to phenol and 
some consumer products, such as cough 
medicines, contain phenol). Nonetheless it 
 
may still be useful in quantifying exposure 
in individuals known to have relatively 
high levels of exposure to benzene. Other 
metabolites are more highly specific (e.g., 
muconic acid for benzene), and others are 
very specific (DDE for DDT). Some 
metabolites are also active agents. 
 
CRITERION 5. The condition or 
exposure being sought must be sufficiently 
common that the tests have acceptable pre- 
dictive value. Exposure is a phenomenon 
common to both a population and an indi- 
vidual. On the individual level, the predic- 
tive value of a screening test depends not 
only on its sensitivity and specificity, but on 
the underlying prevalence of the exposure. 
One can estimate population exposure by 
randomly sampling a subgroup of the pop- 
ulation before extending screening for 
exposure biomarkers to a larger population. 
 
CRITERION 6. The testing must be 
acceptable to the target population. 
Biomarkers of exposure are most often 
detected with noninvasive (breath sam- 
pling, urine testing) or minimally inva- 
sive (milk collection, blood testing) 
approaches. At the other end of the spec- 
trum are fat biopsies which are limited to 
clinical diagnostic settings or to specialized 
research protocols. 
 
CRITERION 7. The testing program must 
be cost effective (see below, on analysis and 
quality assurance). 
 
Use of Biomarkers 
 
Applications of Biomarkers of Exposure. 
Monitoring biomarkers of exposure is 
usually part of a preventive activity. It can 
contribute to identifying and reducing 
exposure or to identifying at-risk or suscep- 
tible populations that need to be protected 
in special ways. In occupational health, the 
major goal of detecting biomarkers is the 
prevention of health impairment by the 
recognition of excessive exposure and the 
elimination of hazards (6). Ideally, expo- 
sure is controlled and measured at the 
source so that no excessive exposure occurs 
(7), but often there is supplemental 
reliance on biological monitoring as part of 
a medical surveillance program, to assure 
that the primary preventive strategies have 
been effective. 
 
A marker can be applied on an individ- 
ual basis to estimate the amount of pollu- 
tant absorbed or retained, usually through 
the measurement of the agent or its specific 
metabolites (8). A marker can reflect 
individual differences in the rate of absorp- 
tion and in toxicokinetics (metabolism, 
distribution, and excretion). 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
703 
 
BARRETT ET AL. 
 
The traditional definition of an expo- 
sure biomarker involves measurement of a 
xenobiotic or its metabolite in a body tis- 
sue or fluid, whereas markers of effect 
include any measurable alteration attribut- 
able to a xenobiotic that can be recognized 
as a health impairment. Between the two is 
a continuum of subtle effects caused by 
chemicals that can be measured but which 
are not indicative of a disease. Some of 
these are early stages in a significant patho- 
genic process (e.g., DNA adducts of alky- 
lating agents), others are early, often trivial, 
stages in a pathogenic process (zinc proto- 
porphyrin [ZPP] elevation in lead expo- 
sure), and others may be the early signs of 
damage that are reversible and not of clini- 
cal significance (for example, depression of 
cholinesterase activity or elevation of some 
tubular proteins in persons exposed to 
heavy metals). In the latter case, it is recog- 
nized that kidney function may show no 
clinically detectable decrement until about 
90% of the nephrons are damaged; hence 
substantial changes can occur with no 
immediate overt clinical significance except 
a reduction in reserve capacity. 
 
Blood lead is a marker of exposure and 
a surrogate marker of effect. Elevations of 
ZPP or erythrocyte protoporphyrin and 
urinary 6-aminolevulinic acid (6-ALA) or 
the activity of 6-ALA dehydratase are all 
effects caused by lead; the inhibition of 
enzymes in the heme synthesis pathway 
results in anemia, yet anemia is rarely the 
end point of concern in lead poisoning, 
especially in adults. Thus, they are useful as 
exposure as well as effect markers. 
 
A major criterion for distinguishing 
markers of exposure from markers of effect is 
the purpose to which they are put. In many 
cases enzymatic or cellular damage markers 
are used for dose reconstruction or for the 
classification of exposure status for epi- 
demiologic studies. Van Schooten et al (9), 
for example, treat DNA adducts in smok- 
ers as a means of estimating their polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) exposure. 
 
For the purposes of this discussion we 
recognize the following as biomarkers of 
exposure: a) measurement of the xenobiotic 
itself (i.e., lead in blood, DDT in milk); 
b) measurement of specific metabolites; 
c) measurement of specific subclinical effects 
that are reversible. Many effect markers that 
are used to estimate exposure or tissue dose 
are described in more detail below. 
 
Choice of Tissue or Fluid and 
Analyte. Factors that influence the choice 
of tissue or fluid and analyte include the 
toxicodynamics of the agent (where it is 
 
distributed, stored, excreted), speciation 
(its chemical form), and chronology (acute 
vs chronic exposures and temporal aspects 
of its kinetics in the body). 
 
An exposure marker should be able to 
distinguish long-term from short-term 
exposures (10). Thus blood lead may 
reflect recent exposure, while bone lead 
reflects cumulative exposure. 
 
An example of the importance of 
appropriate quality control (QC) is 
reflected in the experience with routine 
blood lead determinations by clinical labo- 
ratories. As recently as the early 1990s, 
when laboratory proficiency testing pro- 
grams were concerned with accuracy in the 
presumed toxic range of 40 pg/dl, it was 
found that most laboratories were unable 
to provide reliable results below 15 pg/dI, 
even though the Centers for Disease 
Control had designated 10 pg/dl as a "level 
of concern." Two years later, when profi- 
ciency testing began to include unknowns 
in the 10 pg/dl range, most laboratories 
rapidly improved to the point where they 
provided acceptable results. It is essential 
that a quality assurance (QA) program be 
designed for the range of values that will be 
encountered in a population. 
 
DNA and Protein Adducts. Many 
compounds form covalent adducts with 
nucleic acids and other macromolecules 
including hemoglobin and other proteins. 
In the case of DNA adducts, the changes in 
the DNA molecule may relate directly to 
mutational or repair events and the possi- 
bility of subsequently developing cancer. 
Elevated levels of DNA adducts are seen in 
a number of populations with known ele- 
vated cancer risks, including smokers and 
coke-oven workers. 
 
DNA adducts can be measured by the 
32P-postlabeling technique or by immuno- 
assays. For certain adducts, mass spectrom- 
etry, fluorescence spectrometry, and liquid 
chromatography/electrochemical detection 
have been used. For quantitative analysis a 
standard compound is necessary for the 
calculation of recovery as discussed by 
Hemminki (11). In the case of complex 
mixtures, identification of individual 
adducts may not be possible. In such cases 
recoveries cannot be calculated and quan- 
tification is not possible. Data on half-lives 
of adducts in humans are very limited. 
Biomonitoring of protein adducts applies 
to either hemoglobin or albumin. Adducts 
can be released hydrolytically from the pro- 
tein and assayed by gas or liquid chro- 
matography, or by mass spectrometry. 
N-terminal valine of hemoglobin can be 
 
specifically released in the Edman degrada- 
tion process and assayed by mass spectrome- 
try. Adducts are generally not thought to 
alter the half-lives of the proteins. 
 
DNA-protein cross-links are another 
end point that has been used to estimate 
exposure to mutagens such as hexavalent 
chromium (12). A standardized DNA 
extraction procedure is used that fails to 
extract cross-linked DNA that can be 
quantified as a percentage of the total DNA. 
 
Assessing Population Exposures. 
Examples of exposure markers used to docu- 
ment the effectiveness of regulatory inter- 
ventions are the dramatic decline in blood 
leads in countries that have eliminated lead 
from gasoline (13), and the decline in the 
levels of polychlorinated dioxins and diben- 
zofurans in breast milk in Sweden (14), 
attributable partly to the ban of chlorinated 
phenol herbicides. 
 
Overall Ethical Considerations. The 
estimation of exposure is performed to 
benefit the individual subject or popula- 
tion, usually by subsequently reducing 
their exposure to hazards. It is unethical to 
perform a testing program merely for its 
own sake, without having the goal of 
reducing harmful exposures that may be 
detected. Therefore, in a workplace, a bio- 
logical monitoring program using markers 
of exposure should be performed as part 
of a comprehensive medical surveillance 
program linked to an industrial hygiene 
program capable of discovering and 
eliminating hazards. 
 
Zielhuis (10) cautioned that the results 
of a screening examination must be exam- 
ined in the light of many individual fac- 
tors. In turn the physician must impart 
objective information to the participant. 
"In the perception of the examined subject, 
biological sampling for assessment of inter- 
nal exposure, and henceforth of health risk, 
is not distinguished from assessment of 
their health" (10). Individuals should be 
informed of their health risks, along with 
the degree of uncertainty, regardless of the 
technologic and economic consequences. 
 
Some question the ethics of biological 
monitoring for exposure, arguing that 
humans should not be the guinea pigs or 
the detectors of their own exposure. 
However, biological monitoring offers the 
advantage of taking into account absorp- 
tion by all routes (whereas air monitoring 
would not detect potential exposure by 
other routes). We caution that biological 
monitoring can be an adjunct, but it can- 
not substitute for environmental monitoring 
and controls. [See below and Soskolne 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
704 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
Table 1. Examples of biological exposure markers. 
 
Agent 
 
Aniline 
 
Benzene 
Cadmium 
 
Carbon disulfide 
Chlorobenzene 
Chromium VI 
 
N,N-Dimethylformamide 
Ethylbenzene 
Fluorides 
Furfural 
 
n-Hexane 
Lead 
 
Methanol 
 
Methemoglobin inducers 
Methyl chloroform 
Methyl ethyl ketone 
Nitrobenzene 
 
Organophosphates 
Parathion 
 
Pentachlorophenol (PCP) 
Styrene 
Toluene 
 
Trichloroethylene (TCE) 
Xylenes 
 
Exposure marker 
 
Total p-aminophenol in urine; methemoglobin in blood 
 
Total phenol or muconic acid in urine; benzene in expired air 
Cadmium in urine or blood 
 
2-Thiothiazolidine-4-carboxylic acid in urine; CO in end-expired air 
Total 4-chlorocatechol or p-chlorophenol in urine 
Total Cr in urine 
 
N-Methylformamide in urine 
 
Mandelic acid in urine or ethylbenzene in end-expired air 
Urinary fluoride 
 
Total furoic acid in urine 
 
2,5-Hexanedione in urine or n-hexane in expired air 
Lead in blood or urine, ZPP 
 
Methanol or formic acid in urine 
Methemoglobin 
 
Methyl chloroform in end-expired air or trichloroacetic acid in blood or urine 
Urinary methyl ethyl ketone 
 
Total p-nitrophenol in urine or methemoglobin in blood 
Red cell or serum cholinesterase activity 
 
Total p-nitrophenol in urine or RBC cholinesterase 
Total PCP in urine or free PCP in plasma 
 
Mandelic acid in urine, styrene in blood; phenylglyoxylic acid in urine 
Hippuric acid in urine; toluene in blood or end-expired air 
 
Trichloracetic acid in urine; TCA or trichlorocethanol in blood; TCE in end-expired air 
Methylhippuric acids in urine 
 
(15) elsewhere in this issue for a further 
discussion of ethical issues.] 
 
Examples of Biological Monitoring 
for Seleced Agents (Table 1) 
 
Heavy Metals. Most heavy metals are of 
toxicologic concern, although some are 
essential trace elements in humans as well. 
Since these elements are not metabolized, 
they can be tracked in the body, and can 
be measured in various body compart- 
ments and fluids. A variety of standardized 
analytic procedures are described in readily 
available references (16). Most of these are 
analyzed with atomic absorption spec- 
trophotometry (AAS), usually using a 
graphite furnace as the source. Flame pho- 
tometry works with higher concentrations 
of metals. Mercury is usually measured 
with a cold vapor technique. 
 
LEAD. A variety of tests of lead exposure 
and early effects have been used, including: 
6-ALA in urine, 6-ALA dehydratase activity 
in red blood cells, free erythrocyte pro- 
tophorporin or ZPP in blood (still widely 
used), urinary coproporphyrin (very limited 
use), and blood lead (the standard measure). 
 
The measurement of blood lead is con- 
sidered the best sampling approach for both 
adults and children (17). Analysis for pop- 
ulations with negligible lead exposure (no 
occupational exposure in countries without 
leaded gasoline) requires the sensitivity of 
graphite furnace AAS; this is currently 
the most widely used instrument for any 
 
population, although anodic stripping 
voltammetry is also used. In the absence of 
this capability, excessive lead exposure can 
be detected by measuring ZPP in a finger- 
stick blood sample with a portable fluo- 
rometer. Alternative methods still available 
in some laboratories include measuring the 
urinary excretion of 6-ALA. 
 
These measurements reflect relatively 
recent and ongoing exposure. They do not 
provide information regarding the body 
burden or effects of long-term accumula- 
tion. The challenge test, which uses a dose 
of a chelating agent (usually EDTA) and 
monitors urinary lead excretion in the fol- 
lowing 24 hr, provides an estimate of the 
amount of lead that can be mobilized and 
is used to judge whether chelation will be 
effective. The chelation test carries a level 
of risk, including the mobilization of large 
amounts of lead which can then reach the 
brain and kidneys. 
 
The past decade has seen the develop- 
ment of in vivo X-ray fluorescence (XRF) 
of bone as a way of measuring the relative 
concentration of lead stored in the skele- 
ton. Although increasingly available, the 
technique is still under development, and 
there is not adequate concordance among 
laboratories (18). Two types of machines 
are used, the K-wave and L-wave sources, 
which differ in their penetration and 
apparently in the precision of measure- 
ments. Almost all machines in use today 
employ K-wave XRF. 
 
An example of using blood lead as a 
marker of exposure and susceptibility is a 
recent study in Mexico. Romieu et al. (19) 
found a significant correlation among the 
lead content of ceramics used to prepare 
food, the soil lead on children's hands, and 
the children's blood lead; yet all of the envi- 
ronmental variables explained only 19% of 
the variance in blood lead. Thus even 
assuming that there are uncertainties in 
measurement of the independent variables, 
this leaves tremendous room for individual 
variability in the uptake and distribution of 
inorganic lead in these children. Thus blood 
lead identifies variation in susceptibility as 
well as exposure among these children. 
 
Analysis of lead in urine is of relatively 
little value for quantifying exposure, even 
in those with organolead exposure. 
 
Many studies have shown that there is a 
low correlation between lead in blood and 
lead in air, due in part to the sampling 
duration; concurrent exposures through 
water, diet or other jobs; alternative routes 
of exposure (ingestion); variations in the 
use of protective equipment; variations in 
circumstances of exposure, including respi- 
ratory rate, exercise, and other microniche 
characteristics; and individual variation of 
either a genetic or epigenetic nature (17). 
 
MERCURY. The uptake, toxicokinetics, 
and end points associated with organic mer- 
curials (particularly methyl mercury) differ 
greatly from those associated with inorganic 
mercurials. Inorganic mercury is excreted 
mainly in urine, organic mercury mainly in 
feces. Both mercurials can be deposited in 
hair. Accordingly, inorganic exposure is usu- 
ally monitored with urinary mercury, 
although blood mercury testing is also use- 
ful and helps distinguish exposure within 
the past week from that occurring in the 
past month. Blood mercury is used to assess 
organic mercury exposure. When dietary 
exposure (especially fish consumption) is the 
source of mercury, it is usually not necessary 
to speciate the mercury, since almost all of 
the mercury is methyl mercury. There is a 
strong correlation between either blood or 
urine mercury and air mercury (20). 
 
Hair mercury is useful for screening 
populations. The digestion of hair, however, 
causes difficulties in some laboratories (21). 
Urinary mercury testing is mainly used for 
occupational exposure or for residential 
exposure to metallic (elemental) mercury. 
 
CADMIUM. Cadmium is usually 
measured in blood or urine by graphite fur- 
nace AAS. Lauwerys et al. (7) documented 
the relationship between exposure and 
blood levels of cadmium in humans. Many 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
705 
 
BARRETT ET AL. 
 
sources recommend the concomitant 
measurement of P2-microglobulin, but that 
marker of renal tubular damage is insensi- 
tive and should not be relied on. By the 
time it becomes elevated, significant kidney 
damage has occurred. However, a variety 
of new tubular markers such as retinal 
binding protein (RBP) and N-acetyl-p-D- 
glucosaminidase (NAG) are more sensitive 
but not more specific (22). 
 
The body burden of cadmium has been 
measured by neutron activation in vivo 
(23), but this is a highly specialized tech- 
nique of only research application. 
 
Pesticides. Pesticides include any sub- 
stance or mixture that destroys or controls 
plant or animal pests or vectors of disease. 
"Pesticide" is a broad term including, in 
addition to pesticides, a variety of biocides 
(fungicides, herbicides, acaricides, mollusci- 
cides, rodenticides, etc.) Pesticides remain a 
global occupational health problem (24). 
 
Some pesticides, such as the organo- 
phosphates, are short-lived both in the 
environment and in the body, and it is 
possible to detect only acute exposure (by 
measuring a metabolite) or recent exposure 
(past 3 months) by measuring cholines- 
terase levels. Chlorinated hydrocarbon 
pesticides are persistent both in the envi- 
ronment and in the body and can be mea- 
sured for many months or years after 
exposure has terminated (25,26). 
 
PESTICIDE EXPOSURE. Absorption 
resulting from dermal exposure is the most 
important route of uptake for pesticide- 
exposed workers, while ingestion is the 
most important nonoccupational route. 
Within the body, the pesticide may be 
eliminated or transferred to a target, 
unchanged or after metabolism. Organo- 
phosphates are typically broken down 
rapidly, while many organochlorine pesti- 
cides are stored in the fat. The actual pesti- 
cide exposure (uptake) can be measured by 
biological monitoring of human tissues and 
body fluids. Insecticides and their metabo- 
lites can be measured after occupational 
exposures (26-29). 
 
WHERE TO MEASURE VARIOUS 
 
PESTICIDES. Different sampling approaches 
are required for different classes of pesti- 
cide. Examples include the measurement of 
dialkylphosphates in urine after exposure to 
organophosphorus insecticides (27), of 
p-nitrophenol after exposure to parathion 
and methylparathion (28), and of 1-naph- 
thol after exposure to carbaryl (29). Altered 
liver enzyme activities have been reported 
among pesticide workers exposed to 
organophosphorus pesticides alone or in 
 
combination with organochlorine or other 
pesticides (30). Monitoring changes in 
vitamin K levels is useful for identifying 
exposure to anticoagulant rodenticides (31). 
 
Adducts to hemoglobin have been 
detected with several pesticides (32). The 
advantages of such measurements include 
the possibility of assessing dose closer to 
the target, of assessing individual capacity 
to form electrophiles, and of extrapolating 
data on toxicity more easily across species. 
When the mechanism of action of a pesti- 
cide is understood, more specific markers 
can be used (30). 
 
ORGANOCHLORINES. Certain organo- 
chlorine (OC) pesticides are highly persis- 
tent. Although DDT is metabolized to DDE 
and DDD, these metabolites persist in the 
body fat for many years after exposure. They 
can be detected at much lower levels in 
serum. The reported levels in fat vary among 
countries, the highest levels of DDT being 
found in countries where the compound is 
still used. Fat biopsies are not suitable for 
routine screening of pesticide exposure. 
 
Some studies of the concentration of 
pesticides in human milk are summarized 
by Anwar (26). The contaminants found 
most frequently in human milk have been 
DDT, its main metabolite DDE, hexa- 
chlorobenzene, hexachlorocyclohexane, 
dieldrin, heptachlor epoxide, and the non- 
pesticide polychlorinated biphenyls (33). 
 
ORGANOPHOSPHATES. Whereas persis- 
tent organochlorine pesticides tend to have 
relatively low human toxicity, the organo- 
phosphates (OP) are highly toxic to humans 
and are responsible for many deaths 
around the world. These compounds bind 
various cholinesterase enzymes, thereby 
interfering with transmission in the ner- 
vous system. A widely used biochemical 
biomarker is cholinesterase depression. It is 
frequently used in occupational health as a 
marker of OP exposure and is regularly 
used clinically as a marker of OP effect. 
With a specific antibody it is possible to 
measure the concentration of a particular 
esterase in plasma or serum. Diagnostic 
kits to measure specific activities of blood 
esterases are being developed for use in the 
field (30). However, it is essential that the 
workers with potential exposure have two 
baseline cholinesterase determinations, 
since cholinesterase activity varies greatly 
between individuals and within the same 
individual over time (21,34). 
 
Further markers in pesticide application 
workers are described by Anwar (26). 
 
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons. 
PAH are usually present in complex 
 
mixtures of 3- to 6-ring compounds, of 
which hundreds of congeners may be 
present in various proportions. Analysis 
is usually by gas or liquid chromatogra- 
phy, where selected compounds, such as 
benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P) are quantified. 
 
Biological methods have been devel- 
oped to measure 1-hydroxypyrene (1-HP), 
a metabolite of pyrene, in urine. 1- 
Hydroxypyrene is a prevalent species in 
PAH mixtures. It is excreted in the urine 
and is a good biomarker of exposure to 
PAH (35). An advantage is that urine can 
be stored for at least a year frozen at -20?C 
without preservative. After hydrolysis 
and cleanup, the 1-HP is extracted and 
analyzed on high performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC). The result is 
expressed as pmols/mol of creatinine (35). 
 
0vreb0 et al. (36) found levels up to 
13.5 pmol/mol creatinine in coke oven 
workers compared to 1.54 pmol/mol in the 
surrounding community and up to only 
0.2 pmol/mol in a control area. 
 
Adducts of hemoglobin or albumin are 
measured after hydrolytic cleavage of PAH 
from the protein, followed by quantification 
by mass spectrometry. DNA adducts are 
measured by the 32P-posdabeling technique 
and by immunoassay. Neither of these 
techniques quantifies individual PAHs. 
 
Jongeneelen (37) studied the S9 super- 
natant fraction of liver samples from 15 kid- 
ney transplant donors for variation in PAH 
metabolism in vitro. 1-Hydroxypyrene was 
the major metabolite of pyrene and 3-OH- 
B[a]P was the major metabolite of B[a]P. 
The Vmax for B[a]P and for purine were 
highly correlated. They found individual 
variation in the Vmax and the apparent 
affinity for the substrates. The Vmax for 
B[a]P ranged from 0.002 to 0.710, with a 
geometric mean of 0.012. 
 
Volatile Organies. Ethylene oxide is 
discussed here as an example of a volatile 
organic compound. Ethylene oxide is used 
as sterilant in hospitals. It is also the princi- 
ple metabolite of ethene, a precursor to 
polyethylene plastics and other synthetic 
chemicals. Ethylene oxide can be measured 
by gas chromatography in air or biological 
specimens. Ethylene oxide reacts in the 
body with hemoglobin; N-terminal valine 
may be released by a modified Edman 
degradation process and measured by 
gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. 
DNA adducts can be measured by a 
number of techniques [above; Hemminki 
(11)], including 32P-postlabeling mass 
spectrometry and liquid chromatography/ 
electrochemical detection. 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
706 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
* Ionizing Radiation. Various cytoge- 
netic techniques have been used extensively 
to study populations exposed to ionizing 
radiation, most notably the survivors of the 
bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 
Giemsa-banding techniques are labor 
intensive and provide a resolution of about 
1 million base pairs. They give information 
on the frequency of chromosomal aberra- 
tions: breaks, dislocations, deletions, and 
translocations. The fluorescent in situ 
hybridization (FISH) technique (38) corre- 
lates well with traditional chromosomal 
aberration analysis and allows a more rapid 
screening of individual samples for dose 
reconstruction. This is also an effect 
marker. Reciprocal translocations are 
apparently permanent, hence are poten- 
tially useful for dose reconstruction even 
years after the exposure event. The use of 
hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase 
(HPRT) mutants and other molecular bio- 
logic approaches to detect gene alteration, 
including radiation specific lesions in DNA 
(39) is dealt with below. 
 
Sampling Considerations 
 
Toxiokinetics The Importanee of Timing. 
Many endogenous chemicals and probably 
also xenobiotics do not maintain a constant 
level in the body but undergo diurnal varia- 
tion, sometimes in a deterministic fashion. 
Therefore it is important to standardize 
techniques by sampling at one time of day. 
However, it is also important to understand 
the time course of excretion, which is not 
always a uniphasic half-life (negative expo- 
nential curve) but may be biphasic or 
triphasic with an initial rapid elimination 
followed by much slower elimination. If a 
substance is mainly excreted within 24 to 
48 hr, it is possible only to monitor for 
acute exposure. Even for substances with a 
half-life of 6 to 12 months, it may be 
impossible to reconstruct the exposure that 
may have occurred in years past. 
 
Condusions and Recommendations 
 
Biological monitoring of exposure can play 
an important role in the detection of 
exposed individuals or groups at an early 
stage before significant or irreversible 
adverse effects have occurred. Biological 
markers of exposure also play a role in 
quantifying or classifying exposure for epi- 
demiologic studies. Biological monitoring is 
also useful in identifying variations in sus- 
ceptibility among members of a population. 
It is important that any biological moni- 
toring for exposure markers be conducted 
as part of a comprehensive framework 
 
that includes steps for intervening and 
reducing any hazards that are identified. A 
screening program should meet the criteria 
proposed by WHO. The information 
from such programs should be shared with 
the stakeholders. 
 
Biological Markers of Effect 
Definitions 
 
The International Programme on Chemical 
Safety has defined a biomarker of effect as 
"A measurable biochemical, physiological, 
behavioral or other alteration within an 
organism that, depending upon the magni- 
tude, can be recognized as associated with 
an established or possible health impairment 
or disease" (1). 
 
This is a very broad definition. Such 
biomarkers of effect can be elicited as a 
result of interaction of the organism with a 
host of different environmental factors 
(including chemical, physical, and biologic 
agents); this definition encompasses bio- 
markers of effect at the level of the whole 
organism, at the level of organ function, at 
the level of tissue and individual cells, and 
at the subcellular level. For example, the 
results of neuropsychologic tests may be 
considered biomarkers of behavioral effects 
of the organism which may be induced by 
solvent exposures. Spirometry results may 
be considered biomarkers of physiological 
effects on the respiratory system which 
may be induced by fibrogenic dust expo- 
sures. Sperm counts may be considered 
biomarkers of effect on reproductive cells 
which may be induced by exposure to syn- 
thetic estrogenic compounds. There are 
many other similar examples of biomarkers 
at these levels in almost all systems of the 
body, induding biomarkers of hematologi- 
cal toxicity, nephrotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, 
immunotoxicity, neurotoxicity, pulmonary 
toxicity, and reproductive and develop- 
mental toxicity (1). These will not be con- 
sidered further here, but rather this review 
will focus on biomarkers of effect at the 
subcellular level, particularly at the chro- 
mosomal and molecular level, which are 
particularly useful in assessing susceptibil- 
ity. These include biomarkers at the 
genomic level, such as cytogenetic alter- 
ations and gene mutations, and biomarkers 
of gene expression, such as messenger RNA 
and proteins. Some assays of protein func- 
tion, such as enzymatic activity, could be 
included in this category but could a,lso be 
considered as biomarkers of exposure (e.g., 
cholinesterase activity in response to OP 
exposure), and thus they will not be 
 
included here. Biomarkers at the genomic 
level or at the level of gene expression have 
been most strongly associated with the risk 
for cancer, although in selected instances 
they may also be associated with other dis- 
ease end points. Therefore, in general, we 
will be concerned here with subcellular bio- 
markers of effect that are believed to be 
associated with cancer. We will examine the 
methodologies employed with reference to 
the objectives of their use, their potential 
uses, and their advantages and limitations. 
 
Because in many instances, these 
biomarkers of effect are believed to repre- 
sent events in a causal pathway to disease, 
their occurrence may be viewed as indica- 
tive of an acquired susceptibility for that 
disease. This is in distinction to the bio- 
markers of susceptibility per se, which in 
many cases represent indicators of inher- 
ited susceptibility to disease due to their 
influence on steps in the causal pathway. 
Biological markers of effect, as indicators 
of acquired susceptibility for disease, have 
the theoretical potential to exhibit predic- 
tive value in identifying individuals who 
could develop disease at some point in the 
future or in determining the likely disease 
progression in terms of severity and prog- 
nosis once disease has occurred. In addi- 
tion, biomarkers of effect, because they 
occur quite far along the pathway between 
exposure and disease outcome, essentially 
provide an effective integration of the 
influence of biomarkers of susceptibility 
for all preceding steps in the causal path- 
way and are thus a summary marker for 
susceptibility to that point. 
Cytogenetic Markers 
 
In humans, cytogenetic alterations are 
most often analyzed microscopically from 
peripheral lymphocytes after they have 
been stimulated to divide in culture by a 
mitogen (40). Lymphocytes are used as a 
surrogate for the actual target tissues of 
genotoxic carcinogens. Some cytogenetic 
end points (micronuclei, numerical aberra- 
tions) can also be studied in interphase 
cells from target tissues or proximate target 
tissues, such as exfoliated cells from buccal, 
nasal, urothelial, bronchial or esophageal 
epithelium (41,42). Specimens can also be 
obtained from hair bulbs. In special cases, 
for instance, in connection with accidental 
exposures, dividing cells from bone mar- 
row may be available. Furthermore, cytoge- 
netic biomarkers can be studied from 
samples collected for prenatal diagnosis 
(amniocytes or chorionic villus cells). 
Effects on germ cells can be examined from 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
707 
 
BARRETT ET AL. 
 
semen specimens (43). Fresh samples are 
required in most cases, but preservation by 
freezing or fixation is possible for several of 
the cytogenetic techniques. The analysis of 
cytogenetic end points from such samples 
is used to show exposure to genotoxic car- 
cinogens and may have value in the identi- 
fication of groups of people at increased 
risk of cancer (44,45). Cells from different 
individuals can be challenged with geno- 
toxic agents in vitro, which in some cases 
may enable the recognition of sensitive 
individuals (46,47). 
 
Chromosome Aberrations. Chromo- 
some aberrations (CAs) are structural 
alterations, breaks and rearrangements, in 
chromosomes, usually observed in meta- 
phase-blocked cells using conventional 
microscopy (40). Chromosome-type 
rearrangements, such as translocations and 
dicentrics inspected in biological dosimetry 
of radiation, can also be analyzed using 
chromosome painting based on FISH with 
chromosome-specific DNA probe libraries 
(48). This approach has enabled the recog- 
nition of new types of complex chromo- 
some rearrangements that have not been 
detectable with conventional cytogenetic 
techniques. Recently, a simplified FISH 
method to detect chromosome breakage 
and alterations of chromosome number, 
using tandem DNA probes specific for a 
region in chromosome number 1, was 
reported (49). FISH has also been applied 
to study numerical chromosome aberra- 
tions of specific chromosomes (50). 
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based 
methods for the analysis of lymphocyte- 
specific illegitimate chromosome recombi- 
nation involving human immunoglobulin 
or immune receptor loci and considered to 
reflect genetic instability have also been 
described (51,52). In two recent, indepen- 
dent reports, increased rates of CA in 
peripheral lymphocytes were shown to be 
associated with later development of cancer 
(44,45). Thus, the analysis of CAs is 
presently regarded as the cytogenetic 
method of choice in studies of human 
exposure to genotoxic carcinogens. In vivo 
inducers of CAs in humans include, among 
others, ionizing radiation, alkylating cyto- 
statics, tobacco smoking, benzene, and 
styrene. Besides smoking, factors such as 
age, gender, and diagnostic and therapeutic 
X-rays are usually taken into account as 
possible confounders. In vitro challenging 
of lymphocytes from healthy individuals 
with genotoxins has revealed individual 
differences in CA response to some geno- 
toxic agents (53,54). The reasons for such 
 
differences are unknown, except for 
1,2:3,4-diepoxybutane, where an associa- 
tion probably exists with the deficiency of 
glutathione S-transferase TI (GSTT 1) 
(46,47,55). Among butadiene-exposed 
chemical workers, GSTTI null individuals 
also had an elevated rate of chromosome 
aberrations in peripheral lymphocytes in 
vivo (56). On the other hand, the lack of 
GSTM1 has been associated with elevated 
CA frequencies in smokers and in bus 
drivers (57). 
 
Sister Chromatid Exchanges. Sister 
chromatid exchanges (SCE) represent sym- 
metrical exchanges of DNA segments 
between the sister chromatids of a dupli- 
cated metaphase chromosome (58). In 
lymphocytes of humans, tobacco smoking, 
alkylating cytostatics, and ethylene oxide 
are well documented SCE inducers. 
Factors to be controlled in the analysis of 
SCEs include age, gender, and life style. 
Individuals with enhanced in vitro SCE 
response to some genotoxins have been 
described and, in some cases, this has been 
associated with certain metabolic genotypes 
or phenotypes (46,47,50,59-66). For 
example, individuals sensitive to in vitro 
SCE induction by 1,2:3,4-diepoxybutane 
were recently found to be deficient of 
GSTT1 (46,47,62,64,66). Such people also 
show elevated baseline frequencies of SCEs 
in their peripheral lymphocytes (47,62,67). 
SCEs were not, however, elevated in GS7TJ 
null individuals exposed to butadiene (62). 
Increased SCE rates have also been indi- 
cated in relation to the GSTMJ null geno- 
type and smoking (68) and deficiency of 
the low Km aldehyde dehydrogenase and 
alcohol consumption (69). 
 
Micronuclei. Micronuclei (MN) are 
small additional nuclei observable in inter- 
phase cells. Micronucleus induction can be 
triggered by either clastogens or agents that 
influence the mitotic apparatus, such as 
spindle poisons (70,71). Micronuclei can 
also be scored in exfoliated cells of buccal, 
nasal, or urothelial mucosa (41). The pres- 
ence of whole chromosomes in MN can be 
checked by identifying centromeric DNA 
sequences (using FISH) or kinetochore 
proteins in the MN (72,73). In vivo, 
increased MN frequencies in lymphocytes 
have been associated with exposure to ion- 
izing radiation, aging, and gender (74). In 
women, the influence of age on the fre- 
quency of MN in lymphocytes has been 
relate,d to an increased inclusion of the X- 
chromosome in MN (75,76), while in 
men the Y-chromosome appears to be 
responsible for a part of this effect (77). In 
 
buccal or nasal mucosa, MN induction has 
clearly been shown for, e.g., various ethnic 
chewing habits (3) and exposure to 
formaldehyde (78). The MN analysis has 
given negative results in several studies in 
which another biomarker of genotoxic 
exposure has been positive. As MN can 
originate from chromosomal fragments 
and whole chromosomes, the number of 
cells presently examined may not be 
enough to reveal the relatively small effects 
usually expected in exposed humans. The 
identification of the centromeric contents 
of MN and automated analysis may 
improve the specificity and sensitivity of 
the MN assay of lymphocytes. 
 
General Considerations. At the 
population level, structural CA appears to 
have predictive value for later development 
of cancer. As similar associations have not 
been detected for other cytogenetic end- 
points, the analysis of CA appears to be, at 
present, the cytogenetic method of choice 
in studies of cytogenetic alterations in lym- 
phocytes. However, the sensitivity of the 
assay does not allow evaluation of cancer 
risk based on individual values. Analysis of 
an in vitro cytogenetic response of human 
cells to genotoxins may, in some cases, be 
used to identify susceptible individuals, 
especially when genetic polymorphisms are 
taken into account. In biological dosimetry 
of radiation exposure, the analysis of chro- 
mosome-type aberrations has been used as 
the basis for individual dose estimates. 
Chromosome painting by FISH is becom- 
ing the new tool in the biological dosimetry 
of radiation; the applicability of techniques 
based on FISH and PCR for the identifica- 
tion of specific chromosome alterations for 
studies of chemical genotoxins should be 
evaluated. The MN assay combined with 
FISH analysis of centromeres in MN may 
offer an easier technique to score CA, espe- 
cially in target tissues or proximate target 
tissue. Because each biomarker depicts a 
different phenomenon, the use of various 
exposure and effect biomarkers together is 
recommended in risk assessment. It is also a 
useful approach for detecting patterns of 
human susceptibility. The combination of 
cytogenetic parameters and information on 
metabolic genotypes or phenotypes is 
expected to increase the sensitivity of the 
cytogenetic assays and allow better under- 
standing of the biological significance of 
genetic polymorphisms (43). As some poly- 
morphisms have been shown to influence 
basic or induced levels of cytogenetic 
damage, information on the genotypes or 
phenotypes of the individuals studied is 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
708 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
becoming important when these end 
points are used as biomarkers. Automation 
and analysis techniques utilizing FISH 
offer faster and easier approaches to detect 
cytogenetic alterations. 
 
Markers of Gene Mutations 
 
Somatic Gene Mutations in Surrogate 
Tissues. The detection of mutations in the 
HPRTgene has been used in experimental 
mutagenicity studies of mammalian cells, 
and it is also the most extensively employed 
assay for human gene somatic mutations in 
vivo. In humans, HPRT mutations are 
examined in lymphocytes, and the standard 
assay involves T-lymphocyte cloning for 
phenotypic selection of 6-thioguanine-resis- 
tant mutant cells. With the development of 
PCR-based techniques, further molecular 
characterization of the mutations present in 
the T-cell clones has also become possible. 
Such studies have shown, for instance, a 
clear difference in mutation spectrum 
between "spontaneous" mutations occurring 
early in human development and mutations 
acquired later in life (79). Studies of human 
lymphocytes in vitro are also considered use- 
ful, as they provide information on HPRT 
mutation spectra obtained after exposure to 
specific carcinogens in controlled condi- 
tions. Several studies have been carried out 
on HPRT-mutant lymphocytes in human 
populations exposed to various genotoxic 
agents, as reviewed by Cole and Skopek 
(80) and briefly described by Hemminki 
(11). Only a few studies have thus far tried 
to correlate HPRT mutations with other 
measures of exposure and susceptibility. In a 
study of occupational exposure in a foundry, 
the frequencies of HPRT-mutant T-lym- 
phocytes correlated with the level of aro- 
matic DNA adducts (81,82). In a recent 
study on garage workers, a correlation was 
found between aromatic DNA adducts and 
mutation frequency at the individual level; 
genotypes of two xenobiotic-metabolizing 
genes (GSTMI and NAT2), alone or com- 
bined, did not influence HPRT mutation 
frequency (83). 
 
The glycophorin A (GPA) assay is 
another in vivo method for the detection of 
somatic mutations to study the potential 
effects of exposure to chemical and physical 
mutagens (84,85). The assay is based on 
the autosomal GPA locus that encodes the 
cell surface sialoglycoprotein expressed in 
the erythrocytic lineage and responsible for 
the M,N blood group. It uses immuno- 
labeling and flow cytometry to enumerate, 
in peripheral blood samples of M/N 
heterozygotes, erythrocyte variants reflecting 
 
mutations in the GPA locus. Most of the 
variants are considered to derive from 
mutations that occurred in bone marrow 
stem cells and are therefore permanent, 
depicting lifetime accumulation of muta- 
tions. The GPA assay has been automated 
and is thus easy, fast, and cheap to run. 
The main limitations are that only one half 
of the human population (M/N heterozy- 
gotes) can be studied and an expensive flow 
cytometer is required. As erythrocytes have 
no nuclei, the variant cells cannot be clon- 
ally expanded and the mutations cannot be 
characterized at the molecular level. 
 
Both the HPRT and GPA mutation 
assays show a small number of people with 
exceptionally high mutant frequencies in 
healthy subjects (86). While at least part of 
such high frequencies are due to clonal 
expansion of a few original mutations, some 
of them might indicate individuals of 
enhanced susceptibility. In a study of GPA 
mutations in reinforced plastics workers, 
the high frequency individuals were primar- 
ily smokers or ex-smokers (87). Recently it 
was shown that in smokers significantly ele- 
vated NN variant frequency was associated 
with GSTTI null genotype (88). 
 
Gene Mutations in Target Tissue. 
Knowledge on gene mutations from other 
tissue than peripheral blood and lympho- 
cytes is sparse. This relates to problems in 
availability of samples and difficulties in 
developing methods suitable for detecting 
mutations occurring at a low frequency. 
Growing cells under in vitro conditions cir- 
cumvents the problem with lymphocytes. 
Somatic mutations have been detected in 
genes related to human disease and partic- 
ularly in cancer-related genes (protoonco- 
genes and tumor suppressor genes). In 
most cases somatic mutations in disease- 
related genes do not give rise to any func- 
tional change in the cell, which would 
allow its isolation or expansion in vitro. In 
the case of cancer tissue, malignant growth 
involves clonal expansion of cells, which 
allows detection of mutations by the meth- 
ods presently available. The methods 
appear to work best and most reproducibly 
on fresh frozen tissue, but in many 
instances only preserved tissue is available. 
 
Mutations in oncogenes and tumor 
suppressor genes are most common in 
many types of human cancer. In the con- 
text of external exposure to carcinogens, 
the ras genes have been shown to be muta- 
tionally activated in a number of environ- 
mental cancers in humans (89), and. in a 
carcinogen-specific manner in animal 
studies (90). Since the p53 tumor suppressor 
 
gene is among the most frequently altered 
genes in human cancer, molecular analysis 
of its mutational spectra has been used as a 
clue to cancer etiology and mechanisms of 
carcinogenesis (91,92). In the p53 gene, 
DNA sequences corresponding to the 
highly conserved domains of the protein 
have been identified as a "hot spot" region 
for mutations. A majority of mutations 
identified in these genes in human cancers 
are missense mutations, making them suit- 
able targets for such analysis. The expo- 
sure-related nature of p53 mutations has 
been proposed in many studies on various 
forms of human cancers (91-94). Well- 
known examples of this are nonmelanoma 
skin cancer associated with exposure to 
sunlight (UVB) as well as hepatocellular 
carcinoma related to dietary exposure to 
the mycotoxin aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) (92). 
With the highly sensitive mutation detec- 
tion assays it has been possible to investi- 
gate whether the suggested causative 
carcinogens (AFB1, UVB) induce similar 
kinds of mutations in human cells in vitro. 
In the case of AFB1, the results were in 
agreement with the etiological role of 
AFB1, although other types of mutations 
were also seen (95). In nonmalignant 
human liver tissue, the frequency of the 
specific AGG to AGT mutation at codon 
249 was found to parallel the level of AFB1 
exposure in the geographical areas where 
the patients lived (96). For UVB exposure, 
the experimental work on human skin 
fibroblasts did not find the tandem double 
CC to TT mutations seen frequently in 
skin cancer (97). A relationship between 
certain types of ras mutations or p53 muta- 
tions and occupational exposure to agents 
like solvents, vinyl chloride monomer, some 
bladder carcinogens, and radon has been 
suggested (98-100). In addition, smoking 
has been associated with increased preva- 
lence of p53 mutations in some tumors, and 
certain types of base substitutions have been 
linked with exposure to tobacco smoke 
(101,102). Recently, two studies have 
reported a higher frequency of p53 muta- 
tions in lung cancer patients with the at risk 
genotype of GSTMI gene (103-105). 
 
Studies on prognostic significance of 
p53 protein overexpression (determined 
immunohistochemically) or mutation have 
suggested that accumulation of the mutant 
protein may predict poor survival in many 
cancer types (92). 
 
Methodological Considerations. An 
array of methods has been used for detection 
of point mutations in unknown positions 
of the target gene. Most of them initially 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105. Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
709 
 
BARRETT ET AL. 
 
used radioactive labeling but alternative 
techniques have been developed. One of 
the first techniques available was the RNase 
mismatch cleavage analysis method (106). 
Methods relying on chemical modification 
of mismatched nucleotides, by either car- 
bodiimide or hydroxylamine and osmium 
tetroxide (chemical cleavage of mismatch), 
have been developed; they use mutation 
detection mainly in genes of inherited dis- 
eases (107). Two assays used widely in 
mutation detection in association with 
inherited diseases, genetic polymorphisms, 
and also for somatic mutations in tumor 
tissue are single-strand conformation poly- 
morphism (SSCP) and denaturing gradient 
gel electrophoresis (DGGE). SSCP assay is 
based on conformational changes in DNA 
due to sequence alterations (108,109). 
SSCP has been successfully used for detec- 
tion of DNA alterations of many cancer- 
related genes in human cancer (ras, p53, 
RB, for example). It is estimated to yield 
over 90% efficiency in detecting single base 
substitutions in sequences of 300 bp or less 
in length (109,110). It is also well suited 
for detection of polymorphic alleles of vari- 
ous genes (109). DGGE separates DNA 
molecules based on their sequence-deter- 
mined ability to melt (separate partially) in 
longer fragments (low- and high-tempera- 
ture melting domains) (111). DGGE sepa- 
rates physically wild-type DNA from 
mutant molecules, and under appropriate 
conditions all single-base substitutions, 
frameshifts, and deletions less than about 
10 bp can be resolved from the wild-type 
DNA (112). DGGE, or its application 
called constant gradient gel electrophoresis 
(CDGE) (113), has been used to study both 
germline and somatic mutations in many 
human genes. These include mutations in 
cancer-related genes, human ras and p53 
genes, as well as chemically induced muta- 
tions of HPRTgene in human lymphocytes 
in vitro (112). More recently, a capillary 
electrophoresis technique has been applied 
for CDGE (114). 
 
For detection of known mutations in 
certain sites of a gene, two much-applied 
methods include allele-specific oligonu- 
cleotide hybridization and genotypic muta- 
tion analysis by restriction fragment length 
polymorphism (RFLP)/PCR method. 
Allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization 
uses labeled probes which are hybridized 
to PCR-amplified genomic DNA. It has 
especially been used in studies on ras gene 
mutations in various human cancers 
(89,115). More recendy, many assays rely- 
ing on recognition of a certain restriction 
 
site which either is present in the wild-type 
sequence or results from a mutation have 
been developed. Of these, one of the most 
sensitive and perhaps most promising for 
molecular toxicology purposes is the 
RFLP/PCR assay for detection of codon 
12 mutations in the human H-ras gene and 
codon 247 to 250 mutations in the human 
p53 tumor suppressor gene (116,117). The 
method is very sensitive and suitable for 
detection of very low frequency mutations, 
such as those in premalignant or in normal 
cells after chemical treatment in vitro. 
They are, however, limited to a single base 
substitution at a certain codon. 
 
DNA sequencing based on dideoxy- 
mediated chain termination reaction (118) 
can be performed also after in vitro amplifi- 
cation of the DNA template by PCR. 
Direct sequencing of PCR amplification 
products is thus one method of choice for 
mutation analysis; it is perhaps more labor 
intensive when performed manually but has 
been automated (119). Methods using 
solid phase support in sequencing are being 
used increasingly (120). Sequencing has of 
course the advantage of giving precise infor- 
mation on the sequence alterations unlike 
some other methods (SSCP, DGGE). For 
targeted use, an application called solid- 
phase minisequencing has been developed 
(121). However, direct sequencing of geno- 
mic DNA of poor quality may be problem- 
atic (fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue 
samples) and other methods are better 
suited in such instances. 
 
Markers of Gene Expression 
 
mRNA Expression. Markers of gene 
expression include assays for detection of 
mRNA or for detection of proteins. Many 
of the assays for mRNA employ method- 
ologies similar to those used for DNA 
analysis noted above. In most cases, the 
assays have been used for the examination 
of diseased tissue (e.g., cancer tissue) in the 
target organ. This poses problems of acces- 
sibility. In addition, mRNA has very lim- 
ited stability, and, therefore, tissue samples 
must be obtained fresh and processed quite 
rapidly so that the mRNA is preserved. 
 
With the appropriate oligonucleotide 
probes, the presence of mRNA in tissue 
can be detected by in situ hybridization. 
For example, differences in mRNA for 
oncogenes may be detectable between 
cancer tissue and adjacent normal tissue 
(122). Other disease end points may also 
be relevant. For example, in situ hybridiza- 
tion can detect increases in mRNA for 
growth factors, such as platelet-derived 
 
growth factor and transforming growth 
factor-,, in relation to the stimulation of 
cell growth and the development of fibrosis 
resulting from asbestos (123). Alternately, 
tissue can be analyzed for mRNA expres- 
sion by isolation of message and amplifica- 
tion by quantitative PCR followed by 
Northern blot analysis (analogous to the 
separation techniques of Southern blot 
analysis for DNA by gel electrophoresis) 
with appropriate oligonucleotide probes. 
Quantitative PCR is considerably more 
difficult to perform reliably compared to 
qualitative PCR, adding further complexity 
to this approach. 
 
None of the approaches to mRNA 
expression have been well developed for 
routine application. Thus, among other 
problems, there is generally little standard- 
ization of assay techniques, little definition 
of normal values or values of pathophysio- 
logic significance, and little examination of 
reproducibility, sensitivity, specificity and 
predictive value of the tests in terms of the 
occurrence of or prognosis for disease state 
(i.e., indication of susceptibility for devel- 
opment or severity of disease). Given these 
limitations and the other difficulties noted 
above, it is probably unrealistic to expect 
that gene expression by mRNA analysis 
will be very useful as a biomarker of effect. 
At any rate, the true index of gene expres- 
sion from the point of view of effect in the 
cell is at the protein level, not the mRNA 
level, and it is not even clear that the two 
always correlate. As noted below, detection 
of protein expression has the potential to 
avoid some of the problems inherent in 
mRNA detection and is thus the more 
attractive candidate for a biomarker of gene 
expression for many reasons. 
 
Protein Expression. Methodologies for 
examining gene expression by the detection 
of the encoded proteins all depend on the 
development of antibodies (either poly- 
clonal or monoclonal) that are theoretically 
specific for the identification of the protein 
of interest. In many cases, however, the 
specificity is only theoretical because there 
is cross reactivity of the antibody with simi- 
lar epitopes in other, unrelated proteins, 
raising the possibility of false-positive tests. 
Conversely, sensitivity of the antibody 
detection (related to many factors, includ- 
ing avidity and affinity for the epitope, 
accessibility and stability of the epitope, 
and the sensitivity of the secondary reaction 
system used to identify the occurrence of 
the antigen-antibody interaction) may be 
insufficient to detect the antigen, leading to 
false-negative tests. Monoclonal antibodies 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
710 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
that are produced from a single cell that is 
clonally expanded and producing an anti- 
body for only a single epitope are more eas- 
ily standardized. Polyclonal antibodies can 
be variable and are thus more difficult to 
standardize but may have the virtue of 
reacting with several different epitopes on 
the protein of interest, increasing the likeli- 
hood of detection. Modifications of anti- 
body applications that can improve the 
results include confirmation of the molecu- 
lar weight of the identified protein as con- 
sistent with what is expected and the use of 
more than one antibody probe to demon- 
strate that the protein identified reacts with 
all expected positive antibodies; it does not 
react with negative antibodies. 
 
For protein identification of gene 
expression, antibodies can be used in tissue 
analysis or in assays of surrogate sites such 
as extracellular fluids. As with mRNA 
analysis, tissue analysis for protein expres- 
sion usually relies on diseased tissue (e.g., 
cancer tissue) in the target organ, although 
in some cases the same analysis can be 
applied to exfoliated cells, for example, 
from the urothelium or the bronchial 
epithelium (124). Tissue analysis can be 
either in situ or in aggregate. In situ analy- 
sis relies on the application of the appropri- 
ate antibody in immunohistochemistry 
either to fresh-frozen tissue sections or to 
fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections. 
The latter approach raises issues of the sta- 
bility of the antigen with fixation and with 
storage over time, which can vary with the 
different proteins. Immunohistochemistry 
allows for the localization of proteins of 
interest within cells (e.g., the question of 
whether the protein is identified at the sub- 
cellular site one would expect) as well as 
within the histology of the specimen (e.g., 
if the protein is identified in cancer tissue, 
in precursor lesions, in apparently normal 
adjacent tissue). Aggregate analysis of tissue 
can be accomplished with fresh tissue spec- 
imens by lysis of the cells and analysis of 
the appropriate cellular fraction of the 
lysate (125,126). Analysis of cell lysate can 
be performed with antibodies applied in 
Western blotting (separation of the pro- 
teins by gel electrophoresis followed by 
antibody probing), which has the advan- 
tage of allowing molecular weight determi- 
nation as a confirmatory indicator but 
which can be laborious, difficult, and hard 
to standardize. Alternately, analysis of cell 
lysate can be performed with antibodies 
incorporated into an antigen-competition 
or an immunosorbent assay, such as 
radioimmunoasays or enzyme-linked 
 
immunosorbent assays (ELISA), which are 
generally easier, more rapid, and more eas- 
ily standardized. Stepwise application of 
assays can be employed, for example, in 
which an ELISA may be used to screen 
samples and Western blotting may be used 
to confirm positive results. 
 
Protein identification in extracellular 
fluids can be similarly accomplished with 
antibodies employed in Western blotting 
or ELISA or related assays. This approach 
is obviously more accessible and conve- 
nient than relying on tissue, but it raises 
issues such as whether extracellular fluid 
protein levels accurately reflect cellular pro- 
tein levels. Identification of certain proteins 
in extracellular fluids, such as tumor- 
associated antigens, has been well standard- 
ized in convenient assays and widely 
applied. Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is a 
good example (127,128). Even in these 
cases, however, many important issues 
remain unresolved. Tumor-associated anti- 
gens like PSA may be useful monitoring the 
course of disease once identified and 
treated, but the relationship to the patho- 
physiology of the disease process remains 
unclear and thus its utility in predicting 
future occurrence of disease that will be 
clinically significant in an individual is 
unproven. Other proteins that represent 
expression of genes in the presumed causal 
pathway for disease, such as growth factors 
and oncoproteins, can also be analyzed with 
antibody-based techniques in extracellular 
fluids, as described in depth by Brandt-Rauf 
(129). Unfortunately, these tests are not as 
well developed as the others mentioned. In 
general, they are not standardized; normal 
values and values of pathophysiologic sig- 
nificance are not well defined; confounders 
have not been identified; and sensitivity, 
specificity, and predictive value as indica- 
tors of susceptibility for disease occurrence 
need to be more closely examined. Thus, 
they are clearly not ready for routine use at 
this time. As with all biomarkers of gene 
expression, additional research will be nec- 
essary to more clearly define their advan- 
tages and limitations and to determine their 
potential uses. 
 
Condusions and Reconmendations 
 
Considerations for Developing Countries. 
Little work has been done to monitor the 
level of exposures and their effects on 
human populations in developing countries 
(130). Although trials have been done for 
cytogenetic monitoring of populations at 
risk (42,131), more effort should be made 
to improve the information concerning 
 
human exposure possibilities and the 
identification of exposure-related diseases. 
 
Simple cytogenetic techniques (such as 
CAs, SCEs and MN) and simple gene 
expression techniques (ELISA for protein 
levels) can be applied for monitoring in 
developing countries. More advanced mol- 
ecular biomarkers (e.g., based on PCR and 
gene sequencing) may be considered only if 
the appropriate resources are available. 
 
General Considerations. Most of 
the biological markers of effect described 
here are still experimental tools whose 
utility remains to be established. For these 
biomarkers, issues of assay validation, 
QA/QC, and convenience and cost need to 
be addressed. As noted above within the 
context of susceptibility, one objective of 
their use would be the identification of 
individuals or groups who, by virtue of the 
acquired susceptibility to the effect, are 
likely to develop disease. Some examples, 
such as the evidence that increased rates of 
chromosomal aberrations are associated 
with later development of cancer, suggest 
that this may be possible, but in most cases 
of biomarkers of effect, the predictive value 
remains unproven. 
 
Even if predictive value is ultimately 
established, problems will remain. The util- 
ity of establishing such susceptibility with- 
out any way to alter it is of questionable 
value. In some cases, the effects detected 
may be irreversible, so effective secondary 
prevention would be one important option. 
In other cases, the effects detected may be 
reversible (as with the reversion of SCE 
rates following removal of exposure to cyto- 
static drugs), so that primary prevention 
may be effective. At any rate, primary pre- 
vention through the reduction or elimina- 
tion of the exposure producing the effect is 
always good policy, and secondary preven- 
tive interventions or the use of biomarkers 
to eliminate individuals from ongoing 
exposure situations are not a substitute for 
primary preventive efforts. 
 
Other important social, legal, and ethical 
implications also derive from these aspects of 
biomarkers of effect. For example, the know- 
ledge of truly predictive biomarkers of effect 
could obviously be misused to detrimentally 
affect the employability and insurability of 
the individual concerned, compounding the 
suffering induced by the psychological bur- 
den of the knowledge. Furthermore, such 
knowledge having a potentially adverse psy- 
chological effect raises the issue of whether 
the detection of a biomarker of effect is itself 
an impairment and perhaps a disability, 
even without other demonstrable clinical 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
71 1 
 
BARRETT ET AL. 
 
effects. Could such an impairment/disability 
be compensable under tort or workers' com- 
pensation laws? Would such an individual 
be entitled to special considerations under 
laws for protecting the disabled in employ- 
ment and other societal circumstances? Prior 
to the general use of biomarkers of effect, 
such questions will have to be addressed. 
Some general ethical aspects of these issues 
are considered in more detail elsewhere in 
this volume. 
 
Other potential uses of biomarkers of 
effect are in monitoring of disease progres- 
sion and prognosis, and as adjuncts to 
other biomarkers in providing refinements 
of epidemiology and risk assessments. At 
the very least, biomarkers of effect, as well 
as other biomarkers, offer the opportunity 
to provide scientific confirmation of pro- 
posed exposure-disease pathways in vivo in 
human populations. Biomarkers of effect 
may be particularly useful for demonstrat- 
ing the biologic influence of preceding 
susceptibility factors (e.g., genetic poly- 
morphisms of xenobiotic-metabolizing 
enzymes). It should be noted once again, 
however, that at this time these biomarkers 
of effect should only be employed in the 
context of carefully designed studies with 
all due attention to the rights and concerns 
of the human subjects involved. Neverthe- 
less, we believe that research on biomarkers 
of effect is worth pursuing because of the 
potential benefits for disease prevention. 
Biological Markers 
of Susceptibility 
 
Definition of Susceptibility Markers 
 
A biomarker of susceptibility is defined as 
an indicator or a measure of an inherent or 
acquired ability of an organism to respond to 
the challenge of exposure to a specific xeno- 
biotic substance (1). Biomarkers of suscepti- 
bility are concerned with factors in kinetics 
and dynamics of uptake and metabolism of 
exogenous chemicals. Thus the concept 
encompasses enzymes of activation and 
detoxication, repair enzymes, and changes in 
target molecules for toxic chemicals. Many 
of the latter conditions include factors that 
confer highly increased risks to predisposed 
individuals (i.e., repair gene defects, "frag- 
ile" DNA conditions, etc.). Susceptibility 
factors occur along a continuum from 
"near-obligatory" determinants of high risk 
to contributory low risk factors (such as 
metabolic polymorphisms). In this docu- 
ment, we focus on those factors that involve 
a major contribution of gene-environment 
interaction to become manifest. 
 
Monogenic traits are inherited in a 
Mendelian fashion. A genetic polymor- 
phism refers to a monogenic variation that 
occurs with at least two phenotypes with 
sufficient frequency (> 1%) to cause popu- 
lation differences. Genetic variations occur 
as either germline inheritance or somatic 
cell mutations. Rare inherited metabolic 
diseases such as Crigler-Najjar syndrome 
occur as a germline mutation (132); a well- 
known example of a somatic cell mutation 
is hepatocellular carcinoma caused by 
dietary exposure to AFBI (91). 
 
Nongenetic factors such as age and sex 
are obviously important but need further 
refinement in terms of molecular mecha- 
nisms and their interplay with environmen- 
tal factors before being useful for any 
intervention. Acquired factors (for example 
physiological changes, disease-induced 
changes, induction and inhibition of 
enzymes by dietary factors, etc.) are also crit- 
ical but difficult to study because of their 
individual nature. Such changes may not be 
permanent and thus may be impractical to 
take into consideration in any long-term or 
retrospective study. 
 
Interindividual variability is observed for 
practically all diseases and toxic responses. 
It is certainly related in part to different 
qualitative and quantitative environmental 
exposures, but differences in susceptibility 
between individuals in response to the same 
level of exposure are also common. In most 
chronic diseases, a long sequence of events 
leads to a final response, which is seen as a 
result of an interplay of multiple genetic and 
other host factors and environmental fac- 
tors, each contributing to an overall risk of 
having a manifest response. 
 
Although biomarkers of susceptibility 
identify those individuals in a population 
who have a difference in susceptibility to 
the effects of chemical exposure, only in 
some circumstances can they predict an 
individual's risk with any confidence. It is 
important to not generalize inappropriately 
from in vitro evidence of susceptibility, as 
has occurred in inferring that individuals 
with red blood cell glucose 6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase deficiency are particularly 
sensitive to inhaled ozone (133). 
Objectves of Use 
 
of Susceptibility Markers 
 
Interindividual variation occurs as a result 
of different genetically inherited back- 
ground modified by dietary and environ- 
mental exposure and revealed by genotypic 
and phenotypic variation. Susceptibility 
markers are useful because they can partially 
 
explain interindividual variation inherent 
in the general population and thus provide 
a biological rationale for investigation of 
inherent vulnerability prior to exposure to 
environmental hazards. 
 
The objectives of the use of susceptibil- 
ity markers are the following: 
 
* To evaluate interindividual variation of 
 
risk associated with environmental and 
dietary exposure to hazardous chemi- 
cals. These methods cannot easily iden- 
tify all individuals at risk in a hazardous 
environment due to lack of understand- 
ing of the interaction of compensatory 
genetic and cellular mechanisms and 
complex environmental influences. 
While individual susceptibility may only 
occasionally be specifically linked to a 
single defective gene (e.g., CYP2D6) 
where the specificity of substrate struc- 
ture has been better characterized, it 
currently is our best approach to assess 
populations at risk. 
 
* To determine the role of genetic varia- 
 
tions to explain interethnic differences 
associated with susceptibility to chemi- 
cal exposures and to predict population 
vulnerability. 
 
* To improve the detection of environ- 
 
mental hazards by increasing the sensi- 
tivity of epidemiological studies which 
in turn will result in a) reduction of 
risk through avoidance or limitation of 
chemical exposure b) changes in dietary 
and social habits to improve health or 
reduce risk c) improved drug treatment 
to maximize response and minimize 
toxicity. Better knowledge of xenobi- 
otic metabolism and pharmacokinetics 
of elimination of toxins will speed 
progress of this work. 
 
Methodology in Studying 
 
Susceptibility-related Genes 
 
The approaches and methods described in 
this section will focus on studies of poly- 
morphisms in xenobiotic-metabolizing 
enzymes. However, most of these methods, 
in particular the molecular techniques, can 
be used for studying polymorphisms of 
other susceptibility-related genes, such as 
DNA repair enzyme genes or disease genes. 
 
In addition to the polymorphisms of 
susceptibility-related genes, other genetic 
alterations such as "mini- and microsatel- 
lites" are also believed to be important in 
human carcinogenesis and are involved in 
individual susceptibility (134). 
 
There are two important parts in studies 
of genetic polymorphisms. The first is how 
to identify a new polymorphism and its 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
71 2 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
possible functional significance. The second 
is how to define the role of a known poly- 
morphism in human susceptibility to envi- 
ronmental toxicity in which the frequency 
distribution of the polymorphic genotypes 
or phenotypes should be determined. In 
both cases the PCR technology has greatly 
increased our ability to study genetic poly- 
morphisms. In the PCR reaction specific 
stretches of the DNA can be amplified 
exponentially by thermostable DNA poly- 
merases with a pair of specific primers. 
Several methods are widely used in studies of 
genetic polymorphisms and interindividual 
variations in chemical metabolism. 
 
Methods for Studying Phenotypic 
 
Expression. USE OF PROBE DRUGS IN VIVO. 
 
When an appropriate probe drug (with 
specificity and safety) is available, meta- 
bolic polymorphisms can be identified by 
determining the metabolic ratio, i.e., the 
ratio of the blood or urinary concentration 
of the parent drug over its metabolite in 
different individuals administered the 
probe drug. Metabolic polymorphism is 
usually indicated in a population if the fre- 
quency distribution of the metabolic ratio 
is shown to be bimodal or trimodal. For 
example, a bimodal distribution of debriso- 
quine 4-hydroxylation (catalyzed by 
CYP2D6) is observed due to the existence 
of "poor" and "extensive" metabolizers 
(135,136). The role of gender-based 
CYP1A2 variability in susceptibility to 
bladder cancer has been explored using the 
caffeine breath test (137). 
 
USE OF PROBE DRUGS IN VITRO. The 
probe drugs can be used for in vitro metab- 
olism studies to look for possible polymor- 
phisms of the metabolizing enzymes, which 
are usually indicated if large interindividual 
variations in the activities are observed. 
Diagnostic probe drugs for individual CYP 
enzymes have been developed such as 
coumarin for CYP2A6 and caffeine for 
CYP 1A2 (138). 
 
OTHER METHODS. Polymorphisms of 
xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes can be 
determined at other phenotypic levels. 
Enzyme protein levels can be measured by 
immunological methods such as immuno- 
blotting and immunohistochemical analy- 
ses. mRNA levels are quantified by different 
nucleic acid hybridization techniques 
(Northern and slot blotting, RNase protec- 
tion, and in situ hybridization). Quanti- 
tative RT-PCR (reverse transcription of the 
mRNA to cDNA followed by PCR ampli- 
fication) has been developed for detection 
of mRNA in a small amount of tissue 
samples. Expression of CYPIAI mRNA in 
 
human lymphocytes and its regulation 
by tetrachloro-dibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) 
have been successfully determined by this 
method (139). 
 
Most genotoxic chemicals need to be 
metabolically activated to exert their effects. 
Therefore variations in the activities of the 
xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes by poly- 
morphic changes can influence the geno- 
toxic effects. Biomarkers of effect, such as 
cytogenetic damage caused by a genotoxic 
compound, can be used as an indirect mea- 
surement to evaluate the metabolic activity 
of cells from donors with different poly- 
morphic genotypes or phenotypes. The 
commonly used cytogenetic parameters 
include CAs, SCEs, and MN (46). 
 
Methods for Studying Genetic 
 
Polymorphisms. IDENTIFICATION OF 
 
NOVEL GENETIC POLYMORPHISMS. Once a 
metabolic polymorphism (or a polymor- 
phism at other phenotypic expression lev- 
els) is demonstrated, various molecular 
biology techniques including cloning and 
DNA sequencing can be used to look for 
possible genetic changes of the enzyme. A 
successful example is the discovery of 
CYP2D6 genetic polymorphism (140). 
After cDNA cloning and DNA sequencing, 
it was demonstrated that a mutant 2D6 
allele is responsible for the majority of "poor 
metabolizers." Further work established that 
a mutation at a splicing site caused the pro- 
duction of defective 2D6 mRNA and a total 
absence of 2D6 protein (141). 
 
The DNA sequence alterations can be 
screened by SSCP analysis, which detects 
the mutation-caused mobility shift of the 
DNA fragments on gel electrophoresis 
(109), or by DGGE, in which DNA mole- 
cules are separated based on differences in 
their melting temperatures due to the 
sequence alterations (113). In some cases, 
the variant alleles are detected by sequence 
comparison with no knowledge of the 
related phenotypic polymorphism. Most of 
the polymorphisms will not have a func- 
tional significance. Functional analysis is 
then critically important in establishing the 
phenotypic significance of these variant 
alleles. Catalytic activity of enzymes can be 
studied by expressing different variant pro- 
teins with the cDNA expression systems if 
the polymorphic changes are localized in 
the coding region, such as in CYP2A6 
polymorphism (142). If the polymorphic 
loci are in the noncoding region, their 
effects on the transcriptional regulation can 
be studied by linking the mutated sequence 
with a reporter gene, such as in CYP2E1 
RsaI polymorphism (143). 
 
GENOTYPING OF POPULATIONS. It is 
 
rather simple to determine an individual's 
genotype with respect to a specific locus by 
current molecular biology techniques, 
when the polymorphic sites of a xenobi- 
otic-metabolizing enzyme gene are clearly 
identified. If a polymorphic site changes 
the recognition sequence of a restriction 
enzyme, or the polymorphic alteration 
involves a large deletion, the genetic poly- 
morphism can be identified by RFLP 
analysis in which DNA is subjected to 
Southern blotting after digestion with 
appropriate restriction enzymes and 
hybridized with specific probes. 
 
PCR technology has greatly increased 
our ability to detect genetic polymor- 
phisms. DNA amplification can be carried 
out with specific PCR primers for any par- 
ticular sequence of a polymorphic gene, 
with small amounts of human tissue or cell 
samples. The DNA source can be from 
blood leukocytes, buccal epithelial cells, 
hair roots, and exfoliated cells such as blad- 
der epithelial cells in the urine. The PCR- 
amplified DNA sequence containing the 
polymorphic sites can be analyzed by RFLP 
with restriction digestion and visualized on 
a stained gel after electrophoresis. If the 
genetic polymorphism results in a loss, or in 
some cases a gain, of a restriction site, the 
band pattern on the gel will be different 
from the wild-type samples, such as in 
CYP2E1 polymorphisms (143). If the PCR 
primers are designed to be within the miss- 
ing sequence of a deletion polymorphism, 
no PCR product will be formed. 
 
Obviously, the RFLP method cannot be 
used to screen the genetic polymorphisms 
in which the sequence alterations cause no 
changes at suitable restriction sites. In this 
case, genotyping can be carried out by cre- 
ating a restriction site by mismatch primers 
(144,145) or by allele-specific PCR (146). 
If necessary, the results from PCR-RFLP 
and allele-specific PCR can be confirmed 
by PCR-direct sequencing (147). 
Advantages and Limitations 
 
of Genetc Susceptbility Markers 
 
Determinants of the Quality! 
Appropriateness of the Approaches. 
ASSESSMENT OF AN EXPOSURE. The reliable 
characterization and assessment of the level 
of exposure(s) in the population studied is 
an important task. However, there are dif- 
ficulties in measuring exposure because 
assessment methodologies frequently 
depend on personal recall (148,149). 
In many studies published so far on meta- 
bolic polymorphisms and susceptibility to 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
713 
 
BARRETT ET AL 
 
environmentally induced diseases, the 
exposure data are either very scarce or not 
available. This may contribute in part to 
the divergent findings reported for potential 
host factors in individual responses to toxi- 
cants. Knowledge of the substrate specificity 
of the polymorphic enzyme studied is 
needed before any interpretations concern- 
ing its potential effect on individual 
response to a given exposure can be made. 
 
SELECTION OF THE STUDY GROUP. The 
cases and controls should have comparable 
exposures in studies on individual responses 
to environmental agents. Age and gender 
matching should also be performed. If these 
potential confounding factors are not con- 
trolled, the effect may be nullified (150). 
Where matching is not possible, logistic 
regression can be used to evaluate the indi- 
vidual contributions by multiple factors and 
to identify confounding factors (151). 
 
SAMPLE COLLECTION. The sample 
collection is one important aspect of the 
appropriate assays. The proper treatment 
and storage of the samples is a prerequisite 
for obtaining good results. For instance, 
blood samples for DNA analyses can be 
stored in a refrigerator for several days and 
subsequently may be transported on ice or 
frozen for transportation or for further 
storage. In contrast, the samples collected 
for RNA analyses have to be frozen imme- 
diately, preferably in liquid nitrogen, and 
stored at -800C before use. Blood, which 
has been the most used source of DNA 
samples, should not be collected in heparin 
tubes for DNA extraction. Interference 
with the PCR assay occurs when compared 
to the DNA extracted from blood collected 
in EDTA tubes. Although the DNA- 
bound heparin can be removed using 
heparinases, they are far too expensive to 
be used in studies involving large sample 
sizes. The inhibition can be decreased by 
extensive dilution of the samples (152). 
 
In future studies, increased use of alter- 
native sources of the DNA for genotyping 
studies, such as cells from buccal mucosa 
(153), is expected. These samples are easily 
collected by scraping or mouth washing 
and will thus overcome some of the prob- 
lems associated with blood sampling. Aside 
from the samples collected for "prospec- 
tive" studies, the DNA can also be from 
stored pathological tissue sections, which 
provide great advantage for retrospective 
studies but have additional problems due 
to the small amount of DNA obtained and 
due to possible DNA degradation. 
 
NUMBER OF MARKERS STUDIED SIMULTA- 
 
NEOUSLY. Given the number and variability 
 
in expression of the xenobiotic metabolizing 
enzymes, assessment of a single polymorphic 
phenotype or genotype cannot be expected 
to be sufficient for evaluating individual sus- 
ceptibility to environmental agents. The 
ultimate goal should thus be to concurrently 
assess individual phenotypes or genotypes 
for all the metabolic genes relevant for a 
given exposure (154). This may raise an 
urgent need for software to aid in the inter- 
pretation of the overall risk contributed by 
several different host factors. 
 
Phenotyping versus Genotyping. 
Phenotyping has been widely offered as a 
more appropriate method compared to the 
new DNA-based techniques in studies on 
individual metabolic capacity. Deter- 
mination of the actual phenotype of an 
individual, although more time consum- 
ing, is justified when no genotyping meth- 
ods are available or when the correlation 
between the genotype and phenotype is 
very poor. However, in most cases the cor- 
relation is fairly good. Moreover, pheno- 
typing is easily affected by confounders 
such as food or drug intake prior to testing, 
which do not affect genotyping analyses. 
 
Protein and mRNA levels, although 
they give some indication of the expression 
level of a given metabolic enzyme, do not 
necessarily reflect the metabolic activity 
(155). On the other hand, the power of 
PCR to detect only a few copies of the tar- 
get sequence makes it particularly vulnera- 
ble to errors caused by contaminating 
DNA. Both approaches will be discussed in 
more detail below. 
 
PHENOTYPING ASSAYS. Use of probe 
drugs in vivo. The identification of poly- 
morphic traits has repeatedly been by in 
vivo probe and involves the collection of 
blood or urine usually over a specific 
period. The use of in vivo probes gives a 
picture of the whole body capacity for a 
specific enzyme to metabolize a given 
substance. Probes are not yet available for 
all known polymorphically expressed 
enzymes. In many cases the probe is 
metabolized by other enzymes as well, 
which may complicate interpretation. It is 
also important to have a probe that is both 
specific and safe for use in humans. 
 
Use ofprobe drugs in vitro. Because of 
drug/chemical toxicity, the use of an 
in vitro probe may be the only safe alterna- 
tive to perform phenotyping. A simple 
in vitro assay can be developed, if the poly- 
morphic enzyme is expressed in blood 
cells. The use of other tissues, such as liver 
biopsies, may provide an opportunity to 
measure the expression level of the enzyme 
 
as well. Concerns for patient safety limit 
the availability of these tissues for study. 
 
GENOTYPING ASSAYS. DGGE and SSCP. 
DGGE and SSCP methods are widely used 
for detection of alterations in oncogenes 
and tumor suppressor genes, but they could 
also be used to track down sequence varia- 
tions in the genes coding for xenobiotic- 
metabolizing enzymes. Recently they have 
also been used as a genotyping methodol- 
ogy (156), but at present the RFLP- and 
PCR-based analyses may be more useful in 
these studies. 
 
RFLP assays. The early RFLP-based 
genotyping studies by Southern blotting 
were time consuming and labor intensive 
and usually incorporated the less desirable 
use of radioactive probes. Southern blotting 
has been mainly replaced by PCR-based 
analyses, which have greatly facilitated 
studies of individual susceptibility. This is 
best exemplified by the rapid expansion of 
the studies on GSTM1 polymorphism after 
elucidation of PCR-based methods (157) 
for detection of the gene deficiency (158). 
Although several PCR-based methods are 
available for detection of homozygous gene 
deletions (157,159), amplifications (160) 
or heterozygous deletions (158) of the 
genes are still detectable only by the 
Southern blotting analyses. 
 
PCR-based methods. As mentioned 
above, the PCR methods have mainly 
replaced the genomic DNA methods in 
genotyping studies. The RT-PCR is also 
used to quantitate tissue-specific expression 
of the metabolic genes (161). While rare 
mRNA transcripts can be detected by the 
RT-PCR approach, determination of rela- 
tive or absolute copy number may be more 
problematic (162). Consequently, there is 
debate about whether RT-PCR is suitable 
for these studies. 
 
One advantage of PCR methods is the 
requirement of only nanogram quantities of 
the DNA or RNA template. The need for 
starting material can be further diminished 
by employing a multiplex PCR that gives 
the genotype of several metabolic genes 
from the same sample. However, optimiza- 
tion of the multiplex PCRs may be time 
consuming and the number of assays one 
can add to one reaction is relatively limited. 
 
The evident disadvantage in PCR 
methods is their extreme sensitivity to con- 
taminating DNA. Consequently, special 
emphasis has to be put on controlling the 
contamination (163). This can be achieved 
by minimizing the possibilities for con- 
tamination to occur, by UV radiating the 
reaction mixture before adding template 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
714 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
DNA, and by using carefully selected posi- 
tive and negative internal controls in all 
amplifications. An additional limitation, 
specific for RT-PCR, is that measurement 
of mRNA levels does not necessarily reflect 
metabolic activity. 
 
Sequencing. Sequencing is the only 
method that provides the actual DNA 
sequence of interest. Consequently, it is 
still used mainly to identify novel allelic 
variants and to confirm the applicability of 
new genotyping methods. As the method- 
ology improves, sequencing may be more 
commonly used to determine genetic 
markers (164). 
 
Ethical considerations. Ethical review of 
all studies regarding human risk is appropri- 
ate. Specific issues arise with the use of 
archival samples for which donor permission 
may not have been obtained for the current 
research investigation. Current practice is 
variable regarding the need for consent. A 
second issue is the type and quantity of 
information derived from the project that 
should be provided to the subject [see below 
and Soskolne (15)]. 
 
Condusions and Recommendations 
 
There are a large number of different 
methods to measure susceptibility factors, 
ranging from the activity of an enzyme to 
the detection of mutant alleles of a gene 
associated with a modified phenotypic 
trait. In an era of molecular biology, 
exceedingly sensitive and specific methods 
to detect alleles and expression of genes of 
interest have taken center stage; but one 
has to keep in mind that it is actually the 
phenotype that is of importance for the 
final response to the hazardous insult. 
 
One serious problem in phenotyping 
studies is lack of knowledge of the levels of 
enzymes in the target cells and organs rele- 
vant to the whole body metabolism and 
the correlation of genotype with in vivo 
phenotype. In humans, practical considera- 
tions dictate to a large extent that one has 
to resort to surrogate tissues. 
 
Genotyping has some advantages, such 
as unequivocal identification and lack of 
interference with confounding factors; but 
a modified sequence within a gene (poly- 
morphism) must be demonstrated to 
generate a different phenotype. 
 
In vivo phenotyping has the advantage 
in some cases of assigning a value with one 
assay that might require determination of 
multiple genotyping assays when several 
alleles are present in the population. In vivo 
methods to measure phenotype may lead to 
misclassification of different genotypes, 
 
which in the case of rare alleles can have a 
large effect on the frequency. 
 
To fully exploit the genetics of xeno- 
biotic metabolizing enzymes as risk assess- 
ment tools, much more information on the 
structure/function relationships and regula- 
tion of these enzymes correlated to the 
in vivo phenotype must be elucidated. 
 
On the basis of the current knowledge 
of the field and of the above conclusions, 
the following recommendations are made: 
 
a) Phenotyping should be continued 
along with genotyping, until we gain expe- 
rience with large numbers to enable inter- 
pretation of more complex relationships. 
 
b) The combined impact of all relevant 
genes for a given exposure (as far as they are 
known) needs to be assessed through popu- 
lation-based studies using multiple markers. 
New insights into the physiologic function 
of genes encoding xenobiotic metabolizing 
enzymes will be revealed by studies of 
transgenic "knockout" or"insert" models. 
 
c) Better kinetic characterization of 
enzyme substrate and inhibitor specificity 
must be determined through studies of 
human tissues, as well as through detailed 
metabolic studies of whole organisms. The 
future availability of crystal structure of 
drug metabolizing enzymes in combination 
with computational chemistry will provide 
better information on structure/function 
predictions. 
 
d) A greater understanding of the regu- 
lation of enzyme expression by environ- 
mental agents is needed. 
 
e) The value of intermediate markers of 
exposure such as DNA adducts, should be 
studied and related to other end points of 
disease, e.g., cancer, by cohort studies of 
individuals who have had unintentional 
exposure. 
 
f) Widely available software for inter- 
pretation of the overall risk contributed by 
several different host factors is needed. 
 
g) Better methods of DNA sample col- 
lection should be devised to facilitate stor- 
age and transport and to reduce costs 
because of the need to perform complex 
DNA investigations at remote laboratories. 
 
h) A future approach will be to use 
information obtained from analysis of pop- 
ulations of interethnic groups, in an 
attempt to modify risk by reducing expo- 
sure to potentially hazardous environmen- 
tal and dietary factors linked to disease. 
The effects of these actions must be evalu- 
ated to validate proposed interventions. 
 
i) All of these areas need further 
exploration before we will be able to assign 
individual specific prevention strategies. 
 
Factors That Determine the 
Susceptibility of Organisms, 
Species, Communities, and 
Ecosystems 
Introduction 
 
There are both commonalities and differ- 
ences between the sections on human and 
nonhuman organisms in this report on sus- 
ceptibility. Many of the techniques are the 
same, but whereas for human health the 
main consideration is the protection of sus- 
ceptible individuals, in environmental 
terms we are more concerned with suscep- 
tible species and communities. Even this 
concern is double edged, as there are 
species for which human efforts to control 
have led to the formation of highly resis- 
tant forms. Studies of the mechanisms 
whereby this resistance has occurred have 
given much valuable information on 
the differences between susceptible and 
 
resistant populations. 
 
While this section of the joint report 
follows the sequence of the human health 
sections, namely, biomarkers of exposure, 
effect, and susceptibility, emphasis is given 
to the last category as in general the same 
biomarkers of exposure and effect are used 
in human and nonhuman biota. Examples 
of how these biomarkers are used in the 
environmental context will be given. 
 
Here we use the term biomarker as a 
biological change that is a measure of expo- 
sure and sometimes of toxic effect caused 
by environmental chemical(s) at the level 
of the individual or below. Changes occur- 
ring above the level of the individual are 
referred to as biological indicators. 
 
The discussion here on susceptibility 
covers a broad canvas. There is first a dis- 
cussion of biomarkers of susceptibility at 
the cellular and molecular level, followed by 
those at the individual level, both long and 
short term. Then we move up the organiza- 
tional scale discussing biological indicators 
of sensitivity at the population, community 
structure, and ecosystem levels. We con- 
dude with two case examples of individual 
chemicals or chemical classes to illustrate 
these points. Finally, we note that humans 
are part of ecosystems, and the biomarkers 
of ecosystem susceptibility can also indicate 
and predict effects of chemicals on humans. 
The best biological indicators will both 
warn humans of potential danger and alert 
us to severe ecosystem damage (Figure 2). 
Biomas of Exposure and Effect 
 
We regard biomarkers of exposure and 
effect as essentially a continuum (Figure 2). 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
715 
 
BARRETT ET AL. 
 
t 
 
T I T 
 
I 
 
Individual 
 
t 
 
it 
 
I T I T I T I 
 
t 
 
Figure 2. The role of susceptibility in individuals, biota, populations, and ecosystems. 
 
Whether a biomarker can be used as an 
indicator of effect as well as of exposure 
often depends on the depth of our knowl- 
edge of a particular case. Thus, we have 
not made any effort at making this rather 
 
artificial separation. 
 
Biomarkers and higher level biological 
indicators are important tools in ecotoxi- 
cology. Their application to studies of 
chemical effects on nonhuman biota are 
well documented. However, as this does 
not fall within the bounds of this discus- 
sion, the readers' attention is drawn to a 
number of authoritative texts (165-167). 
 
Among the hierarchy of biomarkers and 
biological indicators, representing pollu- 
tant-induced changes in biota at all levels of 
organization (from the molecular to ecosys- 
tem), lie the means to identify, classify, and 
ultimately quantify, the susceptibility of 
individuals and populations to the detri- 
mental effects of chemical exposure. At the 
levels of molecule, organelle, and cell, there 
are a number of changes we may use in our 
studies of susceptibilities. In the case of 
DNA adducts, for instance, we can measure 
the quantity and rate of adduct formation 
in one individual and compare it to others 
in the same population. Interspecies varia- 
tions could also be measured. Similarly, 
there are a number of important cellular 
regulation and defense proteins that may be 
quantified for comparative purposes. 
 
Detoxification proteins such as the 
mixed-function oxidases (MFO) and the 
cytochrome P450 enzymes may be mea- 
sured, as well as the multidrug/multixeno- 
biotic resistance proteins. The levels of 
such molecules in individuals may give 
some important clues to the susceptibility 
of an organism to toxic insult. 
 
Efficient DNA repair has been shown to 
be an important determinant of chemical 
and radiation-mediated damage in cells. 
We may therefore consider the cellular lev- 
els of the various repair enzymes as indices 
of overall susceptibility. Other important 
molecules are the proteins involved in cell 
regulation mechanisms. Proteins such as the 
oncoproteins may be useful, along with the 
functional analogues of proteins such as 
p53, coded by the tumor-suppressing gene. 
 
Other indicators of susceptibility at the 
subcellular level include changes in 
organelle structure and function, chromo- 
somal aberrations, and the formation of 
micronuclei to genotoxic agents, as well as 
the functional integrity of lysosomes. 
These cellular/molecular indicators of sus- 
ceptibility may be considered in higher ani- 
mals and plants to be only components of 
the overall picture of organism response. 
Thus they may be used in conjunction 
with other higher level markers. However, 
for a large number of single-celled organ- 
isms (and simple organisms) they may play 
a more important role. 
 
Chemical-induced changes in many 
types of cells, tissues and organs can also be 
seen as markers of susceptibility. A high 
level of cellular dysfunction results in dis- 
tinct morphological and biochemical conse- 
quences. An example is apoptosis or 
programmed cell death. The function of a 
cell may be so impaired, or damage to its 
DNA so great, that a "suicide" sequence is 
initiated, resulting in degeneration and 
death. Such a process may be measured his- 
tologically, and the levels of apoptosis mea- 
sured in a target tissue or organ. Cellular 
dysfunction may also be measured in a bio- 
chemical manner, and tracing increases 
 
and/or decreases in tissue specific molecules 
such as hormones and enzymes may be a 
key indicator of individual susceptibility. 
 
Finally, physiological parameters are 
potentially important markers, as they 
relate directly to fitness and consequently 
have higher level effects. Also included are 
homeostatic processes such as thermo- and 
osmoregulation, alteration to respiration, 
and changes in cardiac function. 
DNAAdducts 
 
32P-posdabeling has been used for a number 
of environmental studies. Some of the most 
detailed are those carried out in Puget 
Sound in the State of Washington. Varanasi 
et al. (168) used the 1-butanol adduct 
enhancement method to measure the level 
of DNA adducts in English sole (Parophyrs 
vetulus) that were exposed to high concen- 
trations of sediment-associated chemical 
contaminants and exhibited elevated levels 
of hepatic neoplasms. The level of DNA 
adducts in contaminated sites averaged 
from 17 to 26 nmol/mol nucleotides com- 
pared to < 0.2 from a control site. The 
finding that the levels of aromatic hydro- 
carbons in the sediments of Puget Sound 
were positively correlated with prevalence 
of hepatic neoplasms and related lesions in 
English sole were compared to those found 
for the starry flounder (Platichthys stellatus) 
(169). These workers found that the starry 
flounder had a lower prevalence of hepatic 
neoplasms and studies suggested that bio- 
chemical differences in the metabolism of 
carcinogenic PAHs can explain the lower 
susceptibility of the flounder to chemical- 
induced hepatocarcinogenesis. 
 
The HPLC/fluorescence spectropho- 
tometry approach has been used to show 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
Ecosystems 
 
Populations 
 
t 
 
_ ll t~~~~~~~- 
 
E E , | | S S . l~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
 
t 
 
I 
 
716 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
the presence of B [a] P adducts in a popula- 
tion of beluga whale (Delphinapterus 
leucas) in the St. Lawrence River, whereas 
no such adducts were found in the brains 
of whales from the Arctic population 
(170). The finding of B[a]P adducts in the 
brains of belugas in the St. Lawrence can 
be correlated to the high incidence of 
tumors (cause of death in 18% of the 61 
whales post mortemed) in this population. 
 
The formation of DNA adducts has 
been considered a key step in the initiation 
of carcinogenesis. However, the presence of 
DNA adducts in aquatic invertebrates that 
rarely or never develop neoplasms may 
obviously be linked to genotoxic end 
points other than tumorigenesis. Based on 
good correlations between the induction of 
DNA adducts and gene mutations, it was 
hypothesized that, in natural species, a 
variety of manifestations of the mutational 
event may actually prove much more bio- 
logically and ecologically important than 
the induction of neoplasia (171). 
 
Strand breakage of DNA has also been 
used to study the effects of environmental 
pollutants. Although strand breakage can 
lead to cell death, in many cases it is 
repaired before serious damage occurs. 
Strand breakage as measured by the alka- 
line unwinding assay is one of a suite of 
biomarkers used to study the effects of pol- 
lution on the liver DNA of bluegill sunfish 
(Lepomis macrochirus) in rivers of the eastern 
United States (172). The basic prerequisite 
for the successful use of DNA adduct and 
 
DNA strand breakage in environmental 
risk assessment studies, however, is the 
recognition of the fact that lower inverte- 
brates may be incompetent in forming 
DNA adducts from some highly prevalent 
pollutants such as PAHs (173). 
 
Some indicators of chemical exposure 
and effects methods are shown in Table 2. 
Biological Indicators of Susceptibility 
at the Individual Level 
 
The phenomenon of resistance is a striking 
example of differential susceptibility of 
organisms to environmental chemicals. 
There are a number of mechanisms whereby 
organisms can resist the action of toxic 
chemicals. These include decreased uptake, 
increased efflux, increased rate of metabo- 
lism of the toxicant, sequestration of the 
toxin, and increase or repair of target sites 
within the cell. In some cases more than 
one mechanism is involved and changes 
made against one chemical can protect 
against another; hence, the phenomenon 
of cross-resistance. 
 
The factors that influence the onset of 
resistance fall into three broad categories: 
genetic, biological, and operational. In the 
first category is the frequency and domi- 
nance of the resistant gene. Dominance is 
important; if the gene is normally recessive 
because it has disadvantages, such as lower 
reproductive capacity, the greater the 
genetic disadvantage, the slower the resis- 
tant strain takes over. The shorter the 
generation turnover and the greater the 
 
number of offspring per generation, the 
more rapidly resistance can occur. For pes- 
ticide resistance, the operational factors 
include the actual pesticide used and the 
mode and area of application. It is in the 
area of disease resistance in insects that we 
have the greatest control (174). 
 
The degree of resistance can be large. 
For example there are houseflies for which 
the LD50 for DDT is 3000 times normal, 
the main mechanism that defends the 
organism being increased levels of a dehy- 
drochlorinase (175). Resistance among 
vertebrates is not so evident, although it 
has been reported in several species of fish, 
and the case of warfarin resistance in rats is 
well known. 
 
Resistance can cause considerable 
changes in the community structure of 
invertebrates. Man's attempts to control 
the pests that affect cotton in northeastern 
Mexico and the southern United States is a 
good example of the problems that occur 
with resistance and the alterations of com- 
munity structure caused by differential sus- 
ceptibility of organisms to environmental 
chemicals (176). During the period 1945 
to the mid-1950s there was almost com- 
plete control of the main pests-the boll 
weevil and the cotton fleahopper-by OC 
pesticides and there was a spectacular 
increase in cotton production. In the mid- 
1950s it was necessary to switch to OP 
compounds which increased the costs but 
cotton was still profitable. Former minor 
pests, the bollworm and tobacco budworm 
 
Table 2. Some biomarkers, the pollutant, and their utility for study of environmental susceptibility. 
 
Measure of 
 
Biomarker toxic effect? Pollutant Organization level Reliability index 
 
Inhibition of 6-ALAD Yes Lead Organ, intact animal Sufficiently reliable to replace chemical analysis; can be related 
 
to mechanisms of action 
 
Induction of metallothionein No Cadmium Organ No advantage over chemical analysis; not related to mechanism 
 
of action 
 
Eggshell thinning Yes DDT, DDE, Dicofol Intact animal, population Wide variation in sensitivity; related to reproductive success 
 
Anticoagulant clotting proteins Yes Rodenticides Intact animal, population Has been related to mortality; can be assessed from blood protein 
 
Porphyrin profiles No Several OCs Organ Levels of porphyrins found in samples are well below those causing 
 
adverse effects 
 
Depression of plasma retional Yes 3,4,3', 4'-TCB Tissue, intact animal Dermal and epithelia lesions to specific protein have been shown 
 
and thyroxine 
 
Inhibition of AchE Yes OPs, carbamates Organ, intact animal Easier and more reliable than chemical analysis 
 
Induction of MFOs Yesa OCs, PAHs Organ, population Analysis of TCDD-EQa has been linked to reproductive success; 
 
P450s related to specific pollutants 
 
DNA and hemoglobin adducts No Largely PAHs Organ Good monitor of exposure, for PAHs, relation to effects 
 
DNA integrity ? Metals, OCs, PAHs Organ DNA damage is serious to the individual but relationship to effects 
 
on reproduction is unknown 
 
Other serum enzymes No Metals, OCs, OPs Organ A considerable number of enzymes altered by pollutants, but 
 
effects are not clear 
 
Immune responses ? Metals, OCs, PAHs Organ Proper functioning of this is critical to health but there is 
 
considerable reserve 
 
Stress proteins No Metals, OCs Organ Difficult to separate effects from nonchemical stresses 
8TCDD-EQ, TCDD equivalents. 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives - Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
7 17 
 
BARRETT ET AL 
 
were becoming major pests. By the mid- to 
late-1960s all the pests were highly resis- 
tant to all insecticides and cotton produc- 
tion dropped markedly. The introduction 
of integrated pest management was needed 
to solve this problem. 
 
Individual Susceptibility. Susceptibility 
of individuals to chemical stress, or their 
sensitivity to chemicals, is hard to define. 
Pragmatically, susceptibility may be defined 
as a lack of resistance, or tolerance, to 
chemical stress. Such a definition enables 
the recognition of molecular, biochemical, 
or physiological mechanisms that constitute 
a biological defense mechanism against 
chemical pollution. These include mecha- 
nisms dependent upon the activity or levels 
of mixed-function oxidases, N-acetyltrans- 
ferases, glutathione S-transferases, glu- 
tathione, glucuronidation and sulfation, 
heat-shock proteins, and metallothioneins. 
The basic characteristic of these biologic 
defense/detoxication mechanisms is their 
inducibility. The induced state of these 
enzymes, often expressed in thousands of 
percent increase over natural state, serve as 
useful biomarkers of exposure/effect. Their 
activity and inducibility directly influence 
the outcome of exposure to toxic chemicals 
(induction of DNA adducts, induction of 
single strand breaks in the DNA, induction 
of chromosomal aberrations, modulation of 
fitness and the frequency of diseases, lethal- 
ity, extinction of species). In resistant 
organisms both the natural level and more 
importantly the inducibility of one or more 
of these mechanisms is higher than in sus- 
ceptible individuals. Generally, better 
response of detoxication/defense mecha- 
nisms is inversely proportional to suscepti- 
bility. Thus, biomarkers of exposure may be 
used as short-term indicators of biological 
susceptibility of individuals to chemicals: 
low response in these biomarkers will 
denote a high level of susceptibility. For 
example, lower inducibility of 7-ethoxy- 
resorufin O-deethylase activity in carp will 
denote their higher susceptibility to toxic 
effects of pollutants. 
 
Using the same pragmatic definition of 
susceptibility as a lack of resistance, one 
can utilize a recently discovered multixeno- 
biotic resistance mechanism (MXR) as a 
long-term biomarker of susceptibility of 
individuals to chemicals. The MXR repre- 
sents a general biologic first-line defense 
mechanism, it is taxonomically broadly dis- 
tributed, and its expression is species 
dependent. However, there are considerable 
variations in its expression on an interindi- 
vidual basis (177). The low expression of 
 
activity of P-glycoprotein, a dominant fea- 
ture in the MXR mechanism (178), in, for 
example, the snail Monodonta turbinata 
specimens living in a pristine marine envi- 
ronment, indicates high susceptibility for 
accumulation of xenobiotics and, conse- 
quently, higher likelihood of effects (179). 
In contrast, specimens of snails living at 
polluted sites, expressing higher activity of 
P-glycoprotein due to its induction, are less 
susceptible to toxic effects of xenobiotics 
due to a lower level of its accumulation. 
Thus, the level of expression of MXR may 
be a good long-term indicator of suscepti- 
bility to chemicals. Similarly, species with 
high levels of MXR (P-glycoprotein) 
expression, such as mussels (Mytilus gallo- 
provincialis, Mytilus edulis, Crasostera gigas) 
(180), clam (Corbicula fluminea) (181), 
marine snail (M. turbinata) (179), marine 
worm (Urechis caupo) (182), or four 
marine sponges (183), in contrast to a fresh 
water mussel (Anodonta cygnea) and a fresh 
water snail (Paludina vivipara) (179), are 
not susceptible to chemical pollution. 
Thus, the low, or nihil, expression of MXR 
in A. cygnea and P. vivipara are biomarkers 
of their long-term susceptibility. 
 
Excellent methods are available 
for measurement of a functional state of 
MXR (184), as well as for measurement 
of concentration of inhibitors of MXR, 
the chemosensitizers, in environmental 
samples (185). 
 
Several species or groups can be good 
indicator species. Very good bioindicators 
are the water insects, especially species 
and groups of species of the order 
Ephemerophera. Ecological niches and 
needs of their larvae are well known. By 
feeding on detritus they accumulate in 
their bodies xenobiotics that can be reliably 
identified (186). 
 
Behavioral Mechanisms. Individuals 
can clearly be exposed to chemicals in 
situations in which they cannot escape or 
move away from the exposure: then they 
must rely on biochemical detoxifying 
methods to avoid effects. Sessile organisms 
that make up most species in the aquatic 
world are unable to move away from expo- 
sure. However, many organisms, parti- 
cularly vertebrates, have a number of 
behavioral and life-history strategies that 
enable them to avoid exposure to chemi- 
cals. These mechanisms make them less 
vulnerable or less susceptible to the effects 
of these chemicals. 
 
The most obvious mechanism to avoid 
chemicals is to move away from exposure; 
and many animals do this by simply flying, 
 
swimming, or walking away. This mecha- 
nism functions in many species when they 
are exposed to high doses of chemicals such 
as occurs during an oil spill. Birds, many 
marine mammals, and fish will swim or fly 
from advancing oil when it is possible to 
do so (187). However, other fish and some 
marine mammals will not do so until it is 
too late to avoid exposure. Most exposures 
to chemicals, however, occur at such 
low doses that animals do not, or cannot 
avoid them. 
 
The impairment of locomotion or 
abnormal behavior of animals is being used 
to monitor pollutants. Fish have been used 
commonly--monitoring the frequency of 
coughing (188,189), loss of rheotaxis, or 
disturbance of schooling. These methods 
are linked with automatic water sampling 
systems to serve pollutant analysis. Direct 
measurement of respiration through blood 
vessels in fish was devised to monitor cont- 
aminants (190). Monitoring of mussels' 
activity is also practical since mussels 
respond to hazardous chemicals by closing 
their bulbs. Abnormal web spinning by 
caddisfly larvae or failure to make nests by 
other aquatic insects are also useful meth- 
ods to monitor pollutants. Feeding activity 
can be another biomarker. A short-cut 
test with Daphnia using toxicant-induced 
inhibition of feeding is being studied. 
 
For showing the changes caused by 
long-term exposure, it is most important to 
observe changes in the populations of indi- 
vidual species. Changes in populations that 
are useful include the changes in popula- 
tion dynamics, fertility and fecundity, 
physiological resistance to external factors, 
behavior, levels of parasitism or pathogen 
infestation, and changes in the structure of 
communities of social insects (186). 
 
Life History Parameters. In addition 
to behavior, some life history strategies 
allow animals to avoid exposure, thus ren- 
dering them less susceptible to exposure 
and subsequent effects. Many species 
migrate during part of the year, removing 
them from low-level chronic exposure; 
other species hibernate beneath the ground 
where they also reduce exposure and thus 
their vulnerability. 
 
The two life history strategies that ren- 
der animals most susceptible to the effects 
of chemicals are a sessile life style and a 
long life span. Species that are relatively 
long lived, such as most vertebrates and 
trees, are more susceptible to chronic expo- 
sure to chemicals than those that have a 
short life span. This factor functions with 
chronic, low-level exposure rather than 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
718 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
acute, toxic levels of chemicals. Species that 
have a life history strategy that involves 
short life spans have a reduced susceptibil- 
ity to chemicals because the potential for 
bioaccumulation is less and their reproduc- 
tive potential is higher. Chemicals such as 
dioxins, PCBs, DDTs, and mercury, which 
bioaccumulate in internal tissues and are 
thus available for remobilization into the 
bloodstream, can have severe effects on 
organisms that live a long time. 
 
Of the invertebrate bioindicators, 
insects are the most valuable because of 
their quantities and diversity, and because 
of our sufficient knowledge of their taxon- 
omy, morphology, physiology, and onto- 
geny. Their living areas may be rather 
limited, their life cycles short, and their 
reproductive potential enormous, with 
great variations that can be regulating. 
These properties are useful for bioindica- 
tion. The diversity of insect communities is 
distinct and cumulation of substances is 
specific; it is not difficult to observe 
changes in population dynamics and in 
individual development because the life 
cycles are short. The reproductive system 
of insects is very sensitive to biologically 
active substances (proliferation of follicular 
cells, change in structure and function of 
nutritive cells, etc.) This provides the 
opportunity to use the reproductive system 
of insects as a model for testing the effects 
of toxic substances in the environment. 
 
Taxa Variation. In the environmental 
field we have to look not only at suscepti- 
ble populations of any one species but also 
at interspecies variations that can cause a 
differential effect. In this section we exam- 
ine a number of biomarkers that vary 
widely in their sensitivity from one group 
of animals to another. 
 
MIxED-FuNcTIoN OXIDASES. MFOs are 
a major component of the defenses of 
organisms against toxic chemicals in their 
environment. Originally evolved to handle 
naturally occurring toxic compounds, they 
now play an important role in the detoxi- 
fication of man-made chemicals. Nebert 
et al. (191) consider that the ancestral 
cytochrome gene is probably two thousand 
million years old. The major divergence 
occurred eight hundred to one thousand 
million years ago when animals began 
using plants as food and self-defense mech- 
anisms against toxins in plants evolved. 
Later, additional families of cytochromes 
evolved in response to the necessity to 
metabolize combustion products. 
 
There is some variation between taxa: 
in general terms, the relative activity of the 
 
MFO enzyme epoxide hydrase follows 
phylogenetic lines with mammals > birds 
and amphibia > fish, with little overlap 
between the groupings. Levels in inverte- 
brates are much lower. Glucuronyl- 
transferase activities were much higher in 
mammals than fish with virtually no over- 
lap. Aldrin epoxidase activity follows the 
same trend, but in this case there is consid- 
erable overlap. A linear log relationship was 
found between relative activity and body 
weight for mammals, with man being the 
outlier having activity lower than would be 
expected by body weight. 
 
Fish-eating birds show a high correla- 
tion coefficient for the regression of activity 
against body weight, with the values for 
relative activity being approximately an 
order of magnitude lower than for mam- 
mals of comparable weight. Other species 
of birds tend to have values intermediate 
between fish-eating birds and mammals, 
but the correlation of activity with body 
weight is considerably weaker. Low values 
for fish-eating birds are considered to be 
due to the fact that until xenobiotics conta- 
minated aquatic food chains, the birds had 
less need of these defense mechanisms. 
Regrettably no data appear to be available 
on fish-eating mammals. 
 
The low level of activity in fish has 
been considered to be due to the fact that 
until historical times this group of organ- 
isms has found the excretory route across 
the gills effective for removing most xeno- 
biotics. It is clear that this mechanism is 
quite inadequate to deal with highly 
liposoluble organochlorine molecules that 
have been released into the environment by 
humans in the last few decades. 
 
The relationship between feeding 
habits and MFO activity has also been 
demonstrated in insects. A detailed review 
of the data for aldrin epoxidase has been 
made by Brattsten (192). He found that 
aldrin epoxidase activity is lowest in 
monophagous species, considerably higher 
in oligophagous, and some 10-fold higher 
in the most polyphagous species. 
 
The comparison of Phase I and Phase 
II hepatic transformation in quail and 
trout to that of a number of mammalian 
species commonly used in toxicity testing 
has been made by Gregus et al. (193). 
They found that the overall metabolism of 
xenobiotics could vary several hundredfold 
between species. 
 
ToxicrrY OF DIOXINS. The toxicity of 
dioxins to various mammalian species 
varies greatly. The most sensitive species 
known is the guinea pig; the LD50 for the 
 
male is 0.6 pg/kg and the female 2.1 pg/kg, 
the value for the male rat is 22 pg/kg, for 
the female rat 45 pg/kg and for the rabbit 
(mixed sex) 115 pg/kg, whereas the least 
sensitive species is the hamster (1200 
pg/kg) (194). 
 
EGGSHELL THINNING. The phenomenon 
of eggshell thinning, although confined to 
only one order (Aves) does illustrate some 
interesting points in susceptibility. Eggshell 
thinning is caused by DDE and the sensi- 
tivity varies greatly. A diet of only a few 
parts per million will cause 20% thinning 
(the degree of thinning that causes eggshell 
breakage and thus reproductive failure) in 
raptorial birds and some species of fish-eat- 
ing birds such as the pelican and cor- 
morant. Other species such as gull, terns, 
and ducks are only moderately sensitive 
with diets of 40 to 50 ppm being needed 
to cause biologically significant eggshell 
thinning. Still other species, such as quail 
and chicken are completely insensitive and 
it is impossible to achieve more than a few 
percent thinning even at the highest dosage 
that can be used without mortality. One 
important point from this variation is that 
the common test species are insensitive and 
thus even if the measurement of eggshell 
thinning had been included in test proto- 
cols for new pesticides this phenomenon 
would not then have been recognized. 
Another point is that the species exposed to 
the greatest amount of DDE, due to bioac- 
cumulation, are those that are the most 
sensitive. DDE-induced eggshell thinning 
caused the decline of many species of rap- 
torial birds, such as the peregrine falcon 
(Falco peregrinus) and european sparrow 
hawk (Accipter nisus) over wide areas of the 
northern hemisphere. These declines have 
been reversed in areas where bans on DDT 
have been imposed. 
 
Biological Indicators of Susceptibility 
to Chemicals at the Population Level 
 
Biological indicators for assessing sus- 
ceptibility at the population level measure 
parameters that are a consequence of low 
activity of mechanisms of resistance 
detected by molecular and physiological 
biomarkers. For example, the induction of 
DNA adducts and DNA strand breakages 
found in individuals by molecular biomark- 
ers predicted the increase in mutational 
events in population. Consequently there is 
a higher susceptibility of populations to 
diseases, especially viral, bacterial, and para- 
sitic, as the consequence of impairments in 
the immunosystem. These populations also 
are more highly susceptible to decreased 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
719 
 
BARRETT ET AL. 
 
fitness of population, to impairments in 
reproduction, to sickness and increased 
lethality. All these indicators of susceptibil- 
ity of populations to chemical stress will 
predict the expected consequences on the 
level of population such as alterations in 
adaption, survival and succession. On the 
ecological level, the most severe effect- 
extinction of a species-can occur. 
 
Several examples illustrate the use of 
implications of susceptibility at the popula- 
tion level. In salt marsh ecosystems of 
North America, salt marsh grass (Spartina 
alterniflora) is the primary producer; sus- 
ceptibility of this species to specific chemi- 
cals, which results in lowered reproductive 
output, would have a greater effect on 
community and ecosystem structure than 
would susceptibility of other, less impor- 
tant plant species (195). S. alterniflora is 
susceptible to PAHs from oil pollution; the 
sensitive vegetative propagules can be killed 
and the species may take years to recover. 
Similarly, differences in susceptibility to 
chemicals among species of algae in salt 
marsh communities would also have a crit- 
ical effect on community and ecosystem 
structure since algae productivity is critical 
to the overall productivity of the animal 
communities in the marsh. 
 
Equally important to remember when 
using cellular and molecular biomarkers as 
measures of the susceptibility of communi- 
ties and ecosystems to chemicals, is that 
changes in molecular and cellular organiza- 
tion must have effects at the population 
level to be important for community and 
ecosystem structure. 
 
In many cases, chemical, physical, and 
biological stressors occur together; and the 
communities and ecosystems must contend 
with them at once. Since communities and 
ecosystems are assemblages of organisms, 
and thereby are populations that make up 
the system and are responsible for the stabil- 
ity and repair of that system, the relative 
susceptibility of that system depends on the 
susceptibility of individuals and populations 
within the system. 
 
Biological Indicators of Susceptibility 
to Chemicals at the Community Ll 
Within any community or ecosystem the 
species are not necessarily of equal impor- 
tance with respect to the maintenance of 
stability. That is, some species have a key- 
stone role (196). Keystone species include 
species that provide key nutrients or energy 
at the lower trophic levels, or species that 
regulate competition and predation at the 
higher trophic levels. Where molecular and 
 
cellula'r biomarkers are used to indicate 
potential susceptibility differences among 
individuals or species, care must be given 
to select indicator species that have a key or 
pivotal role in community structure (197). 
Chemical disruptions to species that are 
essential for either the structure or the 
function of the system will have a greater 
effect on the susceptibility of the ecosystem 
than those that are less critical. 
 
Several measures of the structure and 
function of communities and ecosystems 
(Table 3) can be used to measure change 
(167,197-201). The degree of change in 
ecosystem structure and function that 
occurs is a measure of susceptibility. That 
is, if a community or ecosystem undergoes 
few changes in either structure or function 
in response to a chemical, biological, or 
physical perturbation, then it is relatively 
resistant or can be said to be less suscepti- 
ble to the effects of a given chemical or 
class of chemicals. 
 
The methods to evaluate community 
and ecosystem change are often costly and 
time consuming, but they can sometimes 
be used with less technology and equip- 
ment. That is, in places or situations where 
extensive molecular and cellular laboratory 
facilities are not available, the community 
and ecosystem measures outlined in Table 3 
 
Table 3. Methods to measure differences in suscepti- 
bility at the community and ecosystem level.a 
 
Usefulness 
Ease of measurementa for chemical 
Characteristic Aquatic Terrestrial assessmentb 
Biodiversity 1 5 A 
Relative density 1 2 A 
Relative abundance 1 1 A 
Dominance 5 5 C 
Food web 8 8 A 
 
characteristics 
 
Genetic diversity 10 10 A 
Primary productivity 1 1 A 
Secondary 5 3-7 B 
 
productivity 
 
Decomposition 1 1 A 
Energy flow 5 3 C 
Mineral cycles 8 3 A 
Nutrient cycles 8 5 B 
Keystone species 5 5 A 
Index of biotic 10 10 A 
 
integrity 
 
Guild structure 10 8 C 
Biomass 10 10 A 
Erosion 5 5 C 
 
Revised from Burger and Peakall (195); and several 
articles in this volume. Ease of measurement is 
scored on a continuum of 1 to 10, 1 being the easiest 
to measure, 10 the most difficult. bUsefulness for 
assessment is scored on a continuum, A being most 
useful, C the least useful or indicative. 
 
can be effectively used to determine differ- 
ences in susceptibility. On the other hand, 
where such laboratory facilities exist, some 
of these techniques can be used effectively 
as surrogates to determine whether individ- 
ual reproductive potential is compromised, 
thereby affecting population levels, and by 
extension, community structure. Table 3 
also gives an indication of the difficulties of 
each methodology, as well as its usefulness 
for evaluation of the effects of chemicals. 
 
One of the most detailed studies at the 
community structure level was made in 
Canada to determine the effects caused by 
acidification in an experimental lake situa- 
tion (202). In this study the pH of a poorly 
buffered lake in northwestern Ontario was 
reduced from pH 6.8 to pH 5.0 over 8 
years. Fish populations started to collapse 
due to lack of reproduction when the pH 
reached 5.9, and there were marked changes 
in the phytoplankton composition although 
primary production was not decreased. At 
pH 5.6 thick mats of filamentous algae 
appeared, which persisted throughout the 
study. When the stable value of pH 5.0 was 
reached the species composition of phyto- 
plankton was completely different although 
primary production remained high; no fish 
reproduction was occurring; crayfish, 
leeches, and mayflies were absent; but there 
was a considerable increase in chlorophyll 
and no changes in nutrient concentration 
were observed. 
Cas Studies 
 
Lead. Lead is an example of how biomarkers 
can be used at different levels of organiza- 
tion. Concentrations of lead in tissues such 
as blood, liver, and kidney are measures of 
exposure. Analysis of levels of lead and 
other heavy metals, however, is costly and 
requires technical knowledge and sophisti- 
cated equipment. However, 8-aminole- 
vulinic acid dehydratase (6-ALAD) activity 
can also be measured in blood as a bio- 
marker of exposure and effect (203). It is a 
cheaper and easier method of analysis than 
of lead itself. 
 
Additionally, the effects of lead can be 
measured with a number of neurobehav- 
ioral assays, since one of the primary non- 
lethal effects of lead is on cognitive, 
psychomotor, and other neural processes in 
both human (204) and nonhuman biota 
(205,206). Lead can cause mortality 
directly, or can cause lowered reproductive 
success through depression of clutch and 
egg size, mortality of embryos, depression 
of growth, and disruption of reproductive 
behavior in a variety of species, especially 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
720 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
on birds, the work on which has been key 
(206). There are differences in susceptibil- 
ity among birds: seabirds such as gulls and 
terns are more susceptible than chickens, 
ducks, and passerines (207-209). 
 
Lead shows the classic trophic level 
relationships with respect to vulnerability: 
species that are higher on the food chain 
have higher levels of exposure than those 
that are lower on the food chain (206). 
However, susceptibility will also vary with 
such factors as developmental maturity at 
hatching, at least in birds. That is, lead dis- 
rupts parental recognition, making those 
species dependent on recognition (i.e., pre- 
cocial birds) more susceptible to the effects 
of lead than species that do not depend on 
this recognition (210). Humans are at a 
relatively high trophic level and clearly 
show effects of lead. These effects, espe- 
cially the neurological and behavioral ones, 
are particularly apparent during develop- 
ment, and persist for many years in 
humans (204). 
 
Lead can also have disruptive effects at 
the population and community levels. The 
abnormalities caused by lead can reduce 
survival and lower reproduction success, 
resulting in lowered population levels for 
impacted populations (206). The effects in 
humans have the potential to severely alter 
social structure and behavior of popula- 
tions that are severely exposed (204). As 
early as the 1 950s, Bellrose demonstrated 
that lead poisoning could depress popula- 
tion levels by differentially affecting those 
wounded by hunters, and the response was 
dose related (211). Similarly, birds nesting 
along roadways are heavily exposed to lead 
from gasoline, while those in more remote 
areas are not. Animals near smelters are 
also heavily exposed through the aquatic 
food chain. By differentially affecting dif- 
ferent species, the species composition of 
communities can be affected by lead, lead- 
ing ultimately to changes in ecosystem 
structure. Because organisms higher on the 
food chain are more susceptible, this end of 
the system would be more affected. 
 
While the mechanisms whereby lead 
affects hemoglobin formation (e.g., inhi- 
bition of 8-ALAD) are well known, the 
mechanisms disrupting neural systems, 
development, and behavior are not well 
established. These phenomena have been 
quantified, without clarifying the mecha- 
nisms. Phenomena include differences in 
cell growth and neuronal projections. 
 
PCBs and Dioxins. The mechanism of 
action of PCBs, polychlorinated dibenzo- 
furans (PCDFs), and polychlorinated 
 
dibenozo-p-dioxin (PCDDs) is considered 
to proceed via initial binding to a high 
affinity, low capacity cytosolic receptor 
protein. The identification of the Ah recep- 
tor (212) with stereospecific, high affinity 
binding to 2,3,7,8-TCDD was a key find- 
ing in bringing molecular biology into the 
realm of toxicology. Examining the toxico- 
logical and receptor binding data, Poland 
and Knutson (213) concluded that it was 
likely that these compounds exert their 
toxicity through the cytosol receptor. 
 
The ability of specific PCBs, PCDFs, 
and PCDDs to induce the P4501 system is 
greatly influenced by the degree of chlori- 
nation and the chlorine substitution pat- 
tern. The most toxic PCBs are those that 
are unsubstituted in the ortho positions, 
i.e., 3,3',4,4'- tetrachlorobiphenyl (TCB), 
3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl, and 
3,3',4,4',5,5'-hexachlorobiphenyl, which 
allows the molecule to assume a co-planar 
configuration. There is a close relationship 
between aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase 
(AHH) induction and body weight loss, 
and AHH induction and thymic atrophy, 
although the interactions of enzyme induc- 
tion, receptor binding, and toxicological 
manifestations are very complex and our 
knowledge is far from complete. 
 
Problems that have to be faced before 
one can use this approach for wildlife toxi- 
cological investigations in the field are 
extrapolations from species to species and 
extrapolations from cell culture to the 
intact animal. Brunstrom and co-workers 
have carried out studies on avian embryos. 
Marked differences were found in the sen- 
sitivity of the chicken, pheasant, turkey, 
duck, and gull (214-216). They found 
that the pheasant was 50 times less sensi- 
tive than the chicken, and other species 
were even less sensitive. This emphasizes 
the difficulties of interspecies comparison 
since the chicken and pheasant both 
belong to the order Phasianidae. 
 
The application of this complex 
biochemistry to field investigations has 
been based on expressing the complex mix- 
tures of PCBs, PCDFs, and PCDDs as 
dioxin equivalents (TCDD-EQ). Based on 
their affinity for the Ah receptor, the activ- 
ity of the individual congeners are assigned 
a value relative to the most active com- 
pound (2,3,7,8-TCDD) which is given a 
value of 1. These toxic equivalent factors 
are multiplied by their concentration to 
give TCDD-EQ for each compound. 
Although even the co-planar PCBs are a 
good deal less active than 2,3,7,8-TCDD, 
their concentrations are much higher and 
 
thus they contribute more than the dioxins 
to the total TCDD-EQs. Now it is possi- 
ble to do the process in reverse and use 
the degree of enzyme induction to estimate 
the TCDD-EQs. This bioassay approach 
is rapid and inexpensive compared to 
the conventional chemical analysis by gas 
chromatography-mass spectrometry. 
 
Good correlations have been found 
between TCDD- EQ of egg contents and 
both the reproductive success and inci- 
dence of deformities in fish-eating birds in 
the Great Lakes of North America. In 
terms of sensitivity, it is of note that the 
cormorant is some 20 times more sensitive 
than the Caspian tern (Hydroprogne caspia). 
In the most contaminated areas of the 
Great Lakes, the productivity success has 
been linked to population declines. 
Ethical Issues and Ecosystem 
Susceptibiity 
 
There are at least three areas where ethical 
considerations impact methods evaluation 
for ecological systems: scientist versus all 
other stakeholder views, government 
actions and ecosystem vulnerability, and, 
the conflict between using biomarkers in 
ecosystems for understanding the ecosys- 
tem itself and using ecosystems as indica- 
tors for human health [see section on ethics 
below, and Soskolne (15)]. Increasingly, 
the responsibilities of scientists toward 
stakeholders (including scientists) are 
obscure with respect to how well the 
methodologies actually measure the phe- 
nomena in question. It is unclear, there- 
fore, how soon scientific "findings" should 
be released or made available, how strin- 
gent the criteria for acceptance of an effect 
must be (given the accuracy of the meth- 
ods), and how to resolve conflicts between 
scientific viewpoints that develop as a result 
of methodology differences. 
 
Certain communities and ecosystems 
are more susceptible to damage from expo- 
sure to chemicals by virtue of their species 
diversities, unique species assemblages, or 
presence of endangered species. In these 
cases, ecologists and ecotoxicologists have a 
responsibility to make the susceptibility 
known, and where possible, to affect deci- 
sions to reduce the potential for exposure 
to chemicals. 
 
For example, the National Research 
Council examined the susceptibilities of 
offshore communities in the United States 
to oil pollution. They determined that the 
coast of Florida was very vulnerable 
because of the presence of subtropical coral 
reefs and manatees (both limited in the 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 X June 1997 
 
721 
 
BARRETT ET AL. 
 
continental United States). As a result, 
the U.S. government decided not to allow 
offshore oil exploration in Florida. 
 
There is a conflict between the use of 
biomarkers as indicators of ecosystem health 
for itself, compared to using these biomark- 
ers only as indicators of human exposure. 
We would argue that both are important 
uses of biomarkers, and biomarkers should 
be developed that fit and evaluate the effects 
of chemicals in both. We have an ethical 
responsibility to preserve ecosystem integrity 
on a worldwide basis. 
 
Condusions and Recommendations 
 
The following steps should be undertaken 
to protect organisms, species, communities, 
and ecosystems: 
 
a) development of biomarkers at the 
cellular and molecular level that cross-cut 
taxonomic levels, including the vast diversity 
of invertebrates 
 
b) study of molecules and mechanisms 
conserved across the animal kingdom; 
these highly conserved mechanisms may 
also have implications for higher animals 
including humans 
 
c) development of biomarkers that inte- 
grate across all levels of biological organiza- 
tion because some chemicals may have a 
greater effect at lower trophic levels while 
others will be more apparent at higher levels 
 
d) development of biological indicators 
that identify ecosystems susceptible to 
chemicals 
 
e) Development of biomarkers that are 
rapid and inexpensive and thus capable of 
being widely used. 
 
Ethical, Social, and 
 
Legal Issues Surrounding 
Studies of Susceptibility 
 
Intoducdon: Ethics as a Methodology 
Growing Attention to Ethics. Since the 
early 1980s, there has been a growing wave 
of concern about the ethics of studies on 
biomarkers of susceptibility (217-227). 
Technological advances continue to chal- 
lenge our sense of what may be deemed 
"right" and "wrong" or "morally appropri- 
ate." These concerns have escalated since 
the beginning of the 1990s (228-248). 
 
Education in the formal theories, princi- 
ples, and rules of ethics generally has not 
been an integral part of graduate training 
among risk scientists. Even though scientists 
have tended to focus on "the scientific 
method" in their work, there are prominent 
examples of concern with the ethical dimen- 
sions of their speciality (249). Notions of 
 
"peer review" are well developed and mech- 
anisms for achieving "informed consent" are 
firmly in place. However, the social conse- 
quences, including both potential benefits 
and harms, have been relatively neglected in 
many areas of science (250,251). 
 
Utility of Ethies. A brief overview of 
ethical theories in relation to scientific 
technologies is provided, with special 
attention to their application in the field of 
biomarkers of susceptibility. It will be 
shown that the discipline of moral philoso- 
phy, like the scientific specialty areas com- 
prising the risk sciences, provides us with 
methodologies for analyzing decisions (e.g., 
whether or not to implement a new tech- 
nology) and a philosophical basis for our 
actions. In practical terms, ethical analysis 
provides us with the tools through which 
decisions we make can be tested against 
ethical theories (and their attendant princi- 
ples and rules) as a basis for explaining or 
justifying (moral) actions (252). 
 
Ethical Theories and Principles. 
Analogous to other disciplines, ethical 
analysis has a theoretical basis. Stemming 
from each theory are principles and associ- 
ated rules, providing a framework for ethi- 
cal analysis. Empirical data then are 
testable against these theoretical frame- 
works. Several theories from the discipline 
of ethics warrant review in the context of 
biomarkers of susceptibility. 
 
Deontology, a duty-based theory that 
specifies obligations to be upheld by mem- 
bers of the profession, is perhaps the most 
commonly evidenced ethical theory among 
health professionals. The "scientific ethic," 
in fact, is deontological (duty based), 
requiring of scientists, among other things, 
to be objective, honest, and unbiased in the 
use of appropriate methods related to their 
subspecialty area of practice. Physicians, 
too, are bound by duties that derive from 
the principles of autonomy (i.e., the right of 
the individual to make independent 
choices), beneficence (i.e., the obligation to 
do good), nonmaleficence (i.e., the obliga- 
tion to do no harm), and distributive justice 
(i.e., social equity). The preeminent duty 
among physicians is to not cause harm to 
their patients. It is through this duty that 
the physicians' role extends to that of 
patient advocate. Autonomy, as more 
recently interpreted, extends to include 
involving the patient as a partner in deci- 
sions about care. Distributive justice is 
manifest in the principle of equal access to 
care, regardless of ability to pay. These brief 
glimpses of ethics relate to physician- 
patient relationships (253). 
 
Other relationships among health pro- 
fessionals exist. For example, those engaged 
in public health have the community's 
interests to protect, and usually adhere 
more to the utilitarian theory of ethics 
requiring that the greatest good be done 
for the greatest number of people. This 
practice does not predude the indusion in 
public health of other principles such as 
autonomy, nonmaleficence, and equity. 
However, the libertarian ethic has less 
utility within public health because it 
holds the individual more important than 
the community. 
 
The egalitarian ethic holds all commu- 
nity members equally important and 
upholds the principle of solidarity. It mea- 
sures the well-being of the group by that of 
the least well off. As an example of the use 
of egalitarianism, the U.S. Clean Air Act sets 
regulatory standards to protect the most sus- 
ceptible members of the population. The 
principle of justice that flows from the egali- 
tarian theory provides for equal access to the 
process of susceptibility assessment; by the 
same principle, the environmental risks 
should be fairly distributed across social 
classes, ethnic groups, and races. Equal out- 
comes cannot be expected because of the 
nonegalitarian characteristics of inherited 
genetic traits. The egalitarian philosophy, 
however, would strive to compensate for 
those inequalities through biologically based 
treatment or by social means. 
 
It becomes evident that, depending on 
the ethical theory that one draws upon, one 
can rationalize apparently disparate conclu- 
sions. This is where normative professional 
practices need to be defined as an aid to 
individual practitioners faced with dilem- 
mas, ethical conflicts, or tensions among 
various principles deriving from the respec- 
tive theories. The recently formulated ethics 
of postmodernism uphold the principle of 
social specificity. This implies that local, 
subjective, and sometimes fragmented nar- 
ratives may be more appropriate in guiding 
the actions of both scientists and the com- 
munity than traditional overarching or 
absolutist theories. 
 
The relational ethic, for those more 
familiar with moral philosophy, provides a 
basis for making rational comparisons 
among the various theories. While it is 
often heard that "ethics are value neutral," 
in practice it is generally agreed that ethics 
are, in fact, value laden. Hence, relational 
ethics can be especially helpful for identify- 
ing the theories and principles most appro- 
priate to the issues in studies of biomarkers 
of susceptibility. 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
722 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
Distinguishing between "Research " 
and "Practice. "A distinction needs to be 
drawn between the professional engaged in 
research and the professional engaged in 
clinical or public health practice. The latter 
is often governed by legal requirements 
especially in the area of public health prac- 
tice where, for example, tensions can arise 
between the principle of autonomy (in 
terms of the right to privacy) and the pub- 
lic's right to know about, for example, a 
potentially contagious condition that 
requires isolation or quarantine. 
 
Research is that area of professional pur- 
suit that develops new approaches to pre- 
vention, treatment, and cure. Adequate 
testing is required to assure that significantly 
more good than harm will result before any 
new product or technology is made available 
for general practice or commercial applica- 
tion. Where concern is focused on establish- 
ing the sensitivity, specificity, and predictive 
value of a new test, this constitutes research. 
Here, access by the individual to his/her 
findings in the absence of any clear inter- 
pretation would be inappropriate and vol- 
unteers for such research ought to have 
been so advised at the time that informed 
consent was obtained. Any person, includ- 
ing the one who participates in research, 
who would wish to know the results of the 
tests then would be required to await the 
conclusion of the scientific investigation 
and the availability of the test for general 
use or practice. 
 
Legal and Regulatory Perspectives. 
While new technologies may have appeal as 
"magic bullets" to people with concerns for 
potential benefit, it is government's role to 
protect the public from harmful effects. 
Therefore, the involvement of government 
in regulating the use of technologies is 
appropriate in those instances where public 
exploitation or harm could arise from access 
to inadequately tested products, promoted 
in the absence of adequate review. It is the 
scientists' role to pronounce the time when 
they deem products or technologies to have 
been adequately tested and hence safe, 
reliable, and accurate enough for public use. 
 
There is, however, often a fine line that 
separates "safe" from "unsafe." No product 
or technology can be said to be absolutely 
safe, so regardless of where that cut point is 
set, more or fewer untoward (and unin- 
tended) effects will be seen. Society has to 
be involved in the decisions that define 
"acceptable levels of unintended effects" as a 
consequence of any new technology. It then 
becomes the burden of those in risk com- 
munication to ensure public understanding 
 
of any risk associated with a new technology 
used for identifying susceptibilities or for 
building risk management policies around 
susceptibility issues. 
 
Ecosystem Perspective. Aside from the 
ethical concerns of professionals engaged 
directly in human-health-related disci- 
plines, indirect concerns that are intricately 
tied to the ecosystem also must be consid- 
ered. Whether animal species are appropri- 
ately used as sentinels (i.e., to serve as 
indicator species) for exposure effects on 
humans, the ecosphere should be seen as 
life sustaining in itself. Hence, damage to 
nonhuman species or the ecosphere should 
be considered as potentially harmful to 
human life. There is also the deontological 
ethic that assigns to humans stewardship 
responsibility for the natural world. 
Therefore, broader concerns than anthro- 
pocentric ethics need to be considered in 
any ethical analysis. 
 
Contwt of Maco Nature: 
Etbica, Soa, Lea 
 
RelationaL The ethical, social, and legal 
frameworks of biomarker research will dif- 
fer depending on the professional and con- 
tractual relationships of the participants. 
Individual relationships, such as between 
physician and patient, lawyer and client, 
and researcher and participant, are gov- 
erned predominantly by a deontological 
ethic whereby the providing professional 
has the primary obligation to look after 
and protect the interest of the individual 
over all other considerations, including 
social benefits. This obligation is recog- 
nized in law that protects the privacy and 
confidentiality of the physician-patient 
and lawyer-client (and, by implication, the 
researcher-participant) relationship against 
undue intrusion. 
 
This protection may not be complete, 
and will vary under different legal, social, 
and cultural conditions. For example, the 
patient-physician contract may be influ- 
enced by the ethics of the payor of services. 
This ethic places constraints on the pri- 
macy of the deontologic relationship 
because the utilitarian-based principles seek 
the use of fiscal resources for the maximum 
good of the larger population. An addi- 
tional threat to confidentiality rests in the 
potential vulnerability of computer-based 
records in which security may be breached 
by technological intrusion potentially to the 
detriment of the patient/client/participant. 
 
The significance of these considerations 
for studies on biomarkers of exposure, 
effects, and susceptibility rests in the 
 
inherent conflicts and tensions that occur 
when the payor, courts, employer, or pub- 
lic health laws impose requirements on 
biomarker data that intrude on the princi- 
ples of privacy and confidentiality in a way 
that is beyond the power of the original 
contractees to prevent, and with conse- 
quences potentially detrimental to both 
parties. In this way, data on genetic suscep- 
tibility may be used to exclude workers 
from certain job opportunities, or patients 
may find themselves unsuspectedly con- 
strained by public health laws. There is also 
the consideration that the worker in pos- 
session of information on genetic suscepti- 
bility or biologic effect may be motivated, 
in the absence of a full understanding of the 
limitations of the methods, to seek compen- 
sation for injury; this could occur in the 
absence of documented evidence of expo- 
sure to a substance in the workplace because 
of the lack of accompanying technology to 
identify exposure. 
 
The prevention and resolution of these 
difficulties are complex and various 
depending on the social, legal, and cultural 
environment. The overriding ethical prin- 
ciple is, however, that the participants in 
these professional/contractual relationships 
be made fully aware of these possibilities in 
agreeing to participate in biomarker 
studies, and that the legal frameworks 
adjust to the potential negative outcomes if 
they stand in the way of accomplishing a 
desired social goal. The scientist, profes- 
sional, ethicist, and lawyer should work in 
concert to address these issues, recognizing 
the adversarial nature of the process and 
the desirability of engaging the professional 
organizations in identifying capable experts 
to provide testimony. 
 
Sodal Context. Another level of analy- 
sis needed to broaden an understanding of 
ethical concerns on a macro level is the 
social context. The implication is that the 
technologies used to identify susceptibility 
are shaped by a variety of social processes. 
On this level of analysis, questions sur- 
rounding the intended and unintended 
social consequences of dealing with suscep- 
tible individuals and populations need to be 
raised. For example, will the results of iden- 
tifying relevant biomarkers in an individual, 
community, or population have a beneficial 
or harmful effect upon current or future 
employment; compensation status in terms 
of both private insurance and public social 
security systems; and, more generally, exist- 
ing forms of social inequality? In this sense, 
ethical discussions must consider that these 
consequences may be beneficial as well as 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives - Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
723 
 
BARRETT ET AL. 
 
harmful and this should be recognized 
within the scientific community. 
 
Another aspect within the social con- 
text that needs consideration is the inter- 
face between the public health needs of a 
specific community and the duty of profes- 
sionals to identify as well as to provide for 
some of these needs. Simply, what ethical 
demands emerge when professionals are 
confronted with susceptibility in a particu- 
lar community? This may expose a tension 
between utilitarian and deontological theo- 
ries. For example, on the one hand a public 
health perspective, driven by utilitarian 
ethics, upholds the principle of the greatest 
good for the greatest number. On the other 
hand, the deontological ethic, which gov- 
erns health professionals, emphasizes their 
duty to serve those susceptible in the com- 
munity as well as to protect a community's 
right to health. 
 
An intervening ethical theory may be 
the libertarian theory of rights, which 
demands that any health decisions taken, 
whether by professionals or the commu- 
nity, will be absolutely respectful of indi- 
vidual autonomy. Here the emphasis is 
that to act ethically, decisionmakers need 
to assume that their future actions enable 
all persons to attain benefits (on their 
own initiative). 
 
It is worthwhile in an ethical context to 
consider the impact of legislative and regu- 
latory measures on communities. In light of 
the issue of susceptibility, what biological 
markers appear as important in determin- 
ing whether a disease should be reportable 
or notifiable or considered communicable? 
How does susceptibility status affect regula- 
tory measures or official disease classifica- 
tions in the field of public health? Answers 
to these questions should be informed by 
clear ethical principles. But a tension 
emerges if a community's rights for distrib- 
utive justice (i.e., social justice or equity) 
under the law overrides the social need for 
trust in the public health professional. 
 
Still another area of concern is the role 
of the expert in the formation of public 
health policy. Here, a key issue emerges: at 
what stage in the production of knowledge 
about susceptibility factors can experts 
agree collectively that this knowledge will 
contribute to more accurate methods of pre- 
vention? In this way, the ethical principle of 
beneficence is upheld. Hence, meeting the 
need for sensitivity, specificity, and predic- 
tive value in this field has meant that an 
effective contribution to prevention should 
be able to be recognized. However, other 
ethical principles besides beneficence need 
 
to be considered for experts to be successful 
in having an impact on the formulation of 
appropriate prevention policies. 
 
Most definitely, those involved in 
studies on biomarkers of exposure, effect, 
and susceptibility should be cognizant of 
the fact that ethics guidelines may vary 
across cultures. The sorts of ethical princi- 
ples upheld by the scientific community of 
a particular culture may differ significandy 
from those upheld by their counterparts in 
another culture. For example, the basic 
tenets of both contemporary medical and 
public health ethics are derived from major 
conceptual developments in Western cul- 
tures. Scientists and public health officials 
from the "developed world" need to recog- 
nize this fact when they attempt to compare 
studies or assess the utility of biomarkers in 
the "developing world." 
 
Time-related Factors. A third factor in 
the context of the application of biomarker 
technology Ls the evolutionary nature of 
social, ethical and legal concepts and 
norms. The fairly recent institution of the 
principles and practices of informed con- 
sent is an example of evolution in the ethi- 
cal conduct of science. What is considered 
ethically acceptable or legally permissible at 
the time an understanding is reached or a 
contract negotiated may become ques- 
tioned over the life of the outcome of that 
contract, years or decades later, because of 
the maturation of legal, social, or ethical 
philosophy. Research studies on captive 
populations or using potentially injurious 
substances for worthy scientific goals are 
no longer considered ethically justifiable or 
legally permissible. Indeed, tort action is 
proceeding retrospectively. 
 
The status of legal protection of confi- 
dentiality is in a state of flux, becoming 
more secure in some societies and less 
secure in others. Since it is not possible to 
foretell at this time the full implications of 
a biomarker of exposure, effect, or suscepti- 
bility, the potential for unforeseen out- 
comes (detrimental or beneficial) is very 
real. There is a need to provide legal pro- 
tection to the participants in the future, 
provided the contemporary criteria are ful- 
filled. The alternative is to withhold or 
delay the use of biomarker technology until 
greater certainty is achieved. 
Procss and Content 
 
Self-Regulation. ACCOUNTABILITY. 
Governments usually relegate control of 
science to the subspecialty scientific profes- 
sions. It therefore falls on the shoulders of 
the scientific organizations to ensure that 
 
guidelines exist against which members of 
the subspeciality groups of scientists can be 
held accountable (250). Ethics guidelines, 
standards of practice, and the development 
of good laboratory practices are designed to 
help maintain objectivity and scrupulous 
honesty, so necessary for the advancement 
of knowledge. Adherence to good practices 
of record-keeping facilitates the auditing of 
laboratories and thereby minimizes the 
chances of misconduct in terms of data 
handling (i.e., falsification, fabrication, and 
plagiarism) (254). 
 
CAPTIVE POPULATIONS. It is currently 
recognized that captive populations should 
not be included in research because the 
prior voluntary consent needed for their 
participation can have little meaning in 
such circumstances. Furthermore, the sci- 
entific validity of findings derived from 
captive populations may be of questionable 
generalizability in the context of the 
imposed constraints under which such 
participants may live (255,256). 
 
PRIVACY. The privacy of findings from 
research on biomarkers of susceptibility has 
perhaps a higher level of personal concern 
than other personal data. Because such 
research can have profound ramifications, 
not only for the research participant him/ 
herself, but also for his/her family (i.e., sib- 
lings and offspring), special attention must 
be given to respecting the participant's 
right to privacy. In research settings gener- 
ally, as well as in practice, some level of 
uncertainty is associated with the findings 
from susceptibility studies. The confidence 
with which highly sensitive information 
can be shared with the person to whom it 
directly relates is not always optimal. The 
question, therefore, of whether to share 
this information (together with its uncer- 
tain interpretation) must be raised. 
Current deliberations around the principle 
of autonomy suggest that the informed 
consent process should include the option 
of whether or not the research participant 
would want to know his/her results in the 
presence of no clear interpretation. 
 
Furthermore, whether results for which 
no treatment can be offered should be pro- 
vided to research participants is a topic that 
extends to the underlying principles of 
screening, where screening should not be 
undertaken unless something can be offered 
to remediate the condition. In genetic 
marker susceptibility studies, genetic coun- 
seling can be offered; inheritable conditions 
are viewed as "treatable" through recom- 
mendations of the option of abstention or, 
more extremely, of sterilization, an option 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
724 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
that in the presence of uncertainty, could 
result in substantial harm to the individual. 
 
SECURITY. The degree to which informa- 
tion is not only to be protected (secured) by 
researchers, but also the degree to which it is 
to be shared with research participants 
should be effectively addressed in applica- 
tions for ethics review to institutional review 
boards, or human subjects/research ethics 
committees. Studies of biomarkers of sus- 
ceptibility require special attention to these 
details because of the heightened sensitivity 
associated with such findings. Indeed, owing 
to the heightened sensitivity associated with 
the information gleaned from studies into 
biomarkers of susceptibility, special care by 
scientific reviewers might include the ques- 
tion of whether or not the hypothesis or 
question being proposed by the study war- 
rants being addressed. The latter point flows 
from the social values that may or may not 
permit such questions to be addressed from 
the public purse. The question that then fol- 
lows is how to handle the private funding 
for research of a highly sensitive nature. 
 
When research is funded, researchers 
need sufficient funds to ensure data secu- 
rity and to conduct a study of adequate sta- 
tistical power. Pilot studies, while necessary 
for the formulation of a major study pro- 
posal, need to be undertaken with as much 
attention to data security issues as if they 
were full-scale studies. 
 
Concern about the public demand for 
tests that are not scientifically validated is 
especially serious for biomarker studies. 
Whereas syphilis testing remains a required 
premarital test in many countries, in part 
because a treatment is available, this is not 
the situation for many markers of suscepti- 
bility, especially genetic markers. Where 
genetic markers are not clearly inter- 
pretable, more harm than good could 
result from access to such testing; certainly, 
in the current state of development, few 
cures or treatments are possible. Until such 
time as society recognizes genetic aberra- 
tions as a part of the normal range of bio- 
logical diversity, the desire to eliminate 
that which can be eliminated within the 
constraints of respect for life will continue. 
 
RIGHT TO KNOW AND NOT TO KNOW. 
Do we have the right to know our personal 
genetic characteristics? The peculiar and 
highly sensitive nature of such knowledge 
indicates that certain limits and precau- 
tions may need to be considered in view of 
the serious potential consequences of such 
disclosures for the individual, for relatives, 
and for children. Knowledge of an individ- 
ual's genetic characteristics can, in some 
 
cases and, with some limitations, provide 
knowledge about the genetic characteristics 
of his/her relatives. 
 
We also can consider that we have the 
right not to know our own genetic charac- 
teristics, the right to a carefree life, and to 
remain ignorant about our own lot. 
Because genetic screening could lead to 
fatalistic or pathological behavior, some 
people might prefer to remain ignorant of 
this information. Such an attitude would 
deserve the same respect as the one that 
demands the most exhaustive information 
about one's state of health. If, however, off- 
spring are planned and, say, a 50% chance 
of transmission of a serious genetic defect 
exists, should the noncarrying spouse and, 
for that matter, the carrier, be forced to 
know or be provided with the information? 
 
SCIENTIFIC INTEGRITY. The importance 
of ensuring absolute integrity in scientific 
studies involving highly sensitive infor- 
mation is apparent. Hence, methods of 
laboratory procedures that minimize the 
risk of data falsification and fabrication are 
all the more important. Greater scrutiny 
(oversight) of these studies is in order. 
 
Conflicting interests must be protected 
against. These could arise in biomarker 
studies in which premature results are pub- 
lished and the public demand for the 
"new" test serves the interests of the manu- 
facturers (and its shareholders or stock- 
holders) at a time when the test results may 
cause more concern through the inability 
to interpret the results. 
 
When population-based studies are 
undertaken to determine the prevalence of 
any susceptibility factor, unlinked studies 
might be preferable by virtue of their total 
anonymity. In drawing biological speci- 
mens for these or other studies, however, 
informed consent dictates adherence also 
to the principle of veracity and fidelity in 
honoring commitments to, for example, 
privacy and to the withholding of, or the 
communication of, results. 
 
CONTINUING EDUCATION. Because pro- 
fessions are expected to be self regulating, 
the production of this document is one 
mechanism by which the continuing educa- 
tion of researchers engaged in studies of 
biomarkers of susceptibility, as well as their 
students, can be kept abreast of advances in 
the field. Constructive criticism of any of 
the ethics guides presented herein should be 
encouraged, given that societal values and 
technology differ and change over time. 
The need to engage the public and stake- 
holder interest groups in this discussion, 
while difficult, cannot be overstressed. 
 
Communication. Communicating and 
campaigning with different categories of 
scientific bodies, nonscientific bodies, and 
other concerned organizations, are as 
important as the discovery of genetic tests 
themselves. Satisfying the concerns of those 
bodies will facilitate the approval and 
application of those methods, rendering 
them more effective. 
 
The current practice of genetic tech- 
niques offered by researchers for protection, 
selection, or surveillance of susceptible per- 
sons to chemical environmental exposure 
needs to be scientifically sound with honest 
information and validated standards. 
Then these techniques can be presented for 
peer review. 
 
Researchers also should inform and 
explain such methods to important groups 
such as health authorities, general or family 
physicians, occupational health physicians, 
trade unions, legislators, and administra- 
tors. They should explain the benefits of 
the work, as well as the risk assessment 
findings and possible risk management 
approaches to be considered. Other scien- 
tific bodies and researchers can be informed 
through scientific journals, periodicals, lec- 
tures, conferences, and special symposia 
and workshops. 
 
Information to the general public using 
mass media techniques can be handled 
through the public press, radio, and tele- 
vision applying simplified, understandable, 
and uncomplicated language. Risk com- 
munication with the general public should 
be provided for in lay terms. People who 
undergo such tests can be informed or not 
informed depending on their wish to know 
or not to know. Information to family mem- 
bers, children, and siblings depends mainly 
on local values and on legal requirements. 
 
Stakeholder Involvement. As a key 
stakeholder in the development of bio- 
marker technology, the scientist is socially 
accountable. The whole question of deter- 
mining biomarkers of exposure, effects, 
and susceptibility leads to assessments of 
the health of individuals and populations 
as well as considerations of the use of biol- 
ogy in social relationships. For example, 
ethics, as a guiding narrative for those 
making scientific claims, is situated at the 
interface between the scientific discourse 
on susceptibility and the general, social 
discourse on professional ethics. Within 
ethics, ethical principles and basic human 
rights become visible. While ethical princi- 
ples include autonomy, beneficence, non- 
maleficence and distributive justice, basic 
human rights such as the right to health, 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives m Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
725 
 
BARRETT ET AL. 
 
the right to work, and the right to privacy 
emerge concurrently. 
 
As these principles and rights become 
established as collective values, it is the 
duty of-all stakeholders involved to ensure 
that they indeed are upheld. One way to 
ensure this is to maintain open lines of 
communication among the various groups 
of stakeholders. Here, the process of imple- 
menting the ethical principles of veracity 
and fidelity become clear. 
 
Science is not value neutral in that the 
direction of scientific pursuit is determined 
by a synthesis of the value of knowledge for 
its own sake and the value of knowledge 
for social benefit. All stakeholders should 
be made aware of the nature and limita- 
tions of the scientific method: that it func- 
tions by observation, hypothesis, and 
experiment and requires a tightly con- 
trolled methodology for it to provide reli- 
able results. By the same token, although 
investigating a universe that is governed by 
the absolute laws of nature, science can 
never provide an absolute result but 
phrases its conclusions on the best available 
evidence at the time. These conclusions are 
likely to change in the future as new 
hypotheses and subsequent data about the 
laws of nature are gathered. Science strives 
to minimize-but can never eliminate- 
uncertainty. For these reasons, the process 
of science must be transparent to all partic- 
ipants, including the research participants 
themselves, witnesses, and communicators 
of results. Furthermore, in the interests of 
reliability, credibility, and durability, the 
understandable demands for the premature 
release of data, drugs, and technologies 
must be resisted according to the ethical 
principle of nonmaleficence. 
 
In advocating for a position favorable 
to science, medicine, or public health, the 
scientist should retain the identity and 
adhere to the standards of science-objec- 
tivity, impartiality, and stating limitations 
and uncertainties-because the audience 
always will lend the scientist the credibility 
of science. To abandon these principles 
may endanger the stature of science in 
terms of the scientists' obligation to 
improve the state of humankind. The need 
for scientists to convey an attitude of 
"healthy scepticism" should support the 
role of science in the public interest. 
Case Studies 
 
The recognition of biomarkers in combina- 
tion with the rapid development of new 
methods in molecular genetics and analytical 
biochemistry have facilitated the screening of 
 
individuals for genetic variations of direct 
relevance for susceptibility to environmen- 
tal factors and diseases. These biomarkers 
can be analyzed at different levels, indicat- 
ing differences in metabolic conversion of 
chemicals, differences in uptake and expo- 
sure to DNA-binding chemicals, differ- 
ences in genetic effects of chemicals, and 
hereditary differences predisposing to dis- 
eases. Several case studies are used to exem- 
plify these applications. The concluding 
section of each case study attempts to draw 
out relevant ethical tensions or to highlight 
particular ethical principles. 
 
Metabolic Variation. Chemicals to 
which people are exposed are primarily 
detoxified in the liver by essentially two 
systems-one that converts chemicals with 
low water solubility to soluble metabolites 
(cytochrome P450) and one that causes con- 
jugation to glutathione (glutathione S-trans- 
ferases) and to some other compounds. 
 
Of relevance in the present context is 
the fact that both enzyme systems embrace 
genetic variants that affect the efficiency 
with which potentially harmful chemicals 
are metabolized or conjugated to innocent 
or less toxic chemical components. 
Individuals lacking or carrying variants of 
some of the genes for metabolism and con- 
jugation exhibit an increased susceptibility 
to carcinogenic chemicals in the environ- 
ment. This increased susceptibility has 
been indicated by the observation of an 
increase in the binding of the chemicals to 
DNA, the increase of cytological effects 
such as chromosome breakage, sister chro- 
matid exchange, formation of micronudei, 
and an increase of point mutations (46). 
 
The recognition of individuals who are 
subjected to a potentially increased risk of 
cancer from this exposure poses the ethical 
dilemma common to much of the present 
development of biomarker applications: 
how to prevent susceptible individuals 
(particularly those occupationally exposed) 
from being exposed to these chemicals. In 
this context, a tension appears between the 
human right to work and the ethical prin- 
ciple of nonmaleficence. To resolve this 
tension, scientists should consider more 
fully the principle of solidarity. In addi- 
tion, scientists should work in conjunction 
with public health officials who, at the 
same time, tend to uphold the principle of 
social justice. 
 
Mutations Predisposing to Human 
Diseases. In the last few years, the 
characterization of genetic factors involved 
in human disease has undergone a dramatic 
development. A great number of genes now 
 
have been localized and the DNA to a 
great extent has been sequenced. The 
human genome project, HUGO, which 
implies the sequencing of the total human 
genome can be expected to provide much 
new material in this respect. A shortcut in 
this procedure has been performed with 
"expressed sequence tag" through which 
mRNA is used instead of DNA to identify 
human coding genes. DNA of the coding 
genes is collected by enzymatic conversion 
of mRNA to cDNA. With this technique, 
the work can be focused on the 3 to 4% of 
the human DNA giving rise to genes. To 
date, about 50,000 of the 70,000 to 
100,000 genes have been identified. This 
material already has played a crucial role 
for the characterization of the mismatched 
repair genes particularly involved in human 
colorectal cancer (below). This will put the 
person concerned, the physician, and the 
administrator into a dilemma on how to 
handle such information and how to pro- 
tect the person. If the ethical rules will be 
applied and the test with its pros and cons 
explained to the person beforehand, this 
should provide reasonable resolution to 
potential dilemmas. 
 
Repeated DNA Sequences. Among 
genetic variants in the human population 
giving rise to diseases, repeated DNA 
sequences have attracted a great deal of 
attention in recent years. Repeated DNA 
sequences of relevance in this context of 
biomarkers concern amplification of cod- 
ing genes as well as short repeated 
sequences, minisatellite and microsatellite 
DNA (134). 
 
Amplification resulting in overexpres- 
sion of coding genes is a regular phenome- 
non under certain circumstances (257). 
The gene for metallothionein protects 
against heavy metals, and exposure to 
heavy metals can cause an induction and 
an amplification of this gene (258). The 
subsequent increase of the protein there- 
fore can be a biomarker for exposure to 
heavy metals like cadmium and mercury. 
 
Of pathological importance is the 
occurrence of amplification particularly of 
nuclear oncogenes such as c-myc. Such 
amplification has been suggested as a bio- 
marker of some prognosis value in breast 
cancer patients (259). 
 
An essential part of the noncoding 
DNA is built up of short, repeated 
sequences and some of that DNA exhibits 
a pronounced instability, particularly 
involving length alterations. The function 
of this DNA has been and remains 
obscure, but in recent years .several serious 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
726 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
human diseases have been associated with 
short, repeated DNA sequences, minisatel- 
lites (10-100 bp) and microsatellites 
(2-4 bp). 
 
One case of pathological connection 
with minisatellites concerns a minisatellite 
associated with the oncogene ras. Some 
rare variants of this minisatellite are associ- 
ated with multiple forms of human can- 
cers. It is thus possible to identify carriers 
of these rare minisatellite alleles that result 
in a significandy increased risk for cancer. 
 
Microsatellites are particularly impor- 
tant as biomarkers and the cause of some 
serious human neurological disorders. The 
microsatellites are linked to the actual 
genes involved in the disorders and an 
extension of the repeated DNA sequences 
above a certain number causes the disease. 
An important aspect of this process is the 
fact that the amplification tends to increase 
from one generation to the next, making 
the disease gradually more serious with 
earlier onset-"genetic anticipation." 
 
These microsatellite-linked diseases 
involve, for instance, fragile X, which is 
one of the most prevalent mental retarda- 
tion conditions, and the well-known 
Huntington's disease. Huntington's disease 
causes a neurological disintegration with 
onset usually in the age range of 40 to 
60 years. 
 
The genetic predisposition for these 
diseases is passed on to 50% of the off- 
spring and appropriate testing will predict 
disease in the offspring. Only occasionally 
has it happened that the number of 
repeated DNA sequences has diminished 
from one generation to the next. The fact 
that Huntington's disease (as well as other 
neurological diseases) is incurable poses 
many ethical problems at the individual 
and family level, such as testing the off- 
spring and other family members; offering 
prenatal diagnosis; or deciding whether or 
not abortion should be performed. 
 
Traditional debates in this area expose 
major tensions between the ethical princi- 
ples of autonomy, expressed by those 
upholding the right to choose, and non- 
maleficence, implicit in those opposing 
abortion. While this tension has not yet 
been adequately resolved, scientists as well 
as public health professionals would benefit 
from considering how developments in 
biomarker technology may have the poten- 
tial to modify this traditional tension. If all 
stakeholders involved would agree collec- 
tively about what is meant by "human life" 
and when it starts, this awareness would 
shift the traditional debate into a different 
 
ethical arena. Here, deontology guides the 
scientist to stimulate the public's awareness 
of autonomy. 
 
Repair Mutations. It has been known 
for over 25 years that a deficiency of DNA 
repair can cause cancer. The classical case 
is the recessive autosomal mutation 
Xeroderma pigmentosum, which causes a 
serious skin disease. Patients with the disease 
lack the ability to repair the DNA lesions 
caused by ultraviolet light irradiation and 
they invariably develop skin cancer. 
 
In recent years, several genes involved in 
the repair of mispaired nucleotides, mis- 
matched repair, have been characterized 
and localized (260). Mutations in these 
genes are particularly linked to an elevated 
risk of colon cancer. The mutations occur 
as heterozygotes and the tumors are 
induced as the result of the loss of the wild- 
type allele. It has been estimated that this 
mutation is carried by 1 in 200 people, and 
it thus constitutes one of the most prevalent 
human disorder mutations. Screening for 
this mutation is likely to be recommended, 
at least in families that exhibit a high rate of 
this specific colon cancer-type linked to 
deficiency of mismatched repair. Such 
screening will fulfill the purpose of avoiding 
malignant growth of tumors by regularly 
checking the colon. In addition, it is evi- 
dent that exposure to mutagenic and car- 
cinogenic agents can be expected to increase 
the risk of cancer to a greater extent in 
mutant carriers, with possible implications 
for occupational and lifestyle choices. 
 
The fact that susceptibility studies of 
colon cancer implicate family members 
poses the tension already discussed in the 
preceding section "Right to Know and Not 
to Know." Nevertheless, varying attitudes 
about genetic information-and the 
genetic information itself-should be seen 
as equally important by both the public 
health professional and the scientist. 
 
Reliability of Laboratories and 
Methods. Many of the analyses of genetic 
variants and genetic disorders at the molec- 
ular level require sophisticated laboratory 
techniques and professional knowledge to 
properly interpret the data. It is of para- 
mount importance that laboratories 
involved in such analyses are subjected to 
quality control to avoid mistakes. For 
instance, it is critical that analyses of mini- 
and microsatellite patterns in forensic med- 
icine to identify criminals is performed 
without any error-the consequences 
could otherwise be disastrous. It also has 
been pointed out that, although the chance 
of two unrelated persons having a similar 
 
genetic pattern is very remote, relationship 
has to be excluded in the analysis (261). 
On the other hand, correctly performed, 
these techniques for characterizing individ- 
uals genetically constitute invaluable tools 
in forensic medicine, paternity determina- 
tion, and epidemiological and population 
analysis. The proliferation of these tech- 
niques and tools, and their use with indi- 
viduals and populations, demand that the 
collective scientific value of quality assur- 
ance be maintained. In ethical terms, 
the principle of scientific honesty is most 
relevant in laboratory settings. 
 
Impact of Genetic Monitoring or 
Screening on Society. We are doubtless 
only in the beginning stages of the evolu- 
tion of the genetic characterization of indi- 
viduals, but already we can foresee many 
practical and ethical problems for society. 
Solutions must be developed with the ethi- 
cal and moral implications defined explic- 
itly. When social costs are involved, the 
right of autonomy over such personally sig- 
nificant data should be balanced against 
the interests of society according to, for 
example, principles derived from utilitar- 
ian, libertarian, or egalitarian theories 
of ethics. 
 
Among the pressing problems is the 
question of who will have access to the 
genetic information of individuals. The 
initial governing principle here would seem 
to be autonomy. The principle of auton- 
omy requires respect for the individual's 
right to privacy. However, a tension 
emerges when the individual's own actions 
can have a negative impact on the group. 
The tension is between the individual's 
right to privacy and the group's (or the 
community's) right to know. 
 
For example, the fact that people can 
obtain information about mutations that 
are likely to shorten their life expectancy 
may become important in securing life 
insurance. Attempts to prevent genetic 
data from reaching insurance companies 
are not likely to be successful in that insur- 
ance companies can require the right of 
access to medical records as a condition to 
considering insurability. 
 
If egalitarian theories are to be fol- 
lowed, the cost of this insurance risk would 
be shared without penalty across the pool 
of insured people. If either utilitarian or 
libertarian theories are adopted, susceptible 
persons might be excluded from the pool 
of insured, or they might be charged higher 
premiums. It could be foreseen that persons 
who know that they carry a life-shortening 
genetic condition might purchase large 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
727 
 
BARRETT ET AL. 
 
amounts of life insurance and that, in turn, 
could cause an economic deterioration of 
the insurance system. Prior consideration 
of these possibilities might help society to 
focus on the risks associated with the 
adoption of technological advances. 
 
Genetic Screening of Workers. The 
recognition that certain genetic polymor- 
phisms could be identified in humans (e.g., 
hemoglobin S, G-6-PD deficiency, xl- 
antitrypsin deficiency) and could be related 
to differential susceptibility, led Stokinger 
(262) to advocate their application in 
screening for so-called "hypersusceptible 
workers." Omenn (223) cautioned against 
the blanket application of such techniques 
as inadequately predictive of risk, and sev- 
eral critics have noted the importance of 
controlling workplace exposures instead of 
removing susceptible workers from the 
workplace (263). Although unusually sus- 
ceptible individuals would benefit from not 
being exposed to the agents that are likely 
to make them sick, this intent should not 
be used as an excuse to avoid reducing 
exposures in the workplace; nor can it be 
invoked to avoid taking differential suscep- 
tibility into account in risk assessment 
(264). Moreover, none of the genetic 
screening programs thus far proposed are 
sufficiently predictive of risk. Hence, any 
exclusion by virtue of membership in a 
genotypic class would be discriminatory, at 
least under United States law. 
 
The elimination of women of child- 
bearing age from certain occupations is 
now deemed illegal in the United States 
and represents an example of what is 
essentially genetic screening; namely, the 
elimination of persons with a particular 
genotype (XX) without regard to their 
actual susceptibility status. 
 
Ecological Ethics. The emission of 
harmful chemicals into the environment 
also should be considered from an ecotoxi- 
cological point of view. Particularly, the 
contamination of the environment with 
persistent chemicals like some chlorinated 
hydrocarbons and heavy metals can have 
serious effects on the ecosystem through 
bioaccumulation along the food chain. 
Organisms at the top of the food chain run 
the risk of acute intoxication, reproductive 
inability, and behavioral disturbances. 
These effects on the ecosystem are relevant 
for the preservation of biological diversity 
in accordance with the convention of bio- 
diversity accepted by the United Nations 
conference on environment and develop- 
ment in Rio de Janeiro, 1992. But besides 
our moral obligation to take into account 
 
effects on the ecosystem and biodiversity, 
the monitoring of ecotoxicological effects 
often can have relevance to human health. 
 
The human species is also at the top of 
the food chain and is often exposed in the 
same way as other species at this trophic 
level. The recent focus on chlorinated com- 
pounds like PCBs, DDT, and tetrachloro- 
dioxin, because of hormonal effects, may 
serve as a further warning signal for human 
beings. The deontologic duty of humans to 
serve as stewards of the environment for 
their own self interest and that of future 
generations is highlighted in this context. 
This duty enhances the right to life of 
other species. 
 
Ethical Components of Biomarker 
Project Proposals 
 
Parties responsible for biomarker studies 
need to ensure that the broad range of per- 
sons involved in the planning, implemen- 
tation, and outcome of projects (the 
stakeholders) are provided the protection 
of explicit ethical principles under which a 
project will be conducted. Persons involved 
include the study participants, the benefi- 
ciaries (including both participants and 
nonparticipants), the community (special 
and general), those gathering the data 
(researchers and surveyors), employers, 
trade unions, regulators, sponsors, and 
other potential recipients of the results. 
 
The ethical issues to be addressed 
include the following: 
 
* autonomy of the participant in partici- 
 
pating, including fully informed consent 
* beneficence of the project for the 
 
persons and institutions affected 
 
* absence of maleficence toward the 
 
participants and institutions affected 
 
* assurance of justice (equity among 
 
participants and nonparticipants) 
 
* test validity as a function of the target 
 
population, including consideration of 
the degree of risk, exposure, and other 
factors 
 
* explicit provisions to ensure equal 
 
access to participation across race, social 
class, and gender as appropriate to the 
attribute under study 
 
* nonabridgement of deontologic (duty- 
 
based) obligations of the participants 
* scientific integrity and soundness 
 
* confidentiality and security of data, 
 
including anonymity and nonlinkage to 
the individual 
 
* referral for treatment and counseling for 
 
a significant incidental medical finding 
 
h assurance that a recognized public 
health or legal risk will be reported 
 
* formulated response to anticipated 
 
questions about biomarker findings 
 
* identification and allocation of legal 
 
liability 
 
* formats and pathways for communicat- 
 
ing study results, including publication, 
media and employer 
 
* sponsorship, conflict of interest; clear 
 
understanding of deliverables warranted 
for funding received 
 
* action to be taken in the event of an 
 
untoward finding, including employ- 
ment status 
 
* future mutual obligations of partici- 
 
pants in the event of new developments. 
Condusions 
 
A number of conclusions can be drawn, 
particularly the following: 
 
a) Because the issues contained herein 
are from the scientist's perspective, the 
attention of other stakeholders is called for. 
 
b) The positive aspects of biomarker 
technologies must be emphasized without 
failing to recognize the potential for their 
misuse. 
 
c) There is a need to continue research 
to produce better evidence concerning sus- 
ceptibility markers while simultaneously 
protecting against any misuse of premature 
or tentative evidence. 
 
d) The active participation of the pub- 
lic is to be sought in a partnership capacity 
to ensure the advancement of knowledge 
concerning biomarkers for identifying 
susceptible people and populations. 
 
e) It must be recognized that science is 
imperfect. Uncertainty is inherent to the 
scientific method and varies as a function 
of the evolution of scientific knowledge. 
 
f) The imperfections of science require 
humility on the part of scientists. Science is 
but one part of a number of inputs for 
decision making. 
 
g) For every decision that is made, the 
tension between risk and benefit should be 
considered. 
 
h) Good science should be tied to good 
ethics and vice versa. 
 
i) An unintended consequence of 
biomarker technology is that individuals 
and populations could be discriminated 
against. 
 
j) Until the scientists involved with 
developing a new susceptibility biomarker 
technology have declared it adequately 
reliable and accurate and after full peer 
review, the public should be protected 
from commercial interests that wish to pre- 
maturely release the technology into the 
market place. 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
728 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
Recommendations 
 
Participants in preparing this report make 
the following recommendations: 
 
a) Because a multidisciplinary group 
assessed the ethical dimensions of each 
respective subspecialty discipline, this 
report ought to carry some authoritative 
weight in the context of professional ethics. 
 
b) Professionals and their students need 
to engage in an ongoing dialogue concern- 
ing applied ethics. 
 
c) Legislation needs to be developed to 
protect all interests against liability that 
could be judged in hindsight arising from 
changes in ethical standards and scientific 
knowledge over time (i.e., against retro- 
spective tort action in soundly conducted 
studies because of intervening changes in 
social and ethical standards or advances in 
scientific knowledge). 
 
d) There is a need for guidelines 
concerning biomarker susceptibility studies 
for use by researchers and practitioners alike, 
which also would be of use in the training of 
students. Other agencies that have engaged 
in related deliberations (such as those con- 
cerning the Human Genome Project and 
the U.S. Office of Technology Assessment), 
should be sought out for collaboration since 
they have developed guidelines in the area 
and related areas. 
 
e) Every research proposal in the 
area of biomarker susceptibility should 
address the ethical dimensions of the pro- 
posed study. In addition, strategies for 
communication, from peer review through 
individuals and the public, should be doc- 
umented. Studies in biomarker susceptibil- 
ity should be audited for adherence to 
proposed intentions. 
 
f) Scientists must be vigilant in 
developing ethics guidelines in that they 
should ensure equity across all segments of 
society. All guidelines should be sensitive 
to cultural differences. 
 
g) Because of the extremely sensitive 
(i.e., intimately personal) nature of the 
information gleaned from biomarker 
susceptibility studies, extraordinary pre- 
cautions relating to the privacy of the 
information are to be exercised. 
 
h) Specific guidelines on how industry 
and insurance companies might deal with 
individuals discovered to have a suscepti- 
bility are beyond the scope of this text. 
However, attention is drawn to this since 
guidelines in these specific areas may be 
aided by the discussion contained in 
this section. 
 
Appendix 
 
Analysis and Quality 
Assurance 
 
Laboratory results are only useful if they are 
accurate and precise, and are reported in a 
responsible manner. Accuracy refers to the 
ability of the analyst to determine the exact 
quantity present in a sample. Precision refers 
to the ability to provide a consistent result 
(which may not necessarily be accurate, if 
for example, there is a failure in calibration). 
QA represents the sum total of activities that 
are required to produce reliable results (good 
precision and accuracy). In terms of labora- 
tory analysis it includes setting data quality 
objectives on the one hand and evaluating 
quality control measures on the other. 
Stating a data quality objective consistent 
with the goals of the screening program or 
study is a necessary first step. Lack of 
resources or power sufficient to meet these 
objectives is grounds for not doing the 
study. Excessive power increases the cost. 
 
Standard QC procedures have been 
well documented. Most published method- 
ologies include QC procedures which must 
be individualized for each laboratory and 
each analytic instrument and procedure. 
Each laboratory must have a written 
QA/QC statement and protocol. These 
should be very detailed, including, for 
example, assurance that the deionized 
water is free of analytes in question, at least 
within the limits of detection required. 
Similarly, the purity of the solvents and 
reagents and the source of all standards 
should be specified. 
 
Calibration procedures should use 
blanks and fresh standards within the range 
of anticipated concentrations. (One can 
only assume that a method yields linear 
results within the range of the calibration 
curve). The method detection limit should 
be specified for each analyte in each matrix 
(blood, urine, hair, etc). Field and method 
blanks should assure that there is no conta- 
mination at any point in the collection and 
analysis of samples. Spiked samples should 
assure that the technique can recover the 
analyte from the matrix. This allows one to 
document the percent recovery of the spike 
from the sample. Unless otherwise speci- 
fied, it is customary to require that each 
analytic run produce a recovery between 85 
and 115% of the actual spike. For some 
analytes it is difficult to achieve this level of 
accuracy on certain instruments, while for 
others tighter limits are routine. If recovery 
lies outside a certain range of values, then 
the entire run is rejected, and the stored 
samples are redigested and reanalyzed. 
Alternatively, some procedures allow the 
correction of the analytic results by the 
recovery percent. Thus if the recovery is 
only 80% of the spike, the results can be 
multiplied by 1.25 to correct for the defi- 
ciency. This approach is much less desir- 
able and should be avoided, unless there is 
no further material available for analysis or 
unless the method repeatedly results in a 
similar recovery. 
 
Each laboratory should participate 
regularly in a proficiency testing program 
 
involving the blind analysis of unknown 
samples provided by a reference laboratory. 
The results of such testing should be main- 
tained with the QA/QC documents and 
should be available for inspection. 
 
Challenges for 
 
Susceptibility Monitoring 
in Developing Nations 
 
In many cases through international coop- 
eration, developing nations are able to 
mount sophisticated screening programs 
for environmental as well as infectious 
agents. For example, the Mexican govern- 
ment, with the support of several interna- 
tional agencies such as United Nations 
Environmental Program, has been able to 
evaluate the exposure and possible effects 
of chemicals on human health for both 
acute and long-term exposures (Table Al). 
However, such programs can only touch 
the surface of the environmental pollution 
problems present throughout the world. 
Moreover, at the same time that indus- 
trialization is increasing in areas with 
minimal environmental regulation and 
enforcement, the developed nations are 
cutting back on funding for international 
cooperative programs. 
 
Guidelines for the 
Implementation 
 
of Biomarker Studies 
 
In any program the number of guidelines 
should be considered in implementing any 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
729 
 
BARRETT ET AL. 
 
Table Al. Assessment of exposure using various approaches: examples from Mexico. 
 
Exposures Monitoring level Test 
Acute 
 
Chlorine gas tank leak, Mexico City Clinical Spirometry 
 
Smelter emissions, El Paso, Texas Blood level Lead, cadmium, zinc 
Metal exposure (1 0-year followup) conduction Neurological Peroneal nerve 
 
Blood level Lead, cadmium, zinc 
Cows raised on farmland with high natural Food chain As in milk 
 
arsenic content exposure 
Chronic 
 
Studies of air pollution prevalence,a Mexico City Questionnaire symptom 
 
Studies of air pollution, Mexico City Clinical Vital capacity in children 
International 1 0-city study of lead exposure Blood lead level 
 
in schoolteachers 
 
Study of schoolteacher exposure, Mexico City Environmental media Air, food, water, soil, 
 
cooking pottery 
Organochlorine pesticide exposures in Breast milk DDT and other 
 
representative sample of women, Mexico City organochlorines 
 
Carbon monoxide levels in workers exposed Blood Carboxyhemoglobin 
 
on streets, Mexico City 
 
"Daily frequency of respiratory symptoms in elderly or chronically ill people. 
 
screening program for biomarkers. These 
guidelines should include the following: 
Overali Quality Planning 
 
a) The economic resources available for 
 
the program must be identified. 
 
b) The benefits of the program must be 
 
justified to assure adequate funding. 
 
c) The intervention must be specified and 
 
funds identified in advance, if possible. 
 
d) Where resources are not available for 
 
the "best" methodology, the use of 
alternative tests must be evaluated. 
Quality Assurance 
 
a) The screening protocol should include 
 
a statement of the data objectives and 
the required detection limits, the antici- 
pated range of values, and the accept- 
able limits for precision and accuracy. 
 
b) High quality laboratories should be 
 
identified. 
 
c) All participating laboratories should 
 
have a written QA/QC document 
which should include documentation 
of participation in some Laboratory 
Proficiency program. 
 
d) The protocol should allow for an inter- 
 
nal QC program including blind repli- 
cates and confirmation of some 
percentage of the samples by an exter- 
nal reference laboratory. 
 
e) Data quality evaluation should be com- 
 
pleted prior to data analysis. 
 
Standards for Collection of Samples 
 
a) The population to be studied should be 
 
clearly identified and the people to be 
screened should be representative of the 
population of interest (minimize con- 
founders). 
 
b) All personnel should be selected care- 
 
fully and should be conscientious and 
responsible. 
 
c) All personnel (registrars, interviewers, 
 
phlebotomists, etc.) should be carefully 
trained and periodically evaluated. 
 
d) Field sampling conditions should be 
 
made as ideal as possible. Use extreme 
precautions to avoid contaminating 
samples of blood, urine, etc. at the time 
of collection. 
 
e) Care must be taken in the transporta- 
 
tion of samples from the field to the 
 
central laboratory, particularly if sam- 
ples require freezing or refrigeration. 
 
f) All samples must be carefully and accu- 
 
rately labeled and a chain-of-custody 
form may be desirable for certain study 
situations. 
 
Laboratory Standards and Practices 
 
a) High-quality laboratory facilities are 
 
essential. 
 
b) Where possible, a laboratory that is 
 
already functioning and of proven qual- 
ity should be used. 
 
c) Whether old or new, laboratories 
 
should be designed to eliminate both 
external and internal sources of conta- 
mination. This requires high standards 
of design and maintenance. 
 
d) Laboratory equipment should be appro- 
 
priate for the analyses being performed. 
 
e) The appropriate preservation of sam- 
 
ples is important, so facilities should 
have reliable refrigeration, preferably 
with a backup source of emergency 
electricity (gasoline generator). 
 
f) All laboratory personnel should be 
 
trained; usually this will require train- 
ing at an analytic center in a major city 
or outside the country. Training should 
embody the general principles of labo- 
ratory QA/QC and should also be rele- 
vant to the equipment available for use 
in the laboratory. 
 
g) All results should be carefully checked 
 
for internal consistency. Deviant results 
should be repeated. 
 
h) Laboratory supervision should be strict 
 
and consistent to assure high quality data. 
Results 
 
a) There should be adequate computing 
 
facilities and trained personnel for 
analysis of data. 
 
b) All individual results should be treated 
 
as confidential and individuals should 
be informed of their own results with 
adequate information as medically 
appropriate. 
 
c) The suppression of results for economic or 
 
political reasons is strongly discouraged. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. International Programme on Chemical Safety. Biomarkers and 
 
Risk Assessment: Concepts and Principles. In: Environmental 
Health Criteria 155. Geneva:World Health Organization, 
1993. 
 
2. NAS. Biological Markers in Reproductive Toxicology. Report of 
 
the Oversight Committee. Washington:National Academy 
Press, 1989;15-35. 
 
3. Nebert DW, Nelson DR. P450 gene nomenclature based on 
 
evolution. In: Cytochrome P450, Methods in Enzymology. Vol 
206 (Waterman MR, Johnson EF, eds). Orlando, FL:Academic 
Press, 1991;3-11. 
 
4. WHO. IPCS Environmental Health Criteria 155. Biomarkers 
 
and Risk Assessment: Concepts and Principles. Geneva:World 
Health Organization, 1993. 
 
730 Environmental Health Perspectives - Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
5. Jeyaratnam J. Occupational Health in Developing Countries. 
 
Oxford:Oxford University Press, 1982. 
 
6. Mendelsohn ML, Peeters JP, Normandy MJ. Biomarkers and 
 
Occupational Health: Progress and Perspectives. Washington: 
Joseph Henry Press, 1995. 
 
7. Lauwerys R, Buchet JP, Roels H. The relationship between cad- 
 
mium exposure or body burden and the concentration of cad- 
mium in blood and urine in man. Inter Arch Occup Environ 
Health 36:275-285 (1976). 
 
8. Lauwerys RR. Objectives of biological monitoring in occupa- 
 
tional health practice. In: Biological Monitoring and Surveillance 
of Workers Exposed to Chemicals (Aitio A, Riihimaki V, Vanio 
H, eds). New York.Hemisphere Publishing Company, 1984;3-6. 
9. van Schooten FJ, Hillebrand MJX, van Leewen FE, van 
 
Zandwij N, Jansen HM, den Engelse L, Kriek E. Polycyclic aro- 
matic hydrocarbon-DNA adducts in white blood cells from 
lung cancer patients: no correlation with adduct levels in lung. 
Carcinogenesis 13:987-993 (1992). 
 
10. Zielhuis RL. Theoretical and practical consideration in biologi- 
 
cal monitoring. In: Biological Monitoring and Surveillance of 
Workers Exposed to Chemicals (Aitio A, Riihimaki V, Vanio 
H, eds). New York:Hemisphere Publishing, 1984;7-18. 
 
11. Hemminki K. DNA adducts and mutations in occupational and 
 
environmental biomonitoring. Environ Health Perspect 
105(Suppl 4):823-827 (1997). 
 
12. Costa M, Zhitkovich A, Toniele P. DNA-protein cross-links in 
 
welders: molecular implications. Cancer Res 53:460-465 
(1991). 
 
13. Annest JL, Mahaffey KR. Blood lead levels for persons ages 6 
 
months-74 years, in the United States, 1976-1980. DHHS 
84-1683. Washington:U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services. 
 
14. Noren K. Studies of organochlorine contaminants in human 
 
milk. PhD Dissertation. Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, 1987. 
15. Soskolne CL. Ethical, social, and legal issues surrounding 
 
studies of susceptible populations and individuals. Environ 
Health Perspect 105(Suppl 4):837-841 (1997). 
 
16. Baselt R. Biological Monitoring Methods for Industrial 
 
Chemicals. Davis,CA.Biomedical Publications, 1988. 
 
17. Hernberg. Lead. In: Biological Monitoring and Surveillance of 
 
Workers Exposed to Chemicals (Aitio A, Riihimaki V, Vainio 
H, eds). New York:Hemisphere Publishing, 1984. 
 
18. Kosnett MJ. Factors influencing bone-lead concentration in a 
 
suburban community assessed by non-invasive K X-ray fluores- 
cence. JAMA 271:197-203 (1994). 
 
19. Romieu I, Carreon T, Lopez L, Palazuelos E, Rios C, Manuel Y, 
 
Hernandez-Avila M. Environmental urban lead exposure and 
blood lead levels in children of Mexico City. Environ Health 
Perspect 103(11):1036-1040 (1995). 
 
20. Lindstedt G, Gottberg I, Holmgren B, Jonsson T, Karlsson G. 
 
Individual mercury exposure of chloralkalai workers and its rela- 
tion to blood and urine mercury levels. Scand J Work Environ 
Health 5:59-69 (1979). 
 
21. Giovanoli-Jakubczak T, Greenwood MR, Smith JC, Clarkson 
 
TW. Determination of total and inorganic mercury in hair by 
flameless atomic absorption, and of methylmercury by gas chro- 
matography. Clin Chem 20:222-229 (1974). 
 
22. Bernard A, Lauwerys R. Cadmium, NAG activity, and 2- 
 
microglobulin in the urine of cadmium pigment workers. Br J 
Ind Med 46:679-680 (1989). 
 
23. Vartsky D, Ellis KJ, Chen NS, Cohn SH. A facility for in vivo 
 
measurement of kidney and liver cadmium by neutron capture 
prompt y-ray analysis. Phys Med Biol 20:88-95 (1975). 
 
24. Jeyaratnam J. Acute pesticide poisoning: a major global health 
 
problem. World Health Stat Q43:139-144 (1990). 
 
25. WHO. Safe Use of Pesticides. 20th Report of the Expert 
 
Committee. WHO Technical Report Ser 513. Geneva:World 
Health Organization, 1973. 
 
26. Anwar WA. Biomarkers of human exposure to pesticides. 
 
Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl 4):801-806 (1997). 
 
27. Coye MJ, Lowe JA, Maddy KJ. Biological monitoring of agri- 
 
cultural workers exposed to pesticides. II: Monitoring of intact 
 
pesticides and their metabolites. J Occup Med 28:628-636 
(1986). 
 
28. Wolfe HR, Durham WF, Armstrong JF. Urinary excretion of 
 
insecticide metabolites. Excretion of para-nitrophenol and DDA 
as indicators of exposure to parathion. Arch Environ Health 
27:711-716 (1970). 
 
29. Comer SW, Staiff DC, Armstrong JF, Wolfe HR. Exposure of 
 
workers to carbaryl. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 13:385-391 
(1975). 
 
30. IARC. Occupational Exposures in Insecticide Application, and 
 
Some Pesticides In: IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the 
Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Humans. Vol 53. 
Lyon:International Agency for Research on Cancer, 1991. 
 
31. Walker CH. Biochemical responses as indicators of toxic effects of 
 
chemicals in ecosystems. Toxicol Lett 64-65:P527-533 (1992). 
 
32. Shugart LR, Adams SM, Jiminez BD, Talmage SS, McCarthy 
 
JF. Biological markers to study exposure in animals and 
bioavailability of environmental contaminants. In: Biological 
Monitoring or Pesticide Exposure. Measurement, Estimation 
and Risk Reduction. ACS Symposium Ser 382 (Wang RGM, 
ed). Washington:American Chemical Society, 1989;85-97. 
 
33. WHO/UNEP. Public Health Impact of Pesticides Used in 
 
Agriculture. Geneva:World Health Organization, 1990. 
 
34. Ciesielski S, Loomis DP, Mims SR, Auer A. Pesticide exposures, 
 
cholinesterase depression, and symptoms among North 
Carolina migrant farmworkers. Am J Public Health 
84(3):446-51 (1994). 
 
35. Elovaara E, Heikkila P, Pyy L, Mutanen P, Riihiamki V. 
 
Significance of dermal and respiratory uptake in creosote work- 
ers: exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and urinary 
excretion of 1-hydroxypyrene. Occup Environ Med 
52:192-203 (1995). 
 
36. 0vreb0 S, Fjeldstad PE, Grzybowska E, Kure EH, Chorazy M, 
 
Haugen A. Biological monitoring of polycyclic aromatic hydro- 
carbon exposure in a highly polluted area of Poland. Environ 
Health Perspect 103:838-843 (1995). 
 
37. Jongeneelen F. Biological monitoring of occupational exposure 
 
to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Nijmegen, Netherlands: 
Scientific Publishers, 1987. 
 
38. Lucas J, Tenjun T, Straume T, Pinkel D, Moore D, Litt M, 
 
Gray J. Rapid determination of human chromosome transloca- 
tion frequency using a pair of chromosome-specific DNA prob- 
lems. IntJ Radiat Biol 56:35-44 (1989). 
 
39. Kelsey KT, Wiencke JK, Liber HL. Biomarkers to detect radia- 
 
tion exposures. In: Biomarkers and Occupational Health: 
Progress and Perspectives (Mendelsohn ML, Peeters JP, 
Normandy M, eds). Washington:Joseph Henry Press, 
1995;215-225. 
 
40. Evans HJ Human peripheral blood lymphocytes for the analysis 
 
of chromosome aberrations in mutagen tests. In: Handbook of 
Mutagenicity Test Procedures, 2nd ed (Kilbey BJ, Legator M, 
Nichols W, Ramel C, eds). Amsterdam:Elsevier, 1984;405-427. 
41. Rosin MP. The use of the micronucleus test on exfoliated cells 
 
to identify anti-clastogenic action in humans: a biological 
marker for the efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents. Mutat Res 
267:265-276 (1992). 
 
42. Anwar WA, Rosin MP. Reduction in chromosomal damage in 
 
schistosomiasis patients after treatment with praziquantel. 
Mutat Res 298:179-185 (1993). 
 
43. Lahdetie J. Occupation- and exposure-related studies on human 
 
sperm. J Occup Med 37:922-930 (1995). 
 
44. Hagmar L, Br0gger A, Hansteen I-L, Heim S, Hogstedt B, 
 
Knudsen L, Lambert B, Linnainmaa K, Nordenson I, 
Reuterwall C et al. Cancer risk in humans predicted by 
increased levels of chromosomal aberrations in lymphocytes: 
Nordic Study Group on the Health Risks of Chromosome 
Damage. Cancer Res 54:2919-2922 (1994). 
 
45. Bonassi S, Abbondandolo A, Camurri L, Dal Pri L, De Ferrari M, 
 
Degrassi F, Forni A, Lamberti L, Lando C, Padovani P et al. Are 
chromosome aberrations in circulating lymphocytes predictive of 
future cancer onset in humans? Preliminary results of an Italian 
Cohort Study. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 79:133-135 (1995). 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 731 
 
BARRETT ET AL. 
 
46. Norppa H. Cytogenetic markers of susceptibility: influence of 
 
genetic polymorphisms of xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes. 
Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl 4):829-835 (1997). 
 
47. Wiencke JK, Pemble S, Ketterer B, Kelsey KT. Gene deletion of 
 
glutathione S-transferase: correlation with induced genetic dam- 
age and potential role in endogenous mutagenesis. Cancer 
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 4:253-259 (1995). 
 
48. Lucas JN, Tenjin T, Straume T, Pinkel D, Moore D, Litt M, 
 
Gray, JW. Rapid human chromosome aberration analysis using 
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Int J Radiat Biol 56:35-44 
(1989). 
 
49. Rupa DS, Hasegawa L, Eastmond DA. Detection of chromoso- 
 
ma1 breakage in the 1 cen- 1 qi 2 region of interphase human lym- 
phocytes using multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization with 
tandem DNA probes. Cancer Res 55:640-645 (1995). 
 
50. Smith MT, Rothman N, Zhang L, Wang Y, Hayes RB, Yin SN. 
 
Molecular cytogenetics of humans exposed to benzene. Fundam 
Appl Toxicol 30 (No 1, part 1; Su 1:178 (1996). 
 
51. Lipkowitz S, Garry VF, Kirsch IR. Interlocus V-J recombina- 
 
tion measures genomic instability in agriculture workers at risk 
for lymphoi d malignancies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
89:5301-5305 (1992). 
 
52. Bell DA, Liu Y, Cortopassi GA. Occurrence of bcl-2 oncogene 
 
translocation with increased frequency in the peripheral b ood 
of heavy smokers. J Natl Cancer Inst 87:223-224 (1995). 
 
53. Wiencke JK, Wrensch MR, Miike R, Petrakis NL. Individual 
 
susceptibility to induced chromosome damage and its implica- 
tions for detecting genotoxic exposures in human populations. 
Cancer Res 51:5266-5269 (1991b). 
 
54. Cervenka J, Hirsch BA. Cytogenetic differentiation of Fanconi 
 
anemia, "idiopathic" aplastic anemia, and Fanconi anemia het- 
erozygotes. Am J Med Genet 15:211-223 (1983). 
 
55. Wiencke JK, Christiani DC, Kelsey KT. Bimodal distribution 
 
of sensitivity to SCE induction by diepoxybutane in human 
lymphocytes. I: Correlation with chromosomal aberrations. 
Mutat Res 248:17-26 (1991a). 
 
56. Sorsa M, Osterman-Golkar S, Peltonen K, Saarikoski S, Sram 
 
R. Assessment of exposure to butadiene in the process industry. 
Toxicology 113:77-83 (1996). 
 
57. Norppa H, Hirvonen A, Jarventaus H, Uuskula M, Tasa G, 
 
Ojajarvi A, Sorsa M. Role of GSTTJ and GSTMI genotypes in 
determining individual sensitivity to sister chromatid exchange 
induction by diepoxybutane in cultured human lymphocytes. 
Carcinogenesis 16:1261-1264 (1995). 
 
58. Tucker JD, Auletta A., Cimino MC, Dearfield KL, Jacobson- 
 
Kram D, Tice RT, Carrano AV. Sister-chromatid exchange: sec- 
ond report of the Gene-Tox program. Mutat Res 297:101-180 
(1993). 
 
59. Oikawa A, Sakai S, Horaguchi K, Tohda H. Sensitivities of 
 
peripheral lymphocytes from healthy humans to induction of 
sister chromatid exchanges by chemicals. Cancer Res 
43:439-442 (1983). 
 
60. Kelsey KT, Christiani DC, Wiencke JK. Bimodal distribution 
 
of sensitivity to SCE induction by diepoxybutane in human 
lymphocytes. II. Relationship to baseline SCE frequency. Mutat 
Res 248:27-33 (1991). 
 
61. Hallier E, Langhof T, Dannappel D, Leutbecher M, Schroder 
 
K, Goergens HW, Muller A, Bolt HM. Polymorphism of glu- 
tathione conjugation of methyl bromide, ethylene oxide and 
dichloromethane in human blood: influence on the induction of 
sister chromatid exchanges (SCE) in lymphocytes. Arch Toxicol 
67:173-178 (1993). 
 
62. Kelsey KT, Wiencke JK, Ward J, Bechtold W, Fajen J. Sister 
 
chromatid exchanges, glutathione S-transferase deletion and 
cytogenetic sensitivity to diepoxybutane in lymphocytes from 
butadiene monomer production workers. Mutat Res 
335:267-273 (1995). 
 
63. Uuskiila M, Jarventaus H, Hirvonen A, Sorsa M, Norppa H. 
 
Influence of GSTM1 genotype on sister chromatid exchange 
induction by styrene-7,8-oxide and 1,2-epoxy-3-butene in cul- 
tured human lymphocytes. Carcinogenesis 16:947-950 
(1995). 
 
64. Landi S, Ponzanelli I, Hirvonen A, Norppa H, Barale R. 
 
Repeated analysis of sister chromatid exchange induction by 
diepoxybutane in cultured human lymphocytes: effect of glu- 
tathione S-transferase TI and MI genotype. Mutat Res 
351:79-85 (1996). 
 
65. Norppa H, Pelin K, Jarventaus H, Ollikainen T, Knudsen L, 
 
OkkeIs H, Scarpato R, Migliore L, Hirvonen A. Polymorphisms 
of xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes: influence on cytogenetic 
parameters in vitro and in vivo. In: The 4th Nordic Toxicology 
Meeting, 27-31 March 1996, Storlien, Sweden. Abstract. 
 
66. Pelin K, Hirvonen A, Norppa, H. Influence of erythrocyte glu- 
 
tathione S-transferase TI on sister chromatid exchanges induced 
by diepoxybutane in cultured human lymphocytes. Mutagenesis 
11:213-215 (1996). 
 
67. Cheng T-J, Christiani DC, Xu X, Wain JC, Wiencke JK, Kelsey 
 
KT. Glutathione S-transferase genotype, diet, and smoking as 
determinants of sister chromatid exchange frequency in lympho- 
cytes. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 4:535-542 (1995). 
 
68. van Poppel G, de Vogel N, van Balderen J, Kok FJ. Increased 
 
cytogenetic damage in smokers deficient in glutathione S-trans- 
ferase isozyme. Carcinogenesis 13:303-305 (1992). 
 
69. Morimoto K, Takeshita T, Imayyoshi S, Mure K, Inoue C. Low 
 
Km aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH2) polymorphism and chro- 
mosome alterations in alcohol drinkers. In: 2nd International 
Conference on Environmental Mutagens in Human 
Populations, 20-25 August 1995, Prague. Abstract. 
 
70. Heddle JA, Cimino MC, Hayashi M, Romagna F, Shelby MD, 
 
Tucker JD, Vanparys Ph, MacGregor JT. Micronuclei as an 
index of cytogenetic damage: past, present, and future. Environ 
Mol Mutagen 18:277-291 (1991). 
 
71. Fenech M, Morley AA. Measurement of micronuclei in lym- 
 
phocytes. Mutat Res 147:29-36 (1985). 
 
72. Thomson EJ, Perry PE. The identification of micronucleated 
 
chromosomes: a possible assay for aneuploidy. Mutagenesis 
7:407-410 (1988). 
 
73. Norppa H, Renzi L, Lindholm C. Detection of whole chromo- 
 
somes in micronuclei of cytokinesis-blocked human lympho- 
cytes by antikinetochore staining and in situ hybridization. 
Mutagenesis 8:519-525 (1993). 
 
74. Norppa H, Luomahaara S, Heikanen H, Roth S, Sorsa M, 
 
Renzi L, Lindholm C. Micronucleus assay in lymphocytes as a 
tool to biomonitor human exposure to aneuploidogens and clas- 
togens. Environ Health Perspect 101(Suppl 3):139-143 (1993). 
75. Richard F, Muleris M, Dutrillaux B. The frequency of micronu- 
 
clei with X chromosomes increases with age in human females. 
Mutat Res 316: 1-7 (1994). 
 
76. Catalin J, Autio K, Wessman M, Lindholm C, Knuutila S, 
 
Sorsa M, Norpp a H. Age-associated micronuclei containing 
centromeres and the X chromosome in lymphocytes of women. 
Cytogenet Cell Genet 68:11-16 (1995). 
 
77. Nath J, Tucker JD, Hando JC. Y chromosome aneuploidy, 
 
micronuclei, kinetochores and aging men. Chromosoma 
103:725-731 (1995). 
 
78. Ballarin G, Sarto F, Giacomelli C, Bartolucci GB, Clonofero E. 
 
Micronucleated cells in nasal mucosa of formaldehyde-exposed 
workers. Mutat Res 280:1-7 (1992). 
 
79. McGinniss MJ, Nicklas JA, Albertini RA. Molecular analyses of 
 
in vivo hprt mutations in human T-lymphocytes. IV: Studies in 
newborns. Environ Mol Mutagen 14:229-237 (1989). 
 
80. Cole J, Skopek RT. Somatic mutation frequency, mutation rates 
 
and mutational spectra in the human population. Mutat Res 
304:33-105 (1994). 
 
81. Perera FP, Dickey C, Santella R, O'Neill JPO, Albertini RJ, 
 
Ottman R, Tsai WY, Mooney LA, Savela K, Hemminki K. 
Carcinogen-DNA adducts and gene mutation in foundry work- 
ers with low-level exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. 
Carcinogenesis 15:2905-2910 (1994). 
 
82. Perera FP, Tang DL, O'Neill JP, Bigbee WL, Albertini RJ, 
 
Santella R, Ottman R, Tsai, WY, Dickey C, Mooney LA. 
HPRT and glycophorin A mutations in foundry workers: rela- 
tionship to PAH exposure and to PAH-DNA adducts. 
Carcinogenesis 14:969-973 (1993). 
 
732 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 - June 1997 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
$3. Hou S-M, Lambert B, Hemminki K. Relationship between 
 
HPRTmutant frequency, aromatic DNA adducts and geno- 
types for GSTMI and NAT2 in bus maintenance workers. 
Carcinogenesis 16:1913-1917 (1995). 
 
84. Langlois RJ, Bigbee WL, Kyoizumi SK, Nakamura N, Bean 
 
MA, Akiyama M, Jensen RW. Evidence for increased somatic 
cell mutations at the glycophorin A locus in atomic bomb sur- 
vivors. Science 236:445-448 (1987). 
 
85. Langlois RG, Nisbet BA, Bigbee WL, Ridinger DN, Jensen RH. 
 
An improved flow cytometric assay for somatic mutations at the 
glycophorin A locus in humans. Cytometry 11:513-521 (1990). 
 
86. Grant SG, Bigbee WL. In vivo somatic mutation and segrega- 
 
tion at the human glycophorin A (GPA) locus: phenotypic vari- 
ation encompassing both gene-specific an chromosomal 
mechanisms. Mutat Res 288:163-172 (1993). 
 
87. Bigbee WL, Grant SG, Langlois RC, Jensen RH, Anttila A, 
 
Pfaffli P, Pekari K, Norppa H. Glycophorin A (GPA) somatic 
cell mutation frequencies in Finnish reinforced plastics workers 
exposed to styrene. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 
5:801-810 (1996). 
 
88. Langlois AM, Lockhart AM, Watson MA, Thopson CL, Bell 
 
DA. Evidence that GSTTf affects the induction o cophorin A 
variant cells in smokers. Environ Mol Mutagen 27(Suppl 27):39 
(1996). 
 
89. Bos JL, Verlaan-de Vries M, Jansen AM, Veeneman GH, van 
 
Boom JH, van der Eb AJ. Three different mutations in codon 
61 of the human N-ras gene detected by synthetic oligonu- 
cleotide hybridization. Nucleic Acids Res 12:9155-9163 
(1984). 
 
90. Balmain A, Brown K. Oncogene activation in chemical carcino- 
 
genesis. Adv Cancer Res 51:147-182 (1988). 
 
91. Hollstein M, Sidransky D, Vogelstein B, Harris CC. p53 
 
Mutations in human cancers. Science 253:49-53 (1991). 
 
92. Harris CC, Hollstein M. Clinical implications of the p53 
 
tumor-suppressor gene. N Engl J Med 329:1318-1327 (1993). 
 
93. Puisieux A, Lim S, Groopman J, Ozturk M. Selective targeting 
 
of the p53 gene mutational hotspots in human cancers by etio- 
logically defined carcinogens. Cancer Res 51:6185-6189 
(1991). 
 
94. Biggs PJ, Warren W, Venitt S, Stratton MR. Does a genotoxic 
 
carcinogen contribute to human breast cancer? The value of 
mutational spectra in unraveling the aetiology of cancer. 
Mutagenesis 8:275-283 (1993). 
 
95. Aguilar F, Hussain SP, Cerutti P. Aflatoxin B1 induces the 
 
transversion of G -> T in codon 249 of the p53 tumor suppres- 
sor gene in human hepatocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
90:8586-8590 (1993). 
 
96. Aguilar F, Harris CC, Sun T, Hollstein M, Cerutti P. 
 
Geographical variation of p53 mutational profile in nonmalig- 
nant human liver. Science 264:1317-1319 (1994). 
 
97. Almstad P, Hussain SP, Cerutti P. Ultraviolet B light-induced 
 
mutagenesis of p53 hotspot codon 248 and 249 in human skin 
fibroblasts. Mol Carcinog 10:181-188 (1994). 
 
98. Esteve A, Srlie T, Martel-Planche G, Hollstein M, Kusters I, 
 
Lewalter J, Vineis P, Stephan-Odenthal, Montesano R. 
Screening for p53 gene mutations in archived tumors of workers 
occupationally exposed to carcinogens: examples from analysis 
of bladder tumors. J Occup Environ Med 37:59-68 (1995). 
 
99. Husgafvel-Pursiainen K, Ridanpaa M, Anttila S, Vainio H. p53 
 
and ras gene mutations in lung cancer: implications for smoking 
and occupational exposures. J Occup Environ Med 37:69- 76 
(1995). 
 
100. Bartsch H, Hollstein M, Mustonen R, Schmidt J, Spiethoff A, 
 
Wesch H, Wiethege T, Muller K-M. Screening for putative 
radon-specific p53 mutation hotspot in German uranium min- 
ers. Lancet 346:8967 (1995). 
 
101. Takeshima Y, Seyama T, Bennett WP, Akiyama M, Tokuoka S, 
 
Inai K, Mabuchi K, Land CE, Harris CC. p53 mutations in 
lung cancers from non-smoking atomic-bomb survivors. Lancet 
342:1520-1521 (1993). 
 
102. Brennan JA, Boyle JO, Koch WM, Goodman SN, Hruban RH, 
 
Eby YJ, Couch MJ, Forastiere AA, Sidransky D. Association 
 
between cigarette smoking and mutation of the p53 gene in 
squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J Med 
332:712-717 (1995). 
 
103. Ryberg D, Hewr A, Phillips DH, Haugen A. Different suscepti- 
 
bility to smoking-induced DNA damage among male and 
female lung cancer patients. Cancer Res 54:5801-5803 (1994). 
 
104. Rydberg D, Kure E, Lystad S, Skaug V, Stangeland L, Mercy I, 
 
B0rresen A-L, Haugen A. p53 Mutations in lung tumors: rela- 
tionship to putative susceptibility markers for cancer. Cancer 
Res 54:1551-1555 (1994). 
 
105. Kawajiri K, Eguch H, Nakachi K, Sekiya T, Yamamoto M. 
 
Association of CYPlAI germ line polymorphisms with mutations 
of thep53 gene in lung cancer. Cancer Res 56:72-76 (1996). 
 
106. Myers RM, Larin Z, Maniatis T. Detection of single base sub- 
 
stitutions by ribonudease cleavage at mismatches in RNA:DNA 
duplexes. Science 230:1242-1246 (1985). 
 
107. Smooker PM, Cotton RGH. The use of chemical reagents in 
 
the detection of DNA mutations. Mutat Res 288:65-77 (1993). 
108. Orita M, Iwahana H, Kanazawa H, Hayashi K, Sekiya T. 
 
Detection of polymorphisms of human DNA by gel elec- 
trophoresis as single strand conformation polymorphisms. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA 86:2766-2770 (1989). 
 
109. Sekiya T. Detection of mutant sequences by single-strand con- 
 
formation polymorphism analysis. Mutat Res 288:79-83 
(1993). 
 
110. Fan E, Levin DB, Glickman BW, Logan DM. Limitations in 
 
the use of SSCP analysis. Mutat Res 288:85-92 (1993). 
 
111. Fischer SG, Lerman LS. DNA fragments differing by single 
 
base-pair substitutions are separated in denaturing gradient gels: 
correspondence with melting theory. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
80:1579-1583 (1983). 
 
112. Cariello NF, Skopek TR. Mutational analysis using denaturing 
 
gradient gel electrophoresis and PCR. Mutat Res 288:103-112 
(1993). 
 
113. Hovig E, Smith-Srensen B, Br0gger A, B0rresen A-L. Constant 
 
denaturant gel electrophoresis, a modification of denaturing gra- 
dient gel e[ectrophoresis, in mutation detection. Mutat Res 
262:63-71 (1991). 
 
114. Khrapko K, Hanekamp JS, Thilly WG, Belenkii A, Foret F, 
 
Karger BL. Constant denaturing capillary electrophoresis 
(CDCE): a high resolution approach to mutational analysis. 
Nucleic Acid Res 22:364-369 (1994). 
 
115. Bos JL. ras oncogenes in human cancer: a review. Cancer Res 
 
49:4682-4689 (1989). 
 
116. Pourzand C, Cerutti P. Genotypic mutation analysis by 
 
RFLP/PCR. Mutat Res 288:113-121 (1993). 
 
117. Cerutti P, Hussain P, Pourzand C, Aguilar F. Mutagenesis of 
 
the H-ras protooncogene and the p53 tumor suppressor gene. 
Cancer Res 54:1934s-1938s (1994). 
 
118. Sanger F, Nicklen S, Coulson AR DNA sequencing with chain- 
 
terminating inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 74:5463-5467 
(1977). 
 
119. Pease AC, Solas D, Sullivan EJ, Cronin MT, Holmes CP, Fodor 
 
SPA. Light-generated oligonucleotide arrays for rapid DNA 
sequence analysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91:5022-5026 
(1994). 
 
120. Hultman T, Stahl S, Hornes E, Uhlen M. Direct solid phase 
 
sequencing of genomic and plasmid using magnetic beads as 
solid support. Nucleic Acids Res 17:4937-4946 (1989). 
 
121. Syvanen A-C, Soderlund H, Laaksonen E, Bengtstrom M, 
 
Turunen M, Palotie A. N-ras gene mutations in acute myeloid 
leukemia: accurate detection by solid-phase minisequencing. Int 
J Cancer 50:713-718 (1992). 
 
122. Funa K, Steinholtz L, Nou E, Bergh J. Increased expression of 
 
N-myc in human small cell lung cancer biopsies predicts lack of 
response to chemotherapy and poor prognosis. Am J Clin 
Pathol 88:216-220 (1987). 
 
123. Limper AH, Broekelmann TJ, Colby TV, Malizia G, 
 
McDonald JA. Analysis of local mRNA expression for extracel- 
lular matrix proteins and growth factors using in situ hybridiza- 
tion in fibroproliferative lung disorders. Chest 99:555-565 
(1991). 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 733 
 
BARRETT ET AL. 
 
124. Koutselini H, Kappatou G, Yiagnisis M, Field JK, Spandidos 
 
DA. Immunocytochemical study of ras oncoprotein in cytologic 
specimens of primary lung tumours. Anticancer Res 10:597-604 
(1990). 
 
125. Gallick GE, Kurzrock R, Kloetzer WS, Arlinghaus RB, 
 
Gutterman JU. Expression of p21 ras in fresh primary and 
metastatic human colorectal tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
82:1795-1799 (1985). 
 
126. Kurzrock R, Gallick GE, Gutterman JU. Differential expression 
 
of p21 ras gene products among histological subtypes of fresh pri- 
mary human lung tumors. Cancer Res 46:1530-1534 (1986). 
 
127. Ruckle HC, Klee GG, Desterling JE. Prostate-specific antigen: 
 
critical issues for the practicing physician. Mayo Clin Proc 
69:59-68 (1994). 
 
128. Ruckle HC, Klee GG, Oesterling JE. Prostate-specific antigen: 
 
concepts for staging prostate cancer and monitoring response to 
the copy. Mayo Clin Proc 69:69-79 (1994). 
 
129. Brandt-Rauf PW. Biomarkers of gene expression-growth fac- 
 
tors and oncoproteins. Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl 
4):807-816 (1997). 
 
130. Ashby J, Anwar W, Au WW, Massoud A, Gentile JM. Genetic 
 
toxicology in developing countries: comments and recommen- 
dations. Environ Health Perspect (Suppl 3):335-338 (1993). 
 
131. Anwar WA. Cytogenetic monitoring of human populations at 
 
risk in Egypt: role of cytogenetic data in cancer risk assessment. 
Environ Health Perspect 96:91-95 (1991). 
 
132. Burchell B, Coughtrie MWH. Genetic and environmental fac- 
 
tors associated with variation of human xenobiotic glucuronida- 
tion and sulfation. Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl 
4):739-747 (1997). 
 
133. Goldstein BD, Amoruso MA, Witz G. Erythrocyte glucose-6- 
 
phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency does not pose an increased 
risk or black Americans exposed to oxidant gases in the work- 
place or general environment. Toxicol Ind Health 1:75-80 
(1985). 
 
134. Ramel C. Mini- and microsatellites. Environ Health Perspect 
 
105(Suppl 4):781-789 (1997). 
 
135. Alvan G, Bechtel P, Iselius L, Gundert-Remy U. Hydroxylation 
 
polymorphisms of debrisoquine and mephenytoin in European 
populations. Eur J Pharmacol 39:533-537 (1990). 
 
136. Daly AK, Cholerton S, Gregory W, Idle JR. Metabolic poly- 
 
morphisms. Pharmacol Ther 57:129-160 (1993). 
 
137. Horn EP, Tucker MA, Lambert G, Silverman D, Zametkin D, 
 
Sinha R, Hartege T, Landi MT, Caporaso NE. A study of gen- 
der-based cytochrome P4501A2 variability: a possible mecha- 
nism for the male excess of bladder cancer. Cancer Epidemiol 
Biomarkers Prev 4(5):529-33 (1995). 
 
138. Pelkonen 0, Raunio H. Metabolic activation of toxins. Tissue- 
 
specific expression and metabolism in target organs. Environ 
Health Perspect 105(Suppl 4):767-774 (1997). 
 
139. Vanden Heuvel JP, Clark GC, Thompson CL, McCoy Z, 
 
Miller CR, Lucier GW, Bell DA. CYPlAl mRNA levels as a 
human exposure biomarker: use of quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction to measure CYPlAI expression in human 
peripheral blood lymphocytes. Carcinogenesis 14:2003-2006 
(1993). 
 
140. Gonzalez FJ, Skoda R, Kimura S, Umeno M, Zanger UM, 
 
Nebert DW, Gelboin HV, Hardwick JP, Meyer UA. 
Characterization of the common genetic defect in humans defi- 
cient in debrisoquine metabo[ism. Nature 331:442-446 
(1988). 
 
141. Kagimoto M, Heim M, Kagimoto K, Zeugin T, Meyer UA. 
 
Multiple mutations of the human cytochrome P450IID6 gene 
(CYP2D6) in poor metabolizers of debrisoquine. J Biol Chem 
265:17209-17214 (1990). 
 
142. Yamano S, Tatsuno J, Gonzales FJ. The CYP2A6gene product 
 
catalyzes coumarin 7-hydroxylation in human liver microsomes 
Biochemistry 29:1322-1329 (1990). 
 
143. Hayashi SI, Watanabe J, Kawajiri K Genetic polymorphisms in 
 
the 5'-flanking region change transcriptional regulation of the 
human cytochrome P450IIE1 gene. J Biochem 110:559-565 
(1991). 
 
144. Ambrosone CB, Freudenheim JL, Graham S, Marshall JR, Vena 
 
JR, Brasure JR, Laughlin R, Nemoto T, Michalek AM, 
Harrington A et al. Cytochrome P450 lAl and glutathione S- 
transferase (Ml) genetic polymorphisms and postmenopausal 
breast cancer risk. Cancer Res 55:3483-3485 (1995). 
 
145. Oyama T, Mitsudomi T, Kawamoto T, Ogami A, Osaki T, 
 
Kodama Y, Yasumoto K. Detection of CYPIAJ gene polymor- 
phism using designed RFLP and distributions of CYPlAl geno- 
types in Japanese. Int Arch Occup Environ Health 67:253-256 
(1995). 
 
146. Hayashi SI, Watanabe J, Nakachi K, Kawajiri K. Genetic link- 
 
age of lung cancer-associated MspI polymorphisms with amino 
acid replacement in the heme binding region of the human 
cytochrome P4501A1 gene. J Biochem 110:407-411 (1991b). 
 
147. Zimmerman LJ, Fuscoe JC. Direct DNA sequencing of PCR 
 
products. Environ Mol Mutagen 18:274-276 (1991). 
 
148. Birdsong WH, Lash AA, Thayer S, Kumekawa E, Becker CE. 
 
The validity of study group assignments based on occupational 
histories obtained from questionnaires. J Occup Med 
34:940-945 (1992). 
 
149. Hemminki K, Lindbohm M-L, Kyyronen P. Validity aspects of 
 
exposure and outcome data in reproductive studies. J Occup 
Environ Med 37:903-907 (1995). 
 
150. London SJ, Daly AK, Thomas CD, Caporaso NE, Idle JR. 
 
Methodological issues in interpretation of studies of the CYP2D6 
genotype in relation to lung cancer risk. Pharmacogenetics 
4:107-108 (1994). 
 
151. Hosmer DW, Lemeshow S. Applied Logistic Regression. New 
 
York:John Wiley & Sons, 1984. 
 
152. Tasa G, Uuskula M, Hirvonen A, Mikkelsaar A-V. Optimization 
 
of PCR to yield successful amplification from heparin-contami- 
nated DNA. Methods Mol Cell Biol 5:122-124 (1995). 
 
153. Liu Y-H, Bai J, Zhu Y, Liang X, Siemieniak D, Venta P, 
 
Lubman DM. Rapid screening of genetic polymorphisms using 
buccal cell DNA with detection by matrix-assisted laser desorp- 
tion ionization mass spectrometry. Rapid Commun Mass 
Spectrom 9:735-743 (1995). 
 
154. Hirvonen A. Combinations of susceptible genotypes and indi- 
 
vidual responses to toxicants. Environ Health Perspect 
105(Suppl 4):755-758 (1997). 
 
155. Landi MT, Bertazzi PA, Shields PG, Clark G, Lucier GW, 
 
Garte SJ, Cosma G, Caporaso NE. Association between 
CYPlAJ genotype, mRNA expression and enzymatic activity in 
humans. Pharmacogenetics 4:242-246 (1994). 
 
156. Broly F, Marez D, Sabbagh N, Legrand M, Millecamps S, Lo 
 
Guidice J-M, Boone P, Meyer UA. An efficient strategy for 
detection of known and new mutations of the CYP2D6gene 
using single strand conformation polymorphism analysis. 
Pharmacogenetics 5:373-384 (1995). 
 
157. Bell D, Taylor JA, Paulson D, Robertson CN, Mohler JL, 
 
Lucier GW. Genetic risk and carcinogen exposure: a common 
inherited defect of the carcinogen metabolism gene glutathione 
S-transferase Ml (GSTMI) that increases susceptibility to blad- 
der cancer. J Natd Cancer Inst 85:1159-1164 (1993). 
 
158. Seidegard J, Vorachek WR, Pero RW, Pearson WR. Hereditary 
 
differences in the expression of the human glutathione trans- 
ferase active on trans-stilbene oxide are due to a gene deletion. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85:7293-7297 (1988). 
 
159. Steen VM, Andreassen OA, Daly AK, Tefre T, Borresen A-L, 
 
Idle JR, Guldbrandsen A-K. Detection of poor metabolizer- 
associated CYP2D6(D) gene deletion allele by long-PCR tech- 
nology. Pharmacogenetics 5:215-223 (1995). 
 
160. Johansson I, Lundqvist E, Bertilsson L, Dahl M-L, Sjoqvist F, 
 
Ingelman-Sundberg M. Inherited amplification of an active 
gene in the cytochrome P450 CYP2D locus as a cause of ultrara- 
pid metabolism of debrisoquine. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
90:11825-11829 (1993). 
 
161. Vanden Heuvel JP, Clark GC, Kohn MC, Tritscher AM, 
 
Greenlee WF, Lucier GW, Bell DA. Dioxin-responsive genes: 
examination of dose-response relationships using quantitative 
reverse transcriptase-polymersase chain reaction. Cancer Res 
54(1):62-8 (1994). 
 
734 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
162. Rayemaekers L. A commentary on the practical applications of 
 
competitive PCR. Genome Res 5:91-94 (1995). 
 
163. Kwok S, Higuchi R. Avoid false positives with PCR. Nature 
 
339:237-238 (1989). 
 
164. Syvanen A-C, Sajantila A, Lukka A. Identification of individuals 
 
by analysis of biallelic DNA markers, using PCR and solid- 
phase minisequencing. Am J Hum Genet 52:4659 (1993). 
 
165. McCarthy JF, Shugart LR. Biological markers of environmental 
 
contamination. In: Biomarkers of Environmental Contamination 
(McCarthy JF, Shugart LR, eds). Boca Raton, FL:Lewis 
Publishers, 1990;-14. 
 
166. Huggett RJ, Kimerle RA, Mehrle PM Jr, Bergman HL, eds. 
 
Biomarkers. Biochemical, Physiological, and Histological 
Markers of Anthropogenic Stress. Boca Raton, FL:Lewis 
Publishers, 1992. 
 
167. Peakall, DB. Animal Biomarkers as Pollution Indicators. 
 
London:Chapman & Hall, 1992. 
 
168. Varanasi U, Reichert WL, Stein JE. 32P-Postlabeling analysis of 
 
DNA adducts in liver of wild English sole (Parophys vetulus) and 
winter flounder (Pseudopleuronectes americanus). Cancer Res 
49:1171-1177 (1989). 
 
169. Stein JE, Reichert WL, Nishimoto M, Varanasi U. Overview of 
 
studies on liver carcinogenesis in English sole from Puget 
Sound; evidence for a xenobiotic chemical etiology. II. 
Biochemical studies. Sci Total Environ 94:51-69 (1990). 
 
170. Shugart LR. Detection and quantitation of benzo(a)pyrene- 
 
DNA adducts in brain and liver tissues of beluga whales 
(Delphinapterus leucas) from the St. Lawrence and Mackenzie 
estuaries. In: Proceedings of the International Forum for the 
Future of the Beluga. 1990;219-223. 
 
171. Kurelec B. The genotoxic disease syndrome. Marine Environ 
 
Res 35:341-348 (1993). 
 
172. Shugart LR, McCarthy JF, Jimenez BD, Daniels J. Analysis of 
 
adduct formation in the bluegill sunfish (Lepomis macrochirus) 
between benzo[a]pyrene and DNA of the liver and hemoglobin 
of the erythrocyte. Aquatic Toxicol 9:319-325 (1987). 
 
173. Kurelec B, Gupta RC. Biomonitoring of aquatic systems. In: 
 
Postlabelling Methods for Detection of DNA Adducts (Phillips, 
DH, Castegnaro, M, Bartsch H, eds). Lyon:International 
Agency on Research on Cancer, 1993; 365-372. 
 
174. Petersen LB-M, Petersen RC. Anomalies in hydropsychid cap- 
 
ture nets from polluted streams. Freshwater Biol 13:185-191 
(1983). 
 
175. Peterle TJ. Wildlife Toxicology. New York:Van Nostrand 
 
Reinhold, 1991. 
 
176. Adkisson PL, Niles GA, Walker JK, Bird LS Scott HB. 
 
Controlling cotton's insect pests: a new system. Science 
216:19-22 (1982). 
 
177. Kurelec, B. The multixenobiotic resistance mechanism in 
 
aquatic organisms. Crit Rev Toxicol 22:23-43 (1992). 
 
178. Kurelec B. A new type of hazardous chemical: the chemosensi- 
 
tizers of multixenobiotic resistance. Environ Health Perspect 
105(Suppl 4):855-860 (1997). 
 
179. Kurelec B, Lucic D, Pivcevic B, Krca S. Induction and reversion 
 
of multixenobiotic resistance in the marine snail Monodonta 
turbinata. Marine Biol 123:305-312 (1995). 
 
180. Minier C, Akcha F, Galgani F. P-glycoprotein expression in 
 
Crassostrea gigas and Mytilus edulis in polluted seawater. Comp 
Biochem Physiol B Comp Biochem 106B:1029-1036 (1993). 
 
181. Waldmann P, Pivcevic B, Mueller WEG, Zahn RK, Kurelec B. 
 
Increased genotoxicity of aminoanthracene by modulators of 
multixenob iotic resistance mechanism: studies with the fresh 
water clam Corbiculafluminea. Mutat Res 342:113-123 
(1995). 
 
182. Holland-Toomey B, Epel D. Multixenobiotic resistance in 
 
Urechis embryos: protection from environmental toxins. Biol 
Bull 185:355-386 (1993). 
 
183. Kurelec B, Krca S, Pivcevic B, Ugarkovic D, Bachmann M, 
 
Imsiecke G, Muller WEG. Expression of P-glycoprotein gene 
in marine sponges. Identification and characterization of the 
125-kDa drug-binding glycoprotein. Carcinogenesis 13:69-76 
(1992). 
 
184. Hollo Z, Homolya L, Davis CW, Sarkadi B. Calcein accumula- 
 
tion as a fluorometric functional assay of the multidrug trans- 
porter. Biochim Biophys Acta 1191:384-388 (1994). 
 
185. Sarkadi B, Mueller M, Homolya L, Hollo Z, Seprodi J, 
 
Germann U, Gottesman MM, Price EM, Boucher RC. 
Interaction of bioactive hydrophobic peptides with the human 
multidrug transporter. FASEB J 8:766-770 (1994). 
 
186. Landa V, Soldan T. The possibilities of mayfly faunistics to 
 
indicate environmental changes of large areas. In: Overview and 
Strategies of Ephemeroptera and Plecoptera (Alba-Tercedor J, 
Sanches-Ortega A, eds). Gainesville, FL:Sandhill Cram Press, 
1991;559-566. 
 
187. Burger J, ed. Before and After an Oil Spill: The Arthur Kill. 
 
New Brunswick, NJ:Rutgers University Press, 1994. 
 
188. Cairns J, Gruber D. A comparison of methods and instrumenta- 
 
tion of biological early warning systems. Water Resources Bull 
16:261-266 (1980). 
 
189. Kramer KJM, Botterweg J. Aquatic biological early warning sys- 
 
tems: an overview. In: Bioindicators and Environmental 
Management (Jeffrey DW, Madden B, eds). New York: 
Academic Press, 1991;95-126. 
 
190. Hughes GM. Changes in blood of fish following exposure to 
 
heavy metals and acid. In: Biological Monitoring of 
Environmental Pollution (Yasuno M, Whitton BA, eds). 
Hokkaido:Tokai University Press, 1988;1 1-17. 
 
191. DW Nebert, Nelson DR, Feyereisen R. Evolution of the 
 
cytochrome P450 genes. Xenobiotica 19:1149-1160 (1989). 
 
192. Brattsten LB. Ecological significance of mixed-function oxida- 
 
tions. Drug Metab Rev 10:35-58 (1979). 
 
193. Gregus Z, Watkins JB, Thompson TN, Harvey MJ, Rozman 
 
K, Klaassen CD. Hepatic phase I and phase II biotransforma- 
tions in quail and trout: comparison to other species commonly 
used in toxicity testing. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 67:430-441 
(1983). 
 
194. NRC. Ecological Knowledge and Environmental Problem 
 
Solving. Washington:National Academy Press, 1986. 
 
195. Burger J. Effects of oil on vegetation. In: Before and After an 
 
Oil Spill: The Arthur Kill (Burger J, ed). New Brunswick, 
NJ:Rutgers University Press, 1994; 130-141. 
 
196. Paine RT. Food web complexity and species diversity. Am 
 
Natur 100:65-75 (1966). 
 
197. Anderson SL. Linking genotoxic responses and reproductive suc- 
 
cess in ecotoxicology. Environ Health Perspect 102:9-12 (1994). 
198. Pimm SL.The complexity and stability of ecosystems. Nature 
 
307:321-326 (1984). 
 
199. Suter GW II. Ecological endpoints. In: Ecological Assessment of 
 
Hazardous Waste Sites (Warren-Hicks W, Parkhurst BR, Baker 
SS Jr, eds). Rpt 600/3-89/013. Washington:U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, 1989;13-20. 
 
200. Suter GW II. Endpoints for regional ecological risk assessment. 
 
Environ Manage 14:9-20 (1990). 
 
201. Burger J, Peakall D. Methods to assess the effects of chemicals 
 
on aquatic and terrestrial wildlife, particularly birds and mam- 
mals. In: Methods to Assess the Effects of Chemicals on 
Ecosystems (Linthurst RA, Bourdeau P, Tardiff RG, eds). 
Chichester:Wiley & Sons, 1995;291-306. 
 
202. Schindler DW, Mills KH, Malley DF, Findlay DL, Shearer JA, 
 
Davies IJ, Turner MA, Linsey GA, Cruikshank DR. Long-term 
ecosystem stress: the effects of years of experimental acidification 
on a small lake. Science 228:1395-1401(1985). 
 
203. Eastin C, Hoffman DJ, O'Leary CT. Lead accumulation and 
 
depression of delta-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase (ALAD) in 
young birds fed automotive waste oil. Arch Environ Contam 
Toxicol: 12031-35 (1983). 
 
204. Needleman HL, Schell A, Bellinger D, Leviton A, Alfred EN. 
 
The long-term effects of exposure to lead in cildhood: an 11 
year follow-up report.NEngl JMed 322083-88(1990). 
 
205. ATSDR. Toxicological Profe for Lead. Atlanta, GA:Agency for 
 
Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, 1990. 
 
206. Burger J. A risk assessment for lead in birds. J Toxicol Environ 
 
Health 45:369-396 (1995). 
 
207. Grue CE, O'Shea JJ, Hoffman DJ. Lead concentrations and 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 735 
 
BARRETT ET AL. 
 
reproduction in highway-nesting barn swallows. Condor 
860383-389 (1984). 
 
208. Burger J. Behavioral effects of early postnatal lead exposure in 
 
herring gull (Larus argentatus) chicks. Pharmacol Biochem 
Behav 35:7-13 (1990). 
 
209. Burger J, Gochfeld M. Behavioral impairment of lead-injected 
 
young herring gulls in nature. Fundam Appl Toxicol 23: 
553-561 (1995). 
 
210. Burger J, Gochfeld M. Lead and behavioral development in 
 
young herring gulls: effects of timing of exposure on individual 
recognition. Fundam AppI Toxicol 21:187-195 (1993). 
 
211. Bellrose, FC. Lead poisoning as a mortality factor in waterfowl 
 
populations. Trans North Am Wildlife Conf 27:235-288 
(1959). 
 
212. Poland A, Glover E, Kende AS, DeCamp M, Giandomenico 
 
CM. 3,4,3',4'-Tetrachloro azoxybenzene and azobenzene: 
potent inducers of aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase. Science 
194:627-630 (1976). 
 
213. Poland A, Knutson JC. 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin 
 
and related halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons: examination of 
the mechanism of toxicity. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 
22:517-554 (1982). 
 
214. Brunstrom B, Reutergardh L. Differences in sensitivity of some 
 
avian species to the embryotoxicity of a PCB, 3,3',4,4'-tetra- 
chlorobiphenyl injected into the eggs. Environ Pollut 
42A:37-45 (1986). 
 
215. Brunstrom B, Lund J. Differences between chick and turkey 
 
embryos in sensitivity to 3,3',4,4'-tetrachlorobiphenyl and in 
concentration/affinity of the hepatic receptor for 2,3,7,8-tetra- 
chlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Comp Biochem Physiol C Comp 
Pharmacol Toxicol 91:507-512 (1988). 
 
216. Brunstrom B. Sensitivity of embryos from duck, goose, herring 
 
gull, and various chicken breeds to 3,3',4,4'-tetrachloro- 
giphenyl. Poult Sci 67:52-57(1988). 
 
217. Ashford NA. Policy considerations for human monitoring in 
 
the workplace. J Occup Med 28(2):563-568 (1986). 
 
218. Ashford NA. Medical screening in the workplace: legal and eth- 
 
ical considerations. Semin Occup Med 1 (1):67-79 (1986). 
 
219. Atherley G, Johnston N, Tannassee M. Biological surveillance: 
 
rights conflict with rights. J Occup Med 28:958-965 (1986). 
 
220. Lappe M, Gustafson J, Robin R. Ethical and social aspects of 
 
screening for genetic disease. N Engl J Med 206:1129-1132 
(1972). 
 
221. Lappe M. Ethical issues in testing for differential sensitivity to 
 
occupational hazards. J Occup Med 25:797-808 (1983). 
 
222. Lappe M. Ethical concerns in occupational screening programs. 
 
J Occup Med 28:572-577 (1986). 
 
223. Omenn GS. Predictive identification of hypersusceptible indi- 
 
viduals. J Occup Med 24:369-374 (1982). 
 
224. Perera FP. Molecular cancer epidemiology: a new tool in cancer 
 
prevention. J Natl Cancer Inst 78:887-898 (1987). 
 
225. Perera FP, Santella R. Carcinogenesis. In: Molecular 
 
Epidemiology: Principles and Practices (Schulte P, Perera FP, 
eds). New York:Academic Press 1993; 277-300. 
 
226. Schulte PA, Ringen K. Notification of workers at high risk: an 
 
emerging public health problem. Am J Public Health 
74:485-490 (1984). 
 
227. Schulte PA, Ringen K, Altekruse EB, Gullen WH, Davidson 
 
K, Anderson SS, Patton MG. Notification of a cohort of work- 
ers at risk of bladder cancer. J Occup Med 27:19-28 (1985). 
 
228. Annas G. The bioethics of biomonitoring people for exposure 
 
to carcinogens. In: Molecular Dosimetry and Human Cancer: 
Analytical, Epidemiological, and Social Considerations 
(Groopman JD, Skipper PL, eds). Caldwell, NJ:Telford Press, 
1991; 385-399. 
 
229. Ashford NA, Spadafor CJ, Hattis DB, Caldart CC, eds. 
 
Monitoring the Worker for Exposure and Disease. Scientific, 
Legal, and Ethical Considerations in the use of Biomarkers. 
The Johns Hopkins Series in Environmental Toxicology. 
Baltimore:Johns Hopkins University Press, 1990. 
 
230. Council of Europe. Draft Convention for the Protection of 
 
Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Being with Regard 
 
to the Application of Biology and Medicine: Bioethics 
Convention, and Explanatory Report. Strasbourg:Directorate 
of Legal Affairs, 1994. 
 
231. Ettore E. The new genetic discourse in Finland: Exploring 
 
experts view within surveillance medicine. Helsinki:Helsinki 
Association of Finnish Muncipalities, 1996. 
 
232. Grandjean P, Sorsa M. Ethical aspects of genetic predisposition 
 
to environmentally-related disease. Sci Total Environ 
184:37-45 (1996). 
 
233. Hulka BS, Wilcosky TC, Griffith JD, eds. Biological Markers in 
 
Epidemiology. New York:Oxford University Press, 1990. 
 
234. Hulka BS. Overview of biological markers. In: Biological 
 
Markers in Epidemiology (Hulka BS Wilcosky TC Griffith JD, 
eds). New York:Oxford University Press, 1990;3-15. 
 
235. Hulka BS. Methodologic issues in molecular epidemiology. In: 
 
Biological Markers in Epidemiology (Hulka BS, Wilcosky TC, 
Griffith JD, eds). New York:Oxford University Press, 1990; 
214-226. 
 
236. Hulka BS. Epidemiological studies using biological markers: 
 
issues for epidemiologists. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 
1:13-19 (1991). 
 
237. McMichael AJ. Invited Commentary-"Molecular epidemiol- 
 
ogy:" new pathway or new travelling companion? Am J 
Epidemiol 140:1-11 (1994). 
 
238. Merletti F, Soskolne CL, Vineis P. Introduction to the epidemi- 
 
ological method as applied to occupational health and safety. In: 
ILO Encyclopedia of Occupational Health and Safety, 4th ed. 
Geneva:International Labour Office, in press. 
 
239. Pearce N, de Sanjose S, Boffetta P, Kogevinas M, Saracci R, 
 
Savitz D. Limitations of biomarkers of exposure in cancer epi- 
demiology. Epidemiology 6:190-194 (1995). 
 
240. Privacy Commissioner of Canada. Genetic Testing and Privacy. 
 
Ottawa:Canadian National Research Council, 1992. 
 
241. Rothman N, Stewart WF, Caporaso NE, Hayes RB. 
 
Misclassification of enetic susceptibility biomarkers: implica- 
tions for case-controT studies and cross-population comparisons. 
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2:299-303 (1993). 
 
242. Schulte PA. A conceptual and historical framework for molecu- 
 
lar epidemiology. In: Molecular Epidemiology: Principles and 
Practices (Schulte P, Perera FP, eds). New York:Academic Press, 
1993; 3-44. 
 
243. U.S. Congress. Genetic Monitoring and Screening in the 
 
Workplace. OTA-BA-455, Washington:U.S. Government 
Printing Office, 1990. 
 
244. Van Damme K, Casteleyn L, Heseltine E, Huici A, Sorsa M, 
 
van Larebeke N, Vineis P. Individual susceptibility and preven- 
tion of occupational diseases: scientific and ethical issues. J 
Occup Environ Med 37(1):91-99 (1995). 
 
245. Vineis P. Uses of biochemical and biological markers in occupa- 
 
tional epidemiology. Rev Epidemiol Sante Publique 
40:S63-S69(1992). 
 
246. Vineis P. Use of biomarkers in epidemiology. The example of 
 
metabolic susceptibility to cancer. Toxicol Lett 77:163-168 
(1995). 
 
247. Vineis P. Use of biochemical markers in environmental epi- 
 
demiology. In: Environmental Epidemiology: Exposure and 
Disease (Bertollini R, Lebowitz MD, Saracci R, Savitz DA, eds). 
Boca Raton, FL:CRC Lewis Publishers, 1996;210-206. 
 
248. Wilcosky TC, Griffith JD. Applications of biological markers. 
 
In: Biological Markers in Epidemiology (Hulka BS Wilcosky 
TC Griffith JD, eds). New York:Oxford University Press, 
1990;16-27. 
 
249. Greenberg MR, Martell J. Ethical dilemmas and solutions for 
 
risk assessment scientists. J Exp Anal Environ Epidemiol 
2:381-389 (1992). 
 
250. Soskolne CL. Epidemiology: questions of science, ethics, moral- 
 
ity and law. AmJ Epidemiol 129:1-18 (1989). 
 
251. Summers C, SoskoLne CL, Gotlieb C, Fawcett E, McClusky P. 
 
Do scientific and scholarly codes of ethics take social issues into 
account? Accountability Res 4:57-68 (1995). 
 
252. Reece RD, Siegal HA. Studying people: a primer in the ethics of 
 
social research. Mercer, 1986. 
 
736 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 
 
SGOMSEC WORKSHOP REPORT 
 
253. Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of Biomedical Ethics. 
 
4th ed. New York:Oxford University Press, 1994;336-337. 
 
254. Shamoo AE, Annau Z. Data audit-historical perspective. In: 
 
Principles of Research Data Audit (Shamoo AE, ed). New 
York:Gordon & Breach, 1989; 1-11. 
 
255. CIOMS. International Guidelines for Ethical Review of 
 
Epidemiological Studies. Geneva:Council for International 
Organizations of Medical Sciences, 1991. 
 
256. CIOMS. International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical 
 
Research Involving Human Subjects. Geneva:Council for 
International Organizations of Medical Sciences, 1993. 
 
257. Schimke RI. Gene amplification, drug resistance and cancer. 
 
Cancer Res 44:1235 (1984). 
 
258. Beach LR, Palmiter RD. Amplification of the metallothionein 
 
gene 1 in cadmium-resistant mouse cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 78:2110-2114 (1981). 
 
259. Marx J. Oncogenes evoke new cancer therapies. Science 
 
249:1376-1378 (1990). 
 
260. Peltomaki P. DNA mismatch repair gene mutations in human 
 
cancer. Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl 4):755-780 
(1997). 
 
261. Lewontin RC, Hartl DL. Population genetics in forensic DNA 
 
typing. Science 254:1745-1750 (1991). 
 
262. Stokinger HE. Letter: Carcinogen standard. A letter to the 
 
Assistant Secretary, Occupational Safety and Health-and a 
response. J Occup Med 16(2):119-120 (1974). 
 
263. Vainio H, Husgafvel-Pursiainen K. Elimination of environ- 
 
mental factors or elimination of individuals: biomarkers and 
prevention. J Occup Environ Med 37(1):12-13 (1995). 
 
264. Gochfield M. Factors influencing susceptibility to metals. 
 
Environ Health Perspect 105(Suppl 4):817-822 (1997). 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 105, Supplement 4 * June 1997 737