3973ultrasonoUltrasonics SonochemistryUltrason SonochemElsevierPMC1187583511875835118758353996121710.1016/j.ultsonch.2025.107270Ultrasound-mediated nanomaterials for the treatment of inflammatory diseases
ZhangKai WangTingting HuangXingyong WuPeng ShenLufan YangYuanyuan WanWenyu SunSiyu ZhangZhan aDepartment of Gastroenterology, Endoscopic Center, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, PR ChinabEngineering Research Center of Ministry of Education for Minimally Invasive Gastrointestinal Endoscopic Techniques, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, PR ChinacKey Laboratory of Immunodermatology, Ministry of Education, Department of Dermatology, The First Hospital of China Medical University, PR ChinadKey Laboratory of Immunodermatology, National Health Commission of the People’s Republic of China, The First Hospital of China Medical University, PR ChinaeNational and Local Joint Engineering Research Center of Immunodermatological Theranostics, The First Hospital of China Medical University, PR ChinafDepartment of Oncology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, PR ChinagCancer Stem Cell and Translational Medicine Laboratory, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, PR China⁎Corresponding authors at: Department of Oncology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, PR China (Z. Zhang). wanwenyu2020@163.comsun-siyu@163.comzhangzhan@cmu.edu.cn
1Equal contribution first authors.
1222025114107270107270332025© 2025 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Graphic abstract
The mechanisms by which ultrasound enhances nanomaterial effects include enhancing the delivery of nanomaterials, controlling drug release, and playing a role in SDT.
Ultrasound-mediated nanomaterials can treat a wide range of infection-associated and sterile inflammatory diseases.
Future development should focus on material refinement, instrumentation standardization, exploring new mechanisms of action, and expanding the field of therapeutic diseases.
 Keywords: Ultrasound, Inflammatory diseases, Nanomaterials, Sterile inflammation, Infection

## Highlights
•Ultrasound-mediated nanomaterials enhance anti-inflammatory therapy through synergistic interactions.
•Nanomedicines improve treatment outcomes for both sterile and infection-related inflammatory diseases.
•Ultrasound boosts nanomedicine effectiveness by optimizing delivery, controlling release, and enhancing SDT.

## Abstract
Sterile and infection-associated inflammatory diseases are becoming increasingly prevalent worldwide. Conventional drug therapies often entail significant drawbacks, such as the risk of drug overdose, the development of drug resistance in pathogens, and systemic adverse reactions, all of which can undermine the effectiveness of treatments for these conditions. Nanomaterials (NMs) have emerged as a promising tool in the treatment of inflammatory diseases due to their precise targeting capabilities, tunable characteristics, and responsiveness to external stimuli. Ultrasound (US), a non-invasive and effective treatment method, has been explored in combination with NMs to achieve enhanced therapeutic outcomes. This review provides a comprehensive overview of the recent advances in the use of US-mediated NMs for treating inflammatory diseases. A comprehensive introduction to the application and classification of US was first presented, emphasizing the advantages of US-mediated NMs and the mechanisms through which US and NMs interact to enhance anti-inflammatory therapy. Subsequently, specific applications of US-mediated NMs in sterile and infection-associated inflammation were summarized. Finally, the challenges and prospects of US-mediated NMs in clinical translation were discussed, along with an outline of future research directions. This review aims to provide insights to guide the development and improvement of US-mediated NMs for more effective therapeutic interventions in inflammatory diseases.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Dec 12; Revised 2025 Feb 1; Accepted 2025 Feb 11; Collection date 2025 Mar.

1.

## Introduction
Inflammation is defined as a response to microbial infection or sterile injury characterized by pathological manifestations, including redness, swelling, heat, and pain, which represent a significant milestone and lay the foundation for the pathophysiology of inflammation. , Inflammation can be classified into infection-associated inflammation and sterile inflammation based on the inflammatory triggers. Both types collectively involve the activation of a cascade of signals, which may lead to the recruitment of inflammatory cells such as neutrophils and macrophages, along with the production of chemotactic factors and pro-inflammatory cytokines. Infection-associated inflammation is typically caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi, and other pathogens. Sterile inflammation is triggered by various sterile stimuli, including mechanical trauma, stress, ischemia, and environmental factors. It occurs without any pathogen, promotes tissue repair during acute inflammation, and aids in preventing pathogen colonization. Prolonged unresolved inflammatory processes can lead to detrimental chronic inflammation, contributing to sterile inflammatory diseases such as atherosclerosis, neurodegenerative diseases, and autoimmune diseases. 
To treat inflammation, the optimal response requires achieving maximal efficacy (pathogen clearance) while minimizing associated damage. Regulating infection-associated inflammation primarily involves eradicating pathogens. For sterile inflammation, tissue repair is essential, facilitating the cessation of inflammatory responses and the transition toward a steady state. Conventional drug therapy is a widely utilized clinical strategy for the treatment of inflammatory diseases. Despite certain drawbacks, traditional medications still play an important role in the current treatment of inflammatory diseases. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) as well as corticosteroids remain integral to the management of many inflammatory rheumatic diseases due to their ability to alleviate disease progression and their relatively low economic burden on patients, making them foundational treatment options. , , , Although bacterial resistance affects the use of antibiotics, they are still the first choice for most patients with infectious disorders because of their effective bactericidal properties, broad mechanisms of action, and diverse range of antibacterial agents. , However, conventional medications may lead to some side effects, such as gastrointestinal discomfort and kidney damage, and potentially affects the normal function of the immune system, thereby increasing the risk of infection in non-infectious diseases. Additionally, for certain local inflammations, delivering drugs to the specific site is challenging. Inflammation often involves increased vascular permeability, tissue edema, and other changes that can impact the distribution and concentration of drugs at the site of inflammation, thereby limiting the effectiveness of treating inflammatory diseases. 
To enhance drug delivery efficiency and therapeutic performance at sites of inflammation, researchers are striving to design superior targeted and inflammation-modulating therapies. Nanomaterials (NMs) possessing excellent physical and chemical properties have drawn great attention in biomedicine. NMs with small size can passively accumulate in inflamed tissues, resulting in favorable therapeutic outcomes through enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effects. , Nevertheless, relying solely on the EPR effect to enhance the accumulation of NMs is sometimes not satisfactory. In order to obtain more precise delivery and better therapeutic effects, NMs can be designed as various stimulus-responsive delivery systems. Currently, numerous stimuli can influence NMs to enhance their therapeutic efficacy, including US, light, and magnetic fields. Compared to light, which has limited penetration depth, and magnetic fields, which are relatively costly, US stands out as an excellent stimulus due to its deeper penetration, lower cost, and, most importantly, its non-invasive nature. As a mechanical wave capable of transmitting energy, US can induce changes in tissue permeability, facilitating better entry of NMs. , Furthermore, once NMs reach the target tissue, US can promote the release of drugs loaded within the NMs. Whether enhancing tissue permeability or facilitating drug release, US significantly improves the targeting capability of NMs, thereby reducing off-target side effects and enhancing therapeutic outcomes. Moreover, US has the potential to treat inflammatory diseases by significantly reducing the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines. In recent years, US-triggered nanotherapy has been widely studied as an effective therapeutic strategy. Researchers achieved precise temporal and spatial control over treatment and accurately modulated energy and tissue penetration depth. Extensive research indicates that US-triggered nanotherapy offers unique advantages in treating inflammatory diseases, such as excellent bactericidal rates, eradication of bacterial biofilms, maximizing anti-inflammatory efficacy and minimizing detrimental effects. , , , , 
This review aims to provide an overview of the anti-inflammatory effects of US-mediated NMs, offer therapeutic strategies for inflammatory diseases, and guide their treatment. We introduce the biomedical applications of US and common classifications of therapeutic US, summarize the characteristics and superiority of NMs, and outline US-mediated NMs in inflammation control. Subsequently, the latest advances in the use of US-mediated NMs for sterile and infectious inflammatory diseases are discussed in detail. Finally, the current challenges faced in the clinical translation of US-mediated NMs are discussed, and possible future perspectives are outlined ( ).
 
2.

## US
2.1.

## Biomedical applications of US
US is a mechanical wave with a periodic vibration frequency exceeding 20,000 Hz. Its strong penetration, high spatial resolution, and non-invasive properties make it widely applicable in biomedical fields for diagnostic imaging and therapeutic purposes. , , Generally, the biomedical application of US can be divided into diagnosis and treatment based on its intensity and frequency ( ).
 Diagnostic US has a long history of use in medical imaging and encompasses various imaging modalities, such as Doppler US, elastography, and three-dimensional US. It is characterized by a high frequency (3.0–20 MHz) and low intensity (0.0001–0.5 W/cm2). High-frequency US provides superior spatial resolution in imaging. For the utmost safety considerations, the intensity of diagnostic US must be quite low to prevent tissue heating. Diagnostic US has many applications, including imaging of the cardiovascular, reproductive, and digestive system, etc. 
Therapeutic applications of US have emerged in recent decades. Compared with diagnostic US, it has lower frequencies (20 kHz–3 MHz) and higher intensities (≥0.5 W/cm2). Therapeutic US can be further divided into low intensity (0.5–3 W/cm2) and high intensity (>3 W/cm2), with intensity modified based on the specific treatment requirements. US has been utilized across diverse clinical therapeutic applications, including transdermal drug delivery, fracture healing, and tumor ablation. 

2.2.

## Characteristics and classification of therapeutic US
Frequency.
Theoretically, the frequency and penetration depth of US are closely related. Taking 1 MHz US as an example, its penetration depth typically exceeds 30 cm. In contrast, the penetration capability of 10 MHz US is significantly lower and usually limited to a few centimeters. This is attributed to the longer wavelength of lower-frequency US waves, which allows for easier penetration into deeper tissues, whereas higher-frequency US waves with shorter wavelengths exhibit weaker penetration capabilities. Relatively low-frequency US (20 kHz–3 MHz) enables deep penetration and meets various requirements for deep tissue treatment. However, the shortcoming of this modality is its relatively low spatial resolution due to its low frequency, which results in limited image resolution for treatment monitoring. , 
Irradiation mode.
According to the irradiation mode of the sound beam, US can be divided into focused and non-focused US. This precise targeting enables more accurate treatment, often facilitated by specialized acoustic lens or transducer. Focused ultrasound (FUS), a therapeutic technique, concentrates US within the human body and produces thermal, mechanical, or other biological effects, allowing for precise disease treatment without invasiveness. Compared with FUS, which concentrates US energy in a restricted space, non-focused US can affect a large tissue area and has been reported to have fewer possible toxic side effects associated with local heating. , 
Intensity.
Therapeutic US can be divided into high- and low-intensity US. High-intensity US, with high energy, causes inertial cavitation with the collapse of microbubbles, which generates localized high temperatures. For example, high-intensity focused US performs ablation by heating tumor tissue through high temperatures (≥55 °C). The high temperature results from the combined effects of thermal energy and cavitation, which can cause irreversible damage or coagulative necrosis of tumor cells. In contrast, low-intensity US, which typically utilizes mechanical rather than thermal effects to produce a therapeutic effect, has garnered considerable attention from researchers. Low-intensity focused ultrasound (LIFU) utilizes low-energy-level US wave to focus on the target tissue, mainly through mechanical energy. It does not cause a significant increase in tissue temperature, thereby avoiding some potential damage. 
Emission mode.
There are two emission modes: pulsed (e.g., 10 %, 20 %, or 50 % duty cycle) and continuous (100 % duty cycle). The duty cycle is denoted by a percentage, which refers to the percentage of time that US is generated over one cycle. Low-intensity pulsed US has low energy intensity and can output pulsed waves. It can induce therapeutic effects such as accelerating tissue repair or regeneration and inhibiting inflammatory responses. Low-intensity continuous US is a variant of low-intensity pulsed US and has been well-studied for a wide range of clinical applications, including neuromodulation and tissue regeneration. 
In summary, the therapeutic effect of US is influenced by the various parameters described above. Therefore, different US parameters should be selected for specific clinical applications.

2.3.

## Cytokines and signaling pathways associated with therapeutic US
In the treatment of inflammatory diseases, US can exert its effects by lowering the levels of pro-inflammatory factors and increasing those of anti-inflammatory factors. US has been reported to significantly reduce the production and expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), as well as chemokines like C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 1 (CXCL1), CXCL10, and C-C motif chemokine ligand 2. , , , , , , Additionally, it is able to elevate levels of anti-inflammatory factors such as transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) and IL-10. The ability of US to diminish inflammation in the body can be achieved through various signaling pathways, including mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase/serine/threonine kinase (PI3K/Akt), and Toll-Like Receptors (TLRs).
US can reduce the expression of MAP kinase kinase3/6 and mitogen-activated extracellular signal-regulated kinase1/2 phosphorylation induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and inhibit the phosphorylation of p38 and extracellular regulated protein kinases. US affects the MAPK pathway by inhibiting the phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and ERK, thereby preventing the LPS-induced increase in TNF-α and IL-6. US significantly limits the expression of inflammatory cytokines in synovial fluid by activating FAK signaling and inhibiting MAPK-mediated inflammatory responses. Regarding the NF-κB pathway, US suppresses both upstream and downstream factors associated with the TLR4/NF-κB pathway, including the TLR4/Myeloid differentiation primary response protein 88 (MyD88) complex, TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-8. , , By diminishing the phosphorylation degradation of IκBα, US reduces NF-κB phosphorylation and its translocation into the nucleus. , Additionally, US activates the intracellular ubiquitin-editing protein A20, thereby inhibiting NF-κB pathway. In aortic endothelial cells, US inhibits oxidative stress-induced endothelial-mesenchymal transition through the PI3K/Akt pathway. It upregulates the expression of Sox9, aggrecan, type II collagen, and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1 tissue inhibitors while suppressing MMP-3 secretion. Furthermore, it influences the mechanochemical transduction of the integrin-FAK-PI3K/Akt axis and alters macromolecular components. In the TLRs signaling pathway, US decreases the protein expression of TLR4 and MyD88 induced by LPS, , , as well as the phosphorylated expression of TBK1 and IRF3, independent of the MyD88 signaling pathway. This indicates that US influences the TLRs signaling pathway through both MyD88-dependent and TRIF-dependent mechanisms. Moreover, US can exert anti-inflammatory effects by inhibiting the TGF-β/Smad signaling pathway and the F-Box Leucine-rich 2/TNF receptor associated factor 6 signaling pathway. , , In summary, US can regulate cytokine levels through various signaling pathways, which accounts for its extensive applications in treating numerous inflammatory diseases.

2.4.

## Advantages of US over other stimulus-responsive excitation sources
Compared with other stimulus-responsive excitation sources, US has unique advantages, such as deep penetration, precise targeting, non-invasiveness, unaffected by external factors, relatively low price, and more widespread use ( ).
 Light is a key stimulus involved in the application of photodynamic therapy (PDT) and photothermal therapy (PTT) in the treatment of inflammatory diseases, which can address diseases through mechanisms such as the thermal effect and the induction of ROS. , However, there are several limitations in the application of light, such as insufficient penetration depth, potential damage to normal tissues, and thermal tolerance in target lesions that may affect treatment efficacy. , , , In contrast, sonodynamic therapy (SDT) utilizing offers deeper penetration and stronger targeting without harming adjacent normal tissues. , 
In addition to the thermal effects produced by light, changes in temperature can also serve as a stimulus to assist in the treatment of diseases. The temperature changes at the site of inflammation can activate the functions of NMs, making therapies highly targeted and effective. , However, temperature changes in the external environment tend to affect the therapeutic effect of temperature-stimulated NMs, whereas US-mediated NMs are less affected by external factors.
Additionally, the magnetic field acts on NMs to produce a thermal effect, thereby facilitating diseases treatment. This treatment method boasts advantages, including non-invasiveness, deep penetration, and high specificity. Yet, it is less widespread than that of US due to the need for precise, expensive equipment and complex procedures to generate the alternating magnetic field. , , 

3.

## NMs and US
3.1.

## Definition and superiority of NMs
With the remarkable advances of nanotechnology, many well-designed nanosystems have emerged that can be triggered under exogenous US stimulation. Over the past few decades, nanomedicine has made rapid advancements in utilizing the properties of NMs for molecular-level diagnosis and treatment of diseases. As the foundation of nanotechnology, NMs possess unique physical and chemical properties due to their size and shape falling within the nanoscale range, typically with at least one dimension of 100 nm. Compared with macroscopic materials, NMs have the following advantages in controlling inflammation. , 
3.1.1.

## NMs possess the capability of passive and active targeting of inflamed tissues
The EPR effect was mostly reported in anti-cancer NMs, but studies indicate that NMs can also accumulate in target areas through the EPR effect for the treatment of inflammatory diseases. The elevated expression of histamine, bradykinin, leukotrienes, and serotonin in inflamed tissues leads to increased intraendothelial gaps. , , These fenestrations facilitate the specific extravasation of NMs into the inflamed tissue. Additionally, during inflammation caused by infection, the pathogens responsible may secrete factors that increase vascular permeability, thereby promoting the EPR effect. , The EPR effect has been reported in the treatment of various inflammatory diseases, including atherosclerosis, pulmonary fibrosis, inflammatory bowel disease, and rheumatoid arthritis, etc. NMs, with their smaller size, accumulate in various inflamed tissues such as the heart, intestines, and joints through the EPR effect and exhibit high permeability to enter cells. Active targeting involves the conjugation of inflammatory molecules and cell-specific entities onto the surface of NMs, allowing for flexible design of these NMs with high specificity for targeted delivery. Inflammatory targets encompass the inflamed vascular system, pathogens, immune cells, and inflammatory mediators or products. 

3.1.2.

## NMs exhibit adjustable and modifiable characteristics
Nanoscale platforms can load various anti-inflammatory drugs or molecules, delivering anti-inflammatory agents to inflammation sites while enhancing drug absorption and providing sustained release, effectively addressing solubility and stability issues. On the other hand, NMs can serve as drug carriers and therapeutic agents for inflammatory diseases without the need for additional anti-inflammatory drugs. Furthermore, NMs can modulate inflammation at different stages, demonstrating good biocompatibility. 

3.1.3.

## NMs can be triggered by endogenous and exogenous stimuli
During treatment, NMs can be triggered by internal stimuli like pH, enzymes, reactive oxygen species (ROS), and reductive oxidation, as well as by external stimuli such as US, temperature, magnetic fields, light, voltage, and mechanical friction. Among external stimuli, US can provide better control over the release of NMs, thus allowing external intervention and improving manipulability.
NMs have other advantages over conventional materials. Take sonosensitizers, for example, which are the most extensively employed US-responsive agents and can generate ROS. First-generation sonosensitizers, such as porphyrin derivatives, are organic small molecules derived from photosensitizers used in photodynamic therapy (PDT). Despite their success in sonodynamic therapy (SDT), their widespread clinical application remains limited owing to several issues, including low bioavailability, poor pharmacokinetics (susceptibility to clearance by the immune system), poor tissue EPR effect, non-specific distribution, high dose dependence, low stability, and even toxicity. With the development of nanotechnology, the innovative combination of nanotechnology and sonosensitizers has brought about nanosized sonosensitizers, which can significantly overcome the shortcomings of conventional sonosensitizers, thereby enhancing their therapeutic efficacy. 

3.2.

## US-mediated NMs in inflammation control
Classical treatments for certain inflammatory diseases often involve the use of NSAIDs and glucocorticoids, which can cause numerous side effects. For instance, excessive use may trigger complications, such as exogenous Cushing's syndrome, and regardless of the mode of administration, long-term glucocorticoid therapy can result in complications such as obesity, insulin resistant, hypertension. , , In contrast to hormones that affect the entire body even when administered locally, US-mediated NMs offer improved targeting, and the controllability of US allows these materials to exert therapeutic effects at the lesion sites with less impact on other tissues and organs ( A).
 Additionally, the combination of US and NMs can accelerate the accumulation of drugs in target tissues, leading to more rapid therapeutic effects. The clinical significance of the EPR effect of NMs in disease treatment remains controversial, so it is still uncertain whether NMs alone can accumulate rapidly in the lesion. , However, the incorporation of US facilitates the smoother entry of NMs into the tissue, which means the drugs can accumulate more quickly and extensively, thereby achieving better therapeutic outcomes. .
For specific inflammatory diseases, the interaction between US and NMs can achieve anti-inflammatory effects and alleviate disease symptoms in different ways. In inflammatory diseases caused by infections (mainly bacterial infections), therapeutic US and US-responsive NMs exert therapeutic effects such as neutralizing bacterial toxins through sufficient ROS production, eradicating bacterial biofilms, and killing bacteria. While in aseptic inflammatory diseases, these approaches include the production of ROS to induce apoptosis, anti-inflammatory phenotype transition of inflammatory cells (such as macrophages), inhibition of the expression of inflammatory cells and factors ( B).
A variety of action modes are involved in US-mediated NMs for the treatment of inflammatory diseases ( A), which can be categorized as follows:
 3.2.1.

## US facilitates the delivery of NMs
US with energy will produce cavitation effect in the course of its action. , The cavitation effect refers to the formation of bubbles by the compression of gases in the medium, which produces a powerful mechanical effect when the bubbles expand and collapse rapidly under the action of sound waves. The microjet generated by the cavitation effect can propel drugs into tissues and reversibly permeabilize tissue, thereby facilitating drug uptake. The cavitation effect of US is utilized in treating neurological disorders, where US can alter the instantaneous permeability of the blood brain barrier, thus promoting the entry of nanomedicines into the brain to treat diseases such as post-traumatic stress disorder. , , US treatment can also lead to the disruption of bacterial biofilms, thereby increasing the penetration of nanomedicines to achieve better therapeutic outcomes, which plays an important role in treating several infection-associated inflammatory diseases. , , Notably, US-promoted delivery is affected by many properties of the NMs themselves, including their size, shape, elasticity, charge, and surface characteristics. , , , Therefore, by adjusting the material properties and US parameters, it is possible to better control the targeted delivery of NMs to the site of inflammation for therapeutic purposes ( B).

3.2.2.

## US controls the release of drugs from NMs
US not only facilitates the delivery of NMs in vivo but also, through its mechanical and thermal effects, causes the NMs to conformationally change once they reach the target, leading to the release of the drugs or genes loaded in them. Zhou et al. constructed platelet biomimetic rapamycin-loaded poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) NPs for the treatment of atherosclerosis. They found that the combined use of SonoVue™ and US enhanced the efficiency of rapamycin release from NPs, resulting in improved plaque stability and inhibition of atherosclerotic plaque formation. In a study to treat age-related macular degeneration, researchers similarly utilized US to assist in the delivery and release of pirfenidone encapsulated in PLGA NPs or a polyurethane-based nanocapsule system to modulate inflammation and fibrosis. Using US to actively regulate the release of nanomedicines enhances the targeting of the drugs and achieves precision therapy, yielding improved outcomes in managing inflammatory diseases ( C).

3.2.3.

## US and NMs combine to play a role in SDT
The main interaction mechanisms between US and NMs in SDT include ROS generation, mechanical effects, and thermal effects. First, NMs can be activated to generate ROS after absorbing the energy from US. The ROS generation occurs through sonochemical effects, including sonoluminescence and pyrolysis processes. Sonoluminescence is a phenomenon in which bubbles caused by the cavitation effect under US irradiation collapse quickly and release energy to trigger brief light emission. The specific mechanism is still unclear. Pyrolysis is another theory that explains the production of ROS; however, its specific mechanism has not been fully understood. Second, the mechanical effects primarily include cavitation and sonoporation effects. The cavitation effect is an important mechanism in US therapy and can be categorized into stable and inertial cavitation. Stable cavitation is induced by low-intensity US, causing bubbles to undergo periodic oscillation and exert shear forces on the surrounding environment. Inertial cavitation occurs when bubbles become unstable and collapse under local high temperatures and pressures, leading to the production of ROS, such as hydroxyl radicals. Additionally, the rupture of a cavitation bubble produces sonomechanical effects, such as shock waves and shear stress, and high temperatures in local cells or tissue. , The sonoporation effect refers to the formation of pores in the cell membrane under US, which facilitates the transportation of molecules and NMs into cells. Sonoporation can enhance the absorption and accumulation of drug molecules, genes, or NPs. Lastly, the thermal effect means the elevation in tissue temperature because of the absorption of thermal energy converted from US ( D). 

4.

## US-mediated NMs in treating non-infectious inflammatory diseases
Non-infectious inflammation, characterized by the absence of microbial involvement, can affect various bodily systems, such as the muscular, cardiovascular, and nervous systems. While acute inflammation plays a crucial role in tissue repair and regeneration, chronic inflammation can lead to detrimental health effects. As a result, research has focused on strategies to mitigate the harmful consequences of persistent inflammation. US-mediated NMs have emerged as a promising approach, offering an effective alternative to conventional drugs by minimizing side effects. Below are some notable applications of US-mediated NMs in the treatment of non-infectious inflammation.
4.1.

## Musculoskeletal disorder
4.1.1.

## Rheumatoid arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a common chronic inflammatory disease mainly manifested by synovial membrane hyperplasia and inflammatory cell infiltration, and the inflammatory cells secrete inflammatory cytokines that destroy cartilage and bone tissue. , Intervention in the inflammatory process and regulation of the expression of inflammatory mediators are effective treatments for RA.
In the early phase of RA, many inflammatory cells are recruited to the inflamed joints. Antigen-presenting cells present autoantigens, either exogenous antigen or endogenous antigen (such as citrullinated protein), to T cells, resulting in T cell activation and promoting B cell production of autoantibodies, including anti-citrullinated protein antibodies and rheumatoid factors, which attack tissue and cause damage. Activated T cells also promote M1 polarization of macrophages, triggering the generation of key pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-1, IL-6, and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), causing inflammation and tissue injury. Destructive fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) and osteoclasts also lead to the destruction of bone and cartilage. , Additionally, the hypoxic environment and increased generation of ROS in the joints upregulate the level of hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α), inducing macrophage M1 polarization and exacerbating synovial inflammation ( ). 
 Conventional treatment drugs include glucocorticoids, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs. These drugs primarily alleviate the symptoms of RA by inhibiting certain inflammatory mediators or immunosuppression, which have some shortcomings, such as undesirable therapeutic effects, and require high doses. Compared with typical methods, some targeted nanocarriers loaded with dexamethasone (Dex) or methotrexate (MTX) utilize the US-targeted microbubble destruction (UTMD) effects to augment the synergistic therapy of RA, triggering the drug release of nanocarriers and promoting drug delivery to the lesion in a noninvasive pathway. , Many previous studies have proposed that UTMD increases the permeability of cell membranes through the cavitation effect and enhances drug release and penetration. , 
Besides, in addition to microbubbles, US can also promote and accelerate the release of other NMs and drugs for the treatment of inflammatory arthritis. For example, perfluorocarbon (PFC)-based “nanobombs”, also named PFC-based nanodroplets, can be triggered to “explode” by US and enhance the drug release. Wang et al. designed folated-modified US-triggered PFC-nanobombs,which are loaded with Dex and functionalized with polyethylene glycol (PEG) and can be used for targeted therapies of RA via the EPR effect. In the same year, Wu and co-workers constructed a nanoplatform for US-triggered MTX release and near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence imaging to treat RA, which were echogenic liposomes loaded with indocyanine green and MTX, further decorated with iRGD peptide, called iELPs. In the in vivo RA model, the iELPs demonstrated enhanced enrichment in arthritic joints and excellent therapeutic efficacy upon stimulation with FUS ( A). In addition, exosomes, as extensively investigated small extracellular vesicles (typically ranging in size from 30 to 150 nm), can be augmented by US for targeted therapy in RA. , A recent study proposed and prepared anti-inflammatory exosomes (AI-Exo) by integrating IL-10, which is a kind of anti-inflammatory cytokine, and macrophage-derived exosomes. US efficiently increased the targeted entry of AI-Exo into inflammatory joints. Additionally, US-assisted AI-Exo promoted M2 macrophage polarization and decreased the expression level of inflammatory cytokines, which is a novel anti-inflammatory therapy in RA.
 Oxidative stress mediated by excess ROS is one of the most important triggering factors of RA, which exacerbates synovial inflammation. Current therapies can only accelerate ROS breakdown but cannot deal with the ROS generation caused by abnormal mitochondria. Mitophagy is a critical cytoprotective process. However, as there is no effective method to precisely induce mitophagy in the inflammatory area in vivo, further studies about mitophagy therapy have been hindered. Li et al. developed an US piezoelectric catalytic therapy consisting of two-dimensional piezoelectric nanosheets Fe/BiOCl, which can produce electrons in response to US stimulation in a ROS-rich environment ( B). These electrons will absorb and remove hydroxyl radicals (•OH) and singlet oxygen (1O2) produced by abnormal mitochondria to form innocuous H2O, accompanied by abundant H+ consumption and indirect depolarization of the mitochondrial membrane potential, ultimately triggering mitophagy and preventing inflammatory factor production. With this therapy, mitophagy and ROS eradication can be achieved simultaneously, ultimately diminishing the inflammatory response and accomplishing the goal of treating RA. Additionally, US can be used for real-time imaging during the RA treatment process. MnO2-nanomotors, driven by the inflammatory microenvironment, can visualize in situ oxygen generation through US imaging. The nanomotors can also enhance oxygen production, alleviate hypoxia, and activate ROS scavenging. Simultaneously, the arthritic microenvironment powered nanomotor system inhibits pro-inflammatory macrophage polarization and reduces the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines.
Hypoxia, another factor that exacerbates synovial inflammation, is a prominent microenvironmental feature of RA, triggered by the excessive proliferation of RA fibroblast-like synoviocytes, perpetuating inflammation and contributing to cartilage destruction. Currently, the main treatment approach is scavenging ROS and generating O2 to regulate the pathological conditions within the joints, either by eliminating M1 macrophages or converting them to an anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype. Furthermore, US therapy provides a new perspective for alleviating hypoxia by not only increasing oxygen production but also achieving relief through the moderate generation of ROS. US-driven SDT has garnered great attention due to its noninvasiveness and better depth penetration capabilities, ultrasonic cavitation effect is able to effectively eliminate activated synovial inflammatory cells. For better therapeutic effects, several innovative nanoplatforms have been proposed for SDT-involved combinational therapies. , However, the hypoxic synovial microenvironment results in inadequate ROS production, which significantly restricts the efficiency of SDT. Therefore, Song et al. constructed a Z-scheme heterostructure sonosensitizer, which was fabricated by human serum albumin (HSA) modified and zinc protoporphyrin IX (ZnPP) joined bismuth nanotriangle (Bi NTs-ZnPP/HSA). The nanoplatform was used to promote O2 supply and ROS generation with US irradiation for SDT in hypoxic RA treatment ( C). The acquired O2 could lessen hypoxia in the inflamed joints, and the generated ROS could eventually trigger caspase-dependent apoptosis, avoiding further inflammation. Li and co-workers developed a nanocomposite (Rh/SPX-HSA) to achieve mutual-reinforcing SDT activated by US, which is prepared by concave-cubic rhodium (Rh) nanozyme doped with sparfloxacin (SPX) and loaded with HSA. It was found that Rh exhibited intrinsic peroxidase and catalase-like activities to generate O2 in situ, suppressing the levels of HIF-1α, thus relieving hypoxia in joints. The cavitation effect that occurred in SPX-sensitized SDT would upregulate the activity of Rh nanozyme ( D). SPX sonosensitizer and Rh nanozyme synergistically produced ROS, which inhibited FLS proliferation and alleviated RA.
In addition, photodynamic therapy followed by sonodynamic therapy (PSDT) is another method that can be used for the treatment of RA. Tang et al. developed novel biodegradable PLGA NPs, loaded with oxygen and indocyanine green (OI-NPs) simultaneously. The combined strategy demonstrated that OI-NP-mediated PSDT can increase intracellular ROS generation, induce FLSs apoptosis, and ease the local hypoxic microenvironment.

4.1.2.

## Muscle injury
Muscle injury, the most frequent injury in musculoskeletal disorders, which can be divided into acute injury and chronic injury, usually results from a direct trauma. , During muscle injury, damaged muscle tissue releases inflammatory mediators, triggering the inflammatory response. Moderate inflammatory response is beneficial for muscle tissue repair; however, if the inflammatory response is excessive or prolonged, it can cause tissue damage. The inflammation and healing processes triggered by muscle injury consist of three distinct stages. The first stage is the destruction and inflammation phase (1–3 days), during which inflammatory cells such as neutrophils migrate to the damaged muscle area, releasing ROS and pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α and IL-1β. This triggers a series of signaling events that result in phosphorylation, allowing the release of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) and translocation to the cell nucleus, thus initiating its transcription. Simultaneously, the activation of NF-κB enhances the generation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, further promoting the development of inflammation. The second stage is the repair phase (3–4 weeks), during which satellite cells in the body are activated and differentiate into myoblasts. This process is regulated by cytokines and growth factors, such as transforming growth factor β. The extracellular matrix, including collagen, is produced by the matrix to facilitate repair. Finally, the remodeling phase (3–6 months) occurs. If the inflammatory response is excessive and produces a large amount of ROS, it can lead to chronic damage. , 
Therapeutic Pulsed Ultrasound (TPU) is a non-invasive transdermal delivery therapy widely used for healing musculoskeletal lesions, and its therapeutic effects occur through the cavitation phenomenon. US can increase the penetration and enhance the effects of anti-inflammatory agents or antioxidant drugs, which is called phonophoresis. Further, gold nanoparticles (GNPs) exhibit excellent biocompatibility and cellular interaction capabilities. , Their anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties have garnered widespread attention, as they can serve as anti-inflammatory agents by inhibiting NF-κB expression and as antioxidants by suppressing ROS formation ( A). Studies have demonstrated that in arthritis models, GNPs can reduce the infiltration of pro-inflammatory cytokines and macrophage. 
 In 2012, Victor and Silveira et al. linked TPU and GNPs to evaluate their impact on muscle injury, specifically on the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and oxidative stress parameters, which were assessed 7 days following the muscle injury. They introduced GNPs in the conductor gel of the pulsed US and used phonophoresis to promote the transport of NPs into the injured site. Their study has demonstrated that, compared to other groups (except sham), the TPU + dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) + GNP gel and TPU + GNP gel groups exhibited the greatest reduction of TNF-α and IL-1β levels, however, only the TPU + DMSO + GNP gel group demonstrated a significant decrease in superoxide anion (one of the primary ROS produced within cells) production ( B). Thus, they believed that the application of TPU plus GNP promoted the anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects. Several years later, they evaluated the effects of their therapy at the earlier stage of the inflammatory reaction (within 48 h). Their results suggested that TPU + DMSO + GNP can reduce oxidative stress parameters and promote muscle recovery. Moreover, in 2020, the same group reported their further studies, which associated TPU with anti-inflammatory drugs, such as diclofenac and ibuprofen, bound to GNPs in treating traumatic muscle injury. , 

4.2.

## Cardiovascular disease
4.2.1.

## Atherosclerosis and thrombus
Cardiovascular disease is a global health issue with high morbidity and mortality, whose underlying cause is atherosclerotic vulnerable plaque rupture or erosion and subsequent thrombosis. Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease primarily driven by multiple reactions. Inflammation serves as the shared foundation for the pathology and physiology of atherosclerosis, from its initiation and development to its complications. , Targeting the inflammatory pathways has thus offered a novel strategy for the prevention and treatment of atherosclerosis. The recent Canakinumab Anti-inflammatory Thrombosis Outcome Study, a randomized controlled trial that was published in the New England Journal of Medicine, has shifted the targeting of inflammation in atherosclerosis from speculation to clinical reality. 
In the early stages of atherosclerosis, endothelial injury (caused by harmful stimulations such as dyslipidemia or smoking) activates endothelial cells, leading to the expression of various inflammatory factors, including endothelial adhesion molecules. Additionally, monocytes differentiate into macrophages, which uptake modified low-density lipoprotein through scavenger receptor-mediated endocytosis and transform into foam cells. In the presence of pro-inflammatory mediators overpowering anti-inflammatory mediators, further cytokine production and immune cell recruitment are induced, amplifying the inflammatory response. In the later stages of atherosclerosis, plenty of macrophages and inflammatory factors infiltrate the vessel wall, leading to the degradation of collagen fibers in the plaque’s extracellular matrix. This ultimately causes the rupture of unstable plaques and the formation of arterial thrombosis. , 
Early detection and timely suppression can prevent atherosclerotic vulnerable plaque rupture and subsequent thrombosis. Given that macrophages play a key role in atherosclerosis, Yao and colleagues previously revealed that sinoporphyrin sodium‐mediated SDT suppresses plaque neovascularization through suppressing macrophage-mediated inflammation. Subsequently, for monitoring the real-time distribution of sonosensitizers at the molecular level and improving the therapeutic performance of SDT, the same team integrated magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), photoacoustic (PA) imaging, and US into a nanoplatform, providing an effective theranostic strategy for preventing plaque angiogenesis. The nanoplatform, namely termed PFP-HMME@PLGA/MnFe2O4-ramucirumab nanoparticles (PHPMR NPs), was fabricated by encapsulating hematoporphyrin monomethyl ether (HMME), perfluoropentane (PFP), and MnFe2O4 stabilized by PLGA shells and conjugated at the surface of Ramucirumab (an anti‐VEGFR‐2 antibody) ( A). The experiment demonstrated that ramucirumab endowed PHPMR NPs with cell targeting ability through active antigen–antibody interactions, which could actively target the mitochondria of rabbit aortic endothelial cells and enhance the accumulation of NPs in the atherosclerotic plaque neovessel. PFP can be vaporized into gas microbubbles under LIFU exposure. The results indicated that upon LIFU irradiation, PHPMR NPs exhibited higher ROS production efficacy in rabbit aortic endothelial cells, inducing mitochondrial‐caspase apoptosis. Moreover, PHPMR NP‐mediated SDT subsequently inhibited intraplaque hemorrhage and inflammation. As the primary inflammatory cells in the plaque, the decrease of macrophage foam cells can indicate plaque stability. The study found that, compared with the control group, the NP-mediated SDT could reduce the macrophage content by 59 % and the inflammation level in the femoral plaque by 71.5 % under positron emission tomography-computed tomography imaging.
 Studies have shown that targeted induction of proinflammatory macrophage apoptosis at the site of lesions is an efficient method for the early treatment of atherosclerotic plaques. Cao and co-workers developed a sonodynamic and photothermal agent for SDT and PTT synergistic therapy for the inhibition of the progression and inflammation of early atherosclerotic plaques. With a lower intensity of the US and a second near-infrared window (NIR-II, 1000–1700 nm) laser, the safety of atherosclerosis treatment would be improved. The agent, namely HA-HNSs, was CuS/TiO2 heterostructured nanosheets modified with hyaluronic acid (HA) and PEG. HA is a targeting molecule that can specifically bind the cluster determinant 44 receptor (CD44) on the membranes of activated macrophages ( B). Their study revealed that HA-HNSs-mediated SDT and PTT synergistically promoted macrophage apoptosis within plaques and suppressed early lesion progression. In vitro, the combination group (HA-HNSs + US + NIR-II) exhibited a significant reduction in the levels of proinflammatory cytokines compared with the nontreatment group, indicating excellent synergistic anti-inflammatory effects. Subsequent in vivo experiments further showed the anti-inflammatory effect of the HA-HNSs-mediated SDT and PTT.
Rupture-prone plaques and erosion-prone plaques are two major types of atherosclerotic plaques, which are believed to require different and personalized treatment. For rupture-prone plaques, anti-inflammation therapy is of great importance since they are characterized by chronic inflammation. As for erosion-prone plaques, it’s reported that anti-platelets are crucial. Recently, Gao et al. introduced a tailored treatment strategy for plaques that can target both rupture-prone and erosion-prone plaques with two specific peptides. They constructed a “Multifunctional Pathology-mapping Theranostic Nanoplatform (MPmTN)” that has an adjustable effect of anti-inflammation and anti-platelet for different types of plaques, anchoring macrophages and platelets, respectively. The nanoplatforms are composed of PLGA NPs that contain Fe3O4 and PFP, and are coated with two specific plaque-targeted peptides. Under therapeutic ultrasound (TUS) exposure, on the one hand, MPmTNs could effectively induce macrophage apoptosis in vitro and in vivo through a PFP phase transition, exhibiting an excellent anti-inflammatory effect; on the other hand, MPmTNs proved capable of destroying thrombi and breaking up activated platelets by microbubble disruption, together with excellent US/MRI imaging properties.
Thrombus is mainly composed of activated platelets and fibrin, which can block arteries or veins, causing many life-threatening diseases. For detecting thrombi and monitoring thrombolysis, thrombus-targeting NPs have been developed recently, whereas problems such as reticuloendothelial system clearance and limited targeting ability still exist. A bionic strategy concept has been proposed to solve these problems by evading reticuloendothelial system capture and enhancing thrombus-targeting properties. Interestingly, Fang et al. constructed a bionic system with macrophages that engulfed NPs. Macrophages have the ability of active targeting, which can sense chemokines and cytokines, and reach inflammatory tissue through chemotaxis, thus home to inflammatory thrombi. However, considering the progress of homing is relatively time-consuming and the thrombotic disease needs urgent treatment, they chose Fe3O4 NPs, which are magnetic navigation with permanent magnets, to achieve passive targeting under an external magnetic field. With the active chemotaxis of macrophages and passive magnetic navigation, the bionic system was endowed with enhanced targeting ability and could be delivered as much as possible to the thrombus site in a reduced time window. Under LIFU irradiation, the NPs were released from the macrophages and accumulated more in the thrombus. This bionic system exhibited remarkable potential in thrombus targeting; however, it has not been used for drug delivery, so further experiments are needed to explore the thrombolytic effect.

4.3.

## Neurological disorders
4.3.1.

## Cerebral ischemic disease
Stroke is a significant global cause of mortality, with ischemic stroke making up 80 % of cases. Early thrombolytic therapy is crucial in the management of ischemic stroke; however, ischemia–reperfusion injury following thrombolytic therapy is often accompanied by an intense inflammatory response and may result in neuronal injury, which is detrimental to the long-term prognosis. Nevertheless, recent studies have suggested that this thrombo-inflammation may be therapeutically targetable. 
Activated microglia/macrophage (M/M) can persist in the area of inflammation for a long time and participate in the inflammatory responses that occur at the injury site. Research has shown that inhibition of inflammation reduces subsequent neuronal injury. Zhao et al. fabricated phosphatidylserine (PS)-containing microbubbles (PS-MBs) and used UTMD to temporarily open the blood–brain barrier (BBB). US converted the microbubbles into NPs, making it easier to pass through the BBB. The addition of PS endowed microbubbles with targeting capabilities and regulated the activation of microglia to an anti-inflammatory phenotype through PS receptors. In addition, the exposure of PS promoted M/M recognition, and the NPs were absorbed by activated M/M in neuroinflammation, enabling delivery to target inflammatory regions and providing a basis for further inflammatory imaging and targeted drug delivery at cerebral ischemia sites.
Microglia, a type of neuroglia responsible for host defense, inflammatory regulation, etc., are activated in the early stages of central nervous system damage, such as stroke. However, microglia require a specific anti-inflammatory phenotype to reduce inflammation. M1 microglia elevates proinflammatory cytokines, while M2 microglia upregulates anti-inflammatory cytokines, which have opposite effects on neurons and the brain. Li et al. designed an US-responsive nanoliposome consisting of platelet membrane (PM) modified M0 microglia (PM-MG) and IL-4-coated liposomes. Under the irradiation of external US, M2-type polarization of microglia in stroke sites can be accelerated, and the effect of functional neuronal regeneration and targeted repair of the brain can be realized, which can be used for the long-term recovery process after an ischemic stroke ( A).
 
4.3.2.

## Cerebral hemorrhage disease
Intracerebral hemorrhage is a severe cerebrovascular disease that often leads to primary and secondary brain injuries. Primary brain injury refers to the process in which a cerebral blood vessel ruptures, forming a hematoma that compresses surrounding tissue and increases intracranial pressure. Subsequently, secondary brain injury occurs due to factors such as cellular debris, resulting in neuroinflammation and BBB disruption. The inflammatory response initiates immediately after hematoma formation and is characterized by the accumulation and activation of inflammatory cells, such as microglia. Therefore, anti-inflammatory treatment offers a potential treatment strategy after the onset of Intracerebral hemorrhage. , 
Subarachnoid hemorrhage, mainly caused by aneurysm rupture, is accompanied by many adverse effects, such as local inflammatory cascades, systemic inflammation, oxidative stress, and apoptosis. High-dose astaxanthin can down-regulate inflammatory cytokine levels and participate in neuroprotection via anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and anti-apoptotic mechanisms. In order to enhance the accumulation in the brain, Cai et al. prepared US triggered release NPs for craniocerebral delivery of astaxanthin, which were verified by in vivo experiments that the NPs have good biocompatibility, antioxidant and anti-apoptotic effects, and do not cause inflammation by themselves, achieving stable and long-term release, effectively relieving cerebral edema, and playing a neuroprotective role in early brain injury after subarachnoid hemorrhage. 
In order to obtain a better effect on hematoma clearance, Wang et al. combined magnetic targeting and FUS for intracranial drug delivery for the first time. They proposed an effective method of magnetic targeting nanocarriers combined with FUS for the treatment of intracerebral hemorrhage. This nanocarrier is loaded with peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) agonists that magnetically target and enrich hematoma regions. With FUS assistance, drug diffusion can be enhanced, and stable and uniform drug distribution can be achieved. PPARγ has been shown to be a nuclear receptor with anti-inflammatory and hematoma clearance effects, and its activation can reduce the occurrence of neuroinflammation. In vivo experiments have shown that the application of magnets and FUS significantly increased PPARγ activation, decreased the expression level of IL-1β, changed the macrophage type, increased the transformation of macrophages to an anti-inflammatory phenotype, which alleviated neuroinflammation and cerebral edema, accelerated the clearance of hematomas after intracerebral hemorrhage, and improved neurological deficits and brain injury ( B).

4.3.3.

## Alzheimer's disease
Neuroinflammation (including microglia hyperplasia and astrocyte hyperplasia) is a pathological marker of neurodegenerative diseases. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most prevalent neurodegenerative disease. Researchers have found elevated levels of inflammatory markers in AD patients, indicating the important role of neuroinflammation in the pathogenesis of AD, particularly in the early stages involving the release of pro-inflammatory factors. , In order to regulate the inflammatory response and the expression of inflammatory factors, Liu et al. used quercetin-modified sulfur nanoparticles (Qc@SNPs) in microbubbles and FUS to achieve the temporary opening of BBB, mediated the transport and accumulation of nanomedicines in the brain, thereby reducing endoplasmic reticulum stress, inducing neuronal apoptosis, inflammatory response, etc., and protecting nerve cells, so as to effectively treat Alzheimer's disease. Compared to directly incubating cells with Qc@SNPs, the combination of microbubbles and US can effectively help Qc@SNPs enter cells through sonoporation, resulting in approximately a 5-fold increase in “conventional” internalization efficiency. They assessed the anti-inflammatory activity of NPs by their ability to inhibit inflammatory mediators, and the study showed that inflammatory cytokines were significantly reduced after treatment with NPs, thus showing that they were effective in reducing the inflammatory response.

4.3.4.

## Spinal cord disease
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a devastating condition that causes tissue loss and neurologic disorders. The inflammatory environment that develops after SCI hinders neurogenesis and disrupts the spinal cord's ability to mend itself. Zhang et al. implemented a new strategy combining US and 2D NMs to synergistically treat SCI. Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are 2D NMs with good biocompatibility, and the team used a modified LDH (MgFe-LDH) loaded with neurotrophic factor 3 (NT3) to construct MgFe-LDH/NT3 NPs. Previous studies have demonstrated the potential of MgFe-LDH/NT3 for functional recovery in SCI. The latest studies have shown that the combination of US and NP therapy promoted neurogenesis and exerted anti-inflammatory effects ( A). Additional RNA sequencing demonstrated that the core mechanism is Piezo1 downregulation ( B). The study revealed that US inhibited the inflammatory response in vivo and in vitro, and the NPs promoted neurogenesis, both of which could downregulate Piezo1 gene expression. Further experiments showed that combination therapy regulates inflammation through the Piezo1/NF-κB pathway ( C). It is worth noting that the combined therapy proposed by the team has wide potential for clinical application because this inorganic 2D material’s analogue can also be applied clinically for treating gastric diseases.
 
4.3.5.

## Post–traumatic stress disorder
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a mental disorder that occurs following stressful or traumatic events. Recent studies have suggested a close connection between PTSD and neuroinflammation. , , Neuroinflammation is related to the activation of neuroimmune cells and alterations in inflammatory markers. BBB limits the efficiency of drugs used for PTSD treatment. Existing strategies, including NPs, liposomes, exosomes, and cell membrane biomimetic delivery systems, can overcome the BBB. Li et al. proposed a bionic drug delivery system, macrophage membrane nanovesicles (CMNV) loaded with cannabidiol, that can be delivered to inflammatory sites of the brain with the aid of US to alleviate the symptoms of PTSD. Cell membrane-encapsulated delivery system is an important type of biomimetic delivery system. Macrophages, as key cells in inflammatory responses, whose cell membranes have inflammatory and immune escape capability, can serve as “Trojan horses” to transport drug-loading NPs to treat diseases. Cannabidiol is a natural ingredient extracted from cannabis, and the team's previous research has proved its effectiveness in the treatment of PTSD and now improves the efficiency of targeted delivery in the brain through biomimetic drug delivery. In vitro and in vivo experiments have proven the anti-inflammatory, inflammation-targeting, immune cell escape characteristics of nanovesicles and their favorable brain targeting properties.

4.4.

## Other diseases
4.4.1.

## Drug or ischemia/reperfusion-induced hepatitis
Hepatitis refers to the inflammatory changes in the liver caused by viral infections, drugs, alcohol, or other abnormalities. For example, in the early stages of hepatic ischemia, damaged liver cells release molecule patterns that can activate specific pattern recognition receptors on innate immune cells, leading to local aseptic inflammation and further aggravating hepatocellular injury. , Hepatitis induced by drugs or ischemia/reperfusion (IR) is difficult to handle and needs to be treated in the early stages. Even though the inflammation response mechanisms of drug-induced hepatitis and IR-induced liver injury are different, various adhesion molecules can always be found highly expressed on hepatic endothelial cells (HECs). Intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) is one of the major molecules involved in the deterioration of inflammatory responses. Un et al. successfully inhibited acute hepatic inflammation by efficiently suppressing ICAM-1, utilizing US-responsive and mannose-modified lipoplexes (Man-PEG2000 bubble lipoplexes [Man-PEG2000 BLs]), which was achieved by selective and efficient ICAM-1 small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfer. By cleaving messenger RNA, the siRNA can regulate genes and be promising for molecular therapy. However, conventional in vivo siRNA delivery methods are faced with many obstacles, such as degradation and escape from endosomes. With high transfer efficiency into the cytoplasm, delivery using microbubbles and US is becoming a candidate for delivering siRNA. The liposome/siRNA complexes (Man-PEG2000 BLs) developed by Keita Un and workers were transferred into HECs in vitro and in vivo under US exposure and demonstrated the robust anti-inflammation effects of ICAM-1 siRNA delivery in multiple kinds of inflammatory responses, such as IR-induced inflammatory mouse models. As for acute inflammation, the therapeutic effects might be achieved due to the sustained suppression of ICAM-1 effects for a period of 72 h; however, for many of these chronic inflammatory diseases, more stable siRNA forms should be developed to prolong the gene suppression. Moreover, ICAM-1 has been reported to be involved in various other inflammatory diseases, such as ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease; thus, this ICAM-1 siRNA delivery method has a tendency for application to many other inflammatory diseases.

4.4.2.

## Immune nephritis
Immune-associated nephropathy, such as lupus nephritis, often equates with glomerulonephritis, which has the characteristic of podocytopathies. Conventionally, lupus glomerulonephritis is driven by immune complex-mediated inflammation, wherein autoantibodies and immune complexes deposit in the glomeruli, leading to renal inflammation. The functional and morphologic changes of podocytes are caused by many factors, and the stabilization and repair of podocyte actin cytoskeletons by using Dex have been demonstrated to be effective in the treatment of nephritis. However, the clinical utilization of systemic glucocorticoids has been limited by their inevitable side effects. To reduce side effects, plenty of drug-targeted delivery systems have been developed for target kidneys. Fan et al. proposed a novel US reactive Dex nano-delivery system, namely Dex/PFP@LIPs-BMS-α, for the treatment of immune nephritis, which not only achieved controlled drug release through the loaded PFP and LIFU-induced UTMD technology but also caused precise target delivery of Dex to podocyte targets with the navigation of BMS-α. BMS-α is a selective agonist that activates the melanocortin-1 receptor that is expressed on podocytes ( ). The experiment demonstrated that the combination of Dex/PFP@LIPs-BMS-α and LIFU was able to improve podocyte morphology and minimize inflammatory mediator infiltration and expression, along with significantly lower serum creatinine and 24 h proteinuria levels, which were critical indicators of the therapeutic performance of nephritis. Furthermore, visual imaging functions were another satisfactory capability of Dex/PFP@LIPs-BMS-α. It could offer visual guidance and treatment monitoring with the outstanding abilities of ultrasonic, photoacoustic, or fluorescence imaging.
 In summary, US-mediated NMs exhibit excellent targeting capabilities and controllable release in the treatment of non-infectious inflammatory diseases ( ). They address non-infectious inflammation by reducing the expression of inflammatory cytokines at the site of inflammation, increasing the release of anti-inflammatory factors, decreasing the production of ROS, and enhancing ROS consumption. These materials can be further enhanced by loading drugs to amplify these effects or to provide additional functionalities. Moreover, they can provide a monitor during treatment, allowing for better observation of therapeutic outcomes. Therefore, US-mediated NMs play a significant role in the treatment of non-infectious inflammation. However, further efforts are needed to expand the range of diseases treated, improve the treatment efficiency, and simplify manufacturing processes.
 

5.

## US-mediated NMs in treating infection-associated inflammatory diseases
Infection is the process by which pathogenic microorganisms such as bacteria, viruses, fungi, etc. invade the human body and proliferate, causing local tissue and systemic inflammatory reactions, which remain a formidable public health enemy. Infections caused by pathogenic bacteria are common in daily life and can cause diseases ranging from minor skin infections to severe sepsis. , Even though the use of antibiotics has achieved success in slowing down the progress of bacterial infections, the overuse of antibiotics has increased the appearance of multidrug-resistant (MDR) species and greatly reduced the efficacy of antibiotics in treating bacterial infectious diseases. The challenge is further exacerbated by the formation of bacterial biofilms, which are usually encapsulated with extracellular polymeric substances. With less potential for inducing resistance and toxicity, physical methods such as light, US, and temperature have become novel alternatives. Among them, US wave-driven aSDT is becoming a highly promising approach for infection eradiation. 
Sonosensitizers play a significant role in SDT. With the action of sonosensitizers driven by low frequency ultrasonic waves, SDT can convert O2 into toxic ROS, such as •OH and 1O2, causing non-selective damage to the bacterial structures. However, traditional sonosensitizers exhibit problems such as low targeting ability, low bioavailability, and a short duration of action, showing insufficient efficiency in the use of US energy to generate sufficient ROS for bacterial inactivation. The rapid development of nanotechnology has brought opportunities to the treatment of infection. Nano-sonosensitizers refer to NPs loaded with small molecule sonosensitizers or NMs with acoustic sensitization, which can enhance the cavitation effect and effectively promote the efficiency of aSDT. 
Of note, SDT has been found to be more effective in combination with other strategies for destroying bacteria and their biofilms. CDT utilizes Fenton catalysts to eradicate bacteria by promoting the generation of highly toxic •OH from hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). A combined modality of sonoactivated chemodynamic therapy (SCDT) has been proposed. Recently, Liang et al. engineered copper peroxide (CuO2) nanoclusters on the surface of titanium oxide (TiO2) nanosheets, which endowed the Fenton catalytic activity for SCDT, demonstrating an elimination rate > 99.9999 % against MDR pathogens in 5 min ( A). In PTT, solar energy is able to be transferred into heat. He and co-workers developed a Molybdenum (Mo) based sonosensitizer to achieve multimodal therapy by combing SDT and PTT, which was proposed as a novel strategy for NIR-II photo-amplified SDT ( B). Moreover, antibacterial photodynamic therapy (aPDT) is considered an effective therapy that can quickly eradicate pathogens via ROS production under light irradiation. Cheng et al. reported dual-responsive nanocomposites for synergistic antibacterial application when exposed to combined stimulation of NIR and US, which exerted PDT/PTT/SDT functions via the mesoporous TiO2@Polydopamine NPs. This simple structure nanoplatform can achieve effective sterilization with low-energy stimulation ( C). 
 5.1.

## Osteomyelitis
Osteomyelitis, a difficult-to-treat bone disease triggered by bacterial infection, can induce serious inflammation, permanent disability, and fatal sepsis, which is a life-threatening challenge. Clinically, such infection is often treated by the lasting and high-dose antibiotics administration as well as invasive debridement. However, these treatment approaches have failure rates of up to 30 %, accompanied by notable problems like antibiotic resistance and tissue disfigurement. PDT and PTT are mature in dealing with bacterial infection; however, the insufficient penetration depth of light limits the effectiveness of these therapies. Instead, the US is advantageous owing to its safety and strong ability for tissue penetration. aSDT represents an advanced method for treating drug-resistant bacterial infections. Under US irradiation, sonosensitizers could generate toxic ROS, which can cause cellular oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation, DNA damage, and eventually bacterial death. 
Rapid, dynamic clearance of concurrent bacteria and residual toxins is needed, given that the marrow cavity has a blood flow environment. Yu and colleagues construct a multifunctional system for SDT in treating osteomyelitis caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), which has excellent single-atom sonocatalytic and dynamic detoxifying capabilities. They enhanced the sonocatalytic property by immobilizing Pt single atoms in a zirconium-based porphyrin metal–organic framework (HNTM) and realized the dynamic movement ability by loading Au nanorods (Au NRs) on the surface of HNTM-Pt, which also increased ultrasonic, cavitation, and electron transfer efficiency, thus giving the sonosensitizer ideal antibacterial properties. The sonocatalytic mechanism is that Au NRs, as a US-responsive actuator, can boost the ultrasonic cavitation and enhance the ultrasonic energy absorption, thus promoting the generation of 1O2; moreover, Au NRs and Pt single atoms served as electron acceptors to facilitate the transfer of electrons produced from HNTM, increasing the separation efficiency of electron-hole pairs ( A). Besides, the team improved the biocompatibility and enabled toxin neutralization ability by coating HNTM-Pt@Au with rat red blood cell (RBC) membrane. Thus, the RBC-HNTM-Pt@Au had a powerful US propelled ability to dynamically neutralize the toxins secreted by MRSA and provided an achievable method for in situ and rapid management of osteomyelitis.
 Cheng et al. constructed a robust sonosensitizer for synergistic sonodynamic-catalytic therapy for the control of osteomyelitis caused by MRSA, which can produce large amounts of ROS and has high biosafety. The sonosensitizer uses gold-doped titanate nanotubes (Au/TNTs) as the sonodynamic-catalytic backbone and is conjugated with a potent guanidinium-rich polymer (PG). Au/TNTs have high US absorption capacity and exhibit peroxidase-like functionality activated by an infected microenvironment that rapidly degrades endogenous H2O2 to generate adequate ROS, especially •OH, which is the most toxic one to bacterial biofilm. PG shows an excellent affinity for matrix rich in negatively charged components, demonstrating better penetration of biofilms to remove physical barriers, thus supporting the sonodynamic-catalytic clearance of bacterial biofilms. Meanwhile, US has a deep and safe tissue penetration ability, nanostructure Au/TNT@PG sensed and responded to endogenous and exogenous triggers, showing superior bacterial anchorage and bacterial biofilm matrix penetration to trigger “collapse inside biofilm” ( B).
Other high efficiency sonosensitizers provide multiple strategies for treating bone infections. Feng et al. developed a bifunctional sonosensitizer, which consists of porphyrin-like Zn single-atom catalysts (g-ZnN4) and MoS2 quantum dots. Benefiting from the construction of heterogeneous interfaces, the g-ZnN4-MoS2 fully allowed more generation of 1O2. Within 20 min of US irradiation, the generated 1O2 can kill MRSA with an efficiency of 99.58 %; meanwhile, it can achieve steady release for 28 days, ensuring great biologic function, which is a successful treatment of MRSA-infected osteomyelitis ( A). Its sonocatalytic and osteogenic abilities have been proven to be excellent both in vitro and in vivo. Of note, the same research team reported another efficient sonosensitizer, RBC-HNTM-MoS2, through piezoelectric-assisted sonocatalysis. MoS2 nanosheets have a piezoelectric effect, which piezoelectric polarization induced by US, leading to effective charge transfer in the heterointerface of HNTM-MoS2, promoting ROS generation ( B). The sonosensitizer has powerful US-propelling ability to manage MRSA-infected osteomyelitis by producing ROS and excellent mechanical force, which can eradicate MRSA with an efficiency of 98.5 % under 15 min of US irradiation, combined with the toxin neutralization ability. Recently, Wang et al. developed a sonosensitizer, HNTM, modified by Ti3C2 nanosheets (HN-Ti3C2), which is a distinctive nanocomposite that can be used in eliminating infection and promoting bone repair under low-intensity US. Ti3C2 efficiently improved the acoustic catalytic performance and generated large amounts of ROS under US irradiation, demonstrating great 99.75 % antibacterial effectiveness in a MRSA-infected rat osteomyelitis model ( C).
 Moreover, it has been found that sonosensitizers can modulate the inflammatory environment. Cheng and co-workers synthesized ultrasmall platinum-copper alloy nanoparticles (PtCu NPs), which can generate high 1O2 under US irradiation. Experiments show that PtCu NPs promote cell migration and angiogenesis by up-regulating HIF-1α and CD31. Meanwhile, PtCu NPs effectively eliminated staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) and inhibited S. aureus-induced osteomyelitis in the wound model ( D).

5.2.

## Oral inflammatory diseases
Periodontitis is a chronic disease induced by bacteria with uncontrolled bacterial overgrowth and progressive tooth supporting tissue destruction, eventually leading to tooth loss or even systemic diseases. Major clinical treatment strategies, such as antibiotic therapy and mechanical debridement, have some limitations, including bacterial resistance or invasive methods, which will cause side effects and panic in patients. Xin et al. developed an innovative nano-sonosensitizer for efficient ROS generation by combining SDT and CDT under US stimulation, which can treat periodontitis efficiently and noninvasively. The multifunctional nanoplatform was prepared by growing TiO2 on dendritic large pore mesoporous silica nanoparticles (DLMSNs), subsequent to Ag deposition (DT-Ag), and decorating it with quaternary ammonium chitosan (CS+). The obtained DT-Ag-CS+ exhibited excellent SDT and CDT performances, owing to Ag deposition, and the highly positive-charged CS+ on the surface of DT-Ag makes it easy to penetrate into bacterial cells. They investigated the in vitro antibacterial effects of DT-Ag-CS+ against Porphyromonas gingivalis (P. gingivalis) and evaluated the in vivo anti-periodontitis effects via combating periodontitis in rats ( A). The findings revealed the DT-Ag-CS+ group had the lowest relative bacterial survival rate with US irradiation (1 W/cm2, 1 MHz, 5 min), only 19.3 %; meanwhile, it effectively alleviated inflammatory responses.
 Different from periodontitis in natural periodontal tissue, the tissue surrounding the implant is more vulnerable to bacterial invasion, resulting in infectious diseases such as peri-implantitis, namely, peri-implant infection. The primary contributing factor to peri-implantitis is plaque biofilm composed of P. gingivalis and other anaerobic bacteria, whose main manifestation is peri-implant mucosal inflammation and finally implant failure. Biofilm is a microbial community, and the biofilm microenvironment is hypoxic, providing an excellent environment for the colonization of more anaerobic bacteria, reducing antimicrobial efficiency. In addition, the biofilm matrix protects bacteria and makes them resistant to typical treatments. Therefore, the eradication of biofilm is decisive for the successful treatment of peri-implantitis. US-activated aSDT is an emerging method for the management of biofilm infections. Li et al. proposed an activatable nanoplatform (Au TNT) for eradicating biofilm and treating peri-implant infection. This nanoplatform can be utilized as a sonosensitizer for aSDT, which can increase the quantum yield and the performance of SDT and has long-term antibacterial properties. Au TNT was prepared by forming TiO2 nanotubes (TNT) on the surface of the Ti implant and depositing Au NP on the surface of the TNT. Under US irradiation, O2 and ROS produced by Au TNT increased, which alleviated the hypoxic microenvironment of biofilms and effectively eradicated single- and multi-species pathogenic biofilms. In the rat peri-implantitis model, Au TNT decreased by 3 logs of colony-forming units compared with the control group, showing excellent antibacterial effect. Of note, the downregulation of inflammatory cytokines suggested that AU TNT also had an anti-inflammatory effect and promoted bone repair. Previously, Sun et al. developed an Au nanoparticles modified TiO2 nanotube (AuNPs-TNT) to increase the therapeutic depth and enhance the antibacterial effect via SDT. The experiments showed that, under ultrasonic treatment, AuNPs modified on the TNT surface induced the production of many ROS by preventing the rapid recombination of triggered electron holes, which could effectively inactivate P. gingivalis, one of the major pathogenic bacteria forming biofilms in vivo ( B).
Enterococcus faecalis (E. faecalis) is a prominent contributor to dental root canal infection. It is highly resistant to intra-canal irrigation and other disinfection treatments, which may lead to the failure of root canal treatment. Mesoporous calcium silicon nanoparticles (MCSNs) are drug transport vehicles with excellent mesoporous, infiltrating, and releasing properties. Ag-MCSNs prepared by incorporating nanosilver into MCSNs can penetrate into dentin tubules after ultrasonic activation, thus persistently inhibiting the growth of E. faecalis and having an ideal antibacterial effect. Ag − MCSN prepared by Fan et al. by adsorption and the template method, was able to inhibit the colonization of E. faecalis. Among them, Ag-MCSN-T prepared by the template method had lower cytotoxicity and was expected to become a novel root canal disinfectant. Studies have demonstrated that zinc ions can increase the antibacterial effect of silver ions. Further studies by Fan et al. indicated that the combination of silver and zinc exhibited the lowest cytotoxicity and the largest synergistic bactericidal effect when the ratio of silver to zinc atoms was more than 1:6. Based on the above findings, Sun et al. developed silver–zinc-incorporated mesoporous calcium silicon nanoparticles (Ag-Zn MCSNs) with the optimal Ag-Zn ratio (1:12), and verified their great antibacterial effect in the animal tooth infection medal of beagle dogs, indicating their potential as an effective root canal disinfectant. In addition, another team fabricated a synergistic nanoplatform based on mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) for Fenton reaction-enhanced aSDT for root canal disinfection. The fenton reaction refers to the catalytic conversion of H2O2 to •OH. The sonosensitizer loaded on MSNs was activated by ultrasonic irradiation to produce ROS. Meanwhile, the team further increased the production of ROS through a Fenton reaction mediated by metal ions, like iron, which realized efficient bactericidal action against E. faecalis and had good anti-biofilm activity.

5.3.

## Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis is an infectious disease caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB), posing a great threat to human health compared with other bacterial infections. The current regimen for MTB requires a duration of over 6 months, involving the use of multiple anti-tuberculosis drugs, which is time-consuming. Moreover, it can cause drug resistance and many side effects, leading to poor patient compliance. The rapid development of efficient drug delivery strategies has aroused great attention in disease treatment. NPs, which are effective as drug carriers in achieving controlled release of drugs, have shown great potential to deliver therapeutic drugs or molecules to the site of infection, effectively improving anti-infection effects. US-mediated drug delivery can be synergistic with NPs to trigger the release of drug-loaded NPs through the cavitation effect to achieve bactericidal efficacy. 
Due to the high contagiousness and pathogenicity of MTB, experiments about MTB must be performed in laboratories that adhere to the requirements of National Biosafety Level 3 Safety. Therefore, homologous substitution models have become suitable choices for experiments, among which M. smegmatis and Bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG) are commonly used MTB models. , In order to be more effective against MTB, Du's research team conducted a series of studies. In 2020, they developed PLGA NPs loaded with levofloxacin (LEV/LVFX), a typical anti-tuberculosis drug, and combined with low-frequency and low-intensity ultrasound (LFLIU) for the treatment of M. smegmatis in macrophages. Experiments showed that US irradiation (0.13 W/cm2, 42 kHz, 10 min) promoted the release of LEV from NPs, increased the local concentration of the drug, played a combined bactericidal effect, and shortened the treatment period. Meanwhile, the combination of US and drug-loaded NPs can promote apoptosis of macrophages in vitro and induce the production of intracellular ROS, which further leads to bacterial damage.
In 2021, the team demonstrated that the BM2-modified LVFX loaded PLGA-PEG (Polyethylene glycol) nanoparticles (BM2-LVFX NPs) have the ability to target BCG through both in vitro and in vitro experiments. It can be used in the targeted treatment of BCG bacterial infections by sonodynamic antimicrobial chemotherapy (SACT). SACT produces ROS through the synergistic effect of low-frequency US (0.67 W/cm2, 42 kHz, 5 min) and NPs loaded with LEV sonosensitizers, effectively eradicating bacterial infection and inhibiting the growth of subcutaneous abscesses.
The cellulose-containing biofilms formed by MTB make the treatment of tuberculosis more challenging. In 2023, the team developed a composite NP (CL@LEV-NPs) loaded with cellulase (CL) and LEV based on PLGA polymerized organic material, combined with low-frequency US (0.34 W/cm2, 42 kHz, 5 min). US triggered the release of CL and LEV from the composite NPs, CL effectively triggered the destruction of BCG bacterial biofilms, and LEV effectively killed bacteria in biofilms. In addition, another mechanism of antimicrobial action may be associated with SCAT, where US-activated LEV sonosensitizers produce lots of ROS, leading to severe cellular injury. In vivo and in vitro assays have shown its significant removal and bacterial effect on biofilms.

5.4.

## Other bacteria-induced infections
5.4.1.

## Pneumonia
With the emergence of MDR bacteria, deep-tissue infectious diseases such as bacterial pneumonia induced by MDR bacteria are becoming a global health problem. With the development of nanotechnology, scientists have committed to developing a variety of new antibiotic-alternative antimicrobial strategies, of which SDT has shown immense potential. Compared with laser lights, US has stronger tissue penetration and has obvious advantages in the treatment of deep-tissue diseases. Pan et al. first reported the use of SDT for treating bacterial pneumonia by developing ZIF-8-derived carbon@TiO2 nanoparticles (ZTNs) as a sonosensitizer that can be accurately delivered to infected tissue in the lung. The metal–organic framework-derived NPs can be administered by pulmonary inhalation drug delivery, with high bioavailability compared to the oral administration route. In addition, compared with the typical inorganic sonosensitizer TiO2, ZTNs have a narrower bandgap and can produce a higher amount of ROS under US irradiation, mainly 1O2 and •OH, showing a good inhibition rate against a variety of Gram-negative MDR bacteria in vitro. Meanwhile, it can effectively clear MDR Klebsiella pneumoniae in mouse lung infection models ( A). Of note, the survival rate of NOD/SCID (severe immunodeficiency) mice is up to 100 %, which is safe and effective, showing a great prospect for the therapy of deep-tissue bacterial infections.
 
5.4.2.

## Myositis
Myositis caused by bacterial infections usually presents as a focal muscle infection caused by spreading adjacent to the infected site. MDR bacteria make the treatment of bacterial myositis even more challenging. Pan and co-workers developed a smart nanoliposome platform (MLP18) and demonstrated that MLP18-mediated SDT effectively eradicated inflammation and abscess in a MRSA-infected myositis mouse model. The nanoliposomes were prepared by encapsulating a potent sonosensitizer purine 18 (P18) into a cholesterol and bacteria-responsive lipid compositions modified with maltohexaose, which enables the complete eradication of bacteria in vivo by cytotoxic ROS generated under US irradiation ( B). P18 has high sonodynamic activity, along with near infrared optical imaging capability, enabling controlled, effective bacterial internalization by infected microenvironment-triggered drug release. In addition, the maltohexaose and lipid compositions can help selectively target the identification of bacteria and achieve bacteria-activated sonosensitizer delivery, providing specific bacterial diagnostic functions that can accurately differentiate bacterial infection sites from sterile inflammation or cancer.

5.4.3.

## Otitis media
Otitis media, commonly caused by bacterial infections such as S. aureus, can lead to hearing loss in young children and is currently commonly treated with antibiotics, although serious adverse reactions may occur. , SDT has a unique advantage, through the interaction between US and sonosensitizers, it generates ROS to destroy bacteria. Su et al. prepared an antibacterial nanocomposite (NC) consisting of Curcumin, Tanshinone IIA, and Chitosan, which has high solubility and strong electropositivity and can capture bacteria through a spider-web-like effect generated by electrostatic interaction. Meanwhile, in vivo experiments showed that SDT further enhanced the antibacterial and anti-inflammatory activities mediated by the nanocomposite through the generation of ROS and essentially had no bacterial resistance or toxicity, which shows the same efficacy as ofloxacin, a commonly used clinical antibacterial drug, suggesting that NC-mediated SDT is an effective treatment for bacterial otitis media.

5.4.4.

## Acne
Acne is a chronic inflammatory disease primarily triggered by Propionibacterium acnes that can result in soreness, itching, and pain, leave scars on the skin, and even cause psychological problems. , Currently, the most commonly used treatments for acne include oral or topical antibiotics. , However, oral antibiotics may cause other side effects, while topical antibiotics may not have a good therapeutic performance due to the barrier effect of the skin. Applying potent antibacterial agents in situ is the most efficient approach for treating acne. Xiang's team constructed a sodium hyaluronate microneedle patch composed of a zinc porphyrin-based metal–organic framework and zinc oxide (ZnTCPP@ZnO). Sodium hyaluronate made it easy for the ZnTCPP@ZnO to be delivered to diseased places. Under US irradiation, the composite material could generate a substantial amount of ROS to kill Propionibacterium acnes, thus decreasing the concentrations of proinflammatory factors such as TNF-α, IL-8, and MMP-2 ( C). Additionally, the patch enhanced the expression of genes involved in DNA replication and promoted fibroblastic proliferation, eventually favoring skin tissue repair. This study offers a highly effective approach to treating acne.
In conclusion, in the treatment of infectious inflammation, most US-mediated NMs inhibit bacterial growth and kill bacteria through the generation of ROS ( ). Therefore, identifying materials with high electron transfer efficiency to produce more ROS for bacterial eradication is a key strategy. Additionally, some materials can achieve antibacterial effects by reducing biofilm formation or disrupting existing biofilms. Furthermore, several US-mediated NMs can not only remove bacteria but also neutralize toxins produced by bacteria, which is vital for minimizing the damage caused by infectious inflammation to the body. Future research should focus on enhancing antibacterial efficacy without harming normal human cells and improving the effectiveness of neutralizing bacterial toxins.
 

6.

## Challenges and future directions
Inflammatory diseases pose significant global health threats with far-reaching sociomedical implications. US-mediated NMs exhibit therapeutic potential for various diseases, including inflammatory diseases and cancer. Presently, US-mediated NMs demonstrate advantages including targeted delivery, theranostic platforms, and the ability to facilitate combination therapies, which indicates broad prospects for managing inflammatory diseases. However, their clinical translation faces several challenges, and future enhancements are required ( ).
 6.1.

## Refining NMs (nano-sonosensitizers)
The efficacy of US therapy is largely dependent on the type of sonosensitizer used. Ideal sonosensitizers should exhibit low toxicity, high therapeutic efficacy, and enhanced bioavailability. However, NMs used for US therapy have been found to potentially cause some side effects in humans. Previous reports indicate that NMs are associated with an increased risk of inflammation, allergies, and certain reproductive system diseases. , Therefore, long-term toxicity studies of NMs, particularly non-degradable inorganic NMs, are required to ensure their biological safety. Current research indicates that the interactions between NMs and blood, tissues, cells, and biomolecules such as nucleic acids and proteins in the body may lead to toxicity formation. , , , The interaction of biomolecules with NMs causes the formation of biomolecular-nanoparticle-surface-corona, which can disrupt proteins and induce immunotoxicity. , NMs can also interfere with cells and disrupt homeostasis by damaging cell membrane structures. , Moreover, intracellular NMs may harm mitochondria and cause damage to the human body through ROS. , The toxicity of NMs is influenced by dose, route of administration, surrounding environment, and the size, shape, and surface chemistry of the NMs themselves. , , For example, the toxicity of zinc oxide NMs is related to the generation of reactive oxygen species and the release of Zn2+, while the toxicity of titanium dioxide NMs is produced through cell capture. Ag NMs induce embryonic developmental disorders, affecting the cardiovascular and respiratory systems, thereby causing toxicity. Therefore, strategies to mitigate the side effects of different NMs must be tailored to specific circumstances, aiding in their clinical translation.
At the same time, the residual products generated after US interaction with NMs should not be ignored because of their potential to damage normal cells and tissues. Comprehensive biosafety assessments are crucial before nano-sonosensitizers advance to the clinical trial phase. Notably, design and synthesis issues are also critical for the clinical translation of therapeutic nanomedicines, which face challenges such as poor reproducibility, low efficiency in large-scale synthesis, and variable physicochemical properties. The synthesis process of nanomedicines needs to be further improved and simplified, and single-component NPs should be selected when they can satisfy the therapeutic effect to minimize adverse effects and risks and facilitate clinical translation. The application of NMs in the field of medicine was expected to have a revolutionary impact on healthcare. Despite this, nanomedicine still lacks clarity regarding regulatory oversight for clinical use, which greatly hinders its translation. It is crucial to establish internationally standardized regulatory frameworks and guidelines specific to NMs. This necessitates the development of reliable technologies and tools to assess toxicity, thereby accurately estimating their potential hazards and limitations. To harness the diverse benefits of nanotechnology across various sectors, global regulatory agencies are actively working to establish frameworks for the oversight of NMs. In the realm of pharmaceuticals, nanotechnology-based products require specialized strategies to ensure the optimization of their safety, quality, efficacy, and performance, ensuring effective oversight and public health protection.

6.2.

## Improving NMs targeting ability
The precise targeting of drugs is important in the treatment of diseases. Currently, some treatments used in clinical practice feature “always-on”, which may lead to off-target effects, poor therapeutic outcomes, and even side effects on the human body. , , Therefore, improving the targeting of US-mediated NMs in the treatment of inflammatory diseases is also a future direction to explore. At present, there are several methods available to increase the targeting of NMs, including employing highly expressed factors, ions, or proteins in the target environment; , , employing external factors such as light, heat, radiation, magnetic fields, microwaves, and US; , and decorating materials with macrophage membranes, platelet membranes, or erythrocyte membranes. , , , Furthermore, combining the above strategies is a good idea. However, these methods are not necessarily suitable for every nanomedicine, nor are they all necessarily suitable for treating inflammatory diseases.
Therefore, efforts should be made to explore ways to increase nanomedicine targeting for treating inflammatory diseases. While different inflammatory environments exhibit many similarities, they also possess distinct characteristics at the cellular and molecular levels. These differences can be leveraged to develop NMs targeted at specific inflammatory diseases. In certain diseases, specific molecules are expressed at elevated levels, allowing for targeted suppression of their expression to control inflammation. For instance, in drug or IR-induced hepatitis hepatitis, various adhesion molecules such as ICAM-1 are highly expressed on HECs. Designing NMs that target ICAM-1 to reduce its levels presents a promising anti-inflammatory strategy. Similarly, macrophage foam cells play a critical role in atherosclerosis, indicating that designing NMs to target these cells, reducing their functionality or promoting their apoptosis, could be significantly beneficial in treating atherosclerosis. , In the treatment of infections causing inflammation, designing specialized NMs tailored to the characteristics of different bacteria to eliminate them is also a promising approach. For example, many bacteria form biofilms, complicating their removal. Therefore, when addressing inflammation caused by these bacteria, it is crucial to design NMs capable of disrupting their biofilms to achieve effective treatment. , , Additionally, certain bacteria, such as MRSA, have the ability to secretes toxins at the infection site, which can further harm the host. Developing NMs that simultaneously inhibit MRSA growth and neutralize its toxins could lead to improved therapeutic outcomes. , In summary, when treating various inflammatory diseases, it is essential to thoroughly understand the characteristics of the inflammatory microenvironment to facilitate the targeted design and development of NMs.

6.3.

## Standardizing US equipment and parameters
The efficacy of therapeutic US significantly depends on key parameters, such as frequency and intensity, and lacks uniformity across different studies, which requires optimization and standardized criteria. There is also a need for further development of equipment specialized for US therapy. Advancements in capacitive micromachined ultrasonic transducers and integrated systems have enhanced the effectiveness and safety of therapeutic US devices. Furthermore, the integration of artificial intelligence and big data augments the intelligence of therapeutic US devices, which will propel therapeutic US toward clinical translation. To date, US-mediated treatments have been applied across a variety of diseases, with some applications entering clinical use and receiving approval from the US Food and Drug Administration and the European Union, while many others remain under investigation. , US enhances drug delivery and controls drug release. Recently, US-responsive drug delivery systems have gained considerable attention for their non-invasive nature, robust tissue penetration, and precise spatiotemporal controllability, showcasing significant potential for clinical translation. Furthermore, representative clinical trials related to US and their key findings are as follows. Regarding HIFU, substantial research documents its high therapeutic performance in fields such as aesthetics, prostate ablation, breast cancer treatment, bone tumors, liver cancer, renal cancer, uterine fibroids, adenomyosis, benign thyroid nodules, and essential tremor. , , , , , , , , , , , Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound has demonstrated efficacy in promoting fracture healing, , and its regulatory effects on the nervous system suggest potential applications in Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, depression, schizophrenia, anxiety disorders, and substance use disorders. , In lithotripsy, ultrasound is utilized to facilitate the fragmentation of calculi in the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and pancreas, exhibiting satisfactory therapeutic effect. , , 
It is noteworthy that the role of US in immunotherapy is becoming increasingly prominent. Tumor immunotherapy primarily works by reactivating and maintaining the tumor immune cycle to suppress or kill tumor cells. By adjusting various parameters, US can precisely focus on tumor sites and selectively activate sonosensitizers, thereby selectively killing tumor cells. There are four modes of US: HIFU, LIFU, UTMD, and SDT, which can enhance the body's immune response to tumors, thereby improving cancer treatment outcomes, overcoming immune tolerance, and effectively preventing tumor recurrence and metastasis. Among these, Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy is a rapidly evolving cancer immunotherapy in which T cells are genetically engineered to possess redirected specificity against malignant cells. Recent studies have identified inducible CAR T cells that can be directly controlled by FUS without the need for any exogenous auxiliary factors. Compared to standard CAR T cells, short-pulse FUS stimulation can activate engineered T cells at the desired time and location, thereby inhibiting tumor growth in vivo with improved safety. Additionally, FUS-clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-mediated telomere disruption primes solid tumors for CAR T cell therapy. The FUS-CRISPR toolbox allows for non-invasive and spatiotemporal control of genomic/epigenomic reprogramming in cancer treatment and can be applied to synergistic cancer immunotherapy. 

6.4.

## Exploring the specific mechanisms of nano-sensitizers and US in treating disease
The precise mechanisms of US-mediated NMs in disease therapy remain contentious and require thorough clarification. Although most studies illustrate that US and NMs can play an anti-inflammatory role in the treatment of disease, there are a few more cases of US and/or NMs triggering inflammation. In the treatment of neurological diseases, US may induce a sterile inflammatory response while opening the BBB, and it was found that several factors can influence this event. , , , , Besides, some studies have indicated that applying NMs may induce or enhance inflammatory responses caused by other factors. , , , , , These studies demonstrate that US and NMs can also trigger inflammation in certain situations. It is important to avoid these circumstances during their therapeutic use to avoid unexpected patient harm. Further research is required to explore the mechanisms of US and NMs in inflammation treatment, which will guide the manufacturing of these materials and their clinical application.

6.5.

## Discovering the use of US-mediated NMs in more inflammatory diseases
Although US-mediated NMs have been utilized in many inflammatory diseases, their therapeutic role in some inflammatory diseases has not been deeply explored, such as digestive tract inflammation. Inflammatory diseases of the digestive tract, such as inflammatory bowel disease, have a great impact on the quality of life of patients. , 
However, to the best of our knowledge, there are few reports on the use of NMs and US combined for inflammatory and antibacterial therapy in the field of the digestive tract. Only a few researchers have explored the application of SDT in treating Helicobacter pylori and Fusobacterium nucleatum. , , However, there are many combined applications of US and NMs for treating gastrointestinal cancers, such as colorectal cancer. Inflammation and cancer have some commonalities. Therefore, treating gastrointestinal cancer can also provide insights into managing inflammatory diseases. For example, oral administration of drugs is the most popular and feasible method for treating colorectal cancer. However, an acidic environment, digestive enzymes, and mucus barriers in the digestive tract always affect the therapeutic effectiveness of oral administration. In fact, not only the treatment of cancer but also inflammatory diseases of the digestive tract face this problem. Therefore, studies on reducing the loss of oral drugs during delivery in cancer treatment can provide insights for future research aimed at reducing drug losses during delivery to the gastrointestinal tract during the treatment of inflammatory diseases. This can potentially lower treatment costs and improve therapeutic efficacy. In addition to gastrointestinal inflammatory diseases, US-mediated NMs have potential applications in various inflammatory conditions, including those associated with fungal infections. Recently, some inflammatory diseases caused by fungal infections can also be treated using US-mediated NMs, such as vulvovaginal candidiasis caused by Candida albicans. It is hoped that further research will be conducted in the field of inflammation.

6.6.

## Fostering interdisciplinary collaboration
Research on nano-sensitizers and therapeutic US necessitates deeper interdisciplinary collaboration among chemists, biologists, material scientists, and clinical practitioners. In terms of therapeutic approach, SDT can be combined with PDT, CDT, immunotherapy, and other therapies to achieve a more comprehensive treatment effect. With the collective advancement of multiple disciplines, these innovations will ultimately be applied to diagnosing and treating diseases.
This review provides a comprehensive overview of US-mediated NMs for treating inflammatory diseases. Furthermore, US-mediated nanotherapy is crucial for several other diseases. For instance, in the realm of cancer treatment, US-mediated NMs have been extensively researched and applied. , Notably, in the treatment of liver and breast cancer, these nanomaterials are favored for their excellent targeting capabilities and therapeutic efficacy. , , Additionally, in the management of cardiovascular diseases, US-mediated NMs can aid in treating ischemic heart disease by inhibiting while promoting their regression. , , Moreover, in the treatment of conditions such as hypertension and hypercholesterolemia, NMs can also play a significant role. , , , The strategies for enhancing the targeting of US-mediated NMs and reducing their side effects in cancer and cardiovascular diseases treatment can also be referenced in the applications of inflammatory disease therapy. Similarly, any innovative advancements in materials technology within the field of inflammation treatment could benefit cancer and cardiovascular diseases therapy. Therefore, this review may serve as a stepping stone for enhancing the treatment efficacy of inflammatory diseases and improving therapeutic outcomes across various other diseases.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Kai Zhang: Writing – original draft, Supervision, Resources, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Tingting Wang: Writing – original draft, Investigation, Conceptualization. Xingyong Huang: Writing – original draft, Investigation. Peng Wu: Writing – original draft, Resources. Lufan Shen: Resources. Yuanyuan Yang: Resources. Wenyu Wan: Writing – original draft, Validation, Supervision, Investigation. Siyu Sun: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Resources. Zhan Zhang: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgments
Kai Zhang, Tingting Wang, and Xingyong Huang contributed equally to this work. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (32301112), the Natural Science Foundation of Liaoning Province (2023-BS-108), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (20241171040, 2024MD754001), Shenyang U35 Youth Top-notch Talent Project (RC231061), Scientific Research Fund of Liaoning Province Education Department (JYTQN2023025), Young and middle-aged science and technology innovation talent Program (RC220482), and 345 Talent Project of Shengjing hospital.

## Contributor Information
Wenyu Wan, Email: wanwenyu2020@163.com.
Siyu Sun, Email: sun-siyu@163.com.
Zhan Zhang, Email: zhangzhan@cmu.edu.cn.

## References