pmcMater Today BioMater Today Bio3810mtbio101757228Materials Today Bio2590-0064ElsevierPMC12972528PMC12972528.112972528129725284181586310.1016/j.mtbio.2026.102994S2590-0064(26)00237-11029941Full Length ArticleDynamic glucose-responsive mesoporous silica nanoparticle coating on trabecular tantalum implants for dual mode drug delivery
MaShiqing CuiMengzhen ChangKexin YangGuohua LiLe KouBo XuBo LiYaoyang LiuFuli JinMengying ShibataYo ZhouJunzhoujun@dent.showa-u.ac.jp LiRuikqxiufulirui@tmu.edu.cn aDepartment of Stomatology, The Second Hospital of Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300211, ChinabDepartment of Prosthodontics, Tianjin Medical University School and Hospital of Stomatology, No.12 Qixiangtai Road, Heping District, Tianjin, 300070, ChinacTianjin Key Laboratory of Oral Soft and Hard Tissues Restoration and Regeneration, No.12 Qixiangtai Road, Heping District, Tianjin, 300070, ChinadDepartment of Biomaterials and Engineering, Showa Medical University Graduate School of Dentistry, Tokyo, 142-8555, JapaneShizuishan Second People's Hospital, Shizuishan, Ningxia, 75300, China⁎Corresponding author. zhoujun@dent.showa-u.ac.jp⁎⁎Corresponding author. Department of Prosthodontics, Tianjin Medical University School and Hospital of Stomatology, No.12 Qixiangtai Road, Heping District, Tianjin, 300070, China. kqxiufulirui@tmu.edu.cn1These authors contributed equally to this work.
4202602320263750590810299412122025322026132026020320261103202612032026© 2026 The Author(s)2026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Implant integration is severely impacted by diabetes mellitus impaired bone formation and chronic inflammation. Pronounced fluctuations in blood glucose levels further hinder therapeutic regulation, rendering static drug-release strategies inadequate. To address this issue, we developed a trabecular tantalum implant with a porous structure mimicking cancellous bone mechanics, coated with phenylboronic acid–modified mesoporous silica nanoparticles loaded with aspirin. This design enables dynamic, glucose-responsive, dual-mode drug delivery; under normoglycemia, aspirin is released slowly to promote osteogenesis, whereas under hyperglycemia, its release is accelerated to suppress inflammation. In vitro, the coating enhanced the osteogenic differentiation of stem cells and promoted M2 macrophage polarization. In a diabetic rat defect model, this system improved osseointegration and reduced inflammatory responses. These findings indicate that we developed a metabolically adaptive implant surface that integrates trabecular tantalum with glucose-responsive nanocarriers. By coupling drug release kinetics with the metabolic status, this strategy addresses the dual obstacles of impaired osteogenesis and inflammation in diabetes and advances the development of smart biomaterials for clinical translation.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•3D-printed Ta scaffold + Glucose-triggered aspirin nanocarriers = smart diabetic implant.
•Dual-release kinetics: slow/sustained aspirin release at 5.5 mM for osteogenesis, accelerated release above 11.1 mM for anti-inflammation.
•Porous tantalum (∼0.9 GPa, matching cancellous bone) reduces stress shielding, promotes bone ingrowth and mechanical biocompatibility.
•Enhances osseointegration in diabetic patients.

## Keywords
3D printed porous tantalumDiabetic periodontitisGlucose-triggeredDiabetic osseointegrationAnti-inflammatorypmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1

## Introduction
Diabetes mellitus is a widespread metabolic disorder that significantly increases the risk of implant failure [ , ]. Approximately 80–90% of affected individuals develop periodontitis [ ], accompanied by chronic inflammation, alveolar bone resorption, and impaired regenerative capacity. Diabetes severely compromises osseointegration, leading to insufficient peri-implant bone formation and delayed mineralization [ ]. These pathological consequences are caused by persistent hyperglycemia and the accumulation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs), which suppress osteogenic signaling and weaken the mechanical properties of bones [ , ].In addition, chronic low-grade inflammation destabilizes the bone–implant interface [ ]. Collectively, these processes generate a pathological microenvironment in which conventional implant materials are inadequate, underscoring the need for advanced strategies specifically designed to treat diabetic conditions.
Titanium has long been considered the clinical standard for dental implants; nevertheless, since its elastic modulus (110–117 GPa) is substantially greater than that of bone, it leads to stress shielding and bone resorption. These effects are particularly detrimental in patients with diabetes whose capacity for bone formation and remodeling is impaired [ ].In response to these limitations, trabecular tantalum has been developed as a porous alternative [ , ]. With an elastic modulus closer to that of cancellous bone and an interconnected architecture, it provides space for bone ingrowth and promotes osteointegration [ , , , ]. Such refinements have facilitated their clinical application in dentistry and orthopedics [ , ]. However, despite these improvements in mechanical compatibility, trabecular tantalum alone cannot counteract the pathological diabetic milieu characterized by hyperglycemia, oxidative stress, and persistent inflammation.
The biological performance of an implant is significantly influenced by its surface properties [ , ]. To address these pathological challenges, bioactive molecules have been incorporated into implant coatings to modulate inflammation, promote angiogenesis, and stimulate osteogenesis [ , , , , , ]. Among them, aspirin (ASP) is the most effective. As a classical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, ASP exerts context-dependent effects. Under normoglycemia, low doses promote osteoblast differentiation and restrain osteoclastogenesis, whereas under hyperglycemia, ASP scavenges reactive oxygen species, restores osteogenic signaling, and regulates the RANKL/OPG system.
As a classical member of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) family, aspirin (ASP) is widely involved in physiopathological processes such as bone remodeling and the inhibition of inflammatory responses by irreversibly acetylating the cyclooxygenase (COX) active site and inhibiting the biosynthesis of prostaglandins (PGs) [ , ]. It has a unique dose-dependent effect on the regulation of bone metabolism [ ], especially in the specific scenario of diabetic osseointegration, where its mechanism of action shows a high degree of correlation and complexity with changes in blood glucose levels. In normoglycemia, low-dose aspirin can promote osteoblast differentiation through the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway and inhibit NF-κB-mediated osteoclastogenesis. In hyperglycemia, it can also scavenge reactive oxygen species, restore inhibited signaling pathways, upregulate the expression of key osteoblastogenic transcription factors such as RUNX2 and Osterix [ ], and regulate the expression of the RANKL/OPG system. The RANKL/OPG system [ ] further promotes peri-implant bone formation. High-dose aspirin, on the other hand, focuses on inflammation triggered by blood glucose fluctuations, regulates abnormalities, and reduces bone resorption by inhibiting COX-2 and reducing the release of inflammatory factors such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and interleukin-6 (Interleukin-6) [ ]. However, owing to the instability of blood glucose levels in diabetic patients, achieving precise spatiotemporal controlled release of aspirin on the implant surface is still a challenge [ ].
Recent advances in glucose-triggered polymeric nano delivery systems have demonstrated remarkable potential for diabetic bone regeneration. These intelligent nanoplatforms exhibit precise glucose-triggered capabilities and stimuli-triggered drug release profiles, offering a promising strategy for achieving spatiotemporal control of the peri-implant microenvironment in diabetic conditions. Mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSN) are valuable for drug release and stem cell modulation because of their uniform particle size, high porosity, large specific surface area, and controllable pore size structure, among which MSN nanocarriers with the characteristic of “zero early release” have become a hotspot for research [ , ]. The controlled particle size and porosity of MSN nanocarriers [ ] appreciably increase drug loading [ ], and the abundant silane groups on the surface facilitate functionalization to precisely regulate drug release kinetics [ , ]. Drug loading relies on the interactions of molecules with pore walls, and the surface functionalization further enhances the efficiency and controllability of the drug loading [ ]. Among the external stimulus-responsive controlled release systems, the MSN-based glucose-triggered drug delivery system, which involves mainly glucose oxidase (GOx), Concanavalin A (ConA), and phenylboronic acid (PBA) systems [ ], has attracted much attention. However, the application of the GOx and ConA systems is limited because of their pH sensitivity, poor biocompatibility, high toxicity, weak stability, and high cost [ ]. PBA and its derivatives stand out because of their high stability and unique glucose-triggered mechanism, which achieves hydrophobic noncovalent bonding through reversible covalent bonding with molecules containing a cis-diol structure (e.g., glucose)to achieve the transition from a hydrophobic non-ionized to a hydrophilic ionized state [ , , ], driving drug release. In this study, we focused on the reversible binding of sodium alginate (SA) to PBA. SA, a natural polysaccharide with a 1,2-diol structure [ ], competes with glucose for the binding site of PBA during elevated blood glucose, triggering drug release. This strategy circumvents the shortcomings of the traditional GOx and ConA systems and provides a new path for the development of glucose-triggered nanodrug delivery for systems in diabetes treatment, which is expected to achieve the precise controlled release of aspirin and other drugs in diabetic bone integration.
In conclusion, this research endeavors to develop a dual-mode glucose-triggered porous tantalum implant for drug delivery systems ( ). Using polydopamine-mediated surface modification technology, CPBA-modified MSN loaded with ASP are precisely coated onto the porous tantalum surface. Utilizing the dynamic reversible borate ester bond between SA and CPBA-MSN, the implant is endowed with “smart drug release” properties: under normal blood glucose conditions, ASP promotes osteogenic differentiation and regulates bone metabolism through a sustained-release mode. Under high blood glucose conditions, glucose competitively binds with CPBA, triggering the rapid release of ASP, thereby achieving dual effects of inflammation reduction and bone resorption inhibition. This system precisely regulates ASP dosage through a“glucose concentration-dependent drug release mechanism,” synergistically promoting bone formation and anti-inflammatory functions. The research will validate its bone integration efficacy under different glucose environments through in vitro and in vivo experiments, providing an innovative solution to the challenge of implant-bone interface instability in diabetic patients. This not only opens new avenues for surface functionalization design in biomaterials but also holds promise for advancing clinical translation in the field of oral implantology. 

2

## Experimental section
2.1

## Main reagents
Porous tantalum, Ta(Ningxia Oriental Intelligent Manufacturing Technology Co., Ltd, China), aminated mesoporous silica, MSN-NH2 (Jiangsu Zhi Chuan Technology, China), 4-carboxyphenylboronic acid, CPBA (Macklin, China), acetylsalicylic acid, ASP (Aladdin, USA), N-hydroxy succinimide, NHS (RHAWN, China), N-(3-dimethylaminopropyl-N-ethylcarbodiimide) hydrochloride, EDC-HCl (RHAWN, China), anhydrous ethanol (Tianjin Bohua, China), sodium alginate, SA (Beyotime, China) SBF mimetic body fluid (Kolon, China), dimethyl sulfoxide, DMSO (Solarbio, China), DCFH-DA (Solarbio, China), CCK-8 kit (Tongren, Japan), AO/EB live‒dead cell stains (Reagan Bio, China), PBS (Solarbio, China), male Sprague‒Dawley rats (250‒ 300 g, 5‒6 weeks old). All chemicals were of analytical grade and could be used without further purification.

2.2

## Sample synthesis
2.2.1

## Preparation of 4-carboxyphenylboronic acid grafted mesoporous silica nanoparticles
Referring to the methods in the literature [ ], we optimized the synthesis process of MSN-NH2 with CPBA. First, appropriate amounts of CPBA, NHS, and EDC-HCl were dissolved in DMSO and mixed with stirring for 30 min at room temperature. Prepurified MSN-NH2 was slowly added dropwise to DMSO at a concentration of 2 mg/mL. After stirring at room temperature for 24 h, centrifugation was performed, and the mixture was washed sequentially with DMSO, water, and methanol to obtain CPBA-MSN nanoparticles.

2.2.2

## Aspirin loaded with CPBA-MSN
ASP was loaded into CPBA-MSN [ , ]. The samples were placed in a 4 mg/mL ethanol solution of aspirin and stirred in the dark at room temperature for 24 h. After that, CPBA-MSN@ASP was collected via centrifugation and washed gently with ethanol, and the cleaned samples were vacuum dried at 60 °C for 10 h.

2.2.3

## ASP loadings
After centrifugation, the mixture was collected, the OD values were measured, and the drug-carrying capacity of the AMS was calculated according to Equation ( ).(1)Loadingefficiency=(totalamountofASP−freeASP)totalamountofCPBA−MSN×100%

2.2.4

## Functionalization of sodium alginate CPBA-MSN@ASP
10 mg of SA was dissolved in double-distilled water, CPBA-MSN@ASP was added to the solution, and the mixture was stirred for 3 h. The resulting product (AMS) was collected by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 5 min, and the AMS was placed at 4 °C for further use.

2.2.5

## Implant preparation
The porous tantalum material used in this study was produced from Ningxia Oriental Intelligent Manufacturing Technology Co., Ltd. It was fabricated in-house by the company via selective laser melting (SLM) using high-purity tantalum powder. The printing parameters were as follows: laser power 100–300 W, scanning speed 500–1000 mm/s, scanning spacing 0.1–0.14 mm, and powder layer thickness 30–50 μm. The porous structure was designed using 3-matic software. The resulting material featured a three-dimensionally interconnected porous architecture with uniform porosity and pore size distribution, exhibiting good biocompatibility and mechanical properties comparable to those of human cancellous bone. No additional printing or structural modification was performed after receiving the material. Only routine post-processing was carried out, including high-pressure air blowing and dry sandblasting to remove residual powder from the surface and internal pores, followed by ultrasonic cleaning in anhydrous ethanol and vacuum drying before use.

2.2.6

## Polydopamine-modified tantalum
Cylindrical tantalum with a diameter of 10 mm and a height of 3 mm. Dopamine hydrochloride (PDA) was added to 10 mmol/L Tris-HCl buffer at a concentration of 2 mg/mL, pH 8.5, and then tantalum was immersed in the dopamine solution. The mixture was prepared after the reaction was carried out for 24 h at a constant temperature of 37 °C on a shaking table and protected from light, and the unattached dopamine was rinsed off the tantalum repeatedly with double-distilled water. This group was recorded as the DT group. Surface without PDA is noted as the BLANK group.

2.2.7

## AMS modified DT
The previously synthesized AMS solution was applied in a slow dropwise manner to the dopamine coating of the previously synthesized tantalum and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h, thus, the AMS adhered to the tantalum sample, denoted DT-AMS.

2.3

## Sample characterization
2.3.1

## Synthesis of AMS
The morphologies of the MSN, CPBA-MSN, and AMS groups were observed via transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Hitachi, HT7700, Japan). Moreover, the particle size distribution of the nanoparticles was accurately measured via dynamic light scattering (DLS), and the surface charge state of the particles was evaluated by the Zeta potential analysis technique. Full-wavelength scanning was performed using a full-wavelength enzyme marker. A Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FT-IR) (Nicolet iS50, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) with a spectral range of 500 to 4000 cm−1 was used to identify the chemical groups present in the samples. Additionally, X-ray diffraction (XRD) was employed to analyze the crystal structure and phase composition of the samples, while thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was conducted to investigate their thermal stability and thermal decomposition behavior, providing comprehensive characterization of the nanoparticles.

2.3.2

## Determination of the DT-AMS
The modulus of elasticity of the porous tantalum material was quantitatively evaluated via a universal mechanical testing machine. The attachment of the AMS coating on the DT surface was observed in detail by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, ZEISS, Germany), and elemental analyses were carried out using the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The water contact angle was determined using a water contact angle meter for the four groups: BLANK, DT, DT-MSN, and DT-AMS.

2.4

## ASP in vitro release
To evaluate the ASP release behavior of DT-AMS under four different glucose concentrations (0 mg/mL, 1 mg/mL, 2 mg/mL, and 5 mg/mL). The experimental procedure was outlined as follows: first, a series of glucose concentrations was prepared by dissolving glucose in SBF simulated body fluids at 0 mg/mL, 1 mg/mL, 2 mg/mL, and 5 mg/mL. The DT-AMS carrier was subsequently added to each of these solutions, and the mixture was placed in the above solutions to simulate the in vivo environment for drug release experiments. Every 24 h, 1 mL of the supernatant was extracted, and the release of ASP was measured via an enzyme marker at 280 nm. After the assay was complete, the removed supernatant was returned to the original release system to maintain the consistency of the experimental conditions.

2.5

## Sugar response release
Aqueous solutions of alizarin red (ARS) and CPBA-MSN were first prepared independently, both of which used deionized water as the solvent. For the CPBA-MSN solution, homogeneous dispersion was ensured by sonication, and the mixture was stirred under light-avoidant conditions. During continuous stirring, the aqueous alizarin red solution was slowly added dropwise to the CPBA-MSN solution to promote the reaction between the two. The reaction process lasted for 3 h. Subsequently, the reaction mixture was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm to precipitate the complex. The complex was washed three times with deionized water and dried under vacuum at 50 °C to obtain pure CPBA-MSN-ARS. The CPBA-MSN-ARS was reacted in glucose solutions at different concentrations, and the spectra were scanned via a fluorescence spectrophotometer.

2.6

## In vitro study
For the preparation of the sample extracts, the four prepared materials of BLANK, DT, DT-MSN, and DT-AMS were irradiated under UV light for 1h, 30 min per side. Then the three groups of BLANK, DT and DT-MSN were put into sterile centrifuge tubes containing 10 mL of high-sugar DMEM medium, and the three groups of DT-AMS were in the DMEM medium with different sugar contents, and were incubated in a incubated at 37 °C in an incubator, and the supernatant was collected at specific time points according to the experimental requirements, sterilized with a 0.22 μm filter membrane, and supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin.
2.6.1

## Cytotoxicity and proliferation assays
For the cell viability assay, the CCK8 kit was used. Specifically, BMSCs and RAW264.7 cells were inoculated in 24-well plates at a density of 2 × 104 cells/well. The corresponding extracts were added to the wells of each experimental group. After the cells were cultured for 1, 3, 5, and 7 days, the optical density (OD) of each well was measured at 450 nm using a microplate reader to assess the cell viability. For further assessment of toxicity to the cells, the cells were cocultured with the extracts for 1 and 3 days and then stained via the AO/EB staining kit, and the cell survival status was observed via a fluorescence microscope (Olympus, Japan). For observation of the osteoblast skeleton, actin filaments were stained with ghost pen cyclic peptide, and nuclei were stained with DAPI and observed under a laser confocal (Olympus, Japan) microscope.

2.6.2

## Cell migration studies
Transwell experiments to verify the migratory ability of BMSCs, BMSCs were placed in the upper layer of Transwell chambers at a density of 5 × 103 cells/well, and the sample extracts to be tested were added to the lower layer. After 24 h of incubation, the medium was removed from the Petri dishes, and the samples were washed three times with PBS. Staining was carried out using crystal violet. The migrated cells were observed and recorded using a light microscope and analyzed via cell counting via ImageJ software.

2.6.3

## Hemolysis assay
Fresh rat blood was collected and centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 10 min to collect erythrocytes. These erythrocytes were subsequently resuspended in an equal volume of PBS, and this washing process was subsequently repeated three times until the supernatant became almost colourless. Next, the erythrocytes were diluted to a 4% suspension with PBS. Distilled water was used as a positive control, and PBS as a negative control in the experiment. In the experimental group, the erythrocyte suspension was mixed with a 1:1 extract and then incubated at 37 °C for 4 h. After incubation, the mixture was centrifuged again, and the supernatant was removed to determine the absorbance (OD value) at 545 nm. The OD values were calculated according to Equation ( ), and the mean values were recorded for analysis.(2)Hemolysisratio(%)=ODSample−ODNegativeODPositive−ODNegative×100%

2.6.4

## Osteogenic differentiation
To induce the differentiation of BMSCs into osteoblasts, osteogenic differentiation induction medium was prepared. This medium was supplemented with 10 mM/L β-glycerophosphate, 0.1 mM/L dexamethasone, and 0.05 mM/L ascorbic acid in the material extract. This induction medium was added to the culture system when the cell density reached 70% to 80% to stimulate the osteogenic differentiation process of the cells.

2.6.5

## Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity measurement
BMSCs were inoculated in 24-well plates at a density of 2 × 104 cells/well. After co-culturing with different groups of extracts for 3 and 7 days, the medium was removed, and the cells were washed with PBS 3 times. The cells were subsequently fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde solution for 30 min and again washed with PBS 3 times. The cells were stained according to the guidelines of the alkaline phosphatase staining kit, and PBS was added to terminate the reaction after the staining was completed. Finally, the alkaline phosphatase staining results of each group of samples were observed and recorded via an inverted microscope.

2.6.6

## Alizarin red S (ARS) staining
The BMSCs were cocultured with the osteogenic induction extracts of each group of materials for 14 days and 21 days, the medium was aspirated, the samples were washed 3 times with PBS, the BMSCs were fixed with 4% cell fixative for 30 min, the samples were washed 3 times with PBS, 1% (w/v) alizarin red S (pH 4.2) staining solution was added to the well plates, the samples were stained for 30 min at room temperature, the samples were washed gently with deionized water 3 times, and an inverted microscope was used to obtain the staining results, which were photographed via an inverted microscope.

2.6.7

## Macrophage polarization studies
To observe and promote the polarization process of RAW264.7 cells, the cells were cultured in DMEM containing premium serum. The polarization shift of RAW264.7 cells from the M0 type to the M1 type was induced by using lipopolysaccharide (LPS). To determine the optimal concentration of LPS for induction, four different concentration gradients were used: 500 ng/mL, 1 μg/mL, 1.5 μg/mL, and 2 μg/mL. These different concentrations of LPS were added to the medium and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. After the incubation was complete, the cell morphology was observed using an inverted microscope. The BLANK group did not receive LPS treatment and served as the negative control.

2.6.8

## In vitro ROS clearance assay
A Reactive Oxygen Species Assay Kit (DCFH-DA) was used to assess the efficiency of ROS scavenging by RAW264.7 cells. RAW264.7 cells were spread in 6-well plates at a density of 2 × 105 cells/well, and each group of extracts and LPS was added to each well to induce a polarization reaction and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. The DCFH-DA probe was subsequently added to each well. After stimulation for 30 min at 37 °C under 5% CO2, the ROS levels were observed using an inverted fluorescence microscope (Olympus, Japan).

2.6.9

## Immunofluorescence staining
BMSCs (8 × 103 cells/well) or RAW264.7 (1 × 104 cells/well) were inoculated on round coverslips in 24-well plates and cultured with extracts. BMSCs were cultured in osteogenic induction medium, while RAW264.7 cells were stimulated with LPS. After the cells were cultured for the indicated durations, the medium was removed, and the cells were fixed with 4% cell fixative for 30 min, followed by treatment with Triton X-100 for 5 min to permeabilize the cells, which were then incubated with 5 mg/mL BSA solution for 30 min. Afterwards, primary antibody was added, and the mixture was incubated overnight at 4 °C. The next day, the cells were incubated with Cy 3- or 488-labelled secondary antibodies at room temperature and protected from light for 1 h. The cell nuclei were stained with DAPI for 1 h. The cells were then stained via laser confocal microscopy. Finally, the cells were observed and imaged via laser confocal microscopy.

2.6.10

## Expression of osteogenic genes
Reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) was used to quantify the expression of osteogenesis-related genes. After the BMSCs and RAW264.7 cells were cultured for 7 days, RNA was extracted from the cells. Total RNA was extracted via TRIzol reagent, and RNA was transcribed into cDNA via a PCR kit, followed by RT‒qPCR. To guarantee the reliability of the experimental results, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was used as an internal reference gene for the standardization of expression levels. By the ΔΔCt method, we calculated the fold change in gene expression on the basis of the cycle threshold (Ct).

2.6.11

## Western blot
Protein extraction was performed on BMSCs and RAW264.7 cells, followed by mixing and diluting the cell lysate with protein supersampling buffer (5 × ) at a 1:4 ratio. The samples were heated at 99 °C for 5 min and then separated by 10% SDS-PAGE at 120 V for 1 h. The proteins were transferred to PVDF membranes at 300 mA for 120 min. Closure was performed for 1 h at room temperature using skim milk powder. Next, the PVDF membranes were incubated with primary antibodies at 4 °C overnight. The following day, the membranes were incubated with the corresponding secondary antibodies at room temperature for 1 h. Bound proteins were detected via an enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) protein blotting analysis system (CWBIO, Beijing, China). The integral optical density was quantified by ImageJ software, and all the data were normalized to the expression level of GAPDH.

2.6.12

## Plasmid transfection
To assess the functions of Ctnnb1 and Nfkb1, specific siRNAs and a negative control siRNA (NC-siRNA) were obtained from Ribo Bio. Transfection was carried out using X-tremeGENE siRNA reagent according to the manufacturer's instructions. After 48 h of transfection, treatment agents were applied for 24 h before subsequent experiments. siRNA sequences:
Ctnnb1-siRNA: 5′-GCAGGTATTTGACATACTAAA-3′
Nfkb1-siRNA: 5′-GCTGATATTGACGGGCAGTAT-3′

2.6.13

## Transcriptome sequencing and data analysis
For transcriptomic analysis, cells were inoculated in 6-well culture plates and then cocultured with different scaffold extracts for 7 days under standard culture conditions (37 °C). Total RNA was extracted via the TRIzol reagent method, and the obtained RNA samples were stored in an ultralow temperature environment at −80 °C until sequencing. The high-quality sequencing work was performed at Beijing Novozymes Biotechnology Co., Ltd, and the specific process included the following steps: first, the quality of the mRNA samples was checked via an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer, and the qualified samples were then subjected to bipartite 150 bp (PE150) sequencing on the Illumina sequencing platform. In the data analysis stage, the DESeq2 software package was used to screen differentially expressed genes, and the screening criteria were set as |log2 (multiplicity of difference)|≥1 and corrected P-value (padj) ≤0.05. Moreover, the clusterProfiler package was used to perform functional annotation analysis on the set of DGEs, including gene ontology (GO) functional classification and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analyses, where entries with corrected P-value <0.05 were considered statistically noteworthy. Perform Western blot analysis on the relevant pathways.

2.6.14

## Scratch test
BMSCs at the logarithmic growth phase were digested with trypsin, collected by centrifugation at 1000 rpm for 3 min, and seeded evenly into 6-well plates at a density of 2 × 105 cells per well. Add each set of sample materials. After reaching over 90% confluency, a straight scratch was made across the monolayer using a sterile 200 μL pipette tip. The same scratch area was photographed at 0 and 24h under an inverted fluorescence microscope for subsequent migration analysis.

2.7

## In vivo study
The Ethics Committee of Tianjin Medical University has authorized the use of Sprague–Dawley (SD) rats for experimental manipulation in this study and ensured that all experimental activities were conducted in strict compliance with established guidelines and legal norms.
2.7.1

## Animals and surgery
Six-to eight-week-old male SD rats (250–280 g) were selected and randomly assigned to six experimental groups, namely, the BLANK, DT, DT-MSN, DT-AMS(0), DT-AMS(2), and DT-AMS(5) groups. These rats first underwent a three-day adaptive feeding phase. During this period, the rats in the DT-AMS(0) group were maintained on a regular diet, whereas those in the other groups received a high-sugar, high-fat diet for four weeks. After a 28-day feeding cycle, the rats received an intraperitoneal injection of streptozotocin (35 mg/kg) diluted with citrate buffer (pH 4.5). Three to seven days after the injection, blood samples were collected through the tail vein, and non-fasting blood glucose levels (BGL) were determined via an electronic glucometer. When the BGL value was not lower than 16.7 mmol/L, the diabetes model was determined to be successfully established and suitable for subsequent experimental operations.
Prior to surgery, the rats were fasted for 12 h, then anaesthetized via inhalation of isoflurane and then given an intraperitoneal injection of 1% pentobarbital (40 mg/kg). Next, the hair from the hind legs of the rats was shaved, and the skin was thoroughly disinfected with povidone-iodine solution. Subsequently, a longitudinal incision of approximately 10 mm in length was made along the medial side of the right femur via a sterile scalpel. The underlying muscle tissue was meticulously freed via a blunt dissection technique until the femur was exposed. A dental high-speed drill fitted with a 2-mm-diameter pilot drill bit was used to create a cylindrical defect in the femur. The drill was operated at 800 rpm and continuously rinsed with precooled sterile saline to avoid thermal damage. A 2-mm diameter and 6-mm long implant was subsequently gently inserted into the prepared defect. To prevent postoperative infection and to control pain, the muscles and ligaments were closed with 4–0 absorbable sutures, the skin was layered with 3–0 nylon sutures, and penicillin (100,000 IU) was injected intramuscularly for prophylaxis.

2.7.2

## Microcomputed tomography (Micro-CT) analysis
After 8 and 12 weeks, femoral samples were collected and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde. Tomography scans were performed via a Micro-CT instrument, 3D reconstruction was performed by the software Data Viewer, and the images were viewed by the software Ctvox for the calculation of the new bone volume fraction (BV/TV).
At weeks 8 and 12 of the experimental cycle, femoral samples were collected and treated with 4% paraformaldehyde for fixation to ensure the structural stability of the samples. We subsequently performed precise tomography scans of the fixed femoral samples using Micro-CT scanning. 3D reconstruction of the scanned data was performed using the software Data Viewer. Furthermore, the reconstructed images were viewed using the software Ctvox, from which the new bone volume fraction (BV/TV) was calculated to assess the growth and repair of bone tissue.

2.7.3

## Histological and immunohistochemical staining analysis
After Micro-CT analysis, the sample tissues were decalcified, dehydrated, and embedded for pretreatment, after which 10-μm-thick tissue sections were sliced on a rotary sections and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and Masson's trichrome. Images were taken with a microscope. For immunohistochemical staining, the sections were incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies (including those against OCN, iNOS, and CD206) and then treated with secondary antibodies.

2.7.4

## Western blot
Total protein was extracted from 12 weeks of peri-implant bone tissue or cultured cells. Protein extraction, electrophoresis, and membrane transfer were conducted using the standard protocol as previously described.

2.7.5

## Reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR)
Total RNA was isolated from 12 weeks of peri-implant cells using TRIzol reagent and reverse-transcribed into cDNA using a PCR kit, followed by RT-qPCR analysis. RT-qPCR was performed strictly adhering to the protocol detailed in Section . The sequences of specific primers are listed in . 

2.8

## Statistical analysis
All the quantitative data are expressed as the means ± standard deviations, and quantitative experiments were conducted at least in triplicate. Differences between the experimental and control groups were analyzed by one-way ANOVA. ∗P < 0.05 was considered statistically noteworthy. Statistical analysis and data processing were performed via GraphPad Prism 8 and Origin 2024.

3

## Results and discussion
3.1

## Preparation and structure of DT-AMS
The microscopic morphology of MSN, CPBA-MSN and AMS was characterized via transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and the results revealed that all three materials exhibited a regular spherical structure ( A). Among them, the unmodified MSN samples exhibited typical mesoporous structural features with obvious channel-like pores on their surfaces and good particle dispersion with a uniform particle size distribution. The average particle size of MSN was 215.6 ± 12.3 nm (n = 3), as measured by dynamic light scattering (DLS). It is noteworthy that after CPBA modification, CPBA-MSN still maintained the original channel-like pore structure, indicating that the modification process did not cause noteworthy damage to the mesoporous structure of the material. 
Further TEM observation of AMS revealed that after modification with sodium alginate (SA), a transparent film with a thickness of approximately 15–20 nm was formed on the surface of the material, which uniformly coated the particle surface, resulting in effective blockage of most of the mesoporous entrance. Particle size analysis revealed that the average particle size of the AMS increased appreciably to 329.17 ± 18.5 nm (n = 3), which provides direct evidence that SA acts as a “pore blocker” for nanotransporter systems. Dynamic light scattering (DLS) analysis showed ( B) that the hydrodynamic diameter of CPBA-MSN was 224.58 ± 5.67 nm, which was slightly larger than the particle size via transmission electron microscopy (TEM), possibly because of the solvation effect of the material in solution. In addition, the zeta potential test results showed ( C) that the surface potentials of MSN, CPBA-MSN, and AMS were +8.92 mV, −24.6 mV, and −41.6 mV, respectively. The noteworthy changes in the potential values confirmed the successful adsorption of SA on the MSN surface, and with the increase in the degree of SA modification, the negative charge density on the surface of the materials was appreciably increased, and this enhanced electronegativity is conducive to improving the colloidal stability of the AMS drug-carrying system [ ], thus prolonging its retention time in the blood circulation.
UV‒Vis absorption spectroscopy was used to characterize the structural features of the materials further. Full-wavelength scans of MSN, CPBA, SA, CPBA-MSN, and AMS were performed in the wavelength range of 200–800 nm ( D). Compared with unmodified MSN, CPBA-MSN presented a distinct characteristic absorption peak at 300 nm compared to unmodified MSN, which was attributed to the introduction of CPBA molecules. Notably, when SA was modified, the maximum absorption wavelength redshifted due to the conjugation of the o-dihydroxyl group on the CPBA molecule with the o-dihydroxyl group of SA, while the intensity of the absorption peak appreciably decreased. Eventually, the characteristic absorption peak of AMS shifted to 380 nm, and this change in spectral characteristics provided strong evidence for the successful synthesis of AMS.
As a complement to zeta potential and UV‒Vis spectroscopic characterization, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) was further employed in this study to follow the chemical modification process on the surface of the materials ( E). The spectral data showed that the CPBA molecule exhibited a typical characteristic B‒O bond absorption peak at 1313.51 cm−1. In the infrared spectrum of CPBA-MSN, a distinct C=O stretching vibrational absorption peak at 1636.71 cm−1 was observed, confirming the successful binding of CPBA with MSN. It is particularly noteworthy that the characteristic B‒O bond absorption peak at 1321.23 cm−1 of AMS completely disappeared after modification by SA, and this phenomenon indicates that a reversible covalent bond formed between the CPBA moiety on the surface of CPBA-MSN and SA, which led to the breakage of the B‒O bond. The above spectral analysis results corroborate the TEM observations and zeta potential test results, which together confirm the successful preparation of the AMS.
Furthermore, XRD analysis ( ) revealed distinct mesoporous order differences among MSN, CPBA-MSN, and AMS: MSN displayed typical MCM-41 patterns with a strong (100) peak at 2θ = 2.03° and a clear (110) peak at 2θ ≈ 4°–5°, confirming a well-ordered hexagonal mesostructure; CPBA-MSN showed a similar profile but with reduced peak intensities, indicating functionalization preserved the framework yet induced partial disorder; AMS exhibited almost no characteristic peaks, likely due to strong shielding of internal mesoporous signals by the surface biopolymer coating. Meanwhile, TGA ( , N2 atmosphere up to 800 °C) gave total mass losses of 12.63%, 18.24%, and 22.06% for MSN, CPBA-MSN, and AMS, respectively, with incremental losses corresponding to amino group decomposition, CPBA ligand loss, and SA coating degradation, all of the above verified the success of the stepwise modification; all samples showed no obvious premature decomposition or component detachment from ambient to moderate temperatures, demonstrating good structural and formulation stability, while the mesoporous silica framework and biocompatible components endowed the nanocomposites with excellent biocompatibility, offering combined thermal stability and biosafety for biomedical applications.
A porous tantalum implant with a diameter of 10 mm and a height of 3 mm is employed ( ). The microscopic morphology of the scaffolds was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) ( H), which revealed that the scaffolds had a uniformly distributed pore structure with a pore size of approximately 500 μm at 50 × magnification, and the pores showed good three-dimensional connectivity between them. Notably, the surface of the scaffold has a remarkably rough morphology with obvious groove-like microstructures. In addition, some incompletely melted spherical tantalum powder particles could be observed on the surface of the scaffold, and these residual spherical structures not only increased the specific surface area of the scaffold but also provided more active sites for subsequent AMS adsorption. In the high-magnification (3kx) SEM images, it can be clearly observed that MSN and AMS are uniformly distributed on the surface of the tantalum scaffold to form a dense coating.
To further characterize the chemical composition of the material surface, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was used ( I). The results showed that the major element of BLANK was tantalum, and the elements C, O and tantalum were detected mainly in the dopamine-modified DT group, where the presence of C confirmed the successful adsorption of dopamine on the tantalum surface. In the DT-MSN group, in addition to the above elements, noteworthy elemental signals of Si were detected with an atomic percentage of 18.8 ± 0.2%, which directly confirmed the successful modification of MSN on the DT surface. Notably, a noteworthy Na elemental signal was detected in the DT-AMS group with an atomic percentage of 10 ± 0.1%, which was attributed mainly to the sodium alginate (SA) modified on the AMS surface. The results of the EDS analyses verified the success of the coating modification at the elemental composition level.
The surface wettability of the materials was characterized by water contact angle testing ( L). The results revealed that the water contact angles of BLANK, DT, DT-MSN, and DT-AMS were 62.8 ± 2.3°, 49.3 ± 4.74°, 26 ± 1.8°, and 11.38 ± 1.2°, respectively. The noteworthy decrease in the contact angle indicates that the surface hydrophilicity of the materials was appreciably increased after AMS modification, which is conducive to improving the compatibility of the materials with the biological environment. Together, the above characterization results confirm the successful modification of the AMS on the DT surface.
To evaluate the stability of the coatings, the DT-AMS samples were subjected to water bath sonication ( J) and 3 M tape adhesion ( K). After the water bath ultrasonication treatment, SEM observations revealed that only a small amount of the AMS particles were detached, and most of the coating remained intact, indicating that the coating had good mechanical stability.3 M tape adhesion-peeling test results showed that only a small amount of microcracks appeared on the surface of the DT-AMS, and the surface flatness was maintained well, and the internal structure was not affected. At 3k magnification, it can be seen that the AMS still remained firmly adhered to the implant surface. These results indicate that the DT-AMS coating possesses good mechanical stability, which enables it to function completely after implantation and provides a reliable guarantee for the subsequent bone repair process.

3.2

## Mechanical properties of DT-AMS
Porous tantalum scaffolds measuring 3 mm × 10 mm were successfully fabricated using 3D printing technology [ ]. The displacement load curves of the tantalum metal and porous tantalum were obtained, respectively after accurate testing by the universal mechanical experimental machine. A detailed calculation and analysis, revealed ( F and G) that the elastic modulus of tantalum metal is as high as 210.486 GPa, whereas appreciably exceeds the elastic modulus of human bone. The porous tantalum scaffold has an elastic modulus of ∼0.9 GPa, closely matching that of human cancellous bone (the main component of the peri-implant region). This mechanical compatibility reduces stress shielding and ensures initial mechanical stability, its interconnected porous structure also enables inward bone ingrowth, forming mechanical interlocking between host bone and the implant. This structural integration creates a load-sharing interface for even force distribution, ultimately allowing the scaffold to achieve high mechanical biocompatibility and support long-term implant durability [ ].
This ingeniously designed porous architecture not only achieves biomimetic mechanical properties but also ensures initial implant stability through three key mechanisms [ ]: optimized stress distribution that effectively prevents stress shielding effects, appreciably increased bone-scaffold interface contact area, and mechanical interlocking with surrounding bone tissue during early healing. The precisely controlled porous structure maintains sufficient mechanical strength to withstand functional loads while providing an ideal mechanical microenvironment for osseointegration.

3.3

## Sugar response properties of DT-AMS
According to the clinical diagnostic criteria, the critical postprandial glucose level for diabetes mellitus is usually set at 2 mg/mL, and exceeding this threshold is regarded as a hyperglycemic state [ ]. On the basis of these criteria, the present study systematically investigated the response release characteristics of the CPBA-MSN-ARS system in environments with different glucose concentrations. The experimental results revealed that the dissociation of ARS from CPBA-MSN increased appreciably with increasing glucose concentration because the o-dihydroxyl group in glucose molecules had a stronger ability to compete with ARS for the CPBA binding site, and this process is directly reflected in the decrease of the fluorescence intensity of the system.
As shown in M, the fluorescence intensity of the system showed an obvious decreasing trend as the glucose concentration was gradually increased from 0 mg/mL to 5 mg/mL. At 1–2 mg/mL (diabetic threshold), the decrease in fluorescence intensity was relatively gentle, indicating that the binding of ARS to CPBA was relatively stable, when the glucose concentration exceeded 2 mg/mL, a noteworthy decrease in fluorescence intensity occurred, and under the condition of 5 mg/mL (hyperglycemic state), the fluorescence intensity decreased further. This concentration-dependent change in fluorescence intensity was highly consistent with the release behavior of ARS, confirming the sensitivity of the CPBA-MSN system to changes in glucose concentration.
Further analyses revealed that the rate of change in fluorescence intensity was nonlinearly related to the glucose concentration. In the range of 0–2 mg/mL, the rate of decrease in fluorescence intensity accelerated with increasing concentration, which might be related to the increase in the diffusion rate of glucose molecules as well as the increase in the number of competing binding sites. However, in the range of 2–5 mg/mL, the rate of fluorescence intensity decrease tended to be levelled off, which might be attributed to the gradual achievement of dynamic equilibrium in the dissociation process of ARS. In addition, fluorescence lifetime analysis revealed that the fluorescence lifetime of ARS was appreciably shortened with increasing glucose concentration, a phenomenon that further supported the mechanism of ARS dissociation from CPBA-MSN.

3.4

## ASP release
As shown in N, the drug release behavior of DT-AMS in solutions with different glucose concentrations showed a noteworthy concentration-dependent feature. In the control group without glucose (0 mg/mL), aspirin (ASP) showed a slow and sustained release trend due to the osmotic diffusion of the material itself, and the cumulative release was maintained at 28.14% over 7 days. When the ambient glucose concentration was increased to 1 mg/mL (to simulate the normal blood glucose level of the human body), the release kinetics of ASP changed appreciably, and the cumulative release reached 77.85% at 17 days, which was nearly 2.8-fold greater than that of the control group. Further studies revealed that the release behavior of ASP was appreciably positively correlated with the glucose concentration in a high glucose concentration environment.
In the 2 mg/mL glucose solution, the cumulative release of ASP after 7 days was 56.12%, which was 11.78% higher than that of the 1 mg/mL group, while in the 5 mg/mL (simulating diabetic hyperglycemic state) condition, the 7-day release further increased to 68.49%, which was 12.37% higher than that of the 2 mg/mL group. This concentration-dependent release behavior was attributed mainly to the competitive mechanism between the o-dihydroxyl group in the SA molecule and the CPBA binding site in the glucose molecule. Specifically, as the ambient glucose concentration increased, more glucose molecules reversibly bound to CPBA, leading to the breaking of the SA–CPBA bond and thus accelerating the release of ASP. In addition, the slope analysis of the release curves indicated that the release rate of ASP showed a nonlinear increase in the range of 0–1 mg/mL glucose concentration, while it tended to increase linearly in the range of 1–5 mg/mL. This shift may be related to the synergistic effect of the breaking kinetics of the SA–CPBA bond and the diffusion rate of glucose molecules.
Moreover, analysis of the pore structure of the materials showed that the opening of the MSN pores increased appreciably with increasing glucose concentration, which further supported the mechanism of glucose concentration-dependent release.

3.5

## Cytocompatibility studies and cytoskeleton observations
For the evaluation of in vitro biocompatibility, the experimental design is illustrated in A, a co-culture schematic that systematically depicts the procedure of incubating material extracts with bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) and RAW264.7 macrophages. The effects of different coating materials on the activity and proliferative capacity of BMSCs and RAW264.7 cells were systematically evaluated via the CCK-8 assay and AO/EB staining techniques. The experimental results ( B and C) revealed that, in the BMSCs culture system, the DT-AMS(2)-treated group exhibited the most noteworthy pro-proliferative effect, and its cell viability was appreciably better than that of the blank control group (Blank), the DT group, the DT-MSN group and the other experimental groups (P < 0.05). In the RAW264.7 cell culture system, the DT-AMS(5) group presented the greatest pro-proliferative effect, and its cell viability was appreciably higher than that of all the other groups (P < 0.05). Notably, the cell viability of all experimental groups (including the DT, DT-MSN, and DT-AMS series) was appreciably higher than that of the BLANK group, suggesting that all of these materials possessed pro-proliferative bioactivities, with the most pronounced proliferation peaks observed during the 3rd–5th days of incubation. 
Cell viability was assessed by AO/EB dual fluorescence staining ( D–F), which showed that the cells in all the groups maintained good morphological characteristics and membrane integrity, and no obvious apoptosis or necrosis was observed. Quantitative analysis showed that the cell densities of the experimental groups (DT, DT-MSN, and DT-AMS series) were appreciably greater than those of the BLANK group (P < 0.05)( E–G), and the relative cell proliferation rate of each experimental group continuously increased with increasing culture time (1–3 days). These data fully confirmed that the tested scaffold materials (including the DT, DT-MSN and DT-AMS series) were biocompatible and had no noteworthy cytotoxic effects on either the BMSCs or the RAW264.7 cells.
Notably, the DT-AMS series of materials exhibited the most superior pro-cell proliferative effects at specific concentrations (BMSCs: DT-AMS(2), RAW264.7: DT-AMS(5)).The experimental data confirm that all tested materials exhibited no cytotoxic effects, providing substantial evidence for their biosafety from the perspective of cell viability rates. The demonstrated cytocompatibility serves as an essential prerequisite for successful tissue regeneration. These in vitro findings establish a crucial foundation for further evaluation of the materials' osteogenic efficacy in vivo.
Furthermore, BMSCs were co-cultured with sample extracts for 3 days, and cell morphology and spreading were observed by laser confocal microscopy via actin filament fluorescence signals. As shown in J (including both high- and low-density seeding images), actin filaments were well stretched in the blank and all experimental groups, with distinct red fluorescence in the latter, indicating no inhibition of basic cell stretching by the extracts. Low-density images eliminated cell stacking, clearly showing individual cell details (e.g., spreading extent, pseudopod extension) and avoiding migration assessment interference. Together, the high- and low-density actin cytoskeleton data in J fully confirm that the material extracts have no inhibitory effects on BMSCs stretching and migration. In the cell migration assay ( H), the number of migrated cells in the DT-AMS(2) group was appreciably higher than that in the blank group and other experimental groups. Quantitative analysis( I) via bar chart further confirmed this observation, showing that the migrated cell count in the DT-AMS(2) group was significantly elevated compared with the control and other treatment groups (P < 0.05). This numerical result was highly consistent with the visual findings in the migration images, indicating that the DT-AMS(2) material exerts a pronounced pro-migratory effect on BMSCs and thus may facilitate cell recruitment and tissue repair in vivo. In the hemolysis assay, K shows that there was no noteworthy hemolysis in the DT, DT-MSN, DT-AMS(0), DT-AMS(2), and DT-AMS(5) groups after co-incubation with the blood samples, and the hemolysis rate of each group was less than 5%. These data fully confirm the material's good hemocompatibility, indicating its suitability for blood contact scenarios. Combined with the pre-validated cytocompatibility results, the non-hemolytic properties exhibited by the material further support its biosafety for in vivo implantation and tissue engineering applications.

3.6

## Osteogenic properties of DT-AMS
 A illustrates the experimental strategy for bone tissue repair in this study: aspirin-loaded porous tantalum scaffolds enable sustained, low-dose release of aspirin, which acts on BMSCs to significantly promote their osteogenic differentiation, as evidenced by the upregulated expression of osteogenic markers ALP, RUNX2, and OPN. To systematically evaluate this process, BMSCs osteogenic differentiation was assessed in vitro by measuring alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and performing alizarin red S (ARS) staining on days 7, 14, and 21 of culture ( B). ALP, an early hallmark enzyme of osteogenic differentiation, was observed under a light microscope on days 3 and 7 of BMSCs cell culture, between the experimental groups and the blank group. exhibited noteworthy differences. Specifically ( C), the ALP activity of the experimental groups was generally higher than that of the blank group, with the DT-AMS(2) group being particularly prominent with the darkest staining color at the highest level, followed by the DT-AMS(0) and DT-AMS(5) groups, whereas the DT-MSN and DT groups exhibited a slightly darker hues than did the BLANK group. 
Furthermore, the degree of mineralization, a late marker of osteogenic differentiation, was assessed by ARS staining, and the results showed ( D) that on day 14 of incubation, all the experimental groups showed noteworthy calcium nodule deposition, with the DT-AMS(2) group exhibiting the most pronounced mineralization, with a appreciably higher number of calcium nodules than the other groups (P < 0.05). With the extension of incubation time to day 21, the mineralization degree of all groups showed noteworthy enhancement (P < 0.05), especially the DT-AMS(2) group not only maintained the numerical superiority, but also formed characteristic large calcified nodules. This shift in the dynamic mineralization pattern was mainly attributed to the fact that the DT-AMS(2) treatment may have promoted the sustained deposition of calcium and phosphorus salts by modulating bone metabolism-related pathways, such as RANKL/OPG, while the slow-release property of ASP provided a stable microenvironmental support for the mineralization process, which allowed the mineral crystals to grow sufficiently and fuse to form large-sized nodules.
Quantitative analyses further confirmed that the addition of moderate amounts of ASP appreciably enhanced the osteogenic differentiation capacity of BMSCs, as evidenced by the simultaneous increase in ALP activity and mineralization. However, when the concentration of ASP exceeds the optimal range, osteogenic differentiation might be inhibited instead because of cytotoxic effects and metabolic disturbances, which suggests that the release kinetics of ASP need to be accurately regulated in practical applications. The comprehensive results showed that the DT-AMS(2) group exhibited noteworthy advantages in promoting BMSCs osteogenic differentiation through its unique material properties and the synergistic effect of ASP.
To further elucidate the regulatory mechanism of the osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs, this study systematically evaluated the expression characteristics of key osteogenic markers under different experimental conditions through a multidimensional molecular biology technology platform. Three complementary analytical methods, including immunofluorescence staining, reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) and Western blot, were used in the experimental design to comprehensively examine the key regulators of osteogenic differentiation, including alkaline phosphatase (ALP), osteoblast protein (OPN) and RUNX2, from the three levels of protein spatial distribution, gene transcription level and protein expression, respectively.
The results of immunofluorescence staining confirmed these findings. The immunofluorescence staining results revealed ( A) that, compared with those in the control group, the fluorescence intensity of the cells in all the experimental groups was enhanced to different degrees, among which the DT-AMS(2) group presented the most noteworthy fluorescence signal enhancement effect. The fluorescence intensity values of ALP, OPN and RUNX2 in the DT-AMS(2) group were found to be appreciably higher than those in the other experimental groups as determined by laser confocal microscopy observation combined with quantitative image analysis software (P < 0.05) ( D), whereas the fluorescence intensities in the DT-AMS(0) and DT-AMS(5) groups showed similar expression patterns. In terms of gene transcription levels, the results of RT‒qPCR quantitative analysis ( C) showed that all the experimental treatments upregulated the expression of the three osteogenic marker genes to varying degrees. Notably, the DT-AMS(2) group exhibited the most noteworthy up-regulation effect of mRNA expression, with the transcript levels of ALP, OPN, and RUNX2 reaching 2.2-fold, 2.6-fold, and 1.8-fold greater than those of the control group, respectively (P < 0.05). This dose-dependent pattern of gene expression regulation further confirmed the specific activating effect of DT-AMS(2) treatment on the transcriptional activity of osteogenic differentiation-related genes. 
To validate the above findings, Western blot analysis was performed at the protein level. The results showed ( B–E) that the protein expression of ALP, OPN, and RUNX2 in the DT-AMS(2)-treated group was appreciably higher than that in the other experimental groups, which was highly consistent with the trend detected by immunofluorescence staining and RT‒qPCR. It is particularly noteworthy that RUNX2, as a core transcriptional regulator of osteogenic differentiation, showed the most noteworthy change in protein expression, suggesting that DT-AMS(2) may affect the expression network of downstream osteogenesis-related genes by regulating the expression of RUNX2. Taken together, the above results suggest that DT-AMS(2) extract can appreciably promote the secretion of osteogenesis-related factors in cultured BMSCs, thus effectively accelerating the process of osteogenic differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells.

3.7

## Anti-inflammatory properties of DT-AMS
RAW 264.7 cells were polarized to the M1 phenotype by treatment with 1 μg/mL LPS and cultured with extracts from different experimental groups. The excellent reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging property of DT-AMS protects the cells from ROS-induced damage. To demonstrate this property, a DCFH-DA probe was used to study the intracellular ROS levels in RAW 264.7 cells after incubation with various extracts ( A). The lowest fluorescence intensity was observed in the DT-AMS(5) group, and quantitative analysis of fluorescence was also performed ( E) (P < 0.05), which was a statistically noteworthy result. As key effector cells of the innate immune system, macrophages play a central role in regulating inflammation and tissue repair. They are functionally plastic and can polarize into two main phenotypes on the basis of microenvironmental stimuli: proinflammatory M1 macrophages and anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages [ ]. 
M1 macrophages are characterized by high expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and the surface marker CD86, which mediate inflammatory responses [ ], whereas M2 macrophages express high levels of the mannose receptor (CD206) and release anti-inflammatory factors (e.g., IL-10, and TGF-β) to promote tissue repair and reduce inflammation [ ](IL-10, TGF-β), which promote tissue repair and reduce inflammation [ ]. To investigate the role of DT-AMS in macrophage polarization, the RAW 264.7 macrophage line was used in this study, and cocultured with different groups of macrophage extracts, and immunofluorescence staining, RT‒qPCR and Western blot techniques were used to systematically detect specific markers (iNOS, CD86, and CD206) in M1 and M2 macrophages.
The results of immunofluorescence staining ( B) showed that compared with the positive control group (LPS group) and other DT‒AMS groups, the DT‒AMS(5) group appreciably inhibited the activation of M1-type macrophages, as evidenced by the appreciably reduced fluorescence signal intensities of iNOS and CD86, at the same time, the expression level of CD206 in the DT‒AMS(5) group was the highest among all the groups, which indicated that the treatment could effectively promote the activation of macrophages to M2 cells. This indicates that the treatment can effectively promote the polarization of macrophages to the M2 phenotype. Quantitative analysis of fluorescence was also performed ( F) (P < 0.05), and this result was statistically noteworthy. At the gene expression level, RT-qPCR analysis ( D) further confirmed the above trend: the mRNA levels of M1-related genes (iNOS and CD86) were appreciably downregulated in the DT‒AMS(5) group, whereas the expression of M2 marker gene (CD206) was appreciably up-regulated (P < 0.05). In addition, Western blot assay ( C) showed that the protein expression of iNOS and CD86 in the DT‒AMS(5) group was appreciably reduced, whereas the protein level of CD206 was appreciably increased, which was highly consistent with the results of immunofluorescence and RT‒qPCR.
The comprehensive findings demonstrate that the DT-AMS (5) material exhibits remarkable immunomodulatory capabilities, particularly under chronic inflammatory conditions such as diabetes, where it appreciably modulates macrophage polarization by suppressing the M1 pro-inflammatory phenotype while promoting the M2 anti-inflammatory phenotype. This bidirectional regulatory effect not only effectively mitigates inflammatory responses in chronic inflammatory microenvironments but also facilitates local tissue repair and homeostasis restoration.

3.8

## Functional validation of target genes
To validate the key molecular targets through which DT-AMS regulates osteogenic differentiation and anti-inflammatory effects ( A), specific gene knockdown experiments were performed in BMSCs and RAW264.7 macrophages. In BMSCs, compared with the blank control and NC-siRNA groups, the Ctnnb1-specific knockdown group showed significantly downregulated ALP activity and expression of osteogenesis-related genes [ ]after DT-AMS(2) treatment. Western blot analysis confirmed that Ctnnb1 knockdown was stable and effective. These results demonstrate that β-catenin, as a core component of the Wnt pathway [ ], serves as a key downstream target of DT-AMS(2)-mediated osteogenesis. The high osteogenic activity maintained in the NC-siRNA group after treatment effectively excluded nonspecific interference from transfection procedures, ensuring the reliability of the conclusions. In RAW264.7 cells, the Nfkb1-specific knockdown group exhibited significantly reduced expression of M2 polarization markers such as CD206 following DT-AMS(5) treatment, showing clear differences compared with control groups, which suggests that Nfkb1 knockdown blocks DT-AMS(5) induced M2 polarization. This indicates that the anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory functions of DT-AMS(5) are at least partially dependent on the NF-κB pathway, with Nfkb1 playing a critical role in DT-AMS(5) mediated macrophage polarization. Given that β-catenin (Wnt pathway) was identified as a key target for DT-AMS(2) induced osteogenesis via knockdown experiments, we further employed RNA-seq to analyze the genome-wide expression profiles of BMSCs after DT-AMS intervention, aiming to not only elucidate the comprehensive molecular regulatory network underlying these effects but also explore potential crosstalk with other critical osteogenic pathways such as PI3K-Akt, laying a solid foundation for subsequent in-depth mechanistic investigations. 

3.9

## Transcriptome analysis
Building on the findings from the transfection experiments, which identified β-catenin and Nfkb1 as key targets for DT-AMS(2)-mediated osteogenesis and DT-AMS(5)-mediated anti-inflammation respectively, we further combined ex vivo and in vivo experimental investigations to confirm that the synergistic action of ASP endows DT‒AMS(2) with remarkable osteogenic activity, while DT‒AMS(5) exhibits prominent anti-inflammatory properties. To investigate the molecular mechanism of the porous tantalum coating, we performed transcriptome sequencing on cells from the BLANK, DT‒AMS(2), and DT‒AMS(5) groups ( B). The results of the gene expression analysis showed ( C) that the up-regulation of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were visualized via Venn diagrams, where the purple area represents DT‒AMS(2)-specific upregulated genes and the yellow area represents DT‒AMS(5)-specific upregulated genes.
Notably, the genes whose expression was upregulated in both groups included important osteogenesis-related genes [ ](e.g., Bmp2, RhoA, etc.) and anti-inflammation-related genes [ ] (e.g., Il11, etc.), and these genes, whose expression was upregulated in combination with other genes were appreciably expressed in the subsequent volcano maps. Further differential gene expression analysis ( D) revealed 1309 upregulated and 822 downregulated genes in the DT‒AMS(2)-treated group compared with the BLANK group, whereas 933 upregulated and 847 downregulated genes were detected in the DT‒AMS(5) group, a result that fully confirms the noteworthy effect of the material treatments on the cellular transcriptome. To demonstrate the gene expression pattern more intuitively, we constructed a heatmap of highly expressed DEGs ( E), which clearly presented the characteristics of gene expression differences among the two or three groups of BLANK, DT‒AMS(2), and DT‒AMS(5).
On the basis of the results of the differentially expressed genes, we performed a systematic enrichment analysis of the three major Gene Ontology (GO) categories ( F). Compared with the BLANK group, the DT‒AMS(2)-treated group was appreciably enriched for cell proliferation and migration-related functions (e.g., extracellular matrix binding, cell population proliferation, cell migration), as well as osteogenic differentiation-related functions (e.g., bone mineralization, positive regulation of ossification, positive regulation of bone remodeling). Notably, the DT‒AMS(5)-treated group, on the other hand, was mainly enriched in anti‒inflammatory‒related functions (e.g., positive regulation of inflammatory response, regulation of immune response). In order to further analyze the molecular mechanisms involved in these differentially expressed genes, we performed pathway enrichment analysis of the differentially expressed genes between the BLANK group and the DT‒AMS(2) and DT‒AMS(5) groups based on the KEGG database.
The results of the pathway enrichment analysis are shown in G. In the DT‒AMS(2) group, we observed noteworthy activation of several key signaling pathways: cell proliferation and migration‒related pathways (cytokine‒cytokine receptor interaction, ECM‒receptor interaction, cell adhesion molecules), vasculogenic pathway (VEGF signaling pathway), and core pathways of osteogenic differentiation (PI3K‒Akt signaling pathway, Wnt signaling pathway, and MAPK signaling pathway). Among them, the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway [ ] and the Wnt [ , ] signaling pathway are appreciably enriched and closely related to osteogenesis, with well-documented crosstalk between these two pathways in regulating bone formation. It has been demonstrated that low-dose aspirin enhances the osteogenic potential of BMSCs by modulating their telomerase activity [ ]. The Wnt signaling pathway plays a critical role in maintaining bone homeostasis, and abnormalities in this pathway lead to impaired bone formation. In this study, we found that aspirin promotes β-catenin degradation through activation of the Wnt pathway, thereby inhibiting adipose/chondrogenic differentiation and enhancing osteogenic activity [ ].
The DT‒AMS(5) group was enriched mainly in immunomodulation-related pathways, including NF‒κB signaling pathway, Toll‒like receptor signaling pathway, and TGF-β signaling pathway. Mechanistic studies have shown that high-dose aspirin regulates T‒cell subset homeostasis via the TGF-β pathway, while inhibiting osteoclast formation by suppressing the NF-κB pathway [ ]. Notably, the treatment also appreciably upregulated the expression of osteogenic markers such as RUNX2, ALP, and OCN.
Building upon these results and to further dissect the signaling mechanisms through which DT-AMS modulates osteogenesis, we conducted Western blot analysis on total lysates from BMSCs treated with DT-AMS(2) or DT-AMS(5). We examined the activation status of key proteins within the PI3K-Akt, Wnt/β-catenin, and NF-κB pathways, which have been implicated in bone formation and immune modulation. Additionally, given the recognized cross-talk between these pathways and the MAPK/ERK cascade in osteogenic differentiation, we simultaneously assessed the phosphorylation levels of ERK to evaluate the involvement of the MAPK/ERK signaling. This integrated protein-level profiling aims to systematically map the coordinated actions of these critical pathways in DT-AMS-regulated osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs, thereby providing a comprehensive view of the underlying molecular network.
Western blot results demonstrated that the protein expression levels of phosphorylated PI3K (p-PI3K) and phosphorylated Akt (p-Akt) were significantly upregulated in the DT-AMS(2) group ( ), suggesting that this group could effectively activate the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway. In contrast, owing to the massive release of aspirin, the DT-AMS(5) group not only failed to exert the activation effect on the aforementioned pathway but also exhibited significantly weaker osteogenic induction capacity compared with the DT-AMS(2) group. This phenotypic difference indicates that different DT-AMS treatment groups may regulate the osteogenic differentiation process and inflammatory response function of BMSCs by modulating the synergistic effects of multiple signaling pathways, including PI3K-Akt and NF-κB. To verify the above regulatory mechanisms, this study synchronously detected the phosphorylation levels of key proteins in the Wnt/β-catenin and MAPK/ERK pathways. The results were consistent with the expression trend of the PI3K-Akt pathway: the phosphorylation levels of β-catenin (p-β-catenin) and ERK (p-ERK) were significantly increased in the DT-AMS(2) group, confirming the coordinated activation of PI3K-Akt and Wnt/β-catenin pathways in DT-AMS(2)-mediated osteogenesis, which is consistent with our earlier finding that β-catenin is a key downstream target of DT-AMS(2).
Focusing on the anti-inflammatory mechanism of DT-AMS(5), we supplemented Western blot experiments ( ) to detect the activation status of the NF-κB pathway (p-P65/P65) and TGF-β/Smad pathway (p-Smad2/3), which are core pathways involved in immune regulation. The results showed that DT-AMS(5) could inhibit the NF-κB pathway and activate the TGF-β/Smad pathway.
The increase in p-β-catenin induced by DT-AMS(2) reflects its enhanced phosphorylation. DT-AMS(2) likely promotes osteogenic transcription by facilitating p-β-catenin nuclear translocation rather than inhibiting its degradation, consistent with the essential role of β-catenin shown in knockdown experiments. This effect is coordinated with the PI3K-Akt pathway: DT-AMS(2) activates ERK phosphorylation and synergizes with PI3K-Akt signaling to stabilize RUNX2, thereby enhancing osteogenesis. In contrast, excess aspirin in DT-AMS(5) inhibits p-ERK and p-β-catenin, reducing osteogenic efficiency and further supporting the synergistic interaction between these pathways.
On the basis of confirming β-catenin (Wnt pathway) as a key target via knockdown experiments and verifying the coordinated activation of Wnt/β-catenin and PI3K-Akt pathways through Western blot, we further confirmed the core regulatory role of the PI3K-Akt pathway in DT-AMS(2)-mediated BMSCs osteogenic differentiation by performing a pathway-specific inhibition experiment, adding the selective PI3K-Akt pathway inhibitor LY294002 [ ]to the BMSCs culture system treated with DT-AMS(2). Western blot results showed that LY294002 could significantly inhibit the activation of the PI3K-Akt pathway ( ); while DT-AMS(2) could effectively reverse this inhibitory effect ( ), thereby restoring and enhancing the osteogenic ability of BMSCs. In addition, the results of scratch test demonstrated that the migration ( ) abilities of BMSCs in the DT-AMS(2) + LY294002 group were significantly higher than those in the LY294002 group. To clarify the regulatory role of the NF-κB pathway, this study used the selective NF-κB activation inhibitor BAY11-7082 ( ) [ ] for verification. Detection after administration found that the expression levels ( ) of phosphorylated p65 (p-p65) and phosphorylated Iκ-Ba (p-Iκ-Ba) were both significantly reduced, and DT-AMS(5) treatment showed a regulatory effect consistent with that of BAY11-7082, confirming the specific inhibitory effect of DT-AMS(5) on NF-κB signal transduction. Meanwhile, in the ROS scavenging fluorescence staining experiment, the ROS scavenging capacities ( ) of the DT-AMS(5) + LPS group and the BAY11-7082+LPS group were similar.
The RNA-seq results align with previous experimental evidence, demonstrating that DT-AMS(2) promotes osteogenesis through coordinated regulation of the Wnt/β-catenin and PI3K-Akt pathways, while DT-AMS(5) mediates immunomodulatory functions via the NF-κB pathway.

3.10

## In vivo study
We used a type I diabetic rat femoral defect model to systematically evaluate the regulatory effects of different coating materials on bone regeneration capacity under diabetic pathological conditions. Under the premise of strictly ensuring the biosafety of the coating materials in all the experimental groups, we focused on the differential effects of each material on bone regeneration in the femoral defect region of male rats. The experimental design is shown in A. The implantation procedure is illustrated as shown in . The implant was surgically implanted into a specific location in the femurs of the rats ( B), and the femur samples were collected for Micro‒CT scanning and analysis at two time points, 8 and 12 weeks after surgery, to comprehensively evaluate the microstructural characteristics of the bone tissues. The results of the Micro‒CT scans showed that ( C and D), the new bone tissues at the edge of the defects were well formed with the tantalum implant, as shown in the sagittal plane view. The tantalum implants formed a good osseointegration interface, while the cross-sectional images clearly demonstrated the spatial distribution characteristics of each group of bone trabeculae. Notably, the bone trabecular density in the DT‒AMS(2) group was appreciably higher than that in the DT‒AMS(0), DT‒AMS(5), DT, DT‒MSN, and BLANK control groups, a result that fully demonstrated the superior bone regeneration potential of this material in the diabetic pathological environment. 
For further quantitative analysis, we performed 3D reconstruction of the newborn bone tissue ( E), which showed that after 12 weeks of treatment, the DT‒AMS(2) group formed structurally continuous and morphologically complete regenerated bone tissue in the defect area, and its bone volume was appreciably higher than that of the other experimental groups, a finding that was in full agreement with our previous experiments. By quantitative Micro‒CT parameter analyses, we obtained more objective experimental evidence: the DT‒AMS(2) group showed a noteworthy advantage in the determination of the key indexes of the bone volume fraction (BV/TV) ( F) and bone mineral density (BMD) ( G), with the highest values among all the experimental groups. These quantitative data corroborate with the qualitative observations, fully confirming the noteworthy promotion of the bone regeneration process by the DT‒AMS(2) coating under diabetic pathological conditions. Particularly noteworthy is that this material maintains exceptional osteogenic performance even under diabetic conditions characterized by impaired bone metabolism.
Visual and fine evidence of the bone–implant interface morphology was obtained through H&E staining ( A) and Masson's Trichrome staining ( B) of tissue sections. H&E staining clearly revealed the overall morphology of cells and tissues, while Masson's Trichrome staining specifically visualized extracellular matrix components such as collagen. Together, these staining methods demonstrated the following: across the entire section ( ), the bone tissue in the DT-AMS(2) group formed a close and direct contact with the implant surface, with no fibrous tissue interposition at the interface. This direct bony apposition without a fibrous gap is a key morphological feature of successful osseointegration [ ].The achievement of early osseointegration is particularly notable during bone healing, as the rapid formation of a stable bone–implant connection in the early post-operative stage helps to reduce interfacial micromotion, thereby facilitating subsequent bone maturation and remodeling [ ]. 
Further analysis showed that not only was the bone-implant contact rate (BIC) appreciably improved in the DT-AMS(2) group compared to the unmodified DT and BLANK groups, Masson trichrome staining further confirmed a higher degree of extracellular matrix maturation and more organized osteoid formation in this group. This suggests that the new bone tissue was not simply quantitatively increased, but was also of superior quality. These in vivo observations echo our previous in vitro findings and provide strong evidence that surface functionalization modifications can consistently and steadily enhance the osteogenic potential of implant materials.
To further validate the bone regenerative effects of the implants, we performed immunohistochemical analysis. The results showed that the expression of osteocalcin (OCN)( C), a key marker of osteogenesis, was appreciably up-regulated in the DT-AMS(2) group, indicating that the bone matrix mineralization process was more active in this group. In addition, the immunomodulatory effects of the implants were assessed by detecting macrophage phenotypic markers (iNOS and CD206)( D and E). the DT-AMS(5) group exhibited a lower expression of iNOS (M1-type macrophage marker), while the expression of CD206 (M2-type macrophage marker) was appreciably increased, suggesting that the microenvironment of the defect area in this group favored an anti-inflammatory and tissue repair phenotype. Finally, we further validated these results by detecting the protein and mRNA expression levels of OCN, iNOS and CD206 in femoral defect tissues at 12 weeks by Western blot( F) and RT-qPCR( G), confirming that DT-AMS modification synergistically promotes bone regeneration and optimizes the local immune microenvironment.
Furthermore, we examined the expression patterns of genes and proteins related to the PI3K/AKT axis and NF-κB pathway in each group using Western blot ( G). Quantitative analysis of the experimental data further validated these expression trends: the results showed that compared with the BLANK, DT, and DT-MSN groups, the expression levels of p-PI3K and p-AKT were significantly increased in the DT-AMS groups (P < 0.05)( ), with the strongest upregulation observed in DT-AMS(2). Meanwhile, in the NF-κB pathway validation, quantitative analysis ( ) confirmed that as the anti-inflammatory capacity of the materials gradually improved, the expression of p-P65 showed a corresponding significant decrease (P < 0.05). These in vitro findings, supported by quantitative verification, were consistent with the in vivo results, confirming that DT-AMS implants promote femoral fracture healing and reduce inflammation in mice after implantation.

4

## Conclusion
Advancing diabetic bone regeneration, an innovative glucose-triggered multifunctional coating system for 3D-printed porous tantalum implants has been successfully developed. This comprehensive therapeutic platform achieves enhanced bone repair through two mechanistically distinct yet synergistically consistent pathways. The 3D-printed porous tantalum scaffold features a precisely controlled structure and optimized pore characteristics, which along with making its elastic modulus close to that of natural bone tissue serve to provide an ideal structural basis for bone ingrowth and mechanical support. Crucially, the engineered coating exhibits dynamic, glucose-triggered therapeutic release, preferentially activating anti-inflammatory and antioxidant pathways under hyperglycemic conditions, while maintaining sustained osteogenic activity during normoglycemia. By coordinating structural design with biological reactivity, the system simultaneously addresses multiple pathological aspects of diabetic bone healing, including impaired osteogenesis, excessive oxidative stress, and chronic inflammation. This technology as well as offering a clinically viable solution for diabetic bone defects establishes a new framework for the development of metabolically adaptive orthopedic implants.

## Ethics approval and consent to participate
All animal-based procedures were conducted in accordance with the Guidelines for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals established by the Animal Care Research Committee and reviewed by the Animal Ethics Committee of Tianjin Medical University(protocol number YSY-DWLL-2024612). All such experiments were carried out under pathogen-free conditions at the university's facilities. It should be noted that no human subjects were involved in this research.

## Funding
This study was jointly supported by The Science and Technology Project of Tianjin Health Commission (Grant No. TJWJ2025MS007), the 10.13039/501100004772Ningxia Natural Science Foundation Project Plan (Grant Nos. 2025AAC031000 and 2025AAC031001), the Huan County Key R&D Program (Grant No. HX-STK-2025A-031), and Grants-in-Aid for Early-Career Scientists (Grant No. 23K16036, for J.Z.) from the 10.13039/501100001691Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Shiqing Ma: Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Project administration, Resources, Software, Supervision. Mengzhen Cui: Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Software, Supervision, Validation, Writing – original draft. Kexin Chang: Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – original draft. Guohua Yang: Data curation, Formal analysis, Validation, Visualization. Le Li: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. Bo Kou: Data curation, Formal analysis, Validation. Bo Xu: Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Validation. Yaoyang Li: Software, Validation, Writing – review & editing. Fuli Liu: Data curation, Investigation, Validation. Mengying Jin: Data curation, Formal analysis, Visualization. Yo Shibata: Conceptualization, Data curation, Visualization. Jun Zhou: Funding acquisition, Investigation, Project administration, Resources. Rui Li: Funding acquisition, Project administration, Resources, Software, Supervision.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

 Appendix A

## Supplementary data
The following is the Supplementary data to this article.

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Data availability
Data will be made available on request.

Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2026.102994.