822acssdChemical ReviewsChem RevPMC1163890211638902116389023949967410.1021/acs.chemrev.4c00472Technologies
for Targeted RNA Degradation and Induced
RNA Decay
MikutisSigitas BernardesGonçalo J L 1Yusuf Hamied Department of
Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge CB2 1EW, U.K.*Email: sm2029@cantab.ac.uk.
*Email: gb453@cam.ac.uk.
5112024124231330113301–1333014122024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 The vast majority
of the human genome codes for RNA, but RNA-targeting
therapeutics account for a small fraction of approved drugs. As such,
there is great incentive to improve old and develop new approaches
to RNA targeting. For many RNA targeting modalities, just binding
is not sufficient to exert a therapeutic effect; thus, targeted RNA
degradation and induced decay emerged as powerful approaches with
a pronounced biological effect. This review covers the origins and
advanced use cases of targeted RNA degrader technologies grouped by
the nature of the targeting modality as well as by the mode of degradation.
It covers both well-established methods and clinically successful
platforms such as RNA interference, as well as emerging approaches
such as recruitment of RNA quality control machinery, CRISPR, and
direct targeted RNA degradation. We also share our thoughts on the
biggest hurdles in this field, as well as possible ways to overcome
them.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Jun 21; Accepted 2024 Oct 29; Revised 2024 Oct 3; Collection date 2024 Dec 11.

1.

## Introduction
RNA plays a very diverse
set of roles in biology, perhaps more
so than any other biomolecule. Unlike the structurally related DNA,
RNA synthesis and degradation are extremely dynamic, with half-lives
ranging from tens of seconds to tens of hours for mRNAs , to several days for rRNAs , to even longer timeframes
for protein-bound miRNAs. To maintain this dynamic behavior, cells
have evolved numerous RNA degradation mechanisms, some with precise
control over the target and location of degradation and some that
are rather promiscuous. Misregulation of these mechanisms can result
in disease. To give some examples, defects in the miRNA system of
genes are associated with oncologic conditions, , whereas
defects in nucleases which are part of the innate cellular immunity
will make cells more susceptible to viral infections. Many of these RNA regulation systems have been adapted
or served as inspiration to develop tools that degrade the desired
RNAs at will, both to advance the understanding of the functions of
targeted RNAs as well as to develop new therapeutic methods.
But why do we want to therapeutically target RNA in the first place?
Protein targeting approaches remain the central pillar of modern therapeutics
development—by 2019, FDA-approved drugs were targeting 856
proteins and only 37 other biomolecules ( a). However,
just 1.5% of the human genome codes for proteins, and the majority
of those 1.5% do not have well-defined binding surfaces, which hinders
drug development (e.g., transcription factors are key players in numerous
diseases, but most are considered “undruggable”) ( b, c). − When it comes to RNA, around 70% of the human genome is transcribed—an
enormous jump from the space of druggable proteins. Furthermore, the ability to selectively degrade RNAs at
will can also be utilized to modulate the protein space—e.g.,
mRNAs encoding either druggable or “undruggable” proteins
can be degraded to deplete them. As such, there is a huge incentive
to develop new tools to target and degrade RNA, as the newly unlocked
biomolecular target space will undoubtedly present new avenues to
cure diseases that are yet untreatable.
 These tools to degrade RNA in a targeted manner
are the focus of
this review ( , ). This
review divides them into two groups, based on the targeting method,
with an emphasis on translational approaches. The first, nucleic-acid-guided
methods, covers tools where the targeting is achieved via guiding
nucleic acids, targeting RNA in a sequence-dependent manner. The second
is small-molecule-guided methods, which typically target RNA in a
structure-dependent manner. While distinct in the targeting strategy
and the sphere of applicability, they share much in degradation approaches,
and in many cases, nucleic-acid-based methods serve as inspiration
for small molecule approaches. Due to the crosstalk between these
strategies, it is beneficial to look at them together; thus, this
review will contrast various aspects of the two approaches. The most
advanced targeted RNA degradation methods rely on ribonuclease recruitment;
thus, they will be covered first, followed by emerging direct RNA
degradation methods. The description of each RNA degrading tool will
be preceded by an overview of natural systems which served as the
inspiration, followed by the description of the tool itself and the
most advanced use cases as well as limitations and, where applicable,
what may be lacking for the method to find success in the clinic.
Key chemical and structural features that enable RNA targeting and
degradation are described for each tool. A particular focus will be
given to therapeutic applications for each of the methods.
 
2.

## Nucleic-Acid-Guided Methods
Targeting
RNA with oligonucleotides is perhaps the oldest and the
most well-explored method to modulate both stability and function
of RNA species. Antisense oligonucleotide technology was first described
by the team of Paul Zamecnik, when they reported that a DNA oligonucleotide
complementary to a tract in the Rous Sarcoma virus 35S rRNA subunit
inhibits viral replication. The authors
of the initial publication suggested that the oligonucleotide acts
as a steric blocker, which binds RNA and prevents interactions with
native partners. However, the reality turned out to be more complicated
than that—the resulting RNA:DNA hybrid could be recognized
and degraded by ribonuclease H. Thus, it turned out that DNA oligonucleotides
can function not merely as stoichiometric RNA binders but also as
catalytic RNA degraders. − Other nucleic-acid-guided degrader
technologies were to follow—siRNAs are already well established
and have made numerous inroads into the clinic, and CRISPR-Cas13 and
various class 1 CRISPR systems have already been made into tools reported
to be advantageous over existing methods. − Antisense oligonucleotides
are also being harnessed to utilize various RNA quality control mechanisms
for selective degradation.
Before moving on to more granular
discussion, we will define the
key features, scope, and limitations of nucleic-acid-guided RNA degradation
tools. Depending on the biological mechanism used, these guides are
composed or either DNA or RNA typically between 10 and 30 oligonucleotides
long, and are typically heavily modified as nonmodified oligonucleotides
get rapidly degraded inside and outside cells. These oligonucleotides target a particular sequence by
forming base pairs with it. The oligonucleotide needs to be able to
displace native binders if the targeted sequence has any—this
can be facilitated via chemical modifications which increase the RNA
binding strength. Nucleic-acid-based therapeutics have some inherent
drawbacks—the uptake of naked nucleic acids is very poor; thus,
to be useful, they must either be conjugated to a targeting ligand
or used in conjunction with a delivery vehicle; their production cost
can be high, and they are not typically orally bioavailable. Oligonucleotide therapeutics often induce adverse
reactions and toxicity, which has resulted in withdrawals of FDA approval. With these features and limitations in mind,
let us explore the mechanism of RNase H-inducing oligonucleotides
and their journey to becoming one of the most successful classes of
RNA-targeting therapeutics.
2.1.

## RNase H-Inducing Oligonucleotides
RNases H are ribonucleases that bind DNA:RNA duplexes and cut the
RNA strand via a hydrolytic mechanism. Although these enzymes can
also bind DNA:DNA and RNA:RNA duplexes, they will only cleave DNA:RNA
hybrids ( a). − This cleavage selectivity arises from the differential structure
of the DNA:RNA helix—the active site of RNase H interacts with
the minor groove of the duplex, and only the DNA:RNA hybrid has the
correct geometry to position a ribonucleotide for cleavage, due to
the shape of the helix and the puckering of ribose. , The active site of RNase H contains aspartate and glutamate group
amino acid side chains which act as a matrix for divalent metal ion
(preferably Mg2+ or Mn2+) binding ( b). − Metal ions bind the phosphodiester to be cleaved; furthermore, they
bind a water molecule, which is activated as a nucleophile and cleaves
the bound phosphodiester. The cleavage results in 5′-phosphate
and 3′-hydroxyl ends. The two
metal ion cleavage mechanism of RNase H is shared with many DNases;
thus, stringent structural requirements are in place to prevent cleavage
of DNA. 
 The RNase H-induced RNA cleavage in DNA:RNA duplexes
is vital for
DNA replication across all of the domains of life. In eukaryotes,
RNase H1 is needed for initiation of mitochondrial DNA replication
(RITOLS model). − It removes RNA primers on the growing DNA chain as
the failure to do so results in an RNA:DNA duplex, which blocks the
activity of mitochondrial DNA polymerase in subsequent replication
cycles. , It was demonstrated that knocking down the RNASEH1 gene induces embryo development defects in mice
and cell replication defects in humans, due to failure to produce
mitochondrial DNA. RNase H is also key
for replication of retroviruses where it is found as a domain of the
reverse transcriptase holoenzyme complex. , , Retroviral RNase H has also been explored
as a therapeutic target for antiviral drug development, with many
of the developed compounds binding the two magnesium atoms in its
active site. − 
As mentioned in the introduction of this section,
recruitment of
RNase H (in particular, the human RNase H1, encoded by the RNASEH1 gene) was one the first targeted RNA degradation
methods harnessed for therapeutic purposes, in the form of RNase H
inducing oligonucleotides. They take an advantage of the rather unique
ability of RNase H to cleave DNA:RNA hybrids and typically are modified
DNA oligonucleotides with a sequence complementary to a segment of
the targeted RNA species, usually up to 25 nucleotides long. RNase H-inducing oligonucleotides form an DNA:RNA
duplex with the targeted RNA species, which in a cellular environment
leads to recruitment of RNase H and, subsequently, cleavage of the
targeted RNA. , 
One of the key challenges
in the development of RNase H-inducing
ASOs is metabolic stability—endogenous DNases will rapidly
degrade DNA oligonucleotides, with half-lives as short as several
minutes. , The way to circumvent this problem is to
use modified deoxyribonucleotides, which hamper recognition by DNases.
However, RNase H has exquisite selectivity for DNA:RNA duplex geometry,
thus any modifications that disrupt this structure also abolish the
mechanism of degradation. As such, a
fine balance must be struck—too little modifications, and the
oligonucleotide will get degraded too quickly to exert an effect;
too many modifications, and the oligonucleotide will not be able to
recruit the RNase H. Two principles in the design of RNase H-inducing
oligonucleotides are typically followed. First, use of modifications
that do not hinder the recognition by RNase H. Second, design of gapmers—oligonucleotides consisting
of heavily modified flanks which confer exonuclease protection and
lightly modified center which can still be recognized by RNase H.
Other reviews offer a thorough coverage of the modification space
in the context of RNase H-inducing oligonucleotides; this review only
introduces modifications that led to approved drugs. − 
Perhaps the most widely used modification in oligonucleotides
is
the phosphorothioate linkage, which replaces the native phosphodiester
bonds. First made in the ′60s and synthesis coming into use
with automated methods in the ′80s, their success is owed to
two key aspects. , First, they confer resistance
against DNases, with the rate of enzymatic hydrolysis of the phosphorothioate
linkage being at least an order of magnitude slower than that of unmodified
phosphodiester. , Second, they are otherwise similar
to phosphodiester bonds—they both are negatively charged, have
similar shapes, and are structurally similar enough to be recognized
by RNase H. , They do have one key difference
when compared to native phosphodiesters: the phosphorothioate linkage
is chiral. This has consequences for stability, RNA binding, and recognition
by RNase H; however, there is no clear consensus on whether stereochemically
enriched phosphorothioate oligonucleotides are superior to ones with
random stereochemistry. − Phosphorothioate oligonucleotides also exhibit differential
and typically stronger interactions with proteins compared to phosphodiester
analogs. Oligonucleotides containing
a sufficient proportion of phosphorothioate linkages will be covered
with plasma proteins when in circulation (protein corona), which can
improve the biodistribution to various tissues, promote entry to some
cell types and prevent rapid clearance via glomerular filtration characteristic
to nonmodified oligonucleotides. This ability to form a protein corona
is the reason that RNase-inducing oligonucleotides do not require
dedicated delivery. However, interactions of phosphorothioate oligonucleotide
with paraspeckle proteins can lead to their localization to the nucleolus,
which results in inhibition of rRNA transcription and processing,
leading to apoptosis. , 
Another modification present
on all approved RNase-inducing antisense
oligonucleotides is the 2′-O-(2-methoxyethyl) (2′-MOE)
group. As this modification interferes with recognition by RNase H,
it is found on the flanks of the gapmer oligonucleotides. Initially
designed with the aim of increased RNA binding strength, it was also
found to provide exquisite resistance to nucleases compared both to
naked DNA as well as 2′-O-Methyl modification. , It was discovered that in rat tissues, phosphorothioate gapmers
modified with 2′-MOE groups on flanks have 10-fold increased
half-lives compared to oligonucleotide with phosphorothioate as the
only modification, as well as having lower immunogenicity in mice. , Owing to these properties, 2′-MOE modifications as well as
phosphorothioate backbones are found in most clinically relevant RNase-H
inducing oligonucleotides. 
Understanding
of both the mechanism of RNase H as well as the role
of modification in the design of antisense oligonucleotides have made
RNase H-inducing oligonucleotides into a successful class of drugs,
with four approved either by the FDA or EMA to date ( ). − From the design perspective,
they are all very similar—all are 20 nucleotides long, three
of four have phosphodiester linkages fully replaced with phosphorothioate,
whereas in tofersen 15 out of 19 linkages are replaced; all are gapmers,
with five flanking nucleotides on both 5′ and 3′ ends
bearing the 2′-MOE modification (5–10–5 structure).
Three of them have 40% GC content, with mipomersen having 65%. Notably, all have been developed by Ionis Pharmaceuticals,
which has explored various types of antisense oligonucleotides since
the late ′80s.
 All four approved RNase
H-inducing oligonucleotides target mRNA
species, which would be extremely difficult to target on a protein
level. Mipomersen is FDA-approved for homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia
and targets APOB100, encoding the apolipoprotein
B, a protein playing roles in lipid transport. Mutations in the APOB100 can decrease
its affinity for low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor as well as
catabolic rates for associated lipids. , This leads
to buildup of LDL particles in plasma, which is the underlying cause
of the disease. Treatment with mipomersen leads to reduction of APOB100 mRNA, resulting in decreased levels of apolipoprotein
B and LDL particles, which is the mechanism of action for this drug. However, mipomersen was found to be hepatotoxic,
which is why it was discontinued from the market in 2019 and never
got an approval from EMA. 
Inotersen
is used for treatment of hereditary transthyretin-mediated
amyloidosis. The molecular basis for this disease is mutations in
the TTR gene, which encodes transthyretin, a protein
responsible for transport of thyroid hormone thyroxin and retinol. , This protein is not vital for human health, with mutations which
ablate its thyroxin binding ability having no obvious negative impact. However, some mutations can induce transthyretin
aggregation, resulting in formation of neuropathic amyloids, and the
resulting tissue damage is the cause of hereditary transthyretin mediated
amyloidosis. This disease can be treated
by reducing transthyretin levels, which is inotersen’s mechanism
of action—degradation of TTR mRNA and reduction
of protein and pathogenic amyloid plaques levels. 
Volanesorsen is approved by the EMA for treatment
of familial chylomicronemia
and targets APOC3 mRNA. It encodes apolipoprotein
C3, a key regulator of plasma triglyceride levels. This protein inhibits lipoprotein lipase (LPL), responsible
for metabolism of triglycerides; thus, elevated levels of APOC3 will lead to buildup of triglycerides in blood, which
is the underlying cause of familiar chylomicronaemia. Volanesorsen
recruits RNase H1 to reduce the levels of APOC3 mRNA
and the encoded apolipoprotein C3. , This leads
to increased activity of LPL and lower levels of plasma triglycerides,
alleviating the symptoms of the disorder.
Tofersen, approved
by the FDA for treatment of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS) in 2023, targets the SOD1 mRNA. It
encodes superoxide dismutase 1, an enzyme which converts superoxide,
a highly reactive oxidant, into less reactive peroxide and dioxygen;
thus, it is one of the lines of defense against reactive oxygen species
and oxidative stress. Mutations within
this gene can result in the aggregation of the encoded protein. Resulting
plaques accumulate within the glia and motor neurons, damaging them
through an as-of-yet not fully understood mechanism. , Tofersen degrades the SOD1 mRNA and reduces the
amount of superoxide dismutase 1 in the cerebrospinal fluid. , Currently ongoing clinical trials are investigating whether this
reduction is sufficient to slow the progression of ALS.
The
targets of these four clinically approved RNase H-inducing
oligonucleotides have much in common, which indicates preferential
targets as well as the potential limitations of these therapeutic
modalities. All of them target proteins with toxic gain-of-function
mutations.
Mipomersen, inotersen, and volanesorsen target proteins
that are
involved in lipid transport and/or metabolism, synthesized predominantly
or exclusively in the liver. − A number of RNase H-inducing oligonucleotides currently
in clinical trials fall into the same group, with degraders of triglyceride
level modulator DGAT2 and lipid carrier lipoprotein(a)
approaching or currently in phase III clinical trials. This highlights
that delivery to organs besides the liver remain a major hurdle. Nucleic acid delivery vehicles have the potential
to overcome this, but even so, currently available strategies are
limited. Altogether, RNase H-inducing
oligonucleotides are one of the prime strategies to go after targets
produced in the liver as well as targets difficult to modulate on
a protein level, like extracellular proteins with poorly defined binding
surfaces. 

2.2.

## RNA Interference
and siRNA
RNA interference
(RNAi) is another oligonucleotide-guided pathway through which RNA
can be targeted and inactivated or degraded. , It can utilize two distinct types of guide RNAs with distinct biogenesis
and mechanisms of action–micro RNAs (miRNAs) and small interfering
RNAs (siRNAs). The former are endogenously
found in most eukaryotes, where they are produced as 70–100-nucleotide-long
pri-miRNAs, which get processed into pre-miRNAs and finally active
miRNAs, RNA duplexes of 19–25 nucleotides. siRNAs, on the other
hand, are present in plants and various lowereukaryotes. They have
several biogenesis pathways and are found as RNA duplexes of 21–23
nucleotides, although curiously they can be utilized by the human
RNAi system, which is the enabling factor for siRNA therapeutics. , miRNAs act primarily as translation repressors, and a single miRNA
has many targets, whereas siRNAs are a part of response against pathogens
and transposons and have only a single target. miRNA sequences are
only partially complementary to their targets, and they do not typically
induce degradation, whereas siRNA sequences perfectly match those
of their targets, which are primed for degradation. , 
Differences aside, their molecular mechanisms of action are
similar as they both get loaded onto RNA-induced silencing complex
(RISC). The formation of this complex
is initiated when one of the argonaute proteins binds either miRNA
or siRNA duplex, followed by ejection of the passenger strand. The
remaining guide strand remains bound to an argonaute protein, which
then forms the core of the RISC complex; this mature complex will
then bind its target RNA, as defined by the guide. There are several
mechanisms through which the target gets transcriptionally repressed
or degraded; importantly, some argonaute proteins like human AGO2
act as endonucleases, leading to direct cleavage of RNA. Interestingly, the domain with endonuclease
activity in AGO2 is closely related to that of RNase H—it contains
three acidic (one aspartate and two glutamate) residues which bind
two divalent cations such as magnesium that activate water, resulting
in cleavage of the correctly positioned RNA, although in this case,
it has to be a guide RNA:target RNA duplex. Similarly to RNase H, AGO2 has strict structural requirements for
the cleavage; hence, modifications on the loaded siRNA must not alter
the geometry of the RNA:RNA duplex.
The tunable mechanism of
siRNA systems has led researchers to adapt
these tools for both basic research and therapeutic applications.
In the most used iteration of this system, cells are transfected with
an siRNA duplex, the guide (antisense) strand gets loaded onto AGO2
in the RISC complex, whereas the passenger (sense) strand gets ejected
( ). Then the
siRNA-loaded RISC complex will bind and cleave RNAs complementary
to the guide strand, thus reducing the levels of target RNA and, if
it is a coding RNA, the corresponding protein. Both siRNA strands are composed of modified RNA; thus,
the RISC complex must be able to differentiate the guide and the passenger,
and this is achieved by engineering asymmetric strands with differential
overhangs and thermodynamic stability. − 
 The modification landscape of siRNAs is similar
to that of RNase
H-inducing oligonucleotides, with some key differences. Most impactfully,
only a limited number of phosphorothioate linkages can be tolerated
on siRNAs; thus, they are typically engineered only on the flanks
of both the guide and the passenger strands. As these linkages are key to serum protein recruitment, siRNAs will
interact with them much less than with RNase H-inducing oligonucleotides
and thus see much faster clearance rates and poorer trafficking as
well as cell entry. − As such, siRNAs require more elaborate delivery
strategies, which will be discussed below. Furthermore, they require
additional protection from ribonucleases, which is achieved by exchanging
the 2′-OH group on ribose backbones into 2′-Fluoro or
2′-OMe. Many ribonucleases cleave
RNA through deprotonation of the 2′-OH group; thus, transforming
it into a different group confers complete protection against this
mechanism of degradation. Both 2′-Fluoro
and 2′-OMe protect siRNA from serum endonucleases, are similar
enough in size to 2′-OH to retain activity in the RISC complex,
whereas 2′-MOE, favored in RNase H-inducing oligonucleotide,
is likely too bulky for this application. − The 2′-Fluoro group forces the ribose to the C3′-endo
position and greatly improves its binding activity toward its partner,
which can increase the potency of the guide RNA. However, too many 2′-Fluoro modifications on a siRNA
duplex will increase its stability so it will become impossible to
dissociate it, thus ablating its activity. As such, in state-of-the-art
siRNAs, a mixture of 2′-Fluoro and 2′-OMe is used to
obtain optimal binding activity—strong enough for active RISC
complex to find its target RNA but not too strong to prevent dissociation
and loading of siRNA duplex.
As mentioned above, siRNA duplexes
exhibit limited interactions
with plasma proteins and hence are rapidly cleared. As such, they require more elaborate delivery strategies.
To date, two strategies in siRNA delivery have seen success in the
clinic—lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) as delivery vehicles and
GalNAc ligands for selective internalization into hepatocytes. , LNPs, as the name suggests, form lipid envelopes around the siRNA
to be delivered, which can merge with cells and, once inside, promote
escape from endosomes and thus release the siRNA into cytosol of the
cell. Typically, LNPs consist of several different lipids which carry
out a number of functions—positively charged lipids which interact
with the negatively charged RNA, ionizable lipids which become positively
charged and promote escape from acidic endosomes (pH 5.0–6.5),
PEGylated lipids which improve circulation properties and prevent
capture by phagocytes, as well as phospholipids and cholesterol to
stabilize LNP structures. As with many
other delivery approaches, most of the payload ends up being delivered
to the liver, with ability to target different tissues being an area
of intensive research. GalNAc functions
in a very different way—it is a sugar ligand for a receptor
found on hepatocytes; interactions with this receptor result in internalization
into cells. This is a core principle
behind GalNAc–siRNA conjugates, which typically contain a trimer
or a tetramer of GalNAc ligands conjugated to the passenger strand
of an siRNA, which then gets localized to hepatocytes expressing the
asialoglycoprotein receptor. This allows
for effective mRNA degradation in hepatocytes. However, it remains
to be seen whether different cell types and tissues can be targeted
by using ligands for different receptors. 
siRNAs have found success in the clinic, with six approved
both
by the FDA and EMA to date ( ). − All six target mRNAs were made in liver cells, with Patisiran being
delivered as siRNA formulated in LNPs and the remaining five as GalNAc
conjugates. The patisiran siRNA is has 21 nucleotides in both the
guide and passenger strands, with some of them modified with the 2′-OMe
group—as LNPs provide protection from serum nucleases, siRNAs
packaged this way need not be heavily modified to confer nuclease
protection. Nedosiran has 22 nucleotides
on the guide and 36 on the passenger strand, with the other four having
23 and 21 nucleotides, respectively, with the passenger strand conjugated
to the GalNAc trimer or tetramer. In the case of Nedosiran, the four
GalNAc units are conjugated to the 2′-O groups on four nonbase
pairing adenosines through an amide linkage, while in the other four,
a GalNAc trimer is attached to a phosphate on the 3′ end. They
carry many more modifications than the LNP-formulated patisiran as
they do require serum nuclease protection, having between one and
four phosphorothioate linkages on the flanks of both guide and passenger
strands, and all the 2′-OH groups changed into 2′-OMe
or 2′-F, with high modification densities having been shown
to dramatically increase serum stability. 
 Patisiran, LNP-formulated siRNA and
vutrisiran, a GalNAc conjugate,
have both have been approved against the same disease and have the
same target—hereditary transthyretin mediated amyloidosis and
degrading the mRNA of transthyretin, just as RNase H-inducing Inotersen. , The mechanism of action of transthyretin mRNA degradation is discussed
in . While
all three afford a similar reduction in circulating transthyretin
levels, they have different administration regimens—inotersen
is administered once every week subcutaneously, patisiran is administered
once every 3 weeks and, owing to LNP formulation, intravenously, whereas
vutrisiran is administered once every three months subcutaneously. Due to siRNAs having long half-lives once loaded
onto RISC, they remain active for longer compared to RNase H-inducing
oligonucleotides. 
Givosiran is
GalNAc conjugate that has been approved against acute
hepatic porphyrias and targets ALAS1, encoding delta-aminolevulinic
acid synthase, the enzyme which catalyzes the first and rate-limiting
step of heme biosynthesis. The genetic
cause for acute hepatic porphyrias is deficiency for enzymes downstream
of delta-aminolevulinic acid synthase, which can cause acute episodes
where overexpression of hepatic ALAS1 is induced,
but the downstream biosynthetic defects lead to accumulation of intermediate
products and overall depletion of heme. This leads to a negative feedback
loop, causing the further overexpression of ALAS1. This results in a build-up of neurotoxic intermediates such as
5-aminolevulinic acid, the driver of this disease. Givosiran relieves this buildup by closing this negative
feedback loop via reduction of delta-aminolevulinic acid synthase
and its toxic product 5-aminolevulinic acid levels. 
GalNAc-siRNA conjugate lumasiran has been approved
against primary
hyperoxaluria type 1, and targets and degrades mRNA encoding hydroxyacid
oxidase 1. The key hallmark of this disease is increased excretion
of oxalic acid, which leads to buildup of insoluble calcium oxalate
and formation of kidney stones. In healthy
cells, glycolic acid is transformed into glyoxylate by hydroxyacid
oxidase 1, which is further metabolized into glycine by alanine:glyoxylate
aminotransferase or into oxalate by hepatic lactate dehydrogenase.
People affected by primary hyperoxaluria type 1 have genetically debilitated
alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase; thus, the metabolic intermediate
glyoxylate can only be transformed into oxalate, which is the cause
of its buildup. Lumasiran reduces the levels of the enzyme that catalyzes
the glyoxylate-to-oxalate transformation, and leads to normalization
of urinary and plasma levels of oxalate. Nedosiran also targets the same pathway and has been approved against
the same indication as well as to lower urinary oxalate levels in
children but degrades a different target—hepatic lactate dehydrogenase,
encoded by the gene LDHA. As nedosiran targets the enzyme that catalyzes the final step of
oxalate synthesis, it potentially has a wider scope of applicability
and can be effective against gain of function mutations in both LDHA and upstream genes. Like lumasiran, it leads to normalization
of urinary and plasma oxalate levels. , 
Inclisiran,
also a GalNAc conjugate, is an approved therapy against
hypercholesterolemia and functions by degrading proprotein convertase
9, encoded by gene PCSK9. This secreted protein is
responsible for maintaining the levels of low-density lipoprotein
(LDL) receptors on hepatocytes by catalyzing their internalization
and degradation. These receptors facilitate clearance of cholesterol-carrying
LDL particles from the blood. Gain of
function mutations in the PCSK9 make it more efficient
in degrading the LDL receptor, which in turn makes clearance of LDL
particles from blood less efficient and increases the levels of circulating
cholesterol, the underlying reason behind hypercholesterolemia. Notably, people with a loss of function mutation
in the PCSK9 gene were found to have the negative phenotype, with
lower circulating LDL levels and resistance to associated cardiovascular
diseases. Inclirisan functions in a
similar manner—it lowers the levels of PCSK9 mRNA levels in hepatocytes, which reverses the elevation of LDL
levels. , 
The approved siRNA therapeutic landscape
has much in common with
RNase H-inducing oligonucleotides, which is not surprising given the
overall similarity in these modalities. siRNA therapeutics do have a unique advantage—as the siRNA:RISC
complex is stable for days or weeks, siRNA does not need to be administered
as frequently as most other therapeutic modalities, e.g., inclirisan
is administered twice a year. Having
good success with treating pathologies associated with gain of function
mutations in the liver, it remains to be established whether this
can be recapitulated in other tissues—perhaps the biggest limitation
of this approach. Toxicity associated with off-target degradation
also remains a concern and is one of the reasons why these modalities
fail in clinical trials. , , Progress is being made in solving both problems with improvements
in delivery vehicles, chemical modification landscape, and sequence
optimization. With a number of siRNAs targeting different tissues
being in late-stage clinical trials, it is likely that first nonliver-targeting
siRNAs will see approval in the near future. , − 
Delivery of siRNAs into cells is not
the only way to achieve RNAi-induced
targeted RNA degradation—a DNA plasmid that encodes instructions
to make siRNA precursors can be delivered instead. This is typically
achieved by encoding a small hairpin RNA (shRNA), which is exported
to the cytoplasm, processed into siRNA, and loaded onto the RISC complex
by Dicer ribonuclease. Plasmids encoding
shRNA are one of the most common technologies to establish conditional
gene knockdown in tissue culture. This
approach has not yet seen success in the clinic, at least in part
due to a need of suitable delivery vectors and safety concerns about
delivery of DNA plasmids which can integrate into the host genome. Nonetheless, therapeutic potential has been
demonstrated in mice; thus, shRNA vectors do have the potential to
join the ranks of therapeutically useful RNA degradation agents. 

2.3.

## CRISPR/Cas-Induced RNA
Degradation
Ever since the first demonstrations of successful
gene editing using
Cas9, CRISPR has become a ubiquitous tool for nucleic acid manipulation. , In nature, clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat
(CRISPR)-Cas systems are utilized by bacteria and archaea as acquired
immunity systems against undesirable nucleic-acid-based materials,
including phages, transposons, and plasmids. The core component of this system is the CRISPR array—a collection
of nucleic acid sequences for acquired immunity. In cells possessing
this system, certain pathogenic nucleic acids will get cut and integrated
into the CRISPR array, which is carried out by Cas family proteins
such as Cas1 and Cas2. These sequences
then get expressed and processed into mature guide RNAs for Cas family
nucleases, such as Cas9 or Cas13. The
next time the same undesirable nucleic acid agents enter cells, the
Cas nucleases will degrade them.
A number of Cas nucleases have
been reported to degrade RNA, with Cas13 (Cas13a formerly known as
C2c2) being perhaps the most well-characterized one. The RNA-cleaving site of Cas13 contains two HEPN domains,
with each one having one histidine and one arginine residue in the
active site. − As such, Cas13 has an RNA degradation mechanism
distinct from RNase H. Rather, it is akin to RNase A, explored more
in-depth in . Interestingly, the binding site for
guide RNA (crRNA) is not adjacent to the cleavage site. As a result,
the bound RNA retains some flexibility and thus the cleavage can occur
on several locations on the same transcript. Upon certain levels of infection, Cas13 will start exhibiting collateral
cleavage, e.g., will start to degrade endogenous RNA in a nontargeted
manner, which will put the infected cell into a dormant state. The nonselective cleavage is only triggered
in the presence of the targeted sequence, e.g., in the presence of
a pathogen. This mechanism prevents phages from replicating continuously
and acquiring Cas13 immunity, thus allowing the host organisms to
protect their populations from immune-system-evading pathogens.
Cas13 is a part of the class 2 CRISPR/Cas system, meaning that
Cas13 is the only nucleic acid effector. A number of multieffector
class 1 systems can also induce RNA cleavage. , One of the best characterized class 1 ribonucleases, Csm6, is typically
found in CRISPR systems which degrade both pathogenic DNA and RNA. Akin to Cas13, it possesses an HEPN domain
with histidine as the key residue for RNA cleavage. As two HEPN domains
are required for RNA cleavage, Csm6 is active only as a dimer. It is also a collateral activity ribonuclease,
and this activity is controlled by other proteins in the class 1 system,
which produce signaling molecules which affect the overall conformation
of Csm6 and the trans-cleavage ability. , Csm3, another protein in the same family, is also a ribonuclease. It does not contain the HEPN domain or histidine
residues in its active site. Instead, it has a number of highly conserved
aspartate and/or glutamate residues and its RNase activity is divalent
metal ion-dependent, thus it can be speculated to use RNase H-like
mechanism. 
Class 2 Cas proteins,
in addition to Cas13, have also been shown
to exhibit RNase activity. Cas9 came to be associated primarily with
gene editing, although it can also act as an RNA-guided ribonuclease
when provided with suitable guide RNAs. The cleavage site in Cas9 contains glutamate, aspartate, and histidine
residues which bind divalent metal ions, and thus Cas9 cleaves nucleic
acids in a similar manner as RNase H. Cas9 is both a DNase and an RNase, which serves as an example that
the water activation mechanism can be utilized to cleave either of
the nucleic acids. This highlights that conformational specificity
is key for nucleases that cleave only one type of a nucleic acid duplex,
which is the case for RNase H but not Cas9. Some Cas12 family enzymes
have also been demonstrated to act as RNA-guided ribonucleases. , Akin to Cas9, they possess an RNase H-like active site.
CRISPR/Cas
systems and, in particular, Cas13 have been adapted
for various RNA cleavage applications. It should be stated that these
systems have one key disadvantage over RNase H-inducing oligonucleotides
and siRNA—as CRISPR/Cas systems are not native to eukaryotic
cells; they require delivery not just of guide oligonucleotides but
also the Cas proteins or plasmids that encode them. As such, delivery
of these systems is more complicated compared to technologies reliant
on oligonucleotide payloads. Furthermore,
many of the Cas enzymes also exhibit collateral effect, which is undesirable
for therapeutic development. Significant
progress has been made in developing high fidelity Cas13 enzymes as
well as systems with negative feedback loops for Cas13 expression,
both of which minimize the off-target cleavage. , 
Despite the limitations, Cas13 systems can be advantageous
over
other methods for specific applications. In one of the first studies
showing applicability of Cas13, Abudayyeh et al. demonstrated that
this enzyme can achieve knock-down of long noncoding RNAs MALAT1 and XIST which are localized in
the nucleus, whereas siRNAs against the same targets had minimal effect. It has also been demonstrated that the Cas13-based
system can achieve a more complete as well as more selective knock-down
of mRNAs compared to an RNAi method, surprising given the known off-target
effects of Cas13. It must be noted that
these comparisons are somewhat limited in their scope as efficiency
of both systems can be modulated by altering the targeting sequence
as well as modifications on nucleic acid payload.
The collateral
activity of CRISPR-associated RNases can also be
taken advantage of, especially in the context of RNA detection. The
group of Feng Zhang have developed a nucleic acid detection strategy
called Specific High sensitivity Enzymatic Reporter unLOCKing (SHERLOCK). , It relies on an RNA reporter that generates a signal upon cleavage,
e.g., RNase Alert which becomes fluorescent. In the presence of the
target RNA, Cas13 will start cleaving all the RNA in the mixture due
to the collateral effect, including the reporter. This assay was further
refined to enable mobile, lateral flow-based detection of viral infection. Combining similar principles with a microfluidics
workflow, Sabeti and colleagues have developed CARMEN-Cas13, which
pools samples to allow simultaneous high-sensitivity detection of
many viral RNAs. They demonstrated the
ability to differentiate between different types of influenza in patient
samples as well as HIV stains with different mutations in their reverse
transcriptase.
Cas13-based diagnostic methods were clinically
tested during the
COVID-19 pandemic. The SHERLOCK method was combined with loop-mediated
isothermal amplification (LAMP) and the resulting assay STOP involved
immersion of a swab in an extraction buffer, buffer exchange using
magnetic beads, a single 60 °C heating step, and use of detection
strips or a fluorescence reading to provide a result. This method
was cross-validated against 402 patient samples (202 positive, 200
negative) previously tested via RT-qPCR. For 385 samples, the two methods were in agreement. STOP was also
demonstrated to be more sensitive, e.g., to require less viral load
for a positive prediction.
In another study, Uttamapinant and
colleagues developed a method
where SARS-CoV-2 RNA is amplified using a reverse transcriptase and
T7 RNA polymerase. The resulting RNA
mixture is then analyzed via SHERLOCK, via either a fluorometric
readout or a lateral flow test. The latter utilized a fluorescein-biotin
construct with an RNA linker; in a SARS-CoV-2-positive sample, it
would get cleaved, and the liberated fluorescein would migrate to
an upper band, serving as a positive signal. Both iterations of this
method were cross-validated against 154 patient swab samples (81 positive,
73 negative) previously tested via RT-qPCR. It was found that the
lateral flow version of this test agrees with RT-qPCR for 93.5% of
the patients, whereas for the fluorescent readout test, the agreement
was 98.1%. Altogether, these studies demonstrate that Cas13-based
degradation methods are clinically useful for viral pathogen detection.
Although CRISPR-Cas-based therapeutic RNA degraders have not made
it to the clinic, several studies on animals have had promising results.
Zhang et al. report tumor-specific apoptosis-inducing dual-locking
nanoparticles, which selectively deliver Cas13 into tumor cells, and
the resulting collateral cleavage induces widespread RNA degradation
and tumor cell apoptosis. The key component
of these particles is a plasmid that encodes Cas13 together with crRNA
against the mRNA of PD-L1 ( ). This plasmid is packed onto a positively charged
polyethyleneimine (PEI) shell modified with various small molecules
which prevent the uptake of these particles. In the presence of reactive oxygen species and a slightly acidic
environment, characteristic to the tumor microenvironment, these small
molecules get detached from PEI, which allows the nanoparticles to
enter cells. After entering the tumor
cells, the nanoparticles release the plasmid, and the Cas13-crRNA
against PD-L1 mRNA system is expressed. After Cas13 finds its target,
the collateral cleavage mechanism is triggered, and the resulting
widespread RNA degradation triggers apoptosis. PD-L1 is a biomarker
of a number of cancers and is not present in the majority of healthy
cells; thus, this system should remain inert in nontumor cells, to
prevent activity on healthy cells. The
presence of PD-L1 overexpressing cells makes the tumor immuno-silent;
thus, inactivation of these cells will enable immune cells to infiltrate
the tumor and drive its regression. These
DLNPs were tested in mice harboring PD-L1-positive tumors and were
demonstrated to significantly slow down its growth. As further proof
of specificity, these particles were tested in immunocompromised mice,
as well as mice harboring a PD-L1-negative tumor. In both cases, no
antitumor effect was observed.
 Cas13 systems were also shown to have potential
as antivirals.
Blanchard et al. report inhalable nanoparticles which deliver Cas13
mRNA and crRNA against vital genes in influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2. They were packaged into nanoparticles using
poly(beta amino esters) (PBAEs), a positively charged polymer demonstrated
to be suitable for delivery of RNA payloads into lungs of mice. For delivery, these particles are nebulized
and then inhaled. Upon entry into lung cells, they release their payloads
into the cytosol, where Cas13 gets expressed. The active Cas13:crRNA
complex then exerts an antiviral effect by degrading the targeted
viral genes. They were tested against an influenza infection model
in mice and were found to induce a 10-fold reduction of viral load
in the lungs, as measured by qPCR and partially prevent weight loss
caused by the infection. These nanoparticles with appropriate crRNA
were also tested against a SARS-CoV-2 model of infection in Syrian
hamsters. That led to a more modest, 2-fold reduction of the viral
load in the lungs likely due to aggressiveness of the infection model.
The fully treated group saw a weight progression similar to that of
the uninfected group. A study by Abbott et al. has also demonstrated
the utility of Cas13 as a prophylactic against SARS-CoV-2 as well
as influenza A virus and MERS-CoV, although only in cellular models
of infections and only in cells expressing Cas13d. 
Despite the demonstration of utility in animal models,
it remains
an open question whether using Cas13 or other CRISPR-associated RNases
for targeted RNA degradation is advantageous over other oligonucleotide
technologies. Perhaps the key disadvantage for these systems is the
need to deliver both the crRNA and the Cas nuclease (or a plasmid
or mRNA that encodes it). As discussed previously, Cas13 has been
delivered both in mRNA and plasmid form when packaged with a positively
charged polymer. , Lipid nanoparticles are another
type of vehicle that can be used for delivery of Cas13 in nucleic
acid form. There is also a possibility
to deliver an intact Cas13:crRNA complex, which has been successfully
achieved via using a zwitterionic polymer. If these outstanding issues get successfully resolved, CRISPR-associated
ribonucleases will have their chance to shine due to their ability
to induce a nearly complete knockdown and efficiently degrade nuclear
transcripts.

2.4.

## RNA Quality and Translational
Control Mechanisms
Eukaryotic cells have evolved a number
of RNA quality control mechanisms
to ensure streamlined translation, both to conserve resources and
avoid production of defected, potentially toxic proteins. , These mechanisms can be taken advantage of to induce targeted RNA
degradation. Some of these controls are related to the RNA structure
and sequence—certain RNA species possess 5′ Cap structures
and poly(A) tails, defects in which will lead to ribonuclease-induced
degradation. mRNAs without or with defective caps get readily degraded
by XRN family 5′-exonucleases. , The poly(A)
tail protects RNA from 3′ exonucleases through recruitment
of poly(A)-binding proteins (PABPs), which block access to the 3′
end of RNA. , Interestingly, binding of mRNAs
by PABPs can be dependent on ongoing translation. Consequently, mRNA that stops translating protein will
lose protection conferred by PABPs and get degraded.
Other controls
are related to the process of translation and thus are relevant only
to mRNAs, namely no-go decay (NGD), nonstop decay (NSD), and nonsense-mediated
decay (NMD). The biological role of
these mechanisms is to ensure that the protein synthesis is progressing
normally and to prevent translation of prematurely terminated peptides. No-go decay is induced when translating ribosomes
are stalled on the mRNA; this can happen due to translated mRNA possessing
a secondary structure. Stalling results
in collision of multiple ribosomes, which is followed by their ubiquitination
and cleavage of the mRNA by a endoribonuclease. In yeast, this is done by Cue2, a homologue of mammalian
N4BP2. The resulting RNA fragments were
then degraded by XRN exonucleases and the exosome. The role of nonstop
decay is to degrade RNAs which lack stop codons. In their absence, the ribosome will start translating the
poly(A) tail, which results in poly lysine on the growing polypeptide,
which stalls in the exit tunnel of the ribosome due to its positive
charge. The stalled ribosome is recognized
by dedicated proteins which, similarly to NGD, result in cleavage
by endosomes, followed by degradation carried out by Xrn1 and exosomes. 
The role of nonsense-mediated decay is
to degrade mRNAs with premature
termination codons (PTCs). In some cases,
PTCs have a direct link with disease—nonsense mutations in
beta-globin (a cause of beta-thalassemia) result in a toxic version
of this protein; thus, NMD protects from its build-up. In different contexts, NMD can be the underlying
cause of the disease, as is the case for Duchenne muscular dystrophy,
where a PTC is found in dystrophin gene. Although the truncated version of this protein is still functional,
NMD results in degradation of its mRNA and depletion of the protein. This process can be targeted therapeutically—ataluren
is a drug which suppresses NMD and, in the case of dystrophin, promotes
translation of the truncated-yet-functional protein. NMD is a multistep process which begins with detection
of the PTC. The full mechanism is not yet completely understood, but
it is known to be initiated by a stalled exon junction complex. It leads to recruitment of the NMD regulator
proteins and phosphorylation of the master regulator UPF1, an RNA
helicase. , This in turn results in recruitment
of endonuclease SMG1, which carries out the initial cleavage of RNA. As is the case for most other RNA quality control
mechanisms, the damaged mRNA is then degraded by Xrn1 and the exosome. 
The key players in the RNA quality control
mechanisms are the 5′
and 3′ exonucleases, which degrade RNA molecules that did not
pass the quality control checks. The main exoribonuclease that carries
out 5′ to 3′ degradation is Xrn1, which possesses RNase
H-like active site. , The activity of Xrn1 differs
from ribonucleases discussed previously as it is processive—it
can completely chop up an RNA molecule rather than introduce a single
cleavage site, and it does not release partially degraded transcripts. After each cleavage event carried out by Xrn1,
the resulting mononucleoside phosphate is released from the active
site and the resulting 5′-phosphate RNA is translocated, a
process driven by electrostatic interaction between the 5′-phosphate
and its binding pocket. 
Both structural
and translational RNA quality control mechanisms
have been utilized for RNA destabilization and targeted degradation
and in many cases pioneered by Ionis Pharmaceuticals, although these
approaches are yet to be tested in the clinic. Perhaps the first approach to be tested was decapping antisense
oligonucleotides. An oligonucleotide
targeting the 5′ end of ICAM-1 mRNA was reported; the oligonucleotide
was conjugated to a europium complex, which was demonstrated to cleave
triphosphates characteristic to RNA caps. The construct was shown to be able to decap mRNA in vitro, although
they were only able to reach a quite modest efficiency of 26% with
prolonged treatment. In a cellular model, this bifunctional was demonstrated
to reduce the concentration of ICAM-1 protein by 90%, with the antisense
oligonucleotide and the europium complex individually having a much
milder effect, if any. This study has demonstrated that RNA quality
control mechanisms can be utilized for modulation of RNA stability,
although transfection of metal complexes poses many challenges that
complicate translation to the clinic.
Antisense oligonucleotides
can also trigger RNA degradation via
translational quality control mechanisms. A study by Ionis Pharmaceuticals
demonstrated that nonsense-mediated decay-inducing oligonucleotides
can be rationally designed. The reported
oligonucleotides were fully modified with 2′-MOE groups, thus
unable to induce RNase H or RISC. They were designed to modulate splicing;
namely, to induce exon skipping and shift the reading frame so it
would have a PTC which would trigger NMD ( a). Such oligonucleotides
were successfully designed against mRNAs of STAT3 and Sod1, and led to a decrease of both targeted
mRNA and associated protein levels in cell culture and mouse models.
Crucially, knocking down UPF1 or SMG6, two key factors in NMD, partially
rescued the levels of the targeted transcripts, validating that this
process is carried out by NMD machinery. Some prior studies have also
reported hypermodified ASOs being able to decrease transcript levels
potentially via NMD, although without a mechanistic validation. , 
 No-go decay has also been utilized by the team
at Ionis Pharmaceuticals
in design of RNA-degrading ASOs ( b). NGD-inducing
oligonucleotides were designed in a similar manner as the NMD-mediating
ASOs—they were hypermodified, thus unable to induce RNase H.
A library of such oligonucleotides was screened against the mRNA of
nucleolin, and both NMD- and NGD-inducing oligonucleotides were discovered.
NGD-inducing oligonucleotides most likely stalled ribosomes by tightly
binding the mRNA, with ribosomes being unable to displace it. The
activity of these oligonucleotides was found to depend on PELO and
HBS1L, two key factors in NGD, thus validating this mechanism of action. , 
Altogether, these studies demonstrate that intricate RNA quality
control mechanisms can be utilized to degrade RNAs with potentially
therapeutic effect. However, it is not clear what advantages these
approaches have over more established technologies of RNase H-inducing
oligonucleotides and RNA interference. For translational quality control
mechanisms, it is not known what proportion of mRNAs meets the sequence
requirements, e.g., cryptic PTCs to be targeted. Furthermore, these
mechanisms are only relevant to mRNAs, with noncoding RNAs not being
subjected to the same quality controls. Much is left to discover both
about noncoding RNAs and their quality control mechanisms; thus, designing
oligonucleotides which utilize them might provide new opportunities
to modulate their levels as well as functions. 

2.5.

## Direct RNA Degradation:
Oligonucleotide-Based
Artificial Ribonucleases
All the pathways described above
are reliant on recruitment of ribonucleases to degrade RNA. However,
that is not the only way—RNA can instead be brought into the
proximity of an artificial construct resembling a ribonuclease. Very
often, the guiding moiety in these species in an oligonucleotide,
hence this group of degraders is called oligonucleotide-based artificial
nucleases (OBANs). , They typically mimic one of
two groups of naturally occurring ribonucleases—transition-metal-dependent
or general acid/base catalyst-dependent. The former group utilizes cations like zinc or manganese to activate
water and hydrolyze the phosphodiester bond of RNA akin to the mechanism
of ribonuclease H. One key difference is the metal binding matrix—carboxylate-side
chain amino acids are sufficient for magnesium, whereas the binding
matrix of transition metals employs softer electron pair donors, typically
several histidine residues. The metal
is another key difference—zinc and manganese are more potent
nucleophilic activators of water compared to magnesium; thus, they
reduce the pKa of bound water more. Overall,
this leads to faster kinetics of RNA cleavage. 
As the name implies, general base/acid ribonucleases
use basic and acidic residues to cleave RNA through deprotonation
of the 2′-OH group. One of the most thoroughly characterized
enzymes—ribonuclease A—belongs to this class. It utilizes a pair of histidines that act as
bases to deprotonate 2′-OH group and water for initiation of
hydrolysis, and acids to facilitate the leaving group bond cleavage
( ). Another key residue in the RNase A mechanism
is positively charged lysine, which coordinates the phosphodiester
to be cleaved, counteracting its negative charge. In RNase H-type nucleases, magnesium is responsible for
this role, but nucleases without metal cations in the active center
require positively charged amino acids. This lysine was also demonstrated
to form hydrogen bonds with the transition state of RNA to-be-cleaved. 
 Histidine is the amino acid of choice for cytosolic
general acid/base
nucleases due to its pKa value, being
close to 6 for the two catalytic residues in RNase A. As this is close to the pH value of the cytosol,
histidine is found in both deprotonated and protonated forms, meaning
it can function as both a base and an acid catalyst. In more acidic
environments, these histidines are fully protonated, whereas in basic
ones they are fully deprotonated and unable to act as bases/acids,
respectively, which explains why RNase A has a bell-shaped activity
curve, with peak activity at pH 6. Curiously,
in a solution, RNA has peak stability at pH 5, when the sum of acid-catalyzed
and base-catalyzed hydrolysis rates reaches a minimum. 
Transition metal and general base catalysis
are the guiding principles
behind the design of most oligonucleotide-based artificial ribonucleases
( ). The first
oligonucleotide-based artificial RNase was reported by Chen and Sigman,
which followed their previous work on artificial small molecule DNases,
explored more in-depth in . , These designs utilized the phenanthroline–copper(II)
complex as the degrader warhead, joined via an amide linker to a guide
DNA oligonucleotide. Although copper can activate water as a nucleophile,
in this case a different mechanism was utilized—redox cycling.
In the presence of a redox agent such as hydrogen peroxide or ascorbate,
copper will cycle between oxidation states +2 and +1, generating radicals
capable of RNA cleavage. , This initial OBAN
was designed to bind the 5′ end of lac mRNA
and was demonstrated in vitro to degrade 20% of its target in 2 h.
Crucially, no effect was observed when the phenanthroline warhead
and the guide oligonucleotide were added separately, e.g., without
covalent linkage, which shows that at least under the tested conditions,
this phenanthroline-mediated cleavage is proximity-induced. The phenanthroline–copper
complex was demonstrated being able to degrade oligonucleotides on
its own; thus, its constructs should be used at low concentrations
to avoid nontargeted RNA cleavage. 
 Imidazole can catalyze
RNA degradation both via binding transition
metals as well as through acting as a general base/acid, with this
theme explored in the first paper reporting imidazole-oligonucleotide
conjugates. In this study, a single imidazole was attached to the
3′ end of an antisense oligonucleotide, and was tested as a
degrader against a complementary sequence with overhangs on both 5′
and 3′ ends. The degradation
reactions were carried out in vitro at pH 7.0 at room temperature.
Interestingly, no metal-independent degradation was observed. However,
adding 50 μM of zinc to this mixture was sufficient to induce
the cleavage, with appreciable degradation observed in timeframes
as short as one hour. The cleavage was observed at two sites, likely
a consequence of a short two-carbon linker.
RNA degradation
through pure general acid/base catalysis has also
found application in the design of OBANs. One of the first reported
degraders of this kind utilized a mechanism similar to that of ribonuclease
A, using a pair of imidazoles or an imidazole–amine catalytic
dyad, attached to a guide sequence through replacement of one of its
nucleotides. , As a result, the nucleotide
in front of the degrader moiety in its binding partner was unpaired.
The OBAN was found to be able to cleave the target strand in vitro—under
mild conditions (25 °C, pH 7.2), 10% of the oligonucleotide was
cleaved in 5 days. Interestingly, all of the cleavage was found to
take place on the phosphodiester bond in front of the degrader moiety;
it was postulated that is due to the vicinal base being unpaired and
in a nonhelical form, although the limited reach of the degrader might
have had an impact as well. Degrader
constructs containing only polyamines have also been reported and
were found to cleave target RNA faster under more basic conditions,
closer to the pKa values of the amine
groups, which further supports the validity of the general base/acid
mechanism. 
OBANs with phosphodiester
backbones may be capable of undesirable
autocleavage. Indeed, our own work has demonstrated that covalently
attaching an imidazole warhead to an RNA oligonucleotide can induce
its degradation. The most popular alternative
to phosphodiester that circumvents this issue is the peptide bond,
forming the core of peptide nucleic acids (PNAs). The first reported PNA-based OBAN utilized a diethylenetriamine
as the warhead, with the amine groups acting as the general acid and
base catalysts. In this case, the warhead
was attached to the 5′ end of the guide oligonucleotide, and
the degradation was localized in unpaired 3′ overhang of the
target strand, opposite to the degrader moiety. In vitro reactions
were carried out in pH 7 media at 40 °C, and the target RNA got
degraded with a half-life of six hours. Constructs that utilize transition-metal-induced
water activation were also explored, with the first report using a
phenanthroline–zinc complex as the warhead. These constructs were found to cleave its target (a fragment
of telomerase mRNA) site-specifically in vitro, with up to 30% degradation
in 24 h. This study also found that a more flexible linker between
the degrader and guide oligonucleotide is beneficial for degradation.
More recent PNA-based OBANs that utilize phenanthroline–zinc
warhead were reported to cleave target RNA more rapidly, with 7–8-h
half-lives. This was achieved by engineering
an unpaired bulge in the target RNA which is opposite the phenanthroline
warhead. This study also found that adenosine-rich bulges get cleaved
faster.
Oligonucleotide-based artificial ribonucleases have
not yet made
inroads into the clinic and, in fact, have been almost exclusively
used in vitro, which can be attributed to several factors. The rates
of RNA degradation reported so far are relatively slow, thus outcompeting
natural RNA turnover might be an issue. , For transition-metal-dependent OBANs, cells might not have sufficient
concentrations of relevant cofactors to warrant degrader activity. OBANs with nonmodified backbones may not be
sufficiently stable, whereas oligonucleotides with nonphosphodiester
backbones may bind their target RNA too tightly and so be unable to
deattach from the cleaved RNA thus not catalytic. As such, whether or not OBANs can outperform nuclease-recruiting
oligonucleotides under some circumstances. Perhaps their biggest advantage
lies in the fact that they do not rely on endogenous enzymatic machinery
and thus are cellular context-independent, but given their limited
success in cell culture experiments, it is not clear whether it can
find use. Other therapeutic oligonucleotides have found success only
after suitable RNA modification patterns were discovered—perhaps
a more thorough exploration of the appropriate chemical space will
have a similar effect on the composition of the OBANs.

2.6.

## Ribozymes
Ribozymes—enzymes
composed of RNA—are another class of molecules that can induce
targeted RNA degradation. Their RNA
cleavage mechanism does not differ much from that of nucleases—ribozymes
utilize a combination of divalent metal ions and nucleic bases which
act as general base and acid catalysts that are used to cleave the
phosphodiester bond, although ribozymes are orders of magnitude slower
than their protein-based cousins. The
pKa values of nucleic bases vary a lot
depending on their environment and in some cases get close to the
physiological pH, which enables their activity as general base and
acid catalysts. Out of several known
types of RNA cleaving ribozymes, the hammerhead ribozyme was the most
thoroughly explored as a potential therapeutic agent. The native ribozyme
is 50–150 nucleotides long and is composed of three helices
that are required for (auto)cleavage. The canonical cleavage site is on the molecule of ribozyme, on an
unpaired nucleotide of the helical junction, so it cleaves itself.
However, hammerhead ribozymes that can act in a trans fashion, e.g.,
cleave other RNAs, are also known, or in some cases these ribozymes
can cleave a phosphodiester bond on the same RNA molecule but situated
hundreds of nucleotides away. , Ribozymes are found
all across the tree of life—initially identified in plant viruses,
they have been discovered all across the tree of life including mammals. , , 
Several topologies of
hammerhead enzymes exist, but they all have the three helices, and
the cleavage always takes place on a nucleotide on one of the helical
stems. In addition to that, hammerhead
ribozymes require magnesium for both correct folding as well as cleavage. , Intriguingly, the observed magnesium concentration required for
in vitro cleavage was often significantly higher than that found in
the cells. It was demonstrated that this phenomenon can be at least
partially explained by the dielectric constants of the solution. Typical buffers have higher dielectric constants
than cellular media; Sugimoto and colleagues demonstrated that doping
the reaction buffer with 20% organic solvents such as ethanol or ethylene
glycol both lowers the dielectric constant and dramatically increases
the cleavage rate of the ribozyme under low magnesium conditions.
Szostak and colleagues have shown that reduction of magnesium requirements
in vitro can also be achieved by crowding agents such as polyethylene
glycol, although this was demonstrated for ribozyme-catalyzed RNA
assembly rather than cleavage. 
Being nucleic-acid-based, ribozymes turned out to be programmable
and were utilized for therapeutic applications. The first cases of
artificial trans-RNA cleaving ribozymes essentially replicated the
structure of the hammerhead enzyme on two RNA strands, which upon
hybridization form the triple helical structure required for cleavage
( ). , Constructs in both studies were found to cleave RNA in the same
position as natural hammerhead ribozymes on the stem of one of the
loops, and their activity was found to be magnesium-dependent. Similar
principles were utilized in the design of therapeutic ribozymes. Angiozyme
is an angiogenesis inhibitor developed as an anticancer drug by Ribozyme
Therapeuticals. This oligonucleotide
drug was designed so it would hybridize with Flt-1 mRNA, resulting
in the formation of the characteristic hammerhead ribozyme structure
and cleavage of the mRNA strand. Angiozyme is heavily modified like
most therapeutic RNAs, with most riboses harboring 2′-OMe groups
and a number of phosphodiester linkages changed into phosphorothioates,
and curiously, one of the cytosines harboring a 2′-C-allyl
nucleotide. Angiozyme is formulated without a delivery vector, and
thus it relies on local administration; its modification pattern was
designed to protect it against serum nucleases. This ribozyme was demonstrated to cleave its target and
prevent metastasis in a mouse model of colorectal carcinoma. This ribozyme construct entered clinical trials
for solid tumors and metastatic breast cancer. , 
 Several other anticancer and antiviral ribozymes
were designed.
The first ribozyme to inhibit tumor growth in vivo was reported by
Sioud and Sorensen. This ribozyme was
designed to cleave the mRNA of PKCα, a protein kinase which
promotes progression of various cancers. It followed similar principles to angiozyme—this ribozyme
could cleave target RNA through formation of a trihelical junction.
The construct was demonstrated to cut its target in vitro and prevent
the progression of glioma in rat models. The successful application
of this ribozyme against in vivo models is in large part owed to it
being modified with 2′-amino groups, which protect the construct
against nucleases but do not abolish its ability to cleave the target
RNA. An alternative strategy to achieve targeted RNA degradation in
vivo is to use delivery vectors. Fei et al. reported series of hammerhead
ribozymes designed against survivin mRNA, packaged in adenoviral particles. Survivin is an antiapoptotic protein reported
to promote angiogenesis, metastasis, and treatment resistance, thus
its knockdown may suppress tumor growth. Antisurvivin ribozymes were demonstrated to cut RNA in vitro and
in cell culture and slow down tumor growth in mouse models of hepatocellular
carcinoma. The adenoviral vectors used to package the ribozymes provided
both protection against ribonucleases and facilitated delivery into
cells.
An alternative approach is to deliver a ribozyme-expressing
plasmid,
which has been used as a design strategy for antiviral ribozymes. In one case, hairpin ribozymes were designed
against an overlapping region of env and rev genes in HIV. They were encoded in a plasmid and packaged
in a lentiviral vector. These plasmids were transduced to various
lymphoblast cell lines, and their resistance against HIV infection
was tested. As expected, lymphoblast cells expressing the ribozyme
were more resistant to infection than cells not expressing the ribozyme
or expressing an inactive version. A modified version of this approach
was tested in a clinical trial. Briefly,
monocytes of AIDS patients were extracted, and CD4+-enriched
T cells were purified and transduced with an anti-HIV ribozyme plasmid
to enhance their survivability, followed by infusion back into patients.
The procedure was well tolerated, and ribozyme-containing cells exhibited
enhanced survival; however, the overall low ribozyme-containing cell
count precluded further positive effects. 
The ribozyme platform bears many similarities to that of siRNAs—in
both cases, the therapeutic agents are composed of modified RNA bases
targeting a particular sequence. The two approaches have considerable
differences too—siRNA therapeutics utilize endogenous cellular
machinery to knock down RNAs, and this process overall is more efficient
than the direct degradation induced by ribozymes, in part due to RNA
cleavage rates being faster for protein-based ribonucleases. Furthermore, approved siRNA therapeutics retain
their activity for weeks after administration, as RISC-bound RNA substrates
are known to be exceptionally stable. Ribozymes, on the other hand, have much shorter half-lives, and
thus, ribozyme-based therapeutics would need to be administered more
often. Given this comparison, in most cases, the siRNA platform can
provide superior solutions.

3.

## Small Molecule
RNA Targeting
In addition to the establishment of siRNAs
and RNase H-inducing
oligonucleotides as therapeutic modalities, recent years have overseen
a renaissance in targeting of nucleic acids with small molecules.
Small molecules can circumvent numerous issues associated with nucleic
acid therapeutics, as was discussed in the . The nature of targeting between the
two classes is different—ASOs target a sequence, whereas small
molecules target structures. The ability
of small molecules to bind RNA selectively has been getting a lot
of attention—recent studies coming both from academic institutions
and biotechnology companies have demonstrated that high-throughput
screening against RNA structures is indeed possible. , − It has also been demonstrated that numerous
small molecules designed to bind proteins, including FDA-approved
drugs, are also RNA binders. Methods
for screening of RNA–small molecule interactions have also
seen rapid advancement, with small molecule microarray screening as
well as cross-linking and sequencing methods being some of the prime
examples. − 
Unsurprisingly, there is an ongoing
effort to define both what
is a good RNA target for small molecules and what small molecule features
make them good RNA binders. , − As was explored in the previous parts of this review, binding is
not always sufficient to exert a phenotypic effect, thus it is desirable
to develop small molecules which can modulate stability of RNA. Indeed,
small molecules can be envisaged to alter various properties of RNA,
including localization, translational efficiency and epitranscriptomic
modification. This part of the review
will explore how small molecules were utilized to destabilize and
degrade RNA, via recruitment of ribonucleases, direct RNA degradation,
or structural destabilization.
3.1.

## Recruitment of Ribonucleases:
RIBOTACs
The majority of approved antisense oligonucleotide
therapeutics recruit
ribonucleases, either RNase H1 or Ago2. Unsurprisingly, RNase recruitment
approaches are being translated to the world of small molecules, with
the most thoroughly explored ribonuclease in this context so far being
RNase L (L stands for latent). In various eukaryotic cells, it serves
as one of the pieces innate antiviral machinery. , In noninfected cells, it is found in its inactive, monomeric form
(latent). Infection of a cell with viral particles leads to a signaling
cascade leading to its activation—type I interferon response
is triggered by double-stranded viral RNA, which activates synthesis
of rather unusual signaling molecules—2′-5′ oligoadenylates. RNase L binds these oligonucleotides, which
triggers a conformational change in the protein, leading to the C-terminal
ribonuclease domain getting exposed. This is followed by the dimerization of two ribonuclease domains,
resulting in the active dimeric form of this enzyme. The key residues
in RNase L are histidine, aspartate, and glutamate, and it is not
transition-metal-dependent, thus likely follows RNase A-like general
base/acid mechanism. In the early stages
of RNase L activation, it will predominantly cleave viral and rRNAs,
thus inhibiting expression of viral proteins. In the case of prolonged activation, the widespread rRNA
damage will lead to apoptosis, the final line of defense against viral
infection. Notice that this antiviral
pathway holds many similarities with the bacterial Cas13, which relies
on collateral RNA degradation to put the prokaryotic cells into stasis,
thus preventing viral replication. 
RNase L has been utilized to design small molecule RNA degraders,
ribonuclease targeting chimeras (RIBOTACs). These heterobifunctional molecules comprised of an RNA binder, a
linker, and a moiety to recruit RNase L. The molecules function by
bringing together a dimer of RNase L and the targeted RNA, resulting
in its degradation ( ). The construct in the first study reporting RIBOTACs targeted
pri-miR-96 using a ligand previously developed by Disney and colleagues,
connected to a 2′-5′ tetraadenylate through an amide-
and PEG-based linker. This inaugural
RIBOTAC was demonstrated to reduce the levels of pri-miR-96 by more
than 50% across several cell lines in a ribonuclease L-dependent manner.
Interestingly, there was little difference between RIBOTAC and its
parent RNA binder molecule in affecting the levels of mature miR-96.
 The initial construct had several limitations—the
negative
charge arising from the 2′-5′ oligoadenylate was compromising
the molecule’s entry into cells, and their large molecular
weight (2918 amu for the smallest RIBOTAC, roughly equivalent to 9-mer
oligonucleotide) was not ideal for therapeutic applications. Given
that these constructs were composed of a tetranucleotide conjoined
to a relatively large RNA binder, they could be considered oligonucleotide–small
molecule conjugates rather than small molecules. As such, their design
was subsequently refined. Cruicially, it was discovered that the polyadenylate
RNase L recruiter can be replaced by a small molecule without a pronounced
negative charge. RNase L-recruiting
small molecules were previously demonstrated to induce dimerization
or RNase L as well as exert antiviral activity. Recently reported RIBOTACs also utilized smaller binder
groups, which allowed the molecular weight of the construct to be
reduced below 1,000 amu, in line with other heterobifunctional molecules
such as PROTACs. It was also demonstrated
that certain natural products can be transformed into RNA-degrading
RIBOTACs. Zhang et al. reported series
of G-quadruplex targeting RIBOTACs with a caged RNase L recruiter
moiety, which could be released by a stimulus such as a biorthogonal
reactant or elevated reactive oxygen. The utility of these inducible RNA degraders has been demonstrated
in mice, where they acted as tumor growth suppressors, which shows
that this modality has the potential for therapeutic application.
In an antiviral approach inspired by RIBOTACs, Min et al. demonstrated
that RNase L-recruiting moieties can be appended directly to nucleotides. These constructs were demonstrated to exhibit
anti-SARS-CoV-2 activity in cellular models of infections, as well
as Syrian hamsters. They are postulated to function by getting incorporated
into a growing viral RNA chain and then recruiting RNase L to degrade
it. The study showed that sterically perturbing the structure of the
RNase L recruiter leads to a significant but not a total drop in 
antiviral activity. This demonstrated that RNase L recruitment is
the key mechanism of action, but other mechanisms, such as steric
blocking, may also contribute. Various nucleotide derivatives are
often phosphorylated exclusively by viral kinases thus are inactive
in uninfected host cells; it remains to be seen whether that is the
case with the RIBOTAC-like antiviral nucleotides. 
A number of RIBOTACs were demonstrated to work in
cellular models,
but examples of in vivo activity are limited. This could be due to
intrinsic limits to their efficiency—in reports so far, they
typically achieve close to 50% reduction of the targeted RNA, which
might be not sufficient to exert a phenotypic effect. Their relatively
large size is likely translating to a poor pharmacokinetic profile
and limited tissue penetration. So far, all examples of RIBOTACs utilize
ribonuclease L. It has been reported to exhibit an uneven tissue distribution,
with high expression levels only in the spleen, lungs, and thymus,
organs prone to viral infections. As
such, molecules designed for different tissues would require the recruitment
of natively expressed ribonucleases.

3.2.

## Small-Molecule-Induced
RNA Degradation through
Quality Control Mechanisms
As discussed in , eukaryotic cells have
evolved numerous RNA quality control mechanisms that may be triggered
through purposely designed antisense oligonucleotides. Small molecules
have also been demonstrated to induce targeted RNA degradation through
splicing modulation. The foremost example
is branaplam, developed by Novartis. This molecule was initially reported as a splicing modulator of SMN2, a gene with a key role in spinal muscular atrophy.
In the disease state, a genetic mutation causes exclusion of exon
7 from the mature SMN2 mRNA, which in turn results
in production of nonfunctional protein. , Branaplam was found to reverse this, and force inclusion of the
exon 7 by acting as a molecular glue between SMN2 mRNA and U1 snRNP complex, a part of the spliceosome. In this case, the outcome is the production
of a functional protein rather than degradation.
Interestingly,
branaplam was also found to affect the mRNA of huntingtin, driver
of Huntington’s disease. It is
caused by an expansion of CAG repeats on one of the alleles of this
gene. This results in production of
a toxic protein that ultimately causes death of neurons that express
it. Complete knockout of huntingtin has been shown to also be neurotoxic,
although partial knockdown appears to be well tolerated. , Branaplam achieves the latter by forcing inclusion of a premature
termination codon (PTC)-containing poison exon (pseudoexon) in huntingtin
mRNA ( ). As was discussed in , mRNAs containing PTC(s) get degraded
by RNA quality control machinery, so by forcing poison exon inclusion,
branaplam induces degradation of the huntingtin mRNA.
 Branaplam was trialed against
Huntington’s disease in phase
II clinical trials, which culminated in their termination due to the
patients suffering nerve damage. , This goes
in hand with the previous observations that severe reduction in huntingtin
levels induces neurotoxicity and branaplam is not allele-specific,
e.g., it affects the levels of both the wild type and expansion repeat-containing
mRNA. However, branaplam treatment did result in reduction of huntingtin
levels in cerebrospinal fluid, which demonstrates that small molecule
poison exon splicing modulators can indeed induce RNA degradation
in humans. Of note is REM-422, a small molecule which induces poison
exon inclusion in the MYB oncogene and has a similar
mechanism to that of branaplam. It is
developed by Remix Therapeutics and is in clinical trials against
adenoid cystic carcinoma and acute myeloid leukemia.

3.3.

## Direct RNA Degrader Small Molecules
As discussed in , the study
of RNA stability in various media and ribonuclease
mechanisms led to discovery of RNA degrader small molecules. Nonenzymatic
RNA degradation can be catalyzed by various metal ions, with the presence
of magnesium, zinc, potassium, copper, and other cations leading to
faster rates of degradation, through acting as either Lewis acids
or radical generators. − The presence of certain small molecules
in a buffer, including imidazole and morpholine, leads to acceleration
of RNA hydrolysis. − These observations were key in the development
of RNA-degrading small molecules.
The initial RNA degraders
were either unguided or antisense-oligonucleotide guided, with the
latter already discussed in , and could induce RNA degradation via
both transition-metal-dependent and general base mechanisms ( a). Perhaps the
first RNA degrading small molecule to be reported was copper–phenanthroline
complex. The two parts of the complex
are responsible for discrete functions—the phenanthroline is
a nucleic acid intercalator, whereas copper can generate peroxide
and superoxide radicals. Thus, phenanthroline
brings copper to the proximity of a nucleic acid, where it generates
radical species, which react with nucleic acids and result in scission
of the phosphodiester bond as well as base damage. Copper must be
able to cycle between oxidation states +1 and +2 in order to generate
radicals thus needs an auxiliary redox agent, such as peroxide, ascorbate,
or a thiol. A number of transition metal
complexes have been demonstrated to degrade RNA in a similar manner
and were often used as tools to study RNA structures. − 
 The bulk of nonmetal-dependent RNA degrader small
molecules contain
either imidazole (or molecules similar to imidazole) or polyamine
warheads. Cyclodextrin–imidazole conjugates reported by Breslow
were used to study the imidazole-induced RNA cleavage and inspired
further work in this field. Numerous
subsequent degrader molecules consisted of imidazole(s) and amine(s)
conjugated to an intercalating moiety, with reported RNA half-lives
dependent on concentration of the degrader agent and ranging from
one hour to one day. − Imidazoline and benzimidazole warheads were
also used for this application. , Di- and oligoamines
were also shown to degrade RNA, with amines simultaneously acting
as phosphodiester binders (akin to a positively charged lysine residue
acting as a phosphodiester binder in RNase A) and cleavers through
acting as bases. , 
In addition to a degrader
warhead, a guiding moiety is needed to
achieve targeted RNA degradation. As described in , so far the most commonly
used strategy was to attach these warheads to an antisense oligonucleotides,
an approach with a number of caveats. Our group found that conjoining a warhead to an RNA-binding small
molecule can result in a targeted RNA degrader, and we have dubbed
this family of molecules Proximity-Induced Nucleic Acid Degraders
(PINADs) ( b). To demonstrate the utility of this
approach, we have prepared two families of these molecules—one
based on the betacoronaviral pseudoknot binder MTDB and another one
on a G-quadruplex binder pyridostatin, by attaching them to imidazole
via a PEG linker. , Both degrader molecules were
tested against SARS-CoV-2 infection models and were shown not only
to degrade the viral RNA but also to exert an antiviral effect. We
have demonstrated target engagement in vitro, showing that degradation
occurs when these molecules are incubated with the targeted RNA, as
well as in cellular assays, demonstrating that RNA damage accumulates
mostly in the targeted locus. Furthermore, these molecules exhibited
antiviral effects in cellular and mouse models of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
A similar construct was also reported by the Duca group—neomycin,
an aminoglycoside RNA binder was conjoined to a histidine which has
the RNA degrader imidazole warhead. These
molecules coulddegrade a fragment of HIV Tar RNA in vitro, which provides
further evidence for the utility of PINADs as antiviral compounds.
PINADs were demonstrated to have therapeutic potential, but a number
of questions remain before this class of compounds can find its way
to the clinic. The examples featured so far focus on viral RNA—can
PINADs be used for a meaningful reduction of endogenous human RNAs?
Perhaps one of the biggest hurdles here is the lack of selective RNA
binder small molecules, but recent progress in the field shows that
this goal is attainable. RNA turnover rates vary dramatically—can
PINADs be utilized for degradation of short-lived substrates or are
suitable only for degradation of RNAs with slow turnover rates? Most of the degrader warhead characterization
so far was done in vitro; thus, the field would greatly benefit from
the development of systematic cellular assays. If these hurdles are
successfully navigated through, PINADs have the potential to succeed
where oligonucleotide-based artificial nucleases were found to be
lacking.

3.4.

## Direct RNA Degrader Natural Products
Long before the dawn of humanity, nucleic acid degraders were utilized
by bacteria in the form of natural products. Some have mechanisms
of action akin to ones described previously, but some are distinct.
Bleomycins function by bringing nucleic acids to a proximity of a
redox-active transition metal such as iron or copper, akin to phenanthrolines
( a). , These rather complex molecules are composed of four domains—the
metal binding domain which contains an imidazole in addition to other
nitrogen lone pair containing moieties, the nucleic acid binding domain
with a bithiazole playing the key role, the carbohydrate domain that
facilitates cell targeting, and a peptide-based linker to join the
other three. − Similarly to copper–phenanthrolines, bleomycins bind nucleic
acids and lead to a high local concentration of transition-metal-generated
radicals, which are responsible for nucleic acid degradation. For
a time, bleomycin was thought only able to cleave DNA but not RNA,
but the understanding that this class of degraders is transition-metal-dependent
has led to observation that bleomycin–metal complexes can also
cleave RNA. − Bleomycin is an approved chemotherapy against various cancers, including
Hodgkin lymphoma, with the anticancer effect thought to emerge from
inhibition of DNA synthesis and, subsequently, cell replication. 
 Enediynes are another family of nucleic-acid-cleaving
natural products.
They generate radicals through a different, metal-independent mechanism
( b). They contain a large unsaturated system, which
under the right conditions will undergo Bergmann rearrangement, resulting
in a biradical aromatic ring with the two unpaired atoms in nonbonding
sp2 orbitals of aromatic carbon atoms. These biradicals
abstract hydrogens from the deoxyribose/ribose ring of a nucleic acid,
which ultimately results in scission of the phosphodiester bond. As with bleomycins, enediynes were first demonstrated
to cleave DNA, but understanding of their mechanism led to discovery
of RNA cleavage. Like bleomycins, enediynes
require nucleic acid binding moieties to induce RNA degradation. For
this purpose, calicheamicins possess an oligosaccharide domain, whereas
dynemicins contain an anthraquinone moiety, which is not only a nucleic
acid intercalator but a redox cycler in itself. , 
Indeed, anthraquinones in the form of anthracyclines are also
known
to cleave DNA. They contain a large flat aromatic system, which intercalates
between the bases of nucleic acids ( c). They also
contain a redox-cycling anthraquinone moiety, which in the presence
of oxygen and a suitable substrate will produce formaldehyde, a nucleic
acid alkylating and cross-linking agent. In the case of DNA, extensive cross-linking will lead topoisomerase
2 poisoning and double strand cleavage, which is the underlying mechanism
of anthracycline anticancer activity. Anthracyclines have also been reported to induce direct oxidative
DNA damage in the presence of copper. They are also known to bind RNA, although no instances of induced
degradation have been reported. Anthracyclines
are among the most widely used chemotherapies, as the DNA double strand
breaks lead to apoptosis of cancer cells. 
In their native forms, RNA-degrading natural products have
poor
selectivity. To overcome this, Disney and colleagues have conjugated
bleomycin A5 onto a binder of CUG repeat, resulting in a molecule
that specifically degrades RNAs with a high number of CUGs. They demonstrated that this construct can reduce
the abundance of DMPK mRNA containing 500 CUG repeats
by up to 40% in a cellular context but has no effect on mRNAs with
17 CUG repeats or less. Similar results were observed in mice harboring
250 CTG-containing HSA gene. They used a similar strategy do design a bleomycin-degrader
of pre-miR-372, which has the preferred bleomycin cleavage site. These results highlight that RNA-cleaving natural
products can serve as warheads in targeted RNA degraders, although
their relatively high molecular weight and complex synthetic pathways
pose design challenges. Notably, bleomycin has also been conjugated
to a guide oligonucleotide but to induce DNA rather than RNA degradation,
but the construct was found to induce autodegradation, limiting the
applicability of this approach. 

3.5.

## RNA Structure Disrupts As Stability Modulators
RNA
structure and turnover rates are tightly interconnected. This
phenomenon is exploited by viruses—some viral RNAs contain
a U-rich expression and nuclear retention element (ENE). It can hybridize with the poly(A) tail of the
transcript, which protects it from deadenylation and thus extend its
half-life. A long noncoding RNA MALAT1 also contains an ENE-like structural element, which
forms a triple helix ( a). Weakening of this triple
helix by mutating one of its nucleotides was demonstrated to reduce
the half-life of this structural element 3-fold. This triple helix
has been proposed to protect MALAT1 from 3′-exonucleases. As such, its destabilization leads to an increased
rate of transcript decay, which is of therapeutic interest as MALAT1 has been implied to be relevant for cancer metastasis. 
 Small molecules can
also destabilize this structural element and
facilitate MALAT1 decay ( b). Abulwerdi et al. report molecules which
both bind and destabilize the triple helix of MALAT1, leading to decreased levels of the transcript. The binders were identified through a small molecule microarray
approach, which led to discovery of 28 commercially available small
molecules that interact with MALAT1 triple helix. These compounds were then used to treat an
organoid model of mammary cancer, followed by measurement of the MALAT1 levels via qPCR. Two of the compounds
were found to reduce MALAT1 levels by >40%, one
of
which was found to destabilize the triple helix, this likely being
the mechanism behind the transcript’s depletion. Two further
studies by the Hargrove group reported that small molecule binders
of MALAT1 triple helix can alter the transcript’s resistance
toward exonucleases. , Notably, one of the two studies
discovered both structure-stabilizing and structure-destabilizing
molecules, with the former leading to protection from RNase A degradation
and the latter having an opposite effect. Altogether, these findings
demonstrate that a binder of suitable RNA structure can be sufficient
to reduce its levels through modulation of the structure’s
stability. The growing wealth of knowledge about RNA structures can
guide the discovery of new molecules with this mechanism of action
against targets of therapeutic interest.

4.

## Uses Cases,
Limitations, and Perspective for
Targeted RNA Degraders
4.1.

## Applications and Limitations
of Nucleic-Acid-Guided
Methods
Nucleic-acid-based degraders are already having a
huge impact on healthcare, enabling the development of drugs against
targets unapproachable via traditional medicinal chemistry approaches.
The ability to deplete targeted RNA makes these approaches exceptionally
suitedagainst gain-of-function diseases. As nucleic acid therapeutics
target sequences, they are ideal against long RNA species with high
variability in their nucleic acid code, in particular mRNAs, but targeting
of short and sequentially similar RNA species, such as miRNAs and
tRNAs, remains challenging. Furthermore,
siRNAs do not efficiently target nuclear transcripts; thus, for this
modality, cellular transcript localization can also be an issue. , Conversely, both RNase H and Cas13 were shown to be proficient in
nuclear transcript degradation. Perhaps the most severe limitations
of nucleic-acid-based therapeutics arise from delivery and tissue
targeting challenges. In general, oral bioavailability of oligonucleotides
is poor, and although it is not impossible to increase it to acceptable
levels, all currently approved oligonucleotide therapeutics are delivered
through alternative routes of administration. , So far, the most successful antisense oligonucleotides target the
liver, with delivery to other tissues still posing a great challenge.
Furthermore, nucleic-acid-based agents require delivery vectors or
ligands, which are an additional source of adverse effects and require
tuning for optimal pharmacokinetics. , As siRNA
and RNase H-inducing oligonucleotide efficacy is well established,
perhaps the biggest opportunity for the field lies in targeting other
tissues. Altogether, these limitations warrant the need for different
approaches to targeted RNA degradation, and most of them can be overcome
via RNA-degrading small molecules.

4.2.

## Perspective
for Small Molecule Targeted RNA
Degraders
Although RNA-degrading small molecules have been
known for decades, only in recent years have scientists started envisioning
nonoligonucleotide constructs which both target and degrade RNA. A
number of new RNA degrader technologies were recently reported, and
coupled with the ongoing boom of RNA-targeting small molecule development,
they hold the promise to greatly expand the space of druggable biomolecules,
with a superior tissue accessibility compared to oligonucleotide-based
methods. Still, hurdles besides RNA ligand discovery remain. Many
of the reported technologies result in substrates with a large molecular
weight—how to best circumvent this? We can look for answers
in the field of targeted protein degradation, where the relatively
large size of PROTACs did not prohibit them from entering the clinic
but has posed pharmacokinetic challenges. Many small molecule methods to date result in far from complete
RNA degradation, with a ∼50% decrease often being the limit—is
this an inherent limitation of these methods? This phenomenon poses
another challenge—as the extent of degradation with small molecule
degraders is often much lower than that of siRNA, it can be difficult
to pick it up via standard methods such as qPCR due to a lack of sensitivity.
This, together with the fact that in vitro degradation rates depend
on the buffer, leads to reproducibility issues. As such, the field
would benefit from more accurate and standardized assays. Another
hurdle for small molecule degraders is their orientation in space.
Most of the described molecules herein are bifunctional, and thus,
their activity depends on their spatial orientation; e.g., RIBOTAC
must be able to simultaneously bind RNA and RNase L. As such, rational
spatial design is not possible without knowing the absolute RNA structure.
This, together with limited knowledge about the role of linkers, complicates
the design of bifunctional degraders for new RNA targets.
Targeting
specificity of RNA binders is another concern, but as we know from
studies of kinase inhibitors, a nonspecific binder can still be a
clinically useful pharmaceutical. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated
that RNA binders are not necessarily less selective than protein binders. As such, small molecule targeted RNA degraders
have the potential to become a prime strategy to target biomolecules
undruggable on a protein level. With the resolution of the aforementioned
hurdles, the field will be able to pursue at least two high value
directions—targeting mRNAs of undruggable proteins and targeting
noncoding RNAs, with greater tissue accessibility and easier administration
than nucleic-acid-based methods.

4.3.

## Targeted
RNA Degradation and Expansion of
the Druggable Biomolecule Space
Nucleic-acid-guided targeted
RNA degraders have already demonstrated that if a disease has no associated
druggable protein target, then drugging the mRNA can be a valid strategy
instead. Coding RNAs form only the tip of the iceberg—most
of the human genome is transcribed as noncoding RNAs. Understanding
of their underlying biology still lags behind that of coding RNAs,
but their relevance to human disease is established. − Novel tools to study the link between noncoding RNAs and pathology
could cement these transcripts as druggable targets, and targeted
RNA degraders will likely have a role to play here. As such, it is
difficult to think of another approach that could expand the space
of druggable biomolecules as much as targeting and modulating RNA.
The past two decades have seen tremendous progress in oligonucleotide-based
targeting methods, which have been utilized mostly to treat various
liver pathologies. The advent of small molecule approaches may well
result in novel medicines against diseases in a broad range of tissues.
For both targeting moieties, two paths of development are open. Degraders
that recruit ribonucleases exploit their incredible efficiency, but
due to uneven expression and localization patterns, such degraders
are context dependent. Direct degraders exhibit slower RNA turnover
rates but do not rely on biomolecular machinery. Altogether, the expansion
of druggable biomolecule space through targeted RNA degradation has
the potential to completely change the perception of what is a druggable
target.

## Acknowledgments
The authors
would like to thank bioicons.com repository for open-source
graphics used in making figures in this manuscript.

## Biographies
Gonçalo Bernardes is a
Professor of Chemical Biology at
the University of Cambridge. After completing his D.Phil. degree in
2008 at the University of Oxford, UK, he then performed postdoctoral
work at the Max-Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, the ETH
Zürich. His research group interests focus on the use of chemistry
principles to provide new biological insights and derive new targeted
therapeutics. He is a first generation high-school and university
graduate in his family. He has recently received the 2024 Corday-Morgan
Prize for Chemistry.

Sigitas Mikutis finished
his PhD studies at the University of Cambridge,
UK. His doctoral research focused on small molecule targeted RNA degradation
methods, as well as computational methods to expedite chemical space
probing. He is currently in a chemistry role in Ride Therapeutics,
focusing on nucleic-acid-centered therapeutic approaches.

## Author Contributions
CRediT: Sigitas Mikutis conceptualization, writing - original draft; Gonçalo
J. L. Bernardes conceptualization, supervision,
writing - review & editing.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

## Special Issue
Published
as part of Chemical Reviewsspecial issue “Drugging the Undruggable”.

## References