pmcCPT Pharmacometrics Syst PharmacolCPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol2038cptpsp101580011PSP4CPT: Pharmacometrics & Systems Pharmacology2163-8306WileyPMC12823307PMC12823307.112823307128233074125506910.1002/psp4.70141PSP470141PSP-2025-01351ReviewReviewPhysiologically‐Based Pharmacokinetic Modeling to Support Pediatric Clinical Development: An IQ Working Group Perspective on the Current Status and Challenges
YatesJames W. T.https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0433-5900 james.x.yates@gsk.comZientekMichael TaskarKunal S.https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9979-8267 LinWen HeimbachTychohttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-1224-0629 WillmannStefanhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-8322-965X RehmelJessicahttps://orcid.org/0009-0001-5049-1018 ParrottNeilhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6821-7714 HanleyMichael BadeeJustine ChenYuanhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-5106-0658 ColeSusan De ZwartLoeckiehttps://orcid.org/0009-0004-2285-8830 HaertterSebastianhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3569-5626 JiangRongrong KotsumaMasakatsu LiangGuiqing LinYu‐Wei LiuJing OuYing RascherJuliane ShaikNaveed A. WahlstromJanhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9434-1302 WangXiaofeng XiaoGuangqing YeeKa Lai CheungS. Y. Amy 

1

DMPK, Preclinical Sciences, GSK
Stevenage
UK

2

Takeda Development Center Americas
Cambridge
Massachusetts
USA

3

Office of Clinical Pharmacology, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, U.S. FDA
Silver Spring
Maryland
USA

4

Pharmaceutical Sciences and Clinical Supply, Merck & co., Inc.
Rahway
New Jersey
USA

5

Bayer AG, Research & Development Pharmaceuticals, Pharmacometrics/Modeling & Simulation
Wuppertal
Germany

6

Global Pharmacokinetics, Pharmacodynamics, and Pharmacometrics, Eli Lilly and Company
Indianapolis
Indiana
USA

7

Pharmaceutical Sciences, Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Roche Innovation Center Basel
Basel
Switzerland

8

PK Sciences, Biomedical Research. Novartis
Basel
Switzerland

9

Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Genentech, Inc
South San Francisco
California
USA

10

Medicines & Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
London
UK

11

Janssen Pharmaceutica NV, a Johnson & Johnson Company
Beerse
Belgium

12

Clinical Pharmacology, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma
Ingelheim
Germany

13

Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Eisai Inc.
Cambridge
Massachusetts
USA

14

Quantitative Clinical Pharmacology, Daiichi Sankyo co., Ltd.
Tokyo
Japan

15

Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Vertex Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
Boston
Massachusetts
USA

16

Infection Program and Department of Microbiology
Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University
Clayton
Victoria
Australia

17

Clinical Pharmacology, Pfizer Inc.
Groton
Connecticut
USA

18

Clinical Pharmacology
Beigene
USA

19

Quantitative Pharmacology and Pharmacometrics (QP2)
Merck & Co
San Francisco
California
USA

20

Pharmacokinetics and Drug Metabolism, Amgen, Inc.
Thousand Oaks
California
USA

21

Relay Therapeutics Cambridge
Cambridge
Massachusetts
USA

22

DMPK, Revolution Medicines
Redwood City
California
USA

23

Quantitative Pharmacology and Pharmacometrics, Merck & co, Inc.
Rahway
New Jersey
USA

24

Quantitative Science, Drug Development Solutions
Certara
Radnor
USA

*
Correspondence:

James W. T. Yates (james.x.yates@gsk.com)
181120251202615150578310.1002/psp4.v15.1e70141
1992025
3052025
20102025
181120252301202623012026© 2025 The Author(s). CPT: Pharmacometrics & Systems Pharmacology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.

## ABSTRACT
Pediatric extrapolation strategies issued by health authorities have streamlined pediatric drug development and reduced the unnecessary burden of conducting pediatric clinical studies. In line with these strategies, physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models have been utilized extensively for initial dosing regimen and sampling timepoint selection for pediatric studies, as well as dose validation throughout pediatric drug development. Here, the status and challenges of PBPK modeling in pediatric drug development have been summarized by the IQ Pediatric PBPK Working Group. Our work reviews current practices for pediatric PBPK modeling across various therapeutic areas. To enable best practice, we propose an optimized workflow for pediatric PBPK modeling recommendations. Two selected key pediatric PBPK case examples are also described, where modeling impacted the drug label extension to pediatric patients. Moreover, we analyze the current gaps and challenges in our understanding of drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination in pediatric PBPK model development. Since neonates are the least studied and the most medically fragile, the depth of our understanding of their rapidly evolving physiological processes is limited and so there exist significant modeling gaps which we summarize here. Finally, we provide recommendations, including building a public data repository, leveraging real‐world data, and implementing microdose studies for addressing pediatric PBPK modeling challenges.

 In this manuscript, the IQ Pediatric PBPK Working Group (1) reviews the current practices for pediatric PBPK modeling, (2) illustrates the distinctly differentiating role of PBPK modeling for pediatrics compared with PopPK modeling, (3) proposes an optimized workflow for pediatric PBPK modeling, (4) reviews key case examples in which pediatric PBPK modeling impacted the drug label extension to pediatric patients, (5) analyzes current gaps and challenges in pediatric PBPK model development, (6) summarizes the current status and challenges in the neonate PBPK model development, and (7) provides recommendations for pediatric PBPK modeling applications in the future.

2

## Review of the Current PBPK Modeling Practices and Applications in Pediatric Drug Development
Historically, a method for initial pediatric dose selection has been the normalization of the dose used for the adult indication to body size (mg/kg) or body surface area (BSA; mg/m2). While this method has been accepted by regulatory agencies, it lacks important mechanistic aspects such as body‐composition and drug‐metabolizing enzyme (DDE) ontogenies to account for known age dependencies of PK. Similarly, although allometric scaling, without considering body composition and maturation, of PK parameters by body size may be useful in certain pediatric age groups such as adolescents and older children, it is only expected to be reliable if metabolic and drug transporter activities are not anticipated to differ from adults. For younger populations such as infants and neonates or for drugs where enzyme/transporter ontogenies are relevant, the utility of allometric scaling is limited. Upreti et al. indicated that marker substrates for 4 cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes exhibited higher than anticipated clearance (CL) in pediatric patients compared with adults for select age ranges less than 6 years old [ ]. A PopPK modeling approach incorporating allometric scaling of PK parameters has been successfully used where appropriate body‐size relationships and maturation functions could be defined and incorporated [ ]. Allometric scaling methods were compared with PBPK predictions as gold standard, and the results were translated into pediatric scaling decision tables for renally and hepatically cleared drugs [ ].
2.1

## The Use of PBPK Ontogeny Functions in Pediatric PK Prediction
The incorporation of ontogeny (maturation) information to capture developmental changes is important to the success of pediatric PBPK modeling. These ontogeny data are a key strength of PBPK and help illustrate the profound changes throughout the continuum of postnatal development and the differences in disposition pathways compared with adults. However, as will be discussed later in this manuscript, these relationships are empirically derived and dependent upon the substrate studied.
The practice of understanding and mimicking ontogeny to predict pediatric drug CL is not new and relies on the understanding of the mechanisms of drug disposition (e.g., drug transporters and enzymes that determine absorption and elimination). In the early 2000s, much effort was placed in characterizing the ontogeny of the major metabolizing enzymes such as the P450s, especially CYP3A (e.g., CYP3A4, 3A5, and 3A7) [ ]. Additionally, characterization of the ontogeny of other drug‐metabolizing enzymes (DMEs) such as UDP‐glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) and sulfotransferases (SULTs) [ ] has advanced as proteomics‐based techniques have become more commonplace. Much has evolved from the early assessment of the percent of adult activity or preliminary quantification (Figure  ) with the advent of advanced proteomics and activity assessments.
 Due to confounding factors associated with in vitro materials such as sample degradation, approaches using clinical PK data to derive in vivo‐based ontogenies have emerged as a complementary approach to establish DME ontogeny [ ]. Careful selection of probe substrates on which to base an in vivo ontogeny is warranted, as complex ontogeny profiles may result from multiple contributing enzymes. As an example, zidovudine and morphine are both cleared by UGT2B7; however, these drugs show differing in vivo ontogeny profiles because organic cation transporter (OCT)1 contributes markedly to observed morphine CL in clinical pediatric studies, but not to zidovudine [ ]. For enzymes such as CYP3A, which are critically important to the CL of marketed drugs, differing enzyme ontogeny profiles have been developed. Upreti and Wahlstrom [ ] developed a CYP3A ontogeny profile based on the pediatric PK of intravenous (IV)‐dosed sufentanil, while Salem et al. [ ] developed a CYP3A profile based on the pediatric PK of IV‐dosed midazolam.
Comparisons of the different CYP3A ontogeny functions have been made, including the assessment of the drug–drug interaction (DDI) risk for ivabradine in pediatric patients and the dose selection of tadalafil for pediatric patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension; no in vivo ontogeny profile has demonstrated clear superiority for predicting CYP3A‐mediated PK in pediatric patients thus far [ ]. However, in a recent publication, a PBPK model for midazolam and 1‐hydroxymidazolam was developed to test various ontogeny scenarios for CYP3A4 and UGT2B4. The CYP3A ontogeny of Upreti resulted in a more accurate prediction of midazolam CL across 9 clinical studies over an age range of birth to 18 years (Johnson et al. [ ]).
Information on the ontogeny of transporters is emerging and follows similar trends to DMEs, where ontogenies may be stable and may proceed from high expression to low expression or low expression to high expression during maturation [ ]. Based on early proteomic analysis, OCT1, organic anion transporter (OAT)P1B3, and P‐glycoprotein (P‐gp) exhibit discernible ontogenies, although more data are needed to provide confidence in clinical translation and underwrite use for PBPK modeling (Figure  ) [ ]. Data in organs other than the liver are emerging as well. Recent proteomics data in pediatric duodenum confirm that age effects of most enzymes (CYP and UGT) and transporters are not relevant for gut metabolism, except for a trend for CYP3A4 and carboxylesterase (CES)2 observed for 1 to 15‐year‐olds [ ].

2.2

## Pediatric Organ and Tissue Drug Exposure Prediction
The tissue‐plasma partition coefficient (Kp) is a key parameter determining drug tissue distribution that is influenced through the growth and maturation process. Relative to adults, the total body water and extracellular fluid (ECF) space is larger in neonates and infants, while the relative percentage of body fat is lower [ ]. Plasma protein concentrations (i.e., α‐acid glycoprotein and albumin) are lower in neonates than in adults and increase with age [ ]. The paucity of tissue distribution data for pediatric patients presents both challenges and opportunities with implementing PBPK modeling. One approach [ ] is to use tissue distribution studies in preclinical species as a surrogate for humans and scale the PBPK models based on the preclinical results to the human situation. This approach was used to estimate tissue distribution and differentiate between intermittent and continuous dosing for pediatric patients receiving cyclosporine to stave off graft‐versus‐host disease following hemopoietic stem cell transplantation [ ]. However, this study did not account for the impact of PgP on cyclosporine distribution. For drug transporter substrates with, for example, a renal elimination component, it remains unclear how the transporter ontogeny of expression and activity changes affects active tubular secretion, local concentrations and renal CL in pediatrics [ ], which of course heavily influences the fate of the drug. This complex set of intertwined variables, lack of individual measurements, and sparse real‐world data complicates predicting any one parameter in pediatrics. For tissue measurements that may be easier to obtain in humans such as those in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), PBPK approaches have been successfully validated based on adult human data and extrapolated to pediatrics, such as the prediction of analgesic CSF penetration and the effects of the meningitis disease state on drug CSF penetration [ ]. A leading‐edge application of translational PBPK was recently described, where brain ECF concentrations of morphine in pediatric patients following severe traumatic brain injury were obtained through microdialysis and used as a basis for developing and validating a pediatric brain PBPK model using human physiology in adults. The model accurately described brain ECF in areas of the brain that had not been injured substantially [ ]. The PBPK approach also provides an in silico platform to test the hypotheses; Emoto and coworkers used sensitivity analysis on Kp to optimize model predictions for vancomycin tissue distribution in pediatric patients with serious, antibacterial‐resistant infections. Such patients may exhibit increased vascular permeability or excess extravascular fluid due to the infection [ ].

2.3

## Pediatric Absorption Predictions—Bridging Between Formulations, Routes of Administration, and Food Effects
Tablet and capsule dosage forms that are commonly used in adult patients are often unsuitable for children because of their size, poor palatability, and inappropriate dosage strength. Therefore, the development of age‐appropriate pediatric formulations is an important challenge to solve [ ].
Mechanistic absorption models have demonstrated their potential in pediatric formulation development, with multiple examples that address pediatric formulation challenges [ , ]. Although pediatric PBPK analyses are increasingly being submitted to regulatory agencies (9% of the total number of New Drug Applications [NDAs] submitted to FDA with PBPK were for pediatric dose selection), the majority of pediatric PBPK models seen by the FDA continue to use empirical models for absorption [ ]. There are still many gaps in the knowledge needed to build mechanistic pediatric absorption models [ ]. Significant research activity is ongoing with efforts to develop pediatric biorelevant and biopredictive dissolution methods linking dissolution profile data to often limited clinical PK focusing on optimizing media composition and dissolution volume. As an example, Pawar et al. [ ] determined that the most biopredictive carbamazepine dissolution data for integration into the pediatric PBPK model was 200 mL pediatric media (Ped‐FaSSGF and Ped FaSSIF) and not the typically used 500 mL volume used for adult dosage forms. The meal compositions and feeding volumes/water intake vary substantially across neonates and infants, increasing variability in observed PK and posing difficulty for absorption prediction. Van der Veken et al. reported the GI fluid volumes in 0.1 to < 1, 1 to < 2, 2 to 5, 6 to 11, and 12 to 16 ‐year‐old children via MRI, which was used for building an absorption model [ ].
Furthermore, the conditions of an adult food effect study may not be representative of the small amount of food and its composition commonly used to aid the administration of medicines to children [ ]. Clinical investigations have indicated that food effects in infants may differ from the adult food effect, even for drugs with good absorption properties [ ]. Pediatric PBPK modeling can be a powerful tool to improve the assessment of food effects while limiting the need for clinical studies in pediatric populations.

2.4

## Pediatric PBPK Application in Predicting Pediatric DDIs

Ethical concerns limit clinical testing in pediatric populations, and so the current practice is to use data collected from DDI and food effect studies in adults to extrapolate to children using PBPK. However, the multiple changes that occur in metabolic enzymes, drug transporters, and gastrointestinal (GI) physiology especially in neonates (prolonged gastric emptying time, higher gastric pH, and immature biliary function and activities of pancreatic enzymes) may complicate such extrapolation.
The magnitude of a DDI in pediatric patients may differ from adults not just because of ontogeny but also because of other factors related to the drug (e.g., dose and formulation) or the patient population (e.g., disease state, obesity, and malnutrition). Therefore, care needs to be given to adequately account for the age‐associated physiological changes in these models to build high confidence for such untested DDI scenarios [ ].

2.5

## The Impacts of Disease on Pediatric PK Predictions via PBPK Modeling
Modeling of renal and hepatic impairment requires mechanistic assignment of relevant model parameters and comprehensive data on the changes that occur in diseased versus healthy populations. Renal and hepatic impairment in children is typically caused by different diseases than in adults. Renal impairment in children is more likely to be due to congenital disease rather than chronic conditions such as complications of diabetes and heart disease [ ]. Causes of hepatic impairment in children are more likely to be biliary atresia, fulminant liver failure, and metabolic diseases, rather than conditions such as cirrhosis and cancers observed in adults [ ].
Diseases such as obesity, cardiovascular, infection, kidney, or hepatic disease may also change the distribution and elimination functions. It has also been documented that critical illness in pediatric patients affects ontogeny: comparisons of the CYP3A4 ontogeny function with data obtained from critically ill patients dosed with midazolam showed a marked difference in PK parameters [ ].
Finally, the weight/age relationship may be impacted by malnourishment, which can result in altered dose recommendations.

3

## Summary of Pediatric PBPK Case Studies in the Literature
The literature was interrogated to gain insight into the current trends of application of PBPK modeling to the pediatric population and the challenges of these applications. PubMed was searched for pediatric PBPK publications, which were then manually curated by the members of the IQ Pediatric PBPK Working Group. The search terms are in Supporting Information  . Information was extracted on treatment, indication, dose and route of administration, available PK data in adults and children, and metadata on the pediatric population including age range, body weight range, etc. The resulting database, contained in a spreadsheet, was then interrogated using R to visualize the information.
Several general limitations of the dataset must be mentioned. Firstly, there is a potential publication bias because not all modeling/clinical studies are published. For example, only a relatively small number of oncology examples have been published in relation to recent approvals. Secondly, most published modeling studies are retrospective analyses; only a few prospective PBPK examples have been published. With regard to the route of administration, most studies focus on oral or IV administration. No pediatric PBPK modeling studies investigating alternative or topical routes of administration (e.g., via inhalation) have been located. Lastly, the majority of investigated drugs were small molecules; only very limited examples of antibodies, mainly in the field of immunology, have been published so far.
Regarding indications, most application examples were reported in infectious diseases and central nervous system (CNS)/pain; there were fewer examples in respiratory diseases, cancer, cardiovascular diseases, GI indications, and immune diseases (Figure  ).
 Across the different therapeutic areas, PBPK modeling was mostly used to predict the PK or dose‐exposure relationship in children of different ages to support planning and conduct of clinical pediatric trials and/or to recommend first‐in‐children doses (also considering required changes in formulation, for example, liquid formulations for young patients who are unable to swallow tablets). A second common application of PBPK modeling was the prediction of DDIs. Some of the retrospective PBPK analyses aimed to better understand the PK of the compound in children, to validate CYP ontogeny data, or to compare PBPK and PopPK modeling approaches.
There are indication‐specific challenges, such as the lack of validated PBPK models that scale lung physiology with age that could support the development of inhaled drugs to treat respiratory diseases. In infectious diseases, it was reported that the lack of data to validate models with regard to the unbound drug concentration at the site of action (e.g., brain, lung or liver) is a primary challenge [ ]. For CNS indications, the local concentrations in the brain and the ontogeny of relevant active transporters in the brain are relatively unknown. Further difficulties may arise from the complex PK behavior of the drug of interest (e.g., auto‐inhibition or induction of CYPs and a general large inter‐ and intraindividual variability in children). PBPK modeling needs more data in children, specifically for the knowledge gap on CYP2C19 auto‐inhibition. The influence of the disease, although potentially relevant for PK, is usually not considered in pediatric PBPK models. The general challenges of pediatric PBPK modeling increase with the decreasing age of the pediatric patients to be modeled.
Currently, there is no consensus in the literature on whether the PK of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) is altered in children for autoimmune diseases. In such a case with limited published scientific knowledge, developing complex PBPK modeling approaches may not offer significant advantages compared with allometric scaling models.
Across the different therapeutic areas, the exposure matching approach is quite common to determine the preferred dose in children. Exposure matching criteria are usually defined for a derived PK metric such as area under the curve (AUC) (or CL), maximum concentration (Cmax), or minimum concentration (Cmin) at steady state. In infectious diseases, the AUC/minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) ratio is sometimes used. The age range of interest can vary between the indications, but PBPK modeling studies often target the pediatric age range from neonates to adolescents < 18 years (exception: CNS). In infectious diseases, there is a particular interest in investigating neonates. With regard to the type of dosing, the literature review revealed an overall balanced representation of fixed dosing versus weight‐based dosing (Figure  ). Fixed dosing (for given age or body weight ranges) is more common for oral administration (tablet or liquid formulations). In contrast, IV administration facilitates body weight‐adjusted dosing (mg/kg, commonly used for anesthetics and some cancer and CNS drugs). For young children who cannot swallow tablets and require liquid formulations, body weight‐adjusted dosing is also common.
3.1

## Selected High‐Impact Pediatric PBPK Case Studies
Rivaroxaban is an oral anticoagulant widely used in adults to treat and prevent thromboembolic disorders [ ]. For the first pediatric indication, rivaroxaban was studied for treating venous thromboembolism (VTE) in pediatric patients from birth to < 18 years in the EINSTEIN‐JR clinical trial program. Throughout Phase 1 and Phase 2 of this program [ , ], PBPK modeling was used to predict drug exposure in pediatric populations and to ultimately derive a body weight‐adjusted dosing regimen for rivaroxaban that yielded target exposure (equivalent to 20 mg rivaroxaban in adult VTE patients) in pediatric patients with VTE [ ]. As a second pediatric indication, the use of rivaroxaban for thromboprophylaxis in children with congenital heart disease (CHD) with single ventricle physiology who had undergone the Fontan procedure was investigated in the UNIVERSE Phase 3 study [ ]. The UNIVERSE study enrolled patients between 2 and 8 years of age and targeted exposure as observed in adult patients receiving 10 mg rivaroxaban once daily to prevent thromboembolic events after major orthopedic surgery. A model‐based bridging approach using PBPK as well as PopPK modeling was then applied to predict suitable rivaroxaban doses for virtual pediatric CHD patients aged 9 years and older (or having a body weight of ≥ 30 kg) [ ]. The simulation‐derived doses were accepted and included in the US label of rivaroxaban for thromboprophylaxis in children aged 2 years and older with CHD who have undergone the Fontan procedure. This case example highlights the importance of modeling and simulation to extrapolate to the untested pediatric age groups. It shows how model‐based analyses can support regulatory decisions to expedite access of the pediatric population to new therapies [ ].
A second high‐impact example is the dose selection and justification for nilotinib. Heimbach and coworkers reported that a pediatric nilotinib PBPK model was utilized to address regulatory questions about dose confirmation in 2 to < 6‐year‐old group. This supported the drug label extension to a younger age group, where only sparse PK data of 2 patients and a full PK profile of 1 patient were available [ ].

4

## Recommendation of General Workflow for Pediatric PBPK Modeling
Figure  illustrates a recommended workflow for pediatric PBPK modeling. Planning to use a pediatric PBPK approach should start before or alongside preparing the iPSP and PIP. Based on the level of understanding of the compound's absorption, disposition, and confidence in the PBPK model, the PBPK model can predict pediatric dosing and inform the pediatric program strategy, especially for younger age groups. Developing a pediatric PBPK model should follow the best practices consistent with those of the model credibility assessment framework. The level of influence of the model on decision making, the context of use, and the potential consequences of a wrong decision drive the specific modeling approach and required data [ ], concepts that form the ICH‐M15 guidelines [ ]. The usual first step is developing and verifying a robust adult PBPK model using suitable PK and absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME) data obtained from clinical studies from healthy volunteers (HVs). The verification and validation [ ] of the PBPK model usually need to be within acceptable limits considered relevant for the model application; for example either within 2‐fold [ ] or within the bio‐equivalence limits criteria. The appropriate criteria need to be selected, taking into consideration the uncertainties around the input parameters, PBPK model applications and drug safety and efficacy thresholds. Knowledge of the ADME processes and the biopharmaceutics collected into a PBPK model for adults is crucial for effective pediatric PBPK model development. Identifying the CL mechanism enables the appropriate mechanistic ontogenies to be incorporated. Besides, the disease impact on patients' PK needs to be incorporated into the adult model if a dissimilar PK is seen in patients. It is also critical to consider the differing pediatric formulations compared with adult formulations. Usually, the liquid formulation is developed for young patients and pediatric patients who cannot ingest solid formulations. Hence, pediatric formulations may afford varying drug absorption in the pediatric population. Due to the age‐dependent ontogeny setting for DMEs or drug transporters in the commercially available PBPK software, the particular age band, not the body weight range, is provided for the simulation. If the proposed drug label is a body weight‐based dosing regimen, a simulation in a wide age range is recommended, followed by sorting simulation results stratified by body weight ranges using the code in R software, Excel worksheet, or Phoenix software, etc.
 The pediatric PBPK model can be verified with the emerging clinical data from the appropriate pediatric studies. The pediatric Phase 1 trial provides the first‐batch pediatric PK data, which may be necessary if the accuracy of PBPK prediction is questionable, and/or the compound has a narrow safety margin. The verified pediatric PBPK model can be applied to predict the pediatric dosing regimens for the pivotal trial and confirm the dose regimens for submission. Additionally, the qualified pediatric PBPK model can be applied for untested scenarios and ethically unfeasible pediatric clinical studies such as DDI studies, the effect of a revised formulation, and age‐dependent disease progression on drug PK, to name a few. Further, such a pediatric PBPK model can be used for dose regimen selection in the pediatric population, where it is crucial to achieve the right balance between efficacy and safety. Further accounting for certain disease‐related factors would result in applying the PBPK models to enable precision dosing as required in certain disease pediatric populations. Precision dosing using PBPK facilitates predictions using both the drug‐related parameters along with the individual‐specific demographic accompanied by any disease‐related impact on the physiological factors including drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters.

5

## Knowledge‐Gap Analyses and Opportunities for Improvements in Pediatric PBPK Input Parameters
Applying PBPK models in pediatric patients requires appropriate input parameters and clinical data to build and qualify the PBPK models. Challenges primarily reside in insufficient knowledge of pediatric developmental physiology and associated age‐ and food‐dependent absorption. These gaps are summarized in Table  .
 5.1

## Oral Absorption and GI Tract
Age and food may impact bile salt concentrations, and subsequent drug absorption changes may occur, especially for Biopharmaceutics Classification System (BCS) Class II and IV compounds with low and bile acid‐dependent solubility. The reported bile salt concentrations in neonates/newborns and infants are highly variable, and lower bile salt concentrations in pediatric fasted‐state intestinal fluids compared with adults have been reported [ , ], leading to the possibility of reduced absorption in pediatric populations and for lipophilic drugs with bile acid‐dependent absorption. Bile salts can be diluted by liquid food under a fed state, giving rise to hurdles for absorption prediction. For example, human breast milk—but not formula milk—contains bile salts, and this might enhance absorption for BCS II and IV drugs with a prominent positive food effect in infants. For that reason, appropriate bile acid concentrations and biorelevant dissolution data should be considered in the pediatric PBPK modeling [ ]. Well‐designed parameter sensitivity analysis can be utilized to assess the bile salt impact on drug absorption in pediatric patients.
Most registration food effect studies are conducted in the presence of the FDA standard high‐fat meal; however, infants and toddlers tend to eat light meals. Hence, a modeling gap exists to scale down the food effect assessed in adults to pediatric patients. The minitablet formulation designed for pediatric patients is usually taken with yogurt or another soft food, presenting another food effect modeling gap.
For pediatric populations, a meta‐analysis of gastric emptying as a function of age revealed that food type rather than age determined differences in gastric emptying [ ]. Wollmer et al. [ ] summarized that gastric emptying time was not age‐dependent for liquid meals but was age‐dependent for solid meals. Slightly longer small intestine transit time in children was reported, though infants and newborns have shorter small intestines than adults. Nonetheless, the transit time was assessed by wireless motility capsules, not the regular‐sized tablet or capsule. The measured transit time might correspond to the large size of wireless motility capsules. Note that the PBPK model comprises drug disposition uncertainties, and the rendered GTT estimation requires qualification using high‐quality PK data.
Minitablets or liquid formulations are developed for young children who cannot swallow regular tablets or capsules. Most relative bioavailability (rBA) studies are conducted in adult HVs using custom pediatric formulations, not in children. Hence, the different GI transit times, water volume in the GI tract between children and adults, and the impact on drug PK in children should be considered in the model. Capsules or minitablets with a low dose strength are commonly dosed in the pediatric Phase 1 or Phase 3 studies. A dedicated rBA study of the adult final marketing formulation for pediatric patients is often not conducted. This can represent another difficulty for pediatric dose prediction and validation.

5.2

## Distribution Gaps
In some PBPK software, the steady‐state volume of distribution (Vss) value in the adult model can be adjusted using the “Kp scalar” if the in silico‐predicted Vss value is different from the observed Vss value [ ]. Using the Kp scalar in the pediatric full PBPK distribution model is cautioned against, considering the “nonmechanistic” nature of the Kp scalar and the age‐dependent tissue‐plasma coefficient in certain types of tissues in neonates and young infants. For example, the juvenile rat study indicated that the aliskiren tissue/plasma concentration ratio in liver, kidney, heart, and brain tissue in postnatal day 14 rats distinctly differed from adult rats, hinting at the distinct tissue distribution between infants and adults [ ]. Parrot et al. [ ] leveraged the plasma and liver concentrations of oseltamivir and its metabolite measured in adult and newborn marmosets after IV and oral dosing. They successfully built a distribution model that bridged child and adult drug distribution using these data. Though Lam et al. reported lower P‐gp expression in the neonates' brain at birth and a comparable level to adults at ~3–6 months of age, most ontogeny profiles for the blood–brain barrier (BBB)‐associated transporters remain uninvestigated. The ontogeny of transporters and the age‐dependent CSF protein levels also remain uninvestigated. For drug distribution to the CNS, the convective flow of CSF is crucial in determining the drug redistribution to the systemic circulation for elimination. Hence, the age‐dependent CSF flow rate dominates the drug concentration and accumulation in the CNS. Such consideration associated with drug accumulation in the CNS is not reported in the pediatric PBPK modeling research papers or the pediatric dose selection strategies for drugs targeting the CNS. Translation approaches (i.e., tissue distribution data in juvenile animal studies) can be leveraged and incorporated into the pediatric PBPK model.

5.3

## Ontogeny Gaps for DME(s) or Drug Transporter(s)
Accurate prediction of PK in children relies on the knowledge of the ontogeny of enzymes and transporters involved in the disposition of compounds. Our review of the literature revealed a lack of consensus on the ontogenies required to mechanistically describe distribution or elimination characteristics. Either ontogeny information is completely absent (e.g., in the case of many transporters), or there are inconsistent literature reports (e.g., about age‐dependent changes of CYPs or other metabolizing enzymes). For example, the CYP3A4 ontogeny has been described as reaching near adult levels by age 2 years and remaining flat at adult levels thereafter [ ]; other data have suggested that CYP3A4 levels in children over the approximate age range of 2–11 years exceed those of adult levels by nearly 1.5‐fold before falling to adult levels [ ]. Differences between laboratories limit definitive conclusions [ ], potentially resulting in conflicting information. Confidence in the ontogeny functions used for pediatric prediction for a given compound may be increased by evaluation of predicted PK compared with observed pediatric PK on an ongoing basis as pediatric data from a trial become available. As pediatric trials typically initiate in adolescents before moving to lower age groups, there is an opportunity to successively evaluate the predictiveness of the ontogeny function before moving into populations that are likely to differ increasingly from adults.

5.4

## Model Validation/Verification Gaps
One of the main challenges of developing a pediatric PBPK model is the time‐consuming data collection process needed for the development and validation of a PBPK model. These include system‐specific parameter values (enzyme, transporter, and physiological parameters) for pediatric populations and compound‐specific parameter values. While the latter can often be taken from adult PBPK models, more effective approaches are still needed to bring PBPK models to a level where their full potential in supporting pharmaceutical sciences and innovation is realized. For example, a PBPK model to describe ciprofloxacin PK over the entire span of life was presented showing good predictive performance in pediatric and geriatric patients (Schlender et al.) [ ]. Prior to extrapolating to children, the adult PBPK model for ciprofloxacin was first developed based on the mean data of 69 published clinical trials and integrated into the model building, simulation, and verification process.

6

## Pediatric PBPK Modeling for Biologics and Novel Modalities
We see minimal case examples published for PBPK applications to emerging chemistry modalities, including biologics, peptide drugs, antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs), and gene therapies, including minimal PBPK approaches for monoclonal antibodies [ ]. These have historically been dosed IV based on adult body size (e.g., mg/kg, mg/m2), which may partly explain the broader use of allometric scaling approaches for pediatric development compared with PBPK modeling [ ]. However, it is increasingly being recognized that allometric scaling for mAbs/therapeutic proteins can result in the misprediction of CL in pediatric patients, particularly for compounds demonstrating target‐mediated drug disposition (TMDD) because this cannot be considered by the allometric scaling approach [ ]. Understanding factors affecting ADME properties for these modalities is still evolving. PBPK models for mAbs or therapeutic proteins must consider age‐dependent alterations in physiological parameters (e.g., endogenous immunoglobulin G [IgG] levels, neonatal fragment crystallizable receptor (FcRn) concentrations, and lymph flow rate). Characterizing the distinction for such parameters between the adult and pediatric populations is needed [ ]. For example, although the bioavailability of mAbs via subcutaneous and intra‐muscular routes is generally similar in adults and children, more rapid absorption rates have been reported in children. Given that, via these routes of administration, mAbs make their way to systemic circulation through the lymph, the greater extracellular fluid volumes and lymph flow in children is a likely explanation [ ].
It has been reported that PBPK modeling performed similarly to allometry for predicting the pediatric PK of infliximab, which suggests that both approaches may be considered at the start of pediatric development for mAbs/therapeutic proteins [ ]. Note that only 1 out of 7 pediatric PK studies in this paper consisted of patients under 4 years of age; hence, it is difficult to conclude that both models were sufficiently validated for young children. Additional evaluations comparing the 2 methods will ultimately be needed to determine if and when PBPK or allometry is better suited for a particular class of molecule. The pediatric PBPK model for biologics is available in the Simcyp Biologics Simulator. Pan et al. [ ] evaluated the Simcyp PBPK model's performance in predicting small proteins and peptides, fusion proteins, and mAbs for neonates, infants, children, and adolescents. Age‐dependent endogenous IgG concentration derived from literature was incorporated. The lymph flow rate was estimated via the allometric scaling method. In vitro data were used to parameterize the TMDD parameters. This study demonstrates that PBPK models accounting for age‐dependent parameters can predict the PK of various therapeutic proteins in pediatrics.
Unlike conventional small molecule drugs, the ADME processes of new modalities (e.g., ASO) involve interactions with receptor‐mediated endocytosis, nucleases, etc. The ontogeny of these biological processes is poorly understood. In addition, it has been reported that the CSF turnover rate or CSF‐to‐plasma drug distribution ratio predominately determines the PK profile in CNS tissues after intrathecal administration of ASOs targeting CNS tissues. The empirical body weight‐based allometric scaling exponent value of −0.08 for rate constants approach was utilized in [ ] to predict the nusinersen PK profile in the target CNS tissues. The prediction accuracy is nusinersen dose dependent, hinting at a lack of the mechanism components to fully characterize the nusinersen PK in patients < 2 years of age.
Monine et al. [ ] reported an ASO PBPK model based on tissue distribution data in nonhuman primates after intrathecal administration. In particular, the model predicts maximum total exposure in CNS tissues, including the spinal cord and brain, which are not routinely accessible for tissue sampling. The framework defined in the paper can be adopted for the ASO PK projection in pediatric patients. The model can be scaled using allometric principles to predict exposures in patients with pediatric spinal muscular atrophy (SMA). The FIH dose selection in infant patients with SMA for Zolgensma (onasemnogene abeparvovec), the first approved vector‐based gene therapy for SMA, was based on safety and efficacy data from animal studies. There is no published research on applications of pediatric PBPK modeling for gene therapy, because inherited diseases account for most targeted indications, and the treatments start early when young patients are diagnosed (e.g., infant patients with Type I SMA). A mechanism‐based pediatric PBPK model in conjunction with a quantitative systems pharmacology (QSP) model can potentially be developed for FIH dose projection in pediatric patients.

7

## Current Status and Challenges in Preterm/Neonate/Newborn Population PBPK Model Development
Preterm and term neonate patients (< 28 days) are typically not included in dose‐determination studies. Most drugs used in the neonatal intensive care unit are not approved by the FDA for treating neonate patients, and polypharmacy as well as off‐label dosing has been reported [ ]. Due to the knowledge gaps concerning physiological parameter dynamics within the first few weeks of life, neonatal PBPK model development lags behind work done on other special populations. Allegaert et al. identified only 25 publications related to neonate PBPK modeling, reflecting a minimal 0.3%–0.6% increase in research until 2022 [ ]. Despite this, noteworthy advancements have been achieved in our comprehension of newborn physiology. The system parameters defined in a preterm PBPK model developed by Abduljalil et al. [ ] were an important development. This model integrated various developmental physiology parameters from multiple research papers, including body weight, total and intracellular water, extracellular water, fat and nonfat mass, hematocrit, plasma volume, protein binding, renal function, and the ontogeny of 6 CYP enzymes (Tables  and ). Nevertheless, the ontogeny of drug transporters in neonates and the BBB, the impact of disease, and the magnitude of disease state (e.g., cardiac output change during therapeutic hypothermia) were not included [ ]. The increased drug concentration in the neonate's brain and CSF compared with adults is likely attributed to factors such as a reduced plasma protein binding ratio, a higher relative brain size versus body weight ratio, and a higher cerebral blood flow rate relative to the total blood flow rate ratio in neonates as compared with adults [ ].
 In the scientific community, a consensus on neonate absorption‐associated physiological parameters, such as intestinal pH or gut bile acid concentrations, is still lacking [ ]. However, available compiled literature data reveal a high variability of gastric and intestinal pH in newborns compared with those in older children and adults in fasted and fed conditions [ ]. In neonates, the plasma Tmax for acetaminophen, a gastric emptying marker, was reported as 70 min following nasogastric dosing [ ]. This observed Tmax is overall similar to the reported Tmax after oral solution dosing in infants and adults [ ]. However, when concerning the age‐dependent drug disposition, it is challenging to definitively conclude an age‐independent absorption rate with high confidence [ ]. Intestinal permeability, in addition to gastric emptying, was investigated using PSA with an overall limited impact on Cmax and AUC [ ]. Weaver et al. [ ] reported declining intestinal permeability for lactose in preterm neonates within 1 week after birth. The results hinted at the different absorption for poorly permeable drugs in preterm neonates. Increased permeability for lactulose has been observed especially during the first days after birth, with maturation (closure) of the junctions between epithelial cells from the first days after birth up to 15 months of age [ , ]. Nevertheless, intestinal permeability data after birth are scarce, and rapid changes may occur within a few weeks after birth. Accordingly, absorption simulations in neonates should incorporate gestational age (GA) and postnatal age (PNA) and account for the intestinal transporter(s) expression levels, where applicable.
Regarding transporter involvement, van Groen et al. [ ] found that postmenstrual age (PMA) was the most robust parameter predicting transporter expression (i.e., BCRP, BSEP, GLUT1, MDR1, MRP1, MRP2, MRP3, NTCP, OATP1B1, and OCT1) in 62 fetal and newborn liver samples. The disease impact on PBPK modeling was elaborated in Smits et al. [ ] where a PBPK framework for neonates receiving therapeutic hypothermia, a standard treatment for hypothermia owing to perinatal asphyxia (PA) and hypoxic–ischemic encephalopathy in ≥ 36‐week GA neonates, was proposed. The framework accounts for hypothermia's impact on the drug ADME, and a case example of midazolam was presented for dose simulation in neonate patients. The essential components of this paper are various multidisciplinary and translational approaches proposed to build the PBPK framework, including the associated in vitro studies (e.g., the utility of biomarkers for CYP3A4 and OATP1B1/3) and juvenile animal PK studies.
In addition to ontogeny profiles outlining basic physiological parameters, which are akin to those summarized in Table  , a study by Malik and Edington [ ] introduced advanced ontogeny profiles for capillary density, lymph flow rate, and leukocyte concentration, drawing from existing literature. Integrating primary and advanced ontogeny profiles into the PBPK model has enabled the accurate PK prediction for 4 mAbs in premature neonates, achieving results within 1.5‐fold of the observed concentration values. Nevertheless, as a first step in neonate PBPK modeling for mAbs, this research paper acknowledged that ontogeny uncertainty in FcRn expression and endogenous IgG concentrations still needs to be addressed.
Though the neonate PBPK models developed by Abduljalil et al. [ ] represent significant scientific advances, a prominent limitation is the need for more sufficient high‐quality studies in neonates, which enable model qualification. Addressing this limitation is crucial to enhancing the reliability and accuracy of neonatal dose predictions. Care should be taken when correlating PK changes with PMA vs. PNA, especially close to the time of birth. It should also be noted that other studies have demonstrated that renal function scales better with fat free mass rather than total [ ].
Although the EMA allows properly validated PBPK models for dose selection in neonate patients [ ], qualifying the neonate PBPK model remains challenging. This necessitates close collaboration between clinicians and modelers to integrate knowledge (PK datasets, system knowledge, and maturational physiology) to improve the robustness of these models and ensure their effectiveness in clinical practice.

8

## Further Gaps
The development of a PBPK model can be a significant task requiring large amounts of high‐quality background information and input data, as well as time for model development. The qualification of models builds on the repetitive demonstration of successful predictions. Thus, the integrative nature of a PBPK model lends itself to an open‐science approach where information, models, and software can be jointly developed as advocated via an industry‐wide collaboration. Ultimately, the efforts to accelerate the growth in PBPK model development overall will maximize the utility of pediatric PBPK models in clinical applications.

9

## Addressing the Gaps
There are several opportunities to address the “data hungry” gaps in pediatric PBPK model development. First, a public repository of data needed for PBPK model development will be of great value. Ladumor et al. [ ] described the availability of an online public database/repository containing quantitative information on protein abundance data of DMEs and transporters. The repository has been uploaded online as an open access user‐friendly QPrOmics database [ ] and it is updated regularly. It contains literature‐reported protein abundance data of 55 DMEs (30 Phase 1 and 25 Phase 2) and 104 membrane transporters (67 uptake and 37 efflux). What is even more useful is that this database also contains demographic and genetic factors, such as age, sex, ethnicity, disease condition, and genotype. This database will help accelerate time‐consuming data collection and help address inconsistencies in reported literature enzyme and transporter data.
The second opportunity is to leverage real‐world data (RWD) to support the development and validation of pediatric PBPK models, especially where this is coupled with information on time of administration relative to sampling. For example, to address a clinical question regarding dose optimization for enoxaparin in children, a total of 2825 anti‐activated factor X surrogate concentrations were collected from the electronic health records of 596 children, including those with obesity [ ]. Enoxaparin, a commonly prescribed low‐molecular‐weight heparin, is dosed based on body weight irrespective of obesity status to achieve Cmax within a narrow therapeutic or prophylactic target. These RWD coupled with the PBPK model were used to characterize enoxaparin disposition in children with obesity and showed that enoxaparin exposure was better matched across age groups and obesity status using fat‐free mass weight‐based dosing. Similarly, artificial intelligence and machine learning (AIML) techniques can enhance PBPK model development by automating the parameter estimation and model calibration process, leading to faster and more robust optimization. They can also help clean, integrate, and analyze diverse data sources essential for constructing and extrapolating reliable pediatric PBPK models. Machine learning approaches can facilitate efficient sensitivity and uncertainty analysis, especially when extrapolating from adult data and sometimes by building surrogate models to reduce computational demand. Additionally, AIML may enable more personalized predictions by incorporating pediatric patient‐specific data, improving tailored dosing strategies. Overall, these tools support automation and decision support, streamlining the entire modeling process for pediatric PBPK applications.
Another opportunity is presented by microdose studies. Microdose studies in children offer an attractive opportunity without the risk of toxicity posed when a therapeutic dose is given for the first time in a specific age group. A microdose is defined by regulatory authorities as 1/100th of the no‐observed‐adverse‐effect level (NOAEL) in animals or 1/100th of the predicted pharmacologic dose based on animal data or as 100 μg of a new drug, whichever dose is lowest [ ]. The administration of a [14C]Paracetamol microdose helped to elucidate developmental changes in drug disposition in infants (age range 3 days to 6.9 years) [ ]. An accelerator mass spectrometry‐microdose study enabled the safe study of ursodiol in infants and generated PK data previously only available in adults to guide pharmacotherapy of parenteral nutrition‐associated cholestasis [ ]. A [14C] microtracer study, where a low dose of radiolabeled active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) was codosed with unlabeled API at a therapeutic dose, elucidated the metabolite profiles of midazolam in children aged 0 months to 6 years [ ]. A broader use of microdose studies might be hampered by the fact that microdose studies may be accepted by health authorities in children who have a disorder or condition, which is an objective of the research; however, there are ethical concerns for studies in healthy children. Establishing dose linearity between the microdose and the therapeutic dose, which facilitates the extrapolation of PK data to obtain dosing recommendations, is often deemed another hurdle. However, in the case of nonlinear behavior, a comparison of microdose PK given to adults and a certain pediatric population may still be informative and could allow extrapolation to higher doses if the factors driving nonlinearity were known. This information could be integrated into a respective pediatric PK model including maturation of these factors.
There is also a gap in the existence of the right kind of expertise to develop and verify suitable PBPK models. With the advent of commercially available software, although the building of PBPK models has been harmonized to a certain extent, it still requires the right expertise and laborious scrutiny to gather the right datasets (in vitro, in silico, preclinical, and clinical in vivo data) to build an appropriate pediatric PBPK model. Further encouragement of popularizing the PBPK models, either as complementary or supplementary to the existing practices based on the pediatric scientific query being addressed, would help in appropriate model‐informed pediatric drug development. Working closely with clinicians with expertise in pediatric disease areas is important to the success of implementing this. There is also an opportunity to train new researchers who would be instrumental in adopting effective strategies involving PBPK models in the appropriate pediatric drug development plans.

10

## Conclusions, Recommendations, and Outlook
Extrapolation approaches enable sponsors to fulfill their obligations for pediatric drug development while avoiding the unnecessary exposure of children to experimental medicines. PBPK modeling is essential in this respect, especially for younger pediatric populations. We have considered the current state of the art of applying PBPK to pediatric drug development. We have also proposed a workflow that allows the incorporation of pediatric population PBPK modeling while the model is being developed and validated against adult population data. While it is clear that PBPK is highly impactful, there are still a number of key gaps in the implementation of PBPK for very young populations specifically pertaining to ADME.
Absorption modeling requires detailed knowledge of bile salt concentrations and compositions in all pediatric populations, and significant progress has been made showing that bile acid concentrations may be reduced particularly in neonates [ ]. The impact of GI transit time and the impact of food intake are also critical [ ]. Tissue distribution predictions in neonates and young infant populations also require further improvement to overcome the gap in obtaining successful CNS predictions. Translational approaches using tissue distribution data collected in juvenile animals have been impactful for therapies with specific targeted tissues.
Although significant progress has been made in understanding the physiology and ontogeny relevant to drug absorption and disposition, the practicalities and tools available have resulted in differing ontogenies [ , , ], such as for the drug‐metabolizing enzyme CYP3A4. Given the importance of CYP3A4 and other enzymes in the disposition of small molecule therapies, arriving at a consensus on ontogeny profiles would be ideal. Additional examples of comparisons of ontogeny functions for CYP3A4 in the peer‐reviewed literature will help to reach this consensus. Indeed, progress on this has been recently published [ ]. Absolute quantification continues to expand the wealth of ontogeny functions beyond CYPs and toward additional drug‐metabolizing enzymes (e.g., sulfotransferases [SULTs], and UGTs) and transporters (e.g., OCT1, OATP1B3, and P‐GP); however, these will have to be further tested and confirmed with PBPK in comparison with additional clinical data similar to those methods utilized currently with CYP3A4, thus providing verification and confidence.
Another challenge for extrapolation to the pediatric setting is deriving the required drug exposure range. In the literature case studies considered in this review, matching adult AUC was mostly considered. In many therapy areas, dose ranges are still tested in late‐phase clinical trials, enabling the optimization of the required exposure. However, this is not the case in some diseases, notably oncology. In this case, modelers may have to consider the mechanism of action and even preclinical pharmacokinetic‐pharmacodynamic (PKPD) knowledge where such relationships can be explored more fully. Even with adult dose/exposure‐response data available, significant uncertainty could still remain as to the effective exposure in children. The emerging paradigm of QSP approaches could be applied to understand adult PKPD relationships and extrapolate to children in a mechanistic manner.

## Disclosure
This article was developed with the support of the International Consortium for Innovation and Quality in Pharmaceutical Development (IQ, www.iqconsortium.org). IQ is a not‐for‐profit organization of pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies with a mission of advancing science and technology to augment the capability of member companies to develop transformational solutions that benefit patients, regulators and the broader research and development community.

## Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## Supporting information

Data S1: Supporting Information.