pmceLifeElife1894elife101579614eLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC11996172PMC11996172.111996172119961724011190210.7554/eLife.1013501013501version of recordResearch ArticleImmunology and InflammationTissue inflammation induced by constitutively active STING is mediated by enhanced TNF signaling
LukschHellahttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7070-4992 ), Parkinson’s disease ( ), or severe COVID-19 disease ( ). Murine SAVI is a well-established model for pathology and signaling of constitutive uncontrolled STING activation ( ). STING is an innate immune receptor that senses cyclic dinucleotides. These can be derived from bacteria or in mammalian cells be produced by the enzyme cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS), which is activated upon binding to double-stranded DNA. Mammalian cGAS produces the unique 2′3′-cGAMP that binds to STING and results in its translocation, phosphorylation, and oligomerization. STING oligomers recruit TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1), which subsequently activates type I interferon (IFN I) signaling as well as nuclear factor κ light chain enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB) triggered signaling ( ; ; ). STING signaling is terminated by AP-1-mediated sorting of phosphorylated STING into clathrin-coated transport vesicles that fuse with endolysosomes to degrade STING ( ; ).
Uncontrolled activity of STING is associated with various autoinflammatory disorders and severe diseases caused by viral infections ( ; ). Gain-of-function mutations of human STING1 cause SAVI, which is characterized by severe interstitial lung disease, T cell lymphopenia, skin inflammation, and perturbed IFN- and NF-κB-driven signaling ( ; ; ; ). Genetically induced chronic activation of STING results in comparable severe systemic autoinflammatory symptoms in the murine organism ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). We previously established a SAVI mouse model, by knocking in the disease causing variant N153S into the endogenous murine Sting1 gene (STING ki) resulting in T cell lymphopenia, interstitial lung disease, and systemic autoinflammation ( ). In addition, STING ki mice show degeneration of dopaminergic neurons induced by neuroinflammation ( ).
Initially, STING activates various signal transduction pathways and has been assumed to function primarily through type I IFN signaling ( ). Yet, the manifestation of SAVI hallmarks in STING ki mice were unaffected by knockout of cGAS, IFNAR1, IRF3, and IRF7 ( ; ), suggesting that other pathways in the STING signaling cascade are required for SAVI symptoms. In our previous investigations, we observed an elevated transcription of Tnf in spleen and thymus of STING ki mice ( ). In order to test the hypothesis that tumor necrosis factor (TNF) signaling is involved in manifestation and progression of murine SAVI disease, we here used genetic inhibition of TNF receptors.
TNF, a systemic multifunctional cytokine, is involved in inflammation and immune regulation as well as development of lymphoid organs, and TNF can be produced and secreted by nearly every cell. We established new mouse lines with STING ki in addition to genetic depletion of tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1), tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 (TNFR2), or TNFR1/2. Both receptors are involved in TNF signaling pathways with different functions. TNFR1 is constitutively expressed on almost all cell populations, whereas TNFR2 expression is inducible in specific cell types, e.g., immune and endothelial cells ( ). Both receptors are able to bind TNF but only TNFR1 contains an intracellular death domain and is involved in programmed cell death. TNFR2 is associated with survival and proliferation of cells ( ). After binding of ligands, TNF receptors trigger NF-κB-driven signaling, predominantly through TNFR1 whereas TNFR2 activates NF-κB transcription poorly ( ). Current publications suggest distinct effects of TNFR1 and TNFR2 in association with different types of inflammation. TNFR1 signaling stimulates proinflammatory responses within the innate immune system. In contrast, actions of TNFR2 are involved in cellular homeostasis and anti-inflammatory responses ( ). Moreover, in the murine model of autoinflammatory familial Mediterranean fever (FMF), both TNF receptors have opposite effects. TNFR1 showed a pathogenic role and TNFR2 a protective role in association with murine FMF ( ).
In this work, we observed that pathology in the thymus of SAVI mice was dependent on TNFR1 and TNFR2 signaling whereas signaling through TNFR1 but not on TNFR2-mediated pathology in lungs of STING ki mice. Similarly, the manifestation of dopaminergic neuron degeneration in substantia nigra was dependent on TNFR1/2 signaling. Finally, we investigated the role of constitutive STING activation on the endothelial barrier, which was found to be TNF signaling-dependent. Endothelial cells of STING ki mice induced transmigration of neutrophils in a TNFR1-dependent manner. Overall, our study highlights a pivotal role of TNF signaling in SAVI disease and implies TNF blockade as valuable therapeutic option to ameliorate symptoms of SAVI disease in patients.

## Materials and methods

## Animals
Heterozygous STING N153S/WT mice (STING ki) were previously described ( ). STING WT and STING ki mice were crossed to Tnfr1/2-/- mice, kindly provided by Hans-Joachim Anders, Munich, Germany ( ). All mice were housed at the Experimental Center of the University of Technology Dresden under specific pathogen-free conditions. All mice experiments were approved by the Landesdirektion Sachsen (TVV 4/2019, TVV 13/2019) and carried out in accordance with the institutional guidelines on animal welfare.

## Cell preparations and flow cytometry
Spleens and thymi were mechanically homogenized and passed through a 100 µm cell strainer. Single-cell suspensions of spleen, thymi, and blood were obtained by lysis of red blood cells and additional filtration through 30 µm meshes. All cell suspensions were washed with FACS buffer (PBS, 2%FCS, 2.5 mM EDTA). These isolated cells were incubated with fluorescence-labeled antibodies in FACS buffer for 30 min at 4°C. For a detailed overview of used antibodies, see . After incubation, cells were washed twice with FACS buffer. Exclusion of dead cells was performed by adding Zombie UV dye (BioLegend, USA). Cells were analyzed by LSR II and LSR FORTESSA (BD Biosciences, Germany) and evaluated with FlowJo V10 software (Tree Star, USA).

## Histology of lung
Lung tissue was dissected from mice and fixed in 4% formaldehyde for 24 hr at 4°C and embedded in paraffin. Lung tissue sections (thickness of 3 µm) were stained with Mayer’s hemalum (Carl Roth, Germany) and counterstained with eosin (Carl Roth, Germany). For quantification of lung disease, whole tissue sections were scanned by Axio Scan Z1 and ZEN software (both from Zeiss, Germany). ZEN 3.0 (Zeiss, Germany) software was used for evaluation of inflammatory areas in all analyzed lung sections. The area of diseased lung in each section was calculated by inflamed area divided by total area of lung section, excluding large airway spaces.

## Dye labeling of lymph nodes
Identification of lymph nodes was performed as described previously ( ). Briefly, mice were anesthetized and 25 µl of 5% Evans Blue dye in PBS was injected subcutaneously into both hind paws. After 30 min of dye injection, mice were euthanized and dissected for visualization of blue-labeled lymph nodes.

## Gene expression analysis
Total RNA of lung and thymi was extracted from snap-frozen tissue by using the RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and cDNA was generated by MMLV reverse transcription (Promega, Germany). Quantitative real-time PCR assays were carried out by using GoTaq qPCR master mix (Promega, Germany) and QuantStudio 5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). PCR primers were generated from the Primer Bank database, see ( ). Expression of genes was normalized with respect to each housekeeping gene using ΔΔCt method for comparing relative expression.

## LEGENDplex assay
Mouse cytokine release syndrome panel LEGENDplex (BioLegend, USA) is a multiplex bead-based assay using the basic methodology of ELISA. Snap-frozen lung tissue was extracted by 1% NP-40 (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) and cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Germany) in PBS. Collected serum and lung extracts from mice were incubated with bead-conjugated antibodies overnight at 4°C and permanent shaking. Content of chemokines/cytokines was quantified after washing and staining with biotinylated detection antibodies and phycoerythrin-bound streptavidin by using LSR II (BD Biosciences, Germany). Calculation of each chemokine/cytokine quantity was determined by using standard curves according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Immunofluorescence staining of brain sections
Mice were euthanized with an overdose of isoflurane (Baxter, Belgium) and perfused transcardially with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in Tris-buffered saline (TBS, pH 7.6). The tissue was left in 4% PFA for another 48 hr at 4°C. For cryoprotection, brains were incubated in 30% sucrose in TBS. They were snap-frozen at –55°C in isopentane and stored at –80°C. 30-µm-thick coronal brain sections were obtained using a Cryostat (Leica CM3050 S Biosystems, Germany).
Brain sections were rinsed in TBS three times for 10 min each. Afterward they were incubated for 1 hr at room temperature in a blocking buffer, which consisted of 10% donkey serum (BIOZOL Diagnostica Vertrieb GmbH, Germany), 0.2% Triton X-100 (Thermo Scientific, USA), and TBS. Incubation with primary antibody was performed by using sheep anti-TH, chicken anti-GFAP, and guinea pig anti-Iba1 ( ) at 4°C overnight. After three 10 min rinses with TBS, slices were incubated with fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 hr at room temperature Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated donkey anti-sheep, Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated donkey anti-chicken, CF555-conjugated donkey anti-guinea pig ( ). Hoechst was applied for nuclear counterstaining. Sections were mounted in Fluoromount-G (Invitrogen, USA).

## Quantification of dopaminergic neurons, astrocytes, and microglia in the SNc
For each animal, we stained and slide-scanned every fourth brain section. Images were acquired using a spinning disk confocal microscope and a ×20/0.8 objective. The system consists of a Zeiss Axio Observer.Z1 Inverted Microscope (Zeiss, Germany) supported by a Yokogawa CSU-X1 unit (Yokogawa Life Science, Tokyo). Each section was scanned at seven Z-levels with 1 µm intervals and projected according to the ‘Orthogonal projection’ and ‘Stitching’ function in Zeiss Zen 3.1 software (Zeiss, Germany). TH-positive neurons of both hemispheres in the pars compacta of the substantia nigra (SNc) were manually counted in Zeiss Zen. Based on the TH staining, the SNc was manually encircled. The numbers of Iba1-positive microglia and GFAP-positive astrocytes were also quantified manually in both hemispheres within the marked area. Next, each cell type’s count was summed and multiplied by four since every fourth section was analyzed in order to represent the total number within the SNc. Counts of positive stained cells from STING WT and STING ki mice were normalized to the corresponding mean count in STING WT.

## Transcriptomic analysis of murine lung endothelial cells
Murine lung endothelial cells were isolated from perfused (10 U/ml heparin diluted in PBS) lung tissue. Single-cell suspension was obtained after digestion with 1 mg/ml Collagenase (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany), 3.5 mg/ml Dispase (Roche, Germany), and 25 µg/ml DNaseI (Roche, Germany) in native IMDM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) over 45 min at 37°C. Collected cells were washed with PBS and passed through a 30 µm cell strainer. Lung endothelial cells were enriched by positive selection of CD31+ cells with microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. All selected cells were stained with antibodies (all from BioLegend, USA) against CD45.2 (1:300), CD11b (1:500), Ter-119 (1:500), CD326 (1:500), CD31 (1:300), and separated by FACS Aria. Dead cells and cellular debris were excluded by PI staining. The designed gating strategy ensured the exclusion of leukocytes (CD45.2+ and CD11b+), erythrocytes (Ter-119+), and epithelial cells (CD326+). Total RNA was extracted by RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Germany) and poly-A enriched before library preparation using NEBNext Ultra II Directional RNA Library Prep Kit (NEB, USA). For each library, 30 mio single end reads were generated on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000. Reads were mapped to mouse genome GRCm39 followed by normalization, exploratory, and differential expression analysis using DESeq2 ( ). Data are deposited on GEO database, Accession no. GSE244062.

## Functional assays of murine lung endothelial cells
Isolation and culture of murine lung endothelial cells was performed as described previously ( ). In brief, mice were perfused transcardially with 10 U/ml heparin (Carl Roth, Germany) diluted in PBS. Lung tissue was removed and digested with 1 mg/ml Collagenase (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany), 3.5 mg/ml Dispase (Roche, Germany) and 25 µg/ml DNaseI (Roche) in native IMDM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) over 45 min at 37°C. The resulting cell suspension was filtered through a 30 µm cell strainer. The filtered cell suspension was washed in PBS and resuspended in complete IMDM culture medium. The extracted cells of lung tissue were plated into Attachment Factor Protein- (Life Technologies, USA) coated T75 tissue culture flasks for 2 days. After this time, lung cells were detached by Accutase (BioLegend, USA) and the endothelial cells were separated using Dynabeads coupled to anti-CD31 antibody and anti-ICAM2 antibody (BioLegend, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Collected murine lung endothelial cells were cultured in coated T75 flasks. Cultured cells from passages 1–3 were used for analyzing neutrophil attachment and neutrophil transendothelial migration.
For this purpose, 0.3×105 lung endothelial cells were seeded into 6-channel µ-Slides VI 0.4 (IBIDI, Germany), which were precoated with attachment factor (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Cells were incubated for 4 days with changing media twice per day. For stimulated cells, last medium exchange was performed with either 5 ng/ml TNF (Peprotech, USA) or 100 ng/ml cLPS (Invivogen, USA) and incubation lasted overnight. For the migration assay, neutrophils were isolated from murine bone marrow using femur and tibia. Neutrophils were separated by gradient centrifugation using Histopaque 1119 and 1077 (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Neutrophils were washed, counted, and diluted to 1×106 cells/ml. Afterward flow was applied to µ slides at a flow rate of 0.5 ml/min (≡0.6 dyn/cm2) using a syringe pump for 10 min. Subsequently, 0.6×106 neutrophils were injected upstream of the endothelial monolayer via a port. Phase-contrast images (five per each channel) were taken with an AXIO OBSERVER Z1 (Zeiss, Germany) over 20 min at a speed of one image every 10 s. Evaluation of attached and transmigrated cells was performed using ZEN Blue software (Zeiss, Germany).

## Statistics
All statistical analyses were performed by using GaphPad Prism 9. In the graphs, markers represent data from individual animals and lines represent means of all mice from the indicated genotype. Grubbs’ test was used to identify outliers. Comparison of two groups was performed by using Mann-Whitney test. For the comparison of more groups, one-way ANOVA including Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test or Kruskal-Wallis test including Dunn’s multiple comparisons test was used. Significance levels in each figure are indicated by symbols with *p≤0.05, **p<0.005, ***p<0.001, ****p<0.0001. Analysis of effect size and power were performed by G*Power 3.1.9.4 and collected in , effect size d convention (<0.5 = small, 0.5–0.8=medium, >0.8 = large effect) and effect size f convention (<0.25 = small, 0.25–0.4=medium, >0.4 = large effect).

## Results

## Knockout of TNFR1 and TNFR2 does not significantly affect the numbers of blood T cell in STING ki mice
We established the STING ki;Tnfr1/2 -/- mouse line with the combination of the gain-of-function mutation of STING and nonfunctional TNFR1 and TNFR2 as double knockout (TNFR1/2). In addition, we generated two new mouse lines, STING ki;Tnfr1-/- (lacking TNFR1) and STING ki;Tnfr2-/- (lacking TNFR2). At the age of 10 weeks, mice were sacrificed and analyzed extensively in comparison to STING WT and STING ki mice ( for STING WT and for STING ki). The genetic deletion of TNFR1, TNFR2 alone or together did not increase body weight in STING ki mice significantly ( ). Lack of TNFR1 resulted in elevation of blood CD4+ T cell and CD8+ T cell numbers in STING ki;Tnfr1-/- and STING ki;Tnfr1/2 -/- mice ( , large effect size f, ). The frequency of blood CD4+ naïve T cells (CD62Lhi, CD44low) was increased in STING ki;Tnfr1-/- and STING ki;Tnfr1/2-/- mice in comparison to STING ki mice ( , large effect size f, ). The absence of TNFR1 or TNFR2 had no protective effect on naïve CD8+ T cells ( ) and all effector T cell (CD62Llow, CD44hi) populations in the blood of all STING ki mice ( ). In addition, blood myeloid cell numbers were reduced between STING ki with or without TNFR knockout ( , large effect size f, ).
 
Parallel characterization of these parameters in all STING WT mice ( ) showed no differences with exception of significantly more CD8+ T effector cells in the blood of TNFR1/2 ko mice ( ).

## Lack of TNFRs partially rescues thymus and spleen pathology in STING ki mice
The thymus undergoes massive pathological modifications in murine SAVI disease. As previously shown, the numbers of thymocytes were significantly reduced in STING ki mice. Likewise, various inflammatory signaling pathways, detected by gene expression analysis of Sting1, Cxcl10, and Tnf, were upregulated. Finally, these inflammatory processes led to significant functional limitations of T cell maturation in the thymus of STING ki mice ( ).
In order to study thymus and spleen pathology here, TNFR knockout mice were sacrificed and analyzed in comparison to respective STING WT and STING ki mice ( for STING WT and for STING ki) at the age of 10 weeks.
 
 
Knockout of TNFR1, 2 or double knockout of 1 and 2 (1/2) was first studied in comparison to STING WT;BL6 mice. As shown in , knockout of TNFR signaling resulted in unaltered thymic cellular content ( ). Double negative cells were slightly reduced by TNFR2 knockout ( ) while DP cells, SP CD4+ and SP CD8+ cells were unchanged ( ). Transcription of Cxcl10, Sting1, and TNF was unaltered ( ). However, transcription of Il1b was elevated in TNFR1 and TNFR2 knockout mice ( ), albeit unaltered in TNFR1/2 knockout mice in comparison to STING WT;BL6. The total splenic cell content was not altered in TNFR1 and TNFR2 knockout mice, respectively ( ) and the numbers of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were reduced in the spleens of TNFR1/2 knockout mice ( ). Numbers of mononuclear cells did not vary between these genotypes ( ). These observations are in accordance with previously published data ( ; ; ).
In STING ki mice lacking TNFR1 or TNFR1/2, we found that total thymic cellular count was slightly elevated ( ). The absolute numbers in the DN and DP stages were unaffected in STING ki mice by the lack of TNFR1 and/or TNFR2 ( ). However, deletion of TNFR1/2 signaling induced a significant increase in cellular count of thymic SP CD4+ and SP CD8+ in STING ki mice ( ).
Interestingly, disruption of TNFR signaling resulted in lower transcription of various signaling pathways. Thymocytes of STING ki mice lacking TNFR1/2 expressed significantly lower levels of IFN-related genes (Cxcl10, Sting1) ( ) and mice lacking TNFR1 and TNFR1/2 expressed reduced levels of NF-κB-related genes (Tnf, Il1b) compared to STING ki mice with functional TNFR ( ). Obviously, lack of TNFR1 signaling pathways resulted in marked reduction of proinflammatory transcription, potentially causing improvement of physiological function of the thymus in STING ki mice.
In addition, absence of both TNFRs together resulted in an attenuated severity of splenomegaly ( ). The functional loss of TNFR1 or TNFR2 alone had no impact on the manifestation of splenomegaly in STING ki mice. We observed a decrease in splenic CD4+ T cell numbers in STING ki mice lacking TNFR2 ( ). Numbers of splenic CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were similar in STING ki;Tnfr1-/- and STING ki;Tnfr1/2-/- mice ( ). Furthermore, the spleens contained significantly fewer myeloid cells (monocytes and neutrophils) in STING ki;Tnfr1/2-/- mice compared to STING ki;BL6 mice ( ). Taken together, constitutive activation of STING in STING ki mice severely affected SP CD4+ and SP CD8+ T cells in the thymus. The content of CD8+ T cells in spleens of STING ki mice was independent of TNFR signaling. However, the numbers of CD4+ T cells in STING ki;Tnfr2-/- mice were dependent on TNFR2 signaling and the presence of myeloid cells in the spleen of STING ki mice depended on combined signaling of TNFR1 and TNFR2.

## Lack of TNFRs does not restore the formation of lymph nodes in STING ki mice
Constitutive activation of STING N153S in mice led to blockade of lymph node development ( ). After dye injection, we detected stained popliteal and iliac lymph nodes only in STING WT mice, not in STING ki mice. Deletion of TNFR1 or/and TNFR2 had no influence on lymph node development in STING ki mice ( ).

## Neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in dependency of TNFR1/2 signaling
The extent of inflammation in mouse brain resulting from constitutive activation of STING N153S was reported by quantifying the density of Iba1-positive microglia ( ). Consistent with our previous findings ( ), the density of Iba1-positive microglia in the substantia nigra was higher in STING ki;BL6 mice than in STING WT mice ( ). TNFR deficiency did not affect neuroinflammation because there was no significant difference between the density of Iba1-positive microglia between STING ki;BL6 mice and STING ki;Tnfr1/2-/- mice ( ). This suggests that the TNF pathway is not required for STING-induced microglia activation in the substantia nigra.
 In addition, we measured the extent of STING-induced astrogliosis by quantifying the density of GFAP-positive cells ( ). Consistent with our previous findings, the density of GFAP-positive astroglia was higher in STING ki than in STING WT mice ( ). Yet, as for microglia, there was no significant difference between the density of GFAP-positive astroglia between STING ki;BL6 mice and STING ki;Tnfr1/2-/- mice ( ), suggesting that the TNF pathway is not required for STING-induced astrogliosis in the substantia nigra.
Finally, we measured the extent of STING-induced neurodegeneration by quantifying the density of TH-positive dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra ( ). As in our previous findings, the density of TH-positive neurons was lower in STING ki;BL6 mice than in STING WT mice ( ). The density of TH-positive neurons in the substantia nigra of STING ki;Tnfr1/2-/- mice was higher than the density of TH-positive neurons in the substantia nigra of STING ki;BL6 mice ( ), suggesting that the STING-induced degeneration of TH-positive neurons was blunted in Tnfr1/2-/- mice and that TNFR1/2 are involved in the STING-induced degeneration of dopaminergic neurons.
Hence, there is a discrepancy between STING-induced effects on glial cells as opposed to STING-induced effects on neurons. The dependence of STING-induced neurodegeneration but not glial response on TNFR1/2 suggests that the STING-induced degeneration of dopaminergic neurons is not a direct consequence of microglia or astroglia activation. This is consistent with the emerging concept of a neuron-specific inflammatory response ( ).

## TNFR1 signaling drives SAVI-associated lung inflammation in STING ki mice
STING N153S gain-of-function mutation induces lethal inflammatory lung disease, a hallmark of SAVI disease. We previously demonstrated that interstitial lung disease developed largely independent of the IFN I signaling, and occurs in the absence of cGAS, IRF3, IRF7, and of IFNAR1 ( ).
Inactivation of TNFR2 in STING ki mice only mildly reduced the transcription of SAVI-associated cytokines in lung tissue, while lack of TNFR1 led to a much stronger reduction of interferon-driven Cxcl10, Sting1, and NF-κB-driven Tnf or Il1b transcripts. Strikingly, co-deletion of both, Tnfr1/Tnfr2 genes, completely rescued the inflammatory transcriptional signature in lungs of STING ki mice compared to STING WT mice ( ; ). Interestingly, on the protein level, only loss of TNFR1 or TNFR1/2 signaling reduced the amounts of produced CCL2 and IL-6 in lungs of STING ki mice, while loss of TNFR2 signaling alone had no effect ( ; ). However, this effect appeared to be tissue-specific, as we failed to detect a reduction of systemic proinflammatory cytokines in serum ( ).
 
In our STING ki mice, carrying the N153S mutation, approximately 14% of the lung area were infiltrated by immune cells ( ; ). Development of interstitial lung disease in STING ki mice was almost completely prevented by inactivation of TNFR1 (infiltration<0.5% of lung area) but not of TNFR2. Likewise, STING ki;Tnfr1/2-/- mice were completely devoid of lung inflammation. Collectively, our data suggest that the secretion of inflammatory cytokines and subsequent inflammation of lungs in STING ki mice are driven by aberrant signaling through TNFR1.

## Lack of TNFR1/2 abrogates pathologic phenotype in primary lung endothelial cells
Lung inflammation in STING ki mice manifested around pulmonary blood vessels. We hypothesized that lung endothelial cells could be involved in the development of interstitial lung disease. To address this, we isolated primary murine lung endothelial cells from STING WT, STING ki, and STING WT;Tnfr1/2-/- and STING ki;Tnfr1/2-/- mice and subjected them to bulk RNAseq. Analysis of the primary lung endothelial transcriptomes revealed a decreased transcription of several proinflammatory cytokines (e.g. Tnf, Il1b) and chemokines (e.g. Cxcl1, Cxcl2, Cxcl9, Cxcl10, Ccl2, Ccl3, and Ccl4) in STING ki mice lacking TNFR1/2 compared to STING ki mice ( ). Interestingly, chemokines CCL2, CCL3, and CCL4 are essential for the attachment of leukocytes and subsequent migration across the endothelial barrier ( ; ). Furthermore, we observed a strongly reduced expression of several cell adhesions molecules (Jam3, Itgam, Vcam1, Glycam1, Madcam1, Ncam2, and Icam1) and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (Mmp9), all of which are essential for transmigration of leukocytes. This suggests that loss of complete TNFR signaling reverts the inflammatory state of primary lung endothelial cells in STING ki mice, including their transcriptional transmigration signature.
 Currently it is unclear if immune activation of lung endothelium is functionally involved in the development of SAVI lung disease. To address this, we established a cell culture system for quantification of neutrophil adhesion and neutrophil transmigration across a confluent endothelial cell monolayer under flow. Freshly isolated neutrophils from bone marrow of mice were added to cultured primary lung endothelial cell monolayers. All cells were exposed under constant flow pressure, which mimics physiological shear flow conditions. Quantification of attached and transmigrated neutrophils was performed by real-time microscopic supported video documentation. In the first setup, we used cultured endothelial cells from STING WT and STING ki mice, respectively ( ). Isolated neutrophil cells of STING WT mice attached significantly more frequently to STING ki endothelial cells than to STING WT endothelial cells ( ), even without preincubation of the endothelial cell monolayer. We previously demonstrated that chronic activation of STING in STING N153S mice induced elevated transcription and production of TNF in the lung tissue. To mimic this, we preincubated the endothelial cell monolayer with TNF overnight. The attachment of STING WT neutrophils was much stronger after preincubation of endothelial cells with TNF compared to untreated cells. The reinforcement of proinflammatory signaling after preincubation with TNF resulted in elevated counts of attached (STING WT) neutrophils on STING ki endothelial cell monolayer compared to STING WT endothelial cell monolayers.
Many SAVI patients suffer from recurrent bacterial infections in the lungs ( ). For analysis of endothelial cell function during bacterial infection, we preincubated the endothelial cell monolayer with LPS overnight. Similar to TNF pretreatment, the attachment of STING WT neutrophils was increased on LPS-exposed STING ki endothelial cells compared to STING WT. LPS also increased transendothelial migration (TEM) of STING WT neutrophils across the STING ki endothelial cell monolayer compared to STING WT endothelial cells ( ).
Next, we used neutrophils from STING ki mice for the investigation of STING WT and STING ki endothelial cell function ( ). More STING ki neutrophils attached to STING ki than to STING WT endothelial cell monolayer, independent of their preincubation. Similarly, we observed that significantly more neutrophils transmigrated across STING ki endothelial cell monolayer compared to STING WT endothelial cell monolayers. We conclude that attachment and transmigration of neutrophil cells were dependent on expression of STING gain-of-function mutation in endothelial cells. Taken together, STING ki endothelial cells supported the process of attachment and transmigration significantly more than STING WT endothelial cells.
In the next setup, we investigated the influence of the neutrophil genotype on the process of cell adhesion and transmigration ( ). Only after TNF or LPS preincubation of endothelial cell monolayer (STING WT), we observed an effective cell attachment. However, we could not detect any differences in transmigration of neutrophil cells of both genotypes ( ). This is in line with the observation of STING WT or STING ki neutrophil cell attachment on STING ki endothelial cell monolayer ( ). We did not detect any differences in cell attachment without pretreatment and in transmigration of STING WT and STING ki neutrophils. Taken together, STING ki endothelial cells promote neutrophil attachment and transmigration independent of neutrophil genotype (STING WT or STING ki). Attachment and transmigration of leukocytes are elementary mechanisms in the manifestation and progression of SAVI-driven inflammatory lung disease in STING ki mice.
Collectively, we demonstrate that lung inflammation of murine SAVI disease in STING N153S mice activated lung endothelial cells leading to increased attachment and transmigration of immune cells. Furthermore, our data suggests a pivotal role of TNFR1 signaling in the development of interstitial lung disease, which might have major implications for the treatment of human SAVI and other pulmonary inflammatory conditions with similar clinical symptoms.

## Discussion
In this work, we performed the inhibition of TNF signaling by generation of TNFR signaling-deficient mouse model with simultaneous chronic activation of STING caused by STING ki reduced some – but not all – consequences of constitutively active STING.
Constitutive activation of STING results in uncontrolled elevation of NF-κB signaling pathways, demonstrated by upregulated Tnf expression in STING ki mice ( ).
For in-depth analysis of STING-dependent TNF expression, we used TNFR signaling-deficient STING ki mice. We observed improvement of thymocyte counts in STING ki mice lacking TNFR1 and TNFR1/2. Blockade of TNFR signaling, especially signaling of TNFR1, increased survival of thymocytes (SP CD8 cells) and enabled the enlargement of the peripheral T cell pool. Interestingly, the frequency of naïve T cells and effector T cells was unchanged in all analyzed STING ki mice. This indicates that blockade of TNFR signaling can promote the cellularity of thymocytes, but does not influence the activation of peripheral T cells. These results are in agreement with previously published data showing that systemic inflammation driven by TNFR signaling induced severe thymic atrophy. This phenotype was rescued totally in a TNFR1-deficient background ( ). We previously reported that STING ki mice show a disturbed development of lymph nodes leading to the complete loss of lymph nodes ( ). We found that the absence of TNFR1 signaling did normalize the thymocyte numbers, but did not restore the development of lymph nodes in STING ki mice. In contrast, STING ki mice lacking the IFNGR1 showed a successful lymph node development, but no improvement of thymocyte development ( ). These observations suggest that T cell development in the thymus is dependent on TNFR1 signaling, but the development of lymph nodes depends on IFNGR1 signaling.
Manifestation and progression of severe interstitial lung disease is a dominant hallmark of the murine systemic autoinflammatory SAVI disease ( ). It was not possible to improve the severity of lung disease by a curative bone marrow transplantation in STING ki mice ( ). We observed a strong increase of type I IFN and type II IFN signaling as well as elevated transcription of proinflammatory mediators, e.g., Tnf and Il1b in lung tissue of STING ki mice. The manifestation of this inflammatory lung disease was independent of type I IFN, but depended on type II IFN signaling ( ). Our results demonstrated impressive that the initiation and progression of severe lung disease in STING ki mice is also dependent on TNFR1 signaling. In contrast, the deletion of TNFR2 in STING ki mice did not improve the severity of inflammatory lung disease. This is in line with a report that TNFR1 deficiency inhibited skin inflammation and TNFR2 deficiency rather promoted the development of skin disease in a mouse psoriasis model ( ).
The STING-induced degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra was reduced in mice with TNFR1/2 deficiency ( ), whereas the activation of astroglia and microglia was not ( ). Neurons express both TNFRs, so circulating TNF could affect dopaminergic neurons without involvement of glial cells. Indeed, elevated levels of TNF have been implicated in the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons ( ; ). For instance, anti-TNF therapy reduced the incidence of PD in patients with inflammatory bowel disease ( ), and polymorphisms in the TNF gene have been associated with an increased risk for PD ( ; ).
The preserved activation of glial cells in STING ki;Tnfr1/2-/- mice indicates that their activation does not require TNFRs. Genetic inactivation of Casp1 in STING ki mice blocked IL-1β activation, NRLP3 inflammasome formation, and activation of astroglia but not microglia ( ), suggesting that astroglia activation could be mediated by NLRP3-IL-1β signaling. Activation of microglia was affected only moderately by genetic inactivation of interferon receptor 1 (Ifnar1-/-), suggesting that it is not dependent on this pathway.
For determination of essential mediators in the manifestation of SAVI characteristic lung disease, we performed a transcriptome analysis of freshly isolated murine lung endothelial cells. We found a significantly decreased expression of various proinflammatory mediators and their receptors in the lung endothelial cells of STING ki;Tnfr1/2-/- mice in comparison to STING ki mice. Remarkably, transcription of type II IFN-driven Cxcl9, Cxcl10, and NF-κB-driven Tnf and Il1b was downregulated in all analyzed STING ki mice with deletion of TNFR1 and TNFR2 compared to STING ki mice. This is in line with previously described results that lack of IFNGR1 in STING ki mice prevent uncontrolled upregulation of Cxcl9 and Cxcl10 gene expression ( ). The complete evaluation of RNA sequencing data of primary lung endothelial cells disclosed the involvement of chemokines and adhesions proteins in the manifestation of SAVI characteristic inflammatory lung disease. Transcription of Ccl2, Ccl3, and Ccl4 was downregulated in endothelial cell of STING ki mice lacking TNFR1/2 signaling. The chemokine CCL2 induces cytoskeletal alterations in endothelial cells and is essential for recruitment and migration of neutrophil granulocytes across the endothelial barrier in mouse tumor models ( ). Additionally, endothelial secretion of CCL2 controls metastasis by promoting tumor cell extravasation ( ). In mice, CCL3 recruits neutrophil granulocytes to the lung in response to IFNγ-mediated signaling in a virus infection model ( ). In LPS-induced lung inflammation, CCL2 recruits macrophages and neutrophil granulocytes into lung tissue across the endothelial barrier ( ). The presence of CCL2 induces brain endothelial hyperpermeability and attracts leukocytes to murine brain endothelial cells ( ). Human gain-of-function mutations of STING1 induced elevated transcription of CCL3, CCL4, and IL6 in PBMCs from SAVI patients ( ). Taken together, the increased expression of endothelial Ccl2, Ccl3, and Ccl4 is necessary for leukocyte transmigration into the lung tissue in the context of virus- or bacteria-induced inflammation, autoinflammation, and tumor-promoting metastasis. For transmigration of cells across the endothelial barrier, the presence of these chemokines is essential ( ).
Constitutively active STING induces activation of different pathways, e.g., interferon- or NF-κB-driven signaling. Our results demonstrate that proinflammatory mediators are much more produced in primary lung endothelial cells of SAVI mice. We assume that this uncontrolled signaling is essential for endothelial barrier dysfunction and finally for accumulation of leukocytes in the lung tissue. Primary lung endothelial cells of STING ki mice allowed more attachment of neutrophils compared to primary lung endothelial cells of STING WT mice. We pointed out that attachment and transmigration under native condition was independent of neutrophil genotype. These results demonstrated clearly that the intact barrier of lung endothelial cells is a critical factor for the manifestation of severe inflammatory lung disease. In a murine peritonitis model, it was demonstrated that the expression of STING in endothelial cells is essential for leukocyte transmigration ( ). Endothelial cells isolated from human coronary artery produce high amounts of adhesions proteins, e.g., ICAM1, that support the transendothelial migration of leukocytes ( ). In human umbilical vein endothelial cells (stimulated with TNF), several alterations in gene transcription were observed, e.g., elevated transcription of proinflammatory mediators and adhesion proteins as well as decreased transcription of cytoskeletal components ( ; ). This altered signaling led to molecular alterations in endothelial cells and disrupted the endothelial cell barrier. Interestingly, the mouse model for acute lung injury induced by LPS inhalation is characterized by elevated STING expression ( ). Pharmacological inhibition of STING activation prevented the manifestation of this disease. In the same line it was published that the progression of ANCA-associated vasculitis is dependent on the activation of cGAS/STING/IRF3 axis ( ). Blockade of STING activation improved the severity of this disease significantly. Previous murine studies indicated that the expression of STING V154M in endothelial cells is only essential for manifestation of inflammatory infiltrates ( ). Taken together, the chronic activity of STING in endothelial cells of STING ki mice is important for disruption of endothelial cell barrier and manifestation of severe lung disease.
Stinson and coauthors described that murine SAVI disease is promoted by IFNγ signaling ( ) and we here observed a TNFR1 signaling dependency of this disease. These observations demonstrated that the manifestation and progression of systemic murine SAVI disease is dependent on various signaling pathways.
Murine SAVI is caused by heterozygous point mutations in Sting1, resulting in constitutive activation of STING with uncontrolled inflammatory activity. T cell lymphopenia and interstitial lung disease are characteristics of murine SAVI disease comparable to symptoms of severe COVID-19 disease. Cell fusion caused by SARS-CoV-2 spike protein is a potent activator of cGAS-STING pathway with induction of type I IFN and cytokine production ( ; ). During SARS-CoV-2 infection, the secretion of TNF and IFNγ induces inflammatory cell death by PANoptosis mediated by JAK/STAT1/IRF1 axis ( ). Infliximab treatment of patients with severe COVID-19 disease improved the numbers of blood CD4+ T cells ( ). The TNFR signaling is an essential part in the progression of COVID-19 disease as well as murine SAVI disease. Inhibition of TNFR activity is beneficial for both diseases.
In summary, our work suggests that TNFR1 signaling is a driver of murine SAVI disease. Loss of TNFR1 signaling can restore thymocyte (SP CD8 cells) numbers. Lack of TNFR1 signaling prevented the severe inflammatory lung disease manifestation in STING ki mice. However, it is important to note that with these newly generated mouse lines of TNFR signaling blockade, we are not able to explain all features of this systemic autoinflammatory disease. Additional investigations are required for complete elucidation of involved mechanisms and for development of new therapeutic options for SAVI patients.

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100001659Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft

369799452-TRR237 to Felix Schulze.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100001659Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft

EXC2151 - 390873048 to Rayk Behrendt.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100001659Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft

446167311 to Angela Rösen-Wolff.

## Acknowledgements
We thank Katrin Höhne and Barbara Utess for excellent technical support. A Rösen-Wolff, LL Teichmann, C Günther, and R Behrendt were supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) Project ID 369799452-TRR237. R Behrendt is additionally funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy – EXC2151-390873048.

## Additional information

## Competing interests
No competing interests declared.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, Data curation, Supervision, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Writing – review and editing.
Data curation, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – review and editing.
Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft.
Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft.
Investigation.
Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft.
Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing – original draft.
Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft.
Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft.
Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft.
Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft.
Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Writing – original draft.
Data curation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing.
Conceptualization, Resources, Funding acquisition, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing.

## Ethics
All mice experiments were approved by the Landesdirektion Sachsen (TVV 4/2019, TVV 13/2019) and carried out in accordance with the institutional guidelines on animal welfare.

## Additional files
Supplementary file 1.

## List of antibodies for FACS analysis (all from BioLegend).
The following antibodies were used for FACS analysis.
Supplementary file 2.

## List of antibodies for immunofluorescence staining of brain sections.
The following antibodies were used for staining of brain sections.
Supplementary file 3.

## List of qRT-PCR primers.
The following primers were used for qRT-PCR analysis.
Supplementary file 4.

## List of effect size and power calculations.
Analysis of effect size and power were performed by G*Power 3.1.9.4, effect size d convention (<0.5 = small, 0.5–0.8=medium, >0.8 = large effect), and effect size f convention (<0.25 = small, 0.25–0.4=medium, >0.4 = large effect).
MDAR checklist

## Data availability
Transcriptomic data are deposited on GEO database, accession no GSE244062.
The following dataset was generated:

BehrendtR
LukschH
Rösen-WolffA
2024Tissue-specific inflammation induced by constitutively active STING is mediated by enhanced TNF signalingNCBI Gene Expression OmnibusGSE24406210.7554/eLife.101350PMC1199617240111902

 10.7554/eLife.101350.sa0Editor's evaluation
TaniguchiTadatsuguReviewing Editor
https://ror.org/057zh3y96University of Tokyo
Japan
This study provides important insights into the pathogenesis of systemic autoinflammatory disease STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI). Specifically, the authors demonstrate the critical role of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) signaling in SAVI in mouse model. Overall, the data presented are convincing, supporting the author's conclusions.
10.7554/eLife.101350.sa1Decision letter
TaniguchiTadatsuguReviewing Editor
https://ror.org/057zh3y96University of Tokyo
Japan
In the interests of transparency, eLife publishes the most substantive revision requests and the accompanying author responses.
[Editors' note: this paper was reviewed by Review Commons.]
Thank you for submitting your article "Tissue inflammation induced by constitutively active STING is mediated by enhanced TNF signaling" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by 3 peer reviewers at Review Commons, and the evaluation at eLife has been overseen by a Reviewing Editor and Tadatsugu Taniguchi as the Senior Editor.
Based on the previous reviews and the revisions, the manuscript has been improved but there are some remaining issues that need to be addressed, as outlined below:
We have read briefly the manuscript and accompanying comments, some of which are fair and some are not. We think this is a reasonable effort to understand the role of TNFRs in the pathogenesis of STING-associated vasculopathy. A significant amount of the disease observed is secondary to TNFRI activation and partially on TNFRII. Our greatest concern here relates to the use of Infliximab (an anti-human TNF antibody) rather than etanercept. There are studies which question the specificity of infliximab in the murine system (see for example, Anti‐inflammatory effects of infliximab in mice are independent of tumour necrosis factor α neutralization. Clin Exp Immunol. 2017 Feb; 187(2): 225-233. doi: 10.1111/cei.12872). Etanercept is known to bind to and inactivate both human and murine TNF. Although Infliximab has been used in the literature, its effects have been questioned over time and most recent studies preferentially use etanercept as a tool to block TNF-a in mice. The authors do present some results using etanercept (supplementary material). Unless the authors can show convincingly that murine TNF-a is being blocked in their system by Infliximab, this whole part of the study needs to be removed.
10.7554/eLife.101350.sa2Author response
Reviewer #1:
STING is a key signalling hub in the innate immune system, receiving multiple inputs from upstream activators (such as cGAS) and in turn triggering multiple downstream events (such as IFN induction, NF-κB signalling, autophagy, cell death). Mutations in the STING gene cause a rare inflammatory disease called SAVI. Using a previously established STING ki mouse that recapitulates some of the clinical observations in SAVI patients, this manuscript tests the hypothesis that TNF signalling drives pathology. Using anti-TNF antibody and TNF receptor knockout, the authors show that TNF indeed plays important roles in causing disease in this mouse model. For example, the loss of T cells and neurons is prevented when TNF signalling is blocked, and lung pathology is rescued in STING ki mice lacking TNF receptors. Overall, the manuscript is well written and laid out, and the experimental work is of a high technical standard.
Major comments
1. Most figures show pooled data from two independent experiments including a total of 5-8 mice. Given the variability in some of the readouts, this raises the question of whether there is sufficient statistical power to draw conclusions. For example, in Figure 2, the conclusion that "Infliximab did not alter the expression of inflammatory mediators" seems questionable given the results in Figure 2F and G. Did the authors perform a power calculation? What effect size can the authors detect given the variability and number of replicates? Similarly, in Figure 3, the authors conclude that "Disruption of TNFR signaling did not significantly prevent T cell lymphopenia"; however, with some more replicates, the data in Figure 3D would likely reach significance. Similar concerns apply to several panels in Figures 4 and 6 and to Figure S5M. Ideally, the authors should perform additional repeat experiments to increase the number of replicates. If that is not possible, power calculations need to be provided and conclusions should explicitly mention the minimum effect size that the author can detect given the small sample size (for example "Infliximab did not alter the expression of inflammatory mediators more than x-fold").
We thank the reviewer for his/her time and for the constructive comments. Below please find our detailed responses to your points.
Thank you for this suggestion. However, it is not possible to repeat the treatment of mice with Infliximab for generation of more replicates. The blockade of TNF signalling by treatment with drugs did not cure the murine SAVI disease. According to animal welfare restrictions, we cannot perform additional treatment experiments with Infliximab or Etanercept.
We analysed the effect size d, f and power of all these presented results and collected them in table S4. Additional explanations about effect sizes were added in the corresponding text to Figures 2 and 3. The demonstrated results in Figure 4 and 6 already contain significant data. We did not include the calculation of effects sizes here. All effect size and power calculations are summarized in table S4.
2. The authors should not make unjustified overstatements. For example, STING KI; TNFR1/2 KO mice should not be referred to as a "new mouse model". The manuscript simply tests the role of TNFR1/2 in the already published STING N153S model. In line 687, avoid using "impressively" and in line 734 avoid using "massively".
Thank you for this suggestion. We changed this sentence into:…”these newly generated mouse lines of TNFR”…., see line 796. Additionally, in line 687 (actual line 705) we omitted “impressively” and in line 734 “massively produced” into “elevated” (actual line 752).
Minor comments
3. Line 767-769: The statement that spike activates cGAS is misleading, because this effect is an indirect consequence of cell-to-cell fusion (Liu et al. 2022).
Thank you for this suggestion. We changed this sentence into: Cell fusion caused by the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein is a potent… (actual line 785).
Reviewer #1 (Significance (Required)):
The main strengths of this study are (1) the use of complementary antibody-based and genetic methods to test the role of TNF signalling; (2) the use of multiple different readouts; and (3) the analysis of many different cell types / organ systems. The main weaknesses are (1) small sample sizes limiting statistical power (see above) and (2) the exclusive use of mouse models.
Overall, my opinion is that the advance is important, both fundamentally and clinically. Studies of this and the related V154M mouse model previously showed an important role of non-IFN pathways in driving disease. This study indicates that TNF signalling may cause pathology. This not only extends our understanding of STING's role in autoinflammation but also opens a direct therapeutic avenue using approved TNF targeting drugs.
This study will be primarily of interest to specialised audiences working on STING and SAVI, and secondarily to the wider innate immunity field.
This reviewer has expertise in the field of nucleic acid sensing, including cGAS-STING.
Reviewer #2:
In this paper, Luksch et al. (2024) examines the role of TNF signaling in STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI). By using pharmacological inhibition and genetic inactivation of TNF receptors in a murine SAVI model (STING ki), the research found that pharmacologically inhibiting TNF signaling improved T cell lymphopenia but had limited effects on lung disease. Genetic inactivation of TNFR signaling, particularly TNFR1, enhanced thymocyte survival and expanded the peripheral T cell pool, reducing inflammation and neurodegeneration. The development and progression of severe lung disease in STING ki mice are also reliant on TNFR1 signaling, while TNFR2 deletion did not alleviate lung inflammation. The authors also explored the severe inflammatory lung disease manifestation, showing that primary lung endothelial cells in STING ki mice allowed more neutrophil attachment compared to those in STING WT mice, indicating chronic STING activity in endothelial cells disrupts the endothelial barrier and promotes severe lung disease. The study highlights TNFR signaling as crucial in SAVI and COVID-19 progression and suggests blocking TNFR1 signaling as a potential therapeutic approach for both diseases.
Major comments:
The paper establishes a strong connection between TNFR1 depletion and the reduction of SAVI disease severity in lung and neuroinflammation, suggesting TNFR1 blockade as a viable therapeutic strategy for SAVI. To strengthen the arguments and improve the therapeutic potential, the authors should address the following major comments:
1. The authors conclude that TNFR1 signaling drives murine SAVI disease, as evidenced by the reduced severity of lung disease in TNFR1 -/- mice. While the genetic model is convincing, the discrepancy between pharmacological inhibition and genetic models needs clarification. Before attributing the pharmacological failure to late administration, have the authors considered that Infliximab might not sufficiently deplete TNF to achieve therapeutic benefits? In figure 2H, serum TNF levels were not significantly altered in STING ki mice treated with Infliximab. Have the authors considered using other TNF inhibitors or alternative methods to measure TNF depletion efficacy in STING ki murine models, such as qPCR, flow cytometry, or immunohistochemistry in lymph nodes or lung tissues?
We thank the reviewer for his/her time and for the constructive comments. Below please find our detailed responses to your points.
Thank you for this suggestion. In a preliminary experiment, we already treated STING WT and STING ki mice with Etanercept which is not included in the paper. 3-week-old mice were treated with subcutaneously injection of 25 mg/kg Etanercept or saline, twice per week, for 7 weeks. After treatment, all mice were euthanized and single cell suspensions of blood and spleen were used for flow cytometry analysis. Lung tissue was harvested for histological analysis. Quantification of gene expression was performed by snap frozen lung and kidney tissue and quantification of secreted proteins was analysed by snap frozen serum.
The transcription of ISGs and proinflammatory mediators in lung tissue was not significantly improved by the Etanercept treatment of mice, see – D. Interestingly, the amount of secreted CXCL9 in the serum was reduced in Etanercept treated mice compared to vehicle treated mice (E). We concluded that our treatment strategy had no impact in the manifestation and progression of murine SAVI disease, in highly inflamed tissues / organs. However, we found a reduction (partially significant) of proinflammatory mediator transcriptions in the kidney of Etanercept treated mice compared to vehicle control mice. Murine SAVI disease is a systemic autoinflammatory disease without histological alteration in kidney tissue of 10 weeks old mice. Remarkably, transcription of ISGs and proinflammatory mediators is highly upregulated in SAVI mice. Treatment with Etanercept improved this aberrant gene expression in murine SAVI influenced tissue / organ ( – K). These results encouraged us to perform the treatment with infliximab because we expected a more pronounced effect since infliximab can bind the monomeric and trimeric form while etanercept can only bind to the active trimeric from of TNF.
 2. The TNF pathway exhibits redundancy, as multiple signaling molecules or pathways can compensate for the loss of TNF function to maintain cellular processes and immune responses. The authors showed that thymocytes of STING ki mice lacking TNFR1/2 expressed significantly lower levels of IFN-related genes (Cxcl10, Sting1), and mice lacking TNFR1 and TNFR1/2 expressed reduced levels of NF-κB-related genes. Does this imply that IFN and NF-κB pathways are downstream of TNF signaling driving SAVI progression? It would be valuable to hear the authors' comments or postulations on the potential mechanisms of TNF driving SAVI progression in the discussion, and the methods to dissect the mechanisms further using genetic or pharmacological methods.
Thank you for this suggestion. STING is a key player in various proinflammatory mechanism and is directly involved in IFN and NF-κB signalling. We assume that these signalling pathways are adaptable to various proinflammatory situations. Knock out of TNFR1 and TNFR1/2 results in a strong inhibition of all inflammatory reactions in the whole organisms. We think, it is not possible to conclude mechanisms of murine SAVI manifestation and progression from the results of these mouse lines only. These observations provide new hypothesis, but cannot completely explain the mechanism.
3. The authors mentioned that the pharmacological inhibition of TNF by Infliximab is ineffective due to late administration compared to the onset of SAVI. How would this affect the therapeutic treatment of TNF if the treatment is going to be later than the disease onset? Can the authors elaborate on the potential ways to circumvent the timing of treatment? Would TNFR1 antagonists experience the same issue? To understand disease progression and optimal targeting times, the creation of an inducible TNFR1/2 -/- mouse model could be beneficial. This is optional, but the authors are encouraged to comment on improving TNFR1/2 -/- mouse SAVI models to further study the therapeutic potential of TNF signaling blockage in treating SAVI.
We agree with the suggestion. In the next project, we want to generate STING ki mice with inducible knock out.
Minor comments:
4. The authors separate STING WT and STING ki into different graphs, which can sometimes make it hard to compare STING WT and STING ki baseline levels. It would be beneficial to merge the two genotypes into single graphs for easier comparison.
Thank you for this suggestion. In the first version of this manuscript, we collected results from STING WT and STING ki mice in one graph with 8 bars in different colours and textures in the case of TNFR knock out lines. These graphs were overloaded and very confusing. It is was not possible to mark statistical calculations inside these graphs without losing the focus. Hence, we created the demonstrated design of graphs. We think this is the most convincing version.
5. Figure S5 lacks statistical annotations, although the legends mention them. Are the statistics usually shown when a comparison is mentioned in the text, or are they only displayed when the differences are significant? It would be helpful if the authors could clarify this and ensure that all relevant statistical comparisons are clearly reflected in the graphs, regardless of the significance level. This consistency would improve the clarity and interpretation of the data presented.
Thank you for this suggestion. We removed the significance level from the legend of Figure S5 (actually line 1199).
6. The authors did an excellent job discussing the study's implications, but some of this content could be moved to the introduction. The hypothesis that "tumor necrosis factor (TNF) signaling is involved in the manifestation and progression of murine SAVI disease" can be introduced more naturally once the authors present previous findings on TNF's association with various autoimmune disorders. This would set a clear context for the study's objectives and rationale.
We agree with this suggestion and inserted the sentence: “In our previous investigations, we observed an elevated transcription of Tnf in spleen and thymus of STING ki mice (Siedel et al., 2020).” (actual line 89/90).
General Assessment: The study identifies enhanced TNF signaling as a driver of SAVI and specifies TNFR1 blockage as a promising treatment to reduce disease severity. It thoroughly characterizes pharmacological inhibition and genetic perturbations of TNF signaling in murine SAVI models and creates a novel mouse model for studying TNF-targeted therapies in SAVI treatment.
However, the study is limited in characterizing the discrepancy between pharmacological inhibition and genetic depletion of TNF and understanding the underlying mechanisms of TNF driving chronic STING activation and tissue inflammation.
Advances: The study extends knowledge in the field by demonstrating that enhanced TNF signaling drives SAVI, establishing causation rather than mere correlation. The authors provide strong rationale for treating SAVI with TNF inhibitors/blockage, previously used in other autoimmune disorders like IBD or Crohn's disease, but not in SAVI. They also present a valuable genetic model for studying TNFR signaling blockage in SAVI progression, which is important for both the field of SAVI and future therapy development.
Audience: The research provides translational and clinical insights by suggesting that targeting TNFR1 signaling could inspire novel treatments for SAVI. The study also advances basic research on SAVI disease progression. Immunologists and clinicians studying and treating autoimmune disorders are the intended audience, but the findings have broader implications. The study highlights the potential role of TNF signaling in COVID-19 disease progression and treatment, thus attracting interest beyond the field of autoimmune disorders.
Field of expertise:
cGAS-STING regulation in chromosomally unstable cancers, genomic instability, nuclear envelope rupture and repair
Do not have sufficient expertise in:
Immunological underpinning of autoimmune disorders, clinical models or manifestations of SAVI
Reviewer #3:
Uncontrolled activation of STING is linked to autoinflammatory disease "STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI)". The authors had previously published a mouse model of SAVI, which was generated by knocking in the disease causing variant N153S into the endogenous murine Sting1 gene (STING ki) (Luksch et.al., 2019). In the current study, the author further investigated the role of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) signaling in manifestation and progression of murine SAVI disease by using the approach of pharmacologic and genetic inhibition of TNF receptors TNFR1 and TNFR2. Overall, the authors were able to demonstrate the following novel findings:
1) Infliximab treatment of STING ki mice significantly increased the number of blood CD8+ T cells and thymic cells count. The authors claimed that the pharmacological inhibition of TNF signalling has a partial rescue effect of T cell lymphopenia. However, pharmacologic inhibition of TNF signalling however has no effect on lung disease.
2) On the other hand, STING ki;Tnfr1-/- (lacking TNFR1) showed the similar modest rescue of the CD8+ T and CD4+ T cells in blood compared to the WT C57BL/6 (BL6) but not with STING ki;Tnfr2-/- (lacking TNFR2). STING ki;Tnfr1-/-, STING ki;Tnfr2-/- and STING ki;Tnfr1/2-/- had modest rescue of thymic cell count and reduced spleen cell count (reduced splenomegaly). Along with the rescued thymic content and reduced splenomegaly, genetic ablation of TNF signalling (STING ki;Tnfr1-/-) also prevented manifestation of severe inflammatory lung disease.
3) To investigate the role of lung endothelial cells in the development of interstitial lung disease, primary murine lung endothelial cells from STING WT, STING ki and STING WT;Tnfr1/2-/- and STING ki;Tnfr1/2-/- mice were isolated and bulk RNAseq was performed. This showed decreased level of several proinflammatory cytokines (e.g. Tnf, Il1b) and chemokines (e.g. Cxcl1, Cxcl2, Cxcl9, Cxcl10, Ccl2, Ccl3 and Ccl4) in STING ki mice lacking TNFR1/2 compared to STING ki mice.
4) Neutrophils were isolated from bone marrow and were added to cultured primary lung endothelial cell monolayers. The experiments demonstrated that the attachment and transmigration of neutrophil cells were dependent on expression of STING gain-of-function mutation in endothelial cells.
A few points require clarification before publication of this study.
1. Tnfr1-/-, Tnfr2-/- and Tnfr1/2-/- did not show any statistical significant improvement of thymic cell count in STING ki mice. As such, the statement in the conclusion/summary section of discussion regarding Tnfr1 can restore thymocyte numbers should be toned-down.
We thank the reviewer for his/her time and for the constructive comments. Below please find our detailed responses to your points.
Thank you for this suggestion. In Figure 4 E, we demonstrated that knock out of TNFR1 leads to increasing of SP CD8 thymocyte count and partially of SP CD4 thymocyte count (Figure 4 D). In agreement with this suggestion, we marked this subpopulation of thymocytes in the discussion and summary section, see actual line 684 and see actual line 794.
2. The section on Neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration and dependency of TNFR1/2 signaling is very currently difficult to follow (based on how the data are presented in figures and text). This section requires to be re-written for clarity.
Thank you for this suggestion. We re-wrote this section, see line 472 – 499.
“Neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in dependency of TNFR1/2 signaling
The extent of inflammation in mouse brain resulting from constitutive activation of STING N153S was reported by quantifying the density of Iba1-positive microglia (Figure 5 A). Consistent with our previous findings (Szego et al., 2022), the density of Iba1-positive microglia in the substantia nigra was higher in STING ki;BL6 mice than in STING WT mice (Figure 5 B). TNFR deficiency did not affect neuroinflammation because there was no significant difference between the density of Iba1-positive microglia between STING ki;BL6 mice and STING ki;Tnfr1/2-/- mice (Figure 5 B). This suggests that the TNF pathway is not required for STING-induced microglia activation in the substantia nigra.
In addition, we measured the extent of STING-induced astrogliosis by quantifying the density of GFAP-positive cells (Figure 5 A). Consistent with our previous findings, the density of GFAP-positive astroglia was higher in STING ki than in STING WT mice (Figure 5C). Yet, as for microglia, there was no significant difference between the density of GFAP-positive astroglia between STING ki;BL6 mice and STING ki;Tnfr1/2-/- mice (Figure 5 C), suggesting that the TNF pathway is not required for STING-induced astrogliosis in the substantia nigra.
Finally, we measured the extent of STING-induced neurodegeneration by quantifying the density of TH-positive dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (Figure 5A). As in our previous findings, the density of TH-positive neurons was lower in STING ki;BL6 mice than in STING WT mice (Figure 5 D). The density of TH-positive neurons in the substantia nigra of STING ki;Tnfr1/2-/- mice was higher than the density of TH-positive neurons in the substantia nigra of STING ki;BL6 mice (Figure 5 D), suggesting that the STING-induced degeneration of TH-positive neurons was blunted in Tnfr1/2-/- mice and that TNFR1/2 are involved in the STING-induced degeneration of dopaminergic neurons.
Hence, there is a discrepancy between STING-induced effects on glial cells as opposed to STING-induced effects on neurons. The dependence of STING-induced neurodegeneration but not glial response on TNFR1/2 suggests that the STING-induced degeneration of dopaminergic neurons is not a direct consequence of microglia or astroglia activation. This is consistent with the emerging concept of a neuron-specific inflammatory response (Welikovitch et al., 2020).”
The powerful use of in vivo genetic KO models and TNF inhibitor makes this study a valuable contribution to the field – helping further decipher the importance of the NF-ΚB/TNF branch of STING in SAVI (knowledge gap). The audience for this work would be specialised to STING biology and potential clinical treatments of SAVI.
Our expertise is in nucleic acids sensing (such as STING) and auto-immunity.
[Editors’ note: what follows is the authors’ response to the second round of review.]
Based on the previous reviews and the revisions, the manuscript has been improved but there are some remaining issues that need to be addressed, as outlined below:
We have read briefly the manuscript and accompanying comments, some of which are fair and some are not. We think this is a reasonable effort to understand the role of TNFRs in the pathogenesis of STING-associated vasculopathy. A significant amount of the disease observed is secondary to TNFRI activation and partially on TNFRII. Our greatest concern here relates to the use of Infliximab (an anti-human TNF antibody) rather than etanercept. There are studies which question the specificity of infliximab in the murine system (see for example, Anti‐inflammatory effects of infliximab in mice are independent of tumour necrosis factor α neutralization. Clin Exp Immunol. 2017 Feb; 187(2): 225-233. doi: 10.1111/cei.12872). Etanercept is known to bind to and inactivate both human and murine TNF. Although Infliximab has been used in the literature, its effects have been questioned over time and most recent studies preferentially use etanercept as a tool to block TNF-a in mice. The authors do present some results using etanercept (supplementary material). Unless the authors can show convincingly that murine TNF-a is being blocked in their system by Infliximab, this whole part of the study needs to be removed.
We thank you and the reviewers for your time and for the constructive comments which have helped us to substantially improve the manuscript. We have extensively revised the manuscript and omitted experimental data.