pmcRedox BiolRedox Biol2171redoxRedox Biology2213-2317ElsevierPMC12927099PMC12927099.112927099129270994170761610.1016/j.redox.2026.104084S2213-2317(26)00082-01040841Research PaperPKM2 from hyperactive neuron aggravate lung injury post-stroke by promoting FOXO3A/TXNIP mitochondria translocation in mice
ChengYahong LiuDexiang ZhaoYijing LiTingting ZhangLuyao ShengHaoyu LiuSashuang ChaiLiwei XiaoYilei XingXiaohui ChenWenqiang WangZhenwangzhen@sdu.edu.cn aDepartment of Physiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, PR ChinabDepartment of Medical Psychology and Ethics, School of Basic Medicine Sciences, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, PR ChinacDepartment of Neurosurgery, Liaocheng Neuroscience Laboratory, Liaocheng People's Hospital, Liaocheng, Shandong, 252000, PR ChinadQilu Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, PR China⁎Corresponding author. Department of Physiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, 44 Wenhua Xi Road, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, PR China. wangzhen@sdu.edu.cn1These authors contributed equally.
4202612220269150772810408430120261122026120220262402202625022026© 2026 The Authors2026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Ischemic stroke patients frequently develop acute lung injury (ALI), but the pathogenesis of stroke-induced ALI remains elusive. While reperfusion therapy improves stroke survival, it fails to mitigate systemic complications. Therefore, clarifying mechanisms, identifying predictors, and developing distal-targeted therapies for stroke-associated lung injury are unmet medical need. Here, we identified the serum pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2), a modulator of systemic inflammation, exhibit predictive value for assessing severity and outcomes of stroke patients. Using a mouse model of ischemic stroke, circulating PKM2 derived from neural hyperactivity in the ipsilesional primary motor cortex (M1) was found to be related to stroke-induced ALI. Mechanistically, PKM2 loaded in extracellular vesicles (EVs) from activated neurons target alveolar epithelial cells (AEC) via blood circulating and bind to Forkhead Box O3 (FOXO3A), induce its S252 phosphorylation, and promote PKM2/FOXO3A/thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) mitochondria translocation and reactive oxygen species production in mouse AEC. Finally, a pulmonary surfactant liposome loaded with interfering peptide are designed to target and disrupt PKM2-FOXO3A interaction exerting lung protective effects in a mouse model of ischemic stroke. Summarily, PKM2 from activated neurons mediates intercellular crosstalk between brain-lung via host target proteins FOXO3A/TXNIP, contributing to AEC mitochondrial dysfunction and stroke-induced ALI.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Keywords
Ischemic strokeNeuronal activityMitochondriaPKM2Extracellular vesiclesLung injurypmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1

## Introduction
Ischemic stroke is the second leading cause of death worldwide and will affect at least one-sixth of the population, with significant mortality and disability [ , , ]. Medical complications are the primary driver of poor post-stroke clinical outcomes, with high incidence of lung-related issues (including pneumonia, acute lung injury (ALI), acute respiratory distress syndrome, and neurogenic pulmonary edema) [ , , , ]. Studies noted 15.6% of stroke patients develop ALI within 36 h of admission, and 7.8% have pneumonia/bronchitis during hospitalization, indicating robust brain-lung crosstalk [ ]. Existing research links this interaction to inflammation, neurotransmitters, immunosuppression, and autonomic dysfunction [ , ]. However, stroke-induced lung injury mechanisms remain incompletely elucidated. While reperfusion therapy improves stroke survival, it fails to mitigate systemic complications. Current management of systemic complications is primarily supportive, including mechanical ventilation, fluid resuscitation, antibiotic prophylaxis (for secondary infection) [ ]. These strategies lack targeted therapies for the underlying molecular mechanisms of brain-lung crosstalk, leading to limited therapeutic effect and high mortality. Clarifying mechanisms, identifying predictors, and developing distal-targeted therapies are critical to enhancing prognosis and reducing stroke-associated lung injury burden.
Brain-lung crosstalk involved the nervous, neuroendocrine, and immune systems plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of lung injury after stroke. For example, inflammatory mediators are released across the damaged Blood Brain Barrier (BBB) into the systemic circulation and diffuse into the lungs, which are directly correlated with those in the brain [ ]. PKM2, the M2 isoform of pyruvate kinase, catalyzes the final and rate-limiting reaction in the glycolytic pathway. Recently, PKM2 has been implicated not only as a critical regulator of aerobic glycolysis but also as an activator of transcription of pro-inflammatory mediators, including IL-1β and IL-6 [ , ]. Although brain-derived PKM2 was reported to mediate neuroinflammation after acute ischemic stroke [ ], there is insufficient evidence about the role of central PKM2 in stroke-induced ALI, and its potential regulatory pathway also remains unclear.
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are compartments formed by lipid bilayer, and mediate intercellular communication, cross the BBB, and act as multifunctional messengers between organs by carrying proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids [ , , ]. EVs release is regulated by neuronal activity (e.g., depolarization promotes secretion), and post-ischemia glutamatergic synaptic activity induces EVs release that facilitates interneuronal signaling [ , , ]. Brain-derived EVs are released after traumatic brain injury and can cross the BBB to participate in secondary injuries to distal organs such as the lung, kidney and bone [ , ]. Neuron-derived EVs exert dual effects (e.g., suppressing microglial activation to aid spinal cord recovery vs. promoting inflammation), and our studies showed EVs from oxygen-glucose-deprivation/reoxygenation (OGD/R)-exposed neurons activate microglia and induce neuronal apoptosis [ , ]. The role of neuron-derived EVs in post-stroke distal injury remains incompletely elucidated, and identifying their pathological cues is key to understanding interorgan communication. The effect of neuron-derived EVs on distal injury after stroke has not been fully elucidated. Identifying pathological cues during neuron-derived EVs induced distal injury is crucial for understanding the mechanism of interorgan communication.
Here, we first identified that serum PKM2 levels were elevated in ischemic stroke patients, which has exhibit predictive value for assessing severity and outcomes of stroke patients. Using a mouse model of ischemic stroke, circulating PKM2 derived from neural activity in the ipsilesional primary motor cortex (M1) was found to be related to stroke-induced ALI. Mechanistically, EVs from activated neuron encapsulated with higher PKM2, which transport to the lungs via the blood circulation, binds to Forkhead Box O3 (FOXO3A), promotes the phosphorylation of FOXO3A at Serine (S) 252, subsequently facilitates the mitochondrial translocation of the FOXO3A/thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) complex, and increase mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS), ultimately lead to lung injury after ischemia stroke. Remarkably, the detrimental outcome of PKM2 from neuron-derived EVs was prevented by the addition of a small interfering peptide blocking PKM2-FOXO3A interaction in lung of stroke mice. These data shed more insights into the brain-lung crosstalk under ischemic stroke and provide targets for the early diagnosis of or intervention for stroke-induced ALI.

2

## Results
2.1

## Circulating PKM2 is related to stroke-induced ALI in humans and rodents
The influence of ischemic stroke on ALI was assessed in accordance with the procedure ( ). As shown in , ischemia mice displayed significant reduction in cerebral blood flow and obvious cerebral infarction. As previously reported, ischemia mice exhibited significant lung histological injury (pathological changes included multiple indices of inflammatory cell infiltration, alveolar and interstitial edema and alveolar septal thickening) ( ), and exhibited worse outcomes in regard to bacterial burden ( ), lung wet/dry weight ratio ( ) compared to Sham mice. Likewise, inflammatory cytokines were increased in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) (IL-1β) and lung tissue (TNF-α and iNOS) of middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) mice ( ). However, the pathogenesis of stroke-induced ALI remains elusive.
We recruited a small cohort of ischemic stroke patients for blood sampling. A total of 40 patients with stroke were enrolled in our study, with an average age of 62.85 years (70% were male), and all patients reach the emergency department within 24 h of onset of symptoms. Detailed information was shown in Supplemental Data 1. A total of 14 healthy participants were included in this study as control. Dot blot assays of serum showed higher PKM2 levels in patients than healthy control ( A and B). Whether stroke patients have a history of chronic conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, or heart disease does not affect PKM2 levels in serum of stroke patients ( C). Further, PKM2 levels increased to a certain extent with the severity of brain injury in stroke patients. This was manifested by higher National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) and Modified Rankin Scale (mRS) scores being associated with higher PKM2 content, while a higher Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score corresponds to lower PKM2 content ( D–F). Correlation analysis further showed that the serum PKM2 level was significantly correlated with the NIHSS, mRS and GCS scores of stroke patients at admission ( G). Furthermore, the diagnostic efficacy of PKM2 levels in serum for distinguishing stroke patients was evaluated by plotting the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC curve). The results showed that the area under the curve (AUC) of PKM2 for differentiating stroke patients from healthy controls was 0.707 ( H). Meanwhile, the serum levels of PKM2 were related to functional outcomes in patients with stroke. Then the stroke cohort was divided into a good prognosis group (mRS score: 0-2 points) and a poor prognosis group (mRS score: 3-6 points) based mRS score at the time of discharge [ ]. The results of univariate analysis indicated the serum PKM2 level in the poor prognosis group was significantly higher than that in the good prognosis group (p = 0.017), as shown in Supplemental Data 2. Multivariate analysis indicated that the serum PKM2 level was an independent risk factors related to functional prognosis (OR 2.254, 95% CI 1.036-4.904, p = 0.040). These findings indicate that PKM2 level in serum on admission was elevated in stroke patients and manifested certain clinical predictive value for stroke severity and prognosis in patients. 
Compared with Sham mice, PKM2 protein level in the serum of MCAO mice was significantly increased ( I and J). Interestingly, serum PKM2 levels were consistent correlated with the lung injury of stroke mice ( K–N). As expected, the PKM2 level in the lung of MCAO mice was also increased ( O and P). Therefore, circulating PKM2 is potentially related to stroke-induced ALI in vivo.

2.2

## PKM2 from activated neuron aggravates stroke-induced ALI in vivo
The M1 region is critical for somatic motor control, and preserving M1 neuronal function is vital for post-ischemic stroke functional recovery. Our lab's prior studies showed chemogenetic inhibition of ipsilateral M1 neuronal activity reduces infarct size, alleviates neuroinflammation, and improves motor recovery in stroke mice [ , ]. Consist with our previous results, chemogenetic inhibition of neuronal activity with AAV9-hSyn-hM4Di in the M1 alleviated c-Fos levels and behavioral impairments with regard to results obtained in the modified Neurological Severity Score (mNSS), negative geotaxis test and Kondziella's inverted screen test ( A and B and ). Importantly, decreasing activation of M1 neurons with clozapine N-oxide (CNO) in MCAO mice significantly alleviated lung histological injury, pulmonary bacterial load and lung edema ( C–F). Meanwhile, levels of inflammatory cytokines were decreased in the BALF and lung tissue of MCAO + hM4Di + CNO mice ( G–J). Furthermore, we found that the c-Fos expression of brain M1 region was significantly positively correlated with lung CFU/mL ( K), lung wet/dry ratio ( L), TNF-α protein expression ( M) and iNOS protein expression ( N) in lung tissue, indicating that M1 neuronal activity after acute ischemic stroke is related to the severity of stroke-related lung injury. Interestingly, inhibiting neuronal activity using hM4Di + CNO reduced the PKM2 levels in the serum of MCAO mice, as well as in the lung of MCAO mice ( O and P), indicating that circulating PKM2 derived from hyperactive neurons in the ipsilesional M1 of MCAO mice. 
To confirm the direct role of neuronal PKM2 in driving lung injuries in vivo, we constructed an AAV that contained a neuron-specific promoter (hSyn) and a specific PKM2-shRNA fragment (AAV9-hSyn-shPkm2) to knock down PKM2 expression in neuron ( Q). The efficiency of adenovirus infection was verified by examining the fluorescence of ZsGreen in M1 of MCAO mice ( ). As expected, AAV9-hSyn-shPkm2 virus only infected the neurons in M1 region ( ) and effectively downregulated the PKM2 protein level in M1 region of MCAO mice ( ). Decreasing PKM2 expression of neuron in M1 region could reduce the cerebral infarct size and alleviate neurological function damage ( ). Meanwhile, PKM2 knockdown of neuron in M1 region could alleviate lung histological damage, inflammation and lung edema in MCAO mice ( R–T). Likewise, AAV9-hSyn-shPkm2 treatment downregulated the PKM2 content in the serum and lung tissue of MCAO mice ( U and V). These data further indicate that higher PKM2 from activated neurons in the ipsilesional M1 contributes to lung injury after stroke.

2.3

## Activated neuron-derived EVs induced mitochondrial dysfunction of AEC by transporting PKM2
We next investigated the mechanism for transducing PKM2 into lung. In recent years, EVs have been recognized as carriers for long-range intercellular communication and play a big part role in the pathological process of ALI [ , , ]. Firstly, to verify systemic biodistribution of neuron-derived EVs, we constructed AAV9-hSyn-CD63-EGFP vectors to guarantee specific expression only in neurons ( A). As expected, high EGFP expression was detected in the M1 neurons that received the AAV9-hSyn-CD63-EGFP virus injection after 2 weeks ( B–C and ), as well as in lung, serum, liver and kidney of mice ( D and ). These data confirmed that neuron-derived EVs physiologically cross the BBB, enter the systemic circulation, and accumulate in the lung. Furthermore, EVs labeled with CD63-EGFP are extensively taken up by alveolar epithelial cells (AEC) (marked with SP-C) in lung tissue ( E), and to a lesser extent by vascular endothelial cells (marked with CD31) and alveolar macrophages (marked with CD68) ( F and G). These data suggest that activated neuron-derived EVs were transferred into the lung from the brain and mostly taken up by AEC. 
Whether neuron-derived EVs contribute to remote lung injury following ischemic stroke? Firstly, in vitro we treated AEC (MLE-12 cells) with the supernatant of PC12 cells cultured under different conditions (exposed OGD for 6 h and reperfusion for 12 h and/or treated with GW4869, an inhibitor of EVs release) to examine whether EVs secreted by PC12 cells affect the mitochondrial function of MLE-12 cells ( ). Mito-Tracker Red CMXROS staining showed that the supernatant of PC12 cells following OGD/R exposure reduced the mitochondrial membrane potential of MLE-12 cells, which was reversed by GW4869 ( ). Likewise, GW4869 reversed the effect of the supernatant of PC12 cells following OGD/R exposure on mitochondrial ROS and ATP levels in MLE-12 cells ( ). Based on these results, we hypothesis that EVs from activated neurons led to mitochondrial dysfunction of AEC in vitro.
Next, we collected neuron-derived EVs (N-EVs) from control-neuron (Control-N-EVs) and from OGD/R-neuron (OGD-N-EVs) to verify our hypothesis. Both Control-N-EVs and OGD-N-EVs exhibited a characteristic biconcave, double-layer membrane structure ( ). Nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) showed that Control-N-EVs and OGD-N-EVs had similar particle sizes, with an approximate diameter of 140 nm ( ). They expressed the marker proteins TSG101, CD81, but lacked Calnexin ( ), confirming their EVs origin. In vitro results showed that PKH26-labeled N-EVs were internalized into the cytoplasm of the AEC ( ). Furthermore, increased PKM2 levels were observed in PC12 cells following OGD/R exposure or OGD-N-EVs ( H and I). And compared with Control-N-EVs, OGD-N-EVs treatment significantly increased PKM2 protein level in MLE-12 cells, as well as intracellular ROS and mitochondrial ROS generation ( K and L), decreased mitochondrial membrane potential and ATP production ( M and N). Additionally, mouse primary cortical neurons were subjected to OGD/R-treated prior to isolating EVs from cell culture media and cell lysates. Compared with control group, OGD/R-exposure led to increased PKM2 expression both in primary neurons and primary neurons-secreted EVs, suggesting that EVs derived from PC12 cells share similar PKM2 expression patterns with primary neuronal EVs ( ). Functional assays demonstrated that primary neuronal EVs with OGD/R-exposure induced ROS production in MLE-12 cells, recapitulating the same biological effect mediated by EVs derived from PC12 cells ( ). These data further indicate that EVs secreted by activated neurons could induce ROS production to cause mitochondrial dysfunction of AEC in vitro.
To determine whether PKM2 plays a key role in mitochondrial damage of AEC induced by EVs from activated neurons, we decreased PKM2 expression of PC12 cells in vitro using siRNA and shRNA (refer as shPkm2) ( O). We exposed PC12 cells with shPkm2 to OGD/R and collected the EVs released by these cells (OGD-shNC-EVs and OGD-shPkm2-EVs). PKM2 protein level of OGD-shPkm2-EVs was decreased compared to OGD-shNC-EVs ( P). In contrast to OGD-shNC-EVs, OGD-shPkm2-EVs failed to increase the PKM2 level in MLE-12 cells ( Q). Surprisingly, OGD-shPkm2-EVs treatment alleviated the mitochondrial damage in MLE-12 cells compared to OGD-shNC-EVs, as evidenced by increased ATP production ( R) and decreased total and mitochondrial ROS production ( S and T). These data suggested that activated neuron-derived EVs disrupted mitochondrial function of AEC, probably due to PKM2 elevated in N-EVs.
We next investigated the critical role of PKM2 in mitochondrial damage of lung induced by EVs from activated neurons post-stroke in vivo. Bioactive factors of EVs isolated from M1 (M1-EVs) were identified by 4D-DIA quantitative proteomics ( ). Characterization analysis exhibited that M1-EVs possess the recognized characteristics of EVs ( ). We identified a total of 4620 proteins in M1-EVs (Supplemental Data 3). A total of 276 overlapping proteins were found between proteins identified in M1-EVs and EVs-related proteins in ExoCarta (http://www.exocarta.org) ( ). Principal component analysis (PCA) plot showed individual differences in protein expression profiles between the Sham-M1-EVs and MCAO-M1-EVs samples ( ). And 575 proteins in MCAO-M1-EVs were upregulated, and 263 proteins in MCAO-M1-EVs were downregulated ( ). There are 21 proteins were found to overlap between differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in M1-EVs, ALI related proteins (from GeneCards Database), Stroke related proteins (from GeneCards Database) and EVs protein (Top100) (from ExoCarta) ( U). Among 21 proteins, PKM2 had the most abundant counts and played an important role in regulating mitochondrial function ( V). Additionally, the content of PKM2 was increased in the M1 region brain tissue and M1-EVs of MCAO mice, compared with Sham mice, further confirming proteomics results ( W). Next, we compared our results to previously published dataset (GSE270560, GSE238125 and GSE269173). 94.6% proteins in M1-EVs were overlapped with genes identified in primary neurons exposed OGD/R (GSE270560) ( ). Interestingly, 53.7% DEPs in M1-EVs were overlapped with differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in OGD/R-exposed primary neurons (GSE270560), and only 21.2% and 8.2% DEPs in M1-EVs were overlapped with DEGs identified in astrocytes and microglia isolated from the brain tissue of MCAO mice (GSE238125 and GSE269173) ( ). PKM2 expression was significantly upregulated in OGD/R-exposed primary neurons (GSE270560), and no obvious change in astrocytes and microglia of MCAO mice (GSE238125 and GSE269173), indicating that the majority of the elevated PKM2 in M1-EVs originate from activated neurons. Likewise, reducing PKM2 level in the M1 region of MCAO mice using AAV9-hSyn-shPkm2 alleviated stroke-induced mitochondrial damage in lung, as evidenced by increased ATP content, restored mitochondrial membrane potential, and decreased mitochondrial ROS production ( X–Z). These data further indicate that higher PKM2 in M1-EVs is derived from activated neurons and contributes to lung injury after stroke. Collectively, these data demonstrated the deteriorating effect of activated neuron-derived EVs on lung injuries after ischemia stroke through the transport of PKM2, which results further prove our result in and .
How is PKM2 enriched into EVs? Studies have reported that the molecular chaperone heat shock protein 70 (HSC70) can specifically recognize substrate proteins with a pentapeptide sequence (KFERQ motif), then form a complex with lysosome-associated membrane protein 2A (LAMP2A), and subsequently traverse the lysosomal membrane to be degraded by acid hydrolases (i.e., chaperone-mediated autophagy) [ ]. When autophagic function is impaired, it can affect the biosynthesis and secretion of EVs [ ]. Recent studies described a mechanism whereby proteins containing a KFERQ motif pentapeptide are loaded into a subpopulation of exosomes in a process that is dependent on LAMP2A and HSC70 [ ]. Immunofluorescence showed that the fluorescent co-localization degree of LC3B and LAMP1 in M1 was reduced in MCAO mice than Sham mice, suggesting impaired fusion of autophagosomes and lysosomes ( ). Likewise, autophagy process was determined by mCherry-GFP-LC3B dual fluorescence system showed GFP/mCherry signals were significantly higher in the OGD/R group than in the Control group, suggesting OGD/R exposure led to autophagosomes accumulation and autophagic flux was damaged ( ). We found that PKM2 (mouse) contains three KFERQ motifs (VELKK, QVKEK, QDLKF) through KFERQ finder ( ). Co-inmunoprecipitation (co-IP) assays also demonstrated that wild-type PKM2 (PKM2 WT) interacts with LAMP2A and HSC70, while PKM2 with KFERQ motif mutation failed to interact with LAMP2A and HSC70 ( ), validating our hypothesis that after ischemia induced neuronal activation, impaired neuronal autophagy prevents PKM2 degradation via autophagy-lysosomal pathway, and higher PKM2 is loaded into EVs through LAMP2A/HSC70/PKM2 interactions.

2.4

## EVs derived from activated neurons aggravate ALI after stroke
To investigate the in vivo effects of activated neurons-derived EVs, we detected lung tissue responses via intratracheal instillation of OGD-N-EVs and Control-N-EVs (50 μg/40 μL) in MCAO mice (30 min occlusion) ( A). The mouse exposed 30 min occlusion that was sufficient to cause brain infarct, but no significantly lung injury ( B and C). However, MCAO mice treated with OGD-N-EVs displayed more obvious lung injuries compared with Control-N-EVs-treated, as demonstrated by histological damage, increased lung edema, bacterial burden and lung inflammatory cytokine expression ( D–I). OGD-N-EVs treatment also increased levels of intracellular ROS and mitochondrial ROS in lung tissues of MCAO mice compared to Control-N-EVs treatment ( J and K). Likewise, EVs isolated from M1 of Sham mice and MCAO mice (Sham-M1-EVs and MCAO-M1-EVs) (50 μg/40 μL) intratracheally injected into lung of MCAO mice have similar effects on the lungs injuries to differing degrees ( L–S). However, treatment with OGD-N-EVs and MCAO-M1-EVs did not exacerbate the brain infarct and neurological deficits in MCAO mice ( ). These data suggest activated neuron-derived EVs following stroke may act as a key mediator in inducing ROS generation and aggravating lung tissue damage. To further verify this hypothesis, GW4869 was injected into lateral ventricle of MCAO mice. The results showed that GW4869 treatment effectively decreased the brain infarct and neurological deficits of MCAO mice ( ). Moreover, GW4869 intervention found to alleviate lung tissue damage ( T–X). These data further indicated that EVs from activated neurons of M1 mediate stroke-related lung damage. 

2.5

## PKM2 induced mitochondrial dysfunction of lung by promoting FOXO3A/TXNIP mitochondria translocation
How did PKM2 promote mitochondrial dysfunction of lung? We found that the abundant PKM2 carried by N-EVs reaches the lung tissue and obviously enriched in mitochondria of MCAO group, while there were no significant changes in the cytoplasm and nucleus compared with Sham group ( A). Interestingly, inhibiting neuronal activity using hM4Di + CNO, inhibiting the secretion of EVs with GW4869 or reducing PKM2 expression via AAV9-hSyn-shPkm2 in M1 of MCAO mice all reduced the PKM2 enrichment in lung mitochondria of MCAO mice ( B–D). Meanwhile, inhibiting the secretion of EVs with GW4869 also reduced serum PKM2 content of MCAO mice ( E). However, there was no significant difference in Pkm2 mRNA expression of lung tissue between Sham and MCAO mice ( F). This indicated that the increased PKM2 protein in the lung of MCAO mice is most likely carried into the lungs by N-EVs, and preferentially enriches in mitochondria. 
Next, we measured DEGs of lung tissue from Sham and MCAO mice with RNA-seq ( ). PCA plot showed individual differences in gene expression profiles between the Sham-lung and MCAO-lung samples ( ). A total of 1334 DEGs were identified in the lung tissue ( F). Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment analysis and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) indicated that immune and inflammation-related pathways were activated in the lung tissue of MCAO mice ( ). Then we compared between DEGs from RNA-seq of lung tissue, mitochondria related genes (MitoCarta 3.0 database) and ALI related gene (GeneCards database). The result showed that 48 DEGs were found to overlap between them ( G). GO analysis revealed that the 48 DEGs in lung were enriched in response to oxidative stress, development maturation, regulation of mitochondrion organization, cellular amino acid metabolic process, response to reactive oxygen species, reactive oxygen species metabolic process, and so on ( H). Next, we determined the submitochondrial localization of PKM2 in lung tissue and AEC by performing Protease K digestion of purified mitochondria. Mitochondrial lysis with Triton buffer disrupts both outer and inner membranes. The band of PKM2 in mitochondria was cleaved after PK treatment ( I), indicating that PKM2 is localized to mitochondrial outer membrane. GO cellular component ontology term analysis revealed that 3 DEGs were enriched in the outer membrane of mitochondria ( J). Then we constructed protein-protein interaction (PPI) network for PKM2 and 3 DEGs of mitochondrial outer membrane, suggesting that PKM2 interact with FOXO3A ( K). FOXO3A belongs to the FOXO protein family, and it regulates a variety of biological processes, including inflammation, oxidative stress, cell apoptosis, and mitochondrial dysfunction [ ]. Co-IP analysis showed the interaction existed between endogenous PKM2 and FOXO3A in lung tissue and MLE-12 cells ( L).
FOXO3A contains three additional conserved regions (CR1: 16-40AA; CR2: 331-478AA; CR3: 610-644AA) across this subfamily [ ]. We constructed a series of FOXO3A protein truncation and found that C-terminal domain of FOXO3A (272-672AA) was responsible for the interaction with PKM2 ( M). Based on PKM2 deletion mutants (PKM2-ΔCD, PKM2-ABD, PKM2-CD), co-IP results showed that the full length of PKM2 interacted with FOXO3A ( N). Molecular docking indicated that PKM2 had an affinity of −40.3 kcal/mol for FOXO3A ( ). There are 16 hydrogen bonds between the conserved regions of FOXO3A and PKM2. The CR2 region (331-478AA) of FOXO3A is a key domain for interaction with PKM2. Arginine (R) 120 and Lysine (K) 206 in the AB region of PKM2 form 2.5 Å and 3.3 Å hydrogen bonds with Leucine (L) 473 and Serine (S) 475, respectively, in the CR2 region of FOXO3A ( O and ). Further, compared with Sham mice, the protein level of FOXO3A in lung mitochondria of MCAO mice was increased. In contrast, either inhibiting the neuronal activity or reducing PKM2 expression of M1 in MCAO mice decreased FOXO3A aggregation in lung mitochondria of MCAO mice. Similarly, inhibiting EVs secretion of brain in MCAO mice also reduced FOXO3A content in lung mitochondria of MCAO mice ( P and Q). These data suggest that PKM2 loaded in EVs from activated neurons interacts with FOXO3A and co-translocated to the mitochondria of lung.
Phosphorylation is the most critical post-translational modification of FOXO3A, which is mediated by various kinases and directly affects its subcellular localization and functional status. As PKM2 has protein kinase function, we further analyzed whether PKM2 could mediate the of FOXO3A phosphorylation. Through IP and mass spectrometry analysis, we identified three potential phosphorylation sites on FOXO3A which mediated by PKM2, namely the S252, S279, and S283 ( A and B). Next, we investigated whether these potential phosphorylation sites of FOXO3A affect the interaction with PKM2 and the aggregation of FOXO3A/PKM2 on mitochondria. Results showed that compared with FOXO3A WT, these three FOXO3A mutants (FOXO3A-Flag S252A, FOXO3A-Flag S279A and FOXO3A-Flag S283A) had no effect on its binding to PKM2 ( ); however, the mutation at S252 site significantly reduced mitochondrial aggregation of PKM2/FOXO3A complex ( C). Furthermore, we conducted in vitro kinase assays to directly verify the kinase activity of PKM2 towards FOXO3A S252. The result showed that purified PKM2 significantly induced the phosphorylation of FOXO3A S252 in vitro compared with IgG group ( D). These in vitro data directly demonstrate that PKM2 can directly phosphorylate FOXO3A at S252 site. To further confirm this regulatory relationship in vivo, we detected the level of endogenous phosphorylated FOXO3A (p-FOXO3A, S252) in the lung tissue and lung mitochondria of MCAO mice. The results showed that the level of endogenous p-FOXO3A (S252) in the lung tissue and mitochondria of MCAO mice was significantly increased compared with Sham mice ( ). Moreover, knockdown of PKM2 in M1 region neurons, inhibiting the activity of M1 region neurons, and suppressing EVs secretion with GW4869 effectively reduced the increased p-FOXO3A (S252) level in the lung and mitochondria of MCAO mice ( ). These data indicates that the phosphorylation of FOXO3A at S252 site is a key factor for PKM2 to promote mitochondrial aggregation of FOXO3A. 
We next explored the molecular mechanism by which FOXO3A-mediated mitochondrial dysfunction. Based on mass spectrometry results, 160 proteins showed a more than 2-fold increase (Fold change >2) in their binding levels to FOXO3A after PKM2 overexpression ( F). Among 160 proteins, the PPI network showed TXNIP which interacts with FOXO3A attracted our attention ( G). TXNIP is a ubiquitously expressed redox protein that binds to and inhibits the antioxidant activity of mitochondrial thioredoxin (Trx2), which promotes the production and accumulation of ROS, induces mitochondrial stress, and ultimately can trigger inflammation [ , ]. Co-IP results revealed FOXO3A, PKM2 and TXNIP proteins are able to interact with each other forming protein complexes ( H). In vitro pull-down experiments with purified proteins and demonstrated that both PKM2 and FOXO3A direct physically bound TXNIP ( I). We also performed co-IP assays using lung tissues from MCAO and Sham mice to verify the endogenous interaction between FOXO3A and TXNIP under stroke-induced stress conditions. The results clearly showed that the interaction between FOXO3A and TXNIP in lung tissues was significantly enhanced in MCAO mice compared with Sham group ( J). Mitochondrial proteins analysis revealed that FOXO3A alone cannot promote TXNIP translocation into the mitochondria, but in the presence of PKM2 and FOXO3A significantly promotes TXNIP translocation into the mitochondria in MLE-12 cells ( K). Importantly, the S252 site mutation of FOXO3A significantly reduced the enrichment of TXNIP in mitochondria, no affection on binding between FOXO3A and TXNIP ( L and ). However, the amount of TXNIP translocated into mitochondria induced by PKM2 was decreased in MLE-12 cells after FOXO3A knockdown ( M and N). Consistently, compared with Sham mice, TXNIP protein level in lung mitochondria of MCAO mice was increased. In contrast, either inhibiting the neuronal activity of M1 or reducing neuronal PKM2 expression in MCAO mice decreased TXNIP aggregation in lung mitochondria of MCAO mice. Similarly, inhibiting EVs secretion of brain in MCAO mice also reduced TXNIP aggregation in lung mitochondria of MCAO mice ( O and ).
Next, to address the role of FOXO3A S252 phosphorylation (mediated by PKM2) in the mechanism, we conducted in vivo experiments using a non-phosphorylatable FOXO3A mutant (FOXO3A S252A). Mice were transfected with FOXO3A S252A or wild-type FOXO3A plasmid via intratracheal instillation, followed by MCAO modeling. The results demonstrated that transfection of FOXO3A S252A significantly alleviated ROS production and inflammation in lung tissue of MCAO mice ( ). And transfection of FOXO3A S252A significantly reduced FOXO3A and TXNIP enrichment in mitochondria induced by stroke ( ). These indicate that PKM2-mediated FOXO3A S252 phosphorylation is a key factor for PKM2-induced lung injury after stroke. Additionally, to validate the in vivo dependence of lung injury following stroke on TXNIP, we knocked down TXNIP in mouse lung tissues using a targeted shRNA via intratracheal instillation prior to MCAO modeling. The results showed that TXNIP knockdown significantly mitigated stroke-induced lung tissue injury, including reduced inflammatory cytokines and ROS level ( ). Meanwhile, TXNIP and FOXO3A levels in the mitochondria of lung tissues from MCAO mice were decreased after TXNIP knockdown ( ). These in vivo evidences confirms that TXNIP is a critical downstream mediator of lung injury following stroke. In vitro, we verified that FOXO3A or TXNIP knockdown blocked OGD-N-EVs-induced ATP production reduction and mitochondrial ROS increase in MLE-12 cells ( P–T). These data indicate that PKM2 binds to and promotes FOXO3A phosphorylation at S252 site, thereby facilitating PKM2/FOXO3A/TXNIP protein complex translocated to AEC mitochondria. This leads to a reduction in ATP production and an increase in mitochondrial ROS, which in turn induces oxidative damage to AEC.

2.6

## Interfering peptide inhibiting PKM2-FOXO3A interaction showed additive pulmonary-protective effects post-stroke
As stated above, PKM2 and FOXO3A interaction promoted mitochondrial damage of AEC following stroke. We tested whether inhibiting PKM2 and FOXO3A interaction through synthetizing interfering peptide could largely mimic the effects of PKM2 deletion of AEC. As stated above, the CR2 region (331-478AA) of FOXO3A is a key site for interaction with PKM2. Thus, we next designed three interfering peptide, the sequence as RKGEDDEGKR-1 (green: Peptide#1); RKGGEDDEGGKR-2 (yellow: Peptide#2); and RKGEDREGKR-3 (magenta: Peptide#3) ( A–C). We found that Peptide#3 significantly disrupted the interaction between PKM2 and FOXO3A interaction ( D and ). Moreover, at the different concentrations, the three interfering peptides had no effect on the viability of MLE-12 cells ( ). Thus, we chose the Peptide#3 for further experiment. Consistently, Peptide#3 significantly inhibits the interaction between PKM2 and FOXO3A, while simultaneously preventing the aggregation of PKM2, FOXO3A, and TXNIP into mitochondria ( E). 
To facilitate permeation of Peptide#3 in vivo, we fused DPPC-biomimetic liposomes to it and named as Pe@P-Lipo. There were no significant differences between the sizes, morphology and zeta potential of the two types of nanoparticles, both being about 150 nm in diameter ( F–H). To evaluate the stability of Pe@P-Lipo and its ability to maintain target engagement over time, we performed coIP assays using MLE-12 cells treated with Pe@P-Lipo samples stored at 4 °C for 4 weeks and 8 weeks. The results showed that even after 8 weeks of storage at 4 °C, Pe@P-Lipo retained its biological activity that significantly reduced the interaction between PKM2 and FOXO3A in MLE-12 cells ( I). Moreover, 24 h after nebulizer therapy, the lung-targeting liposomes prepared in our study (P-Lipo) was more extensively absorbed by lung tissues compared with the conventional liposomes (C-Lipo) ( J and K). Additionally, we used FITC-labeled peptides (PeFITC@P-Lipo) and performed in vivo distribution assays. Mice were subjected to nebulized administration of PeFITC@P-Lipo, and lung tissues were collected for immunofluorescence staining. The results demonstrated that PeFITC@P-Lipo efficiently accumulated in lung tissues after nebulization ( L), and FITC-labeled peptides mostly co-localized with AECs (marked with SP-C) ( M), directly verified that nebulized PeFITC@P-Lipo can reach and be taken up by AEC. We administered Pe@P-Lipo treatment (1 mg/kg) to MCAO mice 30 min after reperfusion ( N). As expected, Pe@P-Lipo treatment ameliorated lung histological lesions ( O), increased lung ATP production ( P), decreased ROS levels ( Q and R) and inflammatory factors levels in lung ( S), compared with P-Lipo treatment. Meanwhile, Pe@P-Lipo treatment via nebulizer inhalation significantly decreased accumulation of PKM2, FOXO3A and TXNIP in lung mitochondria following stroke ( T). Based on hemolysis experiment, biochemistry assays of plasma and H&E staining, Pe@P-Lipo and P-Lipo at 15 mg/kg were safety in vivo ( ). These data indicated that Pe@P-Lipo showed additive pulmonary-protective effects in MCAO mice by inhibiting PKM2-FOXO3A interaction, as while displayed excellent biosafety without hematotoxicity and tissue toxicity.

3

## Discussion
Mitochondrial dysfunction caused by an imbalance of ROS is an important cause of AEC damage and ultimately leads ALI [ ]. Here, we identified the serum PKM2, a modulator of systemic inflammation, exhibit predictive value for assessing severity and outcomes of stroke patients. Using a mouse model of ischemic stroke, circulating PKM2 derived from neural activity in the ipsilesional M1 was found to be related to stroke-induced ALI. Mechanistically, PKM2 loaded in EVs from activated neurons target AEC via blood circulating and bind to FOXO3A, induce its S252 phosphorylation, and promote PKM2/FOXO3A/TXNIP mitochondrial translocation and ROS production in mouse AEC. Importantly, we have developed Pe@P-Lipo which specifically blocked PKM2-FOXO3A interaction, effectively penetrated lung tissue to exert therapeutic effects in stroke mice. Therefore, from cell-cell crosstalk perspectives, the present study shows that the cargo protein PKM2 in activated neuron-derived EVs could communicate with host target proteins FOXO3A/TXNIP, contributing to mitochondrial dysfunction of AEC and ALI following stroke.
In recent years, an increasing number of researchers have focused on elucidating the action of neuronal activity in stroke. Acute inhibition of a subset of excitatory neurons after ischemic stroke can prevent brain injury and improve functional outcome [ , ]. We previous found that inhibiting neuronal activity in the M1 of ipsilateral hemisphere with the hM4Di-DREADD efficiently improved functional recovery after stroke in mice. Mechanically, activated neuron-derived EVs accelerate pro-inflammatory cytokines releasing in microglia by transporting a diverse range of cargoes [ , ]. In this study, inhibiting the activity of neuron with Syn-hM4Di in M1 could attenuate of ischemia-related behaviors and ALI.
In our study, the elevation of PKM2 level in serum demonstrates significant predictive value in evaluating both the severity and functional outcomes of acute ischemic stroke patients. Higher PKM2 from activated neurons in the ipsilesional M1 contributes to lung injury after stroke. We further investigated the modulatory pathway from central nuclei to peripheral organs for cytokine biosynthesis. Using bioinformatics analysis, we identified that PKM2 loaded in EVs from activated neurons is involved in the AEC mitochondrial dysfunction. It has been shown that brain-derived EVs are released after traumatic brain injury and can cross the blood-brain barrier to participate in secondary injuries to distal organs such as the lung and bone [ , ]. Circulating myeloid-EVs serve as acute mediators of pulmonary vascular inflammation and edema [ ]. Here, we revealed that OGD-N-EVs led to mitochondrial dysfunction of AEC in vitro. Similarly, intratracheally injection of in vitro-generated EVs (OGD-N-EVs or MCAO-M1-EVs) induced ALI and mitochondrial dysfunction after a milder stroke in vivo. GW4869 treatment attenuated ALI and brain infract of mice after stroke, and reversed OGD/R neurons-induced mitochondrial dysfunction of AEC in vitro. Moreover, neuron-derived EVs can be internalized by AEC both in vitro and in vivo. Those data suggested that neuron-derived EVs participate in interorgan communication after stroke by transporting functional messengers to initiate secondary injury.
PKM2, the M2 isoform of pyruvate kinase, catalyzes the final and rate-limiting reaction in the glycolytic pathway. PKM2 has been the most extensively studied in many key biological processes, including cell proliferation, metabolism, inflammation and especially apoptosis. The upregulation of PKM2 is a critical molecular event for the exacerbation of inflammatory injury [ , ]. Previous studies have found that deletion of PKM2 resulted in suppressed inflammatory response and beneficial outcomes in experimental animals with autoimmune encephalomyelitis, ischemic stroke as well as acute lung injury [ , ]. The function of PKM2 largely depends on its oligomerization, subcellular localization, and posttranslational modifications. PKM2 in the tetrameric form has a high affinity to its substrate phosphoenolpyruvate in the cytoplasm, while PKM2 in the dimer/monomer form undergoes nuclear translocation to perform non-metabolic functions, such as promoting inflammation [ ]. The role of PKM2 in the regulation of mitochondrial functions is involved in metabolism, ROS, dynamics and apoptosis, which can be highlighted as a target for the clinical management of cardiovascular and metabolic diseases [ ]. In this study, we found that the monomeric form of PKM2 was increased in M1 tissue or its derived-EVs of MCAO mice, while tetrameric and dimeric forms did not change between Sham and MCAO group. Specifically, silence of PKM2 in neurons alleviated ALI in mice and OGD-N-EVs-induced mitochondrial dysfunction of AEC in vitro, associated with decreased PKM2 in AEC. Based on these results, we hypothesized that PKM2 derived from activated neuron-EVs can engage in intercellular interactions with resident lung cells, suggesting potential therapeutic benefits for ALI following stroke.
As mentioned above, the function of PKM2 largely depends on its subcellular localization. We found that up-regulation of PKM2 accumulated in mitochondrial outer membrane in lung after stroke in mice. However, the exact mechanism that PKM2 induces mitochondrial dysfunction remains to be uncovered. We show that mitochondrial PKM2 interacts with FOXO3A, a core regulator of cellular homeostasis, stress response, and longevity. The activity of FOXO3A is regulated by posttranslational modifications that drive its shuttling between cytoplasm, nucleus or mitochondria. In fact, cytoplasmic FOXO3A is inactive and is shuttled either to the nucleus or to the mitochondria to exert its functions [ ]. FOXO3A mitochondrial import occurs in a MEK/ERK- and AMPK-dependent manner, and the N-terminal domain of FOXO3A (amino acids 1-148) is essential in this mechanism [ ]. For example, under metabolic stress, high levels of AMP and NAD+ are primarily responsible for AMPK activation. Subsequently, specific AMPK-dependent phosphorylation of FOXO3A on S30 promotes FOXO3A mitochondrial translocation [ ]. In this study, we found that PKM2 binds to C-terminal domain of FOXO3A (amino acids 272-672) and induces the phosphorylation of FOXO3A at S252 site. Phosphorylated FOXO3A translocate from the cytoplasm to the mitochondria resulted in increased TXNIP translocation, and decreased mitochondrial membrane potential and ATP production of AEC.
TXNIP also known as TBP2, is known to interact with thioredoxin (Trx) and inhibit its antioxidant functions. The function of TXNIP is closely linked to its subcellular localizations. Under normal physiological conditions, TXNIP primarily localizes to the nucleus. When exposed to ROS or ER stress, TXNIP relocates to mitochondria and binds to mitochondrial Trx2, leading to increased oxidative stress [ , ]. In this study, we revealed that ischemic insult increased PKM2, FOXO3A and TXNIP translocation into the lung mitochondria of mice. Inhibiting the activity of M1 region neurons, knockdown of the PKM2 expression or inhibiting the EVs secretion in MCAO mice decreased the aggregation of FOXO3A and TXNIP in lung mitochondria, associating with alleviating mitochondrial dysfunction of AEC and ALI. PKM2 overexpression increased the interactions between FOXO3A and TXNIP, and promoted FOXO3A and TXNIP relocating to mitochondria. Moreover, deletion of TXNIP or FOXO3A expression reversed OGD-N-EVs-induced mitochondrial dysfunction of AEC. In line with prior outcomes, we manifested that PKM2 modulates mitochondrial function in AEC after OGD/R insult via modulating the FOXO3A/TXNIP pathway and further confirm that OGD-N-EVs promotes the mitochondrial dysfunction of AEC after stroke via transferring PKM2. Finally, we have developed pulmonary surfactant liposomes-loaded with a peptide which specifically blocked PKM2 binding to FOXO3A can effectively penetrating lung tissue to exert therapeutic effects in ischemia mice.
In sum, we conclude that PKM2 in activated neuron-derived EVs could communicate with host target proteins FOXO3A/TXNIP, contributing to mitochondrial dysfunction of AEC and ALI following ischemic stroke. In light of the vicious consequence of PKM2 in stroke-induced ALI, selective intervention of the interactions between PKM2 and FOXO3A to alleviate TXNIP translocation in AEC may represent a promising therapeutic strategy for treatment of various lung diseases.
There are some limitations in our study still. Firstly, clinical data were derived from a single-center cohort with a relatively small sample size and a limited study timeframe. Consequently, further multi-center investigations involving larger sample sizes are warranted to validate the robustness and generalizability of these findings. Additionally, we only evaluated in-hospital outcomes, lacking systematic follow-up of patients after discharge and thus failing to capture long-term outcomes. Unfortunately, serum PKM2 levels were not combined with other clinical parameters and imaging results to establish a more accurate and comprehensive risk stratification model for patients. Secondly, while neuron-derived EVs were shown to circulate to the lung and induce mitochondrial dysfunction, potentially via EVs-enriched PKM2, cellular origin of these EVs in the progression of ALI considering lung cellular diversity is not delineated. Additionally, despite the expression changes of PKM2 in EVs isolated from primary cortical neurons were consistent with those observed in EVs derived from PC12 cells in our preliminary experiments, PC12 cells inevitably retain some adrenal chromaffin cell characteristics [ , ]. And primary neuronal cultures or induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neurons could be employed in future studies to further confirm our conclusions. Thirdly, in mechanistic clarification, more advanced techniques such as immunogold electron microscopy, proximity ligation assay (PLA), or APEX2-based labeling would provide higher-resolution details of the protein complex's mitochondrial localization and interaction dynamics. these are important future research directions to further elucidate the spatial arrangement and molecular interactions of PKM2, FOXO3A, and TXNIP within mitochondria. Fourthly, additional characterization (e.g., quantitative pharmacokinetic analysis of peptide concentration in lung tissue and blood, live-cell imaging of peptide intracellular trafficking, monitoring the binding kinetics of the peptide to PKM2 via surface plasmon resonance) need to conduct further enhancing the completeness of the therapeutic strategy. Finally, our experiment is designed not to study stroke-associated pneumonia, which is one of the leading causes of mortality for acute stroke but rather to imply that stroke causes an ALI syndrome. Additional studies are necessary to elucidate the complex pathways connecting stroke with stroke-associated pneumonia symptoms.

4

## Materials and methods
Detailed methods are available in the Supplementary Materials and Methods.
4.1

## Study design
The main objectives of our study were to clarify the role of PKM2 from hyperactive neuron in brain-lung crosstalk and to evaluate the efficacy of Pe@P-Lipo, an interfering peptide targeting PKM2-FOXO3A interaction. To evaluate the role of neuronal PKM2 in stroke-related lung injury, we assigned mice with surgically induced stroke to different groups, namely, Sham, MCAO, MCAO + hM4Di + Saline, MCAO + hM4Di + CNO, MCAO + DMSO, MCAO + GW4869, MCAO + AAV9-hSyn-shNC and MCAO + AAV9-hSyn-shPkm2 and degree of lung injury in each group was compared. To evaluate the efficacy of Pe@P-Lipo, we assigned mice with surgically induced stroke to two groups, namely, MCAO + P-Lipo and MCAO + Pe@P-Lipo and the efficacy of Pe@P-Lipo in each group was compared. All group assignment was randomized to reduce bias. The data of the deceased animals before the end of the experiment were excluded. For the in vitro assay, a minimum of three biological replicates was used per experiment, with the exact number of replications for each experiment mentioned in the figure legends.

4.2

## Animals and human ethics
Male C57BL/6J mice (purchased from Weitong Lihua Laboratory Animal Technology Co, Ltd, Beijing, China) were bred at the Model Animal Research Centre of Shandong University. Mice were housed five per cage under standard conditions, with 12 h light/dark cycle and food and water ad libitum. All experimental protocols involving animals were approved by the Animal Ethical Committee of the School of Basic Medicine at Shandong University (approval No. ECSBMSSDU2024-2-135) (Shandong, China). All study protocols were conformed with the Guideline for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animal of the National institutes of Health. Mice were randomly and blindly (simple randomization) assigned to sham group and different experimental condition groups. And all efforts were made to minimize animal suffering and the number of animals used in experiments. At the end of the experiment, the animals were euthanized. Following isoflurane (R510-22-10, RWD) anesthesia, cervical dislocation was performed on the experimental animals.
This study included forty serum samples from patients with stroke at Liaocheng People's Hospital of China (Liaocheng, Shandong Province, China) and fourteen serum samples from healthy individuals from September 2021 to April 2023. In stroke patients, the time between the onset and blood draw was not longer than 24 h. Patients were excluded if they had any type of tumor, chronic infectious diseases, liver and kidney dysfunction, thyroid dysfunction or other forms of severe immunodeficiency diseases. We obtained all participants' informed consent prior to sample collection. All patients diagnosed with ischemic stroke underwent rigorous neurological evaluations, including the NIHSS score, the mRS score and the GCS grade, computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging. Details of all patients' information are shown in Supplemental Data 1. All procedures involving human participants were approved by the Ethics Committee of Liaocheng People's Hospital (approval No. 2021164).

4.3

## MCAO surgery
MCAO was performed for 30 min or 2 h followed by 24 h of reperfusion according to previously described in our laboratory [ ]. Briefly, mice were anesthetized using 2% isoflurane. With an operating microscope, the right common carotid artery (CCA), internal carotid artery (ICA), and external carotid artery (ECA) were carefully isolated. Then, the silicon-coated nylon monofilament (Jialing, Guangzhou, China) was inserted into the ICA from the ECA stump until feeling resistance and occluded the origin of the middle cerebral artery for 30 min or 2 h. Sham-operated mice underwent the same as the MCAO procedure except that there was no occlusion of middle cerebral artery. During the operations, the body temperature was kept at 37 °C using an adjustable heating pad.

4.4

## Adeno-associated virus, GW4869 and EVs injection
Chemogenetics is based on the use of Designer Receptors Exclusively Activated by Designer drugs (DREADDs), a family of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) that are activated by administration of CNO. In our study, AAV9-hSyn-HA-hM4(Gi)-IRES-mCitrine virus (2 × 109 vg/2 μL, purchased from Shanghai Genechem Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China)) was stereotaxically injected into mice M1 region two weeks before MCAO surgery used to inhibit neuronal activity. The location of M1 region was determined according to the stereotaxic map of the mouse brain: anteroposterior (AP) +1.0 mm, mediolateral (ML) +1.5 mm, dorsoventral (DV) −1.0 mm). The virus was injected with a 10 μL microsyringe at rate of 0.2 μL/min. The needles remained in place after injection for 5 min to avoid backflow along the needle tract. The AAV9-hSyn-hM4Di was activated by CNO (1 mg·kg-1·d-1) which was intraperitoneally injected at 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th and 15th days after the virus injection. And Control group was injected with an equal volume of saline. The AAV9-hSyn-shPkm2-MCS-T2A-ZsGreen (1 × 1013 vg/2 μL, purchased from General Biol (Anhui) Co., Ltd (Anhui, China)) or AAV9-hSyn-shNC-MCS-T2A-ZsGreen viruses were injected into M1 region of mice two weeks before MCAO surgery in the same injection method, aiming to knock down PKM2 in the neurons of M1 region of mice. GW4869 (1.28 μg/g, purchased from MCE, HY‐19363) was administrated into lateral ventricle of mice (AP -0.3 mm, ML +1.0 mm, DV -3.0 mm) 12 h before MCAO surgery with the objective of inhibit exosome release [ ]. PC12 cells derived EVs (N-EVs), primary neuron derived EVs and mouse M1 region tissue derived EVs (M1-EVs) were collected using differential centrifugation. Mice were treated by intratracheal instillation of EVs (50 μg/40 μL) into the lungs of mice at 24 h before MCAO surgery, as previously described [ ].

4.5

## Isolation and identification of brain tissue and cell derived-EVs
Tissue and cell derived-EVs were isolated and identified according to MISEV2023 and previously described methods [ , ]. The detailed method for isolating and purifying N-EVs were as follows: PC12 cells with the same number of cells were cultured in 15 cm diameter petri dishes. The Control group, OGD/R treatment group, OGD/R + shNC group and OGD/R + shPkm2 group were further cultured for 12 h using EVs-free RPIM 1640 medium. Subsequently, the culture supernatant was collected, and EVs were extracted and purified by differential centrifugation at 4 °C: 300×g for 10 min (collecting the supernatant), 2000×g for 10 min (collecting the supernatant), 10,000×g for 30 min (collecting the supernatant), 100,000×g for 70 min (collecting the pellet), the pellet was resuspended in PBS and then centrifuged at 100,000×g for 70 min again. Finally, the pellet was resuspended in 200 μL PBS. N-EVs obtained from Control group, OGD/R treatment group, OGD/R + shNC group and OGD/R + shPkm2 group refer as Control-N-EVs, OGD-N-EVs, OGD-shNC-EVs and OGD-shPkm2-EVs, respectively.
Follow the steps below to extract and purify EVs from M1 tissues: A total of 42 mice were used, and the M1 tissues from 6 mice were placed into one pool. Collect the M1 tissues from mice of Sham and MCAO groups, cut them into pieces until homogenization, then place the homogenate in RPIM 1640 medium containing 2 mg/mL collagenase and 40 U/mL DNase I, and incubate at 37 °C for 30 min. Filter the homogenate through a 70 μm cell strainer, then centrifuge at 300×g for 10 min, 2000×g for 10 min, 10,000×g for 30 min, and 100,000×g for 70 min, the pellet was resuspended in PBS and then centrifuged at 100,000×g for 70 min again. The final pellet was resuspended in PBS and store it at −80 °C until subsequent experiments. M1-EVs obtained from Sham and MCAO mice refer as Sham-M1-EVs and MCAO-M1-EVs, respectively.
EVs protein concentration was detected by bicinchoninic acid assay. EVs were characterized by NTA, transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Specific EVs surface markers CD86, TSG101 and Calnexin were used to identify the presence of EVs.

4.6

## Proteomics analysis of the cargo proteins in EVs
The EVs samples isolated from M1 of Sham and MCAO mice were processed for 4D-DIA proteomic analysis by Majorbio (Shanghai, China) (Project No. MJ20230828478). Proteomic data were analyzed by the Majorbio Gene Cloud Platform and visualized via the omicshare interface created by the GENE DENOVO (https://www.omicshare.com/tools/) (Guangdong, China). Proteins were considered differentially expressed (MCAO-M1-EVs vs. Sham-M1-EVs) when p < 0.05 and protein expression with a | log 2 (fold change) | > 0.263034.

4.7

## RNA sequencing of the lung tissues
To examine changes in gene expression associated with stoke-related lung injury, we performed RNA sequencing analysis on whole lung tissues obtained from MCAO and Sham mice. The project was conducted by Majorbio (Shanghai, China) (Project No. FX2023090600001). Gene expression data were analyzed by the Majorbio Gene Cloud Platform and visualized via the omicshare interface created by the GENE DENOVO. Genes were considered differentially expressed (MCAO-Lung vs. Sham-Lung) when p < 0.05 and protein expression with a | log 2 (fold change) | > 0.5.

4.8

## Phosphorylation of FOXO3A by PKM2
To investigate whether PKM2 can phosphorylate FOXO3A, we co-transfected HEK293T cells with PKM2 and FOXO3A plasmids tagged with Myc and Flag, respectively. The Control group was transfected with an empty Myc-tagged plasmid and a Flag-tagged FOXO3A plasmid. Total protein lysates were harvested from the transfected cells and immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag antibody (GB15938-100, Servicebio, Wuhan, China) and protein A/G magnetic beads (PB101, Vazyme, Nanjing, China) at 72 h after transfection. The sample was then analyzed using protein phosphorylation mass spectrometry, performed by Wayen Biotechnologies (Shanghai, China) (Project No. HWTLC10620240723).

4.9

## In vitro PKM2 kinase assay
The PKM2-mediated kinase reactions were performed as described previously [ , ]. First, we transfected HEK293T cells with PKM2-Myc and FOXO3A-Flag overexpression plasmids, respectively. Three days after transfection, PKM2 and FOXO3A were purified using IP antibodies (Anti-Myc and Anti-Flag), respectively. Specifically, prior to PKM2 purification, HEK293T cells transfected with the PKM2-Myc plasmid were subjected to 24 h starvation to induce the kinase activity of PKM2. Purified PKM2 (10 μg/ml) was incubated with purified Flag-tagged FOXO3A protein (10 μg/ml) in a kinase buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 50 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM DTT and 0.01% BSA containing 100 μM ATP per reaction) for 45 min at 30 °C. The reactions were terminated by addition of 5 × SDS-PAGE loading buffer and heated to 100 °C. The reaction mixtures were then subjected to 10% SDS-PAGE analyses.

4.10

## Co-IP and His-tag pull-down assays
For co-IP experiments, HEK293T cells were co-transfected with Flag-FOXO3A and/or Myc-PKM2 full-length or different truncate variants plasmids. Cells were lysed routinely lysed with immunoprecipitation lysis buffer, and incubated with protein A/G magnetic beads conjugated with anti-Flag or anti-Myc antibodies at 4 °C overnight with rotation. Beads were washed with IP lysis buffer for five times followed by elution with 60-100 μL SDS-PAGE sample buffer and subjected to western blotting analysis using anti-Flag and anti-Myc antibodies.
His-tag pull-down assays were performed as follows: Briefly, HEK293T cell lysates containing His-tag fusion protein (His-TXNIP) were prepared in binding buffer (20 mM Sodium Phosphate, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM Imidazole, pH 7.4) containing 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM PMSF followed by sonication. After centrifugation, supernatants were incubated with 20 μL SweMagrose His-Tag Labeled Protein Purification Magnetic Beads (IDA-Ni) (Servicebio) for 4 h at 4 °C, which were then incubated with purified Flag-tagged FOXO3A or Myc-tagged PKM2 proteins. The bound proteins were resolved by 10% SDS-PAGE and detected by Western blot analysis with anti-His, anti-Flag and anti-Myc tag antibodies (1:1000, Servicebio, Wuhan, China).

4.11

## The synthesis and characterization of pulmonary-targeted liposomes loaded with interference peptide
4.11.1

## Design and preparation of interference peptides
Using co-IP and molecular docking technology, we identified the interaction surface between PKM2 and FOXO3A. Based on the interaction surface between PKM2 and FOXO3A, we designed targeted interference peptide segments. The final amino acid sequences of the interference peptide segments are: Peptide#1: RKGEDDEGKR, Peptide#2: RKGGEDDEGGKR, Peptide#3: RKGEDREGKR. The peptides were synthesized by the GenScript Biotechnology Co., Ltd (Nanjing, China).

4.11.2

## Preparation of pulmonary-targeted liposomes
A thin-film hydration method was used to synthesize the pulmonary-targeted liposomes (P-Lipo). Briefly, lipid DPPC, DSPE-PEG2000-FITC and cholesterol were dissolved at mass ratio of 8:1:1 in chloroform (5 mL). The solvent was evaporated under vacuum (30 °C, 100 rpm) for 2 h to remove the chloroform. A homogeneous thin film layer was subsequently dispersed in 2 mL sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; pH 7.4, 0.01 M) solution. Additionally, the mixture containing Peptide#3 and P-Lipo was emulsified in an ice using an ultrasonic homogenizer for 150 s, obtained pulmonary-targeted liposomes loaded with the interfering peptide (Pe@P-Lipo). The nanosuspension were stored at 4 °C for the next experiments. In addition, soy lecithin (20 mg) and cholesterol (5 mg) were dispersed in ethanol (10 mL), and conventional liposomes (C-Lipo) were synthesized using the aforementioned method and redissolved in sterilized PBS. The C-Lipo were labeled with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC).

4.12

## Characterization of P-Lipo and Pe@P-Lipo
The size distribution and zeta potential were analyzed by dynamic light-scattering measurements using a Zetasizer Nano ZSE (Malvern Instruments, Southborough, MA). The morphology of liposomes was characterized by TEM.
4.12.1

## In vivo distribution of P-Lipo and C-Lipo
The mice were atomized inhalation with P-Lipo or C-Lipo for 30 min (15 mg/kg) and subsequently the major organs (heart, liver, spleen, lung and kidney) were harvested at 24 h after inhalation to image by 2D fluorescence imaging. The therapeutic concentration of the interfering peptide (encapsulated in P-Lipo) was 1 mg/kg body weight.

4.13

## Statistical analysis
Data from mice died before experimental endpoint (excluding those euthanized per protocol) were excluded. For each experiment, the minimum sample size was calculated by power and sample size calculators from expected effect size based on preliminary experiment. All statistical analysis, graphs and image analysis were performed using GraphPad Prism 8.0.1 and ImageJ and Fiji software. Significant outliers were excluded using the GraphPad outlier calculator. Normality of distribution and homogeneity of variance were first performed using a Shapiro-Wilk normality test and Bartlett's test, respectively. Statistical significance was then determined using two-sided unpaired Student's t-test (two groups) or one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni (homoscedasticity) or Dunnett's (heterogeneity of variance) post hoc test (multiple groups) for parametric data. Mann-Whitney U test (two groups) or Kruskal-Wallis test (multiple groups) were used to assess statistical significance for nonparametric data. All data for continuous variables are presented as the mean ± standard deviation (SD) and p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. All parallel experiments were done for at least three biological replicates.

## Funding
This study was funded by the 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China Grant 82271327 (ZW); the Natural Foundation of Shandong Province ZR2024MH038 (ZW); the 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China Grant U23A6011 (WQC).

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yahong Cheng: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – original draft. Dexiang Liu: Conceptualization, Data curation, Project administration, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Yijing Zhao: Formal analysis, Methodology, Visualization. Tingting Li: Formal analysis, Methodology, Visualization. Luyao Zhang: Methodology. Haoyu Sheng: Methodology. Sashuang Liu: Investigation, Methodology. Liwei Chai: Investigation, Methodology. Yilei Xiao: Methodology, Resources. Xiaohui Xing: Methodology, Resources. Wenqiang Chen: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Resources. Zhen Wang: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors have no financial or personal conflict of interest to disclose.

 Appendix A

## Supplementary data
The following is/are the supplementary data to this article:

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Multimedia component 2
Multimedia component 2

## Multimedia component 3
Multimedia component 3

## Multimedia component 4
Multimedia component 4

## Data availability
All relevant data are accessible from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## Acknowledgements
We thank Translational Medicine Core Facility of 10.13039/100009108Shandong University for consultation and instrument availability that supported this work. We also thank the Basic Medical Sciences of Shandong University for providing experimental instrument. All flowcharts and the graphic abstract were created in https://BioRender.com.
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2026.104084.