pmcMol Ther Nucleic AcidsMol Ther Nucleic Acids1821mtna101581621Molecular Therapy. Nucleic Acids2162-2531American Society of Gene & Cell TherapyPMC11875208PMC11875208.111875208118752084003420710.1016/j.omtn.2025.102468S2162-2531(25)00022-81024681Original ArticleEffect of chemical modification on the exon-skipping activity of heteroduplex oligonucleotides
ShimoTakenori HasegawaJuri YoshiokaKotaro NakatsujiYusuke AsoKotomi TachibanaKeisuke NagataTetsuya YokotaTakanoritak-yokota.nuro@tmd.ac.jp ObikaSatoshiobika@phs.osaka-u.ac.jp 1Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, 1-6 Yamadaoka, Suita-shi, Osaka 565-0871, Japan2Department of Neurology and Neurological Science, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan3National Institutes of Biomedical Innovation, Health and Nutrition (NIBIOHN), 7-6-8 Saito-Asagi, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0085, Japan4Institute for Open and Transdisciplinary Research Initiatives (OTRI), Osaka University, 1-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan∗Corresponding author: Takanori Yokota, Department of Neurology and Neurological Science, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan. tak-yokota.nuro@tmd.ac.jp∗∗Corresponding author: Satoshi Obika, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, 1-6 Yamadaoka, Suita-shi, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. obika@phs.osaka-u.ac.jp5These authors contributed equally
113202501220253614776021024686320242912025010220250303202506032025© 2025 The Author(s)2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).We applied heteroduplex oligonucleotide (HDO) technology, which uses an oligonucleotide hybridized with a complementary strand, to efficiently deliver locked nucleic acid (LNA)-based splice-switching oligonucleotides (SSOs) to the nucleus. Using an in vitro assay involving cationic lipids, we revealed that HDO technology increased the exon-skipping activity of LNA-based SSOs. To assess the effect of heteroduplex SSOs (HDSSOs) on exon-skipping activity, we designed and evaluated various HDSSOs using a series of complementary oligonucleotides with different sugar chemistries (DNA, RNA, and LNA), linkages (phosphodiester; PO and phosphorothioate; PS linkages), and lengths. HDO with different complementary oligonucleotide designs demonstrated a variety of exon-skipping activities. Next, we investigated the intracellular behavior of HDOs, which seemed to affect their efficient exon-skipping activity. We found that HDO technology increased the uptake of both SSOs and complementary oligonucleotides into the nuclei. Additionally, a series of complementary oligonucleotides showed different intracellular stabilities, and complementary oligonucleotide design appears to be one of the key factors affecting efficient exon skipping. Finally, we examined the exon-skipping activity of HDSSOs in mdx mice and found that HDSSOs exhibited higher exon-skipping activity than single-stranded LNA-based SSOs in these mice under intramuscular injections.

## Graphical abstract
 
Obika, Yokota, and colleagues have applied heteroduplex oligonucleotide (HDO) technology to achieve efficient splicing regulation induced by antisense oligonucleotides. They elucidated the effects of various complementary strands in HDOs with sugar chemistries, linkages, and lengths on the exon-skipping activity in vitro and in vivo using the model mouse of Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

## Keywords
MT: Oligonucleotides: Therapies and Applicationsheteroduplex oligonucleotidescomplementary oligonucleotidesantisense oligonucleotidesexon skippingsplicing modulationDuchenne muscular dystrophymdx mousechemical modificationslocked nucleic acids2′-O-methyl RNApmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY

## Introduction
The modulation of pre-mRNA splicing is a promising therapeutic strategy for many genetic disorders, including Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and spinal muscular atrophy. , , In addition, this strategy is able to be applied for individualized treatment, n-of-1 therapy, of a rare mutation or rare genetic diseases. , , Splice-switching oligonucleotides (SSOs) enable the modulation of pre-mRNA splicing by binding to the target region of the pre-mRNA and blocking the binding of splicing factors. Since Dominski and Kole reported that SSOs can modulate splicing, the design of SSO factors, such as length, guanosine-cytosine (GC) content, and target sites on pre-mRNAs, has been well studied. , , , , In addition, SSO chemistry has been optimized by several researchers. , , , , , , , , , , , , Recent studies have focused on the efficient delivery of SSOs, such as conjugation with peptides and small molecules. , , , , , , , , One potential option for the efficient delivery of SSOs is the use of heteroduplex SSOs (HDSSOs). The effect of HDSSOs on the delivery rate of SSOs has been well studied both in vitro and in vivo since the 2000s. In 2001, Morcos first reported that HDSSOs with morpholino-based SSOs with complementary DNA (cDNA) strands enabled the introduction of SSOs into cells using cationic lipids. Since morpholinos do not have phosphodiester linkers that donate a negative charge, the cDNA strand provides a negative charge for association with the cationic lipids. Since this report, many studies have applied this duplex of morpholinos and DNA in their experiments. , Astriab-Fisher et al. revealed that 2′-O-methyl (2′-OMe) RNA-based SSOs with cDNA strands were better internalized by the nuclei than naked 2′-OMe RNA SSOs in vitro; this was when Lipofectamine 2000 was used to transfect the SSOs. However, to the best of our knowledge, HDSSOs have not been applied in locked nucleic acid (LNA)-based SSOs. Additionally, although HDSSO is a simple idea where main-strand oligonucleotides are annealed with complementary oligonucleotides, not enough is known about the design of complementary oligonucleotides. Therefore, we sought to optimize the complementary oligonucleotides in HDSSOs for efficient delivery into the nucleus, which is necessary for higher exon-skipping efficiency.
Another aspect of HDSSOs is that it is possible to conjugate delivery reagents with complementary oligonucleotides. In 2015, Nishina et al. revealed that heteroduplex oligonucleotides can be applied in LNA-based gapmers (heteroduplex antisense oligonucleotides; HDASOs). According to a previous report, complementary oligonucleotides in HDASO can be conjugated with α-tocopherol (Toc). As conjugation with various functional ligands suppresses antisense activities by inhibiting hybridization with target DNA, complementary oligonucleotides in HDASOs seem to be promising carriers for ligands.
In this study, we showed that the design of complementary oligonucleotides for LNA-based SSOs in HDSSOs greatly affected their exon-skipping activity in vitro. According to our experiments, the design of complementary oligonucleotides affected exon-skipping activity. We also investigated the intracellular behavior of HDSSOs in HEK293 cells using time-lapse microscopy. These experiments showed that the intracellular stability of complementary oligonucleotides likely accounts for the differences in exon-skipping activity between the various complementary oligonucleotide designs. We also evaluated the effectiveness of HDSSOs in vivo. We found that HDSSOs had a higher exon-skipping activity than LNA-based SSO without complementary oligonucleotides under intramuscular injections.

## Results

## Evaluation of LNA-based HDSSOs
Although HDSSOs consisting of either phosphorodiamidate morpholino oligomer (PMO)-based SSOs and cDNA strands or 2′-OMe RNA-based SSOs and cDNA strands have been studied, , , , there are no reports on HDSSOs consisting of LNA-based SSOs and complementary strands. To investigate whether HDSSOs could also be applied in LNA-based SSOs, we designed three complementary oligonucleotides for each SSO ( A; ) with different chemistries (Wing, DNA, and RNA). Although previous studies with HDSSOs only used either native DNA-based or 2′-OMe RNA-based oligonucleotides as complementary oligonucleotides, , , , we thought that DNA, RNA, and other chemically modified strands might be functional because Nagata et al. and other groups previously reported that cRNA partially substituted with 2′-OMe RNA phosphorothioate (PS) (here called Wing) increased the activities of LNA-based gapmer ASOs, although they did not investigate HDSSOs. , , Therefore, we used both Wing and naked RNA-based complementary oligonucleotides. 
We evaluated the in vitro exon-skipping activity of LNA- and 2′-OMe RNA-based SSOs targeting the DMD gene ( A; ) using stable reporter cells. Quantitative RT-PCR (RT-qPCR) analysis revealed that LNA-based HDSSOs showed a higher exon-skipping efficiency than single-stranded LNA-based SSOs when using the cationic lipid Lipofectamine RNAiMAX ( B). Specifically, the exon-skipping activity of LNA-based HDSSOs with complementary Wing or RNA oligonucleotides was higher than that of LNA-based HDSSOs with cDNA oligonucleotides. In contrast, the exon-skipping activities of 2′-OMe RNA-based HDSSOs with cDNA oligonucleotides were similar to that of 2′-OMe RNA-based HDSSOs with Wing or RNA. We also determined the melting temperature (Tm) of the SSOs with complementary oligonucleotides. Ultraviolet (UV) melting experiments showed that the Tm value of DNA was lower than that of Wing or RNA. To confirm the generality, we also conducted in vitro assays with both LNA- and 2′-OMe RNA-based SSOs targeting other sites (5′-splice site) of the DMD gene and revealed the same tendency ( ; and ).

## Structure-activity relationships of complementary oligonucleotides in HDSSOs
The results presented in and imply that the HDSSOs technology could be applied in LNA-based SSOs. To date, the structure-activity relationship of complementary oligonucleotides in HDSSOs has not been well studied. Therefore, we synthesized various complementary oligonucleotides, including length, PS linkages, and base modifications to investigate the factors associated with the design of complementary oligonucleotides ( A; ). 
We designed group 1 complementary oligonucleotides, D1–3 and R1–3, of different lengths (9-, 15-, and 21-mer) and evaluated how the exon-skipping activities of the LNA-based SSOs varied with length. Among the DNA-based complementary oligonucleotides, there were no statistically significant differences between the HDSSOs with DNA-based complementary oligonucleotides D1 (21-mer) and D2 (15-mer); however, there were differences between the HDSSOs with D3 (9-mer) complementary oligonucleotides (p < 0.05 D1 versus D3, p < 0.01 D2 versus D3). An HDSSO with D3 (9-mer) had at least 1.35 times more exon-skipping activity than that of HDSSOs with 15- and 21-mer cDNA strands (D2 and D1, respectively) ( B). However, there were no statistically significant differences between the HDSSOs with RNA-based complementary oligonucleotides R1 (21-mer), R2 (15-mer), and R3 (9-mer).
Next, group 2 complementary oligonucleotides, D4–6 and R4–6, were designed to evaluate the effects of PS linkages and the introduction of LNA modification to increase nuclease resistance. D4 and R4 are fully PS linked, whereas D5–6 and R5–6 have a PS linkage at their 5′ and 3′ ends (D6 and R6 also have LNA modifications). Surprisingly, the exon-skipping activities of HDSSOs with D4–6 and R4 were notably lower than those of other designs, having almost the same or lower exon-skipping activities as single-stranded SSOs. In contrast, HDSSO with R5 showed the same exon-skipping activity as HDSSOs with complementary oligonucleotides without PS linkages (R2). HDSSO with R6 had lower exon-skipping activity than HDSSO with R5 (p < 0.05 R5 versus R6); however, it was still about five times higher than that of single-stranded SSOs (p < 0.01 Single versus R6).
Finally, to modulate the duplex stability of HDSSOs, we designed group 3 complementary oligonucleotides D7 and R7. We estimated that the low binding affinity of HDSSOs might result in higher exon-skipping activities because SSOs need to dissociate with complementary oligonucleotides to bind target mRNA after delivery to the nucleus. The complementary oligonucleotides D7 and R7 have a guanosine-to-inosine (G > I) substitution, which is expected to decrease the Tm of the inosine-cytosine base pair compared to the GC base pair. , Therefore, all guanosines were replaced with inosines in the complementary oligonucleotides. Using these complementary oligonucleotides, we evaluated the exon-skipping activity of HDSSOs. HDSSOs with the complementary oligonucleotide D7 showed higher exon-skipping activity than that of HDSSOs with the complementary oligonucleotide D2 (p < 0.001 D2 versus D7, approximately 10 times higher than single-stranded SSO, p < 0.001 Single versus D7). The HDSSOs with RNA-based complementary oligonucleotides, R7, also showed high exon-skipping activity (approximately nine times higher than that of single-stranded SSOs) (p < 0.01 Single versus R7); however, the exon-skipping activity of HDSSOs with the other RNA-based complementary oligonucleotides such as R2 was the same as that of HDSSOs with R7. Thus, the G > I substitutions enabled us to increase the exon-skipping activity of HDSSOs with the DNA-based complementary oligonucleotide (p < 0.001 D2 versus D7), but it did not increase the exon-skipping activity of the HDSSOs with the RNA-based complementary oligonucleotide.

## Visualizing the intracellular behavior of LNA-based HDSSOs using time-lapse microscopy imaging
We confirmed that LNA-based HDSSOs exhibited increased exon-skipping activity, as shown in and . Additionally, we found that different designs of complementary oligonucleotides affected the exon-skipping activities of SSOs ( ). We speculated that the intracellular localization of SSOs was affected by the design of complementary oligonucleotides in HDSSOs according to a previous report. To understand this better, we investigated the intracellular behavior of HDSSOs with group 2 complementary oligonucleotides (evaluating the effects of PS linkages and introducing LNA modification to increase nuclease resistance) R4–6 using time-lapse microscopy imaging ( , , and and A, B, C, D, E, F, and G). As controls, we also investigated HDSSOs with R2, Wing, and single-stranded LNA-based SSOs (Single). Both LNA-based SSOs and complementary oligonucleotides were labeled with the fluorescent molecules 6-FAM (green fluorescence) for LNA-based SSOs and Alexa 647 (red fluorescence) for complementary oligonucleotides ( A; ). After transfection of HDSSOs or single-stranded SSOs using cationic lipid Lipofectamine RNAiMAX, fluorescent images were captured every 30 min for 24 h post-transfection. Both green and red fluorescence were detected in the nuclei of many cells transfected with all types of HDSSOs after 30 min ( A; A, B, C, D, E, F, and G). This showed that both SSOs and complementary oligonucleotides were immediately localized to the nuclei, although it remains unknown whether SSOs and complementary oligonucleotides formed a duplex. At 24 h after transfection, cells expressing green fluorescence were more frequently detected in the nuclei of cells transfected with HDSSOs rather than with single-stranded LNA-based SSOs (Single) ( B). In particular, HDSSOs containing R2 and R5, which showed higher exon-skipping activities than single-stranded LNA-based SSOs ( ), induced a higher number of cells expressing green fluorescence. 

## Video S1A. Merged time-lapse video of LNA-based HDSSOs in HEK293 cells
LNA based HDSSOs containing various complementary oligonucleotides were transfected into HEK293 cells using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX. Immediately after HDSSOs transfection, the images were captured with BZ-X700 (KEYENCE) at every 30 min until 24 h after transfection. Green: 6-FAM conjugated SSOs, red: Alexa-647 conjugated complementary oligonucleotides, yellow: both 6-FAM conjugated SSOs and Alexa-647 conjugated complementary oligonucleotides were co-existed. The images, phase and both green and red fluorescence at same time point, were merged using the BZ-X Analyzer software (KEYENCE). The time-lapse videos of merged images at every 30 min are shown. Images in Figure 3 are part of this result. These images were obtained from an independent experiment performed on a different day than the experiment in both Figures 4 and S2A–S2C. (A–E) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells transfected with HDSSOs containing (A) Wing, (B) R2, (C) R4, (D) R5 and (E) R6 respectively, are shown. (F) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells transfected with Single (single LNA modified SSOs), is shown. (G) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells treated with Lipofectamine RNAiMAX only (mock), is shown. Scale bars show 100 μm respectively.

## Video S1B. Merged time-lapse video of LNA-based HDSSOs in HEK293 cells
LNA based HDSSOs containing various complementary oligonucleotides were transfected into HEK293 cells using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX. Immediately after HDSSOs transfection, the images were captured with BZ-X700 (KEYENCE) at every 30 min until 24 h after transfection. Green: 6-FAM conjugated SSOs, red: Alexa-647 conjugated complementary oligonucleotides, yellow: both 6-FAM conjugated SSOs and Alexa-647 conjugated complementary oligonucleotides were co-existed. The images, phase and both green and red fluorescence at same time point, were merged using the BZ-X Analyzer software (KEYENCE). The time-lapse videos of merged images at every 30 min are shown. Images in Figure 3 are part of this result. These images were obtained from an independent experiment performed on a different day than the experiment in both Figures 4 and S2A–S2C. (A–E) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells transfected with HDSSOs containing (A) Wing, (B) R2, (C) R4, (D) R5 and (E) R6 respectively, are shown. (F) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells transfected with Single (single LNA modified SSOs), is shown. (G) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells treated with Lipofectamine RNAiMAX only (mock), is shown. Scale bars show 100 μm respectively.

## Video S1C. Merged time-lapse video of LNA-based HDSSOs in HEK293 cells
LNA based HDSSOs containing various complementary oligonucleotides were transfected into HEK293 cells using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX. Immediately after HDSSOs transfection, the images were captured with BZ-X700 (KEYENCE) at every 30 min until 24 h after transfection. Green: 6-FAM conjugated SSOs, red: Alexa-647 conjugated complementary oligonucleotides, yellow: both 6-FAM conjugated SSOs and Alexa-647 conjugated complementary oligonucleotides were co-existed. The images, phase and both green and red fluorescence at same time point, were merged using the BZ-X Analyzer software (KEYENCE). The time-lapse videos of merged images at every 30 min are shown. Images in Figure 3 are part of this result. These images were obtained from an independent experiment performed on a different day than the experiment in both Figures 4 and S2A–S2C. (A–E) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells transfected with HDSSOs containing (A) Wing, (B) R2, (C) R4, (D) R5 and (E) R6 respectively, are shown. (F) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells transfected with Single (single LNA modified SSOs), is shown. (G) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells treated with Lipofectamine RNAiMAX only (mock), is shown. Scale bars show 100 μm respectively.

## Video S1D. Merged time-lapse video of LNA-based HDSSOs in HEK293 cells
LNA based HDSSOs containing various complementary oligonucleotides were transfected into HEK293 cells using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX. Immediately after HDSSOs transfection, the images were captured with BZ-X700 (KEYENCE) at every 30 min until 24 h after transfection. Green: 6-FAM conjugated SSOs, red: Alexa-647 conjugated complementary oligonucleotides, yellow: both 6-FAM conjugated SSOs and Alexa-647 conjugated complementary oligonucleotides were co-existed. The images, phase and both green and red fluorescence at same time point, were merged using the BZ-X Analyzer software (KEYENCE). The time-lapse videos of merged images at every 30 min are shown. Images in Figure 3 are part of this result. These images were obtained from an independent experiment performed on a different day than the experiment in both Figures 4 and S2A–S2C. (A–E) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells transfected with HDSSOs containing (A) Wing, (B) R2, (C) R4, (D) R5 and (E) R6 respectively, are shown. (F) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells transfected with Single (single LNA modified SSOs), is shown. (G) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells treated with Lipofectamine RNAiMAX only (mock), is shown. Scale bars show 100 μm respectively.

## Video S1E. Merged time-lapse video of LNA-based HDSSOs in HEK293 cells
LNA based HDSSOs containing various complementary oligonucleotides were transfected into HEK293 cells using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX. Immediately after HDSSOs transfection, the images were captured with BZ-X700 (KEYENCE) at every 30 min until 24 h after transfection. Green: 6-FAM conjugated SSOs, red: Alexa-647 conjugated complementary oligonucleotides, yellow: both 6-FAM conjugated SSOs and Alexa-647 conjugated complementary oligonucleotides were co-existed. The images, phase and both green and red fluorescence at same time point, were merged using the BZ-X Analyzer software (KEYENCE). The time-lapse videos of merged images at every 30 min are shown. Images in Figure 3 are part of this result. These images were obtained from an independent experiment performed on a different day than the experiment in both Figures 4 and S2A–S2C. (A–E) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells transfected with HDSSOs containing (A) Wing, (B) R2, (C) R4, (D) R5 and (E) R6 respectively, are shown. (F) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells transfected with Single (single LNA modified SSOs), is shown. (G) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells treated with Lipofectamine RNAiMAX only (mock), is shown. Scale bars show 100 μm respectively.

## Video S1F. Merged time-lapse video of LNA-based HDSSOs in HEK293 cells
LNA based HDSSOs containing various complementary oligonucleotides were transfected into HEK293 cells using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX. Immediately after HDSSOs transfection, the images were captured with BZ-X700 (KEYENCE) at every 30 min until 24 h after transfection. Green: 6-FAM conjugated SSOs, red: Alexa-647 conjugated complementary oligonucleotides, yellow: both 6-FAM conjugated SSOs and Alexa-647 conjugated complementary oligonucleotides were co-existed. The images, phase and both green and red fluorescence at same time point, were merged using the BZ-X Analyzer software (KEYENCE). The time-lapse videos of merged images at every 30 min are shown. Images in Figure 3 are part of this result. These images were obtained from an independent experiment performed on a different day than the experiment in both Figures 4 and S2A–S2C. (A–E) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells transfected with HDSSOs containing (A) Wing, (B) R2, (C) R4, (D) R5 and (E) R6 respectively, are shown. (F) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells transfected with Single (single LNA modified SSOs), is shown. (G) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells treated with Lipofectamine RNAiMAX only (mock), is shown. Scale bars show 100 μm respectively.

## Video S1G. Merged time-lapse video of LNA-based HDSSOs in HEK293 cells
LNA based HDSSOs containing various complementary oligonucleotides were transfected into HEK293 cells using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX. Immediately after HDSSOs transfection, the images were captured with BZ-X700 (KEYENCE) at every 30 min until 24 h after transfection. Green: 6-FAM conjugated SSOs, red: Alexa-647 conjugated complementary oligonucleotides, yellow: both 6-FAM conjugated SSOs and Alexa-647 conjugated complementary oligonucleotides were co-existed. The images, phase and both green and red fluorescence at same time point, were merged using the BZ-X Analyzer software (KEYENCE). The time-lapse videos of merged images at every 30 min are shown. Images in Figure 3 are part of this result. These images were obtained from an independent experiment performed on a different day than the experiment in both Figures 4 and S2A–S2C. (A–E) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells transfected with HDSSOs containing (A) Wing, (B) R2, (C) R4, (D) R5 and (E) R6 respectively, are shown. (F) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells transfected with Single (single LNA modified SSOs), is shown. (G) Merged time-lapse video, HEK293 cells treated with Lipofectamine RNAiMAX only (mock), is shown. Scale bars show 100 μm respectively.

From 0.5 to 24 h after transfection, the red fluorescence in the nuclei of cells transfected with HDSSOs containing R2, R5, and Wing began to disappear ( and A; A, B, C, D, E, F, and G). In fact, 24 h after transfection, less red fluorescence was detected in the nuclei of cells transfected with HDSSOs containing R2, R5, and Wing than other complementary oligonucleotides ( B, , and A; A, B, C, D, E, F, and G). In addition, cells transfected with HDSSOs containing R2, R5, and Wing showed granules of red fluorescence ( B, , and A; A, B, C, D, E, F, and G). This indicated that the complementary oligonucleotides R2, R5, and Wing were digested or excluded from the nuclei. However, the green fluorescence in the nuclei did not disappear, even though the HDSSOs had different complementary oligonucleotide designs ( B, , and A; A, B, C, D, E, F, and G). Therefore, we theorized that only the complementary oligonucleotides were either digested in the nuclei or excluded from the nuclei, whereas the SSOs remained in the nuclei. Additionally, the disappearance rate of complementary oligonucleotides seemed to be one of the factors that differed in the exon-skipping activities of HDSSOs, although it is still unknown whether LNA-based SSOs bind to complementary oligonucleotides that exist in the nuclei. In fact, many cells transfected with HDSSOs containing R4 and R6 retained red fluorescence in the nuclei even at 24 h after transfection, and these cells showed low exon-skipping activities ( B, B, , and A; A, B, C, D, E, F, and G). To replicate the experiment investigating the intracellular behavior of HDSSOs, we also swapped the fluorescent molecules of HDSSOs containing R4 and R5 ( ). Thus, both LNA-based SSOs and complementary oligonucleotides were labeled with the fluorescent molecules Alexa 647 (red fluorescence) for LNA-based SSOs and 6-FAM (green fluorescence) for complementary oligonucleotides. The result showed the same tendency; many cells transfected with HDSSOs containing R4 retained green fluorescence in the nuclei even at 24 h after transfection, but the cells transfected with HDSSOs containing R5 did not.

## Evaluation of the in vivo activity of HDSSOs
We showed in and that LNA-based HDSSOs had increased exon-skipping activity in vitro. In addition, the different designs of complementary oligonucleotides affect the intracellular behavior of LNA-based SSOs, as shown in , , and and A, B, C, D, E, F, and G. All things considered, we showed that the design of the complementary oligonucleotides affected their exon-skipping activity by modifying the intracellular behavior and that the RNA-based complementary oligonucleotide R5, which had a partial PS backbone at both the 5′ and 3′ ends, efficiently enhanced the exon-skipping activity of SSOs in vitro. Therefore, we investigated the exon-skipping activity of HDSSOs using complementary oligonucleotides based on R5 design in vivo. We used mdx mice for the in vivo assays; therefore, the sequence of LNA-based SSOs was redesigned for the mouse Dmd exon 23 skipping ( ). According to previous reports, , , the designed LNA-based SSOs target the site of the mouse Dmd exon 23-intron 23 junction. Also, the designed LNA-based SSO has a length of 13-mer with six LNA analogs according to our previous report. Before conducting the in vivo assay, we investigated the exon-skipping activity of LNA-based SSOs against the mouse Dmd gene in vitro using C2C12 cells ( ). The newly designed HDSSOs, with a cRNA strand and a partial PS backbone at both the 5′ and 3′ ends, had higher exon-skipping activities than single-stranded SSOs at 8, 40, and 200 nM.
We examined the in vivo activity of HDSSOs in mdx mice under intramuscular injections ( ). As controls, we used both LNA-based HDSSOs with fully PS-linked RNA based complementary oligonucleotides (HDSSOs with full PS) and LNA-based single-stranded SSOs (Single) ( A). Two weeks after intramuscular injections into each tibialis anterior muscle, exon-skipping activity was analyzed using RT-PCR, immunohistochemistry (IHC), and western blotting analysis. HDSSOs showed higher exon skipping than both HDSSOs with full PS and Single in each tibialis anterior muscle injected at both 2 and 8 nmol (both 8.5 and 34.2 μg as single-stranded LNA-based SSOs) ( B and 5C). Over 20% of exon 23 mRNA was skipped with the 8-nmol HDSSOs injection. In contrast, HDSSOs with full PS did not induce almost no exon skipping. However, Single induced over 10% of exon 23 skipping. The IHC assay also showed that HDSSOs notably increased dystrophin protein expression compared to tissues from mice treated with single-stranded SSOs ( D). Furthermore, we also conducted immunoblotting using the same samples and analyzing the dystrophin bands with ImageJ (Fiji) software ( E and ). In the tibialis anterior muscle treated with 2 nmol single-stranded SSO, only a slight dystrophin expression was observed. In contrast, the muscle treated with HDSSO exhibited higher dystrophin expression than that of single-stranded SSO. Increasing the dose to 8 nmol, the muscle treated with single-stranded SSO demonstrated higher dystrophin expression than that of 2 nmol single-stranded SSO, whereas the muscle treated with HDSSO showed much higher dystrophin expression than that of single-stranded SSO. At both dosages, the restoration of dystrophin expression by HDSSO injection was significantly superior to that achieved with single-stranded SSO injection. 
 shows that LNA-based HDSSOs have increased exon-skipping activity in vivo following local administration (intramuscular injection). Therefore, we next investigated the in vivo activity of HDSSOs in mdx mice following systemic subcutaneous (SC) administration ( ). For systemic SC injections, 11.88 μmol/kg (100 mg/kg as single-stranded LNA-based SSOs) of either HDSSOs or single-stranded SSOs were used. Two weeks after systemic SC injections, we evaluated the exon-skipping activity using RT-PCR ( B). RT-PCR analyses revealed that HDSSOs did not increase exon-skipping activity compared to single-stranded SSOs. Our group previously reported that lipid-conjugated complementary oligonucleotides enabled an increase in the exon-skipping efficacy of PMO-based HDSSOs under systemic administration. Therefore, we utilized Toc conjugation for the HDSSOs ( A). Although we also prepared single-stranded SSOs conjugated with Toc, all mice died approximately 30 min after injection (n = 2; data not shown). HDSSOs with Toc conjugation (Toc-HDSSO) exhibited higher exon-skipping activity than single-stranded SSOs without Toc conjugation (Single) and HDSSOs without Toc conjugation (HDSSO), with a statistically significant difference between Toc-HDSSO and Single in the quadriceps.

## Discussion
In this study, we uncovered the potential of either DNA- or RNA-based complementary oligonucleotides to increase the exon-skipping activity of LNA-based HDSSOs. Although DNA-based complementary oligonucleotides were generally used for PMO or 2′-OMe RNA-based HDSSOs in previous studies by other groups, , , , we found that RNA-based complementary oligonucleotides also seem to be suitable for LNA-based SSOs in HDSSOs ( ). From these results, we hypothesized that different chemistries (DNA or RNA) could be used in complementary oligonucleotides, depending on the chemistries used in SSOs, such as PMO, 2′-OMe RNA, and LNA.
To better understand the appropriate design of complementary oligonucleotides in HDSSOs, we synthesized various complementary oligonucleotides with different chemistries, lengths, and PS linkages ( ). Overall, the results suggest that the design of complementary oligonucleotides is necessary for the efficient exon-skipping activities of LNA-based HDSSOs. It might be effective to distinguish the design of DNA- or RNA-based complementary oligonucleotides because our previous report suggested that the mechanism of HDASOs degradation between DNA-based and RNA-based complementary oligonucleotides seemed to be different. Although the detailed mechanism of decreasing exon-skipping activities by PS linkages is still unknown, our results showed that the RNA-based complementary oligonucleotides allowed many designs compared to DNA-based complementary oligonucleotides, suggesting that RNA-based complementary oligonucleotides are more suitable for LNA-based HDSSOs ( ).
To understand the factors contributing to exon-skipping activity, we monitored the behavior of HDSSOs using time-lapse fluorescence microscopy ( and ). Overall, LNA-based HDSSOs were immediately taken up into the nucleus and taken up more efficiently by nuclei than single-stranded SSOs at 24 h after transfection. In a previous report by Astriab-Fisher et al., complementary oligonucleotides of 2′-OMe RNA-based HDSSOs did not transfer into the nuclei with Lipofectamine 2000. Unlike that report, we used Lipofectamine RNAiMAX to transfect LNA-based HDSSOs into the nucleus, which might explain why the different protocols produced different results. After uptake into the nuclei, the red fluorescence-labeled complementary oligonucleotides disappeared in HDSSOs with some designs, R2, R5, and Wing, which implies that the specific designs of complementary oligonucleotides were digested or excluded from the nuclei ( ). The detailed mechanisms involved, such as whether the complementary oligonucleotides were digested or not, are still unknown. The rate of disappearance of the complementary oligonucleotides also seemed to depend on their design; however, the LNA-based SSOs were stable in the nucleus, regardless of the design of their complementary oligonucleotides. Furthermore, the time-lapse imaging indicated that the extremely high intracellular stability of complementary oligonucleotides negatively affects exon-skipping activity. Indeed, Ono et al. recently reported that RNA-based complementary oligonucleotides in heteroduplex gapmer ASO were more efficiently distributed in the nuclei compared with the single-stranded gapmer ASO and the stability of its complementary oligonucleotides is related to efficient gene silencing. Thus, our results indicated that the distribution of complementary oligonucleotides is also a key factor for efficient splicing modulation in HDSSOs.
We also demonstrated the effectiveness of the HDSSOs in vivo. The assay using mdx mice under intramuscular injections showed that HDSSOs had increased exon-skipping activity compared to single-stranded SSOs. Our group previously reported that the heteroduplex oligonucleotide (HDO) technology can be applied to both gapmer ASO and anti-microRNAs, which were modified with LNA analogs. , , In previous reports, PMO-based SSOs were delivered into targeted myotubes using cDNA oligonucleotides and additional delivery reagents, such as lipofectin and the block co-polymer F127. , Since PMO does not have a negative charge, DNA-based complementary oligonucleotides were used as negatively charged donors for the delivery reagents. In contrast, this study showed that HDO technology enabled the delivery of LNA-based SSOs into targeted myotubes without the use of additional delivery reagents under intramuscular injection. Therefore, we believe that HDO technologies, using RNA-based complementary oligonucleotides, are promising delivery tools for LNA-based SSOs at least for intramuscular injection.
Recently, several groups have reported that conjugation technologies are efficient delivery strategies for SSOs. , , , , , The complementary oligonucleotides of HDSSOs can also be used as carriers of conjugates. As Nishina et al. recently noted, direct conjugation with the main strand (gapmer ASO) results in the loss of antisense activity. This means that HDSSOs have two advantages: efficient delivery both in vitro and in vivo and free conjugation carriers. Our group recently reported that HDO technology with lipid-conjugated cRNA enables an increase in the exon-skipping efficacy of PMO-based SSOs in vivo under systemic injections. In this study, we revealed that Toc conjugation into RNA-based complementary oligonucleotides increased the exon-skipping efficacy of LNA-based HDSSOs, with a statistically significant difference between Toc-conjugated HDSSO and single-stranded LNA-based SSO in the quadriceps under systemic SC injection ( ). Another group recently reported prospective peptides for the efficient delivery of SSOs targeting DMD mRNA. We expect that these conjugates could be delivered by complementary oligonucleotides in HDSSOs without losing the exon-skipping activity of SSOs.
The present study also indicates that HDO technology reduces the toxicity of Toc-conjugated single-stranded LNA-based SSOs ( ). Thus, mice injected with Toc-conjugated single-stranded LNA-based SSOs died approximately 30 min after systemic SC injection, but mice injected with Toc-conjugated HDSSOs survived. Although a recent publication indicated the LNA analogs enhance the exon-skipping activity of SSO, LNA-based SSOs induce unintended splicing alterations. Furthermore, our group previously reported that LNA-based gapmer ASO with cholesterol conjugation showed lethal toxicities. In the future, we hope to investigate the off-target effects of LNA-based SSOs using HDO technology with either lipid-conjugation or peptide conjugation.
The LNA-based SSOs in the present study were selected from the optimized designed SSOs in our previous study, which target the skipping of exon 58 in the human dystrophin gene. Although the targetable genetic abnormalities of the SSOs are very rare in DMD, these SSOs have the potential to be a promising treatment of DMD patients, including personalized n-of-1 therapy. However, there is a methodological limitation in our analysis of exon 58 skipping because we only evaluated skipping activity using RT-qPCR for a single exon 58 and not in myogenic and HEK293 cells. RT-PCR analyses including several exons flanking exon 58 and myogenic cells would yield a more accurate assessment for estimating the skipping activity of SSOs.
In conclusion, we found that HDSSOs represent a prospective strategy for increasing exon-skipping activity both in vitro and in vivo. Although the detailed mechanism involved is still unknown, HDSSOs could be one of the options for efficient SSO delivery. We also reported that the optimization of complementary oligonucleotides, including factors such as chemistry and the PS backbone, is important for higher exon-skipping activity.

## Materials and methods

## Synthesis of oligonucleotides
All SSOs and complementary oligonucleotides used in this study are listed in . Chemical modifications, such as LNA and 2′-OMe RNA, were used for the SSO sequences, where the phosphodiester linkages were completely replaced by PS linkages. LNA or 2′-OMe RNA-based SSOs designed to have sequences complementary to those of human DMD were synthesized and purified by GeneDesign (Osaka, Japan). For complementary oligonucleotides, chemical modifications such as LNA, 2′-OMe RNA, and PS linkages were used on a case-by-case basis. Complementary oligonucleotides were designed with sequences complementary to each SSO.
All DNA primers used in this study are listed in , the figure legend of , and the section “ .” DNA primers were synthesized and purified by Hokkaido System Sciences (Hokkaido, Japan) and Eurofins Genomics K.K. (Tokyo, Japan).

## Annealing oligonucleotides for HDSSOs
To prepare HDSSOs, we annealed the SSOs and complementary oligonucleotides. For in vitro study, each SSO and complementary oligonucleotide was dissolved in 50 mM Tris buffer (pH 7.5) containing 100 mM NaCl to a final concentration of 4 μM. For , the dissolved HDSSOs were boiled and followed by slow cooling to room temperature for 8 h. For , , and , the dissolved HDSSOs were denatured at 99°C for 5 min. Then, after incubating at 95°C for 20 min, the dissolved HDSSOs were cooled to room temperature for 3.5 h.
For in vivo study, each SSO and complementary oligonucleotide was dissolved in PBS to a final concentration of 500 μM. The dissolved HDSSOs were annealed at 95°C for 5 min and then incubated at 37°C for 1 h.

## Estimation of skipping efficiency in stable cell line
The Flp-In 293 cells (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA)-based stable reporter cells were used for the assay. Briefly, the stable cells encode the human DMD minigene, which contains exon 58 and its adjacent introns. In the minigene, the intron 57 was shortened to remove it from position +207 to +17,486 because its length is over 17 kbp. The stable cells were cultured in high-glucose Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Biowest, Nuaillé, France), 1× antibiotic-antimycotic (AA) solution for cell culture (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), and 100 μg/mL hygromycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and maintained in a 5% CO2 incubator at 37°C.
Stable reporter cells were seeded 1 day before SSO transfection at a density of 80,000 ( ) or 200,000 ( ) cells/well in 24-well plates (Iwaki, Tokyo, Japan). After 24 h, the cells were transfected with SSOs at a concentration of 10 nM ( ) or 30 nM ( ) using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX, according to the manufacturer’s protocols, and grown in high-glucose DMEM containing 10% FBS and 1× AA. Twenty-four hours after HDSSOs transfection, the cells were harvested and used for assays.
At 24 h after transfection, total RNA was isolated from the samples using QuickGene 800 (Kurabo, Osaka, Japan), QuickGene RNA cultured cell kit S (Kurabo), and RQ1 RNase-Free DNase (Promega, Fitchburg, WI) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Total RNA was reverse transcribed using ReverTra Ace qPCR RT Master Mix (Toyobo, Osaka, Japan) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA dilution was used as the template for individual PCR reactions using specific primer sets ( ) designed using the Primer BLAST program. RT-qPCR was performed using StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and SYBR Green Real-Time PCR Master Mix Plus (Toyobo) according to the manufacturers’ protocols, except that the annealing condition was set at 65°C for 15 s. The DNA primers targeting DMD exon 58-skipped mRNA were used as previously described. , The expression levels of human GAPDH or human RPLP2 mRNA were used to normalize the data. Each experiment was repeated three times to ensure the reproducibility of results.

## UV melting analysis
The Tm value of each HDSSO was measured, as reported in our previous study. Briefly, each SSO and a complementary strand were dissolved in 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.2) containing 10 mM NaCl to a final concentration of 2 μM. The samples were boiled and followed by slow cooling to room temperature for 8 h. The absorbance at 260 nm was measured from 5°C to 95°C at a scan rate of 0.5°C/min. The peak temperature in the derivative curve was determined to be the Tm. The experiment was repeated three or four times to ensure the reproducibility of the results.

## Time-lapse microscopy imaging
Because the stable cells used for exon-skipping activity evaluation also encode the fluorescent proteins EGFP and DsRed, we selected HEK293 cells for time-lapse microscopy imaging. HEK293 cells were cultured in high-glucose DMEM containing 10% FBS and 1× AA and maintained in a 5% CO2 incubator at 37°C. Twenty-four hours before transfection, HEK293 cells were seeded at 24,000 cells/well on Collagen I Cellware 96-Well Black/Clear Plates (Becton Dickinson Labware, Franklin Lakes, NJ) in 100 μL/well FluoroBrite DMEM (Gibco, Waltham, MA) containing 10% FBS, 1× AA solution, and 1× GlutaMAX Supplement (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Fifteen minutes before transfection, the cells were suspended in FluoroBrite DMEM containing 10% FBS, 1× AA solution, 1× GlutaMAX Supplement, and 0.1 μg/mL Hoechst 33342 (Lonza, Walkersville, MD) to image the nucleus. After HDSSO transfection at a concentration of 10 nM using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX, the cells were analyzed using a BZ-X700 microscope (Keyence, Osaka, Japan) with an incubation system that stably incubated the cells at 37°C in humidified 5% CO2. Phase-contrast and fluorescence images were obtained at a 20× magnification. Fluorescence images were collected using excitation wavelength/emission wavelength 360/460-, 470/525-, and 620/700-nm filters (Keyence) for Hoechst 33342, 6-FAM, and Alexa 647 staining, respectively. Images were captured every 30 min for 24 h post-HDSSOs transfection. Image processing (e.g., black balance, merging) was performed using BZ-X Analyzer software (Keyence). The time-lapse videos of merged images were generated using ImageJ (Fiji) and shown in A, B, C, D, E, F, and G. The images per sample were captured from a single field of view, and the experiments were repeated twice to ensure reproducibility of the results (n = 2, Singlet).

## Animal experiments
Mdx mice (mdx, C57BL/10ScSc-Dmdmdx/J, males) were obtained from CLEA Japan (Tokyo, Japan) and bred. Prior to postmortem analyses, mice were anesthetized by inhalation with 4% isoflurane in a draft and sacrificed by cervical dislocation after blood collection. All protocols met ethics and safety guidelines for animal experimentation and were approved by the ethics committee of Tokyo Medical and Dental University (no. A2021-191C and A2023-144C2).

## Estimation of skipping efficiency in vivo
LNA-based SSOs and complementary oligonucleotides were designed based on previous reports ( ). , , For the in vivo study, 5- to 6-week-old mdx mice were used. Each HDSSO targeting exon 23 of the dystrophin gene was dissolved in PBS. HDSSOs or SSOs (2 or 8 nmol) were injected into the tibialis anterior muscle or 11.88 μmol/kg of each SSO was injected SC. Two weeks after injection, the mice were sacrificed under anesthesia with 4% isoflurane (Wako, Osaka, Japan), and muscles were dissected. Muscle samples for RT-PCR were placed in tubes and frozen in liquid nitrogen, while muscle samples for IHC were immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen-cooled isopentane.
Total RNA was extracted from muscle tissues using Isogen 2 (Nippon Gene, Tokyo, Japan), and 500 ng total RNA was used for one-step RT-PCR (Qiagen, Venlo, the Netherlands) according to the manufacturers’ instructions. The primer sequences were mEx22F 5′-ATCCAGCAGTCAGAAAGCAAA-3′ and mEx24R 5′-CAGCCATCCATTTCTGTAAGG-3′ for the amplification of exons 22 to 24. The PCR conditions were 50°C for 30 min and 95°C for 15 min, then 35 cycles of 94°C for 1 min, 60°C for 1 min, 72°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 7 min. The intensity of the PCR bands was analyzed using Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA), and skipping efficiency was calculated using the following formula: (intensity of skipped band)/(intensity of skipped band + intensity of unskipped band). The resulting PCR bands were extracted using a gel extraction kit for direct sequencing to confirm exon skipping.

## IHC
Ten-micrometer cryosections were cut from flash-frozen muscle, placed on Platinum Pro coated slides (Matsunami Glass Industrial, Osaka, Japan), and air-dried. The sections were stained with monoclonal rabbit antibody ab15277 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) against the C terminus of muscular dystrophin and anti-rabbit goat conjugated with Alexa Fluor 568 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as a secondary antibody. For nuclear counterstaining, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole containing a mounting agent was used.

## Western blotting
Proteins were extracted from sliced frozen muscle using SDS buffer (0.125 M Tris/HCl at pH 6.4, 10% glycerol, 4% SDS, 4 M urea, 10% β-mercaptoethanol, and 0.005% bromophenol blue) supplemented with 1× protease inhibitor (Complete Mini, Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany). The normal control lysate from C57BL/10ScNJic (B10) mice was also prepared as a reference for dystrophin expression. Subject and normal control lysates were denatured at 100°C for 3 min and electrophoresed on 4%–15% gradient polyacrylamide gel (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) at 120 V for 90 min. The proteins were then transferred to a polyvinylidene fluoride membrane (Bio-Rad) by wet transfer at 30 V overnight. After incubation with 5% nonfat milk in Tris-buffered saline with 0.1% Tween 20 Detergent (TBS-T) for 60 min, the membrane was incubated at 4°C overnight with an anti-dystrophin antibody (1:200) (ab15277, Abcam) or anti-vinculin antibody (1:1,000) (NB600-1293, Novus Biologicals, Centennial, CO). The membrane was washed 3 times for 10 min in TBS-T and incubated with a 1:10,000 dilution of horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit or anti-mouse antibodies (Jackson Immuno Research, West Grove, PA) for 60 min. The membrane was washed three times with TBS-T and then developed with West Dura Extended Duration Substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturers’ protocols. The immunoreactive bands were detected by ChemiDoc Image System (Bio-Rad).

## Statistical analysis
The data shown in , , and are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Statistical analysis for was performed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Dunnett’s T3 test for multiple comparisons with unequal variances. R software (version 4.0.3), R-Studio (version 1.4.1103), and the R package PMCMRplus (dunnettT3Test mode) were used for statistical analyses. , , 
The data shown in and are expressed as mean ± standard error. Statistical analyses were performed in GraphPad Prism version 9 using ANOVA with Tukey’s test.

## Data availability
The datasets analyzed in the present study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## Acknowledgments
T.S. was supported by Grant-in-aid for JSPS research fellow under grant no. 15J05689. K.T. was supported by the Project Meet and 10.13039/501100004206Osaka University. S.O. was supported by the 10.13039/100009619Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development under grant nos. JP15am0301004 and JP19am0401003.

## Author contributions
T.S., J.H., Y.N., K.A., and T.N. conducted the experiments. T.S., J.H., K.Y., T.N., K.T., T.Y., and S.O. designed the experiments and wrote the paper.

## Declaration of interests
T.Y. collaborates with Takeda Pharmaceuticals, Daiichi Sankyo, Rena Therapeutics, Toray Industries, Eisai, and Sumitomo Pharma, and serves as the academic adviser for Rena Therapeutics and Braizon Therapeutics. Patents WO2014203518A1 related to this paper have been filed by T.Y., K.Y., S.O., and T.S.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S6 and Tables S1–S8

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtn.2025.102468.