pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC10249814PMC10249814.110249814102498143728967910.1371/journal.pone.0286783PONE-D-22-303031Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesMolecular Biology Assays and Analysis TechniquesGene Expression and Vector TechniquesProtein ExpressionResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesMolecular Biology Assays and Analysis TechniquesGene Expression and Vector TechniquesProtein ExpressionBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyImmune PhysiologyCytokinesBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyImmune SystemInnate Immune SystemCytokinesMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyImmune SystemInnate Immune SystemCytokinesBiology and Life SciencesDevelopmental BiologyMolecular DevelopmentCytokinesBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyImmune ResponseInflammationMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyImmune ResponseInflammationMedicine and Health SciencesClinical MedicineSigns and SymptomsInflammationBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsEpithelial CellsBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyBiological TissueEpitheliumEpithelial CellsMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyBiological TissueEpitheliumEpithelial CellsBiology and life sciencesGeneticsGene expressionGene regulationSmall interfering RNABiology and life sciencesBiochemistryNucleic acidsRNANon-coding RNASmall interfering RNAMedicine and Health SciencesPharmaceuticsDrug TherapySteroid TherapyGlucocorticoid TherapyMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancer TreatmentCytokine TherapyBiology and life sciencesBiochemistryNucleic acidsRNAMessenger RNADifferential regulation of BIRC2 and BIRC3 expression by inflammatory cytokines and glucocorticoids in pulmonary epithelial cells
Differential regulation of BIRC2 and BIRC3 by cytokines and glucocorticoidsThorneAndrewConceptualizationInvestigationMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing BansalAkankshaConceptualizationInvestigationWriting – review & editing Necker-BrownAmandahInvestigationWriting – review & editing MostafaMahmoud M.InvestigationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing GaoAlexInvestigationWriting – review & editing GeorgescuAndreiConceptualizationInvestigationWriting – review & editing KooiCoraInvestigationWriting – review & editing LeighRichardResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4919-8498NewtonRobertConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Physiology & Pharmacology, Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, Lung Health Research Group, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada2
Department of Medicine, Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, Lung Health Research Group, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, CanadaSilvaAristóbolo M.Editor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
The products of the baculoviral inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) repeat-containing (BIRC) genes, BIRC2 and BIRC3, are cell signaling regulators involved in innate immune responses and are often referred to as cellular IAP 1 and 2, respectively [ , ]. Believed to prevent apoptosis, BIRC2 and BIRC3 are members of a conserved IAP protein family, the defining feature of which is the presence of one-to-three N-terminal tandem baculovirus IAP repeats [ ]. BIRC2 and BIRC3 also possess a carboxy-terminal really interesting new gene (RING) domain that confers E3 ubiquitin ligase activity. This may result in mono- or polyubiquitylation of target proteins leading to proteasome-mediated degradation or the formation of scaffolds that promote intracellular signaling [ – ].
Probably the most widely characterized roles for BIRC2 and/or BIRC3 are in the regulation of canonical and non-canonical signaling to the inflammatory transcription factor, nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) [ – ]. Activation of signaling by the inflammatory cytokine, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF) involves the TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1) complex, where BIRC2 and/or BIRC3 are suggested to serve as E3 ubiquitin ligases for receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 1 (RIPK1) [ , ]. In this scenario, K63-linked ubiquitin scaffolds are attached to RIPK1 to enable canonical NF-κB signaling via the inhibitor of κB kinases (IKKs) [ ]. Activated NF-κB not only induces expression of inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and inflammatory enzymes, but also numerous anti-apoptotic genes [ – ]. Many of these play pivotal roles in inhibiting caspase-mediated apoptosis and are essential for cell survival. For example, in the absence of BIRC2 or BIRC3, RIPK1 is thought to recruit to a secondary cytoplasmic signaling complex that activates pathways leading to cell death [ ]. In contrast to promoting K63-linked ubiquitin chains leading to IKK activation, BIRC2 and BIRC3 are also suggested to maintain low levels of NF-κB-inducing kinase (NIK) in resting cells via the formation of K48-linked ubiquitin chains leading to proteasomal degradation of NIK [ , ]. Activation of TNF receptor superfamily members, or BIRC2 and BIRC3 inhibition, appears to stabilize NIK and thereby promotes non-canonical NF-κB signaling [ ]. However, in addition to these roles. BIRC2 and/or BIRC3 are also implicated in signaling downstream of toll-like receptors [ ], nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing receptors [ ], retinoic acid-inducible gene 1 [ ], as well as in inflammasome activation [ ]. Furthermore, BIRC2 and/or BIRC3 are suggested to directly regulate transcription factors such as IRF1 [ ]. Thus, in addition to their apparently interchangeable, or redundant, roles, the above studies also highlight a lack of clarity as to the roles of these two BIRC proteins.
Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) detect and respond to the wide array of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) that are produced upon tissue damage, cell death or cellular stress [ , ]. In the airway epithelium, this promotes the release of cytokines, chemokines and antimicrobial peptides that can drive inflammation in diseases such as asthma [ , ]. As signaling from many PRRs converges on NF-κB, it is perhaps not surprising that polymorphisms in BIRC3 have been associated with asthma [ ]. In addition, BIRC3 expression correlates with markers of severe asthma [ ], suggesting BIRC3 could contribute to a more prolonged, or more severe, inflammation. In contrast, BIRC3 may be protective in influenza virus infections and thus transcriptional induction of BIRC3 by inflammatory triggers may help protect from viral-induced cell death [ ]. The airway epithelium is also a key target for inhaled therapies, including glucocorticoids, which represent the mainstay therapy in asthma management [ – ]. While glucocorticoids reduce the expression of many genes that are upregulated by NF-κB, we [ , ], and others [ – ] have consistently found BIRC3 to be a bona fides glucocorticoid-response gene in epithelial cells and in human lung tissue following corticosteroid administration [ ].
Given the unclear, potentially redundant, roles of BIRC2 and BIRC3 in the regulation of inflammatory signaling and gene expression, pulmonary epithelial cell lines and primary human bronchial epithelial cells (pHBECs) were used to characterize the expression and regulation of both BIRC2 and BIRC3 in response to inflammatory cytokines and glucocorticoids. The data reveal largely constitutive expression for BIRC2 protein, whereas BIRC3 protein was highly induced by pro-inflammatory cytokines via a NF-κB-dependent mechanism. BIRC3 expression was also induced by glucocorticoids acting on GR and in combination with inflammatory stimuli, this resulted in maintained, often enhanced, expression relative to the inflammatory stimulus alone. As the stability of BIRC2 and BIRC3 proteins was profoundly reduced by TNF, but not IL1B, these data uncover discrete patterns of regulation and expression for each gene. Since this is likely to underpin differential functions for each protein, the data provide a framework for further investigation of BIRC2 and BIRC3 function.

## Materials and methods

## Stimuli, drugs and inhibitors
Recombinant human IL1B, TNF and IFNG (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) were dissolved in PBS containing 0.1% bovine serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Budesonide (AstraZeneca, Mölndal, Sweden), dexamethasone (Steraloids, Newport, RI), MG-132 (Millipore Sigma, St. Louis, MO), MG-262 (APExBIO, Houston, TX), PR-171 (Adooq BioScience, Irvine, CA), E-64 (APExBIO, Houston, TX), PS-1145, ML-120B (both Sigma-Aldrich) and Org34517 (gift from Chiesi Farmaceutici, Parma, Italy) were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide as stocks of 10 mM. Cycloheximide (Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in water at 10 mg/ml.

## Cell lines, culture and reporter lines
Human pulmonary type II A549 cells (CCL-185, American Type Culture Collection (ATCC), Manassas, VA) were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 2 mM L-glutamine (all Thermo Fisher Scientific, Burlington, ON, Canada). Human bronchial epithelial, BEAS-2B, cells (CRL-9609; ATCC, Manassas, VA)) were grown in DMEM/F12 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 10% FBS and 2 mM L-glutamine. The Calu-3 epithelial cell line (HTB-55; ATCC) was grown in Eagle’s Minimum Essential Medium (ATCC) supplemented with 10% FBS. The NF-κB-dependent reporter, 6κBtkluc.neo, contains three tandem repeats of the sequence 5′-AGC TTA CAA GGG ACT TTC CGC TGG GGA CTT TCC AGG GA-3′, which harbors two copies of the NF-κB binding site (underlined), was stably transfected into A549 cells as described [ ]. A549 cells containing the 2×GRE-dependent reporter, which is based on the parent vector pGL3.neo.TATA, driven by two consensus GRE sites (underlined), 5′-GCT GTA CAG GAT GTT CTA GGC TGT ACA GGA TGT TCT AG-3′, were as previously described [ ]. All cells were grown in submersion culture at 37°C in 5% CO2:95% air and passaged when 90–95% confluent. Prior to experiments, cells were incubated overnight with serum-free basal media to arrest growth.

## Culture of primary human bronchial epithelial cells in submersion culture and at air-liquid interface
Primary human bronchial epithelial cells (pHBEC) were isolated from non-transplantable normal human lungs that were obtained via a retrieval service at the International Institute for the Advancement of Medicine (Edison, NJ), as previously described [ ]. In each case, no identifying donor information was provided and local ethics approval was obtained from the Conjoint Health Research Ethics Board of the University of Calgary (Protocol # REB15-0336). pHBECs as submersion culture (pHBEC-SC) were grown in bronchial epithelial cell growth medium (BEGM) (Lonza, Basel, Switzerland) containing all SingleQuots supplements (Lonza, Basel, Switzerland), as described [ ]. pHBECs as air-liquid interface cultures (pHBEC-ALI) were grown to confluence in PneumaCult-EX cell growth medium (05009; StemCell Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada). Growth medium was then removed from the apical surface to expose pHBECs to air and the basal growth medium replaced with differentiation medium (PneumaCult-ALI basal medium (05002; StemCell Technologies). pHBEC-ALI’s were washed apically with Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline (D-PBS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to remove excess mucus resulting from goblet cell differentiation. This results in pHBEC-ALI cultures that accurately recapitulate a pseudostratified epithelium composed of ciliated cells, goblet cells, and progenitor basal cells, see [ ]. pHBEC-ALI were fed basally with PneumaCultALI basal medium, with no supplements, prior to experiments. All cells were incubated at 37°C in 5% CO2:95% air.

## Reverse Transcriptase PCR
Total RNA was extracted using the NucleoSpin RNA Extraction kit (MN-740955; D-Mark Biosciences, Macherey-Nagel, Bethlehem, PA) and 0.5 μg was used for cDNA synthesis (qScript cDNA Synthesis Kit, CA101414-098; Quanta Biosciences, Gaithersburg, MD). Resultant cDNA was diluted 1:5 with RNase-free water and quantitative PCR (qPCR) performed on 2.5 μl using Fast SYBR Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) with primer pairs specific for genes of interest. StepOnePlus (Applied Biosynthesis) or QuantaStudio3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) instruments were utilized for qPCR and relative cDNA concentrations were calculated from standard curves generated by half-log serial dilution of a stimulated cDNA sample analyzed at the same time as experimental samples. Amplification conditions were: 95°C for 20 s, then 40 cycles of 95°C for 3 s and 60°C for 30 s. Primers (5՛- 3՛): BIRC3 (Forward: CCG TCA AGT TCA AGC CAG TTA CCC and Reverse: AGC CCA TTT CCA CGG CAG CA), BIRC2 (Forward: CTA GTC TGG GAT CCA CCT CTA A and Reverse: GTT CCA AGG TGG GAG ATA ATG), and GAPDH (Forward: TTC ACC ACC ATG GAG AAG GC and Reverse: AGG AGG CAT TGC TGA TGA TCT) were designed using Primer BLAST (NCBI) and were synthesized by the DNA synthesis lab at the University of Calgary. Primer specificity was determined using dissociation (melt) curve analysis: 95°C for 15 s, 60°C for 20 s followed by ramping to 95°C with fluorescence measurement every 2.5 degrees. A single peak in the change of fluorescence with temperature was taken to indicate primer specificity.

## Western blot analysis
Western blotting was carried out as previously described [ ]. Following cell lysis, proteins were size fractionated by sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Proteins were then transferred to nitrocellulose membranes before blocking and incubation with primary antibodies against BIRC3 (cIAP2 #3130; Cell Signaling Technologies, Danvers, MA), BIRC2 (cIAP1 #7065; Cell Signaling Technologies), RELA (p65 sc-8008; SantaCruz, Dallas, TX), GR (PA1-511A; Thermo Fisher Scientific), K48-linkage specific polyubiquitin (#8081; Cell Signaling Technologies), GAPDH (MCA4739; Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) overnight at 4°C. Membranes were washed in tris-buffered saline with tween (TBS-T) followed by incubation with either rabbit or mouse horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary immunoglobulin (Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA) at room temperature. Membranes were washed 4 x 10 min prior to detection of immune complexes by enhanced chemiluminescence (Bio-Rad). Images were acquired using a ChemiDoc Touch imaging system (Bio-Rad), and densitometric analysis was performed using ImageLab software (Bio-Rad).

## Adenovirus infection
Cells grown to ~70% confluency were infected with Ad5-IκBαΔN or Ad5-GFP adenovirus at MOI 25 in serum-containing medium, as previously described [ ]. After 24 h, the cells were incubated in fresh serum-free media overnight prior to treatments.

## Short interfering RNA-mediated knockdown
Pools of four non-targeting siRNAs (SI03650325, SI03650318, SI04380467, 1022064), GR siRNA (SI00003745, SI00003766, SI2654757, SI02654764), or RELA siRNA (SI02663101, SI05146204, SI00301672, SI02663094) (all Qiagen, Mississauga, ON, Canada) were mixed with 3 μL lipofectamine RNAiMax (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 100 μl Opti-MEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then incubated at room temperature for 5 min. This mixture was then added to A549 cells that were grown to ~70% confluency in serum-containing growth medium and incubated for 24 to 48 h until cells were >90% confluent.

## Data presentation and statistical analyses
GraphPad Prism 9 software (Graph-Pad Software, San Diego, CA) was used for generating data figures and performing statistical analyses. Data are plotted as bar or line graphs showing means ± S.E. of ‘N’ independent observations. For normally distributed data, multiple comparison between groups were made by one-way ANOVA, with post-hoc tests (Dunnett, Bonferroni or Tukey), as indicated. Equivalent nonparametric tests were utilized for non-normal distribution. Two-tailed, paired Student’s t tests were used for comparing two treatment groups. To test for greater than simple additivity, the sum of the effects (i.e. fold -1 or stimulated level–basal level) of each treatment was compared to the effect of cotreatment. Competitive antagonism at GR was shown by Schild analysis to produce pA2 values, defined as the negative log of the molar concentration of antagonist necessary to double the concentration of agonist required to achieve the original response, as previously described [ ].

## Results

## Effect of proinflammatory cytokines and glucocorticoids on BIRC2 and BIRC3 mRNA expression
To characterize the expression of BIRC2 and BIRC3, IL1B and TNF were used as inflammatory stimuli and dexamethasone or budesonide as representative glucocorticoids. A549 cells harboring an NF-κB luciferase reporter were first treated with various concentrations of IL1B and TNF to establish the maximum response to each cytokine. IL1B at 1 ng/ml and TNF at 10 ng/ml maximally activated NF-κB-dependent transcription (S1A and S1B Fig in ). This effect was consistent with the induction of NF-κB DNA binding and these concentrations were used for all subsequent experiments [ ].
BIRC2 and BIRC3 mRNA expression was significantly increased by IL1B and TNF with peak expression apparent at 4 h ( ). Thereafter, BIRC2 and BIRC3 mRNA expression sharply decreased in the IL1B-treated cells compared to the more gradual decreases in TNF-treated cells. Dexamethasone modestly, but significantly, increased BIRC3 mRNA expression, whereas BIRC2 mRNA was unaffected ( , S2A Fig in ). Increased BIRC3, but not BIRC2, mRNA expression also occurred in cells treated with the clinically relevant glucocorticoid, budesonide (S2A Fig in ). Compared to IL1B treatment alone, IL1B-plus-dexamethasone showed no change in BIRC3 mRNA, whereas IL1B-induced BIRC2 mRNA was markedly and significantly repressed by dexamethasone ( and S2B Fig in ). While TNF-induced BIRC2 mRNA was also reduced by dexamethasone, TNF-induced BIRC3 mRNA was further enhanced by dexamethasone at all timepoints after 4 h ( ). These effects were significant for both genes at 6 and 24 h (S2C Fig in ). Indeed, the combination effect for TNF-plus-dexamethasone was greater than the sum of the effects of each individual treatment and this confirms supra-additivity ( ). Since BIRC genes may play roles in cell fate following viral infection [ ], we tested whether the viral infection-associated cytokine, IFNG, could enhance BIRC2 and/or BIRC3 expression. However, IFNG, at 10 ng/ml, alone or in the presence of IL1B or/and dexamethasone did not materially change BIRC2 or BIRC3 mRNA expression at 6 h (S2D Fig in ). A similar lack of effect for BIRC2 was apparent at 24 h, whereas BIRC3 mRNA induced by IL1B, or IL1B-plus-dexamethasone was modestly enhanced by IFNG.
 To explore the utility of A549 cells as a model, the expression BIRC2 and BIRC3 was examined in pHBEC grown as both submersion culture (pHBEC-SC) and as highly differentiated cells at air-liquid interface (pHBEC-ALI) [ ]. In pHBEC-SC, BIRC3 mRNA expression was significantly increased by IL1B at 2 h, whereas BIRC2 was unaffected (S2E Fig in ). Similar, but non-significant effects occurred at 6 h and at both times budesonide modestly induced BIRC3 mRNA expression and BIRC2 mRNA was unaffected (S2E Fig in and ). Treatment of pHBEC-SC with IL1B-plus-budesonide significantly increased BIRC3 mRNA expression at both 2 and 6 h and this effect was enhanced relative to the combined effects of the IL1B and budesonide treatments alone (S2E Fig in and ). BIRC2 mRNA expression was also modestly enhanced by IL1B-plus-budesonide at 6 h ( ). IFNG had little effect on BIRC2 or BIRC3 mRNA expression alone or in combination with IL1B or/and budesonide (S2E Fig in ). Using ALI culture of pHBECs, IL1B and budesonide each significantly enhanced BIRC3 mRNA expression at 6 h ( ). IL1B-plus-budesonide markedly enhanced BIRC3 mRNA expression and this was significantly greater than with each treatment alone. Indeed, the effect of the combination was significantly greater than the sum of the effects of each treatment and this supports supra-additivity at 6 h ( ). In pHBEC-ALI, BIRC2 mRNA expression was not significantly affected by either IL1B or budesonide but was modestly and significantly enhanced by the combination of IL1B plus budesonide.
Taken together, these results show that in A549 cells IL1B highly induced BIRC3 mRNA with no additional effect of glucocorticoid. Similarly, TNF also induced BIRC3 mRNA, but revealed cooperation with glucocorticoids to further enhance BIRC3 expression at all times from 6 h. In contrast, BIRC2 mRNA expression was only modestly enhanced by IL1B, or TNF, and this was reduced by glucocorticoid. Although similar data were obtained from primary epithelial cells, as pHBEC-ALI or -SC, greater cooperativity with glucocorticoid was apparent for BIRC3. In the pHBECs, BIRC2 was generally less induced, but showed modest enhancement by combinations with glucocorticoid. In both A549 cells and pHBECs, IFNG had no effect on BIRC2 or BIRC3 mRNA expression at 6 h, but promoted some enhancements at 24 h. Many of these later effects were more variable for BIRC3 in the pHBECs. Since events occurring at 24 h were likely due to secondary effects of IFNG stimulation, these were not further studied.

## Effect of proinflammatory cytokines and glucocorticoids on BIRC2 and BIRC3 protein expression
Protein expression for BIRC2 and BIRC3 was also characterized in multiple models of pulmonary epithelial cells to identify possible commonalities and/or differences with primary cells. Protein expression for BIRC2 and BIRC3 was investigated in A549 cells treated with IL1B, TNF and/or dexamethasone, or budesonide (S3 Fig in ). Peak, or near peak, BIRC3 protein was observed from 6 h following IL1B and TNF treatments. Dexamethasone, or budesonide alone produced gradual, and only modest, increases in BIRC3 protein expression with significance reached at 24 h (S3 Fig in ). IL1B-plus-dexamethasone or TNF-plus-dexamethasone treated cells also showed robust and significantly enhanced BIRC3 protein expression from 6–24 h, with greatest effects occurring at 24 h (S3 Fig in ). BIRC2 protein expression was largely unaffected by IL1B, TNF and/or dexamethasone treatments (S3 Fig in ). At 6 and 24 h, BIRC3 protein expression was significantly enhanced by IL1B and dexamethasone, with the effect of IL1B-plus-dexamehthasone combination was comparable to IL1B alone ( ). TNF significantly increased BIRC3 protein levels and this was further enhanced with TNF-plus-dexamethasone at 24 h ( ). Comparing the sum of the effects of TNF and dexamethasone alone with the effect of TNF-plus-dexamethasone indicated supra-additivity ( ). BIRC2 protein expression was not significantly affected by any of these treatments.
 A549 cells were treated for 6 h with various concentrations of IL1B, TNF, dexamethasone, or budesonide and BIRC3 protein expression was evaluated by western blotting. In each case, IL1B, TNF, dexamethasone, and budesonide produced concentration-dependent enhancements of BIRC3 expression with EC50 values of 51.3 pg/ml, 4.3 ng/ml, 1.8 nM and 3.8 nM respectively (S4 Fig in ). This confirmed that maximal, or near-maximal, concentrations of each cytokine and glucocorticoid were used in the prior experiments. Thus, the observed supra-additivity between cytokines and glucocorticoids on BIRC3 expression represents positive co-operativity between pathways that were maximally activated by each treatment.
In bronchial epithelial BEAS-2B cells, IL1B and dexamethasone at 6 h each modestly enhanced BIRC3 protein expression and this was significantly enhanced by the combination treatment (S5A Fig in ). Similar, although non-significant, effects were apparent at 24 h. When compared to IL1B or dexamethasone alone, the combination of IL1B-plus-dexamethasone was greater than the sum of the effects at 6 h, showing supra-additivity, but not at 24 h (S5B Fig in ). In Calu-3 cells, an immortalized epithelial cell line derived from human bronchial submucosal glands, IL1B significantly increased BIRC3 protein with a more modest increase produced by dexamethasone alone (S5A Fig in ). However, while BIRC3 protein expression was significantly enhanced by the combination treatment and this was significantly greater than for IL1B or dexamethasone alone, the effect was not significantly more than additivity (S5B Fig in ). pHBEC-SC showed only minor enhancements in BIRC3 protein expression with IL1B or budesonide but showed considerably greater and significant enhancements with IL1B-plus-budesoinde at 6 and 24 h ( ). Numerically, this was supra-additive at both timepoints, but was only significant at 24 h ( ). In pHBEC-ALI culture, IL1B induced BIRC3 expression at both 6 and 24 h, whereas the effect of budesonide was more modest and not significant ( ). IL1B-plus-budesonide significantly induced BIRC3 expression at 24 h. While not significant, the enhancement of BIRC3 protein by the combination was numerically supra-additive (p-value 0.056) at 6 h ( ). In BEAS-2B, Calu-3 and pHBEC-SC or pHBEC-ALI’s, BIRC2 expression was largely unaffected by IL1B and/or dexamethasone/budesonide.
The above findings highlight many similarities in the expression of BIRC2 and BIRC3 protein when induced by inflammatory cytokines and/or glucocorticoids in undifferentiated and highly differentiated primary cell culture as well as in cell lines. While there may be cooperative interactions occurring between inflammatory stimulus and glucocorticoids in some models, the data nevertheless support the use of A549 cells to investigate the acute mechanisms of regulation observed for each stimulus. In the following analyses, we investigated regulation primarily at 6 h to avoid indirect effects that would prove difficult to delineate mechanistically.

## Role of NF-κB in the induction of BIRC2 and BIRC3 expression by proinflammatory cytokines
To explore contributions due to the NF-κB pathway in the ability of IL1B or TNF to induce BIRC2 and BIRC3 expression, pools of 4 control- or RELA-targeting siRNAs were titrated against RELA expression in NF-κB luciferase reporter cells ( ). The control siRNA pool was without effect, while maximal reductions in RELA expression were achieved by the RELA-targeting pool at 1 and 10 nM. This correlated with dramatic losses of IL1B-induced NF-κB luciferase reporter activity. In the presence of IL1B or TNF, silencing of RELA significantly reduced both IL1B- and TNF-induced NF-κB reporter activity ( ), these data are consistent with key roles for RELA in the induction of NF-κB-dependent transcription leading to IL1B- and TNF-induced BIRC3. Furthermore, the RELA-targeting siRNAs significantly reduced TNF-, IL1B- and IL1B-plus-dexamethasone-induced BIRC3 protein expression ( and S6 Fig in ). The loss of BIRC3 protein, that was apparent in unstimulated cells following RELA-targeting ( ), raises a possible role for basal NF-κB activity in maintaining low-level BIRC3 protein expression. Any changes in BIRC2 protein expression were only modest and not significant (data not shown).
 In A549 cells, over-expression of the dominant inhibitor, IκBαΔN, is highly effective at preventing IL1B-induced activation of NF-κB [ ]. In prior studies [ ], A549 cells were infected (MOI 25) with Ad5-IκBαΔN or, as a control, Ad5-GFP, followed by treatment with IL1B or IL1B-plus-budesonide for 24 h. While Ad5-IκBαΔN robustly prevented NF-κB-dependent transcription [ ], there was little effect on basal BIRC3 mRNA expression, but IL1B- or IL1B-plus-dexamethasone-induced BIRC3 mRNA was abolished ( ). Additionally, the modest induction of BIRC2 mRNA in IL1B- and IL1B-plus-dexamethasone-treated cells was prevented by Ad5-IκBαΔN, whereas basal BIRC2 mRNA expression was unaffected by either Ad5-IκBαΔN or Ad5-GFP. Similarly, the selective IKK2 inhibitor, PS-1145, reduced activation of NF-κB [ , ] and, at 30 μM maximally inhibits IκBα (serine 32 and 36) phosphorylation and NF-κB-dependent transcription [ ]. This concentration of PS-1145 significantly decreased BIRC3 mRNA expression that was induced by IL1B and IL1B-plus-dexamethasone ( ). TNF-induced BIRC3 mRNA expression was also significantly reduced by PS-1145 and in TNF-plus-dexamethasone treated cells, BIRC3 mRNA was markedly reduced, although this did not reach significance ( ). Dexamethasone-induced BIRC3 mRNA, while not significantly changed by PS-1145, was noticeably reduced and this is consistent with the repressive effect of IκBαDN on basal BIRC3 expression in the prior experiment. Following IL1B or TNF treatments, with or without dexamethasone, BIRC2 mRNA expression was unaffected by PS-1145 ( ). A549 cells were also pre-treated with PS-1145 and the related compound, ML-120B, which is maximally effective in A549 cells at 30 μM [ ]. PS-1145 significantly reduced IL1B-induced BIRC3 protein expression at 6 and 24 h ( ). Significant loss of BIRC3 protein was also shown for PS-1145 on the TNF treatment at 24 h. Likewise, ML-120B significantly reduced BIRC3 expression in cells treated with IL1B at 24 h or TNF at 6 h. Expression of BIRC2 protein was modestly, and with the exception of ML120B on the TNF treatment at 24 h, not significantly, reduced by PS-1145 and ML-120B in IL1B or TNF-treated cells (data not shown). Taken together, these data suggest that IKK2, in the canonical NF-κB activation pathway, contributes to IL1B- and TNF-induced BIRC3 gene expression. However, the lack of effect of PS-1145 on IL1B or TNF-induced BIRC2 mRNA, yet repression by IκBαDN, raises the possibility of BIRC2 induction via IKK2-independent, non-canonical pathways.
 

## BIRC3 expression induced by glucocorticoids requires GR
Possible roles for GR in the ability of glucocorticoid to induce BIRC3 expression were evaluated using ORG34517, a competitive GR antagonist [ , ], and siRNA-mediated silencing of GR. In A549 cells, BIRC3 mRNA expression was induced by dexamethasone and budesonide in a concentration-dependent manner that, as shown by the right-shifts in their response curves, was competitive with ORG34517 ( and S7A Fig in ). Schild analysis produced pA2 values of 8.4 and 8.0 for dexamethasone and budesonide, respectively, which is consistent with competition at GR [ ]. Similarly, ORG34517 significantly antagonized the ability of dexamethasone to induce BIRC3 protein at low concentrations but was ineffective against dexamethasone at 1 μM ( ).
 In A549 cells harboring a stably integrated 2×GRE luciferase reporter, each of four GR-targeting siRNAs strongly suppressed GR protein expression and significantly reduced 2×GRE reporter activity induced by dexamethasone, whereas control siRNA had no effect (S7B Fig in ). Pooling of the four siRNAs to achieve the same aggregate final concentration yielded an essentially identical inhibition curve (data not shown) and was subsequently used at final concentration of 1 nM. Following dexamethasone treatment, the GR-targeting siRNA pool, but not the control siRNAs, strongly and significantly reduced BIRC3 mRNA and protein expression ( ). GR silencing was also confirmed. In addition, BIRC3 protein was significantly reduced following GR targeting in the IL1B-plus-dexamethasone treated cells ( ). Thus, glucocorticoid enhanced and IL1B plus glucocorticoid-induced BIRC3 expression appears to require the GR.

## TNF selectively destabilizes BIRC2 and BIRC3 protein
To investigate the stability of BIRC2 and BIRC3 proteins, A549 cells were pre-treated with IL1B or TNF for 1 h prior to addition (t = 0) of the translational blocker, cycloheximide (CHX), and then harvested at the indicated timepoints ( ). This protocol was adopted to allow possible effects on BIRC expression to be assessed while reducing the impact of protein synthesis inhibition on the control of acutely-activated signaling pathways [ , ]. After 1 h (i.e. t = 0), there was relatively little effect of IL1B or TNF on either BIRC3 or 2 expression ( ). Nevertheless, 1 h of TNF (t = 0) significantly reduced BIRC2 expression and this is consistent with data depicted in S3 Fig in . IL1B and TNF markedly enhanced BIRC3 protein at t = 6 h (7 h post IL1B or TNF), while modestly, but not significantly, inducing BIRC2 protein expression ( ). In IL1B-plus-CHX-treated cells, BIRC3 and BIRC2 protein expression was not induced and even after 6 h, the expression remained similar to the level at t = 0 ( ). This was also apparent in unstimulated cells treated with CHX alone. However, 6 h following TNF-plus-CHX treatment, both BIRC3 and BIRC2 protein expression was consistently and significantly reduced compared to basal expression ( ). These data show divergent effects of IL1B and TNF on BIRC2 and BIRC3 protein stability, whereby TNF, but not IL1B, stimulation led to a dramatic loss of BIRC protein stability.
 Given that BIRC3 protein expression induced by both IL1B and TNF was maximal, or near maximal, at 6 h ( ), A549 cells were stimulated with IL1B or TNF for 6 h prior to the addition of CHX (t = 0) ( ). In each case, IL1B and TNF strongly induced the expression of BIRC3 (i.e. at t = 0). In the absence of CHX, basal, IL1B- and TNF-induced BIRC3 remained constant for 6 h ( ). This was largely unaffected by the addition of CHX and there were no significant differences in BIRC3 expression between CHX, IL1B-plus-CHX or TNF-plus-CHX treatments. These data indicate that unlike basal expression of BIRC2 and BIRC3 proteins, following acute treatment with TNF, the BIRC3 protein expression that was induced by IL1B or TNF at 6 h remained stable and was relatively long-lived.
 

## Proteasome inhibition rescues TNF-induced degradation of BIRC2 and BIRC3
To further interrogate the role of protein degradation in regulating BIRC3 and 2 expression, A549 cells were incubated with MG-132, MG-262 or PR-171, which all inhibit the activity of the proteolytic 20S core of the 26S proteasome [ – ], and the cysteine proteinase inhibitor, E-64 [ ]. Western blotting of whole A549 cell extracts for K48 ubiquitin revealed striking increases in signal following IL1B or TNF treatments in the presence of the three proteasome inhibitors, but not E-64 (S8A Fig in ). As K48 ubiquitylation is typically the cue for proteolytic degradation via the 26S proteasome [ ], these data suggest efficacy of each compound and pave the way for analysis of BIRC expression following IL1B and TNF stimulation ( ). In unstimulated cells, there was no effect of the proteasome inhibitors or E-64 on basal BIRC3 or BIRC2 expression (S8B Fig in and ). However, the induction of BIRC3 protein expression at 6 h by IL1B or TNF was prevented by MG-132, MG-262 and PR-171, but not E-64 ( ). Similar data were obtained 2 h following IL1B and TNF treatment (S8B Fig in ). While proteolytic turnover of BIRCs may have been prevented by inhibitors of the 26S proteasome, the fact that both BIRC3 and 2 appear to be regulated via NF-κB (above) raises the prospect that inhibition of NF-κB was overriding and could therefore explain the current observations. Titration of each compound on an NF-κB-dependent luciferase reporter confirmed profound inhibition of IL1B and TNF-induced NF-κB activity by the proteosome inhibitors, but a lesser effect of E-64 (S8C Fig in ). A549 cells were therefore treated with TNF for 1 h prior to the addition of MG-132, MG-262, PR-171 and E-64 in the presence of CHX. Following TNF-plus-CHX treatment, BIRC3 expression was completely lost, but this was rescued by MG-132, MG-262 and PR-171, and not E-64 ( , upper panel). Similarly, while BIRC2 expression was not modulated by TNF, in the presence of TNF-plus-CHX, BIRC2 expression virtually disappeared ( , lower). The loss of BIRC2 in TNF-plus-CHX-treated cells was also markedly attenuated by MG-132, MG-262 and PR-171, but not by E-64 ( , lower panel). These data confirm the TNF-induced loss of BIRC2 and BIRC3 proteins and indicate a role for the 26S proteasome in their degradation.
 

## Discussion
Precise roles for BIRC2 and BIRC3 remain controversial and they are commonly grouped together as crucial, but apparently redundant, positive regulators of TNF-induced NF-κB and in resisting apoptosis [ ]. Thus, BIRC2/3 double-deficient cells, or treatment with BIRC inhibitors, appears to reduce the ability to activate NF-κB and/or sensitizes to cell death [ , , ]. However, while various reports also suggest that BIRC2 and BIRC3 may not be functionally interchangeable, such effects may be cell type, receptor and/or signal specific, and to date this remains poorly characterized [ – ]. Since the current data document clear differential regulation of BIRC3 and BIRC2 expression in multiple epithelial cell lines and pHBECs, considerable support is provided for the concept that there are key differences in the roles played by each proteins.
In the current studies, BIRC3 mRNA and protein were robustly induced by both IL1B and TNF in multiple pulmonary epithelial cell lines as well as in pHBECs grown as undifferentiated cells in submersion culture or as highly differentiated ALI cultures. Conversely, and despite potential roles for these two BIRCs in cell fate determination during viral infections [ ], the antiviral cytokine, IFNG [ , ], did not acutely induce expression of either BIRC2 or BIRC3. While some effects of INFG were apparent on BIRC expression at 24 h, these were relatively modest, or variable, and a likely a consequence of IFNG inducing downstream effectors that then subsequently induced BIRC expression. Thus, the current data confirm a highly consistent response to inflammatory stimuli, such as IL1B or TNF, in lung epithelial cells that, at least for BIRC3 involved the transcription factor, NF-κB, and activation via an IKK2-dependent pathway. Roles for NF-κB are also supported by previous reports in T cells and promoter analyses using HEK 293 cells [ , ]. Furthermore, while low level expression of BIRC3 was detected in the absence of cytokine stimulation, and is therefore consistent with a possible direct, or immediate, role in signaling, the very considerable increases in BIRC3 expression following IL1B and TNF treatments suggest a more important role at later times following either treatment. These observations contrast markedly with the expression of BIRC2, which was readily detectible by western blotting in unstimulated cells but was relatively unaffected by longer durations of IL1B or TNF treatment. Thus, the near constitutive presence of BIRC2 protein is consistent with possible roles in rapid onset signaling events that occur without the need for new gene expression. However, both IL1B and TNF modestly induced BIRC2 mRNA expression, likely also via NF-κB-, or partially NF-κB-dependent mechanisms. Interestingly, the increases in BIRC2 mRNA induced by IL1B and TNF were refractory to IKK2 inhibitors and this raises the possibility of a non-canonical NF-κB pathway to induce BIRC2 expression. Overall, the relative lack of change in BIRC2 protein raises the possibility that BIRC2 undergoes signal-induced degradation but is then replaced via modestly increased de novo gene expression. Indeed, there was some initial loss of BIRC2 protein expression following TNF treatment that recovered over time. Furthermore, stimulation in the presence of cycloheximide confirmed that TNF, but not IL1B, reduced BIRC2 protein stability in a manner that was attenuated by inhibitors of the 26S proteasome. This effect of TNF was also apparent on basal BIRC3 protein present in unstimulated cells, whereas BIRC3 protein induced by IL1B, or TNF remained stable. Thus, the differential inducibility of BIRC3 compared to the more constitutive expression of BIRC2 suggests a later onset role for BIRC3, whereas BIRC2 would be readily available to participate in immediate signaling events. These current data therefore argue against a simple “redundant” role for these two proteins. Rather, roles in the rapid activation of NF-κB are most likely to be served by BIRC2, while the induction of BIRC3 expression may take on roles in later onset signaling events. The current data therefore provide a temporal framework to explore these effects.
The differential ability of TNF, but not IL1B, to induce proteolytic loss of BIRC2 and BIRC3 raises many further questions. Are these BIRCs both involved in signaling by IL1B and TNF? If so, why in the presence of TNF are there specific mechanisms that act to reduce BIRC expression (and presumably function)? Alternatively, is BIRC signaling only relevant in the presence of TNF and is proteolytic loss a marker of prior BIRC activity? Equally, is the profound enhancement of BIRC3 expression by IL1B a mechanism to prime for anti-apoptotic effects to promote cell survival? While these questions do not currently have clear answers, most data appears to support a role for both BIRC2 and BIRC3 in responses to TNF [ , , , , ]. As BIRC2 and BIRC3 proteins are suggested to be E3 ubiquitin ligases for both activation of signaling and protein degradation, there could be a coordinated switching on and off of TNFR-mediated signaling pathways based on differential BIRC expression kinetics. It is possible that BIRC2 acts as the initial E3 ligase intermediate to allow for TNFR-signaling that is either degraded or supplanted by BIRC3 for later onset signaling. Furthermore, TNF- and IL1B-induced BIRC3 protein was not subject to overt proteolytic degradation suggesting that once induced by NF-κB, the events that previously led to early degradation of BIRC2, or BIRC3, must no longer operate. Reasons for this are yet to be described, but it is salient to note that BIRC2 and BIRC3 are implicated in non-canonic signaling to NF-κB [ , , , ], as well as in responses from NODs [ ], TLRs [ ], other inflammatory receptors and pathways [ ]. Differential roles for BIRC2 and BIRC3, and their possible degradation, will therefore need to be investigated in the context of these different receptor systems.
BIRC2 and BIRC3 also reveal striking differential regulation by glucocorticoids. Like many inflammatory genes that are regulated by NF-κB [ , – ], IL1B- and TNF-induced BIRC2 mRNA was repressed by glucocorticoid co-treatment in A549 cells. However, this effect was not accompanied by corresponding reductions in BIRC2 protein expression suggesting that protein turnover might also be reduced leading to little overall effect. The functional significance of this remains to be explored. Effects of glucocorticoid on BIRC3 were possibly more surprising. In the presence of IL1B and TNF, which, as noted above, induce BIRC3 via an NF-κB-dependent mechanism, there was no evidence of repression by glucocorticoids. Rather in A549 cells, when BIRC3 expression was induced by IL1B it was unaltered by co-addition of glucocorticoid, whereas glucocorticoid in the presence of TNF produced a marked combinatorial, supra-additive effect. Similar failures to repress and synergies with a glucocorticoid were apparent in other epithelial cell lines and in both undifferentiated and differentiated pHBECs. Thus, among inflammatory genes induced by IL1B or TNF, BIRC3 stands out as one that is resistant to repression by glucocorticoids [ , ]. Indeed, the current data documents situations, including in primary epithelial cells, where there is synergy between the inflammatory stimulus and glucocorticoids on the induction of BIRC3 expression. Such observations may account for the presence of BIRC3 expression in severe asthma and the existence of BIRC3 polymorphisms that associate with asthma therefore warrant further investigation [ , ]. Mechanistically, BIRC3 expression was independently induced by glucocorticoids acting via the GR. Indeed, multiple GR bindings sites have been identified at the BIRC3 locus in response to glucocorticoids [ , , ]. Thus, it is plausible that the presence of GR binding to conventional glucocorticoid response elements (GREs) could offset repression that occurs via other mechanisms [ ]. Furthermore, the presence of GR and GREs at the BIRC3 locus may enable transcriptional synergy with factors activated by IL1B or TNF. Positive interactions between GR and various factors, including NF-κB, are widely reported and may underpin the current observations [ , , – ]. Indeed, such interactions are proposed for a ~1 kb BIRC3 promoter region upstream of transcription start that contains putative NF-κB and GRE sites [ ]. However, it is salient to note that this previously reported region does not contain the main GR binding site identified by ChIP-seq [ , , ], and it is therefore likely that important facets of this interaction remain to be described. Indeed, while the current analyses support roles for NF-κB and GR in the rapid induction of BIRC3 by IL1B, TNF and glucocorticoids, how these pathways then interact to produce synergistic increases in BIRC3 expression was not specifically addressed.
Functionally, the effects on BIRC3 expression warrant further consideration. Why would an anti-inflammatory glucocorticoid act to render BIRC3 resistant to repression, or to further increase its expression? We might speculate that it is possible that the induction of BIRC3 by inflammatory stimuli subserves functions that, if inhibited, are detrimental. Indeed, there are multiple examples of inflammatory genes that are maintained by glucocorticoids, for example to ensure feedback control of NF-κB, IL1B and TNF signaling, or inflammatory gene expression [ , , , ]. In the current context, the ability of glucocorticoid to maintain or enhance the expression of BIRC3 with concurrent pro-inflammatory stimuli could be important in maintaining or promoting anti-apoptotic effects, as has been previously suggested [ , ]. Such effects may be important in the context of viral infections, where for example during influenza infection, BIRC3 is thought to be protective [ ].
In conclusion, the current data document differential regulation of BIRC2 and BIRC3 by inflammatory cytokines and glucocorticoids, which we summarize in . We extend many prior observations into primary cells, including undifferentiated and highly differentiated pHBECs. These kinetic data support differential roles for each protein. Thus, the constitutive presence of BIRC2 is consistent with acute effects on signaling, whereas the profoundly induced expression of BIRC3 is more consistent with later onset roles. Importantly, BIRC3 expression was induced by glucocorticoids, and these acted to maintain or even enhance expression in the context of inflammatory stimuli. We therefore postulate that BIRC3 plays key roles in inflammatory signaling, including in the potential prevention of apoptosis. While this may have been conserved during evolution, the functional consequences of glucocorticoids on BIRC3 expression in the context of glucocorticoid therapy requires investigation.

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## Summary table of experimental findings.
Summary table highlighting the commonalities and differences between BIRC2 & BIRC3 expression and regulation found in this study.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 File

## Expression of BIRC2 and BIRC3 in pulmonary epithelial cells.
A549, BEAS2-B, Calu-3, pHBEC-SC and pHBEC-ALI cells were treated with proinflammatory cytokines and glucocorticoids at specific times as per the in-text captions. Included are dose-response curves for IL1B and TNF, siRNA silencing for RELA and GR, proteasome inhibitors and the effect of cycloheximide on K48-Ub. Data for mRNA expression, protein expression and NF-κB- or GRE-dependent luciferase activity are shown. Each figure has a legend detailing the experimental parameters.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 File

## Raw data and uncropped western blot images.
Included are tabular data values used in each individual graph of (1) mRNA expression represented as GENE/GAPDH, (2) NF-κB-dependent luciferase activity shown as relative light units (RLU) of Treatment RLU / Non-stimulated RLU and (3) protein expression as raw densitometric values given as GENE/GAPDH. Additionally, the original, uncropped images for each representative blot are shown with molecular weight marker included. Any lanes not included in the final figure have been marked with an “X” above each lane.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.

 10.1371/journal.pone.0286783.r001Decision Letter 0
SilvaAristóbolo MAcademic Editor© 2023 Aristóbolo M Silva2023Aristóbolo M Silvahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
7 Feb 2023

PONE-D-22-30303Differential regulation of BIRC2 and BIRC3 expression by inflammatory cytokines and glucocorticoids in pulmonary epithelial cellsPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Newton,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
I have assessed your submission, and I agree with the reviewer's comments about the text fluency of the manuscript. I, therefore, request that, besides addressing all the points raised by the reviewers, you revise the text to improve the overall readability of the text, providing fluency and avoiding repetition.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Mar 24 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Aristóbolo M Silva
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. PLOS ONE now requires that authors provide the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot or gel results reported in a submission’s figures or Supporting Information files. This policy and the journal’s other requirements for blot/gel reporting and figure preparation are described in detail at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-preparing-figures-from-image-files. When you submit your revised manuscript, please ensure that your figures adhere fully to these guidelines and provide the original underlying images for all blot or gel data reported in your submission. See the following link for instructions on providing the original image data: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-original-images-for-blots-and-gels.
In your cover letter, please note whether your blot/gel image data are in Supporting Information or posted at a public data repository, provide the repository URL if relevant, and provide specific details as to which raw blot/gel images, if any, are not available. Email us at plosone@plos.org if you have any questions.
3. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.   
4. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This article aims to study the regulation of the expression of BIRC2 and BIRC3 in bronchial epithelial cell lines cultured in the presence of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β or TNFα), in the presence or the absence of the anti-inflammatory compounds dexamethasone or budesonide.
The results shown are interesting but the article is very difficult to read and follow. This could be improved by an introduction in result paragraphs specifying the objectives of the experiments carried out. Moreover, concluding sentence at the end of the result paragraphs could help in the understanding of the results.
I did not understand why the authors analyzed the influence of INFγ (Fig S2D). Since INFγ is no longer used in later experiments and these results are not used for discussion, I believe they are not necessary (line 209-214).
Figure legends: could author indicate the number of experiments (instead of “N”)
Why the authors analyzed the regulation of BIRC2 and BIRC3 expression in pHBEC grown as both submersion culture or as highly differentiated cells? Did they expect different mechanisms of regulation in function of the differentiation state? It seems to me that the results are quite similar, whatever the cell line: A549, pHBEC-SC or pHBEC-ALI and also BEAS-2B and Calu-3. It should be possible to simplify the description of the results in order to avoid repetition and provide fluency (results paragraph 1 and 2).
Figure 3D showed that the IL-1β and TNFα-mediated overexpression of BIRC2 mRNA is prevented by IκBαΔN expression whereas it is not affected by PS-1145 (Figure 4A) that blocks NF-κB. Could authors explain these results. Moreover, PS-1145, as well as ML-120B reduced BIRC2 protein expression in TNF-α-treated cells while PS-1145 did not modify the level of expression of the mRNA. These results have to be explained.
A concluding sentence concerning the role of NF-κB in BIRC3 and BIRC2 expression at the end of the result paragraph 4 could greatly improve the understanding of the results.
Figure 5D. I think that there are errors in the indications of the presence or not of siGR and siCTL.
In the result paragraph 6, the authors analyzed the expression of BIRC3 and BIRC2 proteins in IL-1β or TNFα-treated cells in the presence of absence of cycloheximide. The author should introduce this paragraph and indicate the objectives of these experiments. What is the question addressed? Why did the authors add CHX 1 hours after the cytokine? CHX treatment prevented the IL-1β or TNFα-mediated increase of BIRC3 expression and in a lower extend BIRC2 expression and even decreased BIRC2 protein expression in TNFα-stimulated cells. Again, the authors should give the conclusion of the experiments to help in the understanding of the article. Then, the authors added CHX 6 hours after the cytokine. I did not understand why they did this experiment? What is the question addressed? These points could be precised in the manuscript.
In the last result paragraph, the author analyzed the mechanisms of BIRC2 and BIRC3 degradation? Since the degradation was only observed in the condition of TNFα + CHX treatment (Figure 6B), why did they analyze the condition of IL1β + CHX treatment and why did they analyze the role of proteasome inhibitor on IL1β- or TNFα-induced expression of BIRC3 and BIRC2 ? It is well known that NF-κB activation required proteasome-mediated degradation of IκBα. Since IL1β- or TNFα-induced expression of BIRC3 and BIRC2 is dependent on NF-κB, it seems logical that proteasome inhibitors block the induction of BIRC3 and BIRC2 expression.
The results show that BIRC2 and BIRC3 proteins is degraded 6-7 hours after stimulation of cells with TNFα but not after IL-1β stimulation. This could argue in a favor of a role of BIRC2 and BIRC3 in TNFR signaling pathway but not in IL-1βR signaling pathway. Since BIRC2 is an important cell signaling intermediate in TNFR signaling pathway, we may hypotheze that the degradation of BIRC2 is a feed-back regulatory mechanism in order to regulate TNFR signaling pathway in case of sustain stimulation of receptor. BIRC2 in an E3-ubiquitine ligase able to self-ubiquitinate and stimulate its own degradation and also able to promote the ubiquitinatation and degradation of BIRC3 (in case of Smac mimetic exposure). This point could be discussed.
Reviewer #2: In this excellent study, Thorne et al., from Newton’s group sought to dissociate the redundant roles of BIRC2 and BIRC3 in the regulation of inflammatory signaling in the presence or absence of glucocorticoids (GC) in physiologically relevant cells, airway epithelial cells. The authors used both pulmonary epithelial cell lines (A549, BEAS2B, Calu-3 cells) and primary human bronchial epithelial cells (pHBECs cultured either in submersion culture or ALI). To this end, responses to cytokines (TNF, IL1, IFNg) and GC (Dexamethasone, Budesonide) have been examined in detail. The role of NF-kB in BIRCs expression induced by cytokines has been demonstrated using various strategies such as siRNA, DN, and IKK inhibitors. The involvement of the glucocorticoid receptor in BRCs expression induced by GC has been also demonstrated using GR inhibitor or siRNA GR. The involvement of protein degradation in TNF effects on BRCs was explored and demonstrated using CHX and MG compound. The authors clearly demonstrated the differential regulation of BIRC3 and BIRC2 in epithelial cells by inflammatory cytokines and GC where the constitutive expression of BIRC2 is consistent with acute early events and the inducible expression of BIRC3 is more consistent with later onset roles. The authors also demonstrated that BIRC3 expression is induced by GC and suggested that BIRC3 plays key protective roles in inflammatory signaling. Overall, the study is well-designed, comprehensive and the Ms is well-written. Some minor issues are presented below.
Minor comments:
- While the authors suggested a protective role of BIRC3, some studies showed a correlation between BRC3 and asthma severity (PMID: 27304223). Further discussion is needed.
- While most of the supra-additive effects of IL1b and GC were seen at 24 hr (Fig. 2A), most of the western blot studies (Figs 3C, 5B and FC) were conducted at 6 hr where not clear supra-additive effects were observed. Some justification is needed.
- Figures: Fig 5D, western blot: Experimental conditions under bands, 3, 6, and 9 are not clear. Are those triplicates? Conditions with IL1B only were not presented while stated in the Fig 5D legend.
- Introduction section: Second paragraph, the opposite/contradicting role of BIRCs on the regulation of NF-kB in canonical (line 54-64) versus non-canonical pathways (line 64-67 where the term BRC2/3 inhibition is not clear) is a little bit confusing.
- Due the high number of data and variables in this study, the addition of a summary table highlighting all the findings in one place will enhance the clarity of this study.
- Similarly, a graph depicting the conclusion of the authors should help reinforcing this critical concept and findings generated by this study.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0286783.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
27 Mar 2023

Please see the attached file for our full response to the Editor and reviewers.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0286783.r003Decision Letter 1
SilvaAristóbolo MAcademic Editor© 2023 Aristóbolo M Silva2023Aristóbolo M Silvahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
12 Apr 2023

PONE-D-22-30303R1Differential regulation of BIRC2 and BIRC3 expression by inflammatory cytokines and glucocorticoids in pulmonary epithelial cellsPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Newton,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. One of our reviewers still has raised concerns regarding the article, specifically citing difficulties in following the manuscript and issues with readability.
The reviewer has pointed out that the current version of the manuscript is difficult to follow, making it challenging to read. Additionally, the reviewer has noted that some results are repeated in different figures, and has suggested that the article could be further simplified.
In general, the reviewer has recommended that several figures could be deleted to improve clarity and conciseness, and has raised concerns about contrasting results between Figs. 2A, B and Fig. 6.
Please review the comments from the reviewer and make the necessary changes as requested.
Please submit your revised manuscript by May 27 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Aristóbolo M Silva
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The authors answered to my concerns. However, the article is still difficult to follow. I agree that replication of the results adds robustness but it also brings heaviness and makes the article difficult to read.
1. Figure S1 and Figure 3B both demonstrated that IL-1β and TNFα both induced the activation of NF-κB in the concentrations used in the study. I think that the supplementary Figure 1 can be removed. Then, the authors analyzed the contribution of NF-κB in IL-1β and IL-1β + DEX-induced BIR2 and BIRC3 mRNA expression by using RELA-directed siRNA or IκBα super-repressor. They showed that IL-1β and IL-1β + DEX-induced increased of BIRC2 and BIRC3 mRNA are, at least partly, NF-κB dependent. Then, they confirmed that the increase in BIRC3 protein expression also depended on NF-κB (Figure 3 and S6). The same results were observed in Figure 3C and S6. Could authors simplify the text by describing the two Figure in the same sentence. Since IL1B and IL1B + DEX did not enhanced BIRC2 protein expression (as demonstrated in Figure 2), I think that the authors could simplify the Figure 3 and remove the analysis of BIRC2 protein expression.
2. In Figure 4A, the authors confirmed that NF-κB is involved in the induction of BIRC3 mRNA and protein expression in IL1B, TNFα, IL1B + DEX and TNF + DEX-treated cells by using the IKK2 inhibitor PS-1145. By contrast, PS-1145 did not decrease the induction of BIRC2 mRNA in response to the stimuli. The analysis of BIRC3 protein expression confirmed the involvement of NF-κB. Again, since IL1B and IL1B + DEX did not enhanced BIRC2 protein expression (as demonstrated in Figure 2), I think that the authors could simplify the figure and remove the analysis of BIRC2 protein expression. Since the conclusions of the result paragraph 3 and 4 (Figure 3 and 4) are the same, e.i. the induction of BIRC3 mRNA and protein expression in IL1B, TNF, IL1B + DEX and TNF + DEX treated cells depended on NF-kB, the two paragraphs could be combined.
Line 342: “Dexamethasone-induced BIRC3 mRNA expression was not changed by PS-1145”. I do not agree with this sentence. Although statistically non-significant, the modest induction of BIRC3 in response to dexamethasone (in the left and right panels) in decreased by PS-1145 (Figure 4).
3. The authors analyzed the stability of BIRC2 and BIRC3 proteins in TNFα and IL-1β treated cells (Figure 6). Cells were first treated with the agents for 1 hours, then incubated in the presence or absence of CHX. As expected, IL1b or TNF both enhanced BIRC3 protein expression. While 6 hrs of treatment with IL1B or TNFα did not modify the BIRC2 protein expression in Figure 2A and B, it seems increased BIRC2 protein expression in Figure 6B (quantitative analysis, lower panel)? Is that significant? Could authors explain these results?
4. Figure 8C, left panel reproduced the results of Figure 6B. The authors could simplify and remove this panel. Since the authors demonstrated that IL-1β did not destabilize BIRC2 and BIRC3 protein in Figure 6B, the analysis the importance of proteasome inhibitor on destabilization of BIRC proteins in IL-1β treated cells is not relevant and this can be removed.
Reviewer #2: The authors have adequately addressed all the comments. No further comments.
The authors have adequately addressed all the comments. No further comments.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0286783.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
29 Apr 2023

Response to reviewer comments
Reviewer #1: The authors answered to my concerns. However, the article is still difficult to follow. I agree that replication of the results adds robustness but it also brings heaviness and makes the article difficult to read. 
Author response: Thanks for these remarks. In addition to specifically addressing the concerns raised below, we have also made various minor modifications to the text of the manuscript with the aim of further improving readability. 
1. Figure S1 and Figure 3B both demonstrated that IL-1β and TNFα both induced the activation of NF-κB in the concentrations used in the study. I think that the supplementary Figure 1 can be removed. 
Author Response: While both Fig 3B and Fig S1 do indeed show activation of the NF-κB reporter, the data shown in Fig S1 is necessary to first establish the maximal effective concentrations of IL1B and TNF that are then used in all subsequent experiments. This point was not clearly made in the prior version of the manuscript. Sorry! We have now reworked this part to make the importance of these data more readily apparent to the reader. Thus, Fig S1 represents a necessary piece of initial data and provides the necessary rationale for using 1 ng/ml of IL1B and 10 ng/ml of TNF. We therefore prefer to retain this figure as Supplemental Fig S1.
Then, the authors analyzed the contribution of NF-κB in IL-1β and IL-1β + DEX-induced BIR2 and BIRC3 mRNA expression by using RELA-directed siRNA or IκBα super-repressor. They showed that IL-1β and IL-1β + DEX-induced increased of BIRC2 and BIRC3 mRNA are, at least partly, NF-κB dependent. Then, they confirmed that the increase in BIRC3 protein expression also depended on NF-κB (Figure 3 and S6). The same results were observed in Figure 3C and S6. Could authors simplify the text by describing the two Figure in the same sentence. Since IL1B and IL1B + DEX did not enhanced BIRC2 protein expression (as demonstrated in Figure 2), I think that the authors could simplify the Figure 3 and remove the analysis of BIRC2 protein expression.
Author Response: We have condensed this part of the text as requested by the reviewer. We have also removed Figure 3C bottom panel (analysis of BIRC2 protein expression) and have also condensed the relevant parts of the text relating to these data.
2. In Figure 4A, the authors confirmed that NF-κB is involved in the induction of BIRC3 mRNA and protein expression in IL1B, TNFα, IL1B + DEX and TNF + DEX-treated cells by using the IKK2 inhibitor PS-1145. By contrast, PS-1145 did not decrease the induction of BIRC2 mRNA in response to the stimuli. The analysis of BIRC3 protein expression confirmed the involvement of NF-κB. Again, since IL1B and IL1B + DEX did not enhanced BIRC2 protein expression (as demonstrated in Figure 2), I think that the authors could simplify the figure and remove the analysis of BIRC2 protein expression. 
Author Response: As requested, we have deleted the protein expression analysis for BIRC2 when cells were treated with PS-1145. The relevant parts of the text have also been amended to reflect this change. 
Since the conclusions of the result paragraph 3 and 4 (Figure 3 and 4) are the same, e.i. the induction of BIRC3 mRNA and protein expression in IL1B, TNF, IL1B + DEX and TNF + DEX treated cells depended on NF-kB, the two paragraphs could be combined.
Author Response: As requested, we have condensed the text to include the effect of NF-κB on BIRC expression as a single section of results.
Line 342: “Dexamethasone-induced BIRC3 mRNA expression was not changed by PS-1145”. I do not agree with this sentence. Although statistically non-significant, the modest induction of BIRC3 in response to dexamethasone (in the left and right panels) in decreased by PS-1145 (Figure 4).
Author Response: We thank the reviewer for this keen observation. We agree that there may be a genuine effect where cells treated with Dex + PS-1145 as this does appear to result in a lower level of BIRC3 mRNA. However, we note that this effect was not significant. Nevertheless, inhibition of NF-κB may well reduce the basal expression of BIRC3 as supporting evidence can be seen in Figs 3C, 3D and 4A where there are also modest reductions in BIRC3 expression following NF-κB is inhibition in the unstimulated groups. We have revised the sentence that was flagged by the reviewer and have commented on the possible role of basal NF-κB activity, i.e. even in unstimulated cells. 
3. The authors analyzed the stability of BIRC2 and BIRC3 proteins in TNFα and IL-1β treated cells (Figure 6). Cells were first treated with the agents for 1 hours, then incubated in the presence or absence of CHX. As expected, IL1b or TNF both enhanced BIRC3 protein expression. While 6 hrs of treatment with IL1B or TNFα did not modify the BIRC2 protein expression in Figure 2A and B, it seems increased BIRC2 protein expression in Figure 6B (quantitative analysis, lower panel)? Is that significant? Could authors explain these results?
Author Response: The modest effect on BIRC2 expression shown in Figure 6 that is mentioned by the referee was not significant. As noted by the reviewer, there is some variability when documenting BIRC2 expression throughout the manuscript. We believe that this is primarily due to the inherent variability in western blotting combined with small biological effects and relatively small samples sizes. It is worth noting that any changes in BIRC2 protein expression were less than 2-fold. Western blotting, as semi-quantitative, or comparative, technique (& depending on operator skill) is not really robust enough to clearly document such small expression changes. While some blots appear to support a slight increase in BIRC2, others don’t. Overall, any changes were difficult to consistently capture and this resulted in non-significant outcomes. 
4. Figure 8C, left panel reproduced the results of Figure 6B. The authors could simplify and remove this panel. Since the authors demonstrated that IL-1β did not destabilize BIRC2 and BIRC3 protein in Figure 6B, the analysis the importance of proteasome inhibitor on destabilization of BIRC proteins in IL-1β treated cells is not relevant and this can be removed.
Author Response: With the aim of creating a concise manuscript, we have removed Figure 8C left- and middle-panel. As a consequence, several lines of text have been removed from this section.
Reviewer #2: The authors have adequately addressed all the comments. No further comments.
The authors have adequately addressed all the comments. No further comments.
Author Response: We thank the reviewer for this.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0286783.r005Decision Letter 2
SilvaAristóbolo MAcademic Editor© 2023 Aristóbolo M Silva2023Aristóbolo M Silvahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
24 May 2023

Differential regulation of BIRC2 and BIRC3 expression by inflammatory cytokines and glucocorticoids in pulmonary epithelial cells
PONE-D-22-30303R2
Dear Dr. Newton,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Aristóbolo M Silva
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0286783.r006Acceptance letter
SilvaAristóbolo MAcademic Editor© 2023 Aristóbolo M Silva2023Aristóbolo M Silvahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
26 May 2023

PONE-D-22-30303R2 
Differential regulation of BIRC2 and BIRC3 expression by inflammatory cytokines and glucocorticoids in pulmonary epithelial cells 
Dear Dr. Newton:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Aristóbolo M Silva 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE