pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosoneplosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC11581344PMC11581344.111581344115813443957091510.1371/journal.pone.0310394PONE-D-24-076701Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryBioenergeticsEnergy-Producing OrganellesMitochondriaBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesEnergy-Producing OrganellesMitochondriaBiology and Life SciencesBioengineeringBiotechnologyGenetic EngineeringGenetically Modified OrganismsGenetically Modified AnimalsEngineering and TechnologyBioengineeringBiotechnologyGenetic EngineeringGenetically Modified OrganismsGenetically Modified AnimalsResearch and Analysis MethodsAnimal StudiesExperimental Organism SystemsModel OrganismsMouse ModelsResearch and Analysis MethodsModel OrganismsMouse ModelsResearch and Analysis MethodsAnimal StudiesExperimental Organism SystemsAnimal ModelsMouse ModelsBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsMuscle CellsCardiomyocytesBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyBiological TissueMuscle TissueMuscle CellsCardiomyocytesMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyBiological TissueMuscle TissueMuscle CellsCardiomyocytesBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyElectrophysiologyMembrane PotentialBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesCell MembranesMembrane FusionMedicine and Health SciencesVascular MedicineBlood PressureBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryBioenergeticsEnergy-Producing OrganellesMitochondriaMitochondrial MembraneBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesEnergy-Producing OrganellesMitochondriaMitochondrial MembraneCardiac effects of OPA1 protein promotion in a transgenic animal model
Cardiac effects of OPA1 protein promotion in a transgenic animal modelhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-7544-009XBrusztKittiData curationInvestigationMethodologyWriting – original draft HorvathOrsolyaData curationInvestigationProject administration https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8269-7256OrdogKatalinData curationMethodologyProject administration TothSzilardData curationValidationVisualizationWriting – review & editing JuhaszKataInvestigationMethodology https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0622-442XVamosEszterInvestigationMethodology FeketeKatalinInvestigationMethodologyProject administration GallyasFerencConceptualizationSupervisionWriting – review & editing TothKalmanConceptualizationSupervisionWriting – review & editing HalmosiRobertConceptualizationResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1808-3724DeresLaszloConceptualizationData curationProject administrationSupervisionVisualizationWriting – review & editing 1
1st Department of Medicine, University of Pecs Medical School, Pecs, Hungary2
Szentagothai Research Centre, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary3
Department of Biochemistry and Medical Chemistry, University of Pecs Medical School, Pecs, HungaryBaruffiniEnricoEditor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and files.

## Introduction
Mitochondria are the main source of cellular energy production through oxidative phosphorylation, accounting for 95% of the ATP synthesis [ , ]. The morphology of the mitochondrial network is complex and highly variable due to mitochondrial dynamics, adapting to the cell’s energy needs. Mitochondrial dynamics, involving fusion and fission processes, are crucial for cellular energy production, maintaining cellular health, regulating apoptosis, and ensuring the removal of damaged mitochondrial components. The dynamic balance influences spatial distribution of mitochondria within cells, prevents disease-related imbalances, regulates reactive oxygen species formation as well as cellular signaling pathways. Overall, mitochondrial dynamics play a central role in sustaining cellular function and responding to changing physiological conditions [ – ]. The balance between fusion and fission processes is crucial for maintaining proper spatial distribution and optimal mitochondrial function [ – ].
Cytosolic proteins such as dynamin-related protein-1 (DRP1) and outer mitochondrial membrane partners, including fission 1 (Fis1), mitochondrial fission factor (MFF) and mitochondrial dynamics protein (49 kDa—MiD49 and 51 kDa—MiD51) control the fission process. Mitofusin 1 and 2 (Mfn 1 and 2) facilitate outer membrane fusion, while the long form of optic atrophy-1 (OPA1), a member of the GTPase family, promotes inner membrane fusion. Imbalances in the fission-fusion machinery can lead to impaired mitochondrial function, increased free radical production, opening of anion channels, and membrane depolarization, ultimately inducing mitochondrial fission [ – ]. To address this, damaged mitochondria are targeted for elimination through mitophagy, a process mediated by the PINK1/Parkin pathway [ , ] ( ).
 Mitochondrial dynamics, including processes like fusion and fission, are implicated in cardiovascular diseases. Dysregulation of these processes, as we mentioned above, could cause disturbances in mitochondrial functions that play role in the development and progression of various cardiovascular conditions, including ischemic heart disease, cardiomyopathies, and heart failure [ – ]. Understanding and targeting mitochondrial dynamics may offer opportunities for therapeutic interventions in cardiovascular diseases. Therefore, alongside the investigation of compounds targeting the direct mitochondrial attack points (ie. MitoCsA, Cyclosporin), studies have emerged focusing on influencing mitochondrial dynamics, too.
It has been observed that in heart failure the mitochondrial network of cardiomyocytes is disrupted and dynamics are shifted towards fission. Because of membrane instability during fission, the membrane potential between the two sides of the inner membrane decreases. This is associated with a deterioration in mitochondrial function, resulting in reduced amount of high-energy phosphates, decreased creatine phosphate/ATP ratio and impaired electron transport chain function, as well as increased production of oxygen free radicals and calcium levels [ , – ].
Initially, attempts were made to prevent the fission-induced decrease of membrane potential and deterioration of mitochondrial function, by inhibiting the fission processes themselves. The first and foremost investigated compound is Mdivi-1 or mitochondrial division inhibitor 1, that is a small molecule that has been studied for its potential role in inhibiting mitochondrial fragmentation. Mdivi-1 is thought to act by targeting a protein called dynamin-related protein 1 (DRP1), which plays a key role in mitochondrial fission [ ]. The DRP1 protein inhibitor Mdivi-1 has protective effect against overload-induced acute heart failure and preventing a fission-induced decrease in membrane potential [ – ]. Moreover, it also has protective effect against doxorubicin-induced cardiac injury and in acute myocardial infarction and ischemia-reperfusion injury models [ – ].
It is important to note that despite the above-mentioned positive effects, there are no data regarding the long-term effect of Mdivi-1, moreover its safety and efficacy in humans are still areas of ongoing research. Recent data suggest that Mdivi-1 in cardiomyocytes can also cleave L-OPA1, decrease the expression of OXPHOS complex proteins, and elevate the superoxide production. These effects lead to impaired mitochondrial respiration and inhibition of macro-autophagy [ ]. The inhibition of fission, and consequently the mitophagy, may not necessarily yield long-term benefits.
Therefore, in chronic stress scenarios instead of fission-inhibition, fusion promotion and stabilization of membrane structure came to the forefront of the research. It is assumed that shifting mitochondrial dynamics towards fusion may also have a positive effect on the outcome of heart failure. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that knocking out the fusion proteins OPA1 and Mfn2 caused heart failure [ , – ].
One of the proteins responsible for mitochondrial fusion is the long form of the GTPase family OPA1 protein (L-OPA1), which binds to the inner membrane and promotes fusion by soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE) complex formation after GTP hydrolysis, preventing membrane integrity and inhibiting pore formation. L-OPA1 is cleaved by proteases YME1L1 and OMA1, resulting in the formation of a soluble short form of OPA1 (S-OPA), which limits fusion and plays a role in mitophagy [ – ].
Several genetic animal models have been developed to study the effects of OPA1 protein. A muscle-specific OPA1 KO mutation in neonatal mice led to death within 9 days postnatally, so an inducible OPA1 knock-out model was also established. These animals showed signs of premature aging and died within 3 months of induction [ ]. Using X chromosome-targeted Opa1 transgenesis, moderate OPA1 overexpression was observed in all cells [ ]. These mice were fertile and had normal lifespan, with improved respiratory chain efficiency and they showed protective effects in certain genetic mitochondrial disease models [ , ].
In this study we aimed to investigate and provide a basic cardiological characterization of the promotion of OPA-1 protein in mice.
In our animal model, we used heterozygous knock-in mice in which a ΔS1 mutant version of the Opa1 gene coding sequence was transfected. Therefore, in addition to the wild-type OPA1, mice also express a ΔS1 mutant version of OPA1 protein which cannot be cleaved by OMA1 protease. The OMA1 protease is activated by stress, mitochondrial damage and membrane potential reduction and this protein is responsible for cleaving OPA1 at the S1 cleavage site. YME1L1 constitutively regulates OPA1 processing by cleavage at the S2 cleavage site. We suggest that deleting the OMA1 S1 cleavage site prevents the stress response-induced S-OPA1 dominance and consequent mitochondrial fragmentation. The stable L-OPA1 contributes to cristae structure stability, while the constitutively active YME1L1 maintains the necessary S-OPA1 levels for normal function, including normal fission induction and chaperone functions.

## Materials and methods

## Ethics statement
Animals received care according to the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals published by the US National Institute of Health and the experiment was approved by the Animal Research Review Committee of the University of Pecs, Medical School (Permit number: BA02/2000-48/2022).

## Animal model
Mice were housed in controlled environments maintained at 20–24°C with 30–70% humidity and a 12-hour light/dark cycle in the Animal Research Facility of Szentagothai Research Center, University of Pecs. They were kept in spacious, durable cages providing at least 75 cm2 per mouse, with soft bedding. Social housing is prioritized, with compatible groups to promote natural behaviors, and environmental enrichment is provided through nesting materials, tunnels, and toys.
To alleviate suffering during procedures (echocardiography) and sacrificing, mice are first placed in an induction chamber with isoflurane gas to ensure a gentle induction of anesthesia. During harvesting, a combination of ketamine (100 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg) is administered for anesthesia, with maintenance using isoflurane. Once fully anesthetized, they undergo a thoracotomy, where the chest cavity is carefully opened. The heart is then removed and biological sampling is performed, ensuring the process is swift and humane to minimize distress and pain.
In our study OPA1 male transgenic mice (n = 10) were used, bred at the Department of Biochemistry and Medical Chemistry, University of Pecs, Medical School (permit number: KA-3440). In our model, we used knock-in mice that had the ΔS1 mutant version of the Opa1 gene sequence inserted into their DNA using a PiggyBac transposon gene expression vector. This mutant variant lacks the sequence encoding the S1 cleavage site (190–200 amino acids), resulting in mice expressing the ΔS1 mutant version of the OPA1 protein in addition to the wild-type OPA1 variant, which cannot be cleaved by OMA1 protease. The mutation is maintained in heterozygous. Wild-type littermates from transgenic animals were used as controls. Genotyping was performed at separation.
11-week-old OPA1 male transgenic mice (n = 10) and their wild-type littermates (n = 12) were used. Between 11 and 36 weeks of age echocardiography, blood pressure measurement and ECG were regularly performed. At the end of the experimental period, the animals were sacrificed, then hearts and lungs were removed. Atria and great vessels were trimmed from the ventricles, and the weight of the ventricles was measured. Hearts were fixed in 6% formalin for histology or freeze-clamped for Western blot analysis. Lungs were frozen to determine the wet/dry lung ratio.

## Echocardiographic measurements
Transthoracic echocardiography was performed under inhalation anesthesia at the beginning of the experiment (11 week) and on the day of sacrifice (36 week). The mice were lightly anesthetized with a mixture of 1.5% isoflurane and 98.5% oxygen. The chest of the animals was shaved, and acoustic coupling gel was applied. The animals were imaged in the left lateral position, and a warming pad was used to maintain normothermia. Heart rate did not differ considerably during anesthesia between the groups. Ventricular dimensions, wall thicknesses, and systolic functions were measured from parasternal short and long-axis views just above the midpapillary level. Parameters (E, A, and E’) required for the evaluation of diastolic function were measured from the apical 4 chamber view. For the imaging of mice, VEVO 3100 high-resolution ultrasound imaging system (VisualSonics, Toronto, Canada) was used, which was equipped with a 25 MHz transducer. LV inner dimensions (LVIDd and LVIDs), LV end-diastolic volume (LVEDV), LV end-systolic volume (LVESV), E/A, and E/E’ ratio were determined. EF (percentage) was calculated by 100 × [(LVEDV − LVESV)/LVEDV].

## Non-invasive blood pressure measurement
Non-invasive blood pressure measurements were carried out on each animal at the beginning (11 week of age) and the at end of the study (36 weeks of age). Blood pressure measurement was performed by a non-invasive tail-cuff method using Hatteras SC1000 Blood Pressure Analysis System (Panlab, Harvard Apparatus).

## Determination of plasma B-type natriuretic peptide
After the sacrifice, blood samples were collected into Lavender Vacutainer tubes containing EDTA and aprotinin (0.6 IU/mL of blood) and were centrifuged at 1600g for 15 min at 4°C to separate the plasma. Supernatants were collected and BNP were determined by ELISA method as the manufacturer proposed (Mouse BNP ELISA Kit, Novus Biologicals, #NBP2-70011).

## Histology
Hearts were removed for histological examination at the end of the study. Ventricles were fixed in 6% formalin, sliced, and embedded in paraffin. Five-micrometer-thick sections were cut serially from the base to the apex by microtome. Six-six animals from both transgenic and wild-type groups and 3 sections from each heart were used to determine interstitial collagen deposition in the heart. Images (magnification 10x) were randomly taken from the middle region of the left ventricle wall on each section. The fibrotic area was determined on each image, and the mean value of nine images represents each animal. Masson’s Trichrome staining was applied to visualize interstitial fibrosis. Fifteen-month-old mice were used as positive controls. Picrosirius red dye was used to measure cardiomyocyte diameter as a cellular marker of myocardial hypertrophy. Six animals from both groups and three sections from each animal were used to determine the cell diameter. Images (magnification 10x) were randomly taken from the free LV wall on each section. The fitted polygon technique was used to determine the area of the cells and the calculated diameter was used for statistical analysis. 100 cardiomyocytes were measured from each animal in order to evaluate the cardiomyocyte diameter and each group contained 6 animals.
Immunohistochemical staining was used to determine the extent of oxidative damage. Monoclonal anti-nitrotyrosine antibody (Abcam, ab125106) was used to measure oxidative damage of the proteins and anti-8-oxoguanine antibody (Abcam, ab206461) was used to measure oxidative DNA damage. Binding was visualized with a biotinylated secondary antibody followed by the avidin–biotin-peroxidase detection system using DAB as chromogen. Progress of the immunoreaction was monitored under a light microscope and the reaction was stopped by the removal of DAB. Six-six animals from both transgenic and wild-type groups and 3 sections from the free wall of the left ventricle of each heart were used to determine the degree of oxidative damage to the heart. ImageJ software was used to determine the extent of DAB staining on 20x magnification images.

## Electron microscopic examination of hearts
For electron microscopic analysis, hearts were perfused retrogradely through the aortic root with ice-cold PBS to wash away blood and then washed by modified Kranowsky fixative (2% paraformaldehyde, 2.5% glutaraldehyde, 0.1 M Na-cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4 and 3 mM CaCl2). The electron microscopic samples were prepared as described earlier [ ], and they were examined with a JEM 1200EX-II electron microscope. Four animals of each group, 3–5 blocks from each animal were used. The area of interfibrillar mitochondria (IFM) were measured by free hand polygon selection (n ~ 500/group) using the NIH ImageJ software.

## Neonatal Mouse Cardiomyocyte (NMCM) cell culture
Cardiomyocytes were isolated using the Pierce™ Primary Cardiomyocyte Isolation Kit (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA #88281) from 1-3-day old neonatal OPA1 transgenic mice and their wild-type littermates. The isolation of cardiomyocytes was performed as described earlier [ ].

## Western-blot analysis

## Western blot sample preparation from cardiac tissue
Thirty milligrams of lateral ventricle wall from 8–8 animals were homogenized in ice-cold Tris buffer (50 mmol/l, pH 8.0) containing protease inhibitor (1:100; Sigma-Aldrich Co., #P8340) and phosphatase inhibitor (1:100; Sigma-Aldrich Co. #P5726). The supernatants were harvested in 2x concentrated sodium dodecyl sulphate- (SDS-) polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis sample buffer.

## Electrophoresis and transfer of proteins
Proteins were separated on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. After blocking (2 h with 2% non-fat dry milk in Tris-buffered saline), membranes were probed overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies recognizing the following antigens: glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase GAPDH; 1:1000; Cell Signaling #2118) as a loading control, optic atrophy 1 (OPA1(D6U6N); 1:1000; Cell Signaling #80471), DYKDDDD Tag (FLAG; 1:500; Invitrogen #PA1-984B), voltage-dependent anion channel (VDAC; 1:1000; Cell Signaling #4866), Bcl-2/E1B-19kDa interacting protein 3 (BNIP3; 1:1000; Cell Signaling #3769), mitofusin 1 (Mfn1(11E91H1); 1:200; Abcam #ab126575), mitofusin 2 (Mfn2(D2D10); 1:1000; Cell Signaling #9482), dynamin-realated protein 1 (DRP1(4E11B11); 1:1000; Cell Signaling #14647), parkin (PRK8; 1:2000; Abcam #77924), PINK1 (N4/15; 1:1000; Abcam #186303), OMA1 (1:2000; Proteintech #17116-1-AP), YME1L 1(1:1000; Proteintech #11510-AP).

## Evaluation of mitochondrial fragmentation with fluorescent microscopy
NMCM cells were seeded at a density of 2x104 cells/well in 24 well glass bottom plates and cultured at least 3 days before the experiment. On the day of the experiment, cells were washed once in HBSS and were added 100 nM MitoTracker Red CMXRos dissolved in serum-free DMEM and incubated for 30 min at 37°C. After the incubation, the cells were washed with HBSS, and the mitochondrial network was visualized by Nikon Eclipse Ti-U fluorescent microscope equipped with a Spot RT3 camera using a 60x objective and epifluorescent illumination. We conducted a thorough quantification analysis of the mitochondrial shapes using the Mitochondria Network Analysis tool (MiNA) on the ImageJ interface. For this analysis, images were imported into ImageJ and processed into 8-bit grayscale images. To enhance the quality, we applied an unsharp mask, enhanced local contrast, and performed median filtering. The images were then binarized to generate black foreground mitochondria images against a white background and converted to a skeleton that represents the features of the original mitochondria image in the form of lines. The skeletons were further analyzed using the ImageJ "analyze skeleton" plugin, which measures the length of each branch.

## Mitochondrial membrane potential measurement with JC-1 assay
The mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm) was measured using the mitochondrial membrane potential specific fluorescent probe, JC-1 (Enzo Life Sciences, ENZ-52306) as we performed earlier [ ]. When excited at 488 nm, the dye emits red fluorescence (590 nm) at high ΔΨm and green (530 nm) at low ΔΨm. NMCM cells were seeded on glass bottom 24 well plate and seeded at least 3 days before the experiment. The cells were washed in HBSS and incubated for 90 minutes at 37°C in media containing 5 μg/mL JC-1. We used a pharmacological control group in which wild-type NMCM cells were treated with 10 μM FCCP for 90 minutes. Following incubation, the cells were washed once with HBSS and then imaged with Nikon Eclipse Ti-U fluorescent microscope equipped with a Spot RT3 camera using a 60x objective and epifluorescent illumination. We examined only beating cells, all measurements were repeated three times. Fluorescent signals were quantified by using the ImageJ software (NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA).

## Evaluation of the mitochondrial energy metabolism and function
As we described earlier, Agilent Seahorse Extracellular Flux (XFp) Analyser (Agilent Technologies, (Santa Clara, CA, USA)) was used to determine the NMCM cells’ oxygen consumption rate (OCR) [ ]. NMCM cells were seeded in XFp Miniplate at a density of 4x104 cells/well in 80 μL complete growth medium (DMEM for Primary Cell Isolation containing 10% FBS, 100 IU/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin) and incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 2 days. On the day before the experiment, sensor cartridges were hydrated in XFp calibrant and maintained at 37°C without CO2 overnight. On the day of the assay, DMEM for Primary Cell Isolation medium was replaced by Agilent Seahorse XF Base Medium containing 1 mM pyruvate, 2 mM glutamine and 10 mM glucose (adjusted pH to 7.4 with 0.1 N NaOH). Before measurement, different compounds were loaded into the appropriate ports of a hydrated sensor cartridge (10 μM oligomycin, 10 μM FCCP and 5 μM rotenone/antimycin). Three measurements were performed after each injection. OCR was used to determine mitochondrial energy metabolism. The parameter values, including basal respiration, maximal respiration, ATP-associated OCR and spare respiratory capacity, were determined according to the Seahorse XFp Cell Mito Stress user guide protocol. Data were analyzed using the Seahorse XF test report analysis.

## mtDNA copy number
Total DNA was isolated from lateral ventricle wall from 8–8 animals using GenElute™ Mammalian DNA Miniprep kit (Sigma Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO, USA). For quantification of mtDNA copy number, real-time PCR analysis was performed with the NovaQUANT™ Mouse Mitochondrial to Nuclear DNA Ratio Kit (Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A set of four optimized PCR primer pairs targeting two mitochondrial genes (trLEV and 12s RNA) and two nuclear genes (BECN1 and NEB) were pre-aliquoted in an Applied Biosystems MicroAmp® Fast Optical 96-well Reaction Plate. Real-time DNA amplification was performed using a Bio Rad CFX96 Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System. The results of the qPCR reactions were analyzed with 2 −ΔCT method.

## Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed by SPSS for Windows, version 26.0. All data were expressed as a mean ± standard error of mean (SEM) of the replicate measurements. The normality of distribution was assessed by the Shapiro-Wilk test. The homogeneity of the groups was tested by Levene’s test. A Student’s t-test was used to compare the mean values from the two groups. A value of p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## Results

## Effect of OPA1 transgenic phenotype on gravimetric parameters, systolic blood pressure, BNP level and echocardiographic values during aging
The gravimetric parameters did not differ significantly between the groups, neither at the beginning nor at the end of the study. There was no significant difference in the systolic blood pressure values between the transgenic mice and their wild-type littermates, either at 11 weeks or at 36 weeks. There was no convincing difference in the BNP level, determined from serum, at the end of the experimental period ( ).
 At the beginning of the study, the left ventricular end-diastolic volume was significantly higher in transgenic animals compared to wild-type mice (p<0.05 TGSTART vs. WTSTART), this difference disappeared by the end of experiment ( ). At the age of 36 weeks, we observed a significant decrease in the ejection fraction in the transgenic animals (p<0.01 TGEND vs. TGSTART), while the cardiac function of the wild-type animals remained normal. The left ventricular end-systolic volume (LVSV) increased in both groups, this increase was more pronounced in the transgenic group, but there was no statistically significant difference between the wild-type and transgenic groups. The diastolic function marker E/E’ ratio increased in transgenic animals indicating a worsening diastolic function, but this change did not reach the level of significance. Significant parameter changes that occur naturally with growth are not marked.
 

## Effect of OPA1 transgenic phenotype on interstitial collagen deposition
Picrosirius red staining was performed on the left ventricles in order to monitor the degree of fibrosis ( ). Only a low amount of interstitial collagen deposition could be seen in both transgenic and wild-type mice and there was no significant difference between the groups (WT: 12.99 ± 0.70% vs. TG: 11.92 ± 0.98%). Positive control group has significant higher level of collagen deposition (Positive control: 23,7±0.53%).
 

## Effect of OPA1 transgenic phenotype on the diameter of cardiomyocytes
Histological samples from the left ventricle of the heart stained with Picrosirius red were used to study the cell diameters ( ). The diameter of cardiomyocytes did not differ between groups (WT: 18.45 ± 0.18 vs. WT: 18.93 ± 0.5).
 

## Effect of OPA1 transgenic phenotype on oxidative damage of proteins and DNA
For verification of oxidative stress, the production of nitrotyrosine and 8-Oxoguanine was investigated by immunohistochemical staining ( ). No difference was found between the wild-type and the OPA1 transgenic group either by anti-nitrotyrosine staining specific for oxidative damage to proteins (WT: 17.8 ± 2.7%, TG: 16.4 ± 1.4%) or by anti-8-oxoguanine staining specific for oxidative damage to DNA (WT: 6.7 ± 0.4%, TG: 6.5 ± 0.5%).
 

## Effect of OPA1 transgenic phenotype on mitochondrial ultrastructure
Longitudinal sections of myofibrils were evaluated to assess the status of the interfibrillar mitochondria by electron microscopy ( ). The area of interfibrillar mitochondria was examinedon electron micrographs (500 mitochondria/group were measured). We determined the relative frequencies of the measured mitochondrial areas in arbitrary intervals of 0.3 μm2. In both group, the predominant area range of the measured mitochondria was between 0.3 and 0.6 μm2 (WT: 48.4% vs. TG: 42.8%). However, in the transgenic group, the size of the mitochondria was more heterogeneous. We found a higher proportion of mitochondria in both <0.3 μm2 (WT: 10.4% vs. TG: 13.6%) and the >0.9 μm2 ranges (WT: 13.2% vs. TG: 19.6%) than in the wild-type ( ). The mean mitochondrial area in transgenic animals was significantly larger than in wild-type (WT: 0.606 μm2 vs. TG: 0.684 μm2, p<0.05) ( ). Smaller vacuole-like intercristal widenings and a minor disruption of mitochondrial cristae structure could be observed in the transgenic group, moreover the mitochondrial matrix was also lighter ( ).
 

## Morphological analysis of mitochondrial network
We conducted a thorough quantification analysis of the mitochondrial shapes using the Mitochondria Network Analysis tool (MiNA) on the ImageJ interface. The ultrastructurally observed larger mitochondrial area was not reflected in the characteristics of the mitochondrial network; the branch length of the mitochondrial network did not differ between the wild-type and transgenic animals (Figs and ).
 

## Effect of OPA1 transgenic phenotype on membrane potential (ΔΨ) in NMCM cells
We examined the mitochondrial membrane potential using JC-1, a cell-permeable voltage-sensitive fluorescent mitochondrial dye ( ). JC-1 emits red fluorescence if the mitochondrial membrane potential is high (aggregated dye), while depolarized mitochondria emit green fluorescence (monomer dye). We observed that the mitochondrial membrane potential was significantly different between the groups. Stronger green and weaker red fluorescence was detected in the transgenic NMCMs compared to the wild-type NMCMs (p<0.01). As the validation of the method, FCCP treatment resulted in significantly stronger green and weaker red fluorescence in wild-type NMCMs.
 

## Effect of OPA1 transgenic phenotype on mitochondrial oxygen consumption and energy metabolism in NMCM cells
Neonatal cardiomyocyte cells were isolated from transgenic animals and from their wild-type littermates. To determine the mitochondrial energy metabolism and respiratory function, we used the Agilent Seahorse XFp Analyser system and Agilent Seahorse XFp Cell Mito Stress test ( ). We observed that the oxygen consumption rate of the cells from the transgenic animals was lower compared to the wild-type cells. The deterioration was significant for maximal respiration (WT: 204.4 ± 15.05 pmol/min vs. TG: 152.21 ± 16.22 pmol/min, p<0.05) and spare respiratory capacity (WT: 142.7 ± 11.29 pmol/min vs. TG: 99.83 ± 10.89 pmol/min, p<0.05).
 

## Effect of OPA1 transgenic phenotype on mtDNA copy number
To more precisely support the effect of OPA1 promotion on mitochondrial copy number, real-time PCR studies were performed. We found that the average number of mitochondrial copies was slightly increased in the TG group, but this increase did not reach statistical significance ( ).
 

## Effect of OPA1 transgenic phenotype on the proteins of the mitochondrial dynamics
The OPA1 level of transgenic animals was significantly increased compared to the wild-types (p < 0.01 vs. WT group; ). In the transgenic group primarily the amount of short OPA1 increased, the L-OPA1/S-OPA1 ratio was significantly lower (p < 0.01 vs. WT group; ). Transgenic origin of the elevated OPA1 level was demonstrated with using DYKDDDDK Tag (FLAG) antibody (p < 0.01 vs. WT group; ). The amount of VDAC, indicating total mitochondrial mass, did not differ significantly between the two groups ( ). Levels of proapoptotic mitochondrial BNIP3 did not differ between groups ( Lower panel). The level of OMA1 protease was similar in the transgenic and wild-type animals ( ), while the expression level of YME1L1 was significantly lower in the transgenic animals (p < 0.01 vs. WT group; ).
 There was no significant difference between the groups in the case of Mfn1, but Mfn2 showed a decreasing tendency in the transgenic animals ( ). There was no difference in the level of fission proteins DRP1 and Fis1 between the two groups ( ). The amount of PINK1 and Parkin proteins, which play a role in mitophagy, increased in the transgenic group, in the case of PINK1 the change was significant (p < 0.05; ).
 

## Discussion
It has been previously described that heart failure is accompanied by morphological and functional abnormalities of mitochondria and that mitochondrial alterations cause heart failure [ , ]. The OPA1 level decreases in heart failure and conversely, low OPA1 level can manifest in impaired heart function [ – ]. A decrease in OPA1 level was also observed during aging, which was associated with a deterioration in muscle function. Early aging phenotype and early death were observed in an inducible muscle specific OPA1 KO mouse model [ ]. Based on the literature, we hypothesized that OPA1 overproduction has a beneficial effect on the changes that occur in aging by increasing the stability of the mitochondrial membrane [ ].
OPA1 protein is expressed in eight different isoforms in humans and in four isoforms in mice through alternative splicing [ – ]. After translation, OPA1 proteins are transported into the mitochondria and anchor to the mitochondrial inner membrane. Two L-OPA1 proteins of two individual mitochondria can connect by homotypic protein interaction which promotes fusion and supports the cristae structure. The L-OPA1 can bind to a cardiolipin molecule of another mitochondrion and this heterotypic interaction also initiates GTP-hydrolysis-dependent fusion, but the presence of OPA1 is essential for this fusion type [ – ]. This L-OPA1 form undergoes further proteolytic cleavages, thereby creating soluble short forms [ , ]. The OMA1 protease is activated by stress, mitochondrial damage and membrane potential reduction and this protein is responsible for cleaving OPA1 at the S1 cleavage site. The resulting short OPA1 has a multifaceted task. It inhibits fusion, thereby playing an important role in the elimination of damaged mitochondria [ , ]. On the other hand, it acts also as a chaperone, protecting the proteins of the intermembrane space from thermal and chemical aggregation [ , ]. OMA1 is inactivated by autocatalysis, when the triggering effect is terminated, making the process reversible [ ]. OMA1 can also contribute to the integrated stress response of the cell by cleaving DAP3-binding cell death enhancer 1 (DELE1). This OMA1-mediated protective response was shown to be essential for the survival of mice in a knock-in model of mitochondrial myopathy in which an abnormal protein accumulated the inner membrane [ ]. In contrast, YME1L1 constitutively regulates OPA1 processing by cleavage at the S2 cleavage site. YME1L1 also plays an important role in cellular quality control, organelle biogenesis, membrane fission and vesicular transport [ – ]. The anchored L-OPA1 and the soluble S-OPA1 forms are in dynamic equilibrium, interacting with each other to regulate the fission and fusion processes [ , , , , ].
It has been proposed that stress-triggered cleavage of OPA1 leads to fragmentation of mitochondria and enhances cell sensitivity to death. However, a recent research has revealed that S-OPA1 possesses the ability to preserve cristae structure and maintain energetic functions due to its GTPase activity, despite its lack of fusion capability [ ]. These data indicates that the production of S-OPA1 via OPA1 cleavage may serve as a protective mechanism in cells under stress conditions [ ].
In our model, we discovered that there are higher level of OPA-1, and the ratio of L-OPA/S-OPA is skewed towards the long form. However, the level of S-OPA was higher in the transgenic group in comparison to wild-type animals.
The question arises: Could this phenomenon combine the beneficial effects of both variants?
We performed our experiments on transgenic knock-in mice, in which the ΔS1 mutant version of the coding sequence of the Opa1 gene was inserted. The OPA1 protein expressed in this way lacks S1 cleavage site, so this protein cannot be cleaved by the OMA1 protease. As a result, the transgenic mice express the ΔS1 mutant version of the OPA1 protein in addition to the wild-type OPA1 version. The mutation was maintained in a heterozygous form to moderate the excessively high OPA1 level, which would inhibit the removal of damaged mitochondria due to increased fusion. This type of OPA1 overexpression did not significantly affect the health and reproduction of the animals, similar to the model in which moderate OPA1 overexpression was achieved by X-chromosome targeted OPA1 transgenesis [ – ]. Western blot analysis showed that the expression of OPA1 is significantly increased in the transgenic animals and the transgenic origin of the protein was verified with FLAG antibody ( ) The normal amount of VDAC correlating with the mitochondrial quantity proved that the higher OPA1 level is not a consequence of an increased mitochondrial mass.
The mutant mice were not visibly different from the wild-type littermates, no changes were observed in the gravimetric parameters, blood pressure remained normal, and no arrhythmias occurred ( ). However echocardiographic examination showed a significantly decreased ejection fraction and trend-like increase of E/E’ in transgenic mice during aging ( ). The deterioration of systolic function was not associated with fibrotic remodeling or cardiomyocyte diameter changes (Figs and ) and neither BNP level, nor the wet-to-dry lung ratio did not suggest heart failure ( ). The electron microscopic ultrastructural examination of the interfibrillar mitochondria showed a significant difference in mitochondrial size between the two groups. The mitochondria of transgenic mice were more heterogeneous in size and their mean area was larger. We performed a mitochondrial network analysis; however, the differences in mitochondrial size observed in the ultrastructural analysis were not visible at the light microscopic level.
A more significant difference was observed in the inner structure of mitochondria ( ). The vacuole-like intercristal widenings/expansions and the disruption of cristae are presumably due to the deposition of large amount of transgenic protein. The fact that OMA1 is unable to cleave these proteins may enhance the mitochondrial dysfunction. This inner membrane instability may also explain the respiratory capacity of the transgenic cardiomyocytes ( ), as we detected a significant decrease in membrane potential in the transgenic groups ( ).
We hypothesize that OPA1 overproduction resulted the promotion of fusion processes which is evident in the increase of mitochondrial size. Nevertheless, no changes were observed in mitochondrial mass, including mitochondrial DNA copy number and VDAC protein levels (Figs and ). We expected that the L-OPA protein quantity would increase in the transgenic animals. However, Western blot examination showed that the amount of both forms increased and at least partly as we expected the L-OPA1/S-OPA1 ratio shifted towards the long form ( ). The level of OMA1 protease involved in OPA1 processing did not change and the level of YME1L1 decreased in transgenic mice ( ). However, changes in the OMA1/YME1L1 ratio may also contribute to mitochondrial changes and cardiac dysfunction [ ].
To explain the decreased ejection fraction, we must consider the abnormalities observed in the ultrastructure of the mitochondria, possibly due to the excess amount of transgenic protein. This may lead to a consequential decrease in the effectiveness of mitochondrial respiration as well. The processes of mitophagy are present in the transgenic strain, as indicated by the elevated levels of Pink/Parkin proteins. However, the low levels of the pro-apoptotic BNIP3 do not suggest severe mitophagy and proteosomal degradation.
The processes of mitophagy are present in the transgenic strain, as indicated by the elevated levels of PINK/Parkin proteins. Additionally, a higher fraction of mitochondria in the smaller size ranges was observed in the transgenic group during electron microscopic evaluations. This tendency may indicate normal levels of fragmentation associated with mitophagy, as fragmented mitochondria were not observed at the light microscopy level. Therefore, we do not observe increased fragmentation but rather stronger mitophagy control.
There is ample data suggesting that promoting fusion processes has beneficial effects and enhances cell viability and the elevated level of OPA1 protein stabilize the membrane structure. Moreover as we mentioned above S-OPA1 possesses the ability to preserve cristae structure and maintain energetic functions of the mitochondria and the production of S-OPA1 via OPA1 cleavage may serve as a protective mechanism in cells under stress conditions [ – ].
However, in our model, the increased quantity of OPA1 may also be counterproductive concerning mitochondrial ultrastructural abnormalities and the shift in the balance of OMA1/YME1L1 ratio that have led to consequent deterioration of mitochondrial function and as a result of these gradually accumulating harmful changes, a decreased ejection fraction has developed in older transgenic animals [ ].
Despite of the ultrastructural alterations observed in this chronic model, due to the membrane stabilizing role of OPA1, it deserves further consideration to investigate the possible advantages/benefits of this genotype.
We should consider the possibility that the adverse phenomena experienced at this stage might be counteracted by some undiscovered beneficial properties of this model, which could become apparent in acute stress scenarios.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Supplementary information for .
(PDF)
S2 Fig

## Supplementary information for .
(PDF)
S3 Fig

## Supplementary information for .
(PDF)
S4 Fig

## Supplementary information for .
(PDF)
S5 Fig

## Supplementary information for .
(PDF)
S6 Fig

## Supplementary information for .
(PDF)
S7 Fig

## Supplementary information for .
(PDF)
S8 Fig

## Supplementary information for .
(PDF)
S9 Fig

## Supplementary information for .
(PDF)
S10 Fig

## Supplementary information for .
(PDF)
S11 Fig

## Supplementary information for WB.
(PDF)

 10.1371/journal.pone.0310394.r001Decision Letter 0
BaruffiniEnricoAcademic Editor© 2024 Enrico Baruffini2024Enrico Baruffinihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
27 May 2024

PONE-D-24-07670Cardiac effect of OPA1 overexpression in micePLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Deres,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
==============================
The reviewer submitted his/her report. As you can see, although the merit of your work, several concerns have been raised by the reviewer, with whom I substantially agree. My decision is that major revision are needed before the paper could be accepted for publication in PLOS One.
==============================
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jul 11 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Enrico Baruffini, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. To comply with PLOS ONE submissions requirements, in your Methods section, please provide additional information regarding the experiments involving animals and ensure you have included details on (1) methods of sacrifice and (2) efforts to alleviate suffering.
3. We noticed you have some minor occurrence of overlapping text with the following previous publication(s), which needs to be addressed:
- https://aok.pte.hu/biotechnologia-msc?
In your revision ensure you cite all your sources (including your own works), and quote or rephrase any duplicated text outside the methods section. Further consideration is dependent on these concerns being addressed.
4. We note that the grant information you provided in the ‘Funding Information’ and ‘Financial Disclosure’ sections do not match. 
When you resubmit, please ensure that you provide the correct grant numbers for the awards you received for your study in the ‘Funding Information’ section.
5. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure: "This research was funded by the National Research, Development, and Innovation Office in Hungary within the framework of the project TKP2021-EGA-17."  
Please state what role the funders took in the study.  If the funders had no role, please state: ""The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."" 
If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed. 
Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
6. Your ethics statement should only appear in the Methods section of your manuscript. If your ethics statement is written in any section besides the Methods, please delete it from any other section. 
7. PLOS ONE now requires that authors provide the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot or gel results reported in a submission’s figures or Supporting Information files. This policy and the journal’s other requirements for blot/gel reporting and figure preparation are described in detail at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-preparing-figures-from-image-files. When you submit your revised manuscript, please ensure that your figures adhere fully to these guidelines and provide the original underlying images for all blot or gel data reported in your submission. See the following link for instructions on providing the original image data: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-original-images-for-blots-and-gels.   
In your cover letter, please note whether your blot/gel image data are in Supporting Information or posted at a public data repository, provide the repository URL if relevant, and provide specific details as to which raw blot/gel images, if any, are not available. Email us at plosone@plos.org if you have any questions.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The article entitled ‘Cardiac effect of OPA1 overexpression in mice” by Bruszt K. et al. reports various observations on the effects of overexpression of the mitochondrial fusion protein OPA1 in the heart of mouse.
Overall, the manuscript is written in a clear way, although there are several typos throughout the text. I think that the abstract should be completely re-written, as it does not reflect the content of the article in terms of scientific results and it ends on a somehow subjective question, which is very unusual.
I have major concerns about this manuscript.
1) The title is misleading, as the authors do not really explore cardiac OPA1 overexpression, rather overexpression of a variant not cleavable by OMA1 (delta S1) in addition to normal OPA1 content. Cardiac OPA1 overexpression would mean that the transgene is a wild-type coding sequence of OPA1.
2) The delta S1 transgene cannot be cleaved by OMA1, but it can be cleaved by YME1L1 at cleaving site S2. So, I do not really understand the strategy, because this only prevents to cleave OPA1 under stress conditions (OMA1), but S-OPA1 can still be generated.
3) Overall, the histology experiments lack positive controls. For the interstitial collagen deposition experiment with Picrosirius red, the authors should include positive control samples that display collagen deposition (for example, heart from old mouse, i.e. more than 12 months) to show that the staining is working. Indeed, picrosirius red staining usually shows collagen fibrils in red on a pale-yellow background, which facilitates their quantification. Here the picture shows a homogenous staining where such fibrils are hardly visible.
4) For the diameter of cardiomyocytes, I think that using the picrosirius red picture to estimate the area of cardiomyocytes is imprecise. The authors should use a fluorescence staining, for example with laminin alpha 2, to delineate each cardiomyocyte and estimate the area.
5) The authors describe alterations of mitochondrial cristae structure in transgenic hearts, but on the pictures provided, it is not visible. Please provide enlarged inserts showing these alterations.
6) The mitochondrial network evaluation on NMCM is very subjective, as the authors state “a slight fragmentation of the mitochondrial network structure was observed, but the degree of this change was not significant.” The authors cannot conclude that there is no significant change, without thorough evaluation of the pictures. Please provide quantification analysis of the various mitochondrial shapes (tubular, fragmented, intermediate, etc…) on the NMCM pictures to bring a firm conclusion to this experiment.
7) The authors used JC-1 for evaluation of the mitochondrial membrane potential, but this dye has pitfalls (see Perry et al., 2011 doi: 10.2144/000113610). The authors should perform new experiments with TMRM or TMRE, with calibration with oligomycin and FCCP. Alternatively, they can use a double staining with TMRM (dependent of mitochondrial membrane potential) and Mitotracker green (independent of mitochondrial membrane potential), to show the proportion of active mitochondria in both populations.
8) The western blot data are also confusing. The authors mention an increase in S-OPA1 isoform in the transgenic group, but there are no quantifications of L-OPA1 and S-OPA1 alone, just a global OPA1 quantification. Also, the authors state page 12 that the L-OPA1/S-OPA1 ratio is significantly lower in transgenic mice, while the figure 9C shows the opposite! I am very surprised by the low OPA1 expression in Wild-Type mice. Given the importance of this protein for this article, I would recommend testing a second antibody to confirm this. The authors use VDAC expression as a reflection of mitochondrial mass, but this is only one parameter to estimate mitochondrial biogenesis. To infer this, the authors would need to evaluate mtDNA copy number, Citrate synthase activity, cardiolipin content, etc…Also, some of the blots are not convincing, in particular for PARKIN and PINK1, which show variability and low expression in the WT animals, with only 4 samples of each genotype. I would recommend repeating the blots at least for these 2 proteins with more samples.
For the above-mentioned reasons, my recommendation for this article is Major revisions.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0310394.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
5 Aug 2024

Response to Reviewer Comments
Thank you for taking the time to read our manuscript and for providing valuable feedback. We are sending hereby our responses to your comments. We have introduced the appropriate changes and additive measurements in our resubmitted manuscript.
Point 1. Abstract and title of the article
We agree with the suggestion regarding the abstract. We have re-written the abstract to better reflect the scientific results presented in the article. Additionally, we have changed the title of the article as the Reviewer suggested.
Point 2. The delta S1 transgene cannot be cleaved by OMA1, but it can be cleaved by YME1L1, I do not really understand the strategy, because this only prevents to cleave OPA1 under stress conditions (OMA1), but S- OPA1 can still be generated.
Expression of optic atrophy 1 (OPA1), a mitochondrial fusion protein, was decreased in both human and rat HF. OPA1 is important for maintaining normal cristae structure and function, for preserving the inner membrane structure and for protecting cells from apoptosis. 
Reduction of OPA1 expression with siRNA resulted in increased apoptosis and fragmentation of the mitochondria. 
Overexpression of OPA1 increased mitochondrial tubularity but did not protect against simulated ischaemia-induced apoptosis. Cytochrome c release from the mitochondria was increased both with reduction in OPA1 and with overexpression of OPA1. Mouse tissues express four isoforms: 1, 5, 7, and 8 (Akepati et al., 2008). Isoforms 1 and 7 generate a combination of L-OPA1 and one or two forms of S-OPA1, respectively. 
Our strategies based on that the regulation of processes mediated by the OPA1 protein also involves fine-tuning the L-OPA1/S-OPA1 ratio, as these two forms perform different functions. The OMA1 protease is activated by stress, mitochondrial damage and membrane potential reduction and this protein is responsible for cleaving OPA1 at the S1 site. YME1L1 constitutively regulates OPA1 by cleavage at the S2 site. 
It has been proposed that stress-triggered cleavage of OPA1 leads to fragmentation of mitochondria and enhances cell sensitivity to death. However, a recent research has revealed that S-OPA1 possesses the ability to preserve cristae structure and maintain energetic functions due to its GTPase activity, despite its lack of fusion capability. These data indicates that the production of S-OPA1 via OPA1 cleavage may serve as a protective mechanism in cells under stress conditions
We suggest that deleting the OMA1 S1 cleavage site prevents the stress response-induced S-OPA1 dominance and consequent mitochondrial fragmentation. The stable L-OPA1 contributes to cristae structure stability, while the constitutively active YME1L1 maintains the necessary S-OPA1 levels for normal function, including normal fission induction and chaperone functions.
We are grateful for the constructive criticism and have clarified our approach in the introduction and discussion section.
Point 3. Overall, the histology experiments lack positive controls. For the interstitial collagen deposition experiment with Picrosirius red, the authors should include positive control samples that display collagen deposition (for example, heart from old mouse, i.e. more than 12 months) to show that the staining is working. Indeed, picrosirius red staining usually shows collagen fibrils in red on a pale-yellow background, which facilitates their quantification. Here the picture shows a homogenous staining where such fibrils are hardly visible.
We agree that including positive control samples is crucial for validating the histology experiments. In response, we have repeated the staining using Masson's trichrome stain with the recommended positive control samples from 15-month-old mice. The results are indeed more convincing with this method. However, despite these improvements, we still did not observe a significant change in the extent of fibrosis. Thank you for your valuable suggestion.
Point 4. For the diameter of cardiomyocytes, I think that using the picrosirius red picture to estimate the area of cardiomyocytes is imprecise. The authors should use a fluorescence staining, for example with laminin alpha 2, to delineate each cardiomyocyte and estimate the area.
The Reviewer’s point about the precision of using picrosirius red to estimate the area of cardiomyocytes is valid. Using fluorescence staining with laminin alpha 2 would indeed be more accurate, as it delineates each cardiomyocyte more clearly. While classic histochemical stains have been extensively used for such evaluations in the past and even today, we did not find it necessary to perform immunohistochemistry since neither gravimetry nor echocardiographic parameters indicated hypertrophic remodeling.
However, we would have been willing to repeat the staining as suggested by the Reviewer. Unfortunately, our samples are formaldehyde-fixed and paraffin-embedded, which is not optimal due to autofluorescence issues. If the Reviewer insists, we are willing to declare that the measurement is imprecise and approximate in a Limitations section. We hope this minor issue does not detract from the overall value of our findings.
Point 5. The authors describe alterations of mitochondrial cristae structure in transgenic hearts, but on the pictures provided, it is not visible. Please provide enlarged inserts showing these alterations. 
Thank you for your comment. Upon closer examination, we observed smaller vacuole-like intercristal widenings and minor disruptions of the mitochondrial cristae structure in the transgenic group. Subjectively, the two groups can be clearly distinguished. By using a blinded method to analyze the images at a magnification of 12,000-30,000x, which is approximately the maximum capability of our available system, these ultrastructural differences became evident. To clarify these differences, we have indicated them with arrowheads.
Point 6. The mitochondrial network evaluation on NMCM is very subjective, as the authors state “a slight fragmentation of the mitochondrial network structure was observed, but the degree of this change was not significant.” The authors cannot conclude that there is no significant change, without thorough evaluation of the pictures. Please provide quantification analysis of the various mitochondrial shapes on the NMCM pictures to bring a firm conclusion to this experiment.
Thank you for your comment. We acknowledge the subjectivity in evaluating the mitochondrial network on NMCMs. To draw a firm conclusion, we conducted a thorough quantification analysis of the mitochondrial shapes using the Mitochondria Network Analysis tool (MiNA) on the ImageJ interface. 
For this analysis, images were imported into ImageJ and processed into 8-bit grayscale images. To enhance the quality, we applied an unsharp mask, enhanced local contrast, and performed median filtering. The images were then binarized to generate black foreground mitochondria images against a white background and converted to a skeleton that represents the features of the original mitochondria image in the form of lines. The skeletons were further analyzed using the ImageJ "analyze skeleton" plugin, which measures the length of each branch.
In total, 10 cells from each group were measured and compared using an unpaired t-test. This quantification analysis provides a more objective basis for our conclusions regarding the mitochondrial network structure.
Based on the results, we have reviewed, corrected, and refined our conclusions regarding fragmentation. We appreciate the constructive suggestion.
Point 7. The authors used JC-1 for evaluation of the mitochondrial membrane potential, but this dye has pitfalls (see Perry et al., 2011 doi: 10.2144/000113610). The authors should perform new experiments with TMRM or TMRE, with calibration with oligomycin and FCCP. Alternatively, they can use a double staining with TMRM (dependent of mitochondrial membrane potential) and Mitotracker green (independent of mitochondrial membrane potential), to show the proportion of active mitochondria in both populations.
Thank you for your suggestion. We acknowledge that our experimental protocol using JC-1 indeed carried potential pitfalls. The article cited by the reviewer does highlight the limitations of the JC-1 dye (Perry et al., 2011, doi: 10.2144/000113610). Specifically, it mentions that JC-1 labeling is sensitive to residual H2O2 in the experimental system, which is irrelevant in our case, and that the equilibration time is closely linked to surface-to-volume (S/V) ratios. This means that in cell populations with significant heterogeneity in S/V ratios, such as neurons with extensive processes, this could be problematic.
Another methodological concern raised is that while the monomer (green) form of JC-1 equilibrates on a timescale of approximately 15 minutes, the aggregate (red) form—necessary for using JC-1 as a ratiometric probe for Δψm—takes about 90 minutes to equilibrate in cardiomyocytes (Mathur et al., 2000, doi: 10.1016/s0008-6363(00)00002-x). The study concludes that under these incubation conditions and at a concentration of at least 1 μM, JC-1 is the optimal dye for measuring Δψm in cardiomyocytes.
In response to these considerations, we redesigned our experiment by extending the incubation time and introducing FCCP as a pharmacological control to confirm that directional changes in the dye signal are appropriately interpreted. Based on the results obtained, the mitochondrial membrane potential was found to be significantly lower in the transgenic group. We have incorporated and concluded these findings in the manuscript.
Thank you for the constructive suggestion and your valuable input.
Point 8. The western blot data are also confusing. The authors mention an increase in S-OPA1 isoform in the transgenic group, but there are no quantifications of L-OPA1 and S-OPA1 alone, just a global OPA1 quantification. Also, the authors state page 12 that the L-OPA1/S-OPA1 ratio is significantly lower in transgenic mice, while the figure 9C shows the opposite! I am very surprised by the low OPA1 expression in Wild-Type mice. Given the importance of this protein for this article, I would recommend testing a second antibody to confirm this. The authors use VDAC expression as a reflection of mitochondrial mass, but this is only one parameter to estimate mitochondrial biogenesis. To infer this, the authors would need to evaluate mtDNA copy number, Citrate synthase activity, cardiolipin content, etc...Also, some of the blots are not convincing, in particular for PARKIN and PINK1, which show variability and low expression in the WT animals, with only 4 samples of each genotype. I would recommend repeating the blots at least for these 2 proteins with more samples. 
Thank you for your comment. We apologize for the confusion regarding the Western blot data. The L-OPA1/S-OPA1 ratio is significantly higher in the transgenic mice, as correctly shown in Figure 9 C. We have corrected this mistake in the text. 
We used the monoclonal OPA1 Cell Signaling #80471 antibody, which is highly specific for both L-OPA1 and S-OPA1. This is visible in two bands at 100 kDa and 80 kDa. We quantified these separately, but only visualized the L-OPA1/S-OPA1 ratio to decrease redundancies, as we felt that the given figure already contained a lot of data and this approach better fit the logic of the manuscript. If the reviewer insists, we can replace it with the direct measurement results. 
The low level of OPA1 expression in wild-type mice is only apparent. Western blotting is a semi-quantitative technique, and our gel documentation system uses auto-exposure, which accumulates data relative to the strongest band to prevent overexposure and pixel saturation make the densitometric measurements more precise. Following your suggestion, we repeated the measurements using a different antibody (Invitrogen Opa1 1E8-1D9) and fine-tuned the exposure time to ensure more accurate detection of OPA1 levels. 
We acknowledge that using VDAC expression as a reflection of mitochondrial mass is only one parameter to estimate mitochondrial biogenesis. In response to your suggestion, we have purchased the NovaQUANT™ Mouse Mitochondrial to Nuclear DNA Ratio Kit and performed the additional measurements. This will provide a more comprehensive evaluation of mitochondrial biogenesis, including mtDNA copy number.
The variability in the expression of PARKIN and PINK1 in the WT animals is indeed high, which is unfortunately common with in vivo samples. We have repeated the measurements using freshly prepared samples, and the results have been incorporated into the manuscript. Additionally, after the repeated measurements, the changes in both PINK and PARKIN proteins proved to be significant.
We would like to express our sincere gratitude for the detailed and helpful comments, which have significantly contributed to the improvement of our manuscript.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0310394.r003Decision Letter 1
BaruffiniEnricoAcademic Editor© 2024 Enrico Baruffini2024Enrico Baruffinihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
2 Sep 2024

Cardiac effects of OPA1 protein promotion in a transgenic animal model
PONE-D-24-07670R1
Dear Dr. Deres,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Enrico Baruffini, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
The reviewer endorsed your paper, since his/her comments have been addressed.
The paper can now be accepted by PLoS ONE.
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0310394.r004Acceptance letter
BaruffiniEnricoAcademic Editor© 2024 Enrico Baruffini2024Enrico Baruffinihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
11 Sep 2024

PONE-D-24-07670R1 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Deres, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Enrico Baruffini 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE