2172molmetMolecular MetabolismMol MetabElsevierPMC1254417112544171125441714086563710.1016/j.molmet.2025.102239KAT6A acetylation regulates AMPK function and hypertrophic remodeling in the heart
KellerMariko Aoyagi IvessaAndreas LiuTong LiHong RomanienkoPeter J NakamuraMichinari 1Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Cardiovascular Research Institute, Rutgers-New Jersey Medical School, 185 South Orange Ave, Newark, NJ 07103, USA2Center for Advanced Proteomics Research, Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, 07103, USA3Genome Editing Shared Resource, Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA⁎Corresponding author. Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Cardiovascular Research Institute, Rutgers-New Jersey Medical School, 185 South Orange Ave, MSB G-609, Newark, NJ 07103, USA. Tel. +1 973 972 8619. nakamumi@njms.rutgers.edu
258202510110223910223924102025© 2025 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Diets influence metabolism and disease susceptibility, with lysine acetyltransferases (KATs) serving as key regulators through acetyl-CoA. We have previously demonstrated that a ketogenic diet alleviates cardiac pathology, though the underlying mechanisms remain largely unknown. Here we show that KAT6A acetylation is crucial for mitochondrial function and cell growth. Proteomic analysis revealed that KAT6A is acetylated at lysine (K)816 in the hearts of mice fed a ketogenic diet under hypertension, which enhances its interaction with AMPK regulatory subunits. RNA-sequencing analysis demonstrated that the KAT6A acetylation-mimetic mutant stimulates AMPK signaling in cardiomyocytes. Moreover, the acetylation-mimetic mutant mitigated phenylephrine-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and cardiomyocyte hypertrophy via AMPK activation. However, KAT6A-K816R acetylation-resistant knock-in mice unexpectedly exhibited smaller hearts with enhanced AMPK activity, conferring protection against neurohumoral stress-induced cardiac hypertrophy and remodeling. These findings indicate that KAT6A regulates metabolism and cellular growth by interacting with and modulating AMPK activity through K816-acetylation in a cell type-specific manner.
Keywords: Lysine acetyltransferase 6A, KAT6A, Acetylation, AMPK, Ketone body, Ketogenic diet

## Highlights
•Ketones enhance lysine acetylation in the heart, acting as signaling molecules.
•A ketogenic diet or ketones induce K816 acetylation of lysine acetyltransferase 6A.
•KAT6A-K816 acetylation regulates AMPK activity through physical interaction.
•KAT6A acetylation modulates mitochondrial function and cellular growth.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Mar 21; Revised 2025 Aug 18; Accepted 2025 Aug 18; Collection date 2025 Nov.

1.

## Introduction
Dietary nutrients are critical for maintaining organ structure and function by modulating cellular metabolite levels. Consumption of unhealthy diets disrupts metabolic homeostasis, characterized by impaired energy metabolism, dysregulated signaling pathways, lipotoxicity, and glucotoxicity [ , , ], thereby contributing to cardiometabolic diseases [ ], such as cardiac hypertrophy, atherosclerosis, and contractile dysfunction. Fatty acids serve as key energy substrates, major membrane components, and signaling molecules in the heart. Additionally, other diet-derived metabolites act as alternative energy sources, signaling molecules, or bioactive metabolites, influencing cardiovascular health and disease pathogenesis [ , , ]. Our previous work demonstrated that elevating ketone body levels through a low-carbohydrate, high-fat ketogenic diet (KD) prevents high blood pressure-induced cardiac remodeling and heart failure in mice. This cardioprotective effect correlates with increased lysine acetylation in non-histone proteins from whole heart lysates, as well as in proteins localized to the cytosol, nuclei, and mitochondria [ ]. These findings underscore the pivotal role of diet-mediated lysine acetylation, as observed with a KD, in promoting heart health.
Excessive lysine acetylation of mitochondrial proteins in the heart has been observed during early stages of heart failure in mouse models and in end-stage failing human hearts [ ]. In line with these findings, increased mitochondrial protein acetylation caused by a reduced NAD+/NADH ratio in cardiac-specific Ndufs4 knockout (KO) mice has been shown to sensitize the mitochondrial permeability transition pore, thereby accelerating heart failure [ ]. In contrast, a recent study using double KO mice for carnitine acetyltransferase and sirtuin 3 showed no association between mitochondrial hyperacetylation in the heart and susceptibility to heart failure [ ]. Furthermore, modulating NAD+ levels was shown to alleviate heart failure independently of mitochondrial protein acetylation levels [ ], highlighting the complex and sometimes contradictory roles of lysine acetylation in heart failure. These discrepancies, as comprehensively summarized in review [ ], highlight the need for further investigation into the effects of site-specific acetylation on individual protein function and its broader implications for cardiac physiology.
The thickness of the heart muscle is tightly regulated under physiological conditions to maintain adequate blood flow to peripheral organs [ ]. However, prolonged hypertensive or dietary stress can lead to increased wall thickness of the heart, termed pathological hypertrophy, which is partially driven by dysregulated post-translational modifications [ , ]. The variable effects of lysine acetylation on cardiac function led us to hypothesize that specific lysine acetylation events, rather than global protein acetylation, are critical for ketone body-mediated regulation of cardiac hypertrophy and function. To this end, we conducted an unbiased proteomic analysis using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). We identified acetylation of lysine acetyltransferase 6A (KAT6A) at lysine 816 (K816), which is in a region of the KAT6A protein encoded by exon 16 of the Kat6a gene, in the hearts of mice fed a KD under high blood pressure, but not in those on normal chow (NC). KAT6A catalyzes the transfer of acetyl groups from acetyl-CoA to lysine residues [ ]. Pathogenic variants in the KAT6A gene cause KAT6A syndrome, featuring neurodevelopmental disorders, hypotonia, and heart abnormalities [ ]. Notably, while dysfunction of the KAT6A catalytic subunit severely impacts transcriptional regulation, genotype–phenotype correlations reveal that late-truncating pathogenic variants (in exon 16–17, encoding the non-catalytic acidic domain) are significantly more prevalent [ ]. In this study, we sought to elucidate the functional role and significance of KAT6A-K816 acetylation in mitochondrial and cardiac function, hypothesizing that it serves as a central hub for ketone body-mediated regulation of cardiac function.

2.

## Results
2.1.

## Ketone body increases acetylation of KAT6A at K816 in cardiomyocytes
Since a KD specifically impacts diseased hearts, such as those with hypertensive heart disease [ ], we focused on this pathological condition. To identify proteins undergoing acetylation in the hearts of C57BL/6J wild-type (WT) mice fed a KD compared to a control NC diet under a high blood pressure condition, we performed LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis. We identified 966 acetylated peptides corresponding to 320 acetylated proteins in the hearts of mice fed an NC diet ( ), while 1597 acetylated peptides corresponding to 425 acetylated proteins were identified in the hearts of mice fed a KD ( ). Consistent with previously reported immunoblot data [ ], based on the spectra counting, a KD diet tended to increase the overall number of acetylated proteins and lysine residues in the mouse heart ( A). Lysine acetylation is regulated by lysine acetyltransferases (KATs) and deacetylases, depending on intracellular levels of acetyl-CoA and NAD+ [ ]. Gene ontology (GO) molecular function enrichment analysis of 170 acetylated proteins observed in mice fed a KD revealed significant enrichment in GO terms related to acetyltransferase activity, pyridine nucleotide redox regulation, and metabolic processes ( B).
 To further investigate the mechanism by which a KD enhances acetylation in the heart, we examined the acetylation status of lysine acetyltransferases (KATs). Among the MYST, GNAT, and p300/CBP families of canonical KATs [ ], KD-mediated lysine acetylation in the heart was detected in KAT6A and EP300 ( ). LC-MS/MS mass-spectrometry analysis identified endogenous KAT6A acetylation at K813, which is in a region of the KAT6A protein encoded by exon 15 of the Kat6a gene, and K816 in the hearts of mice fed a KD ( ). Given the clinical relevance and high prevalence of mutations in exons 16–17 of the Kat6a gene, which encompass the non-catalytic acidic domain, we aimed to elucidate the role of KAT6A-K816 acetylation in cardiac disease. The K816 of KAT6A is highly conserved across species: in Mus musculus, it corresponds to K815 in Homo sapiens and Rattus norvegicus. In contrast, KAT6A-K813 in Mus musculus is not conserved in other species ( C). K816 is located within the acidic domain, a region that may influence protein–protein interactions ( D).
To establish the link between KAT6A-K816 acetylation and ketone bodies, while excluding other potential factors related to a KD, we conducted in vitro experiments using adenovirus (Ad)-mediated expression of human KAT6A-wild type (WT), K815R (acetylation-resistant, corresponding to mouse K816), and K815Q (acetylation-mimicking) mutants in primary rat neonatal cardiomyocytes. We have previously demonstrated that ketone bodies increase lysine acetylation levels in whole protein lysates as well as in subcellular fractions, including cytosolic, mitochondrial, and nuclear proteins, in a dose-dependent manner [ ]. Here, we first examined whether ketone bodies alter the acetylation status of KAT6A at K815 in cardiomyocytes to validate the mass spectrometry findings. Treatment of cardiomyocytes with ketone bodies (β-hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate) resulted in a dose-dependent increase in KAT6A-K815 acetylation ( E,F), indicating that the KD-mediated increase in KAT6A-K816 acetylation in the heart is induced by elevated ketone body levels. Notably, mass spectrometry analysis identified acetylation at K813 and K816 in KAT6A from mouse hearts, with no additional acetylation sites detected under the experimental conditions tested. However, this does not preclude the possibility that other lysine residues in KAT6A may also undergo acetylation. Indeed, immunoblot data indicate the involvement of additional acetylation sites, as treatment with 4 mM ketone bodies increased the acetylation of the KAT6A-K815R mutant. Therefore, we sought to elucidate the roles of ketone body-mediated KAT6A-K815 acetylation in cardiac physiology and pathology, particularly in cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction.

2.2.

## Acetylation of KAT6A at K815 stimulates AMPK signaling
Next, we investigated whether KAT6A-K815 acetylation influences histone and non-histone acetylation. Overexpression of neither KAT6A-WT nor K815 mutants altered the overall lysine acetylation levels of total proteins in cardiomyocytes, indicating that KAT6A-K815 acetylation has minimal impact on global protein acetylation ( ); however, acetylation of histone 3 (H3)K9, H3K14, and H3K23 was increased by KAT6A overexpression, with no overt differences between WT and K815 mutants ( ). These findings suggest that KAT6A specifically promotes H3K9, H3K14, and H3K23 acetylation in cardiomyocytes independently of KAT6A-K815 acetylation. In line with these findings, KAT6A-WT and its mutants are localized in the nucleus in cardiomyocytes, irrespective of K815 acetylation status ( ).
Then, we investigated the functional role of KAT6A-K815 acetylation in cardiomyocytes. To unbiasedly understand which biological pathways are significantly activated or inhibited by KAT6A-K815 acetylation in cardiomyocytes, we conducted RNA-sequencing analysis. KAT6A was overexpressed in cardiomyocytes by approximately 1.9-fold compared to those expressing LacZ as a control ( ). The heatmap shows significant alterations in gene expression by KAT6A-WT compared to control LacZ in cardiomyocytes ( A). The gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) using the C2.All.v6.2 (curated) gene sets database revealed enrichment of gene sets related to the activation of fatty acid oxidation by AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) (REACTOME) and the regulation of autophagy (KEGG) ( B, , and ). Furthermore, the effect of K815 acetylation was evaluated by expressing KAT6A-K815Q or K815R mutants ( C). The GSEA showed that gene sets associated with the regulation of mTOR by AMPK and AMPK-stimulated catabolic processes are significantly enriched in cardiomyocytes expressing KAT6A-K815Q compared to those expressing KAT6A-K815R ( D, , and ). In line with these results, KAT6A-K815Q expression was sufficient to significantly increase phosphorylation of Acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) at Ser79, a well-known AMPK substrate, compared to LacZ, KAT6A-WT, or KAT6A-K815R ( E). In addition, ketone body-mediated activation of AMPK was suppressed in cardiomyocytes expressing the KAT6A-K815R mutant compared to those expressing KAT6A-WT ( F). Notably, the concentrations of ketone bodies used in this experiment align with physiological and pathological conditions: 100–250 μM under normal conditions, 1–2 mM after 24 h of fasting or prolonged exercise, 1–5 mM in mice and humans fed a ketogenic diet, and up to 20 mM in diabetic ketoacidosis. These findings indicate that ketone bodies increase acetylation of KAT6A at K815, which, in turn, enhances AMPK signaling in cardiomyocytes.
 
2.3.

## KAT6A-K815 acetylation increases the interaction with AMPK subunits
Next, we investigated the underlying mechanisms by which KAT6A-K815 acetylation enhances AMPK activity. To identify changes in KAT6A interaction partners by K815 acetylation, we transfected Ad-FLAG-KAT6A-WT, -K815R, and -K815Q mutants into cardiomyocytes for 2 days. Ad-FLAG was used as a control. KAT6A was immunoprecipitated with α-FLAG affinity beads, followed by washing, competitive elution with 3x FLAG peptides, and separation by SDS-PAGE. LC-MS/MS proteomic analyses were performed to unbiasedly identify proteins interacting with KAT6A-WT and its mutants ( ). To our surprise, and consistent with RNA-sequencing findings, mass spectrometry identified AMPK β/γ subunits as major interacting proteins with KAT6A in cardiomyocytes ( ). Notably, KAT6A-WT and the K815Q mutant tended to interact with the AMPK regulatory subunits β1 and/or γ2 more efficiently than the K815R mutant. Mass spectrometry analysis normalized to the spectral counts of immunoprecipitated KAT6A further confirmed strong interactions between KAT6A-WT or the K815Q mutant and AMPK subunits ( ). Furthermore, we performed a KAT6A-AMPK interaction assay using FLAG-tagged KAT6A and the endogenous AMPKα subunit in rat neonatal cardiomyocytes. Our results demonstrate that KAT6A-K815 acetylation enhances the interaction between KAT6A and AMPK ( G). These findings suggest that KAT6A-K815 acetylation stimulates AMPK signaling through increased interactions between KAT6A and AMPK β/γ regulatory subunits.
 
2.4.

## KAT6A-K815 acetylation enhances mitochondrial respiratory capacity and fatty acid oxidation through AMPK in cardiomyocytes
AMPK plays a key role in maintaining cardiac function and morphology by regulating metabolism and mitochondrial activity. To explore the functional significance of KAT6A-K815 acetylation in cardiomyocyte size, mitochondrial function, and substrate metabolism, we transduced rat neonatal cardiomyocytes with adenoviruses harboring YFP-tagged KAT6A-K815R or YFP-tagged KAT6A-K815Q mutants. We utilized YFP-tagged KAT6A to identify cardiomyocytes expressing mutant KAT6A. At baseline, no significant differences in size were observed between cardiomyocytes expressing the KAT6A-K815R and KAT6A-K815Q mutants ( A). However, despite the absence of changes in cardiomyocyte size, mitochondrial energy metabolism was markedly altered in cardiomyocytes expressing KAT6A-K815 mutants under non-hypertrophic conditions ( B). Seahorse experiments showed that the basal oxygen consumption rate (OCR), ATP-linked respiration, and maximal respiratory capacity are significantly elevated in H9C2 cardiomyoblast cells expressing the KAT6A-K815Q mutant compared to those expressing the KTA6A-K815R mutant ( bc). These effects were diminished in the KAT6A-K815Q group but not in the KAT6A-K815R group following adenovirus-mediated overexpression of dominant-negative AMPK ( C), indicating that AMPK functions downstream of KAT6A-K815 acetylation.
 AMPK is known to promote fatty acid β-oxidation by reducing the production of malonyl-CoA, an endogenous inhibitor of mitochondrial carnitine palmitoyl transferase 1 (CPT1), via phosphorylation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1 (ACC1) at Serine 79. Consistent with RNA-sequencing results, fatty acid oxidation, as assessed by etomoxir (ETO)-inhibitable OCR in Seahorse experiments, was significantly increased in cardiomyocytes expressing the KAT6A-K815Q mutant but not in those expressing the KAT6A-K815R mutant. These effects were also reversed by adenovirus-mediated inhibition of AMPK activity ( D). Taken together, these findings suggest that KAT6A-K815 acetylation enhances mitochondrial function and fatty acid oxidation through AMPK activation in cardiomyocytes.

2.5.

## KAT6A-K815 acetylation attenuates phenylephrine-induced hypertrophy and mitochondrial dysfunction in cardiomyocytes
Next, to test the hypothesis that acetylation of KAT6A at K815 is involved in cell growth and mitochondrial function in response to hypertrophic stimuli, cardiomyocytes were treated with phenylephrine, an α-adrenergic receptor agonist that mimics hypertensive conditions. Forty-eight-hour phenylephrine treatment significantly increased cell size in cardiomyocytes expressing the YFP-KAT6A-K815R mutant, while cardiomyocytes expressing the YFP-KAT6A-K815Q mutant exhibited a markedly attenuated hypertrophic response ( A). Consistent with these observations, the phenylephrine-induced fetal gene expression, including Nppa, Nppb, and the ratio of Myh7/Myh6, was suppressed in cardiomyocytes expressing the KAT6A-K815Q mutant compared to those expressing the KAT6A-K815R mutant ( E). These findings suggest that KAT6A-K815 acetylation mitigates hypertrophic responses in cardiomyocytes under stress conditions.
Phenylephrine treatment for 24 h increased basal OCR in cardiomyocytes expressing either the KAT6A-K815Q or KAT6A-K815R mutant, while phenylephrine-induced mitochondrial dysfunction, characterized by a reduction in maximal respiratory capacity, was significantly attenuated in cardiomyocytes expressing the KAT6A-K815Q mutant compared to those expressing the KAT6A-K815R mutant ( F). The protective effect of the KAT6A-K815Q mutant on mitochondrial function under phenylephrine treatment was abolished by adenovirus-mediated overexpression of dominant-negative AMPK ( G). To further assess mitochondrial function, mitochondrial membrane potential was measured using Tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester (TMRM) in rat neonatal cardiomyocytes expressing either the YFP-KAT6A-K815Q or YFP-KAT6A-K815R mutant, which identify cells expressing a mutant protein. In line with the Seahorse data, cardiomyocytes expressing the YFP-KAT6A-K815R mutant exhibited a significant reduction in mitochondrial membrane potential in response to phenylephrine, as indicated by a lower intensity of TMRM signal. In contrast, cardiomyocytes expressing the YFP-KAT6A-K815Q mutant maintained mitochondrial membrane potential even in the presence of phenylephrine ( H). These findings indicate that KAT6A-K815 acetylation mitigates phenylephrine-induced mitochondrial dysfunction by enhancing AMPK activity.
Finally, we asked how the catalytic activity of KAT6A contributes to mitochondrial function through KAT6A-K815 acetylation in cardiomyocytes. We hypothesized that KAT6A-K815 acetylation enhances energy homeostasis independently of its MYST catalytic activity, given the minimal impact of KAT6A-K815 acetylation on lysine acetylation ( ). To test this, cardiomyocytes were transfected with Ad-KAT6A-WT or Ad-KAT6A-K815Q in the presence or absence of WM-1119, an inhibitor of KAT6A catalytic activity [ ], followed by Seahorse experiments. As reported [ ], WM-1119 dose-dependently reduced H3K14 and H3K23 acetylation without influencing H3K9 acetylation ( ). We found that WM-1119 (10 μM) markedly reduces maximal respiration in cardiomyocytes expressing KAT6A-WT, suggesting that the MYST catalytic activity of KAT6A is necessary for maintaining energy homeostasis in cardiomyocytes ( I). Importantly, however, WM-1119 failed to impair maximal respiration in cardiomyocytes expressing the KAT6A-K816Q mutant. These results indicate that the catalytic activity of KAT6A is dispensable for enhancing maximal respiration in cardiomyocytes once KAT6A is acetylated at K815, potentially due to auto-acetylation of KAT6A at this site. Taken together, these findings suggest that while KAT6A catalytic activity is essential for the maintenance of mitochondrial function and stress resistance in cardiomyocytes, KAT6A-K815 acetylation provides a catalytic-independent mechanism for enhancing mitochondrial function. This mechanism likely involves the promotion of KAT6A's scaffolding role in AMPK complex formation and activation through K815 acetylation.

2.6.

## KAT6A-K816 acetylation-resistant knock-in mice display the smaller heart size with preserved cardiac function
To investigate the functional significance of KAT6A-K815 acetylation in vivo, we generated KAT6A-K816R (corresponding to human KAT6A-K815) acetylation-resistant knock-in mice using the CRISPR-CAS9 system at the Rutgers Genome Editing Shared Resource. Successful generation of the knock-in mice was confirmed by next-generation sequencing ( ). The KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice were backcrossed with C57BL/6J WT mice for more than six generations. The KAT6A-K816R homozygous knock-in mice were born at Mendelian ratios and exhibited normal viability ( ), suggesting that acetylation of KAT6A at K816 is dispensable for normal embryonic development in mice. Since KAT6A has been implicated in cardiac development through its chromatin-based regulation of Tbx transcription factors [ , ], we evaluated cardiac morphology in homozygous KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice at 6 weeks of age. However, we observed no overt structural abnormalities, particularly in septum development, which has been previously linked to DiGeorge syndrome in the context of KAT6A mutations ( ). Consequently, homozygous knock-in mice were used for all subsequent experiments.
To characterize the newly generated mouse line, we first evaluated systemic phenotypes, including body weight, organ weights, and blood levels of glucose and β-hydroxybutyrate, in both sexes. At 12 weeks of age, there were no significant differences in body weight between KAT6A-K816R homozygous knock-in mice and their littermate WT controls, either at baseline or after fasting, in both sexes ( A,B). Fasting blood sugar levels were also comparable between the two groups in both sexes ( C). Although KAT6A-K816 acetylation increased in response to a ketogenic diet, inhibition of KAT6A K816 acetylation did not affect serum β-hydroxybutyrate levels in either sex at 12 weeks of age ( D).
 Then, we evaluated various organ weights normalized to tibia length in both sexes at 8 weeks of age. Surprisingly, heart weight, ventricular weight, and left ventricular weight were significantly smaller in male KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice compared to their littermate WT controls under fed conditions ( E). This unexpected reduction in heart size was not observed after 36 h of fasting or in female KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice ( E,F). Additionally, the weights of other organs, including the lungs, liver, and spleen, were unaffected by the inhibition of KAT6A-K816 acetylation in either sex ( E,F). Consistent with the reduced heart weight in fed male knock-in mice, interventricular septal wall thickness at diastole was thinner in KAT6A-K816R knock-in male, as assessed by echocardiography, whereas no such difference was observed in females ( G). Despite the smaller heart size, cardiac function remained comparable between KAT6A-K816R knock-in and WT mice of both sexes at 8 weeks of age ( G). These findings indicate that KAT6A-K816 acetylation is essential for maintaining heart size in male mice at baseline in vivo, despite its lack of impact on cardiomyocyte size under non-stress condition in vitro. However, KAT6A-K816 acetylation appears dispensable for preserving baseline cardiac function in both sexes in vivo.

2.7.

## KAT6A-K816 acetylation-resistant knock-in mice show increased AMPK signaling in the heart with smaller cardiomyocytes
We further examined mutant hearts under fasting and non-fasting conditions at 8 weeks of age using histological analyses. Consistent with necropsy and echocardiography data ( ), individual cardiomyocyte size was significantly smaller in the hearts of male KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice compared to their littermate WT controls under fed conditions. However, this difference was not observed in female mice ( A,B). Notably, these size differences were undetectable under fasting conditions in both sexes. In contrast, no significant differences in cardiac fibrosis were observed between KAT6A-K816R knock-in and littermate WT controls, regardless of sex or fasting condition ( C,D).
 To investigate the mechanisms underlying the discrepancy between the in vitro phenotypes of cardiomyocytes and in vivo phenotypes of mutant hearts, we evaluated AMPK signaling and lysine acetylation status in the hearts of KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice by immunoblots. Under fed conditions, phosphorylation of AMPK and its substrate ACC phosphorylation was elevated in the hearts of KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice, but these differences were diminished after 36-hour fasting ( E). In line with these observations, phosphorylation of 4EBP and p70S6K, downstream targets of mTOR, was slightly reduced in these hearts. These findings indicate that inhibition of KAT6A-K816 acetylation enhances AMPK activity, mimicking the fasting phenotype, which contrasts with the findings observed in cardiomyocytes in vitro. However, interestingly, the fasting-induced increase in overall lysine acetylation was suppressed in the hearts of KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice ( F). While H3K23 acetylation levels were unaffected by fasting or the knock-in mutation ( G), H3K14 acetylation levels were elevated in the hearts of KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice under fed conditions, resembling the increase seen during fasting. H3K9 acetylation was reduced under fed conditions but increased during fasting in the hearts of KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice. Finally, we evaluated the effects of KAT6A-K816 acetylation on mitochondrial protein content ( H). Under basal conditions, Cpt1b (a mitochondria outer membrane protein) was elevated in the knock-in mouse hearts. However, the fasting-induced upregulation of Cpt1b was blunted in these mice. In addition, levels of medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD, a mitochondrial matrix protein) were reduced upon fasting in the knock-in mice. In contrast, the expression of NDUFA8 (a component of respiratory complex I located in the mitochondrial inner membrane) remained unaffected by KAT6A-K816 acetylation under both fed and fasted conditions. Again, these results further support the notion that inhibition of KAT6A-K816 acetylation mimics aspects of the fasting response at the level of mitochondrial protein expression. Together, these findings indicate that inhibition of KAT6A-K816 acetylation in vivo alters AMPK signaling and lysine acetylation patterns, potentially contributing to the observed phenotypic differences between in vitro and in vivo models.

2.8.

## Inhibition of KAT6A-K816 acetylation mitigates cardiac hypertrophy and dysfunction in response to hypertrophic stimuli in mice in vivo
To demonstrate the significance of KAT6A-K816 acetylation in the setting of chronic hypertension in vivo, we continuously administered neurohumoral stimulation (angiotensin II and phenylephrine) to KAT6A-K816R knock-in and age-matched control WT mice via osmotic pump for 3 weeks ( A). Given that heart and ventricular weights are slightly but significantly smaller in KAT6A-K816 knock-in male mice compared to WT mice at 8 weeks of age, but the differences get smaller after the age, 10-week-old male knock-in and age-matched control WT mice were used in this experiment. There was no significant difference in heart weight and other organ weights, including lung, liver, and spleen, between both groups after 3 weeks of treatment with vehicle ( B). While chronic neurohumoral stimulation induced cardiac hypertrophy in control WT mice, KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice suppressed the development of hypertrophy ( B). Consistent with necropsy data, angiotensin II/phenylephrine-induced increases in interventricular and left ventricular (LV) posterior wall thickness at diastole and LV mass, as assessed by echocardiography, were suppressed by inhibition of KAT6A-K816 acetylation ( C). Additionally, KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice attenuated neurohumoral stimulation-induced cardiac remodeling and systolic dysfunction ( C). These findings were supported by histological analyses. While individual cardiomyocyte size was similar in response to vehicle between both groups, cardiomyocyte hypertrophy was attenuated in KAT6A-K816R knock-in mouse hearts compared to WT mice ( D). Furthermore, inhibition of KAT6A-K816 acetylation mitigated cardiac fibrosis in response to angiotensin II and phenylephrine ( E). These results suggest that acetylation of KAT6A at K816 promotes pathological cardiac hypertrophy, remodeling, and cardiac dysfunction in response to chronic hypertension, which is opposite to the findings observed in cardiomyocytes in vitro.
 RNA-sequencing, proteomics, and physiological analyses indicate the crucial role of AMPK signaling as downstream of KAT6A-K816 acetylation in regulating cardiomyocyte size and energy metabolism. Hypertrophic stimuli at least initially enhance AMPK activity due in part to increases in the ratio of AMP/ATP and the expression of AMPK α1 subunit [ ], which serves as cardioprotection against hemodynamic stress. Consistent with the previous finding [ ], phosphorylation of AMPK and ACC was increased in WT mouse hearts in response to hypertrophic stimuli ( F). AMPK activity was high at baseline and was further activated in KAT6A-K816R knock-in mouse hearts after hypertrophic stimuli ( F). Although cardiac hypertrophy was attenuated in the knock-in mice, the levels of phosphorylated p70S6K and 4EBP were similar between two groups after hypertrophic stimuli ( F). In contrast to mTOR pathway, stress-induced ERK activation was suppressed in KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice ( F). Regarding lysine acetylation, similar to fasting conditions, angiotensin II and phenylephrine treatment increased the levels of acetylation in total lysine residues, H3K9, H3K14, and H3K23 in the hearts of WT mice ( G,H). However, notably, these changes were not observed in the hearts of KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice ( G,H).

2.9.

## Activation of AMPK signaling by neurohumoral stimuli was suppressed in adult cardiomyocytes isolated from KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice
To understand the underlying mechanism of the discrepancies in the effects of KAT6A-K816 acetylation on cell growth and AMPK signaling between in vivo mouse hearts and in vitro cardiomyocytes, we considered several contributing factors: 1) overexpression versus loss-of-function models; 2) metabolic differences between neonatal and adult cardiomyocytes; and 3) cell-type-specific roles. To address these possibilities, we isolated adult cardiomyocytes from KAT6A-K816R knock-in and WT mice and treated them with angiotensin II and phenylephrine for 30 min to evaluate the cell type-specific effects of KAT6A-K816 acetylation on AMPK signaling ( A). Cardiomyocytes isolated from WT mice exhibited greater AMPK phosphorylation in response to angiotensin II and phenylephrine treatment compared to those isolated from KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice ( B). In line with this, phosphorylation of p70S6K was more pronounced in KAT6A-K816R cardiomyocytes than in WT cardiomyocytes following stimulation ( B). H3K9 acetylation decreased in WT cardiomyocytes, while H3K14 acetylation decreased in KAT6A-K816R knock-in cardiomyocytes, in response to hypertrophic stimuli ( C,D). Baseline AMPK activity was comparatively lower in KAT6A-K816R knock-in adult cardiomyocytes in vitro than in KAT6A-K816R knock-in mouse hearts in vivo. Both were relatively lower than baseline AMPK activity observed in neonatal cardiomyocytes, suggesting that K816 acetylation differentially regulates AMPK activity across different cell types and stages of maturation. Nonetheless, hypertrophic stimuli-induced AMPK activation was similarly suppressed in both KAT6A-K816R mouse hearts and KAT6A-K816R adult cardiomyocytes. This underscores the metabolic distinctions between neonatal and adult cardiomyocytes and the potential influence of experimental models (gain- or loss-of function). These findings highlight the intricate regulation of AMPK activity via KAT6A-K816 acetylation in a cell-type-specific manner and reflect metabolic disparities across cardiomyocyte maturation stages. Collectively, these in vivo and in vitro experiments emphasize the critical role of KAT6A in regulating AMPK activity through K816 acetylation and its pivotal function in cardiomyocyte stress responses.
 
2.10.

## Lack of KAT6A-K816 acetylation accelerates aging-associated cardiac decline
Acetyltransferases play critical roles in regulating senescence [ ]. To investigate the long-term effects of chronic AMPK activation resulting from a lack of KAT6A-K816 acetylation, we monitored KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice up to 28 weeks of age. In male knock-in mice, body weight was slightly but significantly increased compared to WT mice, whereas no significant differences were observed in females ( ). Similarly, hypertrophy indices -including heart weight, ventricular weight, and LV weight-were elevated in older male, but not female, knock-in mice ( ). Moreover, echocardiography analysis revealed mild yet significant systolic dysfunction and cardiac remodeling in aged male KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice, effects that were not observed in females ( ). Furthermore, activation of AMPK signaling and increased acetylation levels of overall lysine residues, as well as histone H3K9 and H3K14, were more pronounced in aged male knock-in mice ( ). While overall lysine acetylation was also increased in aged knock-in female mice, histone H3K9, H3K14, and H3K23 acetylation and AMPK signaling were not elevated ( ). These findings suggest that the chronic activation of AMPK signaling through the inhibition of KAT6A-K816 acetylation accelerates cardiac aging in male mice, highlighting a sex-specific impact of KAT6A-K816 acetylation on AMPK signaling and age-associated cardiac decline.

3.

## Discussion
In this study, we demonstrate that ketone bodies, such as through exogenous β-hydroxybutyrate administration or dietary intake of a KD, enhance KAT6A acetylation at K815 (corresponding to K816 in mice), which governs heart size and cardiac function in a sex-dependent manner. Our findings reveal that KAT6A-K815 acetylation facilitates its interaction with the regulatory β and γ subunits of AMPK, thereby fine-tuning AMPK signaling. This regulation influences cardiomyocyte size and mitochondrial energetics, providing a cardioprotective mechanism against hypertensive cardiomyopathy in a manner contingent upon cell type and maturation stage of cardiomyocytes ( E). These findings establish KAT6A as a pivotal regulatory hub that connects nutrient status to the control of cell size and energy homeostasis, orchestrated through K815 acetylation and the mediation of AMPK signaling pathways.
KATs represent a highly diverse group of enzymes that catalyze the transfer of acetyl groups from acetyl-CoA to lysine residues. KAT6A, also known as monocytic leukemia zinc finger protein (MOZ), is a member of the MYST family of KATs, exhibiting a preference for acetylating histone H3K9 and H3K14, as well as various non-histone proteins [ ]. This acetylation activity promotes cell cycle progression and the proliferation of hematopoietic and neural stem cells. KAT6A-deficient mice exhibit embryonic lethality around day 15, with a severe deficit in hematopoietic stem cells [ ]. Mutations in the KAT6A gene result in the KAT6A syndrome, characterized by intellectual disability, microcephaly, and cardiac defects [ ]. Additionally, pharmacological inhibition of KAT6A and KAT6B using small-molecule compounds WM-1119, WM-8014, or PF-07248114 induces cellular senescence in cancer cells, demonstrating anti-tumor effects in mouse models [ ] and holding potential for human applications [ ]. Although KAT6A undergoes various post-translational modifications, their functional roles and significance, particularly K815 acetylation, have remained unexplored. In this study, we reveal that KAT6A-K815 acetylation functions as a novel regulatory mechanism that operates independently of its acetyltransferase activity, regulating cell growth and mitochondrial function in cardiomyocytes. These findings open avenues for exploring the broader biological implications of KAT6A across various tissues and pathological contexts.
Sex differences in signaling pathways, metabolism, cardiac physiology, and the prevalence of cardiac diseases, partially driven by sex hormones and genetic factors, are well documented. Therefore, it is conceivable that AMPK signaling and cardiac phenotypes differ between sexes in KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice. This stands in contrast to KAT6A mutation-associated cardiac phenotypes, which have not been reported to exhibit sex-specific differences. Based on these observations, we speculate that KAT6A-K815 acetylation functions through mechanisms distinct from those underlying KAT6A mutation-mediated congenital heart disease. Notably, AMPK activity has been shown to differ between sexes at baseline and in response to pathophysiological stresses in both humans and mice [ , ], supporting the idea that the cardiac phenotypes observed in our model are primarily driven by dysregulated AMPK signaling.
AMPK is a central regulator of energy metabolism and mitochondrial homeostasis by sensing the ATP to AMP ratio to maintain a balance between catabolic and anabolic processes and also regulating autophagy through phosphorylation of key autophagy machinery proteins [ ]. AMPK operates as heterotrimeric complexes composed of catalytic α-subunits and regulatory β- and γ-subunits. The γ-subunits bind nucleotides (ATP, ADP, or AMP), inducing conformational changes in the regulatory β- and γ-subunits and modulating AMPK activity in conjunction with phosphorylation at threonine 172 (Thr172). Additionally, AMPK senses the availability of glucose, glycogen, and long-chain fatty acyl-CoA esters, thereby exerting broad control over carbohydrate and lipid metabolism [ , ]. Our study reveals that ketone bodies promote KAT6A K815 acetylation, which in turn enhances AMPK signaling in cardiomyocytes. These findings suggest a novel regulatory mechanism of AMPK activity mediated by ketone-induced KAT6A acetylation, offering new insights into the interplay between nutrient sensing, acetylation, and metabolic regulation in the heart.
AMPK exhibits diverse subcellular localizations, with its catalytic α-subunit containing nuclear export and import sequences that enable shuttling between the cytoplasm and nucleus, thereby regulating its kinase activity in specific subcellular compartments [ ]. Notably, the AMPK γ2 subunit has been shown to translocate into the nucleus during glucose deprivation in COS7 cells [ ]. Given the predominant nuclear localization of KAT6A and the minimal effect of K815 acetylation on its distribution, it is likely that acetylated KAT6A at K815 interacts with AMPK β/γ regulatory subunits in the nucleus, which influences the configuration of the AMPK heterotrimeric complex, promoting AMPK phosphorylation and stabilizing phosphorylated Thr172 by shielding it from dephosphorylation. It is plausible that the differential subcellular localization and expression levels of AMPK α/β/γ subunits across cell types, species, and stress conditions contribute to the cell type-specific role of KAT6A-K815 acetylation. Importantly, while KAT6A is known to acetylate non-histone proteins such as p53, our proteomic analysis did not detect AMPK acetylation under conditions where KAT6A is acetylated in the hearts of mice fed a KD. Thus, it is unlikely that KAT6A directly acetylates AMPK to enhance its activity. Instead, our findings suggest that KAT6A functions as a scaffolding protein, facilitating AMPK signaling by promoting the active conformation of the AMPK complex.
Ketone bodies have multiple roles: 1) generating acetyl-CoA through ketolysis to fuel ATP production in mitochondria; 2) functioning as signaling molecules through chromatin modification and non-histone protein acetylation; and 3) acting as endogenous inhibitors of lysine deacetylases (KDACs) [ , , , , ]. Indeed, ketone bodies increase lysine acetylation levels in both whole lysates and subcellular fractions, including mitochondria, cytosol, and nuclei, in the heart in vivo and in cardiomyocytes in vitro [ ]. Additionally, local changes in acetyl-CoA levels, such as nuclear accumulation, can modulate specific cellular functions [ ]. For example, nuclei at the tissue surface exhibit elevated levels of acetyl-CoA synthase, which generates acetyl-CoA to drive histone acetylation in the epithelial tissue of the Drosophila wing disc [ ]. Our current findings elucidate the role of ketone body in regulating AMPK activity through KAT6A-K815 acetylation. We have previously shown that ketone bodies suppress mTOR signaling in cardiomyocytes [ ]; however, modulation of KAT6A-K815 acetylation has minimal impact on the phosphorylation levels of downstream targets such as 4EBP and p70S6K. This discrepancy suggests that ketone body-mediated suppression of mTOR signaling may occur independently of KAT6A acetylation, underscoring the complexity of ketone body actions in cellular signaling and metabolic regulation.
In addition to the response of cardiomyocytes to ketone bodies, metabolic maturation and remodeling unique to the heart have been extensively studied. During postnatal development, cardiac metabolism undergoes a significant shift from glycolysis to fatty acid oxidation, driven by adaptions to environmental changes in nutrient availability, oxygen levels, gut microbiota population, and hemodynamics [ , ]. Similarly, the expression pattern of AMPK isoforms varies across developmental stages and disease states [ ], aligning with our findings that adult cardiomyocytes isolated from mouse hearts exhibit distinct AMPK activity compared to neonatal cardiomyocytes in vitro and mouse hearts in vivo in WT. These metabolic characteristics of the heart may underpin the maturation stage-dependent mechanism of KAT6A-K815 acetylation. Furthermore, adenovirus-mediated KAT6A expression increases histone H3 acetylation independently of K815 mutant types, emphasizing the effect of KAT6A expression levels on histone acetylation. Conversely, homozygous KAT6A acetylation-resistant knock-in mice almost completely abolish KAT6A-K815 acetylation. This disruption may either fall outside the physiological range of acetylation levels or represent a compensatory negative feedback mechanism that enhances AMPK activity in vivo. It is important to note that the homozygous knock-in in our current mouse model systemically disrupts K815 acetylation, raising the possibility that effects of K815 acetylation in non-cardiac tissues may also contribute to the observed cardiac phenotypes [ ]. These observations highlight the nuanced roles of KAT6A-K815 acetylation in the regulation of cardiac metabolism and function.
We acknowledge several limitations. First, protein expression levels in mouse heart tissue, particularly those of signaling proteins, are inherently more variable than those in cultured cells and can fluctuate due to various factors such as time since the last feeding, estrous cycle, and physiological stress. These variables are difficult to fully control in vivo. In contrast, in vitro culture systems provide more uniform conditions. Achieving consistent protein expression across all mouse samples remains a challenge and will be an important focus of future studies. Second, it remains challenging to determine whether KAT6A, when complexed with AMPK, directly associates with chromatin to regulate gene expression, or whether AMPK signaling-related gene expression is regulated indirectly as a downstream effect of AMPK activation mediated by KAT6A-K815 acetylation. Third, although quantitation of acetylated peptides was performed using a spectral counting-based label-free quantification method, it is not feasible to calculate the actual percentage of acetylation. This is because the enrichment process selectively removes non-acetylated peptides, and low-abundance proteins such as KAT6A may fall below the detection threshold. Consequently, while the acetylation data confirm the presence of specific modifications, they do not allow for accurate comparisons of acetylation levels relative to total protein abundance across experimental conditions in vivo. Data-dependent acquisition mass spectrometry cannot conclusively determine quantitative differences and may not sample all ions present in the specimens, particularly those of low abundance. A targeted mass spectrometry approach to quantify the stoichiometry of KAT6A acetylation, or the development of an acetylation-specific antibody against KAT6A at K815, would allow more accurate and quantitative assessment of endogenous KAT6A acetylation both in vitro and in vivo. Such approaches would be instrumental in elucidating the functional role of KAT6A-K815 acetylation under physiological and pathological conditions. Fourth, The K815R mutation may interfere with other potential post-translational modifications, including ubiquitination, which could influence the observed phenotypes through acetylation-independent mechanism, for example, by altering the stability of the KAT6A protein. While experimental approaches such as proteasome inhibition (e.g., MG132) or protein synthesis inhibition (e.g., cycloheximide) could help evaluate this possibility, consistently detecting the high-molecular-weight KAT6A protein by immunoblotting remains technically challenging. Although repeated immunoblotting and immunofluorescence analyses did not show significant differences in the expression levels of KAT6A mutants, further studies are warranted to determine whether non-acetylation-based mechanisms involving K815 modifications contribute to KAT6A function. Next, overexpression of mutant proteins may exert effects, in part, through dominant-negative mechanisms in vitro. In contrast, overexpression of mutant proteins in true knockout cell lines may offer a more physiologically relevant context for assessing the functional consequences of specific mutations. However, our data highlight the cell type-specific effects of KAT6A-K815 acetylation, underscoring the limitations of using KAT6A knockout cultured cells. Finally, since KAT6A-K816R KI mice are a newly generated mouse line, we conducted a comprehensive characterization, including sex differences and aging effects, in accordance with ARRIVE guidelines. However, we acknowledge that reporting these findings in detail may obscure the main focus of this paper. In future studies, it would be valuable to investigate the roles of KAT6A acetylation in other cell types, such as neural and cancer cells, given that K815 acetylation has been reported by mass spectrometry in the non-small cell lung cancer A549 cell line following treatment with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a clinically used histone deacetylase inhibitor in cancer therapy [ ], as well as in human osteosarcoma (U2OS) cells [ ] and Hela cells [ ], although its functional role in these contexts remains unclear. Notably, previous studies have reported significantly increased KAT6A expression in endothelial and smooth muscle cells in human abdominal aortic aneurysms [ ], reinforcing the cell type-specific role of KAT6A-K815 acetylation observed in the hearts.
In conclusion, our study demonstrates that ketone bodies enhance KAT6A acetylation at K815, facilitating its interaction with AMPK regulatory subunits and thereby stimulating AMPK signaling in cardiomyocytes. These findings highlight the pivotal role of KAT6A acetylation as a central mediator linking ketone availability to metabolic adaptation, regulating cardiomyocyte growth and mitochondrial energy metabolism through AMPK in a manner dependent on sex, cell type, and maturation stage.

4.

## Methods
4.1.

## Mice
KAT6A K816R knock-in mice (C57BL/6J background) were generated using CRISPR-Cas9. C57BL/6J embryos were microinjected with a mixture containing High Fidelity Cas9 protein (IDT), an sgRNA (MilliporeSigma) and ssODN (IDT) which contained homology arms and the K816R mutation. The sgRNA used was TTGTTTTCCTTAATTAGGTGGGG (PAM is underlined). The K816R donor oligo sequence (non-coding strand) was CTTCTTGTCAGTTTCTATTAAAGAGGAAGACTCCTGATCTTTTTTCTCCCGAGACACAGACcTTCCCACCTAATTAAGGAAAACAAAACAAACAAAAACAACATTGATTTTTTTTCAGTCTGCTTGGTTAAG (K816R sequence change in lower case bold, PAM change in upper case bold). Founders were screened by PCR and digested with restriction enzyme HpyAV (NEB) then confirmed by NGS sequencing (Azenta Life Sciences). Confirmed founders were bred and progeny were screened using PCR primers: KAT6A-A GTGGCCAAAGGGAAAGAGTATTCAG and KAT6A-B GGATAGTGTCTCATCCACAAGCATC and presence of restriction site or by Sanger sequencing of PCR products. Genotyping was performed by Sanger Sequencing of PCR primers using a forward primer (5′- CAAAGGGAAAGAGTATTCAGGGT -3′) and a reverse primer (5’ - ACTTTTCCTCGCAGTCTCCA -3′ for sequencing) to identify the expected mutation (K > R) as shown in . The mutant offspring were backcrossed into the C57BL/6J background for more than 6 generations. Male C57BL/6J wild-type mice were purchased from Jackson Labs (Strain # 000664) at 5–8 weeks of age to backcross the knock-in mice. Mice of both sexes were used except experiments of hypertrophic stimulation. Mice were housed in a temperature and humidity-controlled environment within a range of 21 °C–23 °C with 12-hour light/dark cycles, in which they received food and water ad libitum. We used age-matched male mice in all animal experiments. The sample size required was estimated to be n = 5–8 per group according to the Power analysis based upon previous studies examining the effects of pressure overload on cardiac hypertrophy and hypertrophic signaling. All protocols concerning the use of animals were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Rutgers New Jersey Medical School and all procedures conformed to NIH guidelines (Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals). Handling of mice and euthanasia with CO2 in an appropriate chamber were conducted in accordance with guidelines on euthanasia of the American Veterinary Medical Association. Rutgers is accredited by AAALAC International, in compliance with Animal Welfare Act regulations and Public Health Service (PHS) Policy on Humane Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, and has a PHS Approved Animal Welfare Assurance with the NIH Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare (D16-00098 (A3158-01)).

4.2.

## Ketogenic diet
Mice were fed a custom diet (Ketogenic diet (D22021702, 7 kcal% Protein and 90% kcal% Fat) or Control diet (D22021701, 10 kcal% Protein and 15 kcal% Fat) ( ), purchased from Research Diets) ad libitum. Daily ad libitum food intake was measured after an initial 2-day acclimation period on a special diet followed by a 5-day experimental period by weighing food provided and remaining every 24 h and taking an average. The body weight was measured in the late afternoon every week during the special food feeding period. Fasting blood sugar levels were measured after overnight fasting using Aimstrip plus blood glucose meter kit (VWR, #10025-286). Serum β-hydroxybutyrate levels were measured using a β-hydroxybutyrate colorimetric assay kit (Caymen #700190) following the manufacturer's instructions.

4.3.

## Hypertrophy induction with angiotensin II/phenylephrine treatment
Chronic treatment of hypertrophic agonists (400 μg/kg/day of angiotensin II and 100 mg/kg/day of phenylephrine) or vehicle control (0.9% sodium chloride) was conducted with Alzet osmotic mini-pumps (Alzet, Durect Corporation, Lafeyette Instrument Company, Northern California) for 3 weeks, which were subcutaneously implanted in 9∼10-week-old mice under anesthesia of 2.5% Avertin (10 μl/g body weight) and inhaled 2% isoflurane.

4.4.

## Echocardiography
Mice were anesthetized using 10 μl/g body weight of 2.5% avertin (Sigma–Aldrich), and echocardiography was performed using ultrasound (Vivid 7, GE Healthcare). It took around 10–20 min from the establishment of anesthesia to the completion of echocardiography and 1–2 h to fully recover from anesthesia after echocardiography. A 13-MHz linear ultrasound transducer was used. Mice were subjected to 2-dimension guided M-mode measurements of LV internal diameter at the papillary muscle level from the short-axis view to measure systolic function and wall thickness, which were taken from at least three beats and averaged. LV ejection fraction was calculated as follows: Ejection fraction = [(LVEDD)3 – (LVESD)3]/(LVEDD)3 x 100. LV mass was calculated as follows: LV mass = 1.05 x [(IVSd + LVDd + LVPWd)3 – (LVDd)3].

4.5.

## Cell line
HEK293 cells were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (CRL-1573) and maintained at 37 °C with 5% CO2 in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's Medium with 10% fetal bovine serum and penicillin/streptomycin. H9C2 cells were purchased from the ATCC and were maintained at 37 °C with 5% CO2 in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium/Nutrient Mixture F-12 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and penicillin/streptomycin.

4.6.

## Primary rat neonatal cardiomyocytes
Primary cultures of ventricular cardiomyocytes were prepared from 1-day-old Crl:(WI)BR-Wistar rats (Envigo, Somerville) and maintained in culture as described previously [ , ]. The neonatal rats of both sexes were deeply anesthetized with isoflurane. The chest was opened, and the heart was harvested. A cardiomyocyte-rich fraction was obtained by centrifugation through a discontinuous Percoll gradient. Cardiomyocytes were cultured in complete medium containing Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium/F-12 supplemented with 5% horse serum, 4 μg/ml transferrin, 0.7 ng/ml sodium selenite, 2 g/l bovine serum albumin (fraction V), 3 mM pyruvate, 15 mM Hepes pH 7.1, 100 μM ascorbate, 100 mg/l ampicillin, 5 mg/l linoleic acid, and 100 μM 5-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine (Sigma). Culture dishes were coated with 0.3% gelatin or 2% gelatin for immunofluorescence staining on chamber slides. The following ketone bodies were used; β-hydroxybutyrate (Sigma–Aldrich #H6501) and acetoacetate (SigmaAldrich # A8509). WM-1119 (Tocris Bioscience, #6692) was dissolved in DMSO and used for the indicated concentration.

4.7.

## Isolation of mouse adult cardiomyocytes
Adult mouse cardiomyocytes were isolated as described previously with a modification [ , ]. Briefly, the heart of a male mouse was perfused with 12 ml EDTA buffer [130 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 0.5 mM NaH2PO4, 10 mM HEPES, 10 mM Glucose, 10 mM BDM, 10 mM Taurine, 5 mM EDTA] to stop the beating of the heart. Digestion was achieved using 30 ml perfusion buffer [130 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 0.5 mM NaH2PO4, 10 mM HEPES, 10 mM Glucose, 10 mM BDM, 10 mM Taurine, 1 mM MgCl2] containing 1 mg/ml Collagenase type II (Worthington, LS004177) and 0.05 mg/ml Protease XIV (Sigma–Aldrich, P5147). Cellular dissociation was stopped by addition of 5 ml Perfusion buffer containing 5% FBS and 100 mM BSA-conjugated fatty acid cocktail (palmitic acid: oleic acid: linoleic acid = 2:1:1 and BSA: fatty acid = 1:5). Cell suspension was passed through a 100-μm filter and cardiomyocytes, and non-cardiomyocytes were separated by 4 sequential rounds of gravity settling with calcium reintroduction medium containing 100 mM BSA-conjugated fatty acid cocktail. The non-myocyte fraction was plated on 6-well tissue-culture plate in a humidified tissue culture incubator (37 °C, 5% CO2). Media was changed to Dulbecco's modified Eagle's Medium (Cytiva, SH30243.01) with 10% fetal bovine serum after 24 h.

4.8.

## Adenovirus constructs
Recombinant adenovirus vector for overexpression was constructed, propagated and titered as previously described [ , , ]. Briefly, pBHGloxΔE1,3Cre (Microbix), including the ΔE adenoviral genome, was co-transfected with the pDC shuttle vector containing the gene of interest into HEK293 cells. Replication-defective human adenovirus type 5 (devoid of E1) harboring human full length wild type or mutant KAT6A cDNA (Ad-FLAG- or YFP-tagged KAT6A or Ad-KAT6A without tag) was generated by homologous recombination in HEK293 cells. Generation of adenovirus harboring a dominant negative form of the α2 subunit of AMPK has been described [ ]. Adenovirus harboring beta-galactosidase (Ad-LacZ) was used as a control.

4.9.

## Immunoblotting
Cardiomyocyte lysates and heart homogenates were prepared in RIPA buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma–Aldrich P8340 and P0044) [ , , , ]. Lysates were centrifuged at 16,100×g at 4 °C for 15 min. Protein concentrations were determined using a standard BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23227). Total protein lysates (25–45 μg) were incubated with SDS sample buffer (final concentration: 100 mM Tris (pH 6.8), 2% SDS, 5% glycerol, 2.5% 2mercaptoethanol, and 0.05% bromophenol blue) at 95 °C for 5 min. The denatured protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE, transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (Bio-Rad, 1620177) by semi-dry electrophoretic transfer (Bio-Rad), blocked in 2% (w/v) BSA (Fisher, BP9703100) in 1xTBS/0.5% Tween 20 at room temperature for 1 h, and probed with primary antibodies at 4 °C overnight. After washing with 1xTBS/0.5% Tween 20 for 20 min, the membranes were incubated with the corresponding secondary antibody at room temperature for 1 h. After washing with 1xTBS/0.5% Tween 20 for 45 min, the membranes were developed with ECL Western blotting substrate (Millipore, WBKLS0500, WBLUC0100), followed by acquisition of digital image with the ChemiDoc MP Imaging System (Bio-Rad). The intensities of Western blot bands were quantified using ImageJ software. Uncropped blotting images with molecular markers are provided in Source Data File.

4.10.

## Antibodies and reagents
The following commercial antibodies were used at the indicated dilutions: rabbit monoclonal phospho-AMPKα (Thr172) antibody (#2535) (1:3,000), rabbit monoclonal AMPKα antibody (#2603) (1:3,000), rabbit monoclonal phospho-Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase (Ser79) antibody (#3661) (1:3,000), rabbit monoclonal Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase antibody (#3662) (1:2,000), rabbit monoclonal phospho-4E-BP1 (Thr70) antibody (#9455) (1:3,000), rabbit monoclonal 4E-BP1 antibody (#9452) (1:3,000), rabbit monoclonal phospho-p70 S6 Kinase (Thr389) antibody (#9205) (1:3,000), rabbit monoclonal p70 S6 Kinase antibody (#9202) (1:3,000), rabbit monoclonal GAPDH (#5174) (1:5,000), Acetyl-Histone H3 (Lys9) antibody (#9649) (1:3,000), rabbit monoclonal Acetyl-Histone H3 (Lys14) antibody (#7627) (1:2,000), rabbit monoclonal Acetylated-Lysine antibody (#9441), anti-mouse or -rabbit IgG, HRP-linked antibodies (#7076 and #7074) (1:5,000) (Cell Signaling Technology); rabbit polyclonal KAT6A antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #PA5-68046); mouse monoclonal α-tubulin antibody (T6074) (1:5,000), mouse monoclonal FLAG M2 antibody (F1804) (1:4,000) (Sigma–Aldrich); Antibodies were diluted in either 2% (w/v) BSA in 1xTBS/0.5% Tween 20 or Immunobooster solution (Takara), depending on the level of background intensity.

4.11.

## FLAG pull-down assay
Cardiomyocytes were transduced with adenovirus harboring FLAG-KAT6A-WT, K815R, or K815Q for 2 days. Control FLAG sample was used as a negative control. The cardiomyocytes were collected with RIPA buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma–Aldrich) as described previously [ ]. Lysates were centrifuged at 16,100×g at 4 °C for 15 min. After protein concentrations were determined using a standard BCA assay, protein lysates were incubated with anti-FLAG M2 Magnetic Beads (Sigma–Aldrich) overnight at 4 °C. After FLAG pull-down, the samples were washed with lysis buffer five times and eluted with lysis buffer containing 100 μg/mL 3x FLAG peptide (Sigma–Aldrich, Cat#F4799). KAT6A interacting proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue, followed by Mass Spectrometry. For immunoblotting analyses, immunoprecipitates were separated by SDS-PAGE, transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes, and probed with anti-FLAG and anti-AMPKα antibodies, followed by appropriate secondary antibodies.

4.12.

## Mass spectrometry sample preparation and analysis for protein–protein interaction
The whole four lanes of SDS-PAGE gel samples (Ctrl, KQ, KR and WT) were excised for in-gel trypsin digestion as described [ ]. Briefly, the gel bands of each sample were excised into ∼1 cm3 pieces and washed four times with 1 μL each of a solution of 30% acetonitrile (ACN) and 70% of 100 mM NH4HCO3. Subsequently, 200 μL of 25 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) solution was used to reduce disulfides at 55 °C for 30 min, and 200 μL of 50 mM iodoacetamide solution was then added to alkylate thiols at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The resulting gel pieces were dehydrated with 200 μL of ACN to remove both DTT and iodoacetamide. For in-gel trypsin digestion, 100 μL of trypsin solution (5 μg/mL in 50 mM NH4HCO3) was added into each sample and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Resulting peptides were extracted, desalted with Pierce C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific), based on the manufacturer's protocol, followed by Speed Vac prior to LC-MS/MS analysis on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS instrument.
Peptides from each sample were reconstituted in Solvent A (consisting of 2% ACN in 0.1% formic acid, FA). Two microliters of peptides from each sample were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer coupled with an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC+ system (Thermo Scientific). The separation of peptides occurred on an Acclaim PepMap C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) with a 2-hour binary gradient ranging from 2% to 95% of Solvent B (85% ACN in 0.1% FA), at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Eluted peptides were introduced into the MS system via a Nanospray Flex ion source with a spray voltage of 2 kV and a capillary temperature of 275 °C. MS spectra were acquired in positive ion mode using Xcalibur (1.5). Full MS scans were obtained in an m/z range of 375–1500 in profile mode, with an AGC value of approximately 1E6. Subsequent to each full MS scan, the data-dependent MS/MS mode was used to analyze the ions with charge states ranging from 2+ to 7+. The isolation window of 2 m/z was used for MS/MS analysis and the higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) was used for fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 30%. The AGC for MS/MS analysis was set to 5E4 and a dynamic exclusion time of 45 s was implemented.
The MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot rat database using Sequest search engines on Proteome Discoverer (V2.3) platform. The protein false discovery rate is less than 1% as listed in the attached Table. The ratios of K815Q (KQ)/Control (Ctrl), K815R (KR)/Ctrl, and wild-type (WT)/Ctrl were calculated by dividing the spectral counts of KQ, KR, and WT by those of the Ctrl, respectively.

4.13.

## Mass spectrometry sample preparation and analysis for acetylation protein identification
Heart tissues from four mice fed a ketogenic diet and four mice fed a control diet were collected and pooled for the identification of protein acetylation. The samples were homogenized in lysis buffer containing 8M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail, followed by high-speed centrifugation. Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford Assay. Fifteen milligrams of total protein from each pooled sample were used for analysis.
Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 55 °C for 30 min and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. In-solution digestion was then performed using trypsin at a 1:50 enzyme-to-protein (wt/wt) ratio at 37 °C overnight. The resulting peptides were desalted using C18 columns.
A small aliquot (5%) of each sample was reserved for protein expression analysis, and the remaining peptides were used for the enrichment of acetylated peptides using the PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine Motif [Ac–K] Kit, following the manufacturer's instructions (Cell Signaling Technology #13416). The enriched peptides (one-third of the eluted peptides, equivalent to approximately 1 μg of peptides) were loaded per LC-MS/MS run for analysis on a Q Exactive MS instrument. Peptides were separated on a 75 μm × 50 cm C18 analytical column using a linear gradient from 3% to 30% buffer B over 155 min, followed by a ramp to higher buffer B (up to 50%) over 15 min, then up to 95% over an additional 15 min. A wash at 95% buffer B was held for 10 min, followed by column re-equilibration, for a total run time of approximately 220 min. The flow rate was 300 nL/min.
MS/MS acquisition parameters were as follows: MS1 (Full Scan): scan range 400-1,700 m/z; resolution 140,000; AGC target 3 × 106; maximum inject time 100 ms. MS2 (HCD Fragmentation): resolution 17,500; normalized collision energy 27%; AGC target 5 × 104; maximum injection time 100 ms. Precursor charge states 2–4 were selected; dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s; loop count was 15. Data analysis: MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt mouse database using the Sequest search engine on the Proteome Discoverer platform (V2.3). Lysine acetylation (+42.011 Da) was included as a variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to ±10 ppm, and the fragment ion tolerance was ∼0.1 Da. A false discovery rate less than 1% was applied for both protein and peptide identifications.

4.14.

## RNA-seq library preparation, sequencing, and data analysis
Total RNA was isolated from rat neonatal cardiomyocytes using TRIzol (Invitrogen). Isolated RNA was checked for integrity on an Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100; samples with RNA integrity number >7.0 were used for subsequent processing. Total RNA was subjected to two rounds of poly(A) selection using oligo-d(T)25 magnetic beads (New England Biolabs). A paired-end (strand specific) cDNA library was prepared using the NEB Next Ultra-directional RNA-seq protocol. Briefly, poly(A) + RNA was fragmented by heating at 94 °C for 10 min, followed by reverse transcription and second strand cDNA synthesis using the reagents provided in the NEB Next kit. End-repaired cDNA was then ligated with double stranded DNA adapters, followed by purification of ligated DNA with AmpureXP beads. cDNA was then amplified by PCR for 15 cycles with a universal forward primer and a reverse primer with bar code. The sequencing of the cDNA libraries was performed on the Illumina NextSeq 500 platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA) using the single-read 1x75 cycles configuration. The raw reads files have been deposited in the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus.
Raw reads were quality trimmed using Trimmomatic-0.39 with leading and trailing Q score 20, minimum length 35 bp. The cleaned reads were mapped to Rattus norvegicus genome Rnor_6.0 using HISAT2 (Version 2.2.1). The reference genome sequence and annotation files were downloaded from ENSEMBL. The aligned read counts were obtained using htseq-count as part of the package HTSeq-0.6.1. The Bioconductor package edgeR (Version 3.18.1 with limma 3.32.10) was used to perform the differential gene expression analysis under R environment, R version 4.1.1. Expression patterns of regulated genes were graphically represented in a heat map. Hierarchical clustering was performed to group genes with similar features in the expression profile. Normalized expression data were also analyzed with GSEA version 4.1.0 software using the JAVA program (Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA). All gene sets were obtained from the Molecular Signatures Database version 7.3 distributed on the GSEA Web site. We identified significantly altered pathways using the “c2.all.symbols.gmt (Curated)” gene set file, which contains all C2 gene sets from the MSigDB annotated with HGNC gene symbols. A false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.25 was used to define significantly enriched gene sets based on normalized enrichment scores, in accordance with GSEA guidelines. The full list of enriched pathways with FDR <0.25 is provided in the Supplementary Tables.

4.15.

## Immunohistochemistry
The heart tissues were washed with PBS, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned at 10-μm thickness onto a glass slide. After de-paraffinization, sections were stained with wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) for evaluation of the cross-sectional area of cardiomyocytes, or Picric Acid Sirius Red (PASR) for fibrosis. The myocyte cross-sectional area was measured from images captured from wheat germ agglutinin (WGA)-stained sections. The tissues were observed under a fluorescence microscope (BX51, Olympus). The outline of 100–200 myocytes was traced in each section using ImageJ software (NIH).

4.16.

## Cardiomyocyte cell size measurement
Rat neonatal cardiomyocytes were cultured on coverslips, washed with PBS twice, fixed with 3.7% paraformaldehyde for 15 min, and washed with PBS three times. Samples were permeabilized with PBST (0.5% Triton-X in PBS) for 15 min, and blocked in 5% BSA, 5% goat serum in PBST for 30 min at 37 °C. Cardiomyocytes were stained with Alexa Fluor 555 phalloidin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A34055). Samples were washed with PBS and mounted on glass slides with mounting medium (VECTASHIELD, Vector Laboratories). Cells were observed under a fluorescence microscope (Eclipse Ti, Nikon) with Nikon NIS-Elements imaging software. Cell size was measured for 25–30 cells for each condition in each experiment and the mean value was taken as representative of the experiment. This experiment was performed independently five times (n = 5).

4.17.

## Seahorse experiment
The oxygen consumption rate (OCR, pmol/min) in cultured rat neonatal ventricular cardiomyocytes was measured using a Seahorse XFe96 Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience) according to the Installation and Operation Manual from Agilent Technologies. Cardiomyocytes were plated at a density of 30,000 cells/well in 96-well Seahorse assay plates except for background correction wells (Agilent, 102416-100). Cardiomyocytes were transduced with adenovirus for 48 h prior to measurement. One hour prior to the beginning of measurements, the medium was replaced with XF base medium (Agilent, 103335-100) supplemented with 5.5 mM glucose (Sigma–Aldrich, G8270), 1 mM pyruvate (Agilent, 103578-100) and 2 mM L-glutamine (Agilent, 103579-1001), and cardiomyocytes were incubated for 1 h in a 37 °C incubator without CO2. Oxygen consumption rate (OCR) was measured three times at baseline, followed by sequential injection into each well with 2 μM oligomycin (Sigma–Aldrich, O4876) to measure the ATP-linked OCR, 5 μM Carbonylcyanidep-triflouromethoxyphenylhydrazone (FCCP) (Sigma–Aldrich, C2920), an uncoupler, to determine maximal respiratory capacity, and 2 μM rotenone (Sigma–Aldrich, R8875) mixed with 2 μM antimycin A (Sigma–Aldrich, A8674) to determine the non-mitochondrial respiration. For the measurement of fatty acid oxidation rate, etomoxir (100 μM, Sigma–Aldrich E1905), a specific Cpt1 inhibitor, was added to assess the degree of fatty acid oxidation under conditions containing 200 μM BSA-conjugated fatty acid cocktail (palmitic acid: oleic acid: linoleic acid = 2:1:1, with BSA: fatty acid = 1:5) and 0.5 mM carnitine in the above specified medium.

4.18.

## Quantitative RT-PCR
Total RNA was prepared from mouse hearts using TRIzol reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 15596-018) according to the manufacturer's instructions [ ]. Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized by reverse transcription using 480 ng total RNA with PrimeScript RT Master Mix (Takara, RR036). Using Maxima SYBR Green qPCR master mix (ThermoFisher Scientific, K0253), real-time RT-PCR was performed under the following conditions: 95 °C for 3 min; 40 cycles of 95 °C for 10 s, 58 °C for 15 s, 72 °C for 45 s; and a final elongation at 72 °C for 10 min. Relative mRNA expression was determined by the ΔΔ-Ct method normalized to the ribosomal RNA (18S) level. The following oligonucleotide primers were used: NPPA, sense 5′-ATGGGCTCCTTCTCCATCAC-3′ and antisense 5′-ATCTTCGGTACCGGAAGCTG-3′; NPPB, sense 5′-AAGTCCTAGCCAGTCTCCAGA-3′ and antisense 5′-GAGCTGTCTCTGGGCCATTTC-3′; MYH7, sense 5′-GCCAACACCAACCTGTCCAAGTTC-3′ and antisense 5′- TGCAAAGGCTCCAGGTCTGAGGGC-3′; MYH6, sense 5′- GGAAGAGTGAGCGGCGCATCAAGG -3′ and antisense 5′- CTGCTGGAGAGGTTATTCCTCG -3’; 18S rRNA, sense 5′-CGCGGTTCTATTTTGTTGGT-3′ and antisense 5′-AGTCGGCATCGTTTATGGTC-3′.

4.19.

## Viability and mitochondrial function of cardiomyocytes
Tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester (TMRM) (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used to determine the level of mitochondrial functionality according to the manufacture's protocol (dilution of the 1000x concentrated stock solution in culture medium). Cells were observed under a fluorescence microscope (Eclipse Ti, Nikon) with Nikon NIS-Elements imaging software. Intensity of the signals was measured for 8–10 cells expressing a YFP-KAT6A mutant (K816R or K816Q) compared to cells without YFP expression (control) for each condition in each experiment and the mean value was taken as representative of the experiment. This experiment was performed independently four times.

5.

## Statistics
All values are expressed as mean ± SEM. Statistical analyses were carried out by 2-tailed unpaired Student t test for 2 groups or one- or two-way ANOVA followed by the Tukey post-hoc analysis for 3 groups or more unless otherwise stated. If the data distribution failed normality by the Shapiro–Wilk test or Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, the Mann–Whitney U test for 2 groups was performed. The statistical analyses used for each figure are indicated in the corresponding figure legends. Survival curves were plotted by the Kaplan–Meier method, with statistical significance analyzed by log-rank test. Statistical analyses were conducted using Prism 10 (GraphPad Software). All experiments are represented by multiple biological replicates or independent experiments. The number of replicates per experiment are indicated in the legends. All experiments were conducted using at least two independent experimental materials or cohorts to reproduce similar results. No sample was excluded from analysis. A p value of less than 0.05 was considered significant.

6.

## Data availability
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article and its Supplementary Information. RNA-sequencing data have been deposited at GEO and are publicly available as of the date of publication (Accession numbers: GSE286926). The mass spectrometry data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD059838 and PXD059855. Source data are provided with this paper. Study materials are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Mariko Aoyagi Keller: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Andreas Ivessa: Investigation. Tong Liu: Formal analysis, Data curation. Hong Li: Supervision, Resources, Funding acquisition, Data curation. Peter J. Romanienko: Writing – original draft, Resources, Methodology, Funding acquisition. Michinari Nakamura: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Junichi Sadoshima (Rutgers New Jersey Medical School) for generously providing the adenovirus-harboring dominant-negative AMPK α2. This study was supported in part by U.S. Public Health Service grants HL155766 (M.N.). This work was also supported by American Heart Association Scientist Development grant (17SDG33660358) (M.N.). The mass spectrometry data were obtained from the Rutgers Center for Advanced Proteomics Research, which partially receives funding from NIH grant 1S10OD034300 (H.L.). The KAT6A-K816R knock-in mice were generated by Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey Genome Editing Shared Resource P30CA072720-6852.

## Footnotes
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmet.2025.102239.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary data
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Multimedia component 2
Multimedia component 2

## Multimedia component 3
Multimedia component 3

## Multimedia component 4
Multimedia component 4

## Multimedia component 5
Multimedia component 5

## Multimedia component 6
Multimedia component 6

## Multimedia component 7
Multimedia component 7

## Multimedia component 8
Multimedia component 8

## Multimedia component 9
Multimedia component 9

## Multimedia component 10
Multimedia component 10

## Data availability
Data will be made available on request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Multimedia component 2
Multimedia component 2

## Multimedia component 3
Multimedia component 3

## Multimedia component 4
Multimedia component 4

## Multimedia component 5
Multimedia component 5

## Multimedia component 6
Multimedia component 6

## Multimedia component 7
Multimedia component 7

## Multimedia component 8
Multimedia component 8

## Multimedia component 9
Multimedia component 9

## Multimedia component 10
Multimedia component 10

## Data Availability Statement
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article and its Supplementary Information. RNA-sequencing data have been deposited at GEO and are publicly available as of the date of publication (Accession numbers: GSE286926). The mass spectrometry data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD059838 and PXD059855. Source data are provided with this paper. Study materials are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Data will be made available on request.