3532isciiScienceiScienceElsevierPMC1077695410776954107769543820526110.1016/j.isci.2023.108477From TgO/GABA-AT, GABA, and T-263 Mutant to Conception of Toxoplasma
LykinsJoseph MoschittoMatthew J ZhouYing FilippovaEkaterina V LeHoang V TomitaTadakimi FoxBarbara A BzikDavid J SuChunlei RajagopalaSeesandra V FloresKristin SpanoFurio WoodsStuart RobertsCraig W HuaCong El BissatiKamal WheelerKelsey M DovginSarah MuenchStephen P McPhillieMartin FishwickColin WG AndersonWayne F LeePatricia J HickmanMark WeissLouis M DubeyJitender P LorenziHernan A SilvermanRichard B McLeodRima L 1Pritzker School of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA2Department of Chemistry, Department of Molecular Biosciences, Chemistry of Life Processes Institute, Center for Molecular Innovation and Drug Discovery, and Center for Developmental Therapeutics, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208-3113, USA3Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA4Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases and the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA5Division of Parasitology, Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA6Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA7Department of Microbiology, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA8Department of Infectious Diseases, The J. Craig Venter Institute, 9704 Medical Center Drive, Rockville, MD 20850, USA9Department of Infectious Diseases, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy10Strathclyde Institute of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow Scotland, UK11School of Biomedical Sciences and Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, The University of Leeds, Leeds, West York LS2 9JT, UK12School of Chemistry and Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK13Department of Pharmacology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA14Division of Experimental Therapeutics, Military Malaria Research Program, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, 503 Robert Grant Avenue, Silver Spring, MD 20910, USA15Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA16Animal Parasitic Diseases Laboratory, Beltsville Agricultural Research Center, Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture, Beltsville, MD 20705, USA17Department of Pediatrics (Infectious Diseases), Institute of Genomics, Genetics, and Systems Biology, Global Health Center, Toxoplasmosis Center, CHeSS, The College, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA∗Corresponding author efilippova@uchicago.edu
∗∗Corresponding author hernan.lorenzi@nih.gov
∗∗∗Corresponding author r-silverman@northwestern.edu
∗∗∗∗Corresponding author rmcleod@uchicago.edu
18Present address: Department of Emergency Medicine, Chobanian & Avedisian School of Medicine at Boston University, Boston, MA 02118, USA
19Present address: Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
20Present address: Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
21Present address: National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, North Bethesda, MD 20852, USA
22Present address: Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA
23Present address: Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA
24Present address: Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
25Present address: National Institute on Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Dieseases, National Institutes of Health, North Bethesda, MD 20852, USA
26These authors contributed equally
27Lead contact
161120232711084771084771012024© 2023 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Toxoplasma gondii causes morbidity, mortality, and disseminates widely via cat sexual stages. Here, we find T. gondii ornithine aminotransferase (OAT) is conserved across phyla. We solve TgO/GABA-AT structures with bound inactivators at 1.55 Å and identify an inactivator selective for TgO/GABA-AT over human OAT and GABA-AT. However, abrogating TgO/GABA-AT genetically does not diminish replication, virulence, cyst-formation, or eliminate cat’s oocyst shedding. Increased sporozoite/merozoite TgO/GABA-AT expression led to our study of a mutagenized clone with oocyst formation blocked, arresting after forming male and female gametes, with “Rosetta stone”-like mutations in genes expressed in merozoites. Mutations are similar to those in organisms from plants to mammals, causing defects in conception and zygote formation, affecting merozoite capacitation, pH/ionicity/sodium-GABA concentrations, drawing attention to cyclic AMP/PKA, and genes enhancing energy or substrate formation in TgO/GABA-AT-related-pathways. These candidates potentially influence merozoite’s capacity to make gametes that fuse to become zygotes, thereby contaminating environments and causing disease.
Subject areas: Parasitology, Cell biology

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•TgO/GABA-AT uses GABA or ornithine as a substrate
•Co-crystallized inactivators elucidate structure with selective inactivators identified
•Increased in merozoites/sporozoites, regulated by MORC is un-essential for oocysts
•Sequencing clone incapable of zygote formation reveals mutated related genes

Parasitology; Cell biology

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2021 Oct 21; Revised 2023 Apr 28; Accepted 2023 Nov 13; Collection date 2024 Jan 19.

## Introduction
The Apicomplexan parasite, Toxoplasma gondii, is a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide, with toxoplasmosis being one of the leading causes of death attributed to food-borne illness in the United States. , , Globally, this parasite infects between 30 and 50% of the population, which means that approximately two billion people have this parasite living within their brains, with largely unknown consequences. Infection with T. gondii typically occurs via inadvertent ingestion of oocysts in food or water contaminated by cat excrement. Indeed, it has been estimated that the number of infectious oocysts per square foot of soil in the US ranges from 9 to 434. Ingestion of a single oocyst is capable of inducing infection. An acutely infected feline excretes upwards of 500 million oocysts over the approximately two weeks of acute infection, and oocysts persist in moist soil or water for up to a year. , , Comprising a public health threat, toxoplasmosis results in a wide range of serious health problems, including loss of sight and significant neurological disease in congenital infection and severe meningoencephalitis in immunocompromised persons. , , , Current therapeutics for this parasitic infection have some limitations, including toxicity, hypersensitivity reactions, and an inability to eliminate the latent bradyzoite stage of the parasite. , , , , For these reasons, new therapeutic approaches and the development of safe and effective vaccines are needed.
To address this issue, a variety of molecular targets have been identified. One such target, ornithine aminotransferase (OAT) was chosen for its position as a key node in several biochemical pathways, with demonstrated importance to cell viability. In fact, OAT is at the intersection of pathways that produce amino acids, neurotransmitters, purines, as well as play key roles in the urea cycle, TCA cycle, the polyamine pathway, and in the production of glutamate ( A). Glutamate has been reported to be an alternative energy source in Plasmodium, a related Apicomplexan. T. gondii OAT (TgOAT) was selected by the Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Disease at Northwestern University (Chicago, IL) for further study on the basis of its contribution to several key metabolic pathways, as well as its computed drugability, phylogenetic data, assayability, and the predicted feasibility to solve its three-dimensional structure. TgOAT was initially deposited into and selected from the Tropical Disease Resource (TDR) Targets Database by Agüero and colleagues in 2008. , 
 OAT is a pyridoxal-5′-phosphate-dependent enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of L-ornithine and α-ketoglutarate to glutamate-γ-semialdehyde (which spontaneously cyclizes to pyrroline-5-carboxylate) and L-glutamate to prevent toxic accumulation of ornithine in mammalian cells ( B). In protozoans, ornithine is the starting point for the polyamine pathway, which has been the subject of therapeutic interest for some time. , , , The long-term lack of OAT results in hyperornithinemia, leading to gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina, a genetic disorder in humans. , OAT and γ-aminobutyric acid aminotransferase (GABA-AT) are members of subgroup II of the aminotransferase family of enzymes. GABA-AT has been an extensively studied enzyme, the substrate of which, GABA, is the key inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain ( C; ). Vigabatrin, which is approved for the treatment of infantile spasms, and CPP-115 (1, A), which has completed a successful Phase I clinical trial for the treatment of epilepsy and is being used to treat infantile spasms, , are examples of inhibitors of GABA-AT. Because of the similarity in the active sites of both OAT and GABA-AT, it is difficult to design inhibitors that will selectively inactivate OAT; CPP-115, for example, inhibits both GABA-AT and human OAT (hOAT). In 2015, the Silverman group reported the first selective inhibitor (2, in A) for hOAT over GABA-AT, and its selectivity was hypothesized to derive from a novel mechanism of inactivation, which is not seen in GABA-AT, and its overall size.
 The crystal structures and kinetic characterization of humanGABA-AT and OAT complexed with the aforementioned inhibitors, as well as gabaculine, L-canaline, and 5-fluoromethylornithine, have provided a basis for structural characterization of each enzyme. , , , Structural characterization of OAT homologues in other Apicomplexans, including Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium yoelii, has also been reported. , OAT functions as a dimer, in which monomers share a typical α/β structural fold known to be a feature of subgroup II of the aminotransferase family members. The crystal structure of OAT dimer from T. gondii in complex with cofactor PLP has been studied in our previous work. Similar to its homologous structures, each monomer in the TgOAT dimer consists of three domains and resembles a conserved cofactor-binding site.
Beyond a study on the spectroscopic analysis of catalytic characteristics, TgOAT had not been characterized, structurally or functionally to identify selective inhibitors, nor studied for its potential as a molecular target in this parasite. Somewhat surprisingly, this paper suggested that the enzyme, referred to as TgOAT, in fact, had enhanced substrate specificity for GABA relative to ornithine, implicating it in the metabolism of GABA and suggesting that it can also function as a GABA-AT. This metabolic activity would be of potential importance to the recently described GABA shunt, shuttling carbon from GABA into the TCA cycle to meet the energetic needs of the parasite, particularly under conditions of limited nutrient availability and the concomitant stress this causes to the parasite. Nutrient abundance, and its compartmentalization, could influence flux through and substrate utilization in these pathways. Astegno et al. suggested that selective inhibitors might have a role in the treatment of infection with T. gondii in humans. To date, no selective inhibitors of TgOAT have been identified to target any of the parasite life cycle stages. Even if TgOAT were not critical for tachyzoites or bradyzoites, targeting the formation of the environmentally resistant oocyst life cycle stage could have a significant impact on disrupting the chain of transmission and, thereby, decrease consequent morbidity and mortality. Furthermore, inhibition of OAT in P. falciparum also is of interest because P. falciparum causes malaria, and there are particular problems with resistance to available antimalarials. The same compounds that are effective against T. gondii are sometimes also effective against Plasmodia because of their phylogeny as related Apicomplexan parasites. Because of the recently reported use of GABA as a substrate by TgOAT, hereafter we will refer to this enzyme as TgO/GABA-AT, recognizing its potential dual biologic function.
The comprehensive characterization of TgO/GABA-AT, presented herein, includes an analysis of the gene with phylogeny. Further, transcriptional and proteomic analyses led to production of the enzyme and use of the enzyme to produce antibodies, kinetically characterize putative inhibitors/inactivators, and solve and analyze the structure in complex with selected inhibitors. In addition, the antibody was used to characterize life cycle stage-specific expression of TgO/GABA-AT. Genetic knockouts for Type II parasites and an unusual Brazilian parasite (EGS) were performed utilizing genetics and CRISPR/Cas9 techniques. Parasites of different genotypes were utilized to characterize phenotypes that this enzyme produces during critical life cycle stages.
Expression in the sporozoite has been reported to be ∼245 times higher than in tachyzoites and bradyzoites , ; additional insight into this pathway was therefore sought. First, we utilized CRISPR/Cas9 to knockout TgO/GABA-AT in a parasite, EGS, that could be indefinitely cultured as a bradyzoite and thereafter infect cats to produce oocysts following genetic manipulation. The intent of this experiment was to determine whether this enzyme was absolutely essential for the formation of oocysts and not just contributing to their formation. When we found TgO/GABA-AT was not essential, we asked whether the function of OAT’s products, or molecules that influenced their function, might be essential for oocyst formation. To explore this hypothesis, we determined the genome sequence of a mutagenized parasite, T-263, incapable of forming oocysts in cats, revealing nonsynonymous mutations in 18 protein-coding genes that have increased expression in merozoites and/or sporozoites (oocysts). Quite remarkably, one of these mutated genes encodes a sodium: GABA symporter. TgO/GABA-AT may function to convert ornithine to L-glutamate ( B), which can be converted to GABA by L-glutamate decarboxylase. TgO/GABA-AT also may function to convert GABA to succinic semialdehyde ( C), which is oxidized to succinate, and enters the TCA cycle via the GABA shunt. By either function, GABA would be central to these integral metabolic pathways in the parasite. GABA concentration has been found to modulate capacitation of gametes (sperm) in other species. Since sequence data were available and a phenotype of lack of maturation beyond microgamete and macrogamete stages was noted, genes that could be related to capacitation at the merozoite stages or acrosome formation also were of interest.

## Results

## Interrelatedness of OATs shown in multi-sequence alignment
The multiple sequence alignment of six OAT proteins from Apicomplexan, human, and cat species ( ) shows a high degree of conservation. Very high conservation is seen among T. gondii’s close relatives, Hammondia hammondi and Neospora caninum, with 96% and 89% sequence identity, respectively. As expected, there is markedly less conservation between T. gondii and the more distant cat and human homologues with approximately 49% sequence identity. Interestingly, cysteines Cys179 and Cys187 of TgO/GABA-AT are also conserved within species of the phylum Apicomplexa ( , in green), which has been demonstrated, via insertional mutagenesis, to bind thioredoxin increasing enzymatic activity in P. falciparum. Moreover, these Cys residues are positioned such that they could, in an oxidative environment, form a disulfide linkage. The role of this linkage is unknown; however, thioredoxin appears to play a role in binding to and positioning the substrate-binding site. It has been shown that the Eimeria enoyl reductase (ENR) also contains a similar feature not seen in any bacterial homologue. Of note, we found that human and cat OATs do not contain these two cysteine residues. To further investigate the frequency of the two cysteine residues in the OAT family, a more extensive sequence alignment was conducted on 499 protein sequences with between 24 and 97% sequence identity (data not shown). Only six showed the presence of two cysteines in equivalent positions, highlighting this to be a rare feature of the OAT family.

## Population diversity of TgOAT
Analysis of OAT genetic variability in 53 T gondii isolates by parsimony analysis revealed six distinct clusters of strains based on haplotype, as shown in , consistent with major clades previously established on the basis of multilocus and genome-wide SNP analysis. 
Notable distinct isolate clusters in the OAT consensus tree include haplogroups 1, 3, 4, 11, and 14. Haplogroups 2 and 12, related clonal groups common in North America, comprise a single major branch. Some Guiana isolates appear to be hypervirulent for some humans. The Guiana isolates have diverse individual patterns for their OAT sequences.

## TgO/GABA-AT activity
For this assay, we monitor both the rate of consumption and amount of consumption. Since we are monitoring consumption over time it is therefore a rate. The assay conditions employed in the measurement of GABA-AT activity were shown to be effective at measuring the rate of consumption of GABA at 37°C (See ). This means that the activity of GABA-AT was measured as the rate of oxidation of the formed product, succinic semialdehyde, with excess succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase. This corresponds to the rate of consumption of substrate GABA. A reaction rate can be measured by the rate of the formation of the product or the rate of the disappearance of the starting material. In the assay that we chose, we measured the reaction rate by the rate of the disappearance of the starting material.
We have previously employed two coupled-enzyme assays for the continuous measurement of the consumption of L-ornithine by TgO/GABA-AT ( B; ) and GABA by GABA-AT ( C). The ornithine assay monitors the conversion of L-ornithine to L-glutamate-5-semialdehyde, which spontaneously cyclizes to form Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate (P5C), by coupling it to the NADH-dependent reduction of P5C to L-proline by pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase 1 (PYCR1). The disappearance of NADH at 340 nm is monitored with excess NADH, PYCR1, and α-ketoglutarate. For the GABA assay, the conversion of GABA to succinic semialdehyde (SSA) and concomitant conversion of α-ketoglutarate to glutamate is coupled to the NADP+-dependent oxidation of SSA to succinic acid by succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSDH), and the appearance of NADPH is monitored at 340 nm.
The first step was to validate both enzyme assays for the compatibility with TgO/GABA-AT. The assay conditions employed in the measurement of GABA-AT activity were shown to be effective at measuring the rate of consumption of GABA at 37°C (See ). Likewise, the assay conditions for measurement of OAT activity were effective at measuring ornithine consumption. An experiment to determine applicable conditions for the bioassay of TgO/GABA-AT was executed at various concentrations of TgO/GABA-AT, employing both GABA and ornithine as substrates ( A and S3D, respectively). Optimal concentrations of enzyme for GABA- and ornithine-based assays were determined to be 15 μg/mL and 100 μg/mL, respectively. To determine the Km of GABA and ornithine against TgO/GABA-AT, an assay at various concentrations of GABA ( B) and ornithine ( E) was performed. A Km value of 3.77 ± 0.68 mM was obtained with GABA as substrate, whereas a value of 31.0 ± 4.0 mM was obtained with ornithine as the substrate ((18) published Km values of 1.32 ± 0.02 mM and 6.9 ± 0.3 mM for GABA and ornithine, respectively, although they obtained these values using different methods). The Km for GABA was found to be 3.8 mM and that for ornithine was 31.0 mM. Because of the poorer substrate binding of ornithine, in order to see a reasonable rate of reaction, a larger concentration of enzyme was required.

## Effect of inhibitors on TgO/GABA-AT enzyme activity
Compounds screened against TgO/GABA-AT are shown in A. For reversible inhibitors, concentration dependence was observed and Ki, the inhibition constant, was determined by previously developed methods. For compounds showing time dependence and saturation kinetics, KI and kinact, the binding constant and rate constant of inactivation, respectively, were calculated (vide infra). The kinact/KI value affords a measure of the efficiency of the inhibitor. Two methods for the calculation of KI and kinact were employed. We recently employed a curve fitting method for the measurement of KI and kinact for potent inhibitors of porcineGABA-AT (pGABA-AT, ). This method effectively estimates kinetic constants for highly potent inhibitors but struggles with weaker inhibitors. Thus, for weaker inhibitors, we employed a time-dependent assay and a Kitz and Wilson replot method, which we have used with GABA inhibitors in the past. For ornithine, we used the latter method, consistent with our previous work with hOAT. All calculations are described in the Methods section.
Known pGABA-AT and hOAT inhibitors were screened against TgO/GABA-AT with ornithine as a substrate. The results are presented in . Of these compounds, 1, 2, 3, and 14 are potent, irreversible inhibitors of TgO/GABA-AT. The activity of compounds 1, 2, and 3 were of particular interest ( ), given their similarity in structure. These compounds were also screened against TgO/GABA-AT with GABA as the substrate ( ). CPP-115 (1) showed saturation kinetics ( B), and kinetic constants (with GABA as the substrate) were calculated via the curve fitting method ( C). Compound 2 was potent against hOAT and TgO/GABA-AT, yet a weak inhibitor of pGABA-AT, and 3, which was of most interest to this study, is solely selective for TgO/GABA-AT. Kinetic constants for 2 and 3 were calculated via the time-dependent replot method ( D and 2E).
 The enzyme assays with inactivator were performed with enzyme from Type II strain parasites in parallel with the study of the original knockout Type II Prugneaud strain that was characterized (vide infra).

## Overall structure of TgO/GABA-AT and PLP binding site
The crystal structures obtained of TgO/GABA-AT show that the asymmetric unit contains a homodimer as reported previously. Each monomer consists of three domains: the large PLP-binding domain ( A, in green) and two small domains in the N- (in gold) and C-terminus (in orange). The N-terminal domain adopts a small β-sheet with three antiparallel β-strands surrounded by three α-helices. The large PLP-binding domain adopts a central eight-stranded β-sheet surrounded by ten α-helices including four short helical segments. The β-strands within the central β-sheet are parallel except for strand βj, which runs in opposite direction to all other strands inside the β-sheet. The C-terminal domain comprises four stranded antiparallel β-sheets surrounded by three α-helices ( A). Both monomers of the TgO/GABA-AT dimer have a similar fold. The dimer interface of the TgO/GABA-AT is formed by PLP-binding and the N-terminal domains between αI, αII, βA, αIV, βa, αV, βb, αVI, αVII, and αVIII ( A and 3B). In addition to 63 hydrogen bonds and three salt bridges, a disulfide bond between two adjacent Cys96 residues on opposite monomers outside of the active site region contributes to dimer formation.
 There are two PLP-binding sites per TgO/GABA-AT dimer, 15 Å apart from each other. Inside the cavity of the structure of TgO/GABA-AT, and in the presence of the PLP-Lys286 aldimine (PDB: 4ZLV), PLP binds in a similar binding mode observed in the structures of hOAT, PfOAT, and E. coliGABA-AT. 36–38, , Residues from both monomers of the TgO/GABA-AT dimer form the PLP-binding site ( C). In the cavity, PLP is surrounded by residues V79, T135, G136, A137, Y171, W172, G173, E224, D257, I259, Q260, S315 (opposite subunit), and T316 (opposite subunit). All these residues are highly conserved in the TgO/GABA-AT and PfOAT structures ( ). Exceptions were found with residues V75, A137, and Y171, which in hOAT are substituted by phenylalanine, tyrosine, and valine, respectively. By dialysis of TgO/GABA-AT a structure without PLP liganded can be obtained (not shown). In the unliganded TgO/GABA-AT structure (PDB: 5EAV) a single inorganic phosphate anion (from buffer) occupies the position of the phosphate group of PLP in both protein monomers. Analysis of the TgO/GABA-AT structures in the presence and absence of PLP shows that there are no notable differences in the positions of side chain residues surrounding the PLP-binding sites.

## Structure of 15-inactivatedTgO/GABA-AT
The proposed mechanism of compound 15-mediated inactivation of TgO/GABA-AT is shown in A. Following initial Schiff base formation with PLP (16), deprotonation and elimination of F− gives intermediate 17. Attack by Lys286 releases an enamine, which attacks the Lys-PLP imine to give adduct 18. The structures of 15-inactivated TgO/GABA-AT were determined in two ways: incubation of enzyme with 15 and PLP for 4 h followed by co-crystallization shows the electron density at the protein active site with intermediate 17 bound in both monomers ( B, PDB: 5E3K); incubation of enzyme and PLP with 15 overnight (14–15 h) followed by co-crystallization shows 17 bound in one monomer and 18 (X = NH2+ or O) in the other monomer ( C, PDB: 5E5I). This is the first time that an enamine precursor intermediate (17 in this case) has been observed by crystallography; typically, only the final enamine addition product (in this case, 18 or maybe S1, A) is observed. To dismiss a possible alternative interpretation of the 17 structure ( Bi), namely, that our 17 structure is instead S1, the electron density was modeled as S1, where X = O ( Bii) or NH, NH2+ ( Biii); the structure analysis did not support any of these alternative structures, only 17 ( B). Taken together, these crystallographic results solidify the enamine inactivation mechanism and, because of the observation of 17, suggests that, at least in this case, the slow step in the inactivation is attack of Lys286 on 17 to give the enamine and lysine-bound PLP. In forming 18, the PLP undergoes ∼8° rotation around the C5A-O4P bond, delivering C4A closer to the primary amine of K286, while the CA-CB-CG group of 15 undergoes a conformational change and rotates ∼30° around the CD-CG bond ( C). The overall position of the PLP portion of 17 and 18 in the active site of these structures remains unchanged.
 In all monomers, the compound bound to the PLP occupies the TgO/GABA-AT substrate-binding pocket that is formed by residues L76, G78, V79, N48, Y49, L106, R107, A108, Y171, R174, E229, K401, R409 and by H313, G314, S315, and T316 from the opposite monomer. In the pocket, the inactivator’s carboxyl group hydrogen bonds with the OH group of Y49 and the N atom in the main chain of S315 from the opposite monomer ( D). Additionally, the carboxylate of 15 in TgO/GABA-AT is hydrogen bonded through a network of water molecules with the NH2 and OH groups of R174 and Y171, respectively, the backbone amide of S315, nitrogen of R107, and the phosphate group of the cofactor ( D). A conformational change is apparent in the loop (50–54 residues) surrounding the substrate-binding site between the compound-bound and compound-free states when the TgO/GABA-AT structures are compared.

## Structure of gabaculine-inactivated TgO/GABA-AT
To identify the bound structure of gabaculine (14), a nonselective, yet potent aminotransferase inhibitor, in TgO/GABA-AT (S2, ), we performed co-crystallization experiments with 5 mM gabaculine and 2 mM PLP and obtained the TgO/GABA-AT crystal structure with the aromatized inactivator bound to pyridoxamine ( ; inactivation mechanism leading to S2 is shown in ). The carboxylate group of gabaculine interacts with the OH group of Y49 and the N atom in the main chain of S315. The position of the gabaculine in the TgO/GABA-AT active site is similar to its position observed in the structure of hOAT. It has been shown that the interaction between the aromatic ring of the gabaculine adduct and Y85 and F177 residues in hOAT modulates the binding affinity and keeps the product in a specific pose within the active site of hOAT. This leads to the same inactivation mechanism for gabaculine with TgO-GABA-AT as was proposed for hOAT. 
 

## Absence of effect of TgO/GABA-AT small molecule inactivators on tachyzoite replication in vitro
None of the inactivators tested against Type I T. gondii tachyzoites had a statistically significant effect in vitro, even when the compounds were tested in the millimolar range. Additionally, some compounds (including Compounds 1 and 2) were found to be toxic to host cells as demonstrated by a WST assay. In separate experiments, gabaculine was found to inhibit T. gondii tachyzoites at relatively high concentrations (>1 μM) (data not shown).

## Absence of effect of TgO/GABA-AT inactivators on P. falciparum in vitro
Compounds 1, 2, and 3 were tested in the malaria SYBR Green fluorescence assay for drug potency against a drug sensitive P. falciparum parasite, D6 (Sierra Leone). All of the drugs tested showed IC50 values >10,000 ng/mL, indicating no detectable activity against P. falciparum (data not shown).

## In vitro and in vivo phenotypes of type II parasites with deleted TgO/GABA-AT suggest functions
To investigate the role of TgO/GABA-AT in acute and chronic phases of infection, the gene coding region of TgO/GABA-AT was targeted and knocked out in the type II PruΔku80 background using a well-established strategy for targeting and genotype validation , ( A). The in vitro replication rate ( B) and plaque sizes ( C) of Type II parental PruΔku80 and Δoat parasites were essentially identical. To examine the chronic phase of infection in vivo, C57BL/6 mice were infected intraperitoneally with 200 tachyzoites of parental PruΔku80 or Δoat parasites and brain cyst burdens were measured 3 weeks ( D) and 5 weeks ( F) later. Surprisingly, mice infected with Δoat parasites harbored a greater number of brain cysts than mice infected with the parental PruΔku80 parasites. Moreover, we also noticed that a greater percentage of mice (∼40%) infected with just 200 Δoat tachyzoites succumbed to infection. In contrast, fewer than 10% of mice infected with 200 tachyzoites of the parental PruΔku80 succumbed to acute infection ( E). To verify whether Δoat parasites have increased acute virulence, mice were challenged with 2 X 105 tachyzoites of parental PruΔku80 or Δoat parasites and survival was monitored. Mice infected with Δoat parasites succumbed faster than mice infected with the parental PruΔku80 strain ( G). Collectively, these results show that Type II Δoat parasites exhibit no deficiency in their ability to replicate, but rather have increased virulence, during the acute tachyzoite phase of infection or in their ability to establish chronic infection of mice characterized by brain cysts harboring the bradyzoite stages. This is consistent with the findings of Macrae et al. that GABA can enter the TCA cycle through the GABA shunt increasing motility and infectivity.
 

## Protein, expression, and immunofluorescence assays demonstrate merozoite and/or sporozoite TgO/GABA-AT
Expression of TgO/GABA-AT at different T. gondii stages was investigated by western blot using total protein extracts obtained from ME49 tachyzoites, bradyzoites, and sporozoites. To study this expression, a bacterially expressed recombinant protein was produced and used to make a mouse polyclonal antibody. Recombinant TgO/GABA-AT protein was prepared and purified as in our enzyme assays and in our solution of crystal structures. 
As shown in H, anti-TgO/GABA-AT antibodies detected a band at approximately 48 kDa exclusively in the sporozoite lysate, in perfect agreement with the predicted molecular mass of the enzyme. The observed sporozoite-specific expression was consistent with the results of several proteomic studies conducted on tachyzoites and sporozoites , and was further supported by transcriptomic data available in ToxoDB, showing a marked upregulation of TgO/GABA-AT transcription in sporozoites compared to tachyzoites and bradyzoites. Immunofluorescence analysis of freshly excysted ME49 sporozoites with anti-OAT antibodies showed immunostaining in cytoplasm and that co-localized with mitotracker using a method similar to that used in tachyzoites by Bzik et al. With deconvolution the pattern in sporozoites TgO/GABA-AT is in the cytoplasm and in mitochondria ( H, 6I, and 6J). Confocal images with an optical thickness of 0.12 microns were taken by a Zeiss LSM 980 microscope using a planapo objective 60x oil A.N. 1,42. It was not possible to visualize TgO/GABA-AT in fixed tissue sections with either antibody so the cat intestinal stages were not visualized with our method. Tachyzoites did not show immunostaining with anti-TgO/GABA-AT wheras there was immunostaining of the sporozoites at the same time ( I).

## Knockout of TgO/GABA-AT in EGS in murine and cat experiments

## Creation of knockout of TgO/GABA-AT in the EGS strain of T. gondii allows characterization of TgO/GABA-AT in mice and cats
This knockout was created in EGS strain parasites because of the ease of in vitro culture with retention of the bradyzoite phenotype of oocyst production even after multiple passages in vitro. This is likely due to the disordered C terminus of the Apetela2 protein, Apetela 2 IV-4, a protein that blocks parasite transition through a checkpoint that licenses tachyzoites to form. This keeps these EGS parasites as the required bradyzoite needed to form oocysts.
Our cultured EGS is capable of formation of oocysts in the cat even after prolonged times in tissue culture and many in vitro passages. The oocyst formation trait is often lost with time and passages by other strains. EGS belongs to the same haplogroup as other Brazilian parasites. EGS was initially isolated in the 1990s and was also characterized by Vomero, Santos, and Weiss in separate publications in addition to our own work together earlier. The control was EGS-spGFP. This EGS parasite was used to create CRISPR/Cas9 mutants for this experiment because oocysts capable of infecting mice form from bradyzoites. A schematic diagram of the CRISPR/Cas9 cassette, experimental design, and summary of results for each step of these studies are shown in . Knockout of TgO/GABA-AT was confirmed via PCR.
 

## Infection of mice with TgO/GABA-AT EGS knockout parasite was virulent and produced brain cysts
Mice inoculated with this TgO/GABA-AT EGS knockout strain became noticeably ill secondary to toxoplasmosis. The signs of infection in the mice that received either single organisms of EGS from culture or the sub-inoculated sporozoites from oocysts excreted by the cat (please see below under “Infections of cats with EGS TgO/GABA-AT parasites”) were ruffled fur and peritonitis. DNA from these isolated parasites was sequenced documenting TgO/GABA-AT knockout was present. Further, brain cysts were noted after euthanasia, confirming that TgO/GABA-AT is not essential for cyst formation or virulence. Parasites recovered from these mice had their genomic DNA sequenced, which confirmed that the knockout was still present.

## Infection of cats with EGS TgO/GABA-AT knock out parasites produced viable infectious oocysts
Concerning the initial inoculum of brain containing cysts that were fed to the cats, all 5 of 5 mice that received infected brains at the same time the cats were fed were infected ( ). The cats infected with the control EGS strain parental brain and TgO/GABA-AT mutant parasites developed serum antibody to T. gondii, tested using MAT.
When these cats produced oocysts, sporozoites that were excysted from these oocysts were sequenced. This sequencing of the parasite from the oocysts verified the knockout of the TgO/GABA-AT gene in the EGS strain parasite. These oocysts were infectious to additional mice. Viability of oocysts was confirmed with excystation and sub-inoculation into 2 Balb/c mice that were found to be infected ( ).
Based on many experiments and publications, quantification of oocyst shedding is variable, unreliable, and would have been considered an unacceptable use of additional cats in research in the US at this time. 

## Further details and results of these studies with EGS-TgO/GABA-AT KO show viable oocysts can form
Further specific details of the EGS-TgO/GABA-AT KO given to cats are in and are as follows: T. gondii infected mouse brains from 10 mice infected with (EGS-TgO/GABA-AT KO—cat 04) and EGS-spGFP (cat 05) were homogenized by syringe and fed to two female, 141 and 144-day-old, coccidia-free cats from the USDA’s cat colony by placing them at the back of the tongue. All feces for each cat were collected daily after feeding infected mouse brains, and examined for T. gondii oocysts. Screening and harvesting of T. gondii oocysts were done between 3 and 21 days after infection by following procedures as described previously. , , This is a usual prepatent period following feeding of bradyzoites stage. Cats were euthanized on day 21 post infection and blood was collected to do modified agglutination tests (MAT) to test for immunological reactivity to T. gondii antigens. Oocysts were collected by floatation methods using sucrose solution with a specific gravity of 1.15 or higher. Concentrated oocyst pellets were suspended in an aqueous solution containing 2% H2SO4, and aerated on the shaker for 7 days at room temperature (20–22°C) to allow for oocyst sporulation. Cat 04 excreted T. gondii oocysts 13–15 days post inoculation. Cat 05 did not excrete oocysts. At least some oocysts were seen in the feces of the cat fed with this knockout strain, although the numbers of oocysts shed were not quantified because of logistical difficulties, the intrinsic variability in such experiments (J.P. Dubey, personal unpublished observations) and we were also looking for an all or none response (JP Dubey, personal observations). These experiments do not exclude or include a role of TgO/GABA-AT in oocyst formation but there is not a complete absence of oocysts phenotype. Specific detailed description of this experiment is in . Our knockout of TgO/GABA-AT in the Type II strain led to increased cyst formation ( ). It did not completely abrogate capacity of knockout parasites to form infectious, pathogenic, sporulated oocysts ( ).

## Recognition of relationship of TgO/GABA-AT and its substrate GABA to potential roles of candidate T-263 Mutated genes in capacitation and conception
Recognition of this relationship arose from noting regulation of TgO/GABA-AT by MORC combined with culture and sequencing of Frenkel Live Vaccine strain T-263 and analysis of T-263 mutations , , , , , , , , , , , , which occurred in genes responsible for capacitation and conception ( , , and , and in color ; , , , , and ). , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 
 

## MORC complex containing AP2V-2 regulates TgO/GABA-AT expression that is increased in merozoites
As noted above TgO/GABA-AT expression and protein levels are increased in sporozoites. Further, the MORC complex regulates expression of TgO/GABA-AT ( ). AP2V-2 is part of the MORC complex and also is regulated by MORC. Please also see below under AP2V-2 and . These and several other observations led to our interest in whether a chemically mutagenized clone of T. gondii, T-263, might provide insights into roles of GABA, TgO/GABA-AT, or related genes in the formation of the feline intestinal stages of Toxoplasma and capacitation: Specifically, T-263 had been found to be incapable of forming oocysts; there is increased expression of TgO/GABA-AT not only in sporozoites but also in feline intestinal enteroepithelial merozoites. Others have observed that GABA, the substrate of TgO/GABA-AT, can lead to phosphorylation of tyrosine of proteins involved in capacitation in other species studied.
Although the capacitation process in T. gondii is unstudied, in other species capacitation is initiated by pH changes, HCO3_, ROS, and GABA. Then, a PKA leads to phosphorylation of tyrosine in proteins critical to this capacitation process. PKA induces capacitation through this signal transduction pathway involving Ca2+, cAMP and tyrosine phosphorylation. GABA also enters the GABA shunt increasing energy production and increases motility in tachyzoites. 
Characterization and analysis of T-263 , , , , , , , , and its parental C56 C strain parasites reveals genes known in other species to affect capacitation and fertility , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , including those related to TgO/GABA-AT, and GABA.

## T-263 retained its original phenotype at the time of sequencing and other new analyses herein
Studies of a chemically (nitrosoguanidine) mutagenized parasite, called T-263, had been conducted , , , , , decades ago. These studies demonstrated that this T-263 mutant was defective in oocyst formation and prevented subsequent oocyst shedding when immunized cats were exposed to otherwise infectious oocysts. , , , , , , , , 
This parasite clone and parental strain were retrieved from JP Dubey’s collection of parasites. Culture of this Frenkel Live Cat Vaccine strain called T-263 and its parent non-mutagenized C56 parasite allowed expansion of the parasite clones used for other new more current studies herein. The T-263 clone was expanded in human foreskin fibroblast (HFF) cells to collect tachyzoites. Parasite genomic DNA was used for genotyping by multilocus PCR-RFLP markers and confirmed that T-263 belongs to type III lineage as C56. These studies demonstrate that the T-263 parasite that we sequence and use in subsequent experiments herein retains its original defective in oocyst formation phenotype. This phenotype included inability to form fused micro and macrogametes ( and and in ) even after decades of storage and coincident with use in our sequencing studies described below ( , , and [and in color and ]). , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 
In a single pilot study in a cat intestinal organoid model, the reduction in a replicating form associated with differentiation to zygotes and subsequent oocyst formation was impaired in the mutant T-263, but not its parental C strain control studied simultaneously (data not shown but provided to Editors and Reviewers for verification). This parasite that retained its original phenotype was used for sequencing below. It might therefore be suitable to use in future studies to replicate this phenotype in organoid culture and with CRISPR rescue of its mutations to determine which, if any alone or together, rescue its phenotype in organoid culture or the recently developed barcoded cat pass through model (Silva, Grigg Toxo 2022 Abstract, Riverside, California).

## Sequencing of T-263 and its parental C56 strain parasite reveals mutations capable of influencing oocyst formation that are related to TgO/GABA-AT
We sequenced the genome and performed SNP analysis of the T-263 strain and its wild type parental strain C56 to identify parasite genes essential for oocyst formation and infectivity and determine if they were related to TgO/GABA-AT. Relationship to TgO/GABA-AT includes the following: through a direct mutation; mutation in genes responsible for regulation of expression of TgO/GABA-AT; mutations in genes that otherwise modulate amounts of its substrate GABA; or mutations in genes involved in the transport of its substrate GABA influencing energy metabolism and critical merozoite capacitation and conception functions. This analysis identified a number of genes with functions related to TgO/GABA-AT and its substrate GABA ( , , and , [and in color and ]: Summary of relationships of TgO/GABA-AT, GABA and mutations in T-263; , , , , , , , , and ).
 

## Stage associated expression of mutated genes reveals potential importance of capacitation in merozoites in T-263 phenotype
Mutations in T-263 were sorted based on previous data regarding expression patterns across life cycle stages of T. gondii ( , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , and in color and ). Genes shown in bolded or in red (in color and correspond to and ) are noted to be transcriptionally expressed (modulated) in merozoites and or sporozoites of the parasitic life cycle (bold in sporozoites, and red in merozoites, in color and corresponding to and ). , , , Although we find that the T-263 mutant has 116 mutations in merozoite or sporozoite expressed genes ( [and in color ]), we find that there are no mutations in genes expressed in micro or macro gametes in T-263. Since we find that a defect in the mutagenized T-263 strain still yields morphologically identifiable micro and macrogametes in the cat intestine ( A), we deduce that the crucial defect must occur in genes involved in the capacitation process of the merozoite creating macro and/or microgametes that cannot fuse. Although additional mutations in genes expressed in sporozoites could contribute to an additional defect in oocyst formation, the defect in fusion would obviate significance of the mutations in sporozoites because sporozoites could not form unless there was parthenogenesis as suggested might be possible by Ferguson. 
In our analysis of the sequence of T-263 that identified a total of 116 genes carrying potential change-of-function (CoF) exonic mutations in T-263 that were not present in C56 ( , [and in color ]), one hundred thirteen protein coding genes harbor nonsynonymous mutations. Two hypothetical genes and a protein carrying a kinase domain had mutations at either donor splice sites or a new in-frame start codon.
One gene encoding a potential PKA/G (TGME49_209985) was initially thought to have a mutation based on the reference ME49 genome sequence available at ToxoDB ( B). However, further analysis of a PacBio assembly of T. gondii strain RH-88 showed that TGME49_209985 belongs to a highly conserved multicopy gene array (Genebank: CM023082.1 positions 198570–349402) and therefore we could not verify its mutation. Still, the gene and its potential mutation were left in the list of candidate genes due to its potential involvement in gamete formation (see below).

## Mutations in T-263 expressed in merozoites and sporozoites not found in natural isolates allowed for down selection of candidate genes for initial study by using CRISPR CAS 9 to rescue mutations
The inductive processes to down select candidate genes for further study are shown in : One hundred isolates of T. gondii that were sequenced at The J. Craig Venter Institute (JCVI) had meta-data (Lorenzi unpublished) that allowed us to query whether mutations found in T-263 also were identified in any parasite natural isolates. We hypothesized that critical mutations that blocked fusion of male and female gametes might be selected against in natural infections, although it is also possible that transmission from carnivore to carnivore could still occur with such a mutation in certain ecologic niches. For example, the AP2 V-2 and the SRS15C mutations were of interest although they occurred in at least some natural isolates ( and [ and in color]).
To further analyze the mutations that might be critical for the absence of fusion of the male and female gamete, we down-selected mutations in genes expressed in the merozoite stage (pre fusion and before formation of micro and macrogamete that might affect gamete formation) that were not found in natural isolates in the JCVI collection of sequences of all natural isolates ( , , , and ). We identified 21 such genes ( and [ and in color]).

## Genes critical in capacitation and fertilization which are mutated in T-263, with mutations not found in 100 natural isolates sequenced
Bioinformatics, analysis of genes with mutations in T-263 PFAM analysis, and literature searches for genes related to GABA, failure of gametes to make zygotes, or infertility reported in other species revealed genes critical for capacitation and conception in other species. This was done to further identify candidate genes mutated in T-263 that could contribute to or be solely responsible for the failure of zygote formation phenotype and whether they might be related to TgO/GABA-AT. We focused on genes that had no mutations in any of 100 isolates we sequenced at JCVI. Once we had sequences for our mutated, down selected genes, we performed PFAM analyses on those 21 genes. We then looked for homologues for these genes in Pubmed and Google Scholar that when mutated caused infertility in any species. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Those genes with mutations that did not occur in any of the natural isolates are considered candidates for causing similar defects in fitness in T-263 suitable for further study in the future. Examples include the cyclic AMP dependent protein kinase and the sodium GABA symporter critical for entry of GABA into the GABA shunt, to the TCA cycle. These genes also had homologues that when mutated caused infertility in other species.

## Specific candidate genes associated with fertility/infertility and/or capacitation in other species are among our genes mutated in T-263

Cyclic AMP dependent protein kinase-encoding gene is a candidate mutated in T-263 with mutation not found in other natural isolates that can affect conception in other species.

Sequence of T-263 mutagenized Toxoplasma provides further insight into related molecular mechanisms critical in creation of T. gondii zygotes. During our analysis of T-263 described above, a putative cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase-encoding gene ( ; and [ and , and Excel in color]) (TGME49_209985) that is overexpressed in merozoites was evident in our initial analyses when we were using ToxodB to identify the nonsynonymous mutations. Structure of this cyclic AMP dependent kinase is modeled with AlphaFold2 ( and ). However, later, this nonsynonymous mutation could not be confirmed because it was in a highly conserved repetitive region. This repetitive nature of TGME49_209985 was revealed by using third generation sequencing technologies (PacBio/MinION). While potentially very interesting biologically, we are unable to confirm the presence or absence of a mutation, so the gene may not be critical for the oocyst deficient T-263 phenotype. Nonetheless, since such PKAs are essential for zygote formation across all species studied, in the pre-gamete stages (similar to merozoites), we asked whether this PKA we noted could be relevant to that preparation process.
Thus, we compared the PKA we identified to other species PKAs. We note as shown in , that our PKA has some modest sequence similarities to PKA s in other species that are critical for formation of functional male gametes , , , ( ; ), and a PKG (ASSN# genebank: AF465544.1) in plasmodia merozoites. , In other species, this process is called “capacitation”( ) and a PKA in the pre gamete stage is critical for capacitation. A similar PKA has been found in every species studied ( ). Although our PKA is a multicopy gene, the similarities to the malaria PKG led us to notice its unusual relay mode of regulation of multicopy units ( ). It seems possible that a single mutation could regulate a critical initiating or perpetuating step in a relay process, even if in only one copy of a multicopy gene. As with mutations in other genes, the nonsynonymous mutation noted in the ToxodB annotation does not occur as a natural variant in any isolate in T.gondii in nature. The putative cyclic AMP dependent PKA seems likely to play a significant role in the conception process whether or not it is mutated in this ∼14 copy gene. These gene mutations are candidates that could contribute to, and thereby explain the observed loss of function phenotype where male and female gametes do not fuse and thereby fail to make oocysts and result in elimination of oocyst shedding in initial T-263 peroral infection, and prevention of subsequent shedding by challenging with oocysts.

## Sodium GABA symporter gene with functions related to TgO/GABA-AT is mutated in T-263 and mutations in other species are associated with infertility
Although TgO/GABA-AT does not have mutations in T-263, genes responsible for transcription of TgO/GABA-AT, related to TgO/GABA-AT expression in merozoites, and levels of GABA in parasites have mutations in T-263. These are described and presented in , , and , and and [ and ], and herein. This sodium GABA symporter gene that is also mutated in T-263 also has a modest increase in transcription with knockdown of MORC in Prugneaud strain parasites ( ). Because TgO/GABA-AT converts GABA to succinate it thereby lowers the amount of GABA, as described above ( ). Thus, when TgO/GABA-AT is knocked out this conversion will not occur, increasing the amount of GABA. Tg GABA enters the GABA shunt if/when it is transported into mitochondria by the sodium GABA symporter. Our analysis of the TgO/GABA-AT sequence shows that there is no mitochondrial targeting sequence in the sequence of TgO/GABA-AT. However, but the pattern of immunostaining of TgO/GABA-AT and mitotracker co-localized with mitochondria and occurred in the cytoplasm of sporozoites ( I and 6J). Also, and we find a mutation in the symporter for the GABA that is the substrate for TgO/GABA-AT ( and [ and in color]). This mutation in the sodium GABA symporter was corrected by CRISPR ( ) creating a parasite which can be used in future studies. This would be to assess whether there is a loss or gain of function effect from the mutation using the kitten intestinal organoid in vitro and/or cat pooled barcoded knockout in vivo models (Silva, Grigg et al., Toxo 2022, Abstract. Riverside, California).
Precursor GABA would accumulate with knockdown of TgO/GABA-AT in Pru as it is the substrate of TgO/GABA-AT. In earlier studies, MacCrae, Streipen et al. found that in extracellular parasites the GABA shunt then produces additional energy through the TCA cycle that enhances and increases extracellular parasite motility. Parasite (tachyzoite) invasion of host cells involves such motility. With increased motility and hence invasion, the number of parasites initiating cyst formation increases, leading to more established cysts. This is the phenotype we find with the TgO/GABA-AT Prugniaud strain knockout parasite, shown above in . Sporozoite and merozoite invasion also likely involves motility in a similar manner to tachyzoites. Microgamete contact with the macrogamete also likely involves motility of this flagellated form. Extracellular microgametes outnumber macrogametes 15 to 35:1 which favors contact of microgametes with macrogametes as these flagellated microgametes move to encounter and fertilize the female gametes before gamete fusion in the cat intestine ( A). Energy facilitating motility is important in this process, making translocation of GABA into the mitochondria requiring the sodium GABA symporter central to that process. The sodium GABA symporter is overexpressed and regulated by diminution in MORC in the merozoite, the stage that precedes formation of microgametes and we find this symporter is mutated in T-263 ( , , and ; and in color).

## Structure modeling of sodium GABA symporter with AlphaFold2 demonstrates mutation in T-263 surrounds the cholesterol binding cavity that is likely to have functional significance
To investigate how T-263 gene mutations could contribute to deficiencies in oocyst formation we asked AlphaFold2 to predict the structure of the Tg sodium GABA symporter by comparing the wild type T-263 mutant sequence with the identified point mutation L460R ( ). Both wild type and mutant of Tg sodium GABA symporter were well modeled by AlphaFold2 with high pLDDT confidence values above 70 ( A). The overall fold of predicted Tg sodium GABA symporter structure is shown on . Tg sodium GABA symporter exhibits helical structure fold with 14 predicted transmembrane helices. Based on structure alignment using VAST search, dopamine transporter from Drosophila is the closest structural homolog to Tg sodium GABA symporter (RMSD 3 Å over 750 Cα atoms, B). Structural alignment also suggests that Tg sodium GABA symporter most likely displays similar drug and ion-binding sites to dopamine transporter. 
The predicted model of the mutated Tg sodium GABA symporter (mutation L460R located on the TM4 helix) shows structural differences in two regions ( C and 10D). First region contains the extended loop with short α-helix between TM11 and TM12. The second region contains two C-terminal helices. Interestingly, these regions of the Tg sodium GABA symporter surround a cholesterol-binding cavity observed in the structure of the dopamine transporter ( D). Cholesterol plays a key role in regulating function of known neurotransmitter sodium symporters. , In the dopamine transporter, cholesterol stabilizes the outward-open conformation that increases binding of cocaine. , Therefore, if Tg sodium GABA symporter binds a cholesterol molecule in a similar cavity like the dopamine transporter, then conformational differences induced by mutation L460R may disturb symporter function and subsequent transport of GABA into the GABA shunt. We have rescued the sodium GABA symporter mutation in the C56 T-263 mutant tachyzoite as described below as in . It is possible with the HDAC 3 inhibitor or in a knockout of MORC to turn off tachyzoite genes. Thus, this approach including AlphaFold2 can be used for other proteins as herein ( , , , , and ; and [ and , in color]). This approach also provides the foundation for future studies to test this rescued parasite versus the parasite with the unrescued mutated gene to determine whether the mutation is the mutation in T-263 that is critical for or contributes to the T-263 zygote oocyst defective phenotype.

## Candidate genes found in some natural isolates

## AP2V-2 that is part of MORC complex that regulates expression of TgO/GABA-AT is mutated but the mutation is found in some natural isolates
Tg AP2-V-2 is of interest, as the MORC complex that coordinately regulates gene expression as the pre-gamete merozoite develops during capacitation, has TgO/GABA-AT as one of its many coordinately regulated genes ( , adapted from Table S4 in with permission). This MORC regulatory complex includes several Apetela 2 proteins, including AP2 V-2, and an HDAC. Merozoites thereby undergo capacitation prior to fusion of the micro and macrogametes.
Pertinent to our and others’ findings related to the MORC regulated genes presented above under TgO/GABA-AT, we found that there are three tandem mutated bases in the merozoite expressed AP2 V-2 gene ( , [ ]). A barcoded CRISPR knockout of the AP2 V-2 gene parasite has been created and is currently being studied by Grigg et al. Downregulation of the MORC complex including AP2 V-2 recently described to license expression of merozoite genes would license coordinated transcription of our merozoite genes, including TgO/GABA-AT. The mutated AP2 V-2 also regulates other of our genes expressed in merozoites that have mutations. Structure modeling of AP2-V2 with AlphaFold2 failed to predict structure due to low AP2-V2 sequence homology specifically at the N-terminal part of the protein containing mutation. This mutation in AP2V-2 also is found in some natural isolates.

## Mutations in SRS 15C is related to a gene where knockout blocks oocyst shedding but the mutation is found in some natural isolates
Motility is critical to invasion and likely to fertilization. SRS family proteins are critical in invasion. SRS 15C, expressed in merozoites, is also mutated in T-263 with three tandem mutations. A protein in the SRS family related to SRS 15C knocked out in CRISPR/Cas9 barcode pass through experiments of Silva, Grigg et al. (2022) also has a loss of function oocyst forming phenotype demonstrating the feasibility of defining critical mutation(s) alone or in combination with this method (Silva, Grigg et al., Toxo 2022, Abstract. Riverside, California). Further, this gene with a loss of function phenotype in this cat model (Toxo2022) has a plasmodia homologue that renders the plasmodium micro gamete incapable of fusion, which resembles the T-263 phenotype ( and ).
We run AlphaFold2 to predict the model for SRS 15C (purple) and for its mutant G80D (gray) ( and ). Structural modeling of SRS 15C with AlphaFold2 indicates that the tandem mutations in this gene in T-263 do not alter the predicted protein structure. Modeling shows that this mutation is located on the surface of SRS 15C, which might be important for SRS’s function. Many surface residues that critical for protein function among SAG-related proteins are conserved. Therefore, more analysis is needed to elucidate functional importance of the SRS 15C G80D mutant. Further study of parasites with knockout and introduction of the T-263 mutation/allelic variation is in progress/planned (Silva, Grigg et al., Toxo 2022, Abstract. Riverside, California and Grigg, McLeod, in progress, planned for future, 2023).

## Summary of relationships that link MORC regulated TgO/GABA-AT, MORC, AP2V-2, sodium GABA symporter, GABA and capacitation of merozoites to make fusogenic capable gametes and a zygote
These relationships are summarized as shown in the Box in the Supplement. They show the interconnection of MORC regulation of TgO/GABA-AT, the MORC with HDAC 3, AP2V-2, the sodium GABA symporter, GABA and their putative function in capacitation of merozoites to make fusogenic capable gametes and a zygote.

## Other candidate genes associated with fertility/infertility and capacitation were also among the mutated genes in T-263 where there was no similar mutation in natural isolates
As we eliminated from the final list any gene carrying a mutation shared with any of the ∼100 wild type parasites that had been sequenced at The J. Craig Venter Institute (Hernan Lorenzi, unpublished data), we found that a sodium-GABA symporter (TGME49_208420) was among the proteins encoded by mutated genes with increased expression in sporozoites and merozoites. This is related to GABA as a substrate for TgO/GABA-AT ( ). Genes encoding for a phosphofructokinase B adenosine kinase related gene (TGME49_250880) and an ATP-binding protein (TGME49_202850) were also mutated and found overexpressed. Mutations in either the sodium-GABA symporter or the PKA/G encoding genes have been associated with infertility in other species and are therefore consistent with the phenotype seen in T-263. We did not find any exonic mutation in genes that were highly expressed in microgametes or macrogametes, but 74 potential CoF mutations fell within genes that are expressed in the merozoite stage ( and highlighted in red in companion and ), including a hypothetical protein coding gene (TGME49_231880) that is overexpressed in merozoites compared to tachyzoites identified by Hehl et al. Other identified mutated genes expressed in merozoites encode for a tetratricopeptide repeat containing protein (TGME49_216140), formin FRM1 (TGME49_206430), chaperonin protein BiP (TGME49_311720), Sushi domain-containing protein (TGME49_211270), DNA-directed DNA polymerase (TGME49_285540), Myb family DNA-binding domain-containing protein (TGME49_203950), T-complex protein 1 epsilon subunit (TGME49_202370), and a number of hypothetical proteins. Some of these genes are fundamentally important in biological processes that affect fertilization in multiple other species, e.g., formin FRM1, BiP or Myb family encoding genes ( [ ]). We ran AlphaFold2 to investigate if mutations in these protein structures are potentially capable of influencing function ( [ ]); , , , and ; . AlphaFold2 predicted structural models of candidate proteins from T. gondii with mutations with recognized functions in capacitation, fertilization, gamete fusion, or pre-fusion development ( C, , , and ) and ).
AlphaFold2 failed to accurately predict structures of several proteins including TGME49_206430 (formin FRM1), TGME49_211270 (sushi domain-containing protein), and TGME49_203950 (Myb family DNA-binding domain-containing protein) due to large MW of proteins and low sequence homology. Among predicted AlphaFold2 models, most of the mutations are in disordered regions of the protein structure (TGME49_216140, TGME49_267590, and TGME49_210235) similar to the PKA protein. Therefore, it is hard to predict how they might affect function of target protein ( ). We have found that mutations in three targets TGME49_285540 (DNA-directed DNA polymerase), TGME49_250880 (pfkB kinase) and TGME49_311720 (chaperonin protein BiP) might be functionally important.
In the structure of polymerase, which might be RNA polymerase based on predicted structural model, mutation I156T is located between N-terminal helices H1 and H2. AlphaFold2 prediction indicates that mutation might induce conformational change of these helices. Comparison of the structure with its closest homolog (URT1) based on VAST search shows that these helices might affect nucleotide binding-site of the polymerase ( ).
In the second target, mutation is located in the adenosine binding pocket of the kinase and might directly affect binding of the adenosine. Structure of TGME49_250880 is well-studied adenosine kinase from Toxoplasma. We found that this mutation does not alter conformational changes in the protein structure based on AlphaFold2 prediction. Similarly, we have found that mutation in the third target TGME49_311720 (chaperonin) does not trigger conformational changes in chaperonin protein BiP. However, mutation might affect binding activity of chaperonin with its possible binding partner while forming protein complex. Superposition of chaperonin model with its closest homologous structure of Hsp110 shows position of mutated residue in close proximity to Hsp110/Hsc70 binding interface ( ). Additional analysis is needed to elucidate functional importance of these mutations.
It is feasible that one of these or more than one together could be responsible for the T-263 phenotype. A genetic cross between T-263 and a barcoded wild type parasite followed by genome sequencing or the barcode CRISP cat pass through method with MORC likely will in the future allow us to identify the critical gene(s). , , , and and [in color in ] show the likely effects of the mutations as predicted using AlphaFold2 as shown above.

## Foundational methodologic approach uses mutation and knock out of candidate genes and correction of mutations using CRISPR/Cas9
This is foundational to identify critical genes responsible for lack of fusion phenotype in T-263.CRISPR/Cas9 rescue of the sodium GABA symporter gene with no mutation, like the one in T-263 in wild type parasites, was prepared to determine whether it loses the defect in producing oocysts. It is feasible that this approach to CRISPR could rescue more mutations ( and ). Gene knockout of other putative responsible or key genes such as the PKA/G gene array is another approach to link genotype and phenotype. These methods should provide empirical proof of critical gene(s) responsible for the T-263 phenotype. It is likely that these genes will be among those conserved in this “capacitation” process in other species. Thus, these next step experiments can be placed in the context of the results of our list of genes that were identified in a literature search with the keywords “fertility, zygote, or infertility” ( and ). These future studies are likely to reveal the essential gene(s).
To further define these defects the in vitro cat intestinal organoid and in vivo in cat pass through phenotypes will be useful. We have developed the first step analyses by using a CRISPR/Cas9 rescue of mutations, amenable to analysis of T-263 mutants in vitro, and barcoded pass through system in cats (Silva, Grigg et al., Toxo 2022, Abstract. Riverside, California). This seems like T-263 may function as a “Rosetta stone that will help us to identify the critical mutation(s) that lead to its phenotype of failure to move beyond the morphologic male and female gamete to form a zygote in the cat intestine. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Data and analyses from other investigators complement this as they demonstrate that creation of the zygote, and subsequent steps in producing later stages involves multiple genes, common broadly across other species ( and [ and ]; , , , , and ; ).
Further analysis using data and analyses from other investigators demonstrated that it is likely that creation of the zygote, and subsequent steps in producing later stages involves multiple steps, present broadly across species, , a number of these are critical to fertility and capacitation and thereby may contribute to the formation of infectious sporozoites ( , , and [; ]; ).

## Discussion
Herein, we studied a previously uncharacterized Toxoplasma enzyme, TgO/GABA-AT. This was done to comprehensively characterize the genetics, enzymology, inhibition/inactivation, and biology of this enzyme, and the pathway in which it functions. We hypothesized that this might provide a new approach for drug discovery and to identify small molecule inhibitors/inactivators effective against the Apicomplexan parasites T. gondii and P. falciparum. Improved treatments are needed because these parasites cause significant morbidity and mortality, there are limitations of available treatments, and T. gondii is the most prevalent parasitic infection, with approximately two billion people infected worldwide. T. gondii is present throughout the environment, since cats are a critical vector for its dissemination. An acutely infected cat excretes up to 500 million oocysts; one oocyst is enough to establish a successful infection in the intermediate host, and they can persist in water or moist soil for up to a year.
On the basis of a report regarding TgO/GABA-AT, there is an additional dimension to our analysis, as we have considered how TgOAT might function differently in circumstances of different abundance of substrates, accessibility of nutrients, or other stress conditions. This report suggests that, while TgOAT demonstrates the capacity to act on ornithine and acetylornithine, its greatest activity is actually on GABA as a substrate, suggesting that the enzyme called TgO-AT may metabolize GABA as well. TgO/GABA-AT is a key part of amino acid biosynthesis, the urea cycle, and potentially the shuttling of carbon from GABA, via the GABA shunt, into the TCA cycle for addressing the energetic needs of the parasite. Additionally, GABA plays a role in the regulation of tyrosine hydroxylase activity, which is implicated in oocyst formation. Therefore, it was considered to be a potential antimicrobial target in any life cycle stage where it was essential. These considerations led to our characterization of this enzyme for Apicomplexans.

## Phylogeny of TgO/GABA-AT
Phylogenetic analysis revealed a highly conserved enzyme across parasite strains, leading to our supposition that OAT might be used for arginine, proline, glutamate, and GABA synthesis in T. gondii, as well as the clearance of nitrogenous wastes by the urea cycle. Multi-sequence alignment revealed substantial variation between species and the presence of two cysteines (Cys179 and Cys187) within Apicomplexan phylum members, which are Ile185 and Ser193 in human, and may provide an additional level of regulation absent in any other OAT homologue, including the human and cat isoforms of OAT. This site has demonstrated capacity for thioredoxin-binding in P. falciparum OAT. If there is a life cycle stage where this is essential, this difference might be useful for targeting antimicrobial agents, because it ought not interfere with the mammalian enzyme, perhaps providing selectivity for the parasite TgO/GABA-AT. Although there are some residue differences, it should be noted that the substrate binding sites are highly conserved across the apicomplexan and human O/GABA-AT families, such that any rational drug design program would have to be tailored toward these subtle differences. Alternatively, the unique nature of the putative regulatory Cys residues, and the role they play in changing the nature of the substrate-binding pocket due to their close proximity, may provide a new angle for inhibitor design, such as the design of inactivators containing Cys-specific warheads.

## TgO/GABA-AT has a structure similar to those of known OAT and GABA-AT enzymes
The TgO/GABA-AT structure resembles a similar structural fold with other enzymes from subgroup II of the aminotransferase protein family. , The list of known OAT enzymes with determined structures that have a similar structural fold includes the hOAT, , the OAT from P. falciparum, , the OAT from P. yoelii and GABA-AT from E. coli. In addition, there are structures of uncharacterized OAT enzymes in the Protein Data Bank, the OAT from Bacillus anthracis (PDB:3RUY), the OAT from Elizabethkingia anophelis (PDB:5VIU), and GABA-AT from Mycobacterium smegmatis. A structure comparison between TgO/GABA-AT, hOAT, PfOAT, PyOAT and E. coliGABA-AT shows that the differences among identified structures are found mainly in the region that comprises residues from the C-terminal domain ( ). Among them, the hOAT structure shares the closest secondary structural fold with similar PLP and substrate-binding site to TgO/GABA-AT. The details of TgO/GABA-AT structure and comparison analysis to its structural homologs provided a starting point for the identification of selective TgO/GABA-AT inhibitors. 

## Inhibitors and inactivators of TgO/GABA-AT in vitro
Recombinant protein was used to screen for inhibitors and inactiators of TgO/GABA-AT from a part of our library of pGABA-AT inhibitors and inactivators (to identify lead compounds for the development of new anti-toxoplasmosis and anti-malarial drugs. Compounds were chosen in the screened library because of their diversity in structures, including conformationally-rigid, aromatic, and flexible structures, in an attempt to identify different binding modes of the compounds to the active site of TgO/GABA-AT. Four compounds (1, 2, 3, and gabaculine) that have high activity in inactivating TgO/GABA-AT were identified and are considered mechanism-based enzyme inactivators (MBEIs). MBEIs are unreactive compounds that are converted through the target enzyme’s catalytic mechanism to form intermediates that either bind tightly to the enzyme or form covalent bonds. Because these molecules are not initially reactive, indiscriminate reactions with off-target proteins should be greatly reduced, and, therefore, greater selectivity and potency can be achieved. To place the observation that TgO/GABA-AT acts on both ornithine and GABA as substrates in the context of our inhibitor data, as presented in and , the enhanced specificity of TgO/GABA-AT for GABA and the enlarged active site that is more capable of accommodating larger molecules, we have found that large cyclic GABA-analogue inhibitors more potently modulate the enzyme’s activity; compound 3 is highly selective for TgO/GABA-AT. Although compounds 1, 2, and gabaculine are potent inhibitors of TgO/GABA-AT, they also inhibit both pGABA-AT and hOAT. Of most interest is compound 3, which selectively inactivates TgO/GABA-AT. Studies are ongoing to determine the reasons for this selectivity and the mechanism of inactivation.

## TgO/GABA-AT crystal structure with selected inactivators
Recombinant protein also was used to solve the crystal structure of TgO/GABA-AT in the presence of selected inactivators of GABA-AT. The crystal structure of gabaculine (14)-inactivated TgO/GABA-AT ( ) confirmed a similar structure and inactivation mechanism determined with pGABA-AT , and hOAT. A comparison of the crystal structure of TgO/GABA-AT in complex with gabaculine and structures of human OAT complexed with 5-fluoromethylornithine and pGABA-AT with (2S,4S)-4-aminotetrahydrothiophene-2-carboxylic acid revealed a number of differences in their substrate-binding pockets ( ). These differences may explain the enzyme’s specificity toward different substrates and inhibitors. One major difference is the presence of Val79 in the substrate-binding site of TgO/GABA-AT, which is substituted by Ile79 and Tyr85 in GABA-AT and hOAT, respectively. In GABA-AT, Ile79 is thought to narrow the pocket, allowing for binding solely of GABA. In hOAT, Tyr85 helps to stabilize the α-nitrogen of L-ornithine but does not prohibit GABA from binding. Markova et al. showed that mutation of this tyrosine to an isoleucine results in more productive binding of GABA. They surmised from their data that Ile85 serves to orient GABA in such a way that γ-proton abstraction after aldimine formation is enhanced. Val79 could be accomplishing the same task in TgO/GABA-AT. A second major difference is the presence of a phenylalanine residue in both GABA-AT (Phe189) and hOAT (Phe177), whereas TgO/GABA-AT contains a tyrosine (Tyr171). However, the role of these residues in substrate binding remains unclear. A third major difference observed in comparative structures occurs on the carboxylate binding side of the substrate-binding pocket ( ). In GABA-AT, this region is occupied by Phe351, which serves to restrict the active site size, allowing only for binding to GABA. In hOAT, this region is occupied by Tyr55, which is rotated at about a 90° angle relative to that of Phe351 in GABA-AT. Tyr55 is located on the other subunit of the protein on a loop that extends into the substrate-binding site and serves to allow binding to the α-nitrogen of L-ornithine in hOAT but not in GABA-AT. This same tyrosine (Tyr49) is found in TgO/GABA-AT. Finally, the fourth difference is the presence of Gly320 in hOAT that occupies the location of Phe351 in GABA-AT ( ). This change results in the active site of hOAT being larger and more flexible than that of GABA-AT. Thus, we believe that large inhibitors such as 2 and 3 can bind to hOAT and not to GABA-AT. TgO/GABA-AT has these same residues at the substrate-binding site (Gly314 and Tyr49, located on the other subunit of the protein) and produces the same activity with similar inhibitors.

## Cys179 and Cys187 in the TgO/GABA-AT structure do not form a disulfide bond
In P. falciparum OAT, Cys154 and Cys163 have been demonstrated to bind an activator, thioredoxin, which reduces protein disulfides via a disulfide-exchange mechanism. The two residues, Cys154 and Cys163, in P. falciparum OAT correspond to Cys179 and Cys187 in TgO/GABA-AT, but there is no homologous sequence in H. sapiens OAT. On the basis of the crystal structure of TgO/GABA-AT ( ), the formation of a disulfide bond between Cys179 and Cys187 in T. gondii is unlikely because of the large distance between them (4.4 Å), and the formation of a disulfide bond is only likely when the distance is less than 2.5 Å.

## Is TgO/GABA-AT a GABA-AT?
It is important to recognize that these biochemical data with TgO/GABA-AT, upon which much of the previous assertions and suppositions are based, does not confirm that there is a biological in vivo role for the observed GABA-AT activity. The capacity for nonspecific binding leading to catalysis of reactions using both substrates does not mean that TgOAT functions biologically as a GABA-AT. Additionally, if TgOAT is, in fact, a GABA-AT, it is structurally distinct from mammalian GABA-AT, given that some inactivators of TgO/GABA-AT, e.g., compounds 2 and 3, do not inactivate mammalian GABA-AT. This TgOAT or GABA-AT activity would be outside of the activity of the sporozoite in oocysts but not the merozoite, because the oocysts are walled-off in their own, separate, sequestered niche.

## Effect of TgO/GABA-AT inactivators in cells
What remains is a modest phenotype in vivo and increased expression in merozoites and sporozoites. The aforementioned TgO/GABA-AT inactivators demonstrated to effectively modulate TgO/GABA-AT activity via in vitro enzymatic assays, were tested against Type I tachyzoites in vitro as well as against P. falciparum. Since we later learned that the enzyme is not expressed in tachyzoites we found as would be expected with hind-sight that these studies revealed no significant effect on T. gondii replication, with some host-cell toxicity. Similarly, a live-cell parasite assay for P.falciparum revealed the compounds had no antimalarial activity at concentrations up to 10,000 ng/mL. Thus, inhibition of this enzyme is not likely to significantly modify outcomes resulting from active tachyzoite or dormant bradyzoite infection in humans.

## GABA shunt in TgO/GABA-AT
Moreover, the biochemical data showing that TgO/GABA-AT has increased specificity for GABA relative to ornithine corresponds well to a previous study, which demonstrated, metabolically, that Toxoplasma has a functional GABA shunt in a nutrient-poor environment. In MacCrae’s supplemental data, shown in their , they identified the four predicted Toxoplasma genes involved in this GABA shunt. The GABA shunt eliminates two steps in the TCA cycle via the sequential action of glutamate decarboxylase (TGME49_280700), which first converts glutamate to GABA in the parasite cytosol, followed by the import of GABA into the mitochondria by the putative transporter (TGME49_208420) predicted to be a sodium:neurotransmitter symporter. This gene, TGME49_208420, is the very gene predicted to be important and noted to have a nonsynonymous SNP in the Frenkel vaccine strain. This could be of significance, assuming, of course, this mutation actually makes an amino acid change or truncation of the GABA transporter for a predicted null phenotype. The AlphaFold2 analysis suggests this mutation could have functional significance ( ). Additionally, MacRae et al. predicted TgOAT (TGME49_269110) was the most likely candidate for the GABA-AT that converts GABA to succinate semialdehyde, and TGME49_057480 as the NADP-dependent succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase that converts succinate semialdehyde to succinate, which then reenters the TCA cycle.

## Effect of elimination of GABA in TgO/GABA-AT and GABA accumulation in TgO/GABA-AT knockout
Furthermore, the MacRae paper showed that deleting the parasite gene for glutamate decarboxylase completely eliminated the production of GABA. This GABA deficient mutant had no replication defect in vitro, but in vivo in mice they showed a very modest reduction in tissue burden of tachyzoites by day 5–7 post-infection, as well as a very modest reduced virulence in mice. Thus, absence of parasite GABA production slightly reduced acute virulence. MacRae et al. 2012 knocked out the type I RH Glutamate decarboxylase gene that converts glutamate to GABA and is essential for the formation of GABA. In contrast, we knocked out the type II (PRU) TgO/GABA-AT gene that consumes GABA by converting GABA into succinate semialdehyde in the TCA cycle. Consequently, these mutants are not directly comparable.
Interestingly our in vitro and in vivo results with deletion of TgOAT as a GABA-AT found slightly different results. Utilizing a knockout of the Type II parasite, to determine biologic phenotype, we found a mildly increased virulence phenotype in vivo, with slightly diminished survival of infected mice and increases in cyst number. This was not reflected in vitro. Explaining the underlying mechanism of these findings requires an appreciation for the downstream impact of inhibiting this pathway. Knocking out the parasite’s GABA-AT would most likely create an increased metabolic pool of GABA, since glutamate will be converted to GABA by glutamate decarboxylase, but there would be no GABA-AT to convert GABA to succinate semialdehyde. Thus, our finding in Type II parasites that deletion of TgO/GABA-AT did not affect in vitro replication of tachyzoites, but slightly increased acute virulence, is consistent with the idea of perturbation of this metabolic pathway, leading to the accumulation of GABA.

## Importance of GABA
If TgOAT were to function as a GABA-AT, there is certainly precedence for the importance of this pathway, and its transporter identified as mutated in merozoites and sporozoites in the T-263 vaccine strain. GABA is critically important to defend against a variety of environmental stresses in plants and plant pathogens. GABA is also a key signaling molecule, allowing plants to sense how much carbon and nitrogen are available, facilitating the balancing of carbon, nitrogen, and energy needs through the TCA cycle and other metabolic pathways. This role in plants was only recognized recently, but GABA seems to play an important role in response to environmental stress. In Fusarium, a deletion of the fungal GABA-AT induced accumulation of GABA, which adversely affected mitochondrial respiration, the redox state of the cell, and compromised fungal virulence in vivo in wheat plants. Additionally, GABA has been shown to play a critically important role in angiosperm sexual reproduction. While sexual reproduction in plants might seem unrelated to reproduction in a eukaryotic parasite like Toxoplasma, several key metabolic pathways are shared between these organisms suggesting common ancestry. , , , 

## Effect of deletion of TgO/GABA-AT in T. gondii on cat oocyst shedding
This finding, in conjunction with the observations of the 245-fold increase in expression in sporozoites and the increased expression in merozoites, leads to our hypothesis that inhibition of the cat form might be useful in blocking transmission or shedding upon challenge with the parasite. The transcriptional and proteomic data, as well as immunofluorescence assays, suggested that the cat forms might require TgO/GABA-AT. Therefore, the active site and binding pocket of OAT was mutated using a CRISPR/Cas9 system in the EGS cyst-forming T. gondii strain. Abrogation of TgO/GABA-AT was confirmed via PCR. Feeding of these CRISPR/Cas9 knockout parasites to cats revealed continued shedding of oocysts in the feces, although this was not quantitated nor was durability of the oocysts determined so it is not clear whether a reduction in oocyst shedding occurred. These oocysts were tested, and it was confirmed that they still had the construct in place preventing expression of TgO/GABA-AT. We can conclude therefore that TgO/GABA-AT is not essential for shedding of oocysts, although we cannot rule out some contribution of the enzyme to oocyst formation or durability, given the role of numerous metabolic pathways to this process.

## Is there an alternative TgO/GABA-AT gene in the T. gondii mutant strain T-263, that is unable to produce oocysts in cats?
Given the importance of the process of oocyst formation to transmission and infection, we further characterized a mutagenized strain of T. gondii. This mutant, named T-263, created and characterized by Frenkel, Pfefferkorn et al., , , , , , , , , is known to be unable to produce oocysts when fed to cats and to block shedding of oocysts with challenge following immunization. We hypothesized that we might encounter a nonsynonymous SNP or other mutation in this T-263 parasite that was related to the OAT pathway, given the high level of OAT expression in the sexual stages of the parasite, or perhaps even OAT itself. Alternatively, a mutation could alter splicing or regulatory region in the DNA. As our studies herein were ongoing, we (JPD) found that the phenotype of T-263 was an arrest in oocyst development beyond the stage of morphologically normal-appearing male and female gametes and and . Thus, mutations in this pathway might logically cause this phenotype. Any gene potentially involved in the enhanced production of energy (i.e., via the GABA shunt) or in enhancing substrate formation for such an enzyme, especially for an extracellular organism like the male microgamete, could be the responsible gene. A kinase like cyclic AMP dependent protein kinase (PKA) that is critical for development of the male gametes of other species is also likely to be important in this process in the merozoite state even if it is not one of the mutated genes in T-263. A PKA overexpressed in merozoites could be critical for gamete functions. Therefore, T-263 was grown in tissue culture from a stored stock (Jitender P Dubey parasite collection on the C Strain background [JPD,CLS] , , , , , , , , , and sequenced herein to begin to determine the genetic underpinning of this defect in zygote production phenotype and how it might relate to TgO/GABA-AT and GABA. This led to identification of nonsynonymous SNPs. These were studied to identify those genes which might have evidence of upregulation in merozoites, macrogametes, microgametes, or sporozoites. This latter criterion suggested the potential importance to critical aspects of the sexual life cycle stages and, therefore, relevance to earlier stages of functional gamete/zygote formation (merozoites, microgametes) or later stages of oocyst (sporozoite or the other sexual stages) formation. We found no genes with mutations that were over expressed in microgamete or macrogametes. In merozoites, a gene that was of unknown function and a gene that has been identified as a cyclic-AMP dependent protein kinase (PKA) were found to be overexpressed in the merozoite. This seemed to be a gene of high importance as it is a gene critical for formation and capacitation of the functional male gamete ( and ). Although the Toxoplasma database reported this initially as a single copy gene, it appears that there may be as many as 14 copies of this gene. Thus, a single mutation in this gene, unless it was a critical regulatory SNP or enhancer response element, would make it less likely to be critical. As the merozoite was the only stage in which this 14-copy gene was overexpressed, the multiple copies could not be the only reason that it was noted to be overexpressed only in this life cycle stage.

## Phenotype relevance of multicopy protein kinase A genes
Other PKAs have been noted to be important in a T. gondii stage switch. , , Interestingly this cyclic-AMP protein dependent kinase has 23% homology with a PKG in Plasmodia which has a unique relay mechanism allowing it to respond rapidly to environmental conditions ( ). However, the biological function of this gene in other organisms would exactly account for the phenotype of arrest of the cat stage parasite at the stage where gametes are formed before zygotes are formed, but then do not progress beyond that stage. Thus, the gene with relatedness to a malaria PKG (see ) might contribute to the phenotype observed, although it is not consistent with being the critical gene in the mutant T-263. The work herein highlights the likely critical importance of this multicopy gene for the T. gondii merozoite and the conception of T. gondii. There are also multiple hypothetical genes overexpressed in the merozoite compared to tachyzoites. One of these has an N-terminal domain with low similarity to a bacterial ribonuclease E family (e-value <5 x 10−8). Additional nonsynonymous mutations were identified in 17 genes expressed in the merozoite among other stages (ToxoDB, >25% percentile expression ). Four genes contained nonsynonymous SNPs that were overexpressed in sporozoites. These could augment the phenotype where oocyst shedding does not occur but would not explain the phenotype where the male and female gamete do not fuse. In T-263, also of particular interest, pertinent to the present manuscript, were a sodium-GABA symporter (TGME49_208420), an ATP binding domain-containing protein (TGME49_202850), and adenosine kinase (TGME49_250880). The former regulates movement of GABA, a downstream product of TgO/GABA-AT when ornithine is the substrate, or the substrate of TgO/GABA-AT. There are several known small molecule inhibitors, including commercially available antiepileptic drugs, as well as the compounds presented herein. In the future, it will be particularly interesting to further characterize this SNP and others in the mutant. This is in light of our studies of TgO/GABA-AT, because the literature suggests that OAT plays a role in the regulation of concentrations of GABA and glutamate. Glutamate is potentially important as a short-term energy source in T. gondii, as occurs in Plasmodia. Adenosine kinase, another identified protein with non-synonymous SNPs in its gene in T-263, is a component in the redundant purine salvage pathway, with a characterized structure and known inhibitors. These proteins, and the others that have been identified, are potentially targetable, either via small molecules or genetic technologies like CRISPR/Cas9, as was the case in an interesting report in the HIV literature. Should application of these technologies prove that one of these proteins is essential for the process of oocyst formation as was recently described for the microgamete gene, HAP, of unknown function in T. gondii but well known in plants and other species to be associated with fertilization, it could be targeted directly to inhibit development or shedding of oocysts.
We did not find the fusogen HAP1,2 (reported to be present in both plasmodia and T. gondii) or LIKE1,2 or other known fusogens. The relationship of these genes to GABA, sodium channels and stress as some of the drivers of capacitation and PKA/Gs in gamete development and function are presented in , , and . They unify our findings with TgO/GABA-AT and GABA. Levels of GABA modulate capacitation through multiple steps. The sodium GABA symporter controls localization of GABA and sodium and this gene contains one of the T-263 mutations ( and ).
The work herein, in the context of multiple recent studies evaluating the molecular underpinnings of sexual development indicate that there are likely to be multiple genes important to this pathway ( , , , , , , , , and ; ) that also can be targeted. , The biological underpinning of sexual reproduction in the parasite represents a frontier in our understanding of eukaryotic parasites and T. gondii, more specifically and offers us a window into a potentially targetable pathway. Therefore, identification of genes critical for sexual development of the parasite and formation of zygotes studied including methods described herein , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , and newly described, could facilitate public health interventions and interrupt environmental transmission. This would substantially reduce transmission to humans , and thus reduce the morbidity and mortality caused by this parasite.

## Limitations of the study
Our characterizations, sequencing, and analyses of TgO/GABA-AT and T-263 mutagenized Toxoplasma provide considerable insight into related molecular mechanisms critical in creation of T. gondii zygotes. One limitation is that background, haplotype, gene modifications, and different wild-type strains used in our different studies could have influenced results. Nonetheless, this work presents and develops foundational concepts, hypotheses to test, and empirical data. With the novel approaches and reagents that we and others have identified and created, future studies are needed to define which specific mutations in T-263 cause the block in capacitation to zygote formation in T-263Toxoplasma. The Rosetta stone T-263 mutations we have uncovered will inspire future studies to further fully define detailed mechanisms whereby the T. gondii ornithine-GABA pathway acts in merozoites and sporozoites with central roles in development or reduction of highly infectious oocysts, which widely contaminate the environment. The genes we have noted through the mutational analysis present a focused list of candidates associated with development of T. gondii feline stages. To fully identify the functions of selected and all relevant genes will require additional future studies. Nonetheless, genes and pathways identified reveal a process involved in capacitation, fertilization and formation of a Toxoplasma zygote. Even if they turn out not to be responsible for the T-263 phenotype they may with future experimentation prove to be critical for capacitation, fertilization and formation of the zygote, and have provided insights into the biology of GABA and TgO/GABA-AT in these and other cellular processes.

## Conclusions
TgO/GABA-AT was found to utilize GABA and ornithine as substrates. Known aminotransferase inhibitors were screened against TgO/GABA-AT, and many were found to inactivate TgO/GABA-AT irreversibly. Importantly, compound 3 was found to be selective over other aminotransferase enzymes including GABA-AT and hOAT. From crystallography, known aminotransferase inhibitors gabaculine and 15 yielded predicable mechanisms of action against TgO/GABA-AT. The phylogeny of TgO/GABA-AT was determined and found to be conserved across taxa. A knockout parasite and a CRISPER/Cas9 knockout of TgO/GABA-AT were made. TgO/GABA-AT gene was found to be overexpressed in sporozoites and merozoites. TgO/GABA-AT was not essential for the formation of oocysts in cats, nor was it critical for replication of tachyzoites, persistence of dormant cysts, or formation of cysts. A chemically mutagenized parasite, which has lost the capacity to make oocysts or to shed oocysts in the definitive feline host, called T-263, resulted in loss of function. When it was noted that T-263 could not progress beyond structurally normally appearing microgametes and macrogametes, mutations in merozoites (the pre-gamete stage) were considered most likely to be relevant since no mutations were noted in the microgamete or macrogamete. Based on the assumption that in nature a parasite would likely not be perpetuated, any mutation that was also present in any of the JCVI library of 100 isolates from throughout the world was excluded. This left 20 candidate mutations, 10 of which had genes with identifiable functions when searched by name and analyzed by PFAM. A search for whether those genes had been associated with infertility or involve steps known to occur in capacitation, triggering tyrosine phosphorylation, motility, membrane fusion, or fertility of gametes in other species revealed putative candidates for the mutations that are essential for conception of Toxoplasma. These mutations showed a putative pathway beginning with change in pH and ionicity derived from a sodium GABA symporter, leading to a change in cyclic AMP, PKA/PKG, and genes associated with motility and energy. ,
 , , , , , , , , These findings seemed to us similar to a Rosetta stone revealing the same critical genes for these processes that are key for conception in Toxoplasma as identified in other species. We note that GABA modulates these processes in all species studied, possibly providing an explanation for the overexpression of TgO/GABA-AT in the life cycle stage where capacitation occurs, making possible the conception of T. gondii. These processes appear to be broadly conserved from plants to humans and might provide insights into how both medicines and vaccines could be developed to block these processes. For Toxoplasma this would be associated with the life stage of the cat that widely contaminates the environment.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Dr. Rima McLeod (rmcleod@uchicago.edu).

## Materials availability
A putative OAT from T. gondii ME49 clone or protein are available to order free of charge for scientific community from the Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Disease at Northwestern University (Chicago, IL) repository (https://csgid.org/). Inhibitors and inactivators of TgO/GABA-AT were generated in Dr. Richard B. Silverman laboratory and could be obtained upon request (r-silverman@northwestern.edu).

## Data and code availability
Sequences of proteins from T. gondii ME49 used this study are available at ToxoDBdatabase (https://toxodb.org/toxo/app). Code for down selection of genes with mutations is at: https://github.com/TriLab-bioinf/McLeod_T263_manuscript. Original blots are at https://data.mendeley.com. All determined crystal structures with original codes (listed in method details) are deposited into the Protein DataBank (https://www.rcsb.org/). All data reported in this paper will be shared by the upon request. Generated structure models by AlphaFold2 reported in this paper will be shared by the upon request.

## Experimental model and study participant details
List of all experimental models used in this study:

## Animals
(species/strain, genotype, age/developmental stage, sex (and gender if reported for human studies), maintenance, and care, including institutional permission and oversight information for the studies the experimental animal/human study):

## Dartmouth
Cyst burden and virulence assays were performed in 7–8 week old female C57BL/6 mice housed under standard conditions and fed standard mouse food using protocols approved by the Laboratory Animal Use and Care Committee. IACUC protocol approval number is 00002108.Dartmouth’s AAALAC accreditation number is 398 and Animal Welfare Assurance number is D16-0016 (A3259-01).

## Einstein
In the Weiss laboratory, CD1 female mice were used and were from Charles River Laboratory age 5 to 6 weeks Catalog number CD-1 IGS Mouse strain 022. IACUC from 2015 to 2018 was 20150908. For experiments in the time frame of 2012–2015 it was #20121104.

## USDA
For these and other studies herein, overall, four cats, 88–103 days old, 2 males, 2 females from the USDA in-house-colony were utilized; Cats were fed pelleted Purina cat chow.
At the USDA, overall description of mouse source and care is as follows: The KO mice were 8–12 week-old females, BALB/c-Ifnγ from Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine. The outbred Swiss Webster mice were 10–12 weeks old females from NIH, Bethesda, MD. Mice were fed pelleted mouse chow. BAACUC Protocol No.: # 12–016 is the protocol number for animal use.

## Italy
BALB/c female mice were housed in standard conditions and fed standard laboratory mouse food. The animal work has been authorized by the Italian Ministry of Health, according to Legislative Decree 116/92, which implemented the European Directive 86/609/EEC on laboratory animal protection. Animals used in this study were housed at the Istituto Superiore di Sanità and treated according to Legislative Decree 116/92 guidelines.

## Human cell lines
In the Weiss laboratory for these and other studies herein, HFF human foreskin fibroblasts were from ATCC laboratory Cat SCRC-1041 and also have been HFF ATCC CRL-1634.

## Primary cell cultures
Human erythrocytes for malaria inhibition assay were from Valley Biomedical (HB1005).

## Microbe strains species/strain
At Walter Reed Army Instiute (WRAIR) D6 (CDC/Sierra Leone), TM91C235 (WRAIR, Thailand), and W2 (CDC/Indochina III) laboratory strains of P. falciparum were utilized.
At Dartmouth, KU80 knockout background, the Type II TgO/GABA-AT gene locus (TGME49_269110) was deleted in the PruΔku80Δhxgprt (this paper).
T. gondii Pru (https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms10147#article-info)
EGS strain T. gondii is ATCC PRA-396 .
RH strain T. gondii (https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms10147#article-info).
Me49 strain T. gondii (https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms10147#article-info)
C56 strain T. gondii (Dubey JP ).
T-263 strain T. gondi (Dubey JP ).
Details of use of each of these models in each of the specific studies are presented under the corresponding section.

## Method details

## Multi-sequence alignment of ornithine aminotransferase
In the first instance, a small amino acid sequence alignment was performed with Clustal Omega on close homologues (Hammondia hammondi, Neospora caninum & P. falciparum), and the more distant, but important in the context of this work, Felis catus, and Homo sapiens OAT structures (accession numbers T. gondii (XP_002365604.1), H. hammondi (XP_008882303.1), N. caninum (XP_003883978.1), P. falciparum (CAG25330.1), F. catus (XP_003994548.1), and H. sapiens (AAA59957.1)). Then, a second, more extensive sequence alignment was performed in Consurf with 499 sequences identified.

## SNP analysis and phylogeny Construction
Nucleic acid sequences for Toxoplasma gondii ornithine aminotransferase were extracted from the ToxoDBwebsite (http://toxodb.org/) for all available isolates. Sequences were formatted and exported as a FASTA file for analysis. Using PHYLIP (PHYLogeny Inference Package, v3.696) programs included in the Seaview phylogeny interface (http://doua.prabi.fr/software/seaview), 1000 pseudoreplicate datasets were created and an unrooted bootstrap consensus tree was constructed by parsimony analysis.

## Cloning, expression, and purification
Gene (GI: 237832613) of a putative OAT from T. gondii ME49 (TgO/GABA-AT truncated construct (residues 17–441); TgO/GABA-AT(17–441)) was PCR-amplified and cloned into the IPTG (isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside)-inducible pMCSG28 vector by the ligation-independent-cloning. The pMCSG28 vector possesses the C-terminal 6×His affinity tag and Tobacco Etch Virus (TEV) protease cleavage site. Escherichia coli (E. coli) BL21(DE3)/pMagic cells harboring the TgO/GABA-AT-pMCSG28 plasmid were grown in the Terrific Broth (TB) medium to OD600 = 0.6 at 37°C followed by 1 mM IPTG induction at 25°C overnight. Incubated cells were collected by centrifugation (6,000 rpm, 4°C, 10 min) and lysed by sonication in 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3 buffer containing 250 mM NaCl, 100 mM (NH4)2SO4, 43.6 mM Na3PO4, 3.25 mM citric acid, 10% glycerol, 5 mM imidazole and 0.08% n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside (DDM), and 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol (BME) on ice. The soluble fraction and cell debris were separated by centrifugation at 19,000 rpm, 4°C for 40 min. The supernatant was applied onto a 5-mLNi-NTA column (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ), and impurities were washed out using 10 mM Tris-HCl buffer at pH 8.3, with 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM BME, and 25 mM imidazole. TgO/GABA-AT was eluted with 500 mM imidazole in 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3 buffer containing 500 mM NaCl and 5 mM BME and further purified by size exclusion chromatography on a HiLoad 26/60 Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ). All purification steps were carried out on the ÄKTAxpress (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Piscataway, NJ) high-throughput purification system at 4°C. Final purity of the protein was assayed by SDS-PAGE.

## Enzyme activity assays
GABA, L-ornithine, PLP, α-ketoglutarate, NADH, and NADP+ were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich or Alfa Aesar. Human recombinant pyrroline 5-carboxylate reductase 1 (PYCR1) was purchased from Creative Biomart. Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSDH) was purified from GABase, a commercially available mixture of SSDH and GABA-AT, using a known procedure. Ultraviolet (UV) absorption was measured using a Synergy H1 hybrid multimode microplate reader (BioTek, USA) with transparent 96-well plates or 384-well plates (Greiner Bio-One, USA). Compounds 1-15 were previously synthesized, characterized, and tested against human ornithine aminotransferase and used without further manipulation in the TgO/GABA-AT assay procedure. 

## Variation of enzyme concentration of TgO/GABA-AT
For GABA assays, microplate wells were loaded with 60 μL of an assay mixture containing 100 mM potassium pyrophosphate buffer at pH 8.0, 11.1 mM α-ketoglutarate, 1.11 mM GABA, 1.11 mM NADP+, and 1 μL of SSDH. For L-ornithine assays, microplate wells were loaded with 60 μL of an assay mixture containing 100 mM potassium pyrophosphate at pH 8.0, 11.1 mM α-ketoglutarate, 1.11 mM NADH, 0.028 mM PLP, 11.1 mM L-ornithine, and 2.5 ng of PYCR1. 30 μL of potassium pyrophosphate buffer was added to each well. After incubating the mixture at 37°C for 10 min, 10 μL of various concentrations of TgO/GABA-AT in 100 mM potassium pyrophosphate at pH 8.0 was added. The plate was shaken at 37°C for 1 min, and absorbance was measured at 340 nm every 10 s for 90 min. All assays were performed in duplicate. Absorbance was plotted as a function of time in GraphPad Prism as shown in A and S3D.

## Determination of the Km of ornithine against TgO/GABA-AT
For GABA assays, microplate wells were loaded with 60 μL of an assay mixture containing 100 mM potassium pyrophosphate buffer at pH 8.0, 11.1 mM α-ketoglutarate, 1.11 mM NADP+, 1 μL of SSDH, and varying concentrations of GABA. For L-ornithine assays, microplate wells were loaded with 60 μL of an assay mixture containing 100 mM potassium pyrophosphate at pH 8.0, 11.1 mM α-ketoglutarate, 1.11 mM NADH, 0.028 mM PLP, 2.5 ng of PYCR1, and varying concentrations of ornithine. 30 μL of potassium pyrophosphate buffer was added to each well. After incubating the mixture at 37°C for 10 min, 10 μL of TgO/GABA-AT (0.15 mg/mL for GABA assay and 1.0 mg/mL for ornithine assays in 100 mM potassium pyrophosphate buffer at pH 8.0) was added. The plate was shaken at 37°C for 1 min, and the absorbance was measured at 340 nm every 10 s for 90 min. All assays were performed in duplicate. Relative velocity was determined from the slope of the linear portion (t = 750–1500 s for GABA and 2000–4000 s for ornithine) a plot of absorbance versus time. The Km was then obtained by plotting GABA or ornithine concentration versus relative velocity ( C and S3F) and fitting to the Michaelis-Menton Equation in GraphPad Prism where v = (Vmax [S])/(KM + [S]) where v is relative velocity and [S] is the concentration of GABA or ornithine.

## Measurement of kinetic constants of inhibitors and inactivators of TgO/GABA-AT
Curve fitting method – GABA: Microplate wells were loaded with 80 μL of an assay mixture containing 100 mM potassium pyrophosphate at pH 8.0, 11.1 mM α-ketoglutarate, 11.1 mM GABA, 1.11 mM NADP+, and 1 μL of SSDH. Varying concentrations of inhibitors were added to each well, and the plate was preheated at 37°C for 10 min. 10 μL of TgO/GABA-AT (0.15 mg/mL in 100 mM potassium pyrophosphate buffer at pH 8.0) was added via a multichannel pipette. The plate was shaken for 5 s at 37°C, and the absorbance was measured at 340 nm every 10 s for 30 min. All assays were performed in duplicate.
Curve fitting method – ornithine: For L-ornithine assays, microplate wells were loaded with 60 μL of an assay mixture containing 100 mM potassium pyrophosphate buffer at pH 8.0, GABA, 11.1 mM α-ketoglutarate, 1.11 mM NADH, 0.028 mM PLP, 11.1 mM L-ornithine, and 2.5 ng of PYCR1. Varying concentrations of inhibitors were added to each well, and the plate was preheated at 37°C for 10 min. 10 μL of TgO/GABA-AT (1.0 mg/mL in 100 mM potassium pyrophosphate buffer at pH 8.0) was added via a multichannel pipette. The plate was shaken for 30 s at 37°C, and the absorbance was measured at 340 nm every 10 s for 90 min. All assays were performed in duplicate.
Curve fitting method – calculations: Absorbance data were fitted according to a previous procedure. Absorbance data were fitted to , where vi is the initial velocity, vs is the steady state velocity, t is time, and a0 is the initial absorbance. Kobs is then fitted to where [I] is the inactivator concentration and S is substrate (ornithine) concentration.
(Equation 1)Absorbance=vi−vskobs[1−exp(−kobst)]+vst+a0(Equation 2)kobs=kinact[I]kI(1+SKm)+[I]Time-dependent assay method – GABA: Microplate wells were loaded with 5 μL of varying inhibitor concentrations and 11.1 mM α-ketoglutarate in 100 mM potassium pyrophosphate buffer at pH 8. At time points of 0, 10, 20, and 25 min, 5 μL of TgO/GABA-AT (0.15 mg/mL) was added to each inhibitor concentration. After 30 min, 40 μL of an assay solution (preheated at 37°C for 10 min) containing 11.1 mM α-ketoglutarate, 11.1 mM GABA, 1.11 mM NADP+, and 1 μL of SSDH was added. The plate was shaken at 37°C for 60 s, and the absorbance was read at 340 nm for 30 min.
Time-dependent assay method – ornithine: Microplate wells were loaded with 5 μL of varying inhibitor concentrations and 11.1 mM α-ketoglutarate in 100 mM potassium pyrophosphate buffer at pH 8. At time points of 0, 10, 20, and 25 min, 5 μL of TgO/GABA-AT (1.0 mg/mL) was added to each inhibitor concentration. After 30 min, 40 μL of an assay solution (preheated at 37°C for 10 min) containing 11.1 mM α-ketoglutarate, 11.1 mM ornithine, 1.11 mM NADH, 0.028 mM PLP, and 0.5 μL of PYCR1 was added. The plate was shaken at 37°C for 60 s, and the absorbance was read at 340 nm for 60 min.
Time-dependent assay method – calculations: GABA and ornithine data were fitted according to a literature procedure. Briefly, initial velocities are calculated from the slope of a plot of absorbance versus time at each concentration and for each preincubation time. Initial velocity for each concentration and preincubation time is then converted into percent inhibition by considering the positive (No inhibitor) and negative (no inhibitor, no enzyme) controls. Log (Percent inhibition) is then plotted versus preincubation time for each concentration of inhibitor tested. The slope of this plot yields kobs. kinact and KI are obtained from a plot of kobs and the concentration of each inhibitor and fitted in GraphPad Prism to the equation kobs = (kinact x [I])/(KI + [I]) where [I] is the inhibitor concentration.

## Co-crystallization experiments
The TgO/GABA-AT protein at a concentration of 7 mg/mL was crystallized in the presence of gabaculine and TgO/GABA-AT-specific inactivators (compounds 1, 2, 3, and 15) by the sitting-drop vapor-diffusion technique at 295 K. The crystal of TgO/GABA-AT with PLP covalently bound to Lys286 was obtained from co-crystallization of TgO/GABA-AT with 2 mM PLP followed by overnight (14–15 h) incubation. The crystal of TgO/GABA-AT in complex with gabaculine was obtained by co-crystallization with 5 mM gabaculine and 2 mM PLP. The above crystals were grown under similar conditions containing 200 mM (NH4)2SO4, 100 mM Bis-Tris pH 5.5 and 25% (w/v) PEG3350. The crystals of TgO/GABA-AT in complex with compound 15 in an intermediate state and final inactivated state were obtained by co-crystallization with 5 mM compound 15 and 2 mM PLP under conditions containing 0.2 M (NH4)2SO4, 0.1 M Bis-Tris pH 6.5, and 25% (w/v) PEG3350 followed by an incubation period at 4°C for 4 h and overnight (14–15 h), respectively. To oxidize protein and attempt to promote disulfide bond formation, we dialyzed TgO/GABA-AT enzyme in a buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3, 500 mM NaCl, 2 mM PLP and 0.5 mM oxidized glutathione. Therefore, the crystal of TgO/GABA-AT in an unliganded state was obtained under conditions containing 0.2 M (NH4)2SO4, 0.1 M Bis-Tris pH 5.5, and 25% (w/v) PEG3350. Prior to data collection, all crystals were soaked in well solution for cryoprotection and then flash frozen in liquid nitrogen.

## X-Ray data collection and structure determination
Monochromatic X-ray diffraction oscillation data from all crystals were collected at the Life Sciences Collaborative Access Team (LS-CAT) beamlines at Argonne National Laboratory (ANL), Advanced Photon Source (APS). Data were processed with HKL-3000. The structures were determined by the molecular replacement method using Phaser from the CCP4 suite. The crystal structure of the related P. falciparum OAT (Protein DataBank (PDB) code 3lg0 ) was used as a search model for the TgO/GABA-AT structure with PLP in the unbound state that was later used to solve the structures of TgO/GABA-AT with PLP in a bound state, gabaculine-inactivated, and 15-inactivated TgO/GABA-AT states. The initial structure solution for all determined structures was rebuilt using ARP/wARP. Water molecules, manual structure inspection, and alteration of the rebuilt structural models were done in Coot , and REFMAC, respectively. The Translation-Libration-Screw (TLS) refinement (TLS groups were identified on TLSMD server http://skuld.bmsc.washington.edu/∼tlsmd/ , was introduced at the final stages of refinement. The final model of structures was validated with the MolProbity , 
http://molprobity.biochem.duke.edu/). The structures were deposited in the PDB under the accession code 4zlv (TgO/GABA-AT with PLP bound to Lys286), 5eav (TgO/GABA-AT in unliganded state), 5dj9 (gabaculine-inactivated TgO/GABA-AT), 5e3k (15-inactivated TgO/GABA-AT in intermediate state of reaction), 5e5i (15-inactivated TgO/GABA-AT in final state of reaction), contains detailed crystallographic data of deposited structures. The structural comparison between TgO/GABA-AT and its homologues was done using web servers DALI, VAST, and ProFunc. , All figures presenting TgO/GABA-AT structures were prepared in graphical program CCP4mg. 

## Measuring effect of TgO/GABA-AT inactivators on T. gondii in vitro
Human foreskin fibroblasts (HFFs) were grown to confluence in black, flat-bottomed 96-well microplates. HFFs were infected with 2000 Type I RH parasites expressing yellow fluorescent protein (YFP). The parasites were incubated with the cells for 1 h to allow sufficient time for invasion of HFFs and were then treated with several of the TgO/GABA-AT-specific GABA analogues, including compounds 1, 2, 3 and 15. Control triplicates with only fibroblasts and with pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine (the current standard of treatment of T. gondii infection) were also conducted. The cells and parasites were then incubated at 37°C for 72 h. Fluorescence was measured using a Bio-Tek Synergy H4 Hybrid Multi-Mode Microplate Reader.

## Measuring effect of TgO/GABA-AT inactivators on P. falciparum in vitro
The Malaria SYBR Green I - Based Fluorescence (MSF) Assay is a microtiter plate drug sensitivity assay that uses the presence of malarial DNA as a measure of parasitic proliferation in the presence of antimalarial drugs or experimental compounds. As the intercalation of SYBR Green I dye and its resulting fluorescence is relative to parasite growth, a test compound that inhibits the growth of the parasite will result in a lower fluorescence. D6 (CDC/Sierra Leone), TM91C235 (WRAIR, Thailand), and W2 (CDC/Indochina III) laboratory strains of P. falciparum were used for each drug sensitivity assessment. The parasite strains were maintained continuously in long-term cultures as previously described. Pre-dosed microtiter drug plates for use in the MSF assay were produced using sterile 384-well black optical bottom tissue culture plates containing quadruplicate 12 2-fold serial dilutions of each test compound or mefloquine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich Co., Catalog #M2319) suspended in dimethyl sulfoxide. The final concentration range tested was 0.5–10000 ng/mL for all assays. Pre-dosed plates were stored at 4°C until used, not to exceed five days. No difference was seen in drug sensitivity determinations between stored or fresh drug assay plates (data not shown). A batch control plate using chloroquine (Sigma-Aldrich Co., Catalog #C6628) at a final concentration of 2000 ng/mL was used to validate each assay run. The Tecan Freedom Evo liquid handling system (Tecan US, Inc., Durham, NC) was used to produce all drug assay plates. Based on modifications of previously described methods by Plouffe et al. and Johnson et al., P. falciparum strains in late-ring or early-trophozoite stages were cultured in the pre-dosed 384-well microtiter drug assay plates in 38 μL culture volume per well at a starting parasitemia of 0.3% and a hematocrit of 2%. , The cultures were then incubated at 37°C within a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2, 5% O2 and 90% N2, for 72 h. Lysis buffer (38 μL per well), consisting of 20 mM Tris HCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1.6% Triton X-, 0.016% saponin, and SYBR green I dye at a 20x concentration (Invitrogen, Catalog #S-7567) was then added to the assay plates for a final SYBR Green concentration of 10x. The Tecan Freedom Evo liquid handling system was used to dispense malaria cell culture and lysis buffer. The plates were then incubated in the dark at room temperature for 24 h and examined for the relative fluorescence units (RFU) per well using the Tecan Genios Plus (Tecan US, Inc., Durham, NC). Each drug concentration was transformed into Log[X] and plotted against the RFU values. The 50% and 90% inhibitory concentrations (IC50s and IC90s, respectively) were then generated with GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA) using the nonlinear regression (sigmoidal dose-response/variable slope) equation.

## In vitro and In vivo phenotypes of type II parasites deleted for TgO/GABA-AT
Using efficient gene targeting in the KU80 knockout background, the Type II TgO/GABA-AT gene locus (TGME49_269110) was deleted in the PruΔku80Δhxgprt strain using previously described methods. The TgO/GABA-AT knockout plasmid was assembled using recombinational cloning from PCR products using the oligonucleotide primers shown in A and the targeting plasmid was verified by DNA sequencing. Following transfection of linearized TgO/GABA-AT targeting plasmid, Type II TgO/GABA-AT knockouts were selected in 50 μg/mL mycophenolic acid and 50 μg/mL xanthine and parasites cloned by limiting dilution three weeks after transfection. TgO/GABA-AT (Δoat) knockouts were validated using previously described genotype analysis in PCR assays to measure in PCR 1 the targeted deletion of the TgO/GABA-AT coding region (DF and DR primers), in PCR 2 the targeted 5' integration (CXF & 5′DHFRCXR primers), and in PCR 3 the targeted 3' integration (3′DHFRCXF and CXR primers) of HXGPRT to replace the deleted TgO/GABA-AT gene (validation primers shown in B). , The replication rate of Type II Δoat tachyzoites in primary vacuoles (parasites/vacuole) was measured using previously described methods, and the size of 12 day Δoat plaques was measured in comparison to the size of 12 day PruΔku80 plaques by scoring the area of 40 randomly chosen plaques (in triplicate assays) using arbitrary pixel units determined with FIJI software. Cyst burden and virulence assays were performed in 7–8 week old C57BL/6 mice using protocols approved by the Laboratory Animal Use and Care Committee (Dartmouth College 00002108) using previously established methods. , Brain cyst burdens of mice infected with parental PruΔku80 or Δoat parasites were scored by counting GFP+ cysts at a total magnification of 150X, and scoring the number of cysts in 20% of each brain. 

## Levels of TgO/GABA-AT expression as a function of life cycle stage
ToxoDb was used to assess transcription levels of TgO/GABA-AT expression in different life cycle stages.

## Initial TgO/GABA-AT antibody production using recombinant protein also studied in enzyme assays and with crystallography (called “antibody 1”)
Mice were injected with 50 μg of recombinant TgO/GABA-AT, subcutaneously. The protein was formulated with an NISV (nonionic surfactant vesicle) preparation to act as an adjuvant. The vesicles were made by melting mono-palmitoyl glycerol, cholesterol, and dicetyl-phosphate (All from Sigma, UK) in a molar ratio of 5:4:1. Vesicles formed following the addition of 37°C PBS pH 7.4 and vigorously vortexed for 2 min. Vesicle preparations were lyophilized and subsequently rehydrated with the appropriate protein dilutions. These preparations were stored at −20°C until use and heated to 37°C just prior to injection. Mice were given 2 injections of the preparations, 2 weeks apart. Ten days after the final injection, the mice were euthanized by CO2 inhalation, and blood was obtained by cardiac puncture. Blood samples were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. Serum was collected and stored at −20°C prior to testing.

## Additional protein and antibody production; characterization with immunofluorescence assays for TgO/GABA-AT (called “antibody 2”)

## Parasites
Toxoplasma gondii oocysts of the ME49 strain (genotype II) were recovered from the feces of experimentally infected cats housed at the United States Department of Agriculture Laboratory, Beltsville, Maryland, USA and purified by sucrose flotation, as previously described. 

## Production of anti-OAT antibodies and Western blot analysis
To raise anti-TgO/GABA-AT mouse antisera, BALB/c female mice were immunized at 3–4 weeks intervals by intraperitoneal injection with 50 μg of purified recombinant protein in complete (first immunization) or incomplete (first boost) Freund’s adjuvant. Individual sera were collected 2 weeks after the second boost (soluble antigen in PBS). The animal work has been authorized by the Italian Ministry of Health, according to Legislative Decree 116/92, which implemented the European Directive 86/609/EEC on laboratory animal protection. Animals used in this study were housed at the Istituto Superiore di Sanità and treated according to Legislative Decree 116/92 guidelines.
Total protein extracts from ME49 bradyzoites (kindly provided by Manlio Di Cristina, University of Perugia, Italy), tachyzoites and sporozoites were quantified with a Qubit fluorometer (Invitrogen) and equal amounts of the three samples were resolved by SDS–PAGE on a 12% NuPage Novex Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen). Following transfer to nitrocellulose, the blots were blocked with 5% w/v skimmed milk in 1X Tris Borate Saline Tween (TBST; 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Tween 20) and probed for 1 h with a mouse anti-OAT antiserum (1:1000) or with a rabbit anti-GRA1 control serum. Anti-GRA1 mAb Tg17.43; dilution employed 1:2000 Ref. https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-4894(90)90014-4. After 30 min incubation with the appropriate anti-IgG secondary antibody conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (BioRad), reactive protein bands were revealed by chemiluminescence with LiteAblot Plus (EuroClone, Italy). Originals of blots are at https://data.mendeley.com.

## Immunofluorescence
Freshly excysted ME49 sporozoites were air dried on multispot glass slides and fixed for 5 min in cold 95% ethanol/5% acetic acid. samples were blocked with 2% fetal bovine serum in PBS and double stained for 1 h with anti-TgOAT mouse antibodies (1:100) and a rabbit anti-AMA1 serum (1:1000). Anti-GRA1 serum (1:200,000) was also used. Following 30 min incubation with anti-mouse and anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 and Alexa Fluor 594, respectively, samples were mounted in SlowFade Antifade reagent (Invitrogen) and observed under a Zeiss Axioplan 2 epifluorescence microscope using a 100× oil immersion objective. Images were collected with an Axiocam digital camera using the Zeiss Axiovision 4.8 software.
For MitoTracker and anti TgO/GABA-AT co-localization, and deconvolution, ME49 oocysts were excysted in 1.5% sodium taurocholate in Hank’s balanced salt solution (HBSS) supplemented with 500 nM MitoTracker™ Red CMXRos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Freshly excysted sporozoites were washed twice in HBSS and seeded in 8-well Nunc Lab-Tek glass chamber slides (Thermo Fisher Scientific) previously coated with Cell-Tak (Corning). Tachyzoites were processed the same way. Following centrifugation at 700 rpm for 2 min, immobilized parasites were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS, and blocked with 2% fetal bovine serum in PBS for 1 h. Samples were then stained for 1 h with anti-TgO/GABA-AT mouse antibodies (1:50) followed by 30 min incubation with anti-mouse IgG secondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 and DAPI. Samples were mounted in SlowFade Antifade reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and epifluorescence images were taken using the EVOS™ FL Imaging System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 100X oil immersion objective. Confocal images with an optical thickness of 0.12 microns were taken by a Zeiss LSM 980 microscope using a planapo objective 60x oil A.N. 1,42.

## Knockout of TgO/GABA-AT in EGS-strain T. gondii followed by peroral infection of cat and evaluation of subsequent oocyst shedding
Insertion of the drug selection marker in the TgO/GABA-AT coding sequence was performed. First, CRISPR/Cas9 mediated targeting construct pCAS9-GFP::sgRNA-TgO/GABA-AT was made by replacing the sgRNA-UPRT to sgRNA-TgO/GABA-AT. Primers sgRNA-R 5′-AACTTGACATCCCCATTTAC-3′ and 172F 5′-AAGGTAAAGGTGCTCGCGTTGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGC-3′ or 183F 5′-GCTCGCGTTTGGGATATCAAGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGC-3’ (underlined sequence are gRNA target sequence) was used to replace the 20 bp target sequence from pCAS9-GFP::sgRNA-UPRT (114) to pCAS9-GFP::sgRNA-172 and 183, respectively. Chloramphenicol acetyl-transferase (CAT) flanked by the tubulin promoter and SAG1 terminator (CAT cassette) was used as a drug selectable marker. CAT cassette was PCR amplified from the pTUB/CAT (kindly provided by Dr. K. Kim) with primers M13_20 forward 5′-GTAAAACGACGGCCAGT-3′and M13_reverese 5′-GGAAACAGCTATGACCATG-3′ and used for the transfection. For the control exogenous DNA, sfGFP sequences flanked with promoter of sporoSAG1 or sporoMUC1 and gra2 3′UTR were amplified from pDHFR-sporoSAG1-sfGFP or pDHFR-sporoMUC1-sfGFP with primers sporoSAG_F or sporoMUC_F and M13_Reverse. PCR products were cut with DpnI to remove the residual plasmid template and used for transfection. 1 μg CAT cassette (1.7 kbp) was mixed with either of 12 μg sporoSAG1-sfGFP cassette (3 kbp), 12 μg sporoMUC1-sfGFP cassette (3kbp), 20 μg pCAS9- GFP::sgRNA178 (9.7 kbp) or 20 μg pCAS9-GFP::sgRNA183 (9.7 kbp) and transfected into EGS strain 106 freshly purified tachyzoites in 100 μL cytomix using T16 nucleofection as described elsewhere. Transfected parasites were inoculated to HFF cells and 25 uM chloramphenicol selection was started immediately after transfection. Parasites were subcloned and target loci were verified with primers TgO/GABA-AT_996F CTGTGCGACTGATTCAGGGT and CAT_CDS_R GCCATCACAAACGGCATGATG. From the pCAS9-GFP::sgRNA183 transfectants, we used the insertional knock-out line EGS/183-KO to infect mice to produce brain cyst. CD1 mice were injected intraperitoneally with 100 tachyzoites and treated with 400 mg/L sodium sulfadiazine in the drinking water beginning 4 days after injection. When mice had symptoms of acute toxoplasmosis, 0.8 mg sodium sulfadiazine / mouse was injected daily subcutaneously. Similar methods have been utilized previously to use CRISPR/Cas9 for investigations in Toxoplasma. Four weeks after injection, infected brains were collected and brain cysts were purified as described. 
T. gondii infected mouse brains from 10 mice infected with (EGS-TgO/GABA-AT KO—cat 04) and EGS-spGFP (cat 05) were homogenized by syringe and fed to two female, 141 and 144-day old, coccidia-free cats from the USDA’s cat colony by placing them at the back of the tongue. All feces for each cat were collected daily after feeding infected mouse brains, and examined for T. gondii oocysts. Screening and harvesting of T. gondii oocysts were done between 3 to 21 days after infection by following procedures as described previously. , Cats were euthanized on day 21 post infection and blood was collected to do modified agglutination tests (MAT) to test for immunological reactivity to T. gondii antigens. Oocysts were collected by floatation methods using sucrose solution with a specific gravity of 1.15 or higher. Concentrated oocyst pellets were suspended in an aqueous solution containing 2% H2SO4, and aerated on the shaker for 7 days at room temperature (20°C–22°C) to allow for oocyst sporulation. For these and other studies herein, overall, four cats, 88–103 days old, 2 males, 2 females from the USDA in-house-colony were utilized; Cats were fed pelleted Purina cat chow.
To confirm durability and persistence of CRISPR mutation, 5 mL of oocyst suspension was neutralized with equal vol. of 3.3% NaOH and centrifuged at 2000 rpm 10 min. Sediments were resuspended into 1 mL with 0.9% NaCl with 1% penicillin and streptomycin. 200 μL suspension/mouse was injected into 6 BALB/c mice subcutaneously. Mice were observed daily until they showed symptoms of ruff coat and peritoneal inflammation; then they were euthanized. Lungs from the euthanized mice were homogenized and incubated with HFF host cells to recover tachyzoites. Genomic DNA from the tissue culture parasites was used for genotyping of the parasite progeny pool.
At the USDA in the Dubey laboratory, in this study and overall description of mouse source and care is as follows: The KO mice were 8–12 week-old females, BALB/c-Ifnγ from Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine The outbred Swiss Webster mice were 10–12 weeks old females from NIH, Bethesda, MD. Mice were fed pelleted mouse chow. In the Weiss laboratory, CD1 Mice were used and were from Charles River Laboratory age 5 to 6 weeks Catalog number CD-1® IGS Mouse strain 022.
In the Weiss laboratory for these and other studies herein, HFF human foreskin fibroblasts were from ATCC laboratory Cat SCRC-1041 and also have been HFF ATCC CRL-1634; EGS strain T. gondii is ATCC PRA-396 ™.

## Culture and sequencing of Frenkel Live Vaccine TS-AgainstT. gondii
T-263 was thawed and grown in HFF. DNA was isolated as previously described. 

## Genome sequencing of T. gondiiT-263 and CTG strains
For each strain a single Illumina paired-end barcoded library was prepared from tachyzoite gDNA with Illumina TrueSeq library preparation kit. The libraries were then sequenced using 150 bp paired-end reads with an Illumina NextSeq machine to generate ∼50 millon paired-end sequencing reads per genome.

## Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) identification and annotation
Illumina genome sequencing reads from T-263 parasites and from its parental wild-type strain, CTG, were aligned to the T. gondii ME49 reference genome assembly (ABPA02000000, ToxoDBS31 release 13.0) with Bowtie2 and realigned around gaps using the GATK toolkit. SNP calls were done simultaneously on both strains with samtools utility mpileup, requiring a minimum SNP coverage of 5 reads and an alternative allele frequency of 0.8 or higher, given the haploid nature of these genomes. Thereafter, SnpEff and a gff3 file containing the annotation of T. gondii ME49 downloaded from ToxoDBv13.0 were used to classify the different types of mutations identified in each strain. Allelic variants that were different between T-263 and both CTG and ME49 were considered T-263-specific.

## Analysis of putative cyclic-AMP dependent protein kinase
A change in pH and ionicity activates male gamete Cyclic-AMP and PKA that then phosphorylates tyrosines in proteins is a fundamental process in fertilization in a variety of species and a 23% homologous enzyme was noted in plasmodia.

## CRISPR rescue of mutation in sodium GABA symporter
Homologue of a sodium GABA symporter has a likely functional mutation. This gene is overexpressed in merozoites. This mutation was rescued in the T-263 mutant successfully with Crispr cas9 as presented in .

## Protein structures in mutated gene candidates predicted by AlphaFold
AlphaFold version 2.0 colab has been used to predict the effect of mutations on structure and function of proteins listed in including sodium GABA symporter (TGME49_208420), SAG-related sequence containing protein SRS 15C (TGME49_320230), AP2 domain containing transcription factor AP2V-2 (TGME49_285895), cAMP-dependent protein kinase (TGME49_209985), DNA directed DNA polymerase (TGME49_216140) and adenosine kinase (TGME_250880) from Toxoplasma gondii. AlphaFold2 interface that runs structure prediction pipeline is available at https://colab.research.google.com/github/sokrypton/ColabFold/blob/main/AlphaFold2.ipynb. AlphaFold code license is available at https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0. Protein sequences for model predictions were downloaded from ToxoDBdatabase at https://toxodb.org/toxo/app. First 200 and 132 N-terminal residues comprising disordered region of the predicted sodium GABA_Tg symporter and DNA-directed DNA polymerase, respectively, were omitted from the sequence for the model prediction of the mutated variant. The structural comparison between predicted structures and their homologues was done using web servers DALI and VAST. Structure figures were made in graphical program CCP4mg. 

## Bioinformatics, identification by stage associated expression, presence of mutations in natural isolates, PFAM, literature search and systems analysis that reveal capacitation pathway modulated by GABA
Initial stage specific expression of genes with mutations was determined. Meta data had been collected for 100 isolates. Analysis of those identified genes expressed in merozoites that were not found in any natural isolates used code for algorhithm at https://github.com/TriLab-bioinf/McLeod_T263_manuscript.
PFAM analysis was performed on these then AlphaFold2 as above. Each of those genes were searched in Google Google Scholar and PubMed using additional terms capacitation, conception, fertility, infertility which revealed genes associated with capacitation. These were also considered in the context of what is known about the T. gondii sexual cycle in the literature. , , , , , , , , 

## Quantification and statistical analysis
All kinetic experiments were performed in duplicates. All statistical details could be found on Figures. No additional methods were used to determine whether the data met assumptions of the statistical approach.

## Acknowledgments
The data collection was performed at the LS-CAT at the Advanced Photon Source supported by the Argonne National Laboratory operated by University of Chicago Argonne, LLC, for the US Department of Energy, Office of Biological and Environmental Research under contract DE-AC02-06CH11357. The LS-CAT Sector 21 is supported by the Michigan Economic Development Corporation and the Michigan Technology Tri-Corridor (Grant 085P1000817). This project has been funded with Federal funds from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, under Contracts No. HHSN272200700058C and HHSN272201200026C (W.F.A.). This research was supported, in part, by NIH NIDDK grant #1T35DK062719-27 (to J.L.) and by NIH grant R01 DA030604 (to R.B.S.). This work was also supported by the Division of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (grant number U01AI082180-01,RMc), the Conte Center, and the National Institutes of Health (grant numbers 1P50MH094267 and U01HL108634-01). This work also was supported by NIH grant AI155603 (DJB) and NIH grant AI172811 (D.J.B.). We thank the Mann Cornwell family, Engel family (and “Taking Out Toxo”), Morel, Pritzker, Allen, Drago, VanDusen/Longfellow, Rodriguez and Rooney families for their support of this work. We thank Andrew Grose for assistance with references during manuscript preparation. We thank Michael Grigg for helpful discussion. We thank L. Knoll and B. Martorelli Di Genova for their early work with their model and image in A. We thank Mario Falchi (Core Facilities, ISS) for confocal microscope analysis. We thank Mohamed-Ali Hakimi for advice concerning the MORC analysis and permission to include information from the data in that analysis.

## Author contributions
Conception and design: R.L.M., R.B.S., H.A.L., L.M.W., D.B., J.L., J.P.D., E.V.F., T.T., B.A.F., D.B., and C.S.
Performed and/or interpreted experiments: Y.Z., M.J.M., H.V.L., E.V.F., W.A., S.D., H.A.L., S.W., C.W.R., P.L., M.H., B.F., K.E.B., F.S., C.H., P.L., M.H., M.M., J.P.D., M.M., S.V.R., K.F., K.E.B., K.M.W., S.D., C.H., S.P.M., M.M., and R.B.S.
Wrote manuscript: R.L.M., M.J.M., H.V.L., E.V.F., J.L., D.B., L.W., H.A.L., C.W.R., and R.B.S.
Revised manuscript: R.B.S., M.J.M., R.L.M., E.V.F., H.V.L., E.V.F., H.A.L., J.L., Y.Z., J.P.D., and C.W.R.

## Declaration of interests
H.V.L. is currently a program officer at the National Institute on Drug Abuse at the National Institutes of Health.
H.A.L. is currently a scientist working at National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Disease (NIDDK) at the National Institutes of Health. The findings and conclusions of this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), the National Institutes of Health, nor the US Department of Health and Human Services.
R.B.S. and R.L.M., with H.V.L., submitted Patent Number: US 10,632,088 B2 INACTIVATORS OF TOXOPLASMA GONDII ORNITHINE AMINOTRANSFERASE FOR TREATING TOXOPLASMOSIS AND MALARIA through their Technology Transfer offices.
The authors declare no competing financial interest.

## Inclusion and diversity
We support inclusion, diverse and equitable conduct of research.

Published: November 16, 2023

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2023.108477.

## Contributor Information
Ekaterina V. Filippova, Email: efilippova@uchicago.edu.
Hernan A. Lorenzi, Email: hernan.lorenzi@nih.gov.
Richard B. Silverman, Email: r-silverman@northwestern.edu.
Rima L. McLeod, Email: rmcleod@uchicago.edu.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S20, Tables S1–S6, and Box S1

## Table S7. First Table: Candidate mutations in the T-263 clone of T. gondii compared with the Me49 Type II and parental CTg strains
First Table corresponds to and . Second Table: Candidate mutations identified in the T263 strain of T. gondii and not present in the genome sequence of other wildtype T. gondii strains available at NCBI-SRA database. Second Table corresponds to and .

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S20, Tables S1–S6, and Box S1

## Table S7. First Table: Candidate mutations in the T-263 clone of T. gondii compared with the Me49 Type II and parental CTg strains
First Table corresponds to and . Second Table: Candidate mutations identified in the T263 strain of T. gondii and not present in the genome sequence of other wildtype T. gondii strains available at NCBI-SRA database. Second Table corresponds to and .

## Data Availability Statement
Sequences of proteins from T. gondii ME49 used this study are available at ToxoDBdatabase (https://toxodb.org/toxo/app). Code for down selection of genes with mutations is at: https://github.com/TriLab-bioinf/McLeod_T263_manuscript. Original blots are at https://data.mendeley.com. All determined crystal structures with original codes (listed in method details) are deposited into the Protein DataBank (https://www.rcsb.org/). All data reported in this paper will be shared by the upon request. Generated structure models by AlphaFold2 reported in this paper will be shared by the upon request.