822acssdBioconjugate ChemistryBioconjug ChemPMC1271575812715758127157584125928810.1021/acs.bioconjchem.5c00215Aminoglycoside–Peptide
Nucleic Acid (PNA) Conjugates
against Gram-Negative Bacteria
SiekierskaIzabela TrylskaJoanna 1
University of Warsaw, Centre
of New Technologies, 02-097
Warsaw, Poland
*
Email: joanna@cent.uw.edu.pl.
19112025361225572557–256820122025© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyThis article is licensed under CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0

## Abstract
Aminoglycosides (AGs) are among the earliest known classes
of antibiotics.
Despite decades of clinical utility, they have become largely ineffective
due to the spread of antimicrobial resistance. In an effort to improve
the activity of AGs against resistant strains, we conjugated them
with antisense oligonucleotides, specifically peptide nucleic acids
(PNAs). We report the synthesis and biological evaluation of novel
neomycin (NEO) and amikacin (AMK) conjugates with 10-mer PNA oligomers
targeting the essential bacterial gene encoding the acyl carrier protein.
The conjugates were prepared via copper­(I)-catalyzed azide–alkyne
cycloaddition between 5″-azido-modified NEO or 6″-azido-modified
AMK and alkyne-functionalized PNA. The AG–PNA conjugates exhibited
higher antibacterial activity against AG-resistant strains than the
parent AGs or mixtures of unconjugated components, with the NEO–PNA
conjugate showing activity against NEO-resistant Salmonella Typhimurium LT2 at an 8 μM concentration. Experiments using
mismatched-sequence conjugates and conjugates with PNA sequences targeting
the gene encoding red fluorescent protein confirmed the antisense
mechanism’s contribution to antibacterial activity. Membrane
permeabilization assays demonstrated that PNA conjugation preserves
AG interaction with the bacterial outer membrane, but alterations
of the inner membrane potential and dependence on the SbmA transporter
indicate the inner membrane as the main obstacle to bacterial uptake.
These AG–PNA conjugates represent a promising strategy for
overcoming AG resistance via a dual-action mechanism combining membrane
interaction and antisense activity.

 
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 May 8; Accepted 2025 Nov 4; Revised 2025 Nov 3; Collection date 2025 Dec 17.

## Introduction
Aminoglycoside antibiotics, since their
discovery in the 1940s,
have proven effective against a wide spectrum of bacterial infections.
The most common class of AGs consists of a 2-deoxystreptamine (2-DOS)
core connected to amino sugars. Multiple hydroxyl and protonated amine
groups are crucial for efficient binding to negatively charged components
of bacterial cells, such as nucleic acids or lipopolysaccharides (LPS)
in Gram-negative bacteria. In the cytoplasm,
the primary mechanism of action of AGs is their interaction with the
decoding region in the 16S rRNA of the 30S subunit. AGs alter the conformation of two decoding site adenines,
impairing the correct recognition of the aminoacyl-tRNA anticodon,
which leads to the incorporation of noncognate tRNAs and translation
errors. As a result, incorrectly folded polypeptides accumulate and
cause damage to cell membranes, resulting in bacterial cell death.
The positively charged AG groups ensure efficient binding to negatively
charged rRNA, but they also make AGs vulnerable to enzymatic inactivation.
After decades of extensive use of AGs, bacteria have developed several
resistance mechanisms, such as increased efflux of AGs, primarily
in Pseudomonas strains, or modification of their rRNA target site by mutation or methylation. However, the most prevalent resistance mechanism
is the inactivation of AGs by aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes, which
catalyze the attachment of phosphoryl, acetyl, and nucleotidyl moieties
to AG functional groups. To obtain new
AG derivatives with enhanced antibacterial activity or resistance
to enzymatic inactivation, AG structures have been extensively modified,
including the synthesis of AG-based hybrids. The first tested AG conjugates were AG homo- and heterodimers
−

 that showed increased affinity for the hammerhead ribozyme; however, a neomycin (NEO) homodimer showed only
moderate improvement in binding to the A-site of 16S rRNA. To increase cell permeability, AGs were covalently
linked to antimicrobial peptides (AMPs); for example, a tobramycin-AMP
conjugate was more effective against persister cells of E. coli and S. aureus strains than the parent AG. Moreover,
AG conjugates containing linear and hydrocarbon-stapled peptides evaluated
by our group showed enhanced activity
against an amikacin (AMK)-resistant strain compared to AMK alone.
AG hybrids also include those with attached nucleobases, dinucleosides,
,
 or nucleic
acid oligomers such as DNA, RNA, and a synthetic nucleic acid mimic –
peptide nucleic acid (PNA).
,,
 The first AG–oligonucleotide conjugate was reported by Charles
and Arya, who linked NEO to a 7-mer DNA
targeting the α-sarcin loop of 16S rRNA and confirmed its ability
to form stable duplexes with the targeted RNA. Meanwhile, a 16-mer
PNA conjugated to neamine was reported to inhibit HIV-1 replication
by targeting the trans-activation response (TAR) RNA, while the neamine component improved the cellular uptake
of PNA by human lymphoblastic cells. Similar studies with a 6-aminoglucosamine–PNA
conjugate confirmed its ability to enter human cells and its specific
binding to the target. Additionally,
TAR RNA was targeted with an 8-mer 2′-O-methyl
oligoribonucleotide linked to ribostamycin, methyl neobiosamine, or
NEO, and the enhanced stability of their complexes with the target
was confirmed. Despite the primarily
antibacterial properties of AGs, their conjugates with nucleic acids
have to date been tested only in antiviral applications, not against
bacteria.
On the other hand, the unique nucleic acid mimic –
PNA,
developed by Nielsen’s group, has become one of the most frequently
used oligomers in antimicrobial applications.
−

 PNAs are DNA analogs composed of the same nucleobases, but with
the deoxyribose-phosphate backbone replaced by N-substituted
2-aminoethyl-glycine units connected via amide bonds ( C). Their unique backbone structure makes PNAs resistant to enzymatic
degradation, and the lack of negative charge further enhances their
binding affinity to natural nucleic acids by limiting electrostatic
repulsion. Moreover, PNA is not a substrate for the bacterial efflux
pumps AcrA and EmrB, making it an excellent
candidate for an antibacterial hybrid drug.
 Nevertheless, the PNA antisense mechanism of action
requires entry
into the bacterial cytoplasm, which remains challenging, as unmodified
(‘naked’) PNA does not cross bacterial membranes, unless
conjugated to a carrier. PNA oligomers
exceed 600 Da and do not undergo passive diffusion across the bacterial
envelope, with the negatively charged LPS layer considered the main
limiting factor. The first peptide capable
of transporting PNA into bacteria was the cell-penetrating peptide
(KFF)3K.
,
 Cationic membrane-active peptides
proved effective as PNA carriers due to their electrostatic interactions
with the negatively charged outer membrane. Both naturally occurring
peptides, such as drosocin, anoplin, and TAT peptide,
,
 as well as
synthetic ones, e.g., RXR (X–6–aminohexanoic
acid) and (RXR)4XB (B –
β-alanine), were tested to improve PNA transport.
,
 Moreover, we have investigated structurally stabilized hydrocarbon-stapled
peptide analogs as PNA carriers. Nevertheless,
several problems associated with the use of peptides, such as their
low enzymatic stability, necessitate the search for new molecules
facilitating PNA uptake. Among nonpeptidic carriers covalently conjugated
to PNA, “Trojan horse” strategies employ bacterial systems
specialized in vitamin B12 uptake
−

 and in iron-acquisition using
siderophores.
,
 Despite these numerous attempts
to improve PNA transport into bacterial cells, (KFF)3K
remains the most commonly used carrier, although concerns regarding
its poor stability and toxicity have been raised.

Considering the advantages and limitations of AGs
and PNA oligomers
as antibacterials, we hypothesized that the cationic properties of
AGs would facilitate PNA transport across bacterial membranes. Moreover,
the antisense activity of PNA, together with its low susceptibility
to bacterial efflux, may offer a mechanism to overcome AG resistance.
To test the ability of AGs as carriers and exploit the PNA antibacterial
antisense potential, we conjugated AGs (NEO or AMK) with a PNA oligomer
targeting the essential bacterial acpP mRNA encoding
the acyl carrier protein ( ). These AGs were modified by introducing an azide
group at the 5″ position of NEO or the 6″ position of
AMK and subsequently linked to PNA by copper­(I)-catalyzed azide–alkyne
cycloaddition (CuAAC), a reaction previously applied for both AG and PNA hybrids.
,
 Their antibacterial
activity was evaluated against E. coli and S. Typhimurium strains, including those resistant
to AMK and NEO. Through checkerboard assays, we established whether
the covalent linkage between AGs and PNA is essential for antibacterial
activity. Moreover, we tested the conjugates’ interaction with
both the outer and inner membranes of Gram-negative bacteria by employing N-phenyl-1-naphthylamine (NPN) and o-nitrophenyl-ß-D-galactopyranoside (ONPG) permeability assays. For comprehensive
characterization of the uptake mechanism, we investigated the dependence
of AG–PNA conjugates on the inner membrane SbmA protein, previously
recognized as crucial for PNA uptake.
,
 Here, for
the first time, the activities of AG conjugates with nucleic acids
or their mimics were investigated against bacteria, as well as their
interactions with bacterial membranes. While NEO conjugates with oligonucleotides
have been previously studied, AMK–oligomer hybrids have not
been reported to date.

## Results and Discussion

## Design and Synthesis of AG–PNA Conjugates
In
designing potential antibacterial AG-containing conjugates, we focused
on two AGs from the 2-DOS class of antibiotics: the naturally occurring
NEO and the semisynthetic AMK. These antibiotics differ in net charge
(+6e and +4e for NEO and AMK, respectively), allowing us to test the
influence of charge on the membrane-permeabilizing properties of the
conjugates. We used a 10-mer antisense PNA sequence targeting the
essential bacterial gene acpP, which encodes the
acyl carrier protein responsible for transporting intermediates throughout
the fatty acid biosynthesis pathway. This sequence, originally designed
by Nielsen and co-workers, has been widely
applied in antibacterial PNA research.
,,

Conjugation of AMK and NEO to PNA was performed
via copper­(I)-catalyzed azide–alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC),
a common biorthogonal conjugation method.
,
 This “click” reaction was previously applied to other
PNA conjugates, e.g., with vitamin B12
 and hydroxamate or catecholate siderophore mimics.
,
 Before conjugation, appropriate functional groups were introduced
to both components. For AGs, the synthetically most accessible sites
for modification that preserve the AG’s ability to hydrogen
bond with RNA,
,
 are the 5″ position of
NEO and the 6″ position of AMK. Therefore, these NEO and AMK
primary hydroxyl groups were each replaced with an azide group, following
established protocols.
,
 Azide groups were introduced
by first protecting the AG amino groups with tert-butoxycarbonyl (Boc) groups, then substituting the primary hydroxyl
group with 2,4,6-triisopropylbenzenesulfonyl (TIBS) as a good-leaving
group, followed by azide displacement ( ). For the PNA component, an alkyne-containing
linker was attached to the PNA N-terminus during solid-phase synthesis.
To provide flexibility and space between the antisense agent and AG,
we used a linker containing 11 carbon atoms. CuAAC, followed by deprotection
of the Boc groups from AGs, yielded four conjugates: NEO–PNA,
AMK–PNA, and their mismatched PNA sequence analogs ( , ).
 

## Melting Temperatures of mRNA Complexes with AG–PNA Conjugates
We have previously shown that RNA/PNA complexes exhibit increased
thermal stability compared to RNA/RNA duplexes. To evaluate the influence of the positively charged AGs
on the stability of the AG–PNA/RNA complex, we performed a
thermal denaturation experiment. Moreover, we determined the melting
temperatures (T
m) of the complexes of
unconjugated PNA without an additional lysine at the C-terminus ( ). Although it is
common to attach the lysine to improve PNA solubility, its effects
on thermal melting have not been assessed.
We expected that
the charged C-terminal lysine on PNA might affect the thermal stability
of the PNA/RNA duplexes. However, the T
m of the fully complementary PNA/RNA duplex was not affected by the
addition of lysine. Only for the mismatched PNA[mm]/RNA
duplex we observed a slight 2 °C increase in T
m compared to the analog without the C-terminal lysine.
AG conjugation showed a strong stabilizing effect on RNA/PNA duplexes.
The T
m increase for AG–PNA conjugates
containing the fully complementary oligomer was 10–12 °C
compared to the unconjugated PNA. However, the T
m changes were most pronounced for the PNA[mm]-containing
conjugates, for which the attachment of either NEO or AMK increased
the T
m by 18 and 16 °C, respectively,
confirming AG electrostatic interactions with RNA. The observed strong
influence of AG conjugation on the thermal stability of PNA/RNA complexes
can be attributed to the polycationic nature of AGs, as their binding
to RNA is electrostatically driven. Interestingly,
the longer 14-mer PNA
rfp
/RNA duplex showed
a T
m comparable to that of the shorter
10-mer NEO–PNA/RNA, confirming that the NEO charge contributes
to the thermal stability to a similar extent as additional base pairing.
Our results demonstrate that AGs increase PNA binding affinity
to the target and could strengthen the PNA antisense mechanism if
successfully delivered to the cytoplasm.

## Antibacterial Activity of AG–PNA Conjugates
The biological activity of the conjugates was evaluated against Gram-negative E. coli and S. Typhimurium LT2 strains
by measuring their minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs, ). E. coli AS19 was selected for testing due to its
enhanced permeability to PNA oligomers caused by a reduced LPS layer.
,

E. coli WR3551/98 is a clinical isolate
showing resistance to ceftazidime and
amikacin, while Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium strain LT2 carries NEO resistance
induced by prior transformation with the plasmid encoding aminoglycoside
phosphotransferase, as used in our previous work.
E. coli MG1655 (K-12) is
a nonpathogenic laboratory strain, and E. coli ML-35 is a lactose-deficient mutant strain, particularly useful
for investigating interactions with bacterial membranes.
 In the LPS-permeable E. coli AS19
strain, NEO-PNA exhibited potent antibacterial activity (MIC = 2 μM),
comparable to that of free NEO. Interestingly, the conjugate containing
the mismatched PNA sequence did not show antibacterial activity. This
suggests that although the antibacterial activities of NEO and NEO–PNA
were similar in this strain, their mechanisms of action differ, and
the activity of NEO–PNA can be attributed to the PNA antisense
mechanism. This implies that NEO conjugated to PNA facilitates PNA
entry, because PNA alone was inactive.
AMK–PNA displayed
moderate activity (MIC = 32 μM)
against E. coli AS19, which was considerably
weaker than that of free AMK (MIC = 2 μM), indicating that the
attached PNA impairs the activity of the antibiotic. Given the similarly
high MIC of the AMK conjugate with the mismatched PNA, the most probable
reason for its diminished activity, compared to AMK alone, is impaired
transport across the E. coli AS19 membranes,
as cytoplasmic entry is necessary for the action of both components.
A possible explanation for the difference between the NEO- and AMK-containing
conjugates could be their net charge difference; the NEO-PNA conjugate
is more cationic (+6e for NEO versus +4e for AMK), which could result
in a stronger interaction of NEO with the negatively charged outer
membrane, possibly leading to its disruption and facilitating PNA
entry.
Against the clinical isolate E. coli WR 3551/98, the NEO–PNA conjugate demonstrated moderate activity
(MIC = 32 μM). Interestingly, the AMK–PNA conjugate at
a 32 μM showed some bacteriostatic activity during kinetic measurements
(see Appendix, Figure A25), but this was
insufficient for complete growth inhibition. Importantly, free AMK
was ineffective against this strain up to a 128 μM concentration
(Appendix, Figure A15), indicating that
conjugation with PNA partially induced the antibacterial activity.
Additionally, the lack of activity of the AMK–PNA[mm] conjugate suggests that AMK may enhance PNA uptake, allowing it
to act via its antisense mechanism. In contrast, free NEO remained
active against this strain (MIC = 4 μM), but attaching the PNA
oligomer decreased this activity. Against both AG-susceptible E. coli K-12 and ML-35 strains, the NEO–PNA
conjugate showed moderate activity (MIC = 16 μM), but weaker
than that of NEO alone. However, conjugating the mismatched PNA oligomer
to NEO completely abolished the activity, resulting in an MIC >
32
μM. This difference suggests that the antisense mechanism of
action of PNA contributes to the overall antibacterial activity. The
AMK–PNA conjugate showed moderate activity against E. coli K-12 (MIC = 16 μM), but was inactive
against E. coli ML-35 (MIC > 32
μM).
In the NEO-resistant S. Typhimurium
LT2 strain,
NEO-PNA showed significant activity (MIC = 8 μM) despite free
NEO being inactive up to 128 μM concentration (Appendix, Figure A16). Since NEO–PNA[mm] was also inactive, the activity of NEO–PNA can be attributed
to silencing the essential acpP mRNA, which requires
PNA entry into the cell. This entry is potentially facilitated by
the action of the NEO moiety at the bacterial outer membrane.
Conversely, the antibacterial activity of the AMK-containing conjugates
against S. Typhimurium was reduced 4-fold compared
to that of free AMK. Since the MIC values for both AMK–PNA
and AMK–PNA[mm] were 32 μM, the PNA oligomer
appears to hinder the antibacterial activity of AMK.
Although
the overall antibacterial activity of the AG–PNA
conjugates was often weaker than that of the parent AGs, some sequence-specific
effects were observed. We hypothesize that the diminished activity
results from poor uptake of these conjugates, limiting the action
of both components. However, in cases where AGs become ineffective
due to enzymatic inactivation, but the conjugates manage to enter
the cytoplasm, the PNA oligomer can act as the active component and
could be, at least partially, responsible for the antibacterial activity.
The PNA oligomer alone does not enter bacterial cells and consequently
showed no activity across all tested strains. To confirm the need
for covalent conjugation of AGs with PNA, we performed a checkerboard
assay on the NEO- and AMK-resistant strains to test for potential
synergy (Figures A27 and A28). We found
that unconjugated mixtures of NEO or AMK and PNA were inactive (MIC
> 64 μM for NEO + PNA in S. Typhimurium
and
AMK + PNA in E. coli WR3551/98), highlighting
the importance of the covalent linkage between the AG and PNA for
antibacterial action.

## The Role of the Inner Membrane SbmA Transporter
Previous
studies have shown that some peptide-PNA conjugates use the SbmA transporter
to traverse the inner membrane.
,,
 Therefore, we tested the SbmA-dependence of AG-PNA cellular entry
using the E. coli K-12 mutant, sbmA-knockout strain (E. coli JW0368–1, Keio Collection). If
the MIC value against the ΔsbmA strain is unchanged
compared to that against wild-type E. coli K-12, uptake of the tested compound is SbmA-independent. However,
the ΔsbmA strain contains a kanamycin/neomycin-resistance
gene as a marker, which complicates the interpretation of the results.
As expected, NEO was not active against this mutant strain (MIC
> 64 μM, Appendix, Figure A22).
On
the other hand, as shown previously in the S. Typhimurium
strain, the presence of the same kanamycin/NEO-resistance gene does
not necessarily abolish the activity of NEO–PNA conjugates.
However, both NEO–PNA and NEO–PNA[mm] conjugates
were inactive in the ΔsbmA
E.
coli strain at concentrations up to 32 μM. This
is in contrast to the 16 μM MIC for NEO–PNA against E. coli K-12, suggesting its dependence on the SbmA
transporter. Interestingly, the activities of both AMK–PNA
and AMK also decreased in the knockout strain, with MICs > 32 and
16 μM, respectively, indicating their dependence on SbmA ( , Figure A23). This is consistent with the fact that SbmA, as
a nonspecific transporter, mediates the uptake of hydrophilic molecules,
including AGs. Moreover, it was shown
that E. coli strains that adapted to
AMK develop mutations in the sbmA gene, confirming
its importance in AG uptake.

## Antisense Mechanism of Action of AG–PNA Conjugates
To assess the contribution of the antisense mechanism to PNA activity,
we applied an assay employing a PNA sequence targeting the plasmid-expressed
mRNA encoding red fluorescent protein (RFP).
,
 By comparing the fluorescence of the S. Typhimurium
cells treated with NEO–PNA
rfp
 and
its mismatched analog NEO–PNA
rfp[mm], we examined the antisense effect of PNA
rfp, and thus the ability of NEO to deliver PNA to the bacterial
cytoplasm ( ). We compared the results to those using the efficient (KFF)3K–PNA
rfp
 conjugate.

 As shown in , even at a low concentration of 2 μM, the NEO–PNArfp conjugate decreased fluorescence by approximately 13%.
This decrease was concentration-dependent up to 20 μM, with
the silencing effect reaching 50%. Interestingly, at higher concentrations,
the mismatched NEO–PNA
rfp[mm] conjugate
also showed a slight silencing effect. This might result from partial
complementarity to the target, since the used PNA
rfp[mm] sequence has 7 matches out of 14 nucleobases (see Appendix, Figure A10). Moreover, the PNA binding affinity
might be enhanced by the positively charged NEO, which is electrostatically
attracted to the negatively charged mRNA. Although the silencing effect
of the NEO–PNA
rfp
 conjugate was
significantly weaker than that of the previously validated (KFF)3K–PNA
rfp
, it proved to
act via the antisense mechanism, confirming the potential of NEO to
act as a carrier.

## Interactions of AG–PNA Conjugates with Bacterial Membranes
AG entry into bacterial cells occurs in three stages, with the
first stage based on electrostatic interaction between protonated
AGs and the negatively charged outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria.
,
 Magnesium and other divalent cations that bridge phospholipids are
replaced by AGs, leading to increased membrane permeabilization and
enhanced AG uptake. To investigate whether conjugation of PNA to AGs
alters this interaction, we performed an outer membrane permeabilization
assay. We used the N-phenyl-1-naphthylamine (NPN)
dye, which cannot cross the intact outer membrane and fluoresces weakly
in aqueous solution. However, when the integrity of the outer membrane
is compromised, NPN enters the cell and fluoresces strongly upon interaction
with the lipophilic membrane and binding to phospholipids.
 shows the results of this assay, compared to polymyxin B,
a cyclic peptide known to destabilize bacterial outer membranes, used as a positive control.
 Indeed, cells incubated with polymyxin B exhibited
the highest
NPN fluorescence, indicating robust permeabilization, while NPN uptake
in the presence of the tested compounds was significantly lower ( ). Among AGs, NEO
treatment induced about 40% of the permeabilization level of polymyxin
B, and this activity was approximately three times higher than that
of AMK. This can be explained by the higher net charge of NEO (+6e)
compared to AMK (+4e). Interestingly, NEO–PNA exhibited membrane-disrupting
properties similar to those of NEO, indicating that PNA conjugation
does not hinder the interaction of NEO with the outer membrane. A
similar trend was observed for AMK and AMK–PNA, although their
permeabilizing activity remained lower than that of the NEO-based
compounds. These results suggest that both AGs, particularly NEO,
may assist PNA oligomers in traversing the outer-membrane barrier,
which is otherwise impermeable to PNA.
Interestingly, the addition
of magnesium cations significantly
decreased NPN uptake for NEO, NEO–PNA, and polymyxin B, while
it did not strongly influence the permeabilization induced by AMK
and AMK–PNA. This observation supports the hypothesis that
these positively charged antibiotics (+5e for polymyxin B) disrupt
the outer membrane by competing with divalent cations for the same
target sites. Our results confirm earlier studies on the AG mechanism
of action on the bacterial outer membrane, in which a decrease in
fluorescence in the presence of magnesium cations was also observed.

We investigated the transport pathway
further by testing the ability
of the AGs and their PNA conjugates to disrupt the inner membrane.
The initial phase of AG uptake relies on an energy-independent interaction
with the negatively charged outer membrane. However, once AGs enter
the periplasm, they accumulate on the inner membrane, and the next
step in their transport is an energy-dependent phase driven by the
proton motive force. Since AGs are positively
charged, and drawing on previous studies with cationic peptide-PNA
conjugates,
,
 we performed an assay using the E. coli ML-35 (ATCC 43827) strain and ONPG as a substrate
( A). This strain
lacks lactose permease, which prevents the entry of ONPG through the
cell envelope, unless the membranes are compromised. When membrane
disruption occurs, the ONPG substrate passes through the membranes
and is cleaved by the constitutively expressed cytoplasmic enzyme
ß-galactosidase, releasing the yellow chromophore, o-nitrophenol, whose absorbance can be measured at 405–420 nm.

 The absorbance of o-nitrophenol,
the ONPG cleavage
product, over time is shown in A. Polymyxin B caused the most significant inner membrane
disruption, resulting in rapid ONPG cleavage within 60 min. This corroborates
the membrane-lytic mechanism of action of this cyclic peptide. Moreover, a concentration-dependent effect was
observed up to a 10 μM concentration of polymyxin B (Appendix, Figure A29). Further increasing the concentration
to 15 μM did not increase the rate of ONPG cleavage.
Interestingly,
we observed a rapid increase in absorbance in the
presence of AMK after 90 min of incubation, but not for cells treated
with NEO. This may be associated with the lack of lactose permease
in the strain used, which is a proton-driven transporter. This suggests that NEO entry depends on this
transporter, while AMK entry does not. However, the mechanism of AG
passage through the inner membrane has not been fully resolved. The absorbance in the presence of AMK–PNA
and NEO–PNA did not show ONPG cleavage, indicating they do
not disrupt the inner membrane’s integrity. However, this does
not rule out the entry of the AG–PNA conjugates, since their
antibacterial activities ( ) suggest a cytoplasmic mechanism involving translation
inhibition.
Next, we investigated the interactions of AG–PNA
conjugates
and their components with the inner membrane by measuring its depolarization.
The electrochemical gradient across the cytoplasmic membrane is exploited
by AGs to enter the cytoplasm. It has
been shown that alterations in membrane voltage, e.g., due to the
action of protonophores such as valinomycin or carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazine (CCCP), result in decreased AG uptake.
,

We examined whether PNA conjugation to AGs causes a decrease
in
membrane potential, thus limiting their uptake. Depolarization was
assessed with the potentiometric dye DiSC3(5) (3,3′-dipropylthiadicarbocyanine
iodide), which uses the membrane potential gradient to insert into
the cytoplasmic membrane, where it quenches its own fluorescence.
However, to allow the fluorescent dye to reach the inner membrane,
outer membrane permeabilizers such as ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
(EDTA) or strains with increased membrane permeability are commonly
used. To avoid unwanted interactions,
e.g., between negatively charged EDTA and polycationic AGs or their
conjugates, we used the LPS-deficient E. coli AS19 strain, which facilitated uptake and accumulation of DiSC3(5). When the cytoplasmic membrane is depolarized by external
compounds, the dye is rapidly released, increasing the fluorescence
signal. The effect of AGs and their PNA conjugates on cytoplasmic
membrane depolarization is shown in B.
As a negative control, we used unconjugated
PNA, as we expected
that it would not alter the cytoplasmic membrane potential at any
of the tested concentrations. Polymyxin B, which showed strong membrane
permeabilization in previous experiments, served as a positive control.
As expected, AGs did not induce a statistically significant increase
in membrane depolarization compared to PNA. However, both NEO–PNA
and AMK–PNA increased fluorescence compared to the parent AGs,
indicating alterations in membrane potential. On the other hand, as
shown by the ONPG experiment, the AG–PNA conjugates do not
permeabilize the inner membrane sufficiently to facilitate their uptake.
Therefore, we conclude that the inner membrane, through which AGs
alone pass easily, might act as a barrier for AG–PNA conjugates,
preventing their cytoplasmic action.

## Conclusions
In light of promising reports on AG–nucleic
acid hybrids
−

 and the absence of such research in the antibacterial field, we
designed and synthesized acpP-gene-targeting PNA
conjugates linked via a stable triazole ring to selected aminoglycoside
antibiotics: NEO and AMK. For the first time, the antimicrobial activity
of AG-PNA conjugates was tested against Gram-negative bacteria, including
the multidrug-resistant clinical isolate E. coli WR 3551/98 and NEO-resistant S. Typhimurium LT2.
We have shown that AGs can serve as carriers of PNA, with an MIC of
8 μM for NEO-PNA against the Salmonella strain.
By monitoring the silencing of RFP fluorescence by a complementary
PNA, we confirmed that NEO facilitates PNA uptake. We showed that
conjugating PNA oligomers to AGs did not significantly disrupt AG
interactions with the outer membrane, but did alter the inner membrane
potential. Moreover, we showed that the cytoplasmic membrane transporter
SbmA plays a role in AG–PNA uptake. However, elucidating the
detailed transport pathway remains a challenge, even for the parent
AGs. Further improvements, such as modifying
AG structures to enhance their interactions with bacterial membranes,
should be considered. Nevertheless, this work provides a foundation
for the future design of PNA-containing hybrid antibiotics, which
remain scarcely explored.

## Experimental Procedures

## General and Safety Information
Reagents and solvents
were used as received from suppliers without further purification.
9-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl (Fmoc)/benzhydroxycarbonyl (Bhoc)-protected
PNA monomers were obtained from ASM Research Chemicals, Hannover,
Germany, and HLB Panagene, South Korea. Lysogeny broth (LB) and Mueller-Hinton
broth (MHB) were obtained from Difco. Amikacin sulfate was obtained
from ThermoScientific, and neomycin sulfate from Applichem. DiSC3(5) was purchased from Chemat. Other reagents were obtained
from Merck at analytical or reagent grade. Clear 96-well microplates
were obtained from Nest, and black-bottom 96-well microplates were
obtained from Brand. The progress of conjugation reactions was monitored
using reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC)
with an analytical Knauer column C18 (250 × 4.6 mm, 5 μm
particle size), a flow rate of 1.5 mL/min, and a linear gradient of
acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (see
Appendix, Figures A7–A9). Products
were purified using column chromatography on silica gel (pore size
60 Å, 230–400 mesh particle size, Supelco) and thin layer
chromatography monitoring or using the semipreparative Knauer column
C18 (250 × 8 mm) with a flow rate of 4.5 mL/min and the same
gradient. Mass spectra (MS-ESI) were recorded on a Waters Micromass
Q-TOF Premier spectrometer with a positive electrospray ionization
source. Optical density (OD600) was measured using a Tecan
Sunrise plate reader. Fluorescence and absorbance measurements in
membrane permeability assays were conducted using a Biotek microplate
reader. Thermal denaturation experiments were performed by measuring
absorbance at 260 nm with a UV–vis Evolution 300 spectrophotometer
(Thermo Scientific) equipped with a dedicated Peltier thermostat (Model
1 Cell Peltier/Smart Peltier Thermostated Single Cell Holder, Thermo
Scientific) and the VISIONpro software. Centrifugation was performed
using Eppendorf Centrifuges 5810R and 5415R, and freeze-drying was
performed using a Christ Alpha 2–4 LD Plus. Statistical analysis
was performed using GraphPad Prism 9 software.
Caution! The
following chemicals used in the study: di-tert-butyldicarbonate
(Boc2O, CAS-No. 24424-99-5), DMAP (4-(dimethylamino)­pyridine,
CAS-No. 1122-58-3), and piperidine (CAS-No. 110-89-4) constitute significant
safety hazards (fatal or toxic when inhaled) and must be handled with
care – the work should be carried out in a well-ventilated
hood. Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium LT2
and Escherichia coli WR 3551/98 were
handled following BSL-2 protocols.

## PNA Oligomer Synthesis
Two sets of PNA oligomers were
synthesized: the acpP gene-targeting PNA, with the
sequence alkyneC11-CTCATACTCT-K or alkyneC11-CTCTCACATT-K for the mismatched sequence, their analogs without
a linker and C-terminal lysine ( ), and the rfp gene-targeting PNA
alkyneC11-CATCTAGTATTTCT-K, with the mismatched oligomer:
alkyneC11-TTTCTAGTCTCATA-K. Only PNA oligomers targeting
the mrfp1 gene are denoted with a subscript “rfp”. The acpP-targeting PNA oligomers
do not have additional notation. All PNA oligomers were synthesized
manually on a 50 μmol scale using NovaSyn TG Sieber resin (loading:
0.25 mmol/g), resulting in a C-terminal amide upon TFA cleavage. Fmoc/Bhoc-based
solid-phase peptide synthesis (SPPS) chemistry was applied with a
2.5-fold molar excess of PNA monomers and a 3-fold molar excess of
Fmoc-protected lysine (unless otherwise stated) or 10-undecynoic acid
(alkyneC11). Amino acid coupling was conducted for 60 min
using O-(7-azabenzotriazol-1-yl)-N,N,N′,N′-tetramethyluronium hexafluorophosphate (HATU), 1-hydroxy-7-azabenzotriazole
(HOAt), and collidine in the ratio (3:3:6), with catalytic amounts
of 4-N,N-dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP). Removal of
the Fmoc protecting group was performed using 20% piperidine in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) solution (2 × 2 min for
PNA monomers, and 2 × 10 min for lysine residue), followed by
washing with DMF and dichloromethane (DCM). PNA monomers were then
dissolved in the DMF/NMP (N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone)
1:1 mixture and activated by HATU, N-4-methylmorpholine
(NMM), and lutidine in the ratio of 2.5:2.5:3.75. The prepared active
derivatives were added to the resin-containing mixture, and the coupling
reaction was conducted twice, each step for 30 min. The oligomer was
then washed with DMF and DCM. Coupling of 10-undecynoic acid was performed
under the same conditions as for Fmoc-Lys.
Final PNA oligomers
were cleaved from the resin using the 50% TFA solution in DCM containing
5% of m-cresol. Obtained products were precipitated
using cold ethyl ether and centrifuged for 10 min, 7800×g, 4 °C. PNA oligomers were purified using RP-HPLC
(see Appendix, Figure A9), lyophilized,
and obtained as white solids.

## Aminoglycoside Modification
5″-N3-NEO­(Boc)6‑and 6″-N3-AMK­(Boc)4 were synthesized according to previous protocols with minor
modifications.
,,,

## NEO­(Boc)6 and AMK­(Boc)4

Neomycin
sulfate (157.2 mg, 0.173 mmol) was dissolved in 16.6 mL of H2O and methanol (1:1 ratio). Sodium carbonate (243.1 mg, 2.29 mmol)
and di-tert-butyl-dicarbonate (Boc2O,
491.1 mg, 2.25 mmol) were then added, and the mixture was stirred
at room temperature for 6 h. Subsequently, the mixture was concentrated
using a rotavapor until a white solid precipitated. The solid was
collected, washed with water, and dried. The solid was dissolved in
DCM and purified by column chromatography using DCM/MeOH (4–6%
MeOH gradient). Fractions containing the product were collected, and
the NEO­(Boc)6 intermediate was obtained with 52.7% yield
(110.9 mg, 0.091 mmol). Molecular weight calculated for C53H94N6O25: 1215.3389, m/z found: 1215.5043; AMK­(Boc)4 was obtained
analogously, but using triethylamine instead of Na2CO3, resulting in a yield of 56.7% (463.6 mg, 0.467 mmol). Molecular
weight calculated for C42H75N5O21: 986.0658, m/z found:
986.5433.

## 5″-TIBS-NEO­(Boc)6 and 6″-TIBS-AMK­(Boc)4

Next, the NEO­(Boc)6 intermediate (110.9
mg, 0.091 mmol) was dissolved in pyridine (2.2 mL), and 2,4,6-triisopropylbenzenesulfonyl
chloride (TIBS-Cl, 881.9 mg, 2.91 mmol) was added to give a yellow
mixture. The reaction was performed for 48 h at room temperature under
an argon atmosphere and terminated by neutralizing with saturated
sodium hydrogen carbonate (NaHCO3) solution. The mixture
was then extracted with approximately 15 mL of ethyl acetate/water
(in a ratio of about 2:1 v/v), and the organic layer was washed twice
with 10%, 0.5 M HCl, saturated NaHCO3, and water. The ethyl
acetate was then evaporated, and the crude mixture was purified by
column chromatography using DCM with a gradient of 3.3 to 7.5% of
MeOH as the eluent. Fractions containing the product (R
F = 0.5 in DCM/MeOH 10:1, visualized with ceric ammonium
molybdate stain) were collected and evaporated to dryness to give
the 5″-TIBS-NEO­(Boc)6 intermediate with a yield
of 42.8% (57.1 mg, 0.039 mmol). Molecular weight calculated for C68H116N6O27S: 1481.7376, m/z found: 1481.7869. 6″-TIBS-AMK­(Boc)4 was obtained similarly and purified by column chromatography
using DCM with a 1–5% MeOH gradient. Fractions containing the
product (RF = 0.78 in DCM/MeOH 10:1) were collected and
evaporated to give the 6″-TIBS-AMK­(Boc)4 intermediate
(339.7 mg, 0.27 mmol) with a yield of 57.7%. Molecular weight calculated
for C57H97N5O23S: 1252.46, m/z found: 1252.6051.

## 5″-N3-NEO­(Boc)6 and 6″-N3-AMK­(Boc)4

The 5″-TIBS-NEO­(Boc)6 intermediate (57.1 mg, 0.039 mmol) was dissolved in DMF (1.7
mL), and sodium azide (38.1 mg, 0.585 mmol) was added. The mixture
was heated to 70 °C, and the reaction was performed for 24 h.
The mixture was then extracted with approximately 10 mL of ethyl acetate/water
(1:1 v/v) and washed 5 times with water (approximately 5 mL each).
The crude mixture was evaporated, resulting in a crude solid, which,
after MS analysis, was used without any further purification. Molecular
weight calculated for C53H93N9O24: 1240.3514, m/z found:
1240.5262.
The 6″-TIBS-AMK­(Boc)4 intermediate
(89.4 mg, 0.071 mmol) was dissolved in DMF (2 mL), and sodium azide
(18.5 mg, 0.284 mmol) was added. The reaction, performed as above,
resulted in a crude product with the m/z found of 1034.5131 (molecular weight calculated for C42H74N8O20Na+: 1034.4984),
which was used as crude oil without further purification.

## Conjugation of AGs to PNA via CuAAC
5″-N3-NEO-(Boc)6 (2.15 mg, 1.74 μmol) and PNA
oligomer (1.70 mg, 0.58 μmol) were dissolved in a tert-butanol/water 1:1 mixture (2 mL). Then, 100 μL (1.16 μmol)
of copper sulfate pentahydrate solution (2.9 mg/mL) and 100 μL
(4.64 μmol) of sodium ascorbate solution (9.2 mg/mL) were added.
The reaction was performed for 4 h at 40 °C under an argon atmosphere.
The reaction progress was monitored by RP-HPLC. After completion,
the crude mixture was lyophilized and directly underwent Boc-group
removal by dissolving in 50% TFA in DCM with the addition of triisopropylsilane
(TIS, 20 μL, 0.097 mmol). After 3 h, the mixture was concentrated,
dissolved in water, and lyophilized. Conjugation of 5″-N3-AMK­(Boc)4 was performed analogously. The final
products were purified by RP-HPLC (for MS and HPLC chromatograms,
see Appendix, Figures A1–A9), converted
to chloride salts, and, after lyophilization, obtained as white solids
with yields of 11–20%. The final amounts of compounds were
determined based on the absorbance of the nucleobases measured at
260 nm and calculated using PNA-specific extinction coefficients.

## Melting Temperatures of the RNA Complexes with PNA and AG–PNA
Conjugates
The RNA oligomer with the sequence 5′-AGAGUAUGAG-3′,
corresponding to a segment of the acpP mRNA, was
purchased from Genomed (Warsaw, Poland) and diluted in diethyl pyrocarbonate
(DEPC)-treated water. The RNA oligomer and PNA or AG–PNA conjugates
were diluted in 10 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.0), supplemented with
20 mM NaCl, to a final concentration of 2 μM in a quartz cuvette.
For each tested RNA complex, 10 heating and cooling cycles were performed
between 10 and 90 °C at a rate of 1 °C/min. Melting temperatures
(T
m) of the complexes were determined
as the midpoint of the transition of the denaturation curve by fitting
the data to a Boltzmann sigmoidal equation (see Appendix, Figure A11).

## Antibacterial Activity Determination
Minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC) assays, including the SbmA dependence testing,
were conducted using the broth microdilution protocol of the Clinical
and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) M07-A10 method. NEO and AMK were used as sulfate salts, while
AG–PNA conjugates were used as chloride salts. Concentrations
of aminoglycosides were based on their weight, while those for PNA
conjugates were based on their absorbance at 260 nm. Bacteria were
first cultured overnight in lysogeny broth (LB, 2 mL) with shaking
at 37 °C. The overnight culture (20 μL) was transferred
into noncation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth (MHB, 2 mL) and further
cultured at 37 °C with shaking until the optical density at 600
nm (OD600) of the culture reached 0.25. Next, the culture
was diluted 100 times in fresh MHB medium, and aliquots (50 μL
each) were mixed with the previously prepared dilutions of the tested
compounds in MHB (50 μL) in a transparent flat-bottom 96-well
plate. The plate was sealed with transparent foil and incubated for
20 h at 37 °C with shaking. After that time, the growth of bacteria
in each well was verified visually, as well as by measuring OD600 values. Growth inhibition was determined as the lowest
concentration that visibly inhibited bacterial growth. Moreover, OD600 values of each sample were compared with the untreated
culture (growth control, GC) and with MHB alone (sterility control,
SC). Each experiment was conducted in at least two biological replicates
and two technical replicates each (for detailed data, see Appendix, Figures A12–A23). For bacterial strains E. coli ML-35, E. coli WR 3551/98, and S. Typhimurium LT2, additional
measurements recording the change in OD600 values over
time were performed, with readings taken every 5 min for 20 h (see
Appendix, Figures A24–A26).

## Silencing the rfp Transcript by NEO–PNArfp Oligomers
The silencing effect of the NEO–PNA
rfp
 conjugates was assessed by measuring the
reduction in RFP fluorescence as described previously.
Salmonella Typhimurium LT2
bacterial cells transformed with the pBBR­(rfp) plasmid,
encoding the RFP protein, were grown overnight in LB broth at 37 °C
with shaking. Then, the 20 μL of the overnight culture was transferred
to 2 mL of MHB and grown to the exponential phase. After a 100-fold
dilution in fresh MHB, 50 μL aliquots of the cell suspension
were added to the wells of sterile, F-bottom, black 96-well plates
containing different concentrations (2 to 20 μM) of the tested
compounds (50 μL in MHB). Following overnight incubation at
37 °C with shaking, the fluorescence signal (λex= 584 nm; λem= 610 nm) was measured. To rule out
the antibacterial effect of these conjugates, which would affect the
number of cells and therefore the fluorescence signal, bacterial suspensions
were transferred to a clear 96-well plate, and OD600 values
were measured. Due to the antibacterial activity of (KFF)3K–PNA
rfp
 above the 15 μM
concentration, as previously reported, the measured fluorescence signal was divided by the OD600 value and then normalized to untreated cells (GC) to include only
the PNA
rfp
 silencing effect.

## Outer Membrane Permeabilization Assay
The outer membrane
permeabilization caused by AG–PNA conjugates was determined
using the NPN uptake assay with minor
changes. The E. coli ML-35 (ATCC 43827)
strain was cultured overnight at 37 °C in LB. The bacteria were
then resuspended in fresh LB medium and cultured until OD600 reached 0.4. Subsequently, 1 mL of bacterial cell suspension was
centrifuged at 4500×g for 5 min, and washed
with 5 mM (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES)
buffer (pH 7.0). Afterward, bacterial cells were suspended in 5 mL
of the same HEPES buffer, and the bacterial suspensions were plated
in 96-well black microplates. Then, to selected wells, magnesium chloride
solution was added to a 1 mM final concentration. An NPN solution
was prepared by dissolving NPN in ethanol to make a 10 mM stock solution
and then diluting it to a 40 μM working solution in 5 mM HEPES.
The NPN solution was added to bacterial suspensions to achieve a 10
μM final concentration of NPN, and the fluorescence was immediately
measured. The excitation and emission wavelengths were 350 and 420
nm, respectively. After 5 min of measurements, the solutions of the
tested compounds were added to the final concentration of 10 μM,
and the fluorescence was immediately measured again. Polymyxin B was
used as a positive control. The measured fluorescence was normalized
using the following equation:
normalizedfluorescence=Fx−F0Fpol.−F0with F

x
 – the signal of the sample with the tested compound, F
0 – the signal of the sample without
any tested compound, and F
pol. –
the signal of the sample with polymyxin B.
The experiment was
performed in three independent biological replicates, with two technical
replicates each.

## Inner Membrane Permeabilization Assay
The inner-membrane
assay was performed using the E. coli ML-35 (ATCC 43827) strain, kindly provided by Prof. Wojciech Kamysz,
Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University of Gdańsk, Poland.
Permeabilization of the inner membrane was monitored with o-nitrophenyl-β-D-galactopyranoside (ONPG),
a chromogenic β-galactosidase substrate, which is cleaved in
the cytoplasm to release o-nitrophenol. The product
of this enzymatic cleavage was detected spectrophotometrically at
420 nm. The experiment was conducted as previously described with
minor modifications.
,
 Bacteria were incubated in LB
medium (2 mL) for approximately 18 h at 37 °C. Bacterial solution
was then diluted 100-fold in fresh LB medium and incubated at 37 °C
to an OD600 of 0.3–0.4. Next, 1 mL of the culture
was centrifuged (5 min, 4500×g) and rinsed with
PBS (10 mM, pH 7.4). Bacteria were then resuspended in PBS, and 50
μL aliquots were added to each well containing the tested compound
and ONPG in PBS. Bacterial suspension containing ONPG in PBS was used
as a negative control. The final concentration of ONPG was 1.5 mM.
Polymyxin B was used as a positive control. Absorbance readings at
420 nm were taken every 5 min for 3 h at 37 °C. Experiments were
performed in two independent biological replicates, with two technical
replicates each.

## Bacterial Membrane Depolarization Assay
Bacterial membrane
depolarization was measured in E. coli AS19 cells using the DiSC3(5) fluorescent probe. The
overnight culture was resuspended in fresh LB and grown until OD600 reached approximately 0.5. Then, the bacterial cells were
harvested (for 10 min at 1100×g) and washed
twice with 5 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.4). The bacterial pellet was resuspended
in 5 mM HEPES buffer supplemented with 5 mM glucose, and added to
the wells of F-bottom, black 96-well plates to achieve an OD600 of 0.05. Each well contained DiSC3(5) probe at a final
concentration of 1 μM, prepared from a 100 μM stock in
DMSO that was diluted in 5 mM HEPES buffer with 5 mM glucose. Bacterial
cell suspensions were incubated with the fluorescent probe at 37 °C
with shaking until the fluorescence (λex = 622 nm;
λem = 670 nm) decreased and stabilized (see Appendix, Figure A30). Then, 10 μL aliquots of the
tested compounds or HEPES buffer (as a negative control) were added,
and the fluorescence was measured for 30 min with readings taken every
minute, followed by 5 s of shaking.

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science
Centre, Poland (2023/49/N/ST5/01824) awarded to I.S. and (2020/37/B/NZ1/02904)
awarded to J.T.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
2-DOS2-deoxystreptamine
ACNacetonitrile
AGaminoglycoside
AMKamikacin
AMPantimicrobial peptide
Bhocbenzhydroxycarbonyl
group
Boc
tert-butoxycarbonyl group
BSLbiosafety level
CCCPcarbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazine
CuAACcopper­(I)-catalyzed
azide–alkyne cycloaddition
DCMdichloromethane
DiSC3­(5)3,3′-dipropylthiadicarbocyanine iodide
DEPCdiethyl pyrocarbonate
DMAP4-dimethylaminopyridine
DMF
N,N-dimethylformamide
EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
Fmoc9-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl
group
GCgrowth
control
HATU
O-(7-azabenzotriazol-1-yl)-N,N,N′,N′-tetrametyluronium
hexafluorophosphate
HEPES4-(2-hydroxyethyl)­piperazine-1-ethanesulfonic acid sodium
salt
HOAt1-hydroxy-7-azabenzotriazole
LBlysogeny broth
LPSlipopolysaccharide
MHBMueller–Hinton
broth
NEOneomycin
NMM4-methylmorpholine
NMP
N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone
NPN
N-phenyl-1-naphthylamine
ONPG
o-nitrophenyl-ß-D-galactopyranoside
PBSphosphate-buffered saline
PNApeptide nucleic acid
SCsterility control
rfpred fluorescence protein
SPPSsolid-phase peptide synthesis
TFAtrifluoroacetic
acid
TIBS2,4,6-triisopropylbenzenesulfonyl
group
TIStriisopropylsilane
Tmmelting temperature.

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.5c00215.
Mass spectra, structural and molecular formulas, and
HPLC chromatograms for the synthesized AG–PNA conjugates; general
synthesis scheme; thermal denaturation curves; optical density (OD600) as a measure of bacterial growth of E.
coli and S. Typhimurium strains;
optical density (OD600) in the checkerboard test combinations
for E. coli WR 3551/98 and S. Typhimurium LT2 incubated with various concentrations
of PNA and AGs; kinetics of the ONPG cleavage for various concentrations
of NEO, AMK, and polymyxin B; and kinetics of the inner membrane depolarization
(PDF)

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials