822acssdBioconjugate ChemistryBioconjug ChemPMC1051549010515490105154903768224310.1021/acs.bioconjchem.3c00317Engineering
Protein Nanoparticles Functionalized with
an Immunodominant Coxiella burnetii Antigen to Generate
a Q Fever Vaccine
RamirezAaron FelgnerJiin JainAarti JanSharon AlbinTyler J BadtenAlexander J GregoryAnthony E NakajimaRie JasinskasAlgimantas FelgnerPhilip L BurkhardtAmanda M DaviesD Huw WangSzu-Wen †Department
of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, ‡Vaccine Research and Development
Center, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, §Department of Chemistry, ∥Department of Biomedical
Engineering, ⊥Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, and #Institute for Immunology, University of California, Irvine, California 92697, United States¶Department
of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089, United States*Email: ddavies@uci.edu.
*Email: wangsw@uci.edu.
89202334916531653–16662392023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Coxiella burnetii is the causative agent
of Q
fever, for which there is yet to be an FDA-approved vaccine. This
bacterial pathogen has both extra- and intracellular stages in its
life cycle, and therefore both a cell-mediated (i.e., T lymphocyte)
and humoral (i.e., antibody) immune response are necessary for effective
eradication of this pathogen. However, most proposed vaccines elicit
strong responses to only one mechanism of adaptive immunity, and some
can either cause reactogenicity or lack sufficient immunogenicity.
In this work, we aim to apply a nanoparticle-based platform toward
producing both antibody and T cell immune responses against C. burnetii. We investigated three approaches for conjugation
of the immunodominant outer membrane protein antigen (CBU1910) to
the E2 nanoparticle to obtain a consistent antigen orientation: direct
genetic fusion, high affinity tris-NTA-Ni conjugation to polyhistidine-tagged
CBU1910, and the SpyTag/SpyCatcher (ST/SC) system. Overall, we found
that the ST/SC approach yielded nanoparticles loaded with the highest
number of antigens while maintaining stability, enabling formulations
that could simultaneously co-deliver the protein antigen (CBU1910)
and adjuvant (CpG1826) on one nanoparticle (CBU1910-CpG-E2). Using
protein microarray analyses, we found that after immunization, antigen-bound
nanoparticle formulations elicited significantly higher antigen-specific
IgG responses than soluble CBU1910 alone and produced more balanced
IgG1/IgG2c ratios. Although T cell recall assays from these protein
antigen formulations did not show significant increases in antigen-specific
IFN-γ production compared to soluble CBU1910 alone, nanoparticles
conjugated with a CD4 peptide epitope from CBU1910 generated elevated
T cell responses in mice to both the CBU1910 peptide epitope and whole
CBU1910 protein. These investigations highlight the feasibility of
conjugating antigens to nanoparticles for tuning and improving both
humoral- and cell-mediated adaptive immunity against C. burnetii.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Jul 15; Revised 2023 Aug 25; Collection date 2023 Sep 20.

## Introduction
Coxiella burnetii is
the Gram-negative intracellular
bacterium that causes the life-threatening disease Q fever, − and it has been classified by the US Center for Disease Control
and Prevention as a potential bioterrorism agent due to its airborne
transmission, highly infectious nature, and extreme resistance to
environmental conditions. , − Q fever has an almost global distribution and can be found in a
wide variety of animal reservoirs, with ruminants the most common. Human infections are often acquired from inhalation
of contaminated aerosols resulting in an acute febrile illness, which
can progress to pneumonia and hepatitis. In approximately 5% of cases, patients develop a potentially fatal
chronic disease resulting in endocarditis, osteomyelitis, and chronic
fatigue. In chronic forms of Q fever,
that may arise weeks or years postinfection, long-term combination
therapies are required to prevent death. Between 2007 and 2010, the
largest known outbreak of Q fever occurred in The Netherlands resulting
in >4000 cases. Of those identified
as
having chronic Q fever, mortality was 15.8%. 
Despite its pathogenic potential, an FDA-approved vaccine
for this
infectious agent is not yet available. A formalin-inactivated whole
cell vaccine was previously licensed in Australia but was not approved
in the US, and was discontinued due to the costs of production and
required associated screening to prevent severe side effects in patients
with previous exposure. , , Unlike typical bacterial pathogens, C. burnetii exhibits a tropism for professional immune system phagocytes (i.e.,
macrophages) and actively directs its own phagocytosis in order to
reside within the terminal phagolysosomes of host cells in a favorable
low pH environment, enabling its long-term survival and persistence. , , For this reason, a T lymphocyte
response, in addition to an adequate antibody response, is considered
necessary for eradication of the pathogen. − In this investigation,
we examine the ability to design and synthesize a C. burnetii vaccine using a protein nanoparticle (NP) platform to elicit both
strong B and T cell responses. Although the advantages of NPs in vaccine
development have been well-demonstrated, , the design of antigen-conjugated nanoparticles for a Q fever vaccine
has not yet been reported.
The protein NP utilized in this research
is derived from the E2
subunit (E2) of the multienzyme complex, pyruvate dehydrogenase, sourced
from Geobacillus stearothermophilus. , E2 is a 60-subunit, self-assembling ∼25 nm dodecahedral scaffold
with high stability that can be genetically engineered for precise
chemical conjugation sites at the external surface and internal cavity. , − Our prior studies in developing cancer vaccines via a virus-mimetic
strategy have demonstrated the utility of this scaffold for both adjuvant
and antigen delivery. − However, the application of this E2-based strategy for protection
against bacterial pathogens has not yet been investigated. In this
work, we utilize E2’s unique size, functional adaptability,
and innate capability to elicit an antigen-specific immune response
toward developing a prophylactic C. burnetii vaccine.
Proteomics and antigen-specific serological assays have identified
the outer membrane protein CBU1910 as an immunodominant protein antigen
of C. burnetii. − For this reason, CBU1910 was chosen as the antigen for this prophylactic
vaccine formulation. Unlike cancers, which can utilize peptide neoantigens
in a vaccine to produce the desired anti-epitope T cell responses,
infectious disease vaccines typically require the use of whole protein
antigens to elicit both antibody and T cell responses. , Protein antigens contain numerous immunogenic epitopes in native
structural conformations, allowing for stronger antibody responses
and broader adaptive immune responses. − Although immunogenic
peptide epitopes of C. burnetii have been identified
and characterized for their potential use in vaccine development,
application of these peptides in vaccines has not yet shown significant
efficacy. , − More recently, vaccine formulations
using C. burnetii protein antigens and triagonist
adjuvants showed significant levels of protection for challenged animals,
but to a lesser extent than the whole cell vaccine (which is not FDA
approved). Thus, there is still a need
for the development of a safer and efficacious prophylactic vaccine
for C. burnetii.
In this study, we investigated
the integration of C. burnetii antigens onto the
surface of the E2 NP. It is known that B cell
activation and antibody responses are enhanced by a repetitive structural
array on virus-like particles; , , however, there are currently limited options for conjugating protein
antigens onto a NP surface while maintaining this consistent geometric
orientation. Here, we examined three bioconjugation strategies that
would enable a desired consistent antigen configuration: (1) direct
recombinant fusion, (2) high affinity tris-NTA-Ni conjugation to polyhistidine-tagged
(His-tag) antigen, and (3) the SpyTag(ST)/SpyCatcher(SC) system ( ). Direct genetic
fusion of protein antigens onto virus-like particles has shown some
success with particular platforms and therefore was explored with
the E2 protein nanoparticle; however, expression and correct folding
into a soluble protein assembly needs to be empirically tested. , − The introduction of polyhistidine tags on recombinant
proteins to bind to Ni-NTA-based matrices is a well-established protein
purification methodology, − and we previously applied this
complexation-based approach in nanoparticle-mediated delivery of influenza
hemagglutinin antigen; here, we used
it as the basis for loading polyhistidine-tagged (His-tag) CBU1910
antigen onto E2 NPs. To attach protein antigens, covalently and modularly,
onto the surface of E2 NPs, the versatile protein–protein conjugation
method, SpyTag/SpyCatcher, was implemented. − The adaptive immune response (i.e., antibody and T cell responses)
to the most favorable NP construct was then examined to determine
the prophylactic potential of the vaccine formulation.
 

## Results and Discussion

## Three Approaches Were Investigated for Loading C. burnetii Protein Antigen onto E2 Nanoparticles
We examined three
strategies to attach the CBU1910 protein antigen to protein nanoparticles,
as summarized in and described below. Table SI-1 lists
the descriptions of each of the components and the corresponding abbreviations
used in this work.

## Direct Recombinant Fusion of CBU1910 onto E2 Nanoparticles
To investigate this loading strategy, we genetically fused CBU1910
to the N-terminus of a truncated E2 monomer. The wild-type form of
the core E2 nanoparticle (dihydrolipoyl transacetylase) includes,
on its N-terminus, a lipoyl domain and a peripheral subunit-binding
domain, which enables association with the E1 and E3 proteins in the
complex. , , In our studies,
we distill this protein down to its structural dodecahedral core for
application as a nanoparticle scaffold; − , however, based on the native structure, we hypothesized that other
proteins with independent binding domains could be genetically fused
to its N-terminus. We created two E2 mutants with different N-terminal
linker lengths and 60 internal cavity cysteines [E2_152(D381C) and
E2_158(D381C)]. Relative to the truncated E2(D381C) mutant used previously, , , − the E2_152
and E2_158 mutants have an additional 20 and 14 amino acids of the
wild-type protein sequence, respectively, added to their N-termini. , Introduction of 60 internal cavity cysteines allows for adjuvant
conjugation. , 
The CBU1910 protein was
recombinantly fused to E2 (Materials and Methods; Table SI-2), and the fusion proteins were expressed in E. coli (Figure SI-1).
CBU1910 protein antigen fused to an E2 monomer was strongly expressed.
However, these fusion proteins aggregated as inclusion bodies and
were present only in the insoluble fraction, even under different
expression conditions (e.g., lower temperatures, different induction
conditions) (Figure SI-1). In contrast,
the individual proteins (E2 monomers alone, CBU1910 alone) showed
fractions which were soluble (Figure SI-1), with solubility linked to correct folding and nanoparticle assembly
in prior studies. Under the conditions
tested, the fused proteins (CBU1910-E2) could not be expressed as
soluble proteins, suggesting misfolding and/or misassembly of the
complex. For this reason, the two subsequent loading strategies focused
on generating the two proteins separately, followed by conjugation
together.

## Using a tris-NTA-Ni Linker to Conjugate CBU1910 onto E2 Nanoparticles
To conjugate CBU1910 onto the surface of the E2 protein NP, we
used an affinity strategy that we had developed for conjugating green
fluorescent protein (GFP) and influenza hemagglutinin (HA). An E2 NP displaying 60 cysteines on its surface
(E279C) allows for conjugation of a synthesized
maleimide-tris-NTA (mal-tNTA) linker, which enables a His-tagged protein to couple to the NP. This protocol
was performed for CBU1910 as shown in A. Unlike GFP and HA conjugation, which remained
soluble and physically stable over an extended period, conjugation
of CBU1910-(His)6 to E2 yielded a mixture of single nanoparticles
and aggregates of nanoparticles. Optimization of conjugation conditions
(e.g., buffers, salts, surfactants) to yield non-aggregated nanoparticles
was required, and these conditions are summarized in Figure SI-2. HEPES buffer at pH 7.3 with 360 mM NaCl was found
to stabilize the nanoparticles and was used for subsequent purification
and characterization steps. Free CBU1910-(His)6 was separated
from E2-bound CBU1910 using size exclusion chromatography (SEC). Quantification
of the number of E2-attached CBU1910 was determined to be 6 ±
3 per E2 nanoparticle.
 Hydrodynamic diameters for E2, tNTA-E2, and CBU1910-E2
NPs were
27.3 ± 1.1 nm, 28.8 ± 2.2 nm, and 31.6 ± 4.0 nm, respectively,
all of which fall in the size range shown to be beneficial for lymphatic
system trafficking and antigen-presenting cell (i.e., dendritic cell
and B cell) engagement ( B). , The small increase in diameter
for CBU1910-E2 was consistent with the relatively low number of CBU1910
on the surface of the E2 nanoparticle. To dose an adequate amount
of antigen for an in vivo vaccine study, a 10-fold
increase in the concentration was required; however, concentrating
the formulation to this extent led to significant protein aggregation.
Although conjugation of the CBU1910 antigen to the protein nanoparticle
using a tNTA linker showed promise, this strategy showed limitations
for this specific antigen that included low conjugation capacity and
inconsistent physical stability. We note that this result is different
than attachment of HA to E2, which had yielded reliable conjugation
and stable, monodisperse particles, suggesting that these effects
are highly antigen-dependent. Furthermore, the use of the maleimide-tNTA
for surface conjugation via cysteine residues limits the use of cysteines
internally for conjugation of immune-stimulating adjuvants. , − , 

## Using SpyTag(ST)/SpyCatcher(SC) to Conjugate CBU1910 onto E2
Nanoparticles
The SpyTag/SpyCatcher system was used to attach CBU1910 to the E2 nanoparticle using
the strategy outlined in A. The advantages of this approach include its stable
covalent interaction and the ability to separately express both the
antigen and the nanoparticle proteins prior to conjugation, which
can circumvent protein expression challenges. SpyTag (ST) was genetically
attached to the E2 nanoparticle, and SpyCatcher (SC) was genetically
fused with the protein antigen CBU1910. We reasoned that coupling
SpyCatcher to the antigen minimizes the amount of exposed SC after
conjugation to the NP, which is likely favorable for reducing anti-SC
immune responses.
 The ST peptide was genetically fused to the N-terminus
of E2 with
a spacer sequence ( and Figure SI-3). The E2 mutant
D381C possessed 60 internal cavity cysteines, which would enable conjugation
of adjuvant. , Because a high-resolution protein
structure of CBU1910 has not yet been determined, we used the protein
folding prediction tool Alphafold2 to
predict the structure of CBU1910 (Figure SI-4). Based on this predicted structure of N-terminal truncated CBU1910
(to enable a soluble antigen), , we decided to fuse
SC to the N-terminus of CBU1910 ( ; Figure SI-4).
This ensured that when conjugated to the E2 nanoparticle, CBU1910
would be oriented in the same direction as when it is displayed on C. burnetii, exposing more relevant B cell epitopes.
The attachment of ST and SC to E2 and CBU1910, respectively, did
not appear to decrease the expression levels or soluble protein amounts
(Figure SI-3A). Therefore, we proceeded
with purifying ST-E2(D381C) (henceforth referred to as ST-E2) and
SC-CBU1910 for further characterization and studies. Both SDS-PAGE
and mass spectrometry showed an expected molecular weight increase
of ∼2.2 kDa (ST and spacer) for ST-E2 monomers (Figure SI-3B). The ST-E2 NP assembly yielded
a hydrodynamic diameter of 29.2 ± 0.5 nm, which is slightly larger
than the E2 diameter size of 27.8 ± 0.6 nm (Figure SI-3B), as expected. This is approximately 1 nm larger,
which is consistent with previous literature estimates of ST on virus-like
particles (VLPs). For SC-CBU1910, we
achieved a >95% purity and the average molecular weight of ∼40.8
kDa, as determined by SDS-PAGE and mass spectrometry, which is consistent
with SC fused to CBU1910 with a linker (Figure SI-3C).
The E2 protein NP platform, together with the
ST/SC conjugation
system, allows interior and exterior attachments designed for co-delivery
of adjuvants and antigens, respectively. We conjugated the TLR-9 agonist,
CpG1826, to the interior of the ST-E2 NP platform via an acid-labile
BMPH linker ( A). Consistent with prior syntheses
using E2, on SDS-PAGE the lower band on CpG-ST-E2 at ∼30 kDa
shows the unconjugated ST-E2 monomer, and the band at ∼37 kDa
supports the conjugation of one CpG molecule (∼7 kDa) to a
ST-E2 monomer ( B). Quantification indicated 20.5 ± 1.5 CpG1826 molecules were
encapsulated internally per 60-mer E2 NP, similar to previous E2 formulations. The average hydrodynamic diameter of the CpG-ST-E2
nanoparticles was 31.8 ± 1.4 nm ( C).
Although it is well-documented
that the isopeptide bond formation
between SpyTag and SpyCatcher is robust and reliable, , , − conjugation
of the SC-CBU1910 antigen onto the surface to ST-E2 required optimization
to yield intact and monodisperse nanoparticles. As seen with other
ST/SC VLP formulations, adjustments to reaction molar ratios, pH,
ionic strength, and/or detergent concentrations were required to prevent
precipitation/aggregation. , − A tabulated list of the optimization conditions and solubilizing
additives (i.e., surfactants, buffers, and salts) can be found in Figure SI-5. From our investigation, we determined
favorable reaction conditions to be a 1:0.5 molar ratio of ST-E2 (monomer):SC-CBU1910
at room temperature for 20 h with the addition of 0.08–0.0875%
(w/v) SLS; this resulted in stable, monodisperse nanoparticles ( ).
Size and
antigen-to-nanoparticle ratios were then determined. When
conjugated to SC-CBU1910, the ST-E2 monomer molecular weight increases
by ∼41 to ∼71 kDa. As expected, when SC-CBU1910 is
conjugated to CpG-ST-E2, two conjugate bands appear: one band is CBU1910-E2
monomers (∼71 kDa) and the other CBU1910-CpG-E2 monomers (∼78
kDa; both CBU1910 antigen and CpG conjugated onto E2) ( B). Quantification estimated
that 29 ± 2 and 24 ± 2 SC-CBU1910 were conjugated to each
ST-E2 and CpG-ST-E2 nanoparticle, respectively, out of a maximum possible
number of 30 per nanoparticle (based on 1:0.5 molar ratio by monomer).
CBU1910-E2 and CBU1910-CpG-E2 hydrodynamic diameters were 37.9 ±
1.9 nm and 43.6 ± 5.1 nm, respectively ( ), with the size increase corresponding to
the successful loading of antigens on the nanoparticles. Furthermore,
TEM images confirmed intact monodisperse nanoparticles ( D). Because the ST/SC protein–protein
conjugation system could be implemented to co-deliver protein antigen
and adjuvant simultaneously, we used these stable nanoparticles (e.g.,
CBU-CpG-E2, CBU-E2) to evaluate their prophylactic vaccine potential.

## Attaching CBU1910 onto Nanoparticles Elicits Significantly Higher
IgG Responses than Soluble CBU1910 Alone
We investigated
the antibody responses of different vaccine formulations containing
the CBU1910 protein antigen, CpG1826, E2, and oil-in-water emulsion
adjuvant, IVAX, after prime and boost immunization in mice ( A,B). The NPs generated
using the ST/SC approach were selected for evaluation of immune responses
due to their higher physical stability and protein antigen loading
characteristics, as described above. Sera of each animal were evaluated
using antigen microarrays to determine the antibody production elicited
by each formulation ( C). The most striking result was seen when CBU1910 was displayed
on E2 nanoparticles (CBU1910-E2), i.e., in the absence of adjuvants,
which elevated the CBU1910-specific total IgG response significantly
relative to soluble CBU1910 alone ( D).
 It has been previously described that nanoparticle
size and antigen
display topography can play a crucial role in B cell engagement. , Nanoparticles between ∼20–50 nm in diameter with antigen
valences greater than ∼5 per nanoparticle and antigen spacing
larger than ∼25 nm are reported to obtain effective B cell
engagement. The CBU-E2 formulations used
in this immunization study possess these characteristics and could
be one explanation for obtaining >9 times increased IgG antibody
response
toward CBU by simply displaying the antigen on the nanoparticle platform
(relative to unbound antigen). This also supports the premise that
B cell activation can be augmented by the decoration of nanoparticles
with repetitive epitopes; the repetitive geometry and spatial configuration
of NP-attached antigens mimic natural pathogens such as viruses, which
can yield strong innate adjuvating outcomes by improving uptake by
antigen-presenting cells and enabling binding and simultaneous activation
of multiple B cell receptors. , 

## Adjuvant, Either Co-administered in Solution or Encapsulated
within the Nanoparticle, Increases Anti-CBU1910 Titers
The
IgG responses obtained with CpG-E2-based formulations were comparable
to the positive control oil-in-water emulsion adjuvant, IVAX, a combination
adjuvant consisting of AddaVax (a squalene-based adjuvant), monophosphoryl-lipid
A (MPLA), and CpG1018, that has been shown to induce broadly reactive
responses to influenza HA proteins (Group
f, D). Our
previous in vitro studies using CpG-E2 nanoparticles
demonstrated that once taken up by a cell, encapsulated CpG can be
released from the nanoparticle in an acidic environment and activate
mouse bone marrow-derived dendritic cells. Furthermore, encapsulated CpG was shown to activate these cells
at significantly lower concentrations than unbound CpG, indicating
the need for bioconjugation of CpG to the nanoparticle. Other studies have also shown that alternative
types of nanoparticles which simultaneously deliver both conjugated
CpG and antigen can increase the immunogenicity and immune response
mounted against the target antigen. , , − Thus, to deliver adjuvants more
precisely to immune cells involved in adaptive immunity, such as dendritic
cells, CpG was encapsulated within the nanoparticle in an approach
that increases uptake efficiency of CpG and the dose of CpG that an
individual cell receives upon endocytosing a nanoparticle versus free
unbound CpG. The effects of CpG adjuvant and its delivery covalently
encapsulated within the E2 NP (CBU-CpG-E2) or co-administered with
the E2 NP by mixing only (CBU-E2 + CpG) showed comparable results
on total IgG responses (Groups c–e, D). Addition of IVAX to the CBU1910-CpG-E2
formulation further increased the overall anti-CBU1910 IgG response
( D, Group g).

## E2 Formulations That Contained an Adjuvant Elicited More Balanced
IgG1/IgG2c Antibody Responses
Antibody class switching to
IgG1 and IgG2c is associated with the cytokine profiles released from
Th2 and Th1 lymphocytes, respectively. Th2 responses are described
by B cell proliferation, antibody production, and induction of IgG1
antibodies. , Th1 responses are characterized
by the activation of antigen-presenting cells, stimulation of T cells,
and induction of IgG2c antibodies. − Thus, IgG1 and IgG2c
production can be used as indicators of Th2 and Th1 responses, respectively.
Profiles of the IgG1 and IgG2c antibody responses suggest modulation
capabilities that depend on the adjuvant used and whether it was loaded
in the E2 nanoparticle ( E,F). Soluble CBU1910 (Group a) elicited a very weak total
IgG response that was slightly skewed toward IgG1 (Th2). Loading CBU1910
onto nanoparticles (CBU1910-E2, Group c) significantly increased total
IgG (predominantly IgG1 (Th2)), with some measurable IgG2c (Th1) isotype
switched antibodies, suggesting that the E2 NP may have some inherent
Th1 skewing properties in the absence of any TLR agonists. The addition
of soluble CpG1826 to CBU1910-E2 particles (CBU1910-E2 + CpG1826;
Group d) further increased the shift toward a Th1 response as expected,
although few of these shifts were significantly different from CBU1910-E2
alone and did not significantly alter IgG1/IgG2c ratios. Uniquely,
when CpG1826 was internally conjugated to the E2 vaccine particle
(CBU1910-CpG1826-E2; Group e), the total IgG amount did not significantly
change, but the nature of the response shifted toward a Th1 response,
as indicated by a more balanced IgG1/IgG2c ratio, compared to soluble
or no CpG adjuvant addition ( E,F). Our data show that nanoparticles loaded with
CpG elicited a more balanced IgG1/IgG2c response. Addition of IVAX
to the CBU1910-CpG-E2 nanoparticle slightly increased IgG1 and IgG2c
responses without greatly affecting the subtype balance conferred
by the E2 formulation itself.

## Immunization with C. burnetii Antigen Loaded
onto E2 Nanoparticles Increased Antigen-Specific IFN-γ Secretion
The more balanced IgG1/IgG2c antibody ratio elicited by CBU1910-CpG-E2
suggests that T cell responses toward the CBU1910 antigen are likely
to be produced. However, when we examined the effector T cell response,
we found that antigen-specific IFN-γ responses (which corresponds
to an IgG2c/Th1 response) were low in mice that were administered
CBU1910-CpG-E2 alone ( A and Figure SI-6). The addition
of IVAX to this formulation significantly increased the level of IFN-γ
secretion. This observation was not expected, given the similar levels
of antigen-specific IgG2c production after immunization with the CBU1910-CpG-E2
nanoparticle, both with and without IVAX. The unexpectedly low IFN-γ
response from formulations that induced IgG2c/Th1 responses compared
to IVAX, such as CBU1910-CpG-E2, may have resulted from cytokines
other than IFN-γ (including IL-2, IL-10, or TNF-α) driving
the IgG2c response, or a different temporal release of IFN-γ
(assayed after 18 h of restimulation with antigen, only). Further
experiments would be necessary to test these hypotheses. Another reason
for this discrepancy could stem from the TLR-4 agonist (MPLA) and
TLR-9 agonist (CpG1018) present in IVAX. It has been shown that simultaneous
stimulation of cell-surface and endosomal TLR receptors can cause
synergistic increases in the activating/inflammatory immune response,
and the soluble delivery of the adjuvants may cause a more systemic
initial innate immune response. , This differs from the
delivery of CpG via a nanoparticle, which avoids non-specific systemic
immune system stimulation due to encapsulation and increases uptake
by antigen presenting cells (i.e., dendritic cells). Furthermore, previous studies that co-delivered peptide
antigens and adjuvant for cancer vaccines resulted in dosages of ∼2–5
μg of CpG and ∼2–5 μg of T cell immunogenic
peptide epitopes; − however, for this protein antigen vaccine, both the
CpG and immunodominant T cell epitope dosage were nearly an order
of magnitude less than typically dosed for the peptide formulations
of the cancer studies.
 To determine if an E2 formulation was capable of
inducing a strong
antigen-specific T cell response toward C. burnetii, we examined if a peptide antigen (rather than protein antigen)
coupled to the E2 NP could increase the cell-mediated response. Peptide
antigens were conjugated to the NP using a linker and characterized,
as described in the Supporting Information. Interestingly, we observed that immunizing with the CBU1910p-CpG-E2
formulation, an E2 nanoparticle loaded with the immunodominant CD4
T cell epitope peptide of CBU1910, HYLVNHPEVLVEASQ
(CBU1910p), not only generated a higher frequency of CBU1910p-specific
T cells, compared to soluble CBU1910p immunization, but also induced
strong CBU1910-specific IFN-γ secretion ( B and Figure SI-6). This confirms that this peptide is a bona fide epitope generated
by the natural processing of the whole CBU1910 antigen. This CBU1910p
formulation allows for the delivery of ∼50-fold more of the
immunodominant T cell epitope and ∼6-fold more of CpG than
the CBU1910-bound NP formulation (Figure SI-7). These data suggest that using this epitope may be sufficient to
elicit a strong cellular immune response toward the immunodominant
protein antigen of C. burnetii, CBU1910. Given the
strong antibody and T cell responses observed from the CBU1910-based
and CBU1910p E2 NP formulations, respectively, a potential co-administration
of the two warrants further investigations.

## Conclusions
We investigated three methods of conjugating
the C. burnetii immunodominant protein antigen, CBU1910,
to a protein nanoparticle:
genetic fusion, tris-NTA-Ni linker, and ST/SC. We determined that
ST/SC yielded vaccine nanoparticles with the highest antigen loading,
had the capacity to internally encapsulate adjuvant, and could be
formulated to yield stable, monodisperse particles. We engineered
this platform, ST-E2(D381C), to allow for the simultaneous packing
of Th1-skewing adjuvant, CpG, within the interior of the nanoparticle
and displaying of protein antigen, CBU1910, on its surface. By displaying
the antigen on the nanoparticle only, i.e., in the absence of CpG
adjuvant, significant increases in antigen-specific IgG antibodies
were observed in immunized mice compared to soluble antigen alone.
The addition of an encapsulated or co-administered adjuvant balanced
the IgG1/IgG2c antibody profile, which suggests induction of both
Th1 (associated with cellular immunity) and Th2 (associated with humoral
immunity) responses.
Both antibodies and T cells have been shown
to contribute toward
host-mediated protection against C. burnetii infection.
While antibodies play an important role during the early stages of
extracellular infection, T cell activation is vital for clearance
of intracellular bacteria. Of particular
significance are Th1 cells, identified by class switched B cells to
produce IgG2c and IFN-γ positive CD4 T cells. Th1 cells contribute
toward immunity by polarizing macrophages toward an M1 phenotype that
is less permissive for intracellular C. burnetii. Th1 cells also support the activation of cytotoxic
T cells, which target infected cells and aid in the formation of protective
granulomas that surround parasitized cells. Moreover, Th1 cells contribute
to long-term immunity through the generation of memory responses.
A balance between antibody mediated and Th1 mediated immunity is essential
for effective protection against C. burnetii. To
confirm the presence of cell-mediated immunity more directly, we show
that vaccination with a CBU1910 CD4 epitope peptide conjugated to
E2 elicits robust Th1 responses, as measured via the T cell recall
assay with IFN-γ ELISpot. This peptide-conjugation strategy
has clear potential to confer protection against a pathogen with both
extra- and intracellular stages to its life cycle, such as C. burnetii, which requires activation of both humoral and
cellular arms of the immune system to grant protection.

## Materials and Methods

## Materials
All buffer and cloning reagents were purchased
from Fisher Scientific unless otherwise noted. All cloning enzymes
were purchased from New England Biolabs (NEB), unless otherwise noted.
DH5α and BL21(DE3) E. coli were
used for general cloning and expression studies, respectively. DNA
minipreps and gel extractions were performed with the QIAprep Spin
Miniprep Kit (Qiagen) and GeneJET Gel Extraction Kit (Thermo Fisher
Scientific), respectively. DNA primers were synthesized and ordered
from Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT). CloneJET PCR cloning kit (Thermo
Fisher Scientific) was used for all polymerase chain reactions (PCRs).
Plasmid pET11a was used as the expression vector for all protein constructs.

## Construction of CBU1910-E2 Fusion Protein Mutants
Previously
established E2 mutants E2_152 and E2_158 were used to engineer CBU1910-E2
fusion constructs. , D381C is an E2 mutation that
introduces 60 cysteines to the internal cavity of the nanoparticle,
allowing for internal conjugation. , To introduce
the D381C mutation to E2_158 and E2_152 via site directed mutagenesis
(SDM) , the forward primer: 5′-/5Phos/GCCGATCGTTCGTTGCGGTGAAATCGTTGC-3′
and reverse primer: 5′-/5Phos/TTTTCGGCTATACGACCAATACCCAG-3′
were used. To introduce the DNA cut sites required for ligation to
the N-terminus of E2 mutants, Nde1 and Nhe1 cut sites were introduced
to the N-terminus DNA coding region and C-terminus DNA coding region,
respectively, of CBU1910 using the forward primer: 5′-CATATGCACCATCACCATCACCATCCGCAGCAAGTCAAAGACATTCAG-3′
and reverse primer: 5′-GCTAGCTTAGCCGCCGGTTTCCGG-3′.
The plasmid encoding the CBU1910 protein (with its signal peptide
deleted and portion of N-terminus truncated) was previously synthesized
by GenScript Biotech , and was used as the DNA template
for all genetic engineering of the protein antigen.
A standard
Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase protocol was used for PCRs. These
reactions were performed in a thermal cycler using a 30 s denaturation
step at 98 °C, followed by 30 cycles of 15 s at 98 °C, 15
s at 58 °C (E2 D381C mutation) or 53 °C (CBU1910), and 7
min (E2 D381C mutation) or 45 s (CBU1910) at 72 °C, with a final
step of 10 min at 72 °C. The CBU1910 gene was then ligated via
the Nde1/Nhe1 sites of a pET11a vector that contained the E2 gene
between Nhe1/BamH1. Sequencing was performed by GeneWiz/Azenta, and
DNA and protein sequences are given in the Supporting Information.

## Expression of CBU1910-E2 Fusion Protein Mutants
The
CBU1910-E2 fusion protein was expressed in a similar fashion to previous
mutants described. , , Expression studies were performed for each mutant and controls.
Proteins were expressed in BL21(DE3) E. coli via 1 mM IPTG induction. After induction for 3 h at 37 °C,
cells were pelleted and stored at −80 °C. Cells were thawed
and lysed by vortexing with glass beads. Soluble and insoluble lysates
were centrifuged at 18000 × g for 15 min and
analyzed using SDS-PAGE for molecular weight and soluble:insoluble
ratios.

## Conjugation of mal-tNTA to E2 (E279C)
E2 (E297C) is
an E2 mutant that displays 60 cysteines on its surface that can be
used for thiol-based functionalization. We have reported the generation of tNTA-E2 nanoparticles previously. Purified E2 (E279C) in 20 mM HEPES and 100 mM
NaCl (pH 7.3) was incubated with an 8.5× molar excess of TCEP
(Thermo Fisher Scientific; dissolved in Milli-Q water). A 10×
molar excess of maleimido cyclic tris-NTA (mal-tNTA) (diluted to 4
mg/mL in DMF) was added to the E2 and incubated at room temperature
for 2 h and then at 4 °C overnight. Unreacted mal-tNTA, DMF,
and TCEP were removed using Zeba spin desalting columns in 20 mM HEPES
and 100 mM NaCl. Conjugation efficiency and characterization were
determined using SDS-PAGE and mass spectrometry (Xevo G2-XS QTof)
(Figure SI-8). The hydrodynamic diameter
of the purified constructs was analyzed by dynamic light scattering
(DLS) (Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS).

## Attachment of His6-Tagged CBU1910 to tNTA-E2
Attachment of CBU1910-(His)6 to tNTA-E2 nanoparticles
followed similar procedures established using other protein-(His)n antigens. Briefly, a 10×
molar excess of NiCl2 was incubated with tNTA-E2 for 2
h at room temperature and subsequently purified from unchelated Ni
using Zeba spin desalting columns into 20 mM HEPES + 360 mM NaCl buffer
pH 7.3. To test optimal conjugation, varying molar ratios of (His)6-tagged CBU1910 (previously synthesized ) were added to the Ni-tNTA-E2 and incubated at room temperature
for 2 h. The Ni-tNTA-E2 + CBU1910-(His)6 reaction required
optimization to yield unaggregated/precipitated constructs, the details
of which are described in the Supporting Information. After conjugation, solutions were purified with size exclusion
chromatography (SEC) using a Superose 6 Increase 10/300 GL column
(Cytiva) on a FPLC (AKTA, Cytiva). Fractions from the SEC were run
on an SDS-PAGE gel and stained with a Pierce Silver Stain Kit (Thermo
Fisher Scientific) to determine the presence of CBU1910-E2, E2, and
CBU1910, and conjugation efficiencies were estimated by evaluating
band intensities with standards. Fractions containing CBU1910-E2 were
combined and concentrated with a centrifuge concentrator (Vivaspin
6, 10,000 MWCO). Protein concentration was measured via a bicinchoninic
acid assay kit (Pierce). Nanoparticle size was assessed via dynamic
light scattering (DLS).

## Construction of SpyTag-E2 Mutants and SpyCatcher-CBU1910 Fusion
Protein
Previously established mutants E2(D381C) and E2_152
were used to engineer the SpyTag-E2 platforms. To introduce the D381C
mutation to E2_152 via site directed mutagenesis (SDM) the forward
primer: 5′-/5Phos/GCCGATCGTTCGTTGCGGTGAAATCGTTGC-3′
and reverse primer: 5′-/5Phos/TTTTCGGCTATACGACCAATACCCAG-3′
were used. Introduction of the SpyTag to E2(D381C) and E2_152 was
done using the forward primers: 5′-CATATGGCCCACATCGTTATGGTGGATGCCTACAAGCCAACTAAAGGTTCAGGAACAGCAGGTGGTGGGTCAGGTTCCCTGTCTGTTCCTGGTCCCGC-3′
and 5′-CATATGGCCCACATCGTTATGGTGGATGCCTACAAGCCAACTAAAGCTAGCACCGGCAAAAATGGTCG-3′,
respectively. E2 mutants used the same reverse primer: 5′-GGATCCTTAAGCTTCCATCAGCAGCAGTTCCGG-3′.
The plasmid encoding the truncated CBU1910 protein was previously
synthesized by GenScript Biotech. , The plasmid
containing the SpyCatcher gene (pDEST14-SpyCatcher) was obtained from
Addgene. To introduce the endonuclease sites and GS-rich spacer on
CBU1910 for fusion to SpyCatcher, the forward primer was 5′-GCTAGCGGTTCAGGAACAGCAGGTGGTGGGTCAGGTTCCCCGCAGCAAGTCAAAGACATTC-3′
and the reverse primer was 5′-GGATCCTTATTTTTCGACACGGTCAATTTCTTTTTGCAGG-3′.
To introduce the endonuclease sites on SpyCatcher, the forward primer
5′-CATATGTCGTACTACCATCACCATCACCATCACG-3′
and reverse primer 5′-GCTAGCAATATGAGCGTCACCTTTAGTTGCTTTGCC-3′
were used. A standard Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase protocol
was used for PCRs. These reactions were performed in a thermal cycler
using a 30 s denaturation step at 98 °C, followed by 30 cycles
of 15 s at 98 °C, 15 s at 56 °C (SpyTag introduced to E2)
or 55 °C (SpyCatcher) or 52 °C (CBU1910), and 45 s (SpyTag
introduced to E2) or 40 s (SpyCatcher) or 45 s (CBU1910) at 72 °C,
with a final step of 10 min at 72 °C. Sequencing was performed
by GeneWiz/Azenta, and DNA and protein sequences are given in Supporting Information.

## Expression, Purification, and Characterization of SpyTag-E2
Particles
The new E2 protein mutants were prepared similarly
to previously described mutants. , , Expression analysis of the ST-E2 mutants is described
in Supplementary Methods. Mutant ST-E2(D381C)
was ultimately chosen for scale up expression. Briefly, a 1 L culture
supplemented with 100 μg/mL of ampicillin was inoculated with
an overnight culture at 37 °C until an OD of 0.7–0.9 at
which time it was induced by 1 mM IPTG and further incubated for 3
h at 37 °C. Cells were pelleted and stored at −80 °C
overnight before breaking. Cells were lysed using a lysing buffer
containing 3 mM PMSF and French Press (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Soluble cell lysates are heat shocked at 70 °C and ultracentrifuged
to remove thermolabile containments. Subsequently, the lysates were
purified using a HiPrep Q Sepharose anion exchange column (GE Healthcare)
followed by a Superose 6 prep grade (GE Healthcare) size exclusion
column. The purified proteins were characterized by DLS (Zetasizer
Nano ZS, Malvern), mass spectrometry (Xevo G2-XS QTof) and SDS-PAGE,
and bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) for size, molecular weight and
purity, and protein concentration, respectively.
The residual E. coli expression derived lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
was removed following a previously described method. Briefly, Triton X-114 (Sigma) was added to the purified
protein at 1% (v/v), chilled to 4 °C, vortexed vigorously, and
heated to 37 °C. The mixture was then centrifuged at 18000 × g and 37 °C for
1 min, and the protein-containing aqueous phase was separated from
the detergent phase. This total process was repeated 9 times. Residual
Triton was removed with detergent removal spin columns (Pierce). LPS
levels were tested to be below 0.1 EU per microgram of E2 protein
(LAL ToxinSensor gel clot assay, Genscript).

## Expression, Purification, and Characterization of SpyCatcher-CBU1910
The SpyCatcher-CBU1910 fusion protein was expressed in a fashion
similar to that of the E2 particles. Proteins were expressed in E. coli via 1 mM IPTG induction. After induction
for 3 h at 37 °C, the cells were pelleted and stored at −80
°C before breaking. Cells were lysed via French Press and soluble
protein was purified using a HisPur Ni-NTA resin batch protocol (Thermo
Fisher Scientific). Briefly, soluble cell lysates were mixed with
equal parts equilibration buffer and applied to a HisPur Ni-NTA affinity
spin column using a packing ratio of 1.5 mL of resin per 10 mL of
lysate slurry. The lysate was allowed to incubate with the resin for
1 h at 4 °C. Wash buffers and elution buffer containing 75 and
150 mM imidazole, and 250 mM imidazole, respectively, were used to
attain pure SC-CBU1910. Pure protein fractions were collected and
dialyzed into PBS to remove imidazole using 6–8 kDa MWCO dialysis
tubing. The purified protein was characterized by mass spectrometry
(Xevo G2-XS QTof) and SDS-PAGE, and BCA for molecular weight and purity,
and protein concentration, respectively.
Residual E. coli expression derived LPS was removed in a similar
fashion to the E2 protein. Residual Triton was removed with detergent
removal spin columns (Pierce) or SM2 detergent removal beads (Bio-Rad).
LPS levels were below 0.1 EU per microgram of SC-CBU1910 protein (LAL
ToxinSensor gel clot assay, Genscript).

## CpG and SpyCatcher Conjugation onto SpyTag-E2 Particles
The oligodeoxynucleotide TLR-9 ligand CpG 1826 (5′-tccatgacgttcctgacgtt-3′)
(CpG) was synthesized with a phosphorothioated backbone and 5′
benzaldehyde modification by Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT). CpG
was conjugated to the internal cavity of the E2 nanoparticle as described
previously. In brief, the internal cavity
cysteines of E2 were reduced with TCEP (Pierce) for 30 min, followed
by incubation with the N-(β-maleimidopropionic
acid) hydrazide (BMPH) linker (Pierce) for 2 h at room temperature
(RT). Unreacted linker was removed using 40 kDa cutoff Zeba spin desalting
columns (Pierce). The aldehyde-modified CpG was subsequently added
and incubated overnight at RT. Unreacted CpG was removed by desalting
spin columns. Conjugation was estimated by SDS-PAGE and measured by
band intensity analysis. 
Directly
incubating SpyCatcher-CBU1910 and SpyTag-E2 particles allowed for
spontaneous isopeptide bond formation and conjugation. SC-CBU1910
proteins were incubated with ST-E2 particles at a ∼0.5:1 (SC-CBU1910:ST-E2
monomer) molar ratio, supplemented with 0.080–0.0875% (w/v)
Sarkosyl (SLS), for 20 h at room temperature. SDS-PAGE densitometry
analysis with protein standards was used to quantify protein loading
onto the particles. DLS and transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
were used to measure the size, assembly, and monodispersity of the
particles. Transmission electron micrographs of 2% uranyl acetate-stained
nanoparticles on Cu 200 or 300 mesh carbon coated grids were obtained
on a JEM-2100F (JEOL) instrument with a Gatan OneView camera (Gatan).
Further details describing the optimization trials required to
determine the final formulation condition can be found in Supplementary Methods.

## Mice and Immunizations
All animal studies were carried
out in accordance with protocols approved by the Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the University of California, Irvine.
Briefly, 6–8-week-old female C57BL/6 mice (n = 5) were immunized subcutaneously at the left flank on Day 0 and
followed by a booster on Day 14. Injections were 30 μL per mouse
and contained definite amounts of CBU1910, E2, and CpG, based on the
formulations investigated. In groups that used the adjuvant, IVAX,
an equal volume of IVAX to formulation was supplemented (i.e., 30
μL of E2 formulation + 30 μL IVAX). IVAX contains Addavax
(InvivoGen), 1 nmol of CpG 1018, and 3 nmol of MPLA. Seven days after
the last immunization, mice were sacrificed, blood was collected via
cardiac puncture, and spleens were isolated.
For peptide (CBU1910p)
formulations, the same prime boost immunization schedule was followed
as described above. Each dosage of the peptide formulation contained
10 μg of CBU1910p and 5 μg of CpG 1826 (when indicated).

## Protein Microarrays
Protein microarrays were fabricated
as previously described. Briefly, CBU1910
protein was diluted to a concentration of 0.1 mg/mL and printed onto
nitrocellulose-coated glass Oncyte Avid slides (Grace Bio-Laboratories)
using an Omni Grid 100 microarray printer (Genomic Solutions). For
probing, mouse plasma samples were diluted 1:100 in protein array
blocking buffer supplemented with 10 mg/mL E. coli lysate (GenScript) and His-tag containing peptide HHHHHHHHGGGG
(Biomatik) to a concentration of 0.1 mg/mL to block anti-polyhistidine
antibodies. Arrays were rehydrated with blocking buffer prior to addition
of preincubated sera. Arrays were incubated overnight at 4 °C
with gentle agitation. After overnight incubation, the slides were
washed with Tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing 0.05% Tween 20 (T-TBS)
and incubated with biotinylated-SP-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG,
IgG1, or IgG2c (Jackson Immunoresearch). Arrays were washed with T-TBS
and incubated with streptavidin conjugated Qdot-800 (ThermoFisher).
Arrays were washed three times with T-TBS followed by TBS, dipped
in water, and dried by centrifugation. Images were acquired using
the ArrayCAM imaging system (Grace Bio-Laboratories). Spot and background
intensities were measured using an annotated grid (.gal) file. IgG1
and IgG2c antibody subtype proportions were calculated using respective
signal intensities: IgG1/(IgG1 + IgG2c) and IgG2c/(IgG1+IgG2c), respectively. 

## T Cell Recall Assays
Recall assays were performed using
IFN-γ ELISpot format and spleens collected on day 21 essentially
as previously described. Antigens used
for recall were C. burnetii CBU1910 and OVA as an
irrelevant control antigen. Assays were performed in Roswell Park
Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640, containing 5 × 10–5 M β-mercaptoethanol, 100 IU/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL
streptomycin, and 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (complete
medium). Briefly, erythrocyte-depleted splenocytes were incubated
at 5 × 105 cells per well in 96-well ELISpot plates,
coated previously with IFN-γ capture antibody, and blocked in
complete medium, containing titrations of antigen ranging from 2.5
to 10 μg/mL. Mice were assayed separately. Concanavalin A was
included as a viability control.

## Statistical Analysis
For nanoparticle characterization,
including hydrodynamic diameter measurements, molecular weights determined
by mass spectrometry, and antigen/nanoparticle ratios, data are presented
as the mean ± standard deviation (S.D.) of at least three independent
experiments (n ≥ 3), unless otherwise noted.
Statistical analysis of immunization data was carried out by using
GraphPad Prism. Data are presented as mean ± standard error of
the mean (S.E.M.) from at least five independent individuals (n ≥ 5). Statistical analysis was determined by a
one-way or two-way ANOVA over all groups, followed by a Bonferroni
multiple comparison test, unless otherwise noted. P-values less than 0.05 were considered significant.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Defense
Threat Reduction Agency
(DTRA) (Awards HDTRA11810035 and HDTRA11810036), the National Institutes
of Health (R01EB027797), and a Graduate Research Fellowship from the
National Science Foundation (NSF) to A.R. We acknowledge the use of
transmission electron microscopy facilities and instrumentation at
the UC Irvine Materials Research Institute (IMRI), which is supported
in part by the National Science Foundation through the UC Irvine Materials
Research Science and Engineering Center (DMR-2011967). We thank Drs.
Felix Grun and Benjamin Katz at the UCI Mass Spectrometry Facility
and Dr. Nicholas Molino for plasmids containing E2_152 and E2_158.
Portions of Figures 1, 2, 3, 4, SI-1, SI-3, SI-7, and the Table of Contents Graphic were created with BioRender.com.
E2 protein structure was obtained from Protein Data Bank (PDB; 1b5s).

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.3c00317.
Supplementary Tables: Abbreviations and description
of vaccine components; DNA and protein sequences. Supplementary Figures:
Direct recombinant fusion of CBU1910 onto E2 protein nanoparticles;
tNTA-Ni + CBU1910 conjugation conditions optimization; Expression
and characterization of ST-E2 and SC-CBU1910; Alphafold2 Colab prediction
of CBU1910; ST/SC reaction conditions optimization; ELISpot analysis
of splenocytes after immunizations; Conjugation of CBU1910p onto E2
nanoparticles;
Representative mass spectrometry data for tNTA-E2. Supplementary Methods:
Expression analysis of SpyTag-E2 particles; Reaction optimizations
to synthesize final ST/SC CBU1910-E2 formulation; Loading C. burnetii peptide antigen onto E2 nanoparticles (PDF)

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
bc3c00317_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
bc3c00317_si_001.pdf