2171redoxRedox BiologyRedox BiolElsevierPMC1173306111733061117330613970979010.1016/j.redox.2024.103464Model organisms for investigating the functional involvement of NRF2 in non-communicable diseases
RojoAna I ButtariBrigitta CadenasSusana CarlosAna Rita CuadradoAntonio FalcãoAna Sofia LópezManuela G GeorgievMilen I Grochot-PrzeczekAnna GumeniSentiljana Jimenez-VillegasJosé HorbanczukJarosław Olav KonuOzlen Lastres-BeckerIsabel LevonenAnna-Liisa MaksimovaViktorija MichaeloudesCharalambos MihaylovaLiliya V MickaelMichel Edwar MilisavIrina MiovaBiljana RadaPatricia SantosMarlene SeabraMiguel C StracDubravka Svob TenreiroSandra TrougakosIoannis P Dinkova-KostovaAlbena T aDepartment of Biochemistry, Medical College, Autonomous University of Madrid (UAM), Madrid, SpainbInstituto de Investigación Sanitaria La Paz (IdiPaz), Madrid, SpaincCentro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Madrid, SpaindDepartment of Cardiovascular, Endocrine-Metabolic Diseases, and Aging, Italian National Institute of Health, 00161, Rome, ItalyeCentro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC/UAM), Cantoblanco, Madrid, SpainfCE3C-CHANGE, Department of Animal Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Lisbon, 1749-016, Lisbon, PortugalgiNOVA4Health, NOVA Medical School|Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, NMS|FCM, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, Lisboa, PortugalhDepartamento de Farmacología y Terapéutica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, SpainiInstituto de Investigación Sanitaria La Princesa, Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, Madrid, SpainjDepartment of Plant Cell Biotechnology, Center of Plant Systems Biology and Biotechnology, 4000, Plovdiv, BulgariakLaboratory of Metabolomics, Institute of Microbiology, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, 139 Ruski Blvd., 4000, Plovdiv, BulgarialDepartment of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biochemistry Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, 30-387, Krakow, PolandmDepartment of Cell Biology and Biophysics, Faculty of Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, 15784, GreecenDepartment of Experimental Genomics, Institute of Genetics and Animal Biotechnology, 36A Postępu, Jastrzębiec, 05-552, PolandoDepartment of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bilkent University, Ankara, TurkeypDepartment of Neuroscience, Bilkent University, Ankara, TurkeyqUNAM-Institute of Materials Science and Nanotechnology, Bilkent University, Ankara, TurkeyrInstitute Teófilo Hernando for Drug Discovery, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28029, Madrid, SpainsA.I. Virtanen Institute for Molecular Sciences, University of Eastern Finland, P.O. Box 1627, FI-70210, Kuopio, FinlandtDepartment of Applied Pharmacy, Division of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Goce Delcev University, Stip, Krste Misirkov Str., No. 10-A, P.O. Box 201, 2000, Stip, MacedoniauSchool of Medicine, European University Cyprus, Nicosia, CyprusvInstitute of Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Zaloska 4, 1000, Ljubljana, SloveniawLaboratory of oxidative stress research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Ljubljana, Zdravstvena pot 5, 1000, Ljubljana, SloveniaxDepartment of Experimental Physiology and Biochemistry, Institute of Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, University "St Cyril and Methodius", Skopje, MacedoniayInstituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Sols-Morreale (IIBM), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, SpainzCentro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), Madrid, SpainaaREQUIMTE/LAQV, Escola Superior de Saúde (E2S), Instituto Politécnico do Porto, Rua Dr. António Bernardino de Almeida 400, 4200-072, Porto, PortugalabMolecular Oncology & Viral Pathology, IPO-Porto Research Center (CI-IPOP), Portuguese Institute of Oncology, 4200-072, Porto, PortugalacLaboratory for Molecular Neuropsychiatry, Division of Molecular Medicine, Ruder Boskovic Institute, 10 000, Zagreb, CroatiaadJacqui Wood Cancer Centre, Division of Cancer Research, School of Medicine, University of Dundee, Dundee, UKaeDepartment of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences and Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USAafInstituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Sols-Morreale (CSIC-UAM), Madrid, Spain⁎Corresponding author. Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Sols-Morreale", C/Arturo Duperier, 4. 28029, Madrid, Spain. airojo@iib.uam.es
16122024791034641034641512025© 2024 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).This article has been corrected. See Redox Biol. 2025 Jan 19;80:103496.

## Abstract
Non-communicable chronic diseases (NCDs) are most commonly characterized by age-related loss of homeostasis and/or by cumulative exposures to environmental factors, which lead to low-grade sustained generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), chronic inflammation and metabolic imbalance. Nuclear factor erythroid 2-like 2 (NRF2) is a basic leucine-zipper transcription factor that regulates the cellular redox homeostasis. NRF2 controls the expression of more than 250 human genes that share in their regulatory regions a cis-acting enhancer termed the antioxidant response element (ARE). The products of these genes participate in numerous functions including biotransformation and redox homeostasis, lipid and iron metabolism, inflammation, proteostasis, as well as mitochondrial dynamics and energetics. Thus, it is possible that a single pharmacological NRF2 modulator might mitigate the effect of the main hallmarks of NCDs, including oxidative, proteostatic, inflammatory and/or metabolic stress. Research on model organisms has provided tremendous knowledge of the molecular mechanisms by which NRF2 affects NCDs pathogenesis. This review is a comprehensive summary of the most commonly used model organisms of NCDs in which NRF2 has been genetically or pharmacologically modulated, paving the way for drug development to combat NCDs. We discuss the validity and use of these models and identify future challenges.
Keywords: Inflammation, Model organisms, Non-communicable chronic diseases, NRF2, Oxidative stress

## Highlights
•Model organisms are crucial for studying NRF2's role in health and disease.
•Models range from worms to mammals to explore NRF2-regulated pathways.
•NRF2 research has led to clinical trials and two activators in clinical use.
•Challenges remain in developing NRF2 modulators for non-communicable diseases.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Oct 25; Revised 2024 Nov 26; Accepted 2024 Dec 8; Collection date 2025 Feb.

1.

## Introduction
Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) are a group of long-lasting and slowly progressive chronic disorders that have become the leading causes of death; they include cancers, cardiovascular diseases, chronic respiratory diseases, neurodegenerative diseases, diabetes, and many others [ ]. NCDs are mainly caused by environmental conditions, and very often they are characterized at the molecular level by disrupted homeostasis, oxidative stress, and chronic inflammation [ ]. The transcription factor nuclear factor erythroid 2-like 2 (NRF2, encoded by NFE2L2), is a master regulator of homeostatic and adaptive responses that continues to emerge as a critical mediator of a wide range of cellular functions [ ].
NRF2 was first discovered and cloned in 1994 as a protein that could bind a tandem repeat of the consensus site for the transcription factors activating protein 1 (AP-1) and Nuclear Factor, Erythroid 2 (NF-E2) [ , ]. Studies in NRF2-disrupted mice found a significant decrease in the levels of glutathione-S-transferase (GST) and NAD(P)H: quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) in the intestine and liver compared to wild-type mice following administration of phenolic antioxidants, suggesting that NRF2 governs a distinct set of genes from NF-E2 [ ].
NRF2 belongs to the cap ‘n’ collar (CNC) family of bZIP transcription factors, together with p45 NF-E2, NRF1 and NRF3, and acts through the formation of a heterodimer with one of the small MAF proteins [ , ]. These heterodimers activate the expression of more than 250 genes that contain in their regulatory sequences the antioxidant response element (ARE) [ , ]. Analysis of the co-crystal structures of NRF2-MAFG-ARE complexes show that the CNC motif stabilizes the conformation of Arg residues in the basic region in contact with DNA phosphates [ ] ( ). Notably, NRF2 is a protein comprised of seven NRF2-ECH homology (Neh) domains, each serving a specific function. Neh4 and Neh5 serve as transactivation domains, facilitating the recruitment of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB)-binding protein (CBP) and/or receptor-associated coactivator 3 (RAC3). Neh7 plays a crucial role in binding to the negative regulator retinoid X receptor alpha (RXRα), while Neh6 is responsible for interacting with β-transducin repeat-containing protein (β-TrCP), a negative regulator. Neh1 is responsible for forming a heterodimer with the small sMAF protein [ ]. NRF2 activity is mainly regulated at the protein level through a continuous process of synthesis and degradation. Under normal (non-stressed) conditions, NRF2 abundance is principally controlled by Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (KEAP1), an E3 ubiquitin ligase substrate adaptor that targets NRF2 for ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation [ ]. The continual degradation of NRF2 ensures that only a fraction of newly synthesized NRF2 enters the nucleus to control baseline gene expression. The KEAP1 protein contains a bric-a-brac, tramtrack, broad complex (BTB) domain (also known as poxvirus and zinc finger, POZ, domain), an intervening region (IVR) and a Kelch domain known also as double-glycine repeat (DGR) domain ( ) [ ]. Through the DGR domain within each monomer, the KEAP1 homodimer binds to the DLG and ETGE motifs in the Neh2 domain of NRF2 [ , ]. KEAP1 has several cysteine residues in its sequence that are susceptible to modification by electrophiles, resulting in the inactivation of KEAP1 and the stabilization of NRF2 [ ]. In addition to KEAP1, at least three other systems regulate NRF2 proteasomal degradation: the β-TrCP- Cullin1/Rbx1 E3 ligase complex [ ], the WD repeat-containing protein 23 (WDR23)-DDB1-Cullin4 E3 ligase complex [ ], and the E3 ubiquitin ligase HMG-CoA reductase degradation 1 homolog (HRD1) [ ].
 Overall, our knowledge of NRF2 function has significantly broadened since its discovery, largely due to research involving model organisms. Numerous studies have highlighted the roles of NRF2 in physiology and its dysregulation during the development and progression of several diseases. Herein, we discuss the crucial role that model organisms play in advancing our understanding of NRF2 mechanisms of action in NCDs. Furthermore, we explore the therapeutic potential of NRF2 in the prevention and treatment of multiple NCDs.

2.

## Target engagement of NRF2 in non-communicable diseases: regulation of redox and inflammatory balance
The cell contains approximately 20,000 protein-coding genes. Some of them play an imperative role in the regulation of cellular processes and, as such, are often described as guardians. For example, p53 and AMPK are usually dubbed guardians of the genome and metabolism, respectively. Similarly, NRF2 is considered a master orchestrator of cellular homeostasis. Mechanistically, direct transactivation of the expression of more than 250 genes related to redox balance, detoxification, inflammation, metabolism and proteostasis by NRF2 rewires cytoprotective signaling to support the maintenance of stable conditions in cells [ ]. Considering this cytoprotective activity, NRF2 is a promising molecular target since oxidative damage and inflammation are the molecular signature of NCDs underpinning their development.
A stable redox environment is a prerequisite for the maintenance of cellular homeostasis. It is well established that the overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS), reactive nitrogen species (RNS) and the impairment of internal antioxidant defensive mechanisms underlie the development of a variety of health conditions, including diabetes, cancer, and neurodegenerative and cardiovascular disorders. Cells use multiple pathways to catabolise ROS and defend against oxidative stress. They include non-enzymatic antioxidants, and enzymatic systems, prioritising the latter in antioxidant defense capacity [ , ]. The list of genes that encode antioxidant enzymes and proteins involved in the synthesis of non-enzymatic antioxidants that are transactivated by NRF2 is extensive. Just to mention a few, one of the best characterized NRF2 target genes encodes heme oxygenase-1 (HMOX1), an enzyme involved in degrading and detoxifying heme, that is being increasingly recognized as a protein that protects cells via multiple pathways. In addition, NRF2 binds directly to the promoter regions of three major families of enzymes that catabolise superoxide anion and hydrogen peroxide: superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), and glutathione peroxidase (GPX). Also, glutathione reductase (GSR) and NAD(P)H dehydrogenase quinone 1 (NQO1), the enzymes responsible for regeneration of glutathione and ubiquinone/α-tocopherol, respectively, are targets for NRF2. Other examples are the glutathione synthesis enzymes, glutamate-cysteine ligase catalytic and modifying subunits (GCLC, GCLM), and glutathione synthetase (GSS). The components of another, close to glutathione, reducing agent pathway, which is thioredoxin system, are the NRF2-depedent genes, including thioredoxin (TXN) itself, thioredoxin reductase 1 (TXNRD1), and thioredoxin interacting protein (TXNIP). Finally, four main enzymes that generate NADPH, which provides reductive power for glutathione and thioredoxin redox cycles, namely glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1), malic enzyme 1 (ME1), and phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (PGD) are also targets of NRF2.
The fundamental role of the KEAP1-NRF2 pathway in orchestrating redox control in cells was evidenced in numerous experimental studies. Shortly after reporting ARE-dependent inducible regulation of antioxidant enzyme genes by electrophiles and ROS [ , ], studies on peritoneal macrophages isolated from mice lacking NRF2 transcriptional activity evidenced the prime role of NRF2 in transactivation control of oxidative stress-inducible genes [ ]. Interestingly, NRF2 is dispensable for normal development as shown in two independently generated strains of NRF2 Knockout (KO) mice [ , ]. Disruption of NRF2 signaling does not influence viability, fertility, erythropoiesis, or growth of mice. Most likely, compensatory/adapting mechanisms related to the regulation of NRF2 target genes by other transcription factors [ ] in basal conditions, especially NRF1 as double NRF1/NRF2-KO mice die at early embryonic stages [ ], contribute to normal development of these animals. However, experiments based on challenging NRF2-KO mice with electrophiles, oxidative stress inducers, toxic agents, ischemia-reperfusion episodes, hyperoxia, etc., demonstrate the critical role of NRF2 in cellular protection [ ]. Striking similarities in combining redox sensing and activation of defensive response pathways are also found in other species, including bacterial OxyR, yeast Yap, Drosophila CncC/KEAP1, and zebrafish KEAP1-NRF2 [ , ]. A comparable system also functions in C. elegans, but it is not yet clear how SKN-1, repressed by WDR23, is activated by oxidative stress [ ].
Although the first paper describing NRF2-KO mice living under normal conditions reported no difference in their health span compared to their wild type (WT) counterparts until the age of 9 months [ ], a subsequent study found a decrease in survival in NRF2-KO mice of both sexes, with the predominant effect in female animals. NRF2 deficient mice manifested multiorgan inflammatory infiltrates reminiscent of human systemic lupus erythematosus. The most severe pathophenotype, lupus-like glomerulonephritis, found in the kidney of NRF2-KO mice [ ] was also reported in the other murine strain of NRF2 deficiency [ ]. These data suggested a critical role of NRF2 in controlling inflammation. The pro-inflammatory phenotype in the absence of NRF2 signaling is also clearly seen in mice subjected to inflammation-related incidents, such as septic shock [ ], cigarette smoke-induced emphysema [ ], and limb ischemia [ ]. The complexity of molecular mechanisms of NRF2-dependent resolution of inflammation has been comprehensively described [ ]. It includes direct transactivation of anti-inflammatory gene transcription and repression of pro-inflammatory gene expression, modulation of redox-based inflammation, and multilevel crosstalk of NRF2 with the main pro-inflammatory transcription factor nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) ( ). The immunomodulatory effects of NRF2 are crucial in the context of clinical perspective. The anti-inflammatory activity of the NRF2 targeting drugs, dimethyl fumarate and omaveloxolone, currently used for the treatment of multiple sclerosis and Friedrich ataxia, respectively, was one of the rationales for undertaking clinical trials and the final approval of these substances [ , ].
 The mechanisms of oxidative stress and inflammation are inextricably linked and may create a snowballing effect that underlies NCD development. Therefore, experimental studies using animal models to investigate the NRF2-related disease pathomechanisms should address not only the hallmark activity of NRF2, which is counteracting oxidative stress, but also its impact in inflammation.

3.

## Divergence of the KEAP1-NRF2 pathway through evolution
Considering the crucial role of the KEAP1-NRF2 pathway in mediating cytoprotective responses against both intracellular reactive species and extracellular stressors, it is not surprising that the domain architecture of NRF2 is highly conserved across many diverse species of aerobic organisms. Phylogenetic analyses of NRF2 sequences evidenced that its evolution was tightly linked to the rising levels of atmospheric oxygen. In fact, NRF2 is absent in bacteria, archaea, and plants appearing the first functional orthologs in the fungal-metazoan divergence [ ], when photosynthetic oxygen was still being absorbed into the oceans. A subsequent significant divergence in NRF2 is seen to occur during the split between fungi and the Metazoa, when free oxygen was resealed to the atmosphere, but with most of this being absorbed by methane oxidation and oxidative weathering of land surfaces. Atmospheric oxygen levels thereafter accumulated giving rise to metazoan success, driving further NRF2 sequence divergence and KEAP1 recruitment for regulation of the oxidative stress response at the division between mammals and non-mammalian vertebrates [ ].
In the Fungi taxa, Yap1 protein has been identified as the functional equivalent of NRF2 in yeast [ ]. Yap1 operates by binding as a dimer, through its bZIP sequences, to the Yap1 response element (YRE) and activates antioxidant defenses against ROS, heavy metals, and toxic xenobiotics, as extensively reviewed in Ref. [ ]. In contrast to mammalian NRF2, which translocates to the nucleus upon the inhibition of KEAP1 mediated repression, fungi rely on a conformational change induced by oxidative stress to retain Yap1 in the nucleus [ ]. However, despite their similar mechanisms of action, NRF2 and Yap1 exhibit distinct sequences [ ].
The most used species as model organisms to study NCDs comprise invertebrate and vertebrate species ( ). Regulation of the NRF2 antioxidant response exists in simple invertebrates of the phylum Nematoda, as demonstrated empirically for Caenorhabditis elegans. Initially identified for its role in normal pharyngeal development [ ], the NRF2 ortholog known as skinhead-1 (SKN-1), offers protection against oxidative stress [ ]. There are three skn-1 splice isoforms (SKN-1a, SKN-1b, and SKN-1c), each with distinct expression patterns and functions. Specifically, SKN-1a is involved in the endoplasmic reticulum stress response [ ], SKN-1b regulates lifespan under dietary restriction [ ], and SKN-1c regulates expression of antioxidant and detoxification genes [ ]. SKN-1c although serving a similar function, has significant differences in structure and regulatory pathways than NRF2 since SKN-1 binds to specific DNA sequences as a monomer [ ], due to the absence of the leucine zipper domain crucial for dimerization with small MAFs. Furthermore, the negative regulation of SKN-1 differs from NRF2 in mammals. While bioinformatic analysis [ ] has shown that C. elegans encodes proteins highly similar to KEAP1, these proteins do not appear to be involved in inhibiting SKN-1. Instead, the inhibition of SKN-1 is accomplished through its interaction with the protein WDR-23 [ ]. It has been proposed that homologous KEAP1 proteins of nematodes may have subsequently lost persistence, maybe due to a lack of environmental selective pressure attributed to the hypoxic soil-dwelling lifestyle of worms [ ]. Despite these differences in protein regulation, SKN-1 activates target genes like those regulated by vertebrate NRF2 [ ].
 In Arthropoda taxon, the NRF2 ortholog is the cnc gene which was discovered as a protein involved the development of the labral and mandibular structure of larvae in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster [ ]. NFE2L2 and cnc genes shows 60 % similarity encoding for several transcription forms differing in size, N-terminal part structure and expression pattern [ ]. At a protein level, three isoforms, cncA, cncB, and cncC, have been described, each possessing a distinct N-terminal region, while sharing a highly homologous C-terminus that encompasses the bZIP structure [ ]. CncC splice variant is the one that contains sequences resembling the ETGE and DLG motifs key for their interaction. In fact, cncC activity is regulated by dKEAP1 which exhibits a high degree of homology with its mammalian counterpart [ , ], except that dKEAP1 contains a 156 aa C-terminal tail when removed shows abolished nuclear localization and chromatin-binding [ ]. As in mammals, cncC is a known substrate of Slimb (E3 ubiquitin ligase) orthologous to the human β-TrCP being required for normal copper homeostasis in Drosophila [ ]. However, in Drosophila melanogaster, unlike in vertebrates, cncC regulates the expression of genes involved in phase I and II of the detoxification process [ ].
Orthologs of both NRF2 and KEAP1 have been characterized in bony fish taxon being experimentally described in Danio rerio, also known as zebrafish. Specifically, zebrafish expresses six nrf genes (nfe2, nrf1a, nrf1b, nrf2a, nrf2b, and nrf3) [ ] and two genes encoding KEAP1 proteins (keap1a and keap1b) [ ]. As in mammals, the inhibition of NRF2 by KEAP1 in zebrafish relies on the interaction between the Neh2 and Kelch domains [ ]. Notably, zebrafish NRF2 ortholog has been observed to form dimeric complexes with specific proteins, including small MAFs (both MAFG1 and MAFG2) [ ], strongly indicating that vertebrates possess an evolutionarily conserved KEAP1-NRF2 pathway. However, in birds a KEAP1 mutation in the Neoavian ancestor disrupted the repression of NRF2 by KEAP1, leading to constitutive NRF2 activity and decreased oxidative stress suggesting the apparition of a compensatory program in NRF2-target genes [ ].

4.

## Model organisms for investigating non-communicable diseases
Gene-edited animals are defined as animals whose DNA has been modified via the use of genetic engineering methods, such as transgenic (carrying an exogenous gene), KO (disrupting an endogenous gene by gene targeting), and knock-in (inserting a gene sequence at a specific location through gene targeting). In the process of creating gene targeting, several techniques play important roles, including homologous recombination, deletions, or insertions of nucleotides in specific gene locus using engineered nucleases such zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs), transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs), and clustered regularly interspaced palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/Cas9 system [ ]. Each of the following gene-edited animals discussed below has contributed to the current understanding of NRF2 biology.
4.1.

## Worm models (animalia nematoda Caenorhabditis elegans)
The roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans as a model organism allows valuable insights to be gained into the underlying mechanisms of age-related NCDs and the testing of various interventions that could lead to enhanced health span. Years of research have proven its reliability as an important platform for aging research, due to its short lifespan, relatively high level of genetic homology to human biology and the availability of mutant strains with different phenotypes representing the comorbidities associated with aging such as neurodegenerative diseases, obesity, and metabolic disturbances [ ]. For instance, the long-lived strains harboring mutations in evolutionarily conserved genes associated with longevity, such as daf-2, which encodes insulin/insulin growth factor 1 (IGF-1)-like receptor, and age-1, which corresponds the phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3K), also exhibit increased survival in response to stressors and maintain a youthful state throughout their lifespan. The extension of lifespan mediated by daf-2 strongly correlates with the activity of the DAF-16 transcription factor, which is a functional homolog of the Forkhead box O (FOXO) protein family, as well as SKN-1, the functional homolog of NRF2 in C. elegans [ , , , ].
In nematodes, SKN-1 with its three isoforms (SKN-1A, -1B and -1C), regulates the conserved defense against oxidative stress that is an integral component of phase two detoxification system and consists of numerous enzymes responsible for scavenging free radicals, neutralizing reactive compounds, and facilitating the production or utilization of glutathione. During the embryonic development SKN-1 is indispensable for the digestive system formation, while in larvae and adult phases, it determines the lifespan duration, regulates energy metabolism and stress resistance [ , ]. Neuronal SKN-1 that is constitutively present in the ASI neurons (assumed as hypothalamus) in C. elegans is essential for the dietary-restriction-mediated (daf-2-dependent) longevity [ , ]. In stress response, regulation of metabolism, and adaptation to starvation, the activation of SKN-1 is dependent on its p38-mediated nuclear translocation in the intestine [ , ]. The activation of SKN-1 has been linked not only to the downregulation of DAF-2 and the activation of DAF-16 but also to the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway, which responds to the scarcity of amino acid and carbohydrates [ ]. The negative regulation of SKN-1/NRF2 in nematodes it is not definitively characterized since a clear KEAP1 ortholog in C. elegans has not been identified. However, studies suggest evolutionarily conserved functional similarity between KEAP1 and WDR-23 [ , , ]. In worms, the CUL4-DDB1 ubiquitin ligase complex has been shown to associate with WDR-23, and together, they suppress the expression of oxidative stress genes through regulation of SKN-1 [ ] ( ).
 It is worth mentioning, that one of the primary advantages of C. elegans as a model system lies in the relatively simple protocols for genetic modification through CRISPR/Cas9-based approach, RNA interference (RNAi) or the utilization of GFP as a fluorescent reporter for tracking target proteins. Correspondingly, mutant strains of C. elegans are available with modification in the skn-1 alleles or the SKN-1 protein isoform facilitating mechanistic modelling of relevant diseases. Loss-of-function skn-1 mutants exhibit heightened sensitivity to oxidative stress and a shortened lifespan, while overexpression of skn-1 contributes to increased resilience to stress and prolonged lifespan. More than 30 commercially available mutant strains with a modification in the skn-1 gene could be obtained by the Caenorhabditis Genetic Centre (CGC, University of Minnesota, MN, USA) including the QV225 skn-1 (zj15) with hypomorphic allele [ ] or the LD1 that expresses skn-1b/c:GFP in the gut and in the ASI neurons [ ]. Specifically, the skn-1 (zj15) has been generated through the introduction of a point mutation within an intronic region, resulting in the mis-splicing of a fraction of mRNA, which strongly reduces mRNA levels of the two long skn-1a/c variants with a stable fraction of homozygous worms that escape embryonic lethality [ , ]. Solid number of studies have employed the skn-1 (zu67) mutant strains to investigate the involvement of the SKN-1/NRF2 signaling pathway in mediating protective responses against oxidative stress, and the lifespan extension induced by various phytochemicals, such as epicatechin, curcumin, myricetin or quercetin [ ]. The collected data suggest that reduction in insulin/IGF-1-like signaling leads to the MAPK-mediated nuclear accumulation of SKN, hence, highlighting the utility of the loss-of-function mutants of MAPK pathways for studying the involvement of skn-1 in disease modelling [ , ]. Selective activation through gain-of-function (gf) mutation in skn-1 allele of a pool of SKN-1 sequestered at the outer mitochondrial membrane, has been shown to initiate a state of starvation even in the presence of abundant food. These skn-1 (gf) mutants have been characterized with transcriptionally active genes associated with metabolism, adaptation to starvation, aging, and survival [ ]. Solid number of studies utilize the use of skn-1-modified C. elegans strains to investigate the molecular mechanism of numerous NCDs such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), obesity, and age-related chronic inflammation (selected examples are provided in ).
 Collectively, the high level of functional homology between SKN-1 in C. elegans and NRF2 in humans expose this model organism as reliable platform for mechanistic research targeted at its modulation. Moreover, the good susceptibility to genetic manipulations and the well described models of NCDs such as neurodegenerative and metabolic dysregulation in the nematodes further validate the exploitation of C. elegans as valuable research tool.

4.2.

## Insect models (animalia arthropoda Drosophila melanogaster)
Over the years, Drosophila melanogaster has emerged as a potent model organism for investigating fundamental biological processes. Due to its fully annotated genome, this fruit fly has been one of the key models of genetic research for over a century [ ] and has unveiled fundamental biological processes (physiological and pathophysiological), establishing Drosophila as an indispensable model organism in the field of biology [ ]. The fruit fly has obvious advantages as a model organism since it has a high rate of reproduction and low husbandry cost in the laboratory [ ]. In addition, there are fewer gene paralogs in Drosophila compared to vertebrates, and most of the human disease-related genes have orthologs in flies [ ]. Furthermore, Drosophila shows structural and physiological conservation with mammals regarding tissues and organs such as the brain, lung, heart, adipose tissue, pancreatic islets, colon, and urinary system, with most of the respective cellular and molecular processes being conserved [ ]. The robust genetic tools for precise manipulation of the genome allow excellent spatial and temporal control of gene expression and protein function, including the ability to genetically target different tissues or organs independently, and to manipulate the function of a gene in each tissue [ ]. Therefore, Drosophila provides a powerful advantage in helping to elucidate mechanisms of NCDs ( ).
 More specifically, Drosophila has been attracting significant attention as a model for elucidating molecular mechanisms in cancer. The majority of signaling pathways that regulate cell growth and invasion in mammals perform similar functions in flies, enabling a replication of the biology of tumors [ ]. To date, numerous fly models, mimicking various cancer types such as lung, prostate, thyroid, brain, and gastrointestinal cancer [ ], have been established to enhance our understanding on tumor initiation and progression and to explore possible therapeutics. Despite anatomical differences with vertebrates, these models have provided insights into various tumor aspects, including the significance of the tumor microenvironment, cancer cachexia, drug resistance and cancer stem cells competition [ ]. Single-cell transcriptomics identifies Keap1-NRF2/cncC regulated collective invasion in a Drosophila tumor model. Ectopic expression of KEAP1 increased the volume of delaminated follicle cells that showed enhanced invasive behavior with significant changes to the cytoskeleton [ ].
Drosophila is the only major invertebrate model organism that contains a beating heart tube and a circulatory system with developmental and functional homologies to the vertebrate heart [ ]. The adult fruit fly heart consists of around 80 fully developed cardiomyocytes arranged in two opposing bilateral rows, forming a linear cardiac tube [ ]. Differently from mammals, the Drosophila heart functions within an open circulatory system, primarily responsible for the transportation of nutrients and signaling molecules rather than oxygen, the latter being circulated through the tracheal system [ , ]. Despite these differences, heart development exhibits remarkable conservation from flies to humans. Not only gene regulatory pathways are conserved, but there is also increasing evidence that mutations in genes linked to cardiac diseases result in fly heart phenotypes that recapitulate clinical observations in humans [ ]. These Drosophila models have helped in elucidating pathways associated with various cardiac conditions, including arrhythmia [ ], atrial fibrillation [ ], cardiac aging [ ], congenital heart diseases [ ], cardiomyopathies [ ], and drug-induced cardiotoxicity [ ]. Among these studies, multiple outcomes provide strong evidence for the pivotal role of NRF2/cncC signaling in maintaining cardiac health [ ]. In that perspective, the Drosophila heart presents an appealing system for modelling human cardiac diseases.
The fruit fly can also successfully model metabolic diseases such as diabetes [ ]. Same as mammals, the regulation of glucose metabolism is achieved mainly via insulin/IGF signaling (IIS). The insect insulin orthologs, called insulin-like peptides (Ilps), are produced and released from insulin-producing cells (IPC) into the haemolymph, and they control circulating trehalose levels (the glucose equivalent in flies) [ ]. Fly models are available for both types of diabetes, which has greatly advanced the study of diabetes and its complications. Rulifson et al. demonstrated that complete depletion of IPC can generate type 1 diabetes phenotypes [ ]. Later studies by Broughton et al. showed that similar phenotypes can be generated also after partial elimination of IPC [ ]. Unlike type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes is mainly characterized by insulin resistance. Fruit fly models of type 2 diabetes have been created by feeding flies with high-sugar or high-fat diets, which result in metabolic disorders like those seen in patients with type 2 diabetes [ ]. Given the metabolic alterations observed in response to a high-fat diet, including perturbations in insulin signaling, lipogenesis, and gluconeogenesis, these fruit flies have emerged as a valuable model for conducting research on obesity-related phenotypes [ ]. NRF2/cncC has been shown to directly modulate IIS and to affect several metabolic parameters such as glucose and lipid metabolism in flies [ , , ], and thus, could play an important role in diabetes.
With the increase in the aging population, neurodegenerative diseases pose a huge burden on society. Although simpler than the mammalian brain, the fly possesses a sophisticated central nervous system comprising neurons (∼200,000–300,000) and glial cells, surrounded by a blood-brain barrier [ ]. In addition, through the modulation of human gene expression in flies, it is possible to simulate simplified versions of human neurologic diseases. This has extended to various neurologic and neurodegenerative conditions, such as Parkinson's disease (PD), Alzheimer's disease (AD), Huntington disease (HD), and spinocerebellar ataxias, aiming to delineate cell biological mechanisms [ ]. Thus, the use of Drosophila has greatly enhanced our comprehension of the molecular mechanism of several neurologic diseases, leading to the identification of important therapeutic targets [ ]. Enhancing the expression of NRF2/cncC in Drosophila models of PD yields significant improvements in various aspects of neurodegenerative pathology. This includes the mitigation of neurodegenerative symptoms, the induction of mitophagy, enhanced survival of dopaminergic neurons, and an overall amelioration in the locomotor activity of the flies [ , ]. Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that similar favorable outcomes have been observed also in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) models [ ]. On the other hand, in AD model, although NRF2/cncC up regulation confirmed mild stress resistance and reduced proteome ubiquitination, it could not overcome Aβ -related toxicity and neurodegenerative phenotypes [ ]. These studies underscore the complexity of NRF2/cncC role in neurodegeneration, emphasizing the necessity for further investigation ( ).
 Finally, Drosophila can be used as a screening platform for drug discovery. While there are evolutionary differences, Drosophila-based phenotypic screens have emerged as a valuable approach for identifying potential drug candidates [ ]. Using the fly model is it possible to contribute to drug discovery via target-identification, in vivo validation of known drugs and in vivo high-throughput compound screening [ ]. Furthermore, Drosophila can be a valuable choice for exploring multi-therapeutic strategies, as well as for modelling drug resistance and assessing drug toxicity [ ]. Hence, flies offer an attractive model for rapid assay readouts and can be implemented to the discovery and the development of new drugs.

4.3.

## Fish models (animalia chordata Danio rerio)
As a vertebrate model, zebrafish has the same major organs and tissues as humans their muscle, blood, kidney, and eyes share many features with the human systems. Zebrafish can be grown easily, being an important model in developmental biology because of its reasonably fast generation time and the fact that it has transparent embryos that develop outside of the uterus. In addition, the zebrafish genome has been fully sequenced and shows a similar genetic structure to the human genome.
The KEAP1-NRF2 pathway is conserved in zebrafish, first studies demonstrated an ETGE motif within the Neh2 domain of NRF2 by reverse two-hybrid screening and found to be indispensable for its regulation [ ]. Moreover, KEAP1 responded to multiple classes of electrophilic compounds using the “cysteine code” similarly to mammalian [ , ]. An advantage of the zebrafish model is that it often contains duplicate copies of genes that are present as only single copies in mammals thus allowing for additional insight into the multiple functions of the human counterpart [ ]. In fact, there are two paralogs of the NFE2L2 gene, nrf2a/nfe2l2a and nrf2b/nfe2l2b, the latter without the Neh4 transactivation domain, largely due to the loss of exon 3. These genes are expressed in relatively low amounts and in a developmentally and tissue-specific manner. These two paralogs have undergone subfunction partitioning, for instance during embryonic development nrf2b functions as a repressor to regulate constitutive gene expression of p53, Cyclin G1, and Hmox1 1. Moreover, embryos in which nrf2a expression had been knocked down were more sensitive to tert-butyl hydroperoxide but not tert-butylhydroquinone, whereas knockdown of nrf2b did not affect sensitivity of embryos to either chemical. Together, these results demonstrate distinct roles for nrf2a and nrf2b, consistent with subfunction partitioning, and identify a novel negative regulatory role for nrf2b during development [ ].
Evolutionary tracing suggests that the Keap1 gene was duplicated during whole-genome duplication in fish to give rise to keap1a and keap1b, which bind to Cul3 strongly and weakly, respectively. Keap1a was subsequently lost in reptiles and their descendants, and Keap1b evolved into mammalian Keap1. The generation of zebrafish KO for keap1a or/and keap1b genes helps to demonstrate that mammalian Keap1 is an ortholog of fish keap1b, not keap1a [ ]. Interestingly, it has been proposed that molecular evolution of Keap1 was essential for adaptation of vertebrates to terrestrial life, since specific changes in amino acids within the C3IR domain of KEAP1 weakened its interaction with Cul3. In fact, human cells expressing a form of KEAP1 that is similar to that of ancestral aquatic organisms and that binds more strongly to Cul3 are more sensitive to oxidative stress as a result of weak induction of NRF2 [ ]. Once in the nucleus, NRF2 heterodimerizes with sMaf proteins. The homolog genes of MafG and MafK but not MafF has been identified in zebrafish, indicating the former two are conserved among vertebrates. In addition, a novel type of small Maf protein MafT was described. MafT protein bound MARE sequence as a homodimer or heterodimers with zebrafish nrf2a/b [ ] ( ).
 There are several loss-off-function models of nrf2a that pave the way to the study of NCDs. The homozygous mutant nrf2fh318, carrying the R485L mutation, displayed enhanced sensitivity to oxidative stress and electrophiles, especially peroxides, and pretreatment with an Nrf2-activating compound, sulforaphane (SFN), decreased peroxide-induced lethality in the wild type but not nrf2fh318 mutants, indicating that resistance to oxidative stress is highly dependent on Nrf2 functions. These results reveal an evolutionarily conserved role of vertebrate Nrf2 in protection against oxidative stress. Interestingly, there were no significant differences between wild-type and nrf2fh318 larvae regarding their sensitivity to superoxide and singlet oxygen generators, suggesting that the importance of Nrf2 in oxidative stress protection varies based on the type of reactive oxygen species [ ]. Next, CRISPR/cas9 mediated KO of nrf2a was shown to behave similarly to this previous nrf2a mutant; and exhibited higher mortality and a reduced response to H2O2 and acetaminophen [ ] or to heavy metals [ ]. Novel frameshift mutant line nrf2ait321 has been generated introducing a STOP codon within the second exon by CRISP/Cas9 technology. The analysis of SFN-induced gstp1.2 showed that the induction observed in wild-type larvae was greatly attenuated to levels comparable to controls in nrf2ait321 homozygous larvae. It was noted that the induction in nrf2afh318 larvae was slightly larger than that in nrf2ait321 larvae, suggesting that the nrf2afh318 line is a knockdown line with residual nrf2 activity [ ].
In these models is worthy to mention that nrf2a and nrf2b could also be divergent in their responses to different stimuli as well as interaction partners. In fact, nrf2b but not nrf2a targeted p53 gene and crossing homozygous nrf2b deletion mutant with alanyl-tRNA synthetase (aars1cq71/cq71) mutants resulted in amelioration of defects in neurogenesis [ ]. In other studies, nrf2fh318 homozygous mutants showed compensatory increases in nfr2b expression in response to different agents [ ], pointing out to a potential compensation for the loss of nrf2a.
These diverse mutants and KO of paralogous NRF2 mutants in zebrafish provide a plethora of possibilities to test the evolution and conservation of fish and mammalian KEAP1-NRF2 pathway in physiology and pathology. In fact, nrf2 overexpression prevented human 4R-tau-GFP and zebrafish 3R-tau-GFP induced neuronal death [ ]. Natural products have been tested to reduce MAFLD employing zebrafish model. For example, larval zebrafish submitted to high cholesterol diet exhibited reduced body weight, length and width of hepatitis steatosis when treated with 2,3,5,4′-tetrahydroxystilbence-2-O-β-D-glucoside [ ] or p-hydroxybenzyl alcohol [ ]. Although specific activation of NRF2 protein has not been addressed in these studies, Nfe2l2 and Hmox1 mRNA levels were increased in treated vs non-treated animals. A summary of the described zebrafish models is shown in .
 With the ever-increasing high throughput omics data, it would be possible to test findings in response to NRF2 inducers and inhibitors by performing in vivo experiments in zebrafish and translating these findings to mammalian NRF2 signaling related NCDs. The generation of novel NRF2/ARE pathway biosensor fish (Tg (8xARE: EGFP) ia201) will pave the way for high throughput platforms. The transgenic line exhibits a dynamic spatiotemporal expression profile during the early developmental stages and is responsive to known NRF2 pathway modulators including dimethyl fumarate, omaveloxolone, edaravone and CHIR99021 [ ].

4.4.

## Murine models (animalia chordata mammalia Mus musculus)
The use of mice as model organisms to study NCDs is predicated on the genetic and physiological similarities between the species. Despite being bigger than the other model organisms discussed previously, mice are still relatively easily to care for, breed and study. Although issues exist due to differences in immune system performance between mice and humans, the mouse still proves to be the model organism of choice for many studies related to NCDs. The major advantage of using mice is the possibility of modifying their genomes to study specifically the contribution of each gene.
4.4.1.

## NRF2- and KEAP1-deficient mice as the seeds to unravel NRF2 role in NCDs
The field of NRF2 mouse models has received a big impetus by studies led by the Yamamoto's team, from its beginning in 1997, when Itoh and collaborators generated homozygous NRF2-deficient mice, revealing for the first time that NRF2/sMAF heterodimer mediates the induction of phase II detoxification enzyme genes through the ARE in vivo [ ]. NRF2-KO mice was generated by a replacement strategy using a targeting vector containing a 4.2-kb segment of DNA with part of exon 4 and all of exon 5 of NRF2 replaced by a 5.5-kb fragment of DNA coding for the bacterial gene LacZ followed by the positive selection neomycin resistance cassette. This replacement vector was engineered to delete the carboxyl 457 amino acid of the NRF2 molecule and to splice in the bacterial reporter gene LacZ. This design would effectively nullify the NRF2 transactivation function since the CNC bZIP regions were deleted. The construct was electroporated into 129X1/SvJ-derived JM-1 embryonic stem (ES) cells. Correctly targeted ES cells were injected into blastocysts and the resulting chimeric mice were used to generate a colony of NRF2-KO mice, which expressed a fusion of the NRF2 N-terminal domains with LacZ [ ] ( ). NRF2-null mice display discolored grey-white incisor teeth, rather than brownish-yellow teeth possessed by wild type mice, due to a loss of iron deposition in the enamel [ ].
 Likewise, in 2011, the team of Shyam Biswal and Sekhar P. Reddy generated conditional KO mouse with loxP sites flanking exon 5 of the Nfe2l2 gene to study the effect of its deficiency in pulmonary Clara cells [ ]. Mice carrying the NRF2 “floxed” allele were generated on a C57BL/6 background. The targeting vector inserted LoxP sites flanking the DNA-binding domain of the Nfe2l2 gene, and a neomycin cassette flanked by flp recombinase target sites for the selection of positive clones. The linearized vector was transfected into C57BL/6J embryonic stem (ES) cells and positive clones were injected into blastocysts. Chimeras with the targeted allele were backcrossed with C57BL/6 mice to generate the NRF2flox/flox and neomycin cassette (Neo)+ mice ( ). These mice allow tissue-specific deletion of NRF2 upon crossing with mice bearing Cre-recombinase under the control of a tissue-specific promoter. In this way, the specific effect of NRF2 deficiency in a cell type can be studied without confounding factors caused by a global loss of NRF2.
The Yamamoto team have used whole-body NRF2-KO mice and their wild-type counterparts to investigate the role of the transcription factor during spaceflight and a 31-day period on the International Space Station. Detailed comparative analyses showed that NRF2 is activated during spaceflight and this activation is important for the adaptation of skeletal muscle [ ], kidney [ ], and epididymal white adipose tissue [ ], the maintenance of blood pressure and bone mineralization [ ], as well as for the mitigation of the inflammation, immunosuppression, and thrombotic microangiopathy that occur under these conditions of extreme environmental stress [ ].
In work by Yamamoto's team the KEAP1 gene was knocked out in mice through homologous recombination showing that NRF2 constitutively accumulated in nuclei, and NRF2 target genes were constitutively activated [ ]. However, the knockout of KEAP1 resulted in post-natal lethality due to hyperkeratosis in the upper digestive tract, which leads to obstructive lesions [ , ]. The body weight gain was retarded, and abnormal metabolic parameters were observed because of malnutrition [ ]. Remarkably, this phenotype was rescued by the deletion of NRF2 activity in a KEAP1-null background, indicating that KEAP1-null phenotypes are the consequence of the constitutive activation of NRF2 [ ]. The physiological relevance of the cysteine code was evidenced by the generation of different mice lines. The transgenic expression of mutant KEAP1(C273A) and/or KEAP1(C288A) protein in KEAP1 null mice failed to reverse constitutive NRF2 activation, indicating that cysteine residues at positions 273 and 288 are essential for KEAP1 to repress NRF2 activity in vivo. In contrast, KEAP1(C151S) retained repressor activity and mice expressing this molecule were viable [ ] ( ). The generation of conditional floxed null mice for KEAP1 has been crucial to understand its physiological role. Up to this date, two Keap1fl/fl mice have been generated, that we will term Keap1fl/fl A and Keap1fl/fl B. Keap1fl/fl A mice display a constitutive downregulation of the loxP flanked alleles before Cre-mediated recombination, whereas the Keap1fl/fl B mice express normal levels of KEAP1 before recombination [ , , ]. The importance of these models is exemplified by the generation of hepatocyte-specific deletion of the Keap1 gene by crossing the Keap1fl/fl A1 mice with transgenic mice expressing Cre recombinase under the regulation of the Alb gene promoter (Alb-Cre mice). This hepatocyte-specific KEAP1 conditional-KO line of mice displayed constitutive NRF2 activation in the liver [ ]. Keap1fl/fl B mice were first introduced as a model to study the importance of NRF2 activation in lung tissue against cigarette smoke toxicity. This was achieved by knocking out KEAP1 by crossing these mice with Clara cell-specific Cre-recombinase mice [ ].
 To address the relative contributions of KEAP1 and β-TrCP-mediated pathways in NRF2 regulation, a new knock-in mouse lines expressing an NRF2SA mutant that harbored two substitution mutations of serine residues interacting with β-TrCP were generated. The homozygous (NRF2 SA/SA) mice grew normally, with NRF2 levels comparable to those of wild type mice under unstressed conditions. However, when crossed with mice in which KEAP1 was knocked down to two different levels, the NRF2SA/SA mutation induced higher NRF2 activity when the KEAP1 level was strongly reduced, and these mice showed severe growth retardation and hyperplasia and hyperkeratosis in the esophageal epithelium. These results indicate that the β-TrCP- cooperates with the KEAP1-mediated pathway to regulate NRF2 activity, which is apparent when the KEAP1-mediated pathway is profoundly suppressed [ ]. NRF2 participates in the formation of a protein complex with Axin1/GSK-3/β-TrCP that is disrupted by WNT-3A, a prototypic canonical WNT ligand, and leads to upregulation of the NRF2 transcriptional signature. The relevance of this novel pathway was assessed in mice with a conditional deletion of Axin1 in the liver, which showed upregulation of the NRF2 signature in hepatocytes and disruption of liver zonation of antioxidant metabolism [ ].
The development of these models were crucial steps to understand NRF2 biology and paving the way to the generation of a myriad of engineered mice that will be discussed in the next sections within the context of NCDs (see ).
 
4.4.2.

## Mouse models of chronic respiratory diseases
The lungs are constantly exposed to infectious agents and inhaled irritants, including allergens, cigarette smoke and environmental pollutants. The lung epithelium acts as a physical barrier to these insults, whilst at the same time orchestrating innate immune responses. Epithelial cells sense pathogen and damage-associated molecules and drive the activation of innate effector cells and adaptive immune responses to confer prolonged protection [ ]. Abnormal epithelial function and dysregulated immune responses to inhaled insults, in susceptible individuals, promote exaggerated inflammation and extensive lung structural changes that lead to chronic inflammatory lung diseases, such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) [ ].
Examples of studies that have investigated the role of NRF2 in lung diseases are shown in . In a mouse model of irritant-induced asthma involving short exposure to chlorine gas, NRF2-KO mice were shown to have a more prolonged airway inflammation and hyperresponsiveness, than wild type mice, suggesting a role of NRF2 in resolution of inflammation [ ]. NRF2-depleted mice also show greater oxidative stress levels, impaired antioxidant gene activation and a greater susceptibility to ovalbumin-induced airway inflammation, hyperresponsiveness and remodeling, indicating a protective effect of NRF2. This protective effect is, at least partly, dependent on the antioxidant effects of NRF2 as the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine partly reversed the pathological phenotype in NRF2-null mice [ ]. SFN also attenuated airway inflammation and potentiated the anti-inflammatory effects of corticosteroids in cockroach extract-exposed mice [ ]. Another study used epithelial cell-specific activation of NRF2, by expressing a non-functional KEAP1 protein, in an ovalbumin-induced mouse model. NRF2 activation reduced oxidative damage of the epithelium, maintaining its barrier function, and inhibited airway mucus secretion, inflammation and hyperresponsiveness [ ]. These findings suggest that the protective effect of NRF2 in this model may depend on its effects on the lung epithelium and highlight the potential for pulmonary delivery of NRF2 activators as therapeutic intervention.
 Inhalation of cigarette smoke or environmental pollutants may lead to increased severity and poor control of asthma symptoms, and frequent exacerbations [ , ]. This effect is recapitulated using mouse models exposed to a combination of ovalbumin and air pollutants, where the pollutants exaggerate the allergic inflammatory response and lung pathology [ ]. Dendritic cells isolated from NRF2-KO mice are more sensitive to particulate matter-induced oxidative stress and inflammatory cytokine release and have a greater ability to induce T2-type cytokine production from naïve CD4 T cells [ ]. Adoptive transfer of NRF2-KO mouse dendritic cells into wild type mice increased the adjuvant effect of intranasal ultrafine particulate matter administration on ovalbumin-induced inflammation [ ]. Intraperitoneal treatment with SFN improved the sensitivity of mice exposed to ovalbumin and cigarette smoke to the anti-inflammatory effects of corticosteroids. As this effect was only observed in wild type, but not NRF2-KO mice, it is possible that it is mediated by NRF2-dependent mechanisms [ ]. The NRF2 activator omaveloxolone reduced lung neutrophilia, and airway hyperresponsiveness and remodeling in a mouse model of asthma exacerbation induced by ovalbumin and ozone exposure [ ].
The currently used mouse models have yielded important findings regarding the role of NRF2 in allergic sensitization, development and resolution of inflammation, lung pathology and exacerbations of asthma. Although, the protective effects of NRF2 in these models may be mediated, at least partly, through its antioxidant/cytoprotective function, very little is known regarding other pathways that may confer these effects. More effort is required for elucidating the mechanisms driving the protective effects of NRF2 in these models. Furthermore, new, and more relevant models are required. Asthma mouse models are predominantly allergen-driven and therefore characterized by a T2 inflammatory response. Most of these studies use ovalbumin as an allergen due to its low cost and the very well characterized immune response and lung pathology it induces. Nonetheless, ovalbumin is not relevant to human asthma and thus these models have limited translational potential, compared to other allergens like house dust mite and cockroach extract and pollen. Furthermore, there are currently very few models that represent non-T2 asthma, where oxidative stress may play a key pathogenic role [ ], and where NRF2 could be an interesting therapeutic target. The available non-T2 models involve adoptive transfer of Th1 or Th17 cells and are, therefore, of limited translational potential [ , ]. Given the heterogeneity of asthma, mouse models of other known phenotypes and endotypes of asthma are needed.
There is evidence of impaired NRF2-mediated signaling in patients with COPD. Alveolar macrophages and blood mononuclear cells from patients with COPD show reduced NRF2 expression [ ]. Moreover, monocyte-derived macrophages from COPD patients show attenuated oxidative stress-induced NRF2 activation, due to increased NRF2 acetylation and degradation [ ]. These studies suggest a potential beneficial effect of NRF2 activators as therapeutic interventions for COPD. A randomized control study investigating the effect of oral administration of SFN on patients with COPD, showed no effect on NRF2 target gene expression in alveolar macrophages and bronchial epithelial cells, and no modulation of lung inflammatory and oxidative stress markers or lung function [ ]. The effect of more specific NRF2 activators, preferably through the inhalation route, will need to be tested in COPD.
The cigarette smoke (CS) mouse model has been extensively used to study the role of NRF2 in COPD pathogenesis. Specifically, NRF2-KO mice were shown to have increased oxidative stress levels, epithelial cell apoptosis and inflammation, and earlier-onset and more severe emphysema [ ]. In a viral-induced exacerbation model, cigarette smoke-exposed NRF2-KO mice exhibited greater inflammatory responses, lung injury and mortality in response to influenza virus infection [ ]. Alveolar macrophages from NRF2-KO mice were also shown to have reduced ability to phagocytose bacteria, due to reduced expression of the scavenger receptor MARCO [ ]. These findings indicate a protective effect of NRF2 against epithelial damage and abnormal immune activation, slowing down the development of emphysema. Furthermore, NRF2 may also regulate immune responses against infections, therefore, reducing the susceptibility of patients to disease exacerbations. N-acetyl cysteine was shown to prevent airway epithelial damage in NRF2-KO mice, suggesting that the protective effect of NRF2 may be, at least partly, mediated by its antioxidant effects [ ]. The natural compounds SFN, allyl isothiocyanate and trans-4,4′-dihydroxystilbene were also shown to reduce lung inflammation and emphysema, and normalize immune responses, in CS-exposed mice in an NRF2-dependent manner [ , , ]. A similar protective effect of NRF2 was also shown in the elastase-induced model using NRF2-KO mice [ ].
NRF2 was also shown to have an anti-inflammatory effect and to protect against epithelial injury and the development of emphysema in models of intratracheal instillation or whole-body exposure to particulate matter [ , , ]. In the same model, hydrogen sulfide was shown to prevent NOD-like receptor family pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome activation, lung epithelial cell ferroptosis, inflammation, and emphysema, at least partly, through NRF2-mediated antioxidant protection [ ].
The above studies, summarized in , demonstrate the potential of using mouse models for investigating the role of NRF2 in COPD pathogenesis, and for validating new therapeutic targets. Whilst the role of NRF2 in the protection against lung epithelial oxidative damage and the development of emphysema has been established, a better understanding of its role in other aspects of COPD pathology such as airway remodeling, disease exacerbations, as well as in early life exposures, is required. Finally, the mechanisms underlying the effects of NRF2 on COPD pathogenesis need to be explored further, beyond just its antioxidant effects. Mitochondrial dysfunction and metabolic re-programming may play a key role in COPD pathogenesis, suggesting that the effects of NRF2 on mitochondrial biogenesis and cell metabolism may be crucial [ , , , ].

4.4.3.

## Mouse models of cardiovascular pathologies
An imbalance between ROS production and the antioxidant defense system is central to the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease. Genetically modified mice lacking NRF2 have shed light on the role of this factor in cardiovascular diseases, including cardiac hypertension, heart failure and ischemia-reperfusion (IR) injury ( ). NRF2-KO mice have a left ventricular (LV) diastolic dysfunction, characterized by prolonged E wave deceleration time, relaxation time and total diastolic time, increased E/A ratio and myocardial performance index. LV dysfunction in NRF2-KO mice was associated with cardiac hypertrophy and a downregulation of the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase (SERCA2a) in the myocardium. However, vascular function was fully preserved, blood pressure was decreased, and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) was upregulated in the aorta and in the heart of NRF2-KO mice [ ]. Hearts of NRF2-KO mice had impaired antioxidant gene expression, increased hypertrophy, and impaired function compared with those of wild-type littermates following chronic pressure overload. The authors identified the ROS-generating enzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase 4 (NOX4)-dependent upregulation of NRF2 as an endogenous protective pathway that limits mitochondrial damage and apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF)-related cell death in the heart under hemodynamic overload. In mice with cardiac-specific overexpression of NOX4, NRF2 deletion significantly attenuated their protective phenotype during chronic pressure overload [ ]. Cui and colleagues studied the effect of cardiomyocyte-specific transgenic activation of NRF2 on cardiac pathological remodeling and dysfunction [ ]. Cardiomyocyte-specific activation of NRF2 (NRF2ctg mice) suppressed myocardial oxidative stress, cardiac apoptosis, fibrosis, hypertrophy and dysfunction under sustained pressure overload induced by transverse aortic arch constriction (TAC). The constitutive activation of NRF2 increased the steady-state level of autophagosomes while decreasing the ubiquitinated protein aggregates in the heart after TAC. Therefore, NRF2 attenuated the proteocytotoxicity presumably via enhancing autophagy-mediated clearance of ubiquitinated protein aggregates in cardiomyocytes. The same authors reported later both protective and detrimental effects of NRF2 in the heart depending on the functional integrity of autophagy. Thus, in a murine model of pressure overload-induced cardiac remodeling and dysfunction via TAC, the absence of NRF2 enhanced myocardial necrosis and death rate during an initial stage of cardiac adaptation when myocardial autophagy is intact. However, the lack of NRF2 became cardioprotective in the later stage of cardiac remodeling when autophagy is insufficient. The authors concluded that NRF2 is required for cardiac adaptive responses when autophagy is intact; however, NRF2 mediates cardiac maladaptive remodeling and dysfunction when autophagy is impaired [ ].
 Cardiac-specific NRF2 transgenic mice (mNRF2-TG) were resistant to isoproterenol (ISO)-induced oxidative stress, suppressing pathological remodeling [ ]. Preservation of myocardial structure and function in the mNRF2-TG mice was associated with the enhanced NRF2 expression displayed in these hearts with an increased basal and post-treatment expression of redox modulatory genes and an overall enhanced antioxidant status. The role of NRF2 in cardiac IR injury has been recently reviewed [ ]. Myocardial reperfusion after ischemia induces de novo synthesis of NRF2, which protects against IR injury [ ]. Similarly, reperfusion-specific activation of NRF2 has been reported in renal epithelial cells exposed to hypoxia/reoxygenation [ ]. In the same study, the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine (NAC), which attenuates ROS overproduction in reoxygenation, suppressed NRF2 activation, suggesting that ROS mediate NRF2 signaling. Similarly, activation of the NRF2 pathway by miRNAs protects murine cardiomyocytes against in vitro IR or oxygen and glucose deprivation (OGD) followed by reperfusion [ , ]. Using a model of left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery occlusion, Xu et al. showed that NRF2-KO mice present with increased infarct area relative to wild type mice, supporting a protective role for NRF2 against cardiac IR injury [ ]. NRF2-KO mice also showed a reduced degree of cardiac protection by means on ischemic preconditioning [ ]. In addition, the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (4-HNE) induced NRF2 activation in mouse cardiomyocytes [ , ], which protected them against glucose-free anoxia followed by reoxygenation. Likewise, intravenous administration of 4-HNE activated NRF2 in the heart, increasing glutathione content, and improved left ventricular functional recovery following IR in Langendorff-perfused hearts from wild type but not from NRF2-KO mice [ ]. Activation of NRF2 has also been reported to protect the murine heart against pathological cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure by suppressing oxidative stress after TAC [ ]. In murine heterotopic heart transplant models, NRF2 was shown to inhibit NF-κB activation and protect against IR injury, which was mediated by its antioxidant activity, and suppress the subsequent development of cardiac allograft vasculopathy [ ]. Similarly, histone deacetylase 9 (HDAC9) knockdown induced the activation of NRF2 and protected the heart from myocardial infarction. In addition, HDAC9/NRF2 axis modulated the proliferation, apoptosis and myogenesis of mouse neonatal cardiomyocytes [ ]. Contrary to most studies, which show a protective effect of NRF2 activation against IR injury, Erkens et al. reported that global NRF2 gene knockout attenuates IR myocardial injury and dysfunction in mice, most likely due to cardioprotection by nitric oxide derived from endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) [ ]. Numerous studies have focused on the potential beneficial effects of NRF2-mediated activation of endogenous antioxidant defenses. Thus, many phytochemicals and related compounds such as SFN and carnosic acid, activate NRF2 to increase its cytoprotective programme that play significant roles not only in cardioprotection but also in the prevention of IR injury in other organs [ , , , ]. The electrophilic inhibitor of KEAP1 dimethyl fumarate (DMF), an approved therapeutic for multiple sclerosis, has shown protective effects against cardiac ischemia in vivo [ ] and in vitro [ ]. Electrophiles, however, may react with several nucleophiles within the cell. A class of NRF2 inducers (non-electrophilic modulators) that prevent the interaction between NRF2 and KEAP1, known as protein-protein interaction (PPI) inhibitors for KEAP1-NRF2 are a focus of intense research for their therapeutic potential [ , ]. Such is the case of 19a, an indoline-based KEAP1-NRF2 PPI inhibitor, that has shown protective effects in both rat H9c2 cardiac cells and an in vivo mouse model of LPS-induced cardiac injury [ ]. Taken together, NRF2 activation plays a protective role in heart disease, although it can be detrimental under specific conditions.

4.4.4.

## Mouse models of type 2 diabetes mellitus
The most common metabolic disease is diabetes mellitus type 2 (T2D), which is defined as a chronic metabolic disorder characterized by defects in insulin secretion and/or action, thus resulting in chronic hyperglycemia [ ]. Prolonged hyperglycemia, excessive lipid content, mitochondrial dysfunction and enhanced formation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs) lead to ROS production [ ] which actively contribute to T2D progression [ ].
Recent advances in basic and translational research have provided insights into the critical role of the KEAP1-NRF2 pathway in T2D and its comorbidities [ , , ]. In the last decades, several mouse models have been widely used to decipher the impact of modulating NRF2 levels in the context of insulin resistance and diabetes ( ).
 The impact of genetic activation of NRF2 on T2D was evaluated using KEAP1 knockdown mice crossed with the commonly known db/db mice. These animals express a truncated version of the leptin receptor becoming especially susceptible to obesity, insulin resistance and T2D. Interestingly, db/db:KEAP1flox/- mice did not show hyperglycemia and glucose intolerance when compared to their corresponding controls (db/db:KEAP1flox/+ mice) and, importantly, an improvement in insulin secretion after glucose stimulation was observed in db/db:KEAP1flox/- mice, strongly suggesting that NRF2 is likely involved in glucose metabolism [ ]. At the molecular level, NRF2 upregulation has been reported to protect pancreatic islets by activating expression of antioxidant genes. These results were further confirmed by inducing NRF2 signaling with CDDO-Im. NRF2 pharmacological activation strongly ameliorated T2D-induced metabolic effects through both beta cell protection against oxidative stresses and improvement of insulin resistance in the liver and skeletal muscle. Nevertheless, contradictory results emerged from an earlier study from Slitt's group [ ]. Contrarily to the db/db:KEAP1flox/- mice, KEAP1 knockdown in an ob/ob background (Lepob/ob-KEAP1-KD mice) impaired insulin signaling, prolonged hyperglycemia, and dampened insulin resistance which was accompanied by reduced peripheral glucose and lipid metabolism [ ]. It is important to highlight that whereas both ob/ob and db/db mice develop comparable obesity, db/db mice are more diabetic than ob/ob mice [ ]. From the discrepancies between the abovementioned studies arise the possibility that KEAP1-NRF2 modulation might be differentially controlled during diabetes onset and progression. At present, this issue remains unclear and needs to be clarified in future studies.
A follow-up study by Yagishita et al. [ ] used several beta cell-specific conditional KO mice to deplete either KEAP1 or NRF2 in this cell type. In this work, they found that genetic NRF2 induction by KEAP1 depletion strongly preserves the insulin-positive area of the pancreas and protects against apoptosis in an iNOS (Nos2)-Tg background, a beta cell-specific reactive species-mediated damage model. On the contrary, beta cell-specific NRF2-conditional KO mice exhibited reduced islet size and impaired glucose tolerance in response to oxidative stress. Supporting these results, a more recent study described that NRF2 overexpression induced by KEAP1 deficiency protects beta cells from apoptosis and increases beta cell mass and proliferation ratio, as well as improves glucose tolerance upon a high fat diet (HFD) administration [ ]. Conversely, mice lacking NRF2 in beta cells showed decreased adaptive beta cell proliferation and mass expansion in addition to reduced insulin content in the pancreatic islets after a HFD feeding. Notably, NRF2 deletion also contributed to diminish the mRNA expression of some beta cell identity genes, such as Pdx1, Ins2, Glut2, and Nkx6.1, because of oxidative stress and ROS generation.
Besides the pancreas, the potential role of NRF2 in mitigating insulin resistance and its detrimental effects in insulin-target tissues has been getting more attention in the last years. Slocum et al. [ ] demonstrated that NRF2 induction by using the KEAP1-hypo (KEAP1flox/flox) mouse model, in which KEAP1 alleles are hypomorphic, suppressed hepatic gluconeogenesis as well as lipogenesis in after a HFD administration, thus ameliorating the diabetic phenotype of the KEAP1-hypo mice induced by this obesogenic diet. Of note, these results contradict those previously reported for the NRF2-deficient mice which were resistant to HFD-induced glucose intolerance [ ]. A plausible explanation for these divergences between both studies could be attributed to the diet composition since they differed in the percentage of kcal derived from fat (60 % versus 40 %, respectively) and in the sources of fat (lard versus hydrogenated vegetable oil, butter fat, corn oil, and soy oil, respectively).
Another study in db/db:KEAP1flox/- mice [ ] described an increase in Fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) in their livers but not in other tissues such as adipose tissue and pancreas, thereby identifying NRF2 as a positive regulator of this hepatokine. FGF21 has been pointed as a potential target for metabolic disorders since higher circulating levels improves hyperglycemia, insulin resistance and hyperlipidemia and attenuates weight gain in diabetic mouse models [ , ]. In agreement with these data, CDDO-Im administration increased both hepatic Fgf21 expression and plasma FGF21 levels in db/db mice but not in NRF2-deficient db/db mice, evidencing the importance of NRF2 in FGF21 regulation in a diabetic context. However, controversial results have been reported regarding the impact of NRF2 in FGF21 signaling pathway. In a HFD-induced obesity model, both Fgf21 mRNA and protein were elevated in livers of NRF2-deficient mice, whereas FGF21 protein levels were lower in KEAP1-knockdown mice than in wild-type mice [ ], showing an inverse correlation between NRF2 levels and hepatic FGF21 that might explain the improved glucose tolerance in HFD-fed NRF2-null mice. It is important to mention that distinct alterations in metabolic profile were evident when compared genetic (db/db mice) and diet-induced obesity mice models. For instance, circulating insulin levels are elevated in both models of obesity, while glucagon was increased only in the db/db mice [ ], suggesting that the db/db mice are more closely related to human T2D whereas the diet-induced obesity models represent the human prediabetic condition.
NRF2 activation in the db/db:KEAP1flox/- mice also elicited an enhanced expression of glucose and lipid metabolism-related genes in adipose tissue, which in turn improved plasma lipid profiles in these mice [ ]. In line with these evidence, ablation of NRF2 globally or specifically in adipocytes on the leptin-deficient ob/ob background resulted in aggravated insulin resistance, hyperglycemia, and hypertriglyceridemia [ ].
Skeletal muscle is essential for glucose metabolism, being responsible for 80 % of postprandial glucose uptake from the circulation. As insulin resistance in the skeletal muscle appears prior to beta cell failure, the impact of modulating KEAP1-NRF2 specifically in this tissue has also been studied by using skeletal muscle-specific KEAP1-KO mice [ , ]. Notably, NRF2 activation in skeletal muscle reduced blood glucose levels both under feeding conditions and during an insulin tolerance test (ITT) by increasing glucose uptake and suppressed body weight gain in upon a HFD administration. Since liver-specific KEAP1 knockdown mice have been reported to show only a slight decrease in blood glucose levels under feeding conditions, it is tempting to assume that NRF2 activation in skeletal muscle mainly contributes to reduce blood glucose levels after an insulin stimulation, thus being able to hypothesize that the improved insulin sensitivity observed in the ITTs of the global KEAP1 knockdown mice are mainly due to the activation of NRF2 in the muscle [ ].
Finally, a recent study in a murine model that depletes KEAP1 in both hypothalamus and pancreas [ ] revealed that increased levels of hypothalamic NRF2 improved peripheral insulin sensitivity by suppressing oxidative stress in this brain region, thus suggesting that central activation of NRF2 reduced hypothalamic oxidative damage thereby preventing the onset of T2D.
Overall, all these preclinical studies in mice point NRF2 as a key player in the onset and progression of T2D and make the KEAP1-NRF2 pathway a promising candidate for the development of future therapeutics for the treatment of T2D. However, given the complexity of this disease, there are still a number of discrepancies that require further investigation.

4.4.5.

## Mouse models of liver disease
Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD; formerly known as non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, MAFLD) is the most common liver disorder, affecting about 25 % of the global population [ ]. MASLD is marked by excessive fat accumulation in the liver without a history of alcohol use or other liver diseases When liver fat exceeds 5 % and is accompanied by inflammation and swelling of hepatocytes, it progresses to metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH; formerly known as nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, NASH). MASH causes the progressive death of hepatocytes, leading to fibrosis, cirrhosis, and even hepatocellular carcinoma [ , ].
The mechanisms underlying the development and progression of MASH are complex and multifactorial. These include hepatic steatosis, primarily characterized by an excess of triacylglycerides, hepatocellular injury, mitochondrial dysfunction, excessive production of ROS beyond homeostatic capacity, and the presence of inflammatory infiltrates and pro-inflammatory signaling. MASH results in liver fibrosis, which is the primary cause of mortality in MASH patients [ ]. Multiple preclinical models of MASH have been proposed and can broadly be induced by diet, toxins, genetically, or a combination of these. The major limitation of these models is the development of advanced fibrosis, which is problematic since fibrosis stage is considered the best prognostic marker in patients and an important endpoint in clinical trials of MASH. Proof-of-concept studies suggest that NRF2 activation may combat several underlying mechanisms of MASH in one approach ( ).
 Mice fed HFD (up to 70 % of calories from fat) developed steatosis within 10 weeks, mild inflammation after 34 weeks, and slight perivenular fibrosis after 50 weeks [ ]. In these mice, expression of NRF2 and its target genes were reduced and associated with elevated serum and hepatic levels of cholesterol and triglycerides. In contrast, mice deficient for NRF2 had higher levels of lipids and lipid peroxidation in the liver than wild type [ ]. Proteomic analysis identified cellular defense and lipid metabolism as key NRF2-related pathways in the liver. Loss of NRF2 resulted in a down-regulation of proteins involved in cellular defense such as glutathione transferases and glucuronic transferases and in a large up-regulation of proteins involved in the regulation of lipid, protein and carbohydrate metabolism. For instance, the expression levels of ATP-citrate lyase, the enzyme responsible for acetyl-CoA production, were increased in the liver of NRF2-null mouse compared to wild type pointing out NRF2 as a major regulator of cellular lipid disposition in the liver [ ]. NRF2 plays a protective role against fat accumulation damage by limiting the lipogenic activity of liver X receptor α (LXRα). In fact, the hepatic steatosis induced by an LXRα agonist was increased or reduced by NRF2-deficiency or activation with SFN, respectively. The molecular connection has been explained thanks to the description of NRF2 as a repressor of LRXα activity. NRF2 competes for p300 deacetylation with Farnesoid X receptor (FXR), leading to the FXR-dependent induction of small heterodimer partner (SHP). SHP repression subsequently reduced LXRα-dependent gene transcription [ ]. Accordingly, this relationship has been described in lipid and bile acid homeostasis in response to changes of cholesterol absorption. As expected, high cholesterol diet increased hepatic expression of liver X receptor α (LXRα) target genes related to fatty acid metabolism (Fas, Acc1, Srebp-1c, Scd-1c and Cd36), cholesterol transport (Abcg5/abcg8) and bile acid synthesis (Cyp7a1) in wild type mice. However, these genes were not induced in NRF2-null mice [ ].
In general, MASH progression is worsened in NRF2-deficient mice compared to wild type mice, showing increased steatohepatitis, oxidative stress, and inflammation [ , , ]. Hepatocyte- and macrophage-specific NRF2-KO mouse models have been used to elucidate the cell-specific role of NRF2 in the pathogenesis of MAFLD. Following a prolonged HFD exposure, NRF2 deletion in hepatocytes, but not in macrophages, attenuated hepatic steatosis. A possible mechanism is that NRF2 in hepatocytes is responsible for the expression of PPARγ to positively regulate lipid accumulation. Ablation of NRF2 in hepatocytes results in down-regulation of PPARγ expression and subsequent reduction of lipid accumulation [ ].
Although MASH is usually associated with insulin resistance, HFD-fed NRF2-KO mice exhibited better insulin sensitivity than wild-type mice [ ]. This could be partially dependent on the higher levels of FGF21 in plasma, liver and white adipose tissue of NRF2-KO compared to wild-type mice after prolonged HFD feeding [ ]. To unravel the effects of prolonged non-canonical NRF2 activation in diabetes, a model of arsenic intoxication was used employing NRF2-KO, p62-KO, and wild-type mice. Integrated transcriptomic and metabolomic approach to assess diabetogenic changes in the livers evidenced that in contrast to canonical oxidative/electrophilic activation, prolonged non-canonical NRF2 activation via p62-mediated sequestration of KEAP1 increases carbohydrate flux through the polyol pathway, resulting in a pro-diabetic shift in glucose homeostasis. This p62-and NRF2-dependent increase in liver fructose metabolism and gluconeogenesis occurs through the upregulation of ketohexokinase (Khk), sorbitol dehydrogenase (Sord), triokinase/FMN cyclase (Tkfc), and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (Hnf4A) [ ].
Likewise, methionine and choline-deficient (MCD) diets, with or without high fructose, are often used to induce MASH in mice. The NRF2 role in the evolution of MAFLD to MASH has been addressed comparing NRF2-KO and wild-type mice fed MCD diets. Livers from NRF2-null mice showed a substantial increase in macro- and microvesicular steatosis and a large increase in the number of neutrophils, compared to livers from wild-type mice treated similarly. Moreover, these livers suffered more oxidative stress than their wild-type counterparts as assessed by a significant depletion of reduced glutathione that was coupled with increases in oxidized glutathione and malondialdehyde. Furthermore, MCD diet-treated null mice suffered heightened inflammation as evidenced by activation of NF-κB-signature compared with livers from similarly treated wild-type mice [ ].
Liver plasticity of the NRF2 system is evidenced by its capacity to be restored. Indeed, the administration of a diet-induced weight loss after HFD-feeding, restored gene expression of NRF2 and its target genes and is associated with reduced hepatic lipid accumulation and oxidative stress [ ]. These results agree with the findings based on cholesterol supplementation which elevated NRF2 and hypoxia inducible factor α (HIF1α) expression, to stimulate liver regeneration, but if these proinflammatory signals persist, this profoundly alters hepatic metabolism and regeneration [ ]. These findings are consistent with previous studies using KEAP1 knockdown mice in caloric restriction or in standard chow [ , ]. Furthermore, AAV8-mediated overexpression of hepatic NRF2 expression functionally restored liver injury induced by adropin-deficiency MCD-fed mice [ ] and those fed a high-fructose diet (HFFr) [ ].
In double KO mice, damage induced by chronic inflammation in liver has been studied. Hepatocyte-specific NEMO KO mice (NEMOΔhepa) developed chronic liver disease with inflammation and steatohepatitis because of a missing regulatory subunit of the IκB kinase (IKK) complex in hepatocytes [ ]. The condition seemed improved by NRF2 in a double mutant (NEMOhepa/KEAP1Δhepa) by reduced fibrogenesis as well as initiation and progression of hepatocellular carcinogenesis. This suggests that NRF2 activation upregulates genes involved in the antioxidant response, fatty acid oxidation and glucose metabolism and downregulating inflammatory and de novo lipogenesis genes [ ].
Natural products have high potential in treating hepatic steatosis and inhibiting lipid-mediated oxidative stress by exerting antioxidant, lipid-lowering, anti-inflammatory, anti-fibrotic, and insulin-sensitizing effects [ , , ]. Besides their potential to affect multiple aspects of liver steatosis disease, the safety and efficacy of natural products as NRF2 activators need to be carefully evaluated because they can vary depending on the specific dose, route of administration, and individual patient factors.
Pharmacological activation of NRF2 is a more controlled strategy to endorse protection. Indeed, the NRF2 activator TBE-31 reduces experimental MASH and liver fibrosis by inhibiting KEAP1 [ ]. Similarly, CDDO-Im effectively prevented HFD-induced increases in body weight, adipose mass, and hepatic lipid accumulation in wild-type mice, but not in NRF2-disrupted mice. Moreover, the oxygen consumption and energy expenditure were higher in CDDO-Im than vehicle-treated mice. The levels of gene transcripts for fatty acid synthesis enzymes were downregulated after CDDO-Im treatment in the liver of wild-type mice. This inhibitory effect of CDDO-Im on lipogenic gene expression was significantly reduced in NRF2-disrupted mice [ ]. In line, glucoraphanin supplementation of HFD attenuated weight gain, decreased hepatic steatosis, and improved glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity in HFD-fed wild-type mice, but not in HFD-fed NRF2-KO mice [ ]. Although electrophilic KEAP1 inhibitors mitigate MASH in diet-fed mice they can affect other proteins, causing side effects. Thus, new KEAP1 inhibitors are being developed to non-covalently disrupt the KEAP1-NRF2 complex. One such compound, S217879, has shown beneficial effects on MASH and liver fibrosis but can cause hepatomegaly [ ]. Additionally, strong NRF2 activation from KEAP1 interface mutations is found in many tumors, including hepatocellular carcinomas. Clinical data also suggest caution with excessive NRF2 activation due to potential liver issues in treated patients. In this regard, activation of NRF2 within the physiological range by PHAR, novel disruptor of NRF2-β-TrCP interaction, attenuated key markers of MASH progression, including liver steatosis, hepatocellular ballooning, inflammation, and fibrosis. Notably, transcriptomic data indicate that PHAR led to upregulation of 3 anti-fibrotic genes (Plg, Serpina1a, and Bmp7) and downregulation of 6 pro-fibrotic (including Acta2 and Col3a1), 11 extracellular matrix remodeling, and 8 inflammatory genes [ ].
MAFLD and T2DM commonly coexist and act synergistically to drive adverse clinical outcomes. Nigro et al. [ ], showed the effects of the specific contribution of both saturated fats and fructose, on the progression of MAFLD and insulin resistance. Focusing on the analysis of NLRP3 inflammasome and KEAP1-NRF2 antioxidant signaling pathways in the liver of mice fed a standard, a saturated fat (HFAT) or a fructose (HFRT) diet for 12 weeks, the authors reported how, despite lower caloric intake, the HFRT led to a more severe steatosis and more pronounced pro-oxidant and proinflammatory signaling activation with respect to the HFD. An increased levels of cytosolic NRF2 and of its inhibitor KEAP1, paralleled by impaired NRF2 nuclear translocation in the HFRT group, were associated with a greater activation of the SREBP lipogenic pathway thus indicating that saturated fats and fructose in the diet exert dissimilar effects on liver lipid metabolism. Indeed, fructose has a higher lipogenic power than fats, being both SREBP1c and SREBP2 pathways activated to a greater extent in the liver of fructose-fed mice compared to fat-fed mice. Since a decrease in NRF2 activity in hepatic steatosis could promote the progression of MAFLD, the anti-lipogenic effect exerted by NRF2 through inhibition of LXRα, a master regulator of lipid homeostasis [ ], provide the potential for using NRF2 activators for the treatment of MAFLD.
Although loss of NRF2 increases sensitivity to MAFLD, it is less certain whether upregulation of NRF2 by genetic or pharmacologic approaches decreases sensitivity to the disease. Treating MAFLD with diabetic drugs, exercise and/or natural products regarding lipid metabolism, oxidative stress, and inflammation is a promising treatment prospect. Activating NRF2 after the onset of diabetes might reverse insulin resistance along with advanced stages of MAFLD. Zhang et al. showed that upregulation of the AMPK-NRF2-HO-1 signaling pathway might be the key mechanism of metformin and exercise synergistic effect, which may have additive effects on alleviating hepatic lipid accumulation [ ]. Empagliflozin is an SGLT-2 inhibitor recently reported to exert glycemic as well as pleiotropic effects on the progression of MAFLD and its symptoms [ ]. In a non-obese prediabetic rat model, Hüttl et al. [ ] reported the beneficial effect of empagliflozin against the MAFLD development by stimulating antioxidant enzyme activity, SOD, and GPx via upregulation of NRF2. Using a genetic mouse model (Sptasph/sph) of spherocytosis and single-cell RNA sequencing, Pfefferlé et al. [ ], discovered that hemolysis transforms liver macrophages into anti-inflammatory erythrophagocytosis sustained by activation of a heme/NRF2 signaling pathway. These anti-inflammatory macrophages mitigated disease expression in a MAFLD model induced in (Sptasph/sph) mice by feeding them MCD diet. The authors reported that the NRF2-activating drug DMF mimicked the effect of chronic hemolysis on MAFLD progression in the MCD model thus demonstrating the role of heme-induced NRF2 signaling in the regulation of inflammatory phagocyte functions. Despite belonging to a relatively new class of pharmaceuticals, increasing evidence demonstrates biological drugs have promising potential to treat MAFLD. By in vivo studies, Lin et al. [ ] reported that the treatment with recombinant fibroblast growth factor 1 (rFGF1) in diabetes associated MAFLD mouse model (HF/high sucrose diet, HFHS) stimulated NRF2 and antioxidant protein expression via activation of hepatic AMPK. The role of CLUSTERIN, a multi-functional protein that is up regulated in the pathogenesis of various metabolic diseases, including MAFLD, has been investigated by Park et al. [ ] by using transgenic mice with whole-body clusterin overexpression (wCLU-tg) in Western diet-induced MAFLD. The authors reported that clusterin by activating NRF2 and AMPK, protects against Western diet induced MAFLD and opens the way to its translation in preclinical studies as a biological drug. Moreover, Zai et al. [ ] showed a new promising therapeutic strategy based on nanoparticles for liver-targeting IL-22 gene delivery to be utilized for alleviating obesity-related fatty liver via NRF2 activation. Of note, in a murine model of steatosis, Ferrigno et al. [ ] reported for the first time the beneficial effects of metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR)5 antagonist 2-methyl-6-(phenylethynyl) pyridine (MPEP). MPEP induces a reduction of lipid accumulation and oxidative stress in obese (ob/ob) mice fed with HFD for 7 weeks. This result confirms the administration of MPEP produces anti-inflammatory and antioxidative effects in this model of hepatic steatosis by decreasing the mRNA expression of both NF-κB and NRF2. However, the underlying mechanisms by which mGluR5 antagonist contributes to prevent MAFLD need to be further investigated. Collectively, these findings form the basis of a novel complementary therapeutic strategy for MAFLD targeting NRF2 activation to restore injured liver tissue and attenuate oxidative stress.

4.4.6.

## Mouse models of muscular dystrophies
In skeletal muscles, ROS management is particularly relevant. The levels of ROS fluctuate in line with the intensity of muscle contraction, which is directly linked to mitochondrial activity, and mediate a series of physiological adaptations. Apart from the superoxide anions generated by the mitochondria, labile iron is also an important element in oxidative stress signaling in the muscle, with approximately 10–15 % of total iron or heme-iron of the body found in skeletal muscle. The importance of heme-iron in the correct functioning of the skeletal muscle is further illustrated by the fact that heme is a co-factor of key cellular components, including myoglobin and cytochrome c oxidase. Under pathological conditions, ROS accumulation in the muscle leads to mitochondrial dysfunction and muscle atrophy, a common feature in several muscular dystrophies, a group of diseases characterized by progressive weakness and loss of muscle mass [ , , , ]. Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is the most common muscular dystrophy diagnosed during childhood and is characterized by mutations in DMD, which encodes the cytoskeleton-transmembrane receptor bridging protein, dystrophin [ ]. As for other muscular dystrophies, increased oxidative stress [ , ], iron overload [ ], as well as chronic inflammation [ , ] are hallmarks of DMD and therefore antioxidant mechanisms led by NRF2, have been the focus of intense research [ , ]. These studies have shed light on the importance of NRF2 and downstream targets to counter the oxidative stress linked to muscular dystrophies ( ). In particular, the crosstalk between increased ROS and inflammatory response has been shown to occur both in patients and in mdx mice [ ], the preferred mouse model for DMD. This crosstalk is likely mediated by NF-κB activation in response to mechanical stress and related production of ROS, as shown in previous studies using the mdx mouse model [ ]. In accordance, NRF2 induction dampens NF-κB activation, consequently reducing the inflammatory response [ ]. Further supporting a direct role of NRF2 in countering disease pathology in the context of muscular dystrophies, deletion of Nrf2 in the natural A/J mouse model of dysferlinopathy, associated with mutations in DYSF, led to a dramatic increase in disease pathology [ ]. NRF2 has also been shown to play a role in skeletal muscle regeneration. Absence of NRF2 in a model of hindlimb ischemia-reperfusion injury (i.e. muscle injury), did not worsen the extent of the injury, but led to an impairment in muscle regeneration, which is likely associated with the transcriptional modulation of key myogenic factors and consequently to the regulation of muscle stem cell proliferation and differentiation [ ]. The role of NRF2 in skeletal muscle physiology has also been tested in the context of exercise, where Keap1 knockdown mice (Keap1-KD) had increased exercise endurance [ ]. Moreover, different studies have also shown that Nfe2l2 deletion worsens the muscle ageing phenotype [ , , ]. Together these findings support the idea that inducing antioxidant mechanisms may be the key to counter the overall disease pathology in muscular dystrophies. In keeping with this notion, several studies have tested the ability of classic antioxidant compounds, such as NAC to revert disease pathology in mdx mice [ , , ]. In addition to DMD, treatment with NAC has also been used to evaluate the effectiveness of antioxidant treatment in countering other types of muscular dystrophies. This is true for LAMA2 congenital muscular dystrophy (LAMA2-CMD), a disease caused by mutations in LAMA2, encoding the α2 chain of laminins 211 and 221 [ , ]. NAC treatment was shown to counter muscle weakness, prevent the erroneous central nucleation of muscle fibers and decrease apoptosis, inflammation, fibrosis and oxidative stress [ ]. NAC treatment was also shown to allow muscle regeneration upon injury in Stra13−/− mice, which lack the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Stra13 (or Bhlhe40), known to play an important role in muscle development [ ]. Contrasting with this beneficial role of NAC in the treatment of muscular dystrophies, some studies have also highlighted NAC side effects, including a negative impact on body weight gain and gain of muscle mass and a decrease in the liver weight [ , ] thus supporting the use of other strategies based on the activation of endogenous mechanisms. Nevertheless, and considering the undoubtful role of ROS in the pathology of muscular dystrophies, mdx mice have been used as proof of concept to test possible therapeutic strategies aimed at directly activating NRF2 to ameliorate DMD disease pathology. For example, administration of SFN has been shown to improve the pathology of dystrophic muscles, leading to an increase in muscle strength and mass and reduced inflammation and fibrosis [ , , ]. (−)-Epicatechin, a flavonoid that activates NRF2 pathway, improved dystrophin-associated protein complex expression and localization in the frontal cortex of mdx mice [ ]. The use of this same compound has been also evaluated in other models of muscle dystrophies, including δ-KO [ ], a model for limb girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMD), a group of disorders characterized by weakness and atrophy of the limb and shoulder girdle muscles and that is linked to mutations in different genes, such as LMNA (encoding LAMIN A), CAPN3 (encoding calpain 3), DYSF (encoding dysferlin) and SGCA-D (encoding sarcoglycan complex components A-D) [ ]. (−)-Epicatechin treatment of δ-KO mice enhanced overall muscle function, possibly by contributing to improve antioxidant response, to decrease apoptosis and to reduce fibrosis [ ]. The positive effect of (−)-epicatechin was also shown in a model of BaCl2-induced muscle damage, where the improvement on muscle repair was also evident [ ]. Another NRF2 activator, resveratrol, has been shown to improve muscle mass gain, counter oxidative damage, reduce cardiomyopathy and restore mitophagy in mdx mice [ , , , ]. The mTOR inhibitor and activator of the NRF2 pathway, rapamycin, has also been used to ameliorate the pathophysiology in different models of muscular dystrophy [ , ]. For example, for DMD the treatment of mdx mice with rapamycin led to a reduction in muscle fiber necrosis, increased muscle regeneration, increase in skeletal muscle strength and cardiac contractility [ , ]. Myf5Cre/+, FktnL/L is a fukutin-deficient mouse model of dystroglycanopathy, also known as Fukuyama muscular dystrophy. This model allows the conditional deletion of the Fktn gene, encoding the transmembrane protein fukutin, which locates to the Golgi and is involved in the glycosylation of different proteins, possibly including α-dystroglycan. Deletion of Fktn only occurs in cells that express Myf5, an important marker for muscle development, where Cre recombinase is conditionally expressed. Rapamycin treatment of Myf5Cre/+, FktnL/L mice allowed to reduce the levels of fibrosis and inflammation, decreased activity-induced damage, and led to a reduction in the central nucleation and increased size of muscle fibers [ ]. In Lmna−/− mice, which lack LAMIN A/C, an important protein to maintain nuclear structure, rapamycin treatment improved cardiac and skeletal muscle function and increased survival [ ]. The specific contribution of NRF2 to rapamycin beneficial outcomes should be addressed in future studies.
 Taken together, these studies support that targeting NRF2 pathway seems to be a central avenue for treatment of muscular dystrophies. Accordingly, some of these compounds have already been tested in patients with promising results, as reviewed previously for DMD [ ], highlighting the potential use of Idebenone, coenzyme Q10 and flavonoids. Similarly for other muscular dystrophies such as Becker muscular dystrophy, the use of (−)-epicatechin in patients has been shown to improve muscle pathology and mitochondria biogenesis [ ]. Resveratrol is yet another compound that has been on a phase II clinical trial in patients with DMD, Becker muscular dystrophy or Fukuyama muscular dystrophy [ ].

4.4.7.

## Mouse models for neuropsychiatric conditions
Depression is a mental disorder characterized by persistent low mood, loss of interest, feeling of sadness, difficulty in concentrating or making decisions, cognitive impairment, sleep changes, decreased appetite, and suicidal tendencies, which severely limits the patients’ psychosocial function and quality of life [ ].
Many of the factors that influence depression such as physical inactivity, cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes or respiratory diseases can contribute to depressive behavior. In turn, people with these diseases may also find themselves experiencing depression due to the difficulties associated with managing their condition. Different hypotheses have emerged throughout the years to try to explain the pathomechanisms implicated in depression. One of the most longstanding has been the monoaminergic hypothesis proposed by Schildkraut in 1965 [ ]; this hypothesis is sustained on a reduction of brain levels of adrenaline, dopamine, and serotonin. In fact, most treatments used today for the treatment of depression such as serotonin or norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOI) align with this hypothesis. However, these drugs can take months to show an effect and have multiple side effects. Furthermore, these drugs show no efficacy in around 30–40 % of the patients. Therefore, other mechanisms must be involved in the pathogenesis of depression. Among these other mechanisms, inflammation, oxidative stress, reduced neurotrophic factors and activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis (stress, increased cortisol) have been proposed as contributors that are known to be interconnected. For example, peripheral blood inflammatory biomarkers can access the brain and interact with virtually every pathophysiologic domain known to be involved in depression, including neurotransmitter metabolism, neuroendocrine function, and neural plasticity. Indeed, activation of inflammatory pathways within the brain is believed to contribute to decreased neurotrophic support and altered glutamate release/reuptake, as well as oxidative stress, leading to excitotoxicity and loss of glial elements, consistent with neuropathologic findings that characterize depressive disorders [ ].
In this respect, NRF2 is being proposed as an innovative target to develop drugs for the treatment of depression as its induction would induce genes implicated in the regulation of neuroinflammation, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, autophagy and ferroptosis ( ). Results obtained from NRF2-KO mice show that the absence of NRF2 causes a depressive-like behavior indicated by an increase in the immobility time in the forced swimming test and the tail suspension test, and by a reduction in the grooming time in the sucrose splash test (anhedonia). In brain tissue of NRF2-KO mice microgliosis, astrogliosis, reduction of serotonin and dopamine levels, increased glutamate levels, together with altered levels of the neurotrophic factor BDNF have been reported [ , ]. Taken together, NRF2-null mice recapitulate most of the hallmarks that characterize a depressive phenotype.
 Depressive phenotypes can be modelled in animals by inducing a neuroinflammatory response by injecting LPS, by chronic corticosterone administration or by subjecting them to social defeat or chronic mild stress paradigms. In the LPS model, administration of the NRF2 inducer SFN prevented the depressive phenotype shown in the NRF2-KO animals [ ]. HPA axis dysfunction and increased cortisol levels have long been associated with Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) [ ]. Based on this observation, chronic treatment with corticosterone produced a depressive phenotype in mice. In this model, the endogenous compound agmatine reverted the behavioral depressive phenotype by a mechanism that implicated the induction of NRF2. Agmatine increased the expression of NRF2 target genes and its protective effect in the corticosterone model was prevented in NRF2-KO mice [ ]. In a chronic social defeat stress (CSDS) model, edaravone exhibited a potent antidepressant and anxiolytic properties through SIRT1/NRF2/HO-1/GPX4 axis [ ]. These observations, summarized in , indicate that NRF2 induction could provide a beneficial effect for depressive conditions. Although, there is preclinical and clinical evidence indicating that NRF2 is lower in depression [ ], there is still no drug approved for the treatment of depression based on NRF2 induction. At this moment a clinical study using SFN for the treatment of mild to moderate depression in patients with history of cardiac interventions has shown non-conclusive results [ ].
Schizophrenia is a chronic and highly complex psychiatric disorder characterized by cognitive dysfunctions, negative symptoms including decreased emotion, delusions and hallucinations. In recent years, the deficiency of glutamate neurotransmitter system has been paid more attention in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia, which suggested that abnormal concentration of Glu or GABA in the brain of schizophrenia patients is closely related to schizophrenia [ ]. Recently, it has been estimated that over 20 different animal models of schizophrenia have been developed [ ], all fit into four different induction categories: developmental, drug-induced, lesion or genetic manipulation.
Specifically, the NRF2 pathway has been investigated in schizophrenia employing mainly the drug-induced models. Blockade of the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor by non-competitive antagonists such as phencyclidine (PCP), induces delusions and hallucinations in otherwise healthy subjects, symptoms commonly seen in schizophrenia. Acute PCP administration causes hyperlocomotion, social withdrawal, and impairment of both prepulse inhibition of acoustic startle and cognition in rodents [ ]. Remarkably, PCP administration in mice has been associated with increased NRF2 nuclear translocation and DNA binding activity. Indeed, the mRNA levels of Gclcm and Gclc were also elevated in the prefrontal cortex of the PCP-treated mice compared to control [ ]. On the other hand, it has been reported a down-regulation of NRF2 signaling in PCP-induced mouse model of schizophrenia, as evidenced by decreased expression of NRF2, HO-1 and NQO-1 but following sub-chronic PCP treatment [ ]. In a similar model, pretreatment with SFN attenuated PCP-induced cognitive deficits, oxidative stress, reduction of spine density and decrease in parvalbumin (PV) -positive cells in the medial prefrontal cortex and hippocampus of mice. In addition, intake of glucosinolate SFN precursor glucoraphanin, during the juvenile and adolescence prevented the onset of cognitive deficits, oxidative stress and loss of PV immunoreactivity induced by PCP treatment [ ].
Emerging epidemiologic data state that gestational exposure to infection contributes to the etiology of schizophrenia [ ]. Maternal immune activation (MIA) using polyriboinosinic-polyribocytidilic acid [poly (I:C)], a Toll-like receptor 3 agonist, has been widely used as a neurodevelopmental animal model for schizophrenia. The role of NRF2 has been addressed evaluating schizophrenia hallmarks after its activation. Dietary intake of glucoraphanin during pregnancy and lactation prevented cognitive and social interaction deficits, as well as reduction of PV immunoreactivity, in the medial prefrontal cortex of the juvenile and adult offspring after MIA [ ]. The effects of another activator of NRF2, DMF have been investigated in a study which also used prenatal immune activation model of schizophrenia in mice by maternal injection of the viral mimetic poly (I:C) during pregnancy. Prolonged DMF treatment of the male mice offspring counteracted the changes in the medial prefrontal cortex structure and behavior induced by MIA [ ]. Together these studies correlate a protective role of NRF2 activation with a reduction of schizophrenia outcomes, however future studies are needed to establish a causality link.
Autism, also called autism spectrum disorder, is a neurodevelopmental disorder marked by deficits in reciprocal social communication and the presence of restricted and repetitive patterns of behavior. Autism symptoms, including impairments in language development, social interactions, and motor skills, have been difficult to model in rodents. The fact that children exposed in utero to sodium valproate (VPA), clinically in adults as an anticonvulsant agent, demonstrate behavioral and neuroanatomical abnormalities like those seen in autism paves the way to the generation of a novel model to mimic autism in mice. Indeed, mice exposed to valproic acid on embryonic or early postnatal exhibit developmental behavioral deficits like those observed in autism as well as enhanced neuronal death in the cerebellum and hippocampus, regions known to be affected in humans with autism [ ]. Recent studies demonstrated that NRF2 might be linked to autism through its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects. Indeed, NRF2 null mice exposed to early postnatal treatment with VPA had behavioral deficits in open field and rotarod activity, as well as in learning and memory in the Morris water maze, in comparison to wild type mice, suggesting increased sensitivity of NRF2-KO mice to the valproic acid-induced neural damage [ ].
Selenium treatment of BTBR (BTBR T + Itpr3tf/J) mice, used to model autism spectrum disorders, ameliorated impairments in learning and memory, improved social functions, decreased repetitive behaviors, inhibited ferroptosis and increased levels of NRF2 and GPX4 in the hippocampus, whereas treatment with the protein synthesis inhibitor ML385 reduced the effect of selenium on ferroptosis and abnormal behaviors in BTBR mice [ ]. Further evidence suggested that activation of NRF2 by SFN exerts beneficial effects on immune dysfunction and oxidative imbalance in both periphery and brain of BTBR mice, resulting in the ameliorated autism-like symptoms [ ]. In the same BTBR mouse model of autism, toxic environmental pollutants, di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) [ ], as well as methylmercury [ ], caused worsening of autism-like symptoms, related to a lack of NRF2 signaling pathway upregulation as demonstrated by unaltered expression of NRF2, HO-1, and SOD-1 in the periphery and cortex.
Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE) is the most common type of partial epilepsy in adults is a chronic neurological disorder that in a sizable population of patients is associated with progressive neuronal damage and poor control of seizures by currently available treatments. Numerous alterations have been reported in patients with MTLE, including hippocampal sclerosis and cell death, mossy fiber sprouting, reorganization of hippocampal interneuronal networks, gliosis, blood-brain-barrier dysfunction and angiogenesis. Employing transcription factor enrichment analysis (TFEA) on publicly available gene, expression data sets from a variety of epilepsy-related studies identified NRF2 as a potential therapeutic candidate [ ]. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that the NRF2-mediated ferroptosis pathway may be associated with the occurrence of seizures in a clinical setting. The mRNA expression levels of NFE2L2, SLC7A11, and GPX4 were significantly reduced in peripheral blood from patients with newly diagnosed and untreated seizures [ ].
In mice the most common drug to mimic MSTLE is kainate, a cyclic analog of l-glutamate and an agonist of the ionotropic kainic receptors. Analysis of transgenic reporter mice, ARE-hPAP, following kainate injection revealed selective reporter activation within the damaged hippocampus. Relevantly, NRF2-KO mice were shown to be more sensitive to kainate toxicity, as evidenced by elevated seizure severity and duration, hippocampal neuron damage and mortality, as well as altered glial fibrillary acidic protein immunoreactivity and increased microglial infiltration, supporting the relevance of NRF2-ARE signaling in kainate-induced excitotoxicity [ ]. Accordingly, the expression of NRF2, NQO1 and HO-1 was slightly but significantly upregulated in the hippocampus after intracerebroventricular injection of kainate. Their expression levels were significantly increased after gintonin treatment, indicating that observed protective activity of gintonin on kainate-induced seizure and hippocampal cell death might be closely associated with its antioxidant activity [ ]. In contrast, lower expression of NRF2, SLC7A11, and GPX4 in hippocampal tissue of mice with kainate-induced seizures has been reported. However, pretreatment with quercetin alleviated seizure-like behavior, learning and memory deficits and reversed alterations in NRF2, SLC7A11, and GPX4 levels, suggesting inhibitory effects on NRF2-mediated ferroptosis [ ]. These discrepancies could be explained by the differences in the dosage, treatment long and administration route. Indeed, kainate modulate regulation of AKT/GSK-3β axis and NRF2 subcellular localization in a time-dependent manner [ ].
Other drug-induced seizure models have been employed to study the role of NRF2, including pilocarpine. After pilocarpine injection, the expression levels of Nfe2l2 and Hmox1, Nqo1 and mGst mRNA increased progressively in mice following status epilepticus, but after 72h declined. Injection of AAV2-hNRF2 in mice resulted in seizure reduction, decreased microglial activation and prevention of hippocampal neuron loss [ ]. Using a phenytoin (PHT)-resistant mouse model, antioxidative pretreatment with N-acetylcysteine was shown to prevent and reverse PHT resistance, whereas activation of NRF2 was able to induce PHT resistance, suggesting antioxidative therapy as promising strategy for treatment of drug-resistant epilepsy [ ]. Worsened epileptic seizures and cognitive impairment caused by amygdala kindling and hindered response to SFN were observed in NRF2-KO mice [ ]. Moreover, prolonged treatment with SFN elevated seizure threshold in the 6 Hz seizure stimulation and fluoroethyl-induced seizure model, as well as protected mice against pilocarpine-induced status epilepticus. In contrast to findings suggesting SFN anticonvulsant activity due to antioxidant effects and enhanced mitochondrial function, SFN injected acutely at a toxic dose exerted proconvulsant activity in both chemically and electrically induced seizures in mice [ ].

4.4.8.

## Mouse models of neurodegenerative diseases
The involvement of NRF2 in the development of neurodegenerative diseases has been demonstrated in a multitude of studies ( ) [ , , , , , ]. Neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by oxidative stress, mitochondrial alterations, loss of proteostasis leading to the appearance of protein aggregates, and neuroinflammation, with aging being a major risk factor. The aging process is the main cause of the decline in NRF2 activity, which interconnects NRF2 with neurodegenerative diseases. To date, it has not been described that defects in NRF2 are the cause of the neurodegenerative process, but it has been described that several polymorphisms in NRF2 are associated with a more exacerbated progression of these diseases or, on the contrary, may be protective [ , , , , ]. All this evidence points to the transcription factor NRF2 as a key player in the molecular events underlying neurodegeneration and thus many studies have been conducted to unravel the role of NRF2 in these diseases. The use of NRF2-deficient mice in conjunction with models of the different neurodegenerative diseases has led us to understand the role of NRF2 in the neurodegenerative process and its potential use as a therapeutic target to develop new therapies.
 In relation to AD the most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder worldwide, it has been described that the absence of NRF2 in different transgenic mouse models exacerbates memory loss and cognitive impairment in general, due to an increase in the accumulation of Aβ plaques and TAU phosphorylation, the two main molecular characteristics of this disease [ , , , ]. Induction of NRF2 (either by gene overexpression or pharmacological modulation) has therapeutic potential that has been evidenced in different transgenic models recapitulating several AD hallmarks ( ) [ , , , , ]. Based on these evidence, DMF, a potent NRF2 inducer, has been proposed for clinical trials for AD [ ].
The relevance of the role of NRF2 in Parkinson's disease (PD) has also been studied in detail with the use of toxin-based models (6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA), 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) or rotenone) or protein overexpression models, such as overexpression α-synuclein, main component of Lewy bodies. In all these models, the absence of NRF2 exacerbates clinical features of the disease, such as loss of dopaminergic neurons, increased reactive gliosis, exacerbated oxidative stress or mitochondrial alterations [ , , , , ] ( ). As in AD models, the therapeutic potential of NRF2 activation has been studied in different PD models. In the models analyzed, the different NRF2 inducers had beneficial effects on dopaminergic neurodegeneration, neuroinflammation and oxidative stress [ , , , , ].
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) present an overlap at clinical, pathological, and genetic levels, and represent two ends of a spectrum disorder [ ]. The first mutation found to be related to the development of ALS was in the gene coding for SOD1 [ ], and therefore, most of the studies that have been performed to date in relation to ALS and NRF2 are in SOD1 transgenic mice ( ). The data provided by these studies indicate a role of NRF2 preferentially at the astrocyte level, since NRF2 deficiency at the neuronal level or in skeletal muscle fibers has little impact on disease progression [ , , ]. In this model, the effectiveness of different NRF2-inducing compounds has been analyzed [ , , ], and Edaravone has recently been approved for clinical use in ALS patients [ ]. On the other side, although AD is the most frequent dementia, between 60 and 70 % of cases, FTD is the second cause of dementia in adult patients and the most frequent in patients under 65 years of age [ ]. Based on the major protein component, a classification of the disease can be established into two predominant histopathological subgroups, both present in approximately 45 % of patients with FTD [ ]: FTD-TAU associated with mutations in the gene that codes for TAU (MAPT) and [ ] FTD-TDP-43. The relevance of NRF2 in FTD development has been analyzed in several murine models recapitulating various features of the disease. In all models, pharmacological activation of NRF2 can significantly reverse the neurodegenerative process [ , , , ].
In other neurodegenerative diseases of lower prevalence in the population, such as Huntington's disease or Friedreich's ataxia, the use of NRF2 activators was also capable of reversing the neurodegenerative process ( ) [ , , , ]. All this evidence, obtained by combining NRF2-deficient mice with models of the various neurodegenerative diseases, has demonstrated the benefit of pharmacological modulation of NRF2 as a therapeutic strategy applicable to patients with these diseases. This has led to the recent approval of omaveloxolone, an NRF2 inducer, as a treatment for Friedreich's ataxia [ ].

4.4.9.

## Mouse models of retinal diseases
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the most common cause of blindness in the Western world. It has no definitive treatment and can lead to vision loss and decreased quality of life in older adults [ ]. The primary cause of pathology appears to be the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) degeneration, together with the accumulation of extracellular deposits called drusen, between the RPE and the choroid. The heavy, daily, phagocytic load on the RPE, together with a highly oxidative environment and high metabolic activity, leads to the slow accumulation of indigestible material over decades. Consistently, a hallmark of AMD is the accumulation of lipofuscin in the RPE. Lipofuscin is thought to be a by-product of photoreceptor outer segments (POS) phagocytosis and results from incomplete digestion due to lysosomal dysfunction [ , ]. Lipofuscin occurs naturally and accumulates gradually with ageing, but it is exacerbated in AMD, being a predictive marker of retinal stress, evaluated by fundus autofluorescence of the eye [ , ]. Lysosomal dysfunction in RPE is postulated to be at the center of a pathogenic hub contributing to proteotoxicity, mitochondrial dysfunction, redox imbalance, and inflammation in AMD [ , ], eventually leading to RPE cell death and vision loss. Thus, it is likely that dysfunction within lysosomes can cause dysfunction in other organelles, leading to cell death. Also, photodamage of lipofuscin may induce oxidative stress further contributing to AMD. In fact, the retina is especially prone to oxidative stress due to high oxygen pressure and exposure to UV and blue light, promoting ROS generation [ ]. Altogether, current evidence suggests a key role of the antioxidant response, autophagy, and lysosomal function in the maintenance of a healthy RPE.
NRF2, as the master regulator of the antioxidant response, has been implicated in human AMD and prospected as a therapeutic target ( ). It has been shown that the activity of NRF2 in the RPE of aged mice has been found to be impaired, indicating that the aging RPE has a limited capacity to respond to perturbations in ROS levels, and suggesting that an impaired antioxidant response by aging RPE after an oxidative stimulus could induce RPE dysfunction that may contribute to the development of AMD [ ].
 Thus, the NRF2-KO mice can provide a novel model for mechanistic and translational research on AMD. These mice showed RPE damage, namely drusen-like deposits, increased autofluorescence and sub-RPE deposition of inflammatory proteins, resembling dry AMD. Also, the RPE accumulates large amounts of autophagosomes and autolysosomes, due to impaired macroautophagy, suggesting that deregulated autophagy is likely a mechanistic link between oxidative injury and inflammation [ ]. Importantly, these phenotypes are exacerbated by exposure of NRF2-KO mice to mild white light [ ]. Also, a single-nucleotide polymorphism in the NRF2 encoding gene was associated with the risk for AMD [ ].
While there is some data supporting a beneficial effect on NRF2 against AMD, a translational approach using preclinical models is lacking. Evidence suggests that protecting the retina from oxidative stress-induced injury is crucial for managing dry AMD. A recent study showed that overexpression of NRF2 in the RPE with an AAV construct produces a robust rescue effect in a mouse model of retinitis pigmentosa. NRF2 overexpression preserved RPE morphology and upregulated multiple oxidative defense pathways. These are the same pathways that are implicated in the pathogenesis of AMD, suggesting that NRF2 overexpression may be a potential therapeutic strategy to slow the pathogenesis of this disease [ ].
Although there are no current FDA-approved drugs for AMD, an early clinical study called Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) showed that taking a high-dose supplementation with antioxidant compounds such as vitamins C and E and β-carotene can help prevent the progression of AMD and reduce the risk of advanced AMD progression by 25 % and moderate vision loss by 19 % within 5 years [ ]. Newer formulations (AREDS2) replace the β-carotene in the original AREDS formula, with lutein/zeaxanthin. This new formula (AREDS2) is now used as the first-line treatment for dry AMD. Flavonoids, such as quercetin, have free radical-scavenging and antioxidant functions, and can activate NRF2. Correspondingly, preparation of a solid dispersion that significantly improved the solubility and dissolution rate of quercetin, thereby increasing its bioactivity, showed a protective effect on retina oxidative injury in a mice model of AMD, which was associated with activation of NRF2 signaling and related antioxidant enzymes [ ].
In summary, there is mounting clinical and experimental evidence supporting chronic oxidative stress as a driving force in AMD pathology ( ). Therefore, understanding the pathways counteracting oxidative stress in the RPE, especially the NRF2 pathway, in the context of aging, will provide new therapeutic strategies for AMD.

4.4.10.

## Mouse models of cancer
In contrast to the acute physiological regulation of NRF2, in neoplasia there is evidence for increased basal activation of NRF2. Indeed, somatic mutations that disrupt the KEAP1-NRF2 interaction have been identified, indicating that NRF2 activation may facilitate tumor progression. The fact that expression of K-RasG12D reduced ROS levels and increased NRF2 protein levels in a KEAP1-independent manner paves the way to the analysis of NRF2 activation in a tumorigenic context employing mouse models. It is not possible to discuss in detail the numerous mouse models of cancer, where the role of NRF2 has been investigated; here, we just show a small number of examples ( ). Thus, NRF2-deficient pancreata were noted to contain fewer PanIN. While the proliferation of the salivary gland was unchanged, PanIN from NRF2-deficient mice were significantly less proliferative and demonstrated an increased content of cells exhibiting senescence-associated β-galactosidase activity. The role of NRF2 in lung cancer development was investigated. NRF2 deficiency resulted in a significant reduction in lung cancer burden, and an increase in median survival [ ].
 There are multiple factors that determine the control interpreting the role of NRF2 in cancer. Several studies were suggesting that NRF2 suppression could enhance cancer prognosis. For example, in an interesting study, the researchers injected BALB/c nude mouse models with CaoV3 cells to study ovarian cancer. Then, they treated the mice with eriodictyol, showing a significant reduction in NRF2 expression, which led to inhibition of tumor growth [ ]. In line, recent study evidence that NEDD4 Like E3 Ubiquitin Protein Ligase (NEDD4) inhibits migration, invasion, cisplatin resistance and promotes apoptosis of bladder cancer cells by inactivating the p62-KEAP1-NRF2 pathway [ ]. The combined administration of vitamin C and erastin modulated the AMPK/NRF2/HMOX1 pathway, enhancing ferroptosis in pancreatic cancer cells in mice injected with Panc02 cells [ ]. In the case of liver cancer, a study with nude mice injected with SMMC-7721 cells to induce liver cancer explored the impact of overexpression of NRF2. The results indicated that tumors from SMMC-7721-NRF2 cells exhibited significantly larger size compared to those from SMMC-7721-Vector cells [ ]. These findings were confirmed in melanoma mouse models, where NRF2-KO melanoma cells were used to induce melanoma. Notably, 40 % of mice injected with NRF2-KO cells showed no tumor growth, in contrast to all mice injected with control melanoma cells [ ]. These findings were also confirmed in mouse models of lung cancer. For example, BALB/c nude mice were injected with A549 cells to induce lung metastasis. The research showed a decrease in NRF2 protein levels in mice treated with erastin compared to the control group [ ]. In another study, C57BL/6 mice were injected with B16–F10-Luc cells to study the effects of pedunculoside, a plant triterpene saponin. Pedunculoside significantly reduced lung metastasis by reversing the expression of EMT proteins, lowering ROS production, and suppressing the MAPK and NRF2 pathways [ ]. Moreover, Nu/nu nude mice inoculated with A549 tumor cells were used in the study. Luteolin treatment aimed to suppress the NRF2 pathway in vivo [ ]. Paradoxically, in the case of colorectal cancer (CRC), the nature of the xenograft or the pharmacological agent used to induce CRC seems to play a critical role in exploring the role of NRF2. For example, nude mice injected with HT-29 cells with/without NRF2-KO were used to explore the impact of Ibrutinib. The study found that Ibrutinib enhanced the sensitivity of CRC cells to ferroptosis inducers by suppressing NRF2 [ ]. Additionally, it was reported that NOD/SCID mice injected with SW620-Luc2 cells to induce colorectal carcinoma found that curcumin prevented colorectal cancer metastasis by promoting miR-34a, initiating a ROS/KEAP1/NRF2/miR-34a/b/c signaling cascade [ ]. Conversely, NRF2-KO mice were more susceptible to dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced colitis [ ], a major risk factor for the development of CRC. In mice with NRF2-KO, a model with 2.5 % (w/v) DSS in drinking water + AOM (10 mg/kg) with/without 17β-estradiol (E2) was studied. The research found that 17β-estradiol effectively suppressed the development of colorectal cancer induced by azoxymethane/DSS in male mice lacking NRF2 [ ]. Analysis of combined occurrences of preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions in mice lacking NRF2 when administered potassium bromate (KBrO3), to induce intestinal carcinogenesis, revealed notable rise in the number of both lesion type [ ]. However, neither genetic nor pharmacological NRF2 activation, nor disruption of NRF2, affected colorectal adenoma formation in a mouse model of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) [ ], suggesting that NRF2 activation is unlikely to impact the early stages of colorectal cancer development. The disparities could also be noticed on epigenetic levels. For example, using the transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate (TRAMP) model, an epigenetic study was conducted, revealing that NRF2 expression was epigenetically suppressed [ ]. Taken together, these observations suggest that the role of NRF2 in cancer could depend on the type of cancer investigated, the mouse model used, the pharmacological agent used to induce cancer, and the type of study.

4.5.

## Rat models (animalia chordata mammalia Rattus norvergicus)
Although the majority of investigations on NRF2 are performed on mouse models, there are few studies that describe the rat as a model for mechanistic or interventive studies on NRF2 ( ). Rats are considered to be more suitable for physiological and toxicological studies than mice because of their larger body size [ ] and liver response to some toxins such as aflatoxin B1 [ , ].
 The development of new technologies for genetic modifications by the TALEN methodology, as well as the establishment and culturing of embryonic cells, allowed the generation of the first NRF2-KO rat model (SD-Nfe212em1Mcwi) in a Sprague-Dawley background. These rats presented a germ line transmission of a 41-bp deletion within the first exon, eliminating the NRF2 translation start codon avoiding NRF2 protein synthesis [ ]. The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of NRF2 as the most important antioxidant and cell protective transcription factor in defense of endothelial dysfunction, oxidant stress, and microvascular rarefaction. They reported that the mRNA levels for Cat, Hmox1, Sod1 and 2, and Gsr in livers of NRF2-KO rats were lower than those in wild-type rats, and that NRF2 is necessary for the protective effect of low-dose angiotensin II (AngII) infusion to ameliorate endothelial dysfunction and prevent microvascular rarefaction in the face of an elevated dietary salt intake [ ].
The same year a publication by Taguchi et al. (2016) reported the generation of a new NRF2-KO rat model. Two transgenic lines were developed, F344-Nfe2l2em1Kyo and F344-Nfe2l2em2Kyo (the first line harbors a 7bp deletion and the second line harbors a 1bp insertion in the NFE2L2 gene homozygously deleting it). The mRNA levels of Gsta3, Akra2, and Akra3 were reduced in null rats compared to wild-type, and the toxic effect aflatoxin B1 in the liver was aggravated in both NRF2-KO lines [ ].
Additionally, another study aiming to demonstrate whether NRF2 activation occurs at early steps of rat hepatocarcinogenesis employed male F344 NRF2KO rats, was presented in 2018 [ ]. In this study NRF2-KO rat models were compared to wild type rats, after a single dose of diethyl nitrosamine, followed by choline-devoid methionine-deficient (CMD) diet. After a one-week recovery period, rats were fed a diet containing rats were fed choline-supplemented or a choline-devoid methionine-deficient diet for 10- or 17-weeks. Following the marker GSTP, the results indicated that NRF2 activation is involved in early preneoplastic lesions. NRF2 missense mutations, known to disrupt the KEAP1-NRF2 binding, were present in 65.7 % of GSTP-positive foci. In rats fed a CMD diet, genetic inactivation of NRF2 led to increased liver injury and chronic compensatory hepatocyte regeneration [ ]. Recently, in a MAFLD experimental rat model, showed the efficacy of multiple drugs including DMF in a diabetic-MAFLD rat model. Treatment with DMF significantly alleviated HFD/STZ-induced plasma glucose, triglycerides, cholesterol, % of HbA1c, hepatic steatosis, NLRP3, apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase activation and recruitment domain, CARD, caspase-1, IL1β, NFκB, Sod 1, Cat, IGF 1, heme oxygenase 1, receptor for the advanced glycation end product (RAGE), and collagen-1 in diabetic rats [ ].
Kim et al. (2019) have used a sham surgery approach in NRF2-KO male or female rats to examine the effects of hepatic ischemia-reperfusion injury. By correlation of the level of bile transporters expression with the Suzuki score, the serum levels of aminotransferase, bilirubin, and bile acids, and tissue ATP level, they indicated that short warm ischemia time upregulates the transcriptional activities of bile transporter, whereas long warm ischemia time inhibited them, and the effect was blunted by NRF2-KO status [ ].
The relationship of NRF2 and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in angiogenesis was analyzed comparing siRNA-mediated NRF2 knockdown and wild-type using vascular hypertension rat models. SiRNA-targeting NRF2 was injected intraparenchymally in the scull of the rats. Silencing NRF2 prevented the upregulation of the mRNA and protein levels of critical angiogenesis mediators, such as VEGF and HIF-1α induced by hypertension, supporting the role of NRF2 and VEGF interplay in hypertension [ ]. A recent study using a KO rat model (SD-Nfe212em1Mcwi) was designed to evaluate the activation of NRF2 in hyperoxia-induced acute lung injury. This study supports the idea that NRF2 provides some protection against lung injury in rats, as reflected by increases in lung expression of glutathione synthetase, 3-nitrotyrosine (index of oxidative stress), and interleukin-1β in wild types compared to NRF2-KO rats. But, on the other hand, there was no significant difference for myeloperoxidase, Bcl-2 or peroxiredoxin-1 expression between wild-type and KO rats [ ].
NRF2 activation has been tested in response to dexmedetomidine, highly selective α2 adrenoceptor agonist approved as analgesic by the FDA, on acetic acid-induced acute inflammatory visceral pain in rats. Rats treated with dexmedetomidine exhibited a significant reduction of the protein levels of KEAP1, accordingly NRF2 and HO1 protein levels were increased compared to model group. Interestingly, KO of NRF2 did not affect KEAP1 expression, but prevented activation of HO-1 induced by dexmedetomidine in spinal cords [ ]. The therapeutic effect of quercetin on liver damage induced by hyperthyroid dysfunction was assessed comparing NRF2-null rats vs. wild type littermates. Administration of T4 hormone increased the levels of serum triiodothyronine and thyroxine, activity of oxidative stress markers with a parallel decrease in antioxidant markers and NRF2. However, the simultaneous administration of quercetin reversed all these effects indicating its potential in the regulation of hyperthyroidism. Furthermore, the loss of NRF2 diminished these effects resulting from the quercetin application, indicating the inhibitory effects caused by the quercetin may be mediated by the NRF2 pathway [ ]. A recent paper on NRF2 silencing in rats has confirmed the hepatoprotective effects of oleanolic acid on ANIT-induced cholestatic liver damage in NRF2-KO and additionally Fxr KD rats [ ].
In addition, rat models have been used to test the NRF2 role in other NCDs including cardiovascular dysfunction. The compound tanshinol borneol ester (DBZ) inhibited oxidative stress and ER stress, blocked autophagic flow and decreased apoptosis through enhanced NRF2 stability via regulating the mTOR/β-TrCP/NRF2 signaling pathway in a hypertrophic model in rats using TAC surgery and in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes using Ang II [ ]. Moreover, a rat model of intense stress (social defeat, first hit) seed light in mechanisms involved in depression vulnerability, since 40 % of the animals developed a depression-like phenotype after a second stressful hit (chronic mild stress). Vulnerable animals had a persistent state of oxidative stress that could be reverted by the NRF2 inducer terbutylhydroquinone [ ]. The increased oxidative stress status of vulnerable animals was related to reduced levels of brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). Interestingly, BDNF constitutively controlled the nuclear translocation of NRF2. In contrast, in the report by Yao et al., 2021 [ ] they conclude that NRF2 activation increases BDNF. These findings provide a link between reduced BDNF levels, oxidative stress and NRF2 in depression and further support that NRF2 induction as a possible strategy for the treatment of depression. The role of NRF2 in retinal pathologies has also been analyzed by Mandal et al. [ ] using a rat model of light-induced retinal degeneration, curcumin reduces retinal oxidative and inflammatory stress and up-regulates the cytoprotective machinery, protecting the retina from intense apoptotic insult. Thus, curcumin could be an effective nutraceutical compound for preventive and augmentative therapy of AMD. There is an ongoing clinical trial studying the effect of oral curcumin supplementation on choriocapillaris and drusen characteristics measured by multimodal retinal imaging in dry AMD patients (NCT04590196). Using the kainic acid-induced status epilepticus model in rats, it has been shown that pharmacological activation of NRF2 by omaveloxolone, administered only during the first week after disease onset, increases the levels of ATP, protects against neuronal death, and reduces the frequency of late spontaneous seizures for at least 4 months following status epilepticus [ ].
Especially relevant in chronic diseases in which ageing could be a driving force, is the fact that the naked mole rat (Heterocephalus glaber) exhibits high NRF2 binding activity to ARE in liver samples, along with a lifespan four times longer than similarly sized mouse. Surprisingly, it has been described that species longevity was not linked to the protein levels of NRF2 itself, but rather showed a significant negative relationship with the regulators KEAP1 and βTrCP [ , ].

4.6.

## Rabbit and pig models (animalia chordata mammalia Lagomorpha and Sus domesticus)
Even though murine models are frequently used in biomedical research, there are concerns and difficulties because there is less similarity between mice and humans in terms of the pathological mechanisms underlying diseases and medical safety. Thus, there is a growing interest in the possibility of using other animals, which are more closely related to humans.
NRF2 has been a subject of investigation of different diseases in rabbits. Namely, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) in rabbits was significantly inhibited by SFN-induced upregulation of NRF2 [ ], while electroacupuncture treatment effectively attenuates endotoxin-induced ARDS through activation of NRF2/ARE pathway and following up-regulation of HO-1 expression [ ]. Mycotoxines also induce oxidative damage and inflammation, increasing hepatocyte apoptosis and liver injury in rabbits. In this context, it was found that selenomethionine pretreatment alleviated intestinal aflatoxin B1-induced oxidative damage and the inflammatory response by activating NRF2/HO-1 in rabbits [ ]. Moreover, quercetagetin (natural flavonol compound) alleviated the mycotoxin-induced oxidative damage and liver injury via NRF2 [ ]. The levels of NRF2 are increasingly expressed in a parallel time course to the development of cerebral vasospasm in a rabbit experimental model of subarachnoid hemorrhage [ ].
Pigs are thought to be a better model than mice because of their greater similarity to human body size, anatomical features, organ size and structure, physiology, and pathophysiology [ ]. For instance, the size, shape, and blood supply of their pancreas are comparable to those of the human pancreas [ ], and the islet size and ratio among the endocrine cell types in pigs are also comparable to those of humans [ ]. Many plant-derived polyphenols act as NRF2 activators, protect against mycotoxin-induced oxidative stress, and promote the intestinal antioxidant capacity of pigs in vivo. Among them are resveratrol, ferulic acid, chlorogenic acid, and baicalin, which are known to activate NRF2 and protect against oxidative stress injury in pigs [ ]. Ellagic acid (EA) is also a bioactive polyphenolic compound naturally occurring as secondary metabolite in many fruits which displays strong antioxidant properties. EA supplementation promoted NRF2 nuclear translocation and enhanced HO-1 and NQO1 protein abundances of small intestinal mucosa in mycotoxin-induced intestinal injury in piglets [ ]. Also, it was found that dietary apple polyphenols increase the intestinal antioxidant capacity and activate the KEAP1-NRF2 pathway in pig and IPEC-J2 cell models [ ].
Flavonoids exhibit direct antioxidant activities by scavenging of free radicals, inhibiting ROS and proinflammatory cytokine productions, and several studies have highlighted the NRF2 activation by these natural products. In this sense, it was found that the supplementation of Eucommia ulmoides flavones decreased the oxidized glutathione (GSSG) levels and the ratio of GSSG to reduced glutathione (GSH), but increased the protein levels of nuclear NRF2 and KEAP1, as well as the mRNA expression of HO-1, NQO1, and GCLC in the small intestinal mucosa of herbicide-challenged piglets [ ].
Activation of NRF2 has been observed following administration of oxidized oils, which increase gene expression and activities of various enzymes involved in xenobiotic metabolism and stress response. In this sense, Varady et al. (2012) showed time that administration of an oxidized fat activates NRF2 in the liver of pigs [ ]. In addition, the transcript levels of antioxidant and phase II genes, such as SOD, HO-1, Trx 1, microsomal glutathione-S-transferase 1 and NQO1 in the liver were higher in the oxidized fat-treated group than in the fresh fat-treated group. In a condition like this, NRF2 activation generally reflects an adaptive mechanism to prevent cellular oxidative damage since it induces the up regulation of numerous antioxidants, cytoprotective, and detoxifying genes and protects the cell from ROS and harmful substances [ ].

5.

## Conclusions and future perspectives
The use of animal models across various evolutionary stages is crucial for understanding the complexity of the molecular mechanisms involving NRF2 and its role in health and disease. These models, ranging from simpler organisms like fruit flies and nematodes to more complex mammals, allow researchers to investigate the conserved pathways regulated by NRF2 and how these pathways contribute to cellular stress responses and overall homeostasis. This comparative approach is essential for identifying the specific roles of NRF2 in non-communicable diseases (NCDs) and determining how its modulation can be effectively harnessed for therapeutic purposes. In fact, research on model organisms has provided an impressive level of understanding of the molecular mechanisms of the role of NRF2 in the pathogenesis of NCDs, leading to more than 100 clinical trials and culminating in the entry of two NRF2 activators, dimethyl fumarate and omaveloxolone, in clinical practice. Further clinical trials with larger sample sizes and longer follow-up periods using NRF2 inducers alone or in combination with classical drugs to palliate symptoms are necessary to test the effectiveness of NRF2 induction in NCDs, especially in those patients that are refractory to treatment. Although the use of model organisms has generated a wealth of essential knowledge, there are still many challenges that need to be overcome for the future development of NRF2 modulators as therapies for NCDs.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Ana I. Rojo: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Project administration, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Brigitta Buttari: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation. Susana Cadenas: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Ana Rita Carlos: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Antonio Cuadrado: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Ana Sofia Falcão: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Manuela G. López: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Milen I. Georgiev: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Anna Grochot-Przeczek: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Sentiljana Gumeni: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation. José Jimenez-Villegas: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation. Jarosław Olav Horbanczuk: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation. Ozlen Konu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Isabel Lastres-Becker: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Anna-Liisa Levonen: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation. Viktorija Maksimova: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Charalambos Michaeloudes: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Liliya V. Mihaylova: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Michel Edwar Mickael: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation. Irina Milisav: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Biljana Miova: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Patricia Rada: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Marlene Santos: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Miguel C. Seabra: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Dubravka Svob Strac: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Sandra Tenreiro: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Ioannis P. Trougakos: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Albena T. Dinkova-Kostova: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

## Funding
Research in the authors' laboratories is funded as follows: AIR and AC by the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities (PID2019-110061RB-I00, PID-2021-122766OB-100, PDC2021-121421-I00, PDC2022-133765-I00), CIBERNED/ISCIII (CB06/05/0010), and The Autonomous Community of Madrid (P2022/BMD-7230). MGL is funded by Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities (PID2021-125986OB-I00, PDC2022-133809-I00) and Community of Madrid Ref. P2022/BMD-7230-CAM-22. PR is funded by Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities (PID2023-150994OB-I00), The Autonomous Community of Madrid (P2022/BMD-7227) and CIBERDEM/ISCIII (CB07/08/0033). JJV is holder of a FPU contract of Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities (FPU20/03326). ILB is funded by the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities (PID2022-137065OB-100, PCD2022-133774-100) and CIBERNED/ISCIII (CB06/05/0089). MCS, ST and ASF are funded by Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia through R&D unit iNOVA4Health (UIDB/04462/2020 and UIDP/04462/2020) and LS4FUTURE Associated Laboratory (LA/P/0087/2020). ASF is holder of a post-doctoral contract from “La Caixa Foundation” (NASCENT HR22-00569). IM received research core funding by Slovenian Research Agency (P3-0019). AG received research funding from the National Science Centre grant OPUS (2021/43/B/NZ4/02130). ARC is supported by the donor Henrique Meirelles who chose to support the MATRIHEALTH Project (CC1036), Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia Project (https://doi.org/10.54499/PTDC/BTM-ORG/1383/2020) and Unit Funding (https://doi.org/10.54499/UIDB/00329/2020). IPT acknowledges funding from NKUA SARG (C.S. 19067). SC is funded by the ISCIII (PI23/01846). LVM is a grant holder of a contract КП-06-КОСТ/4 of the Bulgarian National Science Fund under BG-175467353-2023-03 programme. LVM and MIG have received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme, project PlantaSYST (SGA No 739582 under FPA No. 664620) and by the European Regional Development Fund through the Bulgarian “Science and Education for Smart Growth” Operational Programme (BG05M2OP001-1.003-001-C01) and Programme Research Innovation and Digitalisation for Smart Transformation. OK is funded by the European Union Horizon's research and innovation program HORIZON-HLTH-2022-STAYHLTH-02 under agreement No 101095679. ADK is funded by the Medical Research Council
UK (MR/W023806/1), the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council
UK (BB/T508111/1 and BB/X00029X/1), Tenovus Scotland (T22-08), and the Cunnigham Trust. This article is based upon work from COST Action CA20121, supported by COST (European Cooperation in Science and Technology) (www.cost.eu) (https://benbedphar.org/about-benbedphar/).

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
No data was used for the research described in the article.