pmcAdv Sci (Weinh)Adv Sci (Weinh)2933advsci101664569ADVSAdvanced Science2198-3844WileyPMC12407332PMC12407332.112407332124073324061961310.1002/advs.202417478ADVS702441Research ArticleResearch ArticleExosomes From Intestinal Epithelial Cells Promote Hepatic Differentiation of Liver Progenitor Cells in Gut‐Liver‐on‐a‐Chip Models
YeLiang LiShi BiGuofang LiBinghui CaiZhai JinMeixian ZhangYing YangWanren LiYang LiShao HuWei GaoYi PanMingxin ZhouShuqin zhoushuqin@smu.edu.cnZhangChao zc15996256330@smu.edu.cnBiHuichang bihchang@smu.edu.cnPengQinghttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-7790-6455 pengqing@cuhk.edu.cn

1

Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery II
General Surgery Center
Zhujiang Hospital
Southern Medical University
Guangzhou
Guangdong
510282
China

2

Central Laboratory of the Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shenzhen & Longgang District People's Hospital of Shenzhen
Shenzhen
510282
China

3

NMPA Key Laboratory for Research and Evaluation of Drug Metabolism & Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of New Drug Screening
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences
Southern Medical University
Guangzhou
510282
China

4

Department of General Surgery
Zhujiang Hospital
Southern Medical University
Guangzhou
510000
China

5

Anesthesiology Department of the Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shenzhen & Longgang District People's Hospital of Shenzhen
Shenzhen
518172
China

6

Department of Anesthesiology
Zhujiang Hospital
Southern Medical University
Guangzhou
510282
China

7

Department of Oncology
Zhujiang Hospital
Southern Medical University
Guangzhou
510282
China

8

Institute of Regenerative Medicine
Zhujiang Hospital
Southern Medical University
Guangzhou
510282
China

*E‐mail: zhoushuqin@smu.edu.cn; zc15996256330@smu.edu.cn; bihchang@smu.edu.cn; pengqing@cuhk.edu.cn

067202582025123249617310.1002/advs.v12.32e17478
1852025
24122024
060720250409202506092025© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley‐VCH GmbHhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract
Hepatic progenitor cells (HPCs) are frequently overactivated, and their differentiation into hepatocytes is impaired in advanced liver diseases. To explore the effects of intestinal epithelial cells and their exosomes on the hepatic differentiation of HPCs, co‐culture systems of Caco‐2/HepaRG cell lines and intestine/HPC organoids are established in a novel gut‐liver‐on‐a‐chip. Exosomes derived from intestinal organoids are administered to mice with carbon tetrachloride (CCL4)‐induced liver fibrosis. The results showed that the co‐culture of HPCs and intestinal epithelial cells promoted the hepatic differentiation of HPCs, mediated by exosomes derived from intestinal epithelial cells. Treatment with exosomes derived from intestinal organoids ameliorated liver fibrosis in a mouse model of CCL4‐induced liver fibrosis. A cluster of miRNAs, miR‐371‐373, is identified within the exosomes of the intestinal epithelial cells, which target RPS6KA2 to modulate hepatic differentiation. This findings demonstrate that exosomes from intestinal epithelial cells promote the hepatic differentiation of HPCs. Exosomes from intestinal organoids may be a novel therapeutic strategy for the treatment of advanced liver diseases.

The effects of intestinal epithelial cells and their exosomes on the hepatic differentiation of HPCs are explored in a gut‐liver‐on‐a‐chip. Exosomes from intestinal epithelial cells improve liver fibrosis. Moreover, the miR‐371‐373 cluster in the exosomes may mediate this effect by regulating the hepatic differentiation of HPCs.
 

exosomeshepatic progenitor cellsintestinal epithelial cellsliver fibrosisorgan‐on‐a‐chip
Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation10.13039/501100021171
2023A1515012452 2021B1515230011
Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou
2024B03J0022
President's Fund of Zhujiang Hospital
yzjj2022ms13
Science and Technology Innovation Project of Guangdong Medical Products Administration
2023ZDZ06 Factors for inter‐organ information exchange are primarily transmitted via extracellular vesicles, among which exosomes constitute a significant proportion.[
 
] Exosomes (EXOs) contain a wide range of signalling proteins, RNA, and genetic material that are transmitted to recipient cells through the bloodstream.[
 
] EXOs have been proven to be a novel class of signalling structures mediating intercellular and interorgan communication.[
 
] Based on these findings, we hypothesized that administration of EXOs from intestinal epithelial cells might be a key factor in promoting HPC‐to‐hepatocyte differentiation and could potentially improve advanced liver diseases. To validate this therapeutic effect, we conducted experiments using a CCL4‐induced liver injury and confirmed the beneficial effects of EXOs derived from Int‐Orgs. To further investigate the mechanisms by which intestinal epithelial cells promote the differentiation of HPCs into hepatocytes, we examined the role of EXOs from intestinal epithelial cells in HPCs differentiation and found that a cluster of miRNAs, miR‐371‐373 in exosomes from intestinal epithelial cells contributed to the enhancement of HPC‐to‐hepatocyte differentiation by targeting RPS6KA2. Our findings offer new insights for the development of innovative therapeutic strategies for patients with advanced liver disease.

2

## Result
2.1

## Construction of Integrated Gut‐Liver‐on‐a‐Chip Platforms Using Cell Lines and Organoids
The gut‐liver‐on‐a‐chip device was designed with three layers of PDMS: a top layer for the inlets and outlets, a middle layer for intestinal culture, and a basal layer for liver culture (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). The upper and lower chambers were separated by a porous polyester membrane (10 µm thickness and 0.4 µm pore size). The intestinal culture was placed in the left upper chamber with a bionic spatial distribution that mimicked the structure of the intestinal crypt‐ and villus‐like domains (Figure  ). The epithelium of the small intestine predominantly consists of absorptive cells. The circular folds, villi, and microvilli work in concert to significantly expand the intestinal surface area, thereby ensuring maximal contact between the epithelial cells and chyme, which is crucial for optimal nutrient absorption.[
 , 
] In this device, the intestinal culture region featured a bionic spatial distribution that closely mimicked the structural organization of the intestinal crypt‐ and villus‐like domains (Figure  ). The liver culture region recapitulated the microstructure of the hepatic sinusoid with liver chambers arranged on both sides and a medium‐flow channel designed through the middle (Figure  ). Micropillars were created as a barrier between the cells and the medium flow. The central microtube was designed as a vessel‐like structure connecting the intestine and liver chambers (Figure  ).
Caco‐2 and HepaRG cells were seeded on the chip in the intestinal and liver chambers, respectively, and perfused with medium using a syringe pump (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). After continuous culturing for 6 days, the bright‐field image on the chip showed that Caco‐2 cells in the gut region formed a tight cellular barrier along the villus‐like structure within the channel, while HepaRG cells in the liver region were distributed along both sides of the hepatic sinusoidal region (Figure  ). The respective coculture media for the cell lines were determined in preliminary studies (Figure , Supporting Information). Immunostaining showed that under dynamic perfusion culture conditions, the cells cultured in the intestinal chamber on the chip exhibited a bionic spatial distribution similar to that of the villi of the small intestine in vivo (Figure  ). LGR5/KRT20‐positive cells were observed in the gut chamber (Figure  ). Both the central region and crypt‐like structures flanking the channel contained cells that were positively stained for SOX9 (intestinal stem cells) and MUC2 (goblet cells), whereas lysozyme‐positive Paneth cells and L‐FABP‐positive enterocytes were found to be more densely concentrated in the central channel (Figure  ). Positive markers (SOX9, L‐FABP, lysozyme, and MUC2) for functional cells were highly expressed throughout the culture channel of Caco‐2 cells when compared to those cultured under 2D static culture conditions (Figure , Supporting Information). HepaRG cells cultured in the liver chamber formed spheroids with diameters ranging from 30 to 100 µm after 12 days (Figure , Supporting Information). The expression of hepatocyte markers (ALB, AAT, and KRT18) in the HepaRG cells on the chip was confirmed by immunofluorescence staining (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information).
In this study, two types of organoids were generated from adult human stem cells (intestinal crypt stem cells and hepatic progenitor cells) (Figure a—e, Supporting Information). The culture strategies for both intestinal and liver organoids involved the pre‐ and post‐differentiation stages, as illustrated in Figure (Supporting Information). Undifferentiated Int‐Orgs grew in a grape‐like cluster pattern, while HPC‐Orgs grew in a cystic shape (Figure , Supporting Information). Compared with the organoids before differentiation, the cell arrangement of the differentiated Int‐Orgs and Hep‐Orgs was more compact and darker (Figure , Supporting Information). Morphologically, the budding structures of Int‐Orgs were more obvious, while Hep‐Orgs still maintained a cystic structure (Figure , Supporting Information). Quantitative real‐time polymerase chain reaction (qRT‐PCR) results showed that HPCs prior to differentiation highly expressed bile duct cell markers (KRT19, HNF1β, CFTR, EPCAM), while HPCs after hepatic differentiation highly expressed hepatocyte markers (ALB, HNF4A, KRT18, CYP3A4) (Figure , Supporting Information). Compared with undifferentiated HPCs, the expression of hepatocyte markers in differentiated HPCs more closely resembled that in primary human hepatocytes (Figure , Supporting Information). Immunostaining results confirmed the stemness and bipotent transitional capabilities of HPC‐Orgs, as evidenced by the expression of the stemness marker SOX9, bile duct marker EPCAM/CK19, and hepatocyte marker HNF4A (Figure , Supporting Information). After two‐stage differentiation, the differentiated liver organoids (Hep‐Orgs) displayed strong expression of hepatocyte markers (ALB, HNF4A, KRT18, CYP3A4), hepatocyte functional proteins (ALB and AAT), and hepatocyte polar proteins (DPPIV, ZO‐1, BSEP, MDR1) (Figure , Supporting Information). In comparison with HPC‐Orgs, the levels of ALB and AAT in Hep‐Orgs were elevated, while the secretion of AFP decreased significantly (Figure , Supporting Information). In both pre‐ and post‐differentiated Int‐Orgs, lysozyme‐positive Paneth cells, MUC2‐positive goblet cells, ChgA‐positive enteroendocrine cells, L‐FABP‐positive enterocytes, and the ubiquitous villin protein were detected by immunostaining. The expression of these intestinal cell markers was more obvious and prominent in post‐differentiated Int‐Orgs (Figure , Supporting Information).
Subsequently, the undifferentiated Int‐Orgs and HPC‐Orgs were seeded in their respective culture chambers on the chip. On Day 2, Int‐Orgs were distributed in crypt‐like structures. By Day 6, Int‐Orgs had grown thicker and covered almost the entire channel of the intestinal chamber (Figure  ). The intestinal barrier constructed by differentiated Int‐Orgs on the chip had a lower permeability ratio of FITC‐dextran than the Caco‐2 cell‐based intestinal barrier, indicating better intestinal barrier integrity for the organoids‐on‐a‐chip (Figure , Supporting Information). After a short culture period of 2–3 days, the typical organoid morphology of HPC‐Orgs was observed in the liver chamber (Figure  ). Following differentiation, the morphology of the Hep‐Orgs on the chip underwent changes, with more hepatocyte‐like cells and increased cytoplasmic granularity (Figure  ). The expression levels of E‐CAD (adherent junctions) and Villin in differentiated Int‐Orgs on the chip were higher and denser than those in Caco‐2 cells on the chip. In addition, the expression of other intestinal cell markers (MUC2, L‐FABP, KRT‐20, and Lysozyme) was detected in the corresponding regions within the intestinal chamber (Figure  ). For Hep‐Orgs, expression levels of BSEP and KRT‐18 were detected after differentiation (Figure  ). Moreover, the levels of secreted proteins (ALB and AAT) from both Hep‐Orgs and HepaRG cells were found to be higher on the chip than those observed under Transwell culture conditions (Figure , Supporting Information).

2.2

## Coculture of HPCs with Intestinal Cells Promoted Hepatic Differentiation in the Gut‐Liver‐on‐a‐Chip Models
In order to investigate the effect of intestinal cells (Caco‐2 or Int‐Orgs) on hepatic progenitor cells (HepaRG/HPC‐Orgs), a coculture system was established on a chip. A schematic of the experimental procedure for organoid coculture and differentiation on the chip is shown in Figure (Supporting Information). The coculture media for organoids were optimized prior to the establishment of gut‐liver‐organoids‐on‐chip (Figure b—h, Supporting Information). Fluorescence imaging of the chip showed that the expression of ALB, HNF4A, and KRT18 in HepaRG cells co‐cultured with Caco‐2 cells on day 5 was significantly higher than that in HepaRG cells cultured alone (Figure
 ). In the liver culture region, hepatocytes located near the central area of the liver sinusoids exhibited more pronounced expression of ALB and AAT than those in the peripheral regions of the liver sinusoids (Figure , Supporting Information). This was likely due to the fact that cells in the former regions could more fully and rapidly receive the secreted substances produced by the intestinal cells. After sectioning the paraffin‐embedded Hep‐Orgs, various cross‐sections of cyst‐like structures were observed (Figure  ). Increased expression of ALB, HNF4A, and KRT18 was also detected in co‐cultured Hep‐Orgs (ALB‐2.5 fold, HNF4A‐1.4 fold, KRT18‐1.5 fold) (Figure  ). qRT‐PCR results showed that the expression of ALB, CYP3A4, HNF4A, KRT18, CYP1A2, AAT, CDH1, and UGT1A1 were upregulated in both co‐cultured HepaRG and HPC‐Orgs, whereas genes associated with proliferation and stemness (PCNA and POU5F1) exhibited a downward trend in these cells (Figure  ). The level of the CYP3A4 enzyme in HepaRG cells in the co‐culture group was significantly increased (Figure , Supporting Information). To evaluate the activity of the drug‐metabolizing enzymes of CYP450s in hepatocytes under different conditions, dextromethorphan, testosterone, and phenacetin were added, and their corresponding metabolites were analyzed using HPLC‐MS. After subtracting the levels of metabolites solely produced by Caco‐2 or Int‐Orgs alone, the results of HPLC‐MS analysis indicated that, under coculture conditions, the concentrations of DXO (Dextrophan), 6βOH‐TEST (6β‐hydroxy testosterone), and APAP (acetaminophen)—the metabolic products of dextromethorphan, testosterone, and phenacetin via CYP2D6, CYP3A4, and CYP1A2, respectively—were elevated compared to those observed under monoculture conditions (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). This difference was found to be particularly pronounced in co‐cultured Hep‐Orgs groups (Figure  ). ELISA data revealed that the levels of secreted proteins (ALB and AAT) were enhanced in co‐cultured HepaRG cells and Hep‐Orgs compared to those in the monocultured groups (Figure  ). Urea production was also significantly elevated in co‐cultured Hep‐Orgs (1.8‐fold), whereas no significant increase was observed with HepaRG cells (Figure  ). To further investigate the potential mechanisms regulating the differentiation of HPCs into intestinal epithelial cells, transcriptome sequencing of HepaRG cells and Hep‐Orgs on chips was performed. Compared with the monoculture group, HepaRG cells in the coculture group had 2100 upregulated and 2124 downregulated genes (Figure , Supporting Information). Similarly, in Hep‐Orgs, 2106 genes were upregulated, and 2113 genes were downregulated in the coculture group (Figure , Supporting Information). There was an overlap of 1159 DEGs between the HepaRG and Hep‐Org groups (Figure , Supporting Information). Liver function‐related genes, such as ALB, AAT, HNF4A, E‐CAD, and CYP3A4, were found to be highly expressed in both HepaRG and Hep‐Orgs in the coculture group. In contrast, YAP1, PCNA, and POU5F1 were expressed at low levels in both the coculture groups (Figure , Supporting Information). These results were consistent with the data obtained from qRT‐PCR and ELISA (Figure  ), indicating that coculturing with intestinal cells promotes the hepatic differentiation of HPCs. According to KEGG enrichment analysis of biological processes, the pathways enriched in HepaRG cells were primarily related to the functional metabolism of hepatocytes, such as cholesterol biosynthesis, drug metabolism, and complement activation (Figure , Supporting Information). Pathways enriched in Hep‐Orgs included glutamic acid metabolism, vitamin absorption, glucose metabolism, bile acid secretion, lipid metabolism, glycogen synthesis, and drug metabolism (Figure , Supporting Information). Moreover, several overlapping DEGs participated in the EGFR‐MEK‐ERK pathway (NTF4, EGFR, CREB1, RPS6KA2) and the downstream classical MAPK pathway (MYC, FOSL1, FOS, CCND1) (Figure , Supporting Information). Additionally, the enriched pathways encompassed the Hippo, WNT, and AMPK signalling pathways (Figure , Supporting Information).
 
2.3

## EXOs of Caco‐2/Int‐Orgs Promoted Hepatogenic Differentiation of HepaRG/Hep‐Orgs
To determine whether the promotion of hepatic differentiation was mediated by EXOs from intestinal epithelial cells, we added EXOs and the exosome inhibitor, GW4869,[
 , , 
] to the coculture chip system. The optimal concentration of GW4869 was determined based on cell activity and EXOs inhibition efficiency (Figure , Supporting Information). After six days of differentiation on the chip, Hep‐Orgs in the coculture group exhibited the most pronounced features of differentiation, characterized by polygonal cell morphology, clear intercellular spaces, and tightly interlaced intercellular connections (Figure
 ). On both day 1 and day 6, the proportion of the tight junction area in the co‐culture group was 1.5 times that of the monoculture group (Figure  ). However, in the coculture group treated with GW4869, Hep‐Orgs/HepaRG cells displayed a noticeable but delayed differentiation, as indicated by reduced levels of ALB and AAT (Figure  ) and a 0.3‐fold decrease proportion of the intercellular tight junction area (Figure  ). After this, nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were performed in order to determine the morphology and particle size of EXOs extracted from Caco‐2 and Int‐Orgs (Figure , Supporting Information). The positive markers (TSG101/HSP70/CD63) and negative marker (calnexin) of the EXOs from Caco‐2 cells were confirmed by western blotting (Figure , Supporting Information). NANOVIEW was used with specific antibodies (CD63/CD81/CD9) to identify the EXOs of Int‐Orgs (Figure , Supporting Information). The uptake of EXOs (labelled with PHK26) was observed in HepaRG cells after 48 h of perfusion on the chip (Figure , Supporting Information). Similarly, labelled EXOs were detected in Hep‐Orgs–24‐48 h after perfusion on the chip (Figure , Supporting Information). After being treated with EXOs derived from Caco‐2, both HepaRG and Hep‐Orgsproduced higher levels of ALB, AAT, and urea compared with the untreated groups (Figure  ). During a 9‐day continuous culture on the chip, HepaRG cells co‐cultured with Caco‐2 cells aggregated into spheroids, a phenomenon that was also observed in the EXO‐treated group (Figure  ). Immunostaining analysis demonstrated a significant increase in the protein levels of ALB, KRT18, and HNF4A in HepaRG cells and Hep‐Orgs treated with EXOs on the chip for 5 days compared with the untreated group (Figure  and Figure
 ). Flow cytometry analysis indicated that the expression levels of ALB, AAT, KRT18, and HNF4A in Hep‐Orgs and HepaRG cells were significantly enhanced under co‐culture conditions or upon exosome treatment compared with those in the monoculture group (Figure  ). qRT‐PCR data also showed enhanced expression of hepatocyte markers (ALB, KRT18, CYP3A4, and AAT) and reduced expression of progenitor cell markers (AFP, EPCAM, and SOX9) in both the EXO‐treated and co‐cultured groups (Figure , Supporting Information). In contrast to monocultured Hep‐Orgs, EXO‐treated and co‐cultured Hep‐Orgs exhibited ultrastructural features closely resembling primary hepatocytes, such as polygonal cell morphology, tightly interlaced intercellular connections, mitochondrial enrichment, widespread distribution of rough endoplasmic reticulum, prominent bile canaliculi structures, increased presence of microvesicles, and aggregation of multivesicular bodies around the endoplasmic reticulum, as shown by TEM (Figure  ). Figure  shows similar changes in the polygonal cell morphology and tightly interlaced intercellular connections among the groups. PAS staining revealed a 2 fold increase in glycogen accumulation in EXO‐treated Hep‐Orgs, as shown in Figure  . The above data demonstrated that EXOs of Caco‐2/Int‐Orgs promoted hepatogenic differentiation of HepaRG/Hep‐Orgs.
 
2.4

## EXOs from Human Int‐Orgs Alleviated the Development of CCL4‐Induced Liver Fibrosis in Mice
Next, we investigated the therapeutic effects of human Int‐Orgs on CCL4‐induced liver fibrosis. Following a 6‐week modelling with CCL4, the livers of the mice exhibited evident tissue structural abnormalities, including fibrous tissue hyperplasia, hepatocyte degeneration, necrosis, and pseudolobular formation (Figure
 ). The EXOs of 1‐week differentiated Int‐Orgs were injected into mice with liver fibrosis through the tail vein (Figure  ). In vivo imaging showed that the DiR‐labelled EXOs were mostly enriched in the liver, and the signals remained high level for 7 days (Figure  ). The mice were intravenously injected (i.v.) with EXOs (40ug/time, dissolved in PBS) of Int‐Orgs or PBS solution once a week starting at week 4. The Hematoxylin–eosin (HE) staining, MASSON trichrome staining, and α‐SMA staining results displayed that treatment with EXOs led to a significant reduction of the liver fibrotic area in mice with 6‐week and 9‐week CCL4‐induced liver fibrosis (Figure  ). After 2 or 5 weeks of treatment with EXOs, mice with CCL4‐induced liver fibrosis (CCL4+ EXOs) exhibited liver weight/body weight ratios similar to those in the control groups (Oil+ PBS) (Figure  ). Additionally, the levels of serum TBIL, DBIL, ALT, and AST decreased, whereas the secretion of proteins (ALB and AAT) and the level of BUN significantly increased in the EXO‐treated mice, which was consistent with the flow cytometry results (Figure  ). Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of tissue sections showed decreased expression of ALB, AAT, and KRT18 within the liver fibrosis region of CCL4‐induced mice (Figure
 ). Conversely, the expression levels of these markers in the fibrotic regions of mice treated with EXOs were comparable to those in normal liver tissues (Figure  ). Additionally, AFP expression decreased in the EXO‐treated group (Figure  ). Dual‐fluorescence staining showed that, compared with the liver fibrosis group (treated with CCL4+PBS), the expression of ALB (a hepatocyte‐specific marker) in hepatocytes in the fibrotic area of the treatment group (treated with CCL4+EXOs) was increased, whereas the expression of KRT19 (a marker for bile ducts) was diminished (Figure  ). After 2 or 5 weeks of EXOs treatment, improvements in the pathologic manifestations of extrahepatic organs (including the spleen, lung, and intestine) of the mice were also observed, as shown by the results of HE staining (Figure , Supporting Information). These data suggested that treatment with EXOs alleviated the progression of liver fibrosis, likely by promoting hepatocyte differentiation and suppressing cholangiocyte differentiation in fibrotic liver tissues. To determine the relative proportion of hepatic progenitor cells in human fibrotic liver tissues, normal human and cirrhotic liver tissues were obtained and subjected to HNF4A/KRT19 dual‐fluorescence staining. The results showed that the proportion of hepatic progenitor cells (HNF4A+/KRT19+) in human cirrhotic liver tissues was ≈7 fold higher than that in normal liver tissues (Figure  ).
 
2.5

## The miR‐371‐373 Cluster Within the EXOs from the Intestinal Epithelial Cells Improved the Hepatic Differentiation of HPCs
Next, we explored the molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of HPC differentiation by EXOs derived from intestinal epithelial cells. Eleven miRNAs were selected (miR‐192‐5p, miR‐371a‐5p, miR‐191‐5p, miR‐182‐5p, miR‐183‐5p, miR‐215‐5p, miR‐372‐3p, miR‐373‐3p, miR‐200b‐3p, miR‐194‐5p, miR‐141‐3p) from the top 50 miRNAs ranked by total read count in the sequencing data of EXOs from Caco‐2 (Figure , Supporting Information). These miRNAs are known to be highly expressed in intestinal tissues but have relatively low expression in liver tissues (EVmiRNA database (http://bioinfo.life.hust.edu.cn/EVmiRNA)). qRT‒PCR results confirmed that in coculture with EXOs from Caco‐2 cells, the levels of these miRNAs increased in HepaRG cells, thus indicating that they can be taken up by HepaRG cells (Figure , Supporting Information). Then, qRT‒PCR was performed to investigate the effects of the 11 miRNAs mimics (100 µM) on HepaRG differentiation‐ and stemness‐related genes in mono‐ and coculture Transwell models. The results showed that the addition of miR‐371a‐5p, miR‐372‐3p, or miR‐373‐3p mimics increased the expression of a series of genes in mono‐ and co‐cultured HepaRG cells, including hepatocyte marker genes (ALB, AAT, ARG, TTR, HNF4A, E‐CAD, KRT18), phase I drug metabolism enzyme‐encoding genes (CYP3A4, CYP1A2, CYP2D6), and phase II drug metabolism enzyme‐encoding gene UGT1A1 (Figure , Supporting Information). Furthermore, ELISA data confirmed that among the tested miRNAs, miR‐373‐3p, miR‐371a‐5p, and miR‐372‐3p mimics ranked among the top 3 in significantly increasing ALB secretion by HepaRG cells under monoculture conditions (Figure , Supporting Information). Similar effects of miR‐371a‐5p, miR‐372‐3p, and miR‐373‐3p on HepaRG cells were observed under coculture conditions (Figure , Supporting Information). Next, the expression levels of 11 miRNAs were compared in Caco‐2 cells, Int‐Orgs (undif and dif), and EXOs (Caco‐2 cells and differentiated Int‐Orgs). Surprisingly, differentiated Int‐Orgs and their EXOs showed a much higher expression of miR‐371a‐5p, miR‐372‐3p, and miR‐373‐3p than Caco‐2 cells (Figure , Supporting Information). Increased expression of these three miRNAs was also detected in Hep‐Orgs cocultured with Int‐Orgs (Dif) (Figure , Supporting Information).
Based on these aforementioned findings, miR‐371a‐5p, miR‐372‐3p, and miR‐373‐3p were selected as potential candidates for further investigation. These miRNAs belong to the miR‐371‐373 cluster, which originates from the same chromatin region (Figure , Supporting Information).[
 , , , 
] The transfection efficiencies of the mimics and inhibitors of the miR‐371‐373 cluster in different culture systems were validated (Figure , Supporting Information). Immunofluorescence analysis and qRT‐PCR results from Transwell models showed that treatment with miR‐371‐373 mimics upregulated the expression of ALB, HNF4A, and KRT18, whereas inhibitors downregulated their expression in both mono‐ and co‐cultured HepaRG cells (Figure
 ). MiR‐372‐3p and miR‐373‐3p showed stronger effects on these proteins than miR‐371a‐5p (Figure  ). Immunofluorescence analysis conducted on the chip revealed that each mimic of the miR‐371‐373 cluster significantly upregulated ALB expression in monocultured HepaRG cells, whereas each corresponding inhibitor resulted in a decrease in ALB expression in co‐cultured HepaRG cells compared to untreated co‐cultured cells. (Figure  ). Similar effects were also confirmed when validating the effects by ELISA (Figure  ), although ALB secretion exhibited a similar trend without statistical significance in the group treated with the miR‐371a‐5p inhibitor (Figure  ). Next, we investigated whether miR‐371‐373 mediates the regulation of intestinal EXOs to promote liver differentiation. Our data revealed that the addition of EXOs derived from intestinal epithelial cells induced ALB production, whereas the presence of each inhibitor in the miR‐371‐373 cluster suppressed this effect (Figure  ). These findings suggest that the EXOs from intestinal epithelial cells promote hepatic differentiation by mediating the miR‐371‐373 cluster.
 
2.6

## RPS6KA2, as the Common Target of the miR‐371‐373 Cluster, was Involved in the Regulation of Hepatic Differentiation of HPC
In order to further investigate the downstream target of the miR‐371‐373 cluster, the miRWalk miRNA (http://mirwalk.umm.uni‐heidelberg.de/) ensemble database was utilized. We found that RPS6KA2 was predicted as the common target of the miR‐371‐373 cluster. Notably, RPS6KA2 was also found in previous sequencing results as a gene that was downregulated, with fold changes of 2.5 and 19.4 in the HepaRG and Hep‐Org coculture groups, respectively (Figure , Supporting Information). This prediction was confirmed by the results of the dual‐luciferase reporter gene experiment, which showed that all three miRNA mimics downregulated the expression of RPS6KA2. MiR‐371‐373 has binding sites for RPS6KA2, and miR‐372‐3p and miR‐373‐3p share the same binding site (Figure
 ). Immunofluorescence images of HepaRG cells showed that when either co‐cultured with Caco‐2 cells or treated with EXOs from Caco‐2 cells on the chip, the expression of RPS6KA2 and its downstream regulation of phosphorylated CREB2 (p‐ATF4) were significantly decreased compared to those in monocultured HepaRG cells (Figure  ). Conversely, the downregulation of RPS6KA2 was increased in HepaRG cells co‐cultured on the chip after treatment with each inhibitor of the miR‐371‐373 cluster (Figure  ). Additionally, we found the same decrease in the expression of RPS6KA2 in Hep‐Orgs when co‐cultured with Int‐Orgs or treated with EXOs on the chip (Figure  ). To confirm the regulatory effect of RPS6KA2 on the hepatic differentiation of HPCs, the expression of RPS6KA2 was knocked down in HepaRG cells by transfecting RPS6KA2‐targeting siRNA (Si‐RPS6KA2) (Figure
 ). Genes associated with hepatocyte function and differentiation, including ALB, AAT, KRT18, ARG, CYP3A4, CYP2D6, UGT1A1, and HNF4A, were upregulated in cells with RPS6KA2 gene knockdown (Figure  ). Furthermore, immunofluorescence analysis demonstrated that the suppression of RPS6KA2 resulted in increased expression of ALB, HNF4A, and KRT18 (Figure  ). To construct a cell line with stable overexpression of RPS6KA2, the synergistic activation mediator (SAM) transcriptional activation system was employed. The SAM system consisted of the dCas9 protein, guide RNA (gRNA), and a transcriptional activator module (MS2‐P65‐HSF1). gRNA guides the dCas9 protein to bind to the promoter region of the target gene, and the transcriptional activator module interacts with the dCas9 protein to enhance the transcriptional activity of the gene, thereby achieving the activated expression of the gene. Based on the principles of the SAM system,[
 
] SgRNA‐dCas9 lentiviruses targeting the RPS6KA2 transcription initiation site (TSS) were constructed and successfully upregulated RPS6KA2 expression (Figure  ). With increased RPS6KA2 expression, the levels of hepatic functional genes (ALB and ARG) and drug metabolism enzyme genes (CYP3A4 and CYP2D6) decreased. The expression of HNF4A decreased by nearly three fold, whereas stemness indices, including POU5F1 (120‐fold) and EPCAM (10 fold), significantly increased (Figure  ). To further clarify the regulation of RPS6KA2 on hepatic differentiation, RPS6KA2‐siRNA was transfected into RPS6KA2‐overexpressing HepaRG cells, which led to a reduction in RPS6KA2 expression (Figure  ). This resulted in the restoration of hepatic functional gene expression, including that of ALB, AAT, KRT18, ARG, CYP3A4, CYP1A2, UGT1A1, and HNF4A, whereas stemness markers (POU5F1 and EPCAM) were significantly downregulated (Figure  ). Collectively, these findings indicate that RPS6KA2 plays a critical role in regard to negatively regulating the hepatic differentiation of HPCs.
 

3

## Discussion
HPCs are the transitional cells formed between cholangiocytes and hepatocytes. Previous research, along with our own study, has demonstrated that in cirrhotic liver tissues, HPCs with bipotential differentiation capacity are significantly activated.[
 , 
] They play significant roles in the regeneration of liver cell regeneration.[
 , , , , , , 
] However, the regulation of hepatocyte differentiation and maturation remains unclear. There is a close relationship between the intestine and the liver. The intestine absorbs nutrients, medications, and toxins from food and transports them to the liver through the portal vein.[
 
] Therefore, the intestines affect the liver microenvironment. However, it is unclear whether it regulates the hepatic differentiation of HPCs. An ideal model that replicates the fundamental structures of the gut and liver and their relationships is required to address this question.
The two primary factors that determine cell models are cell type and cell culture mode. The cell‐line culture model has advantages such as easy accessibility, low cost, easy handling, and fast turnaround time. HepaRG cells were isolated from an Edmonson‐grade I‐differentiated liver tumor that developed into macronodular cirrhosis resulting from long‐term chronic HCV infection. The HepaRG cell line is a human oval ductular bipotent hepatic progenitor cell line that coexpresses both hepatocyte and cholangiocyte.[
 
] Primary hepatocytes are terminally differentiated and have limited potential for hepatic differentiation. Therefore, compared to primary hepatocytes, HepaRG cells were more suitable for the investigation in this study. The human epithelial cell line Caco‐2 is widely used as a model of the small intestine and was selected as the cell line representing intestinal epithelial cells.[
 , , , 
] Organoids derived from human tissues (intestine and liver) were used in this study as they are more representative of the in vivo biological characteristics of human organs, such as tissue heterogeneity, intricate cell‐cell and cell‐matrix interactions, and tissue‐specific functions.[
 , 
] The cell culture mode refers to the specific approach or system used to culture cells, whether it is a traditional 2D cell culture, a 3D organoid culture model, a Transwell system, or a microfluidic organ‐on‐a‐chip system. The choice of the culture mode significantly affects how well the in vitro model replicates the natural behavior, structure, and function of cells or tissues in vivo. Microfluidic organs‐on‐a‐chip provide a more realistic tissue microstructure, better simulate the in vivo dynamic culture environment, and more accurately recapitulate the physiological and pathological status of cells.[
 
] Furthermore, compared with a static Transwell system, microfluidic chips can offer a more direct assessment of the influence of one organ on another. To provide a better model that can capture the direct effects of the intestine on the hepatic differentiation of HPCs, a gut‐liver‐on‐a‐chip was designed and fabricated in this study. When compared to other organ‐on‐a‐chip platforms,[
 , 
] our gut‐liver‐on‐a‐chip platform was designed to incorporate more biomimetic features. It not only recapitulates the specific spatial 3D structure of both the intestine and liver but also enables the integration of organoids derived from primary adult tissues of both the intestine and liver into an organ‐on‐a‐chip.
Using the gut‐liver‐on‐a‐chip in this study, we observed an improved intestinal barrier and a higher hepatocyte‐like function in the cell lines and organoids under perfused conditions. Moreover, organoids on the chip exhibited superior functional protein expression and drug metabolism compared with cell lines, suggesting that they closely simulate in vivo functions. Notably, coculture with intestinal epithelial cells significantly enhanced the hepatic differentiation of HPCs, with greater effects observed in the chip than in the Transwell models. Coculture with intestinal epithelial cells (either in cell lines or organoid systems) significantly enhanced the hepatic differentiation of HPCs, as evidenced by the upregulation of hepatocyte markers (e.g., ALB, AAT, and HNF4A) and downregulation of stemness markers (e.g., AFP and POU5F1). The assessment of CYP450 enzyme expression and activity is also instrumental in evaluating liver function. In this study, CYP2D6, CYP3A4, and CYP1A2 were selected owing to their pivotal roles in metabolism and extensive involvement in the processing of a broad spectrum of clinically relevant drugs. CYP3A4 is the most abundantly expressed CYP in the liver, accounting for ≈30–40% of the total CYP content.[
 
] CYP1A2, another crucial hepatic metabolizing enzyme, accounts for ≈13% of all CYP.[
 
] CYP2D6 is a key drug‐metabolizing enzyme involved in the metabolism of ≈20% of the commonly used drugs.[
 
] Our findings revealed that all three enzymes exhibited higher activity under co‐culture conditions compared to mono‐culture conditions in this study. These results support the vital role of intestinal epithelial cells in promoting the hepatic differentiation of HPCs. Notably, these effects were more pronounced in the microfluidic chip system than in the Transwell model, thus underscoring the superior ability of organ‐on‐a‐chip platforms to replicate complex cellular interactions.
Exosomes are small vesicles (30–100 nm) secreted into the extracellular space by nearly all cell types and mediate various forms of cell‐to‐cell communication.[
 
] Our study demonstrated that the addition of EXOs (derived from intestinal epithelial cell lines and organoids) to HPC cultures enhanced hepatocyte‐specific markers and functions (including ALB, ALB, KRT18, HNF4A, urea, and glycogen synthesis) and the acquisition of hepatocyte‐like morphology. These data support their role in hepatic differentiation of HPCs as a critical mechanism for regulating HPCs fate.
Building on these in vitro findings, we extended our investigation to an in vivo model to explore the potential therapeutic efficacy of exosomes derived from Int‐Orgs for the treatment of liver fibrosis. Given the distinct advantages of human‐derived biological products, specifically their low immunogenicity and absence of zoonotic pathogen contamination, which are highly desirable characteristics for future clinical applications in liver diseases, we opted to use human‐derived Int‐Orgs EXOs in our in vivo study. The EXOs isolated from human Int‐Orgs were administered to mice with liver fibrosis induced by CCL4. After 2 or 5 weeks of EXO treatment, mice with liver fibrosis showed increased body weight and decreased fibrotic liver area. EXOs treatment improves liver function in mice with liver fibrosis. The TBIL, DBIL, ALT, and AST levels decreased, whereas the ALB, AAT, and BUN levels increased. Decreased expression of alpha‐fetoprotein (AFP), a marker, was observed in the EXO‐treated group. These findings suggested that EXOs from Int‐Orgs may alleviate the progression of liver fibrosis by promoting hepatic differentiation. This discovery not only deepens our understanding of the biological functions of exosomes in liver diseases but also opens new avenues for the development of potential therapeutic strategies for liver fibrosis.
EXOs have been shown to contain many different cargo molecules, among which miRNAs are the most abundant.[
 
] Additionally, EXOs offer protection to miRNAs in harsh environments, allowing their stable presence in human plasma and bodily fluids.[
 
] To identify the molecular mechanisms underlying the pro‐differentiation effects of intestinal EXOs, we analyzed the miRNAs in EXOs. Among the miRNAs enriched in intestinal EXOs, the miR‐371‐373 cluster has emerged as a key regulator of HPC differentiation. These miRNAs were found to target RPS6KA2, a negative regulator of hepatic differentiation, and their overexpression in HPCs led to the increased expression of hepatocyte markers. Conversely, the inhibition of the miR‐371‐373 cluster reversed the pro‐differentiation effects of intestinal EXOs, confirming their critical roles in this process. The miR‐371‐373 cluster is specifically expressed in human cells, whereas the homologous cluster in mice is miR‐290‐295.[
 
] Moreover, the expression level of the miR‐372‐3p and miR‐373‐3p has been found to be downregulated in NAFLD (non‐alcoholic fatty liver disease) patients with fibrosis compared to those with normal histology.[
 
] A past clinical study also reported that miRNA‐372 is downregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma.[
 
] Collectively, our findings suggest the crucial regulatory role of the miR‐371‐373 cluster in advanced liver disease. Advanced liver disease is frequently accompanied by intestinal dysfunction in clinical patients.[
 
] We have hypothesized that the impairment of intestinal function in patients with liver fibrosis might lead to a diminished amount of the miR‐371‐373 cluster entering the liver via EXOs, thereby preventing HPCs from differentiating into hepatocytes. This, in turn, may exacerbate liver repair during disease progression. Our study suggests that restoring normal communication between the intestine and the liver through external intestinal‐derived exosomes may offer a promising therapeutic strategy for advanced liver diseases. However, further research is needed to confirm this hypothesis and to shed light on the complex interplay between the miR‐371‐373 cluster, intestinal function, and advanced liver diseases.
RPS6KA2, a member of the ribosomal S6 protein kinase family, is associated with various substrates, including those involved in the MAPK/ERK pathway.[
 , , , 
] Notably, a previous study established that RPS6KA2 functions as a key regulator of hepatic differentiation.[
 
] A dual‐luciferase reporter gene assay confirmed that RPS6KA2 is a common target of miR‐371a‐5p/372‐3p/373‐3p. The negative regulatory effect of RPS6KA2 was confirmed using RPS6KA2 siRNA and sgRNA. Based on these findings, we propose that the miR‐371‐373 cluster–RPS6KA2 signalling pathway in EXOs from intestinal epithelial cells may mediate the hepatic differentiation of HPCs. Analysis of PPI results suggested an indirect interaction between RPS6KA2 and HNF4A (Figure , Supporting Information). According to previous studies,[
 
] CREB2 (ATF4, the primary transcription factor for RPS6KA2) serves as a bridge between RPS6KA2 and HNF4A. A reduction in the activation of RPS6KA2 results in a decrease in the serine‐133 phosphorylation level of CREB2.[
 
] CREB2 (ATF4) serves as a transcriptional co‐activator of HNF4A. When CREB2 is significantly negatively expressed, the expression level of HNF4A correspondingly increases.[
 
] Given that HNF4A has been confirmed as the core regulator of hepatic differentiation,[
 
] we can therefore hypothesize that RPS6KA2 might exert regulatory effects on hepatic differentiation by interacting with CREB2 and HNF4A. Furthermore, the miR‐371‐373 cluster within EXOs from intestinal cells might alleviate liver fibrosis by promoting the hepatic differentiation of HPCs via RPS6KA2 and its interaction with CREB2 and HNF4A. However, further investigations are required to validate these hypotheses.
This study had some limitations. First, there is inherent variability in the generation of organoids, which is influenced by multiple factors, such as cell sources, culture environment, and donor characteristics. Second, although the gut‐liver chip model successfully simulated the interaction between organs, it is still challenging to eliminate potential variations owing to the complexity of the fabrication process. Additionally, because of the high cost of organoids‐on‐a‐chip, this technique has not been used to evaluate the function of the miR‐371‐373 cluster and its downstream targets in the regulation of HPCs differentiation. The limited cell culture capacity also constrains the use of certain conventional experimental techniques, such as western blotting. Furthermore, the potential influence of the intestinal microbiome on in vivo experimental results could not be fully accounted for. Finally, scaling up the production of Int‐Orgs EXOs for clinical use still faces challenges, considering the difficulties in obtaining primary intestinal tissues and also the high cost of large‐scale production.

4

## Conclusion
Our gut liver‐on‐a‐chip models have demonstrated that intestinal epithelial cells can facilitate the hepatic differentiation of HPCs through their EXOs. We have shown that treatment with exosomes derived from intestinal organoids substantially ameliorated liver fibrosis in CCL4‐induced mouse models. It is possible that the miR‐371‐373 cluster–RPS6KA2 signalling pathway in EXOs originating from intestinal epithelial cells is responsible for this effect. These findings provide a new perspective for the future treatment of advanced liver diseases.

5

## Experimental Section

## Culture of Organoids—Patients and Clinical Specimens
Normal human duodenal tissue was obtained from a patient with gastric cancer after surgical resection at the Zhujiang Hospital. Human liver fibrosis samples were obtained from adjacent non‐tumorous tissues of a patient with liver cancer who underwent surgical resection at Zhujiang Hospital. Specimens were collected with informed consent from the patients during surgery, and ethics committee approval was obtained from the Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University (approval number: 2022‐KY‐243‐01). Details of the donors are presented in Table (Supporting Information).

## Culture of Organoids—Isolation of Human Intestinal Crypt Cells and Culture of Int‐Orgs
Human primary intestinal crypt cells were isolated following previously described procedures, with some modifications.[
 
] Briefly, the duodenal samples were transferred to cold DMEM‐F12 (with 15 mm HEPES, Stemcell, Canada, Catalog #36254). The luminal side of the intestine was scraped to remove the luminal content and villous structures. After the intestine was gently washed three times with ice‐cold PBS, it was cut into 1–3‐mm pieces with scissors. The pieces were transferred to a tube and further washed with cold PBS (5–10 times). Tissue pieces were resuspended in 10 mL of Gentle Cell Dissociation Reagent (GCDR, Stemcell, Canada, Catalog: #100‐0485) and incubated on ice for 30 min on a shaker. The supernatant was removed by centrifugation at 290 × g for 5 min. The tissue pieces were resuspended in 10 mL of cold (2–8 °C) DMEM‐F12 containing 1% BSA and pipetted up and down three times. Most intestinal pieces were allowed to settle at the bottom (≈30 s). The supernatant was collected and passed through a 70 µm strainer to obtain the crypt fraction. Crypts were suspended in a 1:1 mixture of Human IntestiCult Organoid Growth Medium (IGM, Stemcell, Canada, Catalog: #06010) and cytokine‐free Matrigel (Corning, Japan, Catalog: 354230) and added to preheated 24‐well plates (50 µl per well). After incubation at 37 °C for 20 min, IGM containing 10 µM Y‐27632 (Stemcell, Canada, Catalog #72302) was added to maintain the culture. The medium was changed every two days. The outgrowing crypts were passaged once a week, and the organoid stocks were maintained for up to 5 months.

## Culture of Organoids—Isolation of Human HPCs and Culture of HPC‐Orgs
Liver tissue was rinsed with HepatiCult Organoid Basal Medium (Stemcell, Canada, Catalog: #100‐0387). The tissue was cut into 1 mm3 pieces using scissors. The liver pieces were washed in 10 mL of HepatiCult Organoid Basal Medium containing 1% FBS 10 times, and the supernatant was discarded. Preheated TM Tissue Digestible Solution (BioGenous, China, Catalog: K601008) was added and incubated at 37 °C in a 200‐rpm shaker for 20 mins. The digestion was terminated, and the supernatant was transferred to a conical tube. The digestion cycle was repeated until the tissue pieces completely dissociated into the hepatic ducts and no tissue pieces remained. The collected supernatants were centrifuged at 300 × g for 3 min. Hepatic progenitor cells (HPCs) were obtained using FACS (see flow cytometry analysis for details). The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was then resuspended in a 1:1 mixture of human HepatiCult Organoid Growth medium (HGM, Stemcell, Canada, Catalog: #100‐0385) and cytokine‐free Matrigel. The supernatant was transferred to a single well of a 24‐well plate to form a dome. After the domes solidified, 750 µL of HGM containing 10 µM Y‐27632 was added for maintenance culture. The culture medium was changed every four days. The cells were considered ready to pass when they resembled organoids. Primary human hepatocytes (PHHs) and primary human intrahepatic bile duct cells (PHBDs) were obtained from primary normal liver tissues by tissue enzymolysis and cell sorting (KRT18+PHHs, KRT19+PHBDs).

## Culture of Organoids—Differentiation of Int‐Orgs and HPC‐Orgs
Int‐Orgs that were previously cultured with Human IntestiCult Organoid Growth Medium were switched to Human IntestiCult Organoid Differentiation Medium (IDM, Stemcell, Canada, Catalog: #100–0214) containing 5 µM DAPT (Stemcell, Canada, Catalog: #72082) and maintained for 7 days. For the first‐stage differentiation of HPC‐Orgs, HDM‐I (HGM with 10 ng mL−1 oncostatin M (Stemcell, Canada, Catalog: #78094) and 1 µm dexamethasone (Sigma, USA, Catalog: D4902)) was added and maintained for 5 days. For the second stage of differentiation, HDM‐II (Human HepatiCult Organoid Differentiation Medium, HDM, Stemcell, Canada, Catalog: #100‐0383) was added and maintained for 10 days.

## Cell Culture and Differentiation
The colon cancer cell line (Caco‐2) was purchased from ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA). HepaRG cells were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA). Caco‐2 cells were cultured in MEM (BasalMedia, China, Catalog: L540KJ) supplemented with 20% FBS (Gibco, USA, Catalog: 10091148), 100 U mL−1 penicillin, and 0.1 mg mL−1 streptomycin (BasalMedia, China, Catalog: S110JV). The maintenance medium for HepaRG cells was William's E medium (Gibco, USA, Catalog: A1217601) supplemented with HepaRG general purpose medium supplement (Thermo Fisher, USA, Catalog: HPRG670), 1X GlutaMAX (Thermo Fisher, USA, Catalog: 35050061), 100 U mL−1 penicillin and 0.1 mg mL−1 streptomycin. All cells were cultured in a humidified incubator at 37 °C and 5% CO2. For differentiation into HepaRG cells, they were seeded at a density of more than 90% and maintained in culture for 5 days. Subsequently, the cells were transferred to differentiation medium and maintained for 10 days. The differentiation medium for HepaRG cells was cultured in maintenance medium supplemented with 2% DMSO (MP Biomedicals, China, Catalog: 196055).

## Cell Counting Kit‐8 Assay
Cell growth and relative quantification were performed using the Cell Counting Kit‐8 (CCK8) assay. Prior to establishing the coculture system, a series of cell growth tests were conducted to determine the optimal medium. Caco‐2 and HepaRG cells were seeded separately in 96‐well plates at a density of 800 cells/well. Different ratios of MEM and Williams’ E complete medium (ranging from 1:0 to 0:1) were added to the wells, and the cells were cultured for 10 days. At each time point (2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 days), 100 µL of DMEM containing 10 µL of CCK8 solution (Dojindo, China, Catalog: LH646) was added to each well and incubated at 37 °C for 2 h. The absorbance of the wells was measured at 450 nm using a microplate reader (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cell growth curves were plotted using the GraphPad Prism 9 software. A 2:1 ratio of MEM to Williams' E complete medium was determined to be the optimal coculture medium for HepaRG and Caco‐2 cells. (Figure , Supporting Information)
To quantify HepaRG cells on the chip, HepaRG cells (mixed with Matrigel) were 3D cultured in 96‐well plates with initial seeding numbers of 1000, 2000, 4000, 8000, and 16 000. Caco‐2 cells of the same number were seeded in 96‐well plates coated with Matrigel. After 4 h of cell adherence, the absorbance of each well was measured using a CCK8 assay. Standard curves were then generated to quantify the number of HepaRG and Caco‐2 cells. HepaRG and Caco‐2 cells were seeded separately onto the chips. 100 µL of DMEM containing 10 µL of CCK8 solution was added to the chips and incubated at 37 °C for 4 h. The perfusate was collected, and light absorption was measured in order to calculate the number of HepaRG and Caco‐2 cells on the chips based on their corresponding standard curves. Enumeration of Hep‐Org and Int‐Org cells on the chips followed procedures analogous to those used for cell lines.

## Construction of the Coculture Systems of Cell Lines and Organoids—Determination of a Coculture Medium for Hep‐Orgs and Int‐Orgs
To determine the optimal coculture medium for Int‐Orgs and HPC‐Orgs, both cell types were individually cultivated in a range of mixed media compositions (IGM: HGM ratios of 1:0, 3:1, 2:1, 1:1, 1:2, and 0:1). Cell growth curves were used to assess the cellular activity in different media blends using the CCK8 assay. Lineage differentiation of Int‐Orgs was assessed by qRT‐PCR, whereas differentiation of Hep‐Orgs was determined by measuring the levels of secreted ALB by ELISA. Following the growth and differentiation assessments of both organoid types, the expansion coculture system was designated as IGM: HGM (2:1). The culture system was then replaced with IGM: HDM‐I (2:1) to ensure initial differentiation of HPC‐Orgs while minimizing the impact on Int‐Orgs. Subsequently, the differentiation coculture medium was adjusted to an IDM: HDM‐II (1:1). The results of the co‐culture medium experiments are shown in Figure (Supporting Information).

## Construction of the Coculture Systems of Cell Lines and Organoids—Construction of a Static Coculture System of Cell Lines and Organoids
To create a static coculture system, Transwell chamber inserts with a 0.4‐µm aperture (Corning, Japan, Catalog: #3470, #3450) were used in 6‐well or 24‐well plates. The membrane was coated with Matrigel at 100 µg mL−1. HepaRG cells differentiated for 10 days were mixed with Matrigel (10 mg mL−1) and seeded at the bottom of the plate. Caco‐2 cells were seeded onto the membranes of the chamber inserts. The coculture medium for HepaRG/Caco‐2 cells was MEM: Williams’ E at a ratio of 2:1. For the construction of the coculture system for organoids, polystyrene rings were used to increase the height of the bottom chamber to accommodate the growth of the 3D organoids. HPC‐Orgs mixed with the Matrigel solution were seeded in the bottom layer, whereas undifferentiated Int‐Orgs were seeded in the upper layer. The Transwell plate was then placed at 37 °C with 5% CO2 for 20 min to allow the Matrigel to solidify. The coculture system was maintained in an expansion medium (IGM: HGM at a ratio of 2:1) for 4 days. After completing the transition stage with an IGM: HDM‐I ratio of 2:1, the medium was switched to a differentiation coculture system with an IDM: HDM‐II ratio of 1:1. These coculture media were also used in the monoculture control group for comparative purposes.

## Establishment of gut‐Liver‐on‐a‐Chip Using Cell Lines or Organoids—Design and Fabrication of Microfluidic Equipment
The microfluidic gut‐liver‐on‐a‐chip was designed using SolidWorks 2020 software. The chip was fabricated by the Wuhan Siyi Service Co., Ltd. (China). The microfluidic chip was cast using polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS, Japan). The necessary microfluidic design was photolithography‐patterned on a silicon wafer using an SU‐8 photoresist (SU‐8 2100, Japan). The PDMS base and its curing agent were mixed at a ratio of 10:1 (w/w) and poured onto a silicon wafer, which acted as the master template. The mixture was then degassed in a vacuum chamber for 20 mins and cured in an oven at 80 °C for 30 min. The cured PDMS was then carefully removed from the mold. The microfluidic chip was composed of three layers and two chambers (intestinal and liver). The top layer contains the inlets and outlets. The intestinal culture chamber was situated in the left middle layer with a lateral wavy shape that mimicked the structure of the native crypt‐ and villus‐like domains. A 10 µm thick translucent polycarbonate membrane (Corning, Japan) was embedded between the middle and bottom layers, precisely positioned beneath the intestine culture chamber. The liver chamber was designed to recapitulate the microstructure of hepatic sinusoids. Micropillars were created to separate the cells from the medium. Additionally, a microtube was incorporated as a vessel‐like structure connecting the intestinal and liver chambers. By utilizing an oxygen plasma treatment, the PDMS layers and glass slides were bonded together to form a sealed microfluidic chip.
Before the experiment, the chips were sterilized under ultraviolet irradiation. Stainless‐steel plugs and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tubing were inserted into the inlets and outlets. A hepatic sinusoid‐like culture system was constructed to establish a gut‐liver on‐chip system. HepaRG cells (1 × 106 cells mL−1) mixed with Matrigel (10 mg mL) were injected into both the left and right liver chambers and incubated at 37 °C for 20 min. Matrigel diluent (300 µg mL) was injected into the intestine channel, and the chip was placed at 37 °C for 20 min. Subsequently, the Caco‐2 cells (2 × 106 cells mL−1) were injected into the intestinal chamber and incubated under static conditions for 4 h to facilitate cell adhesion. Nonadherent cells were washed away, and the liver chamber and intestine chamber were perfused with coculture medium (MEM: Williams’ E at a ratio of 2:1) at a flow rate of 1 µL min−1.

## Establishment of Gut‐Liver‐on‐a‐Chip Using Cell Lines or Organoids—Construction of a Gut‐Liver‐on‐a‐Chip co‐Culture System
Undifferentiated Int‐Orgs and HPC‐Orgs were prepared by mechanical disruption and digestion using GCDR. As illustrated in Figure (Supporting Information), for the construction of a gut‐liver‐on‐a‐chip co‐culture system, undifferentiated Int‐Orgs (passage 6) and undifferentiated HPC‐Orgs (passage 4) were chosen. Initially, 200 µL of Int‐Orgs Matrigel suspension was injected into the intestine chamber via the intestine inlet. The intestinal channel was maintained with HGM, and the culture was carried out for 2 days at a flow rate of 1 µL min−1. Following this, 80 µL of the HPC‐Orgs Matrigel suspension was seeded into the liver chambers. HGM was continuously utilized to sustain the growth of Int‐Orgs, while IGM was introduced into the central channel to maintain HPC‐Orgs, with the culture proceeding for an additional 4 days. Once the intestinal barrier integrity exceeded 70%, the culture medium in all channels was substituted with IGM: HDM‐I (2:1) to maintain the growth of Int‐Orgs and induce the differentiation of HPC‐Orgs for 5 days. Subsequently, the culture medium in all channels was replaced with IDM: HDM‐II (1:1) for the differentiation of Int‐Orgs and HPC‐Orgs, with the culture being maintained for another 6 days. In the HPC‐Orgs monoculture group, the culture medium regimen and perfusion rate were identical to those employed in the co‐culture group.

## Establishment of Gut‐Liver‐on‐a‐Chip Using Cell Lines or Organoids—Assessment of Intestinal Barrier Permeability
FITC‐dextran (40 kDa, Sigma, USA, Catalog: 60842‐46‐8) solution at a concentration of 50 µg mL−1 was injected into the intestine chamber of the chip and perfused at a rate of 100 µL h−1. Effluents from the gut and medium chambers were collected every 3 h, followed by centrifugation at 1000 × g for 5 min. The supernatant was collected and transferred to a black 96‐well plate. Using the fluorescence detection module of a multifunction microplate reader (Thermo Fisher, USA), the excitation wavelength was adjusted to 488 nm, and the emission wavelength was 525 nm to detect the fluorescence intensity of the medium channel effluent (Fluomedium) and gut chamber effluent (FluoEpi). The ratio of Fluomedium/FluoEpi was calculated, and the permeability curve was drawn using GraphPad Prism 9 software.

## Establishment of Gut‐Liver‐on‐a‐Chip Using Cell Lines or Organoids—RNAs Isolation and Quantitative Real‐Time qRT‐PCR
Total RNA was extracted from the EXOs using a Total Exosome RNA and Protein Isolation Kit (Thermo Fisher, USA, Catalog: 4478545) according to the manufacturer's instructions. RNA from cells and organoids was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Thermo Fisher, USA, Catalog: 15596018) and quantified using a Nanodrop2000 (Thermo Fisher, USA). For RNA extraction from the cells on the chip, trypsin‐EDTA was injected for digestion for 5 min, and the non‐gel‐coated cells on the chip were removed. Cell Recovery Solution (CRS, Corning, Japan, Catalog: 354253) was then infused into the chip and incubated on ice for 1 h. Cells on the chip were obtained by infusing the channel with PBS. For mRNA analysis, cDNA was synthesized using an mRNA reverse transcription reagent (AG, China, Catalog: AG11711). For miRNA analysis, cDNA was synthesized using the miRNA reverse transcription reagent (AG, China, Catalog: AG11717). cDNA was quantified by real‐time PCR using SYBR Green qPCR Master Mix (AG, China; Catalog: AG11701). The mRNA and miRNA expression levels were normalized to the expression levels of GAPDH and U6, respectively. The 2−△△CT method was used to calculate the expression levels. The primer sequences for the mRNAs and miRNAs are shown in Tables –S (Supporting Information).

## Establishment of Gut‐Liver‐on‐a‐Chip Using Cell Lines or Organoids—Flow Cytometry and Fluorescence Activating Cell Sorter (FACS) Analyses
For cells or organoids on chips, GCDR was injected into the channel, and the Hep‐Orgs on chips were digested at room temperature (RT) for 15 min. The cells were collected from the chip, centrifuged at 290 g for 5 min, and washed twice with PBS. The eBioscience Foxp3/ transcription factor flow fixation/permeabilization buffer (eBioscience, USA, Catalog: 00‐5523‐00) was then added to cell suspension, followed by overnight fixation at 4 °C. Human BD Fc Block (BD Biosciences, USA, Catalog: 564219) was used to prevent the non‐specific binding of antibodies to Fc receptors. Subsequently, the primary antibodies were incubated at RT for 1 h, and the secondary antibodies were incubated at RT for 30 min. The intracellular protein fluorescence intensity was measured using flow cytometry (BD Biosciences, USA), and data analysis and image integration were performed using the FlowJo software.

## Establishment of Gut‐Liver‐on‐a‐Chip Using Cell Lines or Organoids—ALB, AAT, AFP, and CYP3A4 Detected by ELISA
The supernatant samples were collected at various time points. The concentrations of ALB, AAT, and AFP in the supernatants were measured using ALB ELISA kits (Abcam, Cambridge, UK, Catalog: ab179887), AAT ELISA kits (Abcam, UK, Catalog: ab108799), and AFP ELISA kits (Abcam, Cambridge, UK, Catalog: ab108838), respectively. The content of CYP3A4 in the cells was determined using a CYP3A4 ELISA kit (MEMIAN, China, Catalog: MM‐2358H2) following the manufacturer's instructions. The number of cells was used for standardized quantification.
The level of urea in the supernatant was tested using a Urea Colorimetric Assay Kit (Jiancheng, China, Catalog: C013‐1‐1), following the manufacturer's instructions.

## Establishment of Gut‐Liver‐on‐a‐Chip Using Cell Lines or Organoids—Activity of CYP450s Measured by HPLC‒MS
The activity of CYP450s of the differentiated HepaRG cells and HPC‐Orgs in the monoculture and coculture systems was evaluated by measuring the corresponding metabolites using HPLC‒MS. Four specific substrates of CYP450s were chosen: phenacetin (Yuanye, China, Lot NO. Y05M7Y308689) for CYP1A2, and dextromethorphan (Yuanye, China; lot no. Y03S11W120802) for CYP2D6 and testosterone (Apexbio, USA, Lot NO. C6163213416B9) for CYP3A4. To ensure accurate metabolite detection throughout the HPLC‐MS analysis, the PDMS chip was pretreated with complete medium containing 2% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 12 h to minimize nonspecific drug adsorption. This optimized protocol demonstrated a marked reduction in drug retention by the PDMS material, with an absorption efficiency of < 5%. Then, three drugs, each at a concentration of 50 µM, were added respectively to the chip system with cells, and supernatant was collected every 24 h.
The LC‐MS/MS system consisted of a triple‐quadrupole mass spectrometer (AB/SCIEX 4000 QTRAP; SCIEX, Concord, Ontario, Canada) equipped with an electrospray ionization interface coupled to an LC system (LC‐30AD XR; Shimadzu). The LC system was equipped with two pumps, a system controller, an autosampler, a column oven, and an online degasser. Chromatographic separation was carried out at RT on a Phenomenon Kinetex XB‐C18 column (2.1 × 100 mm, 2.6 µm) at a flow rate of 0.4 mL min−1. The temperature of the autosampler was 4 °C, and the injection volume was 5 µL. The mobile phases were composed of 0.1% formic acid and 2 mmol L−1 ammonium formate in water (solution A) and methanol (solution B) with a gradient elution as follows: 0–1.0 min, 5% B; 1.0–2.0 min 5–95% B; 2.0–4.5 min, 95% B; and 4.5–4.6 min, 95–5% B. 5% B was then maintained at 4.6–7.0 min to reach equilibrium. The total runtime was 7.0 min. The mobile phase effluent from the column was diverted to waste before 0.5 min and after 6.50 min. Electrospray ionization (ESI) was performed in the positive ion mode with nitrogen as the nebulizer, turbo spray, and curtain gas, with the optimum values set at 50, 50, and 10 psi, respectively. The turbo gas temperature was set at 500 °C, and the ESI needle voltage was adjusted to 5500 V. The MRM transitions were m/z 152.1 → 110.1, m/z 258.2 → 157.1, m/z 312.2 → 266.1, and m/z 305.4 → 269.2 for acetaminophen (APAP), dextrophan (DXO), and 6β‐hydroxytestosterone (6βH‐TEST), respectively. Data acquisition, data processing, and instrument control were performed using Analyst V1.6.3 (SCIEX, Concord, Ontario, Canada). To eliminate the interference of CYP450s in the intestinal cells, the level of metabolites in hepatocytes in the gut‐liver coculture system was equal to the concentration of metabolites in the coculture system minus the concentration of metabolites in the monocultured intestinal cell system.

## Establishment of Gut‐Liver‐on‐a‐Chip Using Cell Lines or Organoids—RNA Sequencing
For the Hep‐Orgs on the chip and HepaRG on the chip, the mRNA extracted from each group of cells from 10 chips was sequenced using next‐generation mRNA sequencing (mRNA‐seq). An Illumina HiSeq NextSeq 2000 instrument was used for sequencing, and a sequencing library was constructed. The FPKM value was employed to quantify the gene expression levels. The DESeq R package was used for differential expression analysis. The corrected p value was set to 0.05, and the absolute value of log 2 FC (fold change) was set to ≥0.6 as the threshold for differentially expressed genes (DEGs). The DEGs were further analyzed based on their biological and molecular functions. R packages, including “clusterProfiler,” “enrichplot,” “org. Hs.eg.db,” “pathview,” and “ggplot2,” were used to perform Gene Ontology (GO) database (http://www.geneontology.org/) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://www.kegg.jp/) pathway enrichment analysis. For GO enrichment analysis, biological process (BP), molecular function (MF), and cellular component (CC) categories were analyzed. A threshold of p < 0.05 was used. The intersection of the two groups of DEGs between HepaRG and Hep‐Orgs was then taken, and overlapping DEGs with the same trend were selected for pathway enrichment analysis. The SangerBox data analysis platform (http://sangerbox.com/) was used to draw chord graphs and volcano and Venn diagrams. STRING (https://www.string‐db.org/) was used to construct protein‐protein (PPI) networks of proteins encoded by DEGs. A combined score > 0.6 was considered significant, and key genes with a degree >20 were chosen. All of the RNA sequencing data were accessible through SRA PRJNA1145173 in the NCBI database.

## Establishment of Gut‐Liver‐on‐a‐Chip Using Cell Lines or Organoids—Immunofluorescence Staining, HE, PAS Staining, and MASSON Trichrome Staining
Immunofluorescence experiments on cell lines cultured in Transwell plates were conducted according to the manufacturer's instructions. The supernatant was removed, and the cells were washed three times with PBS. The cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min. The cells were permeabilized in PBS containing 0.2% Triton‐X‐100 at room temperature (RT) for 30 min. The samples were washed three times with PBS and then transferred into immunofluorescence staining blocking solution (Beyotime, China, Catalog: P0102), followed by incubation with primary antibodies diluted in blocking solution overnight at 4 °C. The samples were washed with PBS three times, and fluorescent secondary antibodies were added and incubated at RT for 1 h, followed by nuclear staining with DAPI (Beyotime, China, Catalog: C1006) for 20 min. The images were captured using a fluorescence microscope. For immunostaining cell lines on the chip, solutions were perfused onto the chip using a microinjection pump at a flow rate of 0.1 mL min−1. The chip was then filled with 4% paraformaldehyde, fixed for 30 min, and then washed with PBS for 15 min. PBS containing 0.2% Triton X‐100 was added, and the mixture was allowed to permeate at RT for 45 min. The samples in the chip were blocked with an immunofluorescence sealing solution at RT for 2 h. Primary antibodies were added and incubated at 4 °C overnight. After washing with PBS for 30 min, the cells were incubated with the fluorescent secondary antibody at RT in the dark for more than 2 h. DAPI was infused for nuclear staining for 30 min. The bottom slice of the chip was then removed.
To perform immunofluorescence staining on the organoids cultured in Transwell plates, a solution of precooled 4% paraformaldehyde was added and incubated for 30 min. Organoids were mechanically dissociated by pipetting. For organoids‐on‐a‐chip, a collection of 8–10 chips containing organoids was washed three times with PBS. Next, the organoids were coated with a 2% agarose solution and embedded in paraffin. After pre‐cooling the paraffin, make slices with a thickness of 4 µm and place them in a 37 °C oven. In the immunofluorescence experiments on organoid slices, microwave antigen repair was performed using a citrate solution (pH 6.0). The slices were permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X‐100 for 30 min and then blocked with 2% goat serum at RT for 1 h. Primary antibodies were added and incubated at 4 °C overnight, and fluorescent secondary antibodies were added and incubated at RT for 1 h. DAPI was used for nuclear staining. For HE staining, the sections were stained with H&E for 5 and 2 min, respectively. Images were captured using a SP8 laser confocal microscope (Leica, Germany) and an Axiovert A1 inverted fluorescence microscope (Zeiss, Germany). The 3D reconstructed images were obtained using an SP8 laser confocal microscope. Images were processed and analyzed using Photoshop 2020 or ImageJ software. Excitation light intensity, gain, and exposure time were consistent across the groups for the same metric. Information on the antibodies used is shown in Table (Supporting Information).
For PAS detection, periodic acid–Schiff reagent (Solarbio, China, Catalog: G1281‐50) was used to stain glycogen according to the manufacturer's instructions. To detect liver fibrosis, Masson's trichrome reagent (Solarbio, China, Catalog: G1340) was used to stain the fibrotic area, according to the manufacturer's instructions.

## Establishment of Gut‐Liver‐on‐a‐Chip Using Cell Lines or Organoids—TEM
Hep‐Orgs on the chips were collected and fixed with pre‐cooled 2.5% glutaraldehyde. The samples were then washed with PBS. To further remove the matrix components, the suspensions were centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 min, and this process was repeated three times. The samples were then sliced into ultrathin sections. The images were obtained using TEM (Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan).

## Isolation and Uptake of EXOs—Isolation and Characterization of EXOs
Caco‐2 cells were cultured in MEM complete medium. Once the cell density reached 70–85%, the cells were washed twice with PBS. Then, the cells were cultured in serum‐free MEM supplemented with 50 ng mL−1 EGF (R&D, USA, Catalog: P01133), 100 ng mL−1 FGF7 (R&D, USA, Catalog: P21781) and 1× insulin transferrin selenium (ITS‐G, iCell, China, Catalog: iCell‐4507) for 24 h. In the case of organoids, Int‐Orgs were differentiated for 7 days. Afterward, the supernatants were collected and stored at ‐80 °C. Subsequently, the thawed supernatants were filtered using a 0.22 µm filter. Ultrafiltration and size exclusion chromatography (SEC) were used to extract the EXOs. The initial 500–1000 mL of the supernatant was concentrated to 2–4 mL through ultrafiltration using an ultrafiltration tube (100 kD, Millipore, USA, Catalog: UFC910096) under centrifugation at 5000 × g. The EXOs were isolated from the concentrated liquid using an exosome purification kit (Exosupur, ECHO EIOTECH, China, Catalog: Echo9101), following the manufacturer's instructions. The protein concentrations of the extracted EXOs were measured using a bicinchoninic acid assay. To identify EXOs from Caco‐2 cells, the EXO‐positive markers TSG101, HSP70, and CD63, and the negative marker calnexin were detected by western blotting. The EXOs derived from Int‐Orgs were characterized for the presence of CD63, CD81, and CD9 markers using an ExoView chip (NanoView Biosciences, USA). Particle size and concentration of the EXOs were analyzed using ZetaView (Particle Metrix, Germany). The EXO morphology was observed using transmission electron microscopy (TEM, HITACHI, Japan).

## Isolation and Uptake of EXOs—Western Blot Analysis
Determine the exosome protein concentration using the Bicinchoninic Acid Protein Assay kit (Beyotime, China, Catalog: P0010). 5×SDS buffer in proportion was added to the quantified exosome concentration (10–30ug) and vortexed and mixed thoroughly. Denaturation in a 95 °C water bath for 5 min. After electrophoresis, the separated gel was removed, and the proteins in the target area within the gel were transferred to a PVDF membrane (Millipore, USA, Catalog: 03010040001). After blocking with 3% BSA blocking buffer, the membranes were incubated with primary and secondary antibodies and exposed to a chemiluminescence developer (Bio‐Rad, USA). Gray analysis of the bands was performed using the ImageJ software. Information on the antibodies used was shown in Table (Supporting Information).

## Isolation and Uptake of EXOs—EXOs Uptake and Inhibition Assay
The isolated EXOs were incubated with PKH26 Red Fluorescent dye (Red, Umibio, China, Catalog: UR52302) for 10 min at RT. In order to trace the uptake of EXOs by HPCs in the chip, culture medium containing 5 µg mL−1 (Caco‐2) or 10 µg mL−1 (Int‐Orgs) EXOs was prepared and continuously injected into the chip. The uptake of EXOs by HepaRG cells on the chip was observed using a PKH26 tracer (Red, Umibio, China) following a 48 h infusion of EXOs. The internalization of EXOs by Hep‐Orgs on the chip was assessed by examining histological sections obtained from the chip.
For the EXOs inhibition assay, the concentration of GW4869 (MCE, USA, CAS No: 6823‐69‐4) was determined by the expression of EXOs in intestinal epithelial cells and cell growth curves. The intestinal cells were first treated with GW4869 (Caco‐2‐10 µµ, Int‐Orgs‐20 µµ) for 2 h and then cocultured with HPCs on a chip for 6 days. The supernatant was collected, and the expression levels of secreted ALB and AAT were detected by ELISA.

## Animal Experiments
All animal experiments were performed after institutional review by the Animal Ethics Committee of the Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University (approval number: LAEC‐2023‐136). The mice were divided into six groups: a 6‐week control group, a 6‐week CCL4‐induced liver fibrosis group with PBS treatment, a 6‐week CCL4‐induced liver fibrosis group with EXOs treatment, a 9‐week control group, a 9‐week CCL4‐induced liver fibrosis group with PBS treatment, and a 9‐week CCL4‐induced liver fibrosis group with EXOs treatment. As illustrated in Figure  , to construct a model of hepatic fibrosis, 4‐week‐old C57BL/6J mice were intraperitoneally (i.p.) injected with carbon tetrachloride (CCL4, AR>99.5%, 5 mL kg−1 body weight, diluted at a ratio of 1:5 in olive oil) (Sigma, USA, Catalog:488488) or olive oil alone twice a week for a period–6‐9 weeks. The mice were intravenously injected (i.v.) with EXOs (40ug/time, dissolved in PBS) of Int‐Orgs (differentiation) or PBS solution once a week starting at week 4 until the mice were sacrificed (6 or 9 weeks). The mice were anesthetized with an inhalation anesthetic (isoflurane, 4–5%), followed by orbital blood collection, and the organs were dissected for subsequent experiments.
The distribution of the EXOs (labeled with DIR, Umibio, China, Catalog: UR21017) of Int‐Orgs in mice over a 1‐week period was analyzed using an in vivo imaging system (IVIS Spectrum with excitation/emission wavelengths of 745 nm/800 nm).

## Experiments of EXO miRNAs—EXO miRNAs Sequence and Analysis
Total miRNA from Caco‐2 EXOs was extracted for miRNA sequencing. The Illumina HiSeq2500 platform was used for sequencing, and an miRNA sequencing library was constructed. Read counts were used to detect the miRNA expression levels. All miRNA sequencing data were accessible through SRA PRJNA1145173 in the NCBI database.

## Experiments of EXO miRNAs—Transient Transfection with miRNA Mimics, Inhibitors, and siRNAs
HepaRG cells were transfected with miRNA (miR‐371a‐5p, miR‐372‐3p, and miR‐373‐3p) mimics, inhibitors, negative controls, inhibitor negative controls (NC, iNC), and RPS6KA2 siRNA oligonucleotides (Tsingke, China) using Lipofectamine 3000 reagent (Invitrogen, USA, Catalog: L3000008). According to the manufacturer's instructions, Caco‐2 cells were transfected with miRNA (miR‐371a‐5p, miR‐372‐3p, and miR‐373‐3p) inhibitors, NC, and iNC, and the sequences used are shown in Tables and (Supporting Information).

## Experiments of EXO miRNAs—Dual Luciferase Reporter Gene Assay
Luciferase reporters were constructed using the pSI‐Check2 plasmid containing the SV40 promoter. The firefly luciferase gene (fLUC) was used as the reporter gene, and the Renilla luciferase gene (hRluc) was used as the internal control. Blank plasmids h‐RPS6KA2‐3UTR‐wt, h‐RPS6KA2‐3UTR‐mut‐1, and h‐RPS6KA2‐3UTR‐mut‐2, were constructed by Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (ReGene, China). Briefly, the HepaRG cells were seeded in 24‐well plates. Blank plasmids (0.5 µg), h‐RPS6KA2‐3UTR‐wt, h‐RPS6KA2‐3UTR‐mut‐1, or h‐RPS6KA2‐3UTR‐mut‐2 were added to the wells. Next, 100 nm miR‐371a‐5p, miR‐372‐3p, or miR‐373‐3p mimics were added. Lipofectamine 3000 reagent was used for transfection. The culture medium was changed 8 h after transfection. After 24 h, supernatants were harvested. Then, 100 µL of fLUC reaction solution and 100 µL of hRluc reaction solution (Yeasen, China, Catalog: 11402ES80) were added to the supernatant, and detection was completed within 30 min. The fLUC/hRluc luminous intensity ratio was used for analysis.

## Experiments of EXO miRNAs—Construction of Plasmids of sgRNA‐dCas9 and Lentiviral Transduction
The synergistic activation mediator (SAM) plasmid consisted of three components: Human RPS6KA2 sgRNA in pGWLV11‐new‐sgRNA‐1/‐2 (MS2) _puro, dCas9‐VP64_Blast, and MS2‐P65‐HSF1_Hygro. Construction of sgRNA plasmids, lentivirus packaging, and quality control were performed by Azenta Life Sciences Co., LTD, USA. HepaRG cells were cultured in Williams’ E medium (Gibco, USA, Catalog: A1217601) supplemented with HepaRG general‐purpose medium (Thermo Fisher, USA, Catalog: HPRG670), 1×GlutaMAX (Thermo Fisher, USA, Catalog: 35050061), 100 U mL−1 penicillin, and 0.1 mg mL−1 streptomycin. Cells were passaged every 5 days at a ratio of 1:3.5 × 105 cells were seeded in 6‐well plates and incubated with LV‐Assistant, dCas9‐VP64, and MS2‐P65‐HSF1 lentiviral supernatant (MOI = 10) for 24 h. Transfected cells were replated at low density (0.8 × 105 per well for a 24‐well plate), and a selection agent was added 6 h after plating (10 ug mL blasticidin and 200 ug mL−1 hygromycin, Sigma: SBR00022, 400051). Cells were transduced with RPS6KA2 sgRNAs lentiviral vectors (MOI = 10) for 24 h. 10 ug mL−1 puromycin was added to the media for selection, with the selection period lasting for 5 days. The sequences of RPS6KA2 sgRNAs are listed in Table (Supporting Information).

## Statistical Analysis
The results were presented as the average ± standard error, and all statistical analyses were carried out using GraphPad Prism 9.0. Data between the two groups were compared using an unpaired two‐tailed Student's t‐test. One‐way ANOVA was used to compare multiple groups of sample data with a single variable, and two‐way ANOVA was used for multigroup comparisons with two independent variables, followed by a Tukey HSD post hoc test. A threshold of p<0.05 was used to define significant differences. All data were obtained from at least three independent experiments.

## Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Supporting information
Supporting Information

## Acknowledgements
L.Y., S.L., G.B., and B.L. contributed to this work equally. The authors are grateful for financial support from the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2023A1515012452, 2021B1515230011), the Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou (2024B03J0022), the President's Fund of Zhujiang Hospital (yzjj2022ms13), and the Science and Technology Innovation Project of Guangdong Medical Products Administration (2023ZDZ06).

## Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.