pmcMol TherMol Ther902molther100890581Molecular Therapy1525-00161525-0024American Society of Gene & Cell TherapyPMC11573610PMC11573610.111573610115736103934242810.1016/j.ymthe.2024.09.029S1525-0016(24)00653-11Original ArticleGTSE1-driven ZEB1 stabilization promotes pulmonary fibrosis through the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
JinHee ParkSo-Yeon LeeJi Eun ParkHangyeol JeongMichaela LeeHyukjin ChoJaeho LeeYun-Silyslee0425@ewha.ac.kr 1Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 120-750, Republic of Korea2Center for Genome Engineering, Institute for Basic Science, Daejeon 34126, Republic of Korea3Department of Radiation Oncology, Yonsei University Health System, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea∗Corresponding author: Yun-Sil Lee, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 120-750, Republic of Korea. yslee0425@ewha.ac.kr4These authors contributed equally
06112024279202432114753564138415714420242592024270920242011202428022026© 2024 The Author(s)2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).G2 and S phase-expressed protein 1 (GTSE1) has been implicated in the development of pulmonary fibrosis (PF); however, its biological function, molecular mechanism, and potential clinical implications remain unknown. Here, we explored the genomic data of patients with idiopathic PF (IPF) and found that GTSE1 expression is elevated in their lung tissues, but rarely expressed in normal lung tissues. Thus, we explored the biological role and downstream events of GTSE1 using IPF patient tissues and PF mouse models. The comprehensive bioinformatics analyses suggested that the increase of GTSE1 in IPF is linked to the enhanced gene signature for the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), leading us to investigate the potential interaction between GTSE1 and EMT transcription factors. GTSE1 preferentially binds to the less stable form of zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1), the unphosphorylated form at Ser585, inhibiting ZEB1 degradation. Consistently, the ZEB1 protein level in IPF patient and PF mouse tissues correlates with the GTSE1 protein level and the amount of collagen accumulation, representing fibrosis severity. Collectively, our findings highlight the GTSE1–ZEB1 axis as a novel driver of the pathological EMT characteristic during PF development and progression, supporting further investigation into GTSE1-targeting approaches for PF treatment.

## Graphical abstract
 
Lee and colleagues found that G2 and S phase-expressed protein 1 (GTSE1) expression is elevated in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis lung tissues but not in normal lungs. GTSE1 binds to unphosphorylated zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1), preventing its degradation and promoting epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, which contributes to fibrosis. Targeting the GTSE1-ZEB1 axis could offer novel therapeutic strategies.

## Keywords
pulmonary fibrosisIPFepithelial mesenchymal transitionGTSE1ZEB1protein stabilityubiquitin degradationlipid nanoparticlesRNA therapeuticspmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Introduction
Pulmonary fibrosis (PF) is distinguished by an excessive accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) and persistent destruction of alveolar-capillary structures that lead to a progressive decline in respiratory function. Recent therapeutic advances have successfully slowed the rate of PF in clinical trials , , ; however, a significant proportion of patients still suffers from progressive disease that ultimately results in death or need for lung transplantation. Therefore, deeper understanding of the mechanisms underlying PF is important for developing future therapeutics.
The development and progression of PF encompass alterations in a diverse range of cellular components. One of the key drivers promoting fibrosis is a process called the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Traditionally, three distinct functional categories of EMT are acknowledged. Type I is linked to the physiological processes that occur during embryogenesis and are involved in the formation of tissues and organs. Type II is associated with normal wound healing but can also contribute to excessive tissue repair. Type III indicates the development of a migratory phenotype in malignant epithelial cells that is associated with the invasiveness and spread of tumors (metastasis). Although referred to as EMT, the type II EMT process is not limited to epithelial cells; endothelial cells and pericytes have also been found to undergo a similar procedure to generate fibroblasts, which are used to repair damaged tissue. , However, aberrations in type II EMT can lead to excessive ECM production, which deteriorates the organized structure of the respiratory airways and ultimately hinders normal organ function. , The EMT occurs in response to pleiotropic signaling pathways, including those associated with transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), sonic hedgehog, Wnt/β-catenin, fibroblast growth factor, epidermal growth factor, and interleukins (ILs). ILs are a category of small proteins called cytokines that have a role in inflammation and immunological responses. They have complicated and diverse effects in the formation and development of PF. ILs primarily modulate inflammation and immunological responses, but they can also influence cellular processes like senescence, autophagy, and EMT. Collectively, EMT signaling regulates the expression or activity of certain transcription factors (TFs), including zinc-finger protein SNAI1and SNAI2 (Snail and Slug), twist-related protein 1 (Twist), and protein stability of zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1), which program cells to lose their polarity and cell-to-cell adhesion and gain migration and invasion capacity. Numerous preclinical investigations have demonstrated the promising therapeutic effects of EMT-targeting strategies in diverse organ fibrosis models. Nevertheless, the direct modulation of EMT signaling can present certain clinical limitations due to its crucial involvement in type I and III EMT processes, which are associated with embryogenesis and cancer metastasis, respectively. Thus, unraveling disease-specific EMT regulators could offer a promising avenue for the development of novel therapeutics with few side effects.
Multiple animal models have helped researchers better understand the pathophysiology of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). The most extensively used and best-characterized PF mouse models are bleomycin (BLM)- and ionizing radiation (IR)-induced mouse models. Intratracheal injection of BLM causes lung toxicity, which includes lung architecture remodeling and pulmonary function loss and death. BLM produces lung patchy parenchymal inflammation, reactive hyperplasia, EMT, fibroblast activation and myofibroblast differentiation, and basement membrane and alveolar epithelium damage. IR-induced fibrosis is a clinically relevant injury to the respiratory tract that results in the development of fibrosis. Previously, we developed a mouse model simulating clinical stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) and validated the induction of lung fibrosis by focal high-dose radiation exposure. The pathobiology of IR-induced fibrosis is thought to involve free radical-mediated DNA damage and TGF-β activation, and thorax-limited radiation is widely used to prevent systemic fibrosis. By performing unbiased transcriptome analysis using both IR and BLM-induced mouse PF models, our recent study found a novel biomarker for lung fibrosis, G2 and S phase-expressed-1 (GTSE1), which shows elevated expression in cells within fibrotic areas. , Of note, our preclinical investigation showed that targeting GTSE1 by delivering small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) on lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) provided significant preventive and therapeutic effects against lung fibrosis that were accompanied by significant decreases in EMT markers. In parallel, research from other groups consistently indicates a potential link between GTSE1 and the pathologic EMT phenotype. , , However, its exact molecular mechanisms and potential clinical implications have not yet been fully determined. Given that GTSE1 is rarely expressed in normal tissues and is upregulated in disease states, , it could be a useful therapeutic target to specifically block disease-associated EMT.
For this study, we conducted comprehensive bioinformatics analyses on three independent cohorts of IPF patients and discovered that GTSE1 is significantly and commonly upregulated in IPF tissues, rarely expressed in normal tissues, and positively correlated with an increase in EMT gene signatures. Therefore, we further studied the potential link between GTSE1 and EMT driver proteins and found a molecular link between GTSE1 and protein stability of ZEB1. This study provides mechanistic insights into the pathological, GTSE1-mediated EMT that drives the aggression of PF, supporting further investigation into GTSE1-targeting approaches for PF treatment.

## Results

## GTSE1 and EMT phenotypes are elevated in fibrotic lung tissues
In our previous report, we tried to determine the molecular signature of PF by analyzing transcriptional changes in IR- and BLM-induced mouse models of PF, and we found an increase in the type II EMT phenotype in fibrotic regions. In the present study, to examine the relevance of the EMT to IPF patients, we explored clinical transcriptomic data using the public Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) webserver and the “GEO2R” bioinformatics tool: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/geo2r/. The GEO webserver is a comprehensive archive of gene expression datasets that provides researchers with a comprehensive understanding of molecular processes. Instead of incurring enormous costs and time in recruiting new IPF patient cohorts, we used the transcriptomic data of previously published IPF cohorts that had already been validated and uploaded to the GEO database. Data sharing through such an open-source database provides an abundance of essential information that fuels global research and fosters a data-driven revolution in biomedical research. Since data curation is also crucial for data derived from multiple studies or pooled from various sources, we used a publicly available and interactive web tool, GEO2R platform, which allows users to compare two or more groups of samples in a GEO database and to identify genes that are differentially expressed across experimental conditions or disease states. First, we identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs) by comparing transcriptomic data from IPF and healthy lung tissues across three independent IPF cohorts ( A). Since a recent study successfully identified a transcriptomic signature of IPF using GSE10667 (IPF: n = 31, normal: n = 15) and GSE24206 (IPF: n = 17, normal: n = 6), we included these two cohorts and added another, GSE47460_A (GPL6480) (IPF: n = 38, normal: n = 17) to increase sample size. Whole sample accession numbers from each cohort are presented in , and all clinical samples included in these three cohorts were collected according to the multidisciplinary diagnostic criteria described in the American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society consensus statement. We obtained DEG lists ( ) and volcano plots (middle panels of A) indicating the significantly altered genes in IPF lung tissues compared with control healthy lung tissues (n = 1,481 for GSE10667 [p value < 0.01], n = 2563 for GSE47460_A [p value < 0.001], n = 4975 for GSE24206 [p value <0.05]). We also examined the reliability of our DEG lists by checking the Bland-Altman plots (MA-plots) and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) generated from GEO2R ( A). We confirmed the distribution peak of normalized log ratio to be closer to zero in MA-plots (upper panels in A), indicating that cDNA microarray data were well-normalized. Also the UMAP confirmed that the transcriptomic patterns of IPF samples were distinctive from those of healthy control samples in all three cohorts (bottom panels in A). Then, we subjected the DEG lists to a gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) to identify the associated molecular signatures. The GSEA data (right panels of A) from the cohorts common and significantly enriched upregulated genes in IPF tissues in EMT gene signatures, suggesting that the EMT process is activated in the pathogenesis of IPF, which is in line with other reports. , Intriguingly, when we compared the DEG lists from IPF patients to the DEG lists from the PF mouse models ( ) from our previous study, , we found 14 genes commonly upregulated in human and mouse fibrotic tissue ( B and 1C; ), including the well-known EMT-associated molecules such as collagens (COL3A1, 
COL5A2, , 
COL24A1 ) and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF1 , ). Next, we further explored the GEO web browser and found additional two IPF cohorts include larger sample sizes: GSE47460_B (GPL14550) (IPF: n = 122, normal: n = 91) and GSE17978 (IPF: n = 38, normal: n = 20). We confirmed that all 14 identified genes were significantly elevated in IPF lung tissues compared with healthy controls, except for those genes not detected in the transcriptome analysis ( B; ). This potentially indicates that our comprehensive bioinformatic analyses are reliable methods for identifying fibrosis-associated genes. Notably, our previous preclinical research demonstrated that intratracheal treatment with LNPs incorporating GTSE1 siRNA had strong preventive and therapeutic effects against lung fibrosis and reversed the fibrotic phenotype. In line with this, the present study confirmed the consistent elevation of GTSE1 mRNA levels in IPF patient tissues across all five cohorts ( D and B; ). Therefore, we further investigated the protein levels of GTSE1 to determine its clinical relevance in IPF using human tissue array slides from US Biomax (Derwood, MD, USA). The human IPF tissue array (catalog no. LC561) contained 24 cases, and a human normal lung tissue array (catalog. no. LCN241) contained 24 cases. Histological analyses of the IPF tissue array demonstrated a pronounced increase in GTSE1 protein levels within fibrotic regions, characterized by collagen deposition and visualized as blue patches by Masson’s trichrome staining ( E). More importantly, the GTSE1 protein levels in patient tissues exhibited a strong and positive correlation with fibrosis severity, as determined by the extent of collagen deposition ( F). Consistently, in murine lung tissues with fibrosis, GTSE1 protein levels were elevated by 6.48-fold or 2.53-fold in IR-induced or BLM-induced mouse models, respectively ( A). In parallel, collagen accumulation was increased by 2.81-fold or 3.70-fold in IR-induced or BLM-induced mouse models, respectively. Notably, GTSE1 protein expression co-localized with α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA)+ areas ( B), which indicates the stress fibers. 
In parallel, a recent report used single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to identify the distinct epithelial and mesenchymal cell populations that contribute to PF. We compared GTSE1 expression in lung epithelial cells determined by a pan-epithelial marker, epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM), comparing EpCAM+ epithelial cells from IPF and normal lung tissues (green arrows in A). We discovered that GTSE1 was rarely expressed in epithelial cells unless they were proliferating. Interestingly, in IPF lung tissues, GTSE1 expression was greatly increased in all pathogenic epithelial cell populations (black arrows), such as basal cells, secretoglobin family 3A member 2 (SCGB3A2)+ secretory cells, and especially keratin (KRT)5−/KRT17+ cells, which were first determined to be pathologic ECM-producing epithelial cells by Habermann et al. Only KRT5−/KRT17+ cells from IPF lung tissues showed GTSE1 expression, whereas SRY-Box Transcription Factor 9 (SOX9), the marker for KRT5−/KRT17+ cells, was ubiquitously expressed in KRT5−/KRT17+ cells from both IPF and normal lung tissues ( A). These findings imply that GTSE1 might be relevant to the pathogenic changes seen in IPF epithelium. Next, we explored GTSE1 expression in other cell populations (immune, mesenchymal, and endothelial cells) and found that it was highly enriched in proliferating macrophages and proliferating T cells ( B). But distinct changes in those populations had not been observed previously in IPF tissues. Collectively, both our genomic and histological analyses imply a strong connection between GTSE1 and lung fibrosis in IPF patients that matches what we previously found in a PF mouse model.

## GTSE1 is necessary for profibrotic phenotypic change in fibroblasts and epithelial cells
The increases in the fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition (FMT) and type II EMT phenotype in epithelial cells are hallmarks of fibrosis. , , , Thus, we investigated the potential role of GTSE1 in the FMT and EMT. Myofibroblasts are contractile matrix-depositing cells characterized by α-SMA+ stress fibers. Myofibroblasts are essential in the recovery of damaged tissues and critical in the inflammatory response, but cause pathology when they persist. TGF-β, a key FMT-stimulating growth factor, dramatically increased the GTSE1 protein levels in human pulmonary fibroblasts (HPFs) and the levels of typical mesenchymal markers (fibronectin and N-cadherin) and the contractile myofibroblast marker α-SMA ( A). Notably, this TGF-β-induced increase in FMT markers was blocked by GTSE1 knockdown ( A). In parallel, to evaluate a potential role of GTSE1 in EMT, we again utilized TGF-β and IR, well-known EMT drivers. This analysis showed that GTSE1 was increased in lung epithelial cells (L132) after TGF-β or IR treatment and elucidated EMT marker changes (an increase in N-cadherin and a decrease in E-cadherin, an epithelial marker) ( B and A). More importantly, knocking down GTSE1 prevented the EMT induced by TGF-β or IR in epithelial cells ( B and A). Consistently, F-actin staining showed a large increase in actin stress fibers in epithelial cells after TGF-β or IR treatment, and that was greatly attenuated by GTSE1 knockdown ( C and B). Next, we investigated the potential involvement of GTSE1 in cell migration and fibrotic remodeling, both of which are typical EMT-associated cellular phenotypes. GTSE1 knockdown reduced both the basal and TGF-β-induced migration ability of epithelial cells ( D). A collagen gel contraction assay, which depicts dynamic cell-ECM interactions and 3D cellular contractility, also revealed that GTSE1 knockdown reduced both basal and TGF-β-induced collagen gel contraction ( E). Additionally, histological analyses of tissues from IR-induced PF mice revealed the increased co-localization of GTSE1, EpCAM, and α-SMA, implying that GTSE1 is elevated in EpCAM+ epithelial cells that are probably undergoing the EMT and converting into α-SMA+ cells ( F). Collectively, our findings indicate that GTSE1 is necessary for the pathogenic FMT and EMT. 

## GTSE1 binds to ZEB1 and enhances its protein level
Although it is uncertain whether epithelial cells can directly transform into myofibroblasts via the EMT, it has been strongly demonstrated that EMT-TF expression is essential for the development of fibrosis in multiple organs, including lung. , Thus, to obtain mechanistic insights about the GTSE1-mediated EMT, we screened for a potential relationship between GTSE1 and EMT-TF protein levels in both epithelial cells and fibroblasts. Among the tested EMT-TFs, ZEB1 showed the most dramatic reduction upon GTSE1 knockdown ( A–3C). Next, we investigated the potential interaction between GTSE1 and EMT-TFs using 293T cells overexpressing Flag-tagged GTSE1. In that experiment, ZEB1 was most significantly enriched among the proteins co-immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag ( C and A), suggesting that ZEB1 has the strongest binding ability to GTSE1 among the tested EMT-TFs. In a similar way, we double-confirmed the ZEB1-GTSE1 interaction in L132 cells ( D). Accordingly, GTSE1 knockdown reduced the amount of ZEB1-binding GTSE1 ( D). Intriguingly, TGF-β treatment greatly increased the co-localization of GTSE1 and ZEB1 in the nucleus ( E). The western blot data also indicate that both GTSE1 and ZEB1 protein levels increased after IR and TGF-β treatment, along with changes in the EMT markers ( B). However, only the nuclear level of ZEB1 protein increased upon TGF-β treatment, while cytosolic ZEB1 remained the same ( C). In contrast, both cytosolic and nuclear protein levels of GTSE1 were elevated following TGF-β treatment ( C). Furthermore, the proximal ligation assay (PLA), which allows in situ detection of endogenous protein-protein interactions, confirmed the GTSE1-ZEB1 interaction within the nucleus and its large reduction by GTSE1 knockdown ( F). 
Next, we performed histological analyses to examine the correlation between GTSE1 and ZEB1 in fibrotic tissues. ZEB1 protein levels were consistently elevated in fibrotic tissues from IR- and BLM-induced PF mouse models ( D). Of note, increased co-localization of GTSE1 and ZEB1 was observed in fibrotic lung tissues from IR- and BLM-induced PF mice ( G). Additionally, histological analyses of tissues from IPF patients revealed the increased co-localization of GTSE1, ZEB1, and α-SMA, implying that the GTSE1-ZEB1 interaction was elevated in α-SMA+ fibrotic areas ( H). The protein levels of GTSE1 showed a strong positive correlation with ZEB1 protein levels in IPF patient tissues ( I). Collectively, our data provide the first evidence of the GTSE1-ZEB1 interaction, which appears stronger in the nucleus following IR or TGF-β treatment and in fibrotic tissues.

## GTSE1 increases ZEB1 protein stability by inhibiting ubiquitination
We confirmed the GTSE1-mediated EMT and GTSE1–ZEB1 interaction, thus we further investigated the underlying molecular mechanisms. Surprisingly, although GTSE1 knockdown decreased ZEB1 protein levels ( A and 3B), it had no effect on ZEB1 mRNA levels while increasing E-cadherin (Cadherin1; CDH1) mRNA expression ( A). Therefore, we investigated the effect of GTSE1 on the stability of the ZEB1 protein. Consequently, we found that GTSE1 overexpression delayed a decline in ZEB1 protein levels, after blocking protein synthesis with cycloheximide (CHX, A). Consistently, GTSE1 knockdown accelerated a decline in ZEB1 protein levels under CHX treatment; conversely, the ectopic overexpression of GTSE1 restored ZEB1 protein stability ( B). Further investigation with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 demonstrated that GTSE1 overexpression decreased ZEB1 ubiquitination, while GTSE1 knockdown enhanced it ( C and 4D). This suggests that GTSE1 promotes ZEB1 accumulation through protein stabilization rather than by affecting its mRNA levels. ZEB1 induces the EMT by repressing CDH1 promoter activity. We thus investigated whether targeting GTSE1 also affected CDH1 promoter activity. We found that GTSE1 knockdown significantly augmented CDH1 reporter activity ( E). Furthermore, a chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay revealed that GTSE1 knockdown led to a large decrease in ZEB1 binding with the CDH1 promoter ( F). 
We next investigated whether ZEB1 is required for the GTSE1-mediated EMT. Upon ectopic overexpression of GTSE1, we observed dramatic changes in EMT markers along with ZEB1 protein elevation ( G). Interestingly, the GTSE1-mediated changes in EMT markers were significantly diminished in ZEB1-depleted cells ( G), suggesting that GTSE1 is not fully functional without ZEB1 proteins. Similarly, GTSE1 overexpression increased the number of stress fibers in lung epithelial cells, but that change did not occur when ZEB1 expression was suppressed ( H). Subsequently, the ectopic overexpression of ZEB1 completely restored the loss in cell migratory potential caused by GTSE1 knockdown ( I and B). In a similar way, GTSE1 knockdown enhanced CDH1 reporter activity in L132 cells, but ectopic overexpression of ZEB1 suppressed it even in GTSE1-depleted cells ( C). Together, our findings indicate that increase in ZEB1 protein stability is a key mediator of the GTSE1-induced EMT.

## GTSE1 preferentially binds to unstable forms of ZEB1 and inhibits its degradation
ZEB1 phosphorylation at S585 has been reported to play a role in increasing ZEB1 protein stability. To investigate the potential involvement of GTSE1 in regulating ZEB1 protein stability, we used mutant forms of ZEB1 ( A). The phospho-deficient mutant (S585A) replaced serine 585 with alanine, and the phospho-mimetic mutant (S585E) replaced serine 585 with aspartic acid. Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) revealed that GTSE1 bound preferentially to the S585A mutant rather than the S585E mutant ( B). Furthermore, PLA showed a stronger proximal association between GTSE1 and the S585A mutant than between GTSE1 and the S585E mutant ( C and A). These findings imply that GTSE1 interacts particularly strongly with the unphosphorylated form of ZEB1 at S585. In parallel, GTSE1 overexpression greatly reduced ubiquitination in the S585A mutant form, but it did not affect the S585E mutant form ( D). Similarly, knocking down GTSE1 exclusively reduced the protein stability of the S585A mutant and had no effect on the S585E mutant ( E). These data suggest that GTSE1 preferentially binds to the relatively unstable form of ZEB1 and inhibits its ubiquitination and degradation, leading to increases in ZEB1 protein stability. Because the transcription-repressing role of ZEB1 mutant forms had not been tested before, we compared CDH1 promoter activity upon the overexpression of the S585A mutant or S585E mutant. Both mutant variants significantly inhibited CDH1 promoter activity, with S585E showing slightly greater inhibition ( B). 
In breast cancer cells, IR is known to increase ZEB1 stability by phosphorylating it at S585 via ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) activation. Therefore, we next examined the involvement of ATM in ZEB1 protein regulation in lung epithelial cells. ATM knockdown significantly blocked the IR-induced increase in ZEB1 protein, as GTSE1 knockdown did, suggesting that ATM-mediated ZEB1 protein regulation is still intact in lung epithelial cells ( F). Intriguingly, the GTSE1–ZEB1 interaction increased in the absence of ATM, and the ATM–ZEB1 interaction increased in the absence of GTSE1 ( G), potentially suggesting that the two molecules compensate for each other to promote ZEB1 stability. However, ATM knockdown did not expedite the decrease in ZEB1 protein levels after protein synthesis was blocked, unlike GTSE1 ( H). In parallel, the phosphorylated form of ATM at S1981 (p-ATM), a sign of ATM activation, was increased significantly upon IR but quickly declined after reaching a maximum at 6 h, whereas GTSE1 and ZEB1protein levels were increased consistently upon IR exposure, showing a prolonged elevation pattern similar to fibronectin ( I), a pathological ECM component produced by lung epithelial cells in IPF patients. Collectively, these data suggest the possibility that regulation of ZEB1 by GTSE1 may have a greater impact, particularly in long-term diseases like fibrosis.

## Potential effects of GTSE1-ZEB1 in IPF
Gtse1 knockdown using LNP delivery of RNA therapeutics was shown to inhibit PF induced by BLM and focal IR in mouse models. However, the absence of molecular mechanisms and therapeutic biomarkers at that time limited further investigation of GTSE1-targeting treatment strategies. Thanks to the discovery of the GTSE1–ZEB1 interaction, which increases ZEB1 protein stability and induces the EMT, we further examined whether this mechanism could be used as a biomarker reflecting disease severity or providing evidence of therapeutic efficacy. First, we scored fibrosis severity and GTSE1 and ZEB1 expression levels in both IR- and BLM-induced PF mouse models ( A and 6B). The suppression of GTSE1 expression dramatically reduced the extent of collagen accumulation, with a corresponding decrease in the ZEB1 protein level ( C). Notably, as GTSE1 and ZEB1 protein levels increased, the amount of collagen accumulation increased, causing the IR- or BLM-treated lung samples to migrate to the upper right side of the plot, compared with the naive control samples ( D). Conversely, lung samples from animals treated with LNP-siGtse1 shifted toward the bottom left side of the plots, closer to the naive control samples ( D). Even in the LNP-siGtse1-treated group, mice with higher expression of GTSE1 or ZEB1 exhibited more severe collagen accumulation ( D) than those with lower levels. Accordingly, a strong correlation between GTSE1 and ZEB1 repeatedly appeared in the LNP-siGtse1-treated mice ( E). These data suggest that ZEB1 could serve as a marker of disease status and therapeutic response to GTSE1-targeting treatment. 
In summary, we discovered that the GTSE1 mediates the prolonged pathogenic EMT and drives PF by stabilizing ZEB1 protein levels ( ). The GTSE1–ZEB1 axis not only serves as a PF severity marker, but also reflects the degree of response to disease treatment. 

## Discussion
GTSE1 is a cell-cycle-related protein located in microtubules and is crucial for cell mitosis. In mammals, GTSE1 is a target gene of tumor protein p53 (p53). It translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, establishing negative feedback regulation with the p53 signaling pathway. In the context of cancer, GTSE1 has been shown to activate the protein kinase B (AKT) pathway in different ways depending on the presence of p53 mutations, promoting the proliferation, migration, and invasion of breast cancer cells. Additionally, silencing GTSE1 has been reported to inhibit the phosphorylation of AKT, B cell leukemia/lymphoma 2 protein (BCL2), and cyclin B1 and to promote the phosphorylation of BCL2 associated X protein (BAX), ultimately leading to the growth inhibition of hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Although GTSE1’s involvement in cancer is relatively well understood, it is not well explored in PF. Our combined genomic analysis using both PF mouse models and IPF patient tissues revealed a consistent and significant upregulation of GTSE1 in fibrotic tissues ( B–1E, B, and B). In this study, we first discovered that GTSE1 mRNA levels were very high in IPF patient tissues and rarely expressed in normal lung tissues. This finding, together with earlier preclinical studies demonstrating the preventive and curative effects of GTSE1 suppression in PF, prompted us to further examine the molecular mechanism of GTSE1 in lung fibrosis.
ZEB1 plays a significant role in IPF, mediating the EMT in human alveolar epithelial type II cells within the hypertrophic alveolar septum, which is facilitated by the paracrine EGFR/RAS/ERK signaling pathway. ZEB1 expression is notably elevated in alveolar epithelial cells adjacent to excessive ECM deposition in IPF, which supports our discovery of ZEB1-GTSE1 co-localization in fibrotic areas ( H). Moreover, a recent report supports the relevance of ZEB1-mediated EMT in IPF by demonstrating the microRNA-mediated elevation of ZEB1 expression. In parallel, myofibroblast-specific lineage tracing showed that ZEB1 drives renal fibrosis by augmenting the FMT. ZEB1 is closely associated with pulmonary dysfunction and fibrosis, implying its potential prognostic relevance for patients with those conditions. Although multiple signaling cascades were known to regulate ZEB1 and promote the EMT, pan-inhibition of those signals could interrupt homeostatic signals. In this context, we discovered a novel molecular mechanism that connects a selective fibrosis marker, GTSE1, with a major EMT-TF, ZEB1. GTSE1 enhances the type II EMT phenotype by binding to non-phosphorylated ZEB1, to inhibit ZEB1 ubiquitination and degradation ( ). Our discovery of the GTSE1-ZEB1 axis uncovered a mechanism driving pathogenic EMT during fibrosis, highlighting the importance of GTSE1-targeting strategies as a potential anti-fibrosis treatment.
Our prior investigation delineated the molecular signature of PF through a transcriptional analysis of mouse models and revealed an increase in the type II EMT phenotype in fibrotic regions. , In the present study, we examined clinical transcriptomic data from IPF patients and demonstrated a notable enrichment of EMT gene signatures ( A). Type II EMT is thought to begin as a reparative process triggered by traumatic and/or inflammatory damage, which results in the formation of fibroblasts responsible for tissue rebuilding and repair. Type II EMT is essential for wound healing and tissue regeneration but should end after the repair is complete and the inflammation has subsided. When type II EMT persists in response to chronic inflammation, it leads to organ fibrosis eventually causing organ damage. Our comparative analysis with the PF mouse models and IPF patients unveiled 14 commonly upregulated genes ( C and B; and ), including ECM molecules such as COL3A1, 
COL5A2, , 
COL24A1, and cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP), which are associated with pathological scarring. We also found well-determined inducers of the lung fibroblast transition such as IGF1, , kinases augmenting the TGF-β-induced EMT in fibroblasts such as cyclin dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) and cathepsin K (CTSK), , and a cell-cycle regulator essential for driving the excessive proliferation of myofibroblasts (CCNB1). Given that those genes have been identified consistently by us and other research groups, our combined genomic analysis of IPF mouse models and human tissues is a reliable method for identifying fibrosis-associated genes. In this context, the potential contribution of FERM domain containing 5 (FRMD5) to fibrosis has not been determined, but it can increase cell motility by facilitating integrin signaling, potentially up-regulating the mesenchymal phenotype. Similarly, recent reports proposed the potential contribution of monooxygenase DBH like 1 (MOXD1) , and ribonucleotide reductase regulatory subunit M2 (RRM2) , to the IPF transition, but their exact functions are yet to be determined. Thus, further investigations of those molecules could be valuable.
The EMT is one of several proposed mechanisms through which fibroblasts and myofibroblasts are generated. Advances have been made toward elucidating the causes and mechanisms of the EMT in PF, potentially leading to new treatment options. GTSE1 interacts with ZEB1, a main TF for EMT induction in PF, and stabilizes it. The stability of ZEB1 has been reported to be regulated by its phosphorylation at S585, a process induced by ATM activation and exposure to IR. The ATM-mediated phosphorylation of ZEB1 at S585 inhibits its degradation. However, the mechanisms of ZEB1 degradation, aside from that process, remain unclear. In this study, we found that GTSE1 interacts with ZEB1 unphosphorylated at S585, stabilizing it through a novel regulatory mechanism distinct from previously known pathways. Given that IR and TGF-β, both well-known EMT drivers, can increase or activate both GTSE1 and ATM, both the ATM-induced phosphorylation of ZEB1 and the GTSE1-induced stabilization of ZEB1 could contribute to ZEB1 stability. However, we confirmed that the decline in ZEB1 protein levels was not accelerated by ATM knockdown when protein synthesis was inhibited, unlike GTSE1 ( H). Concurrently, the levels of p-ATM were substantially elevated following exposure to IR, but rapidly decreased after reaching a peak at 6 h. On the other hand, the levels of GTSE1 and ZEB1 proteins continually increased after IR exposure, showing comparable patterns of sustained elevation ( I). Therefore, it is speculated that GTSE1 has greater influence on the protein levels of ZEB1 in long-term disease like PF.
Like ZEB1, ZEB2 also belongs to the ZEB protein family of TFs, which shares key functional domains of ZEB1 including N-terminal zinc fingers, SMAD-binding domain, Homeodomain, C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) interaction domain, and C-terminal zinc fingers. Both ZEB1 and ZEB2 primarily function as transcriptional repressors via cooperation with activated SMAD proteins and by recruitment of either the corepressor CtBP or histone deacetylase complexes, such as nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD). However, in contrast to ZEB1, ZEB2 does not possess an ATM-induced phosphorylation site equivalent to the S585 of ZEB1, suggesting that ZEB2 might be less important than ZEB1 in the GTSE1-mediated EMT.
There is currently no cure for IPF. Pirfenidone and nintedanib have been demonstrated to halt the progression of the disease. However, neither of those drugs improves or stabilizes lung function, nor do they improve the disease’s overall status, so further research into their efficacy and safety is needed. , Furthermore, it is crucial to explore new targets for regulating PF progression, particularly those that control the EMT process during PF. , This pursuit could lead to the development of innovative therapeutics that could effectively treat PF. From this perspective, our newly suggested mechanism by which GTSE1 regulates ZEB1 stability by binding to the unphosphorylated form of ZEB1, leading to PF, is highly significant.

## Materials and methods

## Study design
The objective of this study was to determine how GTSE1 contributes to the progression of PF and how GTSE1 inhibition might be protective, including an evaluation of potential therapeutic interventions targeting GTSE1. We hypothesized that GTSE1 plays a crucial role in the EMT and progression of PF. To test this hypothesis, we used several models of lung injury in mice and explored the genomic data of patients with IPF. Next, we performed in vitro experiments using a GTSE1-deficient cell line and primary human pulmonary fibroblast cells purchased from PromoCell (Heidelberg, Germany) to show that GTSE1 enhances EMT signaling in response to injury. Then, we hypothesized that ZEB1 signaling (GTSE1/ZEB1/E-cadherin) in the EMT is critical in this context. To test that hypothesis, we used ZEB1 expression and an CDH1 promoter vector. Last, to explore GTSE1 as a potential therapeutic target, we used LNP-mediated siRNA targeting GTSE1 in in vivo experiments. The number of biological replicates is indicated in the figure legends. Studies involving animal experimentation adhered to all relevant ethical regulations and were conducted at the Yonsei University or Ewha Womans University using Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) protocols approved by Yonsei University or Ewha Womans University.

## Identification of gene expression signatures from public genomic databases
The gene expression profiles of IPF patients were obtained from the GEO webserver and assessed using the “GEO2R” bioinformatics tool: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/geo2r/) as described in our previous report. , Briefly, the DEG lists were obtained by comparing transcriptomic data from IPF and healthy lung tissues: GSE10667, IPF n = 31, normal n = 15 (p value < 0.01); GSE47460_A (GPL6480), IPF n = 38, normal n = 17 (p value < 0.001); GSE24206, IPF n = 17, normal n = 6 (p value < 0.05). In these DEG lists, the adjusted p values (Benjamini & Hochberg) were used to select significant genes. Different p value cutoff values were used for cohorts with different sample numbers. The MA-plots and UMAP were generated using the GEO2R tool to confirm the quality of microarray data normalization or to confirm the distinctive transcriptomic patterns of IPF compared with healthy control samples, respectively. All cases from the three cohorts fulfilled multidisciplinary diagnostic criteria described in the American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society consensus statement. To validate the importance of the 14 candidate genes, we further examined the mRNA expression patterns of those genes in the additional cohorts: GSE47460_B (GPL14550) (IPF: n = 122, normal: n = 91) and GSE17978 (IPF: n = 38, normal: n = 20).
GSEA was conducted as described in our previous study. Briefly, the DEG lists were applied as a ranked gene list. The GSEA of the ranked gene list was conducted using the Java implementation of GSEA: http://www.broadinstitue.org/gsea/ (1,000 permutations; minimum term size, 15; maximum term size, 500; C2, all curated genes). The normalized enrichment score (NES) accounts for differences in gene set size, indicating that the genes in the annotated gene sets are enriched in IPF lung tissues (NES >0) or normal control lungs (NES <0). A false discovery rate (FDR) q value < 0.05 was used to set the significance threshold.
To identify the commonly upregulated genes in multiple IPF cohorts and PF mouse models, we drew Venn diagrams using the web tool: https://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/Venn/) as previously described. For the scRNA-seq analyses in IPF patients, we used the “IPF Cell ATLAS: http://www.ipfcellatlas.com/". To test the GTSE1 and ZEB1 expression patterns in the cell populations of IPF lung tissues, we explored scRNA-seq data that recently revealed the profibrotic roles of distinct epithelial and mesenchymal lineages in PF patients. 

## Animal experiments
PF mouse models were generated as described in our previous reports (BLM- or IR-induced , models) to acquire transcriptome data and validate the protein expression patterns of GTSE1, as well as to determine the potential effect of GTSE1 knockdown in attenuating PF progression. Briefly, all studies involving mice were approved by the IACUC of the Yonsei University Medical School (IACUC No. 2015–0267) and IACUC of Ewha Womans University (IACUC No. 18–064). In all animal experiments, we selected C57/BL6 mice because this mouse strain is known to show higher sensitivity to IR , and BLM. Adult (10-week-old) male mice were housed in a specific pathogen-free (SPF) room and were allowed to adapt for 1 week following shipment before the experiment began. Mice were kept in individual cages, supplied with food (Rodent Diet 20, PicoLab, St. Louis, MO, USA) and reverse osmosis water, and maintained on a 12:12-h light-dark cycle.
To establish an IR-induced PF mouse model, we utilized SPRT as previously described. , Briefly, we selected a 3-mm collimator to administer a 75-Gy dose to the central area of the left lung. IR was delivered with an X-RAD 320 (Precision, North Branford, CT, USA) equipped with a collimator system composed of 5-cm-thick copper to produce focal radiation beams. In the mice that underwent 75-Gy irradiation, focal irradiated tissues and neighboring tissues were isolated separately. Control lungs were isolated from non-irradiated mice. A total of 12 male mice were randomly divided into four groups (three mice per group) as follows: (1) Control group; (2) IR; (3) IR + siCtrl-incorporated LNP; and (4) IR + siGtse1-incorporated LNP.
The BLM-induced PF mouse model was established as previously described in our report. Briefly, bleomycin sulfate (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA; #200134) was dissolved in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and intra-tracheally injected at a dose of 1.8 mg/kg body weight. At 14 days post-BLM administration, the mice were euthanized, and their lungs were removed for histological staining. During irradiation and BLM injection, the mice were anesthetized with an intraperitoneally administered mixture of 30 mg/kg Zoletil and 10 mg/kg Rompun. Twelve male mice were randomly divided into four groups (three mice per group) as follows: (1) Control group; (2) BLM; (3) BLM+ siCtrl-incorporated LNP; and (4) BLM+ siGtse1-incorporated LNP.

## Microarray data analysis
To obtain a list of genes upregulated in lung tissues from PF mouse models, microarray was performed using tissues as described in our previous report. Briefly, RNA from the mouse lung tissues was extracted using an Easy-SpinTM total RNA extraction kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (iNtRON Biotechnology, Seoul, Republic of Korea). Isolated RNAs from three biological replicates (per group) were pooled to exclude experimental bias; 2 μg of RNA was amplified, labeled using a Low RNA Input Linear Amplification kit PLUS (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), and hybridized to a microarray containing approximately 44,000 probes (∼21,600 unique genes) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions (Agilent Mouse Whole Genome 44K, Agilent Technologies). The arrays were scanned using an Agilent DNA Microarray Scanner (Agilent Technologies).

## Preparation of siRNA-incorporated LNP
To formulate the mannose LNPs for animal experiments, an ethanol phase containing lipid components and an aqueous phase containing RNA were mixed in a microfluidic mixing system (Nanoassemblr, PNI, Canada), as previously described in our previous report, which also provides the molar ratio of lipid component for ethanol phase. Briefly, the ultimate volume ratio of lipids to RNA was 1:3, while the weight ratio for siRNA was 7.5:1. The prepared LNPs were dialyzed in 1× PBS using 3500 MWCO dialysis cassettes (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) overnight. After dialysis, LNPs were concentrated using ultrafiltration for at least 40 min to achieve the required concentration, with an administration volume of 50 μL or less. Mannose LNPs containing siRNA (0.5 mg/kg) were delivered intratracheally twice to assess the effect of Gtse1 silencing in murine PF models.

## Cell culture
To determine the EMT or FMT phenotype, we used both epithelial and fibroblast cells as previously described. , , , L132 human pulmonary epithelial cells and WI-38 human fetal lung fibroblast cells were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA). HPFs were obtained from PromoCell. Cells were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute Medium or Gibco Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator. To investigate protein-protein interaction and ubiquitination, we used HEK293T human embryonic kidney cells, which have a consistent and rapid growth rate and a high transfection rate. All cells were used within nine passages.
To evaluate the knockdown effect of GTSE1, we utilized the short hairpin RNA (shRNA) system as described in our previous report. Briefly, lentiviruses were used to create stable cell lines expressing shRNA for GTSE1. Non-targeting control shRNA (shCTRL) lentiviral particles (#108080), GTSE1 shRNA lentiviral particles (#75216-V), and polybrene (#134220) were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. To generate the shCTRL cells and shGTSE1 cells, cell lines were selected using puromycin (#108071) (1 μg/mL) for at least 1 week.

## siRNA and plasmids
To test the biological effect of target gene knockdown, we utilized small interfering RNA (siRNA) as described in our previous report. Briefly, transient transfection of siRNA or plasmids was performed using Lipofectamine 3000 transfection reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific; #L3000001) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Predesigned siRNAs for human GTSE1, ZEB1, and ATM and a negative control siRNA (siCTRL) were purchased from Bioneer (Daejeon, Republic of Korea). The sequence information of siRNAs is listed in . The coding sequences of human GTSE1, ZEB1, and ubiquitin (UBB) were purchased from Sino Bio (Beijing, Chana) or Addgene (Massachusetts, USA) and were inserted into mammalian expression vectors using a custom service from BIONICS (Seoul, Republic of Korea); p3XFLAG-myc-CMV (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA; #E7283), pcDNA3.1-V5 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA; #V810-20), and pcDNA3.1-HA (Addgene; #128034). The ZEB1 phosphorylation mutant constructs (S585A and S585E mutants) were prepared using PCR-based methods with wild-type ZEB1 cDNA as the template, followed by subcloning into p3XFLAG-myc-CMV. Lists of reagents, antibodies, vectors, siRNA sequences, and primer sequences are provided in .

## RNA isolation and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
To examine the relative amount of target gene mRNA levels, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis was performed as previously described. Briefly, 1 μg of RNA was isolated from experimental cells using QIAzol reagent (Qiazen, Valencia, CA, USA; #79306) at each time point after radiation exposure. RNA purity and concentration were measured with a Nanodrop. RNA was reverse transcribed using a ReverTra Ace qPCR RT kit (TOYOBO, Kita-ku, Osaka, Japan; #FSQ-101) following the manufacturer’s protocol, and PCR was performed to assess the expression of the candidate genes using primers designed for mRNA sequences. The total reaction volume was 20 μL. Reaction conditions started with enzyme activation at 95°C for 10 min, followed by 25–35 cycles of 95°C for 15 s, 58°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 45 s.

## Luciferase reporter assay
To examine the CDH1 promoter activity, we performed luciferase reporter assay as described in our previous report. Briefly, HEK293T cells were seeded at a density of 1.5 × 105 cells/dish in 35-mm cell culture dishes. The cells were transiently transfected with 1 μg of DNA for a CDH1 promoter plasmid for 3 h, followed by transfection with the designated siRNAs. After 24 h of incubation, the cells were treated with TGF-β1 (5 nM) for 24 h, and then CDH1 promoter activity was measured using a luciferase assay system with reporter lysis buffer (Promega, Madison, WI, USA; #E4030). Triplicates were systematically included, and experiments were repeated at least three times.

## Microscopic wound-healing assay
To determine the migration potential of L132 cells, a microscopic wound-healing assay was performed as described in our previous report. Briefly, transfected cells were plated in six-well dishes to reach confluency of 90% (for 24 h) or 80% (for 48 h). TGF-β (5 nM) was applied for 24 h, and parallel wounds of 1 mm were made using an SPLScar (SPL, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea; #201906). The sizes of the wounds after 24 and 48 h were measured using a light microscope (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) in three independent experiments.

## Collagen gel contraction assay
To evaluate cell-ECM interactions and 3D cell contractility, we performed a collagen gel contraction assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions (#MBS168182, MyBioSource, San Diego, CA, USA). Briefly, WI-38 cells were transfected with the siRNA designated in each experiment using Lipofectamine 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then treated with 5 nM TGF-β1 (R&D Systems, MN, USA; #240-B-002). Next, 5 × 104 WI-38 cells were mixed with type I collagen solution (final concentration 1 mg/mL of gel) in each well of a 24-well plate. After incubation at 37°C for 30 min, contraction mediator and growth medium were added to the wells. Then, using a narrow pipette tip, the gels were detached from the edges and bottom of the well. The plate was gently swirled to make sure that the gels were free, and they were incubated at 37°C for another 24 and 48 h for contraction. Areas of collagen gel size were analyzed with ImageJ and normalized to area of the well. The degree of contraction was evaluated by determining the area of the gel matrix before and after treatment. Images were collected with a digital camera after the gels were dissociated.

## In situ PLA analysis
To assess the in situ detection of endogenous protein-protein interactions, we performed in situ PLA analysis (Sigma-Aldrich) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and as previously described in our report. Briefly, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, washed with PBS, and blocked with blocking solution. After the application of GTSE1 (Proteintech, Wuhan, China) and ZEB1 (Invitrogen) or Flag-ZEB1 mutant (Sigma-Aldrich) antibodies, the cells were incubated with PLUS and MINUS secondary PLA probes based on species and then subjected to ligation and amplification using the provided reagents. The samples were mounted with Duolink mounting medium and analyzed using a Zeiss Apotome microscope (Carl Zeiss) at the Ewha Drug Development Research Core Center.

## Cycloheximide chase assay
To evaluate the protein stability of ZEB1, we performed CHX (chase assay), as previously described in our report. Briefly, ZEB1 stability was measured in the presence of CHX (Sigma-Aldrich, #C4859) in the conditions of GTSE1 overexpression and GTSE1 or ATM knockdown. At 24 h after transfection, the cells were split into multiple dishes, CHX was added (100 μg/mL), and the cells were harvested at the indicated times.

## Western blot analysis and immunoprecipitation
To compare the relative amount of target proteins, we performed western blotting as described in our previous report. Briefly, cells were lysed with radioimmune precipitation buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1% Nonidet P-40, 0.1% SDS, and 1% sodium deoxycholate) supplemented with 1 mM Na3VO4, 1mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mM NaF, and a protease inhibitor mixture (Roche Applied Science). The samples were boiled for 5 min, and an equal amount of protein was analyzed by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE).
To assess protein-protein interactions, we performed an immunoprecipitation assay as described previously in the report. Briefly, cells (1 × 107) were lysed in immunoprecipitation buffer: 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES, pH 7.6), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.1% Nonidet P-40. After centrifugation (10 min at 13,000 rpm) to remove particulate material, supernatants were incubated with antibodies (1:100) against V5-tag, ZEB1, and FLAG with constant agitation at 4°C. Immunocomplexes were precipitated with protein A/G agarose beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, #2003) and analyzed by SDS-PAGE using enhanced chemiluminescence detection. Horseradish peroxidase (HRP) activity was measured using enhanced chemiluminescence (EzWestLumi, Tokyo, Japan). Protein band intensity was visualized on ChemiDoc (Bio-Rad) at the Ewha Drug Development Research Core Center and quantified using ImageJ software 1.45 (National Institutes of Health).

## ChIP assay
To assess DNA-protein interactions, we performed a ChIP assay using a kit (#ab500, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and antibodies targeting ZEB1 (Invitrogen) following the instructions, as previously described. The enriched DNA was measured by qPCR as described above using the primers 5′-GGCCGGCAGGTGAACCCTCA-3′ (sense) and 5′-GGGCTG GAGTCTGAACTGA-3′ (antisense) for the CDH1 promoter.

## Tissue histology and immunohistochemical staining
To detect target proteins or collagen in the tissue samples, we performed immunohistochemical (IHC) or collagen deposition assays, as previously described in our report. Briefly, harvested tissues were fixed in 10% (v/v) neutral buffered formalin before the preparation of paraffin sections. Paraffin-embedded sections were deparaffinized and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (Sigma-Aldrich) or Masson’s trichrome (Sigma-Aldrich) and picrosirius red (Polysciences, PA, USA; #24901–500) to detect collagen. Before immunohistochemistry, deparaffinized sections were boiled in 0.1 M citrate buffer (pH 6.0) for 20 min and incubated with 0.3% (v/v) hydrogen peroxide in methanol for 15 min. Sections were blocked in normal goat serum at 37°C for 1 h and immunostained overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies against GTSE1 (1:200; Proteintech) and ZEB1 (1:200; Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Slides were visualized using an avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex (ABC kit; Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) and 3,3′-diaminobenzidine tetrachloride (Zymed Laboratories, San Francisco, CA, USA) and counterstained with hematoxylin. Slides were measured using light microscopy (Carl Zeiss, Zena, Germany). Quantification of positive staining was analyzed with an image analysis software, ImageJ (ImageJ, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA) using standard algorithms to define and evaluate the areas of staining. The human tissue array slides were purchased from US Biomax (Derwood); A human IPF tissue array (catalog no. LC561) contains 24 cases and a human normal lung tissue array (catalog. No. LCN241) contains 24 cases.

## Fluorescence imaging
To observe the co-localization of specific molecules, we performed fluorescence staining, as previously described in our report. Briefly, deparaffinized slides were co-immunostained with GTSE1 (1:200; Proteintech), α-SMA (1:200, Sigma-Aldrich), ZEB1 (1:200; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and EpCAM (1:200; Proteintech) overnight at 4°C and stained with Alexa Fluor 488-, Alexa Fluor 567-, or Alexa Fluor-647-conjugated goat anti-rabbit, anti-mouse, and anti-goat secondary antibodies (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The nuclei were counterstained with 4′,6-diamindino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Sigma-Aldrich, #F6057), and stained tissues were imaged using a Zeiss Apotome microscope (Carl Zeiss). Cells were cultured on chamber slides (SPL Life Sciences, Pocheon, Korea) and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min at room temperature. After being washed with PBS, the fixed cells were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 and incubated for 20 min with 1% bovine serum albumin to block nonspecific antibodies. The cells were incubated with primary antibodies overnight and then with secondary antibodies. To observe changes in the actin cytoskeleton, F-actin was stained with Alexa Fluor 488 phalloidin for 90 min in the dark, as described previously. Then, the nuclei of the stained cells were counterstained with DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich), and the cells were imaged using a Zeiss Apotome microscope (Carl Zeiss) at the Ewha Drug Development Research Core Center (Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Republic of Korea). Results were obtained by at least three individuals blinded to the identity of the sections. Quantification of positive staining was analyzed with ImageJ software as described above (section: tissue histology and IHC staining).

## Antibodies
The following primary antibodies were used: GTSE1 and EpCAM (Proteintech, Rosemont, IL, USA); Twist and V5 (GeneTex, CA, USA); ubiquitin, N-cadherin, ZEB1, and β-actin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology); phospho-ATM (Ser1981), ATM, Snail, Slug, Lamin A/C, hemagglutinin (HA) tag, and FLAG (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA); fibronectin and E-cadherin (BD Biosciences, Santa Clara, CA, USA); α-SMA and FLAG (Sigma-Aldrich); and ZEB1 and Alexa 488-conjugated phalloidin (Invitrogen). The detailed antibodies for immunoblotting, immunohistochemical, and immunofluorescence staining are provided in .

## Statistical analysis
All in vitro and in vivo data are presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). All experiment results were incorporated in terms of fold change analyses. Statistical significances were determined by GraphPad Prism 9.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA), using at least three independent experiments and were analyzed by Student’s t test or two-way ANOVA for two groups, and by one-way ANOVA for groups of three or more. Correlation analysis was performed by calculating Spearman’s correlation coefficient. Asterisks are used to indicate statistical significance; ∗, ∗∗, ∗∗∗, and ∗∗∗∗ indicate p value <0.05, <0.01, <0.001, and <0.0001, respectively.

## Data and code availability
All data are included in the manuscript, in the databases mentioned in the materials and methods, in the supplemental materials, and in (Source data). All data are available upon reasonable request from the corresponding author, Yun-Sil Lee (yslee0425@ewha.ac.kr).

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the 10.13039/501100003725National Research Foundation of Korea, (NRF-2018R1A5A2025286, RS-2024-00431505, and 2021R1I1A1A01059231), funded by the Korean government (10.13039/501100014188Ministry of Science and ICT). This work was supported by the Ewha Womans University Research Grant of 2024.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization: Y.-S.L. Methodology: H.J., Y.-S.L., H.L., and J.C. Investigation: H.J., S.-Y.P., J.E.L., H.P., and M.J. Visualization: H.J. and S.-Y.P. Funding acquisition: Y.-S.L. and H.J. Project administration: Y.-S.L. and S.-Y.P. Supervision: Y.-S.L. Writing – original draft: H.J. and S.-Y.P. Writing – review & editing: Y.-S.L.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S7

## Table S1. List of Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) samples’ identification numbers (IDs) collected in this study

## Table S2. DEG lists between the lungs from idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) patients and those from healthy controls (GSE10667, GSE47460_A, GSE24206; IPF vs healthy control)

## Table S3. List of the upregulated genes in lung tissues from pulmonary fibrosis (PF) mouse models versus lungs from healthy control mice

## Table S4. List of 14 genes commonly upregulated in both lung tissues from PF mouse models and those from IPF patients

## Table S5. Fold changes (log2) and statistical significances of 14 common genes in lungs from IPF cohorts (IPF lungs vs healthy control lungs, GSE47460_B and GSE17978)

## Table S6. List of materials used in this study

## Table S7. Source data used in this study

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2024.09.029.