pmcInt J Pharm XInt J Pharm X3726ijpx101753452International Journal of Pharmaceutics: X2590-1567ElsevierPMC12720357PMC12720357.112720357127203574143842510.1016/j.ijpx.2025.100462S2590-1567(25)00147-11004621Research PaperDextran-modified dissolving microneedle patches for effective amelioration of psoriasis through transdermal delivery of hesperidin
EtemadiNooshin VarshosazJalehvarshosaz@pharm.mui.ac.ir ShamaeizadehNahal RenaniAmir Mohamadsharifiamirsharif@ut.ac.ir MinaiyanMohsenminaiyan@pharm.mui.ac.ir aNovel Drug Delivery Systems Research Center, Department of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmacy, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, IranbFaculty of New Sciences and Technologies, University of Tehran, Tehran, IrancDepartment of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Centre, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran⁎Corresponding author at: Novel Drug Delivery Systems Research Center, Department of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmacy, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, PO Box 81745-359, Iran. varshosaz@pharm.mui.ac.ir12202502122025104921031004622282025191120251122025021220252312202521012026© 2025 The Authors2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).Psoriasis is a chronic, multifactorial, proliferative inflammatory skin disease characterized by immune-mediated relapsing and remitting phases. Topical treatments for mild to moderate psoriasis, as well as systemic treatments for severe cases, can be insufficiently effective and are often associated with significant side effects. The primary objective of this study was to develop a dissolvable microneedle patch containing the flavonoid hesperidin within a polymeric matrix composed of dextran modified polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) aiming to achieve effective control of psoriasis symptoms. The innovative laser ablation technique used in master mold fabrication resulted in well-structured pyramidal arrays, as evidenced by SEM images of the microneedle patches (MNPs). Various formulations were developed in which almost complete dissolving of the needle occured only 30 s. MNP containing PVP 150 mg, PVA 75 mg and Dextran 50 mg, with the highest compressive failure force, was able to sink into the skin well. Over 70 % of hesperidin was released within approximately 15 h from the dissolved MNs into skin. Animal studies were conducted using an imiquimod-induced psoriasis mouse model. PASI score or cumulative amount of three parameters; desquamation or scaling, erythema, and induration or thickness for each group on experimental days 1 to 7 were studied. Significant clinical improvement on PASI scores, was observed in the group treated with hesperidin-loaded optimal MNP (1.67 ± 0.47) compared to the positive control (11.67 ± 0.47) and the oral hesperidin groups (6.00 ± 0.82). The results of this study indicate that dextran modified MNPs of hesperidin can reduce epidermal hyperplasia and inflammatory cell infiltration, demonstrating an effective method for transdermal drug delivery.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Keywords
Dissolving microneedlesPsoriasisHesperidinDextranPVAPVPpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC1

## Introduction
Psoriasis, which affects approximately 3 % of the global population, is a chronic autoimmune skin condition characterized by the rapid accumulation of skin cells, leading to the formation of thick, red, and scaly patches that may be itchy and painful. This condition significantly impacts quality of life, contributing to both physical discomfort and psychological distress ( ). Traditional topical formulations often face challenges in effectively penetrating the skin's natural barrier, prompting the investigation of innovative drug delivery methods to enhance absorption and minimize side effects ( ).
Microneedles (MNs) have emerged as an effective transdermal drug delivery system, providing benefits for both healthcare providers and patients by enabling non-invasive or minimally invasive drug administration ( ). These devices create temporary microchannels in the skin, bypassing the stratum corneum, the primary barrier, and facilitating enhanced drug delivery to target area ( ). MNs can be classified into four main types: solid, hollow, dissolving, and coated, each designed for specific delivery needs, enabling drugs to enter the bloodstream efficiently ( ; ; ). Notably, dissolvable MNs have gained significant attention due to their ability to dissolve after skin penetration, releasing bioactive molecules in the process ( ). The dissolving nature of MNs enhances the drug delivery process by maximizing the amount of drug that can be administered.
In order to achieve notable therapeutic success for psoriasis, created dexamethasone-loaded cationic liposome dissolvable MNs. The therapy of psoriasis has significantly improved when who created tip-swellable MNPs for treatment of psoriasis using photo-cross-linked methacrylated hyaluronic acid. Furthermore, methotrexate (MTX) transfersomes were loaded in dissolving MNs by , and they greatly improved locally intradermal administration for efficient psoriasis treatment. On the other hand, the majority of MNs disintegrate quickly when they come into touch with the interstitial fluid of the skin, resulting in a rapid release of the medication. The effectiveness of treatment is limited by this rapid release, especially when MTX must be administered repeatedly due to recurrent flare-ups of psoriasis. Hydrogel MNs, which enable prolonged drug release, have surfaced as a possible substitute to overcome this restriction. In contrast to dissolvable MNs, hydrogel MNs are generally made from crosslinkable hydrophilic polymers that create matrices, which are not soluble in water, thus prolonging the release of therapeutic agents once they are inserted into the skin.
Tacrolimus is another effective drug in treatment of psoriasis. Tacrolimus nanocrystals synthesized through a bottom-up approach were incorporated into a sodium hyaluronate-based MNP, and its therapeutic effectiveness was assessed. In pharmacodynamic studies, the findings demonstrated enhancements in the phenotypic and histopathological characteristics, along with a decrease in the levels of TNF-α, IL-17A, and IL-23 in psoriatic skin treated with tacrolimus nanocrystals MNP ( ).
Our research focuses on the preparation and evaluation of microneedles loaded with hesperidin for the treatment of psoriasis. Hesperidin, a natural flavonoid found in citrus fruits, exhibits unique physicochemical, pharmacokinetic, and pharmacological properties that make it suitable for this application ( ; ). It has a molecular weight of 610.56 g/mol and is sparingly soluble in water but soluble in organic solvents like ethanol and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) ( ). These characteristics support its integration into MN formulations. Hesperidin has been utilized in patients with vascular disorders, including fragility and permeability-related complaints that result in easy bruising and varicose veins. Its role in enhancing capillary resistance is attributed to its inhibitory effect on the enzyme hyaluronidase, which is known to increase capillary permeability. This action is likely mediated through mechanisms such as the inhibition of eicosanoid synthesis, antioxidant free radical scavenging activity, and reduced synthesis of prostaglandins E2 and F2 in inflammatory granulomas ( ; ).
The findings revealed that hesperidin inhibits psoriasis area and severity index (PASI), suppresses the secretion of pro-inflammatory factors and contributors to skin lesions, and reduces excessive epidermal proliferation. Additionally, it downregulates the expression of IRS-1/ERK1/2, thereby preventing keratinocyte proliferation ( ). Hesperidin is also recognized for its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, potentially alleviating psoriasis symptoms by targeting the skin layers directly and inhibiting pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-17, and IL-2 ( ). Pharmacokinetically, hesperidin shows limited oral bioavailability due to poor absorption and extensive first-pass metabolism, making its delivery by MNs particularly advantageous ( ). This method can enhance its systemic exposure and bioavailability ( ).
Among the materials used for fabrication MNs, PVP/PVA are widely used in numerous biomedical applications but present some undesirable properties consisting of limited mechanical properties and lack of structural integrity compared to those made from other materials, which can lead to breakage during insertion or handling and restricts their applications. Besides, the release profile of drugs from PVA/PVP microneedles can be less predictable, potentially affecting the dosage and therapeutic efficacy. These materials can be dissolved in aqueous environments, which may limit their effectiveness for certain applications, particularly if prolonged stability is required.
Dextran is a polymer recognized for its rapid hydration kinetics and significant water adsorption capacity, which results in quick dissolution or swelling based on its molecular weight. When utilized in MNs, this characteristic enables the MN array to dissolve more swiftly upon contact with interstitial fluid in the skin, thus promoting faster drug release. The structure of the dextran molecule also affects its solubility in water, with polymers that predominantly feature α − D−(1 → 6) linkages being the most soluble. Dextran's capacity to establish a more permeable environment enhances drug delivery. Significant efforts have been made to enhance the performance of MNs composed solely of PVA or PVP for biomedical applications. Combination of PVP with sodium hyaluronate demonstrated sufficient ability to puncture skin and transdermally deliver insulin into the systemic circulation ( ). To prevent incomplete insertion of MNs, due to skin deformation and resistance, developed elongated rapidly separating MNs. The MNs' tips were pyramidal in shape made of dextran/ PVA. The needles were separated from the base made of PVP k90. Chitosan, PVA/PVP were used to create ternary blends reinforced with organically modified montmorillonite nanoclay for transdermal delivery of tramadol ( ). Poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) tips combined with PVA/PVP hydrogel bases create hybrid microneedles for sustained amphotericin B release, improving antifungal treatments ( ). prepared MNs from silk fibroin and PVA to increase the penetration efficiency of porphyrin as possible applications in photodynamic therapy. Dissolving MNs composed of PVA and Gantrez® S-97, polyethylene glycol, and Na2CO3 were used to deliver bevacizumab in cancer immunotherapy ( ).
This study aimed at fabricating dextran/PVP/PVA dissolving MNs with improved biological and mechanical properties for transdermal delivery of hesperidin. By adjusting the proportions of dextran, PVP and PVA not only the mechanical and biological properties MNs can be controlled, but also hesperidin release properties improved too.
The hypothesis of the present study was that dextran-modified MNs of PVP/PVA could provide the necessary strength and enhance the release of hesperidin for treating psoriasis and hesperidin MNs can ameliorate psoriasis lesions more effectively compared to the oral route. The novelty of this work is preparation of hesperidin MNs for the first time in treatment of psoriasis lesions. Besides, dextran is used to modify the release profile of hesperidin from PVA/PVP MNs for the first time.

2

## Materials and methods
2.1

## Materials
Dextran was purchased from Sigma Company (USA) and its source was from Leuconostoc mesenteroides bacteria, with linear formula: (C6H10O5), nominal Mw = 10,000 Da, CAS No.: 9004-54-0. Dextran is an α-1,6-glycosidic linked D-glucan with side-chains α-1,3 linked to the backbone units of the dextran biopolymer. The degree of branching is approximately 5 % in native (unfractionated) dextran and decreases with decreasing molecular weight. The branches are mostly 1–2 glucose units long.
Besides, Sigma Company (USA) provided hesperidin, polyvinyl alcohol (85–124 kDa) (PVA) and polyvinylpyrrolidone (55 kDa) (PVP). Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and its curing agent (the Sylgard 184 Kit typically consists of a mixture of vinyl-terminated polydimethylsiloxane, silica filler, and platinum catalyst) were purchased from Dow Corn (Midland, MA, USA). Poly metylmetacrylate (PMMA) sheets were provided from Yearlong (Taiwan). Imiquimode (IMQ) 5 w/w% cream was purchased from Kimia Kala Razi Pharmaceutical Co. (Iran). Anti-CD3 antibody (1:100), and horse raddish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG were from Abcam (US). All other chemicals and reagents were purchased from Merck Chemical Company (Germany) with the highest purity available.

2.2

## Characterization of dextran
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrum of dextran was recorded (FTIR 6300, Jasco, Japan) at room temperature after preparation of their KBr pellets. 1H NMR spectrum was recorded (Bruker Biospin, 400 MHz, Germany) using deuterium D2O as solvent. Gel permeation chromatography (GPC) in aqueous medium (Waters 1515 pump, Shodex SB-805 HQ column) was carried out to measure molecular weight of dextran.

2.3

## Master mold fabrication
In this study, MN master molds were fabricated through laser ablation process in addition to an innovative array transferring method. A pattern consisting of a 11 × 11 array of MNs with 500 μm side rectangular base and 1 mm gap for tip-to-tip distance was designed in a 15 mm × 15 mm area. The hiegth of MNs were varied due to the laser parameters and was chose to be 1.3 mm for the desired mold. Briefly, a CO2 laser (Yueming, CMA-1610, China) was employed to ablate the surface of a PMMA sheet. Various parameters for controlling the depth of cavities including the beam power and the scanning speed were adjusted to achieve the desired result according to other studies ( ; ; ). Due to the non-linear impact of each parameter on the depth of the cavities at the microscale, the molds were measured indirectly by soft lithography. PDMS replicas were fabricated from each sample with a ratio of 10:1, then the length of the microneedles was measured by capturing microscopic images by an optical upfront microscope. Additionally, the tip diameter of the MNs were measured as they are effective to successful penetration of the MNs into the skin.
After ensuring desirable MNs with proper length, the male mold was fabricated as depicted in . PMMA mold was filled by resin (Nova 3D Ultra-clear) to form a male mold. The resin was cast into the mold to fill the holes thoroughly as represented in a while degassed in the vacuum chamber. Then the mold was exposed to UV light for 5 min to cure thoroughly. Following the male mold fabrication, it was affixed to the bottom of a cubic PMMA pool. PDMS monomer was mixed with its curing agent in a 10:1 ratio and poured onto the male mold. They were cured for 1 h in an oven at 80 °C. The achieved part was released from the cubic pool and the male mold was carefully separated from the resulted PDMS MN mold. (See .) 

2.4

## Preparation of MN patches
PDMS MN molds were used to fabricate MN patches through micro molding procedure. To achieve the optimal concentration of the base polymer, several solutions containing different concentrations of PVA and PVP were prepared as shown in . The polymers were dissolved in 1.5 ml deionized water at 80 °C for 3 h to obtain completely homogenous and uniform solutions. Each solution was poured into the PDMS mold, which was subsequently placed in a vacuum chamber connected to a vacuum pump (Heidolph, Germany) for approximately 20 min to ensure that the needle holes were fully filled with the solution. Afterwards, the mold was incubated at ambient/room temperature for about 24 h to dry. Then, the patch was carefully separated from the mold and stored in a refrigerator. 

2.5

## Drug loading in microneedels
The therapeutic dose of hesperidin in inflammatory diseases is reported 25–50 mg/kg orally ( ; ) although much higher doses of 125–500 mg/kg/day has also been reported in psoriasis treatment ( ). For an average mice weighing 20 g, the required dose to be embedded in each MNP with approximately 13 μl volume, was estimated nominally almost 1 mg of the hesperidin. Taking into account that the needles were designed in the form of a pyramid with a square base, where each side of the square measured 0.5 mm, and the height of each needle was approximately 1.3 mm, the volume of each needle was computed as follows: . The MNPs were composed of an 11 × 11 array of MNs, resulting in a total of 11 × 11 = 121 needles per MNP. Consequently, the overall volume of needles in each patch amounted to 121 × 0.11 = 13 μl.
Considering each mice weighed almost 20 g, then the required dose in 13 μl volume of the MN patch was 1 mg nominally. However, in practice approximately 300 mg of hesperidin was dissolved in 0.5 ml of DMSO and the solution was added to 1 ml of S1 formulation to prepare the drug-loaded solution, therefore, the actual drug loading was approximately 2.6 mg (i.e., 300 mg × 13 μl / 1.5 ml / 1000 = 2.6 mg) in each MN patch.
The mold was filled with the drug-loaded solution and degassed in the vacuum chamber. After that, the remaining excess drug-loaded solution was removed with a spatula and the patch surface was subsequently wiped with a napkin. Following a drying period at room temperature for 24 h, the polymer solution (S1) was cast again into the mold and it was degassed exactly as the previous step and then dried. Therefore, finally, a two-layer patch obtained, the first layer of which contained hesperidin and the second layer was without medicine.

2.6

## Microneedles assessments
2.6.1

## Compression test
Mechanical tests were done to specify compressive strength of the materials, used in fabrication of patches ( ). The MN patches were prepared from S1 to S6 solutions, attached by a thin (∼50 μm) double-sided tape on the lower stainless-steel plate of a Universal Testing Machine (H25KS, Hounsfield, UK), employing a 50 N force load cell. Then, the upper plate approached the patch with a constant movement speed of 0.5 mm/min. The ultimate force was established at 100 N, with each patch subjected to a perpendicular force. Each test was performed in triplicate.
Several images were captured from each MN patch employing an optical microscope (Nikon, ECLIPSE E200, Japan) equipped with a charge-coupled device (CCD) to record the length difference prior and following the compression test. A Hemocytometer or Neubauer cell chamber was used as a reliable dimension reference and the lengths were measured by means of ImageJ software. The length difference was measured through the different sections of the patch and the average was calculated for each patch (n = 20). The length of average bent of MN was considered as a crucial factor for MNs strength.
Due to the low permeability of hesperidin in the Franz cell test, dextran (25, 50, and 75 mg) was incorporated into the S1 formulation of the MN patches. In order to investigate the effect of dextran on the mechanical strength of the patches, the pressure test of the selected S1 patch was also repeated with dextran.

2.6.2

## Microscopy images
After preparing each MN pattern, an optical and a Field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) (Quanta FEG 450, FEI, USA) were used to examine the needles' characteristics including height, base, tip and tip-to-tip distance between needles. Furthermore, we concentrated on the needle tip and height during the mechanical tests and captured images after adjusting the pressure to examine the resulting changes and bending patterns.

2.6.3

## Dissolving time of microneedles
The dissolving test, which measures the time needed for the needle to be dissolved, was conducted using the optical microscope. Following the preparation of polymeric MNs within the mold, they were incubated in an oven at 70 °C to dry completely for 24 h. MNs were then visualized by the optical microscope equipped with a CCD camera. The tips of the needles were carefully exposed to PBS (pH 5.5, simulating skin pH) at a temperature of 37 °C, using a syringe to control the exposure time in intervals of 5 s.

2.6.4

## Microneedle insertion ability into the skin (histological studies)
The optimal MN patch was used to perform the skin insertion ability test. The skin of a recently sacrificed rat was peeled and was completely depilated with an electric shaver. The prepared skin was impressed with the MN patch by thumb pressure. Following the insertion, the skin was cut off, fixed with 10 % formalin for 24 h, thereafter sent for a histological test. The skin was stained with H&E (Hematoxylin and Eosin) and the 5 μm sections were cut by a microtome and stuck on a glass. The insertion pattern was visualized by an optical microscope to confirm the needle insertion into the skin. This test was quantified using a texture analysis device, which measured the force required to pierce rat skin by plotting force-displacement curves. The S1 patch, along with S1 patches containing 25, 50, and 75 mg of dextran, were tested. A 2 × 2 cm piece of rat skin was securely fixed in a horizontal position on the device, with each testing MN patch placed on top. The machine's probe then moved vertically downward at a speed of 1 mm/min, and the force needed to disrupt the skin's integrity was recorded.

2.7

## In vitro drug release from microneedles
Prior to study drug release from MNPs drug loading in each MNP was measured. To determine the amount of drug loaded in each MNP, a drug-free patch and a patch containing hesperidin were prepared from each of the patches S1, S1 containing 25 mg dextran, S1 containing 50 mg dextran, and S1 containing 75 mg dextran. Each of the prepared patches was placed separately in a beaker containing 10 ml of phosphate buffer with pH 7.4 on a stirrer at 37 °C. After complete dissolution of each patch, the absorbance of the uniform solution obtained was read by UV spectrophotometry at a wavelength of 268 nm. The absorbance number obtained from the complete dissolution of each drug-free patch was subtracted from the number obtained from the equivalent patch containing hesperidin; in this way, the absorbance of the drug loaded in each patch was obtained and, by substituting it into the standard curve equation for hesperidin, the concentration and finally the amount of drug loaded in each patch were determined. This test was performed in 3 replicates for each microneedle patch.
To study the skin penetration of hesperidin, diffusion Franz cells with a volume of about 35 ml were used ( ; ). A piece of hairless rat skin was chosen to dip the MN patch, while it was completely clean and dry. The optimum MNP was created using the precise dosage of medication and was pressed into the skin with thumb pressure, subsequently being stretched across the central surface of the Franz diffusion cell. The same was done for a drug-free MN sample as a blank. The environment of the receiving compartment (PBS, pH 7.4) was maintained at a temperature of 37 ± 1 °C and agitated by a stirrer at 600 rpm. This setup ensured complete contact with both the surface of the skin and the needles. At specific intervals, initially every half hour for the first 1.5 h, followed by hourly measurements up to 24 h, a portion of the medium was extracted using an insulin syringe to measure its absorbance by a UV-spectrophotometer (UV mini 1240, Shimadzo, Japan) at the wavelength of 268 nm. As soon as the absorbance of the sample was read, the same sample was carefully returned to the Franz diffusion cell. This was done both for the drug loaded MN patch and for the blank sample. The test was repeated 3 times. Absorbance of the drug-free sample was subtracted from the drug loaded MN to determine the absorbance of the drug. The concentration of each sample was calculated using the standard curve obtained from the step of verifying the validity of Beer-Lambert's law. The drug release test was carried out on the optimal patch, which showed an acceptable mechanical properties i.e., S1 MNs. However, since the initial formulation did not achieve adequate drug release over a 24-h period, varying amounts of dextran (25, 50, and 75 mg) were incorporated with the previous contents, and the microneedles were subsequently subjected to a drug release test once more. The tests were carried out in triplicate.

2.8

## Animal studies
2.8.1

## Induction of psoriasis and grouping of animals
Twenty male BALB/c mice were used in this study (6–8 weeks old; weight 18–22 g) and kept in ventilated room with free access to food and drinking water under 12-h light/dark cycle. We allowed the experiment to run for 7 days. All procedures were in accordance with ethical guidelines for animal research established by the Isfahan University of Medical Sciences (ethical code: IR.MUI.AEC.1402.056) and were conducted in accordance with the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. The S1 formulation of MNs, which contained 50 mg of dextran and hesperidin, was used as the test group in the animal study.
A 5 % IMQ cream (62.5 mg/day) ( ) was applied to the back of animals every day from day 1 to day 6. A 2 × 3 cm area of the back was shaved using a razor prior to each application of IMQ, followed by the application of a depilatory cream. The untreated psoriatic control did not receive treatments but all other groups were treated two hours before IMQ application from day 3 to day 6 of the experiment. Mice were randomly assigned to five groups, each containing five animals. 1) Diseased-mice (positive control) mice were induced, but were not treated; 2) normal-control mice were compared to the diseased positive control. 3) A separate group of mice was used as the blank microneedle group, consisting of disease-induced mice treated for 4 days with MNPs that lacked the drug. 4) In the gavage hesperidin group, diseased mice were treated with oral hesperidin (50 mg/kg) for the first 4 days. To prepare the oral dispersion, 5 mg of hesperidin was mixed into 1 ml of a 2 % sodium carboxymethyl cellulose aqueous solution, and 0.2 ml of this mixture was administered orally to the animals via gavage ( ). This contained the same dose of hesperidin (1 mg) as MNs. The hesperidin MN group of mice were induced disease and received MNPs containing hesperidin (50 mg/kg) for 4 days. As each mice weighed about 20 g, then for a dose of 50 mg/kg, hesperidin was loaded in each MNP. All animals were humanely euthanized, using CO2 inhalation, 24 h post treatment and skin samples were harvested from their dorsal side. Subsequent step for further pathological examination was done by fixing the skin samples with 10 % buffered formalin, washed, dehydrated, and cleared with xylene ( ; ).
The recorded health parameters involved the animals' body appearance. These were first evaluated every hour, then every 24 h, over 48 h. In cases of severe morbidity or altered drinking behavior, the animals were humanely killed by CO2 inhalation, as previously authorized by our animal care and use protocols for minimal distress.

2.8.2

## Scoring of skin inflammation severity
The Psoriasis Area Severity Index (PASI), a modified grading system derived from human studies, was used to quantify and assess the degree of inflammation in the animal models over days 1–7 of the trial. An independent investigator scored thickening, scaling, and erythema on a scale of 0 to 4 (0 = none; 1 = mild; 2 = moderate; 3 = marked; and 4 = obvious severity). Trends were plotted and an accumulation score was calculated to assess the level of inflammation ( ).

2.8.3

## Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining
Skin samples obtained from animals were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde for 24 h. Subsequently, the tissues were embedded in paraffin and sliced into 5 μm-thick sections for staining using a standard hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) procedure. The sections were first deparaffinized and rehydrated before being washed in deionized water. Specimens were mounted using Hematoxylin (Baso, China) staining for 20 min, and rinsed using running water for 15 min. The slices were incubated in 1 % hydrochloric acid ethanol for 30 s to increase the contrast of staining, followed by neutralization with ammonia water for 1 min and rinsed in water. Dehydration was carried out progressively in 50 %, 70 %, and 80 % ethanol, each for 3 min. Sections were then stained with 0.5 % eosin (Baso, China) ethanol solution for 3 min. Gradual dehydration was performed by immersing samples in 95 % ethanol for 3 min and in absolute ethanol for additional 3 min. On both tissues, xylene-ethanol (50:50) was used in the first step, followed by xylene 1 and xylene 2 (5 min in each solution). The stained sections were subsequently mounted with neutral resin for permanent preservation for microscopic observation ( ; ).
The histopathological changes induced by IMQ in the different groups were evaluated by H&E staining and scoring of the major positive impacts of our treatment on 3 parameters: hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis and acanthosis.

2.8.4

## Masson's trichrome staining
Skin samples from flanks of all mice were collected and processed for pathological examination using Masson's trichrome staining. Specimens were first deparaffinized in xylene and then rehydrated through a graded series of ethanol. The staining was performed with hematoxylin for the nuclear staining followed by a mixture of dyes including orange-G, ponceau acid fuchsin, and light green according to the recommended protocol of Masson's trichrome staining. This technique allows collagen fibers, cytoplasm and muscle tissues to be distinguished in the skin sections. The stained samples were then viewed using a light microscope (Eclipse Ti-E inverted microscope, Nikon, Japan or Labomed lx 250, USA) with representative images being taken for analysis. Epidermal thickness and inflammatory cell infiltration were assessed to evaluate inflammatory features in representative areas of each section. Also, Masson's trichrome staining showed collagen content in the tissues ( ).
Measurements were taken multiple time points for both experimental and control animals, with data collected from each mouse. Two researchers conducted independent measurements for all samples (n = 5). Representative images from each time point were provided to summarize the histological results revealed by Masson's trichrome staining.

2.8.5

## Immunohistochemistry for CD3
Skin tissues were incubated in 4 % paraformaldehyde for 48 h, followed by paraffin embedding. The embedded tissues were subsequently cut into 5 μm thick slides. For immunohistochemical staining, the sections were deparaffinized, rehydrated, and subjected to antigen retrieval. Sections were incubated with the primary anti-CD3 antibody (1:100) at room temperature, followed by the HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody. The signal was visualized by chromogenic development with diaminobenzidine (DAB), yielding brown staining for CD3+ cells ( ).

2.9

## Statistical analysis
For statistical analysis and graph charting, Graph Pad Prism version 8 was utilized.
Tukey's post hoc test was used after one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) in the case of parametric data. The non-parametric (scoring) data were subjected to the Mann-Whitney test. The mean ± standard deviation (SD) was used to represent parametric data. A difference was deemed significant when p < 0.05.

3

## Results and discussion
3.1

## Characterization of dextran
 a-supplementary shows the FTIR spectrum of dextran. In spectrum of the dextran the absorption peaks of -glycosidic bond was seen at 914 cm−1. The band at 1158 cm−1 was due to valent vibration of C-O-C bond and glycosidic bridge, band at 1158 cm−1 due to vibration of the C—O bond at the C-4 position of glucose residue and the band at 1013 cm−1 due to the great chain flexibility present in dextran around (1 → 6) glycosidic bonds. The band due to hydroxyl stretching vibration of the polysaccharide was observed in the region of 3427 cm−1. The bands due to C—H stretching vibration and carboxyl group, were in the region of 2921 cm−1 and 1651 cm−1, respectively ( ). While dextran is primarily composed of glucose units linked by α(1 → 6) glycosidic bonds, it can also contain minor amounts of carboxylic acids or other functional groups due to the presence of impurities or during its biosynthesis ( ). 
 b-supplementary shows the 1H NMR spectrum of dextran in D₂O, which reveals a well-defined signal in the anomeric proton region at δ 4.918 ppm, characteristic of the H-1 proton of α-(1 → 6)-linked glucose residues. This sharp peak confirms the predominant presence of α-glycosidic linkages in the polymer backbone. The integration of these anomeric signals reveals that approximately 4–5 % of the glucose units are involved in branching, confirming that the dextran sample is predominantly linear. In contrast, the signals corresponding to the ring protons (H-2 to H-6), typically found in the δ 3.2–4.0 ppm region, are significantly overlapped and poorly resolved, making individual assignment of these protons challenging. This spectral pattern is consistent with previously reported NMR profiles of linear polysaccharides, where the close proximity of chemical shifts for internal ring protons results in broad, merged multiplets. The lack of distinct splitting among H-2 to H-6 signals underscores the homogeneity of the polymer's repeating units and further supports the presence of a highly linear dextran structure with limited branching.
GPC technique was employed to determine the molecular weight and polydispersity of dextran. Polydispersity index was 1.225, Mn 7242 Da and Mw 8872 Da ( c-supplementary).

3.2

## Microneedle molds fabrication
Three different materials were used for mold fabrication (PMMA, resin, and PDMS), all of which remained stable throughout the process. PMMA was used as the substrate for the initial cavities created by CO₂ laser ablation. Since PMMA is rigid and the resin was exposed to UV at ambient temperature, the PMMA mold was not affected by subtle temperature raise that occurred during the curing process. After curing, the resin male mold was strong and rigid enough to preserve the needle geometry, and it could be separated from PMMA without deformation or fracture. It is important to note that after achieving the desired male mold, all PDMS molds used in experiments were direct replications from this stable male mold. Therefore, once a high-quality mold was obtained, no repeated laser ablation or resin casting was required. Finally, PDMS was cast on the resin mold, and due to its flexibility after curing, it could be removed easily while maintaining the shape. The main stability concern, however, was related to the microneedles themselves during insertion into the skin. For this reason, we performed mechanical compression tests on different PVA/PVP formulations to ensure the fabricated polymeric MNs could withstand insertion without bending or failure.
Microneedle molds were fabricated by a three-step mold fabrication technique ( ). First CO2 laser instrument was used to engrave the surface of a sheet of PMMA. Second, a male mold was fabricated by casting into the first step part. At last, negative PDMS molds were fabricated by soft lithography from the male mold. The most challenging step was related to PMMA engraving where diverse parameters take part in the process. Although achieving MNs with an exact height is not ideally achievable due to the low stability of the CO2 laser beam, it is possible to fabricate MNs with an α < 2.99 % for length is viable through this process by tethering the instrumental and environmental factors. Factors namely, source power and scanning speed affect the ablation process significantly; however, other parameters such as the temperature of the laser source, the diameter of the focal lens and the focus height of the laser possess considerable impact ( ). We tried to maintain the factors similar in each test to avoid unprecedented errors.
MNs with different specifications were fabricated by changing the CO2 laser parameters. The width of the MNs were designed a square with 500 μm sides. Therefore, parameter adjustment could only impact it minimally. The initial results exhibited a significant effect of power adjustment on the output. As a consequence, we neglected other parameters by keeping them constant during the fabrication rounds. represents the needle shape and size of a number of fabricated molds in each trial.
We found that the depth of the cavities on the PMMA sheet directly relates on the hole bottom diameter. highlights the difference between tip diameters on the right axis. The figure also depicts the relationship between the source power on the micro engraving depth in a specific situation. The obtained MNs from each laser ablation trial represented a significant convergence in needles' heigth, which was enough to obtain a desired mold by a few experiments. More disscusions on the fabrication steps and controling the parameter was studied comprehensively earlier ( ; ; ).
In particular, employing a power of 24 % (mold e) resulted in an array of MNs with 2.014 ± 0.08 mm height and a tip radius of less than 13.5 μm. The power was set on 23 % for mold d, and the needle height reached to 1.310 ± 0.04 mm with a tip radius of 22.5 μm. The power was set on 22 % for mold c and the needle height reached to 1.05 ± 0.03 mm and 23 μm for the tip. Further experiments were also done to find initial results and meanwhile d is presented to demonstrate the quality of results. The small length and high tip radius were not qualified to be used for microneedle application with 684 ± 0.02 μm and approximately 68 μm for tip radius (mold b). We tried to maintain other parameters affecting the results on a constant situation to manage the process ideally. For instance, the temperature of the laser source was kept low to avoid instrumental errors and was considered in each trial. Other parameters such as scanning interval and scanning speed was set on 0.01 mm and 140 mm/s, respectively.
Among the fabricated molds we chose the d mold due to its appropriate height, larger total volume for drug, and effective tip radius. Mold d provides a volume of 13 μl in the PDMS mold, which facilitates the space for implementation of the required dose into the MNs.

3.3

## Mechanical tests results
3.3.1

## Compression test
The mechanical strength of the MNs is the first step in developing a reliable patch that can accurately pierce the skin. Different ratios of base polymers were studied to reach the best patch with the highest mechanical stability. We prepared solutions with six different ratios for each polymer containing PVA and PVP. Although the presence of PVP offers several advantages to the patch, we did not evaluate pure PVP due to the challenges we encountered in both fabrication and demolding. MNs made up of pure PVP were extensively brittle. This brittleness resulted in breaking about 50 % of MNs while separating from the PDMS mold. On the other hand, MNs made of PVA brought no challenge in comparison to PVP. Hence, we added two different concentrations of PVA alongside with the mixtures of both materials. PVA brings required elasticity to the patch, makes it easier for fabrication, however, the pure PVA was found to have a lower strength than PVP. We designed a set of different compositions to specify the optimized level of PVA. As the effect of adding low-molecular weight PVA was studied earlier that indicates reducing the compressive strength of MNs, we employed high molecular wight PVA of about 85–124 kDa. High molecular weight PVPs have also better mechanical properties, due to smaller pores formed in the structure ( ).
 a represents compression test results and b shows the difference between needles' lengths prior and following the compression test. The first effect to study is the impact of PVP concentration and its effect on the performance of the patch. Considering S1 and S3 samples with PVP to PVA ratios of 2:1 and 1:1, respectively, both exhibited an approximately similar curvature; however, the needle deformation on the b shows the lower deformation of S1 in comparison than S3. On the other hand, the behavior of S2 with 75 mg PVP experiences lower plastic and elastic deformation in comparison to S4 with 168.75 mg PVP. The contrast may be due to the higher concentration of the solution, which results in greater shrinkage during fabrication. Generally, the higher amount of PVP in a low concentration of PVA represented higher degree of stiffness ( ). S6 was made of pure PVA. The compression output reveals an improvement for S6 compared to S5 in needle deformation and gaining a higher slope in the compression test due to higher concentration of the polymer. In contrast, the addition of PVA to mixtures of PVP showcased a reduction in polymer stiffness, however, leveraging the flexibility of the patch. For instance, patch with pure PVP led to failure and the addition of 5 to 10 % of PVA made it possible to separate patches from the PDMS mold. The comparison between S2 and S3 in which the amount of the ratio of PVP to PVA changes from 1:2 to 1:1, reveals a lower stiffness and higher flexibility both in elastic and plastic deformation for S2 that contains a higher PVA concentration. In the case of S1 and S4, containing 2:1 and 3:1 of PVP to PVA, respectively, S4 represents a more elastic behavior due to its higher percentage of PVA. 
Furthermore, c displays an image of a patch before mechanical pressure is applied, while d shows the same patch after mechanical pressure. The method for bending the MN head in the case of combined PVA and PVP patches ( d) differs slightly from that of patches made solely from PVA ( e). The bending pattern of the composite patches resulted in the needle heads bending at a 90-degree angle. In contrast, the bending pattern of the PVA patches primarily resulted in crushing. This indicates that the MNs made from PVA contents more than PVP are excessively flexible, which disrupts their effective permeability into the skin and prevents acceptable penetration.
The evaluation of dextran's effect on the mechanical strength of the patch was conducted by applying pressure to the S1 patch containing 50 mg of dextran. The results indicated no significant changes in the mechanical strength of the patch. Consequently, the final compound selected for patch manufacturing was PVP 150 mg and PVA 75 mg combined with the optimal amount of dextran (50 mg), which yielded the best drug release results as follows.

3.3.2

## Microscopic images of microneedles
Each of the S1 to S6 MNs was photographed using an optical microscope. The final patch S1 (containing PVP 150 mg, PVA 75 mg and Dextran 50 mg) loaded with hesperidin was investigated by the field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) ( a, b, c, d). In general, all the patches were easily removed from the mold and all the needles were well formed. The photos show that the needles were sharp, the base of the surface was uniform and smooth, without bending, deviation, creases and bevels. The patch was not curved and was flat ( e, f). This indicates that the molding process was done correctly. Photographs taken with FESEM confirmed the same. The stability of the MNs remained excellent, even with the addition of hesperidin and dextran. 

3.3.3

## Dissolving time of the microneedles
 presents images of the patch following the buffer treatment. The tip of the needle was exposed to the buffer for 5 s. The photo taken after 5 s shows the dissolving of the needle has started. Almost complete dissolution of the needle occurs only 30 s after exposure to the buffer. The results of this test showed that MNs had a high dissolving rate, so it can easily absorb moisture from the skin after sinking into the skin and release the drug to the outside environment. 
Dissolvable MNPs have superior drug loading capabilities and are highly effective for bolus drug delivery in the skin. They are effective for delivering a wide range of compounds, including hydrophilic, low molecular weight drugs, and larger biopharmaceutical molecules while, hydrogel MNPs possess high drug loading capacity and enable controlled drug release. They can also sustain a constant drug concentration and offer tunable drug-release kinetics. To date, coated and hollow microneedles have been the most successful, despite suffering from issues such as poor drug loading capabilities and blocked pores. Dissolving MNs, on the other hand, have superior drug loading as well as other positive attributes that make it an ideal delivery system, including simple methods of fabrication and disposal, and abundantly available materials. Indeed, dissolvable MNs can even be fabricated entirely from the therapeutic agent itself thus eliminating the requirement for additional excipients ( ). On the other hand, hydrogel-forming MNs are safe and non-toxic, with no residual matrix material, high drug loading capacity, and controlled drug release, and they are suitable for long-term, multiple drug delivery ( ). Hydrogel MNs made from photo-cross-linked gelatin methacryloyl (GelMA) and puerarin, a traditional Chinese medicine, were developed by for sustained release MTX intradermal delivery. Upon insertion into the skin, the backing layer of the MNs, which consisted effervescent agents (NaHCO3 and citric acid), quickly produces CO₂ bubbles when it comes into contact with skin interstitial fluid. This process aids in the immediate detachment of the hydrogel MNs from the backing and their implantation into the skin tissue, serving as reservoirs for MTX. In vivo studies indicated that MTX-loaded in these MNs significantly improved therapeutic outcomes in reducing psoriasis symptoms and downregulating cytokines associated with psoriasis, owing to the synergistic effects of MTX and puerarin.
The delivery of cyclosporine (CsA) is associated with liver and kidney toxicities when used orally over an extended period, and its injectable form is not convenient for frequent administration in patients with psoriasis. created PVA MNs arrays that facilitated the transcutaneous delivery of cyclosporine for systemic effects against psoriasis-like inflammation. The MNs were produced using a micro-molding combined with solvent casting technique, and were characterized for their patch dimensions and mechanical strength. The MNs exhibited the required mechanical strength and dimensions, with slow moisture absorption in humid environments and exhibited good skin penetration strength, reaching depths of up to 630 μm. A reduction of over 60 % in needle length was recorded within 30 min of insertion into the skin. The MNs facilitated rapid drug release (87 % within 60 min) and effective permeation through the skin layer 60 min after insertion into porcine skin. The developed MNs resulted in a significant decrease in PASI scores and levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, along with a notable reduction in spleen size.
In 2018, a pilot trial conducted in Korea involving 10 patients evaluated the enhanced efficacy of a hyaluronic acid-based MNP as a topical treatment for psoriasis ( ). Following a daily topical application of calcipotriol/betamethasone ointment (Daivobet®) for a minimum of 4 weeks, resistant psoriasis plaques were chosen as the target sites for the MNP. The MNP was left on the surface of the plaques pretreated with Daivobet® overnight, and clinical improvement was measured at week 0 and week 1. This clinical study indicated a significant clinical effect of the MNP on the psoriasis plaques; however, it remained uncertain whether this enhancement was due to the strategy employed or the hyaluronic acid itself, given the absence of a control group.

3.4

## Insertion of microneedles in skin (histological test)
The S1 patch, modified with dextran and featuring the most robust array along with the most effective combination of materials—comprising 150 mg of PVP, 75 mg of PVA, and 50 mg of dextran—demonstrated the highest compressive failure force. It was able to integrate well into the skin ( a), and after a duration of 10 min, there were nearly no indications of inflammation or redness on the skin ( b). Histological image of the hole ( c) demonstrated that the MN successfully penetrated the dermis to a depth of 250 μm while piercing the epidermis. This indicates that the needle possesses sufficient length and appropriate hardness for effective transdermal drug delivery ( ). In addition, the penetration depth was optimized to minimize contact with nerves and capillaries, thereby reducing potential damage and pain to a minimal level ( ). illustrates the impact of varying dextran content of S1 MN patches on the skin insertion force. The patch that requires the least force for displacement demonstrates greater mechanical strength for skin insertion. Although the MN patch of S1 with 75 mg of dextran exhibited a lower force for skin piercing, both 50 mg and 75 mg of dextran had the same effect on enhancing hesperidin release ( ). Therefore, 50 mg of dextran was selected for incorporation into the S1 MN patch formulation for further studies. 

3.5

## Hesperidin release form microneedles
The results of drug loading efficiency percent in MNPs are summarized in , which shows it varied between 98.1 and 102.1 % in different formulations. The results of the drug release test are presented in . Initially, when the drug release from the S1 patch was evaluated, the results indicated that, after approximately 24 h, less than 70 % of the drug was released. Consequently, dextran was incorporated into the polymer mixture for the preparation of the microneedle (MN) patches. As a water-soluble biopolymer, dextran has the potential to enhance the solubility of hesperidin following MN dissolution in the medium. Three different amounts of dextran were tested in the preparation of the MNs and their effect on hesperidin release. As illustrated in , the addition of dextran increased both the amount of drug released and the release rate. Incorporating 25 mg of dextran in the sample patch did not significantly enhance the solubility of hesperidin. However, by including 50 and 75 mg of dextran in the patches, over 70 % of the drug was dissolved within approximately 15 h. The patch containing 50 mg of dextran exhibited a more consistent drug release profile, which enhances the predictability of the drug's dynamics and kinetics within the body. In contrast, the drug release from the patch containing 75 mg of dextran demonstrated some irregularity; a burst release was observed in a relatively short timeframe, followed by a sudden decrease in the release rate. Additionally, there was no significant difference between the final release of hesperidin from the patch containing 50 mg of dextran and that from the patch containing 75 mg of dextran. Therefore, further studies and animal tests were conducted on the S1 formulation of MN patch modified with 50 mg of dextran. Although the dextran/drug ratio (50 mg or 75 mg dextran) may not significantly influence the release rate, it can affect the total cumulative hesperidin release amount, in the lower dextran content (in 25 mg dextran) potentially due to increased drug loading in the MN arrays. The release of a poorly soluble drug like hesperidin from a dissolving MN made of PVA and PVP mainly occurs through the breakdown and dissolution of the polymer matrix, along with the drug diffusing as the MN dissolves. PVP's high water solubility combined with PVA's mechanical strength work together to allow quick dissolution while preserving the MN's structural integrity for skin penetration. After the MNs penetrate the outer skin layer (stratum corneum), the polymer absorbs fluid from the tissue and starts to dissolve. This dissolution is essential because it releases the drug trapped inside into the surrounding tissue. The drug's interaction with PVP—often via hydrogen bonds or van der Waals forces—results in a slow release of hesperidin, which is a drug with very low solubility. In summary, the process begins with the MN physically penetrating the skin, followed by the rapid dissolution of the PVA/PVP matrix in the tissue fluid, which enhances the solubility and diffusion of the poorly soluble drug into the target area. The release profile of hesperidin from the MN patch without dextran showed that approximately 63 % of the drug was released after 24 h. In contrast, the patch containing 75 mg of dextran achieved a release of 72.5 %. This indicates that dextran, being a highly soluble polysaccharide, accelerated and enhanced the drug release. However, the release remained sustained due to several rate-limiting factors: the low water solubility of hesperidin itself, its hydrogen bonding with PVA and PVP, and the high viscosity of the dissolved MN patch. While dextran typically improves drug release, the specific formulation requires careful optimization of mechanical properties as similar to other polymers, can affect the mechanical strength of the MNs. However, the evaluation of dextran's effect on the mechanical strength of the patch indicated no significant changes in the mechanical strength of the patch consisting of PVP 150 mg and PVA 75 mg (S1 formulation) combined with 50 mg dextran. 
As seen in , the PVA/PVP MNs, regardless of the varying dextran content, predominantly follow the Higuchi kinetic model for the release kinetics of hesperidin. The Higuchi equation indicates that the release of the drug occurs via diffusion from a matrix. It operates under the assumption of a pseudo-stationary state, where a diffusion front gradually advances inward, allowing the drug to dissolve and diffuse outward through capillary channels that are filled with solvent. By dissolving the MNPs, a viscous polymer solution is created, through which the drug molecules diffuse outward. In a study MNs of PVP and Dextran containig levonorgestrel incorporating chitosan–β-glycerophosphate showed sustained release of drug (70.86 % ± 0.42 %) over 48 h with a first-order kinetics and non-Fickian diffusion, indicating a combined diffusion–erosion mechanism ( ).

3.6

## In vivo experiments
3.6.1

## Severity of animal skin inflammation
Dermatitis due to IMQ is a murine model of psoriasis with some similarities between skin lesions induced by IMQ and human psoriasis lesions; these studies segregate into macroscopic and histopathological types of results. Recent studies on psoriasis-like animal models induced by IMQ have usually come up with similar experimental protocols, with minor variations depending on the study itself. In the current study, IMQ was administered to individuals with shaved backs. The macroscopic analysis in the mouse model, simulating the psoriasis area and severity index, based daily readings on three lesions—desquamous or scales (D), indurating or thickness (I), and erythema (E) on the back of the mice. These parameters were woven into an objective scoring system ( ). All macroscopic pharmacological observations were conducted using the Psoriasis Area Severity Index (PASI) methods, which is a modified human grading system. A score ranging from 0 to 4 was assigned to three parameters; desquamation or scaling, erythema, and induration or thickness for each group on experimental days 1 to 7. Cumulative score graphs of PASI scores were also calculated. PASI scores were compared between treatment groups. The negative control group exhibited zero PASI scores across all parameters, indicating the absence of inflammation, induration, and scaling. Elevated PASI scores were observed in the positive control and blank micro-needle (MN) groups, indicating the most severe skin inflammation. In contrast, the group treated with oral hesperidin demonstrated PASI scores significantly lower (p < 0.05) than those of the positive control group, indicating a reduced level of disease severity. Notably, the PASI scores of the group treated with MN patches loaded with hesperidin were the lowest (p < 0.05) on each treatment day compared to other groups after applying the patches on day 3, suggesting that the topical application of hesperidin-loaded MN was more effective than the other studied groups in alleviating the symptoms of skin inflammation, erythema, desquamation, and thickness ( ). 

3.6.2

## Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining
In addition to the macroscopic parameters, five immunohistopathological parameters were analyzed. Hyperkeratosis, denoted by increased stratum corneum thickness; parakeratosis, characterized by the presence of nucleated cells in the stratum corneum, indicating incomplete or premature keratinocyte maturation; and acanthosis, signaled by excessive Rete Ridge protrusion, neutrophil infiltration in the epidermis, and blood vessel dilation, were assessed in H&E-stained specimens. H&E staining showed histological differences among the experimental groups. The negative control group showed typical psoriasis signs, including epidermal hyperplasia, parakeratosis and extensive inflammatory cell infiltration. However, the epidermis thickness and inflammatory cell infiltration were significantly lower in the oral hesperidin-treated group compared to the negative control group ( ). Importantly, the group that received the MN patches loaded with hesperidin showed an even more significant reduction in epidermal hyperplasia and inflammatory cell infiltration. These results indicate that the topical application of hesperidin using MNs is superior to that of oral administration for improving the histological features of psoriasis ( ). 

3.6.3

## Masson's trichrome staining
Histological evaluation of Masson's trichrome staining of dorsal skin sections correlated with results from PASI scoring measurements. IMQ-application led to epidermal thickening and increase in keratinocytes in skin tissue. Collagen deposition, as evidenced by blue coloration, increased in the samples stained with Masson's trichrome as healing progressed. In comparison, the negative control group showed intact skin without thickening or infiltration. The negative control also demonstrated abnormalities of normal collagen structure, including excessive collagen deposition in the papillary and reticular dermis. In contrast, the oral hesperidin-treated group had a more organized and evenly distributed collagen network, indicating a protective effect on dermal changes associated with psoriasis. The treatment group showed a remarkable restoration of the normal collagen architecture, as well as a reduction in abnormal collagen accumulation compared to the negative control. These findings suggest that MN patches for topical application of hesperidin may be more useful for restoring the extracellular matrix changes associated with psoriasis ( ) ( ).
 developed MNs of polyvinyl acetate as a matrix, combined with cellulose nanocrystals to enhance the strength of the needle tip, and integrated with daphnetin (Daph) to facilitate the treatment of psoriasis at a reduced drug dosage. Ultimately, the needle tips were composed of 30 % HA and 0.1 % cellulose nanocrystals, while the substrate was made up of 30 % polyvinyl acetate. Seven days following the induction of psoriasis modeling by IMQ, the mice in the IMQ group exhibited noticeable symptoms of erythema and scales in comparison to the control group. In contrast to the Daph, vehicle, and IMQ groups, the vehicle added Daph group demonstrated a significant decrease in erythema and the PASI score starting from day 4 post modeling. The findings from HE staining indicated that after 7 days of modeling, the symptoms of abnormal epidermal thickening in the vehicle added Daph group were markedly diminished when compared to the other groups.

3.6.4

## Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for CD3
The histology was further confirmed by immunohistochemistry showing a critical marker of inflammatory infiltration, CD3+ T cells ( ). This IHC evaluation, can also measure CD4+ and CD8+ cells infiltration. Together, all these parameters offer a sound basis for comparing the efficacy of treatments across the animal groups ( ; ).
In the negative control group, there was a substantial increase in the accumulation of CD3+ T cells, indicating an inflammatory response commonly associated with psoriasis. On the other hand, the oral hesperidin-treated group showed significantly less CD3+ T cells infiltration than the negative control. Indeed, the group receiving hesperidin-loaded MN patches showed a significantly greater reduction in CD3+ T cell accumulation, illustrating the potency of local delivery of hesperidin as a topical anti-inflammatory agent. These results indicate that MN patches featuring hesperidin could be an effective method for psoriasis treatment, showing superior histological and inflammatory effects relative to oral administration ( ).
Overall, it should be mentioned that MNs can facilitate both systemic absorption and local drug effects, depending on their design, and the intended therapeutic outcome .  The primary advantage of MNs is their ability to bypass the stratum corneum, the skin's main barrier, enabling drug delivery into deeper skin layers without reaching nerve endings, thus minimizing pain.  MNs are highly effective for systemic drug delivery because they can create microchannels through the skin, allowing drugs to enter the bloodstream efficiently.  Drugs delivered via MNs bypass the gastrointestinal tract and hepatic first-pass metabolism, which can enhance bioavailability and reduce drug toxicity, especially for drugs that are unstable in the stomach's acidic environment or cause gastrointestinal irritation. Studies have shown that microneedle application can significantly increase systemic absorption. For instance, demonstrated a 10 % increase in systemic absorption over a 4-h period compared to subcutaneous injections using a luminal unfolding microneedle injector for insulin delivery. reported a 1.99 times higher area under curve for sinomenine hydrochloride delivered by dissolving microneedles compared to a gel, indicating enhanced bioavailability. MNs have been successfully used for systemic delivery of a wide range of molecules, including small molecules, proteins, peptides, oligonucleotides, insulin, vaccines, and even nanoparticles. For example, have shown systemic administration of naltrexone in humans via MNs.

4

## Conclusions
It can be concluded that dissolving microneedles composed of a combination of synthetic polymers, specifically PVA and PVP, along with the biopolymer dextran, provide a suitable platform that demonstrates excellent mechanical performance and drug release properties. Dextran can be incorporated into PVA/PVP solutions to formulate the polymer solution for MN arrays. These composite materials offer customizable properties and improved, yet controlled, release of hesperidin for drug delivery.
This formulation is capable of effectively penetrating thickened psoriasis lesions and delivering hesperidin efficiently. Hesperidin-loaded microneedles effectively alleviated psoriatic symptoms, restored normal collagen levels, and reduced CD3+ T cell infiltration in the psoriatic lesions of imiquimod-induced mice. Compared with oral administration, topical delivery of hesperidin by MN patches seems to be more effective. MNs enable the targeted release of hesperidin into specific layers of the skin, providing a controlled and focused route of administration, which enhances its therapeutic effects compared to oral delivery.
In conclusion, our results demonstrate that dextran's water solubility and swift dissolution kinetics render it a beneficial additive to PVA/PVP formulations of hesperidin MN, enhancing drug release and permeation and that the topical application of hesperidin-loaded MNPs could ameliorate the psoriatic lesions more effectively than oral route and in animal studies. Our results indicated the group receiving hesperidin-loaded MNPs showed a significantly greater reduction in CD3+ T cell accumulation, illustrating the potency of local delivery of hesperidin as a topical anti-inflammatory agent. These results confirm the initial hypothesis of our study, indicating that MN patches featuring hesperidin could be an effective method for psoriasis treatment, showing superior histological and anti-inflammatory effects relative to oral administration may serve as a promising management option for psoriasis. One limitation of the present study is the relatively small sample size of animals (n = 5 per group), which may restrict statistical power. Additionally, we exclusively utilized male BALB/c mice, whereas including both sexes would have enhanced the generalizability of the findings. Intriguingly, previous research has demonstrated that the combination of hesperidin's potent anti-inflammatory and antioxidant activity with MNs for targeted delivery can create a viable alternative to current topical or systemic therapies. More detailed studies are needed to describe the exact mechanisms of action of hesperidin in psoriasis and, ultimately, to assess the long-term effectiveness and safety of this new delivery system in clinical settings. Also the molecular pathway analysis e.g., cytokine quantification and signaling assays are recommended for further studies. Future pharmacokinetic and bioavailability studies are also necessary to evaluate systemic exposure and confirm that the observed efficacy correlates with plasma drug levels.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Nooshin Etemadi: Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Jaleh Varshosaz: Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Data curation, Conceptualization. Nahal Shamaeizadeh: Writing – original draft, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Amir Mohamadsharifi Renani: Writing – original draft, Software, Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis. Mohsen Minaiyan: Visualization, Supervision, Methodology.

## Funding
This research was funded by 10.13039/501100003970Isfahan University of Medical Sciences by projects number 3400565 and 2402131.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 Appendix A

## Supplementary data

Figure 1-spplementary: a) FTIR, b) 1HNMR and c) Gel permeation chromatogram of dextran
Image 1

## Data availability statement
Data will be available on request.

## Acknowledgments
The authors appreciate financial support of 10.13039/501100003970Isfahan University of Medical Sciences by project number 3400565 and Novel Drug Delivery Systems Research Center of Isfahan University of Medical Sciences by project number 2402131.
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpx.2025.100462.