pmcInt J Pharm XInt J Pharm X3726ijpxInternational Journal of Pharmaceutics: X2590-1567ElsevierPMC12766095PMC12766095.112766095127660954149730410.1016/j.ijpx.2025.100390S2590-1567(25)00075-11003901Review PaperOverview of dendrimers as promising drug delivery systems with insight into anticancer and anti-microbial applications
FadaeiMohammad Reza FadaeiMohammad SalehFadaeiMS4001@mums.ac.ir KheiriehAmir EmadKheiriehAE4001@mums.ac.ir HatamiHoomanHatamiH982@mums.ac.ir Rahmanian-DevinPouriapouryar2@gmail.com Tayebi-KhorramiVahid FathabadiMaryam FadaeiFathabadiFM4011@mums.ac.ir Baradaran RahimiVafavafa_br@yahoo.com AskariVahid Rezavahidrezaaskary@gmail.com aDepartment of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmacy, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, IranbPatient Safety Research Center, Clinical Research Institute, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, IrancTransplant Research Center, Clinical Research Institute, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, IrandDepartment of Cardiovascular Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, IraneClinical Research Development Unit, Imam Reza Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran⁎Corresponding author at: Clinical Research Development Unit, Imam Reza Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Azadi Sq, Vakil Abad Highway, Mashhad 9177948564, Iran. vahidrezaaskary@gmail.com1These authors share the co-first authorship.
1220250992025104921031003902520252982025492025090920250601202615012026© 2025 The Authors2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Dendrimers are tree-like polymeric molecules that have three main compartments: the core, branching units, and functional end groups. They are nanosized and monodispersed, with an almost spherical shape. For the past few decades, dendrimers have been evaluated in numerous studies as a promising category of candidates for gene delivery and diagnostic applications. Nowadays, some advanced dendrimers are considered promising anticancer delivery systems due to the vast types and applicable modifications. They also showed their effectiveness as antibacterial and antiviral agents. Smart dendrimers with pH-, redox-, or directly tumor microenvironment-responsive properties are investigated. pH-sensitive dendrimers enhance drug release in the tumor's acidic environment and inhibit release at physiological pH, thereby increasing the hemocompatibility of these chemical agents. Dendrimers have been examined for years to prevent sexually transmitted diseases, such as HIV, HPV, HSV, etc. In this regard, some studies yielded encouraging results and opened new avenues. Following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, researchers have shifted their focus toward seeking remedies to prevent and treat this viral disease. Dendrimers have already demonstrated favorable efficacy in protection against COVID-19 and other respiratory viral diseases. Furthermore, they may mitigate the neuroinflammatory manifestations of COVID-19 in individuals experiencing a critical disease state.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Dendrimers are tree-like polymeric molecules that have three main compartments.
•Dendrimers have been candidate for drug and gene delivery, and diagnostic goals.
•Some advanced dendrimers are available with no toxicity, but reduce the toxicity.
•Dendrimers show effectiveness as antibacterial and antiviral agents.
•Dendrimers showed efficacy against COVID-19 and other respiratory viral diseases.

## Keywords
DendrimerToxinViralBacterialChemicalCancerpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes

## Abbreviations
4T1Breast cancer cell line of mice
ADPAdenosine diphosphate
AKTProtein kinase B
ALGDAnionic Linear Globular Dendrimer
ALTAlanine transaminase
AMPDsAntimicrobial peptide dendrimers
AMPsAntimicrobial peptides
Arg90Arginine 90
ASTAspartate transaminase
BABetulinic acid
BBBBlood-brain barrier
BDBetulinic acid loaded dendrimer
BSABovine serum albumin
BTZBortezomib
BUNBlood urea nitrogen
CD4Cluster of differentiation 4
CFUColony-forming unit
CMCO, O-carboxymethyl chitosan
COVID-19Coronavirus disease of 2019
CURCurcumin
CUR-DCurcumin-dendrimer complex
DAPI4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
dCatAlbDendrimer cationized albumin
DMBADimethylbenz[a]anthracene
DNADeoxyribonucleic acid
DNCsDendrimer nanocomposites
DOXDoxorubicin
DpfDays post-fertilization
D-PPTPodophyllotoxin-dendrimer complex
DPVDapivirine
D-RapaRapamycin-dendrimer complex
e.gExempli gratia
EDHydrophobic
EDAEthylenediamine
EMErythromycin
EPSExopolysaccharide
ESKAPEEnterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species
ETECEnterotoxigenic Escherichia coli
ETPEctocervix tissue parts
FKBP1212 kDa FK506-binding protein
GAGallic acid
GBMGlioblastoma
GEMGemcitabine
HAdV-5Human adenovirus C serotype 5
HCTHematocrit
HCT 116/HT-29Human colon cancer cell line
HECHydroxyethylcellulose
His6Polyhistidine-tag
HIV-1Human immunodeficiency viruses 1
HpfHour post-fertilization
HSHeparan sulfate
HSPGHeparan sulfate proteoglycan
HSVHerpes simplex virus
HUSHemolytic uremic syndrome
ICHInternational Council for Harmonisation
IL-6Interleukin 6
LCLiquid-crystalline
LDHLactate Dehydrogenase
LKB1Liver kinase B1
LPSLipopolysaccharide
Lys122Lysine 122
Lys91Lysine 91
MBCMinimum Bactericidal Concentration
MCF-7Breast cancer cell line
MD-2Myeloid differentiation factor 2
MDRMulti-drug resistant
MICMinimum inhibitory concentration
MIPMacrophage inflammatory protein
mTORMammalian TOR
mTORC1Mammalian TOR complex 1
NACN-Acetylcysteine
NIH3T3Fibroblast cell line
OXOxaliplatin
PA14Protective antigen 14
PA63Protective antigen 63
PAMAMPoly(amidoamines)
PBSPhosphate buffer saline
PDTPhotodynamic therapy
PEGPolyethylene glycol
PGSAPhloroglucinol Succinic acid
PI3Phosphoinositide 3
PI3KsPhosphoinositide 3-kinases
PLGAPoly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
PLLPoly-l-lysine
Pmx-BPolymyxin B
POHydrophilic
POPAMPoly-Propylene Amine
PpIXProtoporphyrin IX
PPTPodophyllotoxin
PTENPhosphatase and tensin homolog
RapaRapamycin
RasRat sarcoma
RAW 264.7Macrophage cell line
RBCRed blood cell
RNARibonucleic acid
ROSReactive oxygen species
RSVRespiratory syncytial virus
S6K1P70-S6 Kinase 1
SARS-CoV-2Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
SEMScanning electron microscopy
Ser118Serine 118
STAT3Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
StxsShiga toxins
TAMsTumor-associated macrophages
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
TLR4Toll-like receptor 4
TNF-αTumor Necrosis Factor-α
TORTarget of rapamycin
TPTriptolide
TPA12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
TSC1/2Tuberous sclerosis proteins 1 and 2
U87Glioblastoma cell line
1

## Introduction
Nanotechnology is one area that has revolutionized the pharmaceutical industry. A variety of nano systems are used for drug and gene delivery. Nano-drug delivery methods, for instance, take advantage of the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect in cancer, which enables the drugs to preferentially accumulate in tumor tissues due to the tumors' poor lymphatic drainage and leaky vasculature. However, the therapeutic applicability of classic nano systems is limited due to their complicated production processes and low drug-loading capacity. One kind of nano delivery system that has become very modifiable is dendrimer ( ; ). The term “dendrimer” originates from the Greek word “dendron,” denoting a tree. Dendrimers possess a unique structural arrangement wherein the central core is augmented by adding branches, resulting in a progressive convergence of these branches and forming a spherical architecture comprised of iterated branches ( ; ; ; ). Dendrimers generally consist of three primary components: the core, branches, and terminal functional groups ( ; ; ; ). The aforementioned structures have the potential to exhibit a broader range of properties compared to linearly branched polymers with similar molecular weight, as will be elaborated upon in subsequent sections ( ; ; ) ( ).
Numerous techniques can be used to transfer genes ( ). Li et al., for instance, used lentiviral gene therapy. In the β0/β0 TDT, they assessed the effectiveness of a lentivirally modified cell product (BD211) generated by the isolator, which exhibited optimal expression. Two girls were recruited, given BD211 injections, and monitored for a median of 25.5 months. Both patients experienced a stable and effective transplant of genetically engineered hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Neither before nor after the infusion were there any unforeseen safety issues. For over 22 months, both patients remained transfusion-independent. The lifespan of red blood cells was increased by about 42 days as a result of this treatment ( ). Dendrimers are also one of the nanosystems with high potential for gene delivery due to their unique structure. Various types of dendrimers are utilized for diverse applications, including drug delivery, gene delivery, and vaccine delivery.
Dendrimers can be classified based on their chemical structure, function, generation number, and other factors. Regarding chemical structure, we can refer to dendrimers such as polyamidoamine (PAMAM), poly(propylene amine) (POPAM), poly-l-lysine (PLL), etc. ( ). There are also hybrid dendrimers, whose core consists of one type of dendrimer and the branches of another ( ). Additionally, dendrimers can be modified to acquire unique properties, such as pH-sensitive dendrimers that release their cargo in an acidic environment. These dendrimers have shown good efficiency in targeted drug delivery for tumor treatment in cell and animal studies, and have significantly reduced the adverse effects of chemotherapy drugs on regular cell lines ( ).
Dendrimers, due to their cationic terminal groups, are susceptible to some toxicity, which increases with increasing generation. Although this cationic feature can be helpful in their antibacterial effects, for drug delivery applications, the terminal groups can be modified with anionic and neutral groups ( ; ). In recent decades, not only has it been proven that we can manufacture non-toxic dendrimer structures, but dendrimers are also used to decrease the toxicity of chemical, natural, and even biological noxious compounds. Dendrimers have received special attention in recent years because of unique features such as low polydispersity, nanometer dimensions, the ability to carry different molecules by surface receptors or encapsulating them in the cavities between the branches, the ability to precisely control the size and molecular weight, during manufacturing, high solubility, miscibility, and reactivity due to a large number of terminal branches, and the ability to control solubility in polar or non-polar solvents by changing surface groups. Currently, many dendrimer-based products for (a) targeted drug delivery applications, (b) early diagnostic uses, (c) uses as gene transfection vectors, and (d) antimicrobial applications have entered the commercial market or are in the clinical phase. In , the most important marketed and under-clinical study products are listed. Dendrimers have shown promise in enhancing the efficacy of anticancer molecules while minimizing their side effects. Chemotherapy agents, widely used in cancer therapy protocols, are mainly potent agents from chemical or natural sources. There are some issues with chemotherapy agents, despite their proven effectiveness. In many cases, they have low solubility, low bioavailability, and high toxicity, which restricts their usage or requires increasing their doses. Hydrophobic voids in dendrimers are proper places for incorporating such hydrophobic molecules and can increase their availability with hindered side effects ( ; ; ). 
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) today comes through as a challenging health threat. Based on the statistics report in 2019, around 5 million deaths were associated with AMR. This number is predicted to increase by 2050, based on the current trend. Also, the COVID-19 pandemic accelerated the rate of AMR due to an increase in antibiotic usage. Furthermore, AMR is also raising the governmental health expenditures due to an increase in hospitalization time ( ). Manny approaches the issue of controlling AMR by hindering access to antibiotics, upgrading diagnostics, or developing non-antibiotic-based treatments. One suggested approach is to enhance the efficacy of current antibiotics using novel delivery systems. Regarding this point, dendrimers have emerged as a promising delivery system with intrinsic antibacterial properties. Peptide-based dendrimers, phosphorus dendrimers, and cationic PAMAM dendrimers are examples with self-antibacterial and anti-toxin effects ( ; ; ; ).
Dendrimers have also been examined for their potential in combating viral infections and have shown promising activity. For example, intravaginal administration of G2-S16 (an anionic carbosilane dendrimer) showed acceptable protection against HIV-1 in animal studies. In addition, studies demonstrated that G2-S16 could hinder the binding of the virus to the CD4+ receptors ( ). The conjugation of G2-S16 and dapivirin was also examined, and the result showed that this conjugation works and could interfere with the virus replication ( ). Astodrimer sodium (SPL7013) is another dendrimer with microbicide and antiviral effects, and it is the first dendrimer approved for the prevention of HIV, HSV, and HPV. It was a polylysine-based dendrimer produced by an Australian company (Starpharma), and the Carbopol-based gel named VivaGelÔ is available in the market ( ). SARS-CoV-2 has led the 2019 coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19). The COVID-19 pandemic has caused considerable deaths worldwide, and efforts to reduce its severity and incidence continue. COVID-19 can cause mild, self-limiting respiratory problems or severe pneumonia. Astodrimer sodium (1 %) nasal administration showed promising activity against SARS-CoV-2 in both in vitro and in vivo models. This formulation is available in the market under the name VIRALEZEÔ to moisturize barriers and provide protection against airborne viruses ( ; ).
In the current manuscript, we first review the history of dendrimers, their specific features, types, methods of preparation, and toxicity. Second, we discussed studies that utilized dendrimers as delivery systems to enhance efficacy and mitigate the systemic toxicity of chemical and natural toxins, particularly a group of compounds with anticancer properties. We focused on the studies that showed the effectiveness and toxicity of their formulation on both tumor cell lines and normal cell lines. One of the most important approaches used in this area is the use of stimuli-responsive dendrimers. These stimuli-responsive dendrimers are modified with molecules or polymers, which makes them less toxic and helps provide them with stimuli-responsive properties. They may be sensitive to acidic conditions in the tumor environment, making them release their cargo in these moieties. Additionally, they may function as a prodrug, a substrate for specialized enzymes in the tumor environment. Furthermore, we gained insight into the antibacterial and antiviral activity of dendrimers based on recent studies and clinical trials.

2

## Methodology
A systematic methodology was utilized to select relevant literature, ensuring a thorough exploration of the topic. The literature search was conducted using key databases, including PubMed and Scopus, as well as the Google Scholar search engine for supplementary sources. A set of keywords was employed: TITLE (Dendrimer*) AND TITLE-ABS (((toxic*) OR (toxin) OR(toxicity)) AND ((cancer) OR (tumor) OR (chemotherapy) OR (photodynamic therapy) OR (bacteri*) OR (antiviral) OR (viral) OR (virus)OR (natural) OR (Covid 19) OR (Drug delivery) OR (in vitro) OR (in vivo)) AND NOT ((imaging) OR (MRI) OR (gene therapy) OR (gene delivery) OR (gene silencing) OR (SiRNA) OR (mRNA))). This search was conducted from 2017 to June 2025. In our initial screening, after omitting duplicates, we identified 224 articles. Following a second screening, 103 articles were selected as the core of this review. These articles addressed the topic, were published in peer-reviewed journals, and offered full-text access. This review encompasses discussions of in vitro, in vivo, and clinical research. Articles that were off-topic, lacked original data or peer review, or were published in languages other than English were excluded from consideration.

3

## Dendrimers
The term “dendrimer” was first introduced by D.A. Tomalia, who derived it from two Greek words: “dendrons,” meaning trees, referring to their branching structure, and “meros,” meaning parts, indicating their chemical composition, which consists of connected monomers. In 1985, Tomalia invented branched PAMAMs, popularly known as “starburst dendrimers”. The Michael addition, involving the reaction of methyl acrylate with ammonia, was utilized, similar to the initial cascade synthesis ( ) ( ). Dendrimers are different from monomers and oligomers because they have very good symmetry, several branches, and maximal terminal functionality. Dendrimers have reactive end groups, which enable (a) controlled branching (topology); (b) regulated molecular weight building (monodispersed); and (c) diversity in terminal end group design and modification ( ; ). 
Dendrimers are nano-sized spherical polymers (1–100 nm) with three prominent structural components ( ): (i) Dendrimers possess a central core, comprising an atom or molecule that exhibits a minimum of two chemical functionalities; (ii) The branches that emerge from the core consist of repeated units that contain at least one branch junction. The repetition of these units leads to the formation of radially condensed layers known as ‘generations’; and (iii) Numerous terminal functional groups are commonly found on the surface of dendritic structures. These surface groups determine the characteristics of dendritic macromolecules ( ). Furthermore, the terminal groups will frequently be folded back into the molecule's interior, resulting in a non-homogeneous surface. The properties of dendrimers, such as shape, solubility, stability, topology, flexibility or rigidity, and viscosity, can vary depending on how the terminal groups are synthesized. The number of end groups increases with each successive generation. Unlike linear polymers, dendrimers exhibit distinct behavior regarding their intrinsic viscosity, and it does not increase proportionally with their molar mass. Instead, it follows a unique pattern characterized by an initial rise at a specific generation, known as the limiting generation, followed by a subsequent decrease at higher generations. This phenomenon is commonly referred to as the dendrimer effect. However, increasing the molecular weight of hyperbranched polymers generally augments their intrinsic viscosity. This finding can be attributed to the gradual transition of lower generations of dendrimers from a nearly open structure to an almost globular structure in later generations. This is why higher-generation dendrimers have a smaller volume than equivalent linear polymers. Furthermore, they seem more soluble in organic solvents and usually crystallize with difficulty ( ). Recent research has demonstrated that utilizing a dendritic scaffold can enhance the solubility and bioavailability of low-solubility pharmaceutical compounds, including antibacterial, antiviral, antitubercular, anticancer, and other therapeutic agents. 
3.1

## Type of dendrimers
In the synthesis process, each successive reaction step leads to additional branches, with the number of steps representing a dendrimer generation (denoted G). According to the number of branches, dendrimers can be classified as (i) low generation (G < 4) and (ii) high generation (G ≥ 4). The dendrimer nucleus is occasionally referred to as zero generation or G0 ( ; ). Lower generations of dendrimers are more flexible and have open structures, whereas higher generations tend to have condensed, spherical structures ( ) ( ). Other dendrimer classifications are based on their chemical structure and functionality at the core, end groups, and branching units. Dendrimers possess the potential to form intricate structures when combined with inorganic compounds, referred to as “metallo-dendrimers”. Dendrimers are sometimes defined by their unique properties, such as stimuli-responsive dendrimers, hybrid dendrimers, liquid crystalline dendrimers, and so on ( ) ( ). Some of the well-known types of dendrimers, based on their chemical structure, are summarized in . 

3.2

## Method of preparation
In dendrimer synthesis, two primary approaches have emerged as the most prominent: convergent and divergent methodologies. Nevertheless, numerous alternative approaches have been devised, drawing upon the methodologies mentioned earlier. The divergent synthesis method involves the progressive expansion of a chain from a central core, resulting in the formation of successive generations (see ). In the convergent method, however, the chain and branches first connect to each other, and then they conjugate with each other via the core ( ). PAMAM dendrimers are one of the most well-known dendrimer classes, having been first synthesized using the divergent method by Tomalia et al. ( ; ; ). presents the primary differences between divergent and convergent methods, which are further discussed in the following sections. 
3.2.1

## Divergent synthesis
The divergent synthesis process was the first technique for dendrimer synthesis to be introduced. The synthesis process initiates at the polyfunctional center and extends radially through the sequential activation and condensation of building components, also known as monomers ( ). Every generation requires the inclusion of numerous peripheral groups. This technique has proven more effective in synthesizing molecules with a higher molecular weight than convergent methods. Additionally, numerous studies have shown that it has significantly increased in popularity as a widely used commercial approach ( ; ; ). The ability to automate repetitive processes and the attainable high-molecular-weight nano-scaffold architecture are two benefits of the divergent technique, which was the first to be devised ( ). Therefore, the divergent technique is the preferred method for POPAM and PAMAM dendrimers, which are commercially available ( ). There are also other benefits, such as quick synthesis, mass production, highly symmetric dendrimers, and high-generation dendrimers, by adding desired functional groups to the surface of the dendrimer ( ). The exponentially increasing number of functional terminal groups poses a problem with this synthetic approach, as they may fail to react quantitatively, leading to structural flaws. Despite introducing significant excess reactants, avoiding such deficiencies is only sometimes possible. Also, because the properties of these compounds are so similar, it is tough to separate structurally perfect dendrimers from those that aren't ( ). Additional drawbacks include the inherent propensity for errors in synthesizing high-generation dendrimers, the complexities associated with isolating the desired product from the reactants, and the use of excess reagents. It requires a large amount of starting material, involves multiple steps to construct a massive structure, and may result in an incomplete reaction of the terminal groups.

3.2.2

## Convergent synthesis
The convergent synthesis technique moves from the periphery to the center, or from the outside inward. Components of a multi-functional core unit's focal point, known as a “dendron”, are bonded to its reactive terminal groups ( ). This synthesis method is better than the divergent synthetic pathway because it avoids structural flaws, such as the lack of branches in later steps, which are common in that pathway. The limited presence of reactive terminal groups is responsible for this phenomenon ( ). Additionally, convergent synthesis techniques can be carried out at equimolar levels, preventing the requirement for great excesses and facilitating the preliminary work-up. When compared to the divergent synthesis technique, the by-products are formed because of incomplete reactions of bulky dendrons with the branching unit, diverging significantly in molecular mass, and are easier to eliminate after each step ( ). Dendron interaction at the periphery causes steric hindrance, restricting the dimensions of dendrimer growth. This is the primary reason why lower-generation dendrimers are being prepared using this synthetic method. As a result, divergent and convergent syntheses complement each other ( ; ). Other benefits are that they can be purified to the desired product, defects are rare, asymmetric dendrimers can be synthesized, few processes are needed for each molecule, and they facilitate more structural control compared to the divergent approach. Other drawbacks include a decreased yield, an inability to produce a high generation of dendrimers, and difficulty modifying the terminal groups ( ).
Some other methods for synthesizing dendrimers (other than divergent and convergent syntheses) are presented in . 

3.2.3

## Chemical anticancer
Today, the drug delivery of anticancer agents faces challenges due to their physicochemical properties, such as poor solubility( ). Additionally, controlling the adverse effects on normal cells forces scientists to explore different delivery systems, specifically those based on nanoparticles ( ; ). Nanosized systems can help target tumor cells passively, and with modifications, active targeting becomes achievable ( ; ). Dendrimers, because of their nanosized shape and the existence of chemical groups for modifications, are considered promising drug delivery systems. The studies demonstrated that these systems could be safe for normal cells while also enhancing the cytotoxicity of chemotherapeutic agents against cancer cells. Furthermore, animal studies showed successful results of antitumor activities. In the following sections, some of these studies will be discussed in more detail.
Doxorubicin (DOX), a highly effective chemotherapeutic agent belonging to the anthracycline family, is widely used in the treatment of various hematologic and solid tumor malignancies, such as leukemia, sarcomas, and breast cancer ( ; ). However, anthracyclines like DOX can cause cardiotoxicity, which restricts their usage. There are three types of anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity: (i) acute, (ii) early-onset chronic progressive, and (iii) late-onset chronic progressive. In some cases, patients (∼ 1 %) experience acute cardiotoxicity quickly after the anthracycline infusion, expressed as an acute, transient decrease in myocardial contractility that is typically reversible.
During therapeutic intervention or within the initial year following treatment, 1.6 % to 2.1 % of patients encounter the chronic progressive variant characterized by an early onset. Late-onset chronic progressive cardiotoxicity occurs in a range of 1.6 % to 5 % of patients, specifically after at least one year has passed since the completion of therapy. DOX is thought to cause cardiotoxicity through several mechanisms, such as the production of free radicals, the overloading of calcium, mitochondrial dysfunction, and the formation of peroxynitrite ( ). The semiquinone radical of DOX has a reduction potential. The semiquinone radical of DOX donates its electron directly to molecular oxygen, generating a superoxide radical and hydrogen peroxide. The significance of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the toxicity induced by DOX has been well established ( ). Glioblastoma is an aggressive primary brain tumor categorized as an astrocytoma grade IV tumor, constituting approximately 80 % of malignant tumors ( ). DOX is one of the oldest chemotherapeutic agents used to treat glioblastoma ( ). Despite recent breakthroughs in glioblastoma treatment, the overall prognosis remains poor, and long-term survival is relatively rare ( ). Muniswamy et al. designed and investigated a novel cationic dendrimer complex of dendrimer-cationized albumin (dCatAlb) ( ). They described a technique for solving the difficulties of DOX distribution in glioblastoma (because of the BBB) using dendrimer-cationized albumin (dCatAlb) coated with PLGA nanoparticles (dCatAlb-pDNP). In their study, dCatAlb was synthesized via carboxyl activation. The 2.0 G PAMAM dendrimer was used in this formulation. The PLGA nanoparticles (pDNP) of DOX were manufactured using the nanoprecipitation method and then used to coat the dCatAlb. Kesharwani et al. previously reported the cationization of bovine serum albumin (BSA) with ethylenediamine (EDA) ( ). Despite this, EDA only has two amine groups. The 2.0G of PAMAM dendrimer had sixteen amine groups, which could help prepare cationized albumin using a minimized cationic agent. The BSA release study at physiological pH (7.4) and endosomal pH (5.0) showed pH-sensitive release properties ( A shows the release profile of DOX from the dendrimer at different pH levels). After 24 h of duration, DOX released from each formulation showed significant differences in physiological and acidic conditions. After a week, the released DOX from dCatAlb-pDNP in an acidic environment was significantly higher than the physiological pH. This difference was noticeably insignificant for pDNP after 7 days. These formulations exhibited the best fit for the Higuchi model in both release media. In addition, an in vitro BBB model was used to examine transmembrane permeability across the mouse brain endothelial cells (bEnd.3), which includes transcellular and paracellular permeation. DOX was penetrated 10.08-fold more by dCatAlb-pDNP than by the DOX solution. dCatAlb-pDNP increased cell permeability 1.49-fold over pDNP. The permeation study results indicated that the cationized albumin nanoparticle uptake in bEnd.3 cells enhanced penetration ( C shows the DOX levels were permeated through cells from dCatAlb-pDNP versus pDNP and free DOX). A glioblastoma cell line (U87MG) was employed to assess the cytotoxicity of free DOX, pDNP, and the dCatAlb-pDNP formulation of DOX. After 24 h of duration, the dCatAlb-pDNP had the highest cytotoxicity on the glioblastoma cell line (IC50 = 2.16 ± 0.5 μM). The RBC hemolysis study was conducted to show how each formulation affected RBCs. The hemocompatibility of pNP, pDNP, and dCatAlb-pDNP was assessed, which was found to be higher than that of a free DOX solution ( D and E show the hemolysis of RBCs in the presence of different concentrations of DOX and nanoparticles; p < 0.05 ( ). 
In a study by Karimi et al., a functionalized graphene oxide nanocarrier of DOX, incorporating a triazine-type dendrimer, was designed for breast cancer treatment. The divergent method was used to efficiently construct triazine dendrimer (G 2.5), which could then functionalize graphene oxide (GO-DT G2.5) (This modification is shown in ). Furthermore, Fe3O4@PEG nanoparticles were attached to the surface of GO-TD G2.5 (GO-TD-Fe3O4@PEG), which was thought to have efficient loading and could give pH-responsive properties to releasing DOX. The in vitro DOX release from GO-TD-Fe3O4@PEG was studied at various pH levels (5.0, 6.8, and 7.4). From the DOX release results, it was observed that the DOX release process was pH-sensitive. After 72 h of duration, the percentage of DOX released from GO-TD-Fe3O4@PEG was found to be higher at pH 5 (97.30 %) in comparison to those at pHs 6.8 and 7.4 (69.00 % and 66.10 %, respectively). This pH-responsive release of DOX might be related to the fact that in an acidic milieu, the hydrogen bonding among DOX and GO-TD-Fe3O4@PEG could be significantly weakened by the protonation of NH2 groups on DOX ( ). In vitro cytotoxicity evaluations against normal and breast cancer cells (MCF − 10 A and MCF-7, respectively) were carried out. The MTT assay was used to evaluate the cytotoxicity of the formulation against both normal and breast cancer cells. The results revealed that GO-TD-Fe3O4@PEG-DOX had higher dose-dependent cytotoxicity on breast cancer cell lines compared to free DOX. The results of this study demonstrated no cytotoxicity on regular cell lines by the GO-TD-Fe3O4@PEG-DOX nanostructures. The GO-TD-Fe3O4@PEG nanostructures (without DOX) showed low toxicity and high compatibility in the physiological milieu. Flow cytometry and DAPI labeling were used to demonstrate the anti-apoptotic activities of these functionalized graphene oxide nanocarriers. The GO-TD-Fe3O4@PEG-DOX revealed more anti-apoptotic activities than free DOX. Within four hours, cellular uptake results demonstrated a higher absorption for GO-TD-Fe3O4@PEG-DOX than free DOX ( ). 
Oxaliplatin (OX) is a well-known 3rd-generation platinum (II)-based antitumor agent with an oxalate leaving group and a steady bidentate 1,2-diamino cyclohexane fraction. OX inhibits DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis by forming cross-links between or within DNA strands of rapidly dividing cells, resulting in cell apoptosis. OX usually attacks all rapidly dividing cells, so it acts nonspecifically, and in addition to damaging cancer cells, it also damages healthy cells. Because of this, its dose-limiting toxicity includes gastrointestinal reactions, cardiotoxicity, peripheral sensory neuropathy, and increased transaminases and alkaline phosphatases, which are the main problems ( ).
There are numerous studies on the use of dendrimers in cancer diagnosis and treatment. Cationic PAMAM reacts with negatively charged biological membranes, causing membrane damage and cell death. One approach to resolving this issue is to modify the surface of the PAMAM dendrimers. Some examples of customizing the PAMAM surface include acetylation, PEGylation, carbohydrate engineering, DNA/gene conjugation, antibody conjugation, peptide/amino acid conjugation, and others. PEGylation is the most straightforward and effective method for modifying the surface of PAMAM dendrimers. In this methodology, the -NH2 surface groups of PAMAM are modified with mPEG. When eight groups of -NH2 are replaced with eight groups of mPEG, the PAMAM dendrimer remains cytocompatible even at high concentrations ( ). Hoang Do et al. encapsulated OX in PAMAM G3.0-mPEG-8 and investigated the cytotoxicity of free OX and OX-loaded PAMAM G3.0-mPEG-8 against HeLa cells. The study showed no toxicity at low dosage strength (up to 25 g/ml) for both OX-loaded PAMAM G3.0-mPEG-8 and free OX. However, as the concentration increased, free OX was more effective on the HeLa cell than PAMAM G3.0-mPEG-8. However, OX-loaded PAMAM G3.0-mPEG-8 remains effective and exhibits anticancer activity. The in vitro OX-releasing pattern of OX-loaded PAMAM G3.0-mPEG-8 and OX-loaded PAMAM G3.0 demonstrated that after 24 h, the cumulative amount of PAMAM G3.0 was 26.7 %, and that of PAMAM G3.0-mPEG-8 was around 8 %. This finding indicates that PEG groups on the surface of dendrimers can delay OX release ( ).
Bortezomib (BTZ) emerged as the first proteasome inhibitor employed in the therapeutic management of hematological malignancies, including multiple myeloma and mantle cell lymphoma. There is a noticeable difference in the anticancer efficacy of BTZ when comparing the results of in vitro and in vivo investigations ( ). The primary reason is that BTZ exhibits poor blood stability due to its boronic acid groups, which can form chelates with the reactive functional groups of plasma proteins. Consequently, plasma proteases can subsequently degrade BTZ. In addition, BTZ has shown severe toxic side effects, especially on the cardiovascular system ( ; ; ). Xuefeng et al. designed an amphiphilic, dopamine-functionalized PEGylated dendrimer and reacted it with BTZ to form a BTZ prodrug-based nanostructure. Their study indicated that the boric acid groups present in BTZ could be protected at pH 7.4 (in the blood). When the formulation reaches the tumor tissue, particularly in an environment with a decreased pH, the protective effect may be alleviated ( ). Additionally, they demonstrated that a BTZ prodrug-based nanostructure is more stable in blood than BTZ alone. An in vivo study showed that BTZ-prodrug-based nanostructure suppressed tumor volume more efficiently than BTZ alone. BTZ prodrug-based nanostructures induced apoptosis and inhibited tumor cell angiogenesis more effectively than BTZ alone. Histopathological examination of the organs revealed that the BTZ-prodrug-based nanostructure could mitigate the adverse effects of BTZ on the heart, liver, and kidneys. Biochemistry analysis showed that this nanostructure (BTZ prodrug-based) decreased ALT, AST, and urea levels, which means that they have reduced the liver and kidney toxicity of BTZ ( ). 
Gemcitabine (GEM), an antineoplastic agent of the antimetabolite class, is widely employed to treat a variety of cancers, such as breast, bladder, pancreatic, and ovarian cancers. The issue with using GEM as an anticancer agent is that it possesses poor tumor specificity, causing it to affect normal tissue and leading to unwanted side effects ( ). Zhang et al. designed GEM-loaded enzyme-responsive PEGylated dendrimers to achieve selective drug delivery to the tumor site. Some enzymes, such as cathepsin B, are expressed at higher levels in tumor tissue than in other tissues. This study used the substrate cathepsin B to make an enzyme-responsive PEGylated dendrimer loaded with GEM. According to the release studies, in the presence of cathepsin B, 60 % of GEM was released after 30 min, and 90 % of GEM was estimated to be released after 24 h. In contrast to the absence of cathepsin B, a negligible amount of GEM was released after 24 h. These findings indicated that GEM-loaded enzyme-responsive PEGylated dendrimers were more stable in the blood and did not cause any toxicity to normal tissues, as cathepsin B expression levels were lower in normal tissues ( ). In vitro cytotoxicity studies showed that free GEM is more cytotoxic than GEM-loaded PEGylated dendrimers against 4 T1 (a mouse breast cancer cell line) and has a lower IC50. Because a cancer cell's lysosome is a cathepsin B-rich environment, GEM-loaded PEGlayted dendrimers had to endocytose the cancer cell's lysosomes. In vivo studies have shown that these GEM-loaded PEGlayted dendrimers stopped tumor growth and reduced tumor size more than free GEM. Furthermore, GEM-loaded PEGylated dendrimers inhibited tumor cell proliferation more than free GEM. On the other hand, GEM-loaded PEGylated dendrimers induced apoptosis in tumor cells more effectively than free GEM. In this work, Zhang et al. also measured the body weight of treated mice to investigate the toxicity of GEM, demonstrating that the free GEM group lost weight, whereas the dendrimer-GEM group did not experience any weight loss. Histology results demonstrated no sign of tissue damage in the heart, spleen, lung, or liver by the action of the GEM-loaded PEGylated dendrimers ( ).
Sheikh et al. engineered a PAMAM dendrimer loaded with doxorubicin and camouflaged with an RBC membrane functionalized with an epithelial cellular adhesion molecule (EpCAM) aptamer, targeting EpCAM-positive triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells specifically. Notably, the size of the doxorubicin-loaded PAMAM increased from 11.34 nm to 108.4 nm after coating with the RBC membrane and aptamer. Coating the dendrimer surface with the RBC membrane enhanced biocompatibility and prolonged blood circulation time. Meanwhile, aptamer functionalization facilitated improved internalization by cancer cells. The findings indicated that the RBC coating enabled controlled and sustained release over the 140-h study period. In vitro cell viability assessments revealed increased apoptosis and significantly higher uptake by cancer cells compared to the non-targeted formulation. An in vivo study using a 4 T1-laden tumor mouse model demonstrated a remarkable tumor-suppressive effect attributed to the selective internalization of cancer cells ( ).
Some anticancer drugs, conjugated with dendrimers to enhance their therapeutic efficacy and mitigate adverse effects, are listed in . 

4

## Natural anticancer–induced toxicities
Many medications have been inspired by nature ( ; ). Nowadays, a significant portion of pharmaceuticals sold in the commercial sector comes from natural sources. It is clear that critical anticancer drugs, such as paclitaxel and doxorubicin, come from natural sources. Vinca alkaloids are another important natural anticancer compound ( ; ; ). As with other pharmaceuticals of this kind, a significant problem with these drugs is the difficulty of adjusting dosage, which is based on the possibility of unidentified toxicities. Most of these medications have adverse effects at very low dosages. Because dendrimers can bind to drugs strongly and prevent unwanted off-target effects, they are effective as safe drug delivery systems. Additionally, these medications have low bioavailability due to their lipophilic nature, a characteristic that dendrimers can help with.
Rapamycin (Rapa), or sirolimus, was initially identified as an antifungal compound produced by Streptomyces hygroscopicus in soil. Subsequently, it has been documented that Rapa exhibits antiproliferative and immunosuppressive characteristics in mammalian cells. Rapa has been found to possess potent inhibitory effects on the activation of S6K1, a serine/threonine kinase that various agonists can activate. S6K1 is recognized as a crucial mediator of PI3 kinase signaling. Simultaneously, the Rapa (TOR) target was identified in both yeast and animal cells. The formation of a gain-of-function complex occurs when Rapa interacts with the 12 kDa FK506-binding protein (FKBP12). This compound forms a complex with the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and inhibits its functionality. The occurrence of gain-of-function mutations in oncogenes such as PI3K, AKT, or Ras, as well as loss-of-function mutations in tumor suppressors like PTEN, LKB1, or TSC1/2, has been associated with heightened activation of mTORC1 in various cancer types ( ). Targeting tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) has demonstrated promise in cancer treatment because of their essential roles in controlling tumor-supportive immune responses ( ). It has been suggested that Rapa-mediated inhibition of the mTOR pathway controls how TAMs promote tumor angiogenesis ( ). However, formulation and delivery difficulties have restricted its application as an anticancer therapy. Even though Rapa has a low IC50 value for mTOR, it is not very soluble in water (2.6 g/mL), is not very bioavailable, has systemic toxicities that change depending on the dose, and is taken up less in the brain and tumors ( ; ). In a study, Sharma et al. investigated Rapa formulation by conjugation with PANAM dendrimers modified with terminal hydroxyl groups. Their investigation aimed to develop a viable and effective formulation for treating glioblastoma to reduce the systemic toxicity associated with using Rapa. The compound was subjected to modification through the incorporation of an ester linker, which enables its cleavage under low pH conditions. Additionally, a concentrated esterase was employed to facilitate the release of the compound intracellularly and within tumor tissues. Rapa's multiple hydroxyl groups complicate the selective attachment of linkers. Lipase-catalyzed acylation was used to attach a linker to Rapa's 42nd hydroxyl group, achieving an improved yield and specificity. Microwave energy was employed, reducing the reaction time from 40 to 8 h. There have been documented instances of systemic toxicity, explicitly affecting the kidneys and lungs, associated with administering rapamycin ( ; ). The mice in the Rapa group exhibited toxic symptoms compared to those in the control group, as reported. D-Rapa lowered these toxicity biomarkers (p = 0.08 for D-Rapa vs. Rapa). Dendrimers undergo renal clearance without degradation within a 24-h timeframe, thereby limiting their interaction with systemic organs. Additionally, the researchers demonstrated that using a more extended linker, which conjugates Rapa to the surface of the dendrimer, effectively decreases steric hindrance. This reduction in burden facilitates the triggered release of Rapa within cells and tumors. Dendrimer delivery improved TAM reprogramming and GBM antiproliferative efficacy in vitro by inhibiting mTOR. A study conducted in mice investigated D-Rapa's in vivo targeting capabilities, demonstrating its ability to penetrate solid GBM and specifically accumulate within TAMs. The tumor environment was exposed to D-Rapa by the administration of TAMs ( ). This targeting reduced Rapa-induced renal toxicity and improved tumor progression markers ( ). 
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a well-established cancer treatment modality involving the uptake of a photosensitizer by malignant cells, followed by subsequent exposure to light. In recent studies, researchers have proposed the concept of using nanocarriers to deliver photosensitizers. This approach has been suggested as a potential solution to address the requirements for an optimal agent for PDT ( ; ). Protoporphyrin IX (PpIX) and its by-products are very effective PDT agents that, at higher cell concentrations, can cause dark toxicity because they stick to the membranes of mitochondria ( ). A suitable photosensitizer should exhibit high phototoxicity and no dark toxicity, as healthy tissues can readily adsorb the photosensitizer in dark conditions ( ).
Murugesan et al. defined the use of PGSA dendrimer (a biocompatible anionic nanocarrier) to deliver PpIX with phototoxicity investigations against HeLa cells in vitro ( ). In their previous study, they developed a promising water-soluble and biocompatible anionic dendrimer by reacting 2,4,6-trihydroxybenzene (Phloroglucinol) with succinic acid as a catalyst in a suitable solvent, and they used it as a novel system for the delivery of PpIX. They confirmed the correlating characterizations for the existence of an anionic-natured surface in all generations (G0.5–G2.5). The reflux technique produced the PGSA dendrimer with an anionic surface ( ). The outcomes of their dark toxicity investigation after 24 h suggested that the dendrimer lowered the toxicity of PpIX in dark conditions. It enhanced the cell viability over free PpIX at all concentrations (0.2–6.4 μg/mL). PpIX in free form reduced cell viability by 50 % at higher concentrations (6.4 μg/mL) in dark conditions, but the dendrimer achieved 75 % viable cells. Similarly, after 20 min of exposure to light, the phototoxicity results showed that G2.5 dendrimer with PpIX significantly reduces cell viability more than free PpIX against HeLa cells.
Triptolide (TP) was isolated for the first time from Tripterygium wilfordiiHook F (TWHF). It exhibits promising immunosuppressive and anticancer characteristics, but is limited by its considerable systemic toxicity ( ; ; ). TP acts as an antagonist for STAT3 and stops STAT3 from being overexpressed or overactive, and sends signals to tumors in TAMs ( ; ). TP is known to be toxic to almost all organs, with the central toxicity reported in the hearts and livers ( ). The treatment window is limited due to these poor solubilities and toxicities. Analogs to change their formula and toxicity characteristics are being investigated ( ). As a result, nanoparticle-mediated approaches for limiting triptolide-induced selective toxicity by bringing it to the target organ may improve TP's safety profile for clinical use ( ; ).
Liawet et al. described a dendrimer-TP conjugate to deliver TAMs in brain tumors ( ). The ester bond at position C14 connected TP to the dendrimer, enabling esterase and pH-sensitive release. This architecture enabled triggered release in intratumoral and intracellular environments, thereby restricting TP exposure outside the tumor tissue. Because the -OH group at C14 is essential for the drug's anti-tumor behavior, TP must be released from the compound to be effective. In plasma environments with a pH of 7.4, the release of triptolide was less than 1 % within the initial 24 h period, and only 4 % was observed to be released over two weeks. The investigation on intracellular release was conducted under pH 5.5, including esterases, to replicate the environment found within endosomes. Approximately 30 % of the TP is released within the first 24 h in intracellular environments, with more than 80 % released within ten days. These data have also been proven in animal studies.
Gallic acid (GA) is a polyhydroxy phenolic compound found in numerous plants, fruits, and food sources. It is alternatively known as 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid. Recent studies have demonstrated that GA exhibits anti-proliferative effects against diverse cancer types. GA has been found to exhibit various biological activities, including antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antiviral, anti-allergic, and anti-melanogenic effects ( ; ; ). Priyadarshi et al. developed PAMAM dendrimers conjugated with gallic acid. They tested GA and PAMAM-GA conjugates in HCT 116, NIH 3 T3 cancer cells, and normal cells. Free GA was more toxic to HCT116 and NIH3T3 cells than the PAMAM-GA conjugate. After that, they confirmed the inhibition of cancer cell proliferation. They observed that PAMAM-GA inhibits the growth of cancer cells (HT-29, HCT-116, and MCF-7). Normal NIH3T3 cells did not experience a significant growth slowdown, indicating that GA attached to PAMAM dendrimers targets cancer cells. An in vitro release study at different time points revealed that the PAMAM-GA conjugate released gallic acid slowly. The results showed that when gallic acid was attached to PAMAM dendrimers, its stability and release properties improved, making it more permeable. This team previously demonstrated that PAMAM (G4) conjugated with gallic acid exhibits selective toxicity against MCF7 cell lines compared to normal cells ( ). Some natural toxins, their sources, and various therapeutic dendrimers investigated for combating these toxins are listed in . 
Curcumin is a naturally occurring, active compound that is extracted from the spice turmeric, which is widely used in Indian and Asian cuisine ( ; ; ). The substance's distinctive yellow hue is noteworthy, and it possesses a diverse array of medicinal properties, including anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and anticancer effects. A substantial body of research has demonstrated the capacity of curcumin to inhibit the proliferation of cancerous cells, induce apoptosis in diseased cells, and prevent tumor dissemination. In the context of specific studies, the favorable effects of this compound have been observed in combating breast, colon, prostate, and skin cancers. Nevertheless, for several reasons, curcumin tablets or capsules have not yet been introduced into the pharmaceutical market. A significant challenge is the rapid rate of decomposition of this substance in the body and its facile excretion. The limited absorption and the inability to establish effective contact with target cells are other fundamental problems that have affected the effectiveness of curcumin. The compound in question has been classified as a BCS class 4 drug, indicating that it possesses both low solubility and low absorption. Consequently, the necessity of administering elevated doses to attain the desired outcomes gives rise to deleterious and potentially unfavorable side effects. Consequently, contemporary scientific research is centered on the development and refinement of innovative formulations to address these challenges and enhance the clinical efficacy of curcumin, thereby optimizing its unique potential ( ).
Numerous investigations have elucidated that the implementation of dendrimer nano-systems can significantly augment the pharmacological potency of curcumin. Dendrimers exhibit a plethora of beneficial characteristics that make them suitable for use as carriers in biomedical applications, particularly in drug delivery. These characteristics encompass extensive branching, precisely defined globular architectures, exceptional structural uniformity, multivalent interactions, adaptable chemical compositions, and remarkable biological compatibility. The effective and secure delivery of curcumin to neoplastic tissues presents a considerable challenge in the realm of oncological therapies that employ curcumin. In recent decades, dendrimers have been strategically utilized to enhance the delivery of curcumin. Notwithstanding the preliminary nature of dendrimer applications in the context of curcumin delivery, these nanostructures present a multitude of favorable attributes, including the ability to modify the fundamental framework of the system. The preponderance of these investigations has leveraged PAMAM-based dendrimers, a category of multifunctional nano-carriers, owing to their capacity for accommodating a variety of anticancer agents and their potential for modification with target-specific ligands for enhanced delivery to malignant cells. Moreover, the simultaneous administration of additional anticancer agents, such as doxorubicin, within a dendrimer-mediated formulation alongside curcumin has been demonstrated to produce synergistic effects, potentially amplifying the overall anticancer efficacy of the therapeutic regimen. The conjugation of dendrimers with folate as a targeting ligand constitutes a promising strategy for precise drug delivery. The circulation duration of dendrimer-based therapeutics has been optimized via the incorporation of PEGylation ( ).
Dar et al. developed Gal24-Sil, a galactose-functionalized dendrimer to which the natural flavonoid Silybin (also known as Silibinin) is coupled, as a potential treatment for hepatocellular cancer. They demonstrated that linking Silibinin to the Gal24 dendrimer significantly increased its solubility and therapeutic efficacy. In vitro studies demonstrated that Gal24-Sil conjugates considerably enhanced the anticancer activity of Silibinin in HepG2 and Hep3B liver cancer cell lines. The compound induced an inflammatory response and the production of ROS, resulting in cellular death and necrosis. Furthermore, Gal24-Sil efficiently inhibited cell growth by promoting mitochondrial membrane potential depolarization and DNA damage ( ).

5

## Biological toxins–induced toxicities
5.1

## Bacterial toxins–induced toxicities
The emergence of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) poses a significant threat to global health, necessitating the development of novel antimicrobial agents. Dendrimers, particularly amphiphilic dendrimers, have emerged as promising candidates in this battle against resistant bacteria. However, as with any antimicrobial agent, there is a risk that bacteria may develop resistance mechanisms against dendrimer-based therapies. Understanding these potential mechanisms is crucial for developing effective strategies to mitigate resistance and enhance the efficacy of dendrimer therapies. One of the primary resistance mechanisms that bacteria may employ is the alteration of membrane permeability. Bacteria can modify their cell membranes to reduce the uptake of dendrimers, which often rely on their cationic charge to interact with the negatively charged bacterial surface. By increasing the proportion of lipopolysaccharides (LPS) or altering the charge of their membranes, bacteria can hinder the ability of dendrimers to disrupt their membranes, which is a key mechanism of action for these agents ( ; ). Another significant mechanism is the upregulation of efflux pumps. These pumps actively transport antimicrobial agents, including dendrimers, out of the bacterial cell, thereby reducing their intracellular concentrations and effectiveness. This mechanism is particularly concerning as it is a well-documented form of resistance against many traditional antibiotics and could similarly affect dendrimer efficacy ( ; ).
Biofilm formation presents another challenge. Bacteria can form biofilms, which are protective layers that shield them from antimicrobial agents. Dendrimers may struggle to penetrate these biofilms effectively, allowing the bacteria within to survive and potentially develop resistance. The protective nature of biofilms can significantly reduce the effectiveness of dendrimer-based treatments, necessitating strategies to disrupt the integrity of biofilms. Additionally, bacteria may produce enzymes that can degrade dendrimers or modify their structure, rendering them ineffective. This enzymatic resistance can be a significant barrier to the successful application of dendrimer-based therapies, especially if the enzymes are produced in response to the presence of the dendrimers ( ).
To mitigate these potential resistance mechanisms, future research should focus on several key areas. First, the design and modification of dendrimers should be prioritized to enhance their properties and overcome bacterial resistance. This includes developing dendrimers with modified surface charges or hydrophobicity to enhance membrane penetration and reduce the efficacy of efflux pumps. Incorporating reactive groups that can interact with bacterial enzymes may also help prevent degradation ( ). Second, combination therapies that pair dendrimers with traditional antibiotics or other antimicrobial agents could enhance their effectiveness and reduce the likelihood of resistance development. This approach can exploit synergistic effects, where the combined action of multiple agents is greater than their individual effects, potentially overcoming resistance mechanisms like biofilm formation and efflux pump activity ( ).
Research should also focus on strategies to disrupt biofilms, such as using dendrimers that can penetrate and destabilize biofilm structures. This could involve the development of dendrimers that release antimicrobial agents in response to biofilm-associated signals or that can physically disrupt the integrity of biofilms. Continued investigation into the specific resistance mechanisms that bacteria develop against dendrimers is essential. This includes studying the genetic and biochemical pathways involved in resistance, which can inform the design of next-generation dendrimers that are less susceptible to these mechanisms ( ).
PAMAM dendrimer possesses cationic functional groups and is a newly developed antibacterial agent. These dendrimers exhibit strong antibacterial efficacy due to the phenomenon of electrostatic interaction. The surface of bacterial cells has an anionic charge, which facilitates the binding of cationic dendrimers to it. This disruption can destabilize the bacterial cell's lipid bilayer, ultimately resulting in cell death. Utilization of dendrimers as antibacterial agents reduced toxicity through localization of the action in a specific organ and increased the duration of action ( ). Additionally, dendrimers can enhance the efficacy of antibacterial agents and mitigate their adverse effects.
MDR bacteria remain an unsolved universal public health matter, with polymyxins serving as a last-resort treatment. In the MDR bacterial collection, known as ESKAPE (Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species), opportunistic P. aeruginosa is among the most challenging bacteria. Hospital-acquired infections are common in hospitalized patients with severe conditions ( ). While it is true that conventional dressings have been found to facilitate wound healing, their efficacy in preventing bacterial infections is limited. In contrast, contemporary antimicrobial dressings may exhibit a certain level of cytotoxicity, thereby impeding the wound-healing process. There is a discernible clinical requirement to develop antimicrobial agents that can eradicate P. aeruginosa, while minimizing undesirable side effects ( ).
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) of both natural and synthetic origins can effectively address this issue against many bacteria. Still, they are quickly degraded once they come into contact with human serum and lose their effects ( ). Antimicrobial peptide dendrimers (AMPDs), which were recently developed, have exhibited greater antibacterial activity and a broader spectrum than AMPs. AMPDs can be distinguished from linear AMPs based on two key characteristics: a higher density of surface groups and a three-dimensional, regularly branched structure formed by covalent bonds between amino acids ( ). Viorica Patrulea et al. detailed the initial chemical grafting of sizable AMPD molecules onto chitosan derivatives through covalent coupling chemistry. Both TEM and SEM showed that G3KL-chitosan conjugates disrupt bacterial membranes and kill them rapidly ( ). The safety and non-toxicity of G3KL-chitosan conjugates to mammalian cells were also demonstrated, both in vitro and ex vivo. The treatment of infected wounds was facilitated by developing three distinct formulations: nanoparticles, gels, and foams inspired by the two molecules. The robust in vitro activity against P. aeruginosa exhibited by the developed formulations indicates the significant biological efficacy of the AMPD-chitosan conjugates incorporated into wound dressings. This is a significant development because these peptides are highly effective against MDR bacteria, offering a potential alternative to antibiotics for wound dressings; however, they are unstable for longer than 24 h. The covalent conjugation of AMPDs to the biopolymer derivatives employed in this study reduced their cytotoxicity toward mammalian cells while retaining their potent antibacterial efficacy. Time-lapse confocal microscopy was used to observe how the fluorescein-labeled G3KLcys-chitosan conjugate was taken up by bacteria and accumulated within them. This occurred after the disruption of both the external and internal membranes. Furthermore, recent chemistry has demonstrated the effectiveness of preserving AMPD bioactivity, enabling the conjugates to exhibit synergistic antimicrobial effects. AMPD activity was lost when AMPDs were added to biopolymer matrices, but G3KLcys-conjugates incorporated within the wound dressings maintained AMPD activity. 
Reduced hemolytic activity is another crucial factor in developing a new antimicrobial system that balances biological efficacy and toxicity to mammalian cells. They observed no inhibition of G3KL activity when using G3KLcys-chitosan conjugates in CMC (2 %) and HA (1 %) matrices. However, the findings revealed that AMPD's biological activity in dressings was only maintained when combined with chitosan derivatives (MIC of 3.9–7.8 μg/mL). This finding demonstrated that chitosan derivatives have the potential to confer antimicrobial properties on biomaterials incorporated within wound dressings ( ).
The most varied class of antibiotics is known as antimicrobial peptides (AMP). Microorganisms, plants, and animals produce them and exhibit a wide range of activity. These are made up of cyclic peptides like polymyxins, produced by Paenibacillus polymyxa, or linear peptides (for example, LL-37 as a human AMP). The interaction between the cationic polymyxins and the anionic phosphate residues in lipid A results in the displacement of Mg2+ ions. Gram-negative bacteria employ lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to fortify and stabilize their outer membranes. The lipid layer of both membranes is disrupted by the subsequent insertion of polymyxins, leading to an osmotic imbalance and ultimately causing cell death ( ; ; ).
Colistin, also known as polymyxin E, has attracted significant attention in clinical settings as it has demonstrated efficacy against MDR Gram-negative bacteria. Due to the toxicity and kidney toxicity of polymyxins and colistin, as well as the rise of colistin resistance in clinical settings, it is essential to use AMPs ( ). Fatma Ben Jeddou et al. demonstrated that the synthetic AMP-dendrimer G3KL (MW 4531.38 Da, 15 positive charges, MIC = 8 mg/L) killed P. aeruginosa strain PA14 faster than polymyxin B (Pmx—B) with no detectable resistance selection. This study aimed to identify potential methods for resisting dendrimer AMPs, which differ from cyclic polymyxins found in mammals in terms of their structure, size, and charge. Acquiring spontaneously resistant mutants posed a significant challenge when utilizing both dendrimers. Based on the analysis, the selection frequency with G3KL was estimated to be at least 10- to 100-fold lower than Pmx—B. It was found that spontaneous mutants with a loss of function in the PhoQ sensor kinase gene were more sensitive to dendrimers. However, their MICs for Pmx-B were lower, and the arnB operon was expressed more (4-amino-L-arabinose was added to lipid A). The MICs for Pmx-B and G3KL were elevated (8-fold and 4-fold, respectively) in two mutants containing missense mutations in the PmrB sensor kinase's periplasmic loop, but not for the dendrimer T7 (MW 4885.64 Da, 16 positive charges, MIC = 8 mg/L).
According to the findings, peptide dendrimers are potential antibacterial agents with diverse structures and a low inclination for resistance selection. The dendrimer defense mechanisms exhibited by P. aeruginosa share similarities with polymyxins. However, their notable attributes, such as swift bactericidal activity and reliance on particular pmrB mutations, render them a compelling prospect for potential advancement as innovative therapeutic agents targeting multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria ( ). Bacterial sepsis syndromes and wound healing largely depend on the interaction of bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS), Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), and MD-2 on the cell surface. The two phosphorylated glucosamines of the lipid A component of LPS bind at the charged entrance of MD-2's hydrophobic cavity. Many surface residues within MD-2 have been shown to play an essential role in binding LPS electrostatically, including Arg90, Lys91, Ser118, and Lys122 ( ). Some bacterial toxins, their sources, and various therapeutic dendrimers investigated for combating bacterial toxins are listed in . 
In the ongoing battle against bacterial infections, a comparison between dendrimers and conventional antibiotics reveals significant differences in their mechanisms of action, effectiveness, and potential for developing resistance.
Dendrimers, PAMAM and PPI types, are synthetic macromolecules characterized by their branched structure, which allows for multiple functional groups that can interact with bacterial cells. Their primary mechanism involves disrupting bacterial membranes through electrostatic interactions, where the positively charged dendrimers bind to the negatively charged bacterial surfaces. This interaction leads to membrane destabilization, resulting in cell lysis and death. Additionally, dendrimers can penetrate biofilms—protective layers formed by bacterial communities—enhancing their antibacterial efficacy against bacteria associated with biofilms. Importantly, dendrimers can be engineered to reduce toxicity to mammalian cells while maintaining their antimicrobial activity, making them a promising alternative in the context of rising AMR ( ; ) In contrast, conventional antibiotics typically target specific bacterial processes, such as cell wall synthesis, protein synthesis, or DNA replication. For example, beta-lactam antibiotics, such as amoxicillin, inhibit the synthesis of bacterial cell walls, leading to cell lysis. However, bacteria can develop resistance through various mechanisms, including reducing drug uptake, modifying drug targets, and actively expelling antibiotics via efflux pumps. This targeted approach often leads to the selection of resistant strains, posing a significant challenge in treating infections ( ).
One of the critical advantages of dendrimers over conventional antibiotics is their lower likelihood of inducing resistance. Due to their multifaceted mechanisms of action, dendrimers can exert potent antibacterial effects without the same selective pressure that leads to the development of resistance in traditional antibiotics. This characteristic is particularly valuable in treating multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacteria, where conventional antibiotics may fail ( ). Moreover, dendrimers can enhance the efficacy of existing antibiotics when used in combination. For instance, studies have shown that dendrimers can enhance the solubility and stability of antibiotics, such as amoxicillin, enabling lower doses and reduced side effects. This synergistic approach not only improves the antibacterial effect but also minimizes the risk of resistance associated with higher antibiotic usage. In summary, while conventional antibiotics have been the cornerstone of bacterial infection treatment, their effectiveness is increasingly compromised by the emergence of resistance mechanisms. Dendrimers, with their unique structural properties and mechanisms of action, offer a promising alternative that not only enhances antibacterial efficacy but also reduces the risk of resistance development. As research continues to explore their full potential, dendrimers may play a crucial role in addressing the challenges posed by antimicrobial resistance, providing effective treatments for infections that are becoming increasingly difficult to manage with traditional antibiotics ( ; ; ).
Antibacterial and anticancer efficacy of PEGylated citric acid-based dendrimers (PE/TMP-MC-PEG-CA-PEG and PE/TMP-MS-PEG-CA-PEG) was evaluated in a study. These dendrimers were then conjugated with cefotaxime sodium. Cytotoxicity assessment revealed that the cefotaxime-loaded dendrimers were non-toxic to normal epithelial cells and exhibited anticancer efficacy of 20–22 % against A549 lung carcinoma cells. Additionally, the created dendrimers and drug-dendrimer complexes exhibited 15–28 % and 2–3 % hemolytic toxicity toward red blood cells, respectively. The antibacterial activity of all the third- and fourth-generation drug-dendrimer complexes manufactured was tested against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. The results showed that the drug conjugate with third-generation dendrimers had a larger zone of inhibition against these dangerous microorganisms than the fourth-generation drug-dendrimer complexes ( ).

5.2

## Viral toxins–induced toxicities
Dendrimers have demonstrated potent antiviral activity in recent decades, particularly against the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Several of the antiviral properties of dendrimers, such as SPL7013, OP-101, and G2-S16, are summarized in this section. In 2011, Telwatte et al. published the first dendrimer-based microbicide, a poly(l-lysine) (PLL)-dendrimer called SPL7013. It contains polylysine molecules that bind to a central core of benzhydrylamine. Nevertheless, it was not applicable due to the lack of broad anti-HIV-1 properties against R5-HIV-1 strains and its augmented HIV-1 risk associated with epithelial damage after 7–14 days of twice-daily treatment ( ; ). SPL7013 (also known as Astodrimer sodium) was initially developed as a vaginal microbicide to inhibit the transmission of HIV and herpes simplex virus (HSV) ( ) and has recently been incorporated as an antiviral agent in lubricated condom products in Europe, Australia, and Japan. SPL7013 products demonstrated low cytotoxicity and vaginal irritation ( ) and effectively inhibited SHIV transmission via the vaginal route in pigtailed macaques ( ). Furthermore, the clinical trials (Phase 1, 2, and 3) also proved that the dendrimer is harmless for vaginal application in women ( ). A recent study also showed that this dendrimer has antiviral action against adenoviruses in vitro. SPL7013 was assessed for its antiviral function in this research, compared to adenoviruses, in an Ad5/NZW rabbit ocular model. The consequences indicate that topical 3 % SLP7013 is safe for rabbit eyes and keeps antiviral activity against Human adenovirus C serotype 5 (HAdV-5) ( ).
G2-S16 dendrimer was first developed as a topical microbicide [32]. It is a second-generation carbosilane polyanionic dendrimer comprising sulfonate groups and silicon nuclei. The best ways to make carbosilane dendrimers are that they are easy to use, repeatable, and flexible, give high yields of action, and reagents are easy to obtain. G2-S16 works against HIV by binding to gp120 and stopping the virus from attaching to CD4 receptors. This is a broad anti-HIV action that works against many different HIV strains.
Previous research has provided evidence through in vitro and in vivo studies that the topical application of G2-S16 as a vaginal microbicide is considered safe, as indicated by references ( ; ; ). According to G2-S16, it has demonstrated the ability to maintain its inhibitory impact on HIV-1 at non-toxic concentrations, even in the presence of amyloid fibrils in semen, which have been found to enhance the virus's infectivity ( ). The intravaginal administration of a 3 % G2-S16 HEC gel to humanized h-BLT mice demonstrated the dendrimer's in vivo effectiveness, providing 84 % protection against HIV-1 transmission ( ). G2-S16 could be a suitable candidate for advancing a topical microbicide against HIV-1 infection, possessing properties such as in vivo biocompatibility and the ability to halt HIV-1 infection in the presence of semen, paving the way for transfer to clinical trials ( ). Other research demonstrated that G1-S4 or G2-S16 in a mixture with Platycodin D could be a tremendous vaginal microbicide with contraceptive action ( ). They report that these dendrimers have >95 % HIV-1 inhibition in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and TZM-bl cells. They also indicated that G1-S4 or G2-S16 could persuade 100 % sperm immobilization in 30 s. Furthermore, no significant variations or injuries to the vagina were detected ( ). Another study in 2019 found promising results when this dendrimer was combined with dapivirine (DPV). G2-S16-DPV achieved its inhibition by interfering with the viral cycle at different points ( ).
In other studies, the G2-S16 dendrimer has been shown to treat other viral infections, such as respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). RSV causes respiratory infections and bronchiolitis, which often necessitate hospitalization, particularly in infants. The interaction between RSV, cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPG), and envelope glycoproteins G and F is essential for attachment and entry into the host cells. The author group indicated that this dendrimer constrains RSV infection in vivo and in vitro, showing proper biocompatibility in vivo. They thought the G2-S16 dendrimer binds to the HSPG on the host cell's surface through HS receptors. This would stop RSV from infecting more cells. The G2-S16 was safe when used intranasally with animal models, and fascinatingly enough, this G2-S16 dendrimer hinders 85 % of RSV ( ). In another recent study, G2-S16 dendrimer confirmed biosafety, sufficient efficacy, behavior, and effectivity in human healthy donor vaginal tissue explants against HIV-1 infection. All these results, together with those previously achieved on this dendrimer, strongly support registering G2-S16 dendrimer vaginal prophylactic usage in a clinical trial ( ). In other research, a PEG-citrate dendrimer (G2) was constructed to evaluate its anti-HIV function. The G2 dendrimer exhibited several desirable features, including direct conjugation with medications through its functional groups, biocompatibility, anti-HIV activity, and high-water solubility. PEG-citrate dendrimer indicated low toxicity (CC50:0.6 mM) and antiviral properties (ICC50:0.4 mM) at high concentrations ( ).
SARS-CoV-2 infection, caused by the virus also known as COVID-19, leads to an illness that varies from mild to severe ( ; ; ). Symptoms include fever, fatigue, cough, difficulty breathing, and the loss of smell and taste, according to Wikipedia. The virus is highly contagious and spreads via respiratory droplets and aerosols ( ; ; ). In a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-masked, multicenter, phase 2 clinical trial, an OP-101 dendrimer was evaluated for safety and preliminary efficacy in subjects with severe COVID-19. In this study, 24 subjects received a single intravenous dose of either placebo (n = 7 patients) or OP-101 (n = 17). This investigation found that OP-101, a hydroxyl dendrimer conjugated to NAC, exhibits favorable safety and efficacy trends, improving survival and reducing markers of inflammatory and neurological harm in COVID-19 patients. OP-101 dendrimer has the capacity to cure acute inflammation associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection and is also valuable for treating multiorgan inflammation linked to other disease processes ( ). The other dendrimer considered for antiviral application was the PAMAM dendrimer. PAMAM suggested that a non-soluble non-nucleoside HIV-1 reverse transcriptase inhibitor, a thiocarbamate derivative, may serve as an acceptable prodrug for parenteral delivery ( ). Consequently, the reviewed research has demonstrated the importance of various dendrimers in recent decades as antiviral agents, which have established a significant presence in this area. Some viral toxins, along with their sources and various therapeutic dendrimers investigated for combating viral toxins, are listed in . 
Scientists have developed a therapeutic approach for SARS-CoV-2 infection using enhanced anti-COVID-19 siRNAs encapsulated within a novel, safe peptide dendrimer known as KK-46. This delivery system demonstrated that topical therapy, achieved via intranasal injection of the improved siRNA-peptide dendrimer formulation, can effectively reduce viral replication and alleviate lung inflammation induced by COVID-19. The findings offer a promising avenue for treating COVID-19 and may help to combat the ongoing pandemic ( ).
In a notable study, Kandeel and colleagues investigated the antiviral activity against Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) using a series of 16 distinct PAMAM dendrimers, drawing parallels to the research conducted on SARS-CoV-2. They designed and tested three types of polyanionic dendrimers with varying terminal groups: sodium carboxylate (generations 1.5, 2.5, 3.5, and 4.5), amido-ethanol hydroxyl (generations 2, 3, 4, and 5), and succinamic acid (generations 2, 3, 4, and 5), along with polycationic dendrimers containing primary amine groups (generations 2, 3, 4, and 5). The results showed that the G (1.5)-CO2Na PAMAM dendrimer exhibited the most effective inhibition of MERS-CoV plaque formation (40.5 % inhibition), followed closely by the G (5)-succinic acid-PAMAM dendrimer (39.7 % inhibition), which possessed 16 and 128 terminal groups, respectively. These findings suggest that certain PAMAM dendrimers may have significant potential as antiviral agents against coronaviruses, such as MERS-CoV and possibly SARS-CoV-2 ( ).
In another study, Han and Král demonstrate that, through molecular dynamics simulation studies, the binding affinity of peptide inhibitors derived from ACE2, which exhibit high SARS-CoV-2 blockage, can be significantly improved by attaching multiple peptides to the surfaces of nanoparticles, dendrimers, and clusters, thereby facilitating multivalent binding. Moreover, these inhibitors hold potential as inhaled therapeutic agents, mitigating viral activation within the lungs. These findings present promising opportunities for developing targeted treatments against SARS-CoV-2 and potentially other respiratory viruses by leveraging the enhanced binding affinity of peptide inhibitors and innovative drug delivery methods ( ).

6

## Challenges
The biocompatibility of dendrimers in pharmaceutical applications is crucial and warrants considerable attention at present. Dendrimers used in pharmaceutical and medical applications should possess non-toxic or non-immunogenic properties. Dendrimers with positively charged surface groups can cause the membrane to become unstable, which could lead to the cell's death ( ). Based on the findings of the researchers' investigations, it has been observed that there is a positive correlation between the generation of dendrimers and their toxicity, indicating that toxicity levels tend to rise as the generation increases ( ). The cytotoxicity of PAMAM dendrimers with anionic surface functional groups, such as carboxyl groups or sulfonates, is negligible. The non-adhesive nature of anionic dendrimers to the negatively charged cellular membranes may explain their lack of toxicity ( ). Amine-terminated PAMAM dendrimers, specifically those of generation 4 (G4) and generation 7 (G7), are safe for consumption at doses not exceeding 10 mg/kg. In contrast, carboxyl-terminated dendrimers of generations 3.5 (G3.5) and 6.5 (G6.5), as well as hydroxyl-terminated dendrimers of G4 and G7, have been deemed safe at doses up to 50 times higher in mice derived from cesarean sections ( ). In the case of PLL dendrimers, linear PLL dendrimers are more likely to increase the lipid bilayer's permeability ( ).
One approach to enhance the biocompatibility of dendrimers involves modifying their end groups by incorporating anionic or neutral moieties. Various groups, including polyethylene glycol, folate, and acyl groups, have already been utilized in different studies. It has also been reported that the toxicity of cationic dendrimers can be lessened by conjugating them with specific compounds, such as amino acids, peptides, or even other molecules ( ).
A primary concern is the inherent toxicity of dendrimers, particularly those with cationic surface groups (e.g., PAMAM). Their positive charge can interact detrimentally with negatively charged cell membranes, leading to membrane disruption, cell damage, the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), inflammation, and nonspecific cell death. This toxicity is both dose- and generation-dependent, with higher-generation dendrimers often exhibiting increased toxicity. Lower-generation dendrimers (G5 or below) are usually cleared via renal filtration, whereas higher generations primarily undergo hepatic clearance. This difference complicates pharmacokinetics and may elevate toxicity risks. Surface modifications such as PEGylation ( ) or the addition of hydroxyl ( ) or carboxyl groups can mitigate surface charge, thereby reducing toxicity and improving biocompatibility. Another innovation in reducing the toxicity of dendrimers is the use of carbosilane types, which are less toxic than cationic types due to their negative charge. Carbosilane dendrimers are a class of dendritic macromolecules defined by a molecular skeleton made predominantly of carbon and silicon atoms linked through stable Si—C bonds. This backbone is distinguished by its notable chemical and thermal stability, as well as its low polarity. This attribute gives rise to a relatively hydrophobic framework in comparison to other dendrimers ( ; ).
Due to their open, branched structure, dendrimers may offer poor control over drug release, often resulting in abrupt and nonspecific release upon contact with biological fluids. This can diminish therapeutic efficacy and elevate side effects. Despite their well-defined structure at the laboratory scale, challenges persist in scaling up synthesis while maintaining batch-to-batch consistency, purity, and uniform functionalization—factors crucial for clinical translation. The complex nanoscale architecture of dendrimers, coupled with potential toxicity and limited clinical data, poses significant regulatory challenges. Most dendrimer-based therapies and vaccines have been tested only in vitro or animal models, with limited human trial data, making the assessment of safety and efficacy in humans challenging. Some dendrimers are quickly eliminated from systemic circulation, reducing their effective therapeutic window. Additionally, nonspecific delivery without effective targeting can compromise efficacy and lead to increased off-target effects ( ; ; ).

7

## Conclusion and future perspectives
Dendrimers are highly branched polymers with a precise nanostructure, where the branches are synthesized as a layer around the central core. The presence of such a structure enables precise size control, facilitates drug conjugation, and allows for modification of the particle surface. Additionally, dendrimers possess functional groups on their surfaces, enabling them to bind to a wide range of bacterial and viral receptors. Hydrophobic and hydrophilic drugs can be loaded, conjugated, or absorbed into the central core and multivalent surface of dendrimers. Compared to linear polymers, dendrimers have multivalent active end groups, which suggests that they play a role as drug carriers. Incorporating anticancer drugs into dendrimers is a promising approach to improving the efficacy and reducing the side effects of these drugs. For years, dendrimers have been recognized as promising gene delivery systems due to their unique properties. With the growing use of synthetic methods and modifications, they could be accepted as new drug delivery systems in pharmaceutical sciences.
Recent studies suggest that conjugating anticancer agents and chemotherapy agents with dendrimers may reduce their toxicity to normal cells, while also enhancing their anticancer effects. Furthermore, they showed that they can be promising delivery systems for both passive and active targeting of tumor cells. With control over the size and molecular weight, the passive targeting of tumors can be effectively accessed. However, active targeting is more complicated. In many studies using different modifications on dendrimers, new features can be made available. Differences in the type of dendrimers, such as PAMAM-based, peptide dendrimers, carbosilane-based, and metallo dendrimers, allow for various modifications to be available. A simplest one is PEGylation, which can sustain and control the release of anticancer agents. Besides that, there is a vast spectrum of modifications that give dendrimers innovative features, such as pH, redox, and overall tumor microenvironmental responsive capabilities. Some of these modifications are present in .
New approach in targeted delivery of dendrimers involves using targeting agents like conjugation of monoclonal antibodies, for example, trastuzumab, and using aptamers. Such an approach also yielded promising results; however, further studies are needed to thoroughly evaluate all aspects. In addition, it should be considered that these methods are regularly hindered by their high costs. So, working on fabricating new dendrimers with innovative features seems to be preferable. Another perspective on the future of anticancer delivery by dendrimers is their ability to deliver two chemotherapy agents. This approach helps to achieve significant antitumor activity by using synergistic effects, and with the rise of multi-drug protocols in cancer chemotherapy, it can be truly useful. Photodynamic therapy is another feature that can be accessed through incorporating photosensitizers like Protoporphyrin IX as an organic compound.
The role of dendrimers in combating microbial organisms is one of their most attractive applications, which researchers are focusing on. Dendrimers can kill microorganisms by directly destroying their cell membranes and stopping their interactions with the host cell. In extensive studies, PAMAMs have been investigated as carriers. The main problem is that these carriers contain amines, which makes them very toxic. To overcome this limitation, PAMAM is modified with hydroxyl or carboxyl groups. The modified carriers are more biocompatible and easily conjugated with antimicrobial agents. A report states that the antimicrobial activity of sulfamethoxazole encapsulated in PAMAM dendrimers was significantly higher than that of the drug alone. Also, in another study, the dissolution of an antimalarial drug in its encapsulated form in dendrimers based on lysine and PEG showed a significant increase. Consequently, many antimicrobial agents have been incorporated into dendrimer nanoparticles to enhance their solubility and therapeutic efficacy ( ; ). The mechanism of killing or preventing bacterial growth through dendrimers entirely depends on the type of surface groups on the dendrimer. When the dendrimer enters a solution with bacteria, it replaces the divalent ions on the surface of the bacteria, such as magnesium and calcium. It then binds to negatively charged phospholipid membranes, altering the permeability of these membranes to molecules. A higher concentration of dendrimers leads to the denaturation of membrane proteins and begins to pierce the phospholipid bilayer. At this stage, the high permeability of the membrane causes the leakage of potassium ions. If the dendrimer concentration increases, the membrane structure becomes more unstable ( ).
A start-up company affiliated with Johns Hopkins University has produced a drug using a dendrimer that can help save people with coronavirus. A dendrimer nanoparticle-based treatment called OP-101 significantly reduced the risk of death and the need for ventilator support in a study of 24 adults with severe COVID-19, Johns Hopkins Medicine researchers say. In particular, this clinical trial demonstrated that patients who received OP-101 experienced a more than fourfold reduction in inflammation and brain damage biomarkers. These markers circulate in their blood compared to patients who received a placebo. Kanan et al. developed OP-101 by attaching a potent antioxidant and anti-inflammatory drug, N-acetylcysteine (NAC), to dandelions. Each dendrimer nanoparticle has many drug molecules attached and can deliver the drug specifically to inflammatory cells such as macrophages. Dendrimer nanoparticles deliver the drug only to those macrophages involved in inflammation at the injury site. For this study, the researchers selected 24 patients between the ages of 43 and 86, mostly men with severe COVID-19, who were admitted to five hospitals between August 2020 and May 2021. Patients with severe COVID-19 symptoms who required mechanical ventilation or oxygen therapy through a high-flow nasal cannula were eligible to enroll in this study. Most of the patients included in the study were in the intensive care unit (ICU). All 24 patients also received standard coronavirus care, including corticosteroids used to suppress inflammation and the antiviral drug Remdesivir. The researchers did not know which patients received a placebo or OP-101 until the end of the study. At the end of the trial, the researchers found that OP-101, administered at doses of 4 mg/kg or 8 mg/kg, was six times more effective in reducing the inflammatory marker C-reactive protein. The ventilator requirement at 30 and 60 days after treatment was 71 % for patients who received a placebo and 18 % for those who received OP-101. At 60 days after receiving OP-101 or a placebo, 3 of 7 patients receiving a placebo and 14 of 17 patients receiving each of the three doses of OP-101 were alive. This study demonstrated that OP-101, an NAC-conjugated hydroxyl dendrimer, exhibits promising trends in efficacy and safety after a single intravenous dose, as evidenced by increased survival, decreased inflammatory markers, and reduced neurological damage in critically ill patients with COVID-19. OP-101, a precise nano-drug that targets activated macrophages throughout the body, can suppress the acute inflammatory response in SARS-CoV-2 infection and cause mutation of the viral spike protein, thereby slowing down its progression ( ; ).
Dendrimers have recently undergone evaluation in clinical trials, which are described below. One study examined the impact of fourth-generation PAMAM on colour stability and dental sensitivity after bleaching, with evaluation periods ranging from 24 h to one year post-procedure. Another similar study investigated the impact of PAMAM dendrimers, nano-hydroxyapatite, and their combined use on the microhardness of demineralized enamel, as well as their effectiveness in treating white spot lesions. Dendrimers have also been investigated in the treatment of COVID-19. The mentioned study aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of MIR 19 in slowing the progression of moderate to severe disease manifestations in outpatients with mild symptoms of SARS-CoV-2 infection. MIR 19® is a formulation that comprises a complex of siRNA that targets explicitly the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RDRP) of SARS-CoV-2, as well as a peptide dendrimer (KK-46).
Overall, this review aims to summarize the main aspects of dendrimers as a drug delivery system for the delivery of both chemical and natural anticancer agents, as well as their antibacterial and antiviral activities, either alone or in combination with other agents. The well-defined architecture, precise surface functionality, and tunable pharmacokinetics of dendrimers continue to make them a unique and adaptable nanoplatform for future therapeutics. As synthesis and characterization progress, they will be able to facilitate combination therapies, targeted delivery, and personalized medicine with increased effectiveness. Recent studies have shown a significant advancement in the development of dendrimers as drug delivery systems. However, challenges regarding their toxicity, cost, and scalability are also unclear and require further investigation.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Mohammad Reza Fadaei: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Methodology, Investigation. Mohammad Saleh Fadaei: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Investigation. Amir Emad Kheirieh: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Investigation. Hooman Hatami: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Investigation. Pouria Rahmanian-Devin: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Investigation. Vahid Tayebi-Khorrami: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Investigation. Maryam Fadaei Fathabadi: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Investigation. Vafa Baradaran Rahimi: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization. Vahid Reza Askari: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization.

## Ethical statement
This is a review article. Ethical approval is not required for the study.

## Funding
N/A.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 

## Data availability
Data sharing does not apply to this article as no datasets were generated or analyzed during the current study.

## Acknowledgment
We would like to acknowledge the Clinical Research Development Unit, Imam Reza Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran, for their support.