822acssdJournal of Medicinal ChemistryJ Med ChemPMC1275103312751033127510334135578910.1021/acs.jmedchem.5c01220Solvent Sustainability
in Drug Discovery: Where Are
We Now, and How Can We Improve?
RichardsonPaul BryanMarian C DiorazioLouis GallouFabrice KeilyShazia MartinezIsamir PlummerScott ReedAnthony B SheppardRobert ShieldsJason WrigleyGail YeungCharles Enríquez-GarcíaÁlvaro 
†
Oncology
Medicine Design, Pfizer, 10770 Science Center Drive (CB2), San Diego, California
09121, United States

‡
Johnson
& Johnson Innovative Medicine, 1400 McKean Road, Spring
House, Pennsylvania
19002, United States

§
Chemical
Development, Pharmaceutical Technology & Development, Operations, AstraZeneca, Macclesfield
SK10 2NA, United Kingdom

∥
Chemical
& Analytical Development, Novartis Pharma
AG, Basel
4056, Switzerland

⊥
Medicinal
Chemistry, Vertex Pharmaceuticals (Europe)
Ltd, 86-88 Jubilee Avenue Milton Park, Abingdon
OX14 4RW, United Kingdom

#
American
Chemical Society Green Chemistry Institute, 1155 16th St Northwest, Washington, District of Columbia
20036, United States

∇
Biomedical
Research, Novartis, 250 Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, Massachusetts
02139, United States

○
Department
of Medicinal Chemistry, Amgen Research, One Amgen Center Drive, Thousand Oaks, California
91320, United States

◆
Medicinal
Chemistry, Research and Early Development, Cardiovascular, Renal and
Metabolism (CVRM), BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Mölndal
431 83, Sweden

¶
Medicinal
Chemistry, Research and Early Development, Oncology R&D, AstraZeneca, Waltham
02451, United States

▶
Medicinal
Chemistry, Research and Early Development, Oncology R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge
CB2 3BZ, United Kingdom

▷
Discovery Chemistry, Merck & Co., Inc., 33 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, United States

◀
Eli Lilly
and Company, DCRT, Avenida
de la Industria S/N, Alcobendas, Madrid
28100, Spain
*
E-mail: paul.f.richardson@pfizer.com.
*
E-mail: enriquez_garcia_alvaro@lilly.com.
812202568242562525625–2566431122025© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyThis article is licensed under CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0

## Abstract
Solvent selection plays a critical role in promoting
synthetic
chemistry reactions. Metrics from the ACS-GCIPR have led to an estimate
that solvents utilized contribute 80–90% of the waste streams
of pharmaceutical manufacturing processes. The medicinal chemistry
team of the ACS-GCIPR has performed a systematic study of the most
common transformations (over 400k reactions) utilized in the drug
discovery phase examining the solvents in which these reactions are
performed. Specifically, we have focused on the use of several solvents
that are undesirable based on their hazardous nature and/or known
adverse effects on human health. The data have shown that in over
40% of cases, the reactions profiled are conducted in what is an undesirable
solvent with the use of methylene chloride and N,N-dimethylformamide being particularly prevalent. The perspective
further discusses strategies and resources available to medicinal
chemists to enable the selection of more sustainable reaction media.

 
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 May 3; Accepted 2025 Nov 12; Revised 2025 Oct 28; Collection date 2025 Dec 25.

## Introduction
With society placing a greater focus on
the long-term well-being
of the environment and an increased onus on corporate social responsibility
to achieve this, over the last two decades the pharmaceutical industry
has expended a significant effort on improving the sustainability
of their chemical processes. Pivotal to
this initiative has been the formation of the American Chemical Society
Green Chemistry Institute Pharmaceutical Roundtable (ACS-GCIPR), and metrics from members of this group have led
to an estimate that solvents utilized in such processes contribute
to 80–90% in terms of the mass of waste streams and 75–80%
of the overall life cycle impact of pharmaceutical manufacturing processes. Despite this study being carried out 15 years
ago, marginal improvements in decreasing solvent use for small molecule
API (active pharmaceutical ingredient) have been offset not only by
the increasing complexity of the molecules being synthesized but also
by the growth of new therapeutic modalities such as peptides and oligonucleotides, which when performed using classical solid-phase methodologies are
highly solvent-intensive particularly through the multiple resin-washing
cycles involved. While the value of employing a solvent and the roles
that this plays in mediating the transformations of organic compounds
into more complex molecules is well recognized, the extensive use
of such materials has prompted scientists to study and seek to benchmark
the health, safety and environmental (HSE) scores for a diverse array
of solvents leading to the development of various guides to enable
judicious decisions to be made in terms of selection. Typically, these guides either prepared by individual companies
or consortia such as the ACS-GCIPR are in good agreement as to which
solvents present greater hazards to the user as well as the deleterious
effects that they pose to the environment. However, while the value
of the metrics presented on the volumes of solvent utilized in the
industry is unquestionable, these have centered exclusively on amounts
employed in late development or manufacturing campaigns to produce
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs), and to the best of our knowledge, there are no systematic accounts
that accurately document solvent use in the early exploratory stages
of the drug discovery process when chemical synthesis plays an extensive
role in the production of milligram amounts of potentially thousands
of compounds for evaluation against a specific therapeutic target.
One rationale presented for this is that herein access to the required
compound is the primary goal, and while intensive synthetic efforts
are dedicated to deliver the variety of analogs required for SAR (structure
activity relationship) studies, these often entail the use of suboptimal,
low-yielding fit-for-purpose synthesis routes on milligram scale.
Application of conventional metrics such as Process Mass Intensity
(PMI) to these endeavors is both inconsistent and of questionable
overall value with high values usually being obtained as result of
the low yields and chromatographic purification methods that are typically
utilized. Taken out of context though,
PMI metrics (or similar quantitative measures) on chemistry at the
early stage of drug development strongly imply that sustainability
considerations do not play a role in the selection of the seemingly
nonefficient synthetic routes applied, and that the opportunity to
develop more green approaches to lead compounds only becomes a tangible
consideration as a molecule progresses toward further development
as a potential clinical candidate. In
discovery chemistry, the scale of operations is often cited to mitigate
these metrics though the waste streams generated and subsequent environmental
impact may not be as negligible compared to multikilogram development
and manufacturing campaigns as one envisions particularly given the
sheer number of ongoing medicinal chemistry projects and therefore
compounds being synthesized globally at any one time. In fact, while it is commonly believed that multistep synthesis
on milligram scales minimally impacts sustainability, it has been
estimated that up to 3.5 million kilograms of waste are generated
from drug discovery through preclinical studies. Furthermore, placing the sole reliance for the investigation/implementation
of more sustainable approaches to candidate compounds on the Chemical
Development department creates significant resource pressures for
groups whose primary objectives are based on time-sensitive deliveries
of high-quality materials intended for critical clinical studies.

Despite the known hazards of many substances
that are utilized
commonly as solvents within Medicinal chemistry laboratories, the
extensive role(s) and as such the inherent need for a solvent in a
chemical reaction are well recognized. While solvent minimization is a viable strategy in attaining more
favorable Green Chemistry outcomes (prevention of waste), the choice
of solvent is also critical with the use of benign solvents (principle
5) and the desire to do less hazardous chemistry (numbers 3 and 12)
highlighted in the 12 Principles of Green Chemistry. In addition, considerations, such as choosing materials
derived from renewable feedstocks and considering how easy they are
to remove, are important factors. There are several solvent selection
tools to aid in this endeavor, as discussed below. One factor that
is important to bear in mind when making solvent selection for a specific
reaction is the concept of solvent class, as often a more judicious
choice of the medium in which to carry out the reaction can be made
through switching to a related member of the family without losing
any of the benefits. An important concept with this strategy is that,
whereas naturally all chemicals/substances have some drawbacks from
an environmental/sustainability perspective, seeking to minimize these
is at the core of the decision made.

The ACS-GCIPR Medicinal Chemistry subteam was created in 2012 with
one of its key initiatives being to both raise awareness and educate
practitioners of the importance and positive downstream impact in
developing more sustainable synthetic routes in early discovery campaigns. Integral and perhaps most challenging to this
objective are to establish a mindset for a researcher to consider
and implement green chemistry right from the outset and to unequivocally
demonstrate that many legacy notions that to achieve this in a fast-paced
drug discovery environment are incorrect. With these objectives in mind, herein we focus on the potential
impact of solvent usage in medicinal chemistry programs through an
in-depth analysis of experimental data from the Journal of Medicinal
Chemistry given that this will serve as a representative reflection
of the synthetic routes employed in an early drug discovery setting. To further cement the validity of this data
set, a period of 20 years (2000–2020) was selected to provide
an accurate illustration of the trends involved, most notably capturing
the promotion of new greener solvent alternatives as well as emerging
chemical methodologies and associated solvent requirements disclosed
during an extended time phase. Not only are the solvents utilized
in specific recurrent chemical transformations considered here but
also those that are employed in both workups and purifications. Furthermore,
we discuss the drivers and incentives for making judicious solvent
selections at an early stage, most notably that such decisions can
accelerate a program through development by avoiding further route
changes/optimizations necessitated through a requirement to switch
the reaction media. It is important to note that the study reported
here evaluates HSE score criteria based on NFPA (National Fire Protection
Association) ratings using the ACS-GCIPR and CHEM21 solvent selection
guides, though other such reports provide similar guidance about the
selection of solvent replacements. This perspective also suggests
a series of preferred conditions from a sustainability perspective
for the top ten most common transformations reported in the medicinal
chemistry literature, while strategies based on miniaturization explicitly
using High Throughput Experimentation (HTE) are discussed as a mechanism
to both reduce solvent volumes and accelerate the identification of
more suitable solvents/conditions for a specific transformation.

## Solvent Hazards
There are numerous sources of information
available that provide researchers with details regarding the safety
and hazards inherent to a specific solvent/substance that is being
used. Perhaps most valuable is the MSDS
(Material Safety Data Sheet, sometimes referred to as an SDS that
contains the same information) that is supplied with all materials
and can be easily accessed from a vendor’s Web site. The MSDS is defined as a document that provides
workers with procedures for safely handling or working with a particular
substance ( ). Many companies will also retain an internal repository/database
of these as part of their Health and Safety groups. While variations
occur in the appearance of the MSDS based on the source, these documents
are typically templated and consist of 16 sections with sections 1
and 2 dealing with the identification of the substance (and the supplier)
and a high-level description of the hazards, respectively. Section
3 describes the specification of the ingredients, while measures addressing
First Aid, Firefighting, and Accidental Release are the topics for
sections 4 through 6. Section 7 talks of the handling and storage
of the material, while section 8 focuses on the exposure controls
and necessary personal protection for working with the substance in
question. Sections 9 and 10 report the physical/chemical properties
and the stability/reactivity characteristics of the material in question,
while sections 11 and 12 provide information on toxicological and
ecological studies. Sections 13 and 14 provide guidance for the disposal
and transportation of the chemical substance, with section 15 addressing
information regarding regulatory listings. Section 16 is provided
to disclose any relevant information that has not been captured elsewhere
in the document.
 
 summarizes
some of the properties of these solvents that we will provide an overview
of in this section. Based on space constraints, this is obviously
not a complete list nor is the following discussion an exhaustive
overview as detailed reports of numerous reports on physical properties,
reactivity, and ecological and toxicological profiles of each solvent
exist in the primary literature.

 The table includes thermal characteristics such as
boiling point,
flash point, and autoignition temperature. The latter two are often
confused, the flash point of a volatile material is the lowest temperature
at which its vapors will ignite if given an ignition source, while
the autoignition temperature is the lowest temperature at which a
substance will spontaneously ignite in a normal atmosphere without
a source of ignition. The NFPA rating system (NFPA 704) provides a
simple visual representation mainly intended for emergency personnel
dealing with a fire or spill to indicate the health (blue), flammability
(red), reactivity (yellow) and special (white) hazards associated
with a specific material. Different colored
sectors are employed to represent the distinct hazards with a number
rating system of 0–4 (0 representing the least and 4 representing
the greatest risk) utilized to rate each of these on the diamond displayed
on the container of the substance. provides an overview of the criteria applied
to assign ratings to materials for each hazard.
 Other labeling systems (HMIS, OSHA HazCom) are
also often used
though they are not discussed here. The
explosive limits for a solvent specify the concentration range of
a material in air which will burn or explode in the presence of an
ignition source and are usually expressed as the percent volume of
the material in the air. The Lower Explosive
Limit (LEL) is the lowest concentration of vapor that will burn in
air and for most flammable gases, it is less than 5% by volume, while
the Upper (or higher) Explosive Limit (UEL) is the highest concentration
of a vapor above which a flame will not spread in the presence of
an ignition source. It is important to note that percentages higher
than the UEL are considered to be “too rich to burn”.
The LC50 and LD50 data tabulated provide
a relative assessment to the toxicity of a specific solvent and should
be considered in context. Specifically,
toxicity is divided into multiple categories based on the duration
of exposure. Acute toxicity is typically
associated with a single exposure over a relatively short time, while
chronic toxicity addresses repeated or long-term exposure that occurs
over months to years. LD50 is used to describe acute toxicity and is the median lethal oral
(or dermal) dose predicted to cause death in 50% of the test animals. The values are expressed in milligrams of compound
per kilogram of body weight of the test species (mg/kg). While LD50 is the lethal dose, LC50 refers to the lethal
concentration and is utilized for inhalation-based studies (the values
for the latter can be reported in mg/L, mg/m3, or ppm). Comparisons are often challenging, as it is
important to remember that estimates of the LD50 are specific
to the test animals used in the study and variability is observed
not only between species but also between different studies. As a guideline, compounds with an oral LD50 of 0–50 mg/kg are considered highly toxic, while
an LD50 of >2000 mg/kg is associated with a material
of
low toxicity. Various assessments such as the Hodge/Sterner or Gosselin/Smith/Hodge
scales can be used to compare and provide a more granular description
of LD50 values, and extensive
databases are available typically through subscription such as the
Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances (RTECS).

Even though the hazards presented by several
solvents are well
understood, there are several that still find widespread use and for
some reactions/tasks represent the preferred choice in Medicinal Chemistry
synthesis programs despite their unsustainable nature ( ). These solvents come from specific solvent classes, namely hydrocarbon, chlorinated, ethereal,
and dipolar aprotic solvents with several
recent reviews providing a broad overview of their applications in
synthetic chemistry. A brief overview of each of the solvents is provided
in the following sections with more detailed information around the
hazards of these materials discussed in the Supporting Information.
 

## Hydrocarbon (Alkane) Solvents

## Hexane

n-Hexane is a very volatile
aliphatic hydrocarbon that is insoluble in water and is commonly used
as a solvent in medicinal chemistry laboratories most notably in chromatographic
separations. Caution must be exercised,
as flammable vapors from this solvent may dissipate away from a spill
and represent an explosion hazard. The odor threshold for hexane is
130 ppm with the solvent reported to have a “faint, peculiar”
odor. Various grades of hexane(s) are
available with the laboratory solvent n-hexane containing
approximately 99% n-hexane, while “hexane”
or “hexanes” is a commercial and industrial product
consisting of a mixture of n-hexane and its isomers
2-methyl- and 3-methyl-pentane along with a small number of other
hydrocarbons.

## Ethereal Solvents

## Dioxane
1,4-Dioxane is a colorless liquid that is commonly
used as a solvent in medicinal chemistry laboratories most notably
as a reaction solvent. It is completely
miscible with water and, in fact hygroscopic. The NFPA instability
rating for this solvent is primarily based on its propensity for the
formation of explosive peroxides, and robust, stringent testing criteria
(date of opening, periodic testing, and prompt, appropriate disposal
scheduled) should be established to ensure these do not become an
issue. Crystals observed in the liquid
potentially suggest that peroxidation has already occurred, and the
product should be considered to be extremely dangerous. Then, and
if peroxide formation is suspected, the container should not be opened
or moved. With respect to flammable vapors,
these may dissipate away from a spill and may represent an explosion
hazard. The odor threshold for 1,4-dioxane is 12 ppm with the solvent
reported to have a “mild faint-sweet ether-like” odor.
1,4-Dioxane is regulated by OSHA and is on the Special Health Hazard
Substance List because it is a carcinogen and is flammable.

## 1,2-Dimethoxyethane
1,2-Dimethoxyethane (DME) is a
colorless liquid with a sharp odor (no information available on the
odor threshold) resembling petroleum distillates that finds used in
research laboratories as a higher boiling alternative to both diethyl
ether and THF. It is often referred to
by a variety of other names such as glyme, monoglyme, dimethyl glycol,
ethylene glycol dimethyl ether, and dimethyl cellosolve, and finds
more extensive use as the low-viscosity component of the solvent for
electrolytes of lithium batteries. It
is completely miscible with water and has found applications as an
alternative solvent for Grignard reactions as well as being used for
a functional solvent to provide homogeneous conditions for Pd-mediated
cross-coupling reactions. Containers
of DME may explode when heated, with vapors forming potentially explosive
mixtures with air with the possibility of the vapors originating from
the source of ignition and causing flashback. As with many ether-based
solvents, explosive peroxide formation represents a significant concern,
particularly when the material is distilled, evaporated, or otherwise
concentrated. As noted previously, robust, stringent testing criteria
(date of opening and periodic testing) should be established to ensure
that this does not become an issue.

## Diethyl Ether
Diethyl ether is a colorless liquid that
is for practical purposes immiscible with water (solubility 6.05 g/100
mL at 25 °C), and possesses a pungent, sweetish, aromatic-like
odor with a reported odor threshold of 0.83 ppm in air. While commonly used as a solvent in research
laboratories perhaps most notably as a solvent to facilitate crystallizations/extractions
or solvent for organometallic reactions, diethyl ether is probably
more generally known as being extensively used as a general anesthetic. However, owing to its high flammability making
the solvent incompatible with modern surgical techniques as well as
reports of abnormal liver function tests from patients anesthetized
using diethyl ether, its use in the medical setting is now obsolete. The flammability is widely cited as the major
hazard associated with this solvent, and the compound is on the Special
Health Hazard Substance List due to this. Containers may explode when
heated, with vapors forming potentially explosive mixtures with air
with the possibility of the vapors originating to the source of ignition
and causing flashback. Again, the formation of explosive peroxides
over time represents a significant concern, and containers should
be dated upon opening and tested periodically for the presence of
peroxides.

## MTBE (Methyl-tert-Butyl Ether)
Methyl-tert-butyl ether (MTBE or sometimes TBME) is on the Hazardous
Substance List as it is cited in by ACGIH, DOT, DEP, IARC, IRIS, and
EPA, and it is also on the Special Health Hazard Substance List because
of its flammability. It is reported to
smell like turpentine (like petroleum distillates) with other descriptors
of its odor being “bitter”, “fruity”,
or akin to a “cleaning-agent”. The odor threshold is
reported to be between 0.09 and 0.13 ppm though such values tend to
be somewhat broad and as such smell alone should not be relied upon
to determine potential exposure. MTBE
is used as an octane booster in gasoline, as well as a solvent in chemical manufacture and in medicine to
facilitate the dissolution of gallstones. In research laboratories, MTBE is promoted as a safer alternative
to diethyl ether and is used for many of the same purposes (such as
reactions and to facilitate precipitations). Specific advantages to support this include a higher boiling point,
reduced water solubility, and a lesser tendency for the formation
of peroxides. It is flammable, and containers
may explode upon heating with the vapors having the potential to form
explosive mixtures with air. In addition, vapors may travel back to
a source of ignition, leading to flashback.

## Chlorinated Solvents

## Dichloromethane
Dichloromethane (methylene chloride,
DCM) is on the Right to Know Hazardous Substance List owing to being
cited by the full gamut of regulatory agencies (OSHA, EPA, ACGIH,
DOT, NIOSH, NTP, NFPA, IARC, and DEP), as well as on the Special Health
Hazard Substance List. The compound is
a colorless, volatile liquid with a sweet smell with the odor threshold
cited between 25 to 150 ppm (note: odor thresholds vary widely and
should not be relied on solely in determining potentially hazardous
exposures). Regarding exposure, dichloromethane
may be a carcinogen in humans, and as such there is no considered
safe level of exposure and all contact should be reduced to the lowest
possible level. Despite this, the solvent
was widely used in paint and varnish removal products and is still employed in research laboratories as a reaction
medium, extensively for liquid/liquid
extractions (dichloromethane is immiscible with water) and for chromatographic
separations. Dichloromethane has no flash
point under conventional conditions though it is flammable (flash
point −7 °C) when exposed to O2 gas. Dichloromethane can also form flammable vapor-air
mixtures above 100 °C and has an autoignition temperature of
556 °C. Although dichloromethane may burn, it does not readily
ignite though poisonous gases including hydrogen chloride and phosgene
are produced in a fire.

## Chloroform
Similarly, to dichloromethane, chloroform
is listed on both the Right to Know Hazardous Substance List and the
Special Health Hazard Substance List. Chloroform is a colorless liquid
reported to have a pleasant, sweet smell, with an odor threshold between
2.4 and 85 ppm, though as noted odor thresholds vary greatly and odor
should not be solely relied upon to determine potentially hazardous
exposures. Chloroform is a probable carcinogen
in humans, and as such, there are no safe levels of exposure, and
all contact should be reduced to the minimum possible level. Chloroform is used as a solvent and in the manufacture
of refrigerants, resins, and plastics. As a laboratory solvent specifically both in liquid/liquid extractions
and chromatography with dichloromethane (see above) is suggested as
a suitable replacement for chloroform though the higher boiling point
of the latter still leads to its use in some thermally mediated reactions,
while the deuterated version is widely used as an NMR solvent. Historically, chloroform was widely employed
as an anesthetic since the 1850s, though this practice stopped after
ca. 100 years owing to both the complications encountered in controlled
administration of an effective dose as well as the development of
safer alternatives. Chloroform has a
boiling point of 61 °C, with no flash point (caution should be
exercised herein as chloroform often contains ethanol, which is volatile
and flammable, as a stabilizer) or autoignition temperature. No explosive
limits are reported for chloroform though explosions of sealed containers
have occurred through reactions with acetone and/or strong bases. In a fire, it should also be noted that chloroform
can lead to the production of poisonous gases.

## 1,2-Dichloroethane
While 1,2-dichloroethane (DCE) may
be a carcinogen and, as such, is listed on the Right to Know Hazardous
Substance as well as the Special Health Hazard Substance Lists, unlike
DCM and chloroform, DCE is also a flammable solvent. DCE is a colorless
liquid reported to have a pleasant smell with an odor threshold of
between 88 and 400 ppm, though due to variances herein, this should
not alone be used to determine hazardous exposures. As a possible carcinogen, there are no safe levels of exposure
and therefore all contact should be reduced to as low a level as possible. In addition to its use as a laboratory solvent,
DCE is widely used to make vinyl chloride and is a key step in the manufacture of PVC and was historically
used as an antiknock additive in gasoline. DCE has a boiling point of 83 °C thus representing a higher
boiling option to both the previously discussed chlorinated solvents,
and forms azeotropes with many other solvents including water (at
a boiling point of 71 °C) despite being immiscible with the latter. The utility of DCE though as a solvent can to
some degree be limited by its potential reactivity with functional
groups such as amines. Containers of
DCE even when empty should be kept away from heat and sources of ignition,
and vapors can form explosive mixtures in air and travel back to a
source of ignition and flashback. Thermal decomposition can lead to
the release of toxic and irritating gases and vapors including CO,
CO2, hydrogen chloride, and phosgene.

## Dipolar Aprotic Solvents

## 
N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF)
DMF is included on the candidate list for REACH (Registration,
Evaluation, Authorization, and Restriction of Chemicals Regulation)
within the EU (ECHA – European Chemical Agency) as a substance
of very high concern (SVHC) owing primarily to acute toxicity and
its reported propensity to lead to adverse reproductive and developmental
effects. In addition, it is on the Right
to Know Hazardous Substance List, owing to citations from a broad
range of regulatory organizations. DMF is a colorless (though sometimes
slightly yellow) liquid that is hygroscopic and miscible with water.
It is reported to have a fishy, unpleasant (ammonia-like) odor with
an odor threshold of 2.2 ppm (estimates of this have varied between
0.47 and 100 ppm again demonstrating how odor thresholds can vary
greatly and given this odor alone should not be taken to determine
potential exposure). DMF is widely used
as an industrial solvent to produce polymer fibers, films, and surface
coatings. In the pharmaceutical industry,
polar aprotic solvents such as DMF are broadly used for specific subsets
of reactions (SNAr, amide bond formation, solid-phase peptide
synthesis) exploiting its relatively high boiling point, and its ability
to solubilize a wide range of drug-like molecules as well as in crystallization
processes in which the miscibility with water (as an effective antisolvent)
is taken advantage of. DMF has a boiling
point of 153 °C, though it is purified through distillation under
reduced pressure to avoid potential decomposition. Although this is not reported to occur until much higher
temperatures, disproportionation leading to CO and dimethyl amine can be observed in some reaction media, while
there have been instances of DMF vapors traveling back to an ignition
source leading to a flashback.
DMF has been extensively used
as a solvent for synthetic reactions utilizing the widely employed
strong base sodium hydride. This is mainly due to the solvent’s
ability to solubilize both organic and inorganic compounds. However,
despite the prevalence of this practice, the hazards associated with
the thermal instability of NaH/DMF mixtures particularly on scale-up
are significantly underappreciated and seldom discussed within the
chemistry community. Thermal decomposition
of a NaH/DMF mixture was first observed in the 1960s with further
incidents reported since in the literature, while calorimetric studies
demonstrated that these mixtures can self-heat at temperatures often
in an unpredictable manner though at temperatures as low as 26 °C.
A more detailed report of the explosive hazard of NaH in DMF was published
in 2019, and while this combination is rarely seen now in scale-up
synthetic routes, it is still utilized in medicinal chemistry laboratories,
and this is a practice that should be highly discouraged. In a similar manner, studies have also demonstrated
that solutions of NBS in DMF undergo a hazardous thermal decomposition
at low temperature with a safe working temperature for a 22 wt % solution
established to be 32 °C. Probing
this phenomenon highlighted a possible autocatalytic mechanism for
decomposition with further investigations carried out to establish
the role of concentration/materials, etc., on both the onset temperature
and the overall energy output.

## 
N,N-Dimethylacetamide (DMA/DMAc)
Like DMF, DMA is included on the candidate list for REACH within
the EU as a substance of very high concern (SVHC) owing primarily
to acute toxicity and its reported propensity to lead to damage the
liver. In addition, it is on the Hazardous
Substance List owing to citations from a range of regulatory organizations.
DMA is a colorless liquid that is hygroscopic and miscible with water.
It is reported to have a faint ammonia-like odor with an odor threshold
of 47 ppm though the range of accepted odor thresholds can be quite
broad thus highlighting that caution should be exercised in relying
on odor alone as a warning for potentially hazardous exposures. In addition to being employed in medicinal chemistry
laboratories, DMA is used as a solvent for plastics, resins, and gums. In research, its employment as a solvent is
often to exploit its polarity, relatively high boiling point, and
ability to effectively solubilize a broad range of both organic and
inorganic compounds. This miscibility with water also presents an
opportunity in the crystallization space in which the aqueous component
acts as an “anti-solvent”. DMA has a boiling point of 165 °C being again distilled under
vacuum to avoid thermal disproportionation, which leads to dimethylamine
being produced. DMA has a flashpoint
of 63 °C and an autoignition temperature of 490 °C with
the potential for containers to explode when heated (note that both
product and empty containers should be kept away from heat and sources
of ignition).
In a similar manner to DMF, DMA has also been
widely employed as a solvent for reactions involving the strong base
NaH. Process safety studies have confirmed that this results in a
mixture that possesses a propensity for self-heating with the formation
of noncondensable gasesous products during thermal decomposition,
thus presenting a viable scenario for a runaway reaction. GC studies
herein showed that the release of H2 occurred at a lower
temperature than with the NaH/DMF sample with methane, ethane, acetylene,
and CO also been observed as being formed. Avoiding using NaH/DMA
even in discovery-scale reactions is strongly recommended.

## 
N-Methylpyrrolidone (NMP)
NMP (1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone)
is reported on the REACH authorization list as an SVHC owing to its
toxicity profile specifically that the compound may be a teratogen
in humans leading to malformation of embryos. In addition, it causes severe irritation to the skin and eyes and
may irritate the lungs. NMP is also listed on both the Right to Know
Hazardous Substance List (cited by DOT, DEP, NFPA, and EPA) and the
Special Health Hazard Substance List. NMP is a colorless, hygroscopic
liquid noted to have a “mild-amine”, fishy-like smell
with an odor threshold reported to be between 4 and 10 ppm though
odor should not solely be used as an indicator to determine potential
exposure. NMP is a combustible liquid
and should be kept away from heat, sparks, and sources of ignition.
NMP is widely used as a solvent in a variety of industries including
paints/coatings removal, petrochemical processing, agricultural chemicals,
electronics cleaning, and industrial/domestic cleaning. The high boiling point of this solvent is exploited
in synthetic chemistry, for example, in Cu-based Ullmann couplings, and again the miscibility with water can be
taken advantage of in developing suitable crystallizations for emerging
drug development candidates.

## Resources to Inform Solvent Selection
With the hazards
of several solvents established, it is important to consider what
role solvents play in a reaction, and what resources are available
to inform the decisions made in selecting them. Specifically, the use of a solvent is key to enable mixing and mass transport between phases and can have an influence on both the rate and selectivity
,
 of a particular
process.
,
 Perhaps the most important use
of solvents is from a safety perspective, wherein the reaction medium
typically acts as a “heat sink” to control exotherms
arising from the reaction. Solvents also are widely utilized in techniques
involved in product isolation and though we will not consider this
here, in cleaning protocols. While many
are beyond the scope of this perspective, it is important to note
that several suggested “greener alternatives” have been
investigated that avoid the use of a conventional reaction solvent
including running reactions neat, solid-phase
reactions as well as employing surfactants
to enable chemistry in aqueous media or exploring emerging options for conducting reactions such as ionic
liquids or supercritical fluids. It cannot be overemphasized how important the
selection of a solvent is not only in dissolving and dispersing the reaction
participants but also in being of the appropriate polarity to promote the chemistry (SN2, E1CB, etc.) and through modification of the solute properties
(redox potential, pKa, H-bonding). Add to this the benefits gained through removing impurities/byproducts
through partitioning, and isolation
of the desired product by crystallization demonstrates how selection of the right solvent from the outset
can alleviate issues with downstream processing. The contribution of the solvent toward the Process Mass
Intensity (PMI) of a process only exacerbates this decision and most
notably how the potential hazards arising from this should be minimized.
The ACS Green Chemistry Institute Pharmaceutical Roundtable (ACS-GCIPR)
was established in 2005 when the ACS Green Chemistry Institute and
a handful of pharmaceutical companies saw an opportunity to work together
in a precompetitive manner to promote green chemistry and engineering
innovation. One of the major initiatives of the ACS-GCIPR is the development
of a robust suite of tools that embrace
commonly agreed-upon metrics and support chemists’ choices
around material and method selection to maximize resource efficiency,
minimize hazards, and reduce waste and cost over the life cycle of
the process. While initially developed
by and for the pharmaceutical industry, it should be emphasized that
these tools are also useful and accessible to the broader chemistry
and chemical engineering communities. Two such resources have been developed with respect to solvent selection,
namely a solvent guide and a solvent
selection tool. While the former provides
tabulated information ranking solvents through evaluation of various
properties, the latter allows a more prospective approach to solvent
selection/optimization through identification of suitable reaction
media utilizing the desired properties to facilitate the process as
inputs.
While the properties of a solvent are key to making
an informed
decision, there are other factors that need to be considered. Obviously,
the chemistry must work, and it is important that the solvent is also
inert under the reaction conditions, while enabling the workup/isolation
of the desired product can also streamline the process. Solvent recovery
and potential for recycling should be considered, while safety and
potential hazards to both health and the environment are critical.
Overall cost not only to purchase the material but also to dispose
of the waste stream in compliance with the relevant legislation must
be kept in mind. The term “green solvent” is widely
employed in the chemistry literature, and it is important to establish
criteria for a material to meet with this definition. Specifically, a material should be derived
from a renewable feedstock and place low demands on the energy required
to produce it. The solvent should also be biodegradable, insoluble
in water, and have a midrange boiling point in that it is not too
low as to be considered a VOC and not too high in that it is difficult
to recycle. Married to these characteristics should be the properties
of materials that are considered to be “safe” solvents
with high stability, low flammability (high FP) and low to moderate
toxicity.
Often during discussions regarding the development/utilization
of solvents, the environmental impacts associated with the overall
manufacture of the materials are overlooked though they are a vital
part of the complete picture. While a detailed discussion of this
is beyond the scope of this perspective, it is, however, critical
for the scientist to have knowledge of the factors involved to allow
for both the judicious selection of current reaction solvents to be
made as well as a critical benchmarking of the processes reported
to produce emerging “greener” reaction solvents. In
addition, when considering aspects of worker safety, it is important
also to consider workers associated with the various manufacturing
processes in addition to the end user. In many cases, the manufacturing
processes for a solvent are energy-intensive and generate significant
greenhouse gas emissions, thus contributing to climate change, with
this issue being exacerbated by the requisite transportation of solvents
to various locations for use. As noted, many solvents are volatile
organic compounds (VOCs) that vaporize quickly at room temperature
and, during manufacture, can escape into the atmosphere. Reactions
occur with other chemicals contributing to ground-level ozone, which
is a component of smog. Not only does this contribute to air pollution
but also leads to impacts on health, such as causing respiratory issues
and triggering asthma. Many manufacturing processes for solvents also
generate wastewater that can often contain chemical pollutants, with
stringent control measures required to prevent these entering waterways
to contaminate aquatic ecosystems. With newer reaction media, much
onus is placed on these being derived from renewable feedstocks as
most of the current solvents we utilize are derived from oil and gas,
which are finite resources, though the overall proposed manufacture
of a new solvent (or a conventional solvent from renewable feedstocks)
has to be considered as more hazardous processes may be involved if
a biobased feedstock is employed as the raw material. In addition, for a complete lifecycle analysis
of a solvent to be derived, the extraction/processing of the raw materials
also needs to be considered. While developing
newer reaction media represents an aspirational long-term goal, one
key factor which should be implemented where viable to mitigate the
environmental impact of a solvent is solvent recovery/recycling systems
that reduce waste and can save costs/resources through enabling reuse
of a solvent. However, in discovery,
implementing such systems is often not viable owing to the scales
involved, while in pharmaceutical industry development/manufacturing,
there are regulatory guidelines to comply with.

## Solvent Guides/Tables
As noted, there are numerous
solvent guides readily available, though they all represent variations
on a theme most notably in how the relevant information is presented.
Behind each of these guides, though, three common themes emerge: worker
safety, process safety, and environmental and regulatory considerations.
These are then broken down into various subcategories, which can be
“scored” for each of the solvents under consideration
based on the available data, with the range of scores across categories
then weighted according to the specific guide to provide an overall
desirability for each specific solvent (and class). Typically, the
guides are presented in a manner that allows granular decisions to
be made based not only on the overall rankings of solvents but also
on differentiation in the three areas defined above. Within these,
for worker safety, carcinogenicity,
mutagenicity, reprotoxicity, skin absorption/sensitization, and toxicity
are typically considered, while for process safety, flammability,
potential for high emissions (high vapor pressure), peroxide formation, static charge, and odor issues are considered.
Finally, ecotoxicity, potential groundwater contamination, EHS regulatory restrictions, ozone depletion, photoreactivity, and compliance with all relevant
legislation are all part of an evaluation of environmental and regulatory
considerations.

A survey of the
solvent selection guides published shows there to be approximately
67% agreement in terms of the classifications of the materials evaluated.
While there is excellent agreement in terms of most solvents that
are either recommended or highly hazardous, there are discrepancies
distinguishing between recommended/problematic or problematic/hazardous
classifications based on a different weighting of the criteria used
in the assembly of discrete guides. The IMI-Chem21 project funded
through the EFPIA (European Foundation of Pharmaceutical Industries
and Associations) and the European Union comprised of a number of
companies (including several pharmaceutical companies) and universities
with the overall remit to develop sustainable biological and chemical
methodologies both through supporting research as well as providing
training packages. One of the components
of the latter was the development of a common solvent selection guide
to allow a preliminary assessment of a solvent’s desirability
to be used for scale-up purposes in the fine chemical industry. This
guide not only includes classical solvents, but also is extended to
newer solvents as well as highlighting bioderived solvents. Although the guide was assembled as part of
a collaborative effort, like in all such endeavors, there are potential
gaps in the methodology used with suggestions that the health criteria
should be based on OEL (Occupational Exposure Limit) while the environmental scoring should include the CO2 synthesis impact/GWP (Global Warming Potential). However, it is stressed that the tool is intended
for a preliminary assessment, with further discussion encouraged in
specific cases to challenge the ranking.
For the Chem21 solvent
guide, the scoring (score in each category
between 1 and 10) and ranking are determined as follows. The physical
data and GHS (globalized harmonized system) hazard statements are collected from the SDS, and the safety
score is calculated using the flash point, autoignition temperature,
resistivity, ability to form peroxides, etc. This proves the easiest
to establish as while the health score reflecting the occupational
hazard would most ideally be linked to the OELs, these are only established
for the most common solvents, and in addition, these threshold limits
are not unified. The health score is therefore linked to the most
stringent H3xx statement, thus capturing the potential severity of
the hazard as well as the range of impact. To these scores, a modifier
of “plus 1” is added if the boiling point is less than
86 °C. For solvents with incomplete toxicological data, a default
score of 5 is assigned. The environmental scoring is still not complete
based on lack of data for some materials though it is based on boiling
point as well as the nature of the H4xx statement. For each solvent,
three scores (HS&E) are determined with the ranking determined
by a combination of these. Solvents with one score >8 or two scores
>7 are classified as “hazardous” (red), one score
=
7 or two scores between 4 and 6 are assigned “problematic”
(yellow), while all other solvents are “recommended”
(green).
The version of the guide showing 53 common solvents
is shown in . As the ranking
system does not distinguish between “hazardous” and
“highly hazardous” solvents, several have been defined
as the latter based on group discussion. With the methodology, 36
solvents present a clear ranking with an 81% concordance with that
obtained from the survey of the other published solvent selection
guides, though it should be noted that in some cases this tool underestimates
both the health and safety hazards presented by a specific solvent.
In the cases in which a clear ranking was not determined, the default
appears to be close to that previously reported.
 This methodology was also applied to a series of
emerging solvents
that have been purported as “greener” replacements for
classical solvents. The data are presented in , and while highlighting the value of some
of these alternative reaction media, it also serves to focus on areas
in which more information is needed regarding both their ecotoxicity
and general toxicity profiles. For some as well, it is also key to
ensuring reaction compatibility prior to utilization.
 

## ACS-GCIPR Solvent Selection Tool
“What would
serve as a suitable replacement solvent” is a typical question
that arises during the optimization of a chemical reaction, and usually,
the obvious answer to this is to consider homologues of what the currently
employed solvent is. For example, we replaced methanol with ethanol.
However, this analysis can be somewhat flawed as it offers the question
as to not only whether ethanol is the best alternative but also whether
methanol was actually the best starting point. An alternative way
to consider this is to find a way to define whether solvents are “similar”
or “different” in behavior beyond simple chemical functionality
and to search for the ideal solvent based on the needs of the reaction.
While the solvent selection guides, we have considered aid in identifying
solvents, they are typically utilized for postselection comparison
between the solvent options. While this is valuable, it should be
considered that often making an objective decision can be compromised
by several factors, notably, what solvents are readily in hand, what
did the chemist use last time for such a transformation, or the commercial
availability of the solvent. With these factors in mind, the choice
of solvent is restricted to a simple consideration of the chemistry
(polarity, incompatible functionality, and temperature range).
The ACS-GCIPR solvent selection tool reverses this philosophy and
focuses on the molecular properties as opposed to the solvents themselves
and looks to see the properties that will either interfere with or
facilitate the proposed process with the ideal selection envisioned
to work across the reaction, workup, and isolation steps. The tool
features 272 solvents including research, process, and next-generation
green solvents with ∼100 options included for the user to filter/highlight
to help identify the best for their given reaction. Included herein
are a range of 30 physicochemical properties for each solvent including
rudimentary experimental data like boiling/melting points, viscosity,
or other safety markers like flash/ignition points, which can be combined
with properties that capture aspects of the solvent’s polarity,
polarizability, and hydrogen-bonding ability, such as dielectric constants,
dipole moments, or Hansen parameters to name a few. The filter tab
also allows the user to select or discard different functional groups
in order to restrict the output to a given class of solvents. Other
categories that can be evaluated are impacts on health, environmental
effects on air and water, life-cycle assessment, and ICH solvent information
( ). What the
tool intends to do is to enable the user to define the requirements
of their application with a set of 272 solvents and then be dynamically
interrogated to provide a shortlist of hits meeting these parameters.
 The objectivity highlighted through the solvent
selection tool
represents the key differentiator in that during this phase of the
workflow leading to the identification of the shortlist, the specific
identities of the solvents are never explicitly revealed. This serves
to not only remove any inherent biases but also facilitate the opportunity
to identify less obvious solvents that may be potentially advantageous
for a specific application.
At this juncture, it is instructive
to learn how the tool works
and to validate its performance given the body of knowledge that the
scientific community has accumulated over time regarding classical
solvents. The first challenge is to break down each solvent into a
series of descriptors with many of these being identified, such as
chemical functionality, molecular descriptors, physical properties,
regulatory classification, legal controls, environmental impact, and
health and safety performance with numerous subcategories present
in many of these. In evaluating a solvent for a specific purpose,
some or all of these descriptors could be important in making the
right decision, while it can be challenging making comparisons while
balancing the impact of a wide range of parameters. To achieve this
and enable identifying “similar” and “different”
options, it is necessary to represent solvents at a level beyond the
individual molecular properties. For this purpose, using a multivariate
technique such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA) allows many potentially
correlated parameters to be reduced to a small number of descriptors. For the solvent data, PCA identified 5 principal
components, enabling a model to be generated to distribute the solvents
in 5-dimensional space (PC1 through PC5). There have been various
reports on utilizing PCA for the analysis of solvents though a facile
method to understand this is that when considering how a solvent may
interact with a solute, there are several potential mechanisms that
may be at play, which may all depend to varying degrees of different
properties of the solvent molecule under consideration. Given this, PCA is an established method to
“combine” and “weight” a series of experimental/computed
properties of a solvent into discrete parameters (PC1, PC2, etc.)
to enable benchmarking/comparison studies of solvents to be carried
out effectively using the selection tool.
The default view in
the tool is the projection in the plane of
the most dominant descriptors (PC1, PC2), and initial validation of
the tool can be derived when one visualizes solvents with the same
primary functionality (homologues within the same series) across these
two vectors with the outcome that they occur in very close proximity
to each other on the plot. From a high-level perspective, PC1 is the
dominant descriptor representing a global lipophilicity (hydrophobicity)-polarity
scale, while PC2 captures the next most significant characteristics
and provides a representation of the hydrogen-bonding ability of a
solvent. Subsequent PCs (PC3–PC5) account for progressively
smaller amounts of the total variance, signifying finer distinctions
in a solvent’s properties (volume, 3D shape, surface area,
etc.). Within the analysis, it is important to bear in mind that a
specific property/molecular descriptor can be embedded into multiple
PCs though with a variation in terms of its weighting/contribution
to that global property. In addition to validation of the generated
PCA map through observed clustering of a related chemical series of
esters, correlation with observed chemical phenomena (keto-enol tautomerism, O- vs C-alkylation, rates of SNAr reactions, etc.) provides further authentication of the value
of this approach. While it is intuitive to infer that those solvents
in proximity on the map are similar, this may not be the case in all
dimensions, demonstrating that solvents that at first inspection appear
very different (for example, in terms of functionality) may offer
more similarities than simple chemical functionality may suggest,
thus highlighting the value of this approach ( ). While the background to how the data are
compiled and validated is useful to know, many users can exploit the
tool simply to provide a graphical view of the solvent shortlist.
 
 illustrates
two high-level scenarios in which the value of utilization of the
solvent selection tool might be realized. The first is a screening
scenario in which a new reaction is being considered, and it is not
clear what is required in terms of solvent properties for the application
( a). The remit
being screening already implies that there is only limited information
available to start a search, and as such the exercise is truly holistic.
Herein identifying an initial hit is useful, and then applying appropriate
filters will provide a shortlist of possible alternatives to evaluate.
Given the nature of the exercise, avoiding aggressive application
of the filters is beneficial. Furthermore, when the desired view has
been generated, a selection of representative solvent candidates from
discrete quadrants will provide a first-pass evaluation as to the
desirable property space for the solvent for the transformation under
investigation.
 A second scenario is perhaps more clear-cut being
an optimization
in which an initial hit is known (perhaps identified through screening),
though replacement options are desired ( b). In this case, it is reasonable to expect
that proximal solvents to the initial hit on the PCA map will provide
some degree of “similar” behavior. With this, applying
filters to a localized subset should provide a reasonable starting
point, while expanding/reducing the scope of these criteria is possible
depending on the scope/goals of the optimization study. In this scenario,
the tool serves as an “idea generator” and evaluating
across the various components while filtering using the properties
options allows a user to generate a “shortlist” that
can then be experimentally evaluated through a further screening campaign.
The ease of use and speed of the tool allow this to be achieved in
a relatively expeditious manner.

## Analysis of Solvent Usage in Common Reactions
Often,
the selection of a solvent for a specific transformation is based
on legacy experience, and given this and the established nature of
organic synthesis, we hypothesized that certain synthetic transformations
are more likely to rely on hazardous or problematic solvents than
others. Given this, we sought to gain a more thorough understanding
on which reaction classes have placed a strong reliance on what we
would consider to be poor solvent selections. To achieve this, we
revisited the solvent usage habits across the Medicinal Chemistry
community by surveying what reaction media were used for the most
recurrent synthetic transformation classes as previously identified
from the experimentals of J. Med. Chem. by Brown
and Bostrom in 2016.
,
 In addition to these fundamental
reactions, the central role that heterocyclic systems play in medicinal
chemistry is also taken into account with the analysis extended to
evaluate “heterocyclic synthesis”, which provides data
on the solvents utilized for reactions employed in the formation of
3, 4, 5, and 6-membered heteroatom-containing rings (N, O, and S). We conducted our SciFinder-n survey on these
transformations across a broader time frame (2000–2021) though
once again limiting the scope of our investigation to articles from J. Med. Chem. Each synthetic transformation was defined
by a structural search with remarkably ∼70% of the total reactions
undertaken coming from just six of the 20 classes (excluding “heterocycle
synthesis” from this analysis as this covers a broader range
of reaction types) that were evaluated ( ).
 A visual depiction of the solvent usage data is
displayed in in which the number
of incidences of the use of undesirable solvents is expressed as a
percentage of the total number of occurrences for each specific reaction
class. It can be noted in the analyses presented that in addition
to granular metrics regarding the use of the unsustainable solvents
highlighted in this review, data on a subset of other “hazardous”
solvents are presented. Although this category features a range of
solvents that are employed on a more sporadic basis, it demonstrates
that benzene, pyridine, carbon tetrachloride (and other chlorinated solvents), di-iso-propyl ether
,
 and HMPA have all been used as reaction media within
medicinal chemistry programs, and as with the featured unsustainable
solvents, replacing these materials in reactions of interest is strongly
recommended.
 Overall, evaluating the data, it can clearly be
seen that across
all reaction classes the use of the problematic solvents DMF and DCM
is prevalent, though despite this and the lesser use of solvents such
as Et2O, DME, dioxane, DCE, and NMP, the latter group still
sees significant use and throughout these applications, the potential
replacement with greener alternatives would be beneficial. In addition,
the data demonstrate that often a specific solvent is selected for
a discrete reaction class, thus reinforcing the hypothesis that solvent
selection is often based on legacy experience. Examples of this observation
include 1,4-dioxane for Suzuki–Miyaura (∼26%), Buchwald–Hartwig couplings (∼28%), and Boc protection/deprotections (∼11/13%); DME for Suzuki–Miyaura couplings (∼14%) and notably diethyl ether for the addition
of organometallic reagents to electrophiles (∼17%) (e.g., Grignard
reactions). Notably for these applications
involving ethereal solvents, medicinal chemists are encouraged to
test more environmentally benign derivatives like 2-MeTHF and CPME (vide infra), which have been reported to perform in a comparative
manner to those historically used for these applications.

Further analysis of these data showed
that among the 20 reaction
classes, two (amide formation and oxidation of alcohols) used unsustainable
solvents in ∼70% of the reported instances, while a further
group of 9 transformations was performed in hazardous reaction solvents
with between 50% and 70% probability ( ). In contrast, only 7 of the reaction classes
were performed in undesirable solvents less than 40% of the number
of times that they were reported. Almost half of the ∼35k amine
alkylations were reported in undesirable solvents with 33% using DMF.
Similarly, ester formation (∼15k hits) was also carried out
∼50% of the time using undesirable solvents (DCM 31%, DMF 13%),
which is somewhat surprising given that these could be avoided if
environmentally benign reaction media such as alcoholic systems are
used with an acid catalyst. The exponential growth of Pd-mediated
couplings over the past 20 years is highlighted by ∼29k examples
of Suzuki–Miyaura couplings being reported in the journal with
over half of these using hazardous solvents most notably those that
are potential carcinogens (1,4-dioxane 26%; DME 14%).
,

 While these data are interesting, it is perhaps
more instructive
to focus on what solvent choices are made for the most popular reactions
currently carried out within medicinal chemistry programs. The most
popular is amide bond formation, which is reported on >63k occasions
utilizing DCM or DMF in 28% or 36% respectively of those instances.
,
 In contrast, the formation of heterocycles represents the second
most prevalent transformation (∼56k) using hazardous solvents
∼32% of the time with either DCM or DMF being employed equally
in almost two-thirds of these occurrences. Strategies commonly invoked
for SAR investigations involve employing reactions to efficiently
forge carbon-heteroatom bonds around the periphery of a core bioactive
scaffold. Several transformations allow for the robust formation of
C–N bonds with broad substrate scope enabling their application
in parallel library format to access collections of related molecules
to expedite SAR studies. Specifically, from our data, C­(sp2)–N/O bond formation (most notably Buchwald-Hartwig couplings),
nitrogen alkylation, and reductive amination are exemplified on ∼64k occasions with
47% of these being carried out in solvents, which are “undesirable”.
For each of these transformations, one can easily identify research
opportunities to develop replacements for dioxane (28%, C­(sp2-N/O bond formation), DMF (33%, nitrogen alkylation) and chlorinated
media (29%, reductive amination) for these reactions. There are ∼39k reports of Boc deprotections,
and the data from these highlight one of the challenges often faced
within a Discovery Chemistry environment. Herein for convenience,
a commercial solution of HCl in 1,4-dioxane (4 M) is extensively utilized
as the reagent, thus leading to ∼13% of the reactions being
carried out using this solvent (this is like the statement above regarding
the use of diethyl ether for Grignard reactions given that many of
these reagents are supplied commercially as solutions in this solvent). DCM is also extensively used for Boc deprotections
(∼33% of the time, typically with TFA) while DMF is also often encountered (∼12%) in this
transformation. It is worth noting that all three of these solvents
(DCM, dioxane, and DMF) are also regularly used in reactions to install
the Boc-protecting group. One further observation from the data is
that there is a significant disparity in the reaction data between
the number of instances in which a Boc-protecting group is installed
as opposed to its removal, with the latter dominating by almost 10-fold.
At first glance, this would appear to be counterintuitive as one would
expect these reactions to be somewhat equivalent. However, discovery
chemistry programs rely to a large degree on the commercial availability
of orthogonally protected building blocks and monomers to elaborate
compounds to investigate chemical space. Given this within our programs,
the Boc-protected amine is often employed as a starting material,
and thus, only the removal is carried out within our laboratories.
From our survey, the six transformations described thus far account
for almost 70% of the reactions described with the remaining 14 reaction
classes accounting for the remainder. However, distinct trends emerge in the analysis of this subset of
data. Notably, the reduction of aromatic nitro groups to anilines
appears to exhibit the most benign solvent profile with this typically
carried out in solvents such as methanol, ethanol, EtOAc, and THF
in contrast to examples in more problematic reaction media (13%). Perhaps this is not surprising given that this
transformation is often carried out via hydrogenation with a heterogeneous
catalyst and the typical solvents used
present favorable properties in terms of both solubilizing the gas
and facilitating the mass transfer between the three phases. While selecting a potential solvent for this
reaction, one can prioritize using either an alcohol or EtOAc for
this transformation, specifically when the significant energy considerations
associated with the manufacture of THF are considered. This though
is very much the exception with, for example, DMF being frequently
used across phenol alkylation (35%), ester formation (13%), O-debenzylation
(6%) and C­(sp2)–N/C­(sp2)–O bond
formations (7%). As noted, the latter also frequently uses dioxane
(28%), while another ethereal solvent DME is employed in ∼14%
of Suzuki–Miyaura couplings. The analysis of this subset of
reaction classes also highlights DCM as a “go-to” solvent
for numerous transformations including alcohol oxidations (54%, often
in tandem with the Dess–Martin periodinane of related hypervalent-iodine-based
reagents), sulfonamide synthesis (40%),
ester formation (31%) O- (20%), and N-debenzylations (15%). A rationale
presented for the prevalent use of solvents such as DMF and DCM in
medicinal chemistry is often their ability to solubilize a broad range
of organic molecules, though AI/ML-based
predictive methods for compound solubility are emerging, which may
provide an opportunity to select more sustainable reaction media based
specifically on the substrate of interest.

With these data in hand, one can immediately reach the conclusion
that significant impacts in terms of sustainability can be gained
within a medicinal chemistry program simply by developing “greener”
conditions specifically with the use of more environmentally benign
solvents for the transformation. To achieve this, the data were further
refined to highlight not only the most recurrent reaction classes
but also those that typically employ undesirable solvents. This led
us to identify the following 12 transformations, which would benefit
from greener reaction conditions with the numbers in parentheses representing
an approximate “count” of the occasions that this reaction
has been performed in a hazardous solvent in the period under review.
These are amide formation (45k), Boc deprotection (26k), amine alkylation
(18k), synthesis of heterocycles (18k), Suzuki–Miyaura coupling
(16k), ester hydrolysis (9k), reductive amination (8k), sulfonamide
synthesis (8k), ester hydrolysis (8k), phenol alkylation (7k), C­(sp2)–N/C­(sp2)–O bond formations (4k),
and oxidation of alcohols (4k). However, despite what might appear
to be a somewhat bleak outlook, from our extensive literature review,
for all of these transformations noted here, there exist numerous
examples in which the reactions are conducted under more sustainable
conditions. In the next section, a series of these have been collated
for each transformation in a readily accessible format, thus enabling
these to be investigated as potential “first-pass” conditions
upon encountering a new substrate without the need for extensive literature
research.

## Toward Greener Conditions for Commonly Used Transformations
There are several approaches that can be adopted to pursue greener
conditions for a specific transformation under investigation. As highlighted,
the choice of solvent plays a major role in assessing the overall
sustainability of the reaction not only through the relative volume
of possible waste generated but also through its potentially undesirable
properties (toxicity, etc.). Considering this, the strategy of straight
substitution of the solvent for a more sustainable medium presents
a logical path forward, and this can be greatly facilitated using
a solvent guide as previously discussed. This has successfully been
implemented and reported on several occasions for example, the replacement
of DCM with 2-MeTHF for amide bond formations, switching DMF for more
recently developed polar aprotic solvents like cyrene or dimethyl isosorbide in SNAr reactions,
and replacing ether with 2-MeTHF for Grignard chemistry. An extension
of this approach is offered through the solvent selection tool, which
enables the user to utilize the most desirable properties that the
reaction medium should possess to mediate the transformation of interest
(polarity, pKa etc.) and then apply these to identify
solvents that may be of value.
With a specific transformation
in mind, the ACS-GCIPR Reagents Guide presents an excellent resource
in providing a starting point for conditions to explore for a given
reaction. Currently this tool covers 29 transformations demonstrating
for each the possible reagents to be utilized in a simple Venn diagram
format, in which conditions are assigned based on criteria around
“wide substrate scope”, “applicability to scale”,
and “greenness”. Naturally those results found at the
intersection of the three circles represent a “sweet spot”
in terms of overall applicability and sustainability ( ). However, within medicinal
chemistry programs, the objective is often speed, and as such, conditions
that have been shown previously to have worked for a wide variety
of examples are the most compelling, though these are often found
to not be particularly attractive from a green perspective.
 The strategies so far discussed focus on either
the choice of solvent
or reagent selection for a specific transformation, which overlooks
the fact that these two discrete parameters are often critically interrelated.
On most occasions when a medicinal chemist is confronted with a new
chemical series to work on, they will search a database (either a
commercial offering such as SciFinder or an institutional ELN: Electronic
Lab Notebook) for reactions that have been run on similar substrates
to provide initial conditions to test. With this workflow, it is highly
likely to perpetuate chemically successful, albeit nonenvironmentally
sustainable reaction conditions given that the methods previously
utilized were largely developed in a time when the importance of sustainability
was not as widely recognized.
Based on our extensive data mining
described for obtaining the
solvent usage information, herein we propose an alternative strategy
for the choice of initial reaction conditions to evaluate when faced
with a novel chemical series. Collected in , one will find a selection of at least three
current, more environmentally sustainable conditions for each of the
ten most common reaction types observed in JMC as previously discussed.
The proposed conditions are ordered from “more conservative”
at the top to “further from precedent” at the bottom,
and we suggest that these can be utilized in situations when a medicinal
chemist is confronted with either a new substrate/chemical series
or perhaps even better when trying to “green” a current
reaction. Each reaction shows a specific substrate with the reaction
conditions and the corresponding references, thus eliminating the
need for the chemist to look up alternate sources, and it is envisioned
that will serve
as a valuable resource for “green” conditions for the
above (12) most common reaction types. To assist in both its uptake
and overall utility, a poster version of this information has been
made available in the Supporting Information for use as a Quick Reference Guide. The overall approach suggested
herein is unique in not only in marrying the reagents/solvents for
a specific transformation but also for the fact that in many cases
the selected examples have been performed on pharmaceutically relevant
substrates, thus somewhat mitigating common concerns regarding substrate
solubility under a specific set of reaction conditions, which is often
a major challenge when a simple “solvent swap” is implemented
to “green” a reaction.
,,,−

 

## Analysis of Solvent Usage in Workup/Purification
It
has been widely recognized throughout the industry that the major
contributors to the PMI of a chemical reaction are solvents and water,
and while this is well established particularly in chemical development,
medicinal chemists often use large volumes of water and organic solvents
particularly in the extractive workup of chemical transformations. In fact, the elimination of such workups and
their replacement with solvent swaps through distillation to telescope reaction steps represents a common strategy to drive down PMI numbers
within chemical development. In order
to assay the impact of solvent usage for workup and purification (vide infra) within the medicinal chemistry research phase,
a similar survey to that described previously was conducted of published J. Med. Chem. procedures between 2000 and 2021. To streamline
the analysis, a representative sampling of four publications was chosen
from each year for a total of 80 publications over the 20-year span
leading to 1874 experiments being reviewed. Of these experiments,
it was shown that 53% utilized an extractive aqueous workup procedure
( ).
,
 In the remaining cases, an extractive workup is avoided either through
direct precipitation of solutes through addition of an antisolvent
or through a simple evaporation to yield the crude product. In contrast to the range of solvents used for
reactions, the options for extraction are more limited based on the
requirement for them to be essentially immiscible with water, and
those utilized in the reactions surveyed are collected in . Pleasingly from
a sustainability perspective, over half of the analyzed reactions
used EtOAc (54%) as the solvent for extraction. However, 31% of the reactions utilized hazardous chlorinated
solvents, while 7% used extremely flammable diethyl ether, which is
also prone to peroxide formation. The survey also clearly reveals
that there has been little to no uptake in medicinal chemistry settings
of newly emerging solvents such as MTBE, CPME, and 2-MeTHF for extractions. While these solvents can serve as greener and
safer alternatives to diethyl ether (the flashpoint of diethyl ether
is −40 °C, while that of 2-MeTHF is −12 °C),
2-MeTHF also presents an alternative to dichloromethane, which as
noted has both health and environmental concerns. From a practical
perspective, 2-MeTHF (unlike THF) is immiscible with water and can
thus be used to extract products directly from reaction mixtures without
the formation of emulsions, which is often a challenge with dichloromethane.
One of the drivers often presented for the use of chlorinated solvents
for extraction within medicinal chemistry is that the desired products
are often highly polar and water-soluble, and as such diethyl ether
and EtOAc are ineffective as extraction solvents. Recent work by Reetz and coworkers has identified n-butanol as an ecologically
viable choice for such systems with this solvent proving to be particularly
effective for the extraction of polar compounds from enzymatic processes. Furthermore, simply through reducing both the
number of extractions employed during an aqueous workup and the volume
of solvents utilized during the process can greatly reduce the overall
PMI value of the transformation leading to a more sustainable outcome.

 In addition to workup conditions, the experimental
procedures were
also probed to assay the trends in the purification methods of choice
within a medicinal chemistry setting. Of the 1874 reactions surveyed,
ca. 90% utilized a purification method of some kind ( ), while the survey indicated
that in contrast to chemical development, telescoping reactions are
not regularly exploited in research settings with only 187 instances
of this being encountered. It is self-evident that telescoping of
reactions can lead to a reduction in solvent usage (reaction, workup,
and purification) as well as potentially time and energy savings.
In contrast to development chemistry, telescoping represented only
∼10% of this data set though this is probably not too surprising
based on the primary focus of the articles being the syntheses of
multiple discrete compounds for biological assays. The predominant
method of purification (>50% of cases) was normal-phase chromatography
using a solid support, which in most cases is silica.
,
 This group has previously published on concepts around “sustainability
chromatography” providing not only a roadmap of potential alternatives
to avoid chromatography but also suggested “greener”
replacements to commonly used mobile phases. The popularity of this method of purification has no doubt been
maintained through the ease of accessibility of simple to use, automated
systems that are prevalent throughout medicinal chemistry laboratories. The survey indicated that the predominant nonpolar
eluant in normal-phase chromatography was hexane, though from a Green
Chemistry perspective, this solvent should be replaced with cyclohexane
or more preferably heptane ( a). These latter solvents are significantly less toxic
and thus have higher occupational exposure limits than hexane. The
lower volatility of heptane compared to both hexane and pentane also
leads to lower emissions and decreased environmental impact while
also representing less of a fire hazard. From a practical standpoint,
the higher boiling point of heptane often allows compounds to be precipitated
directly upon evaporation of heptane/EtOAc mixtures. The survey also
indicates that dichloromethane, most commonly in combination with
methanol, remains a common solvent utilized in medicinal chemistry
settings for chromatography. This is even though practical, straightforward,
and more environmentally responsible alternatives to this toxic solvent
have been evaluated and proven to be effective. In particular, the
survey indicated little uptake of a 3:1 mixture of EtOAc/ethanol (polar
eluent) and heptane (nonpolar eluent) as a recommended substitution
for dichloromethane even though the EtOAc/EtOH blend is now commercially
available and a much greener solvent alternative to dichloromethane/methanol
mixtures. HPLC was also found to be
a common technique for product purification in medicinal chemistry
laboratories though evaporation/lyophilization of aqueous mixtures
can be relatively energy intensive.
,
 SFC is often
promoted as a “greener” method for product purification
,
 though the survey revealed that this is rarely utilized probably
owing to the nature of this technique (requiring high-pressure CO2 supply) thus restricting it to specialist purification laboratories.
,
 The ACS-GCIPR have recently developed an Analytical Method Greenness
Score (AMGS) tool, which can be utilized to benchmark and compare
directly analytical methods. The AMGS
metric factors in both the impact of the solvent (health, safety,
environmental, and waste), the energy demands of the instrumentation
as well as the overall technique and highlights the sustainability
benefits that can be gained in selecting more modernized methods and
techniques without compromising separation performance.
,

 

## The Role of Miniaturization and High-Throughput Experimentation
(HTE) in Greener Solvent Selection and Reducing Solvent Usage
Within medicinal chemistry, access to milligram quantities of bioactive
compounds often suffices for initial profiling in relation to target
biology and metabolic stability, and as such the scale on which one
operates becomes a critical consideration in minimizing waste. A successful discovery campaign will iteratively
improve on advanced compounds through a well-established “design,
make, test, analyze” cycle with
speed of execution being a critical factor leading to a heavy reliance
on parallel synthesis and reversed-phase/accelerated
approaches to purification to drive
decision making. This oft-unstated emphasis on proceeding in an expeditious
fashion can lead to a prioritization of compound numbers (diversity)
at the expense of poor synthetic chemistry and thus sustainability.

Miniaturization provides a complementary
strategy to solvent replacement in minimizing/reducing the pharmaceutical
industry’s footprint on global sustainability. Miniaturization and High Throughput Experimentation
(HTE) are inseparable technologies, which have advanced in their ability
to solve chemistry problems over the past 20 years. In one manifestation, HTE involves performing multiple
chemical reactions in parallel, whether for the purpose of parallel
evaluation of multiple conditions (one reaction, many sets of conditions)
or for parallel synthesis (multiple reacting partners typically under
a common set of conditions). In comparison to reactions conducted
either in dram vials or round-bottom flasks, decreasing the vessel
size to 8 × 30 mm (100 μL) or even 4 × 21 mm (25 μL)
utilizes significantly reduced solvent volumes ( ). Alternatively, reactions
can also be conducted in a 96-well (or 384/1536) plate format though solvent compatibility with plastics
(e.g., polystyrene) needs to be taken into consideration. With advances in technologies such as analytical
techniques, tumble-stirring, inertion chambers, aluminum heating blocks, LED plates, biocatalysis, innovative approaches
to reagent dosing, and parallel electrochemical
designs, the majority of synthetic organic
reactions can now be performed on a microscale (which we will define
as ≤1 mg of substrate per reaction). Hypothetically, an array of 40 microscale reactions consumes the
same quantity of substrate (and solvent) as a single reaction at a
1 mL scale ( ).

 Uptake of both miniaturization and HTE can have
profound impacts
on sustainability and Green Chemistry goals, as demonstrated specifically
through the following activities.

Rapid Optimization Increases the Probability
of Success for Parallel Synthesis
 – consider running an array of compounds under suboptimal
conditions in which only 20% of reactions lead to the desired product.
For example, if there are 24 reactions (1 mL solvent each), with a
20% success rate, only 5 analogs will be successfully obtained. Furthermore,
one strategy that is often adopted for poor-performing reactions is
to increase the scale to ensure that “some” product
is obtained leading to additional solvent use as well as potentially
laborious purification sequences. If, for example, a quick optimization
is carried out using preplated catalysts, and the success rate were to be enhanced to 80%, 19 analogs will
be registered. To illustrate this as an estimate, Scenario A translates
to 100 mL of solvent and uses 3.24 g of advanced intermediate (or
template), whereas Scenario B requires only ∼25 mL of solvent
while now using 984 mg of compound. Further benefits are also realized
with reduced cycle time as well as reductions
in waste generated owing to less starting template being used (e.g.,
discarded nitrile gloves, test tubes, syringes, purification solvents,
reaction workup waste) ( ).

Less is More.
Pushing the Boundary to Nanoscale
Synthesis – there has long been a disconnect within
medicinal chemistry between the amount of compound synthesized compared
to the amount of material needed for an initial biochemical assay,
though with additional recent advances, conducting reactions on vanishingly
small quantities (0.05 mg) has become possible. To this end utilizing automated liquid-handling techniques
capable of dispensing droplet quantities, chemists are now able to
conduct analog syntheses in a 1536-well-plate format either with or
without purification allowing a rapid and systematic evaluation of
chemical space while minimizing solvent use (conducting 1536 reactions
each in 1.2 μL of solvent uses less than 2 mL in total). This
represents a seismic shift in the volumes of solvents utilized during
an SAR campaign if the chemistries for each discrete analog are performed
on a nanoscale. A robust partnership and coordination between analytical
characterization and biological assay
development is critical for success with this approach.

Screen
to be Green – the application
of material-sparing approaches to HTE within medicinal chemistry programs
enables the rapid evaluation to identify potentially greener reaction
conditions for a specific transformation of interest. For example,
the legacy data from J. Med. Chem. suggest that amide-bond
formation is best conducted in either DMF or DCM as the reaction solvent.
Utilizing a 96-well plate format allows the experimentalist to assay
the viability of this reaction in a range of other solvents in a highly
expeditious manner. Furthermore, an HTE-based approach to reaction
development allows secondary- and ternary-interactions between reactants/catalysts/additives
and solvents to be easily detected, thus leading to a more robust
understanding of a reaction mechanism.

Green Solvents are Ideal for Miniaturization –
one of the key technical challenges presented by miniaturization
of chemistries involves the handling/dispensing of small volumes of
liquids reproducibly and accurately. HTE augmented by automation and
liquid-handling favors solvents with high viscosities such as DMSO. Polar aprotic solvents such as this exhibit
high boiling points, are ideal for the effective solubilization of
substrates and reagents, and are highly compatible with a diverse
range of plastics. This is in alignment with the Green Principle of
“Safer Solvents and Auxiliaries” and furthermore reactions
run in DMSO can be utilized directly in principle in various biological
assays provided upfront validation work is carried out.

Minimizing
Hazards – in addition
to the identity of solvent selection in relation to reaction miniaturization,
the intrinsic value of using smaller quantities of hazardous reagents
is attractive and aligns with the Green Principle of “Less
Hazardous Chemical Synthesis”.

Runaway Reactions –
while on
typical medicinal chemistry scales (milligrams), the likelihood of
uncontrolled reactions is typically low, miniaturization further reduces
the possibility of hazardous processes. Coupled with the preference for high-boiling polar solvents and
the favored practice of working under an inert atmosphere (glovebox),
operator safety is high mapping onto the principle of “Inherently
Safer Chemistry for Accident Prevention”. In addition, the
use of a glovebox assists in the mitigation of waste enabling the
preparation, storage, and long-term use of stock solutions of potentially
air- and moisture-sensitive reagents such as phosphine ligands.

Green
by Design – the aforementioned
examples of HTE applied to parallel reaction optimization and parallel
synthesis should enable more rapid decision-making and minimize design-make-test
cycles. In addition, vast quantities of data are generated during
such endeavors, and through the application of cheminformatics tools
coupled with the advances in machine learning and artificial intelligence,
the Green Principle of “Prevention” can be realized. We have already seen how HTE can reduce the
need to repeat experiments through investing upfront, while in combinatorial
designs, the use of predicted properties to enhance the “drug-likeness”
of designs means selecting compounds with a higher probability of
progressing through a project testing cascade thus eliminating the unnecessary synthesis of compounds
with undesirable properties.

To summarize, miniaturization and HTE offer an orthogonal
approach
to reducing solvent usage and therefore contribute to the overall
sustainability of our industry. And while these tools provide medicinal
chemists with many opportunities to increase efficiencies while reducing
waste, an existing challenge most notably for HTE is with relation
to waste consumables (plastic plates/glass vials), where application
of the principles of reduce, reuse, and recycle could further supplement
progress toward sustainable discovery chemistry.

## Conclusion
The Medicinal Chemistry Focus team of ACS-GCIPR
has conducted a
systematic survey of the most common synthetic transformations that
have been carried out within the drug discovery phase over the past
two decades. While these reactions are often performed on a relatively
small scale (milligrams to grams), the amount of solvent utilized
and waste generated is significant given that over 400k reactions
are profiled here. The data clearly indicate that the use of unsustainable/hazardous
solvents is prevalent within the medicinal chemistry community with
over 40% of the reactions being performed in undesirable chlorinated,
dipolar aprotic, ethereal, or hydrocarbon-based solvents with two
transformations (including amide-bond formation, which is the most
prevalent) using unsustainable solvents in over 70% of the instances
surveyed. The survey also examined the common methods and media utilized
for purification and workup of these transformations and again highlights
that most notably methylene chloride is still extensively used in
both chromatography and extractive separations.
This manuscript
provides guidance on resources for the proactive
selection of suitable reaction solvents as well as details regarding
solvent guides, which highlight suitable replacement of reaction media
as well as information around emerging “greener” solvents.
In addition, alternative protocols for the ten most encountered synthetic
transformations currently in medicinal chemistry laboratories are
also reported. Finally, the utility of both High-Throughput Experimentation
(HTE) and the emergence of AI/ML techniques for making more judicious
selections of reaction conditions are also reported. The use of solvents
as a whole within Synthetic Organic Chemistry represents a major dichotomy
with regard to Green Chemistry, and while it is acknowledged that
it is highly challenging given their critical roles to eliminate a
solvent (though “safe” minimization is highly encouraged),
making better choices in terms of selecting a reaction medium will
have a major impact on the overall sustainability of not only a specific
reaction but also the drug discovery process in our industry as a
whole. However, it is important to put the overall guidance from this
article in perspective in that herein we consider only the usage phase
of a solvent’s life cycle. While obviously this is a focal
point for the practicing medicinal chemist, from a big-picture sustainability
perspective for the global chemical enterprise, it is an absolute
priority that the full life cycle of a solvent, including its manufacture,
should be taken into account when one seeks to describe it as a “green”
solvent.

## Significance

Significance: We analyze
reactions reported from Medicinal
Chemistry laboratories over the past 20 years and report on the trends
surrounding the nature of the organic solvents used to perform these
transformations. Impact: The data clearly demonstrate
that ∼50% of the reactions analyzed are run in hazardous, unsustainable
solvents. Innovation: A broad range of strategies is
described, including solvent selection guides/tools, alternative reaction
conditions, and experimental approaches to enable more judicious solvent
selections to be made.

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgments
This manuscript was developed with the
support of
the American Chemical Society Green Chemistry Institute Pharmaceutical
Roundtable (https://www.acsgcipr.org/). The ACS GCI is a not-for-profit organization whose mission is
to catalyze and enable the implementation of green and sustainable
chemistry and engineering throughout the global chemistry enterprise.
The ACS GCI Pharmaceutical Roundtable comprises of companies in pharmaceutical,
biotechnology, agricultural, and animal sciences as well as supporting
organizations such as CMOs and CROs. The organization was established
to encourage innovation while advancing the integration of green chemistry
and engineering in pharmaceutical industry. The activities of the
Roundtable reflect its member’s shared belief that the pursuit
of green chemistry and engineering is imperative for business and
environmental sustainability. We also wish to thank both Joelle Gola
and Paul Peters of CAS for help with SciFinder-n search parameters,
and Klaus Dress (Pfizer) for assistance in preparing the Spotfire
visualizations presented herein.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
ACN (MeCN)Methyl cyanide, acetonitrile
CPMECyclopentyl methyl
ether
DCMDichloromethane
DECDiethyl carbonate
DEEDiethyl ether
DIPEDiisopropylether;
DMACDimethyl acetamide
DOLDioxolane
EtOAcEthyl acetate
GVLgamma-Valerolactone
HPMChydroxypropyl
methylcellulose
THEHigh-Throughput Experimentation
MeTHF2-Methyltetrahydrofuran
MCSGPMulticolumn counter-current solvent
gradient purification
NBP
N-butylpyrrolidinone
NFM
N-formylmorpholine
NMP
N-methylpyrrolidine
PCPropylene carbonate
SFCSupercritical fluid chromatography
THFTetrahydrofuran

## Biographies

Paul Richardson is the Director of
Analytical and
Synthesis Technologies at Pfizer. He joined Pfizer in 2004, after
working with Lexicon Pharmaceuticals as Director of Process Chemistry.
Paul received his B.Sc./Ph.D. (Chemistry) from Sheffield University
(Professor Istvan Marko). He completed postdoctoral studies at Exeter
University (Professor Stan Roberts), and at the Scripps Research Institute
(Professor Barry Sharpless). He is currently the Co-Chair of the ACS-GCIPR
and has received an ACS Heroes of Chemistry Award as part of the team
who discovered and developed Lorbrena.

Álvaro Enríquez-García was born
in Madrid and studied chemistry at the Universidad Autónoma
de Madrid, where he also obtained his M.Sc. in the asymmetric synthesis
of helicene[4]­quinones working with Prof. M. Carmen Carreño.
He carried out his Ph.D. with Prof. E. Peter Kündig (University
of Geneva) developing new asymmetric acylation catalysts, new routes
to bioactive compounds, natural products, and enantioenriched π-fused
arene chromium complexes. From 2007 to 2011, he worked as a postdoctoral
fellow in the group of Prof. Steve Ley (University of Cambridge) on
the synthesis of marine natural products (bengazoles). Since 2011
he has been in his hometown working for Eli Lilly, where he currently
is a Senior Research Advisor. Álvaro is currently the colead
of the ACS-GCIPR Medicinal Chemistry Focus Team.

Marian C. Bryan: Ph.D. from The Scripps
Research Institute,
postdoctoral studies at the California Institute of Technology, currently
a Scientific Director at Johnson & Johnson Innovative Medicine
Global Discovery Chemistry specializing in small molecule drug discovery
including peptides.

Louis Diorazio received his B.Sc. and Ph.D. (aromatic
fluorination, Dr. Dave Widdowson) from Imperial College, London followed
by postdoctoral studies on natural product synthesis (University of
Texas at Austin, Professor Phil Magnus). After 4 years in discovery
roles with CIBA Central Research (insecticides) and Novartis (respiratory),
he moved to Zeneca’s Process Development Department, where
he has been a long-time champion for effective route design to drive
sustainability performance in projects. He was cochair of the ACS
GCI Pharmaceutical Round Table (2020–2022) and inventor of
that group’s Solvent Selection Tool. In 2013, he initiated
AstraZeneca’s oligonucleotide capability and is currently Senior
Principal Scientist (New Modalities) in AstraZeneca Chemical Development
(Macclesfield, UK) with a focus on CMC advocacy and sustainability
for oligonucleotides, peptides, and antibody-drug conjugates.

Fabrice Gallou received his Ph.D.
from The Ohio State
University (2001) in the field of natural products total synthesis.
He then joined Chemical Development at Boehringer Ingelheim, working
as a process chemist responsible for route scouting and the supply
of early-phase programs. He subsequently moved in 2006 to the Chemical
Development group at Novartis, Switzerland, as a process development
chemist, and in 2008 became scientific director, responsible for global
scientific activities, overseeing development, and implementation
of practical and economical chemical processes for large-scale production
of APIs, and is now Lead Scientific Advisor in the Technical R&D
division. His research interests are in the research and development
of sustainable synthetic methodologies intended for large-scale implementation.

Shazia Keily is a Senior Chemist
in Medicinal Chemistry
at Vertex Pharmaceuticals UK. After completing her Chemistry degree
from the University of Leicester, Shazia held roles at Rhone-Poulenc
Rorer and OSI Pharmaceuticals before moving to Vertex in 2004. Over
her 20+ years of industrial experience, she has contributed to multiple
clinical candidates in several therapeutic areas. She currently leads
the UK Green Chemistry team, driving cross-site and cross-function
collaborations and initiatives to make impactful progress toward Vertex’s
sustainability goals. Under her guidance, the team has achieved the
highest ‘Green’ MGL accreditation, pivoted away from
“non-green” solvents, and drastically reduced waste
streams. She is also the Researcher in Residence at the Oxford Learning
Lab, inspiring and mentoring the next generation of scientists from
underrepresented backgrounds.

Isamir
Martinez, Ph.D. is the Assistant Director at
the ACS Green Chemistry Institute (GCI), Office of Sustainability.
She leads strategic cross-sector initiatives to advance green and
sustainable chemistry and engineering across the global chemical enterprise.
Dr. Martinez works closely with industry, academia, and other stakeholders
to accelerate innovation in sustainable chemical practices, focusing
on research, practical tools, education, and leadership development.
Prior to joining ACS, she held roles in medicinal chemistry and chemical
R&D at Neurogen and Pfizer, consulted on partnerships with CROs
and CDMOs, and taught organic chemistry at the university level. She
earned her Ph.D. in Organic Chemistry from the University of Connecticut
and a B.S. in Chemistry from the University of Puerto Rico.

Scott Plummer is a Senior Principal
Scientist within
the Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research (Cambridge, MA). He
is tasked with formulating material enablement strategies with research
teams, outsourcing, and the introduction of emerging synthesis technologies
to the project portfolio. He has a particular interest in green chemistry
and serves as the leader of the Grants Sub-Team of the ACS Green Chemistry
Institute Pharmaceutical Roundtable. He received his Ph.D. at Indiana
University (Bloomington, IN) and previously held positions within
the Chemical Development Unit of AMRI (Syracuse, NY) and Chemical
Preparations Research at Alcon (Fort Worth, TX).

Anthony Reed received an MS from UC Santa
Barbara
(synthetic organic methodology – Bruce H. Lipshutz) and a BS
from Butler University (chemistry). In between obtaining these degrees,
and after a short stint at an environmental consulting firm, he worked
in ADME/Toxicology at Eli Lilly, performing stable label syntheses
as part of their in-house radiochemistry group. Working in Medicinal
Chemistry at Amgen, p38 was the first of myriad kinase programs he
contributed to that led to 13 related patents. Other projects led
to 15 more patents, culminating in the first small molecule Fast Lane
program, KRASG12C, where he invented the series that became
sotorasib, Amgen’s first in-house small molecule to receive
market approval. Anthony now works in clinical manufacturing, focusing
on environmental sustainability and business resilience.

Robert Sheppard studied chemistry at the
University
of Oxford before gaining a Postgraduate certificate in Structure-Based
Drug Design from the University of Nottingham. Robert joined GSK in
1997 with an initial focus on antibacterials prior to becoming a Team
Leader at GSK, Stevenage, in the EpiNova Discovery Performance Unit,
charged with the discovery of new probe molecules to study epigenetic
approaches to autoimmune diseases. Robert joined AstraZeneca in 2015
and is currently a Director of Medicinal Chemistry in Gothenburg,
Sweden, primarily concentrating on developing novel treatments for
cardiovascular, renal, and metabolic conditions.

Jason Shields studied chemistry and history
at Washington
University in St. Louis (class of 2010) before undertaking a Ph.D.
at Princeton University in the laboratory of Abigail Doyle. There,
he worked on enantioselective nickel catalysis and air-stable nickel
precatalysts. After carrying out postdoctoral research with James
Morken at Boston College, Jason joined AstraZeneca in 2016 as a Senior
Scientist in medicinal chemistry in Early Oncology R&D. He has
worked on projects in immuno-oncology, DNA damage response, and epigenetics.
He is currently an Associate Principal Scientist at AstraZeneca, with
research interests in machine learning applications to the design
and synthesis of new molecules, covalent inhibition, and sustainability.

Gail Wrigley obtained a B.Sc.
in Natural Sciences
from the University of Bath, including a year in industry at SmithKline
Beecham in Harlow. After her undergraduate studies, she continued
to specialize in Synthetic Chemistry with completion of a Ph.D. in
Natural Product Synthesis with Prof. R. J. K. Taylor at the University
of York. Gail joined AstraZeneca in 2005 and is currently the Chemistry
Operations Lead within the Oncology Chemistry Group in Cambridge.
External to AstraZeneca, Gail has represented AstraZeneca on the SCI
Young Chemists Panel, was an invited judge for the UK SCI/RSC National
Retrosynthesis Competition and serves on the ACS-GCIPR to progress
sustainability in discovery chemistry.

Charles Yeung received his Ph.D. from the University
of Toronto with Prof. Vy Dong and then pursued postdoctoral studies
at Harvard with Prof. Eric Jacobsen. Charles began his industrial
career at Merck & Co., Inc. (Merck) in 2015 and is currently a
Principal Scientist in Discovery Chemistry. Charles’ interests
include applying data-rich approaches to solving problems including
the use of catalysis, high-throughput experimentation (HTE), and late-stage
functionalization (LSF). Charles has partnered with leading academic
groups to deliver important synthetic advances of broad interest to
the field and has impacted various medicinal chemistry programs at
Merck in oncology, neuroscience, and targeted protein degradation.

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5c01220.
Attached file includes further details on the hazards
of the solvents specifically discussed in this manuscript. In addition,
the methodology for the SciFinder-n searches is included as well as
the metrics for the “reaction counts” for each of the
transformations studied and the purifications/workups analyzed. A
poster summarizing conditions for the commonly encountered transformations
is also included (PDF)

All authors
conceived the idea for the study, and several were involved in the
drafting of various subsections of this manuscript. R.J.S. and A.E.G.
collected the reaction count data. A.B.R. developed the poster of
alternative, greener reaction conditions provided in the Supporting
Information. P.F.R. analyzed the data, visualized the figures, collated
subsection contributions, and authored the final manuscript. Final
editorial input was received from several of the authors.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials