pmcPLoS PathogPLoS Pathog349plospath101238921plosPLOS Pathogens1553-73661553-7374PLOSPMC10522048PMC10522048.110522048105220483769578410.1371/journal.ppat.1011138PPATHOGENS-D-23-001121Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryBioenergeticsEnergy-Producing OrganellesMitochondriaBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesEnergy-Producing OrganellesMitochondriaBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsEpithelial CellsBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyBiological TissueEpitheliumEpithelial CellsMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyBiological TissueEpitheliumEpithelial CellsBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyPhysiological ProcessesRespirationOxygen ConsumptionResearch and Analysis MethodsImaging TechniquesFluorescence ImagingMedicine and Health SciencesPulmonologyPneumoniaResearch and Analysis MethodsMathematical and Statistical TechniquesStatistical MethodsAnalysis of VariancePhysical SciencesMathematicsStatisticsStatistical MethodsAnalysis of VarianceBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensBacterial PathogensPseudomonas AeruginosaMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensBacterial PathogensPseudomonas AeruginosaBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsBacteriaPseudomonasPseudomonas AeruginosaBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryBioenergeticsEnergy-Producing OrganellesMitochondriaMitochondrial MembraneBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesEnergy-Producing OrganellesMitochondriaMitochondrial MembraneAntimicrobial mitochondrial reactive oxygen species induction by lung epithelial immunometabolic modulation
Lung epithelial antimicrobial mitochondrial reactive oxygen speciesWangYongxingConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing KulkarniVikram V.Data curationInvestigationMethodology Pantaleón GarcíaJezreelData curationFormal analysis Leiva-JuárezMiguel M.Data curationInvestigation GoldblattDavid L.Formal analysisInvestigation GulraizFahadInvestigation Vila EllisLisandraInvestigationMethodology ChenJichaoMethodologyWriting – review & editing LongmireMichael K.InvestigationResources DonepudiSri RamyaInvestigation LorenziPhilip L.Methodology WangHaoInvestigation WongLee-JunConceptualization TuvimMichael J.Visualization https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4503-0644EvansScott E.ConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionProject administrationSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Pulmonary Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America2
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center UTHealth Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, Texas, United States of America3
Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America4
Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of AmericaGuillardThomasEditor – ]. Pneumonia management has historically focused on patient-extrinsic factors, such as antibiotic administration [ , ]. To address such challenges as increasing antibiotic resistance and newly emerging infections, our laboratory focuses on manipulating vulnerable patients’ intrinsic antimicrobial defenses to broadly protect them against pneumonia. We advance a strategy of activating the lungs’ mucosal defenses to induce broad, pathogen-agnostic protection via airway delivery of synthetic Toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists.
Once regarded as simple airflow conduits or inert barriers, the airway and alveolar epithelia are critical immune effector cells that supplement the lungs’ mucosal immune defenses by undergoing fundamental structural and functional changes upon encountering pathogens [ – ]. These cells sense pathogens via pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), modulate lung leukocyte responses through cytokine and chemokine expression, and release microbicidal molecules such as reactive oxygen species (ROS) and antimicrobial polypeptides (AMPs) [ – ]. Harnessing this defensive immune function, we developed a protective PRR agonist therapeutic comprised of a synthetic diacylated lipopetide ligand for TLR2/6 (Pam2CSK4, “Pam2”) and a class C unmethylated CpG oligodeoxynucleotide ligand for TLR9 (ODN M362, “ODN”). A single prophylactic treatment with this non-intuitive dyad of ligands (“Pam2-ODN”) for spatially segregated TLRs yields substantial protection against pneumonia [ – ].
We recently reported that Pam2-ODN-induced antimicrobial protection requires therapeutic induction of ROS from both mitochondrial and dual oxidase sources [ , ], but the molecular mechanisms responsible for inducible antimicrobial ROS generation remained unresolved. Here, we find that ODN induces mitochondrial ROS (mtROS) production via metabolic modulation that alters mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) activity in a mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm)-dependent manner. These findings provide novel insights into development of metabolic strategies to protect against otherwise lethal pneumonias in vulnerable populations.

## Results

## Induction of epithelial mtROS by CpG ODN
Having reported that Pam2 and ODN M362 are both required for maximal antimicrobial protection in a manner that depends on inducible ROS production from both mitochondria and dual oxidases, we sought to determine which ligand(s) induce mtROS production. As shown in , ODN M362 alone induced as much mtROS generation as the Pam2-ODN combination from human lung epithelial (HBEC3-KT) cells, revealing ODN M362 as the main driver of this response. This capacity to induce mtROS was not common to all nucleic acid treatments ( ), but was observed following treatment of HBEC-3KT cells with various types of oligodeoxynucleotides ( ). Similarly, ODN M362 induced mtROS in mouse lung epithelial (MLE-15) cells ( ), as well as primary human and mouse lung epithelial cells ( ), regardless of which mtROS detector was used ( ). HBEC3-KT cells and MLE-15 cells are the principal models presented throughout this work, because these two cell types can represent a wide range of epithelia (human cells of bronchial origin and mouse cells with more alveolar characteristics, respectively). This is potentially important, because the effect of mtROS generation upon first encountering pathogens in the airways may be different than interactions as pneumonic infections progress to the parenchyma. However, it is notable that robust induction of mtROS was observed from all tested types of lung epithelial cells whether mouse or human, whether the cells were primarily harvested or immortalized, and whether they were of airway or alveolar origin ( ) Fluorescence microscopy of primary lung epithelial cells from mice expressing redox-sensitive mitochondrial GFP (mt-roGFP) [ , ] revealed that, at baseline, mitochondria display a predominantly reduced GFP phenotype, whereas treatment with ODN induces a predominantly oxidized mitochondrial phenotype ( ). Under normal conditions, oxidative phosphorylation consumes >95% of cellular oxygen [ ], but mtROS formation also requires free oxygen [ ]. By inhibiting oxidative phosphorylation with oligomycin, we can then demonstrate increased oxygen consumption by superoxide (O2•-) production following ODN ( ), which is consistent with the observation of increased mitoSOX fluorescence ( ). This ODN-induced mtROS production is consistently associated with increased ΔΨm, as assessed by multiple assays ( ).
 

## CpG ODN alters electron transport chain activity and energy production
mtROS production is tightly regulated by electron transport chain (ETC) activity [ ]. To understand the mechanisms of ODN-induced mtROS production, we analyzed the enzymatic activity of the ETC complexes in HBEC3-KT cells, finding that ODN treatment induces a 35% increase in complex II activity and an 82% decrease in complex III activity, along with an increase in citrate synthase activity (Figs and ). We also found modest but statistically significant reductions in complex V activity, suggesting ODN may interfere with mitochondrial energy production ( ). The change in ETC complex activity was not accompanied by changes in mitochondrial protein concentrations (Figs and ), suggesting that the ODN effect is mediated by manipulating ETC function rather than altering mitochondrial mass.
 Since the major energy output of ETC activity is ATP, we investigated the impact of ODN treatment on cellular ATP levels. ODN treatment caused a rapid decline in whole-cell ATP concentrations with a nadir around 30 min that recovered by 90 min ( ). In contrast, cellular ADP and AMP levels persistently rose following ODN exposure ( ). These effects on ATP, ADP and AMP were ODN dose-dependent ( ). A drop-and-recovery pattern similar to that of ATP was seen in cellular NADH levels after ODN treatment, whereas NADPH levels were largely unaffected by ODN treatment (Figs and ). NAD/NADH are electron receptor and donor that links large molecule catabolism to mitochondrial energy production. The congruent temporal patterns of NADH and ATP support a hypothesis that ODN stimulates catabolic reactions related to mitochondrial energy production. In contrast, NADPH is primarily produced in the anabolic pentose phosphate pathway, which ODN does not appear to perturb. Levels of reduced glutathione persistently declined after ODN treatment ( ), consistent with the continuing production of ODN-induced ROS.

## CpG ODN blocks mitochondrial nucleotide transition
As TLR9 is the established intracellular sensor for CpG ODNs [ ], we examined whether TLR9 activation regulates ODN-induced mtROS generation. To our surprise, ODN treatment still fully induced mtROS production in primary mouse lung epithelial cells isolated from Tlr9 knockout mice or from mice lacking downstream TLR signaling molecules MyD88 or TRAF6 ( ), indicating that ODN-induced mtROS generation does not require TLR9 signaling.
Seeking to identify a TLR9-independent mechanism by which ODN alters mitochondrial energy metabolism, we investigated whether ODNs could directly stimulate mtROS production in isolated mitochondria. Remarkably, we found that direct ODN treatment of mitochondria isolated from HBEC3-KT cells recapitulates the inducible mtROS generation and increased ΔΨm observed in whole cells ( ). Alternately, to examine whether ODN interacts with mitochondria in intact cells, whole cells were treated with fluorescently-labeled ODN, then the mitochondria were isolated and assessed for fluorescence intensity. As in , mitochondria from cells treated with labeled ODN displayed significant fluorescence, supporting a hypothesis that ODN can directly interact with mitochondria to stimulate mtROS production. To identify potential mitochondrial ODN binding partners, HBEC3-KT cells were treated with biotin-labeled ODN, then the streptavidin precipitants from mitochondria lysates were resolved on an SDS PAGE gel. The silver stain in demonstrates bands present only after ODN treatment. The boxed area was excised and liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry proteomic analysis generated a list of candidate targets ( ).
 Among the most differentially detected peptides in the bands cut from was voltage-dependent anion-sensitive channel 1 (VDAC1), an outer mitochondrial membrane protein component of the VDAC1-ANT1-mCK complex that regulates exchange of ATP and ADP between the mitochondria and cytosol [ , ]. In targeted pulldown studies in mouse and human cells, we confirmed that VDAC1 was detected in immunoprecipitated samples of biotinylated ODN treated cells (Figs and ). The association of ODN with VDAC1 increased with treatment time. We also detected association of ODN with adenine nucleotide translocator 1 (ANT1), the inner mitochondrial membrane component of the VDAC1-ANT1-mCK complex (Figs and ). When HBEC3-KT cells were treated with fluorescently labeled ODN then VDAC1 was localized with fluorescently labeled antibody ( ), 75% of pixels occupied by VDAC1 were also occupied by ODN. The mean Pearson’s correlation coefficient between ODN and VDAC1 pixel intensity was 0.84 ( ), indicating a high degree of colocalization in intact cells.
Given the role of the VDAC1-ANT1-mCK complex as an ATP:ADP antiporter, we investigated whether altered ATP/ADP localization might account for the changes in whole-cell energy stores previously observed following ODN treatment ( ). Indeed, we found that ODN treatment causes mitochondrial ATP levels to rapidly increase and cytosolic ATP levels to precipitously decline, with the opposite pattern for ADP and AMP ( ), consistent with an ODN-induced blockade of ATP:ADP antiporter function. To test whether VDAC1 antagonism can explain the ODN effect on mitochondrial energy metabolism, we investigated the effects of a known VDAC1 inhibitor erastin [ , ] and an ANT1 inhibitor carboxyatractyloside (CAT) [ , ]. Because VDAC1 is one of the subunits composed of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP), we also exposed cells to mPTP inhibitor cyclosporin A [ , ]. As shown in , erastin and cyclosporin A caused changes in ΔΨm, mtROS production, and oxygen consumption that were comparable to ODN, suggesting that blocking VDAC-mediated mitochondrial nucleotide transition exerts these effects. Similar results were observed with an alternate VDAC1 inhibitor, VBIT-4 ( ). When using pharmacologic inhibitors, the possibility that off-target effects contribute to the observed results must be considered. However, given the similar responses observed across the tested agents, off-target effects seem unlikely to fully explain these cellular responses.

## AMPK-dependent metabolic changes increase electron delivery to complex II
AMP-activated kinase (AMPK) is a cellular energy sensor that is activated when cytosolic AMP levels rise due to ATP consumption [ , ], in turn activating catabolic pathways to promote ATP production, including acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) [ , ]. Congruent with the observations that ODN alters cellular ATP/ADP/AMP stores (Figs and ), reverse phase protein array analysis of HBEC3-KT cells treated with ODN [ ] revealed AMPK and ACC to be among the most activated signaling pathways following ODN exposure ( ). We confirmed time-dependent ODN-induced phosphorylation of AMPKα1, AMPKα2 and ACC in vitro (Figs and ). Similarly, AMPKα1 phosphorylation was induced by both erastin and cyclosporin A in vitro (Figs and ). ODN-induced AMPKα phosphorylation was also demonstrated by immunofluorescence staining in mouse airways and alveolar space ( ). When AMPKα genes were conditionally deleted ( ), ODN-inducible mtROS production was significantly reduced without impacting baseline mtROS production ( ).
 A principle means by which AMPK-ACC pathway activation promotes mitochondrial energy production is through increased carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1 (CPT1)-dependent fatty acid β-oxidation. We found that ODN treatment increases acetyl CoA concentrations and fatty acid β-oxidation ( ). This ODN-induced fatty acid oxidation is abrogated when AMPK is depleted ( ). Treatment of HBEC3-KT cells with etomoxir, an irreversible inhibitor of CPT1 [ , ], significantly attenuated ODN-induced mtROS production, oxygen consumption and ETC complex II activity ( ). Knockdown of CPT1 ( ) also attenuated inducible mtROS production to a similar degree to etomoxir ( ).
 Mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation generates NADH and FADH2, which contribute electrons to the ETC via electron shuttle proteins. Specifically, FADH2-carried electrons are transferred to coenzyme Q (CoQ) by electron flavoprotein dehydrogenase (ETFDH) [ ], while NADH-carried electrons are transferred to complex II by glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GPD2) [ ]. Knocking down either of these shuttles ( ) attenuated ODN-induced mtROS production ( ). Fatty acid β-oxidation also generates acetyl-CoA which transfers electrons to the ETC via the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. Treatments with TCA intermediate metabolites oxaloacetate and α-ketoglutarate or the analogue dimethyl malonate attenuated ODN-induced mtROS production ( ). Dimethyl malonate and oxaloacetate are ETC complex II inhibitors while α-ketoglutarate inhibits glutaminolysis [ – ].
In the ETC, CoQH2 is generated when CoQ accepts electrons from FADH2. The CoQH2:CoQ ratio has been described as an indicator of ETC efficiency, with an increased ratio associated with increased mtROS production [ ]. As in , ODN treatment caused an increase in CoQH2:CoQ ratio. Although augmented β-oxidation is required for maximal ODN-induced mtROS production, inducible mtROS production can also be partially attenuated by inhibiting glycolysis and/or glutaminolysis ( ). Future work will explore the contributions of these pathways.
Together, these results indicated that ODN-induced and AMPK-regulated metabolic modulation enhances electron delivery to ETC, increases complex II activity and eventually drives mtROS induction. As schematically summarized in , ODN-impaired ATP/ADP antiport lowers cytosolic ATP levels, serially activating AMPK, ACC and CPT-1, thereby promoting fatty acid β-oxidation that drives additional electrons to ETC complex II via the TCA cycle.

## ODN-induced mtROS generation at complex III is ΔΨm-dependent
It is intriguing that ODN simultaneously increases complex II activity and decreases complex III activity. We hypothesized that these changes in ETC complex activity might provide insights into the site(s) of mtROS generation. A series of ETC complex inhibitors were used to determine the roles of ETC complexes in ODN-induced mtROS generation.
mtROS are formed when molecular oxygen interacts with an electron leaked among electron transport chain [ ], typically from complex I [flavin (F) site and ubiquinone reduction (Q) site] or complex III (Qo site) [ ]. Whereas mtROS formation at complex I following other stimuli can be inhibited by rotenone (Q site) or diphenyleneiodonium (F site) [ , ], neither agent impeded ODN-induced mtROS ( ). Similarly, while TCA cycle input can support reverse election transport from complex II to complex I in the setting of high ΔΨm [ ], we found that neither succinate nor fumarate influence ODN-induced mtROS formation ( ). These findings, along with the modest ODN impact on complex I activity (Figs and ), indicated that complex I is not a major site of ODN-induced mtROS production. In contrast, while inhibitors of complex II activity reduced ODN-induced mtROS, inhibitors of complex III enhanced ODN-induced mtROS dramatically ( ). We thus concluded that complex III is the main ODN-induced mtROS generating site following forward electron transfer. Additionally, while complex IV inhibition had no impact on mtROS induction, the complex V inhibitor oligomycin decreased ODN-induced mtROS production. As oligomycin treatment collapses mitochondrial membrane potential ΔΨm, this result suggested that ODN-induced ΔΨm increases may be required for mtROS formation.
We compared the impacts of ODN and complex III inhibitor antimycin on complex III activity and mtROS induction. Although treatment with antimycin or ODN resulted in similar inhibition of complex III enzymatic activity and initial mtROS production ( ), the two agents function differently. When stigmatellin and myxothiazol inhibit electron transfer from complex III to complex IV by binding the CoQH2 (ubiquinol) oxidation (Qo) site, antimycin cannot induce further oxygen consumption for superoxide production while ODN still can ( ). Antimycin can induce rapid induction of mtROS production in intact epithelial cells and isolated mitochondria, but this effect plateaus by 40 min. Conversely, ODN-induced mtROS continued to increase throughout the period of exposure in intact cells and isolated mitochondria, suggesting different mechanisms of mtROS generation ( ). Central to these differences appeared to be their opposing effects on ΔΨm. In both whole cell and isolated mitochondria models, ODN induced increased ΔΨm while antimycin reduced ΔΨm below that observed in sham-treated samples ( ). Disrupting ΔΨm with the uncoupler FCCP ( ) significantly impaired ODN-induced mtROS generation but had little effect on antimycin-induced mtROS generation ( ). FCCP treatment demonstrated that ODN-induced oxidation of cytochrome bH is ΔΨm-dependent, whereas FCCP did not alter the oxidation of cytochrome bH in antimycin-treated mitochondria ( ). Congruently, in isolated mitochondria, FCCP reversed ODN-impaired complex III electron transfer activity but had no such effect on antimycin treated mitochondria ( ). The generation of ODN-induced mtROS at complex III is graphically displayed in . Under homeostatic conditions, complex III quickly transfers CoQH2-carried electrons to cytochrome c1, which, in turn, transfers the electrons to complex IV. This process facilitates proton pumping across the inner mitochondrial membrane and establishes normal ΔΨm [ , ]. However, ODN-induced increase in ΔΨm hinders the proton pumping, impeding electron transfer at the Qo and quinone reduction (Qi) sites. This ΔΨm-dependent retardation of electron transfer in complex III, in coordination with an increased forward electron transfer from complex II, increases the likelihood that highly-reactive electrons will “leak” to interact with free oxygen, resulting in increased formation of mtROS, in the form of superoxide, at complex III [ – ].
Thus, while dissecting the process of ODN-induced antimicrobial mtROS formation, we identified that mtROS induction requires both AMPK-directed metabolic reprograming to augment electron delivery to ETC complex II ( ) and increased ΔΨm to retard electron transfer at complex III ( ).
 

## mtROS induction yields TLR9-independent antimicrobial effects
To demonstrate the protective effects of antimicrobial mtROS induced by ODN, we have shown that scavenging mtROS by mitoTEMPO or mitoQ ( ) significantly decreases the bacterial killing induced by Pam2-ODN combined treatment in HBEC3-KT cells [ ]. In this system, ODN-induced mtROS levels were not appreciably influenced by the presence of bacteria nor were broader measures of cellular ROS ( ). While pre-treatment with either an ETC complex II inhibitor TTFA or the ΔΨm uncoupler FCCP alone inhibited ODN-induced mtROS to some extent, TTFA-FCCP combination treatment maximally inhibited mtROS production in HBEC3-KT cells ( ) and reversed the mitochondrial reduced:oxidized ratio of ODN-treated cells ( ). As shown in and , the bacterial killing induced by Pam2 and ODN was obviated in HBEC3-KT cells when the cells were pretreated with TTFA-FCCP. Congruently, wild type mice with impaired lung epithelial mtROS generation due to aerosolized TTFA-FCCP pretreatment prior to treatment with Pam2 and ODN were less protected against P. aeruginosa pneumonia than were mice who received sham aerosol pretreatment prior to receiving Pam2-ODN ( ). Notably, both the Pam2-ODN-induced P. aeruginosa pneumonia protection and the TTFA-FCCP-induced impairment were observed in Tlr9 knockout mice ( ). Consistent with our prior reports [ ], airway delivery of TTFA-FCCP had no observed systemic effects on the mice in the absence of infection ( ). Congruent with their ability to generate ODN-induced mtROS ( ), primary lung epithelial cells from mouse trachea, mouse alveoli and human alveoli treated with Pam2 and ODN exert bacterial killing effects ( ). In light of our data supporting VDAC1 blockade as central mediator of protection, we tested whether erastin or VBIT-4 substituted for ODN could protect against infection. In combination with Pam2, erastin and VBIT-4 induced comparable bacterial killing to ODN by HEBC3-KT cells ( ). Strikingly, when delivered by aerosol with Pam2, erastin yielded a similar survival advantage to ODN following P. aeruginosa pneumonia challenge in mice ( ). Even when delivered without Pam2, both ODN and erastin induced significant reductions in the lung bacterial burden ( ).
In summary, we found that antimicrobial mtROS are generated from lung epithelial cells following ODN treatment. ODN interacts with VDAC1 to alter mitochondrial nucleotide transport, driving AMPK-ACC-CPT1-mediated electron delivery to ETC complex II and increasing ΔΨm to promote superoxide production at complex III.
 

## Discussion
Synthetic CpG ODNs have been explicitly developed as immunomodulators and adjuvants [ , , ]. ODN CpG motifs mimic naturally-occurring pathogen-associated molecular patterns recognized by TLR9 that initiate NF-κB-dependent antimicrobial signaling cascades [ – ]. Here, we report previously unknown, TLR9-independent immunometabolic modulation by ODN that results in generation of pneumonia-protective mtROS.
ODN-induced mtROS formation is fundamentally a manifestation of altered energy metabolism. ODN interacts with VDAC1 and ANT1 localized in the mitochondrial membranes. The VDAC1-ANT1-mCK complex regulates the exchange of metabolites between the mitochondria and cytosol [ , ]. We show that VDAC1 binding ODN perturbs cellular nucleotide distribution, activating the AMPK-ACC pathway, and promoting fatty acid β-oxidation. Fatty acid β-oxidation augments FADH2-carried electron flux to the ETC by ETFDH, GPD2, and the TCA cycle, all converging on the CoQ pool (CoQH2 and CoQ). Disruption of any of these elements leads to decreases in inducible mtROS generation.
The increased electron delivery as a consequence of AMPK-ACC activation results in increased complex II activity, however, these observations do not resolve why complex III activity are decreased. During normal bifurcated electron transfer in complex III [ , ], semiquinone (SQ•-) intermediates forming at the Qo or Qi site instantaneously transfer electrons to the low potential heme b (bL) or CoQ, minimizing electron leakage. However, under certain conditions, accumulation of SQ•- increases electron leak [ ]. In one example, antimycin inhibits CoQ reduction at the Qi site, leading to electron accumulation on cytochrome b hemes, allowing SQ•- more time to interact with molecular oxygen to form superoxide at the Qo site [ , ]. Alternatively, high ΔΨm attenuates the proton pump, retarding electron transfer and sustaining cytochrome b hemes in reduced states that cause accumulation of SQ•- at the Qo and Qi sites [ , ]. Here, our findings support the latter as the responsible mechanism as uncoupling ΔΨm with FCCP reduces ODN-induced mtROS and reverses ODN-impaired complex III activity. Thus, ΔΨm accentuation by VDAC-perturbed ATP accumulation in mitochondria increases mtROS production and impairs complex III activity.
Although ROS production is often regarded as an untoward cellular event that contributes to degenerative diseases [ , ], there is robust evidence that controlled mtROS generation contributes to critical signaling events in a wide range of physiologic processes that extend host survival [ – ], including by augmentation of protective antimicrobial responses [ – ]. Superoxide formed at the complex III Qo site may be particularly well suited to function as a cytosolic signaling molecule, as the Qo site is adjacent to the intermembrane space with about half of its superoxide diffusing to the cytoplasmic side of the inner membrane [ , ]. Here, we demonstrate that complex III-dependent mtROS induction is required for maximally ODN-induced bacterial killing in vitro and in vivo. Although the current work does not explicitly test whether mtROS directly kill pathogens or act as cell signals to initiate antimicrobial responses, both topics are areas of active investigation. We have previously shown that ROS induction is associated with improved host and epithelial survival of infections and is well-tolerated by epithelial cells in the absence of an infectious challenge [ , ]. Although the current data focus on the mechanisms of protective mtROS induction in lung epithelial cells, induction of dual oxidase-dependent ROS production is also required for maximal protection and non-epithelial cells can also contribute to the protective response to therapy, though we have shown that epithelial cells are essential to the protection [ , ].
In summary, we identify metabolic mechanisms underlying the ODN-induced antimicrobial mtROS formation. Under physiologic conditions, mtROS production is exquisitely tightly regulated, but we show here that therapeutic manipulation of mtROS is achievable, protective against otherwise lethal infections, and well tolerated by the host. Indeed, this intervention has also been safely tested in five completed human trials (NCT04313023, NCT04312997, NCT03794557, NCT02566252, NCT02124278) with more in preparation. Because of our interest in pneumonia, all of the current work is performed in lung epithelial cells, but we anticipate similar responses can be detected in other epithelial cells and, likely, other cell types.

## Methods

## Primary cell cultures and cell lines
To isolate mouse tracheal epithelial cells (mTECs), mice were anesthetized and tracheas were excised and digested in 1.5 mg/ml Pronase overnight at 4°C. mTECs were harvested by centrifugation and then cultured on collagen coated tissue culture plates or transwells in Ham’s F12 media supplemented with differentiation growth factors and hormones as previously described [ ].
Mouse alveolar epithelial cells were harvested as previously described [ , ]. Briefly, after flushing the right ventricle with PBS, the lungs were minced with forceps, then digested in Leibovitz’s L-15 medium with 2 mg/mL collagenase type I, 2 mg/mL elastase, and 0.5 mg/mL DNase I for 30 min at 37°C. To stop digestion, 20% fetal bovine serum (FBS) was added and the tissue was mechanically homogenized, then placed on ice in a cold room. The tissue was filtered with a 70 μm cell strainer, and centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 1 min, resuspended in red blood cell lysis buffer for 3 min, washed with Leibovitz’s media with 10% FBS and filtered into a 5 ml glass tube with a cell strainer cap. Sample were incubated for 30 minutes with CD45-PE/Cy7, ICAM2-A647, E-Cadherin-A488 at a concentration of 1:250. Then, the cells were centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 1 minute and washed in Leibovitz’s with 10% FBS. The cells were resuspended in this same solution and filtered through a cell strainer cap. Before sorting on an Aria II Cell Sorter, SYTOX Blue was added. For gating, single cells were selected and dead cells excluded. CD45 and ICAM2 negative cells were selected, and from that population ECAD positive cells were selected. Alveolar epithelial cells were seeded on poly-L-Lysine coated transwells at 20,000 cells/cm2 and grown at air-liquid interface culture with alveolar epithelial cell medium for 5 days.
Normal human bronchial epithelial (NHBE) cells were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA) and cultured in airway epithelial cell basal medium supplemented with bronchial epithelial cell growth kit (ATCC, Manassas, VA). Normal human Type II alveolar epithelial Cells were purchased from AcceGen (Fairfield, New Jersey) and air-liquid interface cultured in poly-L-Lysine coated transwells with alveolar epithelial cell medium (ScienCell Research Laboratories, Carlsbad, CA) for 5 days. Cells were seeded at a density of 20,000 cells/cm2 on transwells.
Immortalized Human bronchial epithelial (HBEC3-KT) cells were kindly provided by Dr. John Minna. Murine lung epithelial (MLE-15) cells were kindly provided by Dr. Jeffrey Whitsett. HBEC3-KT and MLE-15 cells were authenticated by the UT MD Anderson Characterized Cell Line Core Facility and IDEXX Bioresearch (Columbia, MO), respectively. HBEC3-KT cells were cultured in keratinocyte serum-free medium supplemented with human epidermal growth factor and bovine pituitary extract (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Grand Island, NY). MLE-15 cells were cultured in DMEM/F2 medium supplemented with 2% of fetal bovine serum and 0.5% of Insulin-Transferrin-Selenium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Grand Island, NY). Cell cultures were maintained in the presence of 1% of penicillin/streptomycin and glutamine. All cells were cultured at 37°C with 5% CO2. All human cell experiments were performed in accordance with Institutional Review Board of The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center (MDACC).

## Mice
Wild type C57BL/6J mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). Prkaa1fl and Prkaa2fl mice were purchased from Jackson. TLR9–/–mice were provided by Dr. Shizuo Akira [ ]. CMV mt-roGFP mice were generated by Dr. D James Surmeier and kindly provided by Dr. Farhad Danesh [ , ]. Sftpc-Cre mice were kindly provided by Dr. Brigid Hogan [ ]. All mouse experiments were performed in accordance with the MDACC Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.

## In vivo infection model
As previously described [ , ], 10 ml of PBS, single ligand 4 μM Pam2CSK4, single ligand 1 μM ODN M362, or a combination of both ligands in 1× PBS was placed in an Aerotech II nebulizer (Biodex, Shirley, NY) and delivered to unrestrained mice in an exposure chamber via an influx polyethylene tube over 40 min. Nebulization was driven by 10 L/min air supplemented with 5% CO2. The exposure chamber connects with an identical efflux polyethylene tube with a low resistance microbial filter (BB50T, Pall, East Hills, NY) at its end vented to a biosafety hood.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain PA103 was purchased from ATCC and stored as frozen stock (1×108 colony-forming unit CFU/ml) in 20% glycerol in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium. Typically, 1 ml of frozen stock was incubated overnight in 100 ml of Tryptic Soy Broth (TSB) at 37°C with 5% CO2, then expanded in 1 liter of fresh LB media at 37°C to OD 600 of 0.52. Bacterial suspensions were centrifuged, washed, re-suspended in 1× PBS, and aerosolized using the same nebulization system for Pam2-ODN treatment over 20 min. For all bacterial challenges, a nebulized inoculum of 10 ml of ~2×1010 CFU/ml were delivered. If not specified, 6 to 8 weeks old single sex mice were used for in vivo infection conducted in a BSL2 biohazard lab. Immediately following bacterial challenge, some mice were anesthetized and mouse lungs were harvested and homogenized using a Mini-Beadbeater-1 (Biospec, Bartlesville, OK). The lung homogenates were used to count lung colony-forming units (CFUs). The remaining mice were closely monitored for 12 days. The relevant euthanasia-triggering criteria consist of any evidence of distressed behaviors including hypothermia, impaired mobility, respiratory distress, and inability to access food or water. When mice were identified to meet the criteria, they were subjected to euthanasia immediately. At least 8–10 mice per condition were evaluated for survival analysis, 4 mice per condition were sacrificed for pathogen burden assessment. Challenges were performed a minimum of 3 times.

## In vitro pathogen killing assay
Human or mouse primary lung epithelial cells at air-liquid interface on transwells or HBEC3-KT cells or MLE-15 cells on 6-well plates in complete media were cultured until cell growth reached ~80% confluence. Cells were replaced with fresh, antibiotic-free media containing PBS, Pam2, ODN or Pam2-ODN. The final concentrations of Pam2 or ODN in media were 2.4 μM or 0.6 μM, respectively. 4 h after the treatment, 20 μl of P. aeruginosa PA103 (1×105 CFUs/ml) were added to each culture well. 4 h after bacteria inoculation, 20 μl of supernatant from each well was aspirated, serially diluted, plated on a TSB agar plate and incubated for 16 h at 37°C. Bacterial CFUs were counted after the incubation [ ]. Studies were performed a minimum of 3 times with 4 biological replicates per condition.

## Mitochondrial ROS detection, scavenging and inhibition
To detect mtROS generation, cells were incubated with 5 μM of each indicated detector, MitoSOX red, ROSstar 550, MitoNeoD, MitoTracker Red CMXRos or tetramethylrhodamine (TMRM) in a black-walled, clear bottomed 96-well plate for 1/2 h before ODN or PBS treatment [ ]. A 24-well plate was used in air liquid interface culture with transwells. After fluorescent mtROS detectors were washed off, fluorescence was continuously measured on a BioTek Synergy2 plate reader for 3 h immediately after ODN or PBS addition. Excitation/emission wavelengths for mtROS-detecting agents are 510 nm/580 nm. Studies were performed a minimum of 3 times with 8 biological replicates per condition.
To scavenge mtROS, HBEC3-KT cells were exposed to 100 nM MitoTEMPO or 10 μM MitoQ for 1 h prior to fluorescent mtROS detector incubation and ODN or PBS treatment.
To disrupt mtROS production, HBEC3-KT cells were exposed to compounds that inhibit mitochondria electron transport chain activity. These include rotenone (10 μM), TTFA (200 μM), atpenin (10 nM), antimycin (100 nM & 5 μM), sodium azide (1 μM), oligomycin (2 μM) and FCCP (400 nM) etc., for 1 h prior to fluorescent mtROS detector incubation and ODN or PBS treatment. Inhibition of ODN-induced mtROS generation in vitro was achieved by concurrent application of TTFA (200 μM) and FCCP (200 nM).
To inhibit mtROS generation in vivo, mice were exposed to TTFA (200 mM) and FCCP (800 μM) in 10 ml of 50% DMSO solution in 1× PBS by nebulization. The 50% DMSO solution was nebulized as vehicle control. Mice received TTFA-FCCP or vehicle control were treated with either Pam2-ODN or PBS and then subjected to P. aeruginosa PA103 challenge.

## JC-1 assay
To monitor changes in mitochondria membrane potential (Δψm) upon ODN treatment, HBEC3-KT cells were incubated with 2 μM of JC-1 fluorescence dye for 30 min. After the JC-1 dye was washed off, fluorescence was continuously measured with ODN or PBS treatment using a BioTek Synergy2 plate reader at wavelengths of 510nm/580nm for J-aggregates and 490nm/525nm for J-monomers. A higher ratio of J-aggregates to J-monomers indicates a higher ΔψM. To inhibit mitochondrial membrane polarization, TTFA (200 μM) and FCCP (200 nM) were concurrently applied for 1 h before JC-1 incubation and ODN or PBS treatment. Studies were performed a minimum of 3 times with 8 biological replicates per condition.

## Indirect immunofluorescence assay and co-localization image analysis
PBS or ODN-treated HBEC3-KT cells or MLE-15 cells growing on a chambered coverglass or frozen lung sections from PBS or ODN-treated mice were fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100, and blocked with 2% goat serum in 1× PBS. Cells or lung sections were incubated with primary antibodies against Phospho-AMPKα-1,2 or VDAC1 at a dilution of 1:200 for 1 h, then with AlexaFluor secondary antibodies (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) at a dilution of 1:500 for half an hour, and counterstained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for 15 minutes. Cells were visualized using a DeltaVision deconvolution fluorescence microscope (GE Life Sciences). Fluorescence intensity of microscope images was quantified using ImageJ.
Pixel intensity data of VDAC1 and ODN-FITC in the fluorescence images were imported into MATLAB and all analysis was performed using default settings. Confidence intervals were set at the 95% confidence limit. Pixel intensity values for VDAC1 and ODN-FITC were compared directly on a scatterplot. Six independent analyses were performed. A simple linear regression model using the least squares standard approach was fit to the data. Pearson’s correlation coefficients were calculated to determine whether VDAC1 pixel intensity tended to accumulate with ODN-FITC pixel intensity.

## Live cell fluorescence imaging
Fluorescent measurement of intracellular mtROS generation was carried out on live and metabolically active mTECs generated from CMV mt-roGFP mice. Cells growing on collagen coated chambered coverglass were mounted onto microscopic chamber at 37°C in air with 5% CO2, treated with ODN or PBS and washed with 1× live cell imaging buffer (Life Technologies). CellMask DeepRed was added to stain the cell membrane. Images were obtained using a DeltaVision deconvolution fluorescence microscope (GE Life Sciences) at excitation wavelengths of 405nm and 488nm at 100 minutes post ODN treatment. Fluorescence intensity of microscope images was quantified using ImageJ software.

## Measurement of oxygen consumption rate
Oxygen consumption rate (OCR) was measured using a Seahorse XFe96 extracellular flux analyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA). HBEC3-KT cells (1.5×104 per well) were seeded into a XFe96 microplate and grew overnight in complete media. 1 h before the assay, the media was changed to Seahorse XF assay media (Agilent) and incubated in a non-CO2 incubator at 37°C. The microplate was loaded onto the analyzer and basal respiration in these cells were recorded by real-time measurement of OCR. Then 25 μl of PBS, ODN and/or mitochondria inhibitors prepared in the assay medium were sequentially injected into each culture well (in 150 μl of assay media) via drug delivery ports. The final working concentrations of these testing regents in culture wells are ODN 1.2 μM, oligomycin 10 nM, and antimycin 1 μM. After injection of each regent, OCR was again measured. At the end of the assay, the number of viable cells was determined using trypan blue. OCR measurements were normalized to final cell numbers. OCR is expressed in pmole min−1. Studies were performed a minimum of 3 times with 12 biological replicates per condition.

## Western blotting and immunoprecipitation
HBEC3-KT cells or MLE-15 cells were suspended in NP-40 lysis buffer containing Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Millipore), disrupted by sonication, and extracted at 4°C for 30 min. The protein concentration of the lysate was determined using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Pierce). 50 μg protein in 1× Laemmli buffer was separated by SDS-PAGE and then transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes (Millipore). The PVDF membranes were blotted with primary antibodies, detected by secondary antibodies with conjugated horseradish peroxidase, and developed using a Pico-sensitive chemiluminescence kit (Pierce). All membranes were stripped and re-blotted for β-actin or GAPDH as loading control.
Whole cell or mitochondria lysates were prepared with biotinylated ODN-treated HBEC3-KT cells or MLE-15 cells. To precipitate proteins Bound by biotinylated ODN in vivo, streptavidin beads (Pierce) were incubated with whole cell or mitochondria lysates containing 300 μg protein overnight at 4° C under constant gentle rotating. After incubation, streptavidin beads were centrifuged, washed with 1× PBS containing 0.05% Tween-20, resuspended in 50 μl of 2× SDS loading buffer, and boiled for 10 minutes. Elutes from the streptavidin beads were loaded onto SDS PAGE gel (Bio-Rad) and immunoblotted with VDAC1 or ANT1 antibody.

## Lentiviral shRNA knockdown
GIPZ E. coli clones containing human CPT1A, GPD2 and ETFDH lentiviral shRNA vectors were purchased from GE Dharmarcon (Lafayette, CO). The lentiviral shRNA vectors were purified using a QIAGEN plasmid kit. Lentiviruses bearing human CPT1A, GPD2 or ETFDH shRNA were produced by co-transfection of the lentiviral shRNA vectors and lentiviral packaging vectors in 293T cells. The shRNA lentiviruses were collected and added into HBEC3-KT cell culture. Lentivirus-infected HBEC3-KT cells were selected by cell sorting based on GFP expression 3 days after infection. Efficiency of the shRNA knockdown was determined by immunoblot using anti-human CPT1A, GPD2 or ETFDH antibodies.

## Adenoviral Cre knockout
Adenovirus containing Cre recombinase or control empty vectors were purchased from Viral Vector Core at the University of Iowa. As previously described [ ], adenoviral infections were carried out in mTECs derived from Prkaa1fl/fl;Prkaa2fl/fl mice.

## Mitochondria isolation
Mitochondria were isolated from either excised mouse lungs or harvested HBEC3-KT or MLE-15 cells. As previously described [ ], a Polytron homogenizer (Pro Scientific, Oxford, CT) was used to dissociate tissues and cells. Mitochondria were separated from cytosol via serial centrifugation at 4°C. The concentration of the isolated mitochondria was normalized in between PBS or ODN treatment groups using BCA protein assay (Pierce). The isolated mitochondria were maintained in mitochondrial isolation buffer on ice for further analysis.

## Biochemical analysis of mitochondrial complex activity
As previously described [ ], spectrophotometric analysis of the respiratory chain complexes was performed on HBEC3-KT cells collected at the indicated time points after ODN treatment. The electron transport chain enzymes were assayed at 30° C using a temperature-controlled spectrophotometer (Ultraspec 6300 pro, Biochrom Ltd., Cambridge, England). The activities of complex I (NADH:ferricyanide reductase), complex II (succinate dehydrogenase), rotenone sensitive complex I+III (NADH:cytochrome c reductase), complex II + III (succinate:cytochrome c reductase) and complex IV (cytochrome c oxidase) were measured using appropriate electron acceptors/donors [ , ]. The increase or decrease in absorbance of cytochrome c at 550 nm was measured for complex I + III, II + III, or complex IV. The activity of NADH:ferricyanide reductase was measured by oxidation of NADH at 340 nm. For succinate dehydrogenase, the reduction of 2,6-dichloroindophenol (DCIP) was measured at 600 nm. For citrate synthase, the reduction of dithionitrobenzoic acid (DTNB) was measured at 412 nm. Enzyme activities are expressed in nmol/min/mg protein. Complex III activity was measured using a Mitochondrial Complex III activity assay kit (BioVision). Complex V activity was measured using a Quantichrom ATPase assay kit (Bioassay Systems).

## Luminescence glo assay
HBEC3-KT cells (1×104 per well) were plated in an opaque-walled 96-well plate and grown overnight. Cells were treated with 0.6 μM ODN and collected at various time points after treatment. Cells were lysed on the plate and incubated with luminescence glo regents per the luminescence glo assay kit’s instructions (Promega). Luminescence was recorded using a BioTek Synergy2 plate reader.

## Fatty acid oxidation assay
A non-radioactive fatty acid oxidation (FAO) assay kit (Biomedical Research Service, State University of New York at Buffalo) was used to measure FAO activity in ODN-treated HBEC3-KT cells. Cells were lysed and incubated with substrate octanoyl-CoA and then FAO assay solution in a 96-well plate, following the manufacturer’s instruction. Oxidation of the octanoyl-CoA by the cell lysate generates NADH, which is coupled to the reduction of the tetrazolium salt INT to formazan in the FAO assay solution. The absorbance of the newly formed formazan (at 490 nm) is proportional to FAO activity.

## Coenzyme Q10 measurement by triple quadruple LC-MS
Levels of ubiquinone (CoQ10) and ubiquinol (reduced form) in PBS or ODN treated HBEC3-KT cells were measured using an Agilent 6460 triple quadruple mass spectrometer coupled with an Agilent 1290 series HPLC system. PBS or ODN treated cells were quickly washed with ice-cold PBS and then liquid nitrogen was poured onto cells to rapidly quench metabolic and chemical reactions. To extract ubiquinone and ubiquinol, 100 μl of 100% isopropanol were added and mixed with the cells. Coenzyme Q9 was added as an internal standard. The cell extracts were vortexed, centrifuged at 17,000 g for 5 minutes at 4°C, and supernatants were transferred to clean auto sampler vials for direct injection. The mobile phase is methanol containing 5 mM ammonium formate. Ubiquinone, ubiquinol and CoQ9 were separated on a Kinetex 2.6 μm C18 100 Å, 100 x 4.6 mm column. The flow rate was 700 μL/min at 37°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in the MRM positive ion electrospray mode with the following transitions: Ubiquinone/oxidized, m/z 880.7→197.1; Uniquinol/reduced, m/z 882.7→197.1; CoQ9 (IS), m/z 795.6 →197.1. Raw files were imported and analyzed using Agilent Mass Hunter Workstation software-Quantitative Analysis.

## Cytochrome bH measurement
The method of cytochrome bH measurement was adapted from that described by Quinlan et al. [ ]. Isolated mitochondria (1 mg/ml) were resuspended at 37°C in buffer containing 120 mM KCl, 5 mM HEPES, 1 mM EGTA (pH 7.2 at 20°C), and 0.3% (w/v) bovine serum albumin. Absorbance change in Cytochrome bH was measured after ODN or antimycin A addition using a NanoDrop One UV-Vis spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The Cytochrome bH signal was recorded by spectrum scanning at the wavelength pair 566–575 nm at 37°C with stirring and normalized based on the assumption that reductions of bH are 0% with no added substrate and 100% with saturating substrates plus 2 μM DTT. In parallel with cytochrome bH measurement, mtROS generation was detected in isolated mitochondria (0.5 mg/ml) treated by ODN or antimycin A using mitoSOX red as above described. To determine the effect of the mitochondria membrane potential on Cytochrome bH redox state and mtROS generation in isolated mitochondria, bH%red and mtROS were analyzed after addition of 500 nM FCCP in the assay buffer along with ODN or antimycin A treatment.

## Proteomics analysis
The biotinylated ODN-bound proteins were precipitated with streptavidin beads from mitochondria lysates and resolved by PAGE (Bio-rad). The PAGE gels were stained using a silver staining kit (Pierce). Silver-stained gel pieces were excised, washed, destained and digested in-gel with 200 ng modified trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) and Rapigest (TM, Waters Corp.) for 18 h at 37° C. In-solution samples were precipitated with 5:1 v/v of cold acetone at -20° C for 18 h, then centrifuged and the acetone was removed prior to treatment with Rapigest (100°C for 10 min), followed by addition of trypsin. The resulting peptides were extracted and analyzed by high-sensitivity LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham MA). Proteins were identified by database searching of the fragment spectra against the SwissProt (EBI) protein database using Mascot (v 2.6, Matrix Science, London, UK) and Proteome Discoverer (v 2.2, Thermo Scientific). Typical search settings were: mass tolerances, 10 ppm precursor, 0.8d fragments; variable modifications, methionine sulfoxide, pyro-glutamate formation; enzyme, trypsin, up to 2 missed cleavages. Peptides were subject to 1% FDR using reverse-database searching.

## RPPA analysis
The reverse phase protein array (RPPA) analyses were performed to examine 161 protein targets in PBS or ODN treated HBEC3-KT cells. Cell lysates were serially diluted in 5 two-fold dilutions with RPPA lysis buffer. An Aushon Biosystems 2470 arrayer (Burlington, MA) was used to print lysates on nitrocellulose-coated FAST slides (Schleicher & Schuell BioScience) and make protein arrays. The array slides were probed with primary antibodies followed by detection with appropriate biotinylated secondary antibodies. The signal was amplified using the Vectastain ABC Elite kit (Vector Laboratories) and visualized by DAB colorimetric reaction. The slides were scanned, analyzed, and quantified using Microvigene software (VigeneTech Inc., Carlisle, MA) to generate spot signal intensities, which were processed by the R package SuperCurve (version 1.01). A fitted “supercurve” was plotted with the signal intensities on the Y-axis and the relative log2 concentration of each protein on the X-axis using the non-parametric, monotone increasing B-spline model [ ]. Protein concentrations were derived from the supercurve for each lysate by curve-fitting and normalized by median polish [ ]. Differential protein expression analysis was performed using R with LIMMA package and adjusted for multiple-testing using the Benjamini-Hoechberg method to reduce the false discovery rate.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using SigmaPlot 14.0 (Systat Software, San Jose, CA) and GraphPad Prism 8 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). One-way ANOVA was used to compare the means of multiple treatment conditions or multiple time points. The Holm-Sidak method was used, unless normality testing failed, in which case Kruskall-Wallis method was used. Means of two groups were compared using two-way Student’s t-test. Survival comparisons were performed using logrank testing by the Mantel-Cox approach.

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## Candidate mitochondrial peptide targets identified by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry proteomic analysis.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Regent sources and identifiers.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## Experimental models.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Fig

## Comparison of mtROS detectors.
(A) mtROS production 100 min after HBEC3-KT cells were treated with PBS, Pam2, ODN or Pam2 and ODN as measured by ROSstar fluorescence. (B) mtROS production 100 min after HBEC3-KT cells were treated with PBS or ODN as measured by MitoNeoD fluorescence. (C) mtROS production 100 min after HBEC3-KT cells were treated with PBS or ODN as measured by MCLA luminescence. * p≤0.001 vs. PBS by one-way ANOVA using Holm-Sidak method.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Comparison of lung epithelial cell types and growth conditions.
mtROS production 100 min after treatment with PBS or ODN was assessed by MitoSOX fluorescence in HBEC3-KT cells plated on collagen (A) or without collagen (B), in MLE-15 cells plated on collagen (C) or without collagen (D), in primary mouse tracheal epithelial cells grown submerged on tissue culture plates (E) or grown on transwells at air-liquid interface (F), in primary mouse alveolar epithelial cells (G) and in primary human alveolar epithelial cells (H). (I) Brightfield (left) and immunofluorescence confocal microscopy (right) from the transwell cultures in F. Scale bar = 50 μm. * p<0.001 by Student’s t test. CCSP, club cell secretory protein.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## ODN-induced changes in mitochondrial electron transport chain complex or super-complex activities.
HBEC3-KT cells were exposed to ODN treatment for 0, 50, and 100 min. Electron transfer activities of (A) complex I, (B) complex I + III, (C) rotenone sensitive complex I + III, (D) complex II, (E) complex II + III, (F) complex III, (G) complex IV and (H) complex V were measured in whole cell lysates. (I) Citrate synthase was used as a marker for TCA activity. * p≤0.006 vs. 0 min ODN by one-way ANOVA using Holm-Sidak method. † p≤0.006 vs. 0 min ODN by one-way ANOVA using Holm-Sidak method.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Fig

## Uncut immunoblots for mitochondria mass analysis.
HBEC3-KT cells were exposed to ODN for 0, 50, or 100 min. Shown are the uncut immunoblots for the bands shown in . These include (A) SDHB, succinate dehydrogenase subunit B; (B) COX4, cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV; (C) ATP5A, ATP synthase alpha-subunit; (D) CS, citrate synthase; (E) VDAC1, voltage dependent anion channel 1; and (F) β-Actin, used as a loading control.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Fig

## Dosage-dependent effects of ODN on energy metabolite production.
HBEC3-KT cells were treated with PBS or increasing doses of ODN for 50 minutes. Shown are levels of (A) ATP, (B) ADP, (C) AMP, (D) NADH and (E) NADPH in whole cell lysates. * p≤0.005 vs. 0 μM ODN by one-way ANOVA using Holm-Sidak method.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Fig

## ODN-induced mtROS production in the setting of TLR signaling deficiency.
mtROS generation as measured by mitoSOX fluorescence 100 min after ODN treatment of primary mouse tracheal epithelial cells from (A) wild type vs. TLR9-/- mice, (B) wild type vs. MyD88-/- mice, (C) MyD88fl/fl vs. MyD88fl/fl;Sftpc-Cre mice, and (D) Traf6fl/fl vs. Traf6fl/fl;Sftpc-Cre mice. * p<0.005 vs. PBS in TLR9-/- or MyD88-/- cells by one-way ANOVA using Holm-Sidak method. † p = 0.01 vs PBS in MyD88fl/fl cells by Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA using Dunn’s method. ‡ p≤0.001 vs. PBS in Traf6fl/fl cells by one-way ANOVA using Holm-Sidak method.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Fig

## Biotinylated-ODN precipitation analysis.
Shown are the uncut blots and densitometry from . Human HBEC3-KT cells or murine MLE-15 cells were treated with the indicated biotinylated-ODNs. Mitochondria were isolated and the mitochondrial lysates were incubated with streptavidin beads. The streptavidin precipitants were resolved by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, then probed for VDAC1 in (A) human or (B) mouse mitochondrial lysates following treatment with ODN for the indicated time. Alternately, human mitochondrial lysates were probed for ANT1 (C) following treatment with ODN for the indicated time. * p < 0.05 vs. PBS-treated by one-way ANOVA using the Holm-Sidak method. VDAC1, voltage dependent anion channel 1; ANT1, adenine nucleotide translocator 1.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S8 Fig

## Correlation between ODN and VDAC1 pixel intensity by linear regression.
Pixel intensity values for FITC-labeled ODN and Alexa Fluor 555-labeled anti-VDAC1 antibody were plotted against each other and a simple linear regression model was fit to the data. Pearson’s correlation coefficients were calculated to determine whether VDAC1 pixel intensity tended to accumulate with ODN1 pixel intensity. FITC, Fluorescein isothiocyanate; VDAC1, voltage dependent anion channel 1.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S9 Fig

## VBIT-4 increases epithelial mtROS generation and ΔΨm.
MitoSOX fluorescence (A) and JC-1 ratio (B) of HBEC3-KT cells treated for 100 min with PBS, ODN or VDAC1 inhibitor VBIT-4. * p<0.001 by one-way ANOVA.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S10 Fig

## Immunoblots for AMPK-ACC pathway activation analysis.
HBEC3-KT cells were treated with ODN or erastin or cyclosporin A for 0, 50, and 100 min. Cell lysates were resolved by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and immunoblotted using antibodies against phospho-AMPK α1, phospho-AMPK α2, phospho-ACC and total AMPK. β-Actin was used as a loading control. (A) Uncut blots from . (B) Densitometry studies for the indicated blots relative to β-actin. * p < 0.05 vs PBS-treated by one-way ANOVA using the Holm-Sidak method.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S11 Fig

## Genotyping PCR of Prkaa1fl/fl;Prkaa2fl/fl mouse tracheal epithelial cells infected with adenovirus containing Cre recombinase or control empty vector.
Shown are post-infection levels of (A) Prkaa1 and (B) Prkaa2. AdV, adenovirus.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S12 Fig

## Efficacy of shRNA knock down cells.
Shown are uncut immunoblots for HBEC3-KT transfected with shRNA against (A) CPT1A, with knockdown #4 (KD4) used in the experiments in ; (B) GPD2, with knockdown #1 (KD1) used in the experiments in and (C) ETFDH, with knockdown #2 (KD2) used in the experiments in . β-Actin was used as a loading control.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S13 Fig

## Effect of TCA cycle metabolites on ODN-induced mtROS generation.
mtROS dose response to ODN in HBEC3-KT cells supplemented with the TCA metabolites or metabolite analogues (A) citrate, (B) pyruvate, (C) α-ketoglutarate, (D) dimethyl succinate, (E) dimethyl malonate, (F) dimethyl fumurate or (G) oxaloacetate. * p≤0.003 vs. 0 μM ODN treated with no metabolite pretreatment by one-way ANOVA using Holm-Sidak method. † p≤0.05 vs. same ODN dose with no metabolite pretreatment by one-way ANOVA using Holm-Sidak method. ‡ p<0.04 vs 0 μM ODN treated with no metabolite pretreatment by Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA using Dunn’s method. § p<0.04 vs 0 μM ODN treated with oxaloacetate pretreatment by Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA using Dunn’s method.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S14 Fig

## Alternate electron sources that contribute to mtROS generation.
(A) ODN-induced mtROS generation in the presence of absence of glycolysis inhibitor UK5099, β-oxidation inhibitor etomoxir, or glutaminolysis inhibitor BPTES. mtROS dose response to ODN in the presence or absence of (B) BPTES, (C) etomoxir, or (D) UK5099. (E) ODN-induced mtROS in the presence of single or combined inhibitors. (F) mtROS dose response to ODN in the presence or absence of (2-DG), a D-glucose analogue. (G) Mitochondrial oxygen consumption in oligomycin-inhibited HBEC3-KT cells following treatment with ODN in the presence of the indicated inhibitors measured using a Seahorse XFe96 Flux Analyzer, shown as mean ± SEM. 2-DG, 2-deoxy-D-glucose; OCR, oxygen consumption rate. * p≤0.04 vs. no ODN with same pretreatment by one-way ANOVA using Holm-Sidak method. † p≤0.002 vs. same ODN dose with no inhibitor pretreatment by one-way ANOVA using Holm-Sidak method. ‡ p≤0.008 vs. same pretreatment without ODN by one-way ANOVA using Holm-Sidak method. § p< 0.001 vs. ODN treated without inhibitor pretreatment by one-way ANOVA using Holm-Sidak method. Δ p = 0.007 vs PBS treated without inhibitor by Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA using Tukey test. # p < 0.003 vs PBS-treated by one-way ANOVA using Dunnett’s test for multiple comparisons.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S15 Fig

## Effect of mitochondrial electron transport chain inhibitors on ODN-induced mtROS generation.
Shown are mtROS dose responses to ODN of HBEC3-KT cells following pre-treatment with (A) complex I inhibitor rotenone, (B) complex I inhibitor diphenyleneiodonium (DPI), (C) complex II inhibitor TTFA, (D) complex II inhibitor atpenin, (E) complex III inhibitor myxothiazol, (F) complex III inhibitor antimycin, (G) complex IV inhibitor sodium azide, or (H) complex V inhibitor oligomycin. TTFA, 2-thenoyltrifluoroacetone. * p<0.03 vs PBS treated without inhibitor by Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA using Tukey test. † p<0.05 vs same ODN dose without inhibitor by Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA using Tukey test.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S16 Fig

## Scavenging ODN-induced mtROS.
HBEC3-KT cells were treated (or not) with mtROS scavengers mitoTEMPO (A) or mitoQ (B), then treated with the indicated concentration of ODN, mtROS generation was measured by mitoSOX fluorescence at 100 min after ODN treatment. (C) MitoSOX fluorescence of HBEC3-KT cells treated with PBS or ODN prior to inoculation with PBS or P. aeruginosa. (D) CellROX fluorescence of HBEC3-KT cells treated with PBS or Pam2ODN prior to inoculation with PBS or P. aeruginosa. * p≤0.001 vs PBS treated without inhibitor by Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA using Tukey test. † p<0.05 vs same ODN dose without inhibitor by Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA using Tukey test. ‡ p <0.005 vs PBS-treated, uninfected by Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA using Tukey test.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S17 Fig

## Inhibition of ODN-induced increase of mtROS and membrane potential ΔΨm by TTFA and FCCP treatment.
HBEC3-KT cells were pre-treated (or not) with either TTFA or FCCP or both, then treated for 100 min with the indicated concentration of ODN. Shown are mitoSOX fluorescence with (A) TTFA, (B) FCCP and (C) TTFA-FCCP. (D) MitoTracker fluorescence, or (E) JC-1 ratio of aggregates:monomers with TTFA-FCCP. (F) Bacterial burden of HBEC3-KT cells treated with the indicated ligands with or without TTFA or FCCP or both. * p≤0.001 vs PBS treated without inhibitor by Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA using Tukey test. † p<0.05 vs same ODN dose without inhibitor by Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA using Tukey test. ǂ p<0.001 vs PBS by ANOVA.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.

 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011138.r001Decision Letter 0
SkurnikDavidSection EditorGuillardThomasAcademic Editor© 2023 Skurnik, Guillard2023Skurnik, Guillardhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
15 Mar 2023

Dear Dr. Evans,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Antimicrobial mitochondrial reactive oxygen species induction by lung epithelial metabolic reprogramming" for consideration at PLOS Pathogens. As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. In light of the reviews (below this email), we would like to invite the resubmission of a significantly-revised version that takes into account the reviewers' comments.
I am returning your manuscript with three reviews. The reviewers came to different conclusions about the paper, as you will see. After reading the reviews and looking at the manuscript, I recommend Major Revision and did not reject your manuscript as recommended by the reviewer #3. Indeed, despite the present form need to address issues raised by reviewers, I have the gut feeling that your study is of interest to tackle antimicrobial resistance by providing new targets. I am sorry I cannot be more positive at the moment, however I am looking forward to receiving your revision. Note that we may send your paper back to some of the more critical reviewers upon resubmission.
I would like to draw your attention to the issue that I have considered critical and for which I expect answers +/- new data. For the other, you are free to decide whether the comments require new data or new explanations arguing in support with your claiming or against the reviewers’ comments.
The first critical issue is your extrapolation to the whole lung. Although, your manuscript represents a large body of work showing that ODN can increase mtROS and thereby being part of the antimicrobial oxidative response of the human airway epithelium, I agree with the reviewer #1 that your results concerned bronchial cells and moreover non-differentiated cells. For these reason, please pay particular attention to the comments #3 and #4 from the reviewer #1.
The second critical issue is the demonstrated link between mtROS production and the alteration of the electron chain transport.

Lines 90-92 (results from figure 1H): inhibiting complex V by oligomycin gives OCR due to proton leak since the ATP-based OCR is inhibited. Therefore, you showed increased OCR with ODN while inhibition by oligomycin. However, would it be possible to measure mtROS production in ODN+oligomycin and (ODN+antimycin or ODN+PBS). It will clearly show increased oxygen consumption by mtROS production.
Please address the reviewer #3’s major concerns #2 to confirm how you ruled out any ROS detection other than mtROS that could lead to falsely conclude to mtROS increase.
Lines 168-169, you mentioned that AMPK is activated in response to ATP consumption. Thus, when ODN inhibits the ECT and subsequently the ATP production (results 2 and 3), AMPK is activated. Could you clarify why deletions of AMPK genes decreased ODN-induced mtROS?

In addition to the reviewers’ minor comments, I would like you to pay attention to my two minor comments I have listed below.

Line 377, please change “Luria-Bertani medium” for “Lysogeny broth medium” as G. Bertani himself explained that LB has been misconstrued to stand for his name (PMID: 14729683)
For the in vivo infection model (lines 370-375) please specify the time of nebulization that is required to ensure a full Pam or AND treatment as well as an effective PA inoculation.

We cannot make any decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is also likely to be sent to reviewers for further evaluation.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to the review comments and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript. Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 60 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email. Please note that revised manuscripts received after the 60-day due date may require evaluation and peer review similar to newly submitted manuscripts.
Thank you again for your submission. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Thomas Guillard, PharmD, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
David Skurnik
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************
I am returning your manuscript with three reviews. The reviewers came to different conclusions about the paper, as you will see. After reading the reviews and looking at the manuscript, I recommend Major Revision based on the critiques from the more critical reviews. Indeed, despite the present form need to address issues raised by reviewers, I have the gut feeling that your study is of interest to tackle antimicrobial resistance by providing new targets. I am sorry I cannot be more positive at the moment, however I am looking forward to receiving your revision. Note that we may send your paper back to some of the more critical reviewers upon resubmission.
I would like to draw your attention to the issue that I considered critical and I expect answers +/- new data. For the other, you are free to decide if the comments require new data or new explanation arguing in support with your claiming or against the reviewers’ comments.
The first critical issue is your extrapolation to the whole lung. Although, your manuscript represents a large body of work showing that ODN can increase mtROS and thereby being part of the antimicrobial oxidative response of the human airway epithelium, I agree with the reviewer #1 that concerned only bronchial cells and moreover non-differentiated. For these reason, please pay particular attention to the comments #3 and #4 from the reviewer #1.
The second critical issue is the demonstrated link between mtROS production and the alteration of the electron chain transport.
- Lines 90-92 (results from figure 1H): inhibiting complex V by oligomycin gives OCR due to proton leak since the ATP-based OCR is inhibited. Therefore, you showed increased OCR with ODN while inhibition by oligomycin. However, would it be possible to measure mtROS production in ODN+oligomycin and (ODN+antimycin or ODN+PBS). It will clearly show increased oxygen consumption by mtROS production.
- Please address the reviewer #3’s major concerns #2 to confirm how you ruled out any ROS detection other than mtROS that could lead to falsely conclude to mtROS increase.
- Lines 168-169, you mentioned that AMPK is activated in response to ATP consumption. Thus, when ODN inhibits the ECT and subsequently the ATP production (results 2 and 3), AMPK is activated. Could you clarify why deletions of AMPK genes decreased ODN-induced mtROS?
In addition to the reviewers’ minor comments, I would like you to pay attention to my minor comments I have listed below.
- Line 377, please change “Luria-Bertani medium” for “Lysogeny broth medium” as G. Bertani himself explained that LB has been misconstrued to stand for his name (PMID: 14729683)
- For the in vivo infection model (lines 370-375) please specify the time of nebulization that is required to ensure a full Pam or AND treatment as well as an effective PA inoculation.
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: The report from Yongxing Wang et al. addresses the molecular mechanisms responsible for mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mtROS) generation after epithelial challenge with TLR ligands. It continues the previous work of the team that developed antimicrobial agents in the context of respiratory research (pneumonia). The investigations are highly significant in the context of antimicrobial strategies for respiratory diseases. The background, the experimental design, and the general execution are robust. The intracellular metabolic cascade leading to ROS production is extremely well characterized by top-notch molecular approaches. The potential involvement of mitochondrial complexes II and III is convincingly described. The figures are appropriate and the results are accurately reported. The methods contained sufficient experimental details. I have only a few remarks that could improve clarity and complement the investigations.
Reviewer #2: Evans and colleagues have developed and functionally characterized a combination of two innate immune stimulators (ODN M362 and Pam2) that induces epithelial resistance against a broad range of opportunistic bacterial and fungal pathogens. In prior work, the authors showed that the induction of mitohondrial ROS is critical to the efficacy of this immunomodulatory strategy that is being tested in human clinical trials. This new manuscript describes the molecular links that bridge Pam2/ODN M362 and mtROS, with the surprising finding that ODN M362 directly binds to the mitochondrial voltage-dependent anion-sensitive channel (VDAC1) in a manner that is independent of TLR9 signaling. This interaction results in metabolic reprograming in mitochondria, and alters cellular nucleotide distribution which in turn activates the AMPK-ACC and fatty acid oxidation. These events promote electron flux through the ETC and the generation of mtROS; ODN M362-dependent disruption of these events results in impaired epithelial mtROS generation and loss of in vivo activity of the ODN M362/Pam 2 activity, resulting in impaired lung host defenses against Pseudomonas challenge in experimental models of disease. Overall, this is an elegant and well-developed study that is relevant for understanding epithelial regulation of innate immunity (and its therapeutic manipulation).
Reviewer #3: This manuscript investigates how ODN induces mitochondrial ROS (mtROS) production via metabolic reprogramming, alters mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) activity in a mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm)-dependent manner. They show that antimicrobial ROS are induced from lung epithelial cells by interactions of CpG oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) with mitochondrial voltage-dependent anion channel 1
(VDAC1) without dependence on Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9). The ODN-VDAC1 interaction alters cellular ATP/ADP/AMP localization, increases delivery of electrons to the electron transport chain, enhances mitochondrial membrane potential, and differentially modulates ETC complex activities. These combined effects promote leak of electrons from ETC complex III, resulting in superoxide formation. They conclude that
ODN-induced mitochondrial ROS may yield protective antibacterial effects. Although the studies are interesting and provide some understanding of protective effects of ODN on host immune response, the studies are not enough to conclude that ODN induced mitochondrial ROS generation in epithelial cells is the sole contributor to host protection in vivo in a model of lung infection with P. aeruginosa.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: I do not recommend additional experimentation for acceptance of this manuscript.
Reviewer #3: Major Concerns:
1) The figures that show the seahorse analysis demonstrate effects of oligomycin and antimycin. The entire graph of cellular respiration needs to be shown with basal, maximal OCR, spare respiratory capacity and ATP production. In addition these should be accompanied with graphs and quantification
2) The investigators use both tracheal and bronchial epithelial cells. The rationale for use of these cells needs to be included
3) In Figure 2 F and G they show the expression of NADH and NADPH, however, none of the experiments include quantification of non-mitochondrial ROS. These should be done in combination with infection of bacteria in vitro.
4) Most of the in vitro studies are performed with ODN alone, it will interesting to include experiments with P. aeruginosa and ODN
5) Many of the conclusions are based on use of VDAC1, ANT1, mPTP inhibitors, off target effects of these reagents should be considered
6) The in vivo experiments in Figure 6 show a protective effect of Pam2-ODN on P. aeruginosa infection. From the data and design of experiments it is difficult to conclude that this would be solely due to mitochondrial ROS generation by ODN in epithelial cells in vivo. Multiple cell types particularly phagocytes such as neutrophils, macrophages contribute to host defense in bacterial infections. Although ODN was administered as nebulization, it is likely to have effects on other immune cells.
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: 1. The title is somehow misleading for 2 reasons: (i) the work is mainly focused on HBEC3-KT cells that are originating from bronchi, therefore the extrapolation to the entire lung should be tackled with caution; (ii) the level of evidence dealing with the induction of mtROS by the modulators on the short kinetic that is presented hardly demonstrate “metabolic reprogramming”.
2. The production of ROS/mtROS is demonstrated but what about the release of these ROS? In addition, is there a way to test if those ROS are beneficial for the epithelial cells and non-toxic?
3. Some more background and details regarding the origin of the epithelial cells and the related hypothesis that is tested should be given in the text. For example, HBEC3 are mainly used, since they are originating from bronchi they may be ideally suited to analyze the first intra-pulmonary contact of the bacteria but pneumonia particularly affects the alveoli (only MLE-15 was used for only one experimental approach). Is it possible to reproduce the most important findings in another cellular model that would represent small airways or alveoli? It should be at least discussed in the manuscript.
4. The authors should also discuss the limitations of their work regarding the in vitro model that was chosen. HBEC3 are non-differentiated cells, whereas the bacteria first encounter differentiated cells in the airways. In addition, it is not clear why and when cell culture was performed on collagen-coated tissue culture plates and transwells since no data that is presented here seem to discuss influencing parameters such as proliferative state of the cells, level of differentiation, or even general morphology/phenotype. If transwells were used, did the authors try to distinguish non-differentiated vs differentiated airway epithelial cells to test the differential ROS production?
5. The full datasets with all the proteins should be provided in supplemental data regarding Figure 3D and Figure 4A.
Additional comments:
1. The manuscript is generally very well written. Nonetheless, there are a few typos to correct.
2. Is there a label that is not correct in Figure S1A or S1B? As it is I do not understand the difference between those 2 panels.
3. The scale bars on the IF do not appear correct or the cells that are shown would reach a few hundred µm.
4. Is it possible to apply a statistical method to analyze the curves in OCR measurements (F1H, F3L, F4J, F5C, FS12G) and F5D-G?
5. Is it possible to show close inserts for F4D? In addition, it would be interesting to explore the alveoli.
Reviewer #2: There are several minor comments that the authors should address:
1. Figure 2B - please quantify Western blot bands.
2. Line 137-140. Re pulldown assays: Is VDAC1 one of the bands in the 35-50 kDa range - Fig. 3D? Please quantify increase in IP of VDAC1 or ANT1 as a function of ODN exposure.
3. See point 2 for Fig. 4B - please quantify.
4. Figure 4 contains an enormous amount of data and recommend splitting in two figures (panels A - F in one figure; panels G - P in second figure; panel P could be the first panel in the second figure to aid the reader in absorbing the ensuing experiments - currently displayed in panels G - O).
5. Similar considerations for current Fig. 5 - helpful to lead with model - panel N - and then associated data.
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Tobias Hohl
Reviewer #3: No

Figure Files:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.

Data Requirements:

Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example see here on PLOS Biology: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
10.1371/journal.ppat.1011138.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
30 Jun 2023

AttachmentSubmitted filename: PLoS Pathogens Response to Reviewers 6-30-23.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.ppat.1011138.r003Decision Letter 1
SkurnikDavidSection EditorGuillardThomasAcademic Editor© 2023 Skurnik, Guillard2023Skurnik, Guillardhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
1 Aug 2023

Dear Dr. Evans,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Antimicrobial mitochondrial reactive oxygen species induction by lung epithelial immunometabolic modulation' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Thomas Guillard, PharmD, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
David Skurnik
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************************************************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: The authors significantly improved their manuscript and satisfactorily answered all my comments. I have no additional remark.
Reviewer #2: The authors have comprehensively responded to my comments and concerns. Well done! It's an elegant study that will be of great interest to the PloS Pathogens readership.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: NA
Reviewer #2: None.
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: NA
Reviewer #2: None.
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Tobias Hohl
10.1371/journal.ppat.1011138.r004Acceptance letter
SkurnikDavidSection EditorGuillardThomasAcademic Editor© 2023 Skurnik, Guillard2023Skurnik, Guillardhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
29 Aug 2023

Dear Dr. Evans,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "Antimicrobial mitochondrial reactive oxygen species induction by lung epithelial immunometabolic modulation," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the pre-publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Pearls, Reviews, Opinions, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript, if you opted to have an early version of your article, will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens. 
Best regards,
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064