3954cellrepsmedCell Reports MedicineCell Rep MedElsevierPMC1319823413198234131982344209714710.1016/j.xcrm.2026.102787A human iPSC-derived sensory neuron platform for high-throughput discovery of neuroprotectants against chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy
PetrovaVeselina MillsCaitlin E HugClemens Cetinkaya-FisginAysel SplaineJennifer FouladzadehSepideh HakimSara PowellRasheen ZhenShannon ChungMirra BradshawGary A DengTao SingecIlyas WangQing KawaguchiRiki JonnagaddalaHarathi BarrettLee B SmithJennifer A KalocsayMarian GyoriBenjamin M HokeAhmet SorgerPeter K WoolfClifford J 1F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Program in Neurobiology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA2Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA3Laboratory of Systems Pharmacology, Harvard Program in Therapeutic Science, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA4Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA5Department of Neurology, Neuromuscular Division, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA6ICCB-Longwood Screening Facility, Harvard Medical School, 250 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA, USA7Department of Bioengineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA8National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS), Division of Preclinical Innovation, Stem Cell Translation Laboratory (SCTL), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Rockville, MD, USA9Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA10Center for Neurobehavioral Genetics, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA11Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA12Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA∗Corresponding author clifford.woolf@childrens.harvard.edu
13Lead contact
652026751027871027872452026© 2026 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) is a major dose-limiting side effect of cancer treatment, yet the lack of predictive human models continues to hinder therapeutic progress. Here, we establish a scalable and reproducible model of paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration and neurotoxicity in human iPSC-derived sensory neurons, suitable for high-throughput identification of neuroprotective compounds. Using this platform, we screen a library of 192 kinase inhibitors and identify 19 hits that commonly inhibit three STE20 kinases—MAP4K4, MINK1, and TNIK. Genetic knockdown studies reveal that multi-kinase inhibition of these kinases is required for neuroprotection against paclitaxel. Consistently, selective pharmacological inhibition of the identified STE20 kinases rescues paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration in iPSC-derived sensory neurons and primary human dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and preserves intraepidermal nerve fiber density in a mouse model of CIPN. Together, these findings establish a translational human sensory neuron platform that enables target validation and drug discovery for CIPN.
Keywords: chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy, iPSC-derived sensory neurons, high-throughput screening, neuroprotective small molecules, axon degeneration, STE20 kinases

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•iPSC-derived sensory neuron model recapitulates paclitaxel axon damage and toxicity
•Screen of 192 inhibitors identifies 19 neuroprotectants targeting three STE20 kinases
•Multi-kinase inhibition of MAP4K4/MINK1/TNIK prevents axon degeneration
•STE20 inhibition preserves nerve fibers in human and mouse CIPN models

Petrova et al. develop a high-throughput human iPSC-derived sensory neuron platform for drug discovery in chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy. They uncover that inhibition of three members of the STE20 kinase family (MAP4K4/MINK1/TNIK) is neuroprotective against paclitaxel-induced axon damage, with validation in primary human and mouse models.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Dec 11; Revised 2026 Mar 13; Accepted 2026 Apr 8; Collection date 2026 May 19.

## Introduction
Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) is a debilitating side effect of cancer treatment that occurs in approximately 30%–70% of patients undergoing chemotherapy. , CIPN arises from the toxicity of chemotherapeutic agents on peripheral neurons, resulting in a range of sensory symptoms such as numbness, tingling, and burning pain, predominantly in the upper and lower distal extremities, and in some cases, motor and autonomic deficits. In a substantial subset of patients, the onset of severe symptoms requires early termination of their anti-cancer treatment, which worsens outcomes. Currently, there are no approved drugs or measures to prevent or reverse CIPN, mainly because the mechanisms leading to neuronal damage are not fully understood, and the translatability of preclinical rodent models to the clinic has been poor. , However, the predictable nature of chemotherapy administration presents a unique opportunity for intervention before irreversible neuronal damage occurs. With the rising incidence of cancer and improved long-term survival, eliminating CIPN without compromising the efficacy of antineoplastic therapies is a high priority.
Paclitaxel is one of the most used chemotherapy drugs in the treatment of lung, ovarian, breast, and other solid cancers. Paclitaxel belongs to the family of taxanes that stabilize microtubules, resulting in mitotic arrest and the death of dividing cancer cells. Treatment with paclitaxel and other taxanes is, however, commonly associated with peripheral neuropathy and chronic neuropathic pain. , A large body of work utilizing in vivo and in vitro mouse models has identified some of the mechanisms by which paclitaxel leads to CIPN. These include defective axon transport , and axonal abnormalities, , dysfunctional mitochondria, , altered calcium signaling, , inflammatory processes, , and neuronal hyperexcitability. , Yet, the exact timing, sequence, progression, and molecular signature of the events leading to axon degeneration and neuronal cell death remain unclear, and studies in human neurons have been limited. , , 
Recent literature has uncovered significant differences in mouse and human dorsal root ganglion (DRG) biology, which is a likely contributor to the limited translation from rodent models. , , , The increasing availability of differentiated human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neurons presents an opportunity to utilize a well-controlled system for studying human-specific mechanisms of axon degeneration and cell death in sensory neurons following chemotherapy exposure. Previous research has used commercially available neurons expressing cortical and peripheral markers to study chemotherapy exposure in culture. , However, these early models did not fully recapitulate sensory neuron function. More recent studies have used differentiation protocols optimized for sensory neurons, which are functionally active and show a dose-dependent vulnerability to paclitaxel. , These models reproduce key features of chemotherapy-induced neurotoxicity, including calcium disturbances and mitochondrial dysfunction. In one study, several chemotherapy agents spanning different classes of drugs exhibited axonal toxicity, suggesting that common mechanisms may lead to axon damage. 
In this study, we utilized human iPSC-derived sensory neurons to conduct a high-throughput screen of 192 kinase inhibitors from the Optimal Kinase Library (OKL), , tested at four concentrations, for their ability to prevent paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration. Our differentiation protocol allows for the production of large numbers of sensory neurons that express mature sensory neuron markers, are functionally active, and recapitulate sensory neuron-specific properties, such as responsiveness to capsaicin. The primary screen identified 19 compounds with neuroprotective properties. Leveraging kinome-wide affinity data, we identified three members of the STE20 family of kinases—MAP4K4, MINK1, and TNIK—that were jointly inhibited by the hit compounds. Subsequent pharmacological studies, using available selective inhibitors as well as small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown, showed that neuroprotection requires simultaneous inhibition of multiple kinases. Transcriptomic analysis after chemotherapy treatment alone or with the rescue compounds revealed the JNK/c-Jun pathway as essential for induction of neuronal cell death and the MAP4K-p38 pathway and lipid metabolism as contributors to axon degeneration. We confirmed that inhibition of MAP4K4, MINK1, and TNIK was neuroprotective against paclitaxel-induced neurotoxicity in a mouse model of CIPN and primary human DRG cultures. These findings expand our knowledge of the molecular mechanisms underlying taxane-mediated axon degeneration and cell death in human sensory neurons, provide a rationale for the development of STE20-targeted therapeutics to prevent CIPN, and establish a scalable, human-specific platform for further neuroprotective drug discovery.

## Results

## Modeling paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration and neurotoxicity in human sensory neurons in a 384-well format
To model chemotherapy-induced toxicity in vitro and develop a model suitable for high-throughput screening, we utilized an optimized, scalable protocol to differentiate human-derived iPSCs into sensory neurons ( A). iPSCs were differentiated for 14 days and then cultured in 384-well plates for an additional 14 days to allow for neuronal maturation and maximal axon extension ( A). We confirmed sensory neuron identity by immunocytochemistry for sensory neuron markers BRN3A, β3-tubulin, NF200, peripherin, CGRP, and TAC1 ( B), as well as by evaluating RNA transcript levels of sensory neuron-specific markers, ion channels, neurotransmitters, and neuropeptides ( C). Our iPSC-derived sensory neurons comprise a mixed population of sensory neuron subtypes, as reported. At 28 days in vitro (DIV), sensory neurons were exposed to increasing doses of paclitaxel ranging from 0.01 to 3 μM for 96 h ( D and 1E). Live-cell imaging with a neurite-tracking platform (IncuCyte) was used to monitor changes in neurite length ( E and A). Paclitaxel induced progressive axon degeneration in a dose-dependent manner, starting at doses of 30 nM ( E). Conversely, treatment with 1 μM hydroxyurea, a chemotherapeutic not commonly associated with CIPN, did not affect axonal length ( E). For subsequent studies, we chose to use paclitaxel at 0.3 μM, the lowest concentration at which a robust and reproducible axon degeneration phenotype (56% decrease in axon length) was observed at 96 h post-treatment ( F). In patients, the common treatment regimen involves administration of paclitaxel at 175 mg/m2 over a 3-h infusion once every 2 weeks. This results in a maximum plasma concentration of ∼5 μM and a plasma half-life of ∼12–48 h. There are no data on what the actual drug exposure to sensory neuronal cell bodies in the DRGs or axons in the periphery is, but chemotherapy plasma concentrations are predictive of treatment-limiting neuropathy. The doses used in our in vitro model were ∼15 times lower than the average plasma concentration in patients, supporting its physiological relevance.
 To assess whether axonal loss was associated with induction of apoptosis, activation of the effector caspases-3 and -7 was monitored over time using a Caspase-Glo assay ( B and S1C). We observed that axon degeneration preceded caspase activation since substantial axon degeneration was observed at 24 h post-treatment, but caspase activation was only detected 72 h post-treatment ( E and B). At 96 h, paclitaxel doses starting at 0.1 μM induced a 3-fold increase in caspase activation compared to DMSO, suggesting that axon degeneration was accompanied by induction of apoptosis in our model ( C). Additionally, live-cell dye (Calcein AM) staining after treatment with paclitaxel revealed that the number of live cells did not decrease compared to DMSO for the duration of the experiment, suggesting that the cells are in an early stage of apoptosis, before membrane rupture and cell death occur ( D).
We have developed a high-throughput, phenotypic human iPSC-derived sensory neuron assay that captures progressive axonal loss and caspase activation after chemotherapy treatment, constituting a translational tool to uncover mechanisms of neurotoxicity and the discovery of neuroprotective drugs and targets.

## KW-2449 is neuroprotective against paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration in iPSC-derived sensory neurons
We previously identified KW-2449, a multi-kinase inhibitor, as a neuroprotective compound against vincristine-induced growth arrest in iPSC-derived motor and sensory neurons during initial axonal outgrowth upon replating. We re-examined the effects of KW-2449 on axon degeneration induced by 0.3 μM paclitaxel in iPSC-derived sensory neurons with fully extended axons and found that KW-2449 is neuroprotective in a dose-dependent manner in this setting, with doses of 1 and 3 μM being most neuroprotective and doses >10 μM inducing neuronal toxicity ( G, 1H, and A). KW-2449 also decreased paclitaxel-associated caspase activity after 96 h in a dose-dependent manner ( B).
Any neuroprotective treatment for peripheral neuropathy must not interfere with chemotherapy’s effect on cancer cells. To assay the effects of KW-2449 on paclitaxel-induced death in cancer cells, we tested this combination in four breast cancer cell lines (BT20, BT459, MCF7, and Hs578T). Neuroprotective doses of KW-2449 inhibited paclitaxel-mediated cell death in three out of the four breast cancer lines, as measured using either growth rate (GR)-corrected measures of efficacy or fraction of dead cells ( C). Given the clinical implications of this result, we included counter-screening in breast cancer cell lines in our assay pipeline of all neuroprotective compounds.
KW-2449 is a multi-kinase inhibitor designed to inhibit FLT3 kinase. To determine whether FLT3 or other kinase target(s) were responsible for KW-2449’s neuroprotective action, we queried KINOMEscan data, which includes measurement of the estimated potency of KW-2449 for 468 human kinase targets (406 wild-type kinases and 62 common mutant kinases) and found that KW-2449 is a sub-100 nM inhibitor of 60 kinases and inhibits at least 184 kinases in the micromolar range (KDKd ≤ 1 μM) ( D). Based on KW-2449’s broad kinase inhibition profile and the difficulty in dissecting its mechanism of action, as well as its interference in paclitaxel-mediated killing of cancer cells, we concluded that it was necessary to screen for more selective kinase inhibitors matching the neuroprotective activities of KW-2449 but not its liabilities.

## High-throughput screen of kinase inhibitors identified 19 neuroprotective compounds and three STE20 kinases as drivers of axon degeneration
To determine which of KW-2449’s kinase targets contribute to its ability to protect sensory neurons from paclitaxel toxicity, we screened the Laboratory of Systems Pharmacology OKL. OKL is a custom-made library containing 192 kinase inhibitors that inhibit the majority of the druggable human kinome with varying degrees of selectivity while retaining chemical diversity within a compact library. , Sensory neurons were treated with each kinase inhibitor at four concentrations and their neuroprotective effects compared to those of KW-2449 ( A). Any compound that met either of the following criteria was identified as a hit: (1) a Z score equal to or higher than 4 or (2) an average % response equal to or higher than 80% compared to KW-2449’s neuroprotection against paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration in all replicates. Using these criteria, 19 neuroprotective compounds were identified, including KW-2449 ( B and 2C; ). To validate these hits, the 19 compounds were re-tested in secondary screens at 12 concentrations (ranging from 0.017 to 33.33 μM) in triplicate ( A). Except for lenvatinib ( B), all hits exhibited dose-dependent neuroprotection (EC50s ranged from 0.066 to 8.11 μM for axonal rescue). Lenvatinib was excluded from further studies. In addition, four compounds (sunitinib, sotrastaurin, PD407824, and A-674563) exacerbated paclitaxel toxicity when added to neurons at micromolar doses ( ).
 To identify the kinases inhibited by the hit compounds, we leveraged the KINOMEscan data. Most validated compounds (16/18) had activity against three structurally related STE20 family kinases—MAP4K4 (HGK), MINK1 (MAP4K6), and TNIK (historically referred to as MAP4K7) ( D and 2E). Tanzisertib, one of the two hit compounds that spared the three STE20 kinases, is a potent inhibitor of JNK, whereas AT-7519 lacks targets that overlap with KW-2449’s, suggesting a distinct protective mechanism ( D and 2E). JAK/STAT pathway kinases were also inhibited ( E). JAK inhibition has shown protective activity in other neurodegenerative contexts. , We counter-screened all hits in three breast cancer cell lines and found that six, including KW-2449, reduced paclitaxel-mediated cancer cell killing ( A), resulting in 13 compounds with selective neuroprotection ( A). The six compounds that exhibited activity in the breast cancer lines are promiscuous inhibitors and excluding them did not change potential downstream neuroprotective targets ( B). To further identify which kinases are of particular importance in mediating paclitaxel’s toxic effects on sensory neurons, we tested three commonly used kinase inhibitors at four concentrations: JNK-IN-8 to target the JNK family of kinases, baricitinib to target the JAK/STAT family of kinases, and GNE-495 to target STE20 kinases. GNE-495 rescued paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration in a dose-dependent manner, but JNK-IN-8 and baricitinib did not ( F–2H), indicating that inhibition of multiple members of the STE20 family of kinases is the driver of axonal neuroprotection in our human sensory neuron model of CIPN.

## Genetic and pharmacological inhibition of three STE20 kinases confers neuroprotection against paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration
Our kinome analysis identified three structurally and functionally related STE20 kinases—MAP4K4, MINK1, and TNIK—that might drive axon degeneration in our model. Transcriptomic studies reveal that the expression of these kinases is conserved across species, and all three kinases are found in multiple subtypes of sensory neurons in human, primate, and rodent DRGs ( A) as well as in our iPSC-derived sensory neurons ( B). , To validate that these kinases are involved in mediating paclitaxel toxicity in sensory neurons and investigate their individual roles, 24 DIV iPSC-derived sensory neurons were transfected with siRNA for each kinase individually or in combinations of two or three kinases. RNA levels were measured in cells 72 h later by RT-qPCR to confirm knockdown ( C). Sensory neurons in which MAP4K4, MINK1, and TNIK were individually knocked down were not protected against paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration ( D and 3E). Sensory neurons in which MINK1 and TNIK, or MINK1 and MAP4K4, were knocked down simultaneously also did not exhibit protection from paclitaxel ( F). However, sensory neurons in which TNIK and MAP4K4, or all three kinases, were knocked down simultaneously were partially protected ( F). These results confirm that blocking STE20 kinases mediates neuroprotection against paclitaxel in iPSC-derived sensory neurons, and this requires inhibition of multiple members of the family.
 To further validate the involvement of MAP4K4, MINK1, and TNIK in paclitaxel-mediated neurotoxicity, we tested four commercially available inhibitors of these kinases: GNE-495, , DMX-5804, PF-06260933, and prosetin. We first performed a KINOMEscan analysis of each inhibitor at two concentrations (100 nM and 10 μM) to assess their selectivity. While GNE-495, DMX-5804, and PF-06260933 have fewer than 20 high-affinity kinase targets, prosetin strongly inhibits 71 kinases ( A). To determine on-target affinities, we collected 11-point inhibition curves for MAP4K4, MINK1, and TNIK for each agent using in vitro assays and recombinant kinases ( B). The resultant IC50 values were in the nanomolar range, confirming potent inhibition of the STE20 kinase targets by all inhibitors. All four compounds fully rescued paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration in the iPSC-derived sensory neurons in a dose-dependent manner ( G and 3H). While prosetin showed robust neuroprotection with an EC50 of 0.035 μM, it also exhibited toxicity at doses higher than 3 μM ( H), a likely consequence of its broader off-target inhibition profile.
Next, we examined paclitaxel-induced neuronal apoptosis and found that GNE-495, DMX-5804, and PF-0626033 did not decrease caspase activity in sensory neurons at their neuroprotective doses ( C). Prosetin, however, showed a dose-dependent rescue of paclitaxel-induced caspase activity ( C). Blocking apoptotic initiation using a pan-caspase inhibitor, Z-VAD-FMK, prevented caspase activation in a dose-dependent manner following paclitaxel treatment ( E) but did not prevent axon degeneration ( F), suggesting that paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration and apoptosis initiation are distinct cellular processes with different downstream effectors.
We also tested the effects of GNE-495 inhibition in breast cancer cell lines and found that GNE-495 did not prevent paclitaxel-mediated cell killing in three of four lines tested, although it did have an effect in Hs578T cells at a high concentration ( A). These results suggest that specific STE20 kinase inhibition with selective pharmacological agents is a viable approach to mitigate the unwanted neuronal toxicity induced by paclitaxel without interfering with its desired toxicity on cancer cells.
We further validated our findings by testing GNE-495 and prosetin for their neuroprotective properties against paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration in commercially available iPSC-derived sensory neurons derived from two different iPSC lines ( B and S6C). Inhibition of the three STE20 kinases of interest, but not JNK, was fully neuroprotective against paclitaxel in these additional cell models ( B and S6C), showing a high level of reproducibility of our assay.
To understand whether MAP4K4, MINK1, and TNIK inhibition confers neuroprotection only against paclitaxel-specific insults or has broader effects, we treated 28 DIV iPSC-derived sensory neurons with vincristine (microtubule destabilizer), bortezomib (proteasome inhibitor), and cisplatin (DNA damage) and found that all three agents induced substantial axon degeneration that was fully rescued by STE20, but not JNK inhibition, in the case of vincristine ( D). Inhibition of multiple STE20 kinases showed partial neuroprotection against bortezomib and cisplatin, suggesting that additional molecular mechanisms might contribute to these conditions.

## Molecular profiling of paclitaxel-induced neurotoxicity
Previous research has suggested that paclitaxel-induced caspase activation involves JNK kinases. , , Consistent with this, we found that treatment of iPSC-derived sensory neurons with JNK-IN-8, a JNK-specific small molecule drug, prevented caspase activation upon paclitaxel treatment ( F) but did not prevent paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration ( G). To determine if phosphorylation of the JNK substrate cJun is involved in this effect, as described, we performed immunofluorescence to detect cJun phosphorylation at serine 73. The nuclear intensity of the phosphorylated and active form of c-Jun (p-cJun) increased 24 h after paclitaxel treatment relative to DMSO-treated cells, and this was blocked by JNK-IN-8, but not by GNE-495, DMX-5804, or PF-06260933 ( A and S7B). KW-2449, which also blocked caspase activation, decreased cJun phosphorylation, potentially by also inhibiting JNK (KDKd values of 72 nM for JNK1, 130 nM for JNK2, 65 nM for JNK3). Although the proportion of p-cJun-positive cells did not change upon paclitaxel treatment, both JNK-specific inhibition and treatment with KW-2449 reduced the number of p-cJun-positive cells ( C), suggesting that apoptosis induction in this model occurs through JNK-induced phosphorylation of cJun and inhibiting this pathway rescues apoptosis-associated caspase activation.
STE20 kinases phosphorylate JNK kinases to mediate their downstream cellular effects. Our finding that STE20, but not JNK kinase inhibition, preserves axons after paclitaxel treatment suggests that there are additional parallel pathways that mediate the effects of STE20 kinase inhibition, bypassing JNK. To investigate mechanisms underlying the responses of sensory neurons to paclitaxel and neuroprotective kinase inhibitors, we performed bulk RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) of 28 DIV iPSC-derived sensory neurons treated for 24 h with DMSO, paclitaxel (0.3 μM), as well as JNK-IN-8 and GNE-495 at two doses (1 μM and 3 μM), or combination treatments of the rescue agents with paclitaxel. Differential expression analysis and principal-component analysis (PCA) revealed robust changes in the transcriptional signatures in each condition ( A; A). Paclitaxel treatment alone resulted in widespread transcriptional changes (1,034 and 1,162 genes were significantly down- and upregulated, respectively (Benjamini-Hochberg [BH] adjusted p value <0.05) ( A). The most significantly upregulated genes included tubulin-related genes (e.g., TUBB4B, TUBB3, TUBB, TUBA1A, and TUBB2B), calcium and potassium channel subunits (e.g., KCNJ10 and KCNJ13), and caspase-3 (CASP3). The downregulated genes included those involved in cholesterol and lipid biosynthesis (e.g., ACAT2, ASS1, IDH1, LSS, ACSS2, and SUCNR1) ( A). JNK and MAP4K inhibition alone also resulted in substantial transcriptional changes ( B).
 Gene set enrichment analysis revealed that paclitaxel strongly suppressed transcripts associated with lipid and fatty acid metabolism while activating pathways associated with gap junctions, Rho GTPase signaling, and Golgi vesicle trafficking. Co-treatment with either GNE-495 or JNK-IN-8 reverses a substantial proportion of these paclitaxel-induced changes: 434 of 1,034 downregulated genes and 264 of 1,162 upregulated genes were rescued by one or both compounds ( ).
To disentangle potential molecular mechanisms underlying the different rescue phenotypes of the two inhibitors—axon degeneration and caspase activation—we analyzed gene expression patterns using two complementary approaches: (1) gene set enrichment in up- and downregulated genes across rescue conditions (PTX vs. DMSO, GNE + PTX vs. PTX, and JNK-Inh + PTX vs. PTX; B) and (2) k-means clustering of differential expression signatures [−sign(log2FC) × log10(padj); C; B]. Lipid metabolism genes were enriched among paclitaxel-downregulated genes rescued by both agents ( B) and in cluster 1, which contains genes with a similar expression pattern ( D). To identify mechanisms specific to GNE-495-mediated axon protection, we examined gene sets exclusively rescued by this compound. Notably, genes upregulated by paclitaxel and reversed only by GNE-495 were enriched for extracellular matrix interactions and cell adhesion pathways, including integrin and non-integrin extracellular matrix (ECM) signaling. This aligns with prior work in Drosophila, showing that integrin overexpression rescues paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration. Cluster 13, which contains genes rescued predominantly by GNE-495, was enriched for p38-linked genes, implicating p38 signaling in the GNE-495-mediated axonal rescue.
Next, we tested a series of inhibitors that perturb the pathways identified by the gene set enrichment analysis of the rescue mediated by GNE-495. A pan-p38 inhibitor, doramapimod, prevented the GNE-495-mediated rescue of axon degeneration and increased caspase activity, suggesting that p38 activation might mediate the STE20 effects on axon degeneration and apoptosis induction ( A and S10B). Two compounds that modulate lipid metabolism, A922500 and AMPK-IN-3, conferred a partial rescue of the axon degeneration induced by paclitaxel alone, as well as when paclitaxel was combined with JNK-IN-8 ( A and S10B). A922500 is a DGAT1 (diacylglycerol O-acyltransferase 1) inhibitor that prevents triglyceride synthesis and results in the accumulation of free fatty acids and phospholipids in cells. AMPK-IN-3 is an AMPK kinase inhibitor that promotes fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis and fatty acid oxidation. These results suggest that lipid metabolism might play a role in neuronal protection against chemotherapy agents ( C).
We also examined protein abundance and phosphorylation state in ReN VM cells after treatment with paclitaxel, alone or in combination with each rescue agent. ReN VM cells show similar p-cJun phosphorylation and axonal rescue patterns to iPSC-derived sensory neurons upon compound treatment ( A–S11C), but with an improved detection of protein abundance and phosphorylation status. Paclitaxel resulted in an upregulation of several tubulin family proteins (TUBB1, TUBB2A, TUBB2B, TUBB4B, etc.) as well as DCLK2, a microtubule-associated kinase ( D). Enrichment analysis of the paclitaxel-induced upregulated proteins ( E) confirms microtubule cytoskeleton organization as the top enriched Gene Ontology (GO) biological process (adjusted p value <10−9). No significant protein abundance changes were observed for paclitaxel combined with JNK-IN-8 or GNE-496, compared to paclitaxel alone.
On analysis of phosphoprotein abundance, we found an upregulation of DCLK2-S312 as the single significant change upon paclitaxel treatment alone ( F). On comparing paclitaxel combined with GNE-495 to paclitaxel alone, 72 phosphosites on a total of 58 proteins were significantly downregulated ( G). An enrichment analysis of these proteins ( I) reveals biological processes related to the neuronal cytoskeleton (e.g., regulation of modification of postsynaptic actin cytoskeleton and presynaptic cytoskeleton organization) as well as neuron development and projection (e.g., axonogenesis, positive regulation of neuron projection arborization, neuron projection development, regulation of dendrite morphogenesis, and regulation of postsynaptic organization). Biological processes related to cell junctions and adhesion (e.g., regulation of focal adhesion assembly and cell-cell junction assembly) were also captured, and specific signaling mechanisms involved the regulation of small GTPase-mediated signal transduction and Wnt signaling.
When comparing paclitaxel combined with JNK-IN-8 to paclitaxel alone, 114 phosphosites on a total of 99 proteins were significantly downregulated ( H). Enrichment analysis of these proteins ( J) highlighted actin filament bundle assembly, negative regulation of microtubule depolymerization, and microtubule cytoskeleton organization. Molecular mechanisms include downregulation of several phosphosites on proteins in the JNK cascade (MAPK8IP1, MAPK8IP2, MAP2K4, MAP3K10, and ATF2) as well as regulation of GTPase-mediated signal transduction and Rho protein signal transduction (e.g., RALBP1 and ARHGEF2). Though 24 phosphosites were significantly upregulated (e.g., IGF2R-S2347 and TACC2-S2072), the enrichment analysis did not reveal any significant processes.

## Inhibition of three STE20 kinases prevents paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration in primary human DRG neurons and an in vivo mouse model of CIPN
To assess the translational impact and validity of our findings, we used two models. First, primary human DRGs were dissociated and grown in culture for 14 days to allow axons to extend before treatment with paclitaxel and KW-2449 or GNE-495 ( A–5D). Cells were fixed after 72 h of treatment and stained for NF200 to assess the neurite area per cell body. Treatment with KW-2449 resulted in a dose-dependent rescue of the paclitaxel-induced reduction in neurite area ( A and 5B). Treatment with GNE-495 resulted in partial neuroprotection in primary human DRG cultures against paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration ( C and 5D), suggesting that our model allows for the identification of neuroprotective targets relevant to human biology.
 Lastly, we utilized an in vivo mouse model of paclitaxel-induced sensory changes and terminal axon retraction, where an intravenous injection of 25mg/kg paclitaxel was administered three times every other day ( E). Intraperitoneal injection of GNE-495 was administered starting from the first day of paclitaxel treatment and throughout the length of the experiment (14 days after last paclitaxel injection). Administration of GNE-495 prevented the paclitaxel-induced thermal hyperalgesia and loss of intraepidermal nerve fiber density in mice ( F–5H).
Collectively, our data demonstrate that our iPSC-derived sensory neuron assay can identify targets and compounds with neuroprotective efficacy in human and animal models, supporting its utility for drug discovery.

## Discussion
CIPN remains a major unmet clinical need, as current treatments are largely symptomatic and fail to prevent or reverse axonal damage, underscoring the importance of using human-relevant models to uncover molecular mechanisms and identify effective neuroprotective therapies. Here, we developed a high-throughput screening platform using human iPSC-derived sensory neurons to identify compounds and pathways that prevent paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration. Using this system, we identified three STE20 kinases as previously unrecognized drivers of axon degeneration, and pharmacological inhibition of these kinases prevented axonal damage in both primary human DRG neurons and a mouse model of CIPN, highlighting the translational potential of our approach.
Our previous work showed that the multi-kinase inhibitor, KW-2449, protects against vincristine-induced growth arrest in motor and sensory neurons. KW-2449’s nominal targets include FLT3, ABL1, and AURK kinases, and it was tested in a clinical trial for treatment of acute myeloid leukemia with activating FLT3 mutations. Despite an excellent safety profile, inadequate kinase target engagement in patients led to its failure in phase II. In our study, KW-2449 fully prevented paclitaxel-induced apoptosis and axon degeneration in sensory neurons ( G, 1H, A, 5B, A, and S2B). However, its broad kinase inhibition profile and interference with paclitaxel’s action on cancer cells ( C and S2D) rendered it unsuitable for clinical neuroprotection. Nonetheless, KW-2449 pointed toward multi-kinase inhibition as a viable neuroprotective strategy, prompting a kinome-wide comparison of the top 19 neuroprotective compounds from our screens with KW-2449’s targets ( D and 2E). From this analysis, three members of the STE20 family kinases, MAP4K4, MINK1, and TNIK, emerged as major drivers of axon degeneration.
We validated the role of the three STE20 kinases in paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration using genetic and pharmacological inhibition. Individual kinase knockdown did not produce neuroprotection, whereas dual MAP4K4/TNIK or triple knockdown rescued axonal phenotypes ( A–3F), consistent with prior studies showing structural similarity and functional redundancy of MAP4K4, MINK1, and TNIK. , Additionally, we observed a full rescue of axon degeneration utilizing available STE20-specific pharmacological inhibitors ( G and 3H). Reduced neuroprotection with siRNA compared to pharmacological inhibition is likely a result of incomplete target inhibition by siRNA.
STE20 signaling regulates developmental axon growth and neuroprotective responses after an optic nerve crush in mice and human retinal ganglion cells. In addition, the identified STE20 kinases play a role in the response of mouse primary DRG neurons to growth factor withdrawal, preventing JNK-induced p-cJun phosphorylation and the resulting cell death in a DLK-dependent manner. These studies suggest that STE20 kinases are directly upstream of JNK activation and p-cJun phosphorylation. In our model, paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration and apoptotic initiation are quite distinct processes. Potent caspase inhibitors did not prevent axon degeneration after paclitaxel exposure, and vice versa—most of our neuroprotective compounds that prevented axon degeneration by multiple STE20 kinase inhibition had limited effects on paclitaxel-induced p-cJun upregulation and caspase activation ( C, S5D, and A–S7C). This contrasts with the studies above and suggests that upon chemotherapy treatment, iPSC-derived sensory neurons activate parallel pathways to engage distinct sets of downstream targets, to induce either cell death or axon degeneration, that might occur through JNK and STE20 activation, respectively. These differences may reflect species differences, cell-type-specific responses, as well as the nature and timing of the neuronal injury. Furthermore, we observed neuroprotection with KW-2449 in both primary human DRG neurons and iPSC-derived sensory neurons treated with paclitaxel ( G, 1H, A, and 5B), while the STE20-specific inhibitor, GNE-495, had a smaller effect compared to KW-2449 in human primary DRGs ( C and 5D), which could be a result of their different effects on apoptosis. Ideally, STE20 inhibition should be combined with interventions that prevent paclitaxel-induced apoptosis for maximal protection.
STE20 inhibition has also been explored as a neuroprotective intervention in several disease models, most notably amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), where it prevented cell death in response to growth factor withdrawal through the JNK-c-Jun pathway in SOD1-mutated motor neurons derived from mouse stem cells. In a high-throughput screening study of aging, STE20 inhibition was identified as improving motor neuron viability, morphology, and function in ALS-patient-derived motor neurons harboring FUS and SOD1 mutations. This neuroprotection was, however, independent of phosphorylation and attributed to the kinases serving as a scaffold in a molecular complex that results in altered subcellular distribution of the nuclear pore protein RANGAP1 and TDP43 in a HDAC6-TUBA4A-dependent manner. STE20 inhibition also increased lifespan and motor neuron survival in SOD1G93A mice and promoted survival in response to cyclopiazonic-acid-induced ER stress in iPSC-derived motor neurons. This ALS platform identified URMC-099 as an STE20 inhibitor, which was then used to generate a more potent, stable, and bioavailable inhibitor, prosetin. Prosetin is currently in a clinical trial for the treatment of ALS and has shown a promising tolerability and safety profile in healthy volunteers. In our CIPN model, prosetin prevented paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration and caspase upregulation in the nanomolar range ( G, 3H, and ), suggesting that it is a suitable candidate for preventing CIPN. However, prosetin may have a limited safety profile since it was neurotoxic at high concentrations.
To explore the molecular mechanisms behind paclitaxel-induced toxicity and STE20-mediated neuroprotection in human sensory neurons, we utilized an unbiased RNA-seq approach. Sensory neurons treated with paclitaxel showed a downregulation of genes involved in lipid and cholesterol biosynthesis, in agreement with previous studies implicating lipid metabolism in peripheral neuropathies. , These changes were counteracted by STE20 inhibition ( ), suggesting that lipid synthesis might play a role in neuroprotection against chemotherapy-induced toxicity. Supporting this, we found that a DGAT1 inhibitor, which prevents triglyceride synthesis and renders free fatty acids in cells, boosted axonal protection after paclitaxel exposure ( A and S10B). Elevated levels of plasma triglycerides have recently been identified as a risk factor for the development of CIPN. Lipid-lowering therapeutics, such as statins, can also result in peripheral neuropathy due to their interference with cholesterol synthesis while the administration of cholesterol-like compounds reduces diabetic and chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy. 
In addition to lipid synthesis, p38 signaling emerged as another downstream mediator of STE20-dependent neuroprotection against paclitaxel in our model. Strikingly, a pan-p38 inhibitor abolished the axonal rescue conferred by GNE-495 ( A and S10B), indicating that p38 activity is required for STE20-mediated neuroprotection. Interestingly, previous literature shows that paclitaxel activates Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) signaling in DRG neurons, leading to downstream activation of the p38 pathway, and inhibition of p38 alone significantly attenuated the development and maintenance of paclitaxel-induced and cisplatin-induced peripheral neuropathy. , Future studies should explore the specific p38 isoforms involved, as well as any additional feedback loops or compensatory mechanisms involved. While we did not identify direct links between GWAS-reported variants and the kinases of interest, several downstream molecules that were differentially expressed in our RNA-seq data, including TUBB2A, PRPH, SLITRK1, SEMA5A, ITGB5, and EPHA5, have been previously highlighted as peripheral neuropathy risk, , , highlighting the translational relevance of our model.
Interestingly, in our model, STE20 kinase inhibition showed robust neuroprotection of axonal integrity against paclitaxel and vincristine toxicity but only modest effects on bortezomib- and cisplatin-induced toxicity ( ), suggesting that additional mechanisms might be at play in different chemotherapy contexts. A well-studied mechanism associated with axonal loss upon chemotherapy treatment is Wallerian degeneration. Wallerian degeneration is characterized by NMNAT2 depletion, SARM1 activation, NAD+ loss, and calcium-driven axonal fragmentation. , Genetic or pharmacological inhibition of SARM1 markedly protects against paclitaxel-induced axon degeneration in preclinical models. , Future studies should explore whether combined SARM1 and STE20 treatment could benefit axon preservation and whether additional mechanisms contribute to axonal rescue by STE20 inhibition after chemotherapy.
In conclusion, we have developed a robust, reproducible, and unbiased model of chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy in human iPSC-derived sensory neurons, in which axon degeneration and cell death occur through distinct mechanisms. We found that multi-kinase inhibition of three STE20 family kinases confers protection against axon degeneration, partially through p38 signaling and lipid synthesis, whereas inhibition of JNK prevents paclitaxel-induced caspase activation by reducing p-cJun. Treatment of both axon degeneration and cell death concurrently is, therefore, a future avenue for the development of effective therapeutics to prevent CIPN. STE20 kinase inhibition, a neuroprotective strategy identified in our high-throughput screening efforts, showed promising neuroprotective effects in primary human DRG and a mouse model of CIPN, underscoring the translational potential of our phenotypic platform for drug discovery in CIPN.

## Limitations of the study
Our study establishes a scalable and translational human iPSC-derived sensory neuron platform for the identification of neuroprotective strategies against CIPN. However, it is important to recognize the inherent biological constraints of a reductionist in vitro system. Although human iPSC-derived sensory neurons provide a powerful and human-relevant model, they cannot fully recapitulate the cellular diversity, spatial organization, and microenvironmental complexity of the DRG, where sensory neurons interact dynamically with satellite glial cells, immune populations, extracellular matrix components, and vascular inputs that shape vulnerability and repair responses. Future studies should employ single-cell transcriptomics to define subtype-specific susceptibility to paclitaxel as well as differential responses to STE20 inhibition and include co-culture systems to evaluate the response of non-neuronal cells to insult and to kinase inhibition. In addition, while our kinase-focused screening strategy enabled systematic interrogation of druggable signaling networks, broader chemical and biomolecular libraries may uncover complementary non-kinase mechanisms of neuroprotection. Finally, transcriptomic and phosphoproteomic analyses implicate lipid metabolism and p38-associated signaling in the protective response, providing mechanistic directionality, though deeper functional studies will be required to define causal relationships and patient-specific variability.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Requests for further information and resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Clifford Woolf (clifford.woolf@childrens.harvard.edu).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents. All materials and reagents in this study are available from the with a completed materials transfer agreement.

## Data and code availability

•Bulk RNA sequencing data have been deposited at Gene Expression Omnibus as GEO: GSE298389 and are publicly available. Mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository as dataset identifier PRIDE: PXD074954 and are publicly available. Raw data supporting the findings of this study will be shared by the upon request.
•All original code has been deposited in GitHub and is publicly available at peripheral-neuropathy repository: https://github.com/labsyspharm/peripheral-neuropathy.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
We thank the Assay Development and Screening Facility at Boston Children’s Hospital for the assay optimization and automation and the ICCB-Longwood Screening Facility at Harvard Medical School for preparing and providing compound plates, screening optimization, and expert data analysis. We thank Dr. Aakanksha Jain for providing expert feedback on the manuscript. This study was supported by funding from the National Institutes of Health (NIH R35NS105076 and NIH 5P50HD105351) to C.J.W., the Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson Medical Research Foundation to C.J.W. and A.H., and DARPA PANACEA program grant HR0011-19-2-0022 to P.K.S. and C.J.W. V.P. was funded by the PhRMA Foundation Post-Doctoral Fellowship in Drug Discovery. A.C.-F. was funded by Merkin Peripheral Neuropathy and Nerve Regeneration Center. B.M.G. and S.F. were funded under the DARPA ASKEM and ARPA-H BDF programs (HR00112220036). M.K. is a CPRIT scholar in Cancer Research, and H.J. is supported by a CPRIT grant RR220032 to M.K.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, V.P. and C.J.W.; methodology, V.P., C.E.M., C.H., L.B.B., and J.A.S.; investigation, V.P., C.E.M., C.H., M.C., S.Z., T.D., S.H., R.P., A.H., R.K., Q.W., A.C.-F., S.F., B.M.G., G.A.B., and H.J.; visualization, V.P., C.E.M., C.H., J.S., J.A.S., L.B.B., and B.M.G.; funding acquisition, C.J.W., P.K.S., A.H., V.P., B.M.G., and A.C.-F.; supervision, C.J.W., P.K.S., A.H., I.S., and M.K.; writing – original draft, V.P., C.J.W., C.E.M., and C.H.; writing – review and editing, V.P., C.J.W., C.E.M., C.H., P.K.S., and all.

## Declaration of interests
P.K.S. is a consultant for Merck and co-founder and member of the BOD of Glencoe Software and member of the SAB for RareCyte, Montai Health, and Reverb Therapeutics; he holds equity in Glencoe, Reverb, and RareCyte. A.H. is a consultant to Pfizer, Sangamo, Sanofi, and Novartis. C.J.W. is a founder of Nocion, Quralis, and Blackbox Bio. The other authors declare no competing interests.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental models and subject details

## Human iPSC-Derived sensory neurons
Human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs; line LiPSC.GR-1.1, male donor) were obtained from the NIH Common Fund Regenerative Medicine Program. Cells were karyotyped and maintained under feeder-free conditions in E8 medium on vitronectin-coated plates at 37°C and 5% CO2. Differentiation into sensory neurons followed a previously established protocol and is described in detail under . All experiments were performed with cells between 14 and 32 days of differentiation, as indicated.

## Primary human dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons
Dissociated primary human DRG neurons from de-identified donors were purchased from AnaBios Corporation. Cells were plated on poly-D-lysine/laminin–coated plates and maintained for 14–55 days in DMEM/F12-based medium supplemented with 10% horse serum, neurotrophic factors, and antibiotics at 37°C and 5% CO2 before treatments. All donor information was handled in compliance with relevant ethical regulations.

## Ren cell model
ReN VM cells were isolated from the ventral mesencephalon of a 10-week human male fetal brain and v-myc immortalized. ReN VM cells were purchased from Millipore Sigma (Burlington, MA) and were maintained in their recommended growth conditions 37°C and 5% CO2. Differentiation into neurons followed a previously established protocol and is described in detail under .

## Mice for paclitaxel-induced neuropathy model
A/J mice (Jackson Laboratory strain 646) were housed in a pathogen-free facility on a 12-h light/dark cycle with ad libitum food and water. All procedures were approved by the Johns Hopkins University IACUC. Paclitaxel and GNE-495 were administered as described in . Behavioral assessments and tissue collection were performed at specified time points.

## Method details

## Sensory neuron differentiation, maintenance, and small compound treatments
Human iPSCs (LiPSC.GR-1.1) from a male donor were established through the NIH Common Fund (Regenerative Medicine Program). Cells were expanded, karyotyped, maintained in E8 media (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. A1517001), and plated on vitronectin-coated (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. A14700) 6-well plates for differentiation at 1.5 M cells/well following a previously established protocol for the generation of sensory neurons. Once 90% confluent, iPSCs were treated with 0.2 μM CHIR-98014 (Selleck Chemicals, cat. no. S2745) and 2 μM A83-01 (Tocris, cat. no. 2939) dissolved in E6 media (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. A1516401) for 3 days. Cells were then dissociated into a single-cell solution using Accutase (Innovative Cell Technologies, cat. no. AT104) and plated at 5.5 M cells/well density in 6-well AggreWell plates (STEMCELL Technologies, cat. no. 34825). Cells were then treated with 0.5 μM CHIR-98014, 2 μM A83-01, 1 μM DBZ (Tocris, cat. no. 4489), and 25 nM PD173074 (Tocris, cat. no. 3044) dissolved in E6 media for 11 days. During this time, iPSCs formed nocispheres, which were dissociated on day 14 using the MACS Embryoid Body dissociation kit (Miltenyi Biotech, cat. no. 130-096-348) into single cells and cryopreserved in Neuron Freezing Media (Cell Applications, cat. no. 042–50).
As needed, frozen cells were thawed in neuron maturation medium containing DMEM/F12 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. 21041025), B27 Supplement (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. 17504044), N2 Supplement (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. A1370701), supplemented with 25 ng/mL BDNF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. PHC7074), 25 ng/mL GDNF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. PHC7045), 25 ng/mL β-NGF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. PHG0126), 25 ng/mL NT-3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. PHC7036) and the CEPT cocktail and plated at a density of 5000 cells/well in 384-well plates (Greiner, cat. no. 781090). 24 h post-plating, full media change was performed (without the CEPT cocktail), including 1 μM PD0332991 (Tocris, cat. no. 4786) for the rest of the maturation process to eliminate dividing progenitor cells. Half-media changes were performed every 3–4 days 28 days after the start of differentiation, cells were treated with varying doses of DMSO vehicle or paclitaxel (PTX) (EMD Millipore, cat. no. 580555) +/− rescue compounds such as KW-2449 (MedChem Express, cat. no. HY-10339), GNE-495 (MedChem Express, cat. no. HY-100343), DMX-5804 (MedChem Express, cat. no. HY-111754), PF-06260933 (MedChem Express, cat. no. HY-19562), or Prosetin (Sigma, cat. no. SML2810).

## Primary human DRG culture and immunostaining
Dissociated primary human DRGs from five different donors were purchased from AnaBios Corporation. Cells from each donor were randomly assigned across experimental treatment groups. Cells were plated on PDL (MP Biomedicals, cat. no.0215017580)/laminin (Life Technologies, cat. no. 23017015) pre-coated 96-well plates and maintained in culture for 14–55 days at 37°C with 5% CO2 in DMEM/F12 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. 11320033) supplemented with 10% horse serum (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. 26050088), 2 mM glutamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. 25030081), 25 ng/mL β-NGF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. PHG0126), 25 ng/mL GDNF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. PHC7045), Gem21 NeuroPlex (GeminiBio, cat. no. 400-160-010), and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. 15070063). Half of the culture media was replaced with fresh media every 2–3 days. Cells were treated with paclitaxel and rescue compounds and then fixed in 4% PFA for 30 min at 3 days post-treatment. Cells were then blocked with blocking buffer (0.3% Triton X-, 10% donkey serum in PBS) for 2 h at room temperature and stained overnight with the following primary antibodies: mouse anti-beta-3-tubulin (1:500, Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. T8660), chicken anti-Neurofilament H (1:250, EMD Millipore, cat. no. AB5539). Cells were washed 3 times with PBS, and secondary antibodies were added for 1 h at room temperature (donkey anti-mouse 488, 1:500, Thermo Scientific, cat. no. A-21202; donkey anti-chicken 647, 1:500, Thermo Scientific, cat. no. A78952). Hoechst (1:5000, Thermo Fischer Scientific, cat. no. H3570) nuclear stain was added with the secondary antibodies. Cells were washed 3 times in PBS and images were acquired using the Molecular Devices ImageXpress Micro Confocal (IXM-C; RRID:SCR_020294) at 10× magnification and analyzed using MetaXpress Custom Module Editor neurite tracking function (Molecular Devices; RRID:SCR_016654).

## Mouse model of paclitaxel-induced pain and degeneration
All experiments involving animals were carried out according to protocols approved by the Johns Hopkins Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. A/J mice were used in the experiments. (Jackson Laboratory Strain 646). Paclitaxel (Sigma, cat. no. 580555) was administered by means of tail vein injections at a dose of 25 mg/kg on days 1, 3, and 5. GNE-495 was administered by means of IP injections daily at a dose of 50 mg/kg for the duration of the experiment. The injections were given at the same time each day using standard rodent injection techniques. Baseline thermal sensitivity tests were carried out one day before the start of injections and two weeks after the last dose of paclitaxel. Mice were then euthanized by isoflurane inhalation, and tissues were harvested for histopathological evaluation.

## Thermal sensation testing
Mice were individually placed inside a containment box and allowed to acclimate to their surroundings for 20 min. The light source was then switched on, emitting heat onto the medial plantar surface of the subject’s left foot. The time it took for the mouse to lift its paw was measured 6 times, with 10-min intervals.

## Epidermal nerve fiber density analysis
At the endpoint, footpads were harvested for the evaluation of intraepidermal nerve fiber density (IENFD). 2 mm punch biopsies of medial plantar footpads were fixed with paraformaldehyde-lysine-periodate fixative for 24 h at 4°C, kept in a cryoprotective solution, and cut serially with a freezing microtome with 50 μm thickness. The sections were stained with pan-axonal marker anti-protein gene product 9.5 (PGP9.5, Abcam, cat. no. ab108986).

## High-throughput screening
High-throughput screening was performed in collaboration with the ICCB-Longwood Screening Facility at Harvard Medical School and the Assay Development and Screening Facility at Boston Children’s Hospital as follows: iPSC-derived sensory neurons were grown for 28 days. On the day of screening, 30 μL of fresh media was added to a 384-well plate (Greiner, cat. no. 781090). Experimental compounds were then added via pin transfer using an Epson T6-602s SCARA robot, and assay-specific controls (DMSO and KW-2449) were added using a Beckman Coulter Echo 655 acoustic dispenser. All compounds were added to the media plate at a concentration 3 times higher than the desired final assay concentration. An Agilent BRAVO robot was then used to remove 2/3 volume of conditioned media from neuron-containing wells and then add 1/3 volume of fresh media followed by 1/3 volume experimental compounds and controls, resulting in a final volume of 60 μL per well and compounds at their final screening concentrations of 11 μM, 1.1 μM, 0.11 μM and 0.011 μM. DMSO was present at 0.11% in all wells and KW-2449 was used at a final concentration of 1 μM. Primary screens were conducted using the Optimal Kinase Library (OKL) developed at the Laboratory of Systems Pharmacology at HMS as part of the NIH LINCS program. The current OKL library comprises 192 kinase inhibitors, selected for their target and chemical diversity, as well as their stage of clinical development. For secondary screens, custom-made compound plates were created with 12 concentrations per compound, enabling the generation of detailed dose-response relationships and the calculation of EC50s.

## Dose response calculations
Neurite length values were obtained from the IncuCyte neurite-tracking algorithm (RRID:SCR_025411) at T = 0 and T = 96 for three replicates. The ratio of neurite length was calculated by dividing the neurite length T96 by the neurite length T0 for each of the three replicates. The ratio of neurite length for the negative and positive controls for each replicate was averaged. Paclitaxel plus DMSO condition was used as a negative control, and paclitaxel plus KW-2449 was the positive control. The % response for each replicate was calculated using the following formula:
%Response(PositiveControl)==(RatioNeuriteLength−RatioNeuriteLengthNegativeControl)(RatioNeuriteLengthPositiveControl−RatioNeuriteLengthNegativeControl)∗100EC50 curves were determined using GraphPad Prism. EC50 was determined at the inflection point of 50%. On occasion, some data points were omitted as outliers to determine a best-fit curve.

## siRNA transfection and qPCR validation
siRNAs against targets of interest including MINK1/MAP4K6 (s27006), TNIK/MAP4K7 (s22905) and HGK/MAP4K4 (s18096) were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific. siRNAs at 1 nM concentration were transfected individually, in pairs, or triplets into 24-day-old sensory neurons using the RNAiMAX Transfection Reagent (Thermo Scientific) and Opti-MEM media for 18 h before a full media change was performed. 72 h post-transfection, cells were lysed for RNA extraction (Qiagen), cDNA synthesis, and qPCR validation of genetic knockdown or treated with paclitaxel or DMSO vehicle control, and imaged over 4 days.

## Live-cell imaging
Cells were imaged at 10× magnification in the phase contrast channel in a live-cell imaging platform, the IncuCyte (Sartorius, RRID:SCR_019874), for 4 days upon compound treatment, and a built-in neurite tracking algorithm was used to calculate the number of neurites before and after treatment. Images were obtained every 6 h. The ratio of neurite number post-vs. pre-treatment was calculated.

## Caspase 3/7 glo assay
A caspase assay was performed using the Caspase-Glo 3/7 Assay System (Promega, cat. no. G8090) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were treated with experimental compounds for 4 days before half of the media was removed and substituted with Caspase Glo Buffer/Substrate mix. Cells were incubated for 30 min on a shaker before recording luminescence levels. Several controls were employed in this experiment: cells with fresh media, no substrate, substrate with no cells, DMSO control, and positive control – 1 μM staurosporin (Tocris, cat. no. 1285) treated for 24 h.

## Drug response measurements in cancer cell lines
MCF7, BT20, BT549 and Hs578 T breast cancer cell lines were acquired from ATCC and maintained in their recommended growth medium (DMEM for MCF7 and Hs578 T, RPMI-1640 for BT549, and EMEM for BT20) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and for BT-549 cells, 1 μg/mL insulin, at 37°C and 5% CO2. Cell line identities were verified by STR profiling and confirmed to be free from mycoplasma. For drug response assays, cells were plated (2000/well for MCF7, 1500/well for BT20, 1000/well for BT 9, and 500/well for Hs578 T) in 60 μL of media in 384-well PhenoPlates (Revvity, cat. no. 6057302) and allowed to adhere for 24 h. Drug treatments were then administered with a D300 digital drug dispenser (Hewlett-Packard); combination treatments were added simultaneously. At the time of drug addition, a control plate was stained and fixed according to the Dye Drop protocol. After 72 h of incubation, the treated plates were stained and fixed with the Dye Drop protocol. In brief, cells were stained with Hoechst 33342 (1:5000) and LIVE/DEAD far red fluorescent dye (LDR, 1:2000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. L10120), prepared in a 10% solution of OptiPrep (Sigma, cat. no. D1556) in PBS to displace the growth medium, for 30 min at room temperature (RT). Cells were then fixed with 4% formaldehyde, prepared in 20% OptiPrep (a denser solution to displace the stain solution and media column), for 30 min at RT. Fix, stain, and media were aspirated, and 80 μL of PBS was added per well. Plates were then sealed and stored at 4°C until image acquisition. Microscopy was performed on an ImageXpress Micro Confocal (Molecular Devices IXM-C; RRID:SCR_020294) high-throughput microscope. Four fields of view were captured per well with a 10× Plan Apo objective to cover almost the full area of each well. Nuclei were segmented based on the Hoechst intensity, and the intensity of the LDR signal within the nuclear mask was extracted with MetaXpress software (Molecular Devices; RRID:SCR_016654). Cells were classified as live or dead based on their LDR intensity, and live cell counts were used to calculate growth rate inhibition (GR) values. All experiments in breast cancer cell lines were performed using technical and biological triplicate.

## Kinase affinity profiling
KINOMEscan-derived apparent Kd values (based on SCANmax assay data from Eurofins) were obtained for all agents in the LSP-OKL against 468 kinase targets. The Kd data were filtered to include only wild-type kinases and only those compounds that were hits in the phenotypic screen. The data were further filtered to consider kinases only inhibited by KW-2449 (a positive control) with Kd ≤ 100 nM. Hierarchical clustering was performed on kinases and inhibitors using the Seaborn function ‘clustermap’ in Python with default parameters. 11-point IC50 assays (HotSpot with 10 μM ATP) for select drug-kinase pairs were outsourced (Reaction Biology, Malvern, PA).

## Sample preparation and RNA isolation
14 DIV iPSC-derived sensory neurons were matured in 6-well plates at 500,000/well for an additional 14 days 28 DIV-old neurons were treated with DMSO and paclitaxel in the presence or absence of GNE-495 or JNK-IN-8. Samples for each condition were collected in duplicate from 3 separate differentiation batches. Cells were lysed 24 h after treatment using RT lysis buffer, and RNA was isolated using a RNeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## RNA-seq library preparation and sequencing
RNA-seq libraries were prepared using the TruSeq Stranded Total RNA with Ribo-Zero Gold kit (Illumina), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Libraries were dual-indexed, pooled, and then sequenced on the Illumina NovaSeq X Plus platform for paired-end 2 × 150 bp reads.

## Identification of differentially expressed genes
Reads were quantified against the Ensembl transcriptome (v114) using Salmon (v1.10.3). Differential gene expression analysis was performed with DESeq2, using a model that included treatment condition, iPSC differentiation batch, and sequencing batch as separate terms to account for batch effects. Differential expression was assessed using the Wald test, comparing each treatment condition to DMSO and each rescue condition to paclitaxel alone.

## Gene set enrichment analysis from RNA sequencing data
To compare the ability of JNK-IN-8 and GNE-495 to counteract the effects of PTX, we performed a gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). We used gene sets from the Hallmark, KEGG medicus, and Reactome collections available through MSigDB. To compute gene enrichment for the paclitaxel vs. DMSO comparison, we calculated a ranking metric for each gene as −sign(log2 fold change)×log10(p-value) and used the ranked gene lists as input for the fgseaMultilevel() function from the fgsea R package to identify enriched pathways. For categorical analysis of genes significantly up- or downregulated in each rescue condition, we used the hypergeometric test implemented in fora() from fgsea.

## ReN VM cell drug response measurements
ReN VM cells were maintained on Growth Factor reduced Matrigel (Corning, Corning, NY) coated plates in ReNcell NSC maintenance media (EMD Millipore, Danvers, MA) supplemented with 20 ng/mL rhEGF (Millipore Sigma, Burlington, MA), and 20 ng/mL FGF (Millipore Sigma, Burlington, MA) at 37°C and 5% CO2. Cells were plated in 10 cm plates in complete media and allowed to grow for two days. Differentiation was initiated by growth factor withdrawal, and cells were maintained with bi-weekly growth factor free media changes for seven days. Cells were then removed from the 10 cm plates with accutase (EMD Millipore, Danvers, MA) and transferred to 96 well plates and maintained in growth factor free medium for an additional seven days. Cells were then drug treated using a D300 digital drug dispenser (Hewlett-Packard, Palo Alto, CA). Cells were fixed by adding 60 μL of a 4% formaldehyde solution prepared in 10% OptiPrep in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) for 30 min at room temperature. Following fixation (after 24 h for phospho-cJUN staining, or after four days for β-tubulin staining), the well contents were aspirated and cells were permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 for 15 min and blocked with Intercept buffer (Li-COR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, Cat. No. 927–700001) for one hour. Primary antibody was diluted in Intercept buffer containing Hoechst 33324 (1:5000) (Sigma, Cat. No. XX) (1:200 for anti-phospho-cJUN (Ser73) (Cell Signaling Technologies, Danvers, MA, Cat. No. 3270 S); and 1:1000 for anti-β-tubulin conjugated to Alexa Fluor 555 (Cell Signaling Technologies, Danvers, MA, Cat. No. 2116 S)), added to the cells, and incubated overnight at 4°C. Cells were then washed once with PBS-T (PBS with 0.1% Tween 20) and twice with PBS. Secondary Alexa Fluor 647 donkey anti-rabbit (Thermo Fisher, A31573) was diluted 1:2000 in Intercept buffer and added to label the phospho-cJUN for one hour at RT. Cells were then washed once with PBS-T and twice with PBS. Plates were sealed and stored at 4°C until image acquisition.
Stained and fixed cells were imaged with an ImageXpress Micro-Confocal (IXM-C) high throughput microscope equipped with a plate hotel and robotic arm (Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA). Image analysis was performed with MetaXpress software (version 6.5.3.427, Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA): nuclei were segmented, and nuclear masks were defined based on the Hoechst signal. The nuclear mask was dilated to create a ring mask, and the intensity of each signal in each mask was measured. Local background was accounted-for by subtracting the intensity of each marker in the ring mask from the nuclear mask. Mean phospho-cJUN nuclear intensity was quantified. β-tubulin staining was quantified using the ‘Neurite Outgrowth’ module in MetaXpress.

## ReN VM cell culture and treatment
ReN VM cells were maintained as described above. 2 × 106 cells were plated in 15 cm plates in complete media and allowed to grow for five days. Differentiation was initiated by growth factor withdrawal, and cells were maintained with bi-weekly growth factor free media changes for two weeks. Duplicate plates were then treated with DMSO, 300 nM paclitaxel, 1 μM GNE-495, 1 μM JNK-IN-8, 300 nM paclitaxel +1 μM GNE-495, or 300 nM paclitaxel +1 μM JNK-IN-8. After 24 h plates were placed on ice, and washed twice with ice-cold PBS, residual PBS was aspirated after the second wash, and 1 mL of PBS with 1× HALT protease/phosphatase inhibitor (XX) was added. Cells were scraped thoroughly off the plates, collected in 50 mL falcon tube, and centrifuged for 5 min at 2500 rpm at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded, and the cell pellet was flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C. Samples were collected in biological triplicate.

## Protein extraction and preparation
Cells were lysed directly in sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-based lysis buffer composed of 2% (w/v) SDS, 150 mM sodium chloride (NaCl), and 50 mM Tris (pH 8.7), supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo Fisher, Cat. #A32953 and #A32957). Following lysis, homogenization was carried out using Qiashredder spin columns (Qiagen, Cat. No. 79656) to ensure uniformity. Disulfide bonds were reduced by adding dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 5 mM, followed by incubation at 37°C for 1 h. Subsequently, cysteine residues were alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark, and the reaction was quenched by adding DTT to a final concentration of 50 mM. Protein concentration was quantified using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. No. 23235) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For each biological replicate, 2 mg of total protein was taken forward for subsequent processing. Detergents were removed from lysates using methanol/chloroform precipitation following the protocol described by Wessel, D.M. and Flügge, U.I., 1984 The resulting protein pellets were resolubilized in 8 M urea prepared in 200 mM EPPS buffer (pH 8.5). Proteins were digested in a two-step protocol. For each sample, Lys-C protease (2 mg/mL, Fujifilm Wako, Cat. #129–02541) was added at an 1:50 stock:digest, and samples were incubated overnight in the presence of 2% acetonitrile (v/v) to initiate digestion. After overnight digestion, samples were diluted with 200 mM EPPS buffer to reduce the urea concentration to 1 M, maintaining 2% acetonitrile. Trypsin (Promega, Cat. No. V5113) was then added at a 1:100 stock:digest, and digestion continued for 6 h at 37°C. Digestion efficiency was evaluated by LC-MS/MS analysis of 1 μL aliquots, with missed cleavage rates consistently below 10%.

## TMT labeling and peptide fractionation
For each sample, 100 μg of solubilized proteins was subjected to TMTpro 18plex labeling. To initiate labeling, 30 μL of acetonitrile was added to each peptide solution, followed by the addition of TMTpro 18plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. No. A52045). The reaction mixtures were incubated at room temperature for 1 h with occasional vortexing to ensure complete mixing. To assess labeling efficiency, 1 μL aliquots from each reaction were pooled and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. All samples showed >95% labeling efficiency. Reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine (50% aqueous solution) to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) and incubated for 15 min at room temperature and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed to assess peptide ratios. Based on this analysis, protein inputs were normalized across channels to ensure approximately equal loading. The samples were then acidified with formic acid to pH < 3.0, and trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to a final concentration of 0.1%. Labeled samples were pooled into a single multiplex and peptides were dried to 30% volume using vacuum centrifugation and subsequently reconstituted in 1% formic acid containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Reversed-phase solid-phase extraction (SPE) was performed using 200 mg Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Cat. No. WAT054945). Cartridges were pre-conditioned sequentially with methanol, acetonitrile, and 1% formic acid with 0.1% TFA. Following sample loading, peptides were washed with three column volumes of 1% formic acid and eluted with 95% acetonitrile in 1% formic acid.
A second multiplex was generated from the remaining unlabeled peptide material and processed in parallel for phosphopeptide enrichment. Peptides were first desalted using 500 mg Sep-Pak tC18 Vac RC solid-phase extraction (SPE) cartridges (Waters), followed by enrichment of phosphopeptides using the Pierce High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Scientific, Cat. No. A32992), with 200 μL of Fe-NTA slurry used per column per sample. Enrichment was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting phosphopeptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS to assess enrichment efficiency for individual samples. Following validation, enriched phosphopeptides were labeled with TMT using the same protocol described above. Labeled phosphopeptide samples were then pooled, dried using a SpeedVac concentrator, and re-purified using Sep-Pak SPE prior to fractionation. For deep proteomic analysis, TMT-labeled samples (including both peptides and phosphopeptides) were fractionated by high-pH reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) on an Agilent 1260 Infinity II series. Separation was achieved using a gradient of increasing acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH ∼8.0). Eluted fractions were collected into 96 wells and concatenated into 24 pooled fractions for downstream LC-MS/MS analysis.

## Mass spectrometry analysis
Peptides were analyzed using a Vanquish Neo nano-ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (nano-UHPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a 25 cm × 75 μm internal diameter, 1.7 μm C18 Aurora Ultimate capillary column (IonOpticks), maintained at 60°C. Peptide separation was carried out at a flow rate of 500 nL/min over a 240-min linear gradient from 5% to 100% Buffer B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), with Buffer A composed of 0.1% formic acid in water. Quantitative mass spectrometry analysis was described recently. Eluted peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Ascend Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a tandem mass tag (TMT)-based MS2 acquisition method coupled with high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) at compensation voltages of −40 V, −60 V, and −80 V. Full MS (MS1) scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000. MS2 scans were obtained at a resolution of 30,000 following higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 33%. The quadrupole isolation window was set to 0.7 m/z. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and ranged from 59 to 400 ms for MS2. Raw MS data were searched using the COMET search engine against the human UniProt reference proteome (downloaded April 19, 2024). Static modifications included +304.207145 Da on peptide N-termini and lysine residues (TMT), and +57.021464 Da on cysteine residues (carbamidomethylation). Oxidation of methionine (+15.994914 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues (+79.966330 Da) were considered as dynamic modifications. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered to a false discovery rate (FDR) below 1% at both the peptide and protein levels using a target-decoy approach followed by linear discriminant analysis (LDA). Quantified peptides required a summed TMT signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio greater than 200 and an isolation specificity of at least 70%.
Fold changes across pairs of conditions (PTX vs. DMSO, PTX+JNK-IN-8 vs. PTX, and PTX+GNE-495 vs. PTX) and FDR-adjusted p-values (Benjamini-Hochberg method) were calculated for each protein using limma package (Version 3.64.1) in R (Version 4.5.1), following log2 transformation of protein intensity values. For phosphoprotein abundance data, an additional normalization step was applied to account for the corresponding protein abundance by subtracting log2-transformed protein levels, thereby isolating phosphorylation-specific changes independent of overall protein expression. Differentially abundant protein and phosphoprotein lists were filtered based on adjusted p-values (FDR ≤0.05). Enrichment analysis was performed against gene sets from Gene Ontology biological processes using the gseapy package (Version 1.1.4). Enrichment was calculated separately for upregulated and downregulated protein sets to capture direction-specific biological processes and pathways.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 10.2 (GraphaPad Software, La Jolla, CA) and R v4.4.2. All datasets were first tested for normality using the Shapiro-Wilk test. For datasets with a normal distribution, statistical significance between groups was assessed using unpaired two-tailed Student’s t tests, one-way ANOVA, or two-way ANOVA, as appropriate. For experiments involving repeated administration of chemotherapy and rescue compounds over multiple days, repeated-measures one-way ANOVA was used. Multiple comparisons were corrected using Tukey’s post hoc test. All statistical analyses were performed at a 95% confidence level, and differences were considered significant at p < 0.05.
Differential gene expression analysis was performed using the R package edgeR. Genes were considered significantly differentially expressed using a Benjamini–Hochberg adjusted p-value cutoff of 0.05. Pathway enrichment analysis was performed using the Reactome database and the R package fgsea. Genes were ranked according to −sign(log2 fold-change) × p-value, and enrichment significance was assessed using Fisher’s exact test.
Data are presented as mean ± SEM unless otherwise indicated. The exact value of n, the definition of n (e.g., number of independent differentiations, biological replicates, technical replicates, cells, or donors), the statistical tests used, and measures of center and dispersion are indicated in the figure legends, figures, or section for each experiment.

Published: May 6, 2026

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2026.102787.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S11

## Table S1. List of genes identified by bulk RNA sequencing analysis, related to Figure 4
(A) Differential gene expression analysis for each condition. (B) Gene lists for each cluster identified.

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S11

## Table S1. List of genes identified by bulk RNA sequencing analysis, related to Figure 4
(A) Differential gene expression analysis for each condition. (B) Gene lists for each cluster identified.

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Data Availability Statement

•Bulk RNA sequencing data have been deposited at Gene Expression Omnibus as GEO: GSE298389 and are publicly available. Mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository as dataset identifier PRIDE: PXD074954 and are publicly available. Raw data supporting the findings of this study will be shared by the upon request.
•All original code has been deposited in GitHub and is publicly available at peripheral-neuropathy repository: https://github.com/labsyspharm/peripheral-neuropathy.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.