pmcACS Pharmacol Transl SciACS Pharmacol Transl Sci3799acspts101721411ptACS Pharmacology & Translational Science2575-9108American Chemical SocietyPMC10353067PMC10353067.110353067103530673747002410.1021/acsptsci.3c000471ReviewMessenger RNA-Based
Therapeutics and Vaccines: What’s
beyond COVID-19?
LiDongqiao https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3858-1501LiuCynthia https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4946-7272LiYingzhu https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4698-6832TenchovRumiana https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1156-5184SassoJanet M. ZhangDi LiDan ZouLixue WangXuezhao https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6711-369XZhouQiongqiong ‡Information
Center, National Science Library, Chinese
Academy of Science, Haidan District, Beijing 100190, P.R. China§CAS, a division of the American Chemical Society 2540 Olentangy River Rd, Columbus, Ohio 43202, United States*wangxz@mail.las.ac.cn*qzhou@cas.org0307202314072023674409189439690803202303072024030720241907202303072024© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2023The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
With the rapid success in the development of mRNA vaccines
against
COVID-19 and with a number of mRNA-based drugs ahead in the pipelines,
mRNA has catapulted to the forefront of drug research, demonstrating
its substantial effectiveness against a broad range of diseases. As
the recent global pandemic gradually fades, we cannot stop thinking
about what the world has gained: the realization and validation of
the power of mRNA in modern medicine. A significant amount of research
has now been concentrated on developing mRNA drugs and vaccine platforms
against infectious and immune diseases, cancer, and other debilitating
diseases and has demonstrated encouraging results. Here, based on
the CAS Content Collection, we provide a landscape view of the current
state, outline trends in the research and development of mRNA therapeutics
and vaccines, and highlight some notable patents focusing on mRNA
therapeutics, vaccines, and delivery systems. Analysis of diseases
disclosed in patents also reveals highly investigated diseases for
treatments with these medicines. Finally, we provide information about
mRNA therapeutics and vaccines in clinical trials. We hope this Review
will be useful for understanding the current knowledge in the field
of mRNA medicines and will assist in efforts to solve its remaining
challenges and revolutionize the treatment of human diseases.

mRNAvaccinetherapeuticCOVID-19infectious diseasecancerChinese Academy of Sciences10.13039/5011000023672023182Research on Key Technologies of mRNA Vaccine R&D PipelineNAE11Z0416Chinese Academy of Sciences10.13039/501100002367E2290436pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9pt3c00047document-id-new-14pt3c00047ccc-priceThe COVID-19 mRNA vaccines were
developed and approved at unprecedented speed and have demonstrated
significant effectiveness against infections and acute COVID in the
real world. Although the idea of using mRNA as a simple and promising
way to deliver vaccines or therapeutic drugs had been around for decades
before the onset of the recent global pandemic, the success of mRNA
vaccines against COVID has created huge enthusiasm around this concept
and significantly boosted development and applications of this class
of medicines in other areas. As the pandemic gradually fades, we cannot
stop thinking about what the world has gained in this chaos: the realization
and validation of the power of mRNA in modern medicine.
Messenger
RNA (mRNA) is the molecule that carries genetic information
from DNA in the cell nucleus to the cytosol for synthesizing proteins
by ribosomes. While most of conventional therapies work by binding
and inhibiting hyperactive disease-causing proteins, mRNA therapies
can restore protein activities for treating diseases caused by the
loss of certain protein functions. Moreover, mRNA therapy is explicit,
as defined by the nucleic acid sequence, and very unlikely to have
an off-target effect. Compared to antibody or cell therapies, mRNA
is also much easier to synthesize and purify on large scales. Another
advantage is that mRNA is transient and does not enter the cell nucleus;
therefore, it is very unlikely to cause any genetic mutations in cells.
Many key research findings have contributed to the advancement
of mRNA’s medical applications.
Early research on mRNA’s stability and translational activity
provided the foundation for developing mRNA-based vaccines and drugs.
Comprehensive exploration of nucleic acids in the 1950s and 1960s
brought the discovery of mRNA. − Since then, mRNA has been the
subject of systematic basic and applied research aimed at various
diseases ( ).
 In the first decades after its discovery, the research
was mainly
focused on understanding the structural and functional aspects of
mRNA and its metabolism in eukaryotic cells, in parallel with developing
tools for mRNA recombinant engineering. Later, the 5′-cap on
mRNA was discovered. , In the 1980s, in vitro transcription from engineered DNA templates by means of a bacteriophage
SP6 promoter and RNA polymerase led to the production of mRNA in cell-free
systems. Although attempts in using liposomes
to deliver mRNA into cells to induce protein expression date from
the 1970s, , the invention of cationic lipids was the decisive step in enabling nucleic acid
transport into cells which resulted in the first cationic lipid-assisted
mRNA delivery. , 
In the 1990s, preclinical
evaluation of in vitro mRNA transcription
began for applications such as protein substitution and cancer and
infectious diseases vaccinations. − In 1992, a team of scientists working at Scripps Research Institute
used mRNA to transiently reverse diabetes insipidus in rats. Albeit the concept of mRNA vaccines sounds relatively
new, it was actually first suggested in 1995, for encoding cancer
antigens. The accrued expertise was valuable
in solving some of the obstacles associated with mRNA pharmaceuticals
such as its short half-life and unfavorable immunogenicity.
In 2005, a solution was found on how to prevent activation of the
immune response against the injected mRNA per se by inserting a naturally
occurring modified nucleoside: pseudouridine. The invention of the pseudouridine modification and further exploration
on mRNA led to the first human trial of a mRNA vaccine against melanoma
in 2008. In the following years, numerous
preclinical and clinical trials on mRNA-based vaccines against infectious
diseases and cancer were completed. , In 2009, the
first trial on cancer immunotherapy using mRNA-based vaccines in human
subjects with metastatic melanoma was conducted. In 2010, it was shown that pseudouridine-modified mRNA
might be applied as a safe approach for effectively reprogramming
cells to pluripotency. The first clinical
trial of personalized mRNA-based cancer vaccine was performed in 2017. In 2021, a successful use of lipid nanoparticles
(LNPs) comprising Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 mRNA
and a CRISPR guide RNA in patients with transthyretin amyloidosis
with polyneuropathy was reported. 
Two human mRNA vaccines against COVID-19 received Emergency Use
Authorization in 2020 and were finally approved in 2021. − This was only brought about by decades of research on mRNA-based
therapeutics. The lessons learned during the COVID-19 mRNA vaccines
development were recently applied in formulating a multivalent nucleoside-modified
mRNA flu vaccine. 
As it became
clear that mRNA vaccines provide a promising alternative
to conventional vaccine approaches due to their high efficiency, potential
for rapid development, low-cost manufacture, and capacity for scale-up,
as well as safe administration, significant efforts have been concentrated
on developing mRNA drug and vaccine platforms against infectious diseases,
cancer, and other debilitating diseases and have demonstrated encouraging
results.
This Review provides a detailed overview of mRNA drugs
and vaccines
and considers future directions and challenges in advancing this promising
platform to widespread therapeutic use. We examine data from the CAS
Content Collection, the largest human-curated
collection of published scientific information and analyze the publication
landscape of recent research in order to reveal the research trends
in published documents and to provide insights into the scientific
advances in the area. We also discuss the evolution of the key concepts
in the field, the major technologies, and their development pipelines
with company research focuses, disease categories, development stages,
and publication trends. We hope that this report can serve as a useful
resource for understanding the current state of knowledge in the field
of mRNA medicines and the remaining challenges to fulfill the potential
of this new class of medicines.

## Landscape of Scientific Publications Related to mRNA Therapeutics and Vaccines

## Trend of mRNA Publications over Time
Based on the analysis
of CAS document collection, a total of 9,322 research papers have
been published in the field of mRNA therapeutics and vaccines. Due
to the small number of published papers before 2000, the analysis
of the development trend focused on those papers published since 2000.
As shown in the left panel of , the number of published papers in this area showed
a slow growth prior to 2020 followed by a significant increase each
year afterward. From 2000 to 2019, the annual number of publications
in the global mRNA field was less than 200, and the growth in publication
was relatively slow. Due to the impact of the novel coronavirus outbreak
at the end of 2019, mRNA technology has attracted wide attention from
researchers. After 2020, the number of published papers in this area
has shown a rapid growth trend, with the number of published papers
increasing to 3,361 in 2021 and nearly 5,000 in 2022.
 A total of 2,089 patents related to mRNA therapeutics
and vaccines
have been published worldwide, according to CAS document collection.
Due to the small number of patents before 2000, the trend analysis
also focused on the analysis of patents since 2000. As shown in the
right panel of , the number of patents each year grew slowly from 2000 to 2010 with
some fluctuations, and the annual publications were all below 30.
Between 2011 and 2019, the number of mRNA-related patents worldwide
increased from 46 to 177 each year. Stimulated by the COVID-19 pandemic,
the annual number of patents increased dramatically after 2020, increasing
to 382 in 2021 and likely to nearly 450 in 2022. We also performed
trend analyses for patents on mRNA therapeutic, mRNA vaccines and
delivery systems separately. The results for those are described in
the Supporting Information.

## Distribution of Research Topics

## Distribution of Topics in Journal Publications
This
report then examined CAS-indexed concepts in mRNA therapeutic and
vaccine journal articles in order to reveal emerging trends or the
more specific focus of research and development in this field ( ). From the distribution
of research topics based on the index concepts, it seems that the
research has thus far focused on research in immunology, mechanisms
of action, and disease indications. Among the immune research (red
dots), key concepts include immunoglobulin G, viral spike glycoproteins,
neutralizing antibodies, immunogenicity, etc. In terms of mechanism
of action studies (green dots), key concepts include signal transduction,
transcriptional regulation, genetic elements, RNA splicing, etc. In
the treatment of diseases (blue dots), key concepts include diabetes,
hypertension, myocarditis, and cardiovascular disease. In terms of
indicator studies (yellow dots), key concepts include c-reactive protein,
leukocyte, blood platelet, etc. Conceivably, due to the outbreak of
the COVID pandemic and the development of mRNA vaccines against this
disease, the cluster surrounding coronavirus infection accounts for
a very large portion of journal publications.
 

## Distribution of Topics in Patents
Key concepts in the
field of mRNA therapeutics and vaccines were also examined with a
concept cluster analysis for patents within the CAS Content Collection
( ). Unlike
journals, a significant portion of the patents focused on drug delivery
such as nanoparticles (red dots) and immunotherapy in addition to
SARS-CoV-2-related studies, etc. In terms of immunotherapy (green
dots), key concepts include chimeric fusion proteins, chimeric antigen
receptors, cancer immunotherapy, T cell receptors, etc. In other treatment
aspects (blue dots), key concepts include RNA vaccines, immune adjuvants,
etc. The high occurrence of all these terms reflects the emphasis
of most R&D activities in this area.
 

## Major Countries Contributing to the R&D of mRNA Therapeutics and Vaccines

## Top Countries/Regions
Among the top 20 countries and
regions in terms of scientific research output ( ), the United States has the largest scientific
research output in both journal articles and patents, with 29.8% and
45.9% of the world’s total output in these two types of publications,
respectively, and significantly outnumbers those by other countries/regions.
Germany ranks distantly the second in total scientific output, accounting
for 7.4% of journal articles and 16.5% of patents. China ranks the
third in scientific research output, with 6.8% of journal articles
and 13.4% of patents. Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdom ranked
fourth, fifth, and sixth, respectively, in total output.
 

## Patent Output Trend over Time for Top Countries
 shows the contributions
by the top five countries for the periods of 1970–2019 and
2020–2022 (the period following the outbreak of the COVID-19
pandemic). The U.S. is in the lead position in both periods for both
journal and patent publications. The number of journal articles published
by China from 1970 to 2019 was slightly lower than that of Germany,
but increased rapidly during the period of 2020–2022, exceeding
Germany during this period. The numbers of journal articles published
by Italy and Japan were also small (<80) during 1970–2019
but increased significantly (>390) during 2020–2022 (left
panel).
 The numbers of patent applications by organizations
in the U.S.
and Germany during 1970–2019 were higher than those in 2020–2022,
indicating the presence of sufficient R&D activities in these
two countries before the onset of COVID-19 ( , right panel). While the numbers of patents
from these two countries decreased during the three-year period of
2020–2022, the numbers were still higher than those of other
countries, reflecting their leading roles. The trend of patent output
from China appears to be different from that of other countries as
indicated by the low activity during 1970–2019 and 5-fold increase
during the period of 2020–2022, indicating that China is rapidly
increasing its technological development in the mRNA therapeutics
and vaccines due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.

## Patent Filing Strategies Revealed by Analysis of Patent Application
Flows among Major Countries/Regions
This report then examined
the pattern of patent application flow related to technology development
of mRNA therapeutics and vaccines. Our studies show that the U.S.,
Germany, the U.K., Japan, and Italy all have applied for technology
protection in some overseas markets ( ). In contrast, the majority of patents initiated
by organizations in China were filed domestically to the Chinese Patent
Office with some to the World Intellectual Property Organization,
indicating that those Chinese organizations have placed less emphasis
on seeking overseas protection of their intellectual properties. The
U.S., Germany, the U.K., Japan, and Italy mainly distributed patents
to other countries through the World Intellectual Property Organization.
Among them, the number of patents distributed through the World Intellectual
Property Organization in the U.S., Germany, Japan, and Italy accounted
for more than 90%, and the number of patents distributed through the
World Intellectual Property Organization in the U.K. accounted for
more than 75.0%. The U.S. ranks first in the volume of patents distributed
through the World Intellectual Property Organization, followed by
Australia, Canada, Japan, and China. Countries such as the U.S., Australia,
Canada, Japan, and China are also preferred when distributing patents
through the European Patent Office.
 

## Major Organizations Contributing to the R&D of mRNA Therapeutics and Vaccines

## Organizations in Journal Publications
Among the top
15 organizations in the world publishing mRNA journal articles in
this area ( ),
12 are from the U.S., indicating that the U.S. has a predominant role
in basic research. Israel, the U.K., and China each has one organization
ranking among the top 15. In terms of the nature of the top 15 organizations,
11 are universities, 3 scientific research institutions, and 1 company.
The top three are Harvard University, the University of California,
and the University of Pennsylvania, with 108, 84, and 84 journal articles,
respectively. Tel Aviv University in Israel ranks fourth globally,
with 74 papers. Johns Hopkins University, Moderna, Washington University,
the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the U.S.
National Institutes of Health all ranked in the top 10. The University
of Oxford in the U.K. ranks eighth in the world, with 57 articles.
It may be worth mentioning that the U.S. Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention and Mount Sinai Hospital account for more than 94%
of the published journal articles in 2020–2022, indicating
the high level of dedication of these two organizations to this area
in recent years, probably related to the effort on fighting the COVID-19.
 

## Organizations in Patent Publications
Among the top
15 organizations with a high number of patents in this area ( ), the dominant organizations
are mainly located in the U.S. (8 out of 15) followed by Germany (4
out of 15). Among these top patent applicants, companies are the main
source of patents (11 out of 15). Thus, as expected, the major R&D
effort of commercial companies has been focusing on the development
of patentable technologies in this area. Moderna of the U.S. has produced
most patents, followed by CureVac and BioNTech of Germany. The Chinese
Academy of Science had the highest percentage of patents in the past
three years, accounting for 70.6%, which may be indicative of an emphasis
of R&D in this area by this organization in more recent years.
 

## Patent Distribution among Key Technologies
From the
perspective of technology classification, mRNA patents
mainly include therapeutic technology, delivery technology, vaccine
technology, and mRNA modification technology ( ). Out of 2,089 patents, 1,129 patents are
related to the development of mRNA therapeutics for disease treatment,
977 related to development of delivery technology, and 659 related
to vaccines. The total number is larger than 2,089 because some patents
covered more than one specific technology area. The number of patent
applications in these three types of technology account for 93.3%
of the total patents, whereas the number of patents about mRNA modification
technology is relatively small, though this technology is crucial
to the success of mRNA vaccines and therapeutics.
 

## Analysis of Patents Related to mRNA Therapeutics

## Top Countries/Regions with Published Patents Related to mRNA
Therapeutics
 shows the top 10 countries/regions where patent applicants
in the field of mRNA therapeutics are located. The U.S. and Germany
are the top two countries with 550 and 214 patents, respectively.
The patents from these two countries account for about 67.7% of the
total global patents in this area, reflecting the predominant role
of these two countries in this area. China has filed 89 patents in
this field, ranking distantly third.
 

## Top Organizations with Published Patents Related to mRNA Therapeutics
 lists the
top 11 organizations with patents related to mRNA therapeutics. As
can be seen from the table, most of these organizations are in the
U.S. (six) and Germany (four) with one in the U.K. Most of these patent
applicants are commercial companies (nine) and only two are universities,
indicating a heavy role of commercial companies in leading the R&D
effort on mRNA therapeutics. The top five companies are Moderna, BioNTech,
CureVac, Translate Bio, and Tron, with Moderna holding the largest
number of patents (121).
 

## Notable Patents Related to R&D of mRNA Therapeutics
 highlights
several of the most notable patents focused on the development of
mRNA therapeutics.
 Patent application WO2020097409 by Moderna, USA features
methods
for treating ovarian cancer, as well as other cancers such as solid
tumors, lymphomas, and epithelial origin cancers, by administering
mRNA encoding an OX40L polypeptide, also known as CD252. The disclosure
also presents pharmaceutical composition for intratumoral administration
comprising lipid nanoparticles with a mRNA encoding a human OX40L.
The disclosure also features combination therapies, such as the use
of mRNA encoding an OX40L polypeptide in combination with a checkpoint
inhibitor, such as an anti-PD-L1 antibody.
Patent application
WO2021198157 by BioNTech, Germany, provides
RNA technologies for targeting Claudin-18.2 (CLDN-18.2) polypeptides.
Such RNA technologies can be useful for the treatment of Claudin-18.2
pos. cancer, including biliary cancers, ovarian cancers, gastric cancers,
gastroesophageal cancers, and pancreatic cancers. Noteworthy is a
mRNA formulation encoding monoclonal IgG1, such as Zolbetuximab (Claudiximab).
Patent application WO2018160540 by Sanofi, France, and BioNTech,
Germany, relates to the field of therapeutic mRNAs for the treatment
of solid tumors, including medical preparation comprising mRNA encoding
an IL-12sc protein, an IL-15 sushi protein, an IFNα protein,
and a GM-CSF protein. The disclosed pharmaceutical formulations are
for use in a method of preventing cancer metastasis.
Patent
application WO2020260685 by eTheRNA Immunotherapies, Belgium,
relates to combinations of mRNAs encoding CD40, caTLR4, and CD70 with
mRNAs encoding tumor-associated antigens for use as therapeutic vaccine
in the treatment of metastatic cancer patients, primarily with malignant
melanoma disease, but also to other cancer types. The disclosed therapies
may further encompass the administration of checkpoint inhibitors.
The invention provides administration schemes focusing on administration
of the therapeutic into lymph nodes, the so-called intranodal therapy.

## Analysis of Patents Related to mRNA Vaccines

## Top Countries/Regions with Published Patents Related to mRNA
Vaccines
The patent applicants in the global mRNA vaccine
field are mainly from the U.S., China, Germany, and countries and
regions shown in . The U.S., China, and Germany have 220, 144, and 134 patent
applications respectively, making them the three countries with the
strongest strength in this technology field. It needs to point out
that China does not yet have a mRNA vaccine on market probably due
to its late involvement in this area and thus the patent data here
does not necessarily reconcile with the market data and correlate
with the impact. Countries such as Belgium, the U.K., and France have
less than 30 patent applications in this field.
 

## Distribution of mRNA Vaccine Patents among Top Organizations
 lists the
top 12 organizations in terms of mRNA vaccine patent output. Among
them, five are from the U.S., three from Germany, two from China,
and one each from the U.K. and Belgium. Like other technical fields,
companies are the main contributors of mRNA vaccine patents (8 out
of 12). The top 3 companies are CureVac (92), Moderna (59), and BioNTech
(38).
 

## Most Notable Patents Related to mRNA Vaccine R&D
Over 650 patents related to mRNA vaccine development with their associated
information were identified in this study. and list several
intriguing patents focused on the mRNA vaccines for infectious diseases
and cancers, respectively, the two major disease classes for which
mRNA vaccines are being developed.
 Patent application WO2021255270 (Ziphius Vaccines,
Belg.; Universiteit
Gent) discloses a self-amplifying COVID-19 vaccine comprising a mRNA
encoding SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, nucleocapsid protein, and alphavirus
nonstructural proteins (nsp1–4) in thermally stabilizing RNA
vaccine formulation. Patent application WO2022129918 (Imperial College
Innovations Limited, U.K.) discloses novel uses and methods for thermally
stabilizing RNA vaccine formulations, including self-amplifying RNA
replicons derived from Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis virus encoding
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein encapsulated in lipid nanoparticles. The
higher and prolonged in vivo translation improves the efficacy of
self-amplifying RNA vaccines even in low dose.
Patent application
WO2022137133 (CureVac AG and GlaxoSmithKline
Biologicals) discloses that the mRNA vaccine encoding variants of
highly immunogenic SARS-CoV-2 spike protein in lipid nanoparticle
formulation induces neutralizing antibodies and immune cell responses
against SARS-CoV-2.
Patent application WO2021155243 (Moderna)
discloses a vaccine comprising
a codon optimized human respiratory syncytial virus (hRSV) nucleic
acid encoding a stabilized prefusion form of an hRSV F glycoprotein
variant formulated in the lipid nanoparticles. In vivo study was conducted
to evaluate the immunogenicity, efficacy, and safety of the mRNA vaccine
in mice and the RSV cotton rat model.
Patent application WO2022116528
(Suzhou CureMed Biomedical Technology)
discloses a circular RNA (circRNA) vaccine comprising a specific internal
ribosome entry site (IRES) element and receptor domain of SARS-CoV-2
spike protein without 5′ or 3′ ends. The covalently
closed structure of circRNA prevents the degradation by exonucleases
and improves its biostability. They exemplified the further application
for making circRNAs encoding erythropoietin, anti-PD1 antibody, interleukin
15, prostate cancer specific antigen PAP, and CD16 CAR receptor for
protein expression in 293T cells.
Patent application US20220325255
(University of Texas) discloses
antiviral compositions including mRNA encoding for a TRIM7 protein
encapsulated into a lipid nanoparticle (LNP), as well as methods for
impairing enterovirus replication for treating viral infections. The
disclosure provides for the first time E3 ligase targeting an enterovirus
protein and the first demonstration that a viral membrane remodeling
protein is subject to degradation as a host antiviral strategy.
Patent application WO2021155149 by Genentech, BioNTech, and Hoffmann-La
Roche AG discloses mRNA vaccines composed of mRNAs encoding up to
20 neoepitopes (two decatopes) deriving from cancer-specific mutations
in patients formulated in cationic liposomes ( ). The first-in-human phase Ia and Ib studies
of a mRNA vaccine as a monotherapy and in combination with atezolizumab
were conducted in patients with advanced or metastatic solid tumors.
They showed innate and neoantigen-specific immune responses induced
by the mRNA vaccine alone and combined with atezolizumab.
Patent
application WO2015024664 by CureVac discloses development
of a mRNA-based personalized cancer vaccine encoding prostate cancer-associated
antigens, prostate-specific antigen), PSMA (prostate-specific membrane
antigen), PSCA (prostate stem cell antigen), STEAP (six transmembrane
epithelial antigen of the prostate), MUC1 (mucin 1) and PAP (prostatic
acid phosphatase) for treating prostate cancer.
Patent application
WO2016180467 by BioNtech and TRON Translationale
Onkologie Mainz discloses administering to the mammal T cells genetically
modified to express a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) targeted to
antigen. Antigen is selected from claudin 18.2, claudin 6, CD19, CD20,
CD22, CD33, CD123, mesothelin, CEA, c-Met, PSMA, GD-2, or NY-ESO-1.
CAR-transgenic human CD8+ T cells targeting claudin-6 proliferated
in response to CLDN6-transfected autologous dendritic cells. Murine
CLDN6-CAR T cells were able to proliferate strongly in response to
murine BMDCs expressing human CLDN6 antigen after RNA transfer.
Patent application WO2020097291 by Moderna discloses mRNA cancer
vaccines composed of mRNAs encoding 3–50 neoepitopes formulated
in cationic lipid nanoparticles. A phase I study was undertaken to
assess the safety, tolerability, and immunogenicity of mRNA vaccine
monotherapy in patients with resected solid tumors and in combination
with pembrolizumab in patients with unresectable solid tumors. A randomized
phase II clinical study was conducted in patients with resected cutaneous
melanoma.

## Analysis of Patents Related to mRNA Delivery Systems

## Top Countries/Regions with Published Patents Related to mRNA
Delivery Systems
Patent applications in the field of mRNA
delivery systems are mainly from the U.S., China, Germany, and other
countries, as shown in . The U.S. has the largest number of patents (480),
which equals to almost the combined number of patents from other countries.
 

## Top Organizations with Published Patents Related to mRNA Delivery
Systems
As shown in , like that in the field of mRNA therapeutics, global
patent applicants in the field of mRNA delivery systems are primarily
located in the U.S. (6 of top 10), Germany (2 out of 10)), Canada
(1 out of 10), and the U.K. (1 out of 10. In terms of the nature of
organizations, companies are the main source of these patents (9 out
of 10), The top 5 patent applicants are Modena, Translate Bio, CureVac,
Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, and BioNTech with Modena having the largest
number of patents (64).
 

## Key Technology Layout in the Field of mRNA Modification
From the annual trend, the number of global patent applications in
the field of mRNA modification fluctuates, with a significant increase
and peak in 2013, followed by a decline (Supplemental Figure S3). The trend of patent applications was relatively
stable from 2015 to 2018, and after a brief decline in 2019, the number
of patent applications showed a slow growth trend from 2020.
From the distribution of patent research topics, the global field
of mRNA modification focuses on drug delivery types, carrier materials,
nucleic acid modification, mechanism research, and other aspects (Supplemental Figure S4). Among them, in terms
of the type of administration, key concepts include intraperitoneal
injections, pharmaceutical intravenous injections, subcutaneous injections,
etc. With regard to carrier materials, nanoparticles are infused with
cationic lipids, pharmaceutical nanoparticles, pharmaceutical liposomes,
etc. Nucleic acid modifications include oligonucleotide analogs, nucleotide
analogs, peptide nucleic acids, etc. In terms of mechanism research,
key concepts include transcription, growth factors, membrane proteins,
etc.
From the perspective of patent origin countries, the patentees
in the global field of mRNA modification are mainly from the U.S.,
Germany, China, Japan, and France (Supplemental Figure S5). Among them, the U.S. filed the largest number of
patents in the field, Germany and China are in second and third places,
with Japan and France last filing a relatively small numbers of patents.
From the perspective of patent application institutions, global
patent application institutions in the field of mRNA modification
are mainly concentrated in the U.S. and Germany (Supplemental Table S1). Among the top 10 patent-filing organizations,
six are from the U.S. and four are from Germany. From the perspective
of institutional nature, companies are still the main body of patent
application, accounting for about 70% of all applications. The top
five patent filers were Modena, CureVac, BioNTech, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals,
and Translate Bio, which also ranked among the top 5 in the field
of mRNA modification.

## Notable Patents on mRNA Delivery and Modification
RNAs, which are hydrophilic and
negatively charged, cannot diffuse
across cell membranes; thus, they require delivery vectors and/or
chemical modification to reach their targets. mRNAs may also be quickly
hydrolyzed by circulating RNases. As such, when administered systemically,
RNA delivery systems need to protect the RNA against serum nucleases,
bypass the undesirable immune reaction against mRNA per se, avoid
nonspecific interactions with serum proteins, and block renal clearance. Thus, delivery vehicles and chemical modifications
are of the utmost importance for the success of the mRNA therapeutics. summarizes some notable
patents disclosing essential advances in these areas.
 Patent application WO2013086373 by Alnylam Pharmaceuticals,
USA,
relates to novel cationic lipids that can be used in combination with
other lipid components such as a neutral lipid, a sterol such as cholesterol,
and a PEG-lipid conjugate capable of reducing aggregation, to form
lipid nanoparticles with oligonucleotides, to facilitate the cellular
uptake and endosomal escape, and to knockdown target mRNA both in
vitro and in vivo. Exemplary LNP composition comprised 50% cationic
lipid, 10% DSPC, 38.5% cholesterol, and 1.5% PEG-DMG (average PEG
molecular weight of 2000).
Patent application WO2020160397 by
Moderna, USA, provides methods
of producing LNP formulations and the produced LNP formulations thereof.
It reflects the recent efforts toward “bedside” and/or
“point-of-care” formulations, whereby mRNA may be encapsulated
within preformed vesicles that were prepared at an earlier date. This
mode of production offers advantages in the context of clinical supply,
as empty LNP vesicles may be produced and stored separately prior
to recombination with mRNA in a clinical compound setting. Specifically,
bedside formulations may promote increased stability, since mRNA and
empty raw materials can be stored in separately optimized conditions.
Process complexity and cost of goods may be reduced since the LNP
preparation occurs independent of cargo, enabling a platform approach
for multiple mRNA or active agent constructs. The empty LNP plus mRNA
modality may be referred to as “post-hoc”. The concept
of post hoc loading as described in the present invention may enable
control and/or optimization of each step separately. Further, the
post hoc loading may enable mRNA addition at timescales that enable
point-of-care formulation, e.g., months or years following empty LNP
production.
Patent application WO2017176974 by The Ohio State
University, USA,
relates to biodegradable amino-ester lipid nanoparticles for efficient
delivery of RNAs including siRNA, miRNA, and mRNA. Provided are also
compositions including an amino-ester lipid compound of the invention,
a noncationic lipid, a PEG-lipid conjugate, a sterol, and an active
agent such as mRNA, which can be used to correct a mutation in a genome.
For example, mRNAs can be delivered to correct mutations that cause
hemophilia due to mutations in the genes encoding Factor VIII (hemophilia
A) or Factor IX (hemophilia B).
Patent application WO2019092145
by Evox Therapeutics, UK, pertains
to extracellular vesicles (Evs), specifically exosomes, as delivery
vehicles for nucleic acid-based therapeutics. The distinctive properties
of the extracellular vesicles (Evs), and specifically their nanosized
subgroup, the exosomes—their innate stability, low immunogenicity,
biocompatibility, and good biomembrane penetration capacity—allow
them to function as superior natural nanocarriers for efficient drug
delivery and are currently viewed as the rising star in drug delivery. The nucleic acid therapeutics of the present
invention are loaded into Evs using inventive engineering protein
and nucleic acid engineering strategies to enhance loading into Evs
and to facilitate release of the nucleic acid cargo molecules inside
target cells.
Patent application US10808242 by BioNTech, Germany,
is focused
on decreasing immunogenicity of RNA. The provided methods for decreasing
immunogenicity of RNA comprise modifying the nucleotide sequence of
the RNA by reducing the uridine (U) content, by elimination of U nucleosides
from the nucleotide sequence of the RNA and/or a substitution of U
nucleosides by nucleosides other than U in the nucleotide sequence
of the RNA. Using RNA having decreased immunogenicity allows administration
of RNA as a drug to a subject, e.g., in order to obtain expression
of a pharmaceutically active peptide or protein, without eliciting
an immune response which would interfere with therapeutic effectiveness
of the RNA or induce adverse effects in the subject.
Patent
application WO2020069718 by Johannes Gutenberg-University
Mainz and BioNTech, Germany, relates to RNA particles for delivery
of RNA to target tissues after parenteral administration and compositions
comprising such RNA particles. Specifically, polysarcosine–lipid
conjugates are featured as suitable components for the assembly of
RNA nanoparticles. By now, PEG has been the most widely used and gold
standard “stealth” polymer in drug delivery. However,
PEG has been found to exhibit some undesired effects such as lowering
transfection efficiency, accelerated blood clearance induced by anti-PEG
antibodies, and/or complement activation, as well as inducing a specific
immune response. The present invention shows that polysarcosine-lipid
conjugates avoid the disadvantages accompanied by the use of PEG.
Polysarcosine–lipid conjugates enable manufacturing of RNA
nanoparticles with different techniques, resulting in defined surface
properties and controlled size ranges. Manufacturing can be done by
robust processes that are compliant with the requirements for pharmaceutical
manufacturing. The particles can be end-group functionalized with
different moieties to modulate charge or to introduce specific molecular
moieties like ligands.
Patent application US20230043677 by the
Oregon State University,
USA, relates to nanoparticle composition for encapsulating a therapeutic
agent, such as a mRNA, suitable for nebulization and/or delivery of
the nebulized formulation to the lungs by inhalation. The nanoparticles
comprise an ionizable lipid, a cholesterol derivative, a structural
lipid, and a PEG lipid.
Patent application WO2022155598 by Tufts
College and Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, USA, discloses a highly potent nonviral LNP-mediated
CRISPR-Cas9 delivery system for liver or lung delivery of Cas9 mRNA,
and demonstrates its efficacy by targeting the Angptl3 gene. The system is composed of a leading tail-branched bioreducible
lipidoid (306-012B) co-formulated with an optimized mixture of excipient
lipid molecules, and it successfully co-delivers SpCas9 mRNA and a
single guide RNA targeting Angptl3 via a single administration.
The success of mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccines have demonstrated the
effectiveness of two key strategies for developing RNA medications:
the chemical modifications of mRNA uridine to pseudouridine and 5′-capping,
as well as the lipid nanoparticle delivery vectors, paving the way
for further advancement of mRNA therapeutics and vaccines.

## Application of mRNA Therapeutics and Vaccines in Disease Treatment and Prevention

## Analysis of Diseases Claimed in Patents Related to mRNA Therapeutics
and Vaccines among Diseases
Diseases covered in mRNA patents
include 69 primary disease classes, and the top 20 disease classes
are shown in . Proliferative disorders such as neoplasm, are claimed in the largest
number of patents (600) followed by infectious diseases (358), indicating
strong focus on application of mRNA medicines in these two areas.
From the anatomical perspective, digestive system diseases, immune
diseases, respiratory system diseases, nervous system diseases, and
glandular diseases have been studies with relative high frequencies
in patents. Disease classes such as genetic disorders and others are
involved in fewer than 200 patent applications.
 

## Analysis of Proliferative Diseases Disclosed in Patents Related
to mRNA Therapeutics and Vaccines
 shows classes of diseases claimed by patents
related to mRNA therapeutics and vaccine development. The diseases
are arranged hierarchically with the number range of patents involved
indicated by dots in different colors. As shown in the figure, proliferative
diseases such as neoplasm are the most investigated diseases in the
R&D of mRNA therapeutics and vaccines. Within this broader class
of diseases, neoplasm is the most explored for mRNA therapeutics and
vaccines and appeared in 528 patents, indicating a strong interest
in applying this new class of medicines to cancer prevention and treatment.
As shown in and , among the more specific diseases,
digestive system neoplasm, lung neoplasm, urogenital system neoplasm,
and various forms of carcinoma (i.e., epithelial tissue-derived neoplasm)
attracted the most attention, with more than 100 patents involved
in each case.
 

## Patent Distribution among Infectious Diseases
As shown
along the hierarchical tree of infectious diseases in , there are 16
classes and over 60 specific diseases explored by patents on mRNA
therapeutics or vaccines. Among those classes of diseases, viral infection
has been most examined. Bacterial infections and parasitic infections
were also of high concern. From the anatomical system perspective,
respiratory system infection received more attention than other systems.
Most of these patents are related to vaccine development against infectious
diseases.
 

## Analysis of Immune Diseases Disclosed by Patents Related to
mRNA Therapeutics and Vaccines
Among various immune diseases
examined by the mRNA therapeutic and vaccine patents, autoimmune diseases,
followed by hypersensitivity (exaggerated response or over reaction
to an antigen such as in the case of allergy) and immunodeficiency
diseases, received the most attention as shown in .
 

## mRNA Vaccines and
Therapeutics in Clinical Trials

## Action Mechanism of mRNA Vaccines and Therapeutics
When the lipid nanoparticle (LNP) encapsulating mRNAs encoding targeted
protein (antigenic protein) are administered in the body, LNP-mRNAs
are engulfed by endocytosis and mRNAs are released to cytosol through
endosomal escaping mechanism in antigen-presenting cells (no shown
in the figure). Inside the ribosomes,
a cellular machinery, proteins are translated based on the mRNAs.
mRNA-encoded protein therapeutics use synthetic mRNAs that produce
the desired proteins, such as antibodies, cytokines, and enzymes inside
the human body. For vaccines, mimicking the viral infection process,
intracellular produced antigens mainly elicit cell-mediated and antibody-mediated
immunities. ( ) First, the proteasome degrades antigenic proteins into peptide
epitopes, which are transported into the endoplasmic reticulum and
loaded onto major histocompatibility complex class I molecules (MHC
I). The MHC I-peptide epitope complexes are presented on the surface
of cells that bind to the T cell receptor to activate CD8+ T cells
and kill infected or cancer cells (cell-mediated immunity). The antigenic
proteins are transported via the Golgi apparatus and released to the
outside of the cells. The secreted proteins are endocytosed by antigen-presenting
cells, degraded, and loaded onto the MHC II peptide inside endosomes.
The MHC II-peptide epitope complexes are presented on the surface
of cells, which is recognized by CD4+ T cells facilitating
B cells to make antigen-specific antibodies (antibody-mediated immunity). 
 

## mRNA Vaccines in Clinical
Trials
Top companies for mRNA vaccine research include Moderna,
BioNTech,
Pfizer, and CureVac. Examination of diseases investigated by mRNA
vaccines in clinical trials revealed that the vast majority (80%)
of mRNA vaccines were designed for infectious diseases such as coronavirus
infection, influenza, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), rabies,
and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), among others. Other mRNA vaccines
in the pipeline are being researched for various forms of cancers.
 lists
mRNA vaccine candidates for infectious diseases currently in at least
phase II trials. All mRNA vaccine candidates are developed for COVID-19
and encode the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 or its receptor-binding
domain. mRNA-1283 is a potential refrigerator-stable COVID-19 vaccine
comprising mRNA encoding a SARS-CoV-2 spike protein N-terminal fragment
and receptor-binding domain formulated in lipid nanoparticles. It
is considered as the “next generation” vaccine candidate
aiming for a pan-human coronavirus domain vaccine.
 In addition to mRNA vaccines for SARS-CoV-2 infection,
several
mRNA vaccine candidates for infection by other viruses such as RSV,
influenza virus, Zika virus, and cytomegalovirus (CMV) have entered
clinical trials. In January 2023, Moderna announced that RSV vaccine,
mRNA-1345, demonstrated vaccine efficacy of 83.7% at preventing symptoms
in older adults in randomized phase III trial. Moderna plans to submit mRNA-1345 for regulatory approval
in the first half of 2023. 
Two
research groups examined levels of neutralizing antibodies
and differences in CD4+ or CD8+ T cell responses induced by monovalent
and bivalent COVID-19 booster vaccines for protecting against omicron
variants. Neither group observed superior immune responses to bivalent
booster vaccines compared to monovalent vaccines. Most of neutralizing
antibodies elicited by vaccines targeting newer variants still recognize
only the original virus because of “immune imprinting”
in which the body repeats its immune response to the first variant
encountered. , However, fine-tuning the dosage
of booster vaccines might increase their efficacy of protection again
immune-escape COVID-19 variants. 
The success of COVID-19 mRNA vaccine has revealed the application
potential of mRNA platform not only for expansion to other infectious
diseases but also for cancers ( ), especially as therapeutic vaccines The clinical
study of mRNA vaccines has shown good efficacy in the treatment of
melanoma, non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and prostate cancer.
Ref. Autogene cevumeran (RO 7198457, BNT122), jointly developed by
BioNTech and Genentech, is a mRNA-based individualized neoantigen
specific immunotherapy (iNeST). It encodes up to 20 neoepitopes defined
by the patient’s tumor-specific mutations delivered in an RNA-lipoplex
formulation. A combination of intravenously administered autogene
cevumeran combined with anti-PD-L1 immune checkpoint inhibitor atezolizumab
is conducted in patients with locally advanced or metastatic solid
tumors has entered a first-in-human phase I study. It has induced
strong CD4+ and CD8+ T cell immunity against neoantigens. Randomized
phase II studies of autogene cevumeran for patients with melanoma
in combination with pembrolizumab, for individuals with non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) in combination with atezolizumab, and for individuals
with colorectal cancer (CRC) are currently ongoing.
 BNT111 developed with the BioNTech’s FixVac
platform encodes
four tumor-associated antigens (TAAs), the cancer-testis antigen NYESO-1,
the human melanoma-associated antigen A3 (MAGE-A3), tyrosinase, and
putative tyrosine-protein phosphatase (TPTE) and is encapsulated in
an RNA-lipoplex formulation. It has entered phase II clinical trials
to treat advanced melanoma and has gained FDA fast track designation
in 2021. A report from a phase II trial showed that the use of BNT111
alone or in combination with PD-1 antibody can induce tumor antigen-specific
CD4+ and CD8+ T cell immune responses.
CV9201, developed by
CureVac, is an RNA-based therapeutic vaccine
encoding five NSCLC antigens. The first-in-human, multicenter, phase
I/IIa study was conducted in 7 patients with locally advanced NSCLC
and 39 patients with metastatic NSCLC. The result demonstrated that
specific immune responses against at least one antigen were detected
in 63% of patients after treatment and the frequency of activated
IgD+ CD38hi B cells increased by more than 2-fold in 60% of evaluated
patients. 
Moderna’s personalized
mRNA cancer vaccine, mRNA-4157, encodes
34 unique neoantigen genes that may stimulate specific T cell responses.
Phase I trials showed that this vaccine is safe and tolerable in monotherapy
or in combination with pembrolizumab. In December 2022, Moderna and Merck announced that mRNA-4157 in
combination with anti-PD-1 antibody, pembrolizumab reduced the risk
of recurrence or death by 44% in patients with stage III/IV melanoma
compared with pembrolizumab monotherapy based on their randomized
phase IIb trial. 

## mRNA Therapeutics
in Clinical Trials
Top companies for mRNA therapeutic research
include BioNTech, Moderna,
Arcturus Therapeutics, AstraZeneca, and Sanofi. mRNA therapeutics
have a broad range of targeted diseases. Consistent with the patent-disease
analysis data above, mRNA therapeutics are being developed largely
for cancers, followed by metabolic, cardiovascular, infectious, immunological,
and respiratory diseases.
mRNA therapeutic products currently
in clinical trials are examined
in to reveal
a landscape view of the current progress in mRNA therapeutics in the
clinical development pipeline. A select few are also examined in further
detail below to showcase the variety of mRNA therapeutics, their mechanism
of actions, and their targeted disease indications.
 Arcturus Therapeutics developed and is currently evaluating
a mRNA
therapeutic for the treatment of ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC)
deficiency that currently has no FDA-approved treatments. The urea
cycle enzyme OTC helps remove ammonia from liver cells, and a deficiency
leads to high ammonia levels. Utilizing their lipid-mediated nucleic
acid delivery system (LUNAR), Arcturus is currently researching LUNAR-OTC
in a phase II clinical trial (NCT05526066) to evaluate its safety
and tolerability in participants with OTC deficiency. 
AZD8601 is a mRNA therapeutic developed through a
collaboration
between AstraZeneca and Moderna. It encodes for VEGF-A, a paracrine
factor important for new blood vessel formation and progenitor cell
division that contributes to repair and regeneration of the heart.
A phase II clinical trial (NCT03370887) examined the safety, tolerability,
and exploratory efficacy of an intra-myocardium AZD8601 injection
in patients with moderately impaired systolic function undergoing
coronary artery bypass grafting surgery. Trial results revealed no
serious side effects and a rising trend in efficacy for the treatment
group. 
SQZ Biotechnologies, in
collaboration with Roche, has developed
a mRNA-based cell therapeutic called SQZ-eAPC-HPV. SQZ-eAPC-HPV delivers
five mRNAs for HPV16 protein antigens and immune-stimulating proteins,
including CD86 and membrane-bound IL-2 and IL-12, into four different
types of engineered immune cells (monocytes, T-cells, B-cells, and
NK cells). A phase I/II clinical trial (NCT05357898) is currently
recruiting to assess safety and tolerability, antitumor activity,
and immunogenic and pharmacodynamic effects of SQZ-eAPC-HPV as monotherapy
and in combination with pembrolizumab in patients with recurrent,
locally advanced, or metastatic HPV16+ solid tumors.
BioNTech
developed BNT141, a mRNA that encodes secreted IgG antibodies
targeting claudin 18.2, a protein commonly expressed on certain solid
tumors. It is being researched in phase I/II clinical trial number
NCT04683939, looking at its safety and pharmacokinetics in patients
with Claudin 18.2-positive solid tumors. 

## Methods
This study used the CAS Content Collection
as the primary data
source, which aggregates and connects key scientific details disclosed
in more than 50,000 journals and patents from 64 issuing authorities,
as well as many other sources to cover the scope of science from chemistry
and life sciences to engineering, materials science, and agriculture.
A search query that searched for words or phrases in titles, abstracts,
keywords, CAS index terms, and substances was developed to extract
all the scientific journal articles and patents related to mRNA vaccines
and therapeutics. The resulting patents were then intellectually reviewed
to 1) remove false drops and 2) classify each document into one or
more of the following classes: a) vaccines, b) therapeutics, and/or
c) delivery system as well as mRNA modification methods. During this
review process, the likely intriguing/notable/highly
influential patents were also tagged for further analyses.
Once
such reviews were done, the answer set containing over 2,000
patents and more than 9,000 journal articles was further analyzed
for patents and journal articles separately for the categories of
mRNA vaccines and mRNA therapeutics. Specific analyses included the
trends over time; landscape analyses including country distribution,
patent office distribution, flow of patents from applicant home countries
to patent offices, and most influential organizations; and topic cluster
analyses. Most notable patents, diseases involved, and specific mRNA
therapeutics and vaccines in clinical trials were also examined based
on both CAS-licensed data and publicly available information. The
analysis tools include Thomson Data Analyze (DDA), VOSviewer, OmniGraphSketcher,
and ECharts.
At the document level, this report focused more
on patents than
journal articles. A group of patent applications covering the same
or similar technical content is called a patent family. Patents for
the same technological invention may be filed in multiple countries
or regions, and the CAS database maintains these related applications
as one record for indexing; this record is referred to as the basic
patent for most analyses in this report. Individual patent applications
from the same patent family may be applied for in different countries
and/or patent offices. This properly represents the distribution of
patent applications filed by applicants’ countries (i.e., applicants
from different countries or organizations); individual patent applications
from the same family are counted separately for geographic distribution
and patent flow analysis. The country of origin of a patented technology
is determined based on the country location of the patent assignee
(or applicant/inventor). The country analysis in this report is based
on the country location of the patent applicant for determination
of the country of origin of the technology or the actual country owning
the technology.

## Outlook and Perspectives
The remarkable success of
mRNA vaccines against COVID-19 has strongly
motivated interest in mRNA as a way of delivering therapeutic proteins.
However, a variety of challenges remain to be resolved before mRNA
can be verified as a common therapeutic modality with wide-ranging
relevance to both rare and common diseases. The challenges in developing
better mRNA formulations are as follows:
• Enhancing
specific protein expression: Elaboration
of the mRNA cargo to augment the time and amount of protein production
in vivo, including advances in the design of the primary chemical
structure of the mRNA, novel forms of circular and self-amplifying
mRNA, and improved purification strategies. The most critical
advances in mRNA vaccines and therapeutics are due to the discovery
that the insertion of chemically modified nucleosides, specifically
in uridine moieties, can significantly increase protein expression.
So far, over 130 chemical modifications of RNA have been described,
and the properties and effects of multiple other RNA chemical modifications
remain to be explored. , All parts of the mRNA—the
cap, 5′ and 3′ regions, open reading frame, and polyadenylated
tail—can be optimized to augment protein expression. In addition to the amount of protein expression,
a crucial hurdle of mRNA therapeutics for chronic diseases is the
relatively short time period of protein production, which requires
repetitive administrations. Self-amplifying mRNAs (saRNAs) make use
of the self-replication of an RNA alphavirus, which can amplify RNA
transcripts in the cytoplasm. , Circular mRNAs (circRNAs)
provide another approach for extending the duration of protein production.
The circular structure shields circRNA from exonuclease attacks, which
prolongs the RNA lifespan, thus raising the total protein yield. 
• Improving mRNA packaging
and delivery systems,
including ionizable LNPs, peptide-based nanoparticles, cells, and
cell-based extracellular vesicles. The rapid clinical implementation
of mRNA-based vaccines and therapies has become possible due to the
development of efficient delivery vehicles to protect and transport
the highly unstable mRNAs. Various smart delivery systems have been
invented to improve key features such as circulation time in blood
stream, biodistribution, cargo loading, and release.
Lipid-based
nanoparticles are currently the most widely studied
and clinically advanced vehicles for mRNA delivery. , − The most extensively used are cationic and ionizable
LNPs. Although cationic lipid-based nanoparticles
have shown promise in certain therapies, their possible cytotoxicity and relatively short circulation time have somehow impeded their clinical application.
To deal with these issues, a variety of novel lipid–PEG conjugates
and ionizable lipids have been synthesized and tested. Ionizable lipids
remain neutral at physiological pH, which reduces their toxicity and
increases to some degree their circulation half-life. Furthermore, the protonation of ionizable lipids at acidic
pH not only allows successful condensation and encapsulation of mRNAs,
but also allows the escape of mRNAs from the acidic endosomes. , The PEG shell set up by PEGylated lipids considerably prolongs the
circulation half-life of the LNPs and reduces their aggregation; it
also cut back unfavorable interactions with serum proteins. 
Another promising approach uses extracellular
vesicles and especially
their smallest version, the exosomes, as a delivery vehicle. Exosomes are nanosized vesicles enclosed by
a lipid bilayer membrane. They are produced by most eukaryotic cells
and subsequently released in the extracellular space, providing means
of efficient intercellular communication and signaling, including
transport of bioactive molecules such as proteins, nucleic acids,
and metabolites between cells and across biological barriers. , As natural delivery vehicles, exosomes possess multiple benefits,
such as biocompatibility and low immunogenicity. It has been reported
that exosomes originated from various cell types do not provoke toxicity
and are well-tolerated after repetitive dosing. Thus, they can be viewed as promising mRNA delivery systems
in cases in which repeated dosing is required.
Peptides represent
other versatile, biocompatible, and targetable
RNA carriers. From this class, cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) that
can penetrate the cellular membrane and transfer to the cytoplasm
are used most frequently for RNA delivery by forming a variety of
nanocomplexes depending on the formulation settings and the properties
of the used CPPs and RNAs. , 
A further novel
biological alternative to lipid nanoparticle carriers
is the use of cell-based delivery systems, exploiting the cellular
paracrine communication ability to directly deliver proteins synthesized
by mRNA brought into cells ex vivo. It provides certain advantages,
such as biocompatibility, lack of toxicity, and extended half-life
in circulation. Various modifications are feasible by introducing
mRNA into cells such as immune cells, blood cells, and others. − Recently, a bacteria-mediated vehicle for oral mRNA vaccine delivery
has been also developed. This multiple-target vaccine successfully
explored engineered Salmonella-based vector to deliver mRNA vaccine
against Delta and Omicron variants of COVID-19. , 
• Targeting mRNA therapeutics to certain tissues
and engineering of delivery systems with tissue-specific affinity. Fulfilling the potential of mRNA therapeutics requires proper targeting.
Liver is the largest internal organ in human body, performing vital
roles in various physiological activities, thus large amount of disease
targets potentially receptive to mRNA therapies reside within the
liver hepatocytes. A promising liver-targeted N-acetylgalactosamine
(GalNAc) ligand has been assessed in various trials for enhancing
the cellular uptake and tissue specific delivery of mRNAs. GalNAc-based delivery relies on the ability
of the hepatocytes to express the asialoglycoprotein receptor, a high-capacity,
rapidly internalizing receptor that binds glycoproteins via receptor-mediated
endocytosis. In recent years, encouraging progress has been made in
the field of GalNAc conjugates, underscoring the value of targeting
moieties. , The conjugation of GalNAc moieties to oligonucleotides
represents a promising and safe approach for liver-targeted delivery
of nucleic acid therapeutics.
• Selective delivery
of mRNA therapeutics to organs
other than liver requires specifically developed packaging and delivery
systems with appropriate affinity. The recent efforts on
developing better delivery systems and/or administration routes for
this purpose have produced some exciting results. For example, Daniel
Siegwart’s team has recently developed a method of Selective
ORgan Targeting (SORT) that uses various engineered lipid nanoparticles
to selectively deliver mRNA to extrahepatic organs. Qiaobing Xu’s team has identified an endogenously
lymph node-directing lipid nanoparticle system. Kathryn A. Whitehead’s team devised a strategy of
delivering cationic helper lipid-containing lipid nanoparticles by
intraperitoneal administration to deliver mRNA to pancreas, especially
the insulin-producing cells. Gaurav Sahay’s
lab has developed a LNP system with increased polyethylene glycol
(PEG) and inclusion of a cholesterol analog, β-sitolsterol to
optimize the delivery of the nebulized, LNP-based mRNA for fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein as potential inhalable
LNP-based mRNA therapies. 
• Strategies for allowing repeated dosing for the
treatment of chronic conditions. The development of mRNA
therapeutics raises further challenges as compared to those with mRNA
vaccines. While immunization requires only a small amount of protein
production, as the immune system will amplify the antigenic signal,
mRNA therapeutics require much higher level of protein to reach a
therapeutic level. The tissue bioavailability, half-life in circulation,
and carrier efficiency to deliver to the targeted tissue remain challenging.
Another major difficulty is the repeated dosing, which is typically
required in the treatment of chronic diseases and which activates
innate immunity in the long run, with a resultant reduction of therapeutic
protein expression. Regardless of these
hurdles, however, a variety of emerging technologies are currently
under development with the effort to deal with them. , − 
Despite these challenges, impressive progress
has been made in
the research and development of mRNA therapeutics and vaccines. Most
recently, Luis A. Rojas et al. have reported the promising result
of a Phase 1 clinical trial in which personalized uridine mRNA neoantigen
vaccines induced substantial T cell activity in postsurgery patients
with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. The remarkable success of the mRNA vaccines for COVID-19, along
with recent expansion of this technology into treatment of most lethal
cancers, has validated the great promise of this new class of medications
and significantly enhanced the chance to witness their extensive applications
in the near future.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsptsci.3c00047.SI-1, trend over time for patents related to mRNA therapeutics;
SI-2, trend over time for patents related to mRNA vaccines; SI-3,
trend over time for patents on mRNA delivery systems; SI-4, trend
over time for patents related to mRNA modification; SI-5, analysis
of research topics in mRNA therapeutics patents; SI-6, analysis of
research topics in mRNA vaccine patents; SI-7, analysis of research
topics in patents related to mRNA modification; and SI-8, top countries
and organizations in the field of mRNA modification (PDF)

## Supplementary Material
pt3c00047_si_001.pdf

## Author Contributions
† D.L. and C.L. contributed equally to this paper.
The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
The authors sincerely appreciate the CAS
Data, Analytics &
Insights team for their assistance in data extraction. The authors
want to thank Caroline Ma and Sunny Yu for their effort in facilitating
collaboration and Dharmini Patel for project management. The authors
are grateful to the leadership team from their two organizations:
Xiwen Liu, Manuel Guzman, Gilles Georges, Michael Dennis, Craig Stephens,
and Dawn Riedel. We are also grateful to the consulting experts for
their guidance during the research process. The Chinese National Science
Library (NSL) work was funded by the Youth Innovation Promotion Association
for Chinese Academy of Science (No. 2023182), NSTL “Research
on Key Technologies of mRNA Vaccine R&D Pipeline” (E11Z0416),
and Chinese Academy of Sciences Literature and Information Capacity
Building Project in 2022 (E2290436).