4428acsbmcauACS Bio & Med Chem AuACS Bio Med Chem AuAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC1012532610125326101253263710181210.1021/acsbiomedchemau.2c00073Bioinspired Lipid Nanocarriers for RNA Delivery
GolubovicAlex TsaiShannon LiBowen †Department
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3M2, Canada‡Institute
of Biomedical Engineering, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G9, Canada*Email: bw.li@utoronto.ca.
161202332114114–1362542023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 RNA therapy is a
disruptive technology comprising a rapidly expanding
category of drugs. Further translation of RNA therapies to the clinic
will improve the treatment of many diseases and help enable personalized
medicine. However, in vivo delivery of RNA remains challenging due
to the lack of appropriate delivery tools. Current state-of-the-art
carriers such as ionizable lipid nanoparticles still face significant
challenges, including frequent localization to clearance-associated
organs and limited (1–2%) endosomal escape. Thus, delivery
vehicles must be improved to further unlock the full potential of
RNA therapeutics. An emerging strategy is to modify existing or new
lipid nanocarriers by incorporating bioinspired design principles.
This method generally aims to improve tissue targeting, cellular uptake,
and endosomal escape, addressing some of the critical issues facing
the field. In this review, we introduce the different strategies for
creating bioinspired lipid-based RNA carriers and discuss the potential
implications of each strategy based on reported findings. These strategies
include incorporating naturally derived lipids into existing nanocarriers
and mimicking bioderived molecules, viruses, and exosomes. We evaluate
each strategy based on the critical factors required for delivery
vehicles to succeed. Finally, we point to areas of research that should
be furthered to enable the more successful rational design of lipid
nanocarriers for RNA delivery.
Keywords: lipid nanoparticles, liposomes, RNA delivery, bioinspired, natural lipids, virus-inspired, exosome-inspired

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Nov 5; Accepted 2022 Dec 21; Revised 2022 Dec 20; Collection date 2023 Apr 19.

1.0.

## Introduction
RNA therapeutics leverage RNA-based molecules to regulate gene
expression or produce therapeutic proteins to treat or prevent various
diseases, including cancer, infectious diseases, immune diseases,
and genetic diseases. , This field has gained more popularity
in recent years due to the rapid production and success of the coronavirus
2019 (COVID-19) mRNA-based vaccines; − however, research has
been focused in this area for decades, with several other clinically
approved RNA therapies currently on the market. , − With advantages including customizability, ease of production, , and safety, RNA therapeutics have the potential to address several
unmet medical needs in the treatment of numerous diseases.
For
RNA therapies to function therapeutically, they must reach
the cytosol of target cells. This can be challenging as RNA is a large,
negatively charged, hydrophilic molecule that cannot pass through
the cell membrane independently. Furthermore,
RNA lacks stability and is highly susceptible to degradation via exonucleases
found within organisms. Hence, appropriate
nonviral nanoparticles are required to stabilize, protect, and deliver
RNA to the cytosol, among which ionizable lipid nanoparticles (LNPs)
are the most clinically viable. The classical
formulation of LNPs consists of four components: ionizable lipids,
cholesterol, helper lipids, and PEGylated lipids. In 2018, LNPs enabled the first FDA approval of a small-interfering
RNA (siRNA) drug called Onpattro; two
years later, two COVID-19 vaccines (Comirnaty, Spikevax) − , based on LNPs containing mRNA
also arrived at the clinic, helping prevent severe infection and saving
lives during the COVID-19 pandemic. , Notably, the
success of LNPs highly depends on the ionizable lipid component: once
LNPs are internalized by cells via endocytosis, acidification of the
endosomal compartment leads to protonation of the ionizable lipid. , This destabilizes the LNP and endosomal membrane, ultimately enabling
the RNA payload to escape from the endosome and enter the cytosol. , Although current lipid-based nanocarriers have seen some success
in translating RNA from bench to bedside, there is still a vast area
for improvement in extra-hepatic organ targeting, overcoming biological barriers, and preventing unwanted immune stimulation. To maximize the safety and efficacy of RNA therapy, new RNA delivery
systems are highly desired.
Bioinspired lipid nanocarriers,
which combine biological elements
with traditional lipid nanocarriers to mimic processes exhibited
by biological systems, present a promising
opportunity to enable efficient organ-specific RNA delivery while
reducing potential toxicity. In this
review, we outline and discuss state-of-the-art research on developing
bioinspired lipid-based nanocarriers for applications of RNA therapeutics.
Nanocarriers inspired by natural materials, endogenous molecules,
viruses, and exosomes are specifically discussed.

2.0.

## Introduction to RNA Therapeutics
RNA is a biomolecule involved
in the flow of genetic information
within an organism. In cells, DNA acts as a template that is transcribed
into RNA. A portion of this RNA falls
under the category of coding RNA, which is translated into proteins
essential for survival. , In addition, some noncoding
RNAs (ncRNAs) are never translated into a protein. The majority of ncRNAs function as regulatory molecules,
controlling elements of gene expression and protein function. − Several genetic and common chronic diseases are linked to mutations
in the noncoding and regulatory genomic regions of genes, leading
to the dysregulation of noncoding or coding RNAs that are critical
for protein synthesis and function. For
example, microRNA (miRNA) deregulation is associated with every cancer
that has been studied and plays a significant role in metastasis. − Therefore, the ability to deliver synthetic RNA to cells is a promising
therapeutic option to treat and prevent numerous diseases, including
certain cancers, infectious diseases, immune diseases, and Mendelian
disorders. 
RNA therapy involves
treating or preventing diseases using RNA-based
molecules that can manipulate gene expression or produce therapeutic
proteins. , Compared to traditional treatment methods,
RNA therapies offer several advantages. Most conventional treatment
strategies rely on small molecules that inhibit or alter protein function
by binding to their active sites. A caveat
of this method is that only 22% of these proteins can be targeted
with small molecule drugs, which limits the types of diseases that
can be treated and creates “undruggable targets”. , RNA therapeutics present a solution to this problem as RNA sequences
can be designed to target almost any genetic component within a cell. Another critical advantage of RNA therapy is
its fast and cost-effective production compared to small molecules
or recombinant proteins. , Once an RNA chemical
structure and delivery method are established, RNA sequences can be
designed and altered for different applications. This was recently
exemplified through the rapid development of mRNA-based vaccines in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic. − The ability to adjust
RNA sequences for different targets also presents opportunities for
developing vaccines that adapt to evolving pathogens and personalized
treatments for rare diseases. RNA is also
advantageous for its safety; most notably, RNA is noninfectious, does
not integrate into the genome, and is degraded by normal cellular
processes after performing its therapeutic task. Despite the several advantages of RNA therapeutics, significant
challenges include effectively delivering the RNA to the cytoplasm
of target cells and protecting it from exonuclease-mediated degradation. Both obstacles can be addressed by encapsulating
RNA in a biocompatible nanocarrier. 
2.1.

## Types of RNA Therapeutics
The applications
of RNA therapies depend on if the therapeutic RNA is noncoding or
protein-coding. ncRNA therapies regulate gene expression and encompass
a broad category of RNAs, including short antisense oligonucleotides,
long ncRNA, circular RNA, tRNA, siRNA, miRNA, and several others.
The different types of therapeutic noncoding RNA have been extensively
reviewed. , Among ncRNAs, siRNA and miRNA have been
widely studied for their use in therapeutics, with several siRNA therapies
being approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and miRNA
therapies in clinical development. Coding
RNA therapies often deliver mRNA to the cytoplasm to produce proteins. The applications of protein-coding RNA therapies
are highly diverse, including protein replacement therapies, vaccines
for infectious diseases, cancer immunotherapy, and gene editing. The following section provides a background on
siRNA, miRNA, and mRNA, which are three therapeutically relevant RNA
payloads.
2.1.1.

## Small Interfering RNA (siRNA)
siRNA
is a short, synthetic, double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) duplex that inhibits
gene expression by promoting mRNA degradation. , − Traditionally, the siRNA duplex contains two 21–23
nucleotide strands known as the guide and passenger strand, each with
a two-nucleotide overhang at the 3′-end. , , siRNA therapeutics leverage the endogenous
RNA interference (RNAi) pathway to regulate the expression of target
mRNAs, which involves interactions with RNA-induced silencing complexes
(RISCs) that contain the argonaute 2 (Ago2) protein. , Once siRNA is delivered to the cytoplasm of cells, it is incorporated
into a RISC that retains the siRNA guide strand and discards the complementary
passenger strand. , The guide strand then directs
the RISC to the target mRNA via complementary base pairing. After the RISC identifies the target mRNA, the
Ago2 protein cleaves the target and induces mRNA degradation. , , Through this mechanism, siRNA
triggers efficient and specific gene silencing for an individual target. Currently, there are four siRNA-based therapeutics
approved by the FDA: Patisiran, Givosiran, Lumasiran, and Inclisiran.
In 2018, Patisiran, designed for treating hereditary transthyretin-mediated
(hATTR) amyloidosis, became the first FDA-approved siRNA-based drug. hATTR amyloidosis is caused by mutations in the
gene encoding for transthyretin (TTR), which results in a misfolded
protein that causes amyloid deposits in the peripheral nerves, heart,
kidney, and gastrointestinal tract. Patisiran
targets TTR mRNA to inhibit its production and reduce the accumulation
of amyloid deposits. Patisiran is formulated
in an LNP optimized to ensure delivery to the liver, which is the primary location of circulating TTR. Givosiran is also designed to target the liver
but uses siRNA conjugated to a trivalent N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNac)
ligand instead of a nanocarrier. This
therapy is used to treat hepatic porphyria: a rare disease caused
by high plasma levels of aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and porphobilinogen
(PBG). , Next, Lumasiran treats primary hyperoxaluria
type 1 (PH1), a rare genetic disease linked to kidney problems due
to the overproduction of oxalate in the liver. Lastly, in 2021, Inclisiran was approved by the FDA to treat primary
hypercholesterolemia. It lowers cholesterol
levels in the bloodstream by targeting mRNA encoding for proprotein
convertase subtilisin/Kexin type 9 (PCSK9). Similar to givosiran, this drug uses a GalNac conjugate to target
hepatocytes. Based on the existing FDA-approved
siRNA therapeutics, the field is limited to therapeutics that target
liver diseases. For siRNA therapeutics to become more diverse in their
applications, a key challenge is to develop novel nanocarriers that
can target different organs in the body. Designing new, bioinspired
nanocarriers may be a solution to this problem.

2.1.2.

## MicroRNA (miRNA)
miRNA is similar
to siRNA in structure, often consisting of a 19–25 nucleotide
RNA duplex with two-nucleotide overhangs on the 3′ end. Like siRNA, miRNA also interacts with RISC to
cleave a target mRNA through RNAi. However,
miRNA differs in function by regulating the expression of several
mRNA targets by blocking translation or promoting degradation. The mechanism of target recognition for miRNA
is more complex than siRNA, which binds by being entirely complementary
to its target. In fact, miRNA relies on imperfect base pairing, meaning
it only needs to be partially complementary to its target mRNA. This distinction in target recognition enables
miRNA to regulate several mRNAs. miRNA therapeutics are often classified
as miRNA mimics (dsRNA molecules that mimic endogenous miRNAs) and
miRNA inhibitors (single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) oligos that interfere
with miRNA). , Currently, no miRNA therapeutics
are approved by the FDA; however, several companies are working on
creating miRNA therapeutics, and many candidates are in clinical trials. , 
Detailed overviews of miRNA-based therapeutics currently in
clinical trials have previously been established. , The
following highlights some examples. First, miRagen Therapeutics is
developing multiple miRNA therapeutics with applications including
the treatment of blood cancers, keloids, and pathologic fibrosis,
as well as strategies to accelerate tissue repair. For example, MRG-229 mimics a miRNA called miR-29 to treat
pathologic fibrosis. , miR-29 plays a role in the pathogenesis
of pulmonary fibrosis and is significantly reduced in fibrotic lungs,
making it a candidate for treating this disease. In addition, InteRNA Technologies has developed a mimic
for tumor suppressor miRNA called INT-1B3, which regulates the immunosuppressive
tumor microenvironment for treating solid cancers. INT-1B3 is based on miR-193a-3p: a miRNA associated with
cancer, metastasis, and therapy resistance when downregulated. Furthermore, SantarisPharma and Regulus Therapeutics
are developing antiviral therapies for the Hepatitis C virus (HCV)
known as Miravirsen and Rg-101, respectively. Both treatments are inhibitors for miR-122, as this miRNA is essential
for HCV replication. Despite the vast
number of companies working toward developing miRNA therapeutics,
none have been approved for clinical use. A key reason for this is
miRNA’s ability to regulate multiple genes. This creates undesirable off-target effects, which can
lead to toxicity or unwanted adverse effects. While this problem is challenging to eliminate, establishing drug
delivery systems that enable miRNA to target specific organs will
be critical to improving the safety and clinical translation of these
therapeutics.

2.1.3.

## Messenger RNA (mRNA)
mRNA is an
ssRNA molecule transcribed from DNA and eventually translated into
a functional protein. Therapeutic mRNA
is synthesized through in vitro transcription and contains key functional
regions: the 5′ cap, the 3′ poly(A) tail, the open reading
frame (ORF), and the untranslated regions (UTRs). , The
5′ cap is critical for ribosomes to recognize the mRNA sequence
for protein synthesis, while the 3′ poly(A) tail has vital
roles in interactions with translation initiation factors. The ORF encodes the protein of interest, beginning
with a start codon and ending with a stop codon. The UTRs surround the ORF and do not encode proteins but
are essential to regulate mRNA’s translation efficiency and
stability. Initially, one of the major
concerns of using mRNA in therapeutics was its high immunogenicity,
as its longer length makes it more likely to induce immune responses
when delivered for therapeutic purposes; however, this can be mitigated
by modifying mRNA with pseudouridine. , , Another challenge is mRNA stability, as it is susceptible
to degradation by endogenous exonucleases, but this can be mitigated
by encapsulating the mRNA in a nanocarrier.
mRNA therapeutics
can be separated into two primary categories. First, mRNA can be used
to develop protein-replacement therapies, where the mRNA is used to
replace or supplement endogenous proteins. , The
application of mRNA as a protein-replacement strategy has been explored
for several diseases, including (but not limited to) cardiac, lung,
hematologic, metabolic, orthopedic, and neurogenic diseases, as well
as cancer. Most mRNA protein replacement
therapies are in preclinical development, with only drugs encoding
for a vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) reaching clinical trials. For example, the clinical trial involving VEGF
mRNA (sponsored by AstraZeneca) is based on the drug AZD8601. This
drug focuses on enhancing angiogenesis in patients with coronary artery
diseases undergoing surgical revascularization. AZD8601 contains naked mRNA and is injected directly into
the epicardium in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting
surgery. Second, mRNA therapeutics are
used in developing prophylactic vaccines for infectious diseases and
therapeutic vaccines to fight cancer. In
this application, mRNA encodes for antigens and adjuvants, enabling
the immune system to protect against or oppose a particular disease. For example, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech developed mRNA-based vaccines protecting
against disease infection. − Both formulations adopt LNPs encapsulating
the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) spike
protein. While protein replacement therapy
and vaccination are the primary applications of mRNA therapeutics,
several other areas are being researched, including cell therapy and
gene editing. 
Despite the diverse
applications of mRNA therapeutics, few drugs
are approved for clinical use. As with siRNA and miRNA, significant
limitations arise based on the ability to successfully deliver the
payload to the correct target cell while protecting the payload and
facilitating endosomal escape in the cytoplasm of cells. Next-generation
nanocarriers, including bioinspired nanoparticles (NPs), may be critical
in accelerating the development of RNA therapeutics to overcome delivery
challenges.

3.0.

## Delivery Challenges
For RNA to have a therapeutic benefit when delivered, it must reach
the cytosol of target cells to regulate gene expression or produce
a functional protein. This is challenging without a delivery vehicle
as naked RNA is a large, negatively charged, and hydrophilic macromolecule. This results in electrostatic repulsion between
RNA and the anionic cell membrane and prevents diffusion into the
cell. Accordingly, the cellular uptake
rate of naked mRNA is less than 1 in 10,000 molecules. The existence of ribonucleases (RNases) is another
reason administering naked RNA is an inefficient therapy, as these
enzymes rapidly degrade RNA and are abundant in blood and tissues. 
Due to these challenges, NPs are commonly
used as delivery vehicles
to stabilize, protect, and deliver RNA into the cytosol. However,
even after encapsulating RNA in an NP, many internal barriers work
to prevent successful delivery. When intravenously (IV) injected or
absorbed into the bloodstream, NPs must evade phagocytosis by immune
cells and binding to serum proteins. , Renal clearance
by glomerular filtration must also be avoided to prolong the circulation
of the NPs. To reach the target tissue,
delivery vehicles must cross vascular endothelial cells and diffuse
through the dense ECM to the desired cells. The successful traverse
of the vascular endothelium by NPs depends on their size and the organ-specific
continuity of the endothelium. , A continuous endothelium
is characterized by endothelial cells coupled by tight junctions and
anchored to a continuous basal membrane; this is mainly found in the
brain, skin, lungs, heart, and muscles. The presence of transcellular
pores or a poorly structured basal membrane results in endothelium
discontinuity. Some organs, such as the liver, are easier to penetrate
due to their more discontinued endothelium, characterized by the presence
of 50–200-nm-sized pores. − Commonly adsorbed proteins also
preferentially ferry nanocarriers to the liver. Upon successfully reaching target cells, NPs enter primarily
through endocytosis and must escape the endosome before lysosome formation
and subsequent enzymatic degradation can occur. , Endosomal escape may be the most significant bottleneck in the delivery
of therapeutics to the cytosol, as it was previously reported that
even the most advanced delivery vehicles only escape the endosome
1–2% of the time. 
To unlock
the full potential of RNA therapeutics, delivery vehicles
should be able to deposit RNA in various target organs with minimal
off-target effects. RNA therapeutics can potentially treat many diseases
across various organs, including the brain, heart, and eyes. However, NPs can only significantly access specific
organs when administered systemically. The parenchyma of organs/tissues
with discontinuous capillaries, such as the liver, spleen, and bone
marrow, is readily accessed by NPs. NPs can also infiltrate inflamed
tissues such as solid tumors; however, organs/tissues with continuous
capillaries effectively resist penetration. Additionally, the lungs and lymph nodes have been shown to contain
moderate quantities of NPs following systemic administration depending
on the NP chemistry. , Notably, inhalation and subcutaneous
routes of administration can boost NP levels in the lungs and lymph
nodes, respectively, compared to systemic routes. − Overall, there exists a need
for NPs to access organs with continuous capillaries and target specific
cells for cancer treatment, gene editing, immunotherapy, or protein
replacement therapy.
Based on the mechanisms and delivery barriers
of RNA therapy, a
nanocarrier should possess key traits to be considered a successful
delivery vehicle. First, the carrier should efficiently encapsulate
RNA during synthesis to yield a high loading level and minimize material
waste, ultimately increasing therapeutic efficacy and lowering cost. , Nontoxicity, biocompatibility, and biodegradability are essential
for nanocarriers, as they can minimize adverse reactions in the human
body and increase tolerability to chronic dosing. Moreover, upon serving
its therapeutic purpose, a carrier should have a safe and nontoxic
degradation and clearance pathway in the body. Additionally, compatible
immunogenicity is a crucial property for RNA delivery vehicles, and
immunogenicity levels should vary based on the application. High immunogenicity
inducing dangerous inflammatory responses should be avoided entirely,
while some immunogenicity may be desired for applications such as
mRNA vaccines to stimulate proper immune memory. Furthermore, a nanocarrier should be stable and avoid premature
degradation in the bloodstream. Two vital functional requirements
are high cell transfection efficiency and selective targeting of the
desired organ/tissue with minimal off-target effects. A high transfection
efficiency indicates the ability to escape the endosome and deliver
RNA into the cytosol, one of the significant challenges of RNA delivery.
Finally, focusing on translatability, an RNA carrier should have a
scalable and economically feasible synthesis process that can be scaled
up for clinical trials and commercial use.

4.0.

## Overview
of Conventional Lipid Nanocarriers
for RNA Delivery
There are many nanocarriers for RNA delivery
that range in technological
maturity. These carriers include polymeric, , , lipid-polymeric, , inorganic, exosome, − and cell-based systems, which have been reviewed elsewhere. However, lipid-based
materials have achieved the most success in the clinic, with the most
popular conventional lipid nanocarriers for RNA delivery being liposomes
and LNPs. Both consist of an assortment of several lipids arranged
into a membrane-core structure. , Liposomes are formed
from the self-assembly of amphiphilic phospholipids into biocompatible
bilayer vesicles. Cholesterol and PEG-lipids
can be added to the bilayer to increase rigidity and prolong circulation
in vivo. Although they can range from
20 to 1000 nm in diameter, liposomes smaller than 100 nm are typically
most successful at RNA delivery due to their ability to escape phagocytosis. , Considered the original lipid-based carrier, liposomes are used
in several FDA-approved commercial therapies such as liposomal doxorubicin,
Vyxeos, and Lipoplatin. However, no FDA-approved
therapies utilize liposomes to deliver RNA. , − The critical advantages of liposomes are that they
can protect drugs from the external environment, reach target tissues,
and release their cargo in a controlled manner. The nanocarriers can carry hydrophobic and hydrophilic
therapeutics in their lipid membrane and aqueous core. Long RNA payloads also have ample space inside
the large core of liposomes, where they are protected from the external
environment until delivery into cells.
In addition to their
biocompatibility and efficient encapsulation
of RNA, liposomes are easily prepared and modified. Liposomal synthesis techniques include thin-film hydration,
solvent injection, and reverse phase evaporation, with emerging methods
including freeze-drying and microfluidics. These techniques aim to achieve a narrow polydispersity index (PDI)
and effective drug encapsulation. A major
drawback specific to liposomes is that organic solvents are frequently
used for their synthesis, which can present barriers when scaling
up production. , 
LNPs are currently the
most effective lipid carriers for mRNA delivery
and consist of four major components: ionizable lipids, helper lipids,
cholesterol, and PEG-lipids. The ionizable
lipids are typically amino lipids that are neutral at pH 7 but become
positively charged in the acidic endosomal environment (∼ pH
5–6.5), which helps to destabilize the endosomal membrane and
facilitate endosomal escape. , The positively charged
lipids bind to the negatively charged lipids on the endosomal membrane,
disrupting the endosomal membrane structure to instead form a nonbilayer,
hexagonal (HII) arrangement. This HII structure
is believed to promote membrane fusion, endosomal escape of the LNP,
and release of the RNA into the cytosol. Based on their geometry, structural helper lipids generally improve
the endosomal escape (by favoring the HII phase) or bilayer
stability of LNPs. Cholesterol and PEG
lipids serve a similar function as they do in liposomes. The four lipid types combine to form a lipid
monolayer, yielding a spherical lipid vesicle with a hydrophobic core.
When LNPs are mixed with RNA, ionizable lipids in the core of the
particle form shells around the nucleic acids. , The most successful LNPs follow a specific framework: diameter between
80 and 100 nm, neutral zeta potential, PDI less than 0.2, and encapsulation
efficiency of at least 80%. − For example, the DLin-MC3-DMA LNP used in Onpattro (patisiran) was
reported to have a diameter of less than 100 nm and neutral zeta potential. 
Several LNPs have been approved for commercial
use in therapeutics
such as Onpattro and, most notably, Pfizer/BioNTech’s BNT162b2
and Moderna’s mRNA-1273 vaccines for COVID-19. Moreover, LNPs delivering RNA are currently well-represented
in clinical trials, given that they are the most advanced delivery
vehicle used for the promising application of mRNA therapeutics. , Originally, methods such as detergent dialysis and ethanol-loading
were used to form LNPs. However, novel
microfluidic architectures (T-junctions, staggered herringbone micromixers,
bifurcating mixers) have helped establish rapid microfluidic mixing
as the preferred method to form LNPs loaded with RNA. 
As RNA carriers, LNPs possess numerous advantages.
When the right
ionizable lipid chemistry is incorporated (e.g., no cations in the
headgroup, biodegradable bonds present in tails), LNPs are nontoxic
and biodegradable carriers that protect RNA from the external environment. , Additionally, stable and potent LNPs achieving RNA encapsulation
efficiencies greater than 95% are frequently reported using microfluidic
techniques. , , These rapid-mixing microfluidic techniques also enable the high
throughput synthesis of smaller and more homogeneous LNPs while requiring
less labor. , Moreover, as mentioned, LNPs
allow the endosomal escape of RNA cargos via pH-responsive ionization
and efficiently shuttle them into the cytosol. Finally, differential
LNP chemistries can lead to selective targeting of the liver, spleen,
or lungs when LNPs are administered systemically in mice. , When specifically comparing them to liposomes, LNPs stand out due
to a few key factors. LNPs form micellar structures in their core
to further protect RNA, are more stable and rigid, and can be synthesized
more homogeneously at a commercial scale. 
Despite the strengths and success of lipid-based carriers
for RNA
delivery, there is still much room for improvement. First, lipid-based
carriers struggle to target a variety of organs and generally accumulate
in clearance-associated organs such as the liver. One primary reason
is that they strongly interact with Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) upon administration,
leading to low-density lipoprotein receptor-mediated cellular uptake
to hepatocytes. Thus, there exists a
need for lipid nanocarriers to reach new organ targets, such as the
brain and bone marrow, to enable specific and nontoxic RNA therapies
further. − Although capable of potent RNA delivery, the best lipid nanocarriers
still only escape the endosome about 1–2% of the time. Enhancing the cellular uptake and endosomal
escape of nanocarriers is crucial for improving the effectiveness
of RNA therapies, decreasing dosages, and minimizing material waste. Furthermore, an assortment of challenges stemming
from using PEG-lipids can be classified as the “PEG dilemma.”
PEGylation is used to prolong the circulation of NPs in vivo and help
them reach their target destination to perform their intended function. , However, there are several potential drawbacks to using PEG-lipids,
which may stem from developing anti-PEG antibodies in humans after
repeated exposure to PEG. , First, it has been
observed that PEGylated liposomes can lose their circulating properties
and be rapidly cleared from the blood after repeated doses. Additionally, complement activation-related
pseudoallergy can be triggered by PEGylated lipid-based particles
due to adverse innate immune responses. − The presence of PEG in cosmetics, cleaning products, and therapeutics
contributes to the increase in anti-PEG antibodies being developed
in humans. Given that anti-PEG antibodies can stunt the efficacy of
PEGylated lipid-based carriers, there is a need for solutions to the
“PEG dilemma”. 
To
help address the targeting limitations of LNPs, Selective Organ
Targeting (SORT) was recently developed to deliver LNPs to extrahepatic
tissues such as the lung and spleen. However,
SORT LNPs rely on using either toxic cationic lipids for lung targeting,
which severely limit the dosage and narrow the therapeutic window,
or anionic lipids for spleen targeting, which to some extent attenuate
the RNA transfection potency. Moreover,
only two extra-hepatic tissues, the lung, and spleen, can be targeted
by this approach. Hence, there is a need
to develop nontoxic and more potent LNPs for the precise and effective
delivery of RNA therapeutics across a broader range of different target
tissues. Overall, while conventional nanocarriers have demonstrated
success in the clinic, there is still ample room for improvement in
their safety, efficacy, and extra-hepatic organ targeting ability.

5.0.

## Bioinspired Lipid-Based Nanocarriers
Bioinspired lipid-based
nanocarriers have been investigated to
address the challenges associated with lipid nanocarrier RNA delivery.
Indeed, traditional lipid nanocarriers are already bioinspired to
a certain extent. Their lipid membranes mimic the membranes observed
in biology and incorporate naturally occurring lipids such as phospholipids
and cholesterol. However, further mimicking biology through increased
natural lipid incorporation or replicating endogenous molecule/virus
structures has been explored to help address the current challenges
of lipid-based RNA delivery. The potential benefits of this method
are widespread, ranging from increasing circulation time to improving
organ selectivity through targeting endogenous receptor pathways.
Crucially, bioinspired nanocarriers aim to improve performance while
maintaining the advantages of conventional delivery systems. The current
research on lipid nanocarriers that take inspiration from natural
materials, endogenous molecules, viruses, and exosomes is reviewed
in the following section. An overview of the bioinspired strategies
covered in this review is provided in .
 5.1.

## Substituting LNP Components with Natural Lipids
One
of the most common methods of producing bioinspired lipid-based
NPs is to incorporate naturally derived lipids into existing synthetic
LNPs. This strategy typically aims to improve the circulation time
of LNPs, increase their cellular uptake, and improve their endosomal
escape. This method generally entails substituting one of the four
major lipid types in LNPs with a naturally occurring analog.
Inspired by endogenous lipoproteins, Dong et al. screened several
lipopeptides for their effectiveness as ionizable lipids in an LNP
formulation containing distearoylphosphatidylcholine (DSPC), cholesterol,
and PEG-DMG (a commonly used PEG-lipid). A schematic of the lipopeptide nanoparticles is shown in A. The group found
that lysine-derived lipopeptides were most effective at delivering
FVII-silencing siRNA and identified a lead material, cKK-E12, which
incorporated a lipopeptide with a dilysine-derived diketopiperazine
core and four amino alcohol-based lipid tails. cKK-E12 effectively
targeted hepatocytes in vivo and achieved a remarkably low efficacious
dose at the time (ED50–0.002 mg/kg in mice). More recently, Fenton et al. formulated a group of alkenyl
amino alcohol (AAA) ionizable lipids, a moiety found in sphingosine
and other bioactive molecules, with cholesterol, 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphoethanolamine (DOPE), and C14-PEG-2000
to form LNPs. A schematic of the LNPs
is depicted in . The group compared the performance of the LNPs with cKK-E12 when
delivering mRNA encoding for human erythropoietin (EPO) in vivo to
C57BL/6 mice. Their most potent LNP, OF-02, increased EPO production
2-fold compared to cKK-E12 across a broad linear dose–response
window, establishing itself as the most potent LNP at the time in
2016. Additionally, OF-02 had nearly identical biodistribution to
cKK-E12 and limited batch-to-batch variability, indicating its scale-up
potential. 
 Attempting to solve the
“PEG dilemma,” Nogueira et
al. replaced PEG-DMG with polysarcosinated lipids in an LNP formulation,
as illustrated in B. Polysarcosine (pSar) is a
polypeptoid composed of repeating units of the endogenous amino acid
sarcosine (N-methylated glycine). pSar has been found
to exhibit stealth-like properties similar to PEG and have low immunogenicity. − The researchers found that pSar and PEG-DMG LNPs delivering mRNA
encoding for Firefly luciferase (Fluc) had comparable performance
when administered intravenously to Balb/C mice. However, pSar LNPs
promoted longer EPO secretion in mice with significant EPO levels
still present at 48h postadministration. Another finding of the study
was that pSar nanocarriers induced lower proinflammatory cytokine
secretion and reduced complement activation in an in vitro human whole
blood model compared to PEGylated LNPs. Nogueira et al. suggested
that the lower toxicity of pSar may positively affect cellular uptake
and processing of the pSar-LNPs, leading to prolonged expression of
the target protein. 
Helper lipids
and cholesterol are other components of LNPs that
have been replaced by naturally derived molecules in studies. For
example, Patel et al. investigated the replacement of cholesterol
with C-24 alkyl derivatives. C-24 alkyl
derivatives are phytosterols that play a critical part in constituting
the membrane composition and dynamics of plant cells and are consumed
in our diet. The group incorporated
these natural cholesterol analogs into LNPs and named them enhanced
LNPs (eLNPs). Remarkably, the eLNPs were comparable in size and encapsulation
efficiency to traditional LNPs but exhibited an 11- to 211-fold improvement
in transfection in vitro when delivering mRNA, depending on the alkyl
derivative and mRNA dosage used. Cryo-TEM revealed that eLNPs incorporating
the alkyl derivative β-sitosterol differed in structure from
LNPs mainly due to their highly faceted surface, which showed more
defects. Interestingly, β-sitosterol differs from cholesterol
by only one ethyl group, as shown in C.
Further experiments exhibited the
higher uptake and retention of
eLNPs in HeLa cells and the superior transfection of eLNPs in NPC1-deficient
fibroblasts compared to LNPs. This led Patel et al. to postulate that
the different surface morphology of eLNPs enabled them to fuse more
easily with membranes and possibly take more favorable trafficking
pathways for enhanced transfection .Given that NPC1 is a transmembrane
protein located on lysosomes, the researchers also stated that eLNPs
probably interact less with lysosomal transporters, thus increasing
their residence time and enhancing their endosomal escape. This proposed phenomenon is illustrated schematically
in C.
Another group, Kim et al., also incorporated β-sitosterol
into their LNPs and found similar effects on the structure and transfection
efficiency of their LNPs. Combining
the use of β-sitosterol with a denser PEG-lipid layer, Kim et
al. developed LNPs that achieved effective mRNA transfection in mouse
epithelial cells upon nebulization and inhalation. In a separate study, Kim et al. substituted the helper
lipid DSPC with a series of naturally occurring membrane lipids originating
from the cell membrane of plants and microorganisms. They primarily studied diacylglyceryltrimethylhomo-Ser
(DGTS), a lipid found in algae associated with lipid metabolism and
cell survival in stress conditions. The
structures of DSPC and DGTS are provided in D. DGTS LNPs had worse transfection in vitro
(HeLa and A549 cells) than DSPC but better performance delivering
mRNA in vivo (IV administration, Balb/C mice). Upon repeating in vitro
testing after nebulizing the LNPs, DGTS only performed 12-fold worse
than DSPC as opposed to 50-fold prenebulization. Thus, the authors
concluded that DGTS may possess advantages over DSPC for in vivo delivery
and tolerability for nebulization. 
Recently, novel biomimetic phospholipids have been employed to
improve LNP formulations, taking inspiration from the molecules that
are natural components of the cell membrane and are already used in
many formulations as helper lipids. For
example, Li et al. tested the effectiveness of phospholipid and glycolipid-mimetic
lipids as ionizable components in LNP formulations. After screening numerous lipids, Li et al. isolated the
phospholipid PL1, pictured in E, as the optimal ionizable lipid for their LNP formulation.
PL1 contained a biomimetic phosphate head, an ionizable amino core,
and three hydrophobic tails. Upon encapsulating mRNA encoding for
costimulatory T-cell receptors (CD137 or OX40), PL1 LNPs effectively
delivered the cargo to a T-cell line in vitro and in vivo to T-cells
within tumors resulting in a significant therapeutic effect. 
Previously, the development of SORT LNPs
revealed that adding distinctly
charged lipids to existing LNP formulations could affect serum protein
adsorption by controlling the global/apparent pKa of LNPs; subsequent interactions between surface-bound proteins
and cognate receptors highly expressed in specific tissues enabled
RNA delivery beyond the liver. , LoPresti et al. performed
a similar investigation, instead entirely substituting DOPE with distinctly
charged lipids rather than adding a fifth lipid component. Seven endogenous lipids and a synthetic lipid
1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane (DOTAP) were tested. The neutral lipids were DOPC, sphingomyelin
(SM), and a ceramide; the anionic lipids were phosphatidylserine (PS),
phosphatidylglycerol (PG), and phosphatidic acid (PA); the cationic
lipids were ethyl phosphatidylcholine (EPC) and DOTAP. The structures
of DOPE, DOTAP, and PS are pictured in F. The researchers found that neutral lipids
promoted protein expression in the liver, and anionic and cationic
lipids shifted expression to the spleen and lungs, respectively. These
results were obtained from administering LNPs containing 40 mol %
of the new helper lipid to mice and were consistent across formulations
containing three different ionizable lipids. Several possible mechanisms
for the difference in organ targeting were suggested, including that
the different surface charges affected the protein corona that coated
the LNPs and thus led to differential trafficking pathways, as observed
with SORT LNPs. Importantly, SM, PA,
DOPC, and EPC LNPs had very low efficacy in vivo; thus, those helper
lipids were determined to be unlikely components of potent LNP formulations.
However, the authors stated that those lipids may perform better when
a standard helper lipid such as DOPE is used alongside them, as PA
was one of the more successful lipids tested in SORT LNPs. In contrast, DOTAP and PS maintained high efficacy
while shifting specificity to the lungs and spleen, respectively.
Remarkably, the PS LNPs developed by LoPresti et al. had higher efficacy
than the PS SORT LNPs, driven by greater spleen expression. Finally, the group reported that anionic lipids
were the best at transfecting immune cell lines RAW 264.7 and Raji
B cells. As with SORT, it is essential
to note that the use of cationic lipids promotes toxicity, while the
inclusion of anionic lipids limits transfection potential. 
To summarize, bioderived ionizable lipids
are first worth screening
to achieve increased LNP potency, while replacing PEG-lipids with
pSar-lipids can lead to comparable efficacy with the benefit of lower
immune activation. Remarkably, substituting cholesterol with β-sitosterol
can significantly improve LNP uptake, retention, and transfection
efficiency potentially due to changes in LNP surface morphology. Regarding
helper lipids, DGTS may possess advantages over DSPC for administration
routes requiring nebulization, such as in highly sought-after nasal
and lung vaccines. − Incorporating differently charged endogenous helper lipids can shift
protein expression to the liver, lung, or spleen, and PS stands out
as one of the most efficacious helper phospholipids with similar performance
to the cationic DOTAP. Additionally, the poor performance of DGTS
compared to DSPC in vitro (HeLa and A549 cells) but better performance
in vivo (IV administration, Balb/C mice) indicates that in vitro models
are not always accurate predictors of in vivo performance. Overall,
substituting one of the four lipid components with natural lipids
is a valuable strategy to improve the efficacy of LNPs without sacrificing
their core properties and scale-up potential.

5.2.

## Mimicking
Endogenous Molecules
Another
method of producing bioinspired lipid nanocarriers is to go beyond
substituting one lipid type and instead model the whole particle architecture
after an endogenous molecule. This method exploits endogenous pathways
to reach and transfect target cells with higher efficacy.
High-density
lipoproteins (HDLs) are the smallest lipoproteins and natural carriers
of RNA in vivo, ferrying and delivering miRNA to cells. , Scavenger receptor type B-1 (SR-B1) is a high-affinity receptor
for spherical HDLs that exhibit surface expression of apolipoprotein
A-I (apoA-I), and it is expressed in a wide variety of cell and tissue
types. , − Thus, HDLs deliver
miRNA with high selectivity to cells expressing SR-B1, motivating
the synthesis and evaluation of HDL-mimicking particles for RNA delivery.
McMahon et al. pursued this concept by developing templated lipoprotein
particles (TLPs) to mimic spherical HDLs. The TLPs were created by mixing the lipids DOPC, cholesterol, and
a phospholipid with 5 nm gold NPs decorated with Human apoA-I. The
apoA-I served to mimic HDL, while the gold NPs were used to aid synthesis
and could theoretically be removed in future iterations. When incubated
with a mixture of single-stranded siRNA and DOTAP (used to neutralize
the negative charge of siRNA), 110 nm-sized siRNA-TLP complexes were
formed. A schematic of the structure and synthesis of the siRNA-TLPs
is illustrated in A; the particles were anionic, uniform in size, and successfully
protected siRNA from degradation. During testing in multiple cancer
cell lines, the siRNA-TLPs successfully targeted SR-B1 and potently
reduced two established protein targets in prostate and other cancers,
androgen receptor and enhancer of zeste homologue. − 
 Furthermore, 13 doses of 0.7 mg siRNA/kg over 26
days significantly
reduced tumor volume in a mice prostate cancer xenograft model. Crucially,
no off-target toxicity was observed during this treatment. Along with
successfully targeting SR-B1 by mimicking HDL, the TLPs validated
that delivering ssRNA complements of a siRNA duplex is a viable method
for efficaciously delivering siRNA. Showing
the versatility of the TLPs, Wang et al. used the system in a follow-up
study to successfully deliver miRNA to corneal and limbal epithelial
cells as well as stromal keratocytes through topical application to
the ocular surface. Corneal re-epithelialization
was significantly improved in diabetic mice who suffered alkali burn-induced
inflammation after treatment with miRNA-TLPs. 
Another group that targeted SR-B1 with HDL-mimics
containing apoA-I
was Lu et al. In a similar fashion to
McMahon et al., they condensed anionic anti-miR155 miRNA with cationic
acid-labile polyethyleneimine (PEI) and surrounded it with a lipid
bilayer coat comprised of cholesterol, phospholipids, sodium cholate,
and apoA-I. The final particles were 180 nm in size with a −37
mV zeta potential; a schematic of the particles is shown in . Through several
in vitro tests, the group validated the miRNA protection, lack of
cytotoxicity, and macrophage SR-B1 targeting of the system. Lu et
al. reported a 22% reduction of relative miRNA level in Raw 264.7
cells after treatment with their approach compared to regular liposomes
or an 80% reduction of miRNA compared to untreated cells. These were promising results despite the lack
of in vivo testing. A final SR-B1-honing structure was reported by
Jiang et al., who targeted not only SR-B1 but the scavenger receptor
CD36 commonly expressed on macrophages. By complexing SR-A siRNA and catalase with ATP-responsive ternary
polyplexes and housing them in a lipid bilayer containing PS, Jiang
et al. created an HDL-mimic for treating atherosclerotic plaque. The
mimic and its dual-targeting mechanism are depicted in B. The final particles were
200 nm in diameter with a zeta potential of −27 mV. A 3-month
dosage regimen of the NPs reduced plaque areas by 65.8% and decreased
macrophages by 57.3% in ApoE–/– mice. 
A hyperactive Ras pathway is characteristic
of many cancers, with
around 30% of all human cancers exhibiting at least one Ras gene mutation. The activation of Ras promotes cancer cells
to engulf extracellular proteins through macropinocytosis to gain
nutrients. , Huang et al. decided to exploit
this pathway to infiltrate cancer cells more efficiently with a lipoprotein-biomimetic
nanostructure. The group designed a
nanosized calcium phosphate-siRNA complex surrounded by a layer of
two phospholipids, which they subsequently incubated with apolipoprotein
E3 (ApoE3) to create HDL-mimicking NPs named siRNA-CaP-rHDLs. The
synthesis outline and schematic of the siRNA-CaP-rHDLs are shown in C. ApoE3 was employed
to help target low-density lipoprotein receptors in the blood–brain
barrier (BBB) and glioblastoma cells. ApoE3 was key to the formulation
as the group aimed to target activating transcription factor-5 (ATF5),
an overexpressed antiapoptotic transcription factor in glioblastoma,
with their siRNA treatment. The siRNA-CaP-rHDLs were 20–40
nm in diameter with a PDI of 0.2–0.4, indicating a moderately
variable synthesis process.
Further characterization studies
confirmed that Ras-activated cell
lines exhibited elevated uptake of CaP-rHDL and that compared to previous
work on HDL mimics, the CaP-rHDL could load more siRNA and better
protect against nuclease degradation. ATF5 siRNA delivered by CaP-rHDLs significantly suppressed ATF5
mRNA and protein expression and induced apoptosis in glioblastoma
cells. In a xenograft tumor mice model, a 0.36 mg/kg siRNA dose significantly
extended the survival time of treated mice with minimal side effects.
In addition, due to the common Ras pathway the CaP-rHDL exploits,
its siRNA cargo and targeting protein could be modified to treat many
different types of cancer. 
A final
method of mimicking lipid-based endogenous molecules for
RNA delivery is to create LNPs based on NPs naturally found in edible
ginger (GDNPs). The significant advantages of this strategy are hypothesized
to be the lack of toxicity and increased production scale compared
to traditional synthetic LNPs (due to an abundant natural source). Zhang et al. initially isolated GDNPs from
ginger which contained many lipids, a few proteins, and around 125
miRNAs. The group successfully used
the particles to reduce acute colitis, enhance intestinal repair,
and prevent chronic effects in mouse colitis models. In a follow-up study, Zhang et al. loaded the GDNPs with
siRNA-CD98 and reduced CD98 expression in colon tissues after oral
administration. Most recently, Sung
et al. reverse-engineered the GDNPs and found that they were mostly
comprised of the lipids PA, monogalactosyldiacylglycerol (MGDG), and
digalactosyldiacylglycerol (DGDG). The
galactolipids MGDG and DGDG form the stable lipid bilayer of chloroplast
in plant leaves. The authors noted that many plant-derived NPs do
not contain cholesterol but are stable enough to target the lower
GI tract. Thus, they mixed PA, MGDG, and DGDG at the ratio found in
GDNPs (5:2:3) and observed that the lipids self-assembled into new
LNPs (nLNPs). The structure of the three lipids is provided in D.
Interleukin-22
(IL-22) has anti-inflammatory effects against ulcerative
colitis in the colon, so Sung et al. complexed IL-22 mRNA with the
cationic polymer turbofectamine and encapsulated the system inside
nLNPs. The polymer served to reconcile the negative charge of the
RNA such that it could combine with the negatively charged nLNPs.
The final diameter and zeta potential of the mRNA-nLNPs were 200 nm
and −18 mV, respectively. Oral delivery of the mRNA-nLNPs promoted
IL-22 expression in the colonic mucosa of mice, coinciding with an
accelerated healing process indicated by more body weight and colon
length recovery and a reduction in histological index and pro-inflammatory
cytokines. Consistent with the fact that synthetic LNPs offer a more
consistent product than naturally derived counterparts, Sung et al.
noted that the nLNPs had a more consistent composition and reduced
batch-to-batch variability while inheriting many core properties of
the original GDNPs. , 
In conclusion, mimicking
HDL is an effective strategy to deliver
RNA to the various cells expressing SR-B1 and to target the commonly
hyperactive Ras pathway in cancers. This method has proven to be efficacious
in vivo and may unlock RNA delivery to historically difficult-to-reach
targets; however, it requires the synthesis of complex multilayered
nanostructures which have unclear scale-up potential. In addition,
modeling the lipid composition and ratios of LNPs after GDNPs may
be a potent strategy for RNA delivery to the colon to treat bowel
diseases such as colitis. However, synthesis complexity and toxicity
concerns are increased due to the complexation of RNA with a cationic
polymer to achieve charge reconciliation. Mimicking endogenous molecules
is thus an intriguing strategy to exploit new tissue-targeting pathways.
However, there is uncertainty about its scalability in the current
state.

5.3.

## Mimicking Viruses
A promising approach
for developing nanocarriers with better organ targeting and enhanced
endosomal escape for RNA therapies involves taking inspiration from
viruses. In nature, most viruses consist of a 20–500 nm protein
capsid containing genetic material in either DNA or RNA. Viruses have evolved to bypass the immune system,
prolong their blood circulation time, and overcome physiological barriers
to infect hosts with their genetic material. Essentially, viruses act as natural gene delivery systems that promote
genomic transfer by enhancing cell recognition, cellular binding,
endocytosis, penetration, and nuclear import. Most importantly, viruses have efficient cellular uptake
and endosomal escape attributed to their structure and ability to
respond to changes in their microenvironment. , Because these properties overlap with essential traits of drug delivery
systems in RNA therapeutics, viruses have inspired the development
of multiple nanocarriers. One strategy is to directly use a viral
vector to deliver RNA, which involves removing the genetic material
of a virus and replacing it with a therapeutic gene; however, safety
concerns arise due to potential immunogenicity, toxicity, inflammation,
and insertional mutagenesis. This has
motivated the development of lipid-based carriers that incorporate
lipids and proteins found in viruses, resulting in a safer alternative
to viral vectors and more efficacious delivery than conventional nonviral
vectors. Current research focuses on
endowing lipid-based nanocarriers with the fusogenic properties of
viruses through the incorporation of fusion proteins or specific lipids
found within viral membranes. These molecules enable viruses to insert
their genetic material into cells by initiating fusion between the
viral and host membrane. Traditionally,
fusion proteins are incorporated into liposomes to form virosomes,
while membrane lipids that enhance cell uptake are added as components
to LNPs.
5.3.1.

## Virosomes
Virosomes contain viral
and nonviral components, forming a liposomal phospholipid bilayer
embedded with viral fusion glycoproteins. Because of this, virosomes can enhance the RNA delivery of nonviral
systems while reducing cytotoxicity compared to viral systems. Examples of membrane fusion proteins used in
virosomes include influenza virus hemagglutinin (HA), − vesicular stomatitis virus G (VSV-g) protein, and Sendai virus proteins. − Currently, most virosome systems
are designed for applications delivering siRNA. For example, Jonge
et al. developed an influenza-based virosome for siRNA delivery, which
relied on HA for membrane fusion activity. HA can enhance RNA delivery in virosomes by binding with sialic
acid receptors on cells to induce endocytosis and by undergoing conformational
changes in the acidic endosomal pH to cause endosomal escape. 
The process of HA-mediated fusion is
shown in A.
Jonge et al. synthesized the virosomes by solubilizing the influenza
virus in a phosphatidylcholine (PC) detergent and extracting the viral
protein and membrane components using centrifugation. From here, siRNA was complexed with a cationic
lipid, N,N-dioleoyl-N,N-dimethylammonium
chloride (DODAC), and added to the solubilized viral components where
virosome self-assembly occurred. To evaluate gene silencing, the authors
delivered virosomes containing green fluorescent protein (GFP)-silencing
siRNA to cells expressing GFP. The virosome performance was compared
to lipofectamine, a commercial transfection agent used only for in vitro transfection of nucleic acids. This resulted in decreased fluorescence comparable to the
lipofectamine control, indicating that functional siRNA was successfully
delivered to the cell cytoplasm. To determine if HA-mediated membrane
fusion was responsible for the siRNA delivery, the authors inactivated
the HA protein on the virosomes by exposing them to low pH before
cell incubation. Pre-exposure to low pH causes HA to undergo a conformational
change before entering the endosome, disabling its ability to mediate
endosomal escape. When virosomes with
inactivated HA were delivered, cell GFP expression was unaffected.
This result indicated that the siRNA could not reach the cytoplasm
without the HA undergoing a conformational change in the endosome
and highlighted that the functional integrity of the fusion protein
is critical for siRNA delivery. In addition to their ability to enhance
siRNA delivery in vitro, the authors found that the virosomes had
minimal cytotoxicity, with cell viability remaining between 80 and
100%. However, the optimized virosomes only achieved a siRNA encapsulation
efficiency of ∼37%.
 More recently, Kim et al. developed cancer-targeting antibody-conjugated
cationic virosomes (viroplexes) incorporating Sendai virus proteins
for use in siRNA-based cancer therapies. The structure of these viroplexes is shown in B. Sendai virus contains fusion (F) and hemagglutinin-neuraminidase
(HN) glycoproteins that enhance virosome uptake by binding to sialylated
glycans on the cell surface, initiating fusion of the virus envelope
with the host-cell membrane. Kim et
al. extracted and purified the F/HN viral proteins using a detergent-based
method. Cationic liposomes complexed with siRNA were composed of O,O-dimyristyl-N-lysyl glutamate (DMKE)
as positively charged lipids, cholesterol, and PEG lipids.
The
purified F/HN proteins were added to the cationic liposome
solution to form the viroplexes, and an antibody targeting epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) was conjugated to the particle surface.
EGFR is overexpressed in tumors, making it an ideal target for developing
cancer-specific delivery vehicles. Compared
to noncationic virosomes and cationic liposomes with no viral proteins,
the viroplexes exhibited the highest siRNA transfection during in
vitro tumor cell studies. Moreover, when used to deliver antitumoral
siRNA to mice, significant tumor growth inhibition was observed for
both cationic liposome and viroplex delivery systems. Most notably,
when the viroplexes were delivered in combination with doxorubicin,
significantly enhanced tumor inhibition was observed compared to all
other controls. Ultimately, Kim et al. concluded that the viroplexes
resulted in the most effective siRNA delivery to target the cancer
cells, as indicated by high transfection in vitro and tumor suppression
in vivo. While these cationic virosomes showed great promise, the
cytotoxic nature of positively charged nanoparticles in healthy cells must be considered when analyzing the safety
of these delivery systems.
Currently, a significant limitation
of virosomes is the traditional
preparation method. As described by Jonge et al. and Kim et al., preparation
typically involves solubilizing an inactivated virus with a detergent,
using ultracentrifugation to extract the desired protein and membrane
components, and relying on the hydrophobic effect for viral protein
insertion in a lipid-bilayer particle. This method is problematic as it requires multiple steps, the detergents
can destroy the structural and functional integrity of the membrane
protein, and the lipid assembly process often yields poor encapsulation
efficiency. 
Recently, Wang et
al. developed a one-step virosome preparation
method using cell-free protein expression technology. Cell-free protein expression systems rely on
transcription and translation machinery found in cells to synthesize
proteins in vitro using synthetic DNA templates. The details of these expression systems have been reviewed
previously. , Using this method, the authors
prepared HA virosomes with a lecithin-based liposomal membrane and
a chitosan-siRNA core for better RNA encapsulation. The steps for
producing these virosomes are outlined in C. This system displayed minimal cytotoxicity
when delivered to A549 and NCI-N87 cells, with cell viability higher
than 70% even at a lipid concentration of 200 ug/mL. Additionally,
the HA virosomes exhibited superior cell uptake compared to liposomes
and the independent chitosan-siRNA complexes. The virosomes were also
tested for silencing VEGF in cells using siRNA, and the HA virosomes
showed more efficient gene silencing (19%) compared to liposomes (6%).
This demonstrated that the cell-free synthesis method enables the
formation of functional HA-virosomes that enhance cell uptake and
siRNA delivery. While this method is still in development, further
optimization of the formulation and protein expression may enable
the creation of entirely synthetic virosomes. 
With respect to commercial development, Entos Pharmaceuticals
has
established a proteo-lipid delivery system similar to virosomes. The
platform relies on neutral lipids to form the lipid-bilayer structure
and integrates proprietary fusion-associated small transmembrane (FAST)
proteins derived from reoviruses. , FAST proteins
are small, nonstructural viral proteins that are not involved in viral
entry into cells. Instead, these proteins
are expressed by reovirus-infected cells and mediate fusion of infected
cells with uninfected cells. It is reported
that the use of FAST proteins in Entos Pharmaceuticals’ platform
enables rapid fusion of the lipid nanocarrier to the cell membrane,
thus enabling cargo delivery directly to the cytoplasm while bypassing
conventional endocytic pathways. , There are
limited studies available that assess the performance of this platform
in nucleic acid therapeutics; however, the company reports applications
in the delivery of RNAi, miRNA, mRNA, and DNA. Currently, Entos is working on clinical trials assessing
the performance of a COVID-19 DNA vaccine using their established
platform. The company also has several
other nucleic acid therapies under preclinical and clinical development. 
Overall, virosomes present a promising
option for improving the
delivery of RNA through fusion-mediated cell uptake. With advantages
including better cell uptake and enhanced endosomal escape, virosomes
can provide solutions to several challenges associated with RNA delivery.
The research focused on virosome-mediated siRNA therapeutics demonstrates
better gene silencing and cell uptake than traditional liposomes. , Entos Pharmaceuticals exemplifies successful commercialization of
a virosome-like proteo-lipid vehicle platform; however, there are
limited studies assessing the performance compared to conventional
delivery systems. In the future, direct comparisons of virosomes with
other clinically relevant delivery systems, such as LNPs, will be
critical to evaluate the efficacy of virosomal delivery systems. Despite
the advantages, virosomes lack efficient preparation methods, with
established procedures relying on cumbersome processes involving using
detergents to extract viral proteins. With advancements in cell-free
protein synthesis, this problem can be mitigated; however, integrating
this strategy in virosome preparation still requires further optimization.
Moreover, high siRNA encapsulation efficiency is difficult to achieve
using conventional preparation strategies. Therefore, for virosomes
to become a clinically relevant delivery system in RNA therapeutics,
research should focus on developing more efficient and scalable preparation
techniques.

5.3.2.

## Mimicking Viral Membranes
In addition
to virosome development, recent work has investigated the delivery
of LNPs incorporating phospholipids found on viral membranes. In particular,
the phospholipid phosphatidylserine (PS) has been explored. PS is a component in several viral membranes
and functions by camouflaging the virus as a dead cell via apoptotic
cell mimicry. , In mammalian cells, PS is naturally
contained within the cell membrane; however, once these cells undergo
apoptosis or necrosis, PS is exposed outside the cell membrane. This process induces PS recognition, causing
apoptotic clearance. In viruses, PS found on the outer viral membrane
disguises it as an apoptotic body and causes cells (including macrophages
and tissue cells) to engulf virions through cell clearance mechanisms. Moreover, cells contain PS-mediated virus entry-enhancing
receptors (PVEERs). These receptors enable viruses to evade the immune
system through both anti-inflammatory signaling and facilitating cell
internalization without requiring extracellular exposure of receptor
binding domains or fusion proteins. For
these reasons, incorporating PS in LNP compositions can theoretically
create an “eat-me” signal for cells, increasing LNP
uptake. For example, Lotter et al. investigated the partial substitution
of the helper lipid 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphocholine (DOPC)
with PS. A summary of the experiments run by Lotter et al. is shown
in D. By varying
the PS content of their LNPs from 0 to 10%, the group found that 1–5%
of PS, corresponding to 10–50% substitution of DOPC, was optimal
for transfection efficiency and protein translation in vitro in HuH-7
cells.
The 2.5% PS LNPs increased the EGFP signal 3-fold compared
to the DOPC LNPs with no impact on cell viability. Further studies
displayed that 2.5% of PS LNPs had a 13.5% increase in cellular uptake
compared to DOPC LNPs, with the authors suggesting the activation
of Annexin V (a cellular protein that binds strongly to PS) as a significant
factor contributing to this result. Furthermore,
Lotter et al. stated that PS also increases clathrin-mediated endocytosis
by enhancing interactions with scavenger receptors of target cells.
In a final in vivo study, the potency of PS was confirmed as PS LNPs
had a 3.7-fold increase in transfection potency compared to DOPC LNPs
in the tail region of a zebrafish embryo after IV injection. 
Luozhong et al. also investigated the
impact of adding PS to LNPs,
explicitly focusing on leveraging PS to target secondary lymphoid
organs (SLOs), including lymph nodes (LNs) and the spleen. As discussed previously, PS causes apoptotic
mimicry in a similar manner to viruses, enabling cell entry by signaling
cell clearance pathways. These signals primarily communicate with
phagocytes, like macrophages, which are abundant in SLOs. − Because of this, Luozhong et al. hypothesized that incorporating
PS in LNPs could redirect LNP delivery from the liver to SLOs. A summary
of the SLO targeting mediated by PS-LNPs is illustrated in E. To test their
theory, a series of experiments compared PS-LNP formulations with
traditional MC3-LNP formulations (containing MC3, DSPC, cholesterol,
and DMG-PEG2000). The PS-LNPs contained 5% 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphate-l-serine (DOPS), with the phosphoserine functional group required
for targeting. An additional formulation containing 1,2- dioleoyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphate
(PA) (an anionic lipid with no phosphoserine targeting group) was
used as a reference.
In an initial in vivo study, mice were
IV injected with LNPs containing
Fluc mRNA to evaluate luciferase expression across different organs.
The MC3-LNPs showed maximum protein expression in the liver, while
both PS- and PA-LNPs showed higher expression in the spleen. Notably,
compared to PA-LNPs, the signal in the spleen for PS-LNPs was 45-fold
stronger. In addition, the PS-LNPs accumulated in superficial cervical
lymph nodes (SCLNs), while the MC3-LNPs and PA-LNPs did not. The total
luminescence signal for PS- and MC3-LNPs was comparable, indicating
that the PS LNPs achieved spleen targeting while maintaining high
transfection efficiency. Biodistribution studies after the systemic
injection of LNPs containing Cy-5 labeled RNA showed that MC3- and
PA-LNPs exhibited almost no fluorescence in lymph nodes. Conversely,
PS-LNPs showed Cy-5 signals in all lymph nodes, with SCLNS being the
strongest (90% of the signal). To better understand the PS-targeting
mechanism, in vitro tests were performed using HepG2 cells (hepatocyte
cell line) and RAW264.7 cells (a monocyte/macrophage cell line). MC3-LNPs
had ten times higher expression in HepG2, while PS had higher transfection
in RAW264.7. PS-LNPs also exhibited higher transfection in primary
murine splenocytes. Ultimately, this result suggested that PS-lipids
increase LNP transfection in immune cells, especially macrophages.
Additional in vivo tests confirmed that PS-lipids recruit blood or
tissue-derived monocytes, suggesting that monocytes and macrophages
mediate PS LNP delivery. To ensure the role of macrophages in SLO
targeting using PS, Fluc mRNA LNPs were delivered to a macrophage-depleted
mouse model. In this model, the PS-LNPs were no longer delivered to
SLOs, and FLuc expression occurred in the liver.
In summary,
incorporating PS in LNP compositions creates a biomimetic
nanoparticle with enhanced cell uptake and SLO targeting. Because
PS acts as a natural “eat-me” signal for macrophages
and other tissue cells, adding small amounts (2.5%) to conventional
LNP formulations has resulted in different enhancements in cell uptake
and protein translation both in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, because
PS triggers cell clearance pathways associated with macrophages, it
can efficiently mediate LNP delivery to SLOs, which is essential for
applications requiring mRNA delivery to immune cells. Another key
advantage is that PS can be seamlessly incorporated into current LNP
self-assembly mechanisms to enhance cell uptake and organ targeting.
For these reasons, developing virus-mimicking LNPs using PS is an
ideal strategy to create bioinspired nanocarriers with enhanced cellular
uptake, protein translation, and organ targeting properties.

5.4.

## Mimicking Exosomes
Exosomes are a
subset of extracellular vesicles (EVs) secreted by various cell types,
including cancer cells, specific immune cells, and epithelial cells. , , Typically, exosomes consist
of 30–120 nm diameter lipid membrane vesicles enriched with
various proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids from their parental cell. , , The primary function of exosomes
is to facilitate the transport of molecules between cells, which directly
affects intercellular communication and other biological processes. , Exosomes have vital advantages over conventional nanocarriers such
as LNPs. These advantages include their heightened ability to evade
phagocytosis in the bloodstream and circulate for longer in bodily
fluids, cross biological barriers, and efficiently transfect target
cells using their surface proteins. , Due to their
endogenous source, exosomes can be more biocompatible and less immunogenic
than synthetic carriers. However, exosomes possess some major disadvantages
related to their production. There lacks standardized methods for
the large-scale production of exosomes with consistent properties
due to the many variable factors in the biological extraction of
exosomes. Once extracted, it is challenging
to purify exosomes without sacrificing yield and incurring high costs.
Moreover, passive loading techniques result in low amounts of RNA
in exosomes, especially for longer RNAs such as mRNA. , Finally, the complex composition and undefined biological functions
of exosomes impede their transition to the clinic, as these characteristics
may promote unwanted side effects. , , To circumvent these challenges, recent literature
has focused on developing exosome-mimetic nanoparticles for drug delivery
applications. This strategy leverages the lipid-bilayer structure
of liposomes, which closely resembles that of exosomes. To achieve a more biomimetic nanoparticle structure,
specific exosome-like lipid compositions and surface proteins can
be integrated into the liposomes. , , , Traditionally, these
systems require bottom-up preparation strategies, which enable more
control of the final product composition and result in more clinically
translatable structures. Current work
has investigated using exosome-mimetic particles for siRNA and miRNA
delivery. , , , 
5.4.1.

## Mimicking
Exosome Lipid Compositions
One strategy to create exosome-mimicking
nanocarriers entails developing
liposomal formulations that contain lipid compositions found in exosomes.
Exosomes are rich in sphingomyelin (SM) and cholesterol (Chol), with
reduced levels of phosphatidylcholine (PC). Moreover, both PS and phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) are also traditionally
found in exosomes, with PS playing a vital role as an “eat-me”
signal. The distribution of lipids found
in exosome membranes is hypothesized to contribute to the release
and delivery of exosome cargos to receptor cells, making this composition desirable to mimic for RNA delivery.
This strategy was implemented by Lu et al., where they developed exosome-mimetic
liposomes with a lipid composition of DOPC/SM/Chol/DOPS/DOPE at a
21/17.5/30/14/17.5 molar ratio (as shown in A). These exosome-mimics
were prepared using a thin-film hydration method, with siRNA loading
occurring during the hydration step. For comparison, cationic DOTAP
liposomes and conventional PC Chol liposomes were prepared. The synthesized
exosome-mimics were ∼119 nm in size with a zeta potential of
−24 mV, comparable to exosomes reported in the literature.
However, the encapsulation efficiency was only 31%, which was lower
than the DOTAP liposomes (70%) and PC Chol liposomes (37%). This result
is expected, given the electrostatic repulsion between the anionic
siRNA and the anionic lipids within the exosome mimic. Through in
vitro studies, the exosome-mimics demonstrated cell viability 4-fold
higher than the DOTAP liposomes, highlighting the safety of the noncationic
delivery systems. Cell uptake in A549 and HUVEC cells displayed that
exosome-mimics had better uptake than PC Chol liposomes but significantly
worse uptake than DOTAP liposomes. Notably, the cell uptake and gene
silencing ability of the exosome-mimics was >3-fold higher than
the
PC Chol liposomes. When investigating gene silencing effects through
the delivery of siVEGF to cells, the exosome-mimics demonstrated >3-fold
higher gene silencing than PC Chol liposomes. Despite this, the gene
silencing was much lower than the cationic DOTAP liposome formulation,
showing room for improvement in future research. This study also exemplifies
the challenges to achieving high encapsulation efficiency when formulating
exosome-mimics.
 Kimura et al. attempted to solve issues with poor RNA encapsulation
in exosome mimics by developing a one-step microfluidic synthesis
process for exosome-mimicking NPs, outlined in B. This process
involved solubilizing siRNA in a buffer solution containing Ca2+, which counteracted the anionic charge of the siRNA to reduce
electrostatic repulsion. The lipids used in the exosome-mimics (DOPC/SM/Chol/DOPS/DOPE
at 21/17.5/30/14/17.5 molar ratio) were solubilized in ethanol. These
aqueous and organic solutions were then combined in a microfluidic
mixer to form the exosome-mimics, with an optimal flow rate of 500
uL/min at an aqueous: organic ratio of 2. Using this method, the authors
achieved an encapsulation efficiency of over 50%, while alternative
methods yielded encapsulation efficiencies below 20%. Moreover, when
delivering luciferase siRNA in vitro to HeLa cells with the new exosome-mimics,
50% luciferase knockdown and minimal cytotoxicity were achieved. Compared
to cationic LNPs, the luciferase expression was significantly lower
(80% knockdown in cationic LNPs), but cell viability was improved.
Overall, by mimicking the lipid composition of exosome membranes,
Lu et al. demonstrated enhanced in vitro gene silencing and cell uptake
performance compared to conventional liposome formulations. However, siRNA encapsulation was still significantly
limited as no cationic lipid component was used during preparation,
thus leading to electrostatic repulsion. While Kimura et al. developed
a microfluidic method to enhance encapsulation and liposomal size
control, encapsulation peaked at ∼50%. New strategies to improve the encapsulation efficiency
of siRNA should be investigated in future research, such as complexing
the siRNA in cationic particles before microfluidic mixing or incorporating
an ionizable component during formulation. In addition, these exosome-mimics
showed poor results compared to traditional cationic formulations,
demonstrating that the lipid composition alone may be insufficient
for effective RNA delivery when progressing to in vivo studies. However,
these studies also emphasize that exosome mimics can overcome safety
challenges related to cationic liposomes. In conclusion, further lipid
formulation optimization may be required to develop high-performing
exosome mimics, given the complexity of exosome structures.

5.4.2.

## Mimicking Exosome Transmembrane Proteins
To overcome
challenges related to cell uptake and organ targeting,
recent research has focused on developing exosome-mimetic liposomes
that incorporate transmembrane (TM) proteins found in endogenous exosomes.
Exosomes secreted from different cells have different compositions
and TM proteins, which can generate a cell “homing”
effect, − enabling exosomes to specifically target
their origin or “home” cell type for delivery of their
cargo. Thus, functionalizing exosome-like liposome formulations with
TM proteins presents a strategy to achieve enhanced cell targeting,
cell uptake, and RNA delivery. For example, Vázquez-Ríos
et al. proposed exosome-mimetic nanoplatforms for targeted cancer
delivery by mimicking the structure of tumor-derived exosomes, as
illustrated in C. Tumor-derived exosomes have tumor-homing
properties that enable cancer and metastasis targeting. , Transmembrane proteins (TMs) found in tumor-derived exosomes, such
as integrin α6β4, contribute to this tumor-homing ability. More specifically, integrin α6β4
is involved in lung targeting. For this
reason, Vázquez-Ríos et al. used an ethanol-injection
methodology to create liposome-based exosome-mimics functionalized
with integrin α6β4 for cancer-targeted delivery of miR-145,
a well-known tumor-suppressing miRNA. The liposome composition consisted of Chol/PC/SM/Ceramide (Cer)
at a 0.9/1/0.4/0.03 w/w ratio. In vitro testing in A549 cancer cells
showed that the functionalized exosome-mimetic nanosystems (F-EMNs)
resulted in a 5-fold increase in Cy-5 labeled miR-145 expression compared
to nonfunctionalized EMNs. This increase in miR-145 delivery was associated
with reduced cell proliferation and reduced expression of N-cadherin
(a protein that promotes tumor cell survival, migration, and invasion). Overall, this result showed that the F-EMNs
resulted in enhanced delivery of functional miR145 to cancer cells.
In vivo tests focused on comparing the F-EMNs to tumor-derived exosomes
after intraperitoneal injection in mice with lung cancer. Both groups
generated similar levels of miRNA in the lung and tumor. Notably,
F-EMN-treated mice displayed lower fluorescent signals in their kidneys
compared to the exosome-treated group, suggesting that the mimetic
system can better target tumors and reduce systemic toxicity.
In addition, Lu et al. developed exosome-mimetic NPs incorporating
the TM protein Connexin 43 (Cx43) for siRNA delivery. Cx43 is found in exosomes and is thought to
enhance cytosolic delivery. Evidence
suggests that Cx43 leads to the docking of exosomes on target cells
through a process that forms gap-junction (GJ)-like structures, which
transfer exosome payloads into cells through the channel pore. Incorporating proteins like Cx43 in lipid-bilayer
NPs typically occurs via cell-based protein preparation methods; however,
this can cause protein precipitation, insufficient membrane insertion,
and cytotoxicity. Thus, Lu et al. proposed
a cell-free synthesis method to generate their Cx43 exosome-mimetic
particles, which leverages the lipid bilayer NPs to prevent protein
aggregation and facilitate the oligomerization, refolding, and membrane
integration of Cx43. D shows a schematic of this preparation method. Thin-film
hydration was used to prepare exosome-mimetic liposomes composed of
DOPC/SM/Chol/DOPS/DOPE (21/17.5/30/14/17.5 molar ratio), which encapsulated
a cationic chitosan-siRNA complex. This structure was combined with
a Cx43 plasmid and transcription and translation reagents, resulting
in the synthesis and membrane integration of Cx43. When delivering
the Cx43 liposomes encapsulating a membrane-impermeable dye in vitro,
58% of the cells were dye-positive, while only 5% of cells treated
with liposomes lacking Cx43 showed a positive signal. Moreover, when
adding a GJ inhibitor, the dye-positive cells decreased by 43% in
the Cx43 liposome-treated group, suggesting that the TM protein facilitates
cell uptake through GJ mechanisms. Lu et al. also looked at VEGF silencing
in U87 MG cells. Cx43 siVEGF liposomes significantly decreased VEGF
protein expression (∼30% downregulation) relative to controls,
including the liposomes lacking Cx43. When combined with endocytosis
and GJ inhibitors, VEGF downregulation was reduced. This result suggested
that gene silencing and siRNA delivery was facilitated through clathrin
and caveolin-mediated endocytosis, as well as gap junction mechanisms.
Lastly, the Cx43 exosome-mimetic NPs exhibited cell viability above
85%, showing minimal cytotoxicity. Despite these positive results,
the authors acknowledged that the exosome-mimetic NPs still have inadequate
in vitro RNA transfection compared to the lipofectamine commercial
transfection agent, indicating that further optimization is required.
To conclude, incorporating TM proteins into exosome-mimetic liposomes
resulted in better performance than liposomes lacking TM proteins.
By selecting proteins expressed on cell-specific exosomes, effective
cell targeting can be achieved, as shown by Vázquez-Ríos
et al. Moreover, Lu et al. showed that
incorporating TM proteins can enhance cell uptake while being minimally
cytotoxic. With the advancements in
cell-free synthesis methods, protein-functionalized exosome-mimetic
particles can be synthesized by a safer, more efficient, and clinically
translatable method. However, as mentioned by Lu et al., the RNA delivery
was inferior lipofectamine controls, which suggests that an ionizable
lipid element may be required for more RNA to reach the cytosol through
enhanced endosomal escape. Nevertheless, adding TM proteins expressed
in endogenous exosomes presents a novel method to generate functional
exosome-mimetic liposomes with cell-targeting abilities while maintaining
biocompatibility and minimal toxicity.

6.0.

## Conclusions and Future Outlook
There are many design strategies
to create bioinspired lipid nanocarriers
for RNA delivery, with the primary goal being to achieve greater potency
than established synthetic liposomes and LNPs. Bioinspired design
can enhance several RNA carrier properties, including tissue targeting,
cellular uptake, and endosomal escape.
First, substituting LNP
components with natural lipids can increase
LNP efficacy while maintaining scale-up potential. For example, replacing
cholesterol with β-sitosterol modifies LNP surface morphology
and increases transfection efficiency. Also, substituting traditional
helper lipids with bioderived counterparts shifts the primary organ
targets of RNA therapies and can potentially stabilize LNPs during
nebulization for effective intranasal and lung vaccines. Finally,
incorporating pSar-lipids instead of PEG-lipids decreases unwanted
immune activation while maintaining the efficacy of LNPs.
Additionally,
mimicking endogenous molecule structures utilizes
existing endogenous pathways to target hard-to-reach tissues. Mimicking
HDL helps target cells expressing SR-B1 and the Ras pathway in cancers,
showing positive outcomes in vivo. Meanwhile, RNA delivery to the
colon may be unlocked by mirroring GDNPs. However, these strategies
are marred by the requirement to synthesize multilayered nanostructures,
which can be complicated to scale up.
Taking inspiration from
viruses is another method of bioinspired
design, given that viruses naturally transfer nucleic acids from cell
to cell. Virosomes improve cellular uptake and endosomal escape through
their enhanced fusogenicity and have outperformed liposomes for siRNA
delivery. However, virosome preparation requires viral protein extraction
and results in inefficient siRNA encapsulation. A more feasible methodology
is to incorporate PS into LNP membranes to mimic viral membranes.
This method achieves enhanced cellular uptake and protein translation
in vitro and in vivo due to PS acting as a natural “eat-me”
signal. Moreover, RNA delivery to immune cells can be improved using
PS due to its macrophage and SLO targeting. Importantly, the seamless
incorporation of PS into existing LNPs does not compromise synthesis
simplicity or scalability.
Mimicking exosomes by developing
liposomal formulations with similar
lipid compositions to the natural molecules is a final pathway to
developing bioinspired lipid nanocarriers. Exosome-mimetic liposomes
have demonstrated enhanced cellular uptake and gene silencing in vitro
compared to specific conventional liposomes. Furthermore, incorporating
TM proteins into exosome-mimics further increases their performance
and enables more specific cell targeting. However, exosome-mimics
struggle to achieve suitable encapsulation efficiencies and are outperformed
in vitro by traditional cationic liposomal systems (e.g., Lipofectamine).
Thus, ionizable lipid components in exosome-mimics should be used
to help reconcile the negative charge of RNA during formulation, thereby
increasing encapsulation efficiency while maintaining biocompatibility.
To conclude, the current research findings first point to incorporating
natural lipids into LNPs as the most advanced and clinically translatable
bioinspired design strategy for lipid-based nanocarriers. This method
enhances the properties of existing LNPs without sacrificing their
current advantages, such as ease of synthesis and scalability. Natural
lipid substitution is a good strategy to help overcome RNA delivery
challenges, such as the lack of cellular uptake and endosomal escape,
to improve LNP potency. However, this method only provides slight
modifications to current LNP formulations and thus may be limited
in what it can achieve. Overall, further research should be undertaken
to optimize the incorporation of natural lipids such as β-sitosterol
and PS into state-of-the-art LNP formulations and compare the performance
to their unmodified counterparts. Current research also reveals the
potential benefits of mimicking endogenous molecules, viruses, or
exosomes. Doing so can exploit endogenous pathways to target SR-B1-expressing
cells, the Ras pathway in cancer, and other hard-to-reach tissues
and cells. Nevertheless, these methods are still immature and have
unclear translational potential in their current state. They require
multiple components to efficiently encapsulate RNA, thereby increasing
synthesis complexity. Thus, exploring ionizable lipids in these systems
is suggested to help reconcile the positive charge of RNA while maintaining
biocompatibility.
In addition to optimizing RNA carrier systems,
several other areas
of research in the RNA delivery field should be pursued to fill knowledge
gaps and enable better carrier design. First, creating in vitro models
that are more predictive of in vivo performance is vital to better
screen and develop potent RNA carriers. Moreover, a more profound
elucidation of cellular uptake and endosomal escape pathways taken
by RNA delivery vehicles is required to improve rational design strategies
for the particles. The correlation between cellular uptake and endosomal
escape in different cells and organs should also be further investigated.
Finally, cell-free protein synthesis methods should be optimized to
enable simpler and more efficient virosome and exosome-mimic production.
The further exploration of bioinspired lipid nanocarriers and the
other areas above will help overcome the major bottleneck of RNA therapy:
delivering RNA safely and efficaciously to target cells. Given the
potential of RNA therapeutics, these advancements could substantially
impact global health and the lives of those struggling with disease.

## Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the funding
support from
the Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto, Connaught
Foundation (514681), and J.P. Bickell Foundation (515159); S.T. acknowledges
scholarships from the Centre for Pharmaceutical Oncology (CPO).

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
RNAribonucleic acid
COVID-19coronavirus 2019
LNPlipid nanoparticle
FDAfood and drug administration
PEGpolyethylene glycol
siRNAsmall interfering
RNA
mRNAmessenger
RNA
DNAdeoxyribonucleic
acid
ncRNAsnoncoding
RNAs
miRNAmicroRNA
dsRNAdouble stranded
RNA
RNAiRNA interference
RISCRNA-induced silencing
complex
Ago2argonaute
2
hATTRhereditary
transthyretin-mediated
TTRtransthyretin
GalNacN-acetylgalactosamine
ALAaminolevulinic acid
PBGporphobilinogen
PH1primary hyperoxaluria type 1
PCSK9proprotein convertase
subtilisin/Kexin
type 9
ssRNAsingle
stranded RNA
HCVHepatitis C virus
ORFopen reading frame
UTRuntranslated region
VEGFvascular endothelial growth factor
CFTRcystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator
SARS-CoV-2severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2
RNasesribonucleases
NPnanoparticles
IVintravenously
PDIpolydispersity index
HIIhexagonal
ApoEapolipoprotein E
SORTselective organ targeting
DSPCdistearoyl phosphatidylcholine
AAAalkenyl amino alcohol
DOPE1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphoethanolamine
EPOerythropoietin
pSarpolysarcosine
Flucfirefly luciferase
eLNPenhanced LNP
DGTSdiacylglyceryltrimethylhomo-Ser
DOTAP1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane
SMsphingomyelin
PSphosphatidylserine
PGphosphatidylglycerol
PAphosphatidic acid
EPCethyl phosphatidylcholine
HDLhigh-density lipoproteins
SR-B1scavenger receptor
type B-1
apoA-Iapolipoprotein A-I
TLPtemplated lipoprotein particles
ApoE3apolipoprotein E3
BBBblood–brain barrier
ATF5activating transcription factor-5
GDNPginger derived
nanoparticle
MGDGmonogalactosyldiacylglycerol
DGDGdigalactosyldiacylglycerol
nLNPnew LNP
IL-22interleukin-22
HAhemagglutinin
VSV-gvesicular stomatitis virus G
PCphosphatidylcholine
DODACN,N-dioleoyl-N,N-dimethylammonium chloride
GFPgreen fluorescent protein
Ffusion
HNhemagglutinin-neuraminidase
DMKEO,O-dimyristyl-N-lysyl glutamate
EGFRepidermal growth factor receptor
FASTfusion-associated
small transmembrane
PVEERsPS-mediated virus entry-enhancing
receptors
DOPC1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphocholine
SLOssecondary lymphoid
organs
LNslymph
nodes
PA1,2- dioleoyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphate
SCLNssuperficial cervical
lymph nodes
EVsextracellular vesicles
PEphosphatidylethanolamine
Cholcholesterol
TMstransmembrane
CerCeramide
F-EMNsfunctionalized exosome-mimetic
nanosystems
Cx43Connexin 43
GJgap-junction.

## Author Contributions
# A.G. and S.T.
contributed equally. All authors have given approval
to the final version of the manuscript.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References