379blackwellopenPediatric PulmonologyPediatr PulmonolPMC1209345112093451120934514039641710.1002/ppul.71113Current Standards and Future Directions of Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy Respiratory Care: The PPMD Italy Meeting Report
RaccaFabrizio FinderJonathan D MercuriEugenio VianelloAndrea ChatwinMichelle AmaddeoAlessandro CrescimannoGrazia TruccoFederica SheehanDaniel W BarberisLuigi BuccellaFilippo WolffJodi KatzSherri L BirnkrantDavid J the PPMD Respiratory Group
MercuriEugenio 
1
Division of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, AO Ordine Mauriziano, Turin, Italy
2
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee, USA
3
Paediatric Neurology, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy
4
Centro Clinico Nemo, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy
5
Department of Cardiac, Thoracic, Vascular Sciences and Public Health, University of Padua, Padua, Italy
6
NMCCC, The National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, University College London Hospitals Foundation Trust, London, UK
7
Institute for Maternal and Child Health IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy
8
Istituto per la Ricerca e l'Innovazione Biomedica (IRIB) del Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Palermo, Italy
9
Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal and Child Health, University of Genova, Genoa, Italy
10
Pediatric Neurology and Muscular Diseases Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy
11
Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA
12
University of Rochester School of Medicine, Rochester, New York, USA
13
Parent Project aps, Rome, Italy
14
Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy, Washington, DC, USA
15
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
16
Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA
17
S.O.C. Pediatria d'Urgenza e Pronto Soccorso IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy
18
Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA
19
Parent Project aps Italy
20
NMCCC University College London Hospitals Foundation Trust, London, UK
21
Istituto per Ricerca e Innovazione Biomedica (IRIB) Consiglio Nazionale Ricerche, Palermo, Italy
22
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy
23
Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Sperimentale Università di Pisa, Italy
24
Centro clinico NeMO Trento, Trent, Italy
25
Division of Pneumology AUSL Romagna, Rimini, Italy
26
Division of Pneumology, AO Ordine Mauriziano, Turin, Italy
27
Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy
28
UOC Fisiopatologia e Riabilitazione Respiratoria PO Monaldi AO Ospedali dei Colli Napoli, Naples, Italy
29
Unità operativa di pediatria, Ospedale di Rovereto, Rovereto, Italy
30
Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario and University of Ottawa, Canada
31
Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, USA
32
Division of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Grande Ospedale Metropolitano Niguarda, Milan, Italy
33
Division of Pediatric Pulmonology Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy
34
Centro Clinico NeMO Ancona, Ancona, Italy
35
Centro Clinico Nemo, Ospedale La Colletta ‐ Arenzano, Genoa, Italy
36
Division of Pneumology, Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Turin, Italy
37
Jacobs School of Medicine, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA
38
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, USA
39
Pediatric Neurology and Muscular Diseases Unit, IRCCS Istituto “Giannina Gaslini”, Genoa, Italy
40
Department of Cardio‐Thoracic and Vascular Sciences, University of Padova, Padua, Italy
41
Centro ACE, Reggio Calabria, Italy*

Correspondence: David J. Birnkrant (dbirnkrant@metrohealth.org)

✉Corresponding author.
2152025605e71113e711132252025© 2025 The Author(s). Pediatric Pulmonology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.

## ABSTRACT

## Objective
This report summarizes key discussions from the meeting “Current Standards and Future Directions of Respiratory Assessment and Management of Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD),” organized by Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy (PPMD) Italy and the United States to address current challenges and opportunities in DMD respiratory care.

## Methods
The meeting brought together researchers, clinicians, and patient advocates who shared experiences, discussed advancements in DMD respiratory management, and identified areas of debate that require further research.

## Results
The speakers emphasized routine assessment of pulmonary function and of breathing during sleep to achieve timely diagnosis of respiratory complications. Therapeutic discussions focused on airway clearance and assisted ventilation, highlighting noninvasive ventilation (NIV) as the preferred modality, even for advanced respiratory failure. The respiratory implications of new pharmacological therapies were discussed. The speakers endorsed the importance of cardiorespiratory outcomes in assessments of drug efficacy. To assess a drug's clinical impact and to define current respiratory phenotypes, the trajectory of the absolute value of forced vital capacity (FVC) was proposed as a potentially better parameter than FVC percent predicted, which is favored in current drug studies. In regard to management of acute respiratory failure and perioperative situations, standards of care and areas needing future research were identified.

## Conclusion
In this meeting, many points of consensus emerged, as well as areas requiring further research. The necessity to involve patients and their families in all aspects of respiratory care was emphasized, as well as the need for patient centered outcomes in medical decision making and research.

Keywords: anesthesia, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, mechanical insufflation‐exsufflation, new therapies, noninvasive ventilation, outcome measures, respiratory insufficiency

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2025 Apr 20; Received 2025 Mar 10; Accepted 2025 Apr 23; Issue date 2025 May.

## Abbreviations
AAVAdeno‐associated viral vector
ACTairway clearance technique
AIartificial intelligence
ARFacute respiratory failure
CPFcough peak flow
DMDDuchenne muscular dystrophy
dSDBdiaphragmatic sleep disordered breathing
EtCO2
exhaled end‐tidal CO2

FEV1forced expiratory volume at 1 s
FVCforced vital capacity
GCglucocorticoid therapy
HDUhigh dependency unit
HFNChigh‐flow nasal cannula
ICUintensive care unit
LVRlung volume recruitment
MACmanually assisted coughing
MIPmaximum inspiratory pressure
MI‐Emechanical insufflation‐exsufflation
NHnocturnal hypoventilation
NIVnoninvasive mechanical ventilation
OSAobstructive sleep apnea
PPMDparent project muscular dystrophy
RTIrespiratory tract infection
SNIPsniff nasal inspiratory pressure
SpO2oxyhemoglobin saturation measured by pulse oximetry
tcPCO2
transcutaneous carbon dioxide
TVtracheostomy ventilation
1.

## Introduction
The meeting “Current Standards and Future Directions of Respiratory Assessment and Management of Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD)” was organized by the Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy Italy (PPMD aps) with the support of PPMD in the United States (PPMD US). The conference was held in Rome, Italy, on September 26–27, 2024. The panel consisted of an international group of 28 clinicians and researchers—14 adult pulmonologists, 7 pediatric pulmonologists, 3 anesthesiologists/intensivists, 3 pediatricians, and 1 pediatric neurologist— specialized in the management of pediatric and adult neuromuscular patients. The panel also included one respiratory therapist and four representatives from PPMD aps and PPMD US. The meeting reviewed current standards and the latest advancements in respiratory management for individuals with DMD.
This paper summarizes the key presentations and discussions that occurred during the meeting. The meeting was divided into the following topics: (i) routine respiratory diagnostics; (ii) chronic respiratory therapeutics; (iii) respiratory aspects of new DMD therapies; (iv) acute respiratory failure (ARF) and perioperative management. Closing remarks from the final session are summarized, including areas of agreement, as well as areas of debate that require additional research, and the perspective of patient advocates, representing individuals with DMD and their families.

2.

## Routine Respiratory Diagnostics
Dr. Finder discussed the routine assessment of pulmonary function. Early detection of respiratory muscle weakness by routine pulmonary function testing can guide interventions and is recommended for all patients able to perform the testing [ , ]. While pulmonary function testing is often used to assess disease control in asthma and cystic fibrosis, in individuals with DMD, it is a way of assessing the functional status of the respiratory muscles. Use of ulnar length to predict height was endorsed in nonambulatory individuals, but since steroid therapy can alter long bone growth, a modification of this equation is necessary [ ].
Spirometry is the primary method used to measure lung function and is typically performed in children aged 6 years and older. It requires effort and cooperation and can be difficult to obtain if there is significant developmental delay or intellectual disability. Forced vital capacity (FVC) is the most studied spirometric parameter, as it reflects both inspiratory and expiratory muscle strength [ ]. However, forced expiratory volume at 1 s (FEV1) tracks closely with FVC and can serve as an alternative, especially in less cooperative individuals, as it is based on just the first second of effort. Threshold reduced FVC levels can be used as a criterion for initiating noninvasive ventilation (NIV), as well as the need to perform a diagnostic sleep study, even in individuals who do not yet have symptoms of sleep‐related hypoventilation.
Cough peak flow (CPF) measures the highest rate of flow that can be generated with cough. This is helpful to assess an individual's airway clearance capability, which is important for respiratory health and prevention of pneumonia. CPF can predict the need for manual or mechanically assisted coughing, and tracks with FVC [ , ]. The use of mechanical insufflation‐exsufflation (MI‐E) is recommended before patients experience severe respiratory issues, with a cautionary note that some standard thresholds of CPF (i.e., 270 L/min) lack a strong evidence base. Ambulatory monitoring of exhaled CO2 is a simple, inexpensive, and noninvasive tool that can be used to determine the need for daytime NIV. An individual with an awake, daytime CO2 level over 45 mmHg should start daytime respiratory support. Sniff nasal pressure (SNIP) [ ] and maximal inspiratory/expiratory pressures (MIP/MEP) are additional means of assessing respiratory muscle strength. MIP and MEP are subject to effort‐related variability and require a cooperative patient; valid results can be used as criteria for starting MI‐E. SNIP is an emerging assay of diaphragm strength and can be performed in patients as young as 3 years of age.
In the next talk, Dr. Crescimanno focused on sleep physiology and its impact on breathing in individuals with DMD. During sleep, there are significant changes in ventilation and breathing patterns due to reduced cortical input, chemoreceptor sensitivity, muscle contractility, lung function, and supine position [ ]. REM sleep suppresses all respiratory muscles except the diaphragm, underscoring the importance of intact diaphragm function [ ]. Both obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and nocturnal hypoventilation (NH) are common in DMD [ ]. OSA may be associated with increased body mass index (BMI), corticosteroid use, and anatomical factors like macroglossia. It is usually mild, but symptoms can mimic attention deficit hyperactivity disorder or autism.
Dr. Crescimanno distinguished between OSA and diaphragmatic sleep disordered breathing (dSDB), an entity with specific diagnostic criteria [ ] (Figure  ). In dSDB, individuals may generate shallow breaths due to reduced muscle strength rather than upper airway obstruction—especially, but not exclusively, during REM sleep. Diaphragmatic events are diagnosed as either apnea or hypopnea via overnight cardiorespiratory polygraphy or polysomnography and are characterized by reduction in inspiratory effort compared with baseline.
 Dr. Crescimanno emphasized the importance of using overnight polysomnography and oxy‐capnography (i.e., an overnight recording of oxygen saturations and transcutaneous carbon dioxide levels) to assess for sleep‐related breathing disorders (i.e, OSA, dSDB, and NH), because their impact can be significant [ ], including sleep disruption, weight loss, and failure to thrive. In terms of future research, evolving guidelines for diagnosing NH disorders using oxy‐capnography were discussed, Diagnostic criteria customized for individuals with DMD are still needed as those criteria guide treatment decisions [ ]. For example, in DMD, less strict criteria for NH (e.g., in comparison to the current standards of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine) may be more clinically relevant.
During the subsequent discussion, FVC thresholds that are commonly used to guide the timing of overnight sleep studies and respiratory interventions were reviewed. However, most participants agreed that FVC alone is inadequate and stressed the need for CO2 monitoring to assess ventilation needs. During the session, several areas needing additional research were discussed. A debate arose regarding transcutaneous carbon dioxide (tcPCO2) versus exhaled CO2 (EtCO2) for nocturnal monitoring, highlighting concerns about the accuracy and reliability of EtCO2 measurements, particularly in patients who experience air leaks related to NIV therapy (during NIV, the higher the rate of air leak, the lower the accuracy of the EtCO2 measurement). Dr. Trucco also noted that in Europe, capillary blood gas and tcPCO2, rather than EtCO2, are commonly used in outpatient settings to assess the need for daytime NIV. Finally, it was noted that dSDB requires additional investigation, as its onset likely precedes the development of NH, and dSBD might have a role in decision‐making regarding initiation of NIV. If confirmed by prospective studies in an appropriately sized study group, the quantification of dSDB could be a useful respiratory outcome measure in clinical trials, particularly as a measure of respiratory function in nonambulant individuals with DMD and in those who have difficulty performing routine pulmonary function tests.

3.

## Standards of Care for Chronic Respiratory Therapeutics
Dr. Chatwin presented a lecture focused on airway clearance techniques (ACTs), highlighting the need for early intervention and correct targeting of ACTs in managing the respiratory decline associated with DMD. Individuals with DMD experience progressive respiratory muscle weakness, which leads to decreased lung volumes, ineffective cough, and sputum retention, making them vulnerable to lower respiratory tract infections (RTIs). Respiratory therapy can treat the consequences of respiratory muscle weakness. The first step is to improve lung volumes with lung volume recruitment (LVR) techniques. LVR has been shown to improve respiratory system compliance [ , ]; however, long‐term effects on hospitalizations and other outcomes are still areas of debate [ , ]. The effectiveness of LVR may depend on consistent use and a learning curve [ ]; the optimal time to initiate LVR remains unknown [ ].
As the disease progresses, cough becomes less effective and ACTs are vital. ACTs can be categorized as peripheral ACTs, which mobilize secretions from the smaller airways to the central airways, and proximal ACTs that clear the central airways (cough augmentation) [ , ]. Before commencing ACTs optimal hydration should be ensured. Proximal ACTs are initiated first, to compensate for ineffective coughing. However, as the disease progresses microaspiration and recurrent RTIs can cause atelectasis and require addition of peripheral ACTs, to mobilize secretions into the large airways, where they can be extracted with proximal techniques [ , ].
Guidelines for DMD patients recommend early respiratory intervention [ , ], including use of proximal ACTs when CPF is ≤ 270 L/min [ , , ]. Proximal ACTs include inspiratory support with a resuscitation bag, ventilator or glossopharyngeal breathing and manually assisted coughing (MAC) [ , ]. When these fail, MI‐E devices are recommended [ ]. However, in the later stages of DMD, individuals may experience upper airway closure [ ] and re‐evaluation of MI‐E treatment is warranted. Guidelines support MI‐E in acute care [ ], increasing the frequency during RTIs or when oxygen saturation drops below 95% [ , ]. Recent guidelines endorse flexible approaches, tailored to patient‐specific needs.
The lecture by Dr. Amaddeo covered a range of topics related to long‐term NIV in individuals with DMD, focused on initiation and monitoring of therapy, and areas requiring future research.
Although there are guidelines for starting NIV based on the results of sleep studies [ ], there is no standardized, evidence‐based definition of NH in children or adults that can be used for diagnosis and management [ ]. Moreover, studies are lacking on the end‐organ morbidity of chronic hypoventilation. Table  shows different definitions of NH currently in use [ , , , , , , ]. While most neuromuscular specialists agree that the AASM definition of NH (> 25% of sleep time with a PtcCO2 > 50 mmHg) may be too permissive, there is an ongoing debate regarding the best threshold values to use for the diagnosis of NH and initiation of NIV [ , , ]. Dr. Amaddeo highlighted the need for proactive intervention, especially in cases of REM hypoventilation. He discussed the study of Ward et al. showing that when NH was defined by a transcutaneous level of CO2 over 48 mmHg, it predicted the need for NIV within 2 years [ ]. Dr. Amaddeo proposed that use of a low threshold to define NH (i.e., > 2% sleep time with a PtcCO2 > 50 mmHg) could enable early detection of chronic respiratory insufficiency, and enable an anticipatory approach to clinical follow‐up and NIV treatment.
 Dr. Amaddeo stated that individuals with DMD who are clinically stable should have NIV initiated in an outpatient setting, with provision of necessary home care and monitoring, stressing the need for adequate outpatient support [ ]. In individuals with DMD, effective NIV can generally be achieved using a relatively narrow range of conventional device settings, with minor adjustments occurring with aging, such as reduction in the back‐up respiratory rate [ ].
Dr. Amaddeo touched upon the current state of telemonitoring platforms, stating that they lack detailed breath‐by‐breath analysis, which is a crucial for effective patient monitoring [ ]. He spoke of the utility of built‐in ventilator software to monitor patients remotely, combined with tools like home oxy‐capnography [ ]. In Italy, there are many options for ventilators, allowing personalized care for each patient.
He also speculated on the future integration of artificial intelligence (AI) into NIV systems [ ]. Dr. Amaddeo expressed concerns about the potential for AI to make autonomous decisions, such as changing ventilator settings autonomously. He emphasized the importance of human involvement and oversight. Dr. Amaddeo concluded with the idea that despite advancements in technology and AI, medical professionals must continue to play an active role in patient care. He raised thought‐provoking questions about whether healthcare professionals will actively guide these changes or passively accept current trends, including those related to AI.
Dr. Vianello's lecture was on the topic of continuous NIV. Daytime ventilatory failure commonly occurs in individuals with DMD who are at an advanced stage of the disease. Specifically, the onset of diurnal hypoventilation and the need for daytime ventilatory support has been associated with a decline of FVC below 30% predicted, and a high risk of life‐threatening RTI [ ]. Diurnal CO2 retention is related to reduced respiratory muscle competence in the setting of increased respiratory muscle load due to microatelectasis, ribcage stiffness, and scoliosis [ ]. In most cases, full‐time NIV is begun when, despite nocturnal ventilation, symptoms of hypoventilation occur during wakefulness. Daytime NIV is then added to address those symptoms, often in the setting of abnormally high PaCO2 levels [ ]. According to current guidelines, full‐time ventilation should be considered when VC drops below 20% predicted, diurnal PaCO2 levels rise and/or clinical signs of respiratory muscle fatigue are detected [ ]. Due to a lower risk of tracheobronchial infection and the possibility of maintaining the ability to speak, full‐time NIV has potential advantages over tracheostomy‐based ventilation (TV) [ ]. However, successful NIV requires intact bulbar muscle function and the ability to cooperate with assisted coughing techniques. Under these conditions, NIV via a mouthpiece was found to reduce severe complications compared with TV [ ]. Considering that most patients with DMD prefer a noninvasive treatment approach, NIV should be considered the default option in cases of full‐time ventilator dependency. Of importance, several major complications can be associated to 24 h NIV use, including the risk of fatality due to equipment failure, and severe gastric or colonic distension [ ]. Although there are conflicting findings on its impact on survival rate and quality of life, tracheostomy remains a viable option for individuals who fail full‐time NIV [ ].
During the subsequent discussion, participants emphasized the importance of standardizing the timing for initiating nocturnal NIV. Although this remains a debated issue, wider dissemination of institutional and regional practices could encourage uniform standards and enhance patient care. Some attendees debated the choice between full‐time NIV and tracheostomy ventilation. Most participants favored NIV for its positive impact on speech and quality of life, while highlighting the importance of respecting patient preferences. All participants endorsed early identification of weak cough and implementation of ACTs.

4.

## Respiratory Aspects of New DMD Therapies
Professor Mercuri's lecture focused on advancements and challenges in treating DMD. The overview initially focused on dystrophin restoration using DNA/RNA strategies, including Adeno‐associated viral vectors (AAVs) gene therapy and antisense oligonucleotides. Gene Therapy focuses on delivering shortened versions of the dystrophin gene via AAVs [ , ]. Exon skipping was also discussed, that is, the possibility to skip additional exons to convert out‐of‐frame mutations into in‐frame mutations that can produce some functional dystrophin [ ]. An overview of the different approaches and related trial results were critically discussed [ , , ].
The results of first‐generation of Oligonucleotides (ASOs) and early results from studies of the new generation of these drugs were also discussed. Data were also presented on Ataluren, which aims to restore functional dystrohin production by targeting premature stop codons. Despite positive long‐term data, the renewal of the drug in Europe is under threat [ ].
The review also included approaches based on drugs with nongenetic mechanisms of action, like Vamorolone, a new glucocorticoid which offers similar efficacy to traditional steroids but fewer adverse effects, like diminished bone health and delayed puberty; and Givinostat, a histone deacetylase inhibitor which showed statistically significant slowing of disease progression by reducing inflammation and fibrosis [ , ].
Lastly, Professor Mercuri highlighted some lessons learned from previous trials, such as the need for longer study durations; and the need to combine short‐term placebo‐controlled studies with long‐term observational studies, to assess key outcome measures like loss of ambulation, hand‐to‐mouth function, and ventilation requirements.
Next, Drs. Birnkrant and Katz examined potential problems in the regulatory pathway by which new DMD drugs are approved, with a focus on the outcome measures used to assess drug effectiveness. In DMD, patient survival is determined by cardiorespiratory function, and the most impactful clinical complications are cardiorespiratory in nature [ , ]. They occur in older individuals, who are in the late nonambulatory stage of the disease. Thus, to be considered truly effective, a new DMD drug should show that it improves cardiorespiratory function. Instead, new DMD drugs can be approved through the Accelerated Regulatory pathway [ ] based on small improvements in timed tests and muscle strength scales and on surrogate outcome measures, like tissue levels of nonbiologic dystrophin, without considering cardiorespiratory data. Moreover, these studies usually involve a young, ambulatory population, who essentially never experiences the cardiorespiratory complications that occur in the late nonambulatory stage of DMD [ , , , ].
Drs. Birnkrant and Katz also discussed the methodological limitations of studies that do include respiratory outcomes. One such outcome is a delay in reaching certain threshold pulmonary function values [ , ]. For example, if a drug delays the decline of FVC to < 50% predicted, the level at which assisted ventilation is recommended by current guidelines. However, these thresholds have never been clinically validated; they were intended as a clinical strategy, not an outcome measure [ , ]. For example, it has never been established that starting assisted ventilation right when FVC falls below 50% predicted mitigates morbidities or prolongs survival. Next, problems with historical controls were discussed. Historical control data are observational in nature. Therapies that impact cardiorespiratory function, including glucocorticoids, cardiac medications, and assisted ventilation, are not prescribed or administered in a standardized way, and become uncontrolled variables [ , ].
Another methodological problem is that historical databases use statistical smoothing to report a single, constant rate of decline in FVC % predicted as their respiratory outcome measure. However, this single rate of decline is inaccurate. In fact, pulmonary function in DMD is heterogeneous, reflecting the progressive weakness that occurs with aging. As an example, respiratory data from the Canadian Neuromuscular Data Registry (CNDR) show that individual rates of decline in FVC % predicted are quite variable—variability that is masked by the single rate of decline reported by historical control databases (Figure  ) [ , , ]. With their uncontrolled variables and statistical smoothing, respiratory results from historical datasets vary widely; drug studies can select the most pessimistic results as their historical controls, making it easier to claim that a drug is effective [ ].
 Drs. Birnkrant and Sheehan discussed broader problems with FVC %predicted, the respiratory outcome measure used in current DMD drug studies. Pulmonary function in DMD can be thought of as the product of two competing forces: growth (which increases pulmonary function) versus progressive weakness (which impairs pulmonary function). The relative influence of these forces changes with aging. In the youngest individuals, the influence of growth predominates. As a result, ambulatory individuals are in the rising stage of pulmonary function. When the early nonambulatory stage begins, growth and weakness are in equilibrium, and pulmonary function enters the plateau stage. Finally, weakness predominates as individuals enter the late, nonambulatory stage of DMD, and pulmonary function begins its final decline (Figure  ) [ ]. This heterogenous pattern of pulmonary function with aging is lost when pulmonary function is portrayed by FVC % predicted, which involves a single, constant rate of decline across the lifespan (Figure  ) [ , , ]. Those changes are more accurately portrayed using the absolute value of FVC over time (the “Rideau Plot”), instead of FVC % predicted, making Rideau Plots a potentially better respiratory outcome measure that deserves further study.
 To illustrate, the speakers showed a “mock drug trial,” assessing the respiratory effect of glucocorticoid therapy (GCs) [ , ]. When portrayed with FVC % predicted, the improvement is barely noticeable—annual decline changes from −6.06%/year to −5.44%/year, a finding of uncertain clinical significance. In contrast, Rideau Plots show that GC‐treated individuals retain favorable pulmonary function into their late teens, an age when the untreated individuals experience a rapid decline (Figure  ) [ ]. Rideau Plots show that GCs allow FVC to remain higher for longer, exerting their benefits at the age when respiratory complications occur. It thus becomes apparent that GCs are likely to confer impactful clinical benefits, a conclusion that is obscured when the data are portrayed using FVC % predicted.
 Drs. Birnkrant and Sheehan proposed various improvements in study methodologies involving the use of Rideau Plots as the preferred respiratory outcome measure, in place of FVC % predicted [ ]. For example, the speakers showed Rideau Plots from two brothers with identical dystrophin mutations and unexpectedly divergent respiratory function (Figure  ) [ ]. If the brother with the beneficial phenotype had been treated with a new drug, one might conclude that the drug was effective; instead, his superior pulmonary function was due to a favorable respiratory phenotype. To define contemporary respiratory phenotypes, new natural history studies are needed that are done prospectively [ ]. Key features of Rideau Plots, such as the level of peak FVC and the individual's age at its acquisition, could be used to group study subjects into phenotypically homogeneous cohorts.
 A prospective study design would assure that the study population is treated with current standards of care, minimizing the effect of uncontrolled variables that can confound historical control databases, such as variable dosing of, and adherence to GC therapy; and variations in the therapeutic details of, and adherence to assisted ventilation [ ].
Dr. Birnkrant then discussed why it is crucial to include cardiac outcomes in studies of drug effectiveness. Although cardiac function is a key determinant of survival, cardiac outcomes are currently undervalued. Phenotypic discordance is when cardiac function diverges from respiratory function in a single individual—as if the heart and lung were expressing “opposite phenotypes.” Phenotypic discordance was illustrated by four individuals with identical dystrophin mutations [ ]. Two of the individuals had unexpectedly good heart function despite unmeasurably low pulmonary function. Two of the individuals had the opposite type of discordance—unexpectedly poor heart function, despite adequate pulmonary function (Figure  ) [ , ]. In one study, “Very Prolonged Survivors” of DMD (alive, at mean age 34.3 years) had “Good Heart/Bad Lung” discordance. Good heart function allowed them to achieve prolonged survival, with use of assisted ventilation to compensate for respiratory failure. By contrast, individuals experiencing “Early Death” (at a mean age of 21.7 years) had the opposite type of discordance—“Bad Heart/Good Lung.” Their progressive heart failure was life‐limiting, despite adequate pulmonary function. Overall, cardiac function was the main determinant of survival when individuals with DMD were treated with assisted ventilation (the current standard of care) [ ].
 In conclusion, the speakers suggested that new DMD drugs should show they can improve cardiorespiratory function to demonstrate their true effectiveness. The speakers presented proposals designed to improve study methodologies and outcome measures, and they endorsed prospective data acquisition instead of historical controls. Their proposals will require further study and validation.
During the subsequent discussion, participants focused on the need for longer studies, prospective data acquisition and better respiratory outcome measures. Professor Mercuri highlighted the idea that upper limb strength and prolongation of ambulation are key outcome measures in young individuals, and they may be more clinically relevant than cardiorespiratory function in that age group.

5.

## Standards of Care for Perioperative Management and ARF
Dr. Racca discussed the fact that individuals with DMD are at high risk of intra‐ and postoperative complications such as ARF, upper airway obstruction, congestive heart failure and difficulty weaning from mechanical ventilation [ , , ]. Anesthetic drugs can depress respiratory and cardiac function, which may already be compromised. Additionally, exaggerated sensitivity to sedatives and muscle relaxants can have prolonged postoperative effects. Finally, there is a risk of acute rhabdomyolysis when exposed to inhaled anesthetics or succinylcholine. Key recommendations for preoperative evaluation are summarized in Table  . In particular, preoperative consultation with cardiologists and pulmonologists is critical [ , , ]. Dr. Racca also discussed different anesthesia techniques. Regional anesthesia is preferred when possible, to minimize respiratory complications, but caution is needed for spinal anesthesia in cases of severe cardiac dysfunction [ , , ]. If general anesthesia is necessary, a total intravenous anesthesia technique should be used, avoiding inhalational agents and succinylcholine [ , , ]. Ultrashort‐acting anesthetic drugs should be chosen when possible. Rocuronium is the nondepolarizing muscle relaxant of choice, because its effects can be reversed with sugammadex [ , ]. The depth of anesthesia and neuromuscular function should be carefully monitored to adjust the drug dosage appropriately. Cardiovascular function requires close observation, particularly in patients with low ejection fractions (< 35%), as they are at increased risk of intraoperative hypotension and other cardiac complications.
 After surgery, admission to an Intensive Care Unit (ICU) or to High Dependency Unit (HDU) should be considered in any patient who is at risk for respiratory or cardiac complications [ , ]. Patients with significant respiratory muscle weakness should be extubated directly to NIV, using MI‐E to assist in clearing bronchial secretions. The use of multimodal pain relief is essential to limit opioid use, especially in patients with reduced respiratory function.
The presentation by Dr. Trucco focused on the home management of ARF in individuals with DMD, highlighting the importance of anticipatory home care and personalized treatment to reduce hospital admissions and improve outcomes. RTIs are responsible for over 90% episodes of ARF [ ]. The initial presentation can be subtle. Initially, increased respiratory secretions, changes in the level of consciousness, and dyspnea can all be mild, but the severity can quickly escalate [ , ]. In adult patients with DMD, the risk of silent aspiration should be always considered [ ].
It is recommended that all patients have access to pulse oximetry at home [ ]. Oxygen levels should be measured regularly via pulse oximetry, with levels of SpO2 below 95% indicating the need for escalation of respiratory support and < 92% triggering potential hospital admission. The treatment of ARF should include early, empirical use of broad‐spectrum antibiotics, especially when there are increased respiratory secretions or abnormal oxyhemoglobin saturations. For individuals already using NIV, adjustments should include increased time on NIV, and adjustments in the device settings, such as a higher inspiratory pressure and/or an increase in the back up rate of breathing.
Increased time on NIV can result in the development of pressure sores. As a precaution, two different masks should be alternated, and hydrocolloid patches should be applied to protect pressure points, such as the nasal bridge. ACTs such as MI‐E should be applied frequently to prevent mucus plugging and atelectasis. In the home, oxygen can be administered by connecting it to the ventilator circuit, but should only be used briefly to support patients with hypoxia, such as before and after airway clearance treatments. Suggested criteria for hospital admission include a persistent decrease in oxyhemoglobin saturation below 92%, changes in mental status, dehydration, or lack of response to home management.
Dr. Trucco emphasized the role of nonrespiratory strategies that are preventative, particularly adherence to age‐appropriate immunizations, and good dental hygiene. The benefits of a written emergency health care plan were discussed, and the need to train families and caregivers to recognize the early signs of RTI, so that timely therapy can be instituted. Finally, tele‐monitoring may be effective in improving the home management of respiratory exacerbations in individuals with DMD who are treated with assisted ventilation [ ].
In his second talk, Dr. Racca discussed the hospital management of ARF in individuals with DMD. If home management fails, hospital admission is required [ , ]. NIV is the first‐line treatment, but potential contraindications such as severe dysphagia, reduced consciousness, and severe hypoxemia should be assessed [ , ]. NIV alone may be insufficient if respiratory secretions are increased. In this case, combining NIV with MI‐E can treat and prevent mucus plugging [ ].
Patients should be treated in an ICU or HDU to assure continuous monitoring, adequate staffing and rapid physician availability. As MI‐E could be used up to every 10 min, professional staffing can be augmented by suitably skilled home caregivers, so that MI‐E is available on‐demand [ ].
Noninvasive strategies should not delay intubation. If NIV fails or is contraindicated, early intubation is crucial, especially in cases of severe hypoxemia. Given the risks associated with the difficult airway management intrinsic to DMD, emergency intubations should be avoided whenever possible [ , ].
Another key factor is diagnosing the underlying cause of ARF, to implement targeted therapy. If clinical presentation is consistent with pulmonary edema, it is essential to consider congestive heart failure and fat embolism sydrome. Although rare, pneumothorax should always be ruled out, as it can become life‐threatening [ ]. In patients with scoliosis, chest CT or ultrasound may be more reliable than plain chest radiographs, which can be difficult to interpret in cases of pneumothorax.
After recovery from an acute illness involving endotracheal intubation, extubation directly to NIV is critical to avoid reintubation, with MI‐E for mucus clearance [ ]. Tracheotomy may be considered in patients with severe bulbar dysfunction or repeated extubation failures [ ].
Safe management of acute respiratory situations depends on the skills of the local emergency care team, who may not have experience with DMD, due to its rarity. Additionally, emergency teams may hesitate to provide needed treatments due to misconceptions about life expectancy and quality of life, inappropriately limiting therapeutic interventions. This is why it is important for individuals with DMD to carry a pocket guide provided by their neuromuscular team, that includes individualized protocols for management of acute illness, for the benefit of emergency medical personnel [ , ]. In 2020, an Italian Emergency Card for Individuals with DMD was produced by the Parent Project Italy (PPMD aps), and in April 2022 that document was improved based on a consensus conference [ ].
The specialized care needed by individuals with DMD experiencing acute respiratory illness highlights the critical importance of establishing a network of ICUs and HDUs with knowledge regarding the treatment of individuals with neuromuscular disorders.
During the subsequent discussion, panelists emphasized that elective surgery should be performed in a hospital with appropriate experience in the management of DMD. When urgent surgical interventions must be performed in nonspecialized centers, it is crucial that current recommendations for anesthesia and perioperative management are implemented.
The discussion also emphasized the importance of anticipatory care to minimize the frequency and severity of acute clinical deteriorations, by training patients and families to intensify therapy with NIV and MI‐E at home, early in the course of any respiratory illnesses. Dr. Trucco underscored the need to customize management guidelines for individuals treated chronically with NIV versus those in whom NIV is newly initiated with an acute illness. The need for standardized criteria for hospital admission and ICU management was also discussed.
In regard to the use of high‐flow nasal cannula therapy (HFNC), Dr. Vianello described a pilot retrospective case series of nine patients with neuromuscular diseases intolerant to NIV who were admitted to an HDU for ARF [ ]. HFNC was successfully provided during daytime hours and NIV at night. Dr. Vianello suggested that, whenever HFNC is provided to individuals with DMD, PaCO2 levels need to be closely monitored. HFNC may have a role in treating NIV‐intolerant individuals with ARF.

6.

## Closing Remarks and Future Goals
During the final session of the meeting, a summary was created of the key points of consensus that emerged throughout the conference regarding standards of respiratory management of DMD patients. These points are listed in Table  . Of note: they are a product of the meeting's discussions, and not a formal consensus methodology.
 The meeting also raised many unanswered questions regarding the assessment and the management of individuals with DMD that are areas requiring further research. The answers to these questions were viewed as a “to‐do list” for the DMD community. This list is shown in Table  .
 The necessity to apply a patient‐centered perspective was explored in regard to both standards of care and questions needing further study. For example, centralization of care at DMD centers has great advantages, as it can assure a high standard of disease management. On the other hand, centralized care is not always possible. Two common, high stakes examples are when individuals with DMD experience acute respiratory illness, and present to their local emergency department; or, when individuals with DMD transition out of pediatric care and subsequently require admission to an adult ICU, where individuals with DMD are rarely encountered.
There was consensus on the need for further efforts to train emergency medical teams to deal effectively with the complications of DMD, and to create a network of ICUs to improve hospital management both during ARF and in the postoperative period. These are a few examples of how existing standards require further dissemination, to assure optimal care by the diverse group of clinicians who interact with individuals with DMD.
Another aspect of standards of care is the need for practicality in terms of their implementation. For example, chronic and acute management of respiratory complications has now been well‐described in multiple consensus statements [ , , ]. However, implementation of those standards must be patient‐centric, to assure tolerability and adherence.
A patient perspective on drug development was discussed. This is a complex and important subject that requires open discussion and debate in the DMD community, involving the need to balance a strong desire for rapid availability of new treatment options with study methodologies and regulatory decisions that ensure the safety and effectiveness of the new drugs reaching individuals with DMD.
Overall, some Key Points that emerged included the following:

1.Respiratory diagnostic and therapeutic approaches to DMD are well‐established and they have helped to improve survival. However, there are still areas that require further research, including the most accurate way to diagnose and treat sleep disordered breathing.
2.Dissemination of respiratory guidelines to clinicians, and the fostering of patient adherence, are areas that require continued emphasis and creative solutions.
3.New drugs for DMD are emerging at an unprecedented rate. It is crucial to include cardiorespiratory outcomes in studies of their effectiveness and in their regulatory approval.
4.Guidelines for optimal perioperative management and treatment of ARF in individuals with DMD require wider dissemination, and further study.
Finally, some of the larger themes that emerged from this conference were: (1) the importance of maintaining respiratory function to mitigate the life‐limiting complications of DMD and (2) the crucial need to include the patient perspective in clinical initiatives and research activities, so that the goals of patients and their families inform current and future care.

## Author Contributions

Fabrizio Racca: conceptualization, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing, project administration, methodology, investigation, visualization, supervision, resources, validation. Jonathan D. Finder: conceptualization, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing, visualization, methodology. Eugenio Mercuri: conceptualization, writing – original draft, methodology, visualization, writing – review and editing. Andrea Vianello: conceptualization, writing – original draft, methodology, visualization, writing – review and editing. Michelle Chatwin: conceptualization, writing – original draft, methodology, visualization, writing – review and editing. Alessandro Amaddeo: conceptualization, writing – original draft, methodology, visualization, writing – review and editing. Grazia Crescimanno: conceptualization, writing – original draft, methodology, visualization, writing – review and editing. Federica Trucco: conceptualization, writing – original draft, methodology, visualization, writing – review and editing. Daniel W. Sheehan: conceptualization, writing – original draft, methodology, visualization, writing – review and editing, investigation. Luigi Barberis: conceptualization, writing – original draft, methodology, visualization, writing – review and editing. Filippo Buccella: conceptualization, funding acquisition, writing – original draft, methodology, visualization, writing – review and editing, project administration, resources, supervision. Jodi Wolff: conceptualization, funding acquisition, writing – original draft, project administration, writing – review and editing, methodology, visualization, resources. Sherri L. Katz: conceptualization, investigation, writing – original draft, methodology, visualization, writing – review and editing. David J. Birnkrant: conceptualization, writing – original draft, methodology, validation, visualization, writing – review and editing, project administration, supervision, resources, investigation.

## Conflicts of Interest
Federica Trucco reports participation in Scientific Advisory Boards for Roche UK and teaching initiatives for Biogen, Avexis, Roche, and BREAS. Michelle Chatwin discloses the fact that she works in a noncommercial role for Breas Medical as Head of Education and Research 3 days a week. Her participation was in her own time, and Breas Medical has had no input into any aspects of the workshop or manuscript. David J. Birnkrant reports a financial interest in granted (US patents 8,651,107; 8,844,530; 9,795,752; and 10,814,082, and related international patents) and pending patents for respiratory devices, licensed to Advanced Bio Machines PTE LTD (ABM Respiratory Care). The remaining authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## Acknowledgments
We thank Dr Rosina Cannone for writing assistance and manuscript preparation; she received payment for their services from Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy (PPMD), which also convened the meeting. PPMD's NBS initiative and related efforts were made possible with support from our industry partners. To date, PPMD has received support from Roche, Dyne Therapeutics, Edgewise Therapeutics, Italfarmaco, and Sarepta.

Members of the PPMD Respiratory Group

Alessandro Amaddeo, S.O.C. Pediatria d'Urgenza e Pronto Soccorso IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy; Luigi Barberis, Division of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, AO Ordine Mauriziano, Turin, Italy; David J. Birnkrant, Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA; Jane Black, Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA; Filippo Buccella, Parent Project aps Italy; Michelle Chatwin, NMCCC University College London Hospitals Foundation Trust, London, UK; Grazia Crescimanno, Istituto per Ricerca e Innovazione Biomedica (IRIB) Consiglio Nazionale Ricerche, Palermo, Italy; Fernanda De Angelis, Parent Project aps Italy; Cristina De Rose, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy; Maria Elisa Di Cicco, Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Sperimentale Università di Pisa, Italy; Massimo Croci, Centro clinico NeMO Trento, Trent, Italy; Alessia Fabiano, Division of Pneumology AUSL Romagna, Rimini, Italy; Giovanni Ferrari, Division of Pneumology, AO Ordine Mauriziano, Turin, Italy; Marco Filippelli, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy; Jonathan D. Finder, University of Tennessee Health Sciences Center, Memphis, Tennessee, USA; Giuseppe Fiorentino, UOC Fisiopatologia e Riabilitazione Respiratoria PO Monaldi AO Ospedali dei Colli Napoli, Naples, Italy; Valentina Fiorito, Unità operativa di pediatria, Ospedale di Rovereto, Rovereto, Italy; Sherri L. Katz, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario and University of Ottawa, Canada; Oren Kupfer, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, USA; Eugenio Mercuri, Paediatric Neurology, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, Centro Clinico Nemo, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy; Luigi Montagnini, Division of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Grande Ospedale Metropolitano Niguarda, Milan, Italy; Martino Pavone, Division of Pediatric Pulmonology Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy; Lucia Pettinari, Centro clinico NeMO Ancona, Ancona, Italy; Fabrizio Rao, Centro Clinico Nemo, Ospedale La Colletta ‐ Arenzano, Genoa, Italy; Fabrizio Racca, Division of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, AO Ordine Mauriziano, Turin, Italy; Fulvia Ribolla, Division of Pneumology, Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Turin, Italy; Daniel W. Sheehan, Jacobs School of Medicine, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA; Richard Shell, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, USA; Federica Trucco, Pediatric Neurology and Muscular Diseases Unit, IRCCS Istituto “Giannina Gaslini”, Genoa, Italy; Andrea Vianello, Department of Cardio‐Thoracic and Vascular Sciences, University of Padova, Padua, Italy; Clara Zinnarello, Centro ACE, Reggio Calabria, Italy; Ilaria Zito, Parent Project aps Italy; Jodi Wolff, Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy, Washington, DC, USA.

For a complete list of the Members of PPMD Respiratory Group, see the Acknowledgments section.

## Contributor Information
David J. Birnkrant, Email: dbirnkrant@metrohealth.org.
the PPMD Respiratory Group: 
Alessandro Amaddeo, Luigi Barberis, David J. Birnkrant, Jane Black, Filippo Buccella, Michelle Chatwin, Grazia Crescimanno, Fernanda De Angelis, Cristina De Rose, Maria Elisa Di Cicco, Massimo Croci, Alessia Fabiano, Giovanni Ferrari, Marco Filippelli, Jonathan D. Finder, Giuseppe Fiorentino, Valentina Fiorito, Sherri L. Katz, Oren Kupfer, Luigi Montagnini, Martino Pavone, Lucia Pettinari, Fabrizio Rao, Fabrizio Racca, Fulvia Ribolla, Daniel W. Sheehan, Richard Shell, Federica Trucco, Andrea Vianello, Clara Zinnarello, Ilaria Zito, and Jodi Wolff

## Data Availability Statement
The authors have nothing to report.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
The authors have nothing to report.