pmcAnal ChemAnal Chem822acssd0370536acAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC11983376PMC11983376.111983376119833764013304610.1021/acs.analchem.4c068031ReviewAcoustofluidics:
Technology Advances and Applications
from 2022 to 2024
GodaryToktam https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1572-1364BinkleyBrandi LiuZhengruAwoyemiOlanrewajuOverbyAmandaYuliantoroHerbiFikeBethany J.AndersonSydneyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8332-7142LiPeng C. Eugene Bennett Department of Chemistry, West Virginia University, Morgantown 26506-6201, West Virginia, United States*should
be addressed to P.L. (peng.li@mail.wvu.edu).2503202508042025971348638568476870151220241303202527022025100420251104202511042025© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2025The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).National Institute of General Medical Sciences10.13039/100000057R01GM135432Division of Chemistry10.13039/100000165CHE-2305137Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems10.13039/100000148ECCS-2144216National Institute of General Medical Sciences10.13039/100000057R01GM153899pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9ac4c06803document-id-new-14ac4c06803ccc-price

## Special Issue
Published
as part of Analytical Chemistryspecial issue “Fundamental and Applied Reviews
in Analytical Chemistry 2025”.
Acoustofluidics, the interplay
of acoustics and fluid dynamics, has experienced exponential growth
in the past decade. Acoustic waves are the result of the vibration
or oscillation of the particles in the medium through which they propagate.
These waves not only propagate through the medium but also exert forces
on it and on objects within their pathway. Through careful engineering
of wave generation and propagation, often in conjunction with microfluidic
platforms, acoustofluidics enables the precise manipulation and control
of a wide range of objects at the microscale, including biological
objects and fluids. Two typical types of acoustofluidic devices are
bulk acoustic wave (BAW) devices and surface acoustic wave (SAW) devices,
classified based on the mode of wave propagation. A typical BAW device
includes a piezoelectric transducer and a resonant chamber, while
SAW requires patterned electrodes on top of a piezoelectric substrate.
Both types have demonstrated extraordinary versatility and effectiveness,
serving as powerful tools across diverse application areas such as
biomedical diagnostics, materials synthesis, and tissue engineering.
This review highlights the major advancements in acoustofluidics spanning
from January 2022 to November 2024, emphasizing both technological
innovations and the expansion of application domains. By showcasing
the breadth of the field and the ingenuity behind its numerous breakthroughs,
we aim to provide readers with a comprehensive understanding of the
current state of acoustofluidics and its future directions.

## Advances
in Technology Development

## Device Fabrication
Fabricating methods
are essential
to the functionality and commercialization of acoustofluidic devices.
While standard microfabrication procedures still apply, factors such
as the acoustic field in the channel, coupling layer, matching the
acoustic wavelength with device geometry, and material properties
are unique to acoustofluidic devices.
Channel materials have
a major impact on the acoustic field and energy efficiency of acoustofluidic
devices. Acikgoz et al. evaluated the
effectiveness of various materials for use as chip materials in acoustofluidic
particle and cell manipulation. The materials studied include silicon,
glass, epoxy with fiberglass filling (FR4), polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS),
and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA). The study shows that while PDMS
and PMMA are the most suitable for biological purposes, silicon is
best for high precision and structural stability, and glass is good
when optical clarity is needed. Luzuriaga et al. reported that acoustophoretic motion of polystyrene particles
can be observed in a hybrid millifluidic resonator. The resonators
have channels that are embedded in hydrogel with properties similar
to liquids. Fakhfouri et al. fabricated
a SAW device made of dry film resist (DFR), which improves the precision
and reproducibility of microchannels. By generating acoustic streaming
that complements the acoustic radiation effect, their device was able
to trap nanoparticles as small as 200 nm.
To generate a bulk
acoustic wave (BAW), Fuchsluger et al. reported that lateral vibration modes of a plate
transducer can also be used in an acoustic resonator device. These
lateral plate transducer modes were demonstrated to perform rapid
particle focusing when excited at a frequency of 540 kHz. Qiu studied the potential of using lead-free piezoelectric
materials to BAW devices. Using the common transducers that are made
of lead zirconate titanate results in environmental and biocompatibility
issues. Through experiments and simulations, the researcher demonstrated
that lead-free transducer devices can match the typical lead transducer
devices at a low power and are even better at intermediate powers.
Qiu et al. studied the impact of transducer
position on the energy efficiency of BAW resonator. They found that
placing the transducer on the side for actuation led to a 4-fold increase
in energy density, due to acoustic field symmetry breaking and the
improvement in energy conversion efficiency.
Using interdigital
electrodes (IDTs) is still the most dominant
way of generating surface acoustic waves (SAWs) in acoustofluidic
devices. While IDTs can be fabricated through the standard “lift-off”
procedure, it is a lengthy process and requires access to clean room
facilities. Rich et al. reported fabricating
IDTs using aerosol jet printing ( A). They successfully printed SAW IDTs using
different materials including silver nanowires, graphene, and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
polystyrenesulfonate (PEDOT:PSS). The devices were then demonstrated
to be comparable to clean room fabricated devices for acoustic streaming
generation and particle concentration. Wang and Qian used femtosecond laser micromachining to fabricate SAW
devices. This method generates the IDTs by micromachining steel foil
to form a mask and then directly evaporating metal on a piezoelectric
substrate using the mask. The resulting device was demonstrated for
various acoustofluidic functionalities. Zhang et al. introduced a novel IDT design termed unapodization. Unapodization
removes the apodization effect, creating laterally uniform surface
acoustic waves and resulting in reduced variations and smoothed-out
wave amplitudes across the surface.
 Surface properties have a major
impact on acoustofluidic
particle
and droplet manipulation. Ning et al. reported using self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) of 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorododecyltrichlorosilane
(FDTS) on LiNbO3 substrates to enhance SAW microfluidic
performance. FDTS SAMs were deposited onto the LiNbO3 substrates
via chemical vapor deposition, creating a hydrophobic surface. Then
these fabricated devices were compared to untreated SAW devices, and
it was found that there was an increase in the droplet driving speed
which therefore enables faster and more precise liquid jetting. Al-Ali
et al. reported using 3-(trimethoxysilyl)
propyl methacrylate (TMSPMA) silane treatment on PDMS to enhance its
attachment to LiNbO3 substrates. The surface modification strategy involved using oxygen plasma treatment
to alter the surface chemistry of the PDMS improving its ability to
bond with other materials.
Due to the cost and lengthy fabrication
procedures of fabricating
SAW substrates, there is a growing need for developing reusable SAW
devices. Kuruoglu reported a strategy
to detach the permanent bonding between the LiNbO3 substrate
and PDMS. They found immersing the device in 0.1 M potassium hydroxide
solution for 2 h can effectively detach the device and no significant
deterioration in the microfluidic channel or LiNbO3 surface
after 3 cycles of bonding-detachment. Another common strategy to achieve
reusable SAW is separating the SAW substrate and the fluidic channel,
which necessitates an efficient coupling layer. Park et al. studied the impact of the thickness of the PDMS
coupling layer on the various acoustofluidic phenomena. They found
that when the thickness is >8 times the wavelength of the acoustic
wave, the coupling layer will absorb almost all the energy and generate
heat. Therefore, to ensure efficient acoustic streaming and acoustic
radiation force generation in the microchannel, the thickness of the
PDMS layer needs to be controlled. Kolesnik et al. also investigated the optimal coupling layer and superstrate
thickness. Results indicated that a superstrate thickness 0.55 times
the acoustic wavelength results in maximized acoustic coupling. Chang
et al. explored using n-dodecane as a coupling layer to enhance the performance of reusable
acoustofluidic microchips. With viscosity similar to water but a lower
surface tension and higher boiling point, n-dodecane
offers unique properties. These properties allow the n-dodecane to reduce the friction between the microchip and fluid. n-Dodecane also enhances the transfer of acoustic energy
from the surface to the fluid, improving particle manipulation. Yang
and co-workers reported fabricating reusable
IDTs by mechanically clamping interdigital electrodes (IDEs) patterned
on a printed circuit board (PCB) onto a piezoelectric substrate. They
achieved reusability for both IDTs and the PDMS microchannel. A thin
layer of polyamide was used to directly fabricate the microchannel
onto the printed circuit board ( B). This allows for the formation of flexible structures
that can be adapted for different applications.
Fabricating
IDTs on a flexible piezoelectric substrate is the first
step to achieve acoustofluidics for wearable devices and many in vivo applications. Zahertar et al. reported flexible acoustic wave devices that were fabricated
on substrates that consist of thin layers of metal and polymer. Overall,
the results indicated that the combination of metallic and polymer
layers offers unique advantages. Metallic layers are ideal for acoustic
wave generation while the polymer layers provide flexibility and allow
for tuning of the device properties. Pang et al. demonstrated that both Rayleigh waves and shear horizontal
SAWs can be generated simultaneously in an inclined ZnO film. The
two wave types can work together to enhance particle manipulation
and fluid control in devices with the dual wave approach also providing
a more versatile platform.

## Advances in Particle Manipulation
Acoustics has been
demonstrated as an excellent tool for manipulating
both biological and nonbiological particles in various fluids via
a contactless manner. Acoustofluidic particle manipulation is mainly
achieved by controlling the acoustic radiation force (ARF) exerted
on the particle. Therefore, accurate characterization of ARF under
various experimental conditions is important. Liu et al. proposed a lookup table for determining the
acoustic radiation force by examining the particle acoustophoresis
mode in discrete phase modulated standing SAW fields. Edthofer et
al. employed two-step focusing to measure
the relative acoustic mobility of polystyrene beads by experiments.
The variations in acousto-mechanical properties of the beads could
be quantitatively analyzed, which showed a large spread in their material
properties, indicating that extra normalization may be necessary when
using different polystyrene particles for device calibration.

## Focusing
Focusing particles under a continuous flow
is one of the early demonstrations for acoustofluidic particle manipulation.
Recent studies have focused on expanding the flexibility for different
targets. Park et al. developed an acoustic
focusing device with a square microchannel and a single acoustic actuation
source to align and focus nonspherical cells, such as ellipsoidal Euglena gracilis. The device achieved 96% orientation efficiency
and a focusing width under 7.8 μm at flow rates up to 200 μL/min.
Hammarstrom et al. reported a protein
microcrystal focusing device for real-time monitoring during serial
crystallography, achieving up to a 200-fold concentration increase.
Wang et al. developed a microflow cytometer
that allows for particle focusing via acoustic streaming tunnel and
fluorescence enhancement via a microreflector for detection to occur
simultaneously without sheath fluid. The microreflector improved the
fluorescence intensity of AlN-Mo substrate by 1.8 and 8.3-fold over
that of the Si and SiO2 substrates, respectively. They
further found that different size particles had different velocities
when they exited the transducer region. Based on this phenomenon,
this system was also able to differentiate particle size based on
their transit time through the detection region.
Another important
area for acoustic focusing is to improve the focusing performance
for submicron particles. Hemptinne et al. utilized frequency-sweeping techniques to achieve efficient particle
focusing across multiple parallel channels, overcoming the influence
of structural variabilities on the resonance for each parallel channel.
In acoustic focusing, acoustic streaming-induced drag force could
act against acoustic radiation force for focusing. When the particle
size is large, ARF dominates over the drag force. However, when the
particle size is small (<1 μm), the drag force could become
so significant that it disrupts particle focusing. Gerlt et al. reported focusing 1 μm polystyrene particles
in round glass capillaries (500 μm ID) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min.
Their simulation results indicated that operating frequencies that
are near the optimal resonance frequency can effectively reduce the
acoustic streaming while maintaining sufficient ARF for particle focusing.
Similarly, Lee and co-workers induced
a unidirectional vortex streaming pattern in a 100 μm square
capillary and successfully focused 0.25 μm polystyrene particles
at a flow rate of 2 μL/min. In the following work, they used
a smaller square capillary (50 μm) and higher actuation frequency
(14.9 MHz) and achieved focusing of 100 nm polystyrene beads at a
flow rate of ∼2 μL/min. Harshbarger
et al. implemented an optical feedback
system to achieve automatic optimization of focusing. When compared
with experienced scientist operators, the automatic feedback control
system achieved superior performance, achieving focusing of 600 nm
particles using a BAW resonator by selecting the optimal working frequency.
Devendran et al. applied diffractive-acoustic
SAW (DASAW) for improving the control of small particles. The author
found that DASAW configuration could reduce critical particle size
by reducing the inherent streaming effects while a similar acoustic
radiation field could be maintained.

## Sorting
Richter
et al. reported an acoustic activated
absorbance droplet sorter for the
sorting of tartrazine dye droplets at different concentrations (30
and 80 μM). Biconcave microlenses were integrated into the microfluidic
device to improve the detection, and traveling SAW (TSAW) was used
for droplet deflection achieving a sorting rate of 1000 droplets/s.
Nawaz et al. utilizes focused traveling
surface acoustic waves (FTSAW) and real-time deformability cytometry
(RT-DC) to sort cells by their physical properties in high throughput.
The focused interdigital transducer (FIDT)-based sorting RT-DC platform
(soRT-DC) was tested with different white blood cells from TBC-depleted
blood and raw diluted whole blood, successfully sorting the cells
based on size with a purity greater than 92% and a cell viability
greater than 90%. Similarly, Sethia et al. utilized TSAWs and image-based detection to sort human stem cell-derived
β cell clusters (SC-β cell clusters) by size. SC-β
cell clusters ranging from diameters of ∼100–500 μm
were passed through the inlet of the device, and pictures of the clusters
were taken with a 2× magnification microscope. For a separation
cutoff of 250 μm, this setup gave a sorting efficiency of 78–90%
with a throughput of up to 0.2 SC-β cell clusters/s. Fuchsluger
et al. introduced a microfluidic sorter
with a geometrically defined acoustic active region using BAW to selectively
focus particles of interest into a central stream while leaving unwanted
particles unaffected.

## Separation
Acoustofluidics is also
a powerful tool
for both label-free and label-based particle separation. To date,
it has been demonstrated to separate various kinds of particles including
mammalian cells, bacteria, viruses, and extracellular vesicles. For
label-free separations, it is possible to separate cells acoustically
based on their differences in size, density, and compressibility.
Wu et al. explored power-controlled SAW
systems for microparticle separation, utilizing standing surface acoustic
waves (SSAWs) and power monitoring to optimize separation efficiency.
Their approach demonstrated good agreement between experimental results
and theoretical predictions for separating microparticles of varying
sizes. During the past 3 years, many reports focused on the optimization
of the tilted-angle standing surface acoustic wave (taSSAW) device
for cell separation. taSSAW takes advantage of the angle between the
flow direction and the SSAW field to overcome the separation distance
limit in conventional acoustofluidic separation devices. Several groups
reported numerical analysis of key design parameters of taSSAW including
tilt angle, prefocusing width, and aperture length of IDTS for improved
separation performance including submicron particles. , Wu et al. combined bipolar electrode-based
DEP focusing with taSSAW to separate cells based on size and mechanical
properties. This integrated device achieved separation efficiency
of 94% and purity of 92% for polystyrene particles and maintained
viability for THP-1 and yeast cells. Xue et al. employed a divergent microchannel in the taSSAAW device
to improve the separation resolution. They achieved a 91% separation
success rate of myelogenous leukemia cell line K562 and the natural
killer cell line NK92, which have similar size and density but different
compressibility. Peng et al. numerically
studied a taSSAW design that employs a spiral channel for cell/particle
focusing with taSSAWs, indicating the potential of further increasing
separation distance for particles/cells with similar properties.
In addition to taSSAW, several new designs were reported to improve
the separation performance for submicron particles. Xia et al. designed Bessel interdigital transducers (BIDTs)
to create a Bessel beam region in the fluidic channel ( A). Compared with conventional
SAW devices, this design achieved ∼5 times higher acoustic
intensities in the Bessel region, leading to improved performance
for nanoparticle separation. They demonstrated the separation of 30,
100, and 400 nm particles in one device, and the successful enrichment
of SARS-CoV-2 virus particles from saliva samples. Zhang et al. leveraged the leaky wave generated by a pair
of standard IDTs to form acoustic virtual pillars in a microfluidic
channel. By employing the optimal channel thickness and excitation
frequency, a traveling leaky wave that is orthogonal to the original
SAW direction can be formed, leading to the formation of acoustic
virtual pillars along the channel direction. Bigger particles experience
bigger deflection forces as they pass the virtual pillar. After this
repeated cycle, separation of nanoparticles can be achieved. They
demonstrated the enrichment of small exosomes (60–80 μm)
from larger ones (90–150 μm) with a purity of 96%. Yang
et al. employed acoustic streaming induced
by a gigahertz BAW resonator to achieve nanoparticle separation. They
designed an arc-shape resonator that can induce strong acoustic streaming
at the edge of the resonator. Combining the lateral fluid flow and
the trapping effect of microvortices, the device was able to capture
30 nm polystyrene particles, while directing 150 nm particles to the
desired outlet. Ang et al. introduced
a glass ceiling to the PDMS-based SAW nanosieve device. Due to the
high acoustic impedance of glass, it reduced the loss of acoustic
energy through the PDMS ceiling thereby improving the energy efficiency
of the device. Their results showed a 30-fold improvement in throughput
over the PDMS device without the glass ceiling.
 For the size-based separation,
Khan et al. employed TSAWs to generate
differential acoustic
radiation forces
and torques, enabling the separation of spherical and prolate particles
with high recovery and purity. Undvall et al. reported the effect of inertial forces on acoustofluidic particles
when separation is performed at high flow rates. They showed that
the spillover effect, where particles diverge from their proposed
path and spill out through the center outlet, could lead to the failure
of acoustic particle separation.
In addition to exploiting the
differential mobility induced by
ARF, isoacoustic focusing (IAF) has also been reported to achieve
cell separation in an acoustic field. This separation utilizes the
inhomogeneous fluid and separates cells not based on their size but
their acoustic impedance. Rezayati Charan studied IAF in the stop-flow regime to achieve precise characterization
of neutrophils and K562 cancer cells using acoustic impedance gradients
and proposed an effective gradient for separating these cells with
very similar properties.

## Patterning
Over the years, acoustofluidic
methods have
gained tremendous success in arranging randomly distributed cells
or particles into lines or arrays in a biocompatible and contactless
manner. Traditionally, it is achieved via creating various patterns
of standing acoustic wave fields. One classical setup involves positioning
2 pairs of IDTs orthogonally to each other to generate various grid-like
patterns. Konig and co-workers studied
the 3D particles patterns generated by a 2D SSAW field, indicating
further investigation for the pattern results is needed as particles
with positive acoustic contrast were found to be present at both pressure
nodes and antinodes. They also studied the thermal effects induced
by the 2D SSAW device, where careful control of operational parameters
is needed to ensure maximum biocompatibility for SSAW-based cell manipulation. In addition to SSAW-based patterning, Huang
et al. reported dynamic control of particle
patterns in an octagonal chamber. This device employed eight piezoelectric
transducers to generate ultrasonic fields that produce complex acoustic
patterns such as stripes, lattices, and hexagons by adjusting the
phase parameters. Further advances in particle manipulation methods
focus on harnessing novel geometries to improve pattern complexity
and control. Tang et al. proposed a fluidic
chamber with Sierpiński-carpet-inspired fractal designs, which,
when combined with uniform acoustic fields, resulted in sophisticated
patterning that could be scaled for diverse applications such as micromachine
orientation and biological sample handling. Placing a capillary on
a SAW substrate is a convenient way to rapidly pattern particles and
cells. Maramizonouz et al. studied the
impact of the direction and different cross sections of capillary
tubes on the acoustic field inside a capillary. Pei et al. combined FIDTs with a capillary to achieve particle
enrichment, alignment, and transport.
While conventional acoustofluidic
patterning methods are efficient in pushing particles together, they
cannot separate the particles afterward. Yang et al. overcame this limit by employing Fourier-synthesized harmonic
waves to achieve high-resolution tuning of an acoustic field inside
a chamber. They achieved high-throughput cell pairing and separation
by applying sequential nanosecond pulse of SAW ( B). Finally, this method was demonstrated
to study the intercellular adhesion strength in a high-throughput
manner.
Another focus for acoustofluidic patterning is achieving
complex
and arbitrary patterns to meet the needs of various applications.
One strategy leverages a microfabricated structure to overcome the
limitations of a simple standing acoustic wave field. Harley et al. introduced subwavelength microresonators with
spring-mass designs that amplify acoustic oscillations for submicron-scale
manipulation. These resonators, fabricated using 3D microprinting
and integrated into microfluidic chambers, produce localized evanescent
fields, enabling arbitrary particle patterns based on the design of
microstructures. Kolesnik et al. introduced
an “acoustic stencil” created by the combination of
a half-wavelength acoustic field and structure surface with different
cavities. This method enabled micropatterning of polystyrene microparticles
and mammalian cells with complex patterns. Li et al. reported a detachable acoustofluidic device for creating
complex particle patterns. They utilized a microfabricated silicon
waveguide to control the coupling acoustic waves with the PDMS chamber.
Due to its detachable setup, this method allows for the possibility
of achieving different patterns with the same substrate by swapping
the waveguides with different patterns. Pan et al. leveraged reconfigurable magnetic micropillar arrays to
achieve dynamic manipulation of particles. Under the influence of
an external magnetic field, magnetic particles can form micropillars
in a fluid chamber, which was subsequently activated by SAW to trap
particles around the pillar. Zhang et al. achieved complex particle patterning utilizing photoacoustic effects.
They employed a laser to generate localized Lamb wave fields for particle
manipulation on the membrane surface. Since the laser pattern can
be arbitrarily controlled, the patterns can also be dynamically controlled
to allow creating animation of particle patterns.
In addition
to using microfabricated structures, acoustic holography
has gained significant traction for achieving tunable and arbitrary
particle manipulation during the past several years. Yu et al. presented the Beam Engineering and Acoustic
Control Node (BEACON) platform, utilizing specific and high-resolution
(<1 μm) IDT patterns to generate configurable 2D and 3D acoustic
holograms. This system achieved high spatial resolution (∼25
μm) and complex 3D particle patterns ( C). Xu et al. reported programmable acoustic holography that is modulated by the
sound speed of the coupling layer fluid. They utilized a fluid layer
to couple the 3D printed hologram phase plate with a chamber filled
with PDMS particles. The acoustic holography visualizes the pattern
of PDMS particles. By changing the liquid to one with a different
sound speed in the fluid layer, different patterns of PDMS particles
can be achieved. In follow-up work, Xu et al. also reported that the 3D printed hologram phase plate can be combined
with a detachable microfluidic channel to achieve complex patterns
in microchannels. Melde et al. employed
multiple transducers and 3D printed holograms to achieve one-step
assembly of 3D patterns of microparticles, hydrogel beads, and biological
cells. The resulting pattern can be fixed via the gelation of the
surrounding medium.
Phased array transducers have also been
used to generate complex
patterns in 3D space. Hirayama et al. created a volumetric display based the acoustic holography particle
trapping. In recent work, they implemented a fast algorithm to account
for the acoustic wave scattering caused by physical objects present
in the patterning space. This method enabled a volumetric display
that could interact with physical objects above or below it. To improve
the operation of phased array transducers, Fushimi et al. reported a digital twin approach to accelerate
the optimization of acoustic hologram. This approach involves integrating
experimental measurement with numerically obtained derivatives of
the loss function to improve the loss function.

## Particle
Trapping and Actuation
Gao et al. developed an acoustofluidic device that employs
acoustic bubble for trapping, rotating, and culturing tumor spheroids.
This device achieved 91% trapping efficiency and could form viable
spheroids within 30 min. After spheroids formation, a long-term culture
was also demonstrated with 84% cell viability after 3 days. Richard
et al. presented an acoustofluidic trapping
device that utilized focused IDTs for cell trapping and release, integrating
an external valve to guide the cells’ trajectory. The device
allowed for the controlled dispensing of single cells or small clusters,
maintaining cell viability and adhesion.

## Acoustic Tweezers
Another important particle manipulation
capability for acoustofluidics is manipulating single or a small amount
particles, which is often termed acoustic tweezers. Shen et al. developed Joint Subarray Acoustic Tweezers (JSAT),
which provide six degrees of freedom manipulation, enabling simultaneous
translation and rotation of cells. They designed 3 layers of IDTs
on the LiNbO3 substrate to achieve complex control of cells
and particles ( A). The outer layer IDTs were used to generate patterns of SSAW field
for controlling the cell movement in the chamber based on ARF. The
middle layer IDTs were used to generate SSAW acoustic streaming vortices
to control the rotation of particles along x and y direction. Finally,
the inner layer of IDTs was used to generate TSAW acoustic streaming
for controlling the rotation along z axis. Wang et
al. employed 3 pairs of IDTs that were
symmetrically positioned around a center fluid chamber. By independently
adjusting the TSAW generated from these IDTs, clockwise and anticlockwise
rotation, as well as linear motion of particles, were demonstrated.
Shen et al. combined SAWs with dielectrophoresis
(DEP) to improve the flexibility of particle manipulation. This setup
overcomes the SAW-based tweezers’ inability to direct different
particles to different paths at the same time thereby demonstrating
cyclical cell pairing and separation. In addition, the combination
of SAW and DEP opens the possibility of distinguishing cell types
based on their mechanical and electrical properties. Xu et al. developed an acoustic ring resonator (RR) for
manipulating microparticles along the waveguides and the RR. The acoustic
RR exhibited a high Q factor (>3000), achieving energy-efficient
particle
manipulation. By changing the design of the waveguides, different
particle trajectories can be achieved.
 In addition to SAW-based acoustic
tweezers, BAW
has also been demonstrated
for acoustic tweezers, especially for in vivo manipulation.
You et al. developed a GHz BAW resonator
array that exploits acoustic streaming forces for controlling the
movement of particles. Due to the short attenuation distance of GHz
acoustic waves, strong acoustic streaming can be induced with minimum
interference by ARF. By controlling the input power amplitude, particles
can move along complex paths in a fluid chamber. Li et al. combined piezoelectric ring transducers with
3D printed acoustic holography plates to generate vortex acoustic
beam to trap particles in 3D space. The chirality of the vortex beam
can be adjusted to control the rotation of particles. Coupled with
a robotic arm, the trapped particle can be transported in an arbitrary
path in 3D space. They also demonstrated that this method works even
through biological barriers, e.g., a tissue layer. Jooss et al. demonstrated controlling the motion of microbubbles
inside a zebrafish that was fixed by agar gel. The axial movement
of microbubbles along the zebrafish was achieved by adjusting the
frequency of four piezoelectric transducers that were placed orthogonally.
In 2023, Shapiro’s group and Zheng’s group both reported
the strategy of using gas vesicles (GVs) to achieve in vivo acoustic manipulation. Cells transfected
with genes for expressing GVs exhibit significantly higher acoustic
contrast compared with background, which enables in vivo acoustic
tweezers manipulation using ultrasound. Yiannacou et al. introduced a programmable
microfluidic platform that employs machine vision to predict and adjust
acoustic fields in real-time. The adaptive controller utilizes online
learning and machine vision to optimize acoustic fields for particle
trajectory control, significantly increasing manipulation accuracy.
The inclusion of automation reinforces the scalability and robustness
of acoustic tweezers, linking their applications across fields like
biophysics and material science.

## Microrobots
Acoustically
driven microrobot/microswimmer
is an emerging area that has gained significant interest in recent
years. These devices can be activated through the interaction with
acoustic waves, which generate sufficient propulsion for traveling
in various mediums. One widely used strategy is fabricating microstructures
with sharp edges/corners to achieve propulsion induced by acoustic
streaming. Liu et al. developed an acoustic
driven microswimmer featuring an elliptical main body with asymmetric,
flexible tails that oscillate under acoustic excitation. By tuning
the resonant frequencies of the tails, the swimmer achieves real-time
directional control, transitioning seamlessly between straight and
turning motions. Voß and Wittkowski explored how geometric factors, particularly aspect ratios, influence
acoustic propulsion for cone-shaped microswimmers. Dillinger et al. fabricated a starfish-inspired artificial cilia
microswimmer, which was made of magnetized soft polymer material.
This swimmer can achieve efficient acoustic propulsion due to the
cilia structures, while allowing magnetic field-guided directional
movement. Zhang et al. combined acoustic
standing waves and rotational magnetic fields to guide magnetic microswarms
along virtual acoustic walls. Their innovative approach allowed precise
bidirectional rolling in an open acoustic chamber without physical
boundaries, resulting in 2D dynamic manipulation with switching the
orientation of virtual walls. Accordingly, their finding highlights
the critical role of symmetry breaking caused by the time-varying
acoustic radiation force for inducing rolling motion.
An exciting
advance for acoustic microrobots is the successful application of
these microrobots to in vivo systems. Ahmed and co-workers
demonstrated several strategies of achieving acoustic-controlled motion
in animal’s vasculature. Fonseca et al. reported that lipid microbubbles can self-assemble and
propel under acoustic stimulation. Utilizing a combination of 18 transducers,
the lipid microbubble assemblies were able to navigate through complex
artificial vasculature networks. Finally, they demonstrated that these
assemblies can also move against bloodstreaming in vessels of a mouse
brain ( B).
Deng et al. fabricated a microrobot with
double helix geometries, which enabled propulsion with the self-rotation
of the microrobot. By adjusting the activation frequency, the direction
of the robot can be switched to enable more flexible and straightforward
control of its motion. This robot enables complex motion in artificial
blood vessels without the need of multiple piezoelectric transducers.

## Advances in Fluid Manipulation
Acoustofluidics is also
a versatile tool for manipulating fluid
at microscale. It has been used in fluid mixing and pumping for various
applications, which are mainly achieved through the control of acoustic
streaming, a steady fluid flow induced by the dissipation of acoustic
energy in the fluid. Acoustic streaming in typical microfluidic devices
is mainly boundary-driven streaming, which can be solved using Nyborg’s
perturbation method. However, when the second-order acoustic streaming
velocity is fast, numerical results based on the perturbation method
could deviate from experimental observation significantly. Therefore,
there have been significant efforts in modeling fast acoustic streaming
in recent years. Friends and co-workers developed a new method to supplant the classic approach. The fast
and slow spatiotemporal scales are defined based on the intrinsic
properties of the fluid under forcing but not arbitrary assumption
in their model. Dubrovski et al. then
developed a method for arbitrary Reynolds number flow. Recently, Joergensen
et al. developed models to explore the
nonlinear thermoviscous effects, revealing that frictional heat could
alter the streaming pattern qualitatively at high acoustic energy
density. Streaming patterns are also
influenced by other factors including shape of confined liquid, IDT
configuration, design of microfluidic channel, operating frequency,
incident position and angle, and particles in the fluid. Quelennec et al. studied the slip dynamics at the interface of liquid and solid for
acoustofluidic devices. Their finding indicated that slip dynamics
depends on the shear stress and fluid pressure of the system and could
change as the fluid properties change.

## Sharp-Edge Fluid Manipulation
The interaction between
high-speed oscillating structures with sharp edges and liquid can
also induce strong acoustic streaming that is often several orders
of magnitude faster than typical Rayleigh boundary-driven streaming.
Due to its high efficiency and flexibility, it has gained significant
popularity in recent years since the early demonstrations of mixing
and pumping by Huang and co-workers. Typical
sharp-edge based devices are comprised of a microchannel with sharp-edge
structures that extrude out from the channel wall into the channel.
Upon activation by acoustic waves, two fast rotating vortices appear
on both sides of the sharp-edge structures. Pavlic et al. reported a hybrid model to improve the efficiency
of sharp-edge device modeling. Due to the large discrepancy in scale
between sharp-edge structures and the rest of the device, it is often
difficult to balance model accuracy and efficiency for sharp-edge
devices. They employed the Fully Viscous modeling approach to model
the fluid domain near sharp-edge structures, while using an efficient
modeling method in the rest of a device, reducing the computation
demand without sacrificing the accuracy of sharp-edge simulation.
Pourabed et al. reported efficient mixing
using a lotus-shaped sharp-edge structure. This device achieved mixing
efficiency from 80 to 94% up to 1400 μL/min flow rate in 2 ms
within a mixing length of 70 μm. Pavlic et al. reported a chemically robust silicon–glass microfluidic
chip with sharp-edge structures. They achieved programmable fluid
pumping, mixing, cell focusing, and trapping in one device. Agha explored the integration of acoustic micromixing
with cyclin olefin copolymer microfluidics. Cyclic olefin copolymers
and other similar polymers are used due to their unique properties,
low cost, and versatile fabrication methods. The sharp-edge mixing
platform was entirely made of cyclic olefin copolymer which was fabricated
in a solvent swelling process. Lu et al. combined trapped oscillating bubbles and sharp-edge structures to
further enhance the streaming in microfluidic channel for efficient
fluid mixing and cell lysis. In addition to standard sharp-edge structures,
Harley et al. examined the impact of
3D sharp-edged microstructure geometry on acoustic streaming. Their
results indicated that arbitrarily designed 3D microstructures can
influence the direction and behavior of 3D streaming vortices as well
as the orientation of oscillating sharp edges, allowing for both in-plane
and out-of-plane vortex orientations. Furthermore, their approach
showed potential to improve particle manipulation by amplifying and
arbitrarily orienting fluid vortices and shear forces. Lu et al. demonstrated an acousto-inertial microfluidic
chip integrating sharp edges and contraction–expansion array
structures to create strong microvortices for efficient mixing and
particle capturing. Operating over a wide flow range and at low actuation
voltages, the platform achieved effective particle trapping, with
particles exhibiting stable recirculating motion under combined acoustic
and inertial forces.
In addition to using microfabricated sharp-edge
structures, Li et al. introduced a vibrating
sharp-tip capillary that can induce strong acoustic streaming without
the need for microfabrication. Due to the highly localized activation
and the glass material, the vibrating sharp-tip capillary showed excellent
energy efficiency, achieving efficient fluid mixing with a power consumption
as low as 1.4 mW. In addition, fluid pumping and droplet generation
have also been demonstrated with a single vibrating sharp-tip capillary.
Li et al. studied the influence of liquid
inside the vibrating glass capillary on the streaming generated, showing
that the liquid presence changed the streaming patterns and resulted
in larger streaming velocity. Durrer et al. reported on a robot-assisted acoustofluidic end effector (RAEE)
by connecting a piezoelectric-driven capillary to a robotic arm, enabling
efficient generation of acoustic streaming around the capillary tip.
Thus, this flexible device achieved droplet merging, bidirectional
liquid pumping, and automated mixing of viscous liquids within a 96-well
plate. They further utilized the acoustic streaming generated by a
vibrating sharp-tip capillary to achieve zebrafish rotation in an
imaging chamber.

## Pumping
You et al. reported
a wireless acoustic pumping device based on a film BAW resonator.
The resonator was cut into a piece of 1*1 mm2 and made
in direct contact with liquid to ensure high energy efficiency for
pumping ( A).
Upon activation by GHz RF signals, a strong Eckart jet can be induced
for achieving unidirectional fluid flow. Due to its small size and
wireless operation mode, it has been used for precise delivery of
solution for ocular disease treatment in a pilot human trial. Mendis
et al. reported a negative pressure
pump for microfluidic devices based on atomization induced by a vibrating
sharp tip. This setup achieved a flow rate range of 3–520 μL/min,
which is dependent upon the inner diameter of the capillary tip. This
setup also allows operating multiple independent pump units to achieve
complex fluid operations including conducting a complete ELISA assay.
Yetiskin et al. reported 3D printed
acoustofluidic pumping comprised of a transducer, fluid reservoir,
and a metal sheet with conical holes serving as nozzles. Oscillations
were amplitude-dependent, and the motion of the metal sheet allowed
the fluid to move from the reservoir to the outlet, with flow rates
surpassing 515 μL/min.
 

## Advances in Droplet Manipulation
Various droplets have
seen increased utility for diverse applications
during the past decade. Aerosols are important targets for drug delivery,
mass spectrometry, and environmental chemistry. Small emulsion droplets
(<1 mm) are excellent microreactors that enable single biomolecule
reactions and accelerate numerous organic reactions. For sub-cm droplets,
they are the convenient holder for many biological samples, enabling
fast and direct analysis of their content. Over the years, acoustics
has been demonstrated as a powerful technique for manipulating droplets
at all scales.

## Atomization
SAW can be used to atomize
liquids into
fine droplets. Cortez-Jugo et al. demonstrated
a SAW-based platform for nebulizing small interfering RNA (siRNA)
therapeutics. This platform uses high-frequency (∼10 MHz) and
low-power (∼2 W) acoustic waves to generate aerosol droplets
with a mean size of 2.7 μm, suitable for deep lung deposition.
Huang et al. introduced a SAW device
with SU-8 microchannels to nebulize salbutamol solution into monodisperse
aerosol droplets for effective lung deposition to treat asthma. By
optimizing input power, frequency, and flow rates, the device achieved
continuous atomization with 75% lung deposition efficiency and minimized
thermal degradation. Yang et al. introduced
an edge-effect SAW atomizer that uses a hydrophilic paper strip as
a passive capillary transport system, eliminating the need for complex
fluid delivery mechanisms. The system used lateral acoustic wetting
to transfer liquid from the wetted paper strip (beneath the substrate)
to the piezoelectric substrate edge, where Rayleigh SAWs (40 MHz)
atomized it. Roudini et al. developed
a compact aerosol generator based on SAW. Using dry film photoresist
(DFR) technology for microfluidics integration, the method facilitated
wafer-scale fabrication of SAW chips, improving durability, scalability,
and mechanical stability.
For high-viscosity fluids, Sharma
et al. developed a microelectromechanical
system (MEMS)-based vibrating mesh atomizer (VMA) integrated with
a microheater. The localized heating reduced liquid viscosity, enabling
efficient atomization with a power consumption <1 W and a temperature
<100 °C. The device atomized fluids with viscosities up to
111 cP, achieving a 25-fold improvement in atomization efficiency
at room temperature and a 55-fold improvement with heating.
Acoustic atomization has also been explored for propulsion systems.
Amihai Horesh et al. proposed a novel
approach that combines acoustothermal phase change with acoustically
driven atomization to generate thrust. Their device used a 55.5 MHz
focused surface acoustic wave (fSAW) to melt frozen water droplets
and atomize the liquid into directed sprays to generate microscale
thrust. This method achieved thrust values of up to 12.3 μN,
demonstrating its potential as a propulsion solution for small satellites.

## Droplet Generation
Conventional acoustic-based droplet
generation methods mainly focused on generating liquid droplets at
the interface of liquid and gas. He et al. utilized the strong acoustic streaming vortices and the pumping
effect generated by a vibrating sharp-tip capillary to achieve on-demand
generation of monodisperse water-in-oil droplets ( B). This device dramatically
reduced the equipment needed to generate size-tunable droplets, enabling
portable droplet generation. They demonstrated high dynamic range
digital PCR and digital LAMP leveraging the size tunability of the
device. In a similar setup, Yin et al. reported that droplet ejecting direction can be controlled by adjusting
the input acoustic frequency, achieving simultaneous droplet generation
and dispensing. Zhou et al. reported
a nozzle-free device for generating water-in-oil droplets. They employed
a GHz BAW transducer to induce high pressure at the interface of water
and oil, which led to the deformation of the interface with subsequent
droplet pinch-off. The droplet size of the device can also be tuned
by adjusting the duration and input power of the GHz acoustic signal.
Steinacher and Amstad utilized SAW-induced
atomization to generate water-in-oil droplets. Aqueous droplets containing
Tween 80 were atomized by SAW and sprayed into an oil bath (dodecane),
where emulsification was driven by a positive thermodynamic spreading
coefficient. The technique enabled tunable emulsion sizes by adjusting
SAW frequencies, with droplet sizes reduced from 5.3 μm at 32.5
MHz to ∼2.7 μm at 65 MHz. The process achieved stable
water-in-oil emulsions at a rate of up to 480 μL/min.

## Droplet
in a Closed Channel
In addition to droplet
generation, many acoustofluidic systems have been reported to manipulate
microdroplets inside microfluidic channels. De Lora et al. reported a device that combined acoustophoretic
and dielectrophoretic forces. This system utilized embedded serpentine
interdigitated transducers positioned directly next to a T-junction
microchannel. Droplets flow through the main channel while a second
solution is positioned perpendicular to the channel. When the acoustic
and electric forces were applied, the second solution was injected
into the droplets and the solutions were mixed in the droplets. Shen
et al. accelerated the mixing inside
microdroplets by activating a GHz transducer as the droplet passes
through the channel. Kim et al. reported
a method of adjusting the concentration of reagents before droplet
generation. Their system, consisting of a reusable transducer and
disposable microchip, used slanted finger interdigital transducers
(SFITs) to form SAWs. The applied acoustics caused the two reaction
solutions to mix in varying amounts depending on the flow rates of
the two solutions as well as the acoustic signal. Malik et al. demonstrated that acoustic waves can also be
used to modify droplets that had been generated. They designed a microfluidic
chamber that can achieve droplet trapping, coalesce, and further split
up, which resulted in the modification of droplet size after generation.
Shakya et al. studied the SAW-based
manipulation of disk-in-sphere endoskeletal droplets. They found that
the orientation of the disk inside the droplet could also be tuned
by changing the frequency of SAW.

## Droplet on Surface
Acoustofluidic methods have also
been demonstrated to manipulate subcm droplets on a surface as well
as the contents inside the droplets. One common setup for droplet
manipulation is achieved by placing a droplet in the propagation path
of SAW. Sui et al. developed an integrated
droplet sensing and manipulation platform using slanted finger interdigital
transducers (SFIDTs) ( C). The SFIDTs served as both droplet actuation unit and the
droplet sensing unit. Thus, closed-loop droplet manipulation including
droplet merging, transportation, and particle enrichment was achieved.
Qian et al. developed a SAW platform
with slanted IDTs to achieve flexible droplet manipulation. Their
device consists of four slanted IDTs arranged in a square around the
reaction area. They demonstrated the fusion of two droplets and subsequent
centrifugation in the fused droplet. Vernon et al. reported an integrated SAW system for droplet manipulation
controlled by a Raspberry Pi system. This system allows for control
of droplet position, mixing, dilution, and temperature control, achieving
PCR with small volumes (∼10 μL).
Liu et al. reported an acoustic black hole device to manipulate
microparticles inside a droplet. The acoustic black hole was fabricated
on a PMMA substrate, which can trap acoustic energy propagating on
the surface of the substrate. When a droplet was placed in the acoustic
black hole region, efficient particle translation and enrichment were
achieved inside the droplet. Vachon et al. fabricated silicon-based membrane waveguides on a SAW droplet manipulation
device. Using the waveguide, multiple droplet operations such as transportation,
aggregate formation, and rotation by controlling the on/off and the
frequency of RF signals applied to different IDTs. It has been reported
that SAW can induce a strong centrifugal effect in a droplet for concentrating
nanoparticles. Gu et al. introduced
an acoustofluidic centrifuge leveraging SAW-induced droplet spinning
to create rotational vortex fields, achieving rapid nanoparticle enrichment
with over 80% purity and separating exosome subpopulations within
a minute, offering a compact and resource-efficient alternative to
ultracentrifugation. Huang et al. developed
a numerical model that also considers the deformation of the droplet
during spinning. Based on the simulation results, they found the particles
are concentrated at a certain height above the surface, which was
then confirmed with their experimental observation.
For large
droplets, surface properties have a major impact on their
manipulation. Several studies exploit the surface property for droplet
manipulation. Yuan et al. utilized phase
array transducers to trap and transport droplets on a superhydrophobic
surface. Similarly, Luo et al. utilized
a single ultrasonic transducer for droplet transportation followed
by Raman spectroscopy detection on a superhydrophobic surface. Wu
et al. utilized a SAW-induced capillary
wave in a thin polymer film to fabricate a surface with different
functionalities including droplet transportation, water collection,
and droplet mixing.

## Advances in Applications

## Cell Separation/Enrichment
Magnusson et al. conducted a pilot
study comparing the isolation
performance of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from prostate cancer
patients between a BAW cell separation device with the FDA-approved
method CELLSEARCH. Their results showed that the BAW device was able
to isolate CTC clusters from patient samples, while no CTC clusters
were detected with CELLSEARCH. This result indicated the great potential
of acoustofluidic separation methods for further expanding the coverage
of different types of CTCs from patient samples.
Acoustofluidic
devices have also been used for diverse blood sample processing applications.
Wu et al. reported a therapeutic apheresis
system for processing small blood volume, which is urgently needed
for infants or small animals ( A). They utilized taSSAW to separate blood cells and
platelets from plasma to remove pathogenic substances and antibodies.
This system demonstrated successful plasmapheresis in mouse models
with a requirement of only 280 μL of blood. Ma et al. leveraged impedance mismatch in an acoustofluidic
device for separating platelet-reduced plasma, achieving 85–95%
platelet removal with a throughput of 20 μL/min, demonstrating
superior performance compared to traditional methods. Alsved et al. developed a label-free, flow-through method
for isolating peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from undiluted
blood using ultrasonic standing waves. The barrier medium and premix
methods enhanced PBMC enrichment by factors of 3,600 to 11,000, with
85% separation efficiency, processing up to 20 μL/min of blood.
Liu et al. utilized different sized
aptamer-modified polystyrene microspheres to separate dengue virus
(DENV) and tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) using TSAW. Hao et
al. reported a two-stage separation
method for isolating nanometer-sized biomarkers of Alzheimer’s
disease using SAW. First, the large micrometer-sized debris is separated
from the other smaller components. Next, the nanometer-sized biomarkers
of interest are separated from any remaining larger particles. Haque
et al. proposed a finger-actuated device
with an acoustofluidic micromixer and a manual pump, which enabled
efficient RBC lysis from finger-prick blood samples (∼20 μL)
in 30 s. This device, tested on ten donor samples, outperformed traditional
manual assays, showing potential for scalable point-of-care diagnostics.
 

## Extracellular Vesicle (EV)
Rufo et al. introduced the flocculation
via orbital acoustic
trapping (FLOAT) method for high yield and rapid isolation of EVs.
EVs are promising for a noninvasive diagnosis of disease but are extremely
difficult to separate from biological samples. This method used an
acoustofluidic droplet centrifuge to rotate and heat droplets. A thermoresponsive
polymer was then added, allowing for nanoparticles to be rapidly and
selectively concentrated at the droplet center. The use of FLOAT reduces
the biofluid starting volume by a factor of 100 demonstrating its
potential for point-of-care diagnostics. Naquin et al. presented acoustic separation and concentration
of exosomes for nucleotide detection (ASCENDx), which allows acoustic
concentration of exosomes from plasma samples. Integrated plasmonic
nanostars on the disc enable label-free detection via Raman scattering.
Results showed that colorectal cancer biomarkers were detected with
high sensitivity and specificity. Wang et al. applied acoustofluidic exosome separation for early diagnosis
of traumatic brain injury (TBI). The device can isolate exosomes which
carry biomarkers indicative of TBI from blood samples. The isolation
step reduced the interference for the detection of exosome biomarkers
of TBI using flow cytometry. Dumcuis et al. introduced a dual-wave acoustofluidic centrifuge for the ultrafast
concentration of nanoparticles and extracellular vesicles. It is difficult
to determine the concentration of EVs because of the complex matrices.
This method used a thin-film printed circuit board with interdigitated
electrodes mounted on piezoelectric substrates. The dual wave creates
an acoustic field resulting in the concentration of the cells which
occurs roughly every 30 s. Wang et al. used acoustofluidics to simultaneously load nanoparticles with drugs
and encapsulate exosomes. Encapsulating exosomes and nanocarriers
is essential to increasing the efficacy of targeted drug delivery.
To accomplish this, the device leverages acoustic radiation force,
acoustic microstreaming, and shear stress in a rotating droplet. This
system allows for drug loading and encapsulation to be done in minutes
without the need for chemical modification.

## Intracellular Delivery
In recent years, acoustofluidics
has been reported as an effective tool to facilitate the delivery
of exogenous agents into cells. The thermal and mechanical effects
induced by acoustic waves were found to induce transient opening of
cell membrane facilitating intracellular delivery. Liu et al. reported an efficient transfection device based
on the acoustothermal effect. Both SAW-induced acoustic force and
heating contributed to the enhanced cell membrane permeability for
gene transfection. They demonstrated the transfection of two genes
simultaneously to mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) with an efficiency
of ∼90%. Salari et al. reported
an acoustofluidic device for delivering cargos with a size range of
3–500 kDa. The strategy is based on the combination of acoustic
streaming and lamb waves induced acoustic excitation to facilitate
the uptake of different size cargos by adherent cells culture on the
channel bottom surface. Gao et al. employed
a phase shifting keying (PSK) technique to dynamically change the
SSAW field pattern in a fluid chamber. As a result, cells trapped
by the SSAW field were subject to contact oscillatory motion. The
combined effect of ARF and acoustic streaming facilitated the update
of drug molecules by cells. Centner et al. compared the performance of acoustofluidic systems with a static
system for molecular delivery to T cells. Their system uses acoustic
waves to create pressure gradients to direct molecules while a static
system uses ultrasound waves without any active fluid flow. The acoustofluidic
system showed similar delivery efficiency while having lower microbubble
concentration and shorter treatment time. Aghaamoo et al. reported an acoustic shear orbiting platform
(AESOP) to optimize intracellular delivery. This platform combines
acoustic waves and electric fields to generate microvortices that
facilitate the efficient entry of large molecules into cells. The
micro vortices cause fluid shear stress to break down the barriers,
while the electric fields create an electroporation effect to help
the cell membrane become permeable. Results showed successful intracellular
delivery of a range of molecule sizes (<1 kDa to 2 MDa) with high
efficiency and cell viability.
Beyond the cellular level, acoustofluidics
has also been used for facilitating transdermal drug delivery. Xu
et al. fabricated active acoustic metamaterials
with pyramid structures attached to a piezoelectric transducer ( B). This device was
able to achieve precise control of the dosage and release kinetics
of therapeutic reagents and demonstrated effective treatment for allergy-induced
anaphylaxis in mouse models. Zhang et al. studied flexible SAW-facilitated transdermal drug delivery. Their
results showed that the flexible SAW device enabled transdermal delivery
of fluorescent molecules up to 2000 kDa. Wang et al. studied the blood brain barrier as it is the gatekeeper
to the central nervous system, which was accomplished using an open-source
board-based acoustofluidic transwell system. The acoustic waves in
this system temporarily disrupted the blood brain barrier, opening
it up for the desired substances to cross.

## Cell Pairing/Fusion
Zhong et al. reported a multiparametric
cellular immunity analysis by
modular acoustofluidic platform, CIAMAP, to manipulate immune cells
using acoustic forces. This platform sorts and collects effector targets
and cell pairs and monitors real-time dynamics while also having a
modular design allowing for easy adaptation to different needs. In
addition to understanding disease, acoustofluidics has been used to
potentially help improve the treatment of them. Liu et al. used oscillating bubbles to enable rapid cell
pairing and fusion. The monodisperse microbubbles were generated using
multiple rectangular structures at the sidewall of the PDMS. Within
40 s, the cells were captured and paired on the surface of these bubbles.
Results showed that cell membrane fusion was achieved within 20 min
and that biological functions of the cells were not altered.

## Organoids
Fabrication and 3D Cell Culture
Acoustofluidics
is also a powerful technology for manipulating and assembling biological
and synthetic systems. Ao et al. utilized
SSAW to fabricate tumor spheroids using patient-derived cells. Their
device can yield hundreds of cell assemblies in a Petri dish under
2 min, which can then be used for evaluating the response of different
therapeutic agents. In the following work, they utilized this method
to evaluate cancer immunotherapy for primary tumor-derived organotypic
cell clusters (POCCs). This method maintains immune and stromal components
of the TME which enables rapid evaluation of T-cell-mediated cytotoxicity
and immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) therapies within 12 h. Shan
et al. fabricated spiral transducers
to generate an acoustic vortex for rapid formation of 3D tumor organoids.
They also found that the acoustic field enhanced ion channel activation
for Ca2+, accelerating intercellular adhesion for cell
assembly formation. In the coculture experiment for tumor organoid
and T cells, a high activation rate of T cells was observed. Zheng
et al. fabricated a cell spheroid array
utilizing bubble-induced vortex streaming, which allows for straightforward in situ drug screening. Luo et al. introduced a portable and integrated acoustic device that constructs
3D cell spheroids rapidly and contact-free. The device used ultrasound
to pattern cell spheroids in capillary systems. Mei et al. developed a SAW-based method to form and manipulate
3D cell clusters. In this method, SAW induced acoustic streaming in
the media to generate recirculation zones that agglomerate cells into
clusters. This method allows for the rapid formation of large, spherical
clusters without using traditional wells, preserving intercellular
communication capabilities and promoting tissue-like functionality.
Acoustic levitation has also been applied to support noncontact culture
environments. Rabiet et al. used acoustic
levitation for the long-term culture of human 3D spheroids without
physical support. In this method, ultrasonic standing waves were used
to suspend and organize cells into self-assembled spheroids. In addition
to cell spheroids, Gao et al. used an
acoustofluidic device to assemble DNA-coated colloids (DNACCs) into
hierarchical structures. By modulating acoustic wave properties such
as frequency and phase, the method created controlled, multiscale
assemblies of DNACCs in a robust and programmable manner. The ability
to achieve external programmability prevents kinetics trapping, allowing
for the formation of complex morphologies.

## Tissue Engineering
Acoustofluidic technologies have
also been used in vascular and tissue engineering applications. Wu
et al. used SSAWs to create vessel-on-a-chip
systems. Endothelial cells were patterned in hydrogel matrices, which
would be developed into vascular networks under interstitial flow
stimulation. The method enables the creation of vessel networks with
high-resolution geometries, high reproducibility, and vascular functionality
such as vascular permeability and perfusion. Shao et al. developed an acoustofluidic-assisted direct
ink writing (DIW) method to fabricate vascular scaffolds with patterned
porous microstructures. Using BAWs, CaCO3 particles within
the sodium alginate ink were aligned, extruded around a rotating rod,
and cross-linked with CaCl2. The CaCO3 particles
were later removed with HCl to create porous microstructures. This
approach yielded 3D tubular scaffolds with a 69% improvement in pore
connectivity, 8% higher in porosity, and enhanced fibroblast cell
distribution with a 96% survival rate. Yin et al. employed an acoustofluidic method for creating structured
cell-laden hydrogel fibers and tubules with tunable cell patterns.
This method exploits acoustic resonances to prepattern cells in liquid
hydrogels before UV cross-linking into stable structures that mimic
natural tissue structures like muscle fibers and blood vessels. Results
showed that patterned hydrogels maintained high cell viability and
proliferation over 72 h. Li et al. expanded
the application of acoustofluidics into the field of responsive materials
by developing an acousto-photolithography technique that combines
SAW patterning with photolithography, resulting in complex transformations
like bending and twisting. Deshmukh et al. used a BAWs acoustofluidic device to produce hydrogel fibers with
patterned cells for tissue engineering. The BAWs were used to pattern
cells within hydrogels followed by photopolymerization to hold the
structure in place. This device can create patterned cellular structures
with precise arrangement of cells, mimicking natural tissues such
as skeletal muscle. Hu et al. presented
a bubble-assisted acoustic wave method for high-precision assembly
of heterogeneous tissue models. This method used oscillating bubbles
in an acoustic field to pattern cells, achieving spatial resolutions
up to 45 μm. The method was applied to construct an in vitro model of hepatic lobules with endothelial and hepatic
parenchymal cells, showing functional performance such as urea and
albumin secretion and enzyme activity.

## Biophysics Measurement
Acoustofluidic microdevices
can be used in biophysical applications such as assessing mechanical
properties of cells and distinguishing phenotypes. For example, Fu
et al. designed an acoustofluidic device
to assess varying metastatic potential in breast cancer cells by evaluating
their compressibility in a rapid and label-free manner. When the piezoelectric
transducer was activated, the standing wave filed directed cells and
polystyrene beads toward the central pressure node of the channel.
They further applied the device to study EMT regulation in MCF-7 cells.
Those with EMT upregulation showed increased cell compressibility,
whereas those with EMT downregulation showed decreased cell compressibility.
Wang et al. used taSSAW to phenotype
different cell lines. As the input power increased, cells migrated
toward the pressure node traveling as much as 271 μm across
the channel region toward the node. By testing breast and lung cancer
cells along with leukocytes, they could differentiate between the
three types of cells as each cell type required slightly different
threshold input power to achieve migration. Hu et al. fabricated a SAW device comprised of two pairs
of IDTs to create pressure nodes array to multiplex the capture and
trapping of HEK293 cells. They obtained dynamics of individual cells
by applying power law rheology dynamics during loading and relaxation
processes.

## Cell/Organism Stimulation
Yoo et
al. reported the working mechanism of
neuromodulation effect
induced by focused ultrasound. They found that the focused ultrasound
activates neuron in culture via mechanosensitive ion channel activation.
When the ion channels were inhibited, reduced response of ultrasound
activation was observed, indicating the key role of these channels
in ultrasonic neuromodulation. Vasan et al. observed cell membrane deflection under ultrasound stimulation using
high speed holographic imaging. They developed a biomechanical model
predicting the change of voltage across cell membrane, which was then
experimentally confirmed using a patch-clamp assay. He et al. studied the mechanobiological secretome of
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) upon acoustic stimulation. 3D MSC aggregates
were actuated by acoustic waves to enhance the secretion from MSCs.
Results showed that N-cadherin was up-regulated for the MSC aggregates,
which enhanced the MSC secretome. Kim et al. investigated the cytotoxic response of natural killer cells in a
microreactor to SAW with the goal of enhancing the function of immune
cells using a noninvasive approach. SAW-induced acoustic streaming
exerted shear stress to the cells, which enhanced the immune cell
function by providing a dynamic microenvironment mimicking physiological
conditions. This device was able to increase cytokine secretion which
is essential for immune activation and antitumor response. Mokhtare
et al. reported on a SAW device to perform
oocyte denudation, which is often necessary in assisted reproductive
technology (ART). This device achieved >90 denudation under various
operation modes. When compared with manual denudation, a similar level
of survival was observed, while the acoustic device significantly
reduced the labor burden of the manual procedure. Bhadra et al. utilized SAW-induced acoustic streaming to
stimulate neurodegenerative disease model Caenorhabditis elegans. The intensity of acoustic streaming can be precisely controlled
by adjusting the input power. They found less neuron loss for C. elegans treated with moderate intensity acoustic streaming.
While the protective effect is less significant for high-intensity
acoustic streaming treatment, it still showed less neuron loss compared
to the control group. Kwak et al. investigated
the effects of helical flow in blood vessels in a SAW dynamic flow
generator. It was found that adjusting the amplitude changes the vortices
and optimal parameters are needed to preserve the integrity of the
endothelial cells. The results suggested that cells respond to the
helical flow through mechanosensitive ion channels and that the helical
flow has an atheroprotective role.

## Sperm Manipulation
Neild and co-workers reported that
a 20 s ultrasound treatment enhanced
the mobility of sperms from bull and human. A 15% increase in curvilinear
velocity was observed for human sperm without significant change in
viability and DNA fragmentation index. In a recent work, they further
showed that using a high-frequency (40 MHz) ultrasound treatment led
to 34% immotile sperm becoming motile.
Castro et al. used acoustic forces to manipulate sperm cells
for efficient sorting and evaluating semen quality. The platform used
ADMiER, an acoustically driven microfluidic rheometry platform, which
is a high-throughput method so that large volumes of semen can be
analyzed quickly. Gai et al. leveraged
acoustic streaming flow to analyze sperm rheotaxis without a pump.
They studied different device geometries to reflect varying fallopian
tubes, and the results gave insight on how sperm navigate in the female
reproductive tract. It was found that rheotactic sperms swim near
the boundaries to overcome the flow and reach the fertilization site.
Wan et al. employed oscillating bubble-induced
vortex acoustic streaming to concentrate sperm for downstream analysis.
Zhang et al. used SAW to concentrate
sperms in a droplet to facilitate in vitro fertilization between sperm
and oocyte. An acoustic device can also be used to select mobile sperms.
Misko et al. reported an acoustic focusing
device that showed only the high mobility sperms could “escape”
the trap.

## Imaging
The advantages in contact-free
manipulation
and sample separation have made acoustofluidics a powerful tool in
various imaging applications. As a nondestructive technique, acoustofluidics
can be coupled with different optical detection techniques such as
fluorescence and Raman spectroscopy. The traditional strategy is to
apply acoustofluidics for the solution mixing and enrichment of target
analytes, and several new applications have been reported in recent
years. Park et al. applied SAW to induce
the aggregation of silver nanoparticles, achieving the signal amplification
for the surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) detection of dopamine.
Kim et al. also utilized acoustofluidics
to concentrate Ebola virus particles for SERS detection. In addition
to biological samples, acoustofluidics is applied for the analysis
of samples which need an ultraclean environment, such as extraterrestrial
material. Ferretti et al. analyzed two
levitated fragments of Saratov meteorite with Raman spectroscopy using
an acoustic levitator for sample manipulation. The contact-free manipulation
could effectively eliminate sample contamination, demonstrating the
potential of acoustofluidics in contact-free and low-contamination
characterization in astronomical research. Nam et al. reported acoustofluidic lysis of MDA-MB-231
cells for Raman spectrum profiling. The cell lysis was realized through
mechanical collisions with polystyrene microparticles, which was actuated
by an acoustofluidic device with a high frequency.
Acoustofluidics
has been adopted for in vivo imaging and real-time
monitoring. Kellerer et al. realized
the real-time monitoring of osmosis in A549 lung cells and red blood
cells. The cells were trapped in a spherical microchamber with an
acoustofluidic device and imaged by a two-photon-excited fluorescence
microscopy. Silva et al. collected the
Raman spectra of live cells using acoustofluidics for cell aggregation.
Ota et al. developed high-throughput
3D-imaging flow cytometry with acoustic manipulation of cells. The
cell stream was focused on a semi-1D rectangular region with the same
velocity for imaging by the light-sheet microscopy. Since the cells
were well-confined in a narrow region, the frame rate of a high-speed
sCMOS camera could be maximized, achieving a throughput of over 2000
cell/s. The authors further improved the high-throughput 3D-imaging
flow cytometry technique and applied it for the comparison of the
nuclear morphology of adhering and suspended cells. The results showed that the nuclei of adhering cells were
smaller and less rounded.
Acoustofluidics has been used to rotate
objects to achieve multiangle
imaging. Liang et al. employed refractive-index
(RI)-based 3D tomographic imaging techniques for the long-term spatiotemporal
observation of a single cell. An acoustofluidic device was applied
for the rotation of cells during culture. This study revealed the
different characteristics of MCF-7 and K562 cells during normal growth,
drug-induced apoptosis, and drug-induced necrosis. The sample manipulation
could also be more precisely controlled by tuning the acoustofluidic
parameters. Løvmo et al. developed
an acoustofluidic device to trap and manipulate biological samples
for high numerical aperture multi-angle imaging. By changing the strengths
of the three transducers, the sample could be rotated for image acquisition
from different orientations. They further combined the acoustic trap
with optical coherence tomography for zebrafish and tumor spheroid
imaging. The acoustic trap allows reorientation of objects thereby
achieving multiangle imaging. Richard et al. combined acoustic trapping, pneumatic valves, and light sheet microscopy
to achieve high-quality imaging of macrophage phagocytosis of bacteria.
Acoustic trapping ensured convenient and accurate positioning of cells
during multiple rounds of imaging process. Their imaging system successfully
resolved phagocytosed bacteria in the macrophage. Zhang et al. leveraged SAW-induced vortex streaming to simultaneously
rotate a large number of cells for multiview precytopathological screening.
Besides working as a tool for sample manipulation, the acoustofluidic
device could also play a key role in the imaging system. Jin et al. developed a dual camera acoustofluidic scanning
nanoscope for high-resolution imaging. Microspheres were placed on
the target sample as super resolution lens to overcome the light diffraction
limit and amplify the image. In this novel nanoscope, an acoustofluidic
device was applied to drive multiple microspheres simultaneously for
sample scanning. The images from each microsphere could be merged
with a seamless image merging algorithm (alpha-blending process) to
achieve a large field of view, which was usually limited in high-resolution
imaging since the field of view is inversely proportional to its resolution.

## Sample Processing
Acoustofluidics has been used to
achieve many sample pretreatment steps for chemical and biological
analysis. Pourabed et al. reported cell
lysis from whole blood samples for blood-borne pathogens. With their
method, a star-shaped device was utilized for inducing acoustic streaming
within a circular channel. The blood samples were then processed for
a variety of tests and diseases. Husseini et al. reported a method of using SAW and sharp-edge glass microparticles
to lyse cell samples in a droplet. The system consisted of a pair
of focused IDTs with the SAW beams converging in the center, where
a 20 μL droplet sits. When the acoustics were applied, the SAW
induced strong sharp edge streaming from the glass microparticles
lysed cells.
DNA fragmentation is an important step for many
DNA analysis applications including sequencing. Sun et al. reported a static lysis device using sharp-edge
and bubble-induced streaming, respectively. 300 bp fragments were
achieved for λ-DNA samples with an actuation duration of 150
s. Li et al. combined a vibrating sharp
tip with a 3D printed microdevice, achieving DNA fragmentation under
a continuous flow. The vibrating sharp tip generated strong acoustic
streaming that fragmented the DNA as it flowed through the channel.
DNAs were fragmented into 700–3000 bp fragments with low power
consumption and a flow rate up to 50 μL/min.
Chang et
al. reported a method of
liquefying sputum samples based on bubble-induced acoustic streaming.
The liquefied samples were collected and filtered. The resulting sample
was smeared on a glass microscope slide for identification of cancer
cells within the sample. This process improved the detection of cancer
cells and reduced the sample processing time. He et al. utilized an acoustic focusing device to enrich
biological particles including cells, crystals, and bacteria from
urine under a continuous flow. As the sample flew through the device,
the particles became more concentrated for convenient microscopic
analysis. Costa et al. introduced EchoGrid,
which is a high-throughput acoustic trapping method, with the goal
of enriching microplastics for analysis. It used high-frequency acoustic
waves to create a grid-like structure in which the microplastics can
be selectively trapped. The technique was able to double the concentration
every 78 s for 23 μm particles and every 52 s for 10 μm
particles. Draz et al. reported a method
of staining tissue samples for cancer detection. The tissue samples
were sandwiched between substrate and coverslip. Two piezoelectric
transducers were applied on opposite ends on top of the device. After
the dye was loaded into the staining chamber the acoustic streaming
caused the dye to travel across the entire tissue sample for uniform
coverage, resulting in higher signal-to-background ratio. Ang et al. reported a SAW nanosieve device to enrich bacteria
from milk samples. As the sample flows through the channel, the bacteria
are captured from the other components, which facilitates downstream
detection of bacteria. Nilghaz et al. reported a pumpless sharp-edge device for rapid homogenization of
food samples for bacteria detection. With their method, a small portion
of a raspberry or strawberry was added to a buffer, and the solution
was added into the microchannel. As the sample traveled along the
microchannel, sharp edges induced microvortexing for mixing and breaking
down of the fruit sample. The resulting DNA in the solution was then
extracted and purified for real-time PCR analysis.

## Nucleic Acids
Detection
Yang et al. reported
an integrated RNA detection system driven by SAW.
First, cell lysis was achieved via SAW-induced collisions between
cells and microparticles. Then, magnetic beads were introduced by
SAW to capture the RNAs from the solution. Next, the RNAs were eluted
from the magnetic beads by SAW-induced streaming. Finally, the RNA
sequences were amplified in situ by PCR using SAW-induced heating.
Li et al. reported an integrated microdevice
for simultaneous detection of multiple respiratory pathogens. This
device integrates magnetic particles-based DNA extraction and purification,
acoustic streaming-enhanced fluid mixing, and PCR amplification and
detection into one chip. This device leveraged oscillating bubble-induced
acoustic streaming to enhance the reagents mixing after DNA extraction,
achieving a limit of detection as low as 10 copies/μL. Duan
and co-workers reported an all-in-one
nucleic acid detection system, achieving “sample-in-answer-out”.
This device integrated an acoustic resonator, thin-film resistors,
temperature sensor, and detection module ( A). In this device, the acoustic unit enabled
on-chip fluid manipulation and DNA extraction. Finally, this device
demonstrated the detection of EGFR gene from plasma with a limit of
detection (LOD) of 1 copy/μL. Zhou et al. reported that acoustic streaming inside a droplet can accelerate
a recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) reaction for detecting
SARS-CoV-2. Their results showed that the acoustic streaming device
halved the reaction time compared with static droplet reaction.
 

## Protein Detection
In addition, many studies have explored
acoustic wave-induced effects to enhance protein detection. Thome
et al. reported an acoustic pipet through
combining functional negative acoustic contrast particles (fNACPs)
and acoustic particle trapping. This acoustic pipet can directly capture
and enrich biomolecules from biofluids with simple pipetting operations
and enabled high-sensitivity downstream fluorescence detection. This
device achieved detection of antiovalbumin antibodies from blood at
pM level. Chen et al. developed a self-contained
portable system for detecting total and free prostate-specific antigen
using a lamb wave resonator array. The device was capable of fluid
mixing, pumping, and particle trapping for analysis. The signal readout
was achieved using an integrated CMOS sensor. Wu et al. employed GHz transducer-induced acoustic streaming
to enrich aggregation-induced emission (AIE) probes, triggering the
formation of larger aggregates. This method achieved human serum albumin
detection with a LOD of 0.5 μg/mL. Das et al. utilized SAW-induced particle concentration in a droplet
to accelerate the detection of protein biomarkers. It has been reported
that combining acoustic trapping with a ratiometric fluorescence sensor
could enhance detection signals. Zhang et al. reported a 10-fold increase in fluorescence signal when
acoustic waves were used enriching the fluorophore-antibody complex.
Due to the enhanced fluorescence signal and the ratiometric fluorescence
sensor, semiquantitative naked eye detection was achieved. Li et al. reported using focused TSAW to trap particles
for enhancing protein biomarker detection. With this method, the reaction
solution flew through the reaction channel until it reached the focusing
and detection area. The particles that carried target proteins got
trapped in the detection area, while other particles were washed away.
Wang et al. reported using Rayleigh
streaming to accelerate antigen–antibody binding by eliminating
the hydrodynamic boundary layer ( B). They conducted the immunoassay in a droplet
placed on the SAW substrate. This method achieved much faster assay
time (40 s vs 20 min) when compared to methods with the absence of
acoustic streaming. Similarly, Zhang et al. reported that acoustic streaming can accelerate ELISA in a standard
96-well plate. With the assistance of acoustic streaming, each reaction
step was shortened to 15 min from 60 min with conventional methods.

## Mass Spectrometry
Acoustofluidic technologies have
enabled a variety of mass spectrometry applications with improved
sensitivity, throughput, and efficiency. First, the acoustic ejection
of droplets has significantly improved the throughput of mass spectrometry
analysis. Speckmeier et al. used an
acoustic droplet ejection mass spectrometry (ADE-MS) assay for screening
of mutant isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (mIDH1) inhibitors. An acoustic
transducer positioned beneath a microplate rapidly ejected nanoliter
droplets into a vortex carrier liquid, which transported the droplets
to an electrospray ionization (ESI) source for MS analysis. This label-free
approach facilitated high-throughput evaluation of enzymatic reaction
directly from 384- and 1536-well plates with minimal sample preparation.
It screened 3200 compounds and identified 29 potent IDH1 R132H inhibitors
at 2.5 s/sample. Winter et al. employed
ADE-OPI-MS for label-free, high-throughput screening of metabolic
enzyme inhibitors, analyzing 54,000 compounds per day. Hu et al. also used an optimized acoustic droplet ejection-open
port interface mass spectrometry method for the high-throughput analysis
of oligonucleotide. The enzymatic activity of terminal deoxynucleotide
transferase (TdT) was evaluated, and 10,000 TdT mutants were screened
at a rate of 3 s/sample using this method. As a result, 3 new variants
with 4-fold higher catalytic activity were identified. Ma et al. modified an acoustic ejection MS (AEMS) platform
to enable adjustable signal durations, enabling compatibility with
workflows requiring extended acquisition times. The modification allowed
simultaneous monitoring of up to 13 MS/MS transitions per droplet,
achieving a 10-fold throughput increase over LC-MS while maintaining
high reproducibility. Puyvelde et al. also used an AEMS-based workflow for the quantification of protein
biomarkers ( A). The workflow combines the speed of AEMS with the selectivity
of peptide immunocapture for the high-throughput analysis of acute
phase response (APR) proteins and SARS-CoV-2 peptides. As a result,
the method quantified 267 plasma samples in triplicate within 4.8
h (CV: 4.2 – 10.5%) and SARS-CoV-2 peptides from 145 swabs
in triplicate in just 10 min.
 Cahill and Kertesz reported the rapid
droplet sampling interface (RDSI) for high-throughput electrospray
mass spectrometry (ESI-MS). A piezoelectric pulse was used to rapidly
dispense 0.3 nL droplets into an open-face microflow capillary, where
the droplets were mixed with a continuous solvent flow for electrospray
ionization. The method reduced analyte dilution thereby improving
sensitivity and enabled rapid sampling at 5 samples per second with
fully baseline-resolved peaks.
Acoustics has also found applications
in the ionization of analytes
for MS analysis. Vibrating sharp-edge spray ionization (VSSI), which
achieves efficiency ionization with a piezoelectric transducer and
a glass slide or a capillary, has been used in many mass spectrometry
applications. Wang et al. combined VSSI
with a solid-phase microextraction (SPME) probe for rapid quantification
of β-blockers from serum samples with a LOD of 0.25 ng/mL. The
method combines desorption and ionization processes into a single
step, which streamlines the analytical workflow and offers a cost-effective,
robust, and portable solution for SPME-MS analysis. Pursell et al. coupled VSSI with atmospheric pressure chemical
ionization (APCI) to overcome ion suppression in complex mixtures.
Samples were nebulized via VSSI and then ionized via APCI. This cVSSI-APCI
method improved ion signals of low-ionizing species (thymine, theophylline,
and vitamin D2) in the presence of high-ionizing species (cocaine)
in methanol by ∼2 to ∼3 orders of magnitude. Elshamy
et al. used VSSI as a nanoflow sheath
voltage-free interface to couple capillary electrophoresis (CE) to
MS. Their method enabled the separation and ionization of small molecules
at low flow rates under different chemical conditions. Attanayake
et al. applied the field-enabled VSSI
to enhance signal intensity in MS/MS experiments in negative ion mode.
This technique significantly improved precursor ion intensities by
more than 1000-fold and fragment ion intensities by up to 10-fold
when compared with conventional ESI and HESI under the same experimental
conditions. Sharif et al. reported that
field-free VSSI could preserve flexible protein conformers better
compared with field-enabled VSSI and ESI. In addition, VSSI has been
coupled with hydrogen–deuterium exchange (HDX) and time-resolved
mass spectrometry to study biomolecule structure and reaction kinetics,
respectively. In addition to VSSI, Dugan et al. reported mechanospray ionization (MoSI), which achieved
ionization using a piezoelectric disk and a mesh with micrometer-sized
holes. Their results with biomolecules indicate that MoSI is a softer
ionization method compared with ESI. Taylor et al. reported a two-stage SAW device to achieve direct analysis
of lipid vesicles using mass spectrometry. The first-stage SAW used
high frequency to disrupt lipid vesicles without the need for chemical
reagents, which are often detrimental to mass spectrometry analysis.
The second-stage SAW was a standard SAW nebulization (SAWN) device
that was coupled with APCI for ionization.
Acoustics also enables
a novel sample handling strategy for MS
analysis. Wasen et al. used acoustic
levitation combined with laser ablation and secondary electrospray
ionization (SESI) for in situ MS analysis of levitated droplets. This
technique uses standing acoustic waves to levitate droplets in the
air to create a contactless microreactor environment. To generate
the analyte plumes, levitated droplets are irradiated with a mid-IR
laser, and the generated plumes are ionized with SESI for MS analysis.
This method efficiently ionized and detected analytes above 1 kDa
with a much-improved sensitivity compared to APCI. They further utilized
acoustic levitation for real-time, contactless protein digestion analysis. The method enabled miniaturization of the digestion
process, reducing the use of solvents, analytes, and enzymes. The
method achieved comparable protein sequence coverage (average of 60%)
to traditional overnight digestion in just 30 min. Urban and co-workers reported that placing a low-frequency (50–350
Hz) sound source close to the mass spectrometer inlet can tune the
spectra obtained with ESI, which could be caused by the deflection
of different sized droplets by the low-frequency sound wave.

## 3D Printing
Owing to its capability of manipulating
fluids and particles without any physical contact, acoustofluidic
methods have also been used to assist an additive manufacturing process.
In the area of reinforced composites, Wang et al. reported acoustic-assisted 3D printing to fabricate conductive
polymer composites with improved electrical properties. SSAWs created
stable acoustic pressure fields that aligned silver particles and
carbon fibers into various patterns such as stripes, nets, or dots
within a photocurable resin matrix. These patterns were subsequently
cured layer by layer using a digital light processing (DLP) projector,
guided by a predefined digital mask. The resulting conductive polymer
films demonstrate anisotropic electrical properties, with the highest
recorded electrical conductivity of 827 S/m achieved at an optimized
layer thickness of 200 μm. In advancing this concept, Xu et
al. applied acoustic-assisted 3D printing
to fabricate fiber-reinforced polymer composites with lightweight
honeycomb structures. This method achieved a 75% increase in energy
absorption and a 102% improvement in stress resistance compared to
pure resin structures. Li et al. optimized
the acoustic-assisted DLP method to fabricate carbon nanofiber-reinforced
honeycomb structures with improved mechanical properties. By using
SSAWs generated by a hexagonal array of IDTs, carbon nanofibers were
aligned into strip-like patterns along honeycomb edges within a photosensitive
resin. The resulting structures demonstrated significant mechanical
enhancements, including an 18.1% increase in ultimate stress and a
7.9% improvement in energy absorption compared to nonreinforced resin
structures. Acoustic waves have also been used to align microparticles
into patterns. Xu et al. developed a
multistep acoustic-assisted 3D printing method to manipulate microparticles
into intricate patterns. This approach utilizes SSAW to arrange microparticles
at acoustic pressure nodes within a resin matrix which is subsequently
cured by a DLP projector. The method successfully fabricated two-dimensional
microparticle patterns with complex geometries, such as semitriangles
and hollow squares, achieving stable and precise arrangements with
a minimum spacing of 200 μm. In another study, Agrawal et al. introduced a volumetric 3D printer called SonoPrint.
This device is capable of patterning microparticles using acoustic
waves piezoelectric transducers into lines, hexagons, and polygons
within a rotating resin vial. This method enabled simultaneous reinforcement
and rapid fabrication of complex structures, achieving notable mechanical
improvements, including a 46% increase in tensile strength and a 13%
improvement in compression strength.
Acoustic modulation has
also been used to fabricate high-resolution 3D-printed structures
rapidly. Vidler et al. presented a novel
3D printing technique called dynamic interface printing (DIP), leveraging
acoustically modulated air–liquid interfaces to produce high-resolution
structures ( B). The DIP method employs a hollow print head submerged in a photopolymer
solution to create a static air–liquid meniscus, which serves
as the printing interface. Capillary-gravity waves generated by acoustic
modulation control material flow to this interface, where visible
light polymerizes the material. This technique achieved rapid fabrication
of complex geometries, including biological models such as heart,
within seconds. It demonstrated print speeds of up to 700 μm/s
for soft hydrogels like PEGDA, resolutions as fine as 15.1 μm,
and low cytotoxicity with 93% cell viability.

## Nanoparticles Fabrication
Traditionally, ultrasound
has been widely used for chemical synthesis and bulk synthesis of
nanoparticles leveraging the cavitation effect. In recent years, the
fast-mixing capability of acoustofluidic devices has enabled synthesizing
various types of nanoparticles in microfluidic devices with high uniformity.
To synthesize polymeric nanoparticles, Zhao et al. introduced a sharp-edge mixing device to fabricate PLGA–PEG
nanoparticles from high molecular weight polymers (>45 kDa). This
device enabled complete mixing of high molecular weight polymers like
PLGA50k–PEG5k and PLGA90k–PEG10k, producing smaller
PLGA–PEG nanoparticles. Additionally, this platform enabled
multistep sequential nanoprecipitation, forming core–shell
PLGA–PEG/lipid nanoparticles by creating a PLGA core in the
first stage and assembling lipid molecules onto its surface in the
second. Ozcelik et al. generates acoustic
streaming flows within a low-cost glass capillary to fabricate polymer
nanoparticles. Their results showed the fabrication of PLGA nanoparticles
with diameters ranging from 65 to 96 nm and polydispersity index values
between 0.08 and 0.18. Lu et al. combined
a contraction–expansion channel with sharp-edge structures
to enhance the mixing efficiency for nanoparticle synthesis. Combining
the convection and acoustic mixing achieved a mixing time as low as
0.2 ms. Finally, they demonstrated the fabrication of chitosan nanoparticles
with tunable sizes across a broad range of flow rates. Xu et al. utilized acoustic streaming generated around
the edge of a bulk piezoelectric transducer to achieve efficient fluid
mixing for fabricating liposomes. Optimized synthesis condition can
be achieved by adjusting the hydrodynamic focusing of the reagent
flow and the shape and orientation of a transducer. They also showed
that the size of liposome can be tuned with different input power
without the need to change the flow rate. Vardin et al. used a sharp-edge mixing device to synthesize
liposome nanoparticles. They controlled liposome size by increasing
the concentration of glycerol in the solvent, which significantly
reduces the average diameter of nanoparticles. Similarly, Agha et
al. synthesized liposome nanoparticles
using a sharp-edge mixing platform with cyclic olefin copolymer (COC)
as the channel material, a low-cost transparent biocompatible thermoplastic.
Acoustofluidics is also suitable for synthesizing metallic nanoparticles.
Liu et al. utilized SAW mixing to fabricate
Ag nanoparticles within a microfluidic device. Under optimal conditions
and a 2:1 ratio of reductant to the precursor, the synthesized Ag
nanoparticles exhibited an average size of 24.4 ± 5.1 nm. Zhang
et al. used a glass capillary tube as
a substrate for growing ZnO nanoarrays within the tube. They developed
an acoustofluidic bubble-driven micromixer for the controllable synthesis
of ZnO nanoarrays within the glass capillary. Their synthesis process
involved acoustic mixing to form ZnO seeds, followed by nanorod or
nanosheet growth. Another low-cost substrate for growing nanoparticles
via acoustofluidics is paper. Zhao et al. demonstrates a one-step acoustofluidic method for producing plasmonic
Ag nanoparticles on paper substrates. The method uses laser cutting
to generate aldehydes on paper edges, serving as natural reducing
agents for Ag+ ions, combined with acoustofluidic mixing
to uniformly distribute Ag nanoparticles in 3 min. In addition to
sphere nanoparticles, Curtin et al. reported
a seedless and stabilizing agent-free method for synthesizing Au nanostars.
They simplified the synthesis process by utilizing a 3D-printed microfluidic
device with a vibrating sharp-tip acoustic mixing technique that required
very low power to achieve complete mixing. Hence, high-quality Au
nanostars were produced in a single-step synthesis without the need
for stabilizing agents or additional postprocessing. Zheng et al. used acoustic levitated droplets for bimetallic
nanoparticle synthesis. They fabricated Au–Ag nanoparticles,
showing smaller size, low polydispersity, and better catalytic activity
compared with traditional methods.

## Surface Cleaning
Ahmed et al. reported that SAW can
effectively remove the oxidation layer on
MXenes without affecting the integrity of Mxenes itself. After 1 min
of SAW treatment, pseudocapacitance of the Mxenes was restored to
98% compared to 50% before treatment. Zhang et al. used a SAW-driven method for the directional clearance
of bacteria captured by charged polystyrene particles. Results showed
that SAW for 20 s yielded 94.8% efficiency in bacterial clearance.
They also found out through motion analysis that ARF was the main
factor for the clearance of bacteria. Fung et al. used oscillating sharp-edge induced acoustic streaming
to clear fouling for cross-flow filtration devices. Ong et al. fabricated a ZnO thin-film SAW device on a
glass substrate. Due to the transparent feature of the glass, debris
removal and defogging by activating SAW is possible with such a device.
In the following work, they also showed that this device can be used
to inhibit the growth of bacteria.
Aerosols generated via SAW
have also been leveraged for surface disinfection and decontamination.
Woo et al. developed a hybrid modulation
method to stabilize the nebulization of plasma-activated water (PAW)
aerosols for surface disinfection and decontamination. Amplitude modulation
improved nebulization rates, while pulse-width modulation alternated
signal on/off cycles to reduce heating. This approach increased nebulization
rates by up to 243% while preserving aerosol characteristics and reducing
thermal stress. Chew et al. explored
the use of SiO2-coated SAW devices to enhance plasma-activated
aerosol generation for bacterial disinfection. The SiO2 coating mitigated efficiency caused by increased electrical conductivity,
particularly in plasma-activated water with high reactive species
concentrations. This innovation improved wettability and nebulization
efficiency, achieving 76% bacterial inactivation with lower aerosol
volumes and reduced treatment times.

## Conclusion and Perspectives
During the past decade,
we have seen the significant growth of
the acoustofluidic community, which directly led to the boom in technology
development and application adoption in recent years. Numerous methods
have been developed to enhance the capability of acoustofluidics in
manipulating particles, fluids, and droplets across various working
conditions. On the application front, we have seen the continuous
expansion of acoustofluidic techniques into new areas, along with
increasing demonstrations under practical and clinically relevant
conditions.
Moving forward, we anticipate continued progress
in several key
areas:1.Advancing
Core Technologies: Continued
evolution of technology to enhance the performance of existing methods
and unlock new possibilities remains a top priority for the field.
We believe interdisciplinary collaborations will play a crucial role
in future research, enabling the integration of advanced acoustic
metamaterials for fluid and particle manipulation with unprecedented
resolution and precision, the development of new materials specifically
optimized for acoustofluidic applications, and deeper integration
with complementary technologies such as optics, DEP, magnetics, and
smart materials.
2.Improving
Robustness and Accessibility:
Enhancing the robustness and ease of use of acoustofluidic methods
is essential for broadening their impact. While the pursuit of peak
performance in method development remains important, devices must
also become more tolerant to real-world working conditions. Due to
the nature of acoustic waves, they are inevitably affected by many
factors during operation such as temperature, fluid properties, particle
properties, and material properties. Multiparametric sensing and feedback
systems could be considered to offer comprehensive monitoring of device
operation. These systems, when combined with machine learning algorithms,
can enable real-time autonomous optimization, significantly improving
reliability and usability in diverse environments.
3.Discovering ″Killer Applications″:
The identification and development of ″killer applications″
is critical to dramatically expanding the impact and user base of
acoustofluidic methods. Such applications are the fundamental driving
force for commercializing acoustofluidic technologies, which, in turn,
will promote improvements in device manufacturing and operability.
Building on the numerous advanced biomedical applications achieved
over the past three years, we envision breakthroughs in areas such
as point-of-care (POC) diagnostics, cell therapy manufacturing, and
noninvasive therapeutic delivery.

## Author Contributions
† (T.G.
and B.B.) These authors contributed equally to this work.
The authors
declare the
following competing financial interest(s): P.L. co-found a company
to commercialize VSSI-related technologies.
Toktam Godary is
currently a Ph.D. candidate under
the supervision of Prof. Peng Li at West Virginia University. She
obtained her B.S. from University of Science and Research, Iran in
2016 and M.S. from Sharif University of Technology in 2020 and is
focusing on developing novel nanoparticles synthesis strategies using
acoustofluidics.
Brandi Binkley is currently a Ph.D. candidate under
the supervision of Prof. Peng Li at West Virginia University. She
obtained her B.S. from Frostburg State University in 2020 and is focusing
on developing novel point-of-care testing methods for protein biomarkers.
Zhengru Liu is currently a postdoc
scholar under the
supervision of Prof. Peng Li at West Virginia University. He obtained
his Ph.D. from University of Pittsburgh in 2024, and B.S. and M.S.
from Wuhan University, in 2012 and 2015, respectively. He is focusing
on developing point-of-care testing methods for nucleic acids and
proteins.
Olanrewaju Awoyemi is currently a Ph.D. candidate
under the supervision of Prof. Peng Li at West Virginia University.
He obtained his B.S. from Osun State University, Nigeria in 2015 and
M.S. from University of Ilorin, Nigeria in 2020 and is focusing on
developing novel mass spectrometry methods utilizing VSSI.
Amanda Overby is currently a Ph.D.
candidate under
the supervision of Prof. Peng Li at West Virginia University. She
obtained her B.S. from Bluefield College in 2016 and is focusing on
developing time-resolved mass spectrometry methods for analyzing biomolecules.
Herbi Yuliantoro is currently
a Ph.D. candidate under
the supervision of Prof. Peng Li at West Virginia University. He obtained
his B.S. and M.S. from Gadjah Mada University, Indonesia in 2018 and
2021, respectively, and is focusing on developing novel mass spectrometry-based
proteomics methods.
Bethany J. Fike is currently a Ph.D. candidate under
the supervision of Prof. Peng Li at West Virginia University. She
obtained her B.S. from Manchester University in 2016 and is focusing
on developing point-of-care digital assay.
Sydney Anderson is currently an undergraduate student
at West Virginia University. She is working on developing time-resolved
spectrometry methods under the supervision of Prof. Peng Li
Peng Li is currently an associate
professor in Chemistry
at West Virginia University. He obtained his B.S. from Tianjin University
in 2008 and Ph.D from Texas Tech University in 2012. Before starting
as an assistant professor at West Virginia University, he was a postdoctoral
scholar at Penn State University from 2012-2016.

## Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the financial support
from National
Institute of Health (R01GM135432 and R01GM153899) and National Science
Foundation (ECCS-2144216 and CHE-2305137).