4835mtadvMolecular Therapy AdvancesMol Ther AdvAmerican Society of Gene & Cell TherapyPMC1314895013148950131489504213729110.1016/j.omta.2026.201707Preclinical evaluation of INS1201 AAV9-micro-dystrophin via CSF administration as a potential therapy for Duchenne muscular dystrophy
ThomsenGretchen KasparAllan FerraiuoloLaura ChuBinh GarciaVeronica J WeissRyan SlaiwaTheresa Casanova-VallveNuria CanoRobert HurleyErin JulazadehHana BautistaHaunani RenteriaAshley LeeMaiya RollinsJaedyn McAlonis-DownesMelissa ArnoldW David TreDenickTracy HsuRyan BaylessLynn E KozialCatherine ForespringChristopher MolonyMichael FraserMichael ZhouJunguo YaoJiaqin BremnerShannon N WardSamuel R SchenkSimon YoshikawaTetsuya MoriyamaAkiko TsusakiHideshi VarmaSamit KrugerMarissa StahlMark KasparBrian 1Insmed Gene Therapy LLC, San Diego, CA 92121, USA2Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA3University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA4BioTechLogic, LLC, a Dark Horse Consulting Group, Inc. Company, Walnut Creek, CA 94597, USA5Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA6Bioengineering, Jacobs School of Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA7Insmed Incorporated, Bridgewater, NJ 08807, USA8Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA9Department of Radiology, School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA10Drug Safety Research Laboratories, Shin Nippon Biomedical Laboratories, Ltd., Kagoshima 891-1394, Japan∗Corresponding author: Gretchen Thomsen, Insmed Gene Therapy LLC, San Diego, CA 92121, USA. gretchen.thomsen@insmed.com
∗∗Corresponding author: Brian Kaspar, Insmed Gene Therapy LLC, San Diego, CA 92121, USA. brian.kaspar@insmed.com
20220263412017072017071452026© 2026 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
INS1201 is an investigational adeno-associated virus 9-micro-dystrophin gene transfer therapy under development as a potential treatment for Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). Administered into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), this delivery approach efficiently targets skeletal and cardiac muscle. Here, we present preclinical findings that demonstrated improved muscle histopathology and functional efficacy in the mdx mouse model starting at 2.0E+11 vector genomes (vg)/mouse and safety in Good Laboratory Practice-compliant toxicology studies in mice and nonhuman primates (NHPs) following INS1201 treatment. INS1201 significantly reduced DMD-associated pathology, whereby increased muscle fiber size, improved overall histology, and decreased inflammation and fibrosis were observed in treated mdx mice compared with mdx control mice. Although wild-type levels were not observed in neuromuscular strength, sustained functional improvements confirmed INS1201’s durable biological activity 1 year post-injection. Moreover, biodistribution and toxicology studies in mice and NHPs demonstrated effective transgene delivery to cardiac and skeletal muscles following INS1201 intra-CSF administration. Toxicology evaluations concluded that INS1201 was well tolerated at all tested doses, with the no observed adverse effect level set at the maximum feasible dose administered for both species (up to 8.0E+11 vg/mouse and 3.05E+14 vg/NHP). Collectively, these findings provided support for an INS1201 phase 1 human clinical study.

## Video Abstract

Keywords: Duchenne muscular dystrophy, gene therapy, recombinant adeno-associated virus, micro-dystrophin, mouse model, nonhuman primates, AAV9, mdx, preclinical, intrathecal

## Graphical abstract
 
INS1201 is an investigational, intrathecally delivered, AAV9-micro-dystrophin construct being evaluated for potential treatment of DMD. Preclinical results demonstrating durable micro-dystrophin expression in skeletal and cardiac muscle, and histopathological and functional efficacy along with safety, indicate that INS1201 delivery via the CSF may provide a novel therapeutic approach for patients with DMD.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Aug 1; Revised 2025 Dec 19; Accepted 2026 Feb 17; Collection date 2026 Mar 12.

## Introduction
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a severe form of X-linked recessive muscular dystrophy caused by mutations in the dystrophin gene that result in absent or near-absent expression of the dystrophin protein. , The loss of dystrophin compromises the stability and function of primarily skeletal and cardiac muscle fibers, leading to muscle degeneration. DMD is usually identified in boys between 2 and 3 years of age and presents with delays in gross motor skills such as standing without support, crawling, and climbing stairs. , , , , , , , , Progressive muscle degeneration leads to loss of ambulation between 10 and 12 years of age and the need for assisted ventilation around 20 years of age. Without successful therapeutic intervention, mortality most often ensues by the third decade of life, usually due to respiratory or cardiac complications. The estimated prevalence of DMD in the United States is 2.5 cases per 100,000 males. , , 
There is currently no cure for DMD. Disease-specific treatment options for DMD broadly consist of anti-inflammatory/anti-fibrotic treatments and treatments that are intended to increase the expression of dystrophin protein. Chronic corticosteroid therapy is the current standard of care, aiming to reduce inflammatory muscle damage and the risk of disease progression to immobility. , Current strategies for increasing dystrophin protein include the use of small molecules that promote ribosomal “readthrough” to bypass stop codons (addressing nonsense mutations; about 10% of cases), the use of oligonucleotides that interfere with RNA splicing to exclude (“skip”) exons and restore a disrupted reading frame (addressing specific exon deletions; 2%–15% of cases), and the use of gene transfer that can express smaller forms of the dystrophin protein from a transgene cassette transduced into muscle (gene mutation agnostic). The use of a gene-transfer approach that employs some form of the dystrophin protein expressed from an exogenously introduced transgene does not depend on the patient’s specific underlying mutation and is therefore a mutation agnostic approach. However, patients with certain deletions—most notably those affecting exons 8 and 9 of the DMD gene—appear to have an increased risk of immune responses to some exogenously expressed dystrophin constructs. This susceptibility is thought to result from the absence of immune tolerance to epitopes present in the therapeutic transgene product. Consequently, such patients are currently ineligible for treatment with these gene therapies and are generally excluded from clinical trials utilizing constructs incorporating these regions. In principle, this risk might be mitigated by employing several strategies, including intensive immunosuppressive regimens, the design of dystrophin constructs lacking the immunogenic epitopes, and the administration of gene therapy early in life when patients are more likely to be immune-response permissive to exogenous dystrophin. Of these treatments that address dystrophin deficiencies, gene transfer holds the potential to address the fundamental underlying pathology of DMD for the broadest population of patients, as it is not limited to use only in patients with specific and relatively rare dystrophin gene mutations.
Gene transfer strategies using recombinant adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors have made significant progress in treating a number of genetic disorders. To date, seven AAV gene therapies have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat diseases such as retinal dystrophy, spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), , hemophilia A and B, , and DMD. The utility of gene transfer has been particularly powerful in the treatment of SMA, where a systemically administered AAV9-based vector (onasemnogene abeparvovec) has been shown to effectively cross the blood-brain barrier and deliver a therapeutic gene directly to the central nervous system (CNS), resulting in robust protein expression in target cells. , , Notably, intrathecally dosed onasemnogene abeparvovec was also recently approved by the US FDA for the treatment of SMA. , Different AAV vector serotypes exhibit tropism for different tissues, with AAV serotypes 1, 2, 8, and 9 (along with engineered variants derived from them that are not endemic to humans, such as AAVrh74) demonstrating affinity for skeletal and cardiac muscles. 
Currently approved and investigational gene transfer therapies for DMD involve systemic (intravenous [i.v.]) administration of AAV vectors carrying a micro-dystrophin transgene. , Micro-dystrophin is a general term that refers to a recombinant, truncated but functional form of dystrophin protein, engineered such that the gene encoding it is less than 5 kb, which is considered the maximal packaging capacity of AAV. Multiple forms of micro-dystrophin that incorporate various combinations of the functional domains of full-length dystrophin have been tested in nonclinical and clinical studies without the emergence of a clear consensus on an ideal sequence. 
Micro-dystrophin expression in the case of INS1201 is driven by the MHCK7 promoter, which is derived from muscle tissue and contains the elements that drive expression of the myosin heavy chain kinase in muscle. Given the known transduction properties of AAV9 following intrathecal (IT) delivery, significant biodistribution of INS1201 vector genomes is expected throughout the CNS but micro-dystrophin protein expression is not likely to be abundant here given the selective properties of the MHCK7 promoter. Future studies may be designed to explore new dystrophin and promoter constructs to address potential CNS therapy for patients presenting with CNS manifestations of DMD.
Systemic administration of AAV micro-dystrophin has resulted in clinical benefit in some cases, with the regulatory approval of delandistrogene moxeparvovec-rokl (Elevidys, Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc.) in the United States, but has also demonstrated some important limitations related to both safety and efficacy. In clinical studies involving systemic administration of AAV vectors in patients with DMD, serious adverse events likely related to the broad range of host immune responses to high doses of AAV were reported, including thrombocytopenia, thrombotic microangiopathy, hepatotoxicity, myocardial inflammation, kidney injury, and death. , , , Of note, thrombotic microangiopathy and issues involving the kidneys were only reported with AAV9 administration. Additionally, hepatotoxicity is a known AAV class effect, and acute liver failure and death has been seen across multiple AAV serotypes. 
On June 15, 2025, Elevidys infusions were suspended in non-ambulatory patients with DMD, following two cases of fatal acute liver failure. An additional gene therapy clinical trial for SRP-9004 in patients with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy was also halted on July 18, 2025, due to another case of fatal acute liver failure. Following the reported fatalities, the FDA added a boxed warning to the label for Elevidys and limited its use to ambulatory DMD patients 4 years of age and older. 
With regard to efficacy, Elevidys, the only currently approved AAV-based therapy for DMD from any regulatory body, failed to demonstrate a statistically significant difference versus placebo in the prespecified primary endpoint of its phase 3 trial, the North Star Ambulatory Assessment (NSAA). However, statistically significant and clinically relevant improvements were noted on three timed function tests. In addition, the pivotal phase 3 study showed inconsistent levels of micro-dystrophin expression following delandistrogene moxeparvovec-rokl administration, whereby the mean change from baseline of micro-dystrophin expression in biopsy tissues collected from the medial gastrocnemius muscle at week 12 was 34% with a considerable standard deviation (SD) of 41%. Heterogeneity was observed in treated patients with regard to functional improvement, and there was a lack of clear correlation between micro-dystrophin expression and functional outcome. Overall, increasing the efficiency of muscle targeting and reducing systemic adverse events remain areas of opportunity for potential DMD treatments.
One way to potentially mitigate the risks associated with weight-based systemic dosing of AAV-based gene therapies for patients with DMD is to significantly reduce the overall dose. IT administration of AAV9 has been shown to safely and effectively target the CNS and treat neurological disorders in non-clinical and clinical studies, such as SMA and certain types of lysosomal storage diseases. , , , , , , , , , , Importantly, while this route of administration has not yet been applied to treating patients with DMD, IT administration of AAV9 has demonstrated efficient transduction of skeletal and cardiac muscles at comparatively lower doses than when systemically delivered (an order of magnitude or more lower than the equivalent i.v. application). , These studies provide evidence of the potential for IT-administered AAV9 to treat patients with DMD by using lower AAV dose levels than those required for i.v. treatment.
INS1201 is an investigational AAV9-micro-dystrophin construct developed to potentially address the serious unmet needs for patients with DMD. INS1201 is administered via injection into the CSF with an aim to promote muscle function and improve structural integrity by expressing a recombinant, truncated form of the dystrophin protein, which itself has shown substantial efficacy in the mdx mouse model of DMD. A variety of delivery methods for AAV-based therapeutics have been evaluated depending on the target tissue, therapeutic goal, and safety considerations. However, until now, there has not been an IT approach for delivering gene therapy to patients with DMD.
As the intended clinical route of administration for INS1201 is a single lumbar IT injection, the preclinical program for INS1201 involved delivery via the CSF to mice and nonhuman primates (NHPs) and comprised the following studies: proof of concept for CSF delivery to transduce skeletal and cardiac muscles; histopathological and functional efficacy in the DMD mouse model (mdx mice); biodistribution of INS1201 in mice and NHPs; and Good Laboratory Practice (GLP)-compliant toxicology studies in wild-type (WT) mice and NHPs. We describe herein the results of these preclinical studies, which supported the initiation of human clinical studies using fixed starting doses of INS1201 (5.0E+14 vg and 1.0E+15 vg) as a potential treatment for patients with DMD.

## Results

## Proof-of-concept delivery of AAV9 via the CSF to transduce skeletal and cardiac muscles
To confirm that AAV vectors could be efficiently delivered to skeletal and cardiac muscles via administration into the CSF, AAV9 carrying an expression vector that encodes green fluorescent protein (GFP [AAV9-GFP]) under the ubiquitous chicken beta actin (CBA) promoter was administered to juvenile NHPs via a single lumbar IT injection. Doses administered via IT injection were 4.6E+13, 9.2E+13, and 1.8E+14 total vg per animal. Tissue sections were immunostained for GFP protein expression and compared with tissues of animals receiving the same vector IV at the two higher doses (9.2E+13 vg and 1.8E+14 vg, which translates to approximately 3.1E+13 vg/kg and 6.0E+13 vg/kg, respectively, based on weight; all animals weighed between 2 and 4 kg at time of dosing; workflow shown in A).
 Immunohistochemistry for GFP performed on tissues collected at 3 weeks post-injection revealed that AAV9-GFP administered via IT injection into the CSF at the doses of 4.6E+13, 9.2E+13, and 1.8E+14 total vg per animal effectively transduced skeletal (biceps, triceps, deltoid, quadriceps, gastrocnemius, tibialis anterior, and diaphragm) and cardiac muscle, with robust GFP expression in what appeared to be a dose-dependent manner ( B). Although this study evaluated just an n = 1 per condition/dose, animals dosed systemically by i.v. injection at the two comparable higher doses of 9.2E+13 and 1.8E+14 vg showed qualitatively lower GFP expression in skeletal and cardiac muscles, but higher expression in the liver, relative to IT dosing. GFP DNA biodistribution analysis was performed comparing the higher-dosed (1.8E+14 vg) IV and IT animal tissues. Consistent with higher liver protein expression observations in the IV- versus IT-dosed animals, 625 vg were identified in the liver of the IV-dosed animal versus 40 vg in the liver of the IT-dosed animal. For each sample assessed—including 18 skeletal/cardiac muscle tissues, 9 CNS tissues, as well as tissue from the lung, kidney, and spleen—the ratio of vg relative to liver vg was higher in the IT-treated animal than in the IV-treated animal ( C). GFP protein expression in select skeletal and cardiac muscle following IT administration of AAV9-GFP was confirmed by western blot for each dose tested (4.6E+13, 9.2E+13, and 1.8E+14 total vg; D), indicating targeted delivery of AAV9 to skeletal and cardiac muscles following a single dose, delivered via the CSF.

## Preclinical pharmacology

## Effects of INS1201 on histopathology in mdx mice
The INS1201 micro-dystrophin construct region has been mapped to the full-length dystrophin protein, as shown in A, which shows the domains of dystrophin included in the micro-dystrophin construct. INS1201 was tested in the most widely used mouse model of DMD, the C57BL/10ScSn-Dmdmdx/J (mdx) mouse. Like human patients with DMD, mdx mutant mice do not express dystrophin and therefore have been routinely used as an animal model of the disease due to the well-characterized dystrophic muscle pathology along with skeletal muscle function deficits, such as weakness and fatigue. Onset of myopathy in mdx mice has been shown to take place as early as 3 weeks of age, when a switch from hypotrophy to a hyperplasia-driven hypertrophy occurs, followed by myonecrosis, regenerative replacement, and extensive fiber branching. , 
 INS1201 treatment was administered via a single intracerebroventricular (ICV) injection at doses 8.0E+09, 2.0E+11, 4.0E+11, and 8.0E+11 total vg in mdx mice at approximately postnatal day 28 (∼p28). In the majority of assessments, mdx mice treated at the lowest dose of 8.0E+09 vg did not differ significantly from mdx negative (−) control mice and therefore this dose was considered non-efficacious. Treatment at doses 2.0E+11 vg and above led to improvements in dystrophic histopathology in the gastrocnemius ( B), tibialis anterior ( A), extensor digitorum longus (EDL; B), and diaphragm ( C), as well as in the slow-twitch soleus muscle ( D), relative to mdx (−) control mice.
Tissues collected at ∼ p115 from mice treated with INS1201 exhibited an overall improvement in structural organization, with larger myofibers observed in these muscles in mdx mice treated with INS1201 versus mdx (−) control mice. Postnatal day 115 (+/− 15 days) was a predefined terminal endpoint based on a post-administration time interval of approximately 3 months. This was chosen based on published reports , of when significant behavioral and histopathological phenotypes are observed whereby the delta between mdx and WT animals is large enough and treatment duration long enough to observe a significant dose-response relationship with respect to INS1201 efficacy.
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining revealed fewer inflammatory cells and reduced endomysial connective tissue specifically in the gastrocnemius, tibialis anterior, and diaphragm muscles in INS1201-treated animals. In gastrocnemius muscle cells, inflammatory CD68+ macrophages and CD8+ T cells were reduced in mice treated with INS1201 versus mdx (−) control mice (however, with n = 4 quantified per group, this did not reach statistical significance); inflammatory cells were generally absent in the WT mouse tissue ( ).
Picrosirius red staining revealed that fibrosis was significantly reduced in mdx mice treated with INS1201 versus mdx (−) control mice for each evaluated muscle sample, including the gastrocnemius, tibialis anterior, EDL, diaphragm, and soleus muscles ( A). Laminin staining revealed significant increases in muscle fiber size measurements in the gastrocnemius, tibialis anterior, and diaphragm in mdx mice treated with INS1201 versus mdx (−) control mice ( B). Relative to mdx (−) control mice, no significant differences in muscle fiber size were observed in the smaller-sized EDL and soleus muscles ( B). In each muscle examined except for the EDL, a shift in fiber size distribution was observed, with fewer smaller fibers and an increased number of larger fibers in mdx mice treated with INS1201, relative to mdx (−) control mice ( ). Additionally, in both the EDL and soleus muscles, animals receiving INS1201 at 2.0E+11 vg (EDL), 4.0E+11 vg (EDL), and 8.0E+11 vg (EDL and soleus) did not differ significantly from WT in fiber size measurements, indicating that the limited improvement, relative to mdx (−) controls, is unlikely due to reduced drug efficacy in these muscles. Rather, the EDL and soleus muscles display comparatively mild dystrophic pathology in the mdx mouse, and therefore substantial therapeutic improvements were not expected.
 Importantly, although dystrophin expression was nearly absent in the skeletal muscle of mdx (−) control mice, analysis of membrane-associated dystrophin expression in mice treated with INS1201 revealed a significant level of dystrophin expression in each muscle examined for each INS1201 treatment group above 2.0E+11 vg, with the exception of the EDL, whereby the 8.0E+11 vg dose group did not reach statistical significance ( C).
Relative to mdx (−) control mice, which may express dystrophin in only rare revertant fibers, membrane-associated dystrophin levels increased in a dose-dependent manner in mdx mice treated with INS1201. Doses of 4.0E+11 vg and 8.0E+11 vg resulted in 61% and 83% dystrophin-positive muscle fibers, respectively, in the gastrocnemius, 83% and 87% in the tibialis anterior, 50% and 72% in the EDL, and 33% and 81% in the diaphragm ( D). Soleus muscle tissue was assessed at the 8.0E+11 vg dose, and similar to the levels observed in fast-twitch muscles, INS1201 administration resulted in 87% dystrophin-positive muscle fibers in this slow-twitch muscle at this dose ( D). Control staining for dystrophin was performed on tissue samples from mdx (−) controls, whereby no primary dystrophin antibody was added during the primary antibody incubation step. Very low background staining was observed in each muscle assessed, including heart, gastrocnemius, tibialis anterior, EDL, diaphragm, and soleus ( E).

## DNA biodistribution of INS1201 in mdx mice
A droplet digital polymerase chain reaction (ddPCR) method using a primer/probe set designed specifically to anneal to a portion of the INS1201 transgene sequence was used to quantify vg in tissues collected at ∼ p115 from mdx mice treated with INS1201. Results demonstrated that INS1201 vg were broadly distributed and detected in a relatively dose-dependent manner across each assessed skeletal and cardiac muscle group ( ). At the highest dose of 8.0E+11 vg, the percentage of muscle nuclei containing INS1201 vg was 15% in the gastrocnemius (0.147 vg/diploid genome), 16% in the tibialis anterior (0.159 vg/diploid genome), 93% in the diaphragm (0.934 vg/diploid genome), and 8% in the EDL (0.076 vg/diploid genome). Given that skeletal muscle fibers are multinucleated, with hundreds to thousands of nuclei per fiber, these levels of transduction suggest that a large number of muscle fibers examined in this study was transduced with INS1201. This biodistribution following delivery of a single INS1201 ICV dose of 8.0E+11 vg correlates with up to 83%, 87%, 81%, and 72% dystrophin-positive myofibers in the aforementioned skeletal muscles, respectively, supporting the observed significant micro-dystrophin protein expression. In the heart, INS1201 vg were detectable at doses of 2.0E+11, 4.0E+11, and 8.0E+11 vg, with mean levels of 0.134, 0.405, and 0.927 vg/diploid genomes, respectively. As part of a GLP-toxicology study, DNA biodistribution was further evaluated in WT mice in additional muscle and non-muscle tissues and is described in the “ ” section below.
 

## Functional efficacy of INS1201 in mdx mice
At 4 to 5 weeks of age, mdx mice have been reported to already show significant impairment in grip strength relative to WT controls. When treated at ∼ p28 and tested at ∼ p115, neuromuscular function was improved in mdx mice treated with INS1201 at doses of 2.0E+11, 4.0E+11, and 8.0E+11 vg relative to mdx (−) control mice, showing significant improvements in forelimb grip strength of 45% (p < 0.001), 49% (p < 0.0001), and 45% (p < 0.001), respectively ( A).
 Similar to the histological readouts described above, the lowest dose of 8.0E+09 vg was considered non-efficacious, as mdx mice administered this dose did not differ significantly from mdx (−) controls. As early research and toxicology studies tested a maximum feasible dose of 8.0E+11 vg (based on the limitation of maximum volume for ICV injections in mice and viral titer concentration at the time), the manufacturing of a higher titer virus allowed for the inclusion of a higher maximal dose group of 1.6E+12 vg in subsequent efficacy studies. The increase in grip strength observed at the highest dose of 1.6E+12 vg did not reach statistical significance relative to mdx (−) control mice at the ∼p115 time point. Since they were not included in the original studies evaluating histopathology at ∼ p115, the animals in this dose group did not have tissues collected at this time; therefore, it was not possible to evaluate histopathology and protein expression levels that correlated to the lack of statistical significance in grip strength at this time point. Additionally, only five animals at this dose were evaluated at this time, making this group potentially underpowered for statistical analysis, as every other group contained 7–11 mice per group. Animals in this 1.6E+12 vg dose group, however, were evaluated for grip strength at p275, at which time their improvements reached statistical significance.
Durability of the intended therapeutic effect of INS1201was observed at ∼ p275, with significant increases in forelimb grip strength of 90% (p < 0.0001), 71% (p < 0.0001), 88% (p < 0.0001), and 94% (p < 0.0001) for 2.0E+11, 4.0E+11, 8.0E+11, and 1.6E+12 vg INS1201, respectively, versus mdx (−) control mice ( B). While forelimb grip strength appeared to decline in mdx (−) control mice from ∼p115 to ∼ p275, mdx mice treated with INS1201 maintained their grip-strength function over this time.
Previous studies have established that mdx mouse skeletal muscles predominantly composed of fast-twitch (type 2) fibers, such as the gastrocnemius muscles, are more susceptible to damage compared with slow-twitch fibers. , , Therefore, physiology measurements were performed to assess contractile torque of the plantar flexion muscles, which includes the gastrocnemius muscle, to further evaluate functional efficacy.
At ∼ p115, significant improvements in peak plantar flexion tetanic torque measurements of 52% (p < 0.05), 92% (p < 0.0001), and 76% (p < 0.001) were noted for doses of 2.0E+11, 4.0E+11, and 8.0E+11 vg, respectively, with stimulation frequency tested at 125 Hz relative to age-matched mdx (−) control mice ( C). When assessed at ∼ p115 at stimulation frequencies of 80–160 Hz, mdx mice treated with INS1201 showed significant improvements in plantar flexion peak torque at doses of 2.0E+11, 4.0E+11, and 8.0E+11 vg (p < 0.05–p < 0.0001), respectively, compared with age-matched mdx (−) control mice ( D; ). Longer-term durability of the intended therapeutic effect on peak plantar flexion twitch torque was also evident at ∼ p275, with significant improvements of 61% (p < 0.05), 77% (p < 0.01), and 82% (p < 0.01) for doses of 2.0E+11, 4.0E+11, and 8.0E+11 vg INS1201, respectively, versus mdx (−) control mice ( E). Additionally, a 45% (p < 0.01) and 53% (p < 0.001) improvement in peak plantar flexion tetanic torque was observed at doses of 4.0E+11 and 8.0E+11 vg, respectively, with stimulation frequency tested at 125 Hz compared with mdx (−) control mice ( F). Mice treated with 1.6E+12 vg were not tested for hindlimb neuromuscular strength at ∼ p115 or ∼ p275, as the physiology assay had not been established at these time points for this dose group.
Plasma creatine kinase (CK) levels were evaluated at ∼ p275 to measure improvements in protein biomarker expression following INS1201 treatment in mdx mice; CK was also measured in WT mice and in mdx (−) control mice. CK is a protein primarily expressed in muscle whose presence in the blood reflects sarcolemma damage, with higher levels reported in patients with DMD relative to control patients. CK has been used to screen for DMD in newborns, and mdx mice have increased blood CK levels similar to patients with DMD. , However, CK measurements in mdx mice are historically well known to be highly variable due to a combination of biological and experimental factors. CK levels reflect muscle membrane damage, which fluctuates depending on the age of the mouse, physical activity, stress, and even circadian rhythms. Young mdx mice typically show peak CK elevations during the acute degeneration phase around 4–8 weeks of age, but levels can decline as muscle regeneration and fibrosis stabilize. Additionally, handling stress, injections, or minor trauma can transiently elevate CK, making it sensitive to procedural inconsistencies. CK is a useful but imperfect biomarker to assess disease severity or therapeutic efficacy in mdx studies.
Using a commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), CK levels in the plasma of WT mice were undetectable for each mouse. As expected, although high variability was observed, CK levels in the plasma of mdx (−) control mice were elevated relative to WT mice. Importantly, plasma CK levels in mdx mice treated with INS1201 at a dose of 8.0E+11 vg decreased by 94% relative to mdx (−) control mice and approached near-WT levels, providing additional evidence of the durability of the intended therapeutic effect of INS1201 in this mouse model of disease ( G).

## Long-term durability of efficacy, biodistribution, and micro-dystrophin protein expression at 1 year after INS1201 administration in mdx mice
Following ICV administration of INS1201 in mdx mice at ∼ p28, functional efficacy, histopathology, vg biodistribution, and micro-dystrophin protein expression were evaluated at approximately 1 year after administration.
The durability of functional improvement in hindlimb muscle strength was shown in mdx mice treated with INS1201 when evaluated for muscle physiology at the age of ∼p400. The long-term functional benefit of INS1201 was observed, with significant improvements in peak plantar flexion twitch torque of 87% (p < 0.001), 67% (p < 0.01), and 104% (p < 0.0001) at doses of 4.0E+11, 8.0E+11, and 1.6E+12 vg, respectively, relative to mdx (−) control animals ( A). Additionally, at this later time point, 68% (p < 0.001), 74% (p < 0.0001), and 106% (p < 0.0001) improvements in peak plantar flexion tetanic torque were observed at doses of 4.0E+11 vg, 8.0E+11 vg, and 1.6E+12 vg, respectively, relative to mdx (−) control animals ( B). When evaluated over multiple stimulation frequencies, mdx mice treated with INS1201 showed significant improvements (p < 0.0001) in peak plantar flexion torque at the doses of 4.0E+11, 8.0E+11, and 1.6E+12 vg when stimulated at 80 to 160 Hz relative to mdx (−) control mice ( A; ). Significant increases in maximal torque were also observed at this later time point in the INS1201 2.0E+11 vg dose group at the lower frequencies of 60 and 80 Hz (p < 0.01 and p < 0.05, respectively).
 In addition to functional efficacy, muscle tissue collected immediately following the ∼p400 muscle physiology assessment was evaluated for sustained long-term improvement in dystrophic pathology. Gastrocnemius muscle from mdx mice treated with INS1201 at doses of 4.0E+11, 8.0E+11, and 1.6E+12 vg showed improvements in dystrophic pathology relative to mdx (−) control animals ( B). An overall improvement in structural organization, fewer inflammatory cells, and reduced endomysial connective tissue were observed, with a significant reduction in fibrosis in mdx mice treated with INS1201 versus mdx (−) control mice. Quantitative assessment of fibrosis using picrosirius red staining to calculate percent collagen in gastrocnemius muscle tissue revealed a 26% (p < 0.01), 30% (p < 0.001), and 50% (p < 0001) reduction of collagen following INS1201 administration at doses 4.0E+11, 8.0E+11, and 1.6E+12 vg, respectively, relative to mdx (−) control mice ( B, row B; C). Importantly, at this late time point, immunohistochemistry-based expression of micro-dystrophin protein was still evident in gastrocnemius muscle in mdx mice treated with INS1201 at doses 4.0E+11, 8.0E+11, and 1.6E+12 vg ( B, row D).
INS1201 vg were also assessed at doses of 4.0E+11, 8.0E+11, and 1.6E+12 vg in the gastrocnemius and appeared to be correlated to micro-dystrophin protein expression, with detection at mean levels of 0.029, 0.040, and 0.661 vg/diploid genome, respectively ( D).
In cardiac muscle tissue collected at ∼ p400, a robust, sustained, dose-dependent INS1201 vg biodistribution was also observed in the heart, with detection at mean levels of 0.758, 1.509, and 3.225 vg/diploid genome at doses 4.0E+11, 8.0E+11, and 1.6E+12 vg, respectively ( D). This vg biodistribution in the heart also appeared to be correlated to micro-dystrophin protein expression, whereby immunohistochemistry in heart tissue at this same time point revealed sustained micro-dystrophin protein expression in mdx mice treated with INS1201 at each evaluated dose (4.0E+11, 8.0E+11, and 1.6E+12 vg; E).
Whole slide imaging scans of sections from one representative WT, mdx (−) control, and INS1201-treated mdx mice (dose 1.6E+12 vg) at the age of ∼p400 were imaged for both gastrocnemius and heart muscles to further support durable widespread micro-dystrophin expression throughout the entire muscle section ( C and S4D, respectively). Western blot analysis ( F and 6G) and quantification of protein ( H and 6I) confirmed a dose-dependent increase in micro-dystrophin expression in both the gastrocnemius and heart, respectively.
Taken together, these data indicate that delivery of INS1201 via the CSF in the mdx mouse leads to long-term (up to ≥1 year post-injection) durability of biodistribution and expression in skeletal and cardiac muscle, with associated sustained functional benefit.

## INS1201 pharmacokinetics in mice and NHP

## Biodistribution of INS1201 in WT mice and NHPs
In addition to the biodistribution observed in mdx mice, INS1201 vg were evaluated and detected by ddPCR following CSF administration in WT mice via ICV injection at ∼ p28 as well as in juvenile NHPs following lumbar IT injection. INS1201 vg were distributed in a relatively dose-dependent manner across the assessed muscle and non-muscle tissues at each examined time point. When compared across species at equivalent doses (based on a 250× scale up from mice with estimated CSF volume of 0.04 mL to juvenile NHP with estimated CSF volume of 10 mL; ), INS1201 vg biodistribution was similar in the muscles, brain, and kidneys of NHPs when compared with mice. This biodistribution comparison supports the functional resemblance between the ICV and IT routes of administration via the CSF in mice and NHPs, respectively.
Specifically, following ICV administration at p28 in WT mice, INS1201 vg were detected in all skeletal and cardiac muscles tested in a relatively dose-dependent manner at each study time point (3, 6, and 12 weeks) and generally maintained a stable distribution pattern over 12 weeks ( A–7C). At the high dose (8.0E+11 vg) at 12 weeks, average vg/diploid genome values ranged from 0.282 in the gastrocnemius to 2.521 in the diaphragm, with all other skeletal muscles, including the intercostal muscle between ribs 6 and 7, triceps, quadriceps, tibialis anterior, EDL, and tongue, containing INS1201 vg/diploid genome within this range. INS1201 vg were detected in non-muscle tissue to varying degrees, with notable distribution in the liver (51.56 vg), brain (2.83 vg), spinal cord (0.854 vg) and dorsal root ganglia (DRG; 6.408) in high-dosed animals at the 12-week time point ( A–S5C). Given the IT route of delivery and transduction properties of AAV9, significant biodistribution of INS1201 vector genomes was not surprising in these tissues.
 In addition to INS1201 vg biodistribution at 12 weeks after administration, INS1201 mRNA expression in WT mice was consistently observed throughout cardiac and skeletal muscles except for the tongue, which did not show mRNA expression in any mouse. INS1201 mRNA expression was also detected in the brain, liver, and spinal cord at the 12-week time point but was not detected in any other non-muscle tissues assessed (data not shown). As INS1201 micro-dystrophin expression is driven by the MHCK7 promoter, it was not surprising that, although high numbers of vector genomes were identified in the DRG, there was an absence of INS1201 mRNA expression.
Micro-dystrophin protein expression was not assessed in WT mice that expressed normal full-length dystrophin; however, the presence of micro-dystrophin protein in select skeletal and cardiac muscle and the absence of micro-dystrophin protein in CNS (brain, spinal cord, and DRG) and liver was confirmed in tissues from mdx mice at the p115 time point ( D).
In a non-GLP, 3-week biodistribution study in NHPs, INS1201 was delivered to juvenile NHPs (1–3 years of age at time of dosing) via IT injection into the CSF compartment, and extrapolation of CSF volume for dose translation between species resulted in comparable biodistribution in mice and NHPs. INS1201 vg were broadly distributed in NHPs and detected in a generally dose-dependent manner across skeletal and cardiac muscle ( E) and in non-muscle tissue ( D), with the highest distribution in the liver (114 and 226 vg/diploid genome at the 1.0E+14 and 2.0E+14 vg dose levels, respectively). A range of 0.102 (deltoid) to 0.40 (diaphragm) vg/diploid genomes were observed in all tested skeletal muscles, and 1.06 vg/diploid genomes were observed in the heart at the highest dose administered in the study (2.0E+14 vg), suggesting that a large number of examined muscle fibers was transduced with INS1201 following IT administration in NHPs.
No statistically meaningful difference in INS1201 vg biodistribution in muscle tissues was observed between WT mice and NHPs at the 3-week time point. To determine this, a comparative analysis of vg biodistribution was performed using data generated from a representative therapeutic dose of each species (8.0E+11 vg in mice; equivalent to 2.0E+14 vg in NHPs). Although small sample sizes were available for comparison, a one-way ANOVA with a Tukey-Kramer honestly significant difference (HSD) test and a 95% confidence interval (CI) was performed to determine whether the mean vg/diploid genome biodistribution of each tissue was significantly different between mice and NHPs. One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey-Kramer HSD statistical analysis performed for each analyzed muscle tissue (triceps, quadriceps, gastrocnemius, heart, tibialis anterior, and diaphragm) in mice and NHPs treated with INS1201 found no statistically meaningful differences in INS1201 vg biodistribution ( A–S6F). With respect to non-muscle tissues, no statistically meaningful differences of INS1201 vg/diploid genome levels were found in the brain, DRG, or kidney ( G–S6I), whereas statistically significant differences were noted in the liver, lung, spleen, and spinal cord ( J–S6M).
In the 3-month GLP study following a single IT delivery of INS1201 in juvenile NHPs (7–12 months of age), INS1201 vg were broadly distributed and detected in a dose-dependent manner in skeletal and cardiac muscle tissues ( F). At the highest dose of 3.05E+14 vg per animal, a range between 0.316 (gastrocnemius) and 1.01 (diaphragm) vg/diploid genome was observed in all examined skeletal muscles, and 2.57 copies of INS1201 vg were present per diploid genome of the heart. INS1201 was distributed in CNS tissues at varying degrees, including in the brain, spinal cord, and DRG ( A and S7B), as well as in peripheral organs and non-muscle tissues ( C), with the highest distribution in the liver (187 and 285 vg/diploid genome at the 1.09 and 3.05E+14 vg dose levels, respectively).
INS1201 RNA expression was observed in every examined skeletal and cardiac muscle for each of the three NHPs treated with high-dose INS1201 ( A). In support of the specificity of the MHCK7-micro-dystrophin construct, INS1201 RNA expression was not observed in any other evaluated non-muscle samples, including in the brain, spinal cord, and non-muscle peripheral organs and tissues, with the exception of two out of three midbrain samples from NHPs in the high-dose group ( B–8D).
 

## Viral shedding
In the CSF of NHPs treated in the GLP toxicology study, INS1201 vg were elevated (independent of dose) on day 2 post-injection, returned to below baseline levels at the next time point (day 24), and remained below baseline or were undetectable on day 86 and at necropsy, which indicated clearance from the CSF by 24 days post-injection ( D). Given that CSF was collected pre-dosing and then at day 2, with the next collection at day 24, it was not possible to identify precisely when vg levels started to decline in the CSF. Serum levels of INS1201 vg reached a peak on day 1 at the 6-h time point post-injection, decreased on day 4, and returned to baseline by day 28 ( E). The time to maximum serum concentration (Tmax) ranged from 2 to 24 h, and mean maximum concentration (Cmax) and area under the curve (AUC0-t) were generally dose proportional. For all doses, INS1201 vg were cleared in urine samples by day 28 and remained undetectable by day 91 ( F). In feces, levels were cleared for the low and mid-doses by day 28, with slightly higher than background levels remaining for the high dose at this time point ( G) but returned to below baseline on day 91.

## Assessment of INS1201 toxicity in mice and NHP
In the GLP WT mouse toxicology study, no INS1201-related mortality, clinical observations, or adverse effects on body weight, clinical pathology, gross pathology, or organ weight were observed (see for liver-related clinical pathology). The maximum feasible dose in this study of 8.0E+11 vg per mouse was based on the limitation of maximum volume for ICV injections in mice and viral titer concentration for the manufactured toxicology lot at the time of study initiation. Higher titer virus allowed for subsequent higher dosing of 1.6E+12 vg in mdx mice, as described above in the long-term efficacy study. Histologically, non-adverse, focal, and minimal mononuclear cell infiltrates in the brain were noted in some individual animals treated with INS1201, without a dose-response relationship (infiltrates were observed in animals at each dose at each time point but with minimal severity). These microscopic findings were discrete and localized to the path of the injection of INS1201, leaving the preponderance of the cerebrum, cerebellum, brain stem, spinal cord, and DRG unaffected. The minimal mononuclear cell infiltrates noted in individual INS1201-treated animals were consistent with the expected response to the ICV introduction of an AAV gene therapy product. On the basis of the nature and minimal severity, the lack of a clear dose-response relationship, partial reversibility, and the absence of any other corroborating findings, this microscopic finding was not considered adverse. Furthermore, DRG toxicity was specifically evaluated as part of the toxicology profile, and a careful analysis of DRG tissue sections from mice in the high-dose group revealed healthy cells and normal histopathology ( E).
The no-observed adverse effect level (NOAEL) for INS1201 via a single ICV injection in mice was the maximal dose administered, 8.0E+11 vg/mouse.
In the GLP NHP toxicology study, following a single IT dose, there were no significant INS1201-related effects on mortality, clinical signs, body weight, food consumption, ophthalmology, blood pressure, electrocardiogram, neurologic examination, nerve conduction velocity, physical examination, clinical pathology, blood cell count in the CSF, T cell responses, necropsy, organ weights, or histopathology, indicating that INS1201 was well tolerated at each studied dose. Non-adverse, transient, INS1201-related effects were noted in individual animals on clinical pathology parameters, including changes in platelet count, aspartate transaminase, and/or alanine transaminase but without any correlating microscopic findings (see for liver-related clinical pathology). Anti-AAV9 antibodies were detected in all animals treated with INS1201 on days 28 and 92/93. The NOAEL in NHPs was also the highest dose tested (3.05E+14 vg/animal).

## Discussion
INS1201 is an investigational AAV9-micro-dystrophin construct currently being evaluated for the potential treatment of ambulatory patients with DMD who are between the age of 2 and 4 years (inclusive). Delivered via a single lumbar IT injection and using an initial fixed clinical starting dose of 5.0E+14 vg with dose escalation to 1.0E+15 vg, INS1201 is designed to drive the expression of micro-dystrophin in skeletal and cardiac muscle to promote muscle function. The results of preclinical studies described here demonstrate that CSF administration is effective in delivering INS1201 to target muscle tissues and provide strong evidence of safety and efficacy to support further clinical investigation of INS1201 for pediatric patients with DMD.
Gene therapy represents a promising therapeutic option for patients with DMD, but intravenously delivered AAV therapies have, to date, demonstrated variable micro-dystrophin expression levels and potential safety risks, underscoring the need for more efficacious and well-tolerated options. Delandistrogene moxeparvovec-rokl (Elevidys) is currently the only FDA-approved AAV gene therapy available for patients with DMD. In the pivotal phase 3 study, the primary endpoint of change in NSAA total score from baseline to week 52 failed to demonstrate a statistically significant difference between the treated and placebo control group. Given these results and the lack of a clearly demonstrated correlation between micro-dystrophin expression and functional outcome, alternative treatment options should be explored to address the persistent unmet clinical need for patients with DMD.
Based upon the existing preclinical data, clinical testing of INS1201 delivered via IT injection to patients with DMD is warranted to evaluate the effect on targeted delivery of the viral vector to skeletal and cardiac muscles at lower total vector doses. We believe this will result in lower levels of off-target delivery, including hepatic uptake of AAV compared with what has been reported in the literature for systemic delivery of viral vectors in gene therapy. Hudry et al. conducted a retrospective analysis compiling biodistribution data and liver-related safety signals across multiple cynomolgus macaque studies involving both i.v. and IT delivery of AAV9 gene therapy. Liver transduction was highest following i.v. dosing at 1.4E14-1.1E15 vg per animal, reaching a median value of 721 vg/dg. They reported that, although AAV9 vector also primarily distributed to the hepatic tissue after a single IT injection (doses 1-6E13 vg/animal), the median value of 19 vg/dg in the liver was notably lower relative to i.v. delivery. Although a direct comparison study was not conducted for i.v. versus IT delivery of INS1201, the liver biodistribution data reported by Hudry et al. is consistent with our reported AAV9-GFP data (625 vg i.v. versus 40 vg IT at dose 1.8E+14 vg) and what we have reported for IT delivery of INS1201. We found that with IT delivery, INS1201 vector genomes were also primarily distributed to hepatic tissue, with mean vector genome biodistribution of 187 and 285 vg/dg at the higher administered doses of 1.09E+14 and 3.05E+14 vg/animal, respectively. Although it was not possible to compare exact doses across studies, our liver biodistribution for INS1201 in NHP appears to be at least two to three times lower than that of the reported AAV9 systemic dosing. Together with previous reports, this provides evidence for potentially reducing transduction of the liver.
Regarding efforts to reduce gene therapy doses, myotropic capsids have been described, which have significantly increased tropism to skeletal and cardiac muscle. Specifically, a peptide-displaying AAV9 mutant exhibited high efficiency and specificity in the musculature, which in combination with IT delivery may further decrease the required AAV dose for muscle targeting.
Histopathological and functional efficacy studies conducted in mdx mice demonstrated that CSF administration of INS1201 resulted in broadly transduced muscle tissues and consequent micro-dystrophin protein expression, improvements in dystrophic pathology with respect to cellular structure and organization, and improvements in both forelimb and hindlimb neuromuscular strength. The treatment age of selected mdx mice, ∼p28, provides comparable levels of muscle degeneration with those reported in patients with DMD who are 2–4 years of age, where muscle fiber degeneration and regeneration cycles have begun but the extent of fibrosis is still limited. In mdx mice, there was an approximate 5-fold increase in the number of vg/diploid genomes detected in the diaphragm as compared with the gastrocnemius and tibialis anterior, yet the diaphragm contained a lower percentage of detected dystrophin-positive muscle fibers. Previous reports have suggested that the diaphragm may be transcriptionally unique, as difficulty achieving transgene expression in the diaphragm with multiple muscle-specific regulatory cassettes has been described. LaFramboise et al. observed a 2- to 3-fold lower endogenous level of MCK transcripts in the diaphragm relative to fast muscles. MHCK7 appears to be an improved regulatory cassette for experimental studies of recombinant AAV (rAAV)-mediated transduction of striated muscle ; however, the presence of relatively high vector genome copies in the diaphragm suggests that the lower micro-dystrophin expression observed is likely due to intrinsically lower cassette activity relative to the other muscles examined. It is encouraging, however, that expression of truncated dystrophin at only a fraction of normal dystrophin levels can significantly prevent dystrophin pathology and reduce myopathic symptoms. Even at higher doses, INS1201 did not appear to have as much of a positive effect on increasing cell size in the diaphragm as with the gastrocnemius and tibialis anterior, but significantly higher dystrophin signal and significant reduction in fibrosis was observed at all doses relative to mdx (−) controls. However, at the lower doses, this was without significant increases in the percent positive dystrophin fibers in diaphragm relative to (−) control, suggesting that perhaps a small population of higher dystrophin-expressing cells exists that is capable of providing the benefit observed in this study as well as in other studies that tested truncated dystrophin in mdx mice. 
At the three higher doses of INS1201, the smaller EDL muscle exhibited lower micro-dystrophin signal levels compared with other larger skeletal muscles. Unlike the diaphragm, however, these lower signal levels in the EDL were accompanied by a significantly higher percentage of dystrophin-positive fibers, suggesting that, in this muscle, a larger proportion of fibers expressed micro-dystrophin, but at lower per-fiber levels. These reduced expression levels may partly explain the relatively modest functional benefit of INS1201 observed in the EDL compared with the gastrocnemius and tibialis anterior. For measures such as increased fiber diameter and reduced fibrosis, the EDL showed minimal apparent benefit relative to mdx (−) controls. Importantly, animals receiving the three higher doses of INS1201 did not differ significantly from WT for these parameters, indicating that the limited improvement is unlikely to be due to reduced drug efficacy in this muscle. Rather, the EDL muscle displays comparatively mild dystrophic pathology in the mdx mouse, and therefore, substantial therapeutic gains would not necessarily be expected. This mild dystrophic pathology was observed to some extent also in the soleus muscle, whereby fiber diameter was not significantly different in mdx animals relative to WT controls. The lack of significant increase in muscle fiber diameter observed in the soleus following INS1201 administration was similarly not surprising.
Improvement in muscle electrophysiology in INS1201-treated mdx mice appeared to increase in a dose-response manner from 2.0E+11 to 4.0E+11 vg and plateau at the dose of 4.0E+11 vg. This plateau in functional benefit could be due to administration of INS1201 in the mdx animal model at the treatment age of p27-35, when cycles of degeneration and regeneration of myofibers has already occurred. , , Therefore, further increases in dose might not be expected to provide additional added benefit when dosed at this time point, as damage is perhaps irreversible. It is possible that earlier therapeutic intervention prior to irreversible damage might provide greater benefit.
Biodistribution studies in both mice and NHPs demonstrated significant vg delivery to muscle groups throughout the body following CSF delivery. Significantly higher vg levels were noted in the liver, lung, spleen, and spinal cord in NHPs versus mice. This could be due to species scaling and differences in anatomy between mice and NHPs. Higher levels of vector genomes detected in NHP spinal cord tissue could also be due to CSF delivery via the lumbar IT injection in NHPs, which could have potentially resulted in higher local accumulation of the virus in the spinal cord that might not have occurred in the mice that were administered the virus via the CSF in the lateral ventricles of the brain. Importantly, when compared at equivalent scaled doses, there was no statistically significant difference identified in INS1201 vector biodistribution across muscle tissue between mice and NHPs, despite the anatomical and size differences between the species, highlighting the achievement of targeted and efficient delivery of INS1201 to the skeletal and cardiac muscles. Given that skeletal muscle fibers are multinucleated with up to hundreds of nuclei per fiber, the levels of INS1201 vg transduction observed in both mice and NHPs suggest that a large number of examined muscle fibers was transduced with INS1201 following CSF administration. This biodistribution comparison supports the functional resemblance between the ICV and IT routes of administration via the CSF in mice and NHPs, respectively, and further supports the INS1201 preclinical proof-of-concept study designs.
While a complete understanding of the biodistribution process following administration of AAV-based therapeutics into the CSF is currently lacking, significant transduction of skeletal and cardiac muscles has been previously observed with this approach. Several mechanisms may account for this phenomenon. Vector in the CSF space may pass through the arachnoid villi, which act as one-way valves into the venous circulation over time. This process could allow vector to reach muscle via the systemic circulation while avoiding a high peak of viremia and the associated vigorous innate and adaptive immune responses that are responsible for immune-mediated toxicities and the rapid reduction in the amount of vector available for transducing muscle. , A similar distribution may also be achieved by lymphatic and glymphatic transport. 
Another intriguing possibility is the prospect of active vector transport in vesicles along motor and autonomic nerve axons to skeletal and cardiac muscle. AAV9 is capable of anterograde (as well as retrograde) neuronal transport with distal transduction, , and AAV that is capable of retrograde transport can produce transduction of the spinal cord when injected into muscle tissue, which supports the plausibility of this mechanism. This type of transport of vector within vesicles along nerves may likely reduce exposure to immune surveillance, avoiding antibody-mediated immune clearance of vector (increasing the efficiency of delivery) and decreasing the potential for immune-mediated toxicities. 
The toxicity of INS1201 was assessed in single-dose, GLP-compliant toxicology studies in juvenile (p28) male WT mice and NHPs (7–12 months of age) to support the initiation of a first-in-human study in pediatric patients with DMD. In both animal studies, results indicated that INS1201 was well tolerated, with no observed treatment-related adverse effects in test parameters.
The NOAELs for these studies were 8.0E+11 vg/animal in mice and 3.05E+14 vg/animal in NHPs, both of which were the highest tested doses and the maximum feasible dose administered in the studies. The NOAELs were further utilized to calculate the safety margins relative to the proposed clinical starting dose for the first-in-human study.
In addition to the safety and efficacy described for INS1201, durability of efficacy was observed at approximately 1 year after administration of INS1201 in mdx mice. Significant functional benefit was still evident with regard to neuromuscular strength, as well as to histopathological improvements and sustained micro-dystrophin expression.
In summary, administration of INS1201 into the CSF enabled highly efficient delivery of micro-dystrophin to skeletal and cardiac muscles in mice and NHPs using lower doses than those reported preclinically for i.v. administration ( ). , , Improvements in functional efficacy were observed by two complementary methods, providing evidence that INS1201 transduction and micro-dystrophin expression led to biological activity and subsequent functional efficacy. IT administration of INS1201 may make dosing feasible in a broader range of patients with DMD by reducing the degree of dose escalation in larger patients, as is required with i.v. administration. Based on the demonstrated preclinical safety and efficacy of INS1201, using a novel delivery route to deliver micro-dystrophin to muscle tissue may represent a promising therapeutic strategy in the field of DMD. An Investigational New Drug application for INS1201 was granted as safe to proceed by the FDA, thereby allowing for initiation of human clinical trials (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT06817382).

## Materials and methods

## INS1201
INS1201 is a single-stranded, non-replicating, recombinant AAV9 encoding a micro-dystrophin gene produced via triple plasmid transfection of human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells adapted for suspension and processed in a stirred tank single-use 1000-L bioreactor. The vector is designed with functional elements from 5′ to 3′ that are flanked on either side by inverted terminal repeats derived from an AAV2 sequence to produce a single-stranded genome. It includes the muscle-derived MHCK7 promoter that contains elements that drive expression of the myosin heavy chain kinase in muscle ; an SV40 intron that has been used in gene therapy vectors to enhance translation of expressed RNA; the micro-dystrophin gene; and an SV40 poly(A) signal, which is important for stability of the mRNA, nuclear export, and translation processes. The SV40 elements do not code for the protein sequence.
Analytical testing of the INS1201 drug product administered in both toxicology studies was performed with approved procedures and test methods using current Good Manufacturing Practices. A qualified and validated ddPCR method using a primer/probe set designed specifically for the INS1201 genome, spanning the junction between the MHCK7 promoter and micro-dystrophin transgene, was utilized for titer quantification.
The vehicle control groups in each study were animals injected with final formulation buffer, which is the proprietary buffer used in the formulation of the test article.

## Animals

## Nonhuman primates
The proof-of-concept study to evaluate biodistribution of AAV9-GFP was performed at the Mannheimer Foundation (Homestead, FL, USA) and used male cynomolgus macaque NHPs, aged 1 to 3 years, with an average body weight of 2–4 kg. To confirm that AAV vectors could be efficiently delivered to skeletal and cardiac muscles following administration into the CSF, NHPs were dosed with AAV9-GFP (SAB Technology, Inc., Philadelphia, PA, USA) via IT lumbar puncture (n = 1; doses: 1.8E+14, 9.2E+13, and 4.6E+13 vg) or i.v. via the saphenous vein (n = 1; doses: 1.8E+14 and 9.2E+13 vg). Animals were necropsied at 3 weeks after dose administration. Animals with AAV9 antibody titer levels above 1:50 dilution were excluded from the study. All animals were cared for according to Mannheimer Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) protocol 2019-08.
In a non-GLP biodistribution study performed at the Mannheimer Foundation (Homestead, FL, USA), a single dose of INS1201 (2.5E+13, 5.0E+13, 1.0E+14, or 2.0E+14 total vg per animal) was administered to male cynomolgus macaque NHPs (1–3 years of age, with an average body weight of 2–4 kg; n = 2 per group) via lumbar IT injection. Animals with AAV9 antibody titer levels above 1:50 dilution were excluded from the study. Animals were necropsied at 3 weeks after dose administration. All animals in this study were cared for according to Mannheimer IACUC protocol 2019-08.
A 3-month INS1201 GLP toxicology study was performed at Shin Nippon Biomedical Laboratories (SNBL), Ltd. (Kagoshima, Japan) and used male juvenile (7–12 months of age, with an average body weight of 1–2 kg) cynomolgus macaque NHPs. Animals with AAV9 antibody titer levels above 1:50 dilution were excluded from the study. NHPs were treated with a single dose of INS1201 (5.28E+13, 1.09E+14, or 3.05E+14 vg/animal of INS1201 at a dose volume of 2.4 mL/animal) by lumbar IT injection (n = 3 per group); vehicle control NHPs (n = 3) were also included. Animals were observed throughout the in-life study portion and necropsied at 3 months after dose administration. This study was approved by the Testing Facility IACUC (approval #IACUC024-001) and was performed in accordance with the animal welfare bylaws of SNBL, Ltd., which is fully accredited by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC) International.

## Mice

## mdx mice
INS1201 efficacy studies utilized male C57BL/10ScSn-Dmdmdx/J (mdx) mice or WT (C57BL/10ScCnj) mice that were postnatal day 27 to day 35 (∼p28, herein) at the time of injection. Mice were supplied by Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME, USA). Seed mdx mice were bred in-house by Insmed Gene Therapy LLC to generate the mice used in the study and were confirmed to be mdx by genotyping. To determine the expression of micro-dystrophin in skeletal and cardiac muscles and functional efficacy of INS1201 following CSF delivery in mdx mice, the vector was administered as a single ICV injection of 8.0E+09, 2.0E+11, 4.0E+11, or 8.0E+11 vg per animal. For long-term studies, an additional dose group of INS1201 1.6E+12 vg was also included. Age-matched mdx (−) control mice and untreated WT control animals were used, with 6–12 animals per group. For the mdx (−) control group, mdx mice treated with vehicle (−) control were used as the negative control mice in most experiments. However, due to the availability of age-matched mice, untreated mdx (−) control animals were used in some assessments in place of mdx mice treated with vehicle (−) control. Functional efficacy experiments comparing mdx mice treated with vehicle (−) with untreated mdx (−) control mice resulted in no significant difference between groups ( ); therefore, for consistency, all (−) control mice are referred to as mdx (−) control mice. All animals in these studies were housed at Explora BioLabs in San Diego, CA, USA, and cared for according to Explora BioLabs IACUC Animal Care and Use Protocol #EB17 063 005.
Direct lumbar IT injections were not performed in mouse studies. Due to the size of the juvenile mouse model together with the size of needles required for this procedure, accurate and consistent IT injections of INS1201 in the mouse were not feasible for a study of this size. The smallest needle for an IT injection in mice would not fit into the IT space, would break the dural surface, and injections could be mistargeted into a blood vessel, as several blood vessels run in close proximity to the IT space, including the spinal arteries and veins as well as between the vertebrae.
Due to this, ICV injection was used in the mouse, placing the AAV directly in the CSF compartment, the accessible route in mouse studies. This was accomplished with a high degree of accuracy, allowing efficacy and safety studies to be executed without heterogeneity of injection technique.
In the NHPs, animals were anesthetized, and the lumbar IT route was used to successfully administer the vector in the CSF compartment. Despite the differences in location of vector administration, biodistribution studies demonstrated similar distribution as was seen in the mouse ICV model.

## WT mice
An INS1201 GLP toxicology study was performed by Pharmaron (formerly Absorption Systems California) and used p28 male WT C57BL/6J mice (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Habor, ME, USA), with an average weight of 18.6 grams. Mice in group 1 (n = 45) received vehicle control treatment, and mice in groups 2, 3, and 4 (n = 45 each) received a single ICV dose of INS1201 at 8.0E+11, 4.0E+11, and 2.0E+11 vg per animal, respectively; group 5 (n = 12) consisted of naive control mice. Fifteen animals in each group were terminated at three time points: 85 ± 10 days (cohort 1), 43 ± 7 days (cohort 2), or 22 ± 3 days (cohort 3). Following treatments, animals were clinically evaluated weekly and routinely for general health and appearance until planned terminations. Pharmaron is an AAALAC-International-accredited site. The care and use of animals was conducted in accordance with the regulations of the United States Department of Agriculture Animal Welfare Act and in compliance with Pharmaron’s Animal Welfare Assurance (D16-00645 [A4282-01]).

## Proof-of-concept CSF delivery of AAV9-GFP in NHPs to transduce skeletal and cardiac muscles: Assessment of GFP protein expression
Tissues were collected and frozen from NHPs necropsied at 3 weeks following administration of AAV9-GFP (described above). For GFP immunohistochemistry analyses, frozen tissue samples were serially sectioned onto slides at 12 μm. Sections were treated with H2O2/methanol to inhibit endogenous peroxidase. Tissues were washed 3× for 5 min per wash in 1× phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Slides were then blocked according to Avidin/Biotin blocking kit (Vector Laboratories Catalog #SP-2001). Blocking was completed with 1:200 diluted rabbit anti-GFP (Invitrogen Catalog #A6455) overnight. Primary antibody was removed by washing slides 3× in 1× PBS. Secondary goat anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody (Vector Laboratories Catalog #BA-1000) was diluted at 1:500 in 10% normal goat serum/1% Triton X-100 for 2.5 h. Next, slides were treated with ABC solution from VECTASTAIN Elite ABC-HRP kit (Vector Laboratories Catalog #PK-6100) and incubated for 30 min, then treated with the Vector NovaRed Peroxidase substrate kit (Vector Laboratories Catalog #SK4800) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, tissues were dehydrated through graded ethanol washes, cleared with 2× CitriSolv, mounted on slides, and covered with VectaMount permanent mounting medium (Vector Laboratories Catalog #H-5000). Slides were stored at room temperature, and images were acquired for analysis no longer than 30 days after staining procedure.
For western blot analysis, equal amounts (20 μg) of total protein extracted from tissue, as determined by Bradford protein assay (BioRad 5000201), were loaded on gels, transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, and probed with an alkaline-phosphatase-conjugated goat polyclonal anti-GFP (1:5,000; Abcam Catalog #ab6661). The blots were then washed 4× with Tris-buffered saline and then washed with nitro blue tetrazolium/5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate ready-to-use alkaline phosphatase chromogen (Abcam Catalog #ab7468), and the image was captured on Amersham ImageQuant using automatic exposure light camera settings.

## Histopathology in the mdx mouse model
Dissected tissue from the gastrocnemius, tibialis anterior, EDL, diaphragm, and soleus muscles was fast-frozen and stored at ≤−65°C. Qualitative and quantitative immunohistochemistry and associated histopathological assessments were performed for H&E staining to determine cellular structure and organization, inflammation, fibrosis, and fiber diameter; picrosirius red staining to determine fibrosis; laminin to analyze fiber size; dystrophin to determine micro-dystrophin expression; and CD68 and CD8 as markers of inflammation. Note, the monoclonal dystrophin antibody used in these studies, MANEX1A (4C7), produced by the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, IA, USA, recognizes the first three amino acids of the n-terminus of dystrophin and therefore detects both micro-dystrophin and full-length dystrophin. Given that untreated mdx mice express dystrophin only in rare cases of revertant fibers, dystrophin staining observed in mdx mice treated with INS1201 is assumed to represent micro-dystrophin expression.
For quantitative evaluation of a stain, the image selection process was standardized to ensure that representative regions of each muscle tissue were evaluated. Images were scanned at low magnification under the microscope to determine tissue and staining quality. Once the tissue was classified as adequate, with no freeze-thaw or staining artifacts identified, 2 to 4 non-overlapping, randomly selected fields of view, depending on muscle size, were imaged by an analyst (blinded to treatment group) at 20× magnification. For smaller muscles, including the EDL and soleus, the selection of two non-overlapping fields encompassed nearly the entire muscle cross-section. For larger muscles, including the gastrocnemius, tibialis anterior, and diaphragm, the selection of four non-overlapping fields encompassed nearly the entire muscle cross-section.
To quantitatively assess fibrosis within muscle tissue, the area fraction of picrosirius red staining was measured in acquired images using the count and measure program within the cellSens software (Evident Scientific, Inc. Tokyo, Japan) to give the percent collagen relative to the entire tissue area.
To quantitatively assess muscle fiber size in laminin-stained muscle tissue, ImageJ Software was run on acquired images to create regions of interest associated with each muscle fiber. Manual inspection of these regions was performed to identify inappropriately labeled cell populations based on the method described by Minamoto et al. (2007). Minimum Feret diameter, a measure of an object’s size along a specified direction, was determined for each region of interest within the image, and group averages for each tissue were compared between dosing groups and control groups. The laminin-stained images used to determine fiber size were also used to determine membrane dystrophin expression and percentage of dystrophin-positive fibers. Individual cells were computationally segmented from the laminin-stained images using Cellpose 2.0. For each segmented cell, average membrane dystrophin signal was quantified. The percentage of dystrophin-positive cells was calculated by fitting a bimodal mixture model using the vehicle-treated fibers as a dystrophin-negative reference.

## Functional efficacy in mdx mice: Forelimb grip strength
Muscle strength was evaluated at p115 ± 15 (“∼p115”) and p275 ± 15 (“∼p275”) in the forelimbs of mdx mice treated with INS1201 to determine functional efficacy. Forelimb grip strength was assessed using a previously described method. , Measurements were performed using a grip meter attached to a force transducer to measure peak force generated (Columbus Instruments, Columbus, OH, USA). Forelimb grip strength in mice relies on the animal’s instinctive tendency to grab as they are pulled backward. When the mouse grabs the mesh pull bar, the peak pull force in grams is recorded. Each individual trial included three measured pulls, which were averaged to give the value for that trial.
Three analysts worked together to perform the grip-strength measurements and document the data collection. Experiments were typically performed around the same time of day (between 12:00 and 17:00 h) during the light cycle to avoid any introduction of variability. Each analyst was identified on internally controlled document forms as analyst 1, 2, or 3 prior to initiating the testing.
Analyst 1 was blinded to the animal treatments, and this analyst remained consistent throughout all grip-strength experiments. A second analyst (analyst 2 or 3) provided the mice to the performing analyst (analyst 1) from their cage and returned the mice when the assessment was complete. When the grip-strength measurement was being performed by analyst 1, analyst 2 or 3 recorded the measurements, and the other remaining analyst (analyst 2 or 3) verified the measurements on document forms. Analyst 1 never switched roles with either analyst 2 or 3 in order to maintain blinding of analyst 1. Each activity was carefully documented to ensure that the activity was attributable to the performing analyst.

## Functional efficacy in mdx mice: Hindlimb muscle physiology
Muscle strength was evaluated at ∼ p115, ∼p275, and ∼p400 in the hindlimbs of mdx mice treated with INS1201 to determine sustained durability of functional efficacy. Hindlimb physiology measurements were used to assess muscle contractility by examining rotational force (torque) in the plantar flexor muscles, including the gastrocnemius (using an in vivo muscle test, 1300A: 3-in-1 Whole Animal System for Mice; Aurora Scientific, Inc. Aurora, ON, USA). Three experiments were conducted (typically between 09:00 and 17:00 h) during the light cycle: plantar flexor twitch torque, tetanic torque, and torque-frequency measurements. Mice were weighed and anesthetized via inhalation and then placed in the supine position to assess the right hindlimb. The right foot was taped to a rotating foot plate connected to a dual control motor to assess plantar flexion torque. The hindlimb was then locked into a testing frame connected to the platform base using blunt clamps at the femoral condyles. For plantar-flexor experiments, the tibial nerve located in the posterior medial knee was stimulated using two insulated monopolar electrodes placed subcutaneously (Natus Neurology Inc., Middleton, WI, USA). Peak twitch torque was measured after a single 0.2-ms supramaximal pulse-wave stimulation. Tetanic torque was measured using a 200-ms train of stimuli delivered at 125 Hz. A torque-frequency curve was created by measuring the maximum torque generated following stimulation at increasing frequencies from 20 to 160 Hz, with 60-s intervals between contractions.

## INS1201 vg biodistribution by ddPCR
A qualified and validated ddPCR method using a primer/probe set designed specifically for the INS1201 genome was used to quantify vg in mouse and NHP tissues. Two probes were used and measured simultaneously using dual wavelength to capture the data from each probe. One probe was specific for INS1201 micro-dystrophin gene construct, designed to span the junction between the MHCK7 promoter and micro-dystrophin transgene, and the second probe was specific for RPP30, the internal reference gene. INS1201 vg were expressed per diploid genome (nucleus) based on RPP30 values.

## Micro-dystrophin protein expression analysis in mdx mice by western blot
For standard western blot, protein lysate from each sample (40 μg for skeletal muscles including the gastrocnemius, tibialis anterior, and diaphragm; 20 μg for heart, brain, spinal cord, DRG, and liver; 5 μg for human positive control) was assessed for expression of micro-dystrophin using the primary antibody NCL-DYS3-A anti-Dystrophin (Dys3; Leica Biosystems). Ponceau staining was performed to confirm relative protein amounts. Cytivia ImageQuant TL software was used to assess protein quantity.
The Dys3 antibody recognizes human dystrophin near exons 10 to 12, with an epitope sequence in amino acids 308 to 351 that is also contained within the INS1201 micro-dystrophin sequence. Apart from the rare case in which spontaneous alternative splicing has occurred in muscle precursor cells resulting in sporadic clusters of dystrophin-expressing revertant fibers, the mdx mouse lacks dystrophin. If endogenous dystrophin were expressed as a result of revertant fibers, this mouse dystrophin protein would not bind to the human-specific Dys3 dystrophin antibody; therefore, this method is specific for the measurement of the INS1201 micro-dystrophin transgene protein.
Detection of INS1201 micro-dystrophin protein expressed in animal tissue as well as in vitro cell models has been observed as two bands or a doublet. This phenomenon has been characterized by mass spectrometry analysis and determined to arise from differential phosphorylation of the higher-molecular-weight or a slower-migrating band. For this characterization, an INS1201 micro-dystrophin product tagged with FLAG and six histidine residues was overexpressed and purified from HEK293 cells. The protein was then resolved on sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and visualized by colloidal Coomassie staining, excised, and peptide analysis was performed by mass spectrometry. Both bands returned peptide fragment matches to micro-dystrophin, and the slower-migrating band contained multiple fragments with phosphorylated serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues, whereas the faster-migrating, lower-molecular-weight band had none. Collectively, this suggests that the observed micro-dystrophin doublet was caused by differential migration during electrophoresis due to these differences in post-translational modification.

## INS1201 RNA expression
Representative samples were assessed for mRNA expression using a fit-for-purpose semi-quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The positive control was RNA isolated from an in vitro cell line transduced with 500K multiplicity of infection of INS1201. The spike-in control was RNA obtained from a vehicle control NHP, mixed 1:1 with positive control. The no-RT negative control was RNA isolated from an NHP, belonging to INS1201 high-dose (3.05E+14 vg) group. No template control was nuclease-free water. Samples and controls were added to individual PCR reaction tubes containing RT master mix and subjected to thermocycling conditions to generate complementary DNA (cDNA). The cDNA samples, positive control, no-RT control, no-template control, and spike-in positive control were added to individual PCR tubes containing PCR master mix and subjected to thermocycling conditions. The samples and controls were mixed with loading buffer and loaded into their respective lanes alongside a 1-kilobase DNA ladder for electrophoresis in 2% agarose gel. The gels were imaged using ImageQuant 800.

## Viral shedding and immunogenicity
To evaluate clearance and viral shedding, CSF, serum, urine, and feces were collected from NHPs in the INS1201 GLP toxicology study and analyzed for INS1201 vg by a qualified and validated ddPCR method, described previously. The LOQ for the viral shedding assay across matrices was determined to be 34 copies/20 μL ddPCR reaction at 25% coefficient of variance. CSF was collected 17 days prior to dosing (to determine baseline levels of INS1201 vg); on day 1 prior to dosing; on days 2, 24, and 86; and on days 92/93 at necropsy. Serum from each NHP was collected prior to dosing and at three time points on days 1, 4, 7, and 28 and on days 92/93 at necropsy.
The presence of anti-AAV9 IgG antibodies was determined using a qualified and validated ELISA against immobilized AAV9 empty capsids.

## Data analysis and statistical methods
Except for the mouse versus NHP biodistribution analysis, all data are expressed as mean ± SD and analyzed using GraphPad Prism software. Statistical analyses to compare mdx treated and mdx (−) control groups were performed using ordinary one- or two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), with Bonferroni correction, and are specified within figure legends. Statistical comparisons of biodistribution between mice and NHPs were conducted using JMP software (v.18) and one-way ANOVA with Tukey-Kramer HSD test and 95% CI. Statistical significance was defined as p ≤ 0.05.
As increases in strength have been shown to parallel somatic growth in normal mice, forelimb grip strength and hindlimb muscle physiology data were evaluated and reported as normalized to individual body weight.

## Data and code availability
All collection and documentation of data presented in this manuscript followed the general guidelines of good documentation practices using effective document-controlled forms and standard operating procedures when possible. Data presented in this manuscript are stored in Insmed Gene Therapy LLC quality assurance (QA)-controlled archives and laboratory notebooks. All data within included a quality check, whereby source data were verified by Insite Quality Assurance, Inc., a third-party independent quality firm. GLP study data underwent verification and review by external Contract Labs QA along with internal Insmed Gene Therapy LLC QA. The data presented in this manuscript are not publicly available due to legal and commercial restrictions.

## Acknowledgments
These studies were funded by Insmed Gene Therapy LLC and Cure Duchenne. We acknowledge Michael Donatelli and Amy Lou Mummert of Insite Quality Assurance, Inc. (Sammamish, WA, USA) for their contributions to these studies. Medical writing and editorial support for this manuscript were provided by Michelle McDermott, PharmD, of Lumanity Communications Inc. (Yardley, PA, USA), and were funded by Insmed Gene Therapy LLC.

## Author contributions
G.T., A.K., L.F., B.C., V.J.G., T.T., L.E.B., C.K., C.F., M.M., M.F., J.Z., J.Y., S.B., S.R.W., S.S., H.T., S.V., M.K., M.S., and B.K. contributed to study conceptualization. G.T., A.K., L.F., B.C., V.J.G., R.W., T.S., N.C.-V., R.C., E.H., W.D.A., R.H., J.Z., J.Y., S.S., T.Y., A.M., and B.K. were responsible for study methodology. G.T., A.K., L.F., B.C., V.J.G., R.W., T.S., N.C.-V., R.C., E.H., R.H., J.Z., J.Y., S.S., T.Y., A.M., and B.K. conducted the investigations. G.T., A.K., L.F., B.C., V.J.G., R.W., T.S., N.C.-V., R.C., E.H., H.J., H.B., A.R., M.L., J.R., McA.-D., W.D.A., R.H., S.N.B., S.S., T.Y., A.M., and B.K. curated the data. G.T., A.K., L.F., B.C., V.J.G., R.W., N.C.-V., R.C., E.H., W.D.A., R.H., J.Z., J.Y., T.Y., A.M., B.K. aided in formal data analysis. G.T., A.K., L.F., B.C., V.J.G., R.W., T.S., N.C.-V., R.C., E.H., H.J., W.D.A., R.H., J.Z., J.Y., T.Y., A.M., and B.K. validated the data. All authors contributed to the writing, reviewing, and editing of the manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
G.T., A.K., L.F., B.C., V.J.G., R.W., T.S., N.C.-V., R.C., E.H., H.J., H.B., A.R., M.L., J.R., C.K., C.F., M.F., J.Z., J.Y., S.V., M.K., M.S., and B.K. are employees of Insmed Gene Therapy LLC and hold stock/stock options in Insmed Incorporated. G.T., A.K., and B.K. are listed inventors on a family of patent applications assigned to Insmed Gene Therapy LLC that disclose the INS1201 construct and its use in treating DMD. McA.-D. has received consulting fees from Insmed Gene Therapy LLC. W.D.A. has received consulting fees and travel support from Insmed Gene Therapy LLC. R.H. has received funds from the Pfaff Laboratory at the Salk Institute and an NIH F30 Training Fellowship, has received consulting fees from Insmed Gene Therapy LLC,s and has a patent pending on unspliced RNA. L.E.B. is an employee of Insmed Gene Therapy LLC and shareholder of Insmed Incorporated, holds stock/stock options in Biogen, Takeda, and Pfizer, and manages a personal portfolio containing additional stock. M.M. is an employee of Insmed Gene Therapy LLC and holds stock/stock options in Insmed Incorporated and Sangamo Incorporated. S.R.W. and S.S. have received research support from Insmed Gene Therapy LLC. A.M. and H.T. have received research support from Shin Nippon Biomedical Laboratories, Ltd. (SNBL), which conducted contracted research funded by Insmed Gene Therapy LLC. T.T., S.N.B., and T.Y. have no disclosures to report.

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omta.2026.201707.
A video abstract is available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omta.2026.201707#mmc2.

## Contributor Information
Gretchen Thomsen, Email: gretchen.thomsen@insmed.com.
Brian Kaspar, Email: brian.kaspar@insmed.com.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S8 and Tables S1–S6

## Video Abstract

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S8 and Tables S1–S6

## Video Abstract

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Data Availability Statement
All collection and documentation of data presented in this manuscript followed the general guidelines of good documentation practices using effective document-controlled forms and standard operating procedures when possible. Data presented in this manuscript are stored in Insmed Gene Therapy LLC quality assurance (QA)-controlled archives and laboratory notebooks. All data within included a quality check, whereby source data were verified by Insite Quality Assurance, Inc., a third-party independent quality firm. GLP study data underwent verification and review by external Contract Labs QA along with internal Insmed Gene Therapy LLC QA. The data presented in this manuscript are not publicly available due to legal and commercial restrictions.