pmcAdv Sci (Weinh)Adv Sci (Weinh)2933advsci101664569ADVSAdvanced Science2198-3844WileyPMC11791949PMC11791949.111791949117919493966172910.1002/advs.202407398ADVS101991Research ArticleResearch ArticleMAM‐STAT3‐Driven Mitochondrial Ca+2 Upregulation Contributes to Immunosenescence in Type A Mandibuloacral Dysplasia Patients
PadhiarArshad Ahmed arshad.padhiar@uconn.eduYangXiaohong ZaidiSyed Aqib Ali LiZhu LiaoJinqi ShuWei ChishtiArif Ali HeLiangge AlamGulzar FaqeerAbdullah AliIlyashttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-3104-2436 ZhangShuai WangTing LiuTao ZhouMeiling WangGang ZhouYan yanzhou.2021Camb@gmail.comZhouGuangqianhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6604-9972 gqzhou@szu.edu.cn

1

Guangdong Key Laboratory of Genomic Stability and Disease Prevention
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Anti‐Aging and Regenerative Medicine
Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Regenerative Technologies for Orthopedic Diseases
Department of Medical Cell Biology and Genetics
Health Science Center
Shenzhen University
Shenzhen
518060
China

2

Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology
University of Connecticut
Storrs
CT
06269‐3043
USA

3

Senotherapeutics Ltd.
Hangzhou
311100
China

4

Department of Laboratory Medicine
Puning Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital
Puning
Guangdong
515343
China

5

Lungene Biotech Ltd.
Yinxing Scientific Building
Shenzhen
510086
China

6

The Guangxi Key Laboratory of Environmental Exposomics and Entire Lifecycle Heath
Guilin Medical University
Guilin
541004
China

7

Brain Research Centre and Department of Biology
Southern University of Science and Technology
1088 Xueyuan Blvd, Nanshan District
Shenzhen
Guangdong
518055
China

8

Department of Tumor Immunotherapy
Shenzhen Luohu People's Hospital
The Third Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University
Shenzhen
Guangdong
518001
China

*E‐mail: arshad.padhiar@uconn.edu; yanzhou.2021Camb@gmail.com; gqzhou@szu.edu.cn

111220242202512548122910.1002/advs.v12.52407398
31102024
0272024
111220240502202507062026© 2024 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley‐VCH GmbHhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract
Individuals with homozygous laminA/C p.R527C mutations manifest a severe form of Mandibuloacral dysplasia‐(MAD) and exhibit overlapping progeroid symptoms, for which the underlying molecular pathology remains unknown. Herein, it is shown that MAD patients achieved inflammaging with different pro‐inflammatory cytokines compared to progeria‐(HGPS) patient. Characterization of MAD iPSC‐derived Mesenchymal stem cells (MAD‐iMSC) uncovers deregulated mitochondrial Ca+2 as the primary cause of inflammaging, mediated through inflammasome formation rather than the cGAS‐STING pathway. Moreover, MAD‐iMSCs extracellular vesicles (EVs) can also upregulate mitochondrial Ca+2 in healthy cells. This deregulated Ca+2 homeostasis is indirectly mediated by mitochondrial calcium mediator, signal transducer, and activator of transcription‐3 (STAT3), situated on the mitochondrial associated membrane (MAM). Inflammaging is mitigated by various FDA‐approved MAM‐STAT3 upstream inhibitors, such as (Tocilizumab) or by correcting R527C mutation with CRISPR/CAS9. These results provide new insights into MAD disease and propose targeting defective mitochondrial Ca+2 homeostasis as a promising therapy for reversing immunosenescence.

This study reveals the molecular basis of severe Mandibuloacral Dysplasia (MAD) with progeroid symptoms, linked to the LMNA p.R527C mutation. Mitochondrial calcium imbalance sparks inflammation and cellular aging, explaining the mutation's severe effects. It is demonstrated that restoring calcium balance with existing therapeutic drugs offers a promising strategy to counteract premature aging in MAD patients.
 

calcium homeostasisextracellular vesicles (EVs)inflammagingmandibuloacral dysplasia (MADA)mitochondrial dysfunctionprogeroid symptomsNational Natural Science Foundation of China
10.13039/50110000180920724803206015732100603 The three patients with homozygous LMNA p.R527C mutations exhibited pronounced MAD symptoms, akin to those seen in autoimmune disorders like rheumatoid arthritis (Figure  ). Examination of skin biopsies unveiled immune cell infiltration and marked dermal sclerosis (Figure , Supporting Information). Notably, serum antibodies for antinuclear and anti‐smith (sm) were found below the reference values (Table , Supporting Information), indicating that the hyperactive immune response observed was not attributable to an autoimmune disorder. Polarization of immune responses into either inflammatory or anti‐inflammatory is influenced by the cytokines released by T‐helper (TH) cells. To delve into this, we profiled various TH‐mediated cytokine levels. We observed higher expressions of IL‐6, IL‐9, and IL‐10 in the serum of patients MAD1‐3 compared to patient HGPS1, whereas IL‐17F, TNF‐α, and INF‐γ levels were elevated in patient HGPS1 compared to MAD patients (Figure 1D; Table , Supporting Information). Furthermore, the T lymphocyte, B cell, and NK cell populations in patients did not significantly differ from those in controls. However, MAD patients exhibited increased levels of CD3−CD57+, CD3+KLRG1− and decreased expression of CD3−CD56Bright (markers indicative of terminally‐differentiated senescent T and NK lymphocytes) (Figure  ; Tables , Supporting Information). In contrast to the patient serum, the cytokine levels in cultured MAD peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) did not exhibit significant differences compared to those in the control group (Tables and , Supporting Information). This suggests that immunosenescence mediation in these patients involves other cells or organs. Collectively, these findings indicate that the hyperactive immune systems observed in patients with MAD and HGPS are driven by distinct patterns of cytokine expression.

2.2

## MAD Patient‐Derived iMSCs Represent a Suitable Model for Studying Premature Senescence
The availability of physiologically relevant models is a crucial step in disease etiology and drug discovery. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) can faithfully recapitulate both the clinical manifestation and pathophysiology of complex multi‐trait disorders, making them suitable models. To this end, PBMCs from patients with MAD were reprogrammed using Yamanaka factors (Klf4–Oct3/4–Sox2 and c‐Myc), resulting in iPSC‐MAD1, iPSC‐MAD2 and iPSC‐MAD3. (Note: We were unable to obtain consent from the parents of HGPS patient for generating iPSCs). From several positive iPSC‐like colonies, three clones from each MAD patient were selected, ensuring a normal karyotype, the presence of embryonic stem cell markers and the ability to differentiate into three embryonic germ layers via teratoma formation (Figures and , Supporting Information). The expression of LaminA/C in these iPSCs was sparse, albeit present (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information), in contrast to previous studies that showed a complete attenuation of LaminA/C expression at both the RNA and protein level.[
 , 
] This discrepancy could be attributed to changes in the starting cell population or variations in the reprogramming methodology. However, the pluripotent markers were maintained after >40 passages (Figure , Supporting Information), indicating successful reprograming from the premature senescent cell phenotype.
 Senescent mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) serve a vital role in immunosenescence, which leads to the chronic subclinical inflammatory state known as inflammaging. Therefore, we postulated that MSCs could serve as a valuable model for elucidating the mechanisms driving inflammaging in MAD patients. To explore this, we derived MSCs from both MAD‐iPSCs and healthy controls. (Note: Data primarily presented or referenced here are from MAD1 (age 3y) derived iMSCs or mentioned otherwise, as the iPSCs from the youngest patient retain the least epigenetic.[
 
] Though, all key experiments were reproducible in MAD2 or MAD3 derived iMSCs as well.) MSCs lacked pluripotent markers, and were positive for CD105, CD90, CD73 and CD146 surface antigens (Figure , Supporting Information). LaminA/C expression in iMSCs increased progressively with culture duration, though at the same given passage number the MAD‐derived iMSCs displayed lower LaminA/C expression (Figure  ). In addition, no pre‐lamin A or progerin protein accumulation was detected in p.R527C‐derived MAD‐iMSCs (LMNAMAD iMSCs), as determined via western blot analysis (Figure , Supporting Information). While the tri‐lineage differentiation potential of iMSCs remained intact, the number of lipid droplets and calcium calcification significantly increased in MAD‐iMSCs upon adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation, respectively (Figure  ). Nuclear deformities, including donut‐shaped nuclei, nuclear herniation, and honeycomb structure, also became more prevalent with cell passages (Figure  ). Additionally, an increase in cell doubling time and the expression of senescent markers, including beta‐galactosidase, p16, and p21, were associated with MAD‐iMSCs (Figure  ). These results collectively demonstrate that iMSCs represent a suitable candidate for investigating the underlying molecular pathology of laminA/C homozygous p.R527C mutations.

2.3

## LaminA/C p.R527C iMSCs Show Discrete Mitochondrial Dysfunction, Which can be Rescued via Correction with CRISPR/CAS9
Recently, a biallelic variant of the outer mitochondrial membrane protein metaxin‐2 (MTX‐2) has been identified, causing mitochondrial fragmentation and resulting in a phenotype resembling that of patients with MAD.[
 
] Notably, fragmented mitochondrial networks were observed in homozygous p.R527C MAD‐iMSCs, but was independent of excess reactive oxygen species (ROS) production (Figure
 ). It is worth noting that excess ROS production is one of the key features of HGPS‐derived cell lines,[
 , 
] however, it was not observed in MAD‐iMSCs. Alongside mitochondrial fragmentation, a significant reduction in ATP was also noted (Figure  ). This prompted an examination of mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP or ΔΨm), a crucial regulator of ATP production. JC‐1 dye is a key indicator for the evaluation of ΔΨm, because in its natural state JC‐1 yields green fluorescence and exists as monomer, but at higher concentrations it forms aggregates and exhibits red fluorescence.[
 
] The MMP of MAD‐iMSCs was found to be severely reduced when stained with JC‐1 dye (Figure  ).
 Although lower ATP production and decreased ΔΨm was observed in MAD‐iMSCs from all three patients, we sought to confirm the effects of p.R527C mutations effect by correcting this with CRISPR/CAS9. Mutation was biallelically corrected by delivering the RNP complex with 80 bp ssDNA donor in MAD‐iPSC cells (Figure , Supporting Information). Homozygous corrected clones were confirmed by Sanger sequencing and then differentiated into iMSCs. The homozygous corrected mesenchymal stem cells are denoted here as (LMNA
Corr
). Nuclear abnormality, cell growth, and senescent markers were restored in corrected iMSCs (Figure , Supporting Information). In addition, the inhibited ΔΨm and increased mitochondrial fragmentation was also reverted in LMNA
Corr
 iMSCs (Figure  ), suggesting that mitochondrial dysfunction was driven by homozygous LMNA p.R527C mutations.

2.4

## Dysregulated Ca+2 Homeostasis in MAD‐iMSCs is the Primary Driver of Mitochondrial Fragmentation
Recognizing the mechanisms underlying mitochondrial dysfunction is crucial for not only characterizing the distinctive and overlapping nature of MAD with other laminopathies, but also to highlight potential targets for its rectification. To this aim, we first assessed previous studies that have investigated mitochondrial dysfunction in laminopathies. Modelling of LMNA E159K mutation in drosophila showed accelerated aging by the defective transport of mitochondrial transcripts from nucleus to cytoplasm.[
 
] However, we did not observe the entrapment of integral mitochondrial membrane transcripts within the nucleus of MAD‐iMSCs (Figure , Supporting Information). Levels of the outer mitochondrial membrane proteins MTX1 and MTX2 were also not downregulated (Figure
 ), which was recently reported to be the causative agent of the MAD phenotype.[
 
]

 Next, we assessed mitochondrial calcium homeostasis, crucial element in maintaining mitochondrial membrane potential dynamics.[
 , 
] The Rhod‐2AM dye, capable of quantifying mitochondrial Ca+2, exhibited increased fluorescence in MAD‐iMSCs compared to healthy or corrected‐iMSCs (Figure  ). Elevated mitochondrial Ca+2 efflux can disrupt calcium levels in other cellular and cytoplasmic compartments. Fluo‐4, a dye assessing cytoplasmic Ca+2 levels, also revealed elevated cytoplasmic Ca+2 levels in MAD‐iMSCs (Figure  ). In order to demonstrate that the rise in cytoplasmic Ca+2 was dependent on increased mitochondrial Ca+2 levels and not the other way round, we treated the cells with CGP‐37157, which is a potent inhibitor of Na+/Ca+2 exchange and blocks mitochondrial calcium efflux to the cytoplasm.[
 
] Cells treated with CGP‐37157 showed decreased cytoplasmic calcium levels (Figure  ), confirming the dependency of cytoplasmic Ca+2 levels on increased mitochondrial Ca+2 levels in MAD‐iMSCs.
Loss of mitochondrial calcium homeostasis is known to induce mitophagy, which is closely associated with the disequilibrium of mitochondrial fission and fusion.[
 
] In this context, evidence of mitophagy induction was observed through the heightened expression of LC3B and reduced expression of p62 (Figure  ). Simultaneously, the activation of mitophagy coincided with a decrease in the expression of the mitochondrial fusion protein MFN2, while there was a significant increase in the expression of DRP1, involved in peroxisomal fragmentation and mitochondrial fission, in MAD iMSCs (Figure  ). Collectively, these findings imply that heightened levels of mitochondrial Ca+2 serve as the key factor in the mitochondrial dysfunction observed in MAD. This, in turn, leads to reduced ΔΨm and ATP production, ultimately culminating in the atypical mitophagy‐driven fragmentation of mitochondria.

2.5

## Mitochondrial Fragmentation in p.R527C MAD‐iMSCs Activates the Inflammasome
MAD patients exhibiting chronic inflammation (Figure  ) could potentially be a result of various factors, including DNA damage,[
 
] activation of transposons,[
 
] or the release of Mt‐DNA via mitochondrial fragmentation.[
 
] Thus, we aimed to investigate whether immunosenescence in MAD could be a consequence of the above‐described phenomena. The expression of the proinflammatory cytokines IL‐8, IL‐18, IL‐6, and IL‐1β was increased in MAD‐iMSCs (Figure
 ), further confirming the involvement of MSCs in the development of inflammaging. However, the expression of IFN‐δ, IFN‐β, and IFN‐α remained unchanged (Figure  ), indicating that the activation of inflammatory cytokines occurred in a cGAS‐stimulator of interferon genes (STING) sensor—independent manner. Interestingly, the expression of STING was significantly higher in MAD‐iMSCs, but the expression of the downstream effector proteins TBK1 and p‐TBK1 remained unchanged (Figure  ). This inhibition of STING DNA sensor can be understood in the context of a recent study that linked the deactivation of STING sensor with saturated levels of calcium.[
 
]

 The expression pattern of pro‐inflammatory cytokines in MAD‐iMSCs suggests the activation of inflammasomes, which can be triggered by oligomeric sensors other than cGAS‐STING.[
 
] Notably, the expression of ′absent in Melanoma 2″ (AIM2) and ″nucleotide‐binding oligomerization‐like receptor family, pyrin domain‐containing protein‐3″ (NLRP3) was increased in MAD‐iMSCs. Importantly, in contrast to HGPS MSCs, which displayed increased expression of DNA damage markers in a previous study,[
 
] γ‐H2AX expression did not increase in MAD‐iMSCs (Figure  ). Additionally, retrotransposons (line‐1), known to activate DNA sensors during the natural aging process,[
 
] were downregulated in MAD‐iMSCs (Figure.  ). These results collectively suggest that aberrant calcium efflux based mitochondrial fragmentation lead to the activation of AIM2 and NLRP3 oligo sensors, triggering inflammasome‐mediated sterile chronic inflammation[
 
] (Figure  ).

2.6

## Activation of MAM‐STAT3 Deregulates Ca+2 Homeostasis Through Increased IL‐6 Expression
Having established that calcium‐dependent mitochondrial fragmentation triggers the inflammasome in MAD‐iMSCs, we delved into identifying the causative agent responsible for disrupted Ca+2 homeostasis. Computational analysis predicted the mutational effect of 527th
LMNA residue, which introduced a pocket in the outer protein structure by disrupting an arginine‐glutamine salt bridge,[
 
] thereby disrupting the nuclear lamina and chromatin organization. Substantial intranuclear aggregation of LaminA/C, lamin B1, lamin B2, and the partial loss of emerin around the nuclear rim indicate disrupted nuclear lamin in MAD‐iMSCs (Figure
 ). Western blotting confirmed reduced expression of emerin, lamin B1, and B2 (Figure  ). LaminA/c is known to influence heterochromatin structure by interacting with chromatin through its topological‐associated domain (TAD), as well as by activating DE acylase. To further confirm the effect of disrupted nuclear lamina on chromatin stability, we extracted chromatins and analyzed histone‐associated methylation and acetylation using western blotting. Several methylation events are involved in transcriptional activation, including H3K4me3 and H3K36me2/3 are significantly decreased in MAD‐iMSCs (Figure  ). Similarly, altered expression of H4k20me2 and H4k20me3 was also noted (Figure  ). However, no difference was observed in H3K9me3 and/or H3K27me3/H3K27ac3 levels (Figure  ), although altered methylation and acetylation in H3k9/H3k27 are a characteristic feature of HGPS‐derived fibroblasts and MSCs.[
 
] This suggests that the epigenetic markers of HGPS (representing typical progeria) and MAD (atypical progeria) do not lead to similar heterochromatin modifications. Furthermore, the expression of nuclear deacylases (SIRT1, SIRT6, and SIRT7), which directly interact with lamin A/C, was also downregulated in MAD‐iMSCs (Figure  ).
 These alterations to heterochromatin should be responsible for a substantial degree of the differential gene expression observed in MAD. However, it is prudent to explore additional factors that may be implicated in the deregulation of calcium homeostasis. For example, downregulation of nuclear sirtuin, including SIRT1 and SIRT6, is known to enhance the expression of IL‐6.[
 , 
] The elevation of IL‐6 levels in serum from MAD patients (Figure  ) and in MAD‐iMSCs prompted further investigation into a recently identified noncanonical role of STAT3. Upon activation, STAT3 has demonstrated to translocate to the mitochondrial associated endoplasmic reticulum membrane (MAM) and modulate Ca+2 homeostasis.[
 , 
] We found a significant increase in both Tyr705 and Ser727 phosphorylation in patient MAD‐iMSCs (Figure  ), signifying the activation of the JAK/STAT pathway. Notably, only Tyr705 STAT3 was found to localize to the MAM when co‐stained with Mitotracker, while p‐Ser727 STAT3 showed higher but more uniform nuclear expression (Figure  ). To further confirm the role of MAMs‐STAT3 in destabilization of Ca+2 homeostasis, STAT3 was activated by exogenous IL‐6 treatment in healthy iMSCs, and then tested for the change in MMP, as well as levels of mitochondrial and cytoplasmic Ca+2. The deterioration of MMP, along with increases in mitochondrial and cytoplasmic Ca+2, was observed in normal iMSCs treated with 20 ng mL−1 IL‐6 (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). These results suggested that MAM‐STAT3 was involved in the regulation of Ca+2 homeostasis, and contributed to mitochondrial dysfunction.

2.7

## Inhibition of MAM‐Stat3 Rescues Ca+2 Homeostasis, the Expression of Pro‐Inflammatory Cytokines and Senescence in MAD‐IMSCs
Given the localization of Stat3‐Tyr705 was on the MAM, our subsequent inquiry delved into examining whether deactivating MAM‐STAT3 could potentially alleviate mitochondrial dysfunction and mitigate early senescence in MAD‐iMSCs. To this end, we employed four different FDA‐approved STAT3 blockers, each exerting its influence on STAT3 dephosphorylation through different mechanisms. Cells were treated with various concentration of Tocilizumab (an anti‐human IL6‐R/CD‐126 antibody), LMT‐28 (a synthetic inhibitor for IL6‐R‐Beta/gp130/CD130), tofacitinib (a JAK family inhibitor) and AZD8055 (an m‐TOR inhibitor), and subsequently assessed for mitochondrial Ca+2 levels and mitochondrial membrane potential. Ca+2 homeostasis and ΔΨm was best rescued by Tocilizumab (Figure
 ). Other STAT3 inhibitors had also rescued mitochondrial dysfunction (Figure , Supporting Information). Tocilizumab not only restored the diminished β‐galactosidase staining intensity but also alleviated nuclear dysmorphism and mitochondrial fragmentation in MAD‐iMSCs (Figure  ). Moreover, a reduction in mRNA levels of other pro‐inflammatory cytokines, including IL‐8, IL‐1β, and IL‐18, coupled with an improvement in mitochondrial function, indicated the inactivation of the inflammasome (Figure  ). The findings suggest a crucial role for mitochondrial integrity in the progression of progeroid syndrome. Inactivating MAM‐STAT3 using FDA‐approved inhibitors emerges as a plausible option for treating patients with MAD.
 
2.8

## MAD‐iMSC Extracellular Vesicles Lose their Immunomodulatory Capabilities and Aggravate Inflammaging at a Systemic Level
MSCs regulate the homeostasis of neighboring tissues, distant organs, and immune cells by various cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors that are secreted as encapsulated extracellular vesicles (EVs). Emerging evidence suggests that age‐related changes in MSCs alter the composition of EVs, which in turn accelerates aging at the systemic level.[
 
] Thus, we investigated the restorative effect of MAD‐iMSC EVs on the well‐developed rodent bleomycin‐induced lung fibrosis model. Since patients affected with systemic sclerosis (SSC) often present with internal organ failure and fibrosis,[
 
] the SSC and chronic inflammation observed in patients with MAD (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information) suggests that these internal organs may also be affected by fibrosis.[
 
]

EVs were purified from iMSC serum‐free culture medium using commercial columns. Purified EVs were enriched with EV marker, and an average diameter of 180 nm was recorded with a Nanosight particle analyzer (Figure , Supporting Information). Only EVs from healthy control iMSCs rescued the bleomycin‐induced aberrant extracellular matrix deposition in the mouse lungs, as determined via trichome or picrosirius red staining. On the contrary, MAD‐iMSC EVs yet enhanced collagen deposition and worsened the fibrotic score compared with the vehicle control (Figure
 ). This aggravating effect of the MAD‐iMSC secretome was further evaluated by utilizing an in vitro hydrogel 2D cell culture system. Fibroblasts treated with MAD‐iMSCs showed increased expression of fibrogenic myofibroblast markers and significant increases in soluble collagen content, indicating the transformation of fibroblasts toward fibrosis. (Figure , Supporting Information) Interestingly, increased expression of IL‐6 was also detected in EVs derived from MAD‐iMSCs, and this has the ability to alter the ΔΨm of healthy cells (Figure  ). From these results, we can infer that MSCs, and similar cells such as fibroblasts with p.R527C mutation, might also be participating in mitochondrial damage‐mediated senescence and inflammation. Accordingly, the proposed IL‐6 inhibitors would be beneficial in restoring the systemic inflammation instigated by cells of mesenchymal origin in patients with MAD.
 

3

## Discussion
Age‐related diseases frequently exhibit shared pathological characteristics, primarily associated with inflammation. In our investigation, individuals with homozygous LMNA p.R527C mutations displayed signs of immunosenescence, prompting a thorough exploration of the underlying molecular pathways involved in this phenomenon. Analysis of patient iPSC‐derived iMSCs revealed that elevated mitochondrial Ca+2 levels were the primary driver of mitochondrial dysfunction and subsequent fragmentation, leading to inflammasome formation. Notably, our findings underscore the potential superiority of patient iPSC‐derived mesenchymal cells over rodent models for studying laminopathies. Previously, our collaborators demonstrated DNA damage‐mediated premature aging in R527C transgenic mice, specifically under a high‐fat diet (HFD),[
 
] whereas HGPS LMNAG609/G609 mouse models showed extended lifespan under an HFD compared to regular chow‐fed counterparts.[
 
] Therefore, careful consideration is crucial in selecting laminopathy‐associated rodent models.
MAD often manifests severe bone issues, including localized osteoporosis and generalized osteolysis. The balance of osteogenic and lipogenic MSC differentiation controls bone remodeling.[
 
] Our study revealed aggressive adipogenesis and premature osteogenesis in MAD‐derived iMSCs. This premature osteogenesis could be responsible for abnormal bone density seen in patients with MAD, although it is also likely that the acro‐osteolysis observed in such cases is largely due to the excess production of osteoclasts. IL‐9 expression, which is persistently high in patients with R527C‐associated MAD (Figure  ), has been shown to promote osteoclast formation in rheumatoid arthritis.[
 
] Furthermore, IL‐6 has been shown to activate osteoclastogenesis by regulating RANKL via the JAK‐STAT3 pathway,[
 
] suggesting IL‐6 inhibitors as potential therapeutics for reducing bone resorption in MAD. iPSC‐derived osteoclasts could be valuable in future drug screening and enhancing our understanding of acro‐osteolysis and lipodystrophy in MAD.
Disrupted nuclear lamina was observed in p.R527C derived cells without the accumulation of pre‐lamin‐A protein, despite the accumulation of progerin or pre‐lamin‐A being considered a common attribute of HGPS and MAD disorders, respectively.[
 
] This suggests that heterochromatin modification due to disrupted nuclear lamina can occur independently of pre‐lamin‐A. MAD exhibits shared patterns of heterochromatin modification with HGPS but with unique features; for instance, H3k9me3 or H3K27me3 histone markers decrease in HGPS but remain unchanged in p.R527C‐MADA. Nuclear sirtuin knockout mice (including SIRT1, SIRT6, and/or SIRT7 alone) have also been shown to develop progeroid features.[
 , , 
] The decreased expression of nuclear sirtuin observed in iMSCs in the present study could be due to the loss of direct interactions with mutant laminA/C, or indirectly. For instance, Set7‐N‐lysine Methyl transferase inversely regulates the expression of SIRT1, and was found to overexpressed in MADA‐iMSCs (Figure , Supporting Information). In addition, chromatin remodelling in laminopathies also activates common downstream transduction pathways associated with mitochondrial dysfunction.
New findings suggest that dysfunctional mitochondrial metabolites transmit signals to the nucleus through mito‐nuclear communication, influencing the epigenetic regulation of genes linked to aging.[
 , 
] Consequently, observed changes in epigenetic modifications in HGPS and MADA may not solely result from disruptions in the nuclear lamina but may also be indirectly influenced by mitochondrial dysfunction. Treating HGPS cells with the mitochondrial‐targeting antioxidant methylene blue not only rescued mitochondrial defects, but also rescued nuclear abnormalities.[
 
] Furthermore, primary defects in mitochondria with MTX2 mutations also include nuclear blebbing,[
 
] reflecting the impact of mitochondrial stress on the integrity of the nuclear membrane. Employing techniques like ATAC‐seq to examine epigenetic landmarks in HGPS or MADA‐derived cells treated with mitochondria‐targeting drugs in the future could clarify the impact of laminA/C mutation and/or dysfunctional mitochondria on cellular function.
In this study, we systematically examined various mitochondrial stressors that previously observed in different laminopathies and identified IL‐6‐dependent dysregulation of intracellular Ca2+ levels as a novel factor contributing to mitochondrial dysfunction. Previous findings from collagen‐induced arthritis mouse models revealed severe ankle joint stiffness due to abnormal Ca+2 signaling and IL‐6‐mediated NLRP3 inflammasome formation.[
 
] Similarly, patients in our study, as well as those previously reported with LMNA p.R527C MAD[
 
] exhibited ulcerated and stiff ankle joints, suggesting aberrant Ca+2 signaling as key factor in MAD.
Interestingly, some studies have shown that IL‐6 levels in the serum of MAD patients with various LMNA mutations, as well as in HGPS patients, remain unchanged[
 , 
] However, HGPS fibroblasts and LMNAG609/G609 progeroid mice showed high level of IL‐6 expression and treatment with tocilizumab has been shown to counteract progeroid features in these models.[
 
] HGPS cells also exhibited elevated intracellular Ca+2 levels and altered expression of calcium regulators, including ITPR, CACNA2D1, and CAMK2N1.[
 
] Additionally, haploinsufficient mutation models for laminA/C showed an upregulation of CACNA1A, which governs P/Q‐type calcium channels.[
 
] This suggests that deregulated Ca+2 signaling may involve factors beyond STAT‐3, with the aforementioned Ca+2 regulators potentially having additive or synergistic effects in destabilizing mitochondrial Ca+2 homeostasis. Examination of these Ca+2 channels in the context of laminopathies may represent a promising direction for future study.
The mitochondria orchestrate a wide range of cellular processes, including energy production, cell metabolism, cell death and inflammation. The release of mitochondrial DNA (mt‐DNA) into cytoplasm or the extracellular milieu is sensed as “foreign” DNA, and activates different innate immune response including TLR9, cGAS‐STING and inflammasome formation.[
 
] Inflammasomes are multimeric protein complexes which activate the IL‐1B and IL‐18 mediated inflammatory form of cell death, called pyroptosis.[
 
] Previous studies have demonstrated that Ca+2 mobilization acts as a potent trigger of mitochondrial dysfunction and NLRP3 inflammasome formation via mitochondrial‐associated ligands.[
 , 
] This NLRP3 activation contributes to a vascular inflammation, leading to atherosclerosis,[
 
] that also observed in patients bearing homozygous p.R527C mutation.
Multiple cellular processes and organs are affected in laminopathies and, as with other diseases that involve the dysfunction of multiple systems, it is likely that a combination of therapies will be needed to treat MAD successfully. The direct correction of mutations by CRISPR/CAS9 has yielded promising results in a mouse model,[
 , 
] but there remains a long way to go before this can be applied to humans. Utility of stem cell‐derived EVs are currently active in clinical trials for various aging disorders. We have shown that MAD patient derived EVs has lost the immunomodulatory effect. On that account, injection of EVs derived from iPSCs or MSCs carried immense potential for increasing the lifespan of HGPS and/or MAD patients. Due to patient scarcity, <6% of all rare diseases have approved treatment options, and may be overlooked due to lack of appropriate models. However, these patients still require treatment. Thus, the repurposing of clinically‐approved IL‐6 or STAT‐3 inhibitors, for which dosage is well defined, may represent a promising treatment for patients with homozygous p.R527C‐associated MAD.

4

## Experimental Section

## Consent
The study's experiment received approval from the Shenzhen Medical Ethics Committee and the Medical Ethics Committee of Shenzhen Luohu People's Hospital, China. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents of the patients, personally signed.

## Genotyping
Genomic DNA was isolated from PBMCs using DNeasy Blood & Tissue kits, according to the manufacturer's protocol (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Direct sequencing of common genes involved in progeroid syndromes, including both introns and exons of LMNA, ZMPSTE24, POLD1, and BNF1, was conducted in probands, siblings, and parents.

## Flow Cytometry
Cytokine levels in the plasma and cell culture medium were detected using the LEGENDplex Human Th Panel (BioLegend, San Diego, CA, USA) containing 13 human antibodies targeting IL‐5, IL‐13, IL‐2, IL‐6, IL‐9, IL‐10, IFN‐γ, TNF‐ɑ, IL‐17A, IL‐17F, IL‐4, IL‐21, and IL‐22. Full antibody details are provided in the “Antibodies” section. Samples from healthy controls were used for cross‐comparison. Cells were harvested and blocked with 1% fetal bovine serum (FBS, cat.no.10100147, Thermo Fisher scientific) for 20 min at room temperature (RT). Cells were then labeled with fluorescein‐conjugated antibodies (see “Antibodies” section for details) for 30 min at RT in 1% FBS. Following incubation, cells were washed three times with 1% FBS. Flow cytometry was performed using a Flow Cytometer (Beckman Coulter Inc., Brea, CA, USA) and analyzed with FlowJo software (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA).

## Isolation and Culture of PMBCs
Whole blood was collected in heparin‐coated tubes and centrifuged using Ficoll gradient for 45 min at 900 x g. PBMCs were washed with PBS prior to suspension in PBMC culture medium, which comprised of StemSpan SFEM II medium with Stemspan CD34+ supplement (STEMCELL Technologies, Inc., Vancouver, Canada). Cells were maintained for 4 days at 5% CO2 at 37 °C before further use.

## Generation and Characterization of iPSCs
Cultured PBMCs were counted, and 3 × 105 cells were transferred to 1 mL fresh complete PBMC medium and transduced with Yamanaka factors using a non‐integrated CytoTune‐iPSC2.0 Sendai Reprogramming kit, (Life Technologies; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, USA; cat. No. A16517). Klf4, Oct4, and Sox2 (KOS) were packaged in the same vector and transduced at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 5; simultaneously c‐Myc and the Klf4 virus which were packaged separately was transduced at an MOI of 5 and 3, respectively. After transduction for 24 h, cells were seeded in 12‐well plate coated with vitronectin (STEMCELL Technologies, Inc.). Stemspan medium was replaced with MTesR complete medium following 72 h transduction, and changed every other day for 21 days. iPSC‐like colonies were manually selected by marking the outline with a 28 cc gauge syringe needle, and were then transferred to new vitronectin‐coated plate using a 200 µL pipette. Different colonies from each donor were further characterized using Giemsa staining, alkaline phosphatase staining, or by teratoma formation in nude mice. In brief, cells were split in 1:10 to 1:50 ratios using ReLeSR, which is a gentle dissociation reagent, or with Accutase (both obtained from STEMCELL Technologies, Inc.). Then, cells were resuspended in mtesR‐plus medium with 10 µm Y‐27632 (STEMCELL Technologies, Inc.) for 24 h before this was replaced with complete MTesR plus medium.

## Karyotyping
Karyotype analysis was performed in the cytogenetic lab of Shenzhen University (China). Chromosome resolution additive and 10 mg mL−1 colchicine were added to the cells for 60 min at 37 °C. Cells were then harvested and treated with 0.075 M KCl solution for 30 min. Slides were fixed with a 1:3 ratio of acetic acid:methanol and analyzed for Giemsa banding.

## MSC Differentiation
Human iPSC clones were differentiated into mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) using a Stemdiff Mesenchymal Progenitor kit, according to the manufacturer's protocol (STEMCELL Technologies, Inc.). Briefly, iPSCs at 50% confluence were induced with early mesodermal progenitor medium (STEMdiff‐ACF) for 4 days, followed by two days’ incubation with MesenCult‐ACF Medium. Cells were passaged at day 6 on MesenCult‐ACF Attachment Substrate‐coated wells in MesenCult‐ACF medium. Cells were split once they reached 80% confluency and characterized 20–22 days after differentiation by qPCR, flow cytometry, and the standard tri‐lineage differentiation.

## Tri‐Lineage Differentiation
The tri‐lineage potential of iMSCs (into adipocytes, osteocytes, and chondrocytes) was evaluated with MSCgo‐adipogenic, MSCgo‐osteogenic, and MScgo‐chondrogenic differentiation kits (all from Biological Industries Ltd., Cromwell, CN, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, 6 × 104 cells per well were seeded in 0.1% gelatin‐coated 24‐well plates and treated with complete adipogenic medium or osteogenic medium for the indicated time, before being fixed with paraformaldehyde. In addition, 2 × 105 cells per well were seeded in U‐bottom 96‐well plates and were used to differentiate iMSCs in chondrocytes.
Early osteogenic potential was evaluated with alkaline phosphatase (Beyotime Biotechnology, China) on day 7, while calcium nodules were stained with Alizarin red staining dye (Vivacell Biotechnology GmbH, Denzlingen, Germany; cat. no. MC370‐1.4) after 21 days of osteogenic differentiation. Oil Red‐O (Vivacell Biotechnology GmbH; cat. no. MC37A0‐1.4) and Alcian blue staining (Vivacell Biotechnology GmbH; cat. no. MC37B0‐1.4) were also performed to assess the formation of lipid oil droplets and cartilage, respectively.

## Senescence Associated Beta‐Galactosidase (SA‐β‐Gal) Staining
SA‐β‐Gal staining was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol (Beyotime Biotechnology, China). Briefly, cells were seeded in six‐well plates at a density of 30–40%, and were fixed at the indicated passage number or treatment once they reached 70–80% confluency. After washing with PBS, cells were stained overnight with freshly prepared SA‐β‐Gal staining solution at 37 °C. Images were acquired with brightfield using a Lionheart FX automated microscope (BioTek; Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA).

## Western Blot Analysis
Cells were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology) containing protease and phosphate inhibitors (MedChemExpress LLC, Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA). Protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.). Lysates were denatured with 6X SDS loading buffer for 10 min at 98 °C, and 20 µg total protein was run on each lane of an SDS PAGE gel. After the protein was transferred to a PVDF membrane (Millipore; Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany; cat. no. IPVH00010), target proteins were detected using the antibodies mentioned in the “Antibodies” section and (Tables , Supporting Information). Images were captured using a ChemiDoc Touch system (Bio‐Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) and band intensities were quantified using Image J software (version 1.8.0; National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).

## Immunofluorescence
iPSCs and MSCs, seeded 48 or 24‐well plates and that had reached the confluency between 50 to 80%, were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde at RT for 15 min, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X‐100, and then blocked with 5% BSA for 1 h at RT. Cells were incubated overnight with primary antibodies at 4 °C. After washing with PBS, cells were stained with fluorescently‐labeled secondary antibodies for 45 min at RT (see “Antibodies” section for further details). Cells were then stained with phalloidin (1:1000 dilution; Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and/or 1 µg mL−1 DAPI (Sigma‐Aldrich; Merck KGaA) for 5 min at RT. Images were acquired using a Lionheart FX Automated Microscope (BioTek; Agilent Technologies).

## EV Purification and Characterization
Cell conditioned medium was collected at 80% cell confluency. Debris and floating cells were removed by centrifuging at 1000 x g for 15 min, followed by passing the medium through a 0.22 µm filter (Millipore; Merck KGaA). Cell supernatant (50 mL) was then concentrated to 5 mL by centrifugation using Amicon Ultra‐15 Ultrafiltration Centrifuge Tubes (Millipore; Merck KGaA) following the manufacturer's protocol. Isolation of exosomes was carried with concentrated supernatant using qEV size exclusion columns/70 nm (Izon Science Ltd., Christchurch, New Zealand), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Purified exosomes were aliquoted and immediately stored at ‐80 °C. The size distribution of isolated EVs was determined using a NanoSight Tracking Analysis NS300 system (Malvern Panalytical, Malvern, UK). The Zeta potential and polydispersity index of EVs were obtained using a Zetasizer Nano ZS molecular size analyzer (Malvern Panalytical).

## In Vivo Bleomycin‐Induced Lung Model
All animal experimental procedures and maintenance abided by the National Research Council's Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. All procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Shenzhen University (Shenzhen, China). ≈30 Male C57BL/6 strain mice (10‐8 weeks old; 20–22 g) were purchased from Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co. Ltd, (Beijing, China) and were housed at 22 ± 5 °C in a 12 h light/dark cycle and supplied with food and water ad libitum. Mice were randomly divided into bleomycin‐treated and sham groups. Anaesthesia was maintained by inhalation of 4% isoflurane while a single endotracheal dose of bleomycin sulphate (50 µL, 3 U kg−1) or 50 µL of PBS as a sham control was administered to each individual. Furthermore, mice treated with bleomycin received a single tail vein injection at day 0 and at day 7 of either 200 µL PBS, EVs derived from MAD‐iMSCs, or EVs derived from WT‐iMSCs. Each EV dose contained ≈1 × 109 particles per 200 µL volume. Each treatment group have six mice in total. The mice were euthanized 14 days after the initial administration of bleomycin or the sham treatment, and underwent histological examination.

## Synthesis and Preparation of GelMA Hydrogels
GelMA hydrogels were synthesized according to a previously reported protocol.[
 
] Briefly, 20 g gelatinA (Sigma‐Aldrich; Merck KGaA) was added into 100 mL of phosphate buffer, and the solution was maintained at 60 °C with constant stirring until the gelatinA was completely dissolved. Next, 2 mL methacrylic anhydride (Sigma‐Aldrich; Merck KGaA) was added dropwise with vigorous stirring, and the mixture was maintained at 60 °C for a further 3 h. The reaction mixture was then dialyzed using a 12–14 kDa membrane (Solarbio Life Science, Beijing, China), and subsequently freeze dried.
GelMA hydrogels with different degrees of stiffness were obtained by adding the 2.5, 5, 10, and 15% (w/v) GelMA powder to Dulbecco's PBS (Gibco; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) with 0.5% (w/v) of a water‐soluble photo‐initiator (Irgacure 2959; Sigma‐Aldrich; Merck KGaA). The solution was then mixed and filtered through a 0.22 µm filter. Next, ≈150 µL of the solution was added to 48‐well culture plates to cover the surface area, and the plates were then exposed to UV light (360 nm; Run LED, China) for 30 secs. GelMA hydrogels were washed twice with PBS prior to seeding with cells.

## Mitotracker Red Staining and Mitochondrial Network and Fragmentation Analysis
Cells were seeded at a density of 3×104 cells per well in 48‐well plates, and incubated with 20 nM of mitotracker red (ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc.) for 30 min at 37 °C. Cells were washed twice and then fixed with paraformaldehyde, following which nuclei and actin were stained with DAPI and phalloidin, respectively, at 1 µg mL−1 for 5 min at RT. The resultant images were processed as described earlier,[
 
] using the freely available Mitochondrial network analysis (Mina) toolset (https://github.com/StuartLab/MiNA).

## ROS Production
iMSCs were seeded at a density of 10 000 cells per well in 48‐well plates for 24 h, and incubated with DCFH‐DA Reagent (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology) at final concentration of 10 µM for 30 mins at 37 °C. The cells that served as a positive control were incubated for 25 min at 37 °C with Rosup at a dilution of 1:1000 prior to staining with fluorogenic DCFH‐DA dye. Images were acquired at Excitation/Emission (Ex/Em) 488/525 nm using a Lionheart FX Automated Microscope (BioTek; Agilent Technologies).

## ATP Quantification
ATP was quantified on lysed cells using a luminescent ATP detection kit (Abcam), following the manufacturer's protocol. Bioluminescence was measured using a Biotek H1 plate reader (BioTek; Agilent Technologies).

## Mitochondrial Membrane Potential (MMP) Assay
The MMP (ΔΨm) of cells was evaluated using the cationic fluorescent dye JC‐1 (Abcam). Briefly, cells cultured in either 24 or 48 well plates were incubated with JC‐1 dye for 20 min at 37 °C, and observed through green and red channels with Ex/Em of 488/525 and 550/585 nm, respectively, using a Lionheart FX automated microscope (BioTek; Agilent Technologies). Fluorescence intensity was further quantified using Image J software (ImageJ 1.8.0; National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).

## RT‐qPCR
Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractionation was conducted using the Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction Reagents kit (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Total RNA, either from whole cells or from nuclear or cytoplasmic fractions was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) and treated with DNase I (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). cDNA was reverse transcribed from 500 ng of total RNA with hexamers using a PrimeScript RT reagent kit (Takara Bio, Inc., Kusatsu, Japan). qPCR was then performed in a 25 µL reaction using TB Green Premix Ex Taq II reagent (Tli RNaseH Plus; Takara Bio, Inc.) on an Applied Biosystems 7500 Real‐Time PCR System. The thermocycler protocol was as follows: 95 °C for 30 s followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 10 s and 60 °C for 30 s. The primer sequences are listed in (Table , Supporting Information). The Cyto/Nuc ratio was calculated using ΔCq values. All experiments were performed in triplicate.

## CRISPR/CAS9 Correction
Biallelic mutations in MAD‐iPSCs (LMNAR527C/R527C) were corrected via previously described methods.[
 , 
] Briefly, we utilized the electroporation of CAS9 protein and gRNA‐tracrRNA, along with a single stranded oligonucleotide (ssODNA) donor template. The gRNA and donor template sequences are listed in (Table , Supporting Information). Briefly, the gRNA complex was first prepared by incubating equal volumes of 100 µM of crRNA and TracrRNA‐ATTO‐550 (ALTR‐HDR, IDTA) at 95 °C for 5 min, followed by incubation at room temperature for 20 min. The RNP complex was made by adding 2 µL sp. Cas9 Nuclease V3 protein (61 µM or 10 µg µL−1; IDTA) with 2.5 µL gRNA (tracrRNA+crRNA) and incubating at RT for 20 min. Simultaneously, iPSCs were incubated with 5 µm of RockIn (STEMCELL Technologies, Inc.) for 2–3 h before dissociating with Accutase. Cells were washed with PBS, and 1×106 cells were centrifuged at 300 x g for 5 min. Cells were mixed with complete p3 electroporation solution (from a Lonza 4D nucleofection kit; Lonza Group AG, Basel, Switzerland) followed by addition of the RNP complex and 500 pmoles of donor ssODNA (Alt‐R HDR; IDTA). Electroporation with the CA‐137 program was performed 3–5 min after this addition (Lonza Group AG). Following this, cells were quickly but gently resuspended in six‐well coated plates with Synthemax (Sigma‐Aldrich; Merck KGaA) in MtesR‐plus medium supplemented with CloneR (STEMCELL Technologies, Inc.), and plates were incubated for 48 h at 32 °C with 5% CO2. After 48 h, cells were maintained at 37 °C. iPSCs were dissociated with Accutase once again, and passed through a single cell filter before being seeded at a density of 500 cells in a 10 cm dish. When single iPSC colonies began to appear after ≈10‐14 days, these were manually selected and seeded in 96 well plates, in replicate.

## Mitochondrial and Cytoplasmic Calcium Quantification
Mitochondrial Ca+2 and cytoplasmic Ca+2 were measured using two different dyes: Rhod‐2, AM (Yeasen Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China; cat. no. 40776ES50) and Fluo‐4, AM (Yeasen Biotechnology Co., Ltd.; cat. no. 40704ES50).
Cells were incubated with 0.2 µM Rhod‐2, AM (37 °C, 20 min) to measure mitochondrial Ca+2 levels and with 2 µM Fluo‐4, AM (37 °C, 20 min) to measure intracellular calcium levels. This was followed by washing with PBS and incubation for 20 min in PBS, and live imaging with Ex/Em of 488/525 and 550/585 for Fluo‐4 and Rhod‐2, AM‐stained cells, respectively. Mitochondrial Ca2+ was blocked with CGP37157 at 30 µM (37 °C, 20 min). Quantitative analysis was performed using Image J software (ImageJ 1.8.0; National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).

## Chromatin Extraction
iMSCs were lysed in hypotonic lysis buffer (10 mM Tris‐HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM DTT) containing protease inhibitors, and the intact nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at 14 000 x g at 4 °C for 10 min. Cell supernatant was discarded, and the nuclei were re‐suspended in 400 µL 0.2 M sulfuric acid and incubated at 4 °C for 30 min. The samples were again collected by centrifugation at 14 000 x g at 4 °C for 10 min, and the supernatant containing the histones was collected. Trichloroacetic acid was added to the histones to a final concentration of 33%, and the samples were incubated on ice for 30 min. Following this, the samples were centrifuged at 14 000 x g at 4 °C for 10 min, and the histone pellets were collected, washed with acetone, and dissolved in ddH2O.

## Treatment with IL‐6 and/or IL‐6 Inhibitors
STAT3 was activated in healthy iMSCs by adding the cytokine IL‐6 (PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ, US; cat. no. 200‐06‐5UG) into the culture medium at the 20 ng mL−1 concentration for (24 hours in 37 °C). Cells were then treated with 10 µg mL−1 tocilizumab (MedChemExpress LLC; cat. no. HY‐P9917) or 0.25 µm tofacitinib (MedChemExpress LLC, cat. no. HY‐40354) for 24 h 37 °C. To confirm the effects of LMT‐28, a synthetic IL‐6 inhibitor, cells were initially starved for 24 h (only MSC basal medium, without supplementation) and then treated with 30 µm LMT‐28 (Medchem Express LLC; cat. no. HY‐102084) for 1 h,37 °C. Mitochondrial membrane potential was also rescued by treating cells with the mTOR inhibitor AZD‐8055 (MedChem Express LLC; cat. no. HY‐10422) at concentration of 500 nM for 24 h, 37 °C.

## Antibodies
Details of antibodies used for iMSC surface antigen identification are presented in Table (Supporting Information). For western blot analysis, details of primary antibodies used are presented in Table (Supporting Information). The following secondary antibodies used in western blot analysis were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA) and diluted at 1:5000: HRP‐linked rabbit IgG antibodies (cat. No. 7074S) and HRP‐linked rabbit IgG antibodies (cat.no. 7076S).
Details of antibodies used for immunofluorescence are presented in Table (Supporting Information). The following fluorescence‐conjugated secondary antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology and diluted at 1:800: rabbit Alexa Fluor‐488 antibodies (cat. no. 2975S), rabbit Alexa Fluor‐594 antibodies (cat. no. 8760S), mouse Alexa Fluor‐594 antibodies (cat. no. 8527S) and mouse Alexa Fluor‐488 antibodies (cat. no. 4408S). In addition, DAPI (1:5000; cat. No. D9542; Sigma‐Aldrich; Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) was used for nucleic acid staining, and phalloidin‐iFluor 488 (1:1000; cat. no. ab176753; Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and phalloidin‐iFluor 594(1:1000; cat. no. ab176757; Abcam) were used for binding to actin filaments.

## Statistical Analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism Software Version 9.4 (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA). Comparisons were made using two‐tailed unpaired Student's t‐tests and One‐way ANOVA with Dunnett's post hoc test. In‐case of multiple comparisons, Two‐way analysis of variance with Turkey's multiple comparison was utilized. P < 0.05 was considered to indicate a statistically significant difference.

## Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Author Contributions
A.A.P. and X.Y. contributed equally to this work. Conceptualization: A.A.P. and G.Z.; Funding acquisition: G.Z., W.S., and Y.Z.; Writing original Draft: A.A.P. and X.Y.; Review and Editing: G.Z., S.Z., S.A.A.Z., T.W., G.W., X.Z., and M.Z.; Mouse model: G.A., A.F., A.A.P., and L.H.; Exosomes purification: A.A.P., I.A., A.F., X.Y., and L.H.; MSCs differentiation: J.L., Z.L., and X.Y.; iPSCs generation and characterization: T.W., J.L., A.A.P., Z.L.; Assessment of patients PBMCs markers clinical data: W.S., L.Z., M.Z., T.L., X.Z., G.W., and G.Z.; Methylation, acetylation status was evaluated by C.A.A., X.Y., and A.A.P.; CRISPR/CAS9 correction: A.A.P., J.L., and X.Y.; Unmentioned contribution of any experiment was carried by A.A.P., I.A., S.A.A.Z., and/or X.Y.; All authors have approved the submitted version of the manuscript.

## Supporting information
Supporting Information

## Acknowledgements
This work is supported, in part, by National Natural Science Foundation of China (2072480, 32060157, and 32100603), and Shenzhen Commission of Development Reform (Funding for Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory for Orthopedic Diseases and Regenerative Technologies). The authors would like to thank Dr. Jessica Tamanini (Shenzhen University and ETediting) and Prof. Daniel I. Bolnick (University of Connecticut) for editing and proof reading the manuscript before submission.

## Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available in the supplementary material of this article.