2616mtmMolecular Therapy. Methods & Clinical DevelopmentMol Ther Methods Clin DevAmerican Society of Gene & Cell TherapyPMC1096325010963250109632503853352110.1016/j.omtm.2024.101229Embryo and fetal gene editing: Technical challenges and progress toward clinical applications
MattarCitra NZ ChewWei Leong LaiPoh San 1Experimental Fetal Medicine Group, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, 1E Kent Ridge Road, NUHS Tower Block, Level 12, Singapore, Singapore 1192282Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, National University Health System, Singapore, 1E Kent Ridge Road, NUHS Tower Block, Level 12, Singapore, Singapore 1192283Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A∗STAR), Singapore, 60 Biopolis St, Singapore, Singapore 1386724Department of Paediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, 1E Kent Ridge Road, NUHS Tower Block, Level 12, Singapore, Singapore 119228∗Corresponding author: Citra N. Z. Mattar, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119228. citramattar@nus.edu.sg
4320243221012291012292632024© 2024 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Gene modification therapies (GMTs) are slowly but steadily making progress toward clinical application. As the majority of rare diseases have an identified genetic cause, and as rare diseases collectively affect 5% of the global population, it is increasingly important to devise gene correction strategies to address the root causes of the most devastating of these diseases and to provide access to these novel therapies to the most affected populations. The main barriers to providing greater access to GMTs continue to be the prohibitive cost of developing these novel drugs at clinically relevant doses, subtherapeutic effects, and toxicity related to the specific agents or high doses required. In vivo strategy and treating younger patients at an earlier course of their disease could lower these barriers. Although currently regarded as niche specialties, prenatal and preconception GMTs offer a robust solution to some of these barriers. Indeed, treating either the fetus or embryo benefits from economy of scale, targeting pre-pathological tissues in the fetus prior to full pathogenesis, or increasing the likelihood of complete tissue targeting by correcting pluripotent embryonic cells. Here, we review advances in embryo and fetal GMTs and discuss requirements for clinical application.
Keywords: embryo, fetus, base editing, CRISPR-Cas9, viral vectors, lipid nanoparticles, microinjection, intrauterine injection, mosaicism, maternal spillage

## Graphical abstract
 
Mattar and colleagues discuss how embryo and fetal editing represent paradigm shifts in hereditary disease management. Embryo editing, useful for understanding embryogenesis, has higher translational barriers than fetal editing with its appreciable benefits. Long-term effects of both must be studied to determine safety and efficacy, including germline transmission and genotoxicity.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoCollection date 2024 Jun 13.

## Introduction
Over 80% of all rare diseases that affect up to 450 million people worldwide have a genetic origin, mostly arising from monogenic mutations, and 83% of these are congenital, neonatal, or pediatric conditions. , The spectrum of genetic diseases causing early-onset pathology that may affect intrauterine or early infant development includes rare inborn errors of metabolism that cause extensive neurological damage, surfactant deficiencies that impede pulmonary function, coagulation disorders and hemoglobinopathies, and chromosomal anomalies that affect the function of multiple organs. About 70% of all rare genetic diseases cause neurological damage. Considering the congenital nature of these diseases, preconception and prenatal medical care may allow early detection and treatment before progress into full pathology. Current preconception care paradigms include a screening of family history, including the presence of intellectual disability and congenital hearing loss, as point mutations or structural chromosomal aberrations may account for a substantial proportion of these conditions. , Preconception care is important because pathology can manifest in the fetus and neonate, where critical protein deficiencies impair organogenesis and functional maturation of organ systems, as seen in hereditary surfactant deficiencies (pulmonary hypoplasia), alpha-thalassemia major (cardiac failure and hydrops fetalis), hemophilia (intracranial hemorrhage), or the mucopolysaccharidoses (neurodegeneration or hepatosplenomegaly from byproduct accumulation). Consequences range from pregnancy loss, stillbirth, or neonatal death to severe multi-organ damage, growth restriction, and developmental delay in surviving infants. Treatment of survivors is often limited to mitigating the effects of ongoing pathology, enzyme replacement, or supportive measures, most of which provide transient relief, require repeat therapy, and generate substantial economic burden for lifetime care. 

## Prenatal genetic diagnosis
The suspicion of a genetic syndrome in a fetus because of ultrasonographical features or the parents’ carrier status can be further investigated with chromosomal microarray (CMA), whole-exome sequencing (WES), whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of trophoblast or fetal cells, or non-invasive testing using cell-free fetal DNA. , , These technologies allow for more precise characterization of the genetic disease and prediction of outcomes, facilitating management planning for the remainder of the pregnancy. Medical options for the affected couple include termination of pregnancy following local regulations or continuation of pregnancy with in utero or postnatal interventions where available. Recent reports of intrauterine enzyme treatment of a fetus diagnosed with Pompe’s disease and fetal transplantation of maternal bone marrow-derived hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) with concomitant blood transfusions to mitigate the effects of alpha-thalassemia major (ATM) are examples of therapeutic strategies aimed at allaying fetal pathology and improving perinatal outcomes. The fetus with prenatally diagnosed Pompe’s disease showed substantial phenotype improvement compared to postnatally treated siblings with the same condition, while the two ATM infants showed tolerance to transplanted HSCs despite suboptimal donor cell chimerism and performed normally on neurological testing at 1 year of age. These highlight the increased therapeutic efficacy from early interventions. With the success seen with these therapeutic modalities (biologics, cell therapy), early interventions with newer therapeutic modalities such as gene modification therapies (GMTs), which correct pathological mutations in the fetus on the genetic level, could potentially circumvent end-organ damage.

## Preconception genetic testing and embryo selection
This is an alternative strategy toward achieving an unaffected pregnancy. Carrier screening plays an important role in identifying risk factors for birth defects, particularly in populations with high prevalence of certain genetic conditions (e.g., cystic fibrosis among Caucasian populations of Nordic ancestry, inborn errors of metabolism among Ashkenazi Jewish populations, hemoglobinopathies among South Asian populations). Fertility planning in couples concordant for heritable pathological alleles includes early prenatal diagnosis following a spontaneous pregnancy and alternatives to child-bearing, including donor gametes and adoption. An increasingly precise, rapid, and acceptable approach to at-risk couples is preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) of embryos produced by in vitro fertilization (IVF) and selection of healthy mutation-free embryos for uterine transfer. This technology may be particularly attractive to carrier couples who wish to avoid terminating an affected pregnancy. PGT is subject to the limitations of embryo culture the diagnostic accuracy of one- or two-cell biopsy, potentially reduced viability following one or more freeze/thaw and biopsy cycles, and the probability of mosaicism. , , Embryo biopsy is indicated to diagnose specific monogenic (PGT-M) or chromosomal anomalies (PGT-A), or in certain cases structural rearrangements (PGT-SRs) in couples with balanced translocations, using comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) or next-generation sequencing (NGS). As these technologies improve and become more widely accessible and cost-effective, the uptake of PGT is expected to increase and may expand to include non-congenital genetic conditions such as Huntington’s disease, a lethal neurodegenerative disorder caused by expansion of a CAG repeat within the Huntingtin (HTT) gene, or hereditary cancer syndromes (e.g., BRCA1/2). PGT will succeed in this regard if there are mutation-free embryos as a result of IVF; if there are none, in vitro embryo gene editing is a possible alternative to discarding affected embryos.
These technologies represent a possibly game-changing paradigm shift in the approach to hereditary disease. In this review, we discuss the technological needs and scientific advances required to apply gene editing to the embryo and the fetus, describe the current findings from in vitro and in vivo experimental models, and explore the knowledge gaps required to realize this technology’s potential for early disease intervention.

## Rationale for gene editing in the embryo or fetus
The urgency to treat a diagnosed genetic disease depends on the onset of pathology, the potential for permanent damage to vulnerable organ systems during critical periods in development, and the likelihood of detrimental immunological responses to the transgenic protein product. Accurate molecular diagnosis in an embryo or fetus presents the opportunity to identify the underpinning disease genes for genetic targeting. Editing the mutation in embryonic stem cells can potentially correct all resulting daughter cells, which preserves normal cell function and differentiation in these cells and should permit normal fetal development. This is particularly advantageous in genetic syndromes that affect multiple organ systems during embryogenesis, which often result in pregnancy loss, complex malformations, and morbidity. The process of embryo gene editing follows the path of PGT and embryo selection ( ), and key determinants of success are mosaicism resulting from incomplete editing, where the final phenotype may be undetermined until birth, and uncertain embryo viability. 
 Fetal GMT targets a monogenic disease diagnosed during pregnancy. Putative benefits of this approach over postnatal therapy are numerous and have been demonstrated in proof-of-principle animal models. These include arrest of cellular pathology, prevention of irreversible organ damage, avoidance of neutralizing antibodies or cytokine-mediated cell death as the fetal immune system is not fully alloresponsive, the highest concentration of stem cells available for correction, immature blood-brain barrier allowing access to the central nervous system (CNS), and the highest therapeutic efficiency due to the small mass of the fetus. Multiple invasive diagnostic and therapeutic procedures can be performed during pregnancy ( ) with excellent tolerance and low fetal loss rates, while multiple organ systems can be specifically targeted under ultrasound guidance, permitting directed delivery to the brain, lungs, retina, liver, and skeletomuscular and hematopoietic systems. The main determinants of success and safety will be the efficiency with which pathology is completely corrected, potential genotoxicity from off-target mutations, and germline editing. This may be preferable to termination, particularly where abortions are unavailable, or to birthing an affected child.

## Editing over replacement: Benefits and limitations
Replacement of the aberrant gene with the engineered transgene bearing the correct genetic sequence can be achieved by delivering the cargo via viral and non-viral vectors. Gene addition and replacement therapy has proved successful in small and large intrauterine animal models of hereditary conditions, ranging from the hemophilias and hemoglobinopathies, to mucopolysaccharidoses and glycogen storage disease. , Delivery of transgenes has been accomplished using adenoviruses (AdVs), adeno-associated viral (AAV), gammaretroviral (γRV), and lentiviral vectors (LV), and more recently non-viral lipid nanoparticles (LNPs). Longevity of transgene expression depends on certain critical factors, including vector tropism and biodistribution for cell types, cell entry (transduction efficiency), integration versus episomal localization of the transgene, transgene dilutional loss or silencing, and lineage restriction of the transgene expression by cell-specific promoters. 

## Integrated and episomally maintained transgenes
Transgene integration might disrupt exonic sequences through insertional mutagenesis. , Disruption of non-exonic segments can result in loss of regulatory control, expression of on/off switches, and downstream metabolic or regulatory functions. This may contribute to suboptimal restoration of cellular function despite providing the correct gene sequence. While higher frequency of integration correlates with increased therapeutic transgene expression, it also comes at the cost of increased potential to cause insertional mutagenesis associated with undesired carcinogenesis and disfunction. This accuracy can be improved by vector and promoter design. Transgene integration may also activate oncogenes or disrupt tumor suppressor genes, and may potentially occur in off-target cells if the vector is delivered in vivo. As off-target integration can be disruptive to cellular function, ex vivo approaches can provide quality control and safety evaluation, where isolated target cells are modified and screened for corrections and unintended mutations before transplantation. , Therefore, clinical trials using integrating vectors often employ ex vivo stem cell gene modification. , , Episomally maintained transgenes, in contrast, may be consistently expressed with fewer constraints imposed by cell endogenous regulatory and feedback mechanisms. However, the episomal nature of these transgenes may lead to loss of expression when the transduced cells divide, rendering the therapeutic effect transient, which may necessitate repeated doses. In addition, supraphysiological protein levels resulting from loss of physiological controls at ectopic production sites may disrupt cellular homeostasis, , , but promising studies have shown that a wide range of ectopic expression levels of clotting factors IX and VIII can correct hemophilia, are well tolerated, and do not disrupt coagulation control. , 

## Gene and base editing
Editing requires efficient delivery to target cells, precise targeting of mutant genetic sequences, and harnessing of cell DNA repair pathways. Many current gene-editing tools are large and require delivery into cells with physical methods (e.g., electroporation or nucleofection), plasmids, or viral vectors with a sufficiently large payload capacity, such as LVs or AdVs. AAVs are especially useful in clinical applications as they are less immunogenic than AdVs, non-integrating unlike LVs, and can be constructed to exhibit high cell tropism, but the limited individual AAV payload of <5 kb is too restrictive for many gene-editing tools. Split-AAV vectors, dual-AAV transduction, oversized AAVs, and even all-in-one AAVs are technologies that have been shown to enable delivery of these more sophisticated gene editors toward clinical utility. Despite these challenges, gene editing and its later iterations, including base editing and prime editing, can enable gene correction in situ, which other drug modalities cannot. This precision editing will enable the corrected gene to function under its normal regulatory control, maintain physiological expression in response to specific microenvironmental signals, and restrict protein expression to its native tissues, an approach particularly well suited to genetically dominant diseases where the mutant gene product should be removed or corrected. , As C-G to T-A and A-T to G-C conversions account for 50% of all known pathogenic single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), the more recent successes in embryo gene editing have arisen from the use of novel base editors to produce gain-of-function or loss-of-function point mutations in animal disease models. 

## The preimplantation approach: Proof of principle and models of embryogenesis
The literature on embryo gene editing is steadily increasing, as mammalian proof-of-principle models have proved useful in demonstrating the effects of knocking in or knocking out target genes to delineate their effect on embryogenesis , or to produce transgenic models , for the study of genetic diseases ( ). These models range from murine to human embryos and have generally demonstrated high specificity of target gene editing, low off-target mutation rates, and a low frequency of insertions/deletions (indels). Genetic correction of the embryo is an in vitro procedure, and physical methods such as electroporation and microinjection have been the most widely used gene delivery techniques. Gene editing has also been achieved using AAV. Recent papers report that in utero transfer of edited non-human embryos has resulted in viable pregnancies in transgenic animal models, with F0 offspring demonstrating the expected phenotype of the loss-of-function or gain-of-function mutation. , , , 
 

## Rodent embryos
Rodent models demonstrate that viable fetuses can be derived following loss-of-function or gain-of-function editing, using CRISPR-Cas9 or base editing systems. Common techniques for editing rodent embryos include superovulation of female mice prior to timed mating, collection of embryos by oviductal flushing, insertion of targeted CRISPR-expression vectors into the one-cell or two-cell embryos by electroporation or microinjection, followed by embryo transfer into pseudopregnant surrogate females. , , , , , , , Resultant viable F0 and F1 offspring have allowed the physical effects of gene knockouts to be appreciated and determinations made on the contribution of individual genes. Mizuno et al. demonstrated that mice homozygous for a novel spontaneous mutant allele KitWS showed a lethal peri-implantation phenotype caused by a monogenic defect of Exoc1, while mice heterozygous for the mutation showed depigmentation in the ventral body. Oh et al. microinjected CRISPR-Cas9 and hybrid single guide RNA (sgRNA) to generate compound knockout mice deficient in the Il10ra (interleukin 10 receptor subunit alpha) and Dr3 (tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily, member 25 [Tnfrsf25]) genes, targeting a homology of the IL10RA mutation causing refractory inflammatory bowel disease in pediatric patients. The substitution mutation resulted in simultaneous Il10ra and Dr3 mutations; 37.5% of transferred edited embryos produced F0 offspring, and this demonstrated that multiplex gene targeting is achievable using hybrid sgRNA. Zhang et al. demonstrated precise gene knockout and knockin multiplex targeting of SYCP3-like X-linked 2 (Slx2), zona pellucida glycoprotein 1 (Zp1), and tyrosinase (Tyr) genes in mouse zygotes by microinjecting several targeting sgRNAs and Staphylococcus aureus Cas9 (SaCas9) mRNA. Transplanted zygotes resulted in mosaic-colored or albino C57BL/6J pups, confirming successful knockout of Tyr, which codes for melanin production. Live births from edited transplanted embryos (8%–18%) revealed 47%–94% editing at Slx2 and Zp1 loci by Sanger sequencing, and the albino rate (edited Tyr) was 38%–73% depending on sgRNA design. Multiple guide RNAs (gRNAs) and SaCas9 targeting all three loci were co-injected and embryos harvested at 48 h for gene amplification, showing that 55.6% of embryos were successfully targeted at three out of three loci. Recombinant rAAV successfully delivered Cas9 and sgRNA targeting Tyr, a gene essential for melanin synthesis, to R26mTmG mouse embryos, with the bi-allelic mutation of Tyr producing albinism. Embryos were successfully transduced in vivo by direct rAAV injection into the oviducts of pregnant females. In vivo-transduced embryos carried Tyr indels at a frequency of ∼10%, showing that embryo editing can be achieved using a simplified in vivo procedure. In vitro-edited embryo survival was high and 80% of F0 neonates were albino. Indels were transmissible through the germline. To address the low editing efficiency of CRISPR-Cas9 due to the low frequency of homology-directed repair (HDR) and the undesired background non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) introducing indels at the target site, Jung et al. utilized a one-step microinjection of sgRNAs and Cas9 or Cas9-nickase protein targeting multiple genes into murine zygotes, producing nine viable F0 mice bearing the correctly edited alleles (frequency 11%–22%). This approach utilized HDR editing of multiple target genes using Cas9-induced DSBs or dual Cas9 nickases programmed with a pair of sgRNAs to flank the target site. The edited alleles were transmissible through the germline.
In situ editing of zygotes by genome editing via oviductal nucleic acids delivery (GONAD) was demonstrated as an alternative technique to in vitro microinjection. Described by Gurumurthy et al., the GONAD procedure required instillation of sgRNA and Cas9 RNA into oviducts of mated female mice via mini-laparotomy at 1.5 post-coital days, using hydrostatic pressure to direct components toward the uterine horns; electroporation was performed directly on oviducts to promote RNA entry into the zygotes present. This technique required up to 100-fold higher concentrations of sgRNA and Cas9 mRNA than used for microinjections, as most RNA was adsorbed into surrounding tissues. Retrieved embryos carried mosaic mutations (from inequitable entry of Cas9 into embryonic cells), and electroporation was associated with significant embryo death.
Base editing results in less chromosomal damage, greater efficiency, and fewer indels than gene editing and has been used to successfully target two functional genes in C57BL/6 mice. One-cell-stage embryos were microinjected with cytosine base editor BE3 (C-to-T conversion) and sgRNA, inducing point mutations in Dmd, producing dystrophin, which causes Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and X-linked dilated cardiomyopathy (XLCM), and Tyr, and transplanted into pseudopregnant females. Of the resultant live-born offspring, 55.6% carried Dmd point mutations at the target site (five out of nine F0 mice), showing editing efficacy of 44%–57%, allelic frequencies up to 100%, and did not substantially express dystrophin. In comparison, in vitro editing using electroporation of BE3 ribonucleoproteins and sgRNA resulted in point mutations in Dmd (81%) and Tyr (85%). Post-electroporation Tyr-mutated embryos transferred to surrogate dams resulted in seven live-born F0 pups, all of which carried various Tyr mutations. Two out of seven (28.6%) pups carried homozygous nonsense mutations resulting in albinism in the eye, while other mutants were mosaic for the Tyr mutation and WT allele. Germline transmission of the mutant allele was confirmed in F1 offspring. No off-target mutations were identified by WGS in the Dmd mutant mouse. Liu et al. also used base editors BE3 and ABE7.10 (converting A to G) to determine feasibility of targeting multiple functional genes in rabbit embryos. Rabbit pronuclear-stage zygotes collected from mated donors were microinjected with BE3 or ABE7.10 mRNA and sgRNAs targeting several disease-causing genes. BE3 generated premature stop codons in myostatin (Mstn) (causing skeletal muscle atrophy); six out of seven (86%) viable rabbit pups homozygous for nonsense mutations all showed the expected double-muscle phenotype at 3 months, with no off-target mutations. Four out of seven (57%) edited rabbits carrying Tyr (human oculocutaneous albinism) mutations showed systemic albinism. Embryos were injected with BE3/sgRNA targeting WT rabbit Lmna to induce the Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) mutation (causing premature rapid aging in childhood), resulting in seven of eight mutant rabbits with the expected RNA mis-splicing verified with Sanger sequencing, which produced progerin and displayed the expected pathognomonic growth retardation, short stature, and bone abnormalities. Rabbit embryos injected with ABE7.10 and transplanted into surrogate dams resulted in six of eight viable pups (75%) carrying Dmd mutations (causing DMD and XLCM at the targeted sites and showed the predicted phenotype of XLCM involving dilated hearts with myocyte disarray and fibrosis and sudden cardiac death within 1 month. Other targeted mutations in Otc (ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency) and Sod1 (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) genes were precisely produced with ABE7.10. Editing efficacy was 44%–100% with allelic frequencies of 100% and no evidence of mosaicism. These complementary experiments demonstrated site-specific base editing of several pathological genes achieved with high efficiency and low off-target mutations.

## Caprine, ovine, bovine, and porcine embryos
Larger models provide further robust evidence of the viability of post-edited embryos and reinforced the editing efficacy of clinically relevant alleles and the ability of achieving multiple gene editing with a single procedure. , , , The role of POU5F1 (a homeodomain transcription factor of the Pit-Oct-Unc [POU] family) in early embryo development and cell lineage specification was delineated by CRISPR-editing of mutations into murine, bovine, and human embryos for targeted disruption. POU5F1, located on the p arm of chromosome 6, is expressed in four- to eight-cell blastocysts in parallel with embryo genome activation and encodes OCT4 in diploid human zygotes. Mutations in POU5F1 are associated with downregulation of NANOG, GATA2, and GATA4 associated with epiblast, trophectoderm, and primitive endoderm, and eventually blastocyst formation fails. Daigneault et al. described the role of POU5F1 in early bovine embryo development to determine the similarities to murine and human pathways. Both inner cell mass and trophectoderm of the early blastocyst express POU5F1. IVF-produced bovine embryos were directly injected with CRISPR-Cas9 and a highly efficient single sgRNA. Targeted mutation of POU5F1 was highly efficient with a total knockout rate of 86%; most edited embryos were mosaic and carried bi-allelic mutations. This disrupted blastocyst formation after the eight- to 16-cell stage causing morula arrest. SOX2 expression was unaffected.
Li et al. used a proof-of-principle goat model to produce knockin nonsense mutations in fibroblast growth factor 5 (FGF5) gene by base editing, which inhibited hair growth during the hair growth cycle. Forty-eight single-cell zygotes collected from naturally mated females were microinjected with base editor BE3 mRNA and sgRNA inducing nonsense mutations, and 22 two-cell embryos were transferred to seven surrogate mothers resulting in five live-born kids (10% of total embryos). BE3 editing produced lower FGF5 expression, likely by post-transcriptional regulation of FGF5, and targeting efficiency (3%–75% at four sites) relied heavily on sgRNA design. The high mosaicism in microinjected embryos was attributed to uneven mRNA distribution, similar to observed outcomes with CRISPR, ZFN, or TALEN editing. Germline transmission was calculated to occur in 20% of animals.
The multiplex approach via microinjection of multiple sgRNA and Cas9 mRNA was also used in ovine one-cell-stage embryos to produce viable sheep with knocked-in nonsense mutations in Mstn, agouti signaling protein (Asip), and beta-carotene oxygenase 2 (Bco2) genes encoding for muscle growth, coat color, and fat color in sheep. Following PCR amplification of target sites, which confirmed precise target editing, injected embryos were transferred to surrogate females and resulted in 36 live-born full-term and largely healthy lambs showing the desired muscle hypertrophy and coat color. Targeting efficiency was 35%–50% in injected zygotes, and a single-gene editing frequency was 28%–33%. Only two live F0 lambs carried all three edited genes. Target mutations in Mstn and Asip were transmissible through the germline in edited male lambs regardless of mosaicism.
Porcine embryos obtained by IVF were treated with one-step gRNAs targeting four genes simultaneously (CMAH, GHR, GGTA1, and PDX1) using pooled gRNAs and Cas9, supporting the feasibility of multiplex gene targeting (knockout) in a single step. These selected genes are critical for porcine pancreas development and growth, with the goal of knockout being to control organ size and expression of porcine-specific antigens to eventually achieve pig-to-human xenotransplantation. Electroporation did not affect blastocyst formation rates, and 56% and 21% of blastocysts showed mutations in one and two target genes, respectively, with no blastocysts showing ≥3 mutations.

## Non-human primate embryos
Experiments in non-human primate (NHP) embryos, with the purpose of producing preclinical models of human disease, demonstrate the ability to achieve single- and multiple-target editing, an important advance toward embryo gene editing to correct inborn single or polygenic mutations, albeit with the need to improve accuracy and efficacy. , Transgenic NHP models are extremely useful for testing the accuracy and safety of in vivo gene-editing strategies, but generating transgenic NHP is challenging and costly. Ryu et al. used CRISPR-Cas9 to knock in deletions in the MYO7A gene leading to Usher syndrome type 1B (USH1B), characterized by hearing, balance, and visual deficits, as proof of principle. This condition is related to MYO7A expression in pigment epithelium cells and photoreceptors and myosin motor protein expression in the inner ear and eye. CRISPR-Cas9 was used to disrupt MYO7A in NHP zygotes, and a single NHP pregnancy arose from the five transferred edited embryos (blastocyst formation rate following microinjection was 11%–20%); on preimplantation biopsy, the viable (mosaic) embryo was confirmed to carry a premature stop codon. The offspring was live born and confirmed to be mosaic for a homozygous frameshift mutation in MYO7A. Editing efficiency was ∼50%, and indel rate was higher than baseline mutations in uninjected controls.
A unique opportunity that arises with multiplex embryo editing is the potential to model polygenic disease caused by multiple pathogenic single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) in NHPs. Cynomolgus zygotes were produced by intracytoplasmic sperm injection and directly injected with sgRNA and several base editors, including BE3 and adenine base editor (ABE). BE3 performed C-to-T conversions at target sites C5 and C6 within fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH), resulting in the W78X mutation (stop codon at exon 4), a pathological variant in hereditary tyrosinemia type 1. Injected zygotes cultured to the eight-cell blastocyst stage showed high specificity of base editing as determined by unbiased WGS. Eleven out of 16 injected embryos had genomic modifications at the target site; two out of 11 embryos showed targeted C-to-T (G-to-A) conversions with 100% allele frequency at C5 and C6, while eight out of 11 were mosaic with allele frequencies of 12%–100% for at least one C. ABE targeted A-to-G conversions at the A5 and A7 loci within the ABE activity window, introducing missense mutations Q33R and I34V into exon 2 of amyloid precursor protein (APP), causative mutations for Alzheimer’s disease. Six of nine embryos showed A-to-G conversions with correct allele frequencies from 20% to 89% for at least at one A. All edited embryos were mosaic (A-to-G corrected and WT alleles), with 50% of embryos showing both Q33R and I34V mutations successfully edited (allele frequencies 20%–75%). Double-base editing with BE3 was achieved in FAH in eight out of nine embryos, all mosaic with C-to-T (G-to-A) and WT/non-C-to-T conversions with allele frequencies at 1%–100%. ABE and sgRNAs simultaneously targeting β-hemoglobin (HBB) and tumor protein p53 (TP53) were injected into five embryos; target sites were A4 and A5 in HBB and A7 in TP53 located within the ABE activity window. All injected embryos carried target site A-to-G conversions in either gene without non-A-to-G conversions or indels. Double A-to-G editing efficiency in a single blastomere was 38.5%, while remaining blastomeres carried single-edited sites (7.7% at HBB and 23.1% at TP5). The authors also demonstrated potential viability of these edited NHP embryos. BE3 and sgRNAs targeting FAH were injected into zygotes from which eight-cell blastocysts were transferred into surrogate NHP dams resulting in three viable fetuses. These pregnancies miscarried following amniocentesis, and tissue genotyping confirmed one out of three fetuses bearing a FAH W78Y mutation caused by both C-to-T and non-C-to-T conversions at 50% allele frequency across organs, and included 66 de novo SNVs and five de novo indels.

## Human embryos
Ultimately, these experimental data will need to be translatable to human embryos, and it will be difficult to repeat the animal embryo editing protocols clinically. To achieve comparable results, human embryos will need several interventions, including trophectoderm biopsy for genetic diagnosis performed on day 3–5, repeat biopsy to confirm correct editing, and repeated freezing-thawing. Although selection of mutation-free embryo would be the first choice, embryo GMT does have a rather narrow beneficial application in the <20% of IVF cycles that produce only one transferable embryo per cycle ; <5% of IVF-PGT-M cycles from heterozygous carrier parents (25% likelihood of affected embryo) will eventually be suitable editing candidates. To reduce mosaicism, a high concentration of editing agents should be applied to embryos as early as possible in the embryonic timeline, which is clinically challenging given the turnaround time realistically anticipated between genotyping, microinjection of editing tools, and confirmation of correction, which may range from days to weeks. Repeated manipulation of the embryo may also affect embryo survival and pregnancy health, although repeat freeze-thawed embryos appear to function normally post transplantation. 
The growing number of gene- and base-editing studies using human embryos report the ability to target genes precisely with varying efficiency, with high mosaicism and unintended editing outcomes, including potentially pathogenic structural DNA damage such as large deletions and complex genomic rearrangements at the on-target site, which raises concerns over translational feasibility. , , , , , , , , , , Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) has been reported and arises from complex genomic rearrangements (chromosome loss, inversions, large insertions, translocations). Several researchers demonstrated these events using IVF-discarded human tripronuclear zygotes (3PN) to show proof-of-concept targeting of the genes originating common human diseases. , , , , Multiple sgRNAs designed to install A/T-to-G/C point mutations in disease-associated genes (identified using ClinVar) were injected directly, and cytidine base editors (CBEs) and ABE base editors converted A/T to G/C or C/G to T/A on target at varying editing efficiencies; additional bystander edits were observed, usually within the editing window. ABE ABEmax produced targeted A-to-G substitutions at all investigated sites with mean on-target editing efficiency 52.9%; cytosine base editor Anc-BE4max-NG installed C-to-T substitutions successfully with a mean efficiency of 62%. Potential off-target sites were predicted by Cas-OFFinder (predicted frequency <0.1%) and investigated by WGS and RNA HiSeq targeted deep sequencing. While the frequency of off-target editing was 0.05%–0.1%, there was a significantly higher number of SNVs detected in edited embryos compared with the >400 SNVs in WT embryos.

## Targeting disease-causing genes
Liang et al. showed effective cleaving of the endogenous β-globin gene (HBB) using CRISPR-Cas9, targeting the most common pathogenic mutations in the Chinese population (CD14/15, CD17, and CD41/42). The efficiency and specificity of HBB gene editing by HDR was assessed by intracytoplasmic co-injection of sgRNA, Cas9 mRNA, and the single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) oligo template into the 3PN zygote cytoplasm; ∼80% of the embryos remained viable 48 h later. Precise HBB editing was achieved in 28 out of 54 embryos with 52% efficiency; 14% of these were edited using the ssDNA oligos as a repair template and embryos were mosaic, while 25% of edited embryos contained mutations that indicated HDR had occurred using the endogenous HBD gene (adjacent to HBB within β-globin gene cluster) as the repair template, despite the availability of ssDNA oligos. Off-target mutations were found in the OPCML (opioid binding protein/cell adhesion molecule like) and TULP1 (TUB like protein 1) introns, while on-target indels were found in all samples. HBB and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) genes in donated human 3PN embryos were targeted to demonstrate feasibility of editing functionally important genes. Patients who had undergone IVF consented to donate 3PN embryos to research; additionally, donated sperm carrying the G6PD G1376T mutation were microinjected into in vitro-matured WT oocytes to produce heterozygous diploid embryos for comparison. Triploid embryos were microinjected with purified Cas9 protein and sgRNAs targeting the desired genes. Nine out of 10 injected triploid embryos demonstrated editing at the G6PD locus; two out of nine embryos carried the correct mutation as determined from an edited HindIII restriction site (editing efficacy of 20%). Injected embryos demonstrated a lower 10% editing efficacy at the HBB locus. All embryos were mosaic comprising WT, corrected, and incorrect mutant alleles. Mutant deletions were explained by NHEJ occurring in the same chromosome post HDR editing. Diploid embryos carrying the G6PD G1376T mutation were injected with the same Cas9 and sgRNA/donor oligo mixture as for triploid embryos. Two out of 10 embryos carried the targeted mutations and both were mosaic for corrected, WT, and incorrectly edited alleles. HDR-editing efficacy varied by locus: while HDR occurred at 100% of G6PD loci, it occurred at 50% of HBB loci in diploid embryos, which was greater efficiency than observed in 3PN embryos (20% for G6PD and 10% for HBB). These data demonstrate reasonably efficient CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing in diploid human embryos compared to triploid embryos. Off-target editing and indels were identified by NGS, but no structural chromosomal anomalies were detected. Even higher editing efficacy (up to 100%) was demonstrated when IVF-discarded human 3PN embryos were injected with base editor BE3 and sgRNAs targeting HBB, FANCF (causing Fanconi anemia), DNMT3B (associated with immunodeficiency syndromes), 
HEK293 site 4, and RNF2 genes. Microinjection embryos showed precise C-to-T conversion in 97%–99% of embryos receiving 50 ng of sgRNA (vs. 68% of embryos injected with 25 ng of sgRNA). Conversion frequencies of RNF2 were lower than in HEK293 site 4, and rare C-to-G or C-to-A substitutions were also observed. There was no on-target indels and off-target mutations affected 1%–10% of samples.
Pathogenic genes in IVF-derived human embryos were corrected by delivery of two Cas9-sgRNA ribonucleoprotein (RNP) constructs, specifically the cardiac myosin-binding protein C gene (MYBPC3) mutation ΔGAGT causing late-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and sudden cardiac death in young people (carrier frequency 2%–8% in Indian populations), and BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations (carrier frequency >2% among Ashkenazi Jews) causing breast and ovarian cancer. Heterozygous embryos carrying the dominant GAGT deletion in exon 16 of MYBPC3, produced by microinjecting carrier donor sperm into WT oocytes, were injected with Cas9-sgRNA RNP constructs designed to target MYBPC3ΔGAGT and single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotide (ssODN) templates that encoded segments homologous to the target region (carrying single-nucleotide substitutions to differentiate edited and WT sites). MYBPC3ΔGAGT carrier patients’ skin fibroblasts were concurrently used to make induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) to demonstrate specificity of the designed editing constructs. Targeting efficiency in microinjected human embryos was 72% compared with 28% in iPSCs. Of the microinjected embryos, 97% survived and developed normally. Sequencing demonstrated that 67% of injected embryos carried two WT alleles, higher than the 47% homozygous WT frequency in control zygotes, demonstrating successful editing. The repair template used in HDR was resolved from the unique single-nucleotide variations distinguishing maternal WT allele and the exogenously provided ssODN, where 52% of blastomeres within the mosaic embryos were observed to be repaired by HDR using the maternal WT allele as template. NHEJ occurred independently concurrent to targeted HDR editing, as shown by the presence of characteristic small indels adjacent to the target site in edited blastomeres. Injection of Cas9-sgRNA into oocytes (before sperm injection) produced more efficient targeting than injection into heterozygous embryos and reduced the incidence of mosaicism.
One published study examined the feasibility of editing the FBN1(T7498C) gene mutation causing Marfan syndrome (MFS), an autosomal dominant disorder with an incidence of 0.2%, in human embryos. Immature surplus oocytes were subjected to in vitro maturation (IVM) before intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) of a single sperm donated by a patient heterozygous for FBN1(T7498C). Resulting embryos were microinjected with base editor BE3 mRNA and sgRNA, with 89% editing efficiency observed. Ten out of 11 of the edited embryos yielded complete conversion at the target 7498C site, while six embryos showed 100% WT alleles without other base conversion or indels, indicative of accurate allele correction. No off-target conversions or indels were detected by targeted deep sequencing. A similar experiment showed the feasibility of editing the TGM1 (transglutaminase-1) gene responsible for maintaining the integrity of the skin barrier. Mutations cause lamellar ichthyosis (“collodion baby” encased in a scaly membrane at birth). Gametes from a couple heterozygous for mutation in TGM1 c.607 C>T mutation were used to produce homozygous embryos. Adenosine base editors ABEmax-NG and Sc-ABEmax both demonstrated editing efficacies of >70% following microinjection, with low frequency of RNA SNVs and no observable off-target mutations.

## Gene determinants of embryogenesis
Editing of critical genes can dissect the role of certain factors in embryo development. Fogarty et al. performed CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing using an efficient OCT4-targeting sgRNA injected into human embryos and mouse zygotes with the aim of delineating the role of POU5F1 in embryogenesis. Engineered human embryonic stem cells (ESCs) were employed to demonstrate the role of OCT4/POU5F1 in embryogenesis. Selected sgRNAs targeting OCT4 or POU were microinjected into human ESCs engineered to induce expression of Cas9. OCT4 depletion led to downregulation of pluripotency genes and upregulation of pro-differentiation genes (including PAX6, SOX17, SOX9). Targeted deep sequencing uncovered indels arising between 24 and 48 h after induction. Surplus embryos from IVF donated with patients’ consent were injected with sgRNA-Cas9 ribonucleoprotein complex in cell-cycling S phase, with the hypothesis of a cell-cycle-linked higher likelihood of CRISPR-Cas9-induced double-stranded breaks. Cleavage arrest was observed in 23 of 37 microinjected eight-cell blastocysts. Compared to human embryos injected only with Cas9, chromosomal anomalies were observed at similar frequencies, suggesting minimal off-targeting frequencies. Microinjected embryos were mosaic, carrying mutant and WT POU5F1. Microinjection of RNP reduced viability of blastocysts, and pluripotent genes were substantially downregulated or not expressed. Indels were observed only at the on-target sites, with no off-target events described; genomic mutations were similar to the background rates observed in control human ESCs. POU5F1 on-target indels were mostly small deletions, although larger POU5F1 deletions were also recorded. OCT4-targeted embryos failed to initiate or substantially downregulated the expression of NANOG and other genes highly enriched in epiblast, and, as a consequence, edited embryos failed to develop. These human embryos were further studied to assess the degree of DNA damage caused by CRISPR-Cas9 editing. All microinjected embryos had on-target genome editing and indels, most of which were 2-bp deletions. Sixteen percent of CRISPR-Cas9-injected embryos exhibited LOH on chromosome 6 spanning 4–20 kb, including segmental gains or losses adjacent to the POU5F1 locus, at a higher rate than in Cas9-only and uninjected controls. Additionally, low-pass WGS data supported the presence of unexpected on-target events resulting in segmental gain or loss directly adjacent to the POU5F1 in ∼30% of CRISPR-Cas9-targeted cells analyzed, but it is unclear whether these edits are present within the whole embryos due to mosaicism. These complex structural changes demonstrate the value of multiplex analyses that includes WGS, transcriptome, and targeted deep sequencing to assess the prevalence of LOH events (including large-scale deletions, complex rearrangements, and cytogenetic abnormalities). Stamatiadis et al. compared the role of POU5F1 in preimplantation human embryo development to murine embryos. Human oocytes surplus to IVF were subjected to IVM prior to intracytoplasmic sperm injection. CRISPR-Cas components were injected into oocytes or zygotes, which resulted in ∼88% of the POU5F1-targeted embryos being successfully edited; <5% of edited embryos progressed to the late blastocyst stage and exhibited complete absence of the inner cell mass, confirming the requirement of POU5F1 expression for blastocyst development. The genetic interrogation of POU5F1 determined that the gene is functionally important at an earlier stage in human embryo development compared to that in mice.

## The challenges of embryo gene editing
Perhaps the highest barrier to implementing a program of embryo editing, even within a highly restricted and regulated environment, is the concern that this technology can be misused. The global moratorium that followed the announcement of the first successful experimental genome-edited babies arose from a sense of boundaries pushed prematurely before all facets of this technology had been fully considered. Global societal consensus on ethical boundaries is required as there are undefined risks to future generations, which include possible detrimental effects from off-target editing. The ethical and moral challenges surrounding embryo gene editing notwithstanding, the scientific technology presents an important addition to developmental biology by allowing greater insights into embryo and early fetal development. The evidence thus far demonstrates that successful implantation and viable offspring do result from edited embryos, with transmission of the corrected genes in the germline. These data demonstrate the feasibility of in vitro gene editing in the early zygote. As the early-stage embryo consists of fewer cells, a small dose of editing components can enter most or all blastocyst cells more readily, increasing the probability of target-site editing, reducing the risk of mosaic embryos, and increasing the hypothetical likelihood a resulting fetus will have a sufficient proportion of daughter cells that arise from correctly edited blastomeres. Microinjection was a more efficient mode of delivery compared with in vivo electroporation, which may cause physical damage to individual blastomeres and the whole embryo, but microinjection required specialized skills and equipment. Viral delivery of editing tools in vitro is possible with AAV as the zona pellucida is permeable to several viruses, including AAV. Small and large models including the NHP demonstrate the viability of embryos transplanted after editing, and base editing resulted in higher efficiency of precise gene targeting compared to CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing and is potentially safer because of potential reduction in large genomic structural change. Mosaicism is another safety concern. Despite the small number of cells available for targeting, mosaicism can arise from inequitable penetration of editing molecules into embryonic cells, variable Cas9 activity in different cells, and post-HDR NHEJ.

## The in utero approach: Fetal gene-editing models
Pregnancies in which genetic mutations are diagnosed during fetal development are more challenging to manage. In utero gene modification is a curative approach in which the goal is genetic correction before the onset of significant fetal pathology. , , , , , , , Fetal treatment carries risks of pregnancy loss from invasive procedures, subtherapeutic editing allowing the pathological processes to continue, and treatment failure, resulting in the birth of a child with significant and irreversible tissue damage. In neurometabolic conditions, intellectual impairment and neurodegeneration may be extensive, such as in neuronopathic Gaucher disease or the mucopolysaccharidoses. In the hemophilias, severe clotting factor deficiencies may result in intracerebral hemorrhage. In osteogenesis imperfecta, widespread fetal fractures can lead to respiratory compromise from chest deformities and early demise. Given the small fetal mass, which increases the likelihood of achieving the optimal dosage of GMT product, and the incompletely developed immune system that is more tolerant toward gene therapy products, optimized therapy is more readily achieved in the fetus than in the larger immunologically mature postnatal recipient. Additionally, the potential to reverse or prevent tissue damage is greater in a developmentally younger recipient, and outcomes are anticipated to surpass that in an older recipient with pre-existing tissue damage.

## In vivo methods of gene editing in fetuses
In vivo gene editing has been used in fetal models with varying degrees of success ( ). This therapeutic strategy presents different challenges to embryo gene editing. While in vitro modification allows physical and vector-based delivery to blastomeres, in vivo fetal cell editing requires consideration of delivery method (physical methods such as electroporation are not practical or sufficiently precise), timing of treatment (following prenatal diagnosis), amount of vector need, precision targeting by vectors to avoid off-target organ effects (to avoid unintended organs from being transduced), and bystander damage. The ability of fetal GMT to reverse pathology may also be limited by tissue damage that exists before treatment is initiated. Additionally, effects on the mother related to invasive procedures, transplacental passage of delivery vectors, and remote indels and mutations in maternal tissues must be considered. , Researchers have taken advantage of various routes of administration to increase correct organ targeting in the fetus, a feat achievable because of the confined intrauterine space with the aid of amniotic fluid. Thus, intra-amniotic injection after the onset of fetal respiratory function can aid in the delivery of vectors to the lung parenchyma and to the intestinal tract, allowing direct targeting of respiratory and intestinal epithelia, a task made harder postnatally by the blood-organ barriers and inflammatory secretions in conditions such as cystic fibrosis. Intraperitoneal delivery is often as effective as intravenous delivery, particularly in early gestation, while intravascular access can be achieved via the large intrahepatic vein or even with cardiac puncture. To limit non-target organ transduction, intramuscular injections can be given for muscular dystrophy, and intrahepatic delivery can be used to boost HSC transduction. The majority of animal models of fetal gene therapies have been performed using gene addition (i.e., genomic integration or episomal insertion of a transgene for expression by the cell). This is achieved with integrating and non-integrating viral vectors, and sufficient transgenic protein production replaces defective native protein, thereby augmenting the intended cellular function. Recently, the utility of ionized lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) for mRNA-mediated protein replacement has been demonstrated as a prenatal strategy. LNPs shield mRNAs from biodegradation and facilitate protein or enzyme production, benefitting from endogenous protein manufacturing and post-translational modifications. LNPs carrying luciferase mRNA (LNP.luc) injected intravenously into E16 murine fetuses showed low toxicity, high survival, and robust luciferase expression in fetal livers. LNPs carrying pA-3.EPO or pB-4.EPO induced hepatic production of erythropoietin; liver toxicity and immune responses were low and there was no spillage into maternal tissues. We will discuss how GMT approaches have been adapted for disease-specific fetal therapy, mainly in transgenic murine models.
 

## Thalassemia
Ricciardi et al. used nanoparticles containing peptide nucleic acids and donor ssDNA oligos to correct a β-globin gene mutation in a Hbbth-4/Hbb+ murine model in which two murine β-globin genes are replaced with the human β-globin gene (Hbb) carrying the intron 2 splice site mutation βIVS2-654, one of the commonest β-thalassemia mutations in Chinese and Southeast Asians. Homozygosity is perinatally lethal, while heterozygous Hbbth-4/Hbb+ mice present a β-thalassemia phenotype marked by microcytic anemia and splenomegaly. Engineered polymeric biodegradable nanoparticles were loaded with triplex-forming peptide nucleic acids (PNAs), consisting of nucleobases and modified polyamide, with ssDNA oligos template. PNAs bind to target DNA producing a PNA/DNA/PNA triplex that induces high-fidelity endogenous DNA repair by NHEJ or HDR with reduced errors. This resulted in specific correction of the native gene mutation in situ using donor DNA, and editing frequency achieved with this triplex was several log folds higher than with donor oligonucleotides alone, with practically undetectable off-target events. Mouse fetuses were injected at E15.5 intravenously via the vitelline vein, resulting in nanoparticle accumulation in fetal liver (main hemopoietic organ) with widespread distribution to other fetal tissues but minimal spillage to maternal tissues. Gene correction was achieved in ∼6% of total bone marrow cells (10% correction was measured in isolated HSCs). Clinical phenotype was successfully improved with sustained correction of anemia and reduced hemolysis and extramedullary hemopoiesis with >70% reduction in splenomegaly. Perinatal survival (70%) and growth of injected recipients were similar to controls, and all of the edited pups survived through an extended period of 500 days (70% for untreated Hbbth-4/Hbb+). The treatment was not associated with significant inflammatory cytokine responses and F1 pups had disease-free litters. In this model, the sustained effect of the corrected β-globin was attributed to survival advantage conferred on edited HSCs.

## Surfactant deficiency syndromes
Alapati et al. demonstrated the ability to target respiratory epithelium directly via the intra-amniotic route, with delivery to small alveoli enhanced by fetal breathing movements. 
SFTPB, SFTPC, and ABCA3 encode for surfactant proteins B and C and ABCA3 phospholipid-transporter protein deficiencies, respectively, and all three genes are critical for correct formation and processing of surfactants. Mutations lead to rapidly progressive and diffuse parenchymal lung damage in developing fetuses. 
SFTPCI73T, a missense substitution (g.1286T>C) expressed by alveolar type II (AT2) epithelial cells and linked to interstitial lung disease, is perinatally lethal in the SftpCI73T knockin mouse model due to intracellular accumulation of mutant proprotein, cellular toxicity, arrested parenchymal development, and respiratory failure. A transduction reporter mouse strain was created by crossing the SftpCI73T knockin mouse with R26mTmG mice, so that successful delivery of the adenovirus co-expressing Cre recombinase deletes mT-tdTomato and activates mG-EGFP, marking transduced cells for further investigation. Cross-bred fetuses received intra-amniotic Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 (SpyCas9) and sgRNA targeting the 5′ and 3′ ends of Sftpc, packaged in AdV vector Ad.Sftpc.GFP, at E16. Fetal breathing, and thus lung parenchymal delivery, was enhanced with concomitant fetal theophylline and mild maternal hypercarbia to stimulate respiratory drive. Control fetuses were given Ad.Null containing SpyCas9 and no sgRNA or Ad.Cre carrying Cre recombinase. CRISPR-Cas9-induced excision of the mutant SftpCI73T gene prevented toxic accumulation of SftpCI73T proprotein and improved lung development in SftpCI73T mutant mice. Pulmonary gene editing was examined at E19, where transduced eGFP+ pulmonary epithelial, endothelial, and mesenchymal cells were confined to respiratory epithelium, and DNA analyses confirmed 18% of pulmonary epithelial cells harbored the gene-edited Sftpc. AT1, AT2, secretory airway, and ciliated airway cells maintained a stable proportion of edited cells over 6 months post IUT (mostly >10% edited, decreasing by a small but significant quantity in AT1/2 cells at certain time points) in contrast to non-targeted mesenchymal and endothelial cells (<1% edited). Target-site indels were found, but large deletions did not occur above background levels. Ad.Sftpc.GFP-injected fetuses showed improved AT1/AT2 cell morphology and lung saccule formation (8% survival ≥24 h postnatal) in contrast to the poorly formed saccules and hypertrophied AT2 cells with immature lamellar bodies in Ad.Null.GFP controls (0% postnatal survival). The 6% (5 out of 87) of treated pups that survived to postnatal day 7 exhibited normal respiratory activity and feeding. The model, though limited by a lack of long-term data regarding off-target deletions, pulmonary function, and maternal effects, convincingly demonstrates a method of targeting surfactant-producing AT2 cells in utero, which contrasts with the postnatal therapeutic challenges accompanying the use of exogenous surfactant or anti-inflammatory therapies, their limited therapeutic effect, and eventual requirement of a lung transplant.

## Inborn errors of metabolism
Knocking in a loss-of-function mutation can benefit certain diseases caused by toxic cellular accumulation of metabolites upstream in the metabolic pathway, which are not processed because of downstream enzymatic deficiencies. One such example is autosomal recessive hereditary tyrosinemia, caused by mutations in the FAH, OTAT, and HPD genes resulting in tyrosinemia types I, II, and III, respectively. These mutations result in pathological accumulation of various metabolites causing cell death and organ failure affecting the liver, kidneys, and CNS. Hereditary tyrosinemia type I (HT1), the most severe and common form, causes failure to thrive, neuropathy, and respiratory failure, and thus the benefits of in utero treatment are potentially great. Liver-targeted in utero base editing was demonstrated to reverse the pathology of HT1 in the FAH knockout murine model. Homozygous Fah−/− mutants, which develop lethal HT1, require treatment with nitisinone to inhibit Hdp and prevent tyrosine accumulation. 
Hpd mutant mice manifest a substantially milder phenotype, thus knocking in a suppressor mutation should alleviate the severity of HT1 by depleting tyrosine, a strategy that has produced good results in an adult mouse model. , Intravenous IUT of adenovirus Ad-BE3-Hpd targeting codon Q352 at E16 introduced a nonsense loss-of-function mutation into Hpd, resulting in greater weight gain and significantly lower transaminases in treated Fah−/− fetuses. Editing rate was ∼15% exclusively in liver at 2 weeks of age, which increased to 40% at three postnatal months due to the survival advantage and expansion of edited cells. Off-target mutations and indels were infrequent, with almost all target sites showing the desired C>T nonsense mutation. Treated pups showed better weight gain and 89% survival at three postnatal months without nitisinone supplementation. Recipients mounted humoral responses to both Ad vector and SpCas9, with higher antibody production following postnatal compared to prenatal treatment. Controls showed failure to thrive and perished by 21 postnatal days. This model demonstrated the utility of a knockin strategy to produce beneficial loss-of-function mutations, reminiscent of reducing PCSK9 function to treat familial hypercholesterolemia.
Intrauterine enzyme and hemopoietic stem cell transplantation therapies have shown promising, although partial, improvements in the postnatal phenotype of mucopolysaccharidoses such as mucopolysaccharidosis type IH (MPS-IH) (Hurler syndrome) and MPS-VII (Sly syndrome), , and these therapies need to be repeated postnatally to sustain corrected protein expression. Efficient gene editing of the causative mutations in the organs of interest, such as the liver or heart, may circumvent the need for further postnatal interventions. Bose et al. demonstrated systemic correction of MPS-IH caused by IDUA G>A W402X mutation in humans, and recapitulated by the Idua-W392X MPS-IH mouse model, by using a dual neurotropic AAV9 strategy. Intrauterine delivery of split-intein AAV.ABE.Idua with ABE and gRNA targeting the Idua-W392X mutation rescued the disease phenotype in the mouse model, with reduction of urine glycosaminoglycans, reduced bony abnormalities on micro-computed tomography (CT) scan, and 6-month survival rate of 100%, compared to 40% in untreated mice. Editing persisted in the heart (∼8.6%) and liver (∼22.8%) at 6 months and there was no evidence of germline transmission. Postnatal intravenous delivery resulted in ∼10.8% editing in liver and reduced GAG levels in the heart similar to injected fetuses; this was accompanied by anti-SpCas9 antibodies in postnatal, but not fetal, recipients. Fetuses are capable of alloantigen responses in utero and show discriminatory humoral responses to viral vectors, thus the humoral response described in these studies was not unexpected. Antibodies were only observed against AdV and against Cas9 protein in AdV-treated fetuses, while AAV-treated fetuses did not mount this response. Because of its immunogenic properties resulting in transduced cell toxicity, AdV has limited clinical application but is useful because of its large payload to show the beneficial potential of in utero gene editing.

## DMD
Gene editing in a fetal model of DMD was partially successful in the mdx mouse model characterized by a single-point mutation in exon 23 of the dystrophin gene causing a frameshift mutation; the resultant stop codon prevents dystrophin protein expression in muscle. ssODNs (donor templates) were designed to induce a single-base alteration at the exon 23 splice junction downstream of the mutation, disrupting mRNA splicing regulatory elements in an effort to restore the reading frame of dystrophin protein. Intramuscular ssODN injection into mdx fetuses using AAV and AdV vectors at E16 efficiently diffused into skeletal muscle and corrected the single-point mutation in dystrophin gene, restoring expression of the full-length dystrophin. Muscle from treated mdx mice were dystrophin positive with fewer centrally placed nuclei, suggesting that dystrophin gene defect correction was stable over time and prevented myofiber degeneration.

## Neurological disease
In the non-disease Cas9 transgenic mouse model, which constitutively expresses Cas9 endonuclease directed by a CAG promoter, intrauterine delivery of CRISPR AAV9-PHP.eB produced widespread fetal CNS gene editing. The investigators used this targeting proficiency to knock out POGZ and DEPDC5 genes, the former identified as a high-confidence autism spectrum disorder loss-of-function gene and highly expressed in fetal brain, and mutations in the latter implicated as common genetic causes of epilepsy. Deletion of Pogz in transgenic mice disrupts embryogenesis is prenatally lethal, thus the Cas9 model was used instead to specifically target the CNS. AAV9-PHP.eB (engineered AAV9 targeting neurons with great efficiency) packaging gRNA targeting Pogz or Depdc5 and co-expressing mCherry was injected into lateral ventricles of fetal mice at E14–15, achieving widespread transduction in the neocortex, hippocampus and striatum (∼10%–25% by mCherry expression) particularly in NeuN-positive excitatory neurons. Here, a single-AAV-vector approach was appropriate and only gRNA and mCherry transgene were packaged, as the mouse model provided the Cas9 protein. Anti-POGZ antibodies confirmed only ∼11% POGZ expression in mCherry+ cells following knockout, and Depdc5-deficient mice displayed increased seizure frequency.
In an experimental mouse model tracing the development of cortical neural precursor cells (NPCs) in the brain, Cheng et al. developed a piggyBac (PB) transposon toolkit, with CRISPR-Cas9-sgRNA integrated into the system (CRISPR-Cas9-PB), aiming to rapidly inactivate mouse Sry-related high-mobility group (HMG) box-2 (Sox2) to examine the genes involved in cortical development and to produce stable persistent expression to trace cell lineage. As episomal plasmid-mediated expression is typically short lived due to dilutional loss, integration of CRISPR-Cas9-sgRNA into the NPC genome using the PB transposon allows persistent expression. Following injection into telencephalic vesicles at E13.5, transuterine electroporation (commonly used to knockdown genes in mammalian cerebral cortex) was used to integrate CRISPR-Cas9-sgRNA into the host genome facilitated by PB transposon. Rapid Sox2 inactivation by day 3 was observed in NPC without affecting migration; 80% of cells had predicted frameshift mutations and knockout efficiency ranged from ∼58% to 78%. This strategy, while useful in developmental models, is not appropriate clinically, as persistent editing by integrated CRISPR-Cas9-sgRNA may have unwanted effects on the target genes.

## The challenges of fetal gene editing
Among the barriers to successful fetal genetic therapies are acceptance of unknown risks, including toxicity, long-term teratogenicity, and germline transmission of viral DNA, in addition to the risk of pregnancy loss or extreme preterm delivery. , It may be argued that diseases that do not cause direct fetal pathology, such as β-thalassemia major, which has postnatal onset, should be treated postnatally to avoid intrauterine complications; however, advocates must continue to emphasize the substantial benefits of fetal treatment, particularly the advantages of stoichiometry, relative immune naivete, and cost-effectiveness in comparison to postnatal therapy. The lack of large-animal transgenic models and the fairly prohibitive costs of conducting multi-year surveillance of fetal GMT models severely restrict the quantum of preclinical data that can inform clinical trials. With increasing acceptance of the benefits of early treatment and safety data from clinical trials of gene therapies in very young children, , the main challenge will be to take the actual step of initiating clinical trials of in vivo fetal GMT. , 

## Future directions of prenatal GMT and real-world applications
Both embryo and fetal GMTs are, at the moment, conceptual models of treatment that may be available only in high-resource settings as they require access to in vitro fertilization and genetics services. In low-resource settings, however, fetal GMT would rely only on ultrasound-guided intrauterine injection by trained practitioners, utilizing available equipment and lowering barriers to entry for treating common genetic diseases. There are compelling arguments in favor of gene correction prior to birth. In vivo fetal gene therapy models have shown promising results and highlight the potential risks, including the unresolved questions of germline transmission and vector integration. These appear to be related to the viral vector delivery systems designed to promote long-term transgene expression. With the “hit-and-run” approach of in situ gene correction, vector integration or episomal persistence are no longer necessary, and the ability to target stem and progenitor cells with greater efficiency than in adult recipients with potentially less dose-related toxicity increases the value of fetal therapy. Although the leap from treatment of young infants in vivo to treating fetuses with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) might potentially be a short one, the ethical barriers are high but not insurmountable. An increasing body of robust data from preclinical models with compelling risk-benefit profiles; enhanced public literacy in GMT; patient advocacy; and ongoing fetal therapies for ATM, X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, and spina bifida (NCT04652908) might increase the support for fetal GMT clinical trials.
Advocates of embryo GMT have a longer road toward clinical application. From the scientific perspective, there are advantages even over fetal GMT, including the survival of edited embryonic cells that develop into all germ layers and persistence of these edited cells in offspring of treated recipients as demonstrated in a small number of animal disease models, without the immunotoxic and bystander effects expected in fetal GMT. This is, in the long term, advantageous for hereditary pathogenic alleles as transmission to future generations may be halted, and it is a particularly strong push factor for embryo GMT in highly selective and highly regulated cases. However, unequal vector penetration of blastomeres can result in mosaicism, of which the degree and functional effect may not be accurately predicted by embryo biopsy prior to transplantation. 
Embryo GMT is unlikely to replace embryo selection as the first option, unless there are no mutation-free embryos, in which case editing may save embryo wastage and medical risks from multiple IVF cycles. The practicality of multiple procedures (repeat biopsies, freeze-thaw cycles) required for correct editing, which may damage the embryo, will need to be thoroughly tested. It will likely only be the most compelling situations involving families with a strong history of recurrent severe genetic disease who will qualify as candidates for PGT and embryo editing in the absence of normal embryos. Thus, for now, embryo GMT is confined to mechanistic discovery in embryogenesis and disease etiology until there is a global consensus on its application in disease and on ethical and political issues regarding just distribution and rights of the future humans and until there are sharp distinctions in therapy versus enhancement, and, importantly, when societal acceptance across diverse communities has been achieved; these are complex issues discussed at length by other authors. , , , At the moment, few studies have addressed clinically relevant long-term outcomes such as effects on growth and reproductive function; such data must be sought in large animals, ideally NHP models, to acquire the clinical confidence to transition to clinical trials.
Gene therapies are exorbitantly expensive for adult patients: Hemgenix (treating hemophilia B) is the world’s most expensive drug at USD3.5 million, while Zyteglo (treating β-thalassemia) is marketed at USD2.8 million. This price accounts for costly clinical trials, manufacturing large vector quantities, and processing autologous stem cells, although the projected cost for prenatal GMT is expected to be a fraction of this due to the smaller doses required. Although still expensive, the potential lifetime cost-savings of treating hemophilia or thalassemia with a one-time prenatal curative treatment should make this therapy economically feasible in the long term. This has the potential to be scaled up for lower-resource populations with high prevalence of the treatable disease, where specialist clinics can be set up to perform prenatal diagnosis and in utero treatment within a short space of time.

## Conclusions
Just as there are roles for both gene addition and editing strategies in the clinical space, there are unique advantages to both embryo and fetal editing that confer relevance and importance to both approaches in a highly selective, strictly regulated manner. As uptake of expanded pan-ethnic genetic carrier screening increases, embryo and fetal molecular therapies may become more attractive as a means of improving cost-efficiency and the impact of GMTs, particularly as the majority of genetic diseases arise from point mutations amenable to base editing and newer editing methods with reduced risk of chromosomal damage and off-target mutations. Preconception carrier screening has limitations of scale and detection, and not all transmissible mutations will be detected before pregnancy. More diseases may be caused by de novo mutations, and some conditions may have genetic causes that are only identified upon detection of a fetal complication. Unless this is performed before pregnancy, embryo screening and selection will not be available to at-risk couples. Additionally, the ethical and clinical boundaries regarding genetic manipulation of the germline and the associated concerns about, among other things, access inequalities, the rights of the future person’s autonomy and interests, and equitable access to healthcare for all affected generations must be specifically debated and widespread societal consensus reached. These ethical issues are more thoroughly discussed elsewhere. For these reasons, fetal therapy is potentially more broadly applicable and acceptable than embryo editing. Precise organ targeting, penetrating physiological barriers, minimizing spillage to non-target organs and to maternal tissues, and managing immunotoxic responses are the main challenges. These are important hurdles to overcome before moving these promising therapies closer to the clinics. Despite these challenges, the current progress in embryo and fetal gene editing hints at the untapped potential for the treatment of de novo or familial monogenic disorders and are worthy additions to precision medicine.

## Acknowledgments
C.N.Z.M. is supported by a grant from the Ministry of Health’s National Medical Research Council (NMRC) grant MOH-CSAINV20nov-0012. and the graphical abstract were created with BioRender.com.

## Author contributions
C.N.Z.M., W.L.C., and P.S.L. conceived of the scope of the review and wrote and revised the manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## References