2546jareJournal of Advanced ResearchJ Adv ResElsevierPMC1313143713131437131314374083499910.1016/j.jare.2025.08.026METTL3 mediates m6A methylation of ADAM17 to Downregulate ACE2–Ang-(1–7) axis and promote progression of hypertension
FeiXuejie LiCaiyu BaiJie XuYu HuRuihua WangXingxing PanYan ZhuXinrui ChenKequan ChenAidong ZhangLei HanYing aKey Laboratory of Targeted Intervention of Cardiovascular Disease, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cardiovascular Disease Translational Medicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences and Department of Physiology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211166, ChinabDepartment of Anesthesiology and Perioperative medicine, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Anesthesiology and Brain Functional Modulation, Clinical Research Center for Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine, Translational Research Institute of Brain and Brain-Like Intelligence, Shanghai Fourth People's Hospital, School of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai 200434, ChinacCollege of Physical Education and Health, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, ChinadThe Second Clinical Medical School, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211166, ChinaeDepartment of Anesthesiology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, Qingdao, Shandong 266000, China⁎Corresponding authors. aidongchen@njmu.edu.cnzhangleimz@qduhospital.cnyhancn@njmu.edu.cn
1These authors contributed equally to this work.
188202583837837–854152026© 2025 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Graphical abstract
 Keywords: METTL3, M6A, Hypertension, Endothelial dysfunction, ADAM17–ACE2–Ang-(1–7) axis

## Highlights
•METTL3-mediated m6A modification of ADAM17 RNA downregulated the ACE2–Ang-(1–7) axis and promoted progression of Ang II-induced hypertension.
•METTL3-EKD improved endothelial function, prevented cardiovascular remodeling and hypertension by inhibiting ADAM17 expression.
•Targeting m6A through METTL3 to normalize the ADAM17–ACE2–Ang-(1–7) axis are promising strategies to treat hypertension.
•This study provides a novel potential diagnostic or therapeutic target to prevent development and progression of hypertension.

## Abstract

## Introduction
Features of hypertension include imbalance between vascular relaxation and constriction along with vascular remodeling caused by endothelial dysfunction, further increasing peripheral resistance and blood pressure (BP). While N6-methyladenosine (m6A) modifications of RNA mediated by methyltransferase-like 3 (METTL3) regulates certain endothelial function, its roles and mechanisms in hypertension remain unknown.

## Objectives
This study was to examine roles of METTL3–m6A and its regulating targets on BP, cardiovascular function, and remodeling in hypertensive mice.

## Methods
We generated METTL3 conditional endothelial cell (EC) knockdown (EKD) mice as well as various EKD or EC overexpression (EOE) mice. We implanted mice with subcutaneous osmotic minipumps containing angiotensin II (Ang II) to induce hypertension and tested parameters of cardiovascular function and remodeling.

## Results
Compared to controls, METTL3 expression and m6A levels in arteries of both hypertensive patients and Ang II-treated mice were increased. METTL3-EKD decreased BP, vasoconstriction, and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) plasma levels; improved cardiovascular remodeling and endothelium-dependent vasodilation; and augmented release of nitric oxide (NO) and endothelial NO synthase activity in hypertensive mice. m6A MeRIP-seq analysis showed that Ang II significantly upregulated m6A peaks of a disintegrin and metalloproteases 17 (ADAM17) RNA in mesenteric arteries, accompanied by increased ADAM17 and decreased angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) expression and Ang-(1–7) plasma level, all of which were reversed by METTL3-EKD. ACE2-EKD abolished but ADAM17-EOE did not influence the effects of METTL3-EKD in hypertensive mice. We found similar results in cultured ECs, and nuclear export of ADAM17 RNA in ECs was elevated by Ang II, which again was reversed by METTL3-EKD.

## Conclusion
METTL3-EKD reduces BP and vasoconstriction and prevents cardiovascular remodeling by inhibiting the suppression of ADAM17 in ECs on the ACE2–Ang-(1–7) axis, and then improving Ang II-impaired endothelial function. This study may offer a novel prospective diagnostic or therapeutic strategy for hypertension.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Jan 13; Revised 2025 Apr 16; Accepted 2025 Aug 16; Collection date 2026 May.

## Introduction
Hypertension is a multifactorial cardiovascular disease with blood vessel damage that leads to lesions of the brain, heart, kidney, and other target organs [ , , ]. Incremental peripheral arterial resistance, accompanied by structural alterations in both the heart and vasculature, is a defining characteristic of hypertension [ , , ]. Endothelial dysfunction arises early in hypertension, resulting in unbalanced constriction and relaxation as well as vascular remodeling of small arteries, further increasing total peripheral resistance and blood pressure (BP) [ , ]. Endothelial dysfunction diminishes the ability of vascular endothelial cells (ECs) to release vasodilator active factors, mainly nitric oxide (NO) [ , ], attenuating vascular relaxation and increasing vascular constriction to increase vascular tone [ ].
In ECs, both endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) and inducible NO synthase (iNOS) catalyze NO generation, but the enzymes differ. eNOS is constitutively expressed in ECs and produces low nanomolar levels of NO [ , ], and eNOS knockout in mice leads to elevated BP [ ]. Conversely, iNOS is not expressed under resting non-inflammatory conditions in ECs but can be induced by pro-inflammatory stimuli and produces micromolar amounts of NO [ , , ]. High NO production in ECs can generate ONOO-radicals during oxidation, causing endothelial damage and vasodilation that decreases BP and tissue perfusion, which is the major cause of hypotension and shock during sepsis [ , , ]. In early stages of hypertension, eNOS plays a key role in releasing NO.
Endothelial dysfunction also causes ECs to release platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) [ ] and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) [ ], which stimulate vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation and fibrosis. This induces vascular remodeling such as thickened media and narrowed lumen of small arteries, further increasing total peripheral resistance and elevating BP [ , , ]. Thus, it is crucial to elucidate the underlying mechanism and find effective therapeutic approaches for endothelial dysfunction in hypertension.
N6-methyladenosine (m6A) methylation, the most prevalent post-transcriptional modification in eukaryotic RNA, plays a pivotal role in regulating RNA stability, splicing, nuclear export, translation, and degradation [ , ]. Methyltransferase-like 3 (METTL3), METTL14, and Wilms' tumor 1-associating protein (WTAP) form a stable complex to “write” m6A modifications, with METTL3 at the catalytic center. METTL3-mediated m6A modification helps regulate vascular biological processes, including the epithelial–mesenchymal transition [ ], vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation [ ], apoptosis [ ], angiogenesis [ ], and vascular EC proliferation [ ] and inflammation [ ]. METTL3–m6A modification is significantly upregulated in ECs under hypoxic stress, and silencing or overexpression of METTL3 alters EC proliferation, viability, tubulogenesis, and migration [ ]. Further, upregulated METTL3-dependent m6A mediates atherogenic inflammatory cascades in vascular endothelium [ ]. Therefore, METTL3–m6A modification helps regulate EC function and plays a key role in various conditions including aneurysm [ ], atherosclerosis [ ], myocardial hypertrophy [ ], and vascular calcification [ ]. Yet the role of METTL3–m6A in ECs in hypertension remains unclear.
Mesenteric, coronary, pulmonary, and renal arteries are four key arterioles closely related to hypertension and its clinical complications and are associated with METTL3–m6A modification. METTL3 is upregulated in the pulmonary arteries of patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension [ ], and METTL3 promotes endothelial–mesenchymal transition of pulmonary artery [ ]. Further, differentially m6A-modified and expressed lncRNAs could serve as biomarkers of coronary artery disease [ ]. Due to the large number of major resistance arterioles in mesenteric arteries, their enhanced vasoconstriction and attenuated vasodilation significantly increase total peripheral resistance, affecting BP in hypertension [ ]. Impaired coronary artery dilation, a consequence of endothelial dysfunction, diminishes blood perfusion to the heart, precipitating myocardial ischemia that manifests as angina and is a common cause of death in hypertensive patients [ ]. Weakened relaxation of pulmonary arteries in hypertensive individuals increases pulmonary arterial resistance, augmenting susceptibility to pulmonary arterial hypertension [ ]. Stenosis of the renal arteries due to impaired relaxation and vascular remodeling is a usual cause of renin–angiotensin system (RAS) activation and development of hypertension [ ].
We hypothesized that METTL3–m6A helps regulate endothelial dysfunction in hypertension, so we used mesenteric, coronary, pulmonary, and renal arteries to assess the impacts of METTL3–m6A on the imbalance between vascular constriction and relaxation, cardiovascular remodeling, and BP in Ang II-induced hypertensive mice through conditional METTL3 knockdown in vascular ECs (METTL3-EKD). We also explored key downstream molecular targets of METTL3–m6A modification and its signaling pathway. By developing biomarkers or specific inhibitors targeting METTL3, this study may offer prospective clinical diagnostic or therapeutic strategies for hypertension.

## Methods

## Patient artery tissue samples
Aorta specimens of adult normotensive control patients and hypertensive patients were procured from the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University (Nanjing, China). This study was approved by the Institutional Review Committee at the First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical University (2022-SR-730).

## Mice
This study used both male and female 8-week-old METTL3 flox/flox mice (C57BL/6 background). All mice (5 mice/cage) had free access to standard chow and tap water and were housed in an environmentally controlled room with a 12-h light–dark cycle at a temperature of 20 °C–26 °C and humidity of 30 %–70 %. Animal procedures were approved by the Experimental Animal Care Committee of Nanjing Medical University (#IACUC-2211007) and were conducted in accordance with guidelines provided in the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (NIH publication, 8th edition, 2011).

## Generation of conditional METTL3 EC knockdown (METTL3-EKD) mice
Exons 2 and 3 of METTL3 were flanked with two loxP sites to generate METTL3 flox/flox mice using the Cre/loxP technique in C57BL/6 mice (Supplementary Fig. S1A). gRNA1 (GGGACCATCATTTGCTGATCAGG) and gRNA2 (ATATCAATAATGCCGTTTCGAGG) targeting mouse METTL3, a donor vector incorporating loxP sites in conjunction with Cas9 mRNA, were co-injected into mouse fertilized eggs, which were transferred into the oviducts of pseudopregnant females to generate targeted conditional knockdown offspring. Genomic DNA was extracted from tails using a FastPure Cell/Tissue DNA Isolation Mini Kit (Vazyme, Nanjing, China). RT-PCR amplification with primers specific to the target sequence was performed to identify the DNA. The resulting PCR amplicons were resolved on 2 % agarose gels. Primer sequences to amplify genomic DNA fragments encompassing loxP sites were: (Pair 1, Supplementary Fig. S1C): forward, 5′-AACCATCCAAACCTTTACTGTGC-3′; reverse, 5′-TAAACATAAACACCAGGCCCTTG-3′ (targeted allele: 214 bp; wildtype allele: 144 bp). Genotyping verification for METTL3 flox/flox homozygous mice is in Supplementary Fig. S1C.
METTL3 flox/flox mice were administered adeno-associated virus serotype 9 (AAV9) encapsulating Cre recombinase and the EC-specific promoter TIE (1E + 13 vg/mL, Genomeditech Co., Shanghai, China) in the caudal vein at 8 weeks of age to generate METTL3-EKD mice, as previously reported [ , ]. Empty AAV9 was used as a control. Verification of AAV9 targeting ECs in the mouse mesenteric artery intima is in Supplementary Fig. S1D. After 6 weeks, the verification of METTL3 specific knockdown was performed by measuring METTL3 expression and m6A level of mesenteric arteries of mice by western blot and ELISA, respectively.

## Generation of Ang II-induced hypertensive mouse model
Abnormal RAS function is a main pathogenic mechanism of hypertension. The Ang II-induced hypertensive mouse model is classic, effective, and stable, so we used this model. Two weeks after METTL3-EKD, mice were administered either Ang II (1000 ng/kg/min; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) or saline through subcutaneously implanted osmotic minipumps (model 2004; Alzet, Cupertino, CA, USA) under inhalation anesthesia with 2.5 % v/v isoflurane/oxygen, as previously described [ , ]. Minipumps remained in the mice for 4 weeks. The production process for Ang II-induced hypertensive and control mice with or without METTL3-EKD using METTL3 flox/flox mice were shown in Supplementary Fig. S1B.

## Generation of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2)-EKD or a disintegrin and metalloproteases 17 (ADAM17) EC overexpression (ADAM17-EOE) with or without METTL3-EKD in hypertensive mice
We generated ACE2-EKD + METTL3-EKD mice via caudal vein injection of AAV9 carrying ACE2-shRNA, Cre, and TIE (1E + 13 GC/mL, PackGene Biotech Co., Guangzhou, China) in 8-week-old METTL3 flox/flox mice. We generated ADAM17-EOE + METTL3-EKD mice via caudal vein injection of AAV9 carrying ADAM17 transcript and TIE (1E + 13 GC/mL, PackGene Biotech Co., Guangzhou, China) and AAV9 carrying Cre and TIE (1E + 13 vg/mL, Genomeditech Co., Shanghai, China) simultaneously in 8-week-old METTL3 flox/flox mice. We generated ADAM17-EOE + control mice via caudal vein injection of only AAV9 carrying ADAM17 transcript and TIE without Cre. After two weeks, Ang II was administered to mice. The production process for these mice was shown in Supplementary Fig. S1E.

## Echocardiography
Four weeks after saline or Ang II administration, when mice were 14 weeks old, we analyzed cardiac function and heart morphology of mice under anesthesia (25 mg/kg ketamine intraperitoneally) using an ultrasound system (Vevo 2100, Visual Sonics, Canada) equipped with a 21-MHz probe, as we previously described [ , ]. We measured left ventricle (LV) end systolic and diastolic diameter (LVESD and LVEDD) and LV posterior wall and anterior wall thickness in systole and diastole (LVPWs, LVPWd, LVAWs, and LVAWd). We also calculated LV ejection fraction, fractional shortening, heart rate, and LV mass. Measurements were obtained from four successive cardiac cycles, with the mean value used for subsequent analysis.

## BP measurement

## Conscious state
Conscious mice tail artery systolic blood pressure (SBP) was measured using a computerized non-invasive tail-cuff apparatus (BP-2000, Visitech Systems Inc., Apex, NC, USA), as we previously reported [ ]. We measured SBP of mice at 8 (before AAV injection) and 14 weeks old (after 2 weeks of AAV injection plus 4 weeks of Ang II or saline administration). To mitigate measurement stress-induced interference in SBP, mice underwent training regimen to acclimate them to daily SBP measurements for ≥ 10 consecutive days before AAV injection and the end of animal model production process. Briefly, the mouse tail was inserted into an annular conduit connected to the transducer, which was used to detect tail arterial pulsation wave forms. An annular rubber pipe on the mouse tail was used to inflate or deflate to measure SBP. Average values were derived from 10 measurements and designated as SBP.

## Under anesthesia
Following four weeks of Ang II or saline administration, a Mikro-Tip pressure catheter (SPR-1000, Millar, Houston, TX, USA) integrated with a Powerlab data acquisition system (8SP, ADInstruments, Sydney, Australia) was inserted into the right carotid artery. This allowed for continuous BP monitoring in anesthetized mice intraperitoneally injected with urethane (800 mg/kg). Diastolic blood pressure (DBP), SBP, mean arterial pressure (MAP), and pulse pressure (PP) were calculated by Chart software.

## Cardiac hemodynamic measurements
After BP recording, the catheter inside the right carotid artery was pushed further into the LV to record LV pressure and calculate hemodynamic parameters, including LV systolic pressure (LVSP), LV end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP), heart rate, and the maximum first derivative of LV pressure (LV +dP/dtmax).

## Protein expression measurements
Mesenteric arteries were isolated from mice, rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at –80 °C. From one mouse, we acquired only one mesenteric artery. Western blot was used to measure protein expression, as we previously reported [ ]. Briefly, proteins (30 μg) in the supernatant of homogenized arterial tissue were separated on 10 % SDS–PAGE gels and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. Membranes were probed with anti-METTL3 IgG (1:1000, Proteintech, #15073–1-AP, Wuhan, China) [ ], anti-ADAM17 IgG (1:1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, #703077, Waltham, MA, USA), or anti-ACE2 IgG (1:1000, Abcam, #AB108252, Cambridge, MA, USA) [ ], followed by incubation with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (1:10,000; Abbkine Scientific Co., #A21020, Wuhan, China). GAPDH (1:5000; Abways Technology Inc, #AB0037, Shanghai, China) was used as a loading control.

## m6A levels, NO contents and eNOS activity of mesenteric arteries, and VEGF and PDGF plasma levels measurements
m6A levels of arteries were measured using an EpiQuik m6A RNA methylation quantification kit (Epigentek, Farmingdale, NY, USA) following published methodology [ ]. Briefly, total RNA was isolated from arteries, and input RNA samples (200 ng) and negative/positive controls were put into separate assay wells containing binding solution (80 µL). Capture and detection antibodies were introduced per the manufacturer’s protocol. After color-developing solution was added, absorbance was read at 450 nm to calculate m6A% per the manufacturer’s formula.
A NOS assay kit (Beyotime Biotech Inc., Nanjing, China) was used to measure eNOS activity of arteries by evaluating its ability to convert L-arginine to NO. Further, the NO concentration within arteries was quantified using a nitrate/nitrite colorimetric assay kit (Cayman Chemical Co., Ann Arbor, MI, USA), as we previously reported [ ]. VEGF and PDGF plasma levels were measured with enzyme immunoassay kits (Beyotime Biotech Inc., Shanghai, China; Saipei Biotech Co., Wuhan, China, respectively).

## Isolation of arteries
After mice were euthanized, we rapidly isolated the heart, lungs, kidneys, and mesentery and placed tissues in Krebs-Henseleit solution. Coronary arteries were isolated from heart, pulmonary arteries were isolated from lungs, renal arteries were isolated from kidneys, and mesenteric arteries were isolated from the mesentery. Arteries were placed in Krebs-Henseleit solution and examined under a microscope.

## Measurement of arterial isometric tension
Arterial contraction and relaxation were evaluated by isometric tension experiments, as we previously documented [ , ]. Briefly, third-order mesenteric, coronary, and pulmonary arteries were divided into 2-mm-long segments. From one mouse, we collected data only from one mesenteric arterial ring, one coronary arterial ring, and one pulmonary arterial ring. Arterial rings were mounted on a four-chambered myograph (620 M, DMT, Denmark), and high-K+ solution was introduced into the chamber to evaluate vasoconstriction ability. Components of Krebs-Henseleit solution or high-K+ solution are described in our previous report [ ]. Six doses of acetylcholine (ACh) or sodium nitroprusside (SNP) (10-9–10-4 mol/L) were then administered in a manner proportional to the dosage following induction of arterial ring contraction by 10-3 mol/L prostaglandin F2α (PGF 2α) to assess endothelium-independent or −dependent vasodilation. The percentage of contraction induced by PGF 2α was considered the degree of relaxation.

## Vascular remodeling evaluation
Third-order pulmonary, coronary, mesenteric, and renal arteries were removed from mice and embedded in paraffin wax. Arteries were cross-sectioned at 5-μm thickness and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) or Masson’s trichrome for histological examination, as we previously reported [ , ]. Changes in arterial morphology and vascular fibrosis were assessed under a light microscope. Collagen volume fraction, lumen diameter, media thickness, and ratio of media thickness to lumen diameter of arteries were used to assess vascular remodeling.

## Myocardial remodelling evaluation
LV was meticulously fixed and sectioned into 5-μm-thick transverse slices for H&E or Masson's trichrome staining. Myoctye cross-sectional area was counted using Image-Pro Plus 6.0 software. Perivascular and myocardial fibrosis was observed in Masson's trichrome-stained sections, and we determined collagen volume fraction calculated as blue collagen deposition area divided by total myocardium cross-sectional area [ , , , ].

## Methylated RNA immunoprecipitation sequencing (MeRIP-Seq) and RNA-seq
We extracted total RNA of mesenteric arteries from control or Ang II-perfused mice, and samples were separated and purified with TRIzol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). RNA quantity and purity were assessed on an ND-1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop, Wilmington, DE, USA), and RNA integrity was evaluated with a Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) to ensure RNA integrity number > 7.0. Denaturing agarose gel electrophoresis further confirmed RNA quality. A minimum of 1 μg total RNA was fragmented with an NEBNext Magnesium RNA fragmentation module (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) by incubating at 94 °C for 5 min. Fragmented RNA, including rRNA, was enriched with m6A antibody–Dynabead complexes through immunoprecipitation. Immunoprecipitated RNA was then reverse-transcribed to yield first-strand cDNA via SMARTScribe reverse transcriptase (ClonTech, Japan). This cDNA served as a template for addition of linker and subsequent synthesis of second-strand DNA by PCR, adhering to the following thermal cycling conditions: initial denaturation for 1 min at 94 °C, followed by denaturation for 15 s at 98 °C, annealing for 15 s at 55 °C, and extension for 30 s at 68 °C, culminating with a final extension phase consisting of 5 cycles, each for 2 min at 68 °C. The amplified DNA-seq library was purified using bead-based methods. cDNA sequences from rRNA reverse transcription were cut by ZapR v2 and R-Probes v2 (mammal) under the following conditions: incubation at 72 °C for 2 min, 4 °C for 2 min, 37 °C for 1 h, 72 °C for 10 min, and 4 °C hold. The final library was amplified by second-round PCR consistent with the initial PCR program, with the number of PCR cycles increased to 12–16. Final sequencing was implemented on an Illumina Novaseq 6000 platform (LC-Bio Technology Co. Ltd., Hangzhou, China) using paired-end 150-bp reads, following standard protocols.
Raw reads were processed using Fastp software to remove adapter sequences, undetermined bases, and low-quality bases under default parameters. Both immunoprecipitated and input sample sequence quality were verified by FastQC and RseQC. Clean reads were aligned to the Mus musculus reference genome (version v101) by HISAT2. Peaks were distinguished and analyzed for differential expression with the R package exomePeak2, and gene annotation was implemented with ANNOVAR. Peak visualization was completed using IGV software. MEME and HOMER were used to identify enriched motifs, with their positions analyzed relative to peak summits. StringTie quantified transcript and gene expression based on FPKM values (total exon fragments/mapped reads × exon length). Genes with differential expression and transcripts were identified with edgeR in R, selecting those with a log2 fold change ≥ 1 or ≤ –1 and a p < 0.05.

## ACE2 level, ACE2 activity and Ang-(1–7) level measurement
The soluble ACE2 (sACE2) level in plasma or ACE2 content in ECs were quantified using a mouse ACE2 ELISA quantification kit (Mlbio, ml107368, Shanghai, China). All reagents were equilibrated to room temperature for ∼ 30 min prior to use, and all procedures followed manufacturer's instructions. The SensoLyte 390 ACE2 activity assay kit (AnaSpec, AS-72086, USA) was used to quantify ACE2 activity by fluorescence resonance energy transfer, as previously reported[ ]. Following the manufacturer’s instructions, 200 μg of tissue were used for every testing sample. Fluorescence was monitored in a 96-well microplate at excitation/emission wavelengths of 330/390 nm. Ang-(1–7) plasma level was measured using a commercial peptide enzyme immunoassay kit (My-Bio-Source LLC, MBS700453, USA) following manufacturer's instructions.

## Primary EC culture
ECs were isolated from the aorta of METTL3 flox/flox mice as reported [ , ]. Briefly, aortas were extracted from 5 to 6 anesthetized mice infused with PBS to the LV. Perivascular adipose tissues of aortas were stripped with forceps. Aortas were dissected longitudinally to expose the endothelium in DMEM without fetal bovine serum and were incubated with collagenase type II for 8 min at 37 °C. Detached ECs were harvested through centrifugation and cultured in endothelial cell growth medium (Sciencell, Carlsbad, CA, USA) containing streptomycin (10 mg/mL), penicillin (100 IU/mL, Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA), and fetal bovine serum (15 %) at 37 °C with 5 % CO2 for 6 days until cells were confluent. ECs were identified by substantial expression of EC marker CD31 via fluorescent staining. First–third-passage ECs were used for experiments, and each experiment used cells from the same passage.

## EC transfection and Ang II treatment
When second-passage ECs were 30 % confluent in antibiotic-free medium, lentivirus-Cre (OBiO Technology Corp. Ltd. Shanghai, China) was transfected into ECs to knock-down METTL3 (METTL3-KD). Mouse ADAM17 siRNA plasmid (Genomeditech Co., Shanghai, China) or control was transfected into ECs with RFectPM siRNA/miRNA transfection reagent (Baidai, Changzhou, China) following the manufacturer’s instructions to knockdown ADAM17 (ADAM17-KD). Mouse ADAM17 overexpression plasmid (PackGene Biotech Co., Guangzhou, China) was transfected into ECs with Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to overexpress ADAM17 (ADAM17-OE). After 12 h of plasmid or virus transfection in ECs, Ang II (10 μM) was added to the cell culture medium. After 48 h of Ang II treatment, ECs were collected for protein/RNA extraction or immunofluorescent staining.

## RT-qPCR
Total RNA was extracted from ECs using an RNA Plus kit (Yi Fei Xue Biotechnology, Nanjing, China). A Nanodrop spectrophotometer was used to check RNA purity. HiScript III RT SuperMix (Vazyme, Nanjing, China) was used to reverse-transcribe isolated RNA. AceQ Universal SYBR qPCR Master Mix (Vazyme, Nanjing, China) was used for qPCR analysis on a CFX96 Real-Time PCR detection system. Relative quantitation was determined by standard 2-ΔΔCt calculations, normalized to GAPDH expression.
Nuclear and cytoplasmic RNA were separated using a cell and nuclear RNA purification kit (Norgen Biotek Crop, Ontario, Canada) per the manufacturer's instructions. ADAM17 nuclear export (ratio of cytoplasmic/nuclear RNA) was analyzed using qPCR. To assess nuclear and cytoplasmic RNA separation efficiency, U6 and GAPDH were used as reference genes, respectively. Primer sequences are in .
 

## Immunofluorescent staining
ACE2 and ADAM17 expression on the cell membrane was detected by immunofluorescent staining. Briefly, ECs were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde for 10 min and permeabilized in 0.1 % Triton X-100 for 15 min. Cells then were blocked with 2 % bovine serum albumin for 30 min, all at ambient temperature. Cells were incubated with anti-ADAM17 IgG (1:1000, #703077, Thermo Fisher Scientific) or anti-ACE2 IgG (1:1000, #AB108252, Abcam) at 4 °C overnight. After three PBS washes, ECs were incubated with goat anti-rabbit IgG H&L (1:100; #GB25303, Servicebio, Wuhan, China) labeled with Alexa Fluor 488 for 1 h at room temperature. Cells were incubated with DAPI for nuclear counterstaining, and fluorescence was visualized on a confocal laser scanning microscope (LSM710, Carl Zeiss, German).

## Chemicals
PGF 2α, ACh, SNP, losartan, and Ang II were acquired from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO, USA). Leupeptin was acquired from APExBIO Technology (Houston, Texas, USA). Reagents were dissolved in saline solution for use.

## Statistical analysis
Data are presented as mean ± standard error (SE). Statistical analysis was conducted using one-way or two-way ANOVA, followed by Bonferroni test for post hoc analysis to assess multiple comparisons. For comparisons between groups, student's t-test was used. P < 0.05 indicated statistical significance (GraphPad software).

## Results

## Arteries of hypertensive patients and mice have elevated m6A levels and METTL3 expression, and METTL3-EKD decreases BP and cardiac hypertrophy
Compared to normotensive control patients, hypertensive patient aortas had increased m6A level ( A) and METTL3 protein expression ( B). Mice with Ang II-induced hypertension also had increased m6A levels ( C) and METTL3 expression in mesenteric arteries ( D) compared to control mice. METTL3-EKD decreased METTL3 expression as well as m6A levels in mesenteric arteries in both control and hypertensive mice. This suggests that the endothelium of hypertensive arteries had upregulated METTL3-mediated m6A levels.
 Hypertensive mice treated with Ang II had increased SBP assessed in a conscious state ( E) or under anesthesia ( F) as well as increased DBP ( G), MAP ( H), and PP ( I) under anesthesia compared to control mice. METTL3-EKD significantly reduced SBP, DBP, and MAP in mice with Ang II-induced hypertension to nearly normal levels, although there was no significant change in PP. METTL3-EKD did not affect SBP, DBP, MAP, or PP of control mice ( E–I).
Ang II-perfused mice had elevated LVSP ( J) and LV +dP/dtmax ( L) compared to control mice, while LVEDP ( K), heart rate ( M), and body weight (BW) ( ) did not significantly differ. Echocardiography (Supplementary Fig. S2A and ) showed that mice with Ang II-induced hypertension had increased LVAW, LVPW, LV mass, and LV mass/BW compared to control mice, while there was no significant difference in fractional shortening and ejection fraction. These results indicate that 4 weeks of Ang II infusion resulted in a thickened LV wall and cardiac hypertrophy but did not impair cardiac function. METTL3-EKD decreased LVSP ( J), LV +dP/dtmax ( L), LVAW, LVPW, LV mass and LV mass/BW, and even more surprising, increased ejection fraction ( ) in Ang II-treated mice, suggesting that METTL3-EKD prevented Ang II-induced cardiac hypertrophy and improved cardiac function by decreasing BP (i.e., cardiac afterload).
 

## METTL3-EKD inhibits vascular contraction, promotes vascular relaxation, increases eNOS activity and NO levels, and decreases VEGF and PDGF plasma levels
Mice with Ang II-induced hypertension exposed to high-K+ solution had significantly enhanced vasoconstriction of mesenteric ( A), coronary ( B), and pulmonary arteries ( C) compared to control mice. METTL3-EKD significantly decreased the vasoconstriction induced by high-K+ in mice with Ang II-induced hypertension but did not affect vasoconstriction in control mice ( A–C).
 Mice with Ang II-induced hypertension had impaired ACh-induced endothelium-dependent vasorelaxation of mesenteric ( D), coronary ( E), and pulmonary arteries ( F) compared to control mice, and METTL3-EKD improved these outcomes. METTL3-EKD also improved endothelium-dependent vascular relaxation in coronary ( E) and pulmonary arteries ( F) in control mice.
No significant disparities were observed in SNP-induced endothelium-independent relaxation in mesenteric ( G), coronary ( H), and pulmonary arteries ( I) between Ang II-induced hypertensive and control mice. Interestingly, METTL3-EKD prompted low doses of SNP-caused vasodilatation in mesenteric, pulmonary, and coronary arteries in both Ang II-induced hypertensive and control mice ( G–I).
Compared to control mice, mice with Ang II-induced hypertension had reduced eNOS activity ( J) and NO levels ( K) in mesenteric arteries, as well as increased VEGF ( L) and PDGF plasma levels ( M), suggesting hypertensive mice have endothelial dysfunction. METTL3-EKD increased NO release and eNOS activity of mesenteric arteries and decreased VEGF and PDGF plasma levels in mice with Ang II-induced hypertension but only decreased PDGF plasma levels in control mice ( J–M). These results suggest that METTL3-EKD improved the impaired endothelial function in hypertension.

## METTL3-EKD restores vascular remodeling
Representative H&E images of mesenteric, coronary, pulmonary, and renal arteries of Ang II-perfused mice had significantly increased wall thickness and decreased lumen diameter compared to control mice ( A). The graphical analysis further demonstrated that Ang II-perfused mice had increased media thickness ( B) and decreased lumen diameter ( C) and ratio of media thickness to lumen diameter ( D) in mesenteric, coronary, pulmonary, and renal arteries compared to controls. However, METTL3-EKD increased lumen diameter and decreased media thickness and ratio of media thickness to lumen diameter in mesenteric, coronary, pulmonary, and renal arteries of mice with Ang II-induced hypertension ( ). Additionally, Masson staining of mesenteric, coronary, pulmonary, and renal arteries ( A) and analysis of collagen volume fraction ( B) indicated severe vascular fibrosis in mice with Ang II-induced hypertension, and METTL3-EKD alleviated this vascular fibrosis ( ). These results suggest that METTL3-EKD restored vascular remodeling in hypertension.
 

## METTL3-EKD repairs cardiac remodeling
Compared to control mice, Ang II-treated hypertensive mice showed cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, as demonstrated by representative myocardium cross-section H&E images (Supplementary Fig. S2B,C), LV cardiomyocyte cross-sectional area (Supplementary Fig. S2F), and increased heart weight relative to BW (HW/BW) (Supplementary Fig. S2G). In addition, Ang II-treated mice had severe myocardial and perivascular fibrosis, as demonstrated by increased blue collagen fiber deposition in Masson’s stained myocardium (Supplementary Fig. S2D,E) and its semi-quantitative analysis (Supplementary Fig. S2H). METTL3-EKD alleviated both LV fibrosis and hypertrophy in hypertensive mice but did not influence cardiomyocyte morphology and myocardial fibrosis in control mice (Supplementary Fig. S2), suggesting that METTL3-EKD repaired cardiac remodeling due to hypertension.

## ADAM17 may be an Ang II target in mesenteric arteries
We conducted m6A MeRIP-seq to examine distribution patterns and abundance of m6A-methylated RNA in mice perfused with Ang II compared to controls. Motif enrichment analysis in the m6A peak region identified RRACH sequence patterns in both groups. GGACA and AAACC were typical sequences associated with m6A in Ang II-treated and control mice, respectively, demonstrating conserved m6A methylation ( A). In peaks with significant differences, 94 % of m6A modifications were in mRNAs and 6 % were in ncRNAs ( B). The m6A peak in both Ang II and control transcripts was preferentially located in coding sequence regions, especially concentrated near the stop codon. There were abundant m6A peaks in 3′ untranslated and exon regions ( C,D).
 In comparison to the control group, Ang II-treated mice exhibited a total of 6009 markedly altered m6A peaks, with 2945 showing significant upregulation and 3064 demonstrating notable downregulation ( E). In addition, RNA-seq showed that Ang II-perfused mice had 545 upregulated and 402 downregulated genes. By integrating RNA-seq and MeRIP-seq data, we classified all differentially expressed genes and m6A modifications into four categories: 61 hypermethylated m6A peaks in RNA transcripts, with 15 significantly upregulated (hyper-up) and 46 downregulated (hyper-down); and 79 hypomethylated m6A peaks, with 46 significantly upregulated (hypo-up) and 33 downregulated (hypo-down) ( F).
To understand the biological significance of differentially methylated RNAs and their prospective roles in hypertension, we analyzed gene ontology (GO) enrichment on genes with notable changes in both methylation and transcription. The GO analysis revealed that genes with m6A modifications were primarily associated with cellular membrane components, protein binding, and signaling pathways, particularly the G protein-coupled receptor signaling pathway ( G). This suggests that RNA-m6A in arteries is an important target for Ang II in mice.
Considering increased METTL3 expression and m6A levels in mesenteric arteries of hypertensive mice, we hypothesized that RNA transcripts with elevated m6A methylation could be Ang II targets. Analysis revealed significant upregulation of m6A peaks in ADAM17 RNA in Ang II-perfused mice compared to controls ( H), indicating that ADAM17 might be a target of Ang II.

## METTL3-EKD restores the abnormal expression and activity of the ADAM17–ACE2–Ang-(1–7) axis
ADAM17 on the cell membrane surface shears ACE2 by proteolytic conversion, shedding the extracellular portion of ACE2 into extracellular fluid and decreasing ACE2 expression and function in the cell membrane [ , ]. ACE2 catalyzes conversion of Ang II into Ang-(1–7), reducing circulating Ang II levels and increasing Ang-(1–7) level [ , ]. We detected altered function and expression of the ADAM17–ACE2–Ang-(1–7) axis of mesenteric arteries in hypertension. Ang II-perfused mice had increased ADAM17 expression ( A) yet decreased ACE2 activity and expression ( B,C) in mesenteric arteries, increased soluble ACE2 (sACE2) ( D) and reduced Ang-(1–7) level in plasma ( E) compared to control mice. METTL3-EKD reversed abnormal expression of the ADAM17–ACE2–Ang-(1–7) axis and ACE2 activity in hypertensive mice, with no significant effects in control mice ( A–E). These results suggest that increased ACE2 was cleaved and released into the plasma by upregulated ADAM17 following Ang II stimulation, and decreased membrane-bound ACE2 contributed to low Ang-(1–7) levels, all of which were reversed by METTL3-EKD.
 ACE2-EKD combined with METTL3-EKD significantly decreased ACE2 expression ( G), and more intrersting, ACE2-EKD rescued the downregulation of ADAM17 expression caused by METTL3-EKD ( F). ADAM17-EOE increased ADAM17 expression ( F) and decreased ACE2 expression ( G), confirming the transgene effectiveness of ADAM17-EOE AAV9 and the suppression of ADAM17 on ACE2. While METTL3-EKD reversed the effects of ADAM17-EOE on ADAM17 and ACE2 expression in hypertensive mice. These results verify that increased ADAM17 resulted in decreased ACE2 expression, and Ang II-induced increases in ADAM17 expression depended on METTL3, as well as without METTL3, low levels of ADAM17 have reduced ability to cleave ACE2.

## Ang-(1–7) promotes vasodilatation
Ang-(1–7) dose-dependently relaxed mesenteric (Supplementary Fig. S3A), coronary (Supplementary Fig. S3C), and pulmonary arteries (Supplementary Fig. S3E) in both control and hypertensive mice. More interestingly, Ang-(1–7) caused greater relaxation of coronary arteries in hypertensive mice compared to control mice. Further, Ang-(1–7) improved endothelium-dependent relaxation induced by ACh in mesenteric (Supplementary Fig. S3B), coronary (Supplementary Fig. S3D), and pulmonary arteries (Supplementary Fig. S3F) in mice with hypertension. These results indicate that Ang-(1–7) both directly relaxed arteries and improved endothelium-dependent vascular relaxation.

## ACE2-EKD or ADAM17-EOE alters BP, haemodynamics, and echocardiography responses to METTL3-EKD
ACE2-EKD abolished the effects of METTL3-EKD to decrease SBP measured in a conscious state ( A) or under anesthesia ( B), DBP ( C), MAP ( D), LVSP ( F), and LV + dP/dtmax ( H) measured under anesthesia in hypertensive mice. In addition, ACE2-EKD + METTL3-EKD further increased SBP ( B), PP ( E), LVSP ( F), and LV +dP/dtmax ( H) under anesthesia compared to controls.
 A surprising finding was that ACE2-EKD + METTL3-EKD hypertensive mice and ADAM17-EOE + control hypertensive mice had significantly decreased BW compared to controls. Therefore, we compared echocardiography parameters corrected by BW in these mice ( ). METTL3-EKD reduced LVEDD/BW, LVESD/BW, LVAWd/BW, LVAWs/BW, LVPWd/BW, and LV mass/BW and increased ejection fraction compared to controls. ACE2-EKD inhibited these effects in hypertensive mice. Moreover, ACE2-EKD + METTL3-EKD further increased LVAWd/BW, LVAWs/BW, LVPWd/BW, and LVPWs/BW compared to control hypertensive mice ( ). These results indicated that ACE2 is a key downstream target of the Ang II-upregulated METTL3–m6A modification of ADAM17 in ECs.
 ADAM17-EOE hypertensive mice had further increased SBP ( B), LVSP ( F), LV + dP/dtmax
( H), and LVESD/BW ( ) but decreased ejection fraction ( ) compared to controls. However, ADAM17-EOE did not influence METTL3-EKD’s effects to decrease BP ( ) and improve cardiac function ( ), indicating that METTL3 is required for Ang II to increase ADAM17 expression. Without METTL3, ADAM17 is unable to overexpress and then cleave ACE2, thus high ACE2 expression exerts hypotensive effects in ADAM17-EOE + METTL3-EKD hypertensive mice. There were no significant differences in LVEDP ( G) and heart rate ( I) among groups.

## ACE2-EKD or ADAM17-EOE affects vascular contraction or relaxation and cardiovascular remodeling responses to METTL3-EKD
ACE2-EKD abolished the effects of METTL3-EKD to decrease high-K+ solution-induced vasoconstriction and improve ACh-induced endothelium-dependent relaxation in mesenteric ( A,B), coronary ( C,D), and pulmonary arteries ( E,F) as well as myocardial remodeling (Supplementary Fig. S4) and vascular remodeling of mesenteric arteries (Supplementary Fig. S5) in hypertensive mice. Moreover, ACE2-EKD further increased vasoconstriction of mesenteric arteries compared to controls ( A).
 As above, ADAM17-EOE did not affect the ability of METTL3-EKD to improve vascular contraction or relaxation ( ) and cardiovascular remodeling (Supplementary Figs. S4 and S5). However, ADAM17-EOE alone further increased vasoconstriction and decreased endothelium-dependent relaxation of mesenteric arteries in hypertensive mice ( A,B). These results suggest that ACE2-EKD abolished, while ADAM17-EOE failed to influence the effects of METTL3-EKD in hypertension.

## Ang II-treated ECs also have increased m6A levels, METTL3 expression, ADAM17 RNA nuclear export and membrane protein expression, and decreased ACE2 expression, which were reversed by METTL3-KD
Cultured ECs were identified by substantial CD31 expression ( A). Compared to controls, Ang II incubation increased m6A levels ( B) and METTL3 expression ( C) of ECs, while METTL3-KD reversed these effects. This is consistent with our results from animal experiments.
 Ang II incubation increased ADAM17 expression and decreased ACE2 expression of ECs compared to controls, consistent with our results from animal experiments. ADAM17-KD decreased ADAM17 expression and increased ACE2 expression, while ADAM17-OE had the opposite effect in ECs incubated with Ang II ( D), further verifying the degradated effects of ADAM17 on ACE2 expression.
Incubation with Ang II increased cytoplasmic/nuclear ADAM17 RNA ratio ( E) and membrane ADAM17 expression ( F) in ECs, and METTL3-KD inhibited these effects. These results indicate that increased METTL3–m6A induced by Ang II promoted nuclear export of ADAM17 RNA and subsequent protein translation. In addition, Ang II incubation decreased ACE2 membrane expression ( G), which was abrogated by METTL3-KD. To further determine why there was not increased ADAM17 expression in ADAM17-EOE + METTL3-EKD mice, we measured ADAM17 cytoplasmic/nucleic transcription level and protein expression in ADAM17-OE + Ang II-treated ECs with or without METTL3-KD. Both cytoplasmic/nucleic ADAM17 RNA ratio (Supplementary Fig. S6A) and ADAM17 protein expression (Supplementary Fig. S6B) were significantly increased in ADAM17-OE ECs compared with controls, suggesting the transgene effectiveness of ADAM17-OE. However, both the increased ADAM17 RNA nuclear export and protein expression were inhibited by METTL3-KD in ADAM17-OE + METTL3-KD ECs, which further verified our results in vivo.
It has been reported that application of Ang-II type 1 receptor (AT1R) inhibitor losartan and lysosomal inhibitor leupeptin in Neuro-2A cells or intracerebroventricularly in mice inhibits the effects of Ang II to reduce ACE2 expression and activity [ ]. To test whether there is a potential synergistic effect of AT1R-dependent lysosomal degradation with the mechanism explored in this study, we detected the effects of EC pretreatment with losartan, leupeptin, ADAM17-KD, or leupeptin + ADAM17-KD before Ang II incubation on ACE2 level in ECs. We found that compared with saline, Ang II incubation significantly decreased the ACE2 level in ECs, while losartan abolished, leupeptin slightly inhibited, and ADAM17-KD or leupeptin + ADAM17-KD significantly inhibited Ang II’s ability to decrease ACE2 expression in ECs (Supplementary Fig. S6C). However, there was no significant difference between the effect of leupeptin + ADAM17-KD and only ADAM17-KD group. These further verified the major downstream mechanism of inhibitory effects of Ang II/AT1R on ACE2 was the increasement of ADAM17 to cleave ACE2 in vascular endothelial cells.

## Discussion
Attenuated small arteries relaxation and increased constriction caused by endothelial dysfunction continuously elevate total peripheral resistance, sustaining elevated blood pressure. Combined with subsequent cardiovascular remodeling, these effects exacerbate development of hypertension and contribute to deteriorating organ function [ , ]. Here we found that arteries of hypertensive patients have elevated METTL3 expression and m6A levels, suggesting they might be clinical biomarkers involved in the pathogenesis of hypertension. Ang II-upregulated METTL3 expression and m6A modification of ADAM17 RNA promoted its nuclear export and subsequent protein expression in EC membranes, which decreased ACE2 membrane expression and activity and thus Ang-(1–7) plasma levels. Due to vasodilator and endothelial protective effects of Ang-(1–7), decreased Ang-(1–7) levels contribute to attenuated vascular relaxation and increased constriction of small arteries, increasing peripheral resistance and maintaining hypertension as well as subsequent cardiovascular remodeling. Our Graphical Abstract depicts how METTL3-mediated m6A of ADAM17 downregulates the ACE2–Ang-(1–7) axis to promote progression of Ang II-induced hypertension.
ECs balance vasoconstriction and vasodilation by releasing endothelium-derived vasoconstrictor and vasodilator factors including NO, endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factors, and prostacyclin [ , , ]. In hypertension, endothelial dysfunction occurs early and mainly manifests as reduced release of endothelium-derived relaxing factors, especially NO [ ], and increased release of VEGF or PDGF, which stimulate proliferation of vascular smooth muscle and cause vascular remodeling [ , ]. Along with pathological development of hypertension, endothelial dysfunction further elevates peripheral resistance and BP as well as cardiovascular remodeling [ , ]. Decreased elasticity and thickened blood vessel walls, increased vascular fibrosis, and arterial stenosis damage organs including kidney, brain, and heart, eventually leading to death [ , , ]. Our previous studies show that spontaneously hypertensive rats have attenuated endothelium-dependent relaxation of small arteries (including mesenteric, coronary, and pulmonary arteries) and vascular remodeling [ , , ]. Therefore, it is urgent to determine the mechanism of vascular endothelial dysfunction in hypertension to identify effective prevention and treatment strategies.
METTL3-mediated m6A modification contributes to pathogenesis of various cardiovascular diseases [ , , ]. The level and distribution of m6A in pericytes of spontaneous hypertensive rats differ from Wistar Kyoto rats, indicating that m6A also participates in development of hypertension [ ]. In addition, METTL3–m6A modification is significantly upregulated in ECs under hypoxic stress, and silencing or overexpression of METTL3 alters EC proliferation, viability, tubulogenesis, and migration [ ]. Increased m6A modification levels enhance miR-19a maturation, accelerating EC proliferation and invasion in patients with atherosclerosis [ ]. These findings indicate that METTL3–m6A modification helps regulate EC function. However, whether METTL3–m6A modification participates in regulation of endothelial dysfunction, BP, and cardiovascular remodeling in hypertension as well as its main target genes and loci remain unknown.
Here we found that Ang II induced significant endothelial dysfunction and cardiovascular remodeling with increased METTL3 expression and m6A levels in arteries. EC-specific METTL3 knockdown significantly improved attenuated endothelium-dependent vasodilation and cardiovascular remodeling, increased NO levels and eNOS activity, decreased vasoconstriction and VEGF and PDGF levels, and decreased BP, effectively resisting the effect of Ang II. These results indicate that elevated METTL3-dependent m6A modification contributes to endothelial dysfunction, cardiovascular remodeling, and high BP in Ang II-induced hypertension. Thus, targeting METTL3–m6A in ECs potentially provides a new target to prevent progression and development of hypertension.
In addition, we found that METTL3-EKD mice have increased smooth muscle relaxation in response to exogenous NO (SNP-induced relaxation), although there was no difference in smooth muscle relaxation between control and hypertensive mice. Whether METTL3 in ECs contributes to smooth muscle NO signaling is an interesting question that we will investigate in future studies. Also interesting is that METTL3-EKD decreased PDGF plasma levels not only in Ang II-induced hypertensive mice but also in control mice, while similar results were not observed for other parameters such as VEGF and NO. One study reports that semaphorin-4D acts on Plexin-B1, inducing METTL3-mediated PDGF secretion to stabilize vessels [ ]. However, another study defines PDGF signaling as an upstream regulator of oncogenic m6A regulation, driving tumor metabolism to promote cancer stem cell maintenance [ ]. Therefore, there might be a complex relationship between METTL3–m6A and PDGF, and we speculate that METTL3 might be necessary for physiological PDGF secretion from ECs, which we will study deeply in the future.
Next question is what is the major target of Ang II-upregulated METTL3–m6A modification in ECs? Our m6A MeRIP-seq analysis showed that arterial m6A methylation is an important target of Ang II in mice and that m6A peaks of ADAM17 RNA were increased in Ang II samples compared to controls. Combined with previous findings that Ang II perfusion increases ADAM17 activity and expression and decreases ACE2 activity and expression in myocardium, resulting in cardiac fibrosis and hypertrophy [ ], and that Ang II enhances ACE2 shedding mediated by ADAM17 in brains of patients with neurogenic hypertension [ ], we speculate that ADAM17 is a key target of Ang II-upregulated METTL3–m6A.
ADAM17 on the cell membrane surface cleaves ACE2, shedding its extracellular portion and reducing ACE2 expression and function on the cell membrane [ , ]. Diabetic mice have increased ADAM17 expression in renal tubules, and its cleavage of ACE2 on the cell membrane increases free ACE2 fragments in urine [ ]. ACE2 plays an important role to catalyze conversion of Ang II to Ang-(1–7) in plasma, reducing circulating Ang II levels and increasing Ang-(1–7) levels [ ]. Activity of Ang-(1–7)/Mas receptors in the periphery improves endothelial-dependent vasodilation and subsequently decreases BP by activating eNOS–NO production in ECs [ , ], counteracting Ang II effects to boost vascular smooth muscle cells’ inflammatory responses, migration, and proliferation [ ].
To ascertain that the ADAM17–ACE2–Ang-(1–7) axis was a major target of METTL3–m6A modification upregulated by Ang II, we firstly measured expressions and activity of members in this axis. We detected opposite expression of ADAM17 and ACE2 in mesenteric arteries, and subsequent increased soluble ACE2 levels and decreased Ang-(1–7) contents in plasma of Ang II-treated mice. This indicates that increased ACE2 was cleaved and released into the plasma by upregulated ADAM17 through Ang II stimulation, resulting in decreased membrane-bound ACE2 enzyme. However, soluble ACE2 should retain the ability to cleave Ang II, so why were plasma Ang-(1–7) levels decreased in Ang II-induced hypertensive mice?
It has been reported that serum soluble ACE2 level and Ang II level are markedly increased while serum Ang-(1–7) level is decreased in diabetes mellitus mice compared to controls [ ], which is consistent with our results. Another study reported that increased soluble ACE2 in cerebrospinal fluid is correlated with elevated SBP in hypertensive patients, while hypertensive patients who control BP by taking RAS blockers have normalized soluble ACE2 levels [ ]. The authors supposed that those drugs might decrease BP by reducing brain RAS activity, inhibiting ADAM17 activation, and ultimately preserving ACE2 on the cell membrane. Compared to the membrane-bound enzyme, soluble ACE2 might be less efficient at converting Ang II into Ang-(1–7), perhaps due to decreased local metabolism or an altered structure [ ]. We agree with the author's above viewpoint and think that decreased membrane-bound ACE2 contributed mainly to low Ang-(1–7) level in hypertension, which we intend to further study in the future. Abnormal expression of the ADAM17–ACE2–Ang-(1–7) axis and ACE2 activity in arteries and plasma in hypertensive mice were all reversed by METTL3-EKD, indicating the upstream regulating contribution of METTL3 to Ang II-induced ADAM17–ACE2–Ang-(1–7) axis alteration.
Secondly, we performed EC-specific ACE2 knockdown or ADAM17 overexpression in Ang II-perfused mice. ACE2-EKD almost completely abolished the protective effects of METTL3-EKD in hypertension, confirming that ACE2 is a key downstream target of the Ang II-upregulated METTL3–m6A modification of ADAM17 in endothelial cells in early stage of hypertension, although ADAM17 has other downstream targets such as pro-TNF-α [ ]. Also interesting was that ACE2-EKD rescued downregulation of ADAM17 expression caused by METTL3-EKD. We speculate that ACE2 might has the negative feedback to inhibit ADAM17 expression by other mechanisms, therefore ACE2-EKD reduces this inhibitory feedback on ADAM17, resulting in the elevated expression of ADAM17. We intend to study this possibility in depth in the future.
ADAM17-EOE significantly increased ADAM17 expression and decreased ACE2 expression in Ang II-treat mice, further suggesting the cleave effect of ADAM17 on ACE2 in ECs membrane. However, ADAM17-EOE with METTL3-EKD together failed to increase ADAM17 expression and influence the effects of METTL3-EKD, verifying that METTL3 is necessary to increase ADAM17 expression and function in Ang II-induced hypertension, because without METTL3-dependent m6A modification ADAM17 is unable to increase its expression and cleave ACE2 in mice with Ang II-induced hypertension.
Cell experiments further found that Ang II incubation increased METTL3 expression, m6A level, and membrane ADAM17 expression yet decreased ACE2 membrane expression in ECs. More importantly, Ang II promoted nuclear export of ADAM17 RNA, and these effects were all reversed by METTL3-KD in ECs. ADAM17-KD increased, while ADAM17-OE decreased ACE2 expression in ECs. These results further confirmed that the increased nuclear export of ADAM17 RNA caused by Ang II-upregulated METTL3–m6A modification is the origin of abnormal ADAM17-ACE2–Ang-(1–7) axis in hypertension.
Cell experiments also showed that nuclear export of ADAM17 RNA was not increased in ADAM17-OE combined with METTL3-KD ECs, and accordingly its ADAM17 protein expression also was not increased as in ADAM17-OE ECs without METTL3-KD. These in vitro results further verified that without METTL3-dependent m6A modification, ADAM17 was unable to export from the nucleus and over-express effectively and play its function despite gene overexpression or Ang II stimulation. This also accounts for unchanged ADAM17 protein expression and no influence in the effects of METTL3-EKD in vivo.
It has been reported that elevated Ang II levels reduce ACE2 expression and activity through an AT1R-dependent mechanism by stimulating lysosomal degradation in neurocytes [ ]. From our results, we surmise that the inhibitory effects of Ang II on ACE2 were by activating AT1R, while the major downstream mechanism after AT1R activation was the increasement of ADAM17 to cleave ACE2 in vascular endothelial cells. There was no significant synergistic effect of these two mechanisms in ECs. The effect of Ang II through elevating ADAM17 to cleave ACE2 is supported by other studies [ , , ] and the situation in vascular ECs might differ from neurocytes.
In summary, we believe that Ang II/AT1R activation upregulated METTL3–m6A modification of ADAM17 RNA, increasing nuclear export of ADAM17 RNA and its membrane protein expression in ECs. Elevated ADAM17 on the EC membrane increases shearing of ACE2, shedding the extracellular portion into blood to decrease ACE2 protein expression and active function on the membrane of ECs and subsequent Ang-(1–7) plasma levels, resulting in endothelial dysfunction and the consequent high peripheral resistance and BP as well as cardiovascular remodeling in hypertension.
Thus we believe that METTL3 or ADAM17 might be important targets for clinical diagnosis and treatment of hypertension. Developing biomarkers based on METTL3 or ADAM17 expression levels could be used for early diagnosis of hypertension or to assess its progression. Specific inhibitors targeting METTL3 or ADAM17 might effectively recover endothelial function, providing new strategies to treat hypertension. Yet despite its strengths, this study also has limitations. We used a single animal model but did not repeat experiments in another model or species to exclude species-specific differences. In addition, the absence of long-term observation (several months to one year) on BP and other parameters by METTL3-EKD limits the clinical significance of our findings.

## Conclusions
METTL3 conditional knockdown in ECs improved endothelium-dependent vasodilation, prevented cardiovascular remodeling, and decreased vasoconstriction and BP in hypertensive mice by inhibiting the suppressive effect of ADAM17 on the ACE2–Ang-(1–7) axis. The ADAM17–ACE2–Ang-(1–7) axis was a major regulating target of METTL3–m6A modification upregulated by Ang II in ECs, so targeting m6A through the methylation writing enzyme METTL3 might be a promising diagnostic or therapeutic strategy for hypertension.

## Compliance with ethics requirements
Aorta specimens of adult normotensive control patients and hypertensive patients were procured from the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University (Nanjing, China). This study was approved by the Institutional Review Committee at the First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical University (2022-SR-730).
Animal procedures were approved by the Experimental Animal Care Committee of Nanjing Medical University (approval #IACUC-2211007) and were conducted in accordance with guidelines provided in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (NIH publication, 8th edition, 2011).

## Data availability
Data supporting the findings of this research article are available upon reasonable request to the corresponding author.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 82270455, 81801047 and 82171173), the Scientific Research Foundation of Shanghai Fourth People's Hospital (# sykyqd03301 and #SY-XKZT-2021-1005), Major Project Foundation of the Science and Technology Commission of Hongkou District, Shanghai (#Hongwei 2301-04), the Qingdao Key Medical and Health Discipline Project (Grant No. 4910) and the Intramural Research Program of The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University (Grant No. 4901).

## Footnotes
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2025.08.026.

## Contributor Information
Aidong Chen, Email: aidongchen@njmu.edu.cn.
Lei Zhang, Email: zhangleimz@qduhospital.cn.
Ying Han, Email: yhancn@njmu.edu.cn.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary data
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

## Supplementary Data 1

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Supplementary Data 1

## Data Availability Statement
Data supporting the findings of this research article are available upon reasonable request to the corresponding author.