pmcCurr Res Food SciCurr Res Food Sci3927crfsCurrent Research in Food Science2665-9271ElsevierPMC12141550PMC12141550.112141550121415504048590110.1016/j.crfs.2025.101068S2665-9271(25)00099-11010681Review ArticleTechnologies for detecting biological risk factors in agricultural products and their applications
LiuYunfang LiuKaifa LiuYahuiliuyahui@nim.ac.cn aSchool of Chemical Engineering Shenyang University of Chemical Technology, Shenyang, 110142, ChinabCenter for Advanced Measurement Science, National Institute of Metrology, Beijing, 100029, China⁎Corresponding author. liuyahui@nim.ac.cn20250652025104772991010685220251342025452025060520250606202509062025© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Agricultural products are crucial to human survival and development. However, during every stage of production, from planting, growing, and harvesting to transportation and storage, products are at risk of infection by bacteria, fungi, viruses, parasites, and other biological factors. Accordingly, rapid and accurate detection of biological risks and effective risk monitoring are urgently required to ensure food safety and effective epidemic control. This review discusses the hazards associated with various biological risk factors for agricultural production. It also synthesizes cutting-edge research on detection technologies for identified risk factors, including nucleic acid amplification, immunoassay, biosensing, mass spectrometry, and spectroscopy. Each method's advantages, current challenges, and future applications are described. This study enhances our understanding of the risk factors in agricultural production and offers a valuable reference for the enhancement of detection technologies.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Exploration of biological risk factors detection methods, from molecular and to immunoassay.
•Discussion of the importance of standardization for accurate testing.
•Future directions for efficient biological risk factors detection in agricultural products.

## Keywords
Detection technologiesBiological risk factorsAgricultural productsFood safetypmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDHandling Editor: Professor Aiqian Ye

## Abbreviations
AAOanodic aluminum oxide
AFB1aflatoxin B1
BaYMVbarley yellow mosaic virus
CbAgoClostridium butyricum argonaute protein
CFUcolony forming units
CRISPRclustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
CasCRISPR associated protein
CSBVChinook salmon bafinivirus
DLDHdihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase
EIECenteroinvasive E. coli
ELISAenzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
GAPDHphosphate-3-glyceraldehyde dehydrogenase
GC-MSgas chromatography-mass spectrometry
HPLChigh-performance liquid chromatography
IMBimmunomagnetic bead
LAMPloop-mediated isothermal amplification
LFDlateral-flow dipstick
LODlimit of detection
LOQlimit of quantification
MaYMVmaize yellow mosaic virus
MRPmuramidase-released protein
PCAprinciple component analysis
PCRpolymerase chain reaction
PCVporcine circovirus
PMApropidium monoazide
PMMoVpepper mild mottle virus
qPCRquantitative real-time PCR
RPArecombinase polymerase amplification
RT-LAMPreverse transcription LAMP
SERSsurface-enhanced Raman scattering
SPIAsingle-primer isothermal amplification
IS-PAsequence-independent single-primer amplification
SPMEsolid-phase microextraction
ToBRFVtomato brown rugose fruit virus
TPPtobacco packaging paper
WGSwhole genome sequencing

1

## Introduction
As a basic strategic resource for the survival and development of human society, agricultural products such as grains, vegetables, fruits, and meat provide essential nutrients, thus ensuring global food security. However, agricultural production systems are facing two simultaneous crises: first, the global population is expected to exceed 9.6 billion by 2050 ( ), and consequently, demand for major crops will increase by 60 %; second, agricultural products are exposed to contaminants, such as bacteria ( ) (Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli., Aflatoxin spp., Shigella spp., and Salmonella spp.), fungal toxins ( ) (aflatoxin B1 [AFB1], fumonisin B1), viruses ( ) (Norovirus, hepatitis A virus, and pepper mild mottle virus [PMMoV]), parasites ( ) (Cryptosporidium tyzzeri and Echinostoma spp.), and other bio-risk factors throughout the production process, including cultivation, processing, storage, and transportation. Pathogenic microorganisms can lead to reductions in crop yield, livestock deaths, and serious public health crises via the crop-livestock-human cross-transmission chain. The World Health Organization reported that in 2010, 31 types of foodborne illnesses had caused 33 million people to be injured or disabled around the globe. ( ; ). Children ≤5 years of age accounted for 40 % of all foodborne cases, with salmonella and norovirus alone causing a significant disease burden ( ). The combined effect of a limited supply of agricultural products due to bio-contamination and an upsurge in foodborne illnesses is placing unprecedented pressure on global food security and healthcare systems.
To address agricultural biosecurity risks, producers have attempted to implement risk management using technological innovations and the transformation of production modes; typical measures include the substitution of biopesticides, the optimization of farming density, and the deployment of intelligent monitoring systems. However, such transitions face multiple challenges in terms of cost-balancing, technological suitability, and ecological sustainability. Therefore, early identification of biological risk factors and the development of targeted response strategies are more realistic measures. Currently, there is a parallel pattern of classical and emerging technologies for bio-risk detection: classical methods, such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) ( ), loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and gas chromatography (GC-MS) are highly accurate, but the required equipment and complexity of the processes severely limit the efficacy of on-site detection. The rapid development of biosensors, surface enhanced raman spectroscopy (SERS), clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR), and other emerging methods has facilitated improved detection rates (minute response), scene adaptability (field/laboratory multi-scene compatibility), and cost-effective triple breakthroughs, resulting in a new generation of rapid detection technology systems. It is noteworthy that the engineering applications of portable equipment, such as the handheld Raman spectrometer, which maintains detection sensitivity and specificity, have enabled the migration of technology from the laboratory to the front line of production, thus marking the beginning of on-site instant diagnosis for biological risk monitoring of agricultural products.
This review systematically summarizes the key research advances in the field of bio-risk factor detection technologies in agricultural products in recent years. The major bio-risk factors of agricultural products and their hazards are summarized, followed by a comprehensive review of existing detection methods. Finally, some challenges and opportunities are presented. The potential applications of different technologies in agricultural production systems are discussed in depth by comparing their advantages and limitations, especially in terms of key aspects such as quality control, transportation process monitoring, and risk assessment. This review breaks the conventional paradigm of focusing on a single technology and adopts a panoramic perspective to elucidate the current mainstream testing technology system. This comprehensive review will improve the efficiency of researchers and reveal important features of the current testing field, such as the “dual-track” development pattern in which the parallel evolution of traditional methods and emerging technologies. Despite the remarkable progress in technological iteration, significant challenges persist in this field. By highlighting these key issues, the analysis provides valuable insights and improvement opportunities for advancing next-generation detection systems.

2

## Main biological risk factors in agricultural products
Foodborne pathogens can use agricultural products as vectors. When these foods are consumed by humans without proper handling, pathogens can enter the body via the esophagus, leading to food poisoning, gastroenteritis, zoonotic infections, nausea, vomiting, and other illnesses.
2.1

## Bacteria
Representative foodborne pathogenic bacteria include E. coli ( ), S. aureus ( ), Vibrio parahaemolyticus, V. cholerae, Listeria monocytogenes ( ), Shigella flexneri, Bacillus cereus, and Salmonella spp. reported an outbreak of Shiga toxin-producing E. coli O104:H4 in Germany in 2011 that led to 2971 cases of gastroenteritis in only two months, including 18 fatalities, resulting in a huge burden on the local healthcare system. Of the confirmed human cases reported in the European Union One Health 2020 Zoonoses Report, 120,946 were attributed to campylobacteriosis, 52,702 to salmonellosis, 5668 to yersiniosis, and 4446 to Shiga toxin-producing E. coli. ( ). Moreover, a quantitative risk model for health hazards in ready-to-eat foods developed by the European Center for Disease Prevention and Control showed that >90 % of invasive listeriosis cases are caused by the ingestion of “meat and meat products,” “fish and fishery products,” and “milk and milk products” containing 2000 colony-forming units (CFU) of L. monocytogenes per gram. Furthermore, foods of plant origin and frozen foods (e.g., cantaloupe, caramel apples, and ice cream) have also been associated with L. monocytogenes outbreaks ( ).

2.2

## Fungi
Mycotoxins such as gibberellinone toxin, ochratoxin A ( ), AFB1 ( ), fumonisin B1 ( ), and vomiting toxins are toxic small-molecule metabolites produced by specific fungi in certain environments and often occur in corn, wheat, and other crops ( ). They can enter the bodies of humans and animals via ingestion and inhalation; however, direct contact with the skin can also be very harmful. The predominant mycotoxins in important agricultural commodities and their hazards, as well as strategies for their control, management, and prevention in pre- and post-harvest foods, have been discussed previously ( ). In humans and animals, fungal toxins can disrupt protein synthesis, destroy cellular structures, inhibit organ function, affect host immune regulation, and induce carcinogenicity, teratogenicity, and mutation, jeopardizing health and ecological stability ( ). In Zimbabwe in 2016 and 2017, the prevalence of aflatoxins and fumonisins was higher in maize than in cereals during grain harvest and storage (52 % and 89 % for maize and 13 %–25 % and 0 %–32 % for cereals, respectively). The risk assessment of aflatoxin exposure showed that consumption of infected maize may lead to hepatocellular carcinoma rates of up to 9.2/100,000 people/year, creating a considerable burden on the local healthcare system ( ).

2.3

## Viruses
Viruses are specialized organisms that lack cellular structures. They must live within the cells of a host organism to carry out their life cycle and show no signs of activity once they leave the host cell. Viruses have caused incalculable losses in agricultural production and development and have raised considerable public health concerns ( ). For example, african swine fever virus (ASFV), which can spread via people moving in vehicles between different areas, causes a lethal disease in pigs. In 2015, ASFV led to just under one million domestic pigs and 1300 infected European wild boars dying or being culled, causing huge economic losses for the livestock industry, especially in underdeveloped areas ( ). Furthermore, human norovirus, which belongs to the Cuprioviridae family, is a major contributor to acute gastroenteritis. Between 2001 and 2015, norovirus caused approximately 900 deaths (2.8/1,000,000 person-years), 109,000 hospitalizations (3.6 per 10,000 person-years), 465,000 emergency room visits (15.3 per 10,000 person-years), and 2,270,000 ambulatory clinic encounters (74.9 per 10,000 person-years) annually in the United States, corresponding to a $600 million annual healthcare burden ( ). Moreover, as the virus changes each year, uncontrollable factors increase, and strain mutations are often unexpected, increasing the risk to human health.

2.4

## Parasites
Parasites are a group of pathogenic invertebrates and unicellular protozoa ( ) that exploit their hosts to obtain nutrients for survival and reproduction ( ). Parasites can affect the behavior of the host and normal functioning of the body. Common foodborne parasites include C. tyzzeri, spiny mouth suckers, nematode eggs, porcine colonic pouch ciliates, and bovine tapeworms. Schistosoma laminarum is a foodborne zoonotic parasite with a complex life cycle and growth stages. It uses agricultural product distribution and migrating animals as vectors, traversing between different environments and hosts before entering humans and triggering problems such as liver tissue damage and inflammation ( ). Similarly, bovine tapeworms are associated with an average economic cost of €3,408,455/year, including €2,954,061/year for insurance, €453,024/year for uninsured cattle deaths, and €1370/year for the disposal of infected dead cattle. With an annual insurance cost of €422,004 for abattoirs and an annual income of €2,322,337 for the insurance companies, it is clear that the economic losses caused by this parasite are substantial and predominantly impact cattle breeders ( ). In areas with underdeveloped basic medical facilities, most parasites are considered simple veterinary problems and, consequently, do not receive the attention of local growers and farmers. However, ignoring the harmful effects of parasites can lead to incalculable losses ( ).

3

## Biological risk factor detection technologies
Accurate detection of biological risk factors in agricultural products is crucial for developing effective food safety protection systems. In recent years, with the iterative upgrading of detection technologies, breakthroughs have been made in key performance indicators, such as sensitivity, detection limit, and dynamic range. In view of the specificity of different biological risk factors, new detection technologies, which are highly effective and enhance the sensitivity of target identification and trace analysis capabilities, continue to emerge. In particular, the CRISPR-Cas system reconstructs the portable path of nucleic acid detection by virtue of the high specificity of “molecular scissors” and is particularly advantageous as it enables room-temperature detection. SERS technology has been used to improve the detection limit and dynamic range of key performance indicators. It enables the sensitive identification of trace toxins in complex matrices at the single-molecule level via a nanoscale “hot spot” effect. At the same time, traditional detection technologies are being integrated with cutting-edge technologies, thus accelerating their evolution toward miniaturization and modularization. PCR, which remains the “gold standard” method used to support accurate verification, antibody kits that empower instant screening on site, and biosensors and mass spectrometry/spectroscopy technologies are expanding the detection scenarios in terms of miniaturization integration and molecular fingerprinting analysis, respectively. The detection technologies form a multi-dimensional complementary technology network. In this context, an in-depth analysis of the principal characteristics and optimization paths of different technologies, through the progressive transformation logic of “laboratory validation-equipment miniaturization-field deployment,” provide a systematic solution that is sensitive, adaptable, and operable for the prevention and control of agricultural biosecurity.
3.1

## Nucleic acid amplification technology
3.1.1

## PCR
PCR is a molecular biology technique that requires a small number of original DNA fragments. It rapidly amplifies specific DNA fragments in vitro from the original sample, resulting in millions of DNA fragments in only a few hours. As PCR is a mature technology, this section focuses on a series of novel techniques derived from it ( ). 
3.1.1.1

## qPCR
Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) ( ) involves the addition of fluorescent dyes or groups to the PCR reaction system. The accumulation of these dyes is monitored in real time and quantitatively analyzed using Ct values and standard curves. Currently, there are two main types of qPCR: the TaqMan probe method and the SYBR Green I dye method. established a TaqMan qPCR technique for detecting Heterodera filipjevi in wheat. The primers designed in the study were verified and determined to have good specificity, with Ct values ranging from 27.11 to 32.38. The established technique was used to detect H. filipjevi, with limits of detection (LODs) of 4−3 single second-stage juvenile (J2) DNAs, 10−3 female DNAs, and 0.01 μg μL−1 genomic DNAs. In addition, established a qPCR technique based on the new primers CampyPFw and CampyPRv, which facilitated the rapid detection and quantification of Campylobacter in chicken samples. These primers were able to detect the four most widespread Campylobacter species at levels <103 CFU/mL. The LOD in non-enriched chicken samples using this primer was 4.6 × 102 cells/mL with R2 = 0.99, slope k = −3.315, and an efficiency of 100.28 %. The qPCR protocol in the study is simple, rapid, has good sensitivity, and can be used to analyze chicken meat that has low bacterial titers directly.
SYBR Green I dye binds to all double-stranded DNA (dsDNA). Therefore, in a PCR system, the dye is incorporated into dsDNA during the extension stage of each cycle as the specific PCR product is amplified exponentially, and the intensity of the fluorescent signal is proportional to the amount of the PCR product. used the SYBR Green I staining method to detect and quantify Bacillus cereus in raw milk, identifying an optimized annealing temperature of 62 °C. A melting curve was constructed for specificity and found to have a good peak shape with no non-specific amplification. The LOD of the method was 200 CFU/mL, and the limit of quantification (LOQ) was 2 × 102∼2 × 108 CFU/mL, with an amplification efficiency of 96.6 %. The overall detection time was controlled at 4 h, enabling the accurate detection of pure B. cereus spores in raw milk.
Propidium monoazide (PMA), a highly selective chemical, can penetrate “dead” cells with compromised membrane integrity. By leveraging this property to detect pathogenic bacteria, researchers can eliminate the false positives caused by dead cells and improve the accuracy of test results. applied PMA to a qPCR assay and established a multiplex method to detect Salmonella, E. coli, and S. aureus in the birds’ nests, donkey skin gelatin, and wolfberry. Three primers and probes were designed to amplify the target genes invA, uidA, and nuc, and the reaction conditions were optimized using an annealing temperature of 57 °C and a PMA concentration of 30 μg/mL. The method specifically detected Salmonella, E. coli, and S. aureus with LODs of 100, 100, and 10 CFU/mL, respectively, with recoveries ranging from 95.7 % to 105.6 %. also used this method to quantify four Xanthomonas pathogens (X. euvesicatoria, X. gardneri, X. perforans, and X. vesicatoria) in tomato seeds. Two pairs of primers were designed, one localized to X. euvesicatoria and X. perforans and the other to X. gardneri and X. vesicatoria, and both were validated to ensure that they amplify the four target strains. Subsequently, DNA was purified from concentrated seed extracts for testing, and PMA-qPCR successfully detected target pathogen DNA in seed samples spiked with 75 CFU/mL of viable bacteria. A crude DNA extraction method was also developed for non-concentrated seed extracts, which detected 104∼108 CFU/mL of viable bacteria when in an extract containing 107 CFU/mL of dead cells. The detection method was inexpensive and could accurately quantify viable cells of the target bacteria.
To improve PMA dye penetration in the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria, developed lactic acid enhancers and successfully used them to detect E. coli in milk. Optimization experiments showed that 10 mM lactic acid pre-treatment effectively enhanced the penetration of PMA in heat-killed cells. Subsequently, a specific primer was designed and tested for the univA gene, exhibiting a good amplification effect and high sensitivity with an LOD of log 2 CFU/mL.
Further improving qPCR performance, validated the ISO/TS 18867 qPCR method to quantitatively detect Yersinia enterocolitica in bivalve mollusks at three different concentrations (2, 20, and 200 CFU/25 g), showing complete agreement with the ISO 10273 method. Subsequently, the assay was performed using SYBR Green and TaqMan dual qPCR methods, demonstrating an LOD of 2 CFU/25 g. Furthermore, showed that the qPCR method could be used for the broad and rapid screening of Salmonella in vegetables by comparing the qPCR assay and traditional culture results across 16 laboratories. In the first round of experiments, the overall positive rate of both the culture method and the novel qPCR technique exceeded 75 % (FDA requirement: 25 %–75 %); in the second round of experiments, the positive rate of both experiments was <75 % at low inoculum levels, with a relative detection level of 0.969, suggesting that both methods have similar sensitivity.

3.1.1.2

## RT-PCR
Reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) technology uses the reverse transcription of template RNA to synthesize complementary cDNA for PCR analysis and is widely used to detect pathogenic bacteria. RT-PCR allows direct RNA extraction, cDNA synthesis, and PCR amplification from infected fruits.
PMMoV is a member of the genus Tobamovirus and is one of the most important causes of reduced pepper yields. It occurs worldwide, posing a serious threat to pepper production and development. compared the performance of RT-PCR for the detection of PMMoV in pepper seeds to that of the double antibody sandwich-ELISA (DAS-ELISA) method. DAS-ELISA was able to detect the target virus from 20 mg of chili seeds, whereas RT-PCR required only one seed. Moreover, the virus's vertical transmission rate in chili seeds was evaluated using both growth tests and RT-PCR. Based on visual observations of the symptoms, the seed transmission rates of three chili varieties, California Wonder, Yolo Wonder, and Doux des Landes, were 63.04 %, 33.80 %, and 33.30 %, respectively. Based on RT-PCR, the seed transmission rate was estimated as follows: California Wonder, 55.56 %; Douxdes Landes, 40.64 %; and Yolo Wonder, 28.96 %. RT-PCR provides more reliable data than visual observations.
Detecting multiple viruses simultaneously in the same target can greatly improve detection efficiency. To this end, Xu et al. ( ) developed a multiplex RT-PCR technique to successfully detect lily symptomless virus, lily mottle virus, cucumber mosaic virus, and plantain mosaic virus in lilies. Specific primers were designed, and both single and multiplex RT-PCR conditions were optimized for sensitive virus detection, resulting in an annealing temperature of 53.8 °C and 35 total cycles. For lily symptomless virus, lily mottle virus, and cucumber mosaic virus, both single and multiplex RT-PCR enabled detection with the same sensitivity. Single RT-PCR was slightly more sensitive for plantain mosaic virus detection, possibly due to the competition between key reactants.
Larocque et al. used crystal digital RT-PCR (RT-cdPCR), a novel detection technique, to quantify norovirus GI/GII and hepatitis a virus in frozen raspberries ( ). RT-cdPCR was more sensitive than RT-PCR at all contamination levels. Thus, the accurate and absolute quantification of norovirus GI/GII and hepatitis A virus is possible in matrices that were previously difficult to analyze (e.g., frozen raspberries).

3.1.1.3

## RT-qPCR
Real-time quantitative fluorescent reverse transcription PCR (RT-qPCR) is a technique wherein template mRNA or total RNA is first reverse transcribed into cDNA and then quantitatively analyzed using qPCR. RT-qPCR has been used to detect microbial pathogens in many agricultural products. studied the effect of tomato brown rugose fruit virus (ToBRFV) on tomato and chili pepper crops in Turkey and developed a reliable RT-qPCR assay. Two pairs of primer sets specific for ToBRFV, ToBRFV1F/ToBRFV1R and ToBRFV2F/ToBRFV2R, were designed and validated for specificity, and both showed positive signals for RNA samples from tomatoes infected with ToBRFV with good specificity and a detection threshold of 1:249. Due to the lack of tomato and pepper varieties resistant to these viruses, the assay developed in this study may be one of the few available tools for early diagnosis and preventive measures in crop management.
Grapevine E virus (GVE) can cause serious disease in grapes. In the early stages of infection, no obvious symptoms appear, and later symptoms can be confused with other physiological diseases, complicating management. Fang et al. ( ) developed an RT-qPCR assay using amplification experiments, sensitivity tests, and virus detection in different seasons to detect GVE in grapevine samples. The QEF4/QER4 primers were validated and showed good specificity, detecting only GVE when co-infected with 10 other viruses at 10−4-fold cDNA dilution. The assay was 100 times more sensitive than traditional RT-PCR, exhibiting good amplification linearity, a high detection coefficient (R2 = 0.997), and high detection efficiency (E = 97.5 %) based on the standard curve. Detection was slightly better in samples from the fall and winter seasons than in those from spring and summer, and the best tissues for GVE detection were old petioles and branches.
 developed RT-qPCR techniques to detect noroviruses and hepatitis A virus in strawberries and vegetables. The overall mean incidence of the virus in fresh strawberries was 48 %, with a mean concentration of 6.1 × 10−3 genome copies (GC)/g; the overall mean incidence of Norovirus genogroups I and II (GI and GII) was 25 % and 40 %, respectively, with a mean concentration of 9.7 × 10−2 and 2.4 × 10−3 GC/g, respectively. The experiments were also carried out on frozen strawberries and vegetables; one week of freezer storage was insufficient to inactivate or degrade virus RNA.
Trypanosoma cruzi is a protozoan organism that can cause serious cardiac and digestive problems if untreated. Oliveira et al. ( ) developed an RT-qPCR method to quantitatively analyze T. cruzi in food products and identified a Cyb1 primer specific for the target. First, the performance of RT-PCR and PCR was assessed using a 10-fold sequence dilution with LODs of 1 × 104 DNA/mL and 1 × 102 mRNA/mL for PCR. RT-qPCR and qPCR detected LOD values of 10 parasites/mL and were able to distinguish between viable and non-viable parasites. Subsequently, the recovery from inoculated açaí fruit juice was tested using RT-qPCR, and the highest recovery (82.50 %) was found for T. cruzi. Interestingly, the sensitivity of RT-qPCR for detecting parasites at >1 × 104/mL was higher than that of the qPCR assay.
Opportunistic parasites are organisms that exhibit a sudden increase in reproduction and pathogenicity when the host is immunocompromised. evaluated the performances of RT-qPCR, PMA-qPCR, and propidium iodide viability staining to determine the viability of three such parasites, Cryptosporidium parvum, Giardia enterica, and Toxoplasma gondii, in fresh leafy green vegetables. The results showed that 2–9 oocysts/g spinach could be accurately detected using RT-qPCR after adding 10 oocysts to 10 g spinach. In contrast, PMA-qPCR did not detect the target DNA even at its highest value after 40 cycles of qPCR thermocycling. Moreover, the RT-qPCR method could efficiently differentiate between live and inactivated C. parvum, G. enterica, and T. gondii in spinach. Although PMA-qPCR did not detect the target parasite in the above experiments, it remains one of the most important methods for differentiating between live and dead pathogens. optimized PMA-RT-qPCR for norovirus detection in live mussels and compared the one-step amplification of short genomic fragments with two-step RT-qPCR using three sets of primers targeting different genomic regions and different amplicon sizes. The RT-qPCR process for detecting >2.3 kbp fragments accurately estimated the infectivity of UV-damaged murine norovirus. Sample virus extraction methods using anionic polymer-coated magnetic beads were compared with the proteinase K ISO standard. Combining magnetic bead-based extraction with the PMA-RT-qPCR technique improved the norovirus gene copy number by 2.3 log10 and resulted in more accurate infection titer estimations than the RT-qPCR technique.

3.1.1.4

## dPCR
Digital PCR (dPCR) is a highly sensitive method for the absolute quantification of nucleic acids derived from the qPCR technique. dPCR entails the homogeneous distribution of the reaction system into independent reaction units for PCR amplification, and quantitative analysis is performed by calculating the nucleic acid copy number according to the Poisson distribution. used dPCR to specifically detect Salmonella spp. in chicken rinses. dPCR of undiluted DNA samples with primers and probes for the Salmonella-specific norovirus gene yielded an LOD of 0.001 ng/μL and an LOQ of 0.01 ng/μL. Subsequently, to further determine the concentration of Salmonella spp., the samples were inoculated for 5 h, and dPCR accurately estimated the level of inoculated bacteria.
 conducted a study comparing Norovirus GI and GII detection in oyster tissues between an optimized RT-dPCR method and an ISO 15216-compliant RT-qPCR method across eight international laboratories. The coefficient of variation (CV%) for Norovirus GI was much lower for RT-dPCR than for RT-qPCR, whereas that for Norovirus GII was similar between methods, although the RT-dPCR assay may be favorable if a dsDNA standard prepared in-house is used. This technique is among the few interlaboratory study methods for the RT-dPCR detection of viral RNA in food.
Furthermore, published single- and multi-laboratory validations of the droplet dPCR method, exploring the performance and acceptance parameters set by the EU and other international guidelines for the analysis of genetically modified organisms in food and feed. The accuracy, repeatability, and reproducibility of the droplet dPCR method met the acceptance criteria set by these guidelines.

3.1.2

## LAMP
3.1.2.1

## Traditional LAMP
LAMP is an isothermal nucleic acid amplification technique first proposed by . LAMP amplifies the target DNA strand under isothermal conditions using DNA polymerase with high exchange strand activity and a set of specially designed primers. It has been widely used for pathogenic microbial detection and has promising applications.
Fusarium wilt, caused by Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. Fragariae, is a typical fungal disease that develops predominantly around the seedling and harvesting stages of fruits. established a LAMP technique for Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. Fragariae detection in strawberry based on the detection of the genomic region between the Han and Skippy parts of the transposable factor. Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. Fragariae strains GL1270 and GL1385 were successfully detected on the strawberry rhizomes after inoculation by increasing the incubation time from 1 to 1.5 h, with an LOD of 100 pg of genomic DNA and no false-positive reactions.
 established a LAMP technique to rapidly detect a recently documented fish virus, Chinook salmon bafinivirus (CSBV), in flounder. The primers designed in this study were based on the spike regions of CSBV Bces-Po19 and CSBV Bces-Sm22 and exhibited good specificity. The optimal detection temperature was 63–67 °C, and the temperature range, stability, and practicality of the assay were improved compared with those of the previous one( ). The LOD of the method was as low as 10 pg/μL.
Spongospora subterranea is a fungal blemish disease of potatoes that can be easily confused with other potato infections. established a LAMP assay for S. subterranea, and the designed primer, PS-LAMP, was useful for detecting this pathogen using computer simulations and in vitro tests. Specificity and sensitivity experiments were also performed to examine the frequent display of polymorphisms in the ITS2 region. The primers exhibited good specificity and accurately detected the pathogen in infected potatoes. The lowest number of reaction copies for LAMP was 6, and the lowest detectable DNA template reached 2 pg, which was 10 times higher than that of the traditional PCR assay. Moreover, the detection results were visible to the naked eye.
To avoid reliance on thermal cyclers and gel electrophoresis, Edgü et al. ( ) developed a LAMP assay for detecting tobacco rattle virus in potatoes using a colorimetric visualization system in place of melt curve analysis, modifying the optimal primer set for the virus. The method was comparable to RT-PCR in terms of precision and reliability, with 89 % sensitivity and 100 % specificity. The mini-LAMP- lateral-flow dipstick (LFD) combination scheme developed in this study exhibits great application potential, as it meets the requirements for on-site detection and simplifies the sample handling process compared with that of the traditional LAMP method.
Blackleg disease is one of the most important infections jeopardizing the yield of rapeseed. Du et al. ( ) established a LAMP method to detect Leptosphaeria biglobosa in oilseed rape using 11 primers based on its ITS-rDNA sequence. After screening, PS5 was selected as the optimal primer set in terms of sensitivity and specificity, and a single nucleotide mutation was artificially introduced into the primers. After optimizing the reaction conditions, the target bacteria could be detected at 65 °C for 45 min. Regarding sensitivity, the minimum amount of DNA in each reaction was 988 fg, which was 100 times higher than that of the traditional PCR technique. employed a 45 min reaction time at an optimized reaction temperature of 60 °C to establish a LAMP detection technique for Phoma macdonaldii in sunflower. When using the specific primers, the five sunflower pathogens showed clear color differences from other pathogens. The LOD of the tested method was 100 fg DNA or 10 conidia per g of seed.
Soybean red crown rot caused by the fungal pathogen Calonectria ilicicola results in root rot, leaf senescence, early defoliation, plant wilting, and even death. developed a LAMP assay for the β-tubulin gene of C. ilicicola in soybean using primers for the 400 bp region of β-tubulin and the 50 bp region of H3 with the highest sequence variation. The gDNA of C. ilicicola could be stably detected at a concentration of 0.01 ng/μL. The authors also developed a field protocol for the assay, which consisted of a simple on-site crude DNA extraction method using a buffer, a vacuum-insulated flask maintained at a temperature of 62 ± 0.5 °C, and a vacuum-insulated bottle. A temperature-stabilized portable container was constructed for isothermal amplification, and SYBR Green I solution was added to the detection system to achieve results visible to the naked eye, providing great convenience for immediate on-site detection.
Olives are an important agricultural product with medicinal and food properties. established a real-time LAMP assay to detect Pleurostoma richardsiae in diseased olive plants. The method incorporated luciferase into the conventional LAMP assay system for real-time detection. First, specific primers for the intergenic spacer region were designed, followed by a sustained reaction at 70 °C for 45 min to amplify target sequences. No fungi other than P. richardsiae were detected in the specific assay that included 10 P. richardsiae strains and 36 other fungal strains. The LOD of the method was 7.5 × 10−2 ng/μL. All olives infected by artificial inoculation were identified, demonstrating the accuracy of this tool.
The accidental ingestion of toxin-containing mushrooms may induce gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea, and hemolysis, liver, and kidney damage, and death in severe cases. developed a visual and real-time fluorescent LAMP method to identify Hebeloma crustuliniforme mushrooms and chose ITS for the primer design because of its short sequence, low interspecies variability, and wide range of applications. WarmStart Colorimetric LAMP 2 × Master Mix (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) was used to visualize the reaction based on pH value; the solution changed from pink to yellow upon target gene detection. This technique can also be used to identify H. crustuliniforme from fresh, cooked, and digested samples with LOD values as low as 1 pg/μL genomic DNA and no cross-reactivity with other mushrooms.

3.1.2.2

## RT-LAMP
Reverse transcription LAMP (RT-LAMP) incorporates reverse transcription with the traditional LAMP system to improve nucleic acid amplification. Considering the frequency of unexpected mutations in the swine influenza A virus (IAV-S) matrix gene, established an RT-LAMP method for gene detection in porcine nasal samples. IAV-S RT-LAMP primers were designed, and the reaction conditions were optimized for 30 min at 65 °C. The LOD was 20 M gene copies for the direct LAMP of the matrix gene standard. However, the LOD was 1000 M genes when using cell culture samples.
Citrus Huanglong disease, also known as yellow blight, is caused by the Bacteroides bacteria that threatens the sustainable development of the citrus industry. developed a rapid RT-LAMP assay targeting the five-copy nrdB gene of Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus, the causal agent of citrus Huanglong disease. The method achieved target molecule detection with a sensitivity as low as 2.6 Log10 copies, enabling rapid identification from crude citrus leaf extracts with 96 % similarity to the qPCR assay results.
Barley yellow mosaic virus (BaYMV) is a major cause of disease in winter barley production areas of Europe and Asia, severely affecting barley and wheat production. established an RT-LAMP method to detect BaYMV using two pairs of primers designed to amplify the BaYMV shell protein gene. Under optimized conditions, the energy band weakened at a reaction temperature of >63.1 °C, so the amplification temperature was set to 62 °C for both RT-LAMP and LAMP reactions. Based on the previously established LAMP reaction, twofold amounts of BaYMV-FIP and BaYMV-BIP primers, as well as Bst DNA polymerase, were added, along with SYBR Green I, and the product could be observed by the naked eye in 30 min, with an LOD as low as 0.001 ng/mL of total RNA.
Maize yellow mosaic virus (MaYMV) is a newly discovered virus belonging to the genus Polerovirus that infects maize and wheat and is transmitted by aphids. Infested plants exhibit yellowing or reddening of the leaves that starts from the tip and gradually expands along the veins to the base of the leaf, as well as stunted growth. developed a one-step RT-LAMP assay for MaYMV detection in maize, achieving an LOD as low as 1 pg, which is 100 times higher than that of conventional RT-PCR. The study was optimized with concentrations of betaine, Mg2+, and deoxy-ribonucleoside triphosphates of 0, 1.4, and 6 mM, respectively, and a reaction time of 50 min. The method successfully detected MaYMV from crude RNA rapidly extracted from infected maize samples as a template, with no significant change in sensitivity.
Banana Bract Mosaic Virus is one of the most prominent viral pathogens affecting bananas. developed a one-step RT-LAMP assay to detect BBrMV by targeting the BBrMV shell protein gene, and six primers were designed with high specificity and sensitivity. Visual detection was achieved by adding 120 μM metal ions to the RT-LAMP system, and a closed-tube assay minimized the possibility of sample cross-infection without any additional steps. The molecular characterization of RT-LAMP products by restriction enzyme digestion analysis and sequencing detected 0.1 pg of BBrMV in the total RNA of symptomatic plants.
 developed one- and two-step RT-LAMP assays coupled with bioluminescence assays in real time (BART) to detect hepatitis A virus in food. ATP is active and luminescent only when bound to Mg2+; consequently, its concentration significantly affects assay sensitivity. Accordingly, the ATP concentration was optimized for 2 mM Mg2+ in the one-step method and 4 mM in the two-step method, with optimal reaction temperatures of 55 °C and 62 °C for the one-step and two-step methods, respectively. After sensitivity testing using 10-fold serial dilutions of virus stock solution, the LOD was 0.083 PFU/reaction for the one-step method and 2.1 PFU/reaction for the two-step method.

3.1.3

## RPA
Isothermal recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) is a technology based on the T4 phage nucleic acid replication mechanism and achieves thermostatic nucleic acid amplification through the action of single-stranded binding proteins, recombinase proteins, and DNA polymerases ( ).
Shrimp liver enterocytosis caused by Enterocytozoon hepatopenaei is a common disease in shrimp that inhibits nutrient absorption, significantly increasing the catchability coefficient and causing incalculable losses to the aquaculture industry. established a real-time RPA detection system for E. hepatopenaei relying on fluorescence analysis instead of the traditionally used gel electrophoresis, eliminating the previous drawbacks of RPA and greatly improving its sensitivity. After validation, the method was 60 times more sensitive than the gel electrophoresis RPA technique. Unlike PCR and other methods that require high temperatures with precise control, the novel RPA process required a reaction at 39 °C for only 3–5 min to achieve an LOD of 13 gene copies/reaction in 95 % of the samples with good specificity.
In a joint application of technology, established an RPA method combined with lateral flow distance (RPA-LFD) to rapidly detect Shigella and enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC). They designed specific primers and LFD detection probes for ipaH, a virulence gene shared by both bacteria. The optimal reaction temperature, primer concentration, and reaction time were optimized at 39 °C, 0.24 μM, and 20 min, respectively. Further, 20 bacterial species were selected for the specificity evaluation, and only Shigella and EIEC produced an obvious red color, indicating good specificity. The LOD of the method was 1.29 × 102 copies/μL, showing similar sensitivity to the RPA method but without requiring expensive laboratory instruments. also established an RPA-LFD assay to specifically identify Pantoea stewartia subsp. stewartii in maize by amplifying a genomic region unique to subspecies for molecular detection and diagnosis. The method provided a detailed categorization and identification of the target genus, with an LOD as low as 0.0005 pg/μL and 1 × 102 CFU/mL−1 (∼2 bacterial cells used per cell reaction).
Zhao et al. reported that combining RPA with the lateral flow chromatography test strip assay (LFS) technique can significantly improve detection efficiency ( ). A real-time RPA-LFS assay was established for the detection of Salmonella in foodborne illness-associated products such as chicken, lamb, vegetables, and eggs. The study designed primers and probes based on the invA, and the reaction conditions were optimized with a temperature of 39 °C and a time of 20 min. The LOD was 1.1 × 101 fg for real-time RPA and 1.1 × 102 fg for LFS-RPA.
The influence of non-targeted microorganisms and other factors that prevent the extraction and enrichment of detection targets is one of the most important challenges to overcome in developing detection technologies. developed an RPA-conjugated immunomagnetic bead (IMB) method for the detection of S. aureus in milk and pork. Carboxylated Fe3O4 magnetic beads are dispersive and superparamagnetic, aiding in the isolation of pathogenic bacteria, and the authors developed IMBs for the enrichment of the pathogenic bacteria. RPA primers were designed for the nuc gene. The capture efficiency of the beads in S. aureus cultures was good, even in the presence of other bacteria such as E. coli and Salmonella typhimurium. The LOD for artificially contaminated samples was 2.5 × 101 CFU/mL. To detect S. aureus, established a real-time RPA method with an LOD of 102 copies/reaction, which is 10 times higher than that for qPCR. In the test case, the LOD was 1.28 × 10−2 copies/reaction, and the detection time was 5–13 min, which is suitable for detecting S. aureus in foods such as artificially contaminated pork.
RPA also enables the simultaneous detection of different pathogenic bacteria. developed a dual RPA method for the simultaneous detection of S. aureus and L. monocytogenes using specific primers and probes based on the nucleotide sequences of the actin assembly-inducible protein precursor and aggregation factor A genes. After optimizing the reaction conditions, the final concentrations of the S. aureus and L. monocytogenes primers were 200 and 220 nM, respectively, and the probe concentrations were 20 and 80 nM, respectively. The sensitivity of RPA detection was 10−2 copies/μL with a detection time of 15 min using the plasmid as a standard, which was not significantly different from the PCR detection sensitivity. After evaluating the efficacy of the dual RPA in a physical model, sensitivities of 230 and 270 CFU/reaction were achieved for L. monocytogenes and S. aureus, respectively, after incubation in inoculated rib sample-enriched broth for 4 h.
Furthermore, established an RPA method for the simultaneous detection of maize chlorotic mottle virus and sugarcane mosaic virus in maize. The reaction time was optimized at 30 min. The method exhibited an LOD of 102 copies/μL−1, which was 10 times more sensitive than the conventional PCR method.
 developed a technique for the detection of ASFV by designing specific primers and probes combined with AuNPs and a lateral flow-directed gene assay. The technique used tailed primers to generate dsDNA with a ssDNA tail, which could hybridize to the AuNPs of a labeled oligonucleotide detection probe. Biotin was attached to the dsDNA end and bound to the streptavidin pre-immobilized on the test line, thus forming a sandwich structure, and the AuNPs labeled on the detection probe showed a red band on the test line of the strip. The reaction was optimized at 37–42 °C for 30 min, and the LOD was 102 copies/μL.
PCR/qPCR systems have dominated the mainstream with mature amplification mechanisms, but their demanding requirements for sophisticated temperature control systems and dependence on specialized personnel have severely limited their application efficiency in point-of-care testing (POCT) scenarios. This has given rise to RPA, LAMP, a representative thermostatic technology: RPA technology using ambient reaction system, with the design of multi-primer can be accomplished with multi-target simultaneous detection, the hardware configuration is simplified to a common thermostatic device can run. However, the non-specific amplification caused by the thermostatic mechanism leads to a decrease in assay precision. Therefore, there is a growing demand for nucleic acid detection technologies with high efficiency, sensitivity, and specificity, that do not have extensive equipment requirements. This means nucleic acid detection technologies have always aimed to balance equipment dependence and detection efficiency.

3.2

## Immunological analysis technology
Immunoassays combine natural immune responses with modern testing technologies using ultra-microform detection and antigen/antibody reactions to assess the quality and safety of agricultural products. Practical applications of immunoassay technologies include common diagnostic techniques such as hemagglutination tests, ELISA, colloidal gold immunochromatography, and radioimmunoassays, which can be used to analyze a variety of products, such as fruits and vegetables, dairy products, meat, poultry and egg products, aquatic products, beverages, wine, and spices.
3.2.1

## ELISA
ELISA uses an enzyme molecule that binds to an antigen or antibody; variations include direct, indirect, sandwich, and blocking ELISA. Indirect ELISA can overcome the limitations of porcine streptococcal ELISA type II kits, which can only detect a single serotype in reactions with a high probability of interaction. established an indirect ELISA method to detect Streptococcus suis. A checkerboard titration method was used to optimize reaction conditions, and GMD protein (a combination of dominant epitopes of phosphate-3-glyceraldehyde dehydrogenase [GAPDH], muramidase-released protein [MRP], and dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase [DLDH]) was purified for use as the encapsulated antigen to improve sensitivity and safety. The method detected S. suis types 2, 7, and 9 without cross-reactivity with S. enterocolitica or E. coli, showing good specificity and sensitivity. This method can be used to detect S. suis rapidly at dilution ratios of 1:6400.
ASFV induces the synthesis of more than 100 viral proteins. established an indirect ELISA technique for ASFV using the genotype II recombinant proteins p22 and p30 expressed and purified in an E. coli vector system and used in combination as antigens. In real serum testing, the sensitivity and specificity of the method were 93.5 % and 99.8 %, respectively, and the batch-to-batch coefficient of variation for internal quality control serum was 6.61 %, showing that the technique can reliably detect ASFV. established an indirect ELISA assay by encapsulating 2.5 μg/mL of the ASFV non-coding structural protein pB602L in a 1:50 dilution of primary antibody and 1:2000 dilution of secondary antibody. Using clinical serum samples, the results were compared with those of an ELISA kit based on p72, and a 95 % agreement was identified between the two, with similar specificity and sensitivity. Furthermore, established an indirect ELISA technique using ASFV p15 protein as the encapsulated antigen, which was expressed in E. coli with an elastin-like peptide and purified by a simple reverse conversion cycle method. To avoid false-positive results, a label-free ASFV p32 protein antigen was produced, and to cut the label, a TEVp recognition site was introduced between the elastin-like polypeptide and the p15 sequence so that the purified protein could be cleaved, yielding a label-free p15 protein. The resulting antigen exhibited good specificity and no cross-reactivity with other viruses, successfully detecting ASFV p15 protein at a dilution of 1:1600 in standard ASFV-positive sera. The intra- and inter-batch CVs were <10 %, demonstrating good reproducibility. Furthermore, established a quadruple recombinant protein indirect ELISA assay for ASFV considering the different expression sites and protein modifications of four proteins: CD2v-N and p22 in the baculovirus expression system and CAP80 and p54 in the prokaryotic cell expression system. The detection of ASFV viral antibodies using the four antigenic proteins resulted in a maximum positive/negative ratio of 24.033 at a concentration of 0.25 μg/mL for a single antigen and 1 μg/mL for the four-antigen combination (at a 1:100 serum dilution), demonstrating high sensitivity compared with commercial ID Screen African Swine Fever Indirect ELISA kits.
Porcine circovirus (PCV) causes a variety of diseases, collectively known as PCV disease, in pigs of different breeds, sexes, and ages. PCV disease symptoms include typical immunosuppressive characteristics. Consequently, it is easily confused with other viral or bacterial diseases, resulting in impaired growth and development and a compromised immune system. established an indirect ELISA method for PCV antibody detection by injecting purified Rep protein into mice to generate specific antibodies for its detection. The resulting antigen did not cross-react with the antisera of the other porcine viruses, and the intra- and inter-group CVs of the assay results were 0.644 %–8.211 % and 0.859 %–7.246 %, respectively, with good reproducibility.
AFB1 is a common mycotoxin in feed ingredients, and it is very harmful to the poultry industry. established a highly sensitive monoclonal antibody for detecting AFB1 in corn and feed and performed an indirect competitive ELISA. AFB1- 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylamino-propyl) carbodiimide (EDC)-BSA was selected as the coating source at an optimized concentration of 1.08 μg/mL and an optimal antibody dilution of 1:1500. The LODs in maize and feed were 6.58 and 5.54 ng/kg, respectively, with recoveries ranging from 72 % to 94 %, and the method was suitable for high-throughput sample detection.
Competitive ELISA (cELISA) has also been used to detect ASFV. developed a nanobody (Nb75) for the ASFV-p30 protein, which has better affinity and stability than conventional antibodies because it only has one variable region to bind to the antigen. Since the competitive ELISA performed using this nanobody does not require an enzyme-labeled secondary antibody, it is more cost-effective and simpler to prepare. To determine the cut-off value of cELISA, which was 22.7 %, 360 negative pig sera were tested. The detection limit of the cELISA for positive pig sera was 1:320.
 established a dual ELISA method by expressing and purifying CD2v and p30 proteins from CHO cells. After validation in a eukaryotic expression system for the n-terminal glycosylated structural domain, ELISA conditions were optimized, and the highest P/N ratios were achieved at CD2v and p30 protein concentrations of 2 and 1.5 μg/mL, respectively. The optical density (OD) cutoffs for the CD2v- and p30-ELISA were 0.32 and 0.22, respectively. The established dual ELISA technique exhibited good specificity and does not cross-react with other antibodies.
To perform blocking ELISA, prepared the monoclonal antibody 4C4 for p72 by recombinantly expressing ASFV p72 protein, yielding an area under the curve of 0.9997 with a 95 % confidence interval range of 99.8 %–100 %. At a threshold of 41.97 %, the test achieved a diagnostic sensitivity of 100 % (95 % confidence interval 92.02 %–100 %) and a specificity of 98.51 % (95 % confidence interval 92.02 %–99.92 %), and detection was possible up to a dilution of 1:512.
Yang et al. ( ) developed a novel ELISA method for detecting antigen-specific immunoglobulin G (IgG) in cows during early and late lactation in New Zealand. Since this technique yielded negative values, it was tested using a Gaussian mixed model. The ELISA exhibited high diagnostic accuracy (AUC = 0.98) for antigen-specific IgG in cows with high somatic cell counts before and after S. aureus infection, with a critical range of values from 0.26 (sensitivity = 0.94, specificity = 0.91) to 0.3 (sensitivity = 0.9, specificity = 0.95).

3.2.2

## GICA
A gold immunochromatographic assay (GICA) that was developed at the end of the 20th century is emerging as an in vitro diagnostic technique. It uses colloidal gold as a marker for the immunological localization and qualitative and quantitative study of cells or tissues via electron microscopy and is capable of achieving rapid detection results.
Schistosomiasis is a disease caused by the parasite Schistosoma haematobium in humans. It results in fever, diarrhea, and liver cirrhosis. It is widespread in Asian, African, South American, and Middle Eastern countries and usually infects individuals working in agriculture or fisheries. established a novel saponin protein, SjSAP4, for the rapid detection of schistosomiasis using GICA. After optimization, PBS with 0.9 % NaCl was selected as the optimal dilution buffer, and the test strip performed well in the dilution range of 1:10–1:2020. Computer analysis improved the accuracy of the results. The combination of SjSAP4-GICA and SjSAP4-ELISA showed a high degree of consistency, and the former exhibited high stability without requiring laboratory personnel. The test strips can be stored for up to 12 months at ambient temperature with no effect on performance.
 established a GICA method to rapidly detect Mycoplasma capricolum subsp. capripneumoniae (Mccp). Recombinant P20 protein, a membrane protein of M. capricolum, was selected as the binding antigen, and colloidal gold particles of 34 nm, which exhibit high stability and good flow on the membrane, were prepared using a solution of hydrated hydrogen tetrachloroaurate and trisodium citrate. The test strips remained valid with excellent sensitivity when the M. capricolum-positive serum samples were diluted up to 64-fold. No cross-reactivity was observed for any other goat pathogens, and the low cost and on-site applicability of the method make it a valuable means for detecting M. capricolum infection in goats.
Porcine deltacoronavirus (PDCoV) is a novel enteropathogenic coronavirus causing gastrointestinal symptoms such as diarrhea and vomiting in pigs. Newborn piglets are highly susceptible to PDCoV infection, with mortality rates as high as 30 %–40 %, posing a considerable threat to the global pig industry. developed a GICA method for the rapid detection of PDCoV. A monoclonal antibody specifically recognizing the recombinant PDCoV core coat protein was prepared to develop GICA test strips. Results showed that the detection limit of the GICA strip developed in this study was 103 TCID50/mL for the suspension of virus-infected cell culture and 0.125 μg/mL for PDCoV, respectively. The detection time was only 15 min, allowing for the rapid and efficient detection of PDCoV in feces.
 developed a double GICA test strip to detect monoclonal ASFV antibodies simultaneously based on immobilized p30 and p72 proteins. The average size of the prepared colloidal gold particles was approximately 18.4 nm, with good uniformity and dispersion. The test paper was able to specifically detect the ASFV antibody after 5–10 min with a sensitivity at dilutions up to 1:256 with over 98 % agreement with commercial ELISA kits. Moreover, it could be stably stored at 18–25 °C and 4 °C for 4 and 6 months, respectively.
T. gondii is a ubiquitous parasite that usually does not cause serious symptoms. However, in immunocompromised individuals, pregnant women, and fetuses, such infections can be fatal. established a GICA protocol for T. gondii. After selecting apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1C) as the best colloidal gold strip, conditions were optimized to a pH 8 and a coupling protein concentration of 2 μg/mL. The strips achieved a suitable LOD at dilutions up to 1:32 and could be stored at 4 °C for 12 weeks or at 37 °C for 4 weeks.
 prepared specific antibodies based on the capsid protein (dCAP) and performed GICA to detect PCV type 2. Affinity chromatography-purified polyclonal antibodies could recognize dCAP protein b. After optimizing conditions to pH 8 and a protein concentration of 8 μg/mL, colloidal gold-polyaniline coupling was performed, and the dCAP and goat anti-rabbit antibodies were sprayed on nitrocellulose membranes as the test and control lines, respectively. The method demonstrated an LOD of 5 ng/mL, and the GICA strips could be stored at 4 °C for 2 years, showing 88.9 % agreement with commercial ELISA kits. The ROC curves showed a sensitivity and specificity of 72.7 % and 96.0 %, respectively.
Wheat and maize are important grain crops that sustain human life worldwide. developed a method to simultaneously detect FB1, deoxynivalenol (DON), and zearalenone (ZEN) in wheat and maize based on 25 nm GICA test strips. The gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) were characterized by UV spectrophotometry, revealing an average diameter of 24.4 nm. The pH, number of antibodies, and immunochromatographic test strips for the AuNPs were optimized separately, and the strips exhibited good methanol tolerance. The LODs for FB1, DON, and ZEN were 60, 12.5, and 6 ng/mL, respectively, with good specificity. The results of both were validated using lipid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS), and they showed good agreement. The established method is simple and rapid, and the results can be obtained within 15 min, providing a new technique for detecting the three toxins in agricultural products such as corn.
The biggest advantages of GICA are its speed, convenience, and safety; the detection process takes approximately 15 min. However, disadvantages also exist: the throughput is not high, and the accuracy of the test paper is highly dependent on the specificity of the antibody, so it is prone to false-positive or false-negative results.

3.2.3

## TRFIA
Time-resolved fluoroimmunoassays (TRFIAs) use lanthanides with unique fluorescent properties and corresponding chelating agents as antibody or antigen tracers in biophilic reaction systems. The fluorescence intensity of the system is measured using a time-resolved fluorometer to determine the amount of the substance to be measured.
Monoclonal antibodies prepared using the hybridoma technique, based on somatic cell fusion, are now widely used in all major fields. developed one such monoclonal antibody-based TRFIA to quantitatively detect AFB in maize and feed. Conditions were optimized as follows: polyester bonding pads, PALL 170 nitrocellulose membrane, MA0120 sample pads, and 6 min assay time. The LOD of TRFIA was 60 and 121 ng/kg for corn and feed, respectively, with a linear range of 100-4000 ng/kg and a recovery of 90 %–98 %. The detection process required only 21 min from sample processing to results, which showed consistency with LC-MS/MS results.
 developed a double-antibody sandwich TRFIA method for the qualitative and quantitative detection of ASFV antigen in porcine nasal secretions. Recombinant p30 antigen is bound by an antibody immobilized on a 96-well plate and conjugated to another antibody labeled with a europium (III) chelate and finally the fluorescence intensity is measured by a time-resolved analyzer. In clinical sample detection, the LOD was 0.015 ng/mL, and the detection time was approximately 45 min. The established method was highly sensitive and specific, providing new insights for ASFV detection.
The bacterium S. aureus can survive in a wide range of environments and cause skin and soft tissue infections, osteomyelitis, pneumonia, sepsis, and other conditions. It can be transmitted by direct contact or through contaminated agricultural products. developed a TRFIA method to quantitatively analyze S. aureus in milk by leveraging the unique advantages of the metal-organic framework glucose oxidase-encapsulated zeolite imidazole framework (ZIF)-90 as a labeling probe to amplify the detection signals using porcin antibody (pIgG) and vancomycin (Van). The functionalization of Fe3O4 nanoparticles with pIgG enriched and isolated the target bacterium, and the metal-organic framework and Van bound specifically to the target bacterium, forming a sandwich structure in which glucose is oxidized and binds to europium tetracycline chelate to induce a fluorescence reaction. In contrast, H2O2 forms a complex with europium tetracycline chelate that emits red fluorescence, thus eliminating background fluorescence and improving the precision of the assay. The LOD of the method was 2 CFU/mL, and the LOD for S. aureus in milk samples was 5, 5, and 3 CFU/mL for raw, partially skimmed, and skim milk, respectively.
DON belongs to a class of fungal toxins with considerable cytotoxicity and fast spread. Widely occurring during the growth, harvest, transport, and storage of wheat, barley, corn, and other cereal crops, it is known as the “invisible killer. established a TRFIA-based test strip for the detection of DON in corn. The performance was optimized with a microsphere-to-antibody ratio of 1:1 and a drying time for the nitrocellulose film of 24 h. The test strips were employed to detect DON in maize, exhibiting an LOQ of 28.16 μg/kg, a linear range of 50-10,000 μg/kg with good linearity (R2 = 0.9926), and a recovery of 92 %–104 %. Furthermore, a one-step, time-resolved, single-channel immunochromatographic test strip based on europium-ionized polystyrene fluorescent microspheres was developed by for the detection of DON and ZEN in maize and wheat, achieving LODs of 0.17 and 0.54 μg/L, respectively. Dual-channel immunochromatographic test strips were designed to detect simultaneously both mycotoxins, with LODs of 0.24 and 0.69 μg/L for DON and ZEN, respectively.
Furthermore, Expanding the traditional TRFIA sensor strategy based on antibody labeling, a second antibody labeling method was used for DON detection. Since the single antibody molecule binds multiple probes, the fluorescence signal intensity is amplified, enhancing detection sensitivity. The TRFIA paper sensor was tested in the detection range of 1–100 ng/mL with an LOD of 0.121 ng/mL for the test sample and of 0.206 and 0.216 ng/mL for the corn and feed matrix, respectively.
Tobacco mosaic virus disease is the most common and harmful disease in global tobacco production. Its occurrence has steadily risen in China, seriously affecting the yield and quality of tobacco. detected the tobacco mosaic virus using TRFIA. Monoclonal antibodies were prepared using virus particles as immunogens and were coupled to Eu3+ nanospheres for immunological analysis. The reaction time was optimized at 10 min. The LOD in naturally infected tobacco samples was 0.24 ng/mL, and the recoveries ranged from 90.71 % to 108.11 %, representing one of the few TRFIA platforms suitable for on-site detection in tobacco with high specificity and sensitivity. summarizes the application of immunoassay techniques to detect and predict biological risk factors in agricultural products (see ). 
Non-competitive immunoassay techniques have demonstrated significant technological advantages at the theoretical level, with core indicators such as detection sensitivity, result accuracy, and linear response range superior to those of traditional detection methods. However, the traditional non-competitive immunoassay requires the analytes to have at least two recognizable epitopes. Therefore, small molecular contaminants in food and agricultural products are not suitable to be detected by the traditional sandwich-type immunoassay. To address this technological bottleneck, the following two improvements can be attempted: first, stabilizing the structure of antibody-small molecule complexes or constructing a new antibody-semi-antigen coupling system; and second, developing cost-effective and intelligent non-competitive immunosensing devices to achieve parallel detection of multiple indicators and rapid screening of large-scale samples.

3.3

## Biosensor technology
Biosensors are instruments that can convert the concentration of a target substance into an electrical signal for detection. They comprise a biomolecular recognition element, enzymes, antibodies, antigens, nucleic acids, and other sensitive biologically active components, and a signal converter. When in contact with the target substance, specific binding with the molecular recognition element yields biological information. The signal converter then converts this information into an optical or electrical signal that is easy to record and analyze, thus detecting the measured substance. Biosensors with high stability, sensitivity, and selectivity are widely used in the food safety monitoring industry.
3.3.1

## Colorimetric biosensors
The colorimetric strategy quantitatively analyzes the amount of a substance in a sample by measuring the difference in light absorption between the sample and a standard solution.
Common colorimetric biosensors use metallic nanomaterials to absorb light at specific wavelengths from the test object for detection purposes. developed an AuNP colorimetric biosensor for the detection of unamplified E. coli O157:H7 DNA extracted from flour based on the Stx1 virulence gene. Detection can be performed in as little as 30 min after genomic DNA extraction, with an LOD of 2.5 ng/μL. developed an infrared bacteriostatic colorimetric biosensor based on CuSe nanoparticles for the detection of E. coli O157:H7 in milk. They used a precipitation method to synthesize magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles surface-modified with specific antimicrobial peptides to identify the target bacteria and prepared magnetic distribution probes using IMBs to selectively enrich and isolate the target bacteria in the samples. Subsequently, the aptamer was modified on the surface of CuSe by Cu-S bonding to obtain apt-CuSe nanoenzymes that, along with the IMBs, could dually recognize E. coli O157:H7 in the samples and bind to the bacterial surface to form a sandwich structure. The signal was amplified by introducing a 2,2′-azino-bis(3-eth-acylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonate) (ABTS)-hydrogen peroxide solution that changed color in response to an increase in bacterial concentration. The LOD of this method is 103 CFU/mL and a detection time of 4 h. A novel microfluidic-based colorimetric biosensor has recently been developed for the detection of E. coli O157:H7 and can be used to detect other pathogenic bacteria via the replacement of the biometric element. The biosensor utilizes a improved AS7265x spectroscopic sensor for colorimetric analysis of catalytic substrates and is capable of detecting 5 × 101 similar to 5 × 106 CFU/mL of E. coli O157:H7 in 45 min with a lower limit of detection of 17 CFU/mL( ).
Novel recognition element phages are increasingly being used in colorimetric biosensors due to their high stability and specificity for bacteria. developed a colorimetric biosensor to detect S. aureus using a corresponding phage as the biorecognition element. After examining the conditions of pH tolerance and uptake rate of four phages, SapYZUs7 showed the highest titer, widest host range, greatest pH tolerance (3–12, >91 %), highest uptake rate (71.6 %, 6 min), and highest unique gene content and was thus selected for biosensor development. The prepared sensor showed high sensitivity and specificity, with an LOD of 0.77 × 102 CFU/mL. In the same year, this team also constructed a colorimetric biosensor containing a nanoenzyme based on the broad-spectrum S. aureus lysogeny phage SapYZU11 and ZnFe2O4. Due to the peroxidase-like ability of SapYZU11@ZnFe2O4, the biosensor not only exhibited excellent bioactivity but also detected a variety of S. aureus isolates from different origins with good sensitivity and specificity (LOD = 0.87 × 102 CFU/mL) ( ). Furthermore, developed a colorimetric biosensor based on magnetic separation and rolling circle amplification to quantitatively analyze S. aureus in fruit juice. The researchers prepared vancomycin-functionalized magnetic beads to enrich and isolate the target bacteria, developed DNA nanoflowers (DNFs) via rolling circle amplification, and introduced streptavidin-modified horseradish peroxidase through the biotin affinity system to amplify the signals. After adding the enzyme substrate, the horseradish peroxidase catalyzed a color change. This validated the method's ability to detect S. aureus with an LOD of 3.3 × 103 CFU/mL.
ELISA-based bacterial biosensors constructed using paper led to inhomogeneity in the vertical direction due to the laminated fiber mat structure of the paper and fiber membranes formed during manufacturing. This can lead to inconsistent colorimetric signals, strong sample matrix effects, and susceptibility to false-positive results. To address this problem, established an ELISA colorimetric biosensor based on chemically modified melamine with a macroporous reticulated three-dimensional framework structure. This structure allows large biomolecules and bacterial cells to move freely and rapidly in all directions, facilitating antibody-antigen interactions, enriching bacteria, and improving the sensitivity of colorimetric detection. The colorimetric biosensing platform exhibited a sensitivity of 10 CFU/mL in a detection time of 1.5 h, which could be increased to 5 CFU/mL with the help of a smartphone.
To establish a compact and lightweight powerless detection device for POCT, established a novel centrifuge tube colorimetric biosensor for S. typhimurium detection. The authors used immunonickel nanowires to form a capture network for the specific separation of target bacteria, gold@platinum nanoenzymes to label the target bacteria to amplify the detection signals, and a mobile phone app to quantitatively analyze the color change, with the entire detection process conducted in laboratory centrifuge tubes. The sensor was tested on pork serum containing S. typhimurium, yielding an LOD of 21 CFU/mL and a recovery of 87.0 %–97.6 %, with an average recovery of 93.9 %.

3.3.2

## Electrochemical biosensors
An electrochemical biosensor combines biorecognition with electrochemical signal conversion to detect biomolecules via changes in electrochemical reactions. In addition to high sensitivity and accuracy, these biosensors enable the continuous, real-time, rapid in situ detection of specific molecules in complex biological fluids or food samples and even in vivo, offering a considerable advantage over analytical techniques such as nucleic acid amplification and immunology.
C. tyzzeri is a common intestinal protozoan parasite that is gradually becoming a global public health problem. developed a scalable chip-based electrochemical biosensor for C. tyzzeri detection in water samples. The sensor was fabricated using standard lithography with a three-electrode mask design and modified with self-assembling sulfhydrylated protein/G and a specific anti-C. tyzzeri monoclonal antibody (IgG3). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy was used to measure changes in sensor membrane resistance and in the electron charge transfer dielectric constant induced by the formation of C. tyzzeri-antibody complexes. The method showed linearity at C. tyzzeri concentrations of 20–200 cells/5 μL with an LOD of 20 cells/5 μL.
Antibodies are widely used recognition proxies in biosensors that specifically recognize targets through immune interactions. developed a highly sensitive and specific electrochemical immunosensor based on a gold electrode for the rapid on-site detection of Salmonella spp. in chicken meat. The Salmonella antibody was immobilized on the electrode through the formation of self-assembled monolayers with mercapturic acetic acid to achieve specific bacterial recognition. Stable antibody attachment was ensured using N-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-N′-ethyl-carbodiimide (EDC) and N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) activation, and the performance of the immunosensor was evaluated using cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy with a calibration curve for linearity. The obtained R2 = 0.9221 indicates a strong linear correlation, with an LOD of 10 CFU/mL. Meanwhile, developed an electrochemical biosensor based on a MXene-amplified methylene blue signal and electrostatically immobilized phage to detect live Salmonella in milk and eggs. Because phages can only infect viable bacteria, they can be used as a reliable means to differentiate between living and non-living cells. The use of electrostatic interactions for the targeted immobilization of phages on solid surfaces greatly improved the efficiency of bacterial capture. The use of a MXene on the electrode substrate of the biosensor enabled efficient biosensing action. The sensor exhibited an LOD of 5 CFU/mL.
Leveraging the natural affinity of phages for their host bacterial cells, developed a novel phage electrochemical nanobiosensor for the quantitative detection of E. coli O157:H7 in food samples. The powerful phage-based nanosensor was constructed using an impedance method, with a nanocomposite consisting of AuNPs, multi-walled carbon nanotubes, and tungsten oxide nanostructures as the sensor platform, which was subsequently crosslinked with 4-amino thiophene and glutaraldehyde self-assembled monolayers. Performance validation using cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy indicated high electrical conductivity. Moreover, the electrochemical nanobiosensor exhibited a high capture sensitivity, with an LOD of 3.0 CFU/mL; high specificity; and a recovery of 90.0 %–108 %. Furthermore, established an electrochemiluminescent biosensor based on NaBiF4 upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) for E. coli O157:H7 detection. The sensor was characterized by fast response, high ECL intensity and good stability, with an LOD of 138 CFU/mL. utilized the same method to prepare an electrochemical biosensor for detecting Campylobacter jejuni in poultry. The researchers immobilized the biorecognition molecule receptor-binding phage protein on an electrode using 1-pyrenebutanoic acid, succinimidyl ester to detect C. jejuni based on charge transfer resistance upon binding. The LOD was 103 CFU/mL in buffer and 102 CFU/mL in isolated samples.
Copper peroxide/covalent-organic framework (CuO2@COF-NH2) nanocomposites exhibit laccase-like activity and can be used as both colorimetric and electrochemical signals for biosensors. Ning et al. ( ) developed a dual electrochemical-colorimetric sensor for norovirus detection in food using CuO2@COF-NH2 as a recognition molecule in this experiment due to its easy modification and synthesis of affinity peptides, high affinity, and good stability. CuO2 nanoparticles were anchored on the surface of COF-NH2 to facilitate substrate enrichment and avoid aggregation, and then CuO2@COF-NH2 was conjugated with the affinity peptide to serve as a capture and signal probe. Finally, a bimodal “peptide-target-antibody” sandwich assay was constructed using simple and inexpensive nanocomposites, and CuO2@COF-NH2 acted directly as a signaling molecule, reducing cost and representing a technological innovation. The colorimetric method exhibited a wide linear detection range of 1–5000 copies/mL and an LOD of 0.125 copies/mL. For electrochemical detection, the linear range was 1–5000 copies/mL, and the LOD was 0.152 copies/mL. Furthermore, developed an electrochemical and colorimetric dual-signal detection method based on AuPt bimetallic nanoparticles loaded with Fe-N-C monatomic nanocomposites for the detection of staphylococcal enterotoxin B in food. For electrochemical signaling, an antibody-based sandwich-type “Ab1-SEBAb2” biosensor was constructed using antibody(Ab)2/AuPt@Fe-N-C as a nanoenzymatic probe, and the electrical signals of the modified electrode were measured during incubation in a 96-well plate. In the presence of the toxin, the catalytic degradation of the probe was reduced. For the colorimetric signal, similar to the electrochemical method, the probe catalyzed the oxidation of 3,3ʹ,5,5ʹ-tetramethyl biphenyl from colorless to blue, and the concentration of staphylococcal enterotoxin B was linearly proportional to the absorbance value at 652 nm; it could be determined either by colorimetric reading or by visual observation. The LODs of the colorimetric and electrochemical methods were 0.0667 and 0.1670 pg/mL, respectively. The dual-mode sensor can also be applied to the detection of AFB1 and the results can be visualized via smartphone. This provides a new direction for dual-mode sensors to improve the accuracy of detection in real samples( ).

3.3.3

## Aptamer biosensors
Aptamers, a new type of biorecognition molecule, have gained interest with researchers due to their excellent recognition ability and high stability. These molecules, also known as nucleic acid antibodies, comprise single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) or RNA can exhibit strong target affinity through binding forces such as hydrogen bonding, van der Waals forces, electrostatic interactions, and hydrophobic effects. For example, an aptamer-based fluorescent sensor achieved rapid FB1 detection in maize, exhibiting good linearity in the concentration range of 0–3000 ng/mL, with an LOD of 14.42 ng/mL and LOQ of 43.70 ng/mL ( ). Furthermore, established a dual-signal amplification system based on aptamer biosensors for detecting S. typhimurium in foodstuffs such as milk. This method employed an antigen-antibody reaction with IMBs and a dual-signal amplification strategy combining immunoheterodimerization chain reaction and surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). The reaction conditions were optimized at 37 °C for 1 h, and the results using milk samples agreed well with those from the conventional plate technique, with recoveries in the range of 103.08 %–104.88 % and an LOD of 6 CFU/mL; the entire assay process required 3.5 h.
Fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) is a biomolecular technique for studying interactions between two fluorescent proteins, with one acting as a donor and one as an acceptor. developed a FRET-based sensor detection system for S. aureus using lanthanide-doped UCNPs modified with nucleic acid aptamers as an energy donor. To improve the efficiency of the burst, the aptamer was self-assembled on the surface of CoOOH nanosheets as acceptors. UCNP fluorescence was suppressed due to FRET. When S. aureus was introduced to the system, it preferentially bound to the specific aptamer, and the physical adsorption of the modified UCNPs with the CoOOH nanosheets was weakened, leading to detachment and the subsequent recovery of burst fluorescence, with an LOD of 15 CFU/mL.
Nucleic acid aptamers are a class of single-stranded oligonucleotides produced and detected in vitro that can selectively combine with target analytes such as proteins, metal ions, and small molecules, with good biocompatibility and they show high levels of stability, synthesis, and modification. They are widely used in bacterial detection. established nucleic acid aptamer-based functionalized Fe3O4/MWCNTs@Mo-Cds (FMMC) nanoenzymes for the colorimetric biosensor detection of E. coli. Due to the strong affinity of FMMC for E. coli, the sensor exhibited high peroxidase (POD) activity to specifically detect the bacterium in complex food matrices. The constructed colorimetric biosensor was tested in the range of 101–106 CFU/mL, with an LOQ of 10 CFU/mL and an LOD of 0.978 CFU/mL.
Molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs) have received considerable attention due to their easy synthesis, reusability, and high selectivity and sensitivity for target molecules. Chi et al.( ) developed a fluorescent sandwich biosensor based on MIP and aptamer-modified CdTe/ZnS for AFB1 detection in food products. The carbonation ability of ZIF-8 at high temperatures yielded porous carbon(PC) with a high specific surface area to control the surface imprinting of AFB1 and obtain highly fluorescent and photostable CdTe/ZnS. With MIP/PC as the identification probe and CdTe/ZnS-Apt as the signaling probe, conditions were optimized to a CdTe/ZnS concentration of 0.8 mg/mL and detection time was 30 min. The highest fluorescence intensity was observed at 1 mL of CdTe/ZnS-Apt and 5 mg of MIP/PC. The fluorescence intensity of the sandwich biosensor formed was proportional to the AFB1 concentration, and the LOD was 4.0 pg/mL, demonstrating good sensitivity. The sensor was stored at 4 °C for 15 d with testing every 3 d, and the fluorescence response only decreased by 9.7 %, indicating good stability.
Due to their stable chemical and optical properties, AuNPs have also been widely used for aptamer sensor applications. developed two kinds of aptamer sensors based on AuNPs, one using lateral flow detection, and the other using SERS with silver nucleus-gold shell nanoparticles. LOD of the former for L. monocytogenes, S. aureus, and E. coli was 20–30 CFU/mL, whereas the latter exhibited a significantly higher detection sensitivity with an LOD of 2 CFU/mL.
Due to their high strength, thermal stability, and ductility, metal nanocomposites have been increasingly used for pathogenic bacteria detection. developed a one-dimensional ZnO-Au nanocomposite photoluminescent immunosensor for the detection of L. monocytogenes. ZnO nanorods and nanowires were synthesized chemically, and AuNPs were deposited by photochemical reduction. The synthesized nanocomposites were characterized using electron microscopy. The photoluminescence of the nanocomposites was most pronounced in the UV region around 380 nm and decreased with an increase in gold deposition time. The LOD of the sensor was 8.3 × 102 CFU/mL. prepared an environmentally friendly nanocomposite using chitosan and carbon dots via microwave-assisted reduction. The composite exhibited aptamer functionality and was highly selective for poly(A) binding protein protein on the surface of Leishmania infantum. Reaction conditions were optimized using various microscopic and spectroscopic techniques to ensure bright fluorescence emission before aptamer addition complete burst fluorescence after addition. The designed fluorescent biosensor exhibited good specificity and high sensitivity, with an LOD of 94 cells/mL.
 developed an aptamer-based biosensor based on quartz crystal microbalance with a magnetic pre-enrichment system for detecting L. monocytogenes in food samples. Bacteria were captured from food samples by removing contaminants through a magnetic enrichment system using Fe3O4@poly(dopamine)@ diamino-polyethylene glycol -Apt with a saturation magnetization value of 36.4 emu/g as magnetic particles. Bacterial abundance was quantified by frequency changes. A Langmuir-Freundlich isothermal model was used to fit the adsorption data and evaluate the sensor's performance, a good linear range of 1.0 × 102∼1.0 × 107 CFU/mL. The LOD and LOQ were 148 and 448 CFU/mL, respectively.
Despite the significant progress in the research and development of high-performance biosensors in recent years ( ), their industrialization and application still face multiple technical bottlenecks. Although the surface modification strategy of semiconductor materials and their composite materials can significantly improve the sensitivity and selectivity of traditional sensors, their adaptability in complex detection environments is insufficient, which can easily lead to poor reproducibility, lack of stability and even functional failure in practical applications. Moreover, complicated processing and tedious sample pretreatment not only increase the operation cost, but also may lead to sensor sensitivity degradation and loss of the activity of the object to be measured, which may lead to detection bias. 

3.4

## Mass spectrometry
MS is a powerful tool for the qualitative and quantitative analysis of material components. In food science, MS is widely used for component analysis and food safety evaluations. Consequently, MS and its associated techniques are now important tools for standard food import and export testing.
3.4.1

## MALDI-TOF-MS
Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time MS (MALDI-TOF-MS) can be used to analyze bacterial protein compositions and obtain a specific fingerprint, which is compared against standard bacterial fingerprints using databases for identification and classification. used MALDI-TOF-MS to identify L. monocytogenes serotype ions. The serum samples were found to have 83 specific mass ions, which were further classified into six groups and analyzed using MALDI biotyping. Individual high-risk L. monocytogenes sera could be identified by regularly combining the mass ions. A distance unit of 1000 was used as the cut-off point for the mass signaling pattern, and all strains were clustered and analyzed using MALDI Biotyper 3.0 software. This method demonstrated the potential of MALDI-TOF-MS to specifically and rapidly identify L. monocytogenes serotypes 1/2a, 1/2b, 1/2c, and 4b, making it a feasible tool for the detection of pathogenic bacteria.
 established a method for detecting bacterial contamination in meat products by combining MALDI-TOF-MS with microchip technology. The method used IgG antibody-functionalized magnetic beads in microfluidic channels to enrich foodborne pathogenic bacteria identified by MALDI-TOF-MS. To improve the assay quality, the microfluidic channels were filled with bovine serum albumin to inhibit non-specific biomolecule absorption, yielding a reproducibility of 93 % after a minimum of five tests, with an LOD of 6 CFU/mL.
 established a method for the identification of cold-resistant wax-producing B. cereus groups based on MALDI-TOF-MS. A cold-tolerant B. cereus population was screened using PCR based on cspA and cspF genes. The MALDI-TOF-MS results and average nucleotide identity values of different strains enabled bacteria to be accurately characterized at the species level. Comparing the biomarker m/z values of different strains revealed subtle differences between species within the B. cereus group.
MALDI-TOF-MS is a rapid, high-throughput microbial identification method for a wide range of microorganisms, including bacteria, fungi, and viruses. The ability to rapidly characterize microorganisms makes it an ideal alternative to conventional laboratory biochemical testing and molecular identification systems and has led to various applications in medical diagnostics, biodefense, environmental monitoring, and food quality control.

3.4.2

## GC-MS
GC uses microbe retention between the stationary and mobile phases of a chromatographic column to detect pathogens. Combined GC-MS leverages both the high separation efficiency of GC and the high sensitivity of MS to analyze and detect target substances.
Solid-phase microextraction (SPME) is an innovative and sensitive technique for solvent-free sample preparation. The method is based on absorption and desorption and uses a coating to extract and concentrate volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and semi-VOCs in the sample. used SPME and GC-MS to detect E. coli O157:H7 by measuring VOCs in leafy vegetables. This approach is advantageous over other assays because it maintains a high level of sensitivity while being non-destructive. Indole, benzyl alcohol, 2-methoxyphenol, ethanol, propen-1-ol, decan-1-ol, tridecan-1-ol, and nonan-2-1 were significantly more prevalent in samples inoculated with E. coli O157:H7 than in the controls and can thus be used as signature VOCs for E. coli O157:H7 detection. Headspace SPME is also a fast and simple technique for extracting VOCs without cumbersome pre-treatment processes such as solvent extraction. Moreover, it exhibits high extraction efficiency, short extraction time, low sample consumption, and low VOC loss. used headspace SPME coupled with GC-MS to detect potato pathogenic bacterial VOCs. PCA scatter plots were drawn to visualize the differences between contaminated samples and the relationship between pathogenic bacteria and VOCs in potatoes after 14 d of storage. Hierarchical cluster analysis was used to evaluate the similarity of VOCs in potato tuber samples contaminated with different pathogenic bacteria. The results showed that Solanum tuberosum L. infections resulted in the most notable changes in the VOC profile.
 performed VOC assays on pure agar cultures of Lecanicillium fungicola, a microorganism infecting mushrooms, and harvested Agaricus bisporus mushrooms for L. fungicola detection. β-barbatene and an unidentified diterpene were present at high levels in visually symptomatic infected mushrooms (dry blisters that grew rapidly). The error rate was 0.0513, as verified by the leave-one-out method. These two VOCs can, therefore, be used for the early detection of dry blister disease in A. bisporus mushrooms to ensure timely management.
 used GC-MS to analyze VOCs associated with bacterial and fungal infections in stored potatoes inoculated with Lactobacillus carotovorans, Aspergillus flavus, and A. niger, along with healthy control samples. The VOCs were measured weekly during 3 weeks of storage at different temperatures (4 ± 1, 8 ± 1, 25 ± 1 °C). PCA and partial least squares discriminant analysis models were used for data analysis, highlighting 1-butanol and 1-hexanol as potential biomarkers for bacterial spoilage associated with lactic acid bacteria during potato storage under different conditions. Hexadecanoic and acetic acids were identified as characteristic VOCs of A. flavus, whereas hexadecane, undecane, tetradecane, octadecane, and triene were characteristic VOCs of A. niger. Compared with the PCA, the partial least squares discriminant analysis model performed better at categorizing VOCs from samples inoculated with the three species and the controls, with higher R2 (96–99 %) and Q2 (0.18–0.65) values.
Patulin is a natural toxin produced by certain fungi (e.g., Penicillium spp.) and is commonly found in infected fruits and produce. detected patulin in 219 Chinese teas using HPLC-DAD and GC-MS. The samples were prepared using acetonitrile ultrasonic extraction, dried, extracted with H2O, filtered, and then analyzed. GC-MS showed high selectivity for pheophytin and 5-hydroxymethylfurfural, with patulin recoveries of 90 %–102 % at peak levels of 10–100 ppb. The LOD and LOQ were 1.5 and 5.0 ng/g, respectively, for the HPLC-UV method and 0.25 and 0.83 ng/g, respectively, for GC-MS.
Botrytis cinerea is a saprophytic fungus that infects more than 200 species of plants, including grapes, strawberries, and cucumbers, making it a serious threat to horticulture. Botrytis cinerea is primarily controlled by spraying pesticides, but the results are unsatisfactory, and the chemicals may affect produce quality and jeopardize environmental safety. used thermal desorption GC-MS to sample B. cinerea-infected grapes that volatilize rapidly in the field for VOCs detection. ZIF-8 crystals were used as a hygroscopic material to extract VOCs from B. cinerea-infected and healthy grapes. Extraction was performed in closed glass containers to ensure a standardized sampling environment. To maintain consistent volatility and avoid contamination, 2-methyl-4-pentanol applied on filter paper was used as an internal standard. Successful detection of trace target compounds as markers of S. aureus infection by testing field samples. The analysis results for 1-octan-3-one, 3-octanone, 3-octanol, and 1-octan-3-ol were positively correlated with those of 3-methyl-1-butanol, 1-hexanol, 1,5-dimethyltetranaphthalene, benzyl alcohol, ethyl benzene, and 1,5-dimethylnaphthalene, indicating an inseparable relationship with B. cinerea. The method also demonstrates the unique advantages of ZIF-8.
GC-MS enables the simultaneous detection of multiple mycotoxins in the same sample and effectively separates their components for analysis with high sensitivity and specificity. However, some pathogenic compounds, such as organic acids, are not easily vaporized at high temperatures and require derivatization before they can be used for analysis. Moreover, complex samples are cumbersome to handle, and the high skill requirements for experimental personnel limit the scope of application.

3.4.3

## LC-MS
LC-MS has become a primary tool in food safety research and serves as an indispensable technology for understanding complex molecular processes in food, detecting food contaminants, as well as analyzing food microorganisms or nutritional components.
Hepatitis E is a zoonotic disease that infects humans, and the symptoms can range from common liver disease to acute hepatitis and reproductive organ damage. Pigs are the most important animal hosts of the hepatitis E virus. performed a proteomic study of porcine liver exudate samples using LC-MS to differentiate between seropositivity and negativity for the virus in pigs. Their analysis identified 554 differentially expressed proteins between the two experimental groups, with 293 and 261 proteins upregulated in the positive and negative samples, respectively. Subsequent pathway enrichment analyses revealed that glucose metabolism was the most prominent pathway affected by hepatitis E virus infection. Thus, the LC-MS method can be used to effectively detect this virus in pigs.
 investigated the effect of Salmonella infection on chicken spleens by comparing the protein expression differences after 3 and 7 days in infected and control groups using label-free LC-MS. The Salmonella infection was associated with the upregulation of proteins mediating redox homeostasis, lysosomal activity, and energy production and a decrease in abundance-mediated developmental progression. Decreased protein abundance was associated with cell cycle progression, whereas increased protein abundance played a role in the cytoskeleton and in mRNA processing. The results indicate that proteins involved in d-triose 1-dehydrogenase activity, including KCNAB2, LOC418170, and AKR1E2, which are specific to day three. Larivière-Gauthier et al. ( ) analyzed the serum metabolome of Salmonella-infected pigs via non-targeted LC-MS. Significant changes in the serum metabolic composition of infected pigs were observed 21 d after infection. These changes were detectable by LC-MS in asymptomatic animals and during early infection, suggesting their utility as markers for Salmonella infection. This approach is promising for controlling the zoonotic foodborne pathogen Salmonella in pigs.
Camp et al. ( ) developed an LC-MS system for the detection and quantitative analysis of aflatoxin M1, eight microcystin congeners, and nodulin in milk. The toxins were extracted with 80 % methanol, followed by a solid-phase extraction clean-up step for LC-MS/MS analysis. The LOQs of the nine cyanobacterial toxins and aflatoxin M1 ranged from 1 to 0.05 μg/L.
Biogenic amines are a class of biologically active nitrogen-containing small molecules found in fish and soy products. Upon excessive consumption, they can cause allergic reactions, such as headache, nausea, palpitations, and respiratory disturbances, which may be life-threatening in severe cases. developed a novel quantitative proteomic strategy using LC-MS to screen for biomarkers of nine biogenic amine-producing bacterial strains in seafood. Peptides present in only one organism were identified and mapped to a specific bacterium via sequence homology. These peptide biomarkers can be used for targeted proteomics studies and foodborne pathogen detection during seafood processing, and the targeted proteomics approach is faster than traditional detection methods such as qPCR.
Staphylococcal enterotoxins can cause vomiting, nausea, and other symptoms. quantified eight Staphylococcal enterotoxins in milk and other food products using LC-MS. Toxin sequences were identified and specific peptides for each toxin were screened. The MS acquisition method and parameters were optimized, and an immunoaffinity enrichment-based protocol was selected for sample preparation. The selected method can directly quantify trace toxins in food samples with an LOD as low as 0.1 ng/g (in milk).
MS technology has led to the emergence of new in situ, real-time, and online ionization techniques, such as desorption electrospray ionization, direct analysis in real time, and dielectric barrier discharge ionization. These new technologies, combined with atmospheric pressure injection for MS, have become an important means of detecting pesticide residues and antibiotics in food. They enable rapid, direct in situ detection and reduce testing costs while improving efficiency.

3.5

## Surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy
The techniques described in the previous section usually involve destructive processes and require sample pre-treatment. In contrast, advanced spectroscopic techniques offer a promising alternative as they provide a rapid, non-destructive, cost-effective, and environmentally friendly means of analysis. Raman spectroscopy is a scattering spectroscopy technique. When changing the excitation frequency of light, different molecular vibrations, rotational energy levels, and other characteristics can be studied. However, the scattering intensity of ordinary Raman spectroscopy is weak, and its sensitivity is low. SERS uses the optical properties of nanostructures with plasma properties to significantly enhance the Raman signals of target molecules within nanostructures, overcoming the low sensitivity of traditional Raman spectroscopy while still providing a rapid real-time analysis. Consequently, SERS has been widely used to detect various microbial pathogens.
The correct choice of substrate is key to optimizing the SERS signal strength; currently, the most used substrates are AuNPs and AgNPs. investigated the factors affecting the SERS-based detection and identification of Salmonella enteritidis to determine if it could be used for food safety analysis. The researchers optimized parameters such as silver nanorod size and capping agents to establish a coffee ring technique based on label-free SERS. Larger nanoparticles enhanced the SERS signal more than small nanoparticles. Moreover, the SERS intensity of S. enteritidis was enhanced at a silver nanosphere particle size of 60 nm. A distinct peak in the spectrum of S. enteritidis was observed at 481 cm−1 when silver citrate nanospheres were used as the coating agent. This peak can be used as a differentiation criterion between S. enteritidis and E. coli O157:H7. The two characteristic peaks at 729 cm−1 and 653 cm−1 indicate bacterial viability versus non-viability. The method detected S. enteritidis at a concentration of 4 CFU/mL within 1.5 h, indicating that it is a rapid and reliable detection tool. Furthermore, combined a portable Raman spectrometer with a Au-tobacco packaging paper (Au-TPP) for pathogen detection in food. In the study, TPP was prepared, and AuNP colloids were synthesized via impregnation (soaking for 12 h) and centrifugation. Active SERS substrates were prepared via centrifugation, and the characteristic peak at 1171 cm−1 confirmed their homogeneity, stability, and reproducibility. Finally, S. aureus and S. flexneri were selected as model pathogens and were collected from the surfaces of the pork samples. The SERS signals of the two pathogens were significantly enhanced by the Au-TPP substrate, and PCA confirmed 100 % accuracy in the classification of the two strains. These results confirmed that Au-TPP can be used as a SERS substrate for the detection of pathogens.
Methods such as PCA and partial least squares regression are often used for the quantitative analysis of foodborne pathogens and can be combined with the corresponding discriminant model to evaluate the abundance of pathogenic bacteria in agricultural products. developed a SERS technique using a gold nanorod substrate to detect dominant spoilage fungi in apples. To improve the signal-to-noise ratio, the spectra were pre-processed with standard normal variables, and PCA was used for spectral information extraction. The main pattern recognition methods used to analyze and compare the target fungi were linear discriminant analysis, K-nearest neighbors, back-propagation artificial neural networks, and a support vector machine. Discriminative modeling was performed based on the spectral interval data and characteristic Raman spectral variables. The back-propagation artificial neural network achieved the best results with a recognition accuracy of 98.23 %. Discriminative modeling of the spectral interval variables processed by PCA greatly simplified the model, and linear discriminant analysis improved the accuracy to 98.31 %.
As a new type of functional nanomaterial, magnetic nanoparticles are simple to prepare and functionalize, offering advantages like good biocompatibility, large specific surface area, and high saturation magnetization strength. established a technique employing SERS with magnetic nanoparticles to detect pathogenic bacteria. The Raman reporter was embedded between Au and Ag shells to leverage the stability of Au and the high activity of Ag. A Prussian blue probe with strong SERS activity was prepared and combined with 4-mercaptophenylboronic acid and 5,5′-dithiobis-(2-nitrobenzoic acid) to form a hybrid SERS probe. Concanavalin A-functionalized magnetic nanoparticles were used to concentrate and isolate pathogenic bacteria ( ). The SERS biosensor prepared in this study exhibited an LOD of 1 CFU/mL for S. aureus, E. coli, and P. aeruginosa and could effectively detect all three foodborne pathogens simultaneously. In addition, used Fe3O4@Au SERS nanotags instead of traditional colloidal gold detection tags for SERS vertical flow immunoassay biosensors for FB1, AFB1, and DON. The limits of detection for FB1, AFB1, and DON are 0.053, 0.028, and 0.079 pg mL− 1, respectively, which are 1000 times more sensitive than those for conventional standard colloidal gold methods; furthermore, the method does not require complex pre-processing and can be used to directly detect the test object.
Handheld Raman spectrometers provide a novel means for instant detection in the field via SERS. Lin et al. developed a handheld Raman spectrometer to detect AFB1 in peanut extract. Au-NBPs-anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) SERS substrate with high selectivity, homogeneity, and stability was prepared. The target toxin could be detected within 1 min, which was much faster than traditional ELISA (30 min), and the LOD reached 0.5 μg/L ( ).
SERS is advantageous because of its ease of operation, rich information content, multi-molecule detection without labeling, high sensitivity, and non-destructive detection. However, the accuracy of Raman spectroscopy detection is affected to some extent by fluorescence during its application, and the processing of spectral data, including fitting, is cumbersome and prone to inaccuracy. Moreover, a complete database of Raman spectral fingerprints for mycotoxins in agricultural products has not yet been established, and consequently, some substances need to be verified and identified by other means after detection.

3.6

## CRISPR/Cas
The Microbial Pathogen Detection via Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats/Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats Associated Protein (CRISPR/Cas) system is an emerging molecular diagnostic technology with high specificity, sensitivity, and programmability. In recent years, it has shown promise as a method for detecting microbial pathogens. In particular, single-subunit effector proteins, such as type II (Cas9), V (Cas12), and VI (Cas13), that function by cutting DNA or RNA are highly efficient and easily modified, and they have been widely used in gene editing and detection research.
The side-strand cleavage activity of CRISPR-Cas13a is activated by specific CRISPR RNAs(crRNA) targeting specific single-stranded RNA sequences and subsequently cleaves nearby non-specific RNAs. Accordingly, non-specific RNA probes can be incorporated into the reaction system to detect specific target molecules. designed a primer with a specific crRNA for a conserved short fragment of the Salmonella invA gene. They combined RPA with CRISPR-Cas13 and established single-tube and two-step RT-LAMP reaction systems to detect Salmonella spp. in food products. The study began by verifying the side-cutting ability of CRISPR-Cas13a. The lowest LOD was 10 pM after validation using different RNA standard dilutions. Subsequently, the conditions were optimized for the two-step RPA-Cas13a detection system compared with the one-tube method. The optimal RPA primer concentration and amplification temperature were selected as 0.48 μM and 39 °C, respectively. The LODs of the single-tube and two-step methods were 102 and 100 copies/L, respectively, with detection times of 20 and 45 min, respectively. Both detection times were lower than those for qPCR, and the single-tube method was suitable for rapid detection, especially in settings with scarce resources. In contrast, the two-step method was more suitable for low-abundance detection.
Cas12a promotes crRNA maturation and protospacer adjacent motif recognition. It can specifically cleave dsDNA and ssDNA and can non-specifically trans-cut ssDNA. developed an electrochemical biosensor based on RPA-CRISPR/Cas12a to detect S. aureus using RPA as an isothermal amplification tool for extracted DNA targets. The designed crRNA combined with Cas12a effectively recognizes the target fragment to cut hairpin DNA (hpDNA). The target bacteria were detected by observing the differences in the current responses of hpDNA at the sensing interface, reaching an LOD of 3 CFU/mL.
IMBs, are advantageous because of their easy operation, high separation efficiency, and large specific surface area. Thus, they are excellent enrichment and separation vectors and versatile tools for the purification, detection, and quantitative analysis of complex analytes. established an IMBs-RPA-CRISPR/Cas12a assay system to detect Shigella fexneri in foods. IMBs coated with S. fexneri antibody were used to specifically capture and enrich the target bacteria and release their genomic DNA as a template for RPA. The RPA product was mixed with preloaded CRISPR/Cas12a for fluorescence visualization. The results could be observed with the naked eye under blue LED light with a detection sensitivity of 5 CFU/mL and a detection time of only 70 min. This method combines the advantages of IMB, RPA, and CRISPR/Cas12a to rapidly and easily detect pathogenic bacteria.
 combined a LAMP-RPA-CRISPR/Cas12 system with a lateral flow biosensor and a fluorescence intensity detector for the detection of S. aureus in food products. The resulting LAMP-RPA-CRISPR/Cas12a-immunochromatographic strip and LAMP-RPA-CRISPR/Cas12a-Flu platforms achieved LODs of 6.7 × 102 and 67 CFU/mL, respectively, demonstrating that the latter platform can achieve high-sensitivity detection.
Novel biosensing technology based on the excellent biorecognition ability and target cleavage property of the CRISPR/Cas system has been rapidly developed. developed an amplification-free CRISPR-Cas12a-SERS biosensor to detect S. typhimurium in poultry. An anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) chip was used as the SERS substrate to design and synthesize a crRNA specific for S. typhimurium. A coating of 180 nm silver nanoparticles was applied to the AAO membrane to improve detection sensitivity. The optimal cleavage reaction time was 30 min, and the LOD was 110 CFU/mL. developed a finger-actuated microfluidic biosensor using one-pot CRISPR/Cas12a combined with recombinant enzyme-assisted amplification to accurately detect seven common foodborne pathogens in milk. Recombinant enzyme-assisted amplification and CRISPR/Cas12a were performed independently, and the upstream products were then delivered to the downstream assay via a one-way valve to prevent interference and cross-contamination. The reagents for recombinant enzyme-assisted amplification and CRISPR/Cas12a can be lyophilized and embedded in the microchip wells without templates during fabrication to improve storage time and convenience for users. The operator only needs to inject the samples and process the data through the associated application to obtain the test results. The testing process required 62 min, and the LOD for the seven types of pathogenic bacteria was <500 CFU/mL. As no other driving devices are required, this method is suitable for testing in special scenarios.
With the advantages of enzyme-free detection, efficient isothermal amplification, ultra-high sensitivity, and flexible structures, the hybridization chain reaction has become a powerful molecular tool with a wide range of applications in biosensing and bioimaging. developed ultra-sensitive magnetic relaxation switch biosensors to detect S. typhimurium by combining the CRISPR/Cas12a system with hybridization chain reaction. The combined method exhibited better sensitivity and accuracy than the conventional magnetic relaxation switch sensor, with an LOD of 77 CFU/mL and a linear range of 102–108 CFU/mL.

3.7

## Other methods
Bacillus cereus, a gram-positive bacillus widely found in nature, is a common pathogen and causal agent of food poisoning. developed a new method to rapidly and accurately quantify live B. cereus in food products that combines PMA for cell viability determination, fluorescence in situ hybridization for bacterial target labeling, and flow cytometry for rapid quantification. A targeted 16S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) fluorescence in situ hybridization probe (pB394) was used to distinguish B. cereus from other Bacillus species. The reaction conditions were optimized as follows: probe concentration of 7 ng/μL, fixation time of 30 min, and hybridization time of 15 min. The labeled samples were analyzed by flow cytometry to calculate the number of viable bacteria for data analysis. The recovery rate of B. cereus from pre-treated food samples was 96.3 %–97.7 %. Thus, it was verified that the established method could accurately quantify live B. cereus cells within 1.5 h, with a linear range of 102–107 cells/g.
Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) involves high-throughput sequencing of whole genomes to obtain target gene sequences for bioinformatic analysis. used WGS to accurately analyze viruses with low contamination levels. Two pre-amplification methods, single-primer isothermal amplification (SPIA) and sequence-independent single-primer amplification (SIS-PA), were compared. The results showed that both methods could detect viral RNA at a concentration of 0.1 cps/3 μL in samples that previously produced negative results via RT-qPCR. However, when applied to frozen raspberry human norovirus transcript (I) samples, only SPIA-WGS could identify all positive samples. This result indicates that SPIA-WGS exhibits better detection performance for samples with high Ct values. Whereas RT-qPCR targets shorter genome fragments, WGS can recover longer viral genome sequences because the samples also contain a large portion of the viral genome. Thus, SPIA-WGS compensates for the shortcomings of RT-qPCR to capture positives when targeting short regions prone to missed signals.
Machine vision uses software and hardware to analyze images and provide guidance and assistance when using industrial equipment; it can also be applied to pathogen detection. established a machine vision-assisted Clostridium butyricum argonaute protein (CbAgo)-mediated fluorescent biosensor to detect live S. typhimurium in food. The live S. typhimurium was captured and lysed using a phage and lysis buffer, avoiding a complicated DNA extraction process. Under gDNA guidance, CbAgo achieved targeted DNA cleavage, and the resulting target DNA fragments activated the cleavage of biotinylated fluorescent probes induced by CbAgo. Subsequently, the fluorescence signals were enriched by polystyrene microspheres conjugated with streptavidin and imaged using an inverted fluorescence microscope. The subsequent data analysis steps were performed with the assistance of machine vision. The fluorescent sensor developed in this study rapidly and specifically detected live S. typhimurium in chicken samples, with an LOD of 40.5 CFU/mL and a linear range of 50–107 CFU/mL.

4

## Challenges and Prospects
Throughout history, viral pathogens, bacterial infections, parasitic infestations, and other biological threats have persistently plagued humanity, and new outbreaks have led to drastic changes in the international biosafety situation. The increasingly prominent threat of biological risk factors to food and environmental safety has become a global concern ( ). Advances in detection technologies are a key step to resolving these threats,but there are many challenges include ongoing struggles between precision and universality, immediacy and authority, and cutting-edge and practicality.
4.1

## Structural contradictions in technology iterations
Biological risk factor detection technologies development is caught in a double paradox. Theis sharp contradiction between “high sensitivity” and “low operational threshold” reflects the structural mismatch between current technological innovations and scenario adaptations. First, it has been difficult to adapt laboratory-grade precision instruments to the dusty, hot, and humid environments of agricultural sites to facilitate rapid field testing. For example, suspended dust particles can affect the detection error of optical sensors. Furthermore, while emerging CRISPR-Cas rapid detection technology can obtain results within 60 min, reagent kits rely on low-temperature cold chains, which discourages users in tropical regions. In cross-border trade scenarios, single tests using cutting-edge technologies such as nanoprobes are expensive. In the real agricultural environment, agricultural products are not only affected by a single biological risk factor but are also susceptible to cross-infections (also known as compound infections), leading to an increase in the number or virulence of pathogens in agricultural products ( ). The complex substances in agricultural products can also affect the detection response, leading to false-negative results. This poses a challenge to the development of single detection technologies. At the same time, the development of combined detection technologies (multiple technologies in combination and sequential use) is also faced with the contradiction of “covering multi-target detection, which requires high sensitivity and considerations regarding the cost of use ( ).

4.2

## Quality assurance of test results
Due to inherent differences in risk factors and the influences of various aspects, such as instrumentation and operator, detection errors may occur in any test, making it impossible to compare and evaluate differences between test results. Quality assurance aims to reduce all errors (including systematic and random errors) to the desired level and can be divided into two main areas: the sample to be tested and the testing system. The quality assurance of a sample includes sampling, sample handling, and sample preservation, which must be ensured through the development of appropriate sample handling standards and operation specifications. In contrast, the quality assurance of the testing system relies on certified reference materials. Reference standards play a key role in the calibration and evaluation of analytical methods, the determination of characteristic quantitative values, and quality control during production and manufacturing. By comparing the analytical results of a sample with those of a Reference Standard, the accuracy and reliability of the analytical method can be assessed, thus ensuring consistency and comparability of the different results ( ).
It is of greater concern that we have yet to establish a unified standard for emerging technologies such as rapidly iterating molecular testing and biosensing, as this leads to significant barriers in the mutual recognition of results from different testing organizations. From the field to the port and the laboratory to the trade chain, there is still a long way to go with regard to testing standards that account for sensitivity, cost, and universality to ensure the quality of test results.

4.3

## Development of automated, digital, and integrated Inspection technologies
There are three primary directions in technology integration and innovation: first, the combination of automated sample processing systems and AI technology has led to a reduction in the error rate of risk factor detection and a shortening of the detection timeframe. Second, the application of deep learning algorithms in multiplex PCR data analysis has resulted in increased accuracy of the simultaneous identification of multiple pathogens and increased data processing efficiency. Furthermore, the integration of microfluidic chips and CRISPR technology has improved the sensitivity of nucleic acid detection to the pg level while reducing the size of the device to that of a smartphone ( ). On-site fast-testing equipment has achieved a revolutionary breakthrough, that is, “samples in - results out” ( ). For example, the miniaturized optical system adopts a complementary metal oxide semiconductor image sensor array combined with a self-developed convolutional neural network algorithm, which can realize the automatic analysis of colorimetric cards and concentration gradient modeling and ensure the real-time transmission of field environment data ( ). This technological leap is reshaping biosecurity defenses. However, as mentioned earlier, the cost of use must be considered. This requires policy guidance to form a hierarchical response mechanism of “basic screening - accurate review” and, ultimately, to build a biosecurity intelligent defense network covering the entire scenario.
In this technological revolution concerning human food safety, testing technology is no longer just a precision instrument in the laboratory, but has evolved into a complex ecosystem connecting field and table and local and global. The direction of its breakthrough not only requires a single point of innovation in nanomaterials or artificial intelligence but also calls for the reconstruction of the standard system, the reconstruction of business models, and even the synergistic evolution of the global governance framework. What is certain, however, is that detection technologies have led to a fundamental understanding of biological processes. This leads to the development of new technologies that can be used to meet real-world agricultural needs.

## Credit authoe statment
Yunfang Liu: Writing – original draft, Investigation, Conceptualization. Kaifa Liu: editing, Formal analysis. Yahui Liu: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Funding acquisition.

## Funding
This study was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2023YFF0614403).

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

 

## Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.