pmcSmall SciSmall Sci4712smallsciSMSCSmall Science2688-4046WileyPMC12168619PMC12168619.112168619121686194052988510.1002/smsc.202400606SMSC127121ReviewReviewNative and Engineered Extracellular Vesicles for the Treatment of Acute Lung Injury and Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
GuZhengyan XueWenjun MaoGuanchao PeiZhipeng LiJingjing SunMingxue ZhangXinkang ZhangShanshan LiSongling CenJinfeng XiaoKaihttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-2558-073X kaixiao@smmu.edu.cn LuYinghttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6627-5363 yinglu@smmu.edu.cn XuQingqianghttps://orcid.org/0009-0007-6872-8865 qingqiangxu@smmu.edu.cn 

1

Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences
School of Pharmacy
Naval Medical University
Shanghai
200433
P. R. China

2

Department of Organ Regeneration
Shanghai East Hospital
Tongji University School of Medicine
Shanghai
200120
P. R. China

3

Lab of Toxicology and Pharmacology
Faculty of Naval Medicine
Naval Medical University
Shanghai
200433
P. R. China

4

School of Medicine
Tongji University
Shanghai
200070
P. R. China

5

School of Traditional Chinese Materia Medica
Shenyang Pharmaceutical University
Shenyang
110006
P. R. China

6

Basic Medical Center for Pulmonary Disease
Naval Medical University
800, Xiangyin Road
Shanghai
200433
P. R. China
2622025620255649078410.1002/smsc.v5.62400606
1222025
03122024
260220251706202518062025© 2025 The Author(s). Small Science published by Wiley‐VCH GmbHhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are lipid bilayer nanoparticles naturally released from cells, playing a crucial role in intercellular communication. They modulate gene expression and regulate physiological and pathological processes, including acute lung injury (ALI) and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Research has shown that EVs contain a variety of active components, are biocompatible and small in size, and do not trigger immune rejection, making the infusion of exogenous EVs a promising therapeutic tool. With further research, engineering strategies have been proposed to enhance the clinical potential of EVs. These strategies involve modifying either donor cells that secrete EVs or the EVs themselves and can be engineered to circumvent the limitations of native EVs. In this review, an overview of the biological properties of native EVs is provided and the current therapeutic potential of native and engineered EVs in treating ALI/ARDS, along with the latest research findings, is summarized. The challenges and opportunities for clinical translation of EVs as a novel therapeutic tool are also discussed, offering new insights into the treatment of ALI/ARDS using EV engineering technology.

Both native and engineered extracellular vesicles (EVs) are served as promising therapeutic agents for treating acute lung injury (ALI) and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). To circumvent the limitations of native EVs, various engineering strategies are adopted. The challenges and opportunities for clinical translation of EVs are also discussed, providing new perspectives for EV‐based therapy. 

acute lung injuryacute respiratory distress syndromesengineered extracellular vesiclesextracellular vesiclesNatural Science Foundation of Shanghai20ZR147030021ZR1477700National Natural Science Foundation of China
10.13039/501100001809821038858227367282471911Shanghai Municipal Health Commission‐Outstanding Youth Foundation of Public HealthGWV‐10.2‐YQ48Shanghai Sailing Program21YF1457400Innovative Research Group Project of the National Natural Science Foundation of China
10.13039/100014718 Numerous preclinical and clinical studies have reported the safety profile and significant therapeutic efficacy of EVs in treating ALI/ARDS. Compared to traditional cellular therapies, EVs offer several advantages, including small size, low immunogenicity, high stability, regenerative capabilities, and anti‐inflammatory properties. These qualities have made EVs a significant alternative to cellular therapy over the past decade.[
 
] The subsequent discussion will explore the therapeutic potential of EVs derived from natural cells for ALI/ARDS treatment (Table
 ).
 3.1

## EV Source
EVs act as paracrine agents, carrying various donor cell components and mirroring the therapeutic effects of these cells. Several studies have demonstrated that EVs from natural sources play a pivotal role in ameliorating ALI/ARDS.
Early research predominantly focused on EVs derived from MSCs and their therapeutic potential in ALI/ARDS. These MSC‐EVs carry various effector molecules that enable them to mimic the biological effects of their parent MSCs.[
 
] MSC‐EVs sourced from bone marrow,[
 , 
] adipose tissue,[
 
] human umbilical cord,[
 , 
] and menstrual blood[
 
] have good antibacterial activity, antiviral activities,[
 
] barrier repair, immune regulation, and autophagy modulation, demonstrating a range of beneficial effects in ALI/ARDS. In animal models, MSC‐EVs have demonstrated significant therapeutic effects in ALI/ARDS induced by a variety of triggers, including mustard gas,[
 , 
] sepsis,[
 
] endotoxins,[
 
] bacterial[
 , 
] and viral infections,[
 
] hyperoxia,[
 
] and burns.[
 
] Furthermore, in ALI animal models, MSC‐EVs can target lung tissue. Following systemic administration, MSC‐EVs accumulate in lung tissue, peaking at around 48 h postdelivery, with a decline by 72 h. Compared with EVs derived from human embryonic kidney 293 cells (HEK293T) cells, the accumulation of MSC‐EVs in the lung tissue was significantly higher.[
 
]

EPCs, the precursors of endothelial cells, exhibit stem cell characteristics and play a pivotal role in endothelial cell regeneration and vascular repair.[
 , 
] EPC‐derived EVs (EPC‐EVs) released via the paracrine pathway mimic these regenerative effects on endothelial barrier repair. In both animal and cell models of ALI/ARDS, EPC‐EVs promote the expression of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR‐2). This is primarily achieved through the transfer of various factors (microRNA (miRNA)‐126,[
 
] miR‐126‐3p, miR‐126‐5p,[
 , 
] long noncoding RNA (lncRNA)‐TUG1[
 
]). EPC‐EVs also promote angiogenesis, inhibit endothelial cell apoptosis, and restore endothelial barrier integrity.[
 , 
]

Plant‐derived extracellular vesicle‐like nanoparticles (ELNs) offer unique therapeutic potential in the treatment of ALI/ARDS. These naturally occurring nanoscale vesicles, extracted from plants, possess similar physical properties to EVs derived from animal cells and contain various unique bioactive components.[
 , 
] ELNs derived from plants, including Aloe vera,[
 
] fresh Rehmannia glutinosa,[
 
] and ginger,[
 
] participate in inflammation regulation and antiviral activities in ALI due to their plant‐derived miRNAs, effectively inhibiting disease progression.
Beyond the aforementioned EVs, EVs derived from red blood cells,[
 
] trophoblasts,[
 
] endothelial cells,[
 
] ECs,[
 
] adipose tissue,[
 
] serum,[
 
] induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC),[
 
] and natural killer cells[
 
] have shown efficacy in the treatment and prevention of ALI/ARDS. These EVs work by interacting with specific cellular receptors or delivering miRNAs to regulate signaling pathways.

3.2

## Administration Route
The administration route significantly influences the distribution of EVs in vivo. In ALI/ARDS animal models, EVs are typically administered via intravenous injection (I.V.),[
 , , , 
] tracheal instillation,[
 , , , , , 
] or inhalation[
 , , , , , 
] (Figure
 ). However, only a few studies have examined the accumulation of EVs in the lung tissues following different administration routes.[
 
]

 I.V. is the most prevalent administration route in ALI/ARDS animal models, offering advantages such as precise dosage, simplicity of operation, rapid onset, and high bioavailability. The lung's extensive vascular network, coupled with the compromised air‐blood barrier during ALI, facilitates the passive targeting of EVs to damaged lung tissue. Nonetheless, in vivo distribution studies revealed that natural EVs do not exhibit substantial targeting of the lung tissue. Lázaro‐Ibáñez E[
 
] found that EVs derived from HEK293T cells primarily accumulated in the liver and spleen, with only weak signals detected in the lung tissue 24 h postinjection. Hemodynamic analysis revealed that HEK293T‐EVs were rapidly eliminated from the body, with a half‐life of less than 10 min. However, the in vivo distribution of EVs varies depending on the disease model and the cell source. For example, in LPS‐induced ALI models, MSC‐EVs were found to target lung tissue more effectively. In an LPS‐induced ALI model, compared with I.V. at 0.5, 5, and 10 h after LPS induction, administration at 24 h more effectively promoted the absorption of EVs by the lung tissue. Biodistribution experiments revealed that MSC‐EVs accumulated in lung tissue for 48 h postinjection, gradually decreasing after 72 h with less accumulation in the spleen and liver compared to HEK293T‐EVs.[
 
]

Local pulmonary administration, such as intratracheal instillation and nebulization, offers the advantages of rapid absorption, no first‐pass effect, reduced distribution in the liver and spleen, and direct effects on damaged lung tissue over systemic administration. Intratracheal instillation involves injecting EVs directly into the trachea, allowing entry into the lung tissue. Compared with nebulization, intratracheal instillation requires simpler equipment and allows for precise dosage control. In animal models of ALI, intratracheal instillation of EVs exerted immune regulation, autophagy induction, barrier protection, and virus clearance effects. However, intratracheal instillation is invasive and unevenly distributed and requires anesthesia, thereby limiting its clinical usage.[
 
] In recent years, nebulization has gradually become the preferred pulmonary administration route. EVs are dispersed into aerosol particles of 1–5 μm and efficiently delivered to lung tissue non‐invasively. Compared with I.V., inhalation delivery can reach the lung tissue directly, facilitating lung injury repair.[
 
] The vibrating mesh nebulizer is commonly used for EV nebulization, consistently producing aerosol particles below 5 μm, ensuring that EVs reach the bronchioles and damaged lung tissues. In vivo biodistribution experiments on ALI mice nebulized with MSC‐EVs revealed that MSC‐EVs were primarily distributed in the lung tissue, peaking at 24 h postadministration and remaining detectable in the lungs 28 days post‐administration.[
 
] Nebulized MSC‐EVs also effectively reduced inflammation, decreased bacterial load in ALI mice, and improved lung function.[
 
]

Moreover, advances in aerosolizable dry powders of EVs prepared by thin‐film freeze‐drying technology have shown promise. These powders retain the original structure and morphology of EVs upon reconstitution, with an optimal mass median aerodynamic diameter (MMAD) of ≈1.2 μm for lung delivery.[
 
] Clinical trials revealed that nebulized MSC‐EVs have good tolerability and short‐term safety[
 
] and do not induce acute or secondary allergic reactions; however, they enhanced the absorption of pulmonary lesions and shortened the hospitalization period in patients with mild COVID‐19 pneumonia.[
 
]

3.3

## EV Dosage
In addition to administration routes and cell sources, EV dosage is a critical factor influencing therapeutic efficacy. To better understand EV dosage and administration strategies in ALI/ARDS, we reviewed 33 preclinical studies on EV‐based treatments of ALI/ARDS (Table ). This study explored varying EV dosages across different administration routes and animal models to establish an effective dosage range.
Among the 33 studies mentioned with dosing schemes in Table and 23 quantified EV dosages were based on total protein content, ranging from 0.1 to 5 mg kg−1. The remaining 10 studies quantified EV dosage based on the number of particles measured by nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA), ranging from 1 × 107 to ×1011 particles kg−1. Compared with particle numbers, studies utilizing protein content quantification showed greater inconsistencies and data dispersion (Figure
 ).
 Notably, the protein content of EV samples may vary due to factors such as the source, isolation, and purification methods.[
 , 
] Current clinical studies primarily use particle numbers as a quantitative criterion; therefore, future studies should use particle number quantification to improve consistency.
Different administration routes influence EV dosage requirements. Studies segregated by administration route showed that systemic administration methods, such as intravenous or intraperitoneal injections (I.P.), generally require higher dosages compared to local pulmonary administration routes, such as intratracheal or inhalation (Figure ). Additionally, different animal models of ALI and ARDS affect the dosage of EVs. A comparison of the doses of EVs in different ALI/ARDS models showed that higher doses of EVs were usually required in sepsis‐induced ALI models (Figure ).
Determining the optimal dosage is a prerequisite for the efficacy of EVs. In a dose‐response study, ALI mice were administered different doses of MSC‐EVs. Within the dose range of 2 × 105–2 × 106 particles, higher doses correlated with improved survival. However, doses exceeding 2 × 106 particles showed a negative correlation with survival rate, indicating that appropriate dosing is important for maximizing the therapeutic effects of EVs.[
 
] Preclinical studies are a prerequisite for clinical research. Thus, improving the evaluation of EV dosages and administration regimens is crucial to facilitate their clinical translation.

3.4

## Mechanism of Action
EVs mediate cellular signaling in ALI/ARDS by delivering noncoding RNAs, proteins, and mitochondrial components (Table ).
3.4.1

## Noncoding RNAs
Natural EVs mainly convey a variety of noncoding RNAs, such as miRNAs, lncRNAs, and mRNA fragments. Accumulating evidence has demonstrated that noncoding RNAs have participated in various biological processes.
Current studies exploring the role that noncoding RNAs derived from EVs play in the ALI/ARDS area are largely focused on miRNAs. miRNAs are small, endogenous noncoding RNAs, typically 22–26 nucleotides in length that function primarily as post‐transcriptional regulators of gene expression. Numerous studies have reported that miRNAs encapsulated within EVs play pivotal roles in anti‐inflammatory, antioxidative, antiapoptotic processes, and barrier repair within the ALI/ARDS model. For instance, miR‐125b‐5p present in adipose‐derived mesenchymal stem cell (AdMSC)‐EVs could alleviate LPS‐induced PMVEC ferroptosis in sepsis‐induced ALI by regulating the Keap1/Nrf2/GPX4 expression axis.[
 
] miR‐146a‐5p, delivered by hucMSC‐EVs, targets TRAF6, enabling hucMSC‐EVs to exert anti‐inflammatory effects in SM‐induced ALI.[
 
] miR‐223‐3p has been identified as a crucial mediator in the regulatory effects induced by MSC‐EVs through the inhibition of polymerase‐1 in lung ECs.[
 
] In addition, miR‐199a‐5p in HMSCs‐Ex mitigates SM‐associated oxidative stress by modulating the CAV1/NRF2 signaling pathway.[
 
] Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell (BMSC)‐EVs containing miR‐127‐5p can downregulate CD64 to reduce tissue damage and inhibit the release of inflammatory factors and neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation.[
 
] miRNA‐125b‐5p derived from BMSCs‐EVs downregulates STAT3, thus inhibiting macrophage pyroptosis and alleviating sepsis‐associated ALI.[
 
] miR‐377‐3p released by human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells (hucMSCs)‐exosomes ameliorated lipopolysaccharide (LPS)‐induced ALI by targeting RPTOR to induce autophagy in vivo and in vitro.[
 
]

EVs also transport lncRNAs, which act as competing endogenous RNAs. These lncRNAs indirectly upregulate target genes by binding to miRNAs and diminishing their activities. Sui et al.[
 
] demonstrated that MSC‐EVs could clear miR‐181 in vivo by delivering IncRNA p21, promoting SIRT1 expression and protecting the epithelial barrier. Ma et al.[
 
] discovered that in a mouse model of sepsis, EPC‐EVs competitively bind to IncRNA TUG1 by transporting microRNA‐9‐5p, upregulating SIRT1 expression to promote M2 macrophage polarization, reducing lung tissue injury.
Furthermore, MVs, which are an important component of EVs, exhibit therapeutic potential by transporting mRNA. Tang et al.[
 , 
] reported that MSC‐MVs improve lung inflammation by delivering keratinocyte growth factor (KGF) mRNA and angiopoietin‐1 (Ang‐1) mRNA, restoring the integrity of the air‐blood barrier.

3.4.2

## Proteins
The proteins present in EVs constitute key components for their functionality. Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), which is a crucial factor associated with endothelial permeability, can display barrier‐protective effects on endothelial cells in ALI/ARDS. Hualing Wang et al.[
 
] demonstrated that HGF is a key factor within MSC‐MVs for protecting the endothelial barrier. In the LPS‐induced endothelial cell model, MSC‐MVs could decrease transcellular permeabilities, and the effect was significantly inhibited after HGF gene knockdown in MSC‐MVs. Moreover, HGF within MVs can also act on the endothelial intercellular junction proteins, reduce the apoptosis of endothelial cells, induce the proliferation of endothelial cells, and protect and stabilize the endothelial barrier function. Serum amyloid A1 (SAA1) is an acute‐phase protein, which can regulate inflammation and immunity. Zhou Lv et al.[
 
] showed that BMSCs‐Exo can inhibit sepsis‐induced lung injury through SAA1.
Apoptotic bodies, which are another subset of EVs, can also exert an effect through surface proteins. Apoptotic bodies can initiate immunoregulation to prevent and suppress inflammation and autoimmunity. Jiang et al.[
 
] demonstrated that apoptotic bodies released by UC‐MSCs convert the macrophages from a proinflammatory to an anti‐inflammatory state, thereby ameliorating the disease. They identify the expression of programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PDL1) on the membrane of UC‐MSC‐derived ABs, which interacts with programmed cell death protein 1 (PD1) on host macrophages. Such an interaction leads to the reprogramming of macrophage metabolism, causing a shift from glycolysis to mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation via the Erk‐dependent pathway in ALI.

3.4.3

## Mitochondrial Translocation and Repair of Mitochondrial Dysfunction
Mitochondrial translocation and repair of mitochondrial dysfunction represent another mechanism through which EVs exert an effect on ALI/ARDS. During the progression of ALI/ARDS, reactive oxygen species generated by mitochondria induce defects in DNA transcription, thereby resulting in mitochondrial dysfunction. Furthermore, damaged mitochondrial DNA perpetuates adverse reactions within the lungs.
The group showed that EVs derived from AdMSCs transfer mitochondrial components (mtDNA and mitochondrial proteins‐TOM20, NDUFV2) to alveolar macrophages in a dose‐dependent manner. After restoring the integrity of mitochondria, the level of mtDNA, mitochondrial membrane potential, OXPHOS activity, and ATP generation were elevated, and mROS stress was decreased in macrophages. Macrophages shift from a proinflammatory phenotype to an anti‐inflammatory phenotype, thereby leading to the restoration of metabolic and immune homeostasis of airway macrophages and alleviating lung inflammatory pathology.[
 
] Furthermore, EVs originated from BMSCs can deliver mitochondria to alveolar macrophages. This transfer process leads to an enhancement of the oxidative phosphorylation and phagocytic abilities of these macrophages. Moreover, it results in a decrease in the secretion of TNF‐α, thus alleviating inflammation and lung injury in ARDS.[
 
]

EVs can also modulate alveolar‐capillary barrier integrity through mitochondrial transfer in the ARDS animal model. Dutra Silva et al.[
 
] reported that in ARDS, EVs derived from normal MSCs restored the integrity of the air‐blood barrier, downregulated the level of ROS, and restored the normal levels of oxidative phosphorylation by transferring healthy mitochondria to damaged alveolar epithelial and endothelial cells, repairing mitochondrial function.
Collectively, these findings provide important evidence for EV‐mediated mitochondrial transfer as a mechanism for the treatment of ALI/ARDS.

3.5

## Clinical Research
Numerous clinical trials have explored the therapeutic potential of EVs in treating ALI/ARDS, focusing on the safety and efficacy of MSC‐EVs[
 
] (Table
 ). One clinical trial evaluated the safety and tolerability of clinical‐grade HAMSC‐EVs in 24 healthy volunteers who inhaled 2 × 108–1.6 × 109 particles. The trial demonstrated good tolerability and short‐term safety, with no severe adverse events or allergic reactions reported within 7 days postadministration (NCT04313647).[
 
] Additionally, the administration of MSC‐EVs to patients with ARDS has shown a high degree of safety. In several clinical studies investigating the use of EVs to treat patients with COVID‐19‐related ARDS, no significant adverse reactions or related adverse events were observed during treatment with varying doses of MSC‐EVs (NCT04491240, NCT04493242, and IRCT20200217046526N2).
 Aerosol inhalation is a commonly used drug delivery method in clinical trials. In a study on patients with severe COVID‐19, seven participants received daily treatment with 2.0 × 108 particles of haMSCs‐Exos for 5 days. The results indicated that all participants exhibited good tolerance to aerosol inhalation, with no adverse events reported, and participants showed varying degrees of improvement in the pulmonary lesions (NCT04276987).[
 
] Another clinical trial involved patients with COVID‐19 who underwent twice‐daily aerosol inhalation of 3.83 × 109–3.50 × 108 MSC‐EVs. This treatment did not induce allergic reactions. After aerosol inhalation of MSC‐EVs, the CRP level in patients was reduced, which promoted the absorption of pulmonary lesions and shortened the hospital stay for patients with mild symptoms (ChiCTR2000030261).[
 
]

Intravenous infusion is another crucial route for EV administration in clinical settings. In a clinical study treating severe COVID‐19‐related ARDS with bone marrow‐derived mesenchymal stem cell exosomes (ExoFlo) after intravenous infusion, patients showed significant improvements in clinical status and oxygenation, with a 192% increase in PaO2/FiO2. Laboratory results showed reduced neutrophils, increased CD3+, CD4+, and CD8+ lymphocyte counts, and decreased acute‐phase reactants such as CRP, ferritin, and d‐dimer.[
 
] In another study, patients with moderate‐to‐severe ARDS received intravenous infusions of placebo, 10 mL of ExoFlo (0.9 × 1012), or 15 mL of ExoFlo (1.2 × 1012) on days 1 and 4. Both doses of ExoFlo were safe. No treatment‐related adverse events were reported. Compared with placebo and ExoFlo‐10 mL, ExoFlo‐15 mL was more effective, which could notably reduce mortality, shorten the time to hospital discharge, and improve ventilation‐free days (NCT04493242).[
 
]

The results from published clinical trials suggest that EVs are a promising therapeutic candidate for patients with ALI/ARDS, though they still face limitations and challenges. The origins of EVs are diverse and heterogeneous, and the active ingredients that they contain are also different. Hence, the findings from the aforementioned clinical study cannot be generalized as class effects. Current clinical studies focus on the safety and preliminary efficacy of EVs. Therefore, large‐scale, multicenter, and long‐term follow‐up clinical trials are necessary to assess the potential benefits of EVs for ALI/ARDS in the future.

4

## Application of Engineered EVs in the Treatment of ALI/ARDS
Preclinical and clinical studies have shown promising potential for EVs derived from natural cells in treating ALI/ARDS. However, natural EV therapy has some limitations. First, EVs are heterogeneous; the active substances they carry can vary with the condition of the donor cells, making it challenging to ensure consistency from different cell batches of EVs. Additionally, numerous distribution experiments have revealed that EVs are rapidly cleared in animals (half‐life < 10 min), limiting their sustained effects on target organs.[
 
] These issues can be addressed using biotechnological approaches to modify and enhance EVs. In recent years, various biotechnologies have emerged to engineer EVs with enhanced tissue specificity, drug delivery efficiency, and biological activity.[
 
] This section summarizes engineered strategies for enhancing the biological activity of EVs and their specific applications in treating ALI/ARDS (Figure
 , Table
 ).
 4.1

## Altering the Culture Conditions of Donor Cells
The biological activity of EVs can be altered by intentionally adjusting the culture conditions of donor cells. This can be achieved by introducing specific stimuli,[
 
] inducing cell differentiation,[
 
] or adding cytokines during cell culture.[
 , 
]

Undifferentiated MSCs primarily rely on glycolytic metabolism for energy, so hypoxia preconditioning can boost their multipotency and proliferation.[
 
] Ren et al.[
 
] cultured MSCs under hypoxic conditions to derive hypoxia‐induced MSC‐EVs or hypo‐EVs. These hypo‐EVs contained higher levels of lncRNA XIST, which served as an miR‐455‐3p sponge targeting Claudin‐4 in ECs, thereby maintaining the integrity of EC junctions. In another study, Wang et al.[
 
] reported that EVs released by ECs subjected to cyclic stretching promoted the polarization of macrophages to an anti‐inflammatory phenotype in ventilator‐induced lung injury. At the molecular level, cyclic stretching stimulated the upregulation of miRNA‐21a‐5p in EVs, inhibiting the expression of Notch2 and SOCS1. Combining EVs with matrix materials can enhance their production without altering their biological activities. Lenzini et al.[
 
] developed a hydrogel substrate composed of alginate polymer combined with the cell adhesion peptide Arg‐Gly‐Asp (RGD). MSCs cultured on this hydrogel substrate secreted more EVs compared with those seeded on rigid plastic substrates, without affecting their therapeutic efficacy in a mouse model of ALI.
Altering the culture medium to induce specific differentiation in donor cells can enhance EV bioactivity[
 
] (Figure
 ). Kaspi et al.[
 
] induced MSCs to differentiate into neurotrophic and immunomodulatory factor‐secreting cells, termed MSC‐NTFs. EVs derived from these MSC‐NTFs elevated the levels of growth factors, which significantly inhibited inflammatory and coagulation responses in an ARDS animal model. Similarly, Jiao et al.[
 
] polarized macrophages into M2‐type macrophages to obtain M2 macrophage‐derived EVs by adding IL‐4 and IL‐13 to the culture medium. Compared with undifferentiated macrophage‐derived EVs, M2‐EVs were enriched with prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), which increased 15‐LO expression, shifted lipid mediator biosynthesis from LTB4 to LXA4 in polymorphonuclear neutrophils, inhibited neutrophil migration and extracellular trap formation, and ultimately reduced lung injury.
 Under the stimulation of various proinflammatory cytokines, MSCs exhibit immunosuppressive properties, enhancing their immune regulatory ability and improving their therapeutic effect in various inflammatory diseases.[
 , 
] The EVs exhibit similar properties. Wei‐Ting Lin et al.[
 
] pretreated MSCs with TNF and IFN‐γ, resulting in IFN‐γ/TNF‐MSCs‐EVs, which showed anti‐inflammatory effects in LPS‐induced ALI models. Similarly, Varkouhi et al.[
 
] utilized IFN‐γ to stimulate MSCs, producing IFN‐γ‐MSC‐EVs. In bacterial‐induced lung injury models, IFN‐γ‐MSC‐EVs effectively enhance phagocytosis and killing activity of macrophages against bacteria. Cheng et al.[
 
] pretreated MSCs with IL‐1β to obtain IB‐EVs, which inhibited endoplasmic reticulum stress and promoted injury repair in sepsis‐induced lung injury by increasing SIRT1 expression and ERK phosphorylation.
However, adjusting the donor cells’ culture conditions risks altering EVs’ biological activity. lncRNA‐p21 expression in EVs produced by LPS‐treated MSCs significantly increases, but excessive LPS stimulation may lead to cellular stress responses, affecting the quality and stability of EVs. Definitive research conclusions are lacking on whether MSC‐derived exosomes produced under LPS or other proinflammatory cytokine exposure conditions affect ECs during the progression of ALI. Additionally, adjusting culture conditions may lead to an increase in the heterogeneity of EVs. Different cellular states and stress responses may produce different types of EVs, which may vary in size, morphology, and composition, affecting their stability and consistency in clinical applications.

4.2

## Loading of Bioactive Substances/EVs as Delivery Vehicles for Therapeutic Drugs
4.2.1

## Modifying Donor Cells/Endogenous Loading
The bioactive substances carried by EVs can be modified by altering the donor cells through gene editing. By performing specific gene editing on donor cells, the biological activity of EVs can be altered. Utilizing genetic engineering techniques to construct a target protein expression vector and introducing it into donor cells, the EVs produced by these cells can carry relevant target proteins to enhance their biological effects.
Syndecan‐1, an endothelial barrier protective protein,[
 , 
] was targeted in a study by Zhang et al.[
 
] They constructed a Syndecan‐1 overexpression lentiviral vector to transfect mouse lung microvascular endothelial cells, producing high Syndecan‐1 expression EVs (SDC1‐high‐EVs). In ALI models, these SDC1‐high‐EVs significantly alleviated lung edema, reduced inflammatory responses, and restored endothelial barrier function. p18 is an endosomal protein that participates in reducing pulmonary endothelial permeability in ARDS. Harrington et al.[
 
] constructed a p18 overexpression plasmid to transfect lung microvascular endothelial cells, obtaining p18‐overexpressing EVs. In animal models of ARDS, p18‐EVs enhance endothelial barrier integrity by upregulating barrier‐protective miRNAs. Ibrahim et al.[
 
] used dermal fibroblasts transfected with CTNNB1 and GATA4 to create specialized activated tissue effector EVs (ASTEX). ASTEX demonstrated anti‐inflammatory and antifibrotic effects in bleomycin‐induced ALI models, thereby preventing the progression of ALI to pulmonary fibrosis. Wnt3a, a hydrophobic protein, is involved in tissue regeneration in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Gao et al.[
 
] engineered Wnt3aWGEVs by coexpressing Wnt3a with the membrane protein WLS and an engineered glypican GPC6ΔGPI‐C1C2. Wnt3aWGEVs activate the Wnt signaling pathway, promoting the growth of damaged alveolar ECs.
EVs can also serve as delivery vehicles for gene editing tools. CRISPR/CasRx (Cas13d) is an important gene‐editing tool that transiently affects the transcriptome of genes by targeting and cleaving specific RNA sequences.[
 
] Li et al.[
 
] developed engineered EVs to deliver CasRx/gRNA complexes to treat ALI. The tPA was selected as the signaling peptide, and plasmids expressing CasRx and the gRNAs for three inflammatory cytokines, TNF, IL‐6, and IL‐1β, were used to transfect donor cells. The released EVs were loaded with CasRx/gRNA gene editing tools. In an LPS‐induced ALI animal model, EVs‐CasRx/gRNA effectively reduced the levels of TNF, IL‐6, and IL‐1β. This intervention resulted in reduced alveolar wall thickening, lung edema, and collagen deposition, while improving lung tissue structure. It played an important therapeutic and reparative role in ALI (Figure ).
Utilizing genetic engineering techniques, target protein expression vectors are constructed and introduced into donor cells. The CRISPR/CasRx (Cas13d) gene editing tool is employed to transiently affect the transcriptome by targeting and cleaving specific RNA sequences. Both approaches enable cells to produce EVs carrying the relevant target proteins, significantly enhancing therapeutic efficacy, which is a widely applied engineering technology at present.
Nevertheless, genetic engineering operations may introduce potential safety risks. Transfection with viral vectors can integrate into the host cell genome, leading to gene mutations or insertional mutations, which may cause adverse outcomes such as cellular carcinogenesis. Gene editing technologies also have off‐target effects, which may damage nontarget genes and affect the normal physiological functions of cells. Moreover, the preparation process for genetically engineered EVs is complex, and quality control is challenging, making large‐scale production and application difficult, thus limiting the promotion of their clinical use.

4.2.2

## Modifying EVs/Exogenous Loading
EVs, with their lipid bilayer structure, high biocompatibility, low toxicity, and small size, make for ideal natural nanocarriers.[
 
] They can be directly loaded with various therapeutic drugs (small‐molecule compounds and nucleotides) through chemical or physical means.

## Small Molecule Compounds
The utilization of EVs for delivering small‐molecule drugs significantly enhances drug bioavailability, stability, and accumulation in target cells. Gao et al.[
 
] developed neutrophil‐derived engineered EVs loaded with the anti‐inflammatory drug piceatannol using a pH gradient, which effectively alleviated LPS‐induced ALI. Kim et al.[
 
] loaded curcumin, a highly hydrophobic drug with anti‐inflammatory activity, into EVs through coincubation, which significantly reduced the levels of proinflammatory factors in animal models of ALI.
Some target‐modified EVs can improve drug delivery efficiency. Zheng et al.[
 
] utilized folic acid‐functionalized EVs (FA‐EVs) targeting inflammatory areas loaded with the anti‐inflammatory drug resveratrol and the immunosuppressive drug celastrol (FA‐EVs/R + C). In the LPS‐induced sepsis model, FA‐EVs/R + C exhibited strong anti‐inflammatory and immunosuppressive activities, reduced cytokine storms and ALI, and improved the survival rate of mice with sepsis (Figure ).
With the assistance of specific proteins expressed on the surface, platelet‐derived EVs (P‐EVs) accumulate at inflammatory sites without aggravating inflammation.[
 
] Ma et al.[
 
] used P‐EVs loaded with the inflammatory factor inhibitor TPCA‐1, which significantly reduced the inflammatory response and prevented cytokine storms compared to TCPA‐1 alone.[
 
]

Dexamethasone (DEX) is an anti‐inflammatory steroid that suppresses the inflammatory response and induces several side effects during long‐term use.[
 
] Based on its hydrophobic properties, Ma et al.[
 
] loaded DEX into P‐EVs via coincubation methods, specifically targeting inflamed lung tissue. Compared with the DEX treatment group, EVs loaded with DEX reduced the required dosage, effectively avoiding the occurrence of side effects.
The use of engineered EVs for the delivery of small‐molecule drugs can significantly enhance the bioavailability, stability, and accumulation of drugs in target cells. Some EVs with targeting modifications can also improve the efficiency of drug administration. However, when used alone, this engineering technology still has limitations. The most obvious are the limitations in drug loading efficiency and targeting accuracy in drug delivery.
The interaction between drug molecules and the membrane may not be entirely ideal, and some drugs may not be able to effectively enter the EVs, leading to insufficient drug loading each time and affecting the therapeutic effect. Moreover, the chemical properties of different drug molecules vary greatly. Some hydrophobic drugs may be easier to load into exosomes, while hydrophilic drugs may require more complex loading methods, increasing the difficulty and uncertainty of the loading process.
Additionally, the targeting modification of engineered exosomes is mainly based on specific receptor‐ligand interactions. In the complex physiological environment in vivo, the targeting ligands may bind to similar receptors on nontarget cells, leading to nonspecific drug delivery and reducing targeting accuracy.

## Nucleotides
Small interfering RNA (siRNA), a 20–25 nucleotide double‐stranded RNA, serves as a crucial gene therapy agent by interfering with the expression of specific genes. EVs are widely regarded as ideal siRNA delivery vehicles due to their nonimmunogenicity, biodegradability, and excellent biocompatibility. Ju et al.[
 
] engineered EVs with ICAM‐1‐siRNA via electroporation. In lung microvascular endothelial cells, these engineered EVs can directly inhibit the expression of ICAM‐1 and reduce the adhesion between neutrophils and endothelial cells, thereby suppressing inflammation. To boost siRNA delivery to lung tissue, Han et al.[
 
] packaged Myd88‐siRNA into EVs and delivered them to damaged lung tissues using a vibrating mesh nebulizer. Studies have shown that siRNA encapsulated in EVs can effectively reduce degradation and enzymatic digestion in vivo and enhance its action in target cells. In ALI animal models, these engineered EVs reduced proinflammatory factors and chemokines, inflammatory cell infiltration, and pulmonary edema.
miRNAs are endogenous, single‐stranded RNA fragments, typically 21–23 nucleotides long, that regulate gene expression by interacting with the 3'UTR of mRNA.[
 
] EVs serve as important delivery vectors for miRNAs.[
 
] MiRNA‐125b exhibits anti‐inflammatory and vascular repair properties. Gu et al.[
 
] loaded miRNA‐125b into EVs using an ExoFect transfection kit. These engineered EVs delivered miRNA‐125b to injured endothelial cells, inhibiting apoptosis, promoting proliferation, restoring intercellular connections, and protecting the endothelial barrier integrity. Similarly, Ma et al.[
 
] used electroporation to load miRNA‐182‐5p into ginseng root‐derived ELNs. These engineered EVs improved ALI in sepsis by inhibiting the target genes NOX4 and the Nox4/Drp‐1/NLR3 signaling pathway.
Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) are small DNA sequences that reduce gene expression at the post‐transcriptional level.[
 
] EVs can enhance their bioactivity by loading ASO. Han et al.[
 
] engineered EVs loaded with ASO via electroporation, effectively reducing lung inflammation in ALI mice by knocking down Lncenc1 expression. Jayasinghe et al.[
 
] utilized red blood cell‐derived EVs to load ASO targeting a key conserved region of SARS‐CoV‐2. These ASO‐loaded RBC‐EVs were efficiently absorbed by cells and inhibited SARS‐CoV‐2 replication in vitro and in vivo.
Small interfering RNA (siRNA), microRNA (miRNA), and others are susceptible to degradation by nucleases in vitro, which affects their stability and therapeutic efficacy. In contrast, EVs can provide a relatively stable internal environment for nucleic acid drugs, protecting them from degradation.
The loading process can be accomplished with the help of methods such as sonication, electroporation, and coincubation.[
 
] However, it may face issues such as changes in the structure of EVs and low loading rates. Loading can also be carried out through genetic engineering approaches. Methods mentioned in the examples above allow for more precise regulation of miRNA secretion, but they require higher standards for the physiological state of cells and the technical skills of the operators.

4.3

## Targeted Modification of EVs

To improve the therapeutic efficiency of EVs, their surfaces can be modified with specific target molecules such as peptides, proteins, and antibodies to enhance lung targeting and reduce hepatic clearance. Chemical modifications and gene engineering are the two primary methods commonly employed for these modifications.
4.3.1

## Gene Engineering
Targeted peptides are polypeptides with specific targeting ability. Due to their low molecular weight, they are often fused with transmembrane proteins expressed on EVs, such as CD63 and Lamp2b, to create expression vectors. After transfecting donor cells, the resulting EVs express the targeted peptide on their surface, thus acquiring targeting capabilities. Kim et al.[
 
] utilized genetic modification technology to fuse the receptor for advanced glycation end‐product receptor (RAGE)‐binding peptide (RBP) with the membrane protein Lamp‐2B on EVs, creating RBP‐EVs (Figure ). These RBP‐EVs colocalize with type I alveolar ECs. In the LPS‐induced ALI model, RBP‐EVs can efficiently deliver the anti‐inflammatory drug curcumin to the injured lungs, compared with unmodified EVs, enhancing an anti‐inflammatory response. Similarly, Gu et al.[
 
] modified the lung microvascular endothelial cell‐targeting peptide (LET) on the surface of EVs using genetic engineering. These modified EVs exhibited significantly prolonged retention in the lung tissue, directly targeting injured lung microvascular endothelial cells and promoting repair of the endothelial barrier.
Gene engineering can be utilized to overexpress target proteins and extend their retention in the lung tissue through receptor‐ligand interactions. For example, SP‐A, an alveolar surfactant protein, binds to various receptors in the lung tissue to prolong retention time. Salazar‐Puerta et al.[
 
] engineered EVs to express SP‐A, resulting in increased retention and accumulation in lung tissue, which enhanced drug delivery and therapeutic efficacy. In COVID‐19 research, Fu et al.[
 
] modified the receptor‐binding domain of SARS‐CoV‐2 spike protein on EV membranes, encapsulating siRNAs targeting the virus. These engineered EVs specifically targeted damaged lung tissues, delivering siRNAs that exerted antiviral effects.

Furthermore, targeted protein‐modified EVs can serve as important neutralizing therapeutic agents. During the COVID‐19 pandemic, SARS‐CoV‐2 primarily infects host cells by binding to angiotensin‐converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors.[
 
] Blocking this interaction is an important preventive measure. El‐Shennawy et al.[
 
] used genetic engineering to create EVs expressing ACE2 (evACE2). Compared with the recombinant human ACE2 protein, evACE2 can efficiently disrupt the binding between the virus and host, effectively preventing SARS‐CoV‐2 infection. In hACE2 transgenic mice, evACE2 effectively protected the mice against lung injury and death caused by SARS‐CoV‐2.

4.3.2

## Chemical Modification
EVs are nonbiological entities with lipid bilayer structures that allow for direct chemical modification of their membrane surfaces.
Target molecules can modify the surface of the EVs by binding to lipid materials under hydrophobic forces. For example, Wang et al.[
 
] modified the RBD in DSPE‐PEG‐NHS to obtain DSPE‐PEG‐RBD and then inserted DSPE‐PEG‐RBD into the membrane surface of EVs via hydrophobic interactions to obtain RBD‐EVs (Figure ). These RBD‐EVs serve as important COVID‐19 vaccines by triggering humoral and cellular immune responses to combat SARS‐CoV‐2. Furthermore, targeting molecules react with surface functional groups (e.g., carboxyl and amine groups) to enhance their targeting abilities. Zheng et al.[
 
] combined an inflammation‐targeting FA with NHS‐PEG to create NHS‐PEG‐FA. This compound anchors FA to the surface of EVs via an amide reaction with primary amines on the surface of EVs. In animal models of LPS‐induced ALI, FA‐EVs accumulated in the lungs after systemic administration, demonstrating the potential for targeted delivery to activated macrophages. Jiang et al.[
 
] utilized SpyTag‐SpyCatcher protein conjugation technology to modify EV surfaces with the RBD, creating an RBD‐OMV vaccine. Intranasal administration of this vaccine in Syrian hamsters with COVID‐19 induced the production of anti‐RBD IgG.
Notably, both genetic engineering and chemical modification may face issues such as increased immunogenicity and reduced biocompatibility. These risks need to be excluded in the actual application process.

4.4

## Combining EVs with Nanomaterials
EVs, known for their superior biocompatibility and specific protein‐loading capacity, can be combined with various nanomaterials to improve drug delivery efficiency.
During the COVID‐19 pandemic, Ma et al.[
 
] developed a Nano‐Bait (PDA@Exosome) to inhibit SARS‐CoV‐2 infection. PDA@Exosomes were obtained by coculturing 293 T cells overexpressing ACE2 with polydopamine (PDA) nanoparticles. In lung injury models, PDA@Exosomes competed with ACE2‐expressing ECs for S protein binding, thereby reducing lung damage. Moreover, due to the ability of PDA to scavenge free radicals, PDA@Exosomes also reduced the production of inflammatory factors by mediating oxidative stress.
Chen et al.[
 
] used P‐EVs and cell membranes expressing calreticulin (CRT) to cloak poly (lactic‐co‐glycolic acid) (PLGA) to obtain PC@PLGA. In an ALI mouse model, PC@PLGA specifically targeted activated neutrophils through P‐selectin derived from P‐EVs and initiated macrophage‐mediated programmed cell clearance through CRT, effectively eliminating activated neutrophils and preventing inflammatory responses.
Liu et al.[
 
] designed a hybrid nanoplatform (D‐SEL) by conjugating DNase I as an outer cleavable arm to a serum exosomal and liposomal hybrid nanocarrier (SEL) via a matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP‐9)‐cleavable peptide and encapsulated it with methylprednisolone sodium succinate (MPS) (Figure ). In ALI animal models, D‐SEL promotes the polarization of macrophages toward an anti‐inflammatory phenotype, degrades neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), disrupts the synergistic interaction between neutrophils and macrophages, and reshapes the pulmonary immune microenvironment through a sequential drug delivery mechanism.
Holay et al.[
 
] encapsulated DEX‐loaded PLGA nanoparticles (DEX‐NPs) in EVs using ultrasonic methods to obtain biomimetic nanoparticles (DEX‐EV‐NPs).[
 
] After intravenous administration, DEX‐EV‐NPs rapidly accumulated in the lungs, effectively reducing the level of the proinflammatory factor IL‐6 in the lungs while also reducing the toxicity of DEX. No significant changes were observed in major organs or hemograms.
Hyaluronic acid (HA),[
 
] a nonsulfated glycosaminoglycan, known for its high molecular weight (HMW) HA (≥1.0 MDa), can enhance the secretion of anti‐inflammatory cytokines by target cells, maintaining the integrity of endothelial and epithelial barriers and promoting tissue regeneration and repair. Zhou et al.[
 
] pretreated MSC EVs with HMW HA, which significantly increased the efficacy of MSC EVs against PA. HMW HA‐induced MSC‐EVs further increased monocyte phagocytosis and bacterial clearance compared with the MSC‐EV group.
This engineering technology is not yet mature enough. For example, the in vivo dynamic behavior and targeting of hybrid nanocarriers mentioned earlier may be affected by the respective characteristics of EVs and liposomes, which need to be further optimized. The high preparation cost also limits its promotion in clinical applications.
In fact, no matter what kind of engineering method has its unique advantages and limitations, the combination of different methods may get better results. Researchers should choose the approach that best meets their needs according to the specific research objectives and experimental conditions. But at the same time, the preparation cost is more complex, so that production standardization and clinical transformation may be more difficult.

5

## Challenges and Perspectives
Over the past decade, scientists have explored EVs extensively to understand their mechanisms of action better. EVs exhibit good biocompatibility and potent bioactivity in the treatment of lung diseases and hold great potential for clinical applications. Compared with ordinary cell therapy, EVs have high stability, low immunogenicity, and excellent biocompatibility. EVs possess a lipid bilayer structure that serves as a natural nanomaterial. Faced with traditional chemically synthesized nanomaterials, EVs exhibit superior biocompatibility and low toxicity. Particularly, compared with the traditional treatments for ALI/ARDS mentioned earlier, EVs can obviously exert a more proactive therapeutic effect by carrying various bioactive molecules, directly penetrating the air‐blood barrier, and participating in the processes of injury repair. Significant progress has been made in preclinical and clinical studies using EVs of various origins to treat ALI/ARDS.
Nevertheless, natural EV therapy faces limitations due to heterogeneity and a short half‐life, which affect therapeutic efficiency and targeting ability. Notably, certain risks remain associated with EV use in therapy. For instance, while MSC‐derived EVs exhibit low immunogenicity, they may still trigger severe immune responses in some instances, particularly with repeated administrations or high dosages. This could lead to inflammatory reactions and tissue damage, potentially affecting cell proliferation and differentiation, thereby increasing the risk of tumor formation.[
 
] To enhance the biological activity of EVs in preclinical studies, EVs have been engineered and modified to improve their targeting and efficiency.
Therapeutic approaches based on EVs have tremendous potential in alleviating lung injury to prevent ALI/ARDS. However, many key issues must still be addressed for clinical translation.
Firstly, optimizing the production process and enhancing the production efficiency for EVs are critical issues that must be addressed urgently. In clinical trials of EV treatment for ARDS, the administered dose of EVs is generally high (0.9–1.2 × 1012 particles per dose for intravenous infusion). The traditional preparation process for EVs is slow, expensive, and inefficient, limiting the demand for large‐scale clinical applications. Consequently, enhancing the yield of EVs has become a crucial issue that requires urgent attention. Various physical, biological, and chemical stimulation methods have been employed to increase EV yield.[
 
] Hao et al.[
 
] developed a microfluidic editing platform that can squeeze and stimulate cells in a high‐throughput and noninvasive manner to enhance EV secretion. Watson et al.[
 
] employed a hollow‐fiber bioreactor to culture cells, enabling the efficient production of bioactive EVs in a short time, thus improving production efficiency.
EVs are a large collection of subsets including exosomes, microvesicles, and apoptotic bodies. The isolation and purification of EVs to obtain a single type are beneficial for standardization. Currently, methods for EV isolation and purification mainly include ultracentrifugation, ultrafiltration, immunoaffinity, polymer precipitation, microfluidics, and size‐exclusion chromatography. A previous study[
 
] counted the exosome applications in therapeutics and diagnostics concerning various exosome isolation methods during the years 2014−2021 (Figure
 ), which implied that microfluidics‐based isolation techniques and polymer‐based precipitation techniques were the most commonly used methods in recent years. They are rapid and simple but have existing problems of low sample capacity and low purity. The traditional ultracentrifugation is appropriate for large‐volume samples and cost‐effective, but it faces high equipment costs, low yield, and potential damage to EVs. According to different application purposes, different methods can be used for EV standardized production.
 Secondly, due to the excellent cell communication ability, EVs have been regarded as an efficient drug delivery vehicle. Various biotechnological approaches have been employed to engineer and modify EVs, such as sonication, electroporation, transfection, incubation, and extrusion[
 
] (Figure ), enhancing their biological activity. However, these modifications are double‐edged swords that may pose risks while improving the biological activity of EVs. For instance, some studies used lentiviral vectors as transfection tools to introduce functional proteins, miRNAs, and targeted peptide sequences into EVs. However, lentiviral vectors may pose the risk of integrating viral genomes into the host genome cell. Therefore, safer modification methods such as plasmid transfection and chemical modification are recommended for further research on engineered EVs. Additionally, EVs, as natural nanocarriers, can be loaded with small molecules or gene drugs using ultrasound and electroporation, but these methods may disrupt their original structure. Therefore, finding safer, more efficient, and gentler EV modification techniques has become an important topic in current research. Yang et al.[
 
] developed a cellular‐nanoporation (CNP) biochip to produce large amounts of exosomes containing therapeutic mRNA and targeted peptides. Cells of various origins were transfected with plasmid DNA and stimulated with local and transient electrical stimulation to promote the release of exosomes carrying transcriptional mRNA and targeted peptides. Compared to other exosome production strategies, cellular nanopores produced up to 50 times as many exosomes and more than 103 times as many exosome mRNA transcripts, even from cells with low basal levels of exosome secretion, which may provide a solution for exosomes to effectively and stably load nucleic acid drugs.
In addition, the storage conditions of EVs are crucial factors that affect their yield and function. Currently, the commonly used storage method for EVs is at −80 °C. The addition of cryoprotectants (e.g., human albumin and trehalose) reduces the impact of freeze‐thaw processes and improves the stability of EVs during long‐term storage and freeze‐thaw cycles.[
 
] Standardizing the preparation of natural and engineered EVs and controlling their quality are crucial for their therapeutic applications. The International Society for Extracellular Vesicles (ISEV) released guidelines for EV preparation in 2014,[
 
] 2018,[
 
] and 2023,[
 
] further evaluating the standards of production quality of EVs. In subsequent clinical studies, it will be necessary to develop more efficient isolation and purification processes under GMP conditions. This will meet stringent regulatory requirements and ensure high purity and consistency across EV batches.
Notably, the classification of EVs is an important regulatory hurdle. EVs may be classified as biotechnology products or advanced therapy medicinal products (ATMP), which affects the scope of subsequent development studies and the approval process.[
 
] Regardless of the registration procedure, the applicant must carefully define the scope of the development research based on the characteristics of the source cell, manufacturing process, and carrying molecules. Preclinical studies for extracellular vesicle drugs are very different from conventional chemical drugs. Focusing on biologically effective doses and safety is essential, along with obtaining reliable data through methods such as animal experiments and 3D culture. Overall, the complexity of the regulatory environment is a major obstacle to the commercialization of EVs. Close collaboration with regulatory authorities is essential to develop a sound development strategy based on product characteristics, ensuring quality, safety, and effectiveness, and ultimately securing marketing authorization.
Although EVs have demonstrated strong therapeutic effects in preclinical trials for ALI/ARDS, key factors need to be considered when transitioning EVs to clinical application, especially the administration route and dosing regimen of EVs. Current preclinical studies show significant variations in dosage and administration regimen owing to differences in EV isolation and preparation methods. The emergence of the COVID‐19 pandemic has accelerated the initiation and progression of numerous clinical trials employing EVs as potential therapeutic modalities for the treatment of ARDS. In these trials, EVs were quantified based on the number of particles. Consequently, it may be a better choice when studying dosage in future preclinical research. Moreover, defining robust potency assay methods for evaluating therapeutic efficacy is paramount to maximizing the effectiveness of these treatments and ensuring safety in the long therapeutic process.
Lastly, ethical guidelines for the clinical use of EVs are currently lacking. In the future, establishing and improving relevant ethical norms is essential to protect patients’ rights and promote the correct use of EVs.

6

## Conclusion
Overall, natural EVs play significant roles in various physiological activities associated with ALI/ARDS, such as the regulation of inflammation, inhibition of apoptosis, promotion of barrier repair, and modulation of autophagy. Understanding their mechanisms, improving quality standards, and confirming optimal dosing and treatment regimens are essential for promoting the clinical use of EVs. Recent significant progress in research on engineered EVs for ALI treatment has indicated their potential as a new class of therapeutics offering good biocompatibility, high efficacy, and customization. Therefore, future endeavors should prioritize optimizing and stabilizing these engineered EVs to ensure their safety and effectiveness, while achieving scalable production for clinical applications.

## Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Author Contributions

Zhengyan Gu: investigation (equal); writing—original draft (lead); writing—review & editing (equal). Wenjun Xue: investigation (equal); writing—original draft (equal); writing—review & editing (lead). Guanchao Mao: investigation (equal); writing—original draft (equal); writing—review & editing (equal). Zhipeng Pei: investigation (equal); writing—original draft (equal); writing—review & editing (equal). Jingjing Li: investigation (supporting); writing—review & editing (supporting). Mingxue Sun: supervision (equal); writing—review & editing (equal). Xinkang Zhang: supervision (equal); writing—review & editing (supporting). Shanshan Zhang: supervision (equal); writing—review & editing (supporting). Songling Li: supervision (equal); writing—review & editing (supporting). Jinfeng Cen: investigation (supporting); writing—review & editing (supporting). Kai Xiao: conceptualization (equal); writing—review & editing (supporting). Ying Lu: conceptualization (equal); writing—review & editing (supporting). Qingqiang Xu: conceptualization (lead); writing—review & editing (supporting). Zhengyan Gu, Wenjun Xue, Guanchao Mao, and Zhipeng Pei contributed equally to this work.

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82103885, 82273672, and 82471911), Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (20ZR1470300 and 21ZR1477700), Shanghai Municipal Health Commission‐Outstanding Youth Foundation of Public Health (GWV‐10.2‐YQ48), and Shanghai Sailing Program (21YF1457400).

Zhengyan Gu obtained her Master's degree from the Naval Medical University and is currently pursuing her Ph.D. at Tongji University. Her research primarily focuses on the engineering modifications of extracellular vesicles and their therapeutic applications in acute lung injury.
 
Wenjun Xue is a doctoral candidate in basic medicine at the School of Medicine, Tongji University. Her research focuses on biomimetic drug delivery systems for therapeutic strategies for pulmonary‐related diseases.
 
Guanchao Mao is a lecturer at the Lab of Toxicology and Pharmacology, Naval Medical University. His research primarily focuses on the design of new biomaterials and their efficacy in the treatment of acute lung injury, such as nanobodies and extracellular vesicles.
 
Zhipeng Pei is a lecturer at Naval Medical University. She obtained her M.A.Sc. (2017) from The Second Military Medical University. Her research interest is in medical protection from chemical weapons, particularly using mesenchymal stem cells and extracellular vesicles.
 
Kai Xiao is a professor at Naval Medical University. He obtained his B.Sc. (1994) and M.A.Sc. (1997) from The Second Military Medical University and Ph.D. (2000) from the Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He is a nominated Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) instructor and qualified expert for the United Nations Secretary‐General's Mechanism (UNSGM) for the investigation of the alleged use of chemical biological and toxin weapons.
 
Ying Lu is the Director and Professor of the Pharmaceutical Science Department at the Naval Medical University. She received her B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the Second Military Medical University in 1994 and 2006. Her research areas include the design and application of neuropeptide‐based nanomaterials in imaging and therapy of lung diseases. In the last 3 years, her research has focused on the research of targeted drug delivery systems and exosome drug delivery systems for acute lung injury.
 
Qingqiang Xu is an associate professor at Naval Medical University. He obtained his B.Sc. (2010) from Shandong University and Ph.D. (2016) from The Second Military Medical University. His research focuses on the toxicology of chemical lung injury and the development of engineered extracellular vesicle drug delivery systems.