pmcACS NanoACS Nano822acssd101313589nnACS Nano1936-08511936-086Xpmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC11210341PMC11210341.111210341112103413876422410.1021/acsnano.4c003601ArticlePlant-Derived Anti-Human
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
2 Antibody Suppresses Trastuzumab-Resistant Breast Cancer with Enhanced
Nanoscale Binding
ParkChanyong KimKibum KimYerin https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7553-7249ZhuRong HainLisa SeferovicHannah KimMin-Hyeok WooHyun Joo HwangHyunju LeeSeung Ho KimSangmin LeeJeong Eon https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2583-1305HinterdorferPeter KoKisung https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3062-1302ParkSungsu https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9636-3329OhYoo Jin †School
of Mechanical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan
University, Suwon 16419, Korea‡Department
of Medicine, Medical Research Institute, College of Medicine, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 06974, Korea§Department
of Applied Experimental Biophysics, Institute of Biophysics, Johannes Kepler University Linz, 4040 Linz, Austria∥Major
of Nano-Bioengineering, College of Life Sciences and Bioengineering, Incheon National University, Incheon 22012, Korea⊥Department
of Breast Cancer Center, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul 06351, Korea#Division
of Breast Surgery, Department of Surgery, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul 06351, Korea*Email: ksko@cau.ac.kr.*Email: nanopark@skku.edu.*Email: yoo_jin.oh@jku.at.200520242506202418254655991612616140090120241005202403052024270620242806202428062024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2024The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
Traditional monoclonal antibodies such as Trastuzumab
encounter
limitations when treating Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2
(HER2)-positive breast cancer, particularly in cases that develop
resistance. This study introduces plant-derived anti-HER2 variable
fragments of camelid heavy chain domain (VHH) fragment crystallizable
region (Fc) KEDL(K) antibody as a potent alternative for overcoming
these limitations. A variety of biophysical techniques, in
vitro assays, and in vivo experiments uncover
the antibody’s nanoscale binding dynamics with transmembrane
HER2 on living cells. Single-molecule force spectroscopy reveals the
rapid formation of two robust bonds, exhibiting approximately 50 pN
force resistance and bond lifetimes in the second range. The antibody
demonstrates a specific affinity for HER2-positive breast cancer cells,
including those that are Trastuzumab-resistant. Moreover, in immune-deficient
mice, the plant-derived anti-HER2 VHH-FcK antibody exhibits superior
antitumor activity, especially against tumors that are resistant to
Trastuzumab. These findings underscore the plant-derived antibody’s
potential as an impactful immunotherapeutic strategy for treating
Trastuzumab-resistant HER2-positive breast cancer.

Ã ?sterreichische Nationalstiftung fÃ Â¼r Forschung, Technologie und Entwicklung10.13039/100010132NAResearch Department of the State of Upper AustriaNANAAustrian Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research and the Ministry of Science and ICT of the Republic of KoreaNANAAustrian Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Research and the Ministry of Science and ICT of the Republic of KoreaNAKR 07/2020National Research Council of Science and Technology10.13039/501100008783CRC22021-200National Research Foundation of Korea10.13039/501100003725NRF-2021R1F1A1063869National Research Foundation of Korea10.13039/501100003725NRF-2019K1A3A1A18116087Austrian Science Fund10.13039/501100002428V584Austrian Science Fund10.13039/501100002428P35166Austrian Science Fund10.13039/501100002428P31599Austrian Science Fund10.13039/501100002428I5791pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9nn4c00360document-id-new-14nn4c00360ccc-priceBreast cancer is a major health
concern affecting more than 2 million women worldwide and its rising
incidence and high mortality rates make it a major economic and social
burden. − Breast cancer can be classified into 4 molecular subtypes based
on the presence or absence of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptors,
and the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). , − Among these subtypes, breast cancer characterized by the overexpression
of HER2 is linked to lower survival rates, presenting significant
treatment challenges. , 
Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)
such as Trastuzumab have been developed
to inhibit the HER2 signaling pathway by binding to its extracellular
domain. , , However, the
efficacy of these mAbs is limited, with up to 60% of patients not
responding to Trastuzumab. , , For example, several molecular variations within the HER2 protein
hinder its binding to Trastuzumab, contributing to the treatment resistance.
Therefore, this limitation has led researchers to explore alternative
therapies that can penetrate tumors better, benefit resistant patients,
and identify new binders’ affinity. , One promising approach is the development of smaller antibody fragments
that retain the intact antibody’s specificity and affinity.
Variable fragments of camelid heavy chain domains (VHHs) are particularly
suitable for targeting and internalizing antigens in poorly vascularized
tissues such as tumors. , VHHs have a lower molecular
weight than full-size mAbs, enabling better tumor penetration. The
smallest variable domain of the heavy chain, with a molecular weight
of 15 kDa, possesses the ability to bind to antigens and is highly
adaptable, facilitating the expression of diverse antibodies within
a single cell. Moreover, this domain
exhibits both physical and chemical stability, presents minimal immunogenicity,
and serves as an exceptionally adaptable binding molecule. Despite
these advantages, its production is constrained by the limitations
of traditional heterologous systems for expressing therapeutic recombinant
proteins, leading to high production costs that complicate large-scale
manufacturing. Consequently, there is
a pressing need for ongoing research aimed at devising more efficacious
therapies and personalized treatment strategies for HER2-positive
breast cancer.
To achieve cost-effective production of VHHs,
researchers have
explored the use of plants as an alternative host for heterologous
protein expression. , Plants offer several advantages
over other expression systems, including safety from zoonotic diseases,
low cultivation costs, glycosylation processes, and the potential
for easy scalability through indoor and outdoor production. , , Among various methods to enhance
the yield of therapeutic proteins in plants, achieving stable expression
via nuclear transgenic plant techniques stands out as a particularly
promising approach for large-scale manufacturing. This method enables
stable gene insertion and simplifies the propagation and storage of
transgenic plants via seeds. In our earlier
investigation, we achieved the successful expression and purification
of the anti-HER2 VHH-FcK antibody, which specifically targets breast
cancer cells utilizing transgenic plants. This achievement was realized
through fusion of the human immunoglobulin G (IgG) Fc domain and KDEL
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention sequence to the VHH fragment. This antibody demonstrated its effectiveness
in inhibiting the in vitro growth and migration of
BT-474 cell line, which is characterized by HER2 positivity. However, it is important to highlight that our
previous study did not include assays to evaluate the anti-HER2 activity
of the VHH-FcK antibody against HER2-positive breast cancer cells
that are resistant to Trastuzumab. Equally unexplored are the intricate
binding mechanism and nanomechanical properties associated with the
VHH-FcK antibody.
Over the past few decades, atomic force microscopy
(AFM)-based
force spectroscopy has emerged as a powerful tool for analyzing ligand
binding strength and dynamics on living cell membranes at single-molecule
resolution. Several studies have deciphered the binding mechanisms
and inhibition processes of antibodies, , peptides, cell adhesion molecules, and enzymes. Moreover, investigating
the binding of mAbs to cancer cells and the subsequent activation
of immune cells has provided insight into the mechanisms underlying
cancer immunotherapy. Force spectroscopy
has also pioneered the binding of single viral proteins and particles
to host cells, deciphering the initial stages of viral infection − and analyzing the molecular dynamics of lectin binding to pathogens
aids the development of therapeutic strategies. , 
Here, we study the anticancer mechanism of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK
against
wild-type (WT) HER2-positive breast cancer (BT-474) and its Trastuzumab-resistant
cells (BT-474 TR). We decipher the nanomechanical kinetic and equilibrium
binding mechanisms of the developed antibody with single-molecule
resolution on living cells to obtain a detailed understanding of the
antibody inhibition process. To this end, we use the AFM-based single-molecule
force spectroscopy technique and deduce the interaction strength and
kinetics during bimodal antibody bond formation and dissociation from
HER2.

## Results

## Isolation and Characterization of Plant-Derived Anti-HER2 VHH-FcK
Antibodies Targeting HER2
We initially transplanted in vitro seedlings of transgenic plants to the greenhouse
to obtain plant biomass ( a). Subsequently, anti-HER2 VHH-FcK was purified from in vivo transgenic plant leaf biomass ( a) and sodium dodecyl sulfate
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) analysis validated the
successful purification of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK using Protein A affinity
chromatography ( a,c). The expression of the anti-HER2 VHH-FcK protein was confirmed
by Western blot ( d). The camelid heavy chain (HC) bearing an antigen-binding site
(VHH) was fused to the human-Fc fragment (hFc) generating the VHH-Fc
fusion protein as a single domain (∼45 kDa), which is smaller
than the HC of full-size antibody (∼50 kDa) ( b–d). Trastuzumab, with
a total molecular weight of 150 kDa, is composed of two heavy chains
(each approximately 50 kDa) and two light chains (each approximately
25 kDa). This structure is significantly larger than that of the anti-HER2
VHH-FcK, which has a molecular weight of around 90 kDa.
 

## Binding of Anti-HER2 VHH-FcK to HER2 on Breast Cancer Cell BT-474
and BT-474-TR Is Specific
To decipher the detailed molecular
mechanisms underlying the biochemical activity of Anti-HER2 VHH-FcK
and Trastuzumab, we performed binding studies at the single-molecule
level in HER2-positive breast cancer cells. The experimental principle
of the approach is shown in a. An antibody (Trastuzumab or anti-HER2 VHH-FcK) was
coupled to the AFM tip using a hydrazone linkage method via a 6 nm
long flexible poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) cross-linker. By applying
this specially tailored linker attachment to one of the small oligosaccharide
chains (e.g., terminal glycan epitope mannose, GlcNAc) on the Fc arm
of the antibody next to the hinge region ( a), , we avoided random coupling
to one lysine residue of the overall antibody structure or asymmetric
orientation. This linkage also ensured sufficient motional freedom
of the antibody for specific binding. Bringing an antibody-adorned
AFM tip into contact with the surface of BT-474 leads to the formation
of up to two cognate molecular bonds between the two Fab arms of the
antibody and the HER2 molecules. Thereafter, the AFM cantilever was
retracted to measure the unbinding force required to break the molecular
bonds ( b).
During retraction, an increasing force load was applied to the molecular
bond, which was directly monitored from the downward deflection of
the AFM cantilever. The loading force increased in a nonlinear parabolic-like
fashion, characteristic for (i) the extension of the distensible PEG
cross-linker (6 nm extended length) through which the antibody molecule
is connected to the AFM tip and (ii) dominated from stretching the
highly elastic cellular membrane (0 to 800 nm). Finally, at a critical force, termed the unbinding force,
the antibody-linked tip detached from HER2 and the cantilever jumped
back to its neutral position. In many of the recorded force–distance
curves, either single-bond unbinding signatures (blue in b) or double-bond
signatures (green for simultaneous and red for sequential unbinding,
in b) were
detected.
 To confirm the specificity of the molecular bonds
formed between
the antibodies (anti-HER2 VHH-FcK/Trastuzumab) and HER2, we analyzed
the binding probability, defined as the percentage of force measurements
that displayed a specific unbinding event. In the case where a single
curve in the analysis showed sequential binding behavior, only the
last unbinding was considered and counted. Measurements were conducted
on the two different cell surfaces, BT-474 and BT-474-TR ( c). Specific unbinding
events were observed in similar frequency (about 13%) for both anti-HER2
VHH-FcK and Trastuzumab on BT-474. Importantly, anti-HER2 VHH-FcK
also exhibited a significant binding probability (13%) on BT-474-TR,
whereas Trastuzumab binding (5%) was largely absent. The specificity
of the interactions of both anti-HER2 VHH-FcK and Trastuzumab was
confirmed through independent control experiments conducted on the
triple-negative breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231, which does not
express HER2 and BT-474 KD (HER2 knockdown BT-474, Figure S1) cells. These experiments demonstrated a significant
decrease in the binding probability, with about 80% reduction observed
on MDA-MB-231 cells and about 60% reduction on BT-474 KD cells ( c and S2). In additional block experiments ( d), injecting free
anti-HER2 VHH-FcK antibodies or Trastuzumab into the measurement solution
abolished the specific unbinding events due to the inactivation of
the tip-adorned molecules. Washing the sample and tip with the measurement
buffer led to recovery of the specific binding signals to about the
same level. In measurements on BT-474 cells using AFM tips, lacking
antibody binding was largely absent ( d). Conclusively, all control experiments
unequivocally validated that the measured unbinding events detected
with AFM tips carrying anti-HER2 VHH-FcK or Trastuzumab arose from
specific molecular bindings of the antibodies to HER2.
The specificity
of antibody binding was further validated in Western
blots. Trastuzumab induces internalization and degradation of HER2
overexpressed on HER2-positive breast cancer cells. To analyze the potential of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK in HER2 protein
degradation, Western blot analysis was performed using cells (BT-474
and BT-474-TR) treated with 20 μg/mL of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK and
Trastuzumab as a control ( e). Anti-HER2 antibodies were used to detect HER2 protein
in cell lysates. In BT-474 cells treated with Trastuzumab and anti-HER2
VHH-FcK antibodies, the density of the t-HER2 protein band was barely
detectable ( e, left). Likewise, BT-474-TR cells treated with Trastuzumab and
anti-HER2 VHH-FcK antibodies showed t-HER2 protein band densities
significantly less pronounced than those of the negative control ( e, right). In both
BT-474 and BT-474-TR cells, the cell lysate treated with the anti-HER2
VHH-FcK showed more degradation of t-HER2 protein compared to the
cell lysate treated with Trastuzumab. Anti-HER2 VHH-FcK is therefore
effective for both HER2-positive breast cancer cell lines, BT-474
and BT-474-TR.
In the cell ELISA, BT-474, its isogenic BT-474
KD and Mock (BT-474
cells transfected with vehicle alone), BT-474-TR, and HER2-negative
colorectal cancer cells (SW480) were cultured in cell media. Subsequently,
we conducted cell ELISA detection to analyze the binding affinity
of plant-derived anti-HER2 VHH-FcK and Trastuzumab to the cell lines
( f,g, S3, and S4). When anti-HER2 VHH-FcK or Trastuzumab
was introduced into BT-474 cells ( f), the absorbance decreased similarly in
proportion to the concentration. Intriguingly, for BT-474-TR cells,
the binding of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK was significantly more pronounced
compared with that of Trastuzumab ( g).
In SW480 cells, neither Trastuzumab
nor anti-HER2 VHH-FcK showed
any detection signals across all concentrations (Figure S3). In all of the BT-474 cells (Figure S4), the absorbance levels of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK were
higher than those of Trastuzumab. In BT-474 KD, both Trastuzumab and
anti-HER2 VHH-FcK showed lower signals across all concentrations compared
with BT-474 WT and BT-474 Mock cells. For BT-474 WT, BT-474 KD, and
BT-474 Mock cells, the absorbance levels of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK were
significantly higher when compared with Trastuzumab. These results
indicate that anti-HER2 VHH-FcK has higher binding activity to HER2
cells when compared to Trastuzumab, with the most distinct effect
on BT-474-TR cells.

## Dynamics of the Anti-HER2 VHH-FcK/HER2 Interactions
We then derived the kinetic on-rate constant (Kon) of antibody binding, for which we approximated the dependence
of the binding probability (i.e., the probability to observe an unbinding
event in a force–distance curve or not) on the tip-cell dwell
time computing a pseudo-first-order kinetic eq ( a–c). More precisely, by varying the
vertical scanning speed in the force–distance measurements,
we set times in which the AFM tip was in contact with the cellular
surface (denoted as dwell time) to eventually enable antibody/HER2
bond formation. Dwell times were calculated by determining the contact
region of the force–distance curves (from 0 to about −150
nm, see slope on the left part of the force–distance curves
in b) for both
the approaching and retracting part, divided by the vertical scanning
speed of the tip. Prolonging the dwell time of the antibody-functionalized
tip on the cell surface led to a significant increase in the binding
probability that finally saturated ( a–c). We performed a least-squares
fit to the data shown in a–c and computed them according to 1where t0 represents
the lag time and A represents the saturated binding
probability. Kon was calculated using 2with Ceff being
the effective concentration of antibodies coupled to the AFM tip. , Ceff is given by Ceff= 1/(ACV), where AC is the Avogadro
constant and V is the effective volume of a hemisphere
with radius reff, over which the tip-adorned antibody can freely move. The effective
radius was estimated as the sum of the cross-linker length (∼6
nm) in equilibrium and the half-length of antibody (∼4 nm;
antibody is linked on the Fc arm close to the hinge region, using
a hydrazone linkage method). Given that
only one single antibody has access to the receptors on the cellular
surface under our experimental conditions, Ceff is the reciprocal of the effective volume V. The Kon values ( ) for the association of Trastuzumab and
anti-HER2 VHH-FcK to BT-474 cells were comparable (5.96 × 104 and 4.79 × 104 M–1 s–1, respectively), whereas Trastuzumab did not bind
at all to the resistant BT-474-TR cells ( c) and anti-HER2 VHH-FcK preserved good binding
activity (Kon = 3.60 × 104 M–1 s–1). We also analyzed the
time course for formation of the second antibody bond over time and
computed the probability for double-bond formation as a function of
the dwell time (pseudo-first-order kinetic equation, a–c). The kinetic rates
for double-bond formation, Kon_2bonds,
for the nanobody anti-HER2 VHH-FcK (Kon_2bonds ∼ 17 s–1) was somewhat smaller than for
the antibody Trastuzumab (Kon_2bonds ∼
22 s–1).
 To attain the dissociation rate constant (Koff) of the cellular interactions of anti-HER2
VHH-FcK and
Trastuzumab, we varied the pulling speed over a wide range. Individual
unbinding forces were plotted versus their force loading rates ( d–f, left).
There, the force loading rate of each individual force measurement
was calculated by multiplying the retraction velocity with the effective
spring constant from two springs in parallel, the spring constant
of the cantilever and that of the molecules at the point of bond dissociation
in force–distance curves. The binding valency of anti-HER2
VHH-FcK and Trastuzumab was retrieved in its distribution of unbinding
forces at a fixed retraction velocity. For the construction of experimental
probability density functions (PDFs), measured unbinding forces (retraction
velocity of 3000 nm/s) were first normalized to Gaussians of unitary
area with their width containing the measurement error, given by the
thermal fluctuation of the AFM cantilever after unbinding occurred
(typically a few pN). Thereafter, the Gaussians were gathered and
summed up to compute the PDFs. PDFs contain the original data and
can be viewed as the equivalent of continuous force histogram, with
their maxima representing the most probable unbinding force. PDFs
of unbinding forces showed a bimodal distribution of unbinding forces,
arising from the bond breakage of one or two Fab arms, and were fitted
with the sum of two Gaussians ( d–f, right). We then took unbinding forces within
the range of the maxima ±2σ of the first Gaussians ( d–f, left)
to consider the single-bond characteristics and fitted the individual
force vs loading rate pairs (dark-colored data points) using Bell′s
single energy barrier model. , According to this theory
that a single energy barrier is crossed in the thermally activated
regime, we observed a linear rise of the unbinding force with respect
to a logarithmically increasing loading rate, as expected. The unbinding
force F is given as a function of the loading rate r, 3where kBT is the Boltzmann thermal energy, Koff is the kinetic off-rate constant extrapolated to zero-force,
and Xβ is the length of the force-driven
dissociation path for binding. In particular, a maximum likelihood
approach was employed for fitting this statistical model with our
data to retrieve the parameters of the model. The variance in the
data in this plot mainly reflects the stochastic nature of the unbinding
process. In addition to the most likelihood fit performed on multiple
independent data sets for estimating the error for retrieving the
kinetic off-rate constant (Koff), mean
values (dark-colored dots) and standard deviations, containing both
measurement uncertainty and stochastic variation (dark-colored error
bars), of the PDFs were added to the data fit. The Koff values for single-bond dissociation of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK
and Trastuzumab from BT-474 yielded 2.3 × 10–1±0.6 s–1 and 3.1 × 10–1±2.8 s–1, respectively. Dissociation of one anti-HER2
VHH-FcK Fab arm from BT-474-TR was less resistant (Koff = 7.7 × 10–1±1.5 s–1).
Based on the fitting parameters of Evans’
theory, we used
a Markov binding model to calculate theoretical
forces for the dissociation of antibody double bonds from the two
Fab arms ( d–f,
left). The uncorrelated dissociation underlying this model implies
that there is no mechanical coupling between the bonds. An excellent
match of the data from the mean (light-colored dots) and standard
deviation of the second Gaussian (light-colored error bars) from the
higher force regime revealed independent dissociation of the two Fab
arms of the antibodies from the cells. According to this model, the
reduction of the overall kinetic off-rates arising from the rupture
of two bonds, Koff_2bonds, which characterizes
dissociation of the whole antibody molecule, can be easily calculated
from Koff, using Koff_2bonds = Koff/1.5. In agreement
with our data, we derived Koff_2bonds for
simultaneous 2 Fab unbinding of 0.15 s–1 for anti-HER2
VHH-FcK/BT-474, 0.51 s–1 for anti-HER2 VHH-FcK/BT-474-TR,
and 0.21 s–1 for Trastuzumab/BT-474. Conclusively,
the equilibrium dissociation constants KD for the interactions of the whole antibodies were calculated from
the ratio between Koff_2bonds and Kon, yielding KD ∼
5.2 μM for Trastuzumab and KD ∼
4.8 μM for anti-HER2 VHH-FcK for binding to the BT-474. Binding
of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK to the resistant BT-474-TR occurred with a lower
affinity (KD ∼ 21.3 μM).

## Migratory Response and Cytotoxicity of Breast Cancer Cell to
Anti-HER2 VHH-FcK
Cell migration inhibition was assessed
using a transwell assay in which BT-474 and BT-474-TR cells were treated
with anti-HER2 VHH-FcK and Trastuzumab, respectively ( a,b). The level of inhibition
was determined by quantifying the number of crystal violet-stained
cells that migrated to the bottom chamber through a defined collagen
layer. The migrated cells were visualized using an optical microscope
( a,b, left),
and the number of migrated cells per field was plotted ( a,b, right). For BT-474 cell
migration ( a), the highest inhibition was observed when the cells were treated
with anti-HER2 VHH-FcK (36.25 migrated cells), followed by Trastuzumab
(49.5 migrated cells), the nonspecific IgG antibody (74.5 migrated
cells), and the 1 × PBS-treated group (76.25 migrated cells).
For BT-474-TR cells ( b), treatment with anti-HER2 VHH-FcK (36.25 migrated cells)
resulted in a similar level of inhibition compared to BT-474, while
Trastuzumab (54.75 migrated cells) had a less pronounced effect. The
controls with the nonspecific IgG antibody (54.25 migrated cells)
and the 1× PBS-treated group (60 migrated cells) yielded the
expected results.
 We then conducted a 3-(4,5)-dimethylthiazol-2-yl-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT) assay to evaluate the effect of plant-derived anti-HER2
VHH-FcK on the viability of HER2-positive breast cancer cells ( c,d). The BT-474
and BT-474-TR cell lines, each seeded at a density of 5 × 103 cells per well, were exposed to antibodies for a duration
of 48 h. Subsequently, cell viability was assessed by measuring light
absorbance at a wavelength of 550 nm utilizing an MTT assay kit. In
both BT-474 and BT-474-TR cells, anti-HER2 VHH-FcK showed considerably
lower viability compared with Trastuzumab across a range of concentrations.
The results obtained from the MTT assay, conducted with antibody treatment
in the absence of immune cell, indicate that anti-HER2 VHH-FcK has
inherent cytotoxicity against HER2-positive breast cancer including
Trastuzumab-resistant HER2-positive breast cancer. The reduced viability
noted in both BT474 and BT-474-TR cell lines upon treatment with anti-HER2
VHH-FcK relative to Trastuzumab suggests that the anti-HER2 VHH-FcK
exhibits superior cytotoxicity against cancer cells.

## Binding Activity of Anti-HER2 VHH-FcK to Fc Gamma Receptor (FcγRIIIa,
CD16a)
ELISA was performed to verify the binding activity
of the Fc region to the CD16a known as FcγRIIIa, expressed on
mast cells, macrophages, and natural killer cells, which activates
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC), eventually leading to the elimination of primary leukemic
cells, cancer cell lines, and cells infected with hepatitis B virus. In this study, we determined the binding affinity
of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK to CD16a, one of the Fc gamma receptors (FcγRIIIa),
and compared it with that of Trastuzumab, using ELISA analysis ( a). In detail, the
surface of a 96-well plate was coated with FcγRIIIa (CD16a),
and subsequently, anti-HER2 VHH-FcK and Trastuzumab were applied at
serial dilutions. The binding interactions were then detected by measuring
the HRP signal using an anti-His tag antibody and monitoring the absorbance
at 450 nm ( a). The results showed that anti-HER2 VHH-FcK exhibited significantly
higher binding affinity to CD16a when compared with Trastuzumab ( a).
 

## Tumor Inhibition Effect of Anti-HER2 VHH-FcK in BT-474 and BT-474-TR
Xenograft Models
The activity of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK to bind
and degrade HER2 protein on the surface of BT-474 and BT-474-TR cells in vitro as well as its inhibitory effect on cell proliferation,
suggests the potential for its in vivo therapeutic
efficacy. To assess this potential, we investigated the in
vivo tumor growth inhibition of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK in HER2-positive
breast cancer cell lines BT-474 and BT-474-TR. We used the NOG mice
xenografted with BT-474 and BT-474-TR cells and administered treatments
with anti-HER VHH-FcK and Trastuzumab. The tumor growth (0 mm3 and 0 g of tumor) was effectively suppressed in all mice
when treated with BT-474 using anti-HER2 VHH-FcK and Trastuzumab ( b, left graph). In
contrast, the control group of mice administered with 1× PBS
and nonspecific IgG antibody continued to increase throughout the
duration of the 43-day experiment. In mice with BT-474TR, tumors began
to emerge on day 27 in mice treated with Trastuzumab ( b, right graph). Furthermore,
tumors were observed as early as day 21 in mice subjected to the negative
controls (1× PBS and nonspecific IgG antibody) and continued
to grow until the end of the experiment (43 days). Notably, in mice
treated with Trastuzumab, the final tumor volume and size were 110
mm3 and 0.03 g after 43 days of growth ( c, right graph). However, the
tumor growth pattern in mice bearing BT-474-TR xenografts exhibited
notable differences. While the tumor growth was effectively inhibited
in all mice treated with anti-HER2 VHH-FcK, no such inhibition was
observed with Trastuzumab treatment ( b, right graph). As anticipated, the control
group of BT-474-TR xenografted mice administered with 1× PBS
and nonspecific IgG antibody showed continuous tumor growth until
the end of the 43-day experiment. In BT474 xenografted mice treated
with 1× PBS and nonspecific IgG antibodies, the extracted tumors
yielded average weights of 0.95 and 1.04 g, respectively ( c, left graph). Conversely,
in BT474 xenografted mice treated with anti-HER2 VHH-FcK and Trastuzumab,
the tumor weighed 0 g ( c, left graph). Similarly, for BT-474-TR xenografted mice
administered with 1× PBS and nonspecific IgG antibodies, the
extracted tumors had average weights of 0.43 and 0.023 g, respectively
( c, right graph).
In contrast, BT-474-TR xenografted mice treated with anti-HER2 VHH-FcK
exhibited no tumor growth, while those treated with Trastuzumab had
tumors with a weight of 0.029 g ( c, right graph).

## Discussion
In this study, we monitored the antitumor
activity of anti-HER2
VHH-FcK on Trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer cell BT-474-TR for
potent anticancer activity. In addition, we deciphered the nanomechanical
binding kinetics and energetics to anti-HER2 VHH-FcK binding to HER2
antigen expressed on human breast cancer cells BT-474 and BT-474-TR
and compared it with that of Trastuzumab. At the single-molecule level
using SMFS, we observed that anti-HER2 VHH-FcK binds specifically
to HER2 on BT-474 as well as on BT-474-TR, whereas Trastuzumab shows
particularly weak binding on the resistant cell surface. We obtained
an affinity KD of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK binding
in the micromolar range on the surface of living cells in a physiological
setting. The bimodal force distribution indicates that anti-HER2 VHH-FcK
formed double bonds, likely via its 2 Fab fragments, with a bond lifetime
of τ = 4.3 s (derived from Koff according
to τ = 1/Koff) on the HER2-positive
tumor cells BT-474. This bond lifetime is longer than that observed
for Trastuzumab (3.2 s) and in agreement with our ELISA assay ( f). The stronger
adhesion of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK suggests greater antitumor potential
compared to Trastuzumab. Additionally, anti-HER2 VHH-FcK demonstrates
high specificity for HER2, even on the surface of Trastuzumab-resistant
tumor cells, indicating its ability to target resistant tumors. Moreover,
modulated kinetic binding constants ( ) suggest binding to other epitopes of HER2,
expanding its potential therapeutic efficacy.
Binding of the
anti-HER2 VHH-FcK antibody to an epitope distinct
from Trastuzumab may enable it to more readily interact with HER2,
even in situations in which the receptor is partially masked by glycoproteins.
Preclinical studies have suggested that membrane proteins interacting
with HER2, such as MUC4, can hinder the accessibility of trastuzumab
to its epitope. MUC4, an overexpressed
transmembrane glycoprotein in some breast tumors, interacts with and
activates HER2, thereby impeding the binding of Trastuzumab to HER2.
Our results suggest that by targeting a different epitope on HER2,
the anti-HER2 VHH-FcK antibody may bypass the masking effect caused
by proteins like MUC4 and exhibit improved binding efficiency.
Antibodies are widely used as targeted therapeutics because of
their high specificity and affinity. However, they are often hindered
by their large size, which limits their efficient diffusion through
the tumor tissue. Additionally, they can be affected by the “binding
site barrier” effect, attributed to their high affinity, , so that the moderate micromolar binding affinity of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK
might make it more effective. Bivalent binding of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK
plays an important role in antibody inhibition, as evidenced by the
bimodal force distributions recorded on the cell surfaces. Fast association
( ), combined
with its smaller size compared to the Trastuzumab, may result in better
conformational accessibility to the HER2 binding site on the surface
of Trastuzumab-resistant cells. This alteration in binding dynamics
between anti-HER2 VHH-FcK and HER2 on the Trastuzumab-resistant cell
surface could ultimately lead to effective inhibition of HER2/HER2
or HER2/HER3 dimerization. The in vitro high affinity
of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK for tumor cells, comparable to Trastuzumab, suggests
it as a promising alternative therapeutic antibody for HER2-positive
breast cancer.
In the cell migration assay, it is noteworthy
that the numbers
of migratory cells for both BT-474 and BT-474-TR, when treated with
anti-HER2 VHH-FcK, were significantly lower than those treated with
Trastuzumab as a positive control. Cancer cell migration is a pivotal
factor in the process of metastasis, which should be inhibited to
suppress the spread of cancer. Thus, these findings highlight the
potential of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK as a promising therapeutic alternative
for trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer.
In the experiment using
immune-deficient mice, both anti-HER2 VHH-FcK
and Trastuzumab effectively inhibited the growth of BT-474 tumors.
Furthermore, anti-HER2 VHH-FcK additionally inhibited the growth of
BT474-TR tumors, while Trastuzumab did not. It is important to note
that the NOG (NOD/Shi-sci/IL-2rnull) mice utilized in this
study are immunodeficient mice derived from NOD/SCID mice, featuring
a common gamma chain mutation. These
mice were developed through backcrossing C57BL/6J-IJ-2R mice deficient
in the IL-2 receptor gamma chain with NOD/Shi-scid mice. The NOG mice have multifunctional defects in
NK cell activity, macrophage function, complement activity, and dendritic
cell function without functional T and B lymphocytes. , Hence, it is unlikely that the inhibition of BT474 and BT474TR was
due to the combinatorial interaction of both the anti-HER2 VHH nanobody
and immune cells such as NK cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells.
Indeed, Trastuzumab, used as a positive control, has been found to
block the interaction between HER2/HER-3 and to inhibit critical downstream
signaling pathways, ultimately leading to the suppression of tumor
cell growth. Furthermore, Trastuzumab
has been reported to induce normalization and regression of the tumor
vasculature. We speculate that the anti-HER2
VHH nanobody may block the homodimerization and heterodimerization
of HER2/HER3, leading to a downregulation of HER2 receptor signaling
and subsequent inhibition of cancer cell proliferation. This note
is based on the similar bivalent binding capacity of the anti-HER2
VHH nanobody when compared with Trastuzumab, which has been reported
to block the interaction between HER2/HER3 and inhibit downstream
signaling pathways. The single domain
of anti-HER2 VHH-Fc can be co-expressed with other targeting VHH antibodies
in a single plant, eventually expressing bispecific or multispecific
antibodies. Fc fusion to VHH could provide ADCC function to anti-HER2
VHH-Fc for anticancer activity. Our results suggest that the anti-HER2
VHH-FcK antibody could be used as a potential immunotherapeutic option
for patients with Trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer.

## Conclusions
Our study represents a pioneering investigation
comparing Trastuzumab
with a plant-derived nanobody, anti-HER2 VHH. The advantages of plant-based
expression systems, including cost-effectiveness, scalability, and
safety, make them an attractive platform for producing various therapeutic
antibodies. Through SMFS, we uncovered stronger adhesion of anti-HER2
VHH-FcK to Trastuzumab-resistant tumor cells compared to Trastuzumab.
Furthermore, our findings revealed the high specificity of anti-HER2
VHH-FcK for HER2, even on the surface of Trastuzumab-resistant tumor
cells, showcasing its potential to target resistant tumors. Additionally,
modulated kinetic binding constants (see ) indicated binding to other epitopes of
HER2, thus expanding its therapeutic efficacy. The bivalent binding
of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK was pivotal in antibody inhibition, as evidenced
by the recorded bimodal force distributions on cell surfaces. Notably,
the rapid association kinetics of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK, coupled with
its smaller size compared with Trastuzumab, may lead to enhanced conformational
accessibility. These results collectively highlight the contribution
of our biophysical approach, leveraging both AFM and cell biology
techniques, to elucidate the distinct mechanisms and potential advantages
of plant-derived antibodies in cancer therapy.

## Methods

## Plant Vector Establishment, Transformation, and Expression of
Plant-Derived Anti-HER2 VHH-FcK Protein
Agrobacterium-mediated plant transformation with the plant expression vector pBI
anti-HER2 VHH-FcK ( a,d) was conducted to generate tobacco plants expressing anti-HER2
VHH-FcK. In vitro transgenic
plant seedlings carrying the anti-HER2 VHH-FcK transgene were transplanted
to cultivate in vivo soil-grown transgenic plants
in the greenhouse ( a). To purify the anti-HER2 VHH-FcK, 200 g of the transgenic
plant leaves were homogenized with the extraction buffer ( a). After the removal of chloroplast and cell debris using
centrifugation and filtering processes, the anti-HER2 VHH-FcK proteins
were purified through Protein A affinity chromatography (Amicogen,
Jinju-si, Korea). The SDS-PAGE gel loaded with the purified target
protein was stained with Coomassie blue staining buffer, and then
the gel was destained by destaining buffer ( b). 

## In Vitro Cultivation of Human HER2-Positive
Breast Cancer Cell Line (BT-474) and BT-474-Trastuzumab-Resistant
Cell Line (BT-474-TR)
Human BT-474 and BT-474-TR were obtained
from the Korean Cell Line Bank, Seoul, Korea. The BT-474 cells were
cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (Welgene, Gyeongsan, Korea) supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA), 100 IU/mL penicillin,
and 100 μg/mL streptomycin. The HER2-positive cells were cultured
at 37 °C in an atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2 in
an incubator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The culture
medium was refreshed by replacing it every 3 days. The human BT-474
Trastuzumab-resistant cells (BT-474-TR) were cultured by the Samsung
Medical Center in Seoul, Korea. BT-474-TR cells were maintained in
RPMI 1640 media (Life Technologies, Rockville, MD), supplemented with
10% FBS (Hyclone, Logan, UT), 100 IU/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL
streptomycin in a humidified atmosphere consisting of 95% air and
5% CO2 in a CO2 incubator (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Waltham, MA).

## Transfection with siRNA
Short interfering RNA (siRNA)
oligonucleotide duplexes targeting the genes of HER2 were synthesized
and annealed by IDT (Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc., San Diego,
CA) as following sequences: 5′-CCUGUGCCCACUAUAAGGA-3′
(sense) and 5′-UCCUUAUAGUGGGCACAGG-3′ (antisense). AccuTarget
Control siRNA (Bioneer, Daejeon, Korea) was used as a negative control.
Transfections were performed using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX Reagent (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. After 48 h, the transfection efficiency was checked
using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) and Western blot analysis.

## Cell ELISA
A cell-based ELISA was performed to evaluate
the binding affinity of anti-HER2 VHH-FcKP and Trastuzumab toward
BT474, its isogenic HER2 knockdown counterpart (BT-474 KD), BT474
cells transfected with the vehicle alone (BT474 Mock), and the colorectal
cancer cell line SW480. , , Cells were plated at a density of 5 × 103 cells
per well in a 96-well plate. For fixation, cell culture medium was
removed, and cells were treated with 100 μL of 4% paraformaldehyde
(PFA) in 1× PBS for 20 min at room temperature. Following fixation,
cells were washed three times with 1× PBS and then blocked using
1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in 1× PBS as a blocking buffer
for 1 h and 30 min at room temperature. Following three washes with
1× PBS, cells were incubated with serial dilutions of Trastuzumab
(Biovision, Inc., Milpitas, CA) and anti-HER2 VHH-FcK (ranging from
2.0 to 0.015625 μg) in blocking buffer, serving as the primary
antibody treatment. After another set of three 1× PBS washes,
HRP-conjugated goat anti-human IgG Fc antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch
Laboratories, Inc., West Grove, PA; diluted in blocking buffer at
a 1:8000 ratio) was added as the secondary antibody and incubated
for 2 h at 37 °C. The wells were then washed with 1× PBS
before the addition of 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine
(TMB) substrate solution (Seracare Life Sciences, Milford, MA) to
each well, allowing for a 3 min signal development. To stop the TMB
reaction, TMB stop solution (Seracare Life Sciences, Milford, MA)
was added. Absorbance at 450 nm for each well was measured using a
Gen5 microplate reader with version 2.01 software (BioTek Instruments,
Inc., Winooski, VT).

## Transwell Migration Assay
Cell migration assay was
performed to analyze in vitro cell invasion using
Transwell Permeable Supports with 3 μm-pore size (Corning Inc.,
Corning, NY). Briefly, BT-474 and BT-474-TR cells (5 × 104 cells) were each seeded in an upper chamber of a 24-well
plate coated with type I collagen solution (Sigma, St. Louis, MO)
in 1× PBS (10 μg/mL) overnight at 4 °C. The under
chamber was filled with 1 mL of RPMI 1640 media containing 20% of
FBS. The seeded cells were treated with anti-HER2 VHH-FcK, Trastuzumab
(positive control), nonspecific IgG antibody (negative control), and
1× PBS at a final concentration of 20 μg/mL and incubated
for 24 h at 37 °C in a CO2 incubator. And the migrated
cells to the bottom chamber were fixed and stained by using 5% crystal
violet. The stained cells were counted under a microscope.

## Cell Viability Assay
Cell viability was measured by
the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT) assay (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). The cells used
in the MTT assay were BT-474 and BT-474-TR, and 5 × 103 cells were grown in RPMI 1640 medium (Welgene) supplemented with
10% FBS in a 96-well plate (SPL Life Sciences Co., Seoul, Korea).
The final volume of cells grown in microplates was 100 μL per
well, and then, the cells were incubated at 37 °C in a CO2 incubator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). After
the incubation, the cells were treated with Trastuzumab (Biovision,
Inc., Milpitas, CA) as positive control, anti-HER2 VHH-FcK at concentrations
of 100, 10, and 1 μg/mL, respectively, and 1× PBS as negative
control incubated overnight in a 37 °C in a CO2 incubator.

## Western Blot to Confirm Total HER2 Protein Level in BT-474 and
BT-474-TR Treated with Anti-HER2 VHH-FcK Using Cellular Protein
The BT-474 and BT-474-TR cells were seeded in 6-well plates and
incubated for 24 h at 37 °C in a CO2 incubator. After
incubation, the cells were treated with commercial Trastuzumab (Biovision,
Inc.) as a positive control (20 μg/mL), anti-HER2 VHH-FcK (20
μg/mL), and no treatment as a negative control for 16 h at 37
°C in a CO2 incubator. Whole-cell lysates (BT-474,
BT-474-TR) were harvested using PRO–PREPTM Protein Extraction
Solution (Intron Biotechnology, Inc., Sungnam-si, Korea) and centrifuged
at 13,200 rpm for 15 min. Western blot was performed using the harvested
antibody-treated cell lysates of BT-474 and BT-474–TR treated
with Trastuzumab and anti-HER2 VHH-FcK. Total HER2 protein (t-HER2,
185 kDa) in cell lysates was detected by anti-HER2 antibody conjugated
to horse radish peroxidase (HRP) (1:5000). An anti-β-actin antibody
was used to confirm that the same amount of cell lysate was used for
the Western blot analysis. In a similar way, the knockdown (KD) efficiency
of the BT474-KD and BT474-Mock cells was confirmed.

## Cell ELISA to Confirm the Binding Activity of Trastuzumab and
Anti-HER2 VHH-FcK to HER2-Positive Breast Cancer Cells BT-474 and
Trastuzumab-Resistant Mutant Cell Line BT-474-TR Cells
HER2-positive
breast cancer cells BT-474 and Trastuzumab-resistant mutant cell line
BT-474-TR cells were fixed on the surface of a 96-well cell culture
plate using 4% PFA overnight at 4 °C. Trastuzumab and anti-HER2
VHH-FcK were used as primary antibodies to HER2-positive breast cancer
cells. The secondary antibody was HRP-conjugated goat anti-human IgG
Fc antibody.

## ELISA Assay to Confirm the Binding Activity of Anti-HER2 VHH-FcK
to Fc Gamma Receptor (Fcγ Receptor, CD16a)
Enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was performed to compare the binding affinity
between anti-HER2 VHH-FcK, Trastuzumab, and CD16a (Sino Biological,
Beijing, China), a type of Fc gamma receptor (FcγRIIIa). 50 ng per well of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK and Trastuzumab
in 100 mM bicarbonate/carbonate coating buffer (pH 9.6) were coated
on the surface of a 96-well Maxisorp plate (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Waltham, MA) for overnight at 4 °C.

## In Vivo Assay for Tumor Growth Inhibition
Female 4-week-old NOG (NOD/Shi-scid/IL-2Rγnull) mice (KLS
Bio, Suwon, Korea) were inoculated s.c. with 2 × 106 human HER2-positive breast cancer cells (BT-474 and BT-474-TR).
Immediately after tumor cell inoculation, four groups of five mice
each were injected i.p. with 5 mg/kg of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK, Trastuzumab
(positive control), and nonspecific IgG antibody (negative control),
respectively, including 1× PBS followed by the same injections
given every day for a total of 4 days. Tumor volumes were calculated
based on the three major diameters measured with graduated calipers
and were recorded 12, 19, 26, 33, and 40 days after injection. The
size of the tumor was measured after the size of the tumor reached
50 mm3, and the formula used for tumor size measurement
is as follows: volume = length × width × width/2. All animal
experiments were conducted in compliance with the guidelines approved
by the Animal Experiment Ethics Committee in accordance with the Animal
Protection Act (Law No. 16977) (Approval Number: KLSIACUC20221130-4-01,
KLS Bio Officer Lee). Mice were killed by CO2 inhalation
on day 40 after tumor observation. Statistical analysis with Student’s t test was performed to test for the different tumor volumes
of each group by using Minitab software (Minitab, State College, PA).

## Conjugation of Antibody through Carbohydrate Residues to AFM
Tip
MSCT cantilevers (Type C, nominal frequency 7 kHz, spring
constant 0.01 N/m, Length 310 μm, Width 20 μm, Q-factor
∼1, Bruker, Camarillo, CA) were washed three times with chloroform
and dried in a gentle nitrogen gas stream directly before further
treatment. Before use, APTES was freshly distilled under a vacuum.
A desiccator was flooded with argon gas to remove the air and moisture.
Then, 30 mL of APTES and 10 mL of triethylamine were separately pipetted
into the chamber, while the AFM tips were placed nearby on a clean
inert surface. Following incubation, APTES and triethylamine were
removed, and the desiccator was again flooded with argon gas for 5
min. The tips were then left inside for 2 days to allow for curing
of the APTES coating. The APTES-functionalized AFM tips were immersed
in 0.5 mL of a solution containing 1 mg/mL of maleimide-PEG27-NHS
in chloroform, with 0.5% (v/v) content, for 2 h. Subsequently, a mixture
of EDTA, HEPES, TCEP hydrochloride, and water was prepared and pipetted
onto the tips, followed by a 2 h incubation period. Afterward, the
tips were washed three times with water and dried by using a gentle
stream of nitrogen.
Antibodies were dialyzed using a mini dialysis
tube in sodium acetate at 4 °C for 2 h. The antibody solution
was collected from the dialysis tube into a 0.5 mL tube. NaIO4 in water was then added to the antibody solution. The reaction
mixture was kept in the dark at room temperature. The antibodies treated
with NaIO4 were dialyzed two times in the buffer. Then,
periodate-treated and dialyzed antibodies were coupled to cantilever
tips containing PEG–PDP before
they were washed and stored in a buffer.

## Single-Molecule Force Spectroscopy Measurement
All
measurements were carried out at room temperature by using a PicoPlus
5500 AFM setup (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) on living cells
containing HBSS. The functionalized cantilever with a nominal spring
constant of 0.01 N/m was moved downward to the cell surface and moved
upward after the tip touched it. Spring constants (Kc) of AFM cantilevers were determined using the equipartition
theorem in an ambient environment and
ranged from 0.007 to 0.012 N/m. The deflection sensitivity was calculated
from the slope of the force–distance curves recorded on a bare
silicon substrate. At least 1000 force–distance curves (2000
data points per curve) were recorded with a typical force limit of
30–100 pN and vertical sweep rates between 0.1 and 2 Hz at
a z-range of typically 3000 nm, resulting in loading
rates from 50 to 5000 pN/s. The loading rates were determined by multiplying
the pulling velocity with the effective spring constants (Keff), which were obtained by the spring constant
of the cantilever (Kc) and the spring
constant of the PEG linker (KL), according
to Keff = [1/Kc + 1/KL]. KL was calculated by fitting the force–distance curves with
the work-like chain model as described. 
To investigate the blocking of HER2 on the surface, blocking
experiments were conducted using free Trastuzumab and anti-HER2 VHH-FcK
antibodies in solution, respectively. 10 μL of Trastuzumab and
anti-HER2 VHH-FcK was incubated in the cell culture chamber for 30
min to block HER2 on the surface. Subsequently, the binding probability
of the AFM tip-adorned HER2 and specific antibodies was measured.
Thereafter, antibodies were washed out three times by using HBSS buffer.
Final measurements were performed to assess the recovery of binding
probability.

## Data Analysis
Force–distance curves were analyzed
using Matlab (MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA) with an integrated in-house
package, which provides tools for the statistical analysis of the
whole set of data, as described before. Unbinding events were identified
by local maximum analysis using a signal-to-noise threshold of 2. , The binding probability was calculated as the fraction of curves
showing unbinding events. For example, if 200 curves from 2000 measured
curves show unbinding events, then the binding activity is 10%.

## Statistical Analysis
All values are presented as the
mean ± SD. Comparison between anti-HER2 VHH-FcKP and
Trastuzumab were performed using unpaired Student’s t test. Statistical analyses were conducted using Minitab
software (Minitab, State College, PA). Statistical significance was
denoted as follows: * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.

## Data Availability Statement
All data and
materials used in this study will be available upon reasonable request.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.4c00360.Confirmation of HER2 KD in BT474 cells (Figure S1);
single-molecule force spectroscopy control measurement (Figure S2);
and cell ELISA to confirm binding activity of anti-HER2 VHH-FcK and
Trastuzumab to SW480, BT474 WT, BT474 KD, and BT474 Mock cells (Figures
S3 and S4) (PDF)

## Supplementary Material
nn4c00360_si_001.pdf

## Author Present Address
∇ Department
of Medical Device, Korea Institute of Machinery &
Materials (KIMM), Daegu 42994, Korea

## Author Contributions
C.P. and
R.Z. performed single-molecule force spectroscopy measurements and
analyzed the data. L.H. and H.S. performed linker chemistry and data
analysis. Kibum Kim, Y.K., H.H., and Kisung Ko purified anti-HER2
VHH-FcK, performed the Western blot, MTT, and ELISA assays, and analyzed
the data. H.J.W. and S.H.L. performed cell migration assay. S.K. and
J.E.L. provided BT-474-TR cells. M.-H.K. did knockdown of HER2 from
BT-474 cells and confirmed the knockdown efficiency using qRT-PCR
and Western. P.H., Kisung Ko, S.K., J.E.L., S.P., and Y.J.O. supervised
the study and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and reviewed
the manuscript.
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
This work
was supported by funding from the Austrian National
Foundation for Research, Technology, and Development and Research
Department of the State of Upper Austria (Y.J.O.) from the FWF projects
V584 (Y.J.O.), P31599, P35166 (R.Z.), and I5791 (Y.J.O., P.H.). S.P.
was supported by a National Research Council of Science & Technology
(NST) grant (CRC22021-200). Kisung Ko was supported by the National
Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant (NRF-2021R1F1A1063869) and
(NRF-2019K1A3A1A18116087). This study was also supported by the Scientific-Technological
Cooperation (WTZ programme, KR 07/2020) from the Austrian Federal
Ministry of Education, Science and Research and the Ministry of Science
and ICT of the Republic of Korea. The authors thank Myungse Ko for
her illustrations featuring llama and human figures, and Holger Rumpold
(Ordensklinikum Linz) for providing Trastuzumab.

## Abbreviations
HER2human
epidermal growth factor receptor
2
mAbsmonoclonal
antibodies
VHHsvariable fragments of camelid heavy chain domains
IgGimmunoglobulin G
ERendoplasmic reticulum
AFMatomic force microscopy
WTwild type
PEGpoly(ethylene glycol)
ADCCantibody-dependent
cellular cytotoxicity
TMBtetramethylbenzidine