Environ Health Perspect253envhperEnvironmental Health Perspectives0091-67651552-9924American Chemical SocietyPMC1533418PMC1533418.115334181533418959969910.1289/ehp.981065051Research ArticleNeurotoxicity testing: a discussion of in vitro alternatives.
CostaL GDept. of Environmental Health, University of Washington, Seattle, USA. lgcosta@u.washington41998106Suppl 2133578505510010419980808200604092018A large number of chemicals may exert adverse effects on the central and/or peripheral nervous system. A commonly recommended strategy for neurotoxicity testing is that of a tiered approach aimed at identifying and characterizing the neurotoxicity of a compound. Guidelines exist in the United States and other countries that define the tests to be utilized in tier 1 testing. To address problems related to the increasing cost and time required for toxicity testing, the increasing number of chemicals being developed, and the concern of animal welfare activists, attention is currently being devoted to in vitro alternatives. This paper addresses the use of in vitro systems in neurotoxicology, and their potential role in a general strategy for neurotoxicity testing. The advantages and disadvantages of in vitro approaches for mechanistic studies and for screening of neurotoxicants are discussed. Suggestions for further validation studies are proposed.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightyespmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articleyespmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 
Neurotoxicity Testing: A Discussion 
of in Vitro Alternatives 
 
Lucio G. Costa 
 
Dept. of Environmental Health, University of Washington, Seattle, 
 
Washington, and Toxicology Unit, S. Maugeri Foundation, Pavia, Italy 
 
A large number of chemicals may exert adverse effects on the central and/or peripheral nervous 
system. A commonly recommended strategy for neurotoxicity testing is that of a tiered approach 
aimed at identifying and characterizing the neurotoxicity of a compound. Guidelines exist in the 
United States and other countries that define the tests to be utilized in tier 1 testing. To address 
problems related to the increasing cost and time required for toxicity testing, the increasing 
number of chemicals being developed, and the concern of animal welfare activists, attention is 
currently being devoted to in vitro alternatives. This paper addresses the use of in vitro systems 
in neurotoxicology, and their potential role in a general strategy for neurotoxicity testing. The 
advantages and disadvantages of in vitro approaches for mechanistic studies and for screening of 
neurotoxicants are discussed. Suggestions for further validation studies are proposed. - Environ 
 
Hecalth Perspect 106(Suppi 2):505-510 (1998). 
505-51Ocosta/abstract.html 
 
Key words: neurotoxicity, in vitro testing 
 
Introduction 
 
The nervous system is one of the most 
complex organ systems in terms of both 
structure and function. Nerve cells are 
unique in that they are not capable of regen- 
eration after lethal damage, thus rendering 
the nervous system particularly vulnerable to 
toxic insult (1,2). Neurotoxicity is defined 
as "any adverse effect on the chemistry, 
structure and function of the nervous sys- 
tem during development or at maturity, 
induced by chemical or physical influences" 
(3). The key issue is the interpretation of the 
word adverse, as there is not always agree- 
ment among scientists on what constitutes 
an adverse change. Issues that have been con- 
sidered include the nature of the change 
(morphologic, neurochemical, neurologic, 
 
This paper was prepared as background for the 13th 
Meeting of the Scientific Group on Methodologies for 
the Safety Evaluation of Chemicals (SGOMSEC): 
Alternative Testing Methodologies held 26-31 
January 1997 in Ispra, Italy. Manuscript received at 
EHP9 May j1997; accepted 24 September 1997. 
 
Research by the author was supported by grants 
from NIEHS (ES-07033 and ES-08851) and NIAAA 
(AA-081 54). 
 
Address correspondence to Dr. L.G. Costa, 
Department of Environmental Health, University of 
Washington, 4225 Roosevelt Way NE, Suite 100, 
Seattle, WA 98105-6099. Telephone: (206) 543-2831. 
Fax: (206) 685-4696. E-mail: lgcosta@u.washington. 
edu 
 
Abbreviations used: OECD, Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development; OPIDN, 
organophosphate-induced delayed neuropathy; U.S. 
EPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
 
http.//ehpnet 1. niehs. nih.gov/docs/1 998/Suppl-2/ 
 
or behavioral), the degree of change, and 
whether the effect is transitory or persistent. 
A proposed definition of an adverse effect is 
"any treatment-related change which inter- 
feres with normal function and compro- 
mises adaptation to the environment" (4). 
Most morphologic changes such as neu- 
ronopathy, axonopathy, or myelinopathy 
would be considered adverse, even if the 
changes were mild or transitory. On the 
other hand, a transitory hypertrophy of 
astrocytes could be viewed as an adaptive, 
physiologic response (4). However, one 
could argue that such an adaptive response 
may reflect prior damage to neuronal struc- 
tures, and thus be a relevant biomarker of an 
adverse effect. Furthermore, a still-debated 
issue is whether neurochemical effects in 
the absence of structural damage should be 
considered adverse. Certainly an acute 
intoxication with an organophosphorus 
insecticide produces acute neurotoxic 
effects that tend to resolve with time. 
Additionally, repeated exposure to these 
compounds changes the homeostasis of the 
cholinergic system, altering the response to 
cholinergic drugs and possibly interfering 
with cognitive processes (5). Similarly, 
acute response to solvents may cause only 
transient central nervous system effects, but 
these should be considered neurotoxic as 
they can lead to impaired function. 
 
Another concept in neurotoxicity is the 
difference between direct and indirect 
 
effects on the nervous system. Damage to 
hepatic, renal, or pancreatic structures can 
result in secondary effects on the function 
and structure of the nervous system, such 
as encephalopathy or polyneuropathy. 
Secondary effects would not cause a sub- 
stance to be considered neurotoxic; how- 
ever, at very high doses, neurotoxicity would 
be evident. The identification of neurotoxic 
effects seen after administration of doses 
that exceed the maximum tolerated dose, or 
at which the normal metabolic processes of 
the body are severely compromised, is there- 
fore a recognized problem (4). Thus, a sub- 
stance should be defined as neurotoxic 
when it or its metabolites produce adverse 
effects as a result of direct interactions with 
the nervous system. This paper briefly 
reviews some current approaches and 
methods of in vivo neurotoxicity testing 
and their advantages and limitations. It 
then analyzes the current efforts aimed at 
implementing and validating in vitro 
methodologies for such testing, and dis- 
cusses the steps necessary for an integration 
of the different approaches. 
 
Detecting Neurotoxicity in 
Standard Toxicity Testing 
 
Standard toxicity studies, required by 
national and international regulatory agen- 
cies, involve exposure to a chemical on an 
acute, subacute, subchronic, and chronic 
basis, in addition to reproductive studies 
and other studies (e.g., those for genotoxic- 
ity). These studies are relevant in the 
assessment of potential neurotoxicity, as 
they are conducted at different dose levels, 
with different routes and durations of 
administration, in different animal species. 
Data on metabolism and toxicokinetics are 
also developed in support of such studies. 
These studies include clinical observations 
and morphologic examinations, which can 
reveal effects on the nervous system. These 
may include changes in motor functions or 
in autonomic functions, or damage to rele- 
vant brain structures. It is important that 
such studies are conducted carefully and 
the observations documented precisely. 
Clinical signs should be recorded as they 
are observed, and should include time of 
onset, degree, and duration of effects. 
Parameters should include changes in skin, 
fur, secretion, activity, gate, response to 
stimuli, etc. Brain weight should be 
recorded at autopsy. Histologic examina- 
tion should include the brain, the spinal 
cord, and one peripheral nerve. Examples 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998 
 
505 
 
LG. COSTA 
 
of chemicals whose neurotoxicity has been 
identified in standard subchronic studies 
include sulfuryl fluoride (6), tris(2- 
chloroethyl)phosphate (7), and benzal- 
dehyde (8). If the dinical observations and 
morphologic examination do not indicate 
any evidence of nervous system effects, and 
when the chemical structure of the sub- 
stance and/or its metabolites does not sug- 
gest concern for potential neurotoxicity, the 
substance can be considered as not neuro- 
toxic. In this case, no further testing would 
be warranted until any new cause for con- 
cern for the nervous system may arise. If 
standard toxicity studies of a new chemical 
provide evidence of direct, adverse effects 
on the nervous system, its development for 
use may be abandoned without further test- 
ing (2). On the other hand, neurotoxicity 
testing may be conducted for more com- 
monly existing substances with commercial 
value or wide exposure. 
 
Testing for Neurotoxicity: 
A Tiered Approach 
 
Because of the variety of toxic effects and of 
cellular biochemical targets, a test strategy 
for the evaluation of the neurotoxic poten- 
tial of chemicals should not be totally rigid, 
but should be determined case by case, with 
an emphasis on the structure of the chemi- 
cal and the indications of the standard toxi- 
city tests. Though structure-activity 
relationship studies are undoubtedly impor- 
tant, caution should also be exerted, as 
empirical findings can be unexpected and 
unpredictable at times. For example, among 
organic tin compounds only two- 
trimethyltin and triethyltin-are neuro- 
toxic, though their effects are notably 
different, whereas other trisubstituted 
compounds are not. 
 
A commonly recommended strategy for 
neurotoxicity testing is that of a tiered 
approach consisting of three tiers aimed at 
identifying (tier 1), and characterizing (tiers 
2 and 3) the neurotoxicity of a chemical 
(2). Initial neurotoxicity studies should 
thoroughly evaluate the nervous system 
with a number of broad but system-specific 
tests, to provide adequate data for risk 
assessment. Because of the multiplicity of 
possible effects on the nervous system, there 
is no single test method that can ensure the 
detection and identification of every possi- 
ble change. The tests that are used are those 
included in the guidelines of the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. 
EPA) (9) and the Organisation for Eco- 
nomic Co-operation and Development 
(10). These include acute and subchronic 
 
administrations of the tested chemical and 
a number of behavioral observations, spe- 
cific measurements, and neuropathologic 
examinations (Table 1). The functional 
observation battery is a standardized 
screening battery for the assessment of 
many aspects of behavior and neurologic 
functions in rodents, and has been vali- 
dated with several known neurotoxic 
chemicals. Special tests are conducted to 
identify specific deficits in motor and sensory 
functions; these may include automated 
measurements of motor activity, rotating 
rods, landing footspread, measurements of 
fore- and hindlimb strength, measurements 
of auditory or thermal thresholds, and 
measurements of startle reflex. 
 
Histologic examination of central and 
peripheral nervous systems would include 
as a minimum the following tissues: brain 
(several sections including those structures 
involved in specific types of behaviors), 
spinal cord (including dorsal root gan- 
glion and dorsal/ventral roots), and peri- 
pheral nerves (sciatic and tibial nerves). 
Measurement of glial fibrillary acidic pro- 
tein or similar approaches (e.g., involving 
measurements of neuronal-specific proteins 
or microglial reactivity), would also provide 
useful information on potential neurotoxic- 
ity, particularly if the experimental design 
provides for multiple measurements (29). 
 
If there is no evidence of a nervous 
system effect in tier 1 studies, then the sub- 
stance can be considered as not neurotoxic. 
When, however, persistent effects on the 
nervous system are detected, the chemical 
can be considered a probable human neuro- 
toxicant. In such cases, additional tests may 
be warranted in tier 2 and 3 studies to char- 
acterize the neurotoxic effects. The data from 
tier 1 studies should provide the basis for 
generation of specific hypotheses for subse- 
quent studies and guide in the selection of 
the appropriate methods. The decision to 
carry out additional studies should be made 
on a case-by-case approach, and may depend 
upon factors such as the intended use of the 
chemical, the potential of human exposure, 
and its potential to accumulate in biological 
systems. Such studies may indude specialized 
behavioral tests, electrophysiologic and 
neurochemical measurements, and additional 
morphologic studies. Examples of such 
studies indude tests for measuring learning 
and memory (active or passive avoidance, 
spatial discrimination tasks); operant condi- 
tioning with various schedules of nerve 
conduction velocity; electromyography, 
neurochemical tests (markers of neuronal or 
glial cells, biochemical parameters of cell 
 
Table 1. Summary of the U.S. EPA neurotoxicity testing 
guidelines. 
Animals 
 
Adult rats, male and female 
Group size 
 
1 0/sex/group 
Control group 
 
Vehicle control 
Dose level 
 
Acute exposure (3 doses) 
 
Subchronic exposure (3 doses) 
Route of exposure 
 
Consider human exposure kinetics 
Observations 
 
Convulsions, tremors, hyperactivity, aggression, 
 
stereotypes, autonomic signs, abnormal posture 
or gait, activity level, abnormal respiration, 
vocalization 
Measurements 
 
Body weight 
 
Sensory functions 
Grip strength 
Motor activity 
 
Landing foot splay 
Neuropathology 
 
In situ fixation 
 
Paraffin/plastic embedding 
H&E stain 
 
Additional stains if necessary 
Tissues/sections 
 
All major regions of nervous system 
 
(central and peripheral) 
 
functions or integrity, biochemical parame- 
ters related to neurotransmission and signal 
transduction); measurement of 2-deoxyglu- 
cose accumulation; and analysis of nerve tis- 
sue after perfusion fixation (which may 
include electron microscopy examinations 
and use of immunohistochemical and mor- 
phometric methods). These tests should 
allow a thorough characterization of the 
neurotoxicity of a substance and provide 
information on its mechanism of action. 
Special Issues in 
 
Neurotoxicity Testing 
Neurotoxicity Induced by 
 
Oranophosphorus Compounds 
 
A number of organophosphorus compounds 
that have been used mostly as insecticides 
have the ability to cause a particular neuro- 
toxicity known as organophosphate-induced 
delayed neuropathy (OPIDN). OPIDN is 
characterized as a distal-central peripheral 
neuropathy and becomes apparent with a 
delay of 2 to 3 weeks after acute exposure. 
Regulatory guidelines require that special- 
ized neurotoxicity testing be conducted 
with all compounds of this dass (9,10). The 
compound is administered acutely and 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 a April 1998 
 
506 
 
NEUROTOXICITY TESTING 
 
subchronically to adult hens and the even- 
tual insurgence of ataxia and other clinical 
signs are monitored and scored. Neuro- 
pathologic examinations of brain, spinal 
cord, and peripheral nerves are then carried 
out. The U.S. EPA also requires biochemi- 
cal measurement of the activity of an 
enzyme, neuropathy target esterase, that is 
considered the target for initiation of the 
neuropathy. For several years, testing for 
OPIDN has been the only type of neurotox- 
icity testing required by regulatory agencies, 
and theprocess has been, for the most part, 
successful in detecting compounds able to 
cause delayed neurotoxicity and prevent 
their commercialization. Recently, however, 
neurotoxicity occurred in an individual who 
had ingested an extremely high dose of an 
organophosphate (far exceeding the dose 
used in animal studies) and was able to 
survive the acute cholinergic poisoning. 
DevelopmenUl Neurotoxicity 
 
The nervous system undergoes gradual 
development that continues well after birth 
in both animals and humans. On one 
hand, the developing nervous system can 
more readily adapt to, or compensate for, 
functional losses as a result of toxic insult; 
however, these may result in a delayed 
functional development. On the other 
hand, damage to the nervous system dur- 
ing key periods of brain development may 
result in long-term, irreversible damage. 
The absence of a fully developed blood- 
brain barrier may result in the accumula- 
tion in the brain of certain chemicals in 
greater quantities than in adults. Special 
guidelines thus exist to determine develop- 
mental neurotoxicity. In principle, care- 
fully conducted reproductive studies 
should be able to provide initial indications 
of potential developmental neurotoxicity. 
However, it has been shown that reliance 
on, for example, the Chernoff/Kavlock ter- 
atology assay as a primary developmental 
neurotoxicity screen could lead to a num- 
ber of false negatives (30). Current devel- 
opmental neurotoxicity screening (9) 
includes a number of observations and 
measurements aimed at determining the 
development of proper motor sensory 
functions, learning, and memory, together 
with landmarks of physical development. 
 
In Vitro Neurotoxicity Testing 
The need to develop acceptable alternatives 
to conventional animal toxicity testing is 
increasingly recognized by toxicologists, 
to address problems related to the escalat- 
ing costs and time required for toxicity 
 
assessment, the increasing number of 
chemicals being developed and commer- 
cialized, and the concern of animal-welfare 
activists (11,12). In the past several years, a 
number of publications have addressed 
issues related to the use of in vitro systems 
for neurotoxicity testing; they are reviewed 
here only briefly (11,13-18). 
 
In vitro testing procedures have several 
practical advantages; yet, the limitations of 
such approaches should also be outlined, 
particularly in the field of neurotoxicology, 
because of the complexity of the nervous 
system. To date, in vitro systems have been 
used extensively to study the mechanism of 
action of neurotoxic agents. However, their 
use in hazard identification in human 
health risk assessment has not been 
explored to any great extent (19). Data 
generated from in vitro procedures are 
based on simplified approaches that require 
less time and cost to yield information 
(two clear advantages), but that do not take 
into account the distribution of the toxi- 
cant in the body, the route of administra- 
tion, and the metabolism of the substance 
(19). In addition, it is difficult to extrapo- 
late in vitro toxicity data to animal or 
human neurotoxicity end points such as 
sensory disorders or cognitive impairment. 
Several in vitro systems are currently being 
evaluated for their ability to predict the 
neurotoxicity of various agents seen in 
intact animals, and an important part of 
this process should be the detection of false 
negatives. Until this process proves satisfac- 
tory, a cautious view should be that out- 
lined recently by the U.S. EPA in their 
proposed guidelines for neurotoxicity risk 
assessment: "Demonstrated neurotoxicity 
in vitro in the absence of in vivo data is 
suggestive but inadequate evidence of a 
neurotoxic effect. On the other hand, in 
vivo data supported by in vitro data 
enhance the reliability of the in vivo 
results" (19). 
 
What are the advantages of in vitro 
testing systems for neurotoxicity, and what 
is their best utilization in neurotoxicology? 
The savings in terms of time, costs, and 
animal use have already been mentioned. 
Other advantages of in vitro toxicity testing 
are summarized as follows: 
 
* Uniform chemical and physical envi- 
 
ronment 
 
* Toxic exposure continuous or inter- 
 
mittent 
 
* Exposure parameters strictly controlled 
* Small amounts of chemical needed 
 
* Systemic (e.g., hepatic) effects bypassed 
* Range of donor species available 
 
* Human materials available (11) 
 
Limitations of in vitro toxicity testing 
are a) lack of integrated functions and 
blood-brain barrier function; b) target 
concentration not known; c) compensatory 
mechanisms cannot be determined, and 
d) single tests cannot cover all targets and 
mechanisms (3). 
 
Most in vitro systems for neurotoxicity 
make use of mammalian cells. In decreasing 
order of complexity, these models include 
organotypic explants, brain slices, reaggre- 
gate cultures, primary cell preparations, and 
established cell lines. It should be noted that 
with the exception of cell lines all other 
models involve the use of cells or tissues 
directly derived from animals. Thus, while 
the number of animals may be reduced (as 
in vitro systems allow the testing of multiple 
concentrations of chemicals and other 
experimental manipulations in tissue 
derived from a single animal), other prob- 
lems inherent to the use of primary cell or 
tissue cultures still necessitate the use of a 
substantial number of animals. From the 
point of view of reducing the number of 
animals, established cell lines are certainly 
the system of choice. A benefit of using 
organotypic explants, brain slices, or reag- 
gregate cultures is that the cytoarchitecture 
of the nervous system, the neural circuitry of 
a specific brain area, or other biochemical 
processes (e.g., myelination), are preserved. 
Systems using primary cultures, on the 
other hand, do not offer the retention of 
neuronal circuitry but allow the study of the 
effects of toxicants on separate cell types 
(e.g., neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes). 
The latter results can also be achieved by the 
use of established cell lines. These have been 
derived from tumors of mouse, rat, and 
human, and are, for the most part, available 
commercially. Cell lines are usually the sim- 
plest to culture and many (e.g., several neu- 
roblastoma or glioma cell lines or PC12 
cells) have been extensively used in neurobi- 
ologic studies, thus providing a large 
amount of information on their physiology 
and biochemical composition. Further- 
more, reproducibility of results is often bet- 
ter in cell lines than in primary cultures. 
On the other hand, cell lines are trans- 
formed (tumor-derived) cells; thus, effects 
in these cells may not always mimic those 
occurring in untransformed cells. 
In Vitro Systems for 
Mechanistic Studies 
 
In vitro systems are amenable and very 
useful for mechanistic studies at the cellular 
and molecular level. As such, they have 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 a April 1998 
 
507 
 
LG. COSTA 
 
been extensively used in neurobiology and, 
to a minor extent, in neurotoxicology. 
Because of the variety of nerve cells and the 
complexity of the nervous system, no single 
in vitro preparation can be relied on to 
detect all possible end points (11,13). 
Depending on the status of knowledge on 
the neurotoxicity of a certain compound, 
and of specific questions that are being 
asked, different cellular systems or prepara- 
tions can be used, and a tiered approach 
can be applied in this context as well. For 
example, neuroblastoma or glioma cell 
lines can be used to investigate the interac- 
tion of neurotoxicants with ion channels or 
receptor and signal transduction systems, 
as well as with basic metabolic functions. 
The hippocampal slice preparation can be 
used to determine whether a chemical may 
affect certain excitatory or inhibitory cir- 
cuitries, as shown, for example, by a study 
with trimethyltin (20). Primary cultures of 
cortical, cerebellar. or hippocampal neu- 
rons are being widely used to study mecha- 
nisms of excitotoxicity (16); cultures of 
Schwann cells may represent a good model 
to study the effect of chemicals on myeli- 
nation. In vitro test systems are amenable 
to biochemical, electrophysiologic, and 
morphologic examinations. Molecular 
biology approaches allow the study of toxi- 
cants on gene expression; techniques such 
as transfection or the use of antisense 
oligonucleotides allow the manipulation of 
cells to address specific questions on the 
role of certain genes, and proteins, in neu- 
rotoxicity. The same caution as for any in 
vitro test system, particularly when the 
results are extrapolated to an in vivo situa- 
tion, also applies to mechanistic studies. 
For example, do the results obtained with a 
cell line stably transfected with a certain 
gene, apply to a different cell type where 
the gene is expressed constitutively, per- 
haps to a lesser degree? How does a phe- 
nomenon such as neurite outgrowth differ 
when investigated in vitro in pure neuronal 
populations, from the in vivo situation, 
where glial cells may directly and indirectly 
play a most relevant role? Despite these 
potential problems, in vitro systems are 
extremely relevant from the point of view 
of mechanistic neurotoxicology, and their 
use is expected to increase. 
 
In Vitro Systems for 
 
Neurotoxicity Screening 
 
A goal of in vitro systems is that of 
providing a quick and inexpensive way for 
assessing potential neurotoxicity. Several 
approaches have been proposed to identify 
 
neurotoxicants and to distinguish them 
from cytotoxicants, as well as to rank neu- 
rotoxicants for toxic potency (11,13). 
Screening is by definition a first-tier evalua- 
tion of chemicals that will be followed by 
additional more specific and complex tests. 
The same criteria for in vitro screening 
approaches for other end points of toxicity 
also apply to the neurotoxicity screening; 
they are a) low incidence of false negatives 
and false positives; b) high correlation with 
in vivo toxicity data; and c) sensitive, sim- 
ple, rapid, economical, and versatile. As 
indicated by many scientists, the challenge 
in developing in vitro systems for neuro- 
toxicity is that of differentiating cytotoxi- 
cants from neurotoxicants. Because any cell 
culture system poorly mimics the intact 
nervous system, it is important to utilize a 
variety of in vitro models and a multiplicity 
of end points to parallel, at least in part, 
neurotoxicity in the whole animal (11). 
Although the use of a test battery is always 
advocated and recommended, the choice of 
the systems to be used has not yet been 
defined, as various investigators have pro- 
posed different though similar approaches 
(14,18). A basic initial test battery should 
include a neuronal and a glial cell line, pos- 
sibly of human origin, one nonneuronal cell 
line, and a slightly more complex system 
such as the rat primary micromass (21) or 
brain reaggregate cultures (11). Recently, 
in vitro systems that could mimic the 
blood-brain barrier, a potential target for 
many neurotoxicants, have also been pro- 
posed. They consist of cocultures of glial 
cells and endothelial cells (or canine kidney 
cells) and have been characterized, but not 
yet sufficiently tested, for their suitability in 
detecting neurotoxicants (22,23). 
 
End points to be measured in in vitro 
tests should include indicators of cytotoxic- 
ity and viability as well as neurotoxicity. 
Basic tests of cytotoxicity and viability are 
common to most cell types and include 
measurements of cell death, membrane per- 
meability, mitochondrial function, cell 
growth and reproduction, energy regulation, 
and synthesis of macromolecules. If these 
end points are affected by a chemical, one 
cannot condude that the chemical is neuro- 
toxic, but only that it displays cytotoxicity, 
whose potency can be readily established by 
conducting concentration-response experi- 
ments. However, the use of nonneuronal 
cell types may provide initial information on 
whether the chemical may have differential 
effects or display different potencies in nerve 
versus nonnerve cells. For the screening of 
putative neurotoxicants, neural-specific end 
 
points representing neurochemical, neuro- 
morphologic,and neurotransmission func- 
tions are necessary (11,13). The choice of 
such end points is not an easy task, as the 
number of parameters that can be mea- 
sured can be endless. This issue probably 
represents the hardest problem to be sur- 
mounted in order to implement the use of 
in vitro systems as effective screening and 
predictive tools. Among the biochemical 
measurements that have been proposed are 
assays for neurotransmitter synthesizing 
enzymes (glutamic acid decarboxylase, 
dopamine hydroxylase, choline acetyl- 
transferase, tryosine hydroxylase), acetyl- 
cholinesterase, neuron-specific enolase, 
glutamine synthetase, and various neuro- 
nal receptors, to mention only a few. 
Morphologic end points such as neurite 
extension can also be measured and quanti- 
fied (24). If neurotoxicity end points are 
affected at concentrations lower than those 
producing cytotoxic effects, a chemical can 
be considered a potential neurotoxicant. 
The concern, however, remains that the 
neurotoxic end points representing the tar- 
get for a certain chemical may have been 
missed by the assays chosen for the neuro- 
toxicity screening, thus generating a false 
negative result. 
 
A number of considerations should be 
made with regard to potential problems 
related to experimental design and techni- 
cal aspects of in vitro neurotoxicity tests, 
all of which indicate the need for a strict 
standardization of experimental proce- 
dures. For example, the source and pas- 
sage of the cell line, the cell density, the 
effect of solvent, the source and composi- 
tion of the media, and the duration of 
exposure are all potential sources of error. 
The fact that several chemicals must be 
metabolized to active toxicants may be 
good motivation to include microsomal 
preparations (the S9 fraction) to the test 
system, as is routinely done, for example, 
in the Ames test for mutagenicity. How- 
ever, even these preparations need to be 
carefully standardized. 
 
The essential step for any battery of in 
vitro neurotoxicity tests is their validation. 
This process is of utmost importance for 
consideration and possible use of in vitro 
tests in the regulatory and risk assessment 
arena. Validation should establish the sen- 
sitivity and specificity of the test battery, its 
reproducibility among laboratories, and its 
degree of predictivity of human neurotoxi- 
cants. Though a 100% correlation between 
in vitro and in vivo end points would be 
difficult to achieve (as even animal tests are 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998 
 
508 
 
NEUROTOXICITY TESTING 
 
not 100% predictive of human toxicity), 
this should be the goal to strive for (11), 
notwithstanding the fact that some in vivo 
end points (e.g., sensory functions, long- 
term memory) do not have in vitro coun- 
terparts. The validation process should 
require the choice of a defined test battery 
(both in terms of test system and of end 
points) and the testing, under standardized 
conditions, of a large number of chemicals, 
some of which are neurotoxic (albeit with 
different targets and mechanisms of neuro- 
toxicity) and others that are known not to 
affect the nervous system. Such a process 
would require a well-organized, strictly 
controlled, and carefully managed effort 
similar to others that have already taken 
place (for example, the study of in vitro 
alternatives to the Draize test). To date, 
however, such multicenter effort has not 
been carried out, and the literature pro- 
vides only examples of validation efforts in 
which few chemicals were tested and differ- 
ent test batteries were used (25,26). Such 
studies, though interesting and useful, do 
not offer sufficient information and confi- 
dence for any utilization of their results in 
the hazard assessment process. They 
should, however, be an impetus for larger 
efforts to be initiated. 
 
Future Perspectives 
 
One of the goals of in vitro testing for toxi- 
cants should be that of reducing the use of 
animals rather then replacing them for tox- 
icity testing (27). As such, in vitro tests 
should complement current in vivo tests, as 
it is unlikely that in vitro methodologies 
 
will become a complete alternative to 
existing approaches and testing methods. 
The efforts to validate a substitute for the 
Draize test represent a case in point, as in 
vitro alternatives have so far failed to be 
better or even equal predictors of eye irrita- 
tion potential as the Draize test itself (12). 
The case of neurotoxicity is as much, if not 
more, complicated. Major problems related 
to the development of in vitro methods for 
neurotoxicants are the complexity of the 
nervous system (both structurally and 
functionally) and the multiplicity of 
potential targets. 
 
It is highly unlikely that a single test 
will be developed for neurotoxicity. The 
suggested battery of tests offers some 
promise. However, as a screening device, 
practicality will necessarily limit the num- 
ber of end points that can be measured, 
with the ensuing risk of generating poten- 
tial false negatives. Before a battery of in 
vitro tests can be taken into serious con- 
sideration as an alternative, a large valida- 
tion study should be carried out; several 
laboratories from different countries 
should be involved in the testing of sev- 
eral hundred compounds. Such effort, 
and the necessary funding, can only come 
from a common action of European, 
North American, and other regulatory 
and scientific agencies, institutions, and 
foundations. National and international 
agencies and scientific organizations 
should promote the formation of a panel 
of neurotoxicologists and statisticians who 
would meet, following a series of discus- 
sions and perhaps additional pilot studies, 
 
to define the nature of the battery (cell 
types, end points), and oversee the com- 
pletion of the large validation experiment. 
Such a validated in vitro battery could 
serve as the basis for prioritization of 
chemicals for further in vivo testing. 
 
In the meantime, in vitro approaches can 
be useful as screening tools for particular sit- 
uations or classes of compounds. For exam- 
ple, cells expressing acetylcholinesterase or 
neuropathy target esterase have been used to 
screen for the inhibitory potency of organo- 
phosphorus esters and may be useful as pre- 
dictors of acute cholinergic toxicity versus 
delayed neurotoxicity (28). As previously 
mentioned, in vitro systems are very useful 
in studying mechanisms of neurotoxicity, 
and represent an important component of 
all stages of toxicity testing. 
 
In summary, it is tempting to conclude 
that neurotoxicology does not offer much 
promise in terms of the development of 
alternatives to the current testing proce- 
dures. Certainly, the road may be more dif- 
ficult than for other, less complex, target 
organs. However, a large concerted effort 
to launch the validation process, and to go 
beyond the necessarily incomplete and 
fragmented attempts so far, would be of 
great benefit. With the results of such 
efforts in hand, the scientific and regula- 
tory communities would be able to decide 
whether sufficient confidence can be placed 
in such an alternative approach and to 
define its role in a concerted testing strat- 
egy, or whether in vitro tests should be 
confined for use in specific situations or in 
mechanistic studies in neurotoxicology. 
 
REFERENCES AND NOTES 
 
1. Office of Technology Assessment. Neurotoxicity: Identifying and 
 
Controlling Poisons of the Nervous System. U.S. Congress, 1990. 
2. National Research Council. Environmental Neurotoxicology. 
 
Washington:National Academy Press, 1992. 
 
3. Ladefoged 0, Lam HR, Ostergaard G, Nielsen E, Arlien Soborg 
 
P. Neurotoxicology: Review of Definitions, Methodology and 
Criteria. Copenhagen:Danish Environmental Protection 
Agency, 1995. 
 
4. ECETOC. Evaluation of the Neurotoxic Potential of 
 
Chemicals. Brussels:European Center for Ecotoxicology and 
Toxicology of Chemicals, 1992. 
 
5. Costa LG. Effects of neurotoxicants on brain neurochemistry. 
 
In: Neurotoxicology (Tilson H, Mitchell C, eds). New York: 
Raven Press, 1992;101-123. 
 
6. Eisenbrandt DL, Nitschke KD. Inhalation toxicity of sulfuryl 
 
fluoride in rats and rabbits. Fundam Appl Toxicol 12:540-548 
(1989). 
 
7. Mathews HB, Dixon D, Herr DW, Tilson H. Subchronic toxi- 
 
city studies indicate that tris (2-chlorocthyl) phosphate admin- 
istration results in lesions in the rat hippocampus. Toxicol Ind 
Health 6:1-10 (1990). 
 
8. Kluwe WM, Montgomery CA, Giles HD, Prejean JD. 
 
Encephalopathy in rats and nephropathy in rats and mice after 
subchronic ora exposure to benzdehyde. Food Chem Toxicol 
21:245-254 (1983). 
 
9. USEPA. Pesticide Assessment Guidelines, Subdivision F. 
 
Hazard Evaluation: Human and Domestic Animals. 
Addendum 10: Neurotoxicity Series 81, 82, and 83. 
Washington:U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1991. 
 
10. OECD. Draft Guidelines for Testing Chemicas: Neurotoxicity 
 
Test Battery, 1992. Brussels:Organisation for Economic Co- 
operation and Development, 1992. 
 
11. Veronesi B. The use of cell culture for evaluating neurotoxicity. 
 
In: Neurotoxicology (Tilson H, Mitchell C, eds). New York: 
Raven Press, 1992;21-49. 
 
12. Roush W. Hunting for animal alternatives. Science 274: 
 
168-171 (1996). 
 
13. Veronesi B. In vitro screening batteries for neurotoxicants. 
 
Neurotoxicology 13:185-196 (1922). 
 
14. Walum E, Nordin M, Beckman M, Odland L. Cellular meth- 
 
ods for identification of neurotoxic chemicals and estimation of 
neurotoxicological risk. Toxicol in Vitro 7:321-326 (1993). 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998 509 
 
L.G. COSTA 
 
15. Abdulla EM, Campbell IC. In vitro tests of neurotoxicity. J 
 
Pharmacol Toxicol Meth 29:69-75 (1993). 
 
16. Abdulla EM, Campbell IC. Studies of neurotoxicity in cellular 
 
models. In: In Vitro Methods in Pharmaceutical Research. San 
Diego, CA:Academic Press, 1997; 155-180. 
 
17. Campbell IC, Fletcher L, Grant PAA, Abdulla EM. Validation 
 
of in vitro tests in neurotoxicology. ATLA 24:339-347 (1993). 
 
18. Atterwill CK, Davenport-Jones J, Goonetilleke S, Johnston H, 
 
Purcell W, Thomas SM, West M, Williams S. New models for 
the in vitro assessment of neurotoxicity in the nervous system 
and the preliminary validation stages of a tiered test model. 
Toxicol In Vitro 7:569-580 (1993). 
 
19. USEPA. Proposed guidelines for neurotoxicity risk assessment. 
 
Fed Reg 60(192):52032-52056 (1995). 
 
20. Janigro D, Costa LG. Effects of trimethyltin on granule cells 
 
excitability in the in vitro rat dentate gyrus. Neurotoxicol 
Teratol 9:33-38 (1987). 
 
21. Atterwill CK. Brain rearegate cultures in neurotoxicological 
 
investigations: adaptationaf and neuroregenerative processes 
following lesions. Mol Toxicol 1:489-502 (1987). 
 
22. Stanness KA, Guatteo E, Janigro D. A dynamic model of the 
 
blood brain barrier in vitro. Neurotoxicology 17:481-496 
(1996). 
 
23. Veronesi B. Characterization of the MDCK cell line for screen- 
 
ing neurotoxicants. Neurotoxicology 17:433-444 (1996). 
 
24. Walum E, Odland L, Romert L, Ekblad-Sekund G, Nilsson M, 
 
Calleman CJ, Bergmark E, Costa LG. Biochemical approaches 
to neurotoxicology in vitro: attempts to develop a test system 
for chemically induced axonopathy. In: In Vitro Methods in 
Toxicology. London:Academic Press, 1992;237-251. 
 
25. Walum E, Hanson E, Harvey AL. In vitro testing of neurotoxi- 
 
city. ATLA 18:153-179 (1990). 
 
26. Atterwill CK, Simpson MG, Evans RJ, Allen SL, Ray D. 
 
Alternative methods and their application in neurotoxicity 
testing. In: Animals and Alternatives in Toxicology (Balls M. 
Bridges J, Southee J, eds). London:MacMillan, 1991; 
121-152. 
 
27. Dewar AJ. Neurotoxicity. In: Animals and Alternatives in 
 
Toxicity Testing (Balls M, Riddell RJ, Worden AN, eds). 
London:Academic Press, 1983;230-284). 
 
28. Correll L, Ehrich M. A microassay method for neurotoxic esterase 
 
determination. Fundam Appl Toxicol 11:1 10-1 16 (191). 
 
29. O'Callaghan JP. Assessment of neurotoxicity using assays of 
 
neuron- and glia-localized proteins: chronology and critique. 
In: Neurotoxicology (Tilson H, Mitchell C, eds). New York: 
Raven Press, 1992;83-100. 
 
30. Goldey ES, Tilson HA, Crofton KM. Implications of the use of 
 
neonatal birth weight, growth, viability, and survival data for 
predicting develop mental neurotoxicity: a review of the litera- 
ture. Neurotoxicol Teratol 17:313-332 (1995). 
 
510 Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 106, Supplement 2 * April 1998