pmcEnviron Health PerspectEnviron Health Perspect253envhper0330411EHPEnvironmental Health Perspectives0091-67651552-9924American Chemical SocietyPMC11783688PMC11783688.111783688117836883988698410.1289/EHP14888EHP148881ResearchImpact of Maternal BPA Exposure during Pregnancy on Obesity in Male Offspring: A Mechanistic Mouse Study of Adipose-Derived Exosomal miRNA
HuangZhenyao https://orcid.org/0009-0004-8863-5744NiuRui XuQiaoqiao ZhangRui HuWeiyue QinYufeng WangXinru XuQiujin XiaYankai FanYun https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3689-9188LuChuncheng 
1State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine and Offspring Health, Center for Global Health, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China
2Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Ministry of Education, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China
3Key Laboratory of Human Genetics and Environmental Medicine, School of Public Health, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, China
4Chinese Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Beijing, ChinaAddress correspondence to Chuncheng Lu, State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Institute of Toxicology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China. Telephone: 86-25-86868420. Email: chunchenglu@njmu.edu.cn. And, Yankai Xia, State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Institute of Toxicology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China. Telephone: 86-25-86868420. Email: yankaixia@njmu.edu.cn. And, Yun Fan, State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Institute of Toxicology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China. Telephone: 86-25-86868420. Email: yunfan@njmu.edu.cn3112025120251331478994017011
2722024
18122024
26122024
310120253101202507062026https://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/about-ehp/licenseEHP is an open-access journal published with support from the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health. All content is public domain unless otherwise noted.

## Background:
The widespread use of bisphenol A (BPA) has led to universal exposure among the population, raising concerns about its health effects. Epidemiological studies have linked environmentally relevant levels of BPA exposure to obesity.

## Objectives:
We aimed to uncover the complex mechanisms by which oral exposure during pregnancy with BPA affects the offspring.

## Methods:
We conducted a two-stage mouse study. In stage 1, we gavaged dams with BPA at 0.05, 0.5, and during pregnancy, and we tracked the offspring’s weight and diet to 12 wk of age. In stage 2, exosomes from BPA-exposed dams and offspring were injected into pregnant mice and 3-wk-old males, respectively, and the mice were observed up to 12 wk. We then sequenced exosomal microRNAs (miRNAs) in male offspring whose dams had been exposed to BPA during pregnancy and checked their expression in adipose, liver, and serum samples at weeks 3, 6, 9, and 12. Finally, we explored the functions of exosomes and exosomal miRNAs secreted by adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells, and we investigated whether the exosomes and miRNAs they secreted could affect glucose uptake, triglyceride synthesis, and the expression of genes related to glucose and lipid metabolism in alpha mouse liver 12 cells.

## Results:
Gavage of of BPA during pregnancy in dams led to obesity in male offspring mice, and injection of exosomes from male offspring with BPA exposure during pregnancy also induced similar outcomes in the next generation of male pups. Exosomal miRNA sequencing identified differentially expressed miRNAs associated with BPA-induced obesity in male offspring, revealing sustained high expression of miRNAs in adipose tissue and a gradual increase in the liver and serum over time. Further mechanistic studies showed that exosomes derived from BPA-treated adipose-derived stem cells reduced the expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma and fibroblast growth factor 21, leading to impaired insulin signaling and lipid metabolism in hepatocytes. Overexpression of miR-124-3p in hepatocytes mimicked these effects; in contrast, knockdown of miR-124-3p or inhibition of exosome secretion reversed them.

## Discussion:
The present study corroborates the regulatory function of adipose-derived exosomal miRNAs in obesity in male offspring mice resulting from BPA exposure during pregnancy. Exosomal miRNA may be a key and novel molecular biomarker in the adverse effects of chemical exposure during pregnancy. https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP14888

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesConclusions and opinions are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the policies or views of EHP Publishing or the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences.
Supplemental Material is available online (https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP14888).
*These two authors contributed equally to this study and should be regarded as joint first authors.
No conflicts of interest are disclosed by the authors.
Note to readers with disabilities:
EHP strives to ensure that all journal content is accessible to all readers. However, some figures and Supplemental Material published in EHP articles may not conform to 508 standards due to the complexity of the information being presented. If you need assistance accessing journal content, please contact ehpsubmissions@niehs.nih.gov. Our staff will work with you to assess and meet your accessibility needs within 3 working days.

## Introduction
Bisphenol A (BPA) has been widely used since the 1950s as an intermediate in manufacturing synthetic resin and plastic. Between 2010 and 2016, the global production of BPA expanded considerably, from 5 to 8 million metric tons (MT) ; the projected market size for BPA is 8.18 MT in 2024, and it is anticipated to grow to 11.23 MT by 2029. BPA is used as a component of several commodities, including thermal paper, medical devices, feeding bottles, food and beverage cans, and reusable plastic bottles. Like other chemicals, BPA can leach from these materials and, depending on temperature and acidity, can migrate into water, air, food, skin, saliva, and blood. BPA has been identified as a pollutant of growing concern in various studies because of its broad environmental presence and potential endocrine disruption effects. , Of even greater concern, BPA has been found in the plasma, excreta, adipose tissue, amniotic fluid, and mother’s milk of human beings. , 
Epidemiologic research has supported the relationship between BPA exposure and increased heart cerebrovascular disease, obesity during childhood and adolescence, and diabetes. Rodent studies have revealed that early life exposure to BPA was significantly associated with increased fat weight and triglyceride (TG) and free fatty acid levels, suggesting potential sex-specific and dose-dependent effects on obesity-related outcomes. Importantly, previous studies have demonstrated that exposure to BPA during pregnancy can lead to insulin resistance, glucose intolerance, and hyperinsulinemia in offspring mice. , Although a well-established association exists between exposure to BPA during pregnancy and obesity in offspring, the mechanism is still under debate. Because the embryo has a limited ability to metabolize and digest exogenous substances during this sensitive period, the prenatal period is a crucial window of development during which exposure to these chemicals may affect fetal development and result in long-term tissue alterations that contribute to poor adult health outcomes. , 
Adipocyte-derived exosomes may play a key role in obesity pathogenesis and its associated comorbidities. Adipose tissue can produce exosomes from both adipocytes and adipose-derived stem cells (ADSCs). Deng et al. found that insulin resistance and increased pro-inflammatory cytokine release resulted after injecting ob/ob mouse adipose-derived exosomes into control mice. The exosomes were stably transported in biofluids, carried diverse bioactive cargoes derived from parent cells, and mediated intercellular communication by transporting and delivering a variety of biological contents, such as mRNA, microRNAs (miRNAs), long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), lipids, and proteins. – Because of their shorter length, miRNAs are thought to be more stable and specific in tissues and blood than mRNAs and lncRNAs. , Emerging evidence suggests that exosome-mediated processes commonly involve miRNAs, which also serve important roles. For instance, exosomal miR-671 derived from adipocytes was found to act directly on transforming growth factor beta receptor 2 (TGFBR2) and curtail phosphorylation of Smad2, attenuating myocardial fibrosis and inflammation in mice, and adipocyte-derived exosomal miR-23a was found to confer chemotolerance through the targeting of the Von Hippel-Lindau dependent (VHLD)/hypoxia-inducible fold axis, promoting mice hepatoma cell growth and migration. Adipose tissue is thought to produce bioactive factors, called adipokines, in a paracrine, autocrine, and distantly secreted manner. Various population-based investigations have demonstrated that abnormal adipocytokine production may facilitate hepatic steatosis and the development of obesity. , As a class of adipokines, the adipocyte-derived exosomal miRNA also affects the function of other organs. Moreover, both human populations and murine model studies have demonstrated that miRNAs are directly involved in blood glucose metabolism and insulin resistance through their action on peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma ( )– or fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21)-associated targets. , Thus, we propose that adipose-derived exosomal miRNA may be related to obesity in offspring caused by exposure to BPA during pregnancy.
We aimed to uncover the complex mechanisms by which maternal exposure to BPA during pregnancy affects offspring development. We conducted a two-stage murine experiment to observe the impact of maternal oral BPA exposure during pregnancy and exosomal miRNA on offspring development. We subsequently performed small RNA (sRNA) sequencing of exosomes in the serum of offspring mice specifically exposed to BPA in utero to screen for differentially expressed exosomal miRNAs. Finally, we conducted in vitro experiments to verify the effects of adipocyte-derived exosomal miRNA on liver cells.

## Methods

## Animals
We performed all animal work under the approval of the Nanjing Medical University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (approval no. IACUC-1908035). The animal ethical and welfare committee examined and permitted the animal usage procedure. Specific pathogen-free (SPF) ICR and C57BL/6 mice were purchased from the animal center at Nanjing Medical University and allowed 1 wk of acclimatization. Forty-four female and 42 male ICR mice were included in the study. Twenty male C57BL/6 mice were used for the ADSC separation. The mice were kept in 12-h dark/light cycles at . One male and 2 female mice were kept in pairs to conceive. By inspecting the vaginal plug, the gestational day (GD) of the pregnancy was determined to be 0.5.
All the mice were housed in BPA-free polypropylene cages. Pregnant mice and pre-sexual maturity offspring were fed experimental mouse growth and breeding feed (Cat# 1010002, Xietong Shengwu), whereas sexually mature mice were fed experimental mouse maintenance feed (Cat# 1010001, Xietong Shengwu), both of which have undetectable levels of BPA. The drinking water for the mice was pure water in glass bottles.

## Cell Lines and Cell Culture
Alpha mouse liver 12 (AML12) cells and 3T3-L1 adipocytes were purchased from Molecular Cell Center of Excellence. We cultured the AML12 cells in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium/Nutrient Mixture F-12 (DMEM/F12; Gibco) with 10% fetal bovine serum (Cat# 11011-8611, Every Green), ITS liquid medium supplement (Cat# I3146, Sigma-Aldrich), of dexamethasone (Cat# YD0007, YIFEIXUE), and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco). The 3T3-L1 cells were cultured in DMEM medium (BasalMedia) with 10% bovine calf serum (Cat# 22011-8612, Every Green) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin.

## Chemical Exposure and End Point Detection with Animals

## Maternal Oral BPA Exposure during Pregnancy.
At 7 wk of age, we randomly assigned 20 female ICR mice of equal body weight into four groups: a) no dose (no BPA administration; Control), b) low dose ( ; BPA-L), c) medium dose ( ; BPA-M), and d) high dose ( ; BPA-H). To perform random grouping for the mice in the study, each mouse was assigned a unique identifier and then randomly allocated to one of the experimental groups using a computer-generated random number sequence, ensuring their equal distribution across all groups. We selected the doses of BPA used in our study to reflect a range of human exposure scenarios, with the low dose corresponding to the US Environmental Protection Agency’s tolerable daily intake (TDI) of . We chose this dose because it represented the estimated safe daily exposure level without significant adverse effects for humans. Higher doses are relevant for understanding the threshold beyond which BPA may elicit toxicological effects. The high dose of was based on the no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL) derived from a murine study. In addition, higher doses were included to evaluate potential dose-dependent effects and to explore scenarios of inadvertent or occupational exposure, cases in which BPA exposure may exceed the TDI. For instance, Vandenberg et al. reported urinary BPA concentrations indicative of exposure higher than the TDI in certain population subsets. These doses of BPA have been used previously in the study of the effects of maternal oral BPA exposure during pregnancy on offspring. Female mice were administered BPA (dissolved in corn oil) by gavage, beginning 1 wk prior to pregnancy and continuing until GD18.5. We defined “maternal oral BPA exposure during pregnancy” as the period during which the fetus is exposed to BPA while in utero. Although BPA administration started before pregnancy, the relevant window for exposure during pregnancy begins at conception and continues until birth, covering the entire duration of fetal development. The choice of this window period was mainly based on our previous research and developmental origins of health and disease (DOHaD) that exposure to endocrine-disrupting chemicals during early life (e.g., in utero) in mice can affect the growth and development of subsequent offspring. The rationale for starting BPA exposure before pregnancy was to ensure the presence of BPA in the maternal system at the time of conception, thereby mimicking environmental exposure scenarios where BPA is present in the maternal environment prior to and during pregnancy. Male mice were used for breeding only, without BPA administration. We monitored pregnant mice daily for body weight and food intake. The number of offspring born from each pregnant mouse was controlled to be no more than 8, male and female equally. We recorded weekly body weight and food intake for the offspring mice up to 12 wk of age and used the measures for the identification of obesity-related outcomes. Meanwhile, blood samples were collected from dams after the first postnatal day (PND) and in offspring mice at 3, 6, 9, and 12 wk of age through the medial canthus vein. The blood samples were centrifuged at for 15 min at room temperature (RT). The supernatant was the serum collected for exosome extraction.

## Identification of Obesity and Obesity-Related Outcomes in Offspring Mice.
Direct assessments of obesity included weight assessment; micro-positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scans of the abdomen, which measured fat accumulation; and hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and Oil Red O (ORO) staining, which assessed lipid deposition in adipose tissue. We conducted other experiments, such as the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), insulin tolerance test (ITT), and blood biochemistry, to evaluate metabolic dysfunction and insulin resistance. These conditions are related to obesity phenotypes but are not direct measures of body fat. We conducted OGTTs, ITTs, and micro-PET/CT on days 1, 5, and the last day of week 12, respectively. Blood biochemical tests, H&E staining, and ORO staining were performed post-sacrifice.

## OGTT.
Mice ( samples/group, randomly selected) were fasted 4–6 h and then subjected to gavage with 
d-glucose (Chimin) dissolved in physiological saline solution. Blood was sampled from the tail vein at 0, 30, 60, 90, and 120 min after glucose injection, and blood glucose was measured using a glucometer (Roche).

## ITT.
Mice ( samples/group, randomly selected) were fasted 3 h and then injected intraperitoneally with regular human insulin (Sannuo). Blood glucose was sampled via tail venipuncture at 0, 30, 60, 90, and 120 min after insulin injection and measured using a glucometer.

## Blood Biochemical Tests.
Serum triglyceride (TG), cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels were measured using BX3010 (SYSMEX). The measurements were carried out by staff at the Animal Center of Nanjing Medical University ( samples/group, randomly selected).

## MRI and Micro-PRT/CT Scans of the Abdomen.
Micro-PET/CT scans of the abdomen were used to evaluate the proportion of abdominal adipose tissue in mice ( samples/group, randomly selected). Briefly, after an overnight fast, the mice were anesthetized using a gas anesthesia machine with isoflurane and then imaged by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; Biospec 7T/20 USR) or micro-PET/CT (LCT-200). The MRI acquisition time was 90 min. A high-resolution 3T (tesla) MRI system was used for this procedure. A gradient echo sequence was employed for image acquisition with a repetition time (TR) of 2,500 ms and an echo time (TE) of 30 ms. The PET acquisition time was 60 min. We used a and 80-kV CT X-ray source with an exposure period of 1,200 ms. The result was quantified using ImageJ software. 

## H&E Staining.
The offspring were euthanized at 12 wk of age by carbon dioxide inhalation. Adipose and liver tissues ( samples/group, randomly selected) were immersed in paraformaldehyde (4%, Beyotime) and then dehydrated with a continuous alcohol gradient. All samples were immersed in paraffin using a paraffin embedding machine (Thermo EC350) then cut into sections (at least 3 sections/tissue sample) of by microtomes (Thermo HM340E), immersed in paraffin, and washed with xylene. Following a rinse with xylene and absolute alcohol, the paraffin-embedded tissues were rehydrated using an alcohol gradient. Then, hematoxylin solution (Beyotime) was used to stain each section, and eosin (Beyotime) was used as a counterstain. After dehydration with alcohol and rinsing with xylene, each section was scanned with a digital slice scanning system (3DHISTECH).

## ORO Staining.
Liver tissue ( samples/group, randomly selected) sections were prepared as above. The sections were stained in ORO staining (Beyotime) solution (prepared with isopropyl alcohol) for 15 min, protected from light. Then, the sections were washed in pure water and placed in a hematoxylin staining solution. Sections were scanned as described above.

## Organ Coefficient.
The organ coefficient ( samples/group, randomly selected) was calculated as the ratio of the weight of the organ to the total body weight, multiplied by 100 to get a percentage: . We calculated the organ coefficient of the heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, brain, and pancreas.

## Exosome Extraction, Characterization, and Injection

## Exosome Extraction.
Serum exosomes were isolated using ExoQuick (SBI) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Cellular supernatant exosomes were isolated using ExoQuick-TC (SBI). The serum samples or cellular supernatants were centrifuged at for 15 min to remove cells and cell debris, and each supernatant was transferred to a sterile vessel with the appropriate volume of ExoQuick (4:1) or ExoQuick-TC (5:1) added to the biofluid. The tube was inverted and flicked to combine the contents thoroughly. We let the serum samples stand at RT for 30 min. We refrigerated the cellular supernatants overnight at 4°C. The tubes remained upright. The tubes were centrifuged with an ExoQuick or ExoQuick-TC/biofluid mixture at for 30 min at 4°C. Any remaining fluid was aspirated out, being careful not to isrupt the exosomes that collected in the pellet. We resuspended the exosome pellets in of sterile . The extracted exosomes were used immediately for experiments or stored at for subsequent experiments.

## Exosome Characterization.
We recorded transmission electron microscope (TEM) images using a JEM-2000EX microscope (JEOL) under 80 kV. The exosome sample was deposited onto a 400-mesh copper grid covered with a carbon support film for the TEM sample preparation. Particle sizes and exosome concentrations were determined by dynamic laser scattering (DLS) using a Zetasizer Nano (ZS90) at a fixed angle of 90°. Western blot assay and flow cytometry (FACS) analysis were performed to detect the exosome marker proteins, including CD63, CD9, CD81, and HSP70 (Abcam) (for details, refer to the sections “Western Blot” and “FACS”). Exosomes labeled with PKH26 were detected using a fluorescence microscope (Nikon).

## Generation of PKH26-Labeled Exosomes.
We measured the concentration of the extracted exosomes using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Vazyme). A working solution of PKH26 (Sigma-Aldrich) at a concentration of was prepared with dilution buffer (Yeasen), protected from light. PKH26 was added to the exosomes, vortexed for 1 min, and then incubated for 10 min. PBS was added to the incubated mixture and mixed thoroughly, followed by an extraction of the exosomes using ExoQuick (SBI).

## Exosome Injection in Mice.
Exosomes for injection experiments were extracted from maternal (F0) and offspring (F1) serum samples in the maternal BPA exposure during pregnancy experiments ( ). This process was meticulously applied to both BPA-L and control exosome groups to minimize any variability in the exosome preparations. In addition, we confirmed the size distribution and concentration of exosomes across all samples, ensuring comparability between the groups (for details, refer to the section “Exosome Characterization”). For exosome injection during pregnancy: at 7 wk of age, 24 female ICR mice of equal body weight were divided into four groups: a) injected with serum exosomes from control dams (Con-F0), b) injected with serum exosomes from control male offspring (Con-F1), c) injected with serum exosomes from BPA-L dams (BPA-F0), and d) injected with serum exosomes from BPA-L male offspring (BPA-F1) ( ). (The exosomes were tagged before infusing, for details, refer to the section “Generation of PKH26-Labeled Exosomes.”) Different groups of PKH26-labeled exosomes were infused into the extremity of the tail vein ( every 3 d using syringes ) throughout the gestation period from positive vaginal plug to delivery. Body weight and food intake were recorded daily in pregnant mice. Offspring mice were processed and observed as described above. For nonpregnant exosome injections: at 3 wk of age, 20 nonexposed male mice of equal body weight were randomly divided into four groups: Con-F0, Con-F1, BPA-F0, and BPA-F1 (exosome origin as above). Different groups of exosomes were injected into the tail vein every 3 d until week 6 (the same frequency of exosome injections as during pregnancy). Weekly records were kept for body weight and food intake for the mice up to 12 wk of age.

## Identification of PKH26-Labeled Exosomes in the Blood of Pregnant Mice, Amniotic Fluid, and Fetal Mice Blood.
First, blood from pregnant mice was collected via the orbital venous plexus. Then, the pregnant mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation before PND. Next, the abdomen of each pregnant mouse was disinfected with iodophor. An incision of an appropriate length was made along the midline of the abdomen, and the abdominal cavity was opened. The uterine horns were found and gently pulled out, with care taken to avoid damaging the uterus and embryos. Subsequently, a syringe equipped with a fine needle was used to carefully puncture the uterine wall (while avoiding the embryos). The amniotic fluid was drawn into the syringe and then transferred to Eppendorf tube. The fetal mice were kept partially exposed. The needle of a micro syringe was inserted into the heart of each fetal mouse, and blood was slowly drawn, reducing mechanical stimulation during the process. The collected blood of the mother mouse, amniotic fluid, and fetal mouse blood were smeared directly onto glass slides (Cat# PC5-301, Citotest). To make the smears, we took another clean slide and gently touched one end to the drop of the fluid, allowing it to spread along the edge of the spreader. The slide was held at a 45-degree angle and smoothly and continuously slid to form an even film. The prepared smears were placed in the air to dry for 5 min. Then, a fluorescence microscope (Nikon) with an excitation light of (for PKH26-labeled exosomes, which emit red fluorescence upon excitation) was used to observe the smears. If red fluorescence was observed, it indicated the presence of PKH26-labeled exosomes.

## Exosome sRNA Sequencing.
We characterized exosomal sRNAs by RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis of exosomal RNAs from two pools of serum obtained from control and BPA-L male offspring (each , randomly selected), following the method described in another study. The exosomal sRNA sequencing method used in this study is consistent with that of another study, both performed by RiboBio. sRNA libraries were constructed and sequenced from total RNA isolated from exosomes (RiboBio). Briefly, total RNA was separated on a 15% Tris–borate–ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) polyacrylamide gel (provided by Invitrogen), and sRNA fractions ranging from 18 to 30 nt were selected for library construction. These sRNAs underwent reverse transcription and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification. For sRNA sequencing experiments, the primary steps from the entire RNA extraction to eventual complementary DNA (cDNA) library preparation were as follows: total RNA was ligated to the 5′ and 3′ splice; first strand cDNA synthesis; PCR amplification; gel electrophoresis to obtain cDNA libraries with insert fragments nt; sequencing on a HiSeq 2500 (Illumina). The filtered reads were then annotated with known noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) such as miRNA, tRNA, rRNA, small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA), and small nuclear (snRNA) after being compared with the miRNA database: miRBase (version 21; https://www.mirbase.org) and the tRNA, rRNA, snoRNA, and snRNA databases: Rfam12.1 (https://rfam.xfam.org). The expression differences of co-expressed miRNAs were compared using scatter plots with the ratio. The significance of miRNA differences between groups was analyzed using edgeR. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis was conducted on differentially expressed miRNAs across various concentrations. The microRNA target prediction database (miRDB) tool was used to identify target genes for each miRNA, which were then subjected to KEGG pathway enrichment analysis using the Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) tool (https://davidbioinformatics.nih.gov/). The raw sequences were deposited in the National Center for Biotechnology Information database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) with accession number PRJNA1147850.

## ADSCs Separation, Culture, Identification, and Transfection

## ADSCs Separation.
The separation method of the ADSCs was based on descriptions in other studies. , Twenty SPF male C57BL/6 mice were bought from the animal center at Nanjing Medical University, 8–10 wk of age post-weaning, weighing . With 1–2 mice per operation, the mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation. The mice were then soaked in 75% ethanol for 3–5 min for disinfection. We cut the inguinal skin with scissors to expose the inguinal adipose masses on both sides, and we used high-pressure scissors to remove the fat tissue on both sides. We then put the inguinal adipose masses in a plate and transferred the plate to a clean bench. The adipose tissue was washed with high-pressure PBS. Next, we removed the fascia tissue and small blood vessels of the adipose tissue, cut the adipose tissue into pieces, and transferred the pieces to a centrifuge tube. The adipose tissue was digested by 0.2% type I collagenase (Sigma-Aldrich) for 50 min at RT, centrifuged at for 10 min at RT, and precipitated to obtain the ADSCs. The ADSCs were cultured in ADSC complete culture medium [DMEM/F12 medium (Gibco) containing 10% fetal calf serum (Gibco) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco)]. Then, the cells were placed in a 37°C, 5% carbon dioxide incubator. Adhesion was observed after 48 h, and the medium was changed for the first time after 72 h. The culture medium was then changed every 2 d. The cells initially isolated from the tissue were designated as the primary ADSCs. After passaging, the third-generation ADSCs were in good growth condition (exponential growth phase).

## Cell Digestion and Passaging.
When the cells reached 80%–90% confluency in a culture dish, we washed the cells one to two times with PBS, then digested the cells with a 0.25% trypsin-EDTA solution (Cat# C0201, Beyotime) and incubated them at 37°C for 5 min. Next, we added complete culture medium to terminate digestion, blew the cells, collected the cell digestion solution, and centrifuged it at for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded, and the sediment in the tube was the cells. We resuspended the sediment with complete culture medium to prepare the single cell suspension. Then the single cell suspension was passaged into culture dishes at a ratio of 1:2.

## Multidirectional Differentiation Ability of ADSCs.
When the cells reached 80%–90% confluency in the culture dishes ( replicates), we digested the cells and placed them into 6-well plates at a density of cells per well. The complete culture medium was changed every 2 d until the cells reached 80% confluency in the 6-well plates. Then, the culture medium was changed to osteogenic induction solution (Cat# MUXMD-90021, OriCell) or lipogenic induction solution (Cat# MUXMD-90031, OriCell), and the medium was changed every 2 d. After 21 d of osteogenic differentiation, the osteogenic induction solution was removed from the 6-well plates ( wells/group). The plates were washed three times with PBS. We added of 4% paraformaldehyde solution to each well and fixed the cells at RT for 30 min. The 4% paraformaldehyde solution was removed, and the cells were washed three times with PBS. Then we added of alizarin red solution (Cat# ALIR-10001, OriCell) to each well and stained the cells at RT for 10 min. Finally, we removed the alizarin red solution and washed the cells three times with PBS. Two milliliters of PBS was placed in each well, and the 6-well plate was placed under the microscope (Nikon) to observe the osteogenic staining effect.
After 7 d of lipogenic differentiation, the lipogenic induction solution from the 6-well plate was removed ( wells/group). The washed and fixed procedure was the same as for the osteogenic induction differentiation. We prepared the working solution by mixing ORO storage solution (Cat# OILR-10001, OriCell) with distilled water at a ratio of 3:2. After mixing the ORO solution, we centrifuged it at for 4 min and used the supernatant. We added of the ORO working solution to each well and stained the cells at RT for 30 min. We removed the ORO working solution and washed the cells three times with PBS. Then, we added of PBS to each well, and placed the 6-well plate under the microscope (Nikon) to observe the osteogenic staining effect.

## FACS.
This experiment was conducted using a Mesenchymal Stem Cell (Mouse) Surface Marker Detection Kit (Cat# MUXMX-09011, OriCell). After preparing the ADSC single-cell suspension (for details, refer to the section “Cell Digestion and Passaging”), the cells were resuspended with of Staining Buffer (Cat# PF00018, Proteintech), and of diluted CD29, CD44, Sca-1, CD31, and CD117 antibody (Cat# MUXMX-09011, OriCell) working solution (diluting the primary antibody in a 1:50 ratio with Staining Buffer) was added to incubate each group of cells (3 parallel controls for each group, plus a blank control group set up at the same time). Then, the tubes were incubated at 4°C for 30 min, centrifuged at for 5 min, and the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was resuspended with of Staining Buffer and then incubated with the fluorescent [fluorescein isothiocyanate and phycoerythrin (FITC/PE)] secondary antibody (Cat# MUXMX-09011, OriCell) at a 1:50 dilution for 30 min at 4°C (FITC Goat Anti-hamster IgG for CD29, FITC Goat Anti-rat IgG for CD44, and Sca-1, the PE Goat Anti-rat IgG for CD31 and CD117). After centrifugation at for 5 min, the supernatant was discarded and of Staining Buffer was added to resuspend the cells, which were then assayed on an Aria III Flow Cytometer (BD).

## Cell Transfection.
When the cell density of ADSCs reached in the 6-well plates, the cells would be prepared for transfection. The plasmids were customized from GenePharma, including Cy3-miR-124-3p (Cat# B02001), miR-124-3p mimic (Cat# B02001) (sometimes represented by miR-124-3p+ in this study), and miR-124-3p inhibitor (Cat# B03001). The plasmids were stored at before use. Before use, they were centrifuged at for 3 min. Then, the pellet was dissolved in PBS according to the instructions provided by the reagent manufacturer, mixed well with a vortex mixer, and prepared and used immediately. All plasmids were transfected according to the following procedure. First, we added the plasmids and Lipo3000 (Invitrogen) into Eppendorf tubes containing equal amounts of basal medium at a ratio of 1.5:1, respectively, and incubated at RT for 5 min. Then, we combined the Lipo3000-containing medium with the plasmid-containing medium and incubated the mixture at RT for 20 min. The mixture was added to the 6-well plates. The complete medium was changed after every 6 h. After 24 h, the transfection efficiencies were validated by quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) (for details, refer to the section “qRT-PCR”).

## Differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells.
The differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells was based on Zebisch et al. When the 3T3-L1 cells reached 80% confluency in 6-well plates ( wells/group), we switched the medium to Differentiation Medium I, which consisted of complete growth medium supplemented with 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX; Cat# I5879, Sigma-Aldrich), dexamethasone (Cat# YD0007, YIFEIXUE), and of insulin (Cat# I2643, Sigma-Aldrich). On the second day, we replaced the medium with Differentiation Medium II (complete growth medium containing of insulin). On the seventh day, we changed the medium back to complete growth medium. At this point, we observed a small number of lipid droplets in the cells. By the 12th day, lipid droplets were visible in most of the cells, marking the completion of differentiation.

## Cell Proliferation Assay
The proliferation of ADSCs and 3T3-L1 cells was assessed using the Cell Counting Kit-8 (Cat# A311, Vazyme) following the manufacturer’s instructions ( wells/group). The cells were passaged and seeded into 96-well plates 1 d prior to the assay, with cells per well. After 12 h of incubation, the medium was replaced with fresh medium containing various concentrations of BPA (0, 10−4, 10−³, 10−2, 10−1, 1, and ). After 24 h of BPA exposure, we added of CCK8 solution to each well. The plates were incubated for an additional 30 min, and the absorbance was measured at using a Tecan Infinite M200pro microplate reader (Tecan).

## Co-Culture Assay
The ADSCs were co-cultured with AML12 cells for 12 h in a Transwell plate (Cat# 3450, , Corning) following transfection with Cy3-miR-124-3p mimic (Cat# B02001, GenePharma) (for details, refer to the section “Cell Transfection”). The AML12 cells were seeded at a density of in the lower chamber (Cat# 3450, Corning) with AML12 complete medium (see details in the section “Cell Lines and Cell Culture”) while the ADSCs were seeded at a density of in the top chamber (Cat# 3450, Corning) with ADSC complete medium (see details in the section “ADSCs Separation and Culture”). The cells were incubated for 48 h. The control group was exposed to only Cy3 dye (without miRNA mimics; Cat# F01001, GenePharma). The rest of the steps were the same as those of the exposure group. The appearance of Cy3 red fluorescence on AML12 was assessed following a PBS wash. Images were taken using a fluorescence microscope (Nikon; absorption wavelength: , emission wavelength: ) and analyzed by ImageJ. 

## ADSCs Exposure to BPA
ADSCs were passaged into 6-well plates ( cells/well). After 24 h, the cells were divided into a control group and a BPA exposure group ( of BPA) ( wells/group). After 24 h of BPA exposure, exosomes were extracted by ExoQuick-TC from the control and the BPA exposure groups (for details, refer to the section “Exosome Extraction”). The exosomes were labeled by PKH26 (for details, refer to the section “Generation of PKH26-Labeled Exosomes”). The exosomes were added to the AML12 complete culture medium of AML12 cells ( cells/well, 6-well plate, wells/group). After 12 h, red fluorescence was observed and photographed using a fluorescence microscope (Nikon) at an excitation wavelength of .

## Exosomes Inhibition Assay
The ADSCs were passaged into 6-well plates ( cells/well). After 24 h, the cells were divided into a control group and a BPA exposure group ( of BPA) ( wells/group). After 24 h of exposure, GW4869 (Cat# D1692, Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the BPA exposure group. After 24 h, exosomes were extracted by ExoQuick-TC from the control group, the BPA exposure group, and the BPA with GW4869 exposure group (for details, refer to the section “Exosome Extraction”). The exosomes were added to the AML12 complete culture medium of AML12 cells ( cells/well, 6-well plate, wells/group). The expression of miR-124-3p in AML12 cells was detected using qRT-PCR after 24 h (for details, refer to the section “qRT-PCR”).

## Glucose Uptake Assay
After the AML12 cells ( cells/well, 6-well plate, wells/group) were cultured for 24 h, the AML12 cells were activated for 30 min in Krebs–Ringer–phosphate– -2-hydroxyethylpiperazine- ′-2-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) (KRPH) buffer after 8 h of serum deprivation. KRPH buffer: HEPES, sodium chloride (NaCl), potassium dihydrogen phosphate ( ), calcium chloride ( ), magnesium sulfate ( ), potassium chloride (KCl), 2% bovine serum albumin (BSA), pH 7.4. We added of KRPH buffer and of 2-deoxy-d-glucose (Cat# D8375, Sigma-Aldrich; ) to each well. The cells were rinsed twice with ice-cold PBS following a 30-min incubation at 37°C. We used the glucose uptake test kit (Cat# E-BC-F041, Elabscience) for this experiment. We added of acid reagent (Cat# E-BC-F041) to each well and let the cells stand at RT for 10 min, then we added of alkali reagent (Cat# E-BC-F041). Next, we added of the working solution [a mixture of enzyme reagent (Cat# E-BC-F041) and chromogenic agent (Cat# E-BC-F041)] to each well. The cells were then incubated for 30 min at 37°C. Fluorescence values were detected using a Tecan Infinite M200pro (emission wavelength: , excitation wavelength: ).

## TG Colorimetric Assay
The TG Colorimetric Assay Kit (GPO-PAP Method) (Cat# E-BC-K261-M, Elabscience) was used to conduct TG assays following the manufacturer’s instructions. For AML12 cells ( cells per sample, wells/group), we digested the cells and centrifuged them at for 3 min at RT. Then, we discarded the supernatant and added of ethanol (Cat# C0691510226, Nanjing Reagent; 99.7%) to the tube. We used an ultrasonic device to break up the pellet for 1 min (power 200 W, ultrasonic 2 s, stop 1 s). The cells were then centrifuged at for 10 min at 4°C, and we collected the supernatant for the next step. For the supernatant of AML12 cells after the above treatment and the cellular supernatant of AML12 cells, we placed of each, separately, in 96-well plates and added of the enzyme working solution (Cat# E-BC-K261-M, Elabscience) to each well. The plates were incubated at 37°C for 10 min, and absorbance values were determined at using a Tecan Infinite M200pro and calculated. For serum TG, we measured TG levels in the blood biochemistry (for details, refer to the section “Blood Biochemical Tests”).

## qRT-PCR
Exosomes, tissues, serum, and cells were employed to extract the total RNA using the TRIZOL reagent (Invitrogen). The RNA concentration was measured using a NanoDrop2000 (Thermo), and RNA quality was considered acceptable when the optical density (OD) 260/280 ratio was between 1.8 and 2.2. The levels of miRNA and gene expression were examined using qRT-PCR. Table S1 contains a list of the primer sequences. (The miRNA primers were designed by Vazyme, and Sangon Biotech designed the mRNA primers. All primers were ordered from Sangon Biotech.). The qRT-PCR reactions were run on the ABI Prism 7900HT/FAST (Applied Biosystems) using SYBR Green master mix (Vazyme). The primer pairs are shown in Table S1. The qRT-PCR program was as follows: preheating at 95°C for 5 min, followed by 40 cycles or 50 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 10 s, annealing at 60°C for 30 s, and a final extension at 72°C for 10 min. Expressions of miRNA were normalized to U6, and gene expressions were normalized to the housekeeping gene glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Gapdh). For quantification, the relative CT technique ( method) was used.

## Western Blot
Proteins were extracted using the BCA assay (Cat# E112, Vazyme) ( samples/group). The protein was loaded at a volume of per well. The volume of the protein marker (Cat# 26616, Thermo) was each time. The Western blot was carried out in accordance with the previously mentioned methods. Table S2 contains a list of the antibodies used in this study. The image was captured using a Tanon 5200 Multi. The result was quantified using ImageJ software. All experimental results were replicated at least three times, with three replicates for each group. For the detection of phosphorylated AKT (p-AKT) protein (Ser403), we used total AKT as an intrinsic reference protein because it provided a direct comparison between the phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated forms. The results were normalized and presented as the ratio of p-AKT to total AKT to reflect the changes in phosphorylation levels of AKT accurately. For the p-AKT/AKT analysis, the same set of samples was used, but two separate Western blots were performed to detect p-AKT and AKT individually. To ensure comparability between the p-AKT and AKT results, equal amounts of protein (based on prior quantification) were loaded for both blots to minimize variation. Both blots were processed in parallel under the same experimental conditions, including transfer, antibody incubation, and detection, to ensure consistency.

## Transcriptome Sequencing
RNeasy Kits (Qiagen) were used to collect and lyse the AML12 cells co-cultured with exosomes extracted from the supernatant of BPA-treated ADSCs and control cells following the instructions. Sequencing was completed by Majorbio ( samples/group). The main experimental steps were as follows: we extracted total RNA from cell samples using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) and used a Nanodrop2000 to detect the concentration and purity of the extracted RNA and agarose gel electrophoresis to detect RNA integrity. Next, we used an Agilent5300 to determine the RNA integrity number (RIN) value. The total RNA amount required for a single library construction is , the concentration is , , and OD260/230 is . The RNA-seq transcriptome library was prepared following the manufacturer’s instructions for Illumina Stranded mRNA Prep, Ligation, using of total RNA. Briefly, mRNA was first isolated according to the polyA selection method by oligo(dT) beads and then fragmented using a fragmentation buffer. Second, double-stranded cDNA was synthesized with random hexamer primers. Then, the synthesized cDNA was subjected to end-repair, phosphorylation, and adapter addition according to the library construction protocol. Libraries were size-selected for cDNA target fragments of 300–400 bp using magnetic beads, followed by PCR amplification for 10–15 PCR cycles. After quantification using Qubit 4.0, sequencing was performed on the Illumina Novaseq 6000 sequencing platform. The sequenced reads were aligned to the mouse reference genome mm10 (https://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgTables). Genes with a fold change or and a false discovery rate (FDR) were selected as differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Using DESeq2, differential gene analysis between groups was carried out based on the quantitative expression findings to identify the genes that differed in expression between the two groups. The raw sequences were deposited in the National Center for Biotechnology Information database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) with accession number PRJNA1147850.

## Chromatin Immunoprecipitation Assays
The MagnaChIP Kit (Cat# 17-10085, Millipore) was used for chromatin immunoprecipitation assay (ChIP) experiments following the manufacturer’s instructions. We employed immunoprecipitation of the Argonaute (Ago) protein, a key component of the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC). This method was crucial for confirming the direct binding of miR-124-3p to its target mRNA, . We first transfected miR-124-3p mimic (Cat# B02001, GenePharma) in hepatocytes (AML12 cells) and then performed immunoprecipitation using an antibody specific to the Ago protein (Table S2) ( wells/group). The transfection concentration was , and the efficiency of transfection was confirmed by fluorescence microscopy to ensure consistent uptake of the mimic (for details, refer to the section “Cell Transfection”). After 24 h of transfection, the cells were subjected to immunoprecipitation using an anti-Ago antibody to assess the binding of miR-124-3p to target mRNAs. Ago binds to miRNAs and their target mRNAs within the RISC. After immunoprecipitation, we isolated the RNAs bound to the Ago protein. To determine the presence and quantity of mRNA bound to Ago, we conducted qRT-PCR using primers described in Table S1 (for details, refer to the section “qRT-PCR”).

## Statistical Analysis
The data were assessed for normality and variance similarity using the Shapiro–Wilk test and Bartlett’s test, respectively. If the data exhibited normal distribution and homogeneity of variance, the -test was used; if not, then the Mann–Whitney -test was used. Data were compared for three or more groups using a one-way analysis of variance [Graphpad Prism (version 8)]. The results were expressed as . The treatment group’s significant difference from the control group was indicated by . All experimental results were replicated at least three times independently.

## Results

## Effects of Maternal BPA Exposure during Pregnancy on Offspring Growth and Metabolic Outcomes
To evaluate the role of developmental BPA exposure and growth and metabolic outcomes, we exposed pregnant dams to BPA or control via intragastric gavage throughout pregnancy. We then evaluated the offspring according to the established experimental workflow, as illustrated in . Compared with controls, the body weight and food intake of dams exposed to BPA showed no significant differences (Figure S1A,B). Male offspring exposed to low doses of BPA (BPA-L, , gavage during pregnancy), but not those exposed to the medium or high doses, showed higher body weight (from the fourth week after birth, 20% higher body weight at week 12) and food intake (weeks 3, 4, 8) compared with controls ( ; ). OGTT and ITT assays in 12-wk-old BPA-L, but not BPA-M and BPA-H, male offspring showed impaired glucose tolerance ( ). Specifically, the blood glucose levels of BPA-L male offspring mice fell slowly after a rapid rise in intraperitoneal glucose injection and did not recover after insulin injection. Blood biochemical assays revealed that in 12-wk-old BPA-L, but not BPA-M and BPA-H, male offspring, the serum TG level was 1.8-fold higher and the LDL-C level was 3.5-fold higher. In contrast, the HDL-C level was 0.6-fold lower when compared with controls ( ), and the level of cholesterol in BPA-L mice showed an increasing trend without a statistical difference ( ) ( ; Figure S1I–K). Micro-PET/CT scans showed that BPA-L male mice had a statistically significant 1.4–1.7 times greater amount of abdominal fat (represented by light gray areas in ) than controls, which was a significant difference ( ). There was no difference in abdominal fat between controls and animals exposed to BPA-M or BPA-H ( ). In contrast, the female progeny mice exposed to BPA did not differ from controls for any of these outcomes (Figure S1C–H,L–O).
 

## Characterization of Exosomes Derived from Dams and Their Offspring following Prenatal Exposure of Dams to BPA
In the BPA exposure experiment, serum exosomes were extracted and identified separately from dams and male offspring ( ). TEM and DLS revealed that particles extracted from serum contained abundant exosomes with a Z-average diameter of ( ). Expression of exosome-associated protein markers CD9, CD63, CD81, and HSP70 was identified ( ). There were no differences in the quantity of any of these exosome-associated protein indicators between control and BPA-L exosomes.
 

## Impact of Serum Exosomes from Male Offspring of BPA-Exposed Dams on Obesity in Recipient Male Offspring After Maternal Injection
We extracted four sets of serum exosomes from the maternal BPA exposure during pregnancy experiment, derived from control dams (Con-F0), 12-wk-old control male offspring (Con-F1), BPA-L dams (BPA-F0), and BPA-L male offspring (BPA-F1). These four groups of exosomes were labeled with a PKH26 tag and then injected into the tail veins of randomly matched, untreated pregnant mice ( ). We next evaluated whether these PKH26-labeled exosomes could be detected in the blood of pregnant mice, amniotic fluid, and blood of fetal mice. We were able to qualitatively identify exosomes in all three sample types ( ).
 These four groups of exosomes were injected into either pregnant dams at 7 wk of age or untreated male mice at 3 wk of age. Among the dams injected with the four distinct types of exosomes, there were no differences in body weight or food intake (Figure S2A,B). Interestingly, male offspring injected with BPA-F1 exosomes (BPA-F1-EXO) showed higher body weight (from the fourth week after birth, 13% higher at week 12) and food intake (31% higher at week 9) ( ; ). OGTT and ITT assays in 12-wk-old BPA-F1 male offspring (the offspring of dams injected with serum exosomes from male offspring exposed to BPA during pregnancy) showed impaired glucose tolerance ( ). Blood biochemical assays showed higher serum TG (1.2-fold), cholesterol (1.3-fold), and LDL-C (1.1-fold) levels, as well as lower levels of HDL-C (0.9-fold) in 12-wk-old BPA-F1 male offspring compared with control (Con-F1) animals ( ; ; Figure S2I–K). Micro-PET/CT scans showed that BPA-F1 male mice had a statistically significant 1.3–1.5 times greater amount of abdominal fat (represented by light gray areas in ) than Con-F1 ( ). Similarly to what was observed in BPA-treated mice (Figure S1C–H,L–O), female progeny mice showed no differences compared with controls (Figure S2C–H,L–O).
To investigate whether exosomes can directly induce obesity in male mice in the absence of developmental exposure, we injected untreated male mice (3 wk of age) with one of the four groups of exosomes described above (Con-F0, BPA-F0, Con-F1, BPA-F1). We found that no group of exosomes resulted in differences in body weight or food intake in male mice up to 12 wk of age (Figure S3A, B). OGTT and ITT assays also showed no mice with impaired glucose tolerance (Figure S3C–F).

## Profiling of Exosomal miRNAs in Male Offspring following Maternal Gavage of BPA during Pregnancy
Deep sequencing of sRNAs from serum pools of control (Con-F1) and BPA-L (BPA-F1) male offspring mice was performed to evaluate the expression of exosomal miRNAs after BPA exposure. We found that miRNA accounted for the largest proportion of the sRNA distribution (59.7%), followed by tRNA ( ). More than 200 miRNAs were identified in exosomes ( ), including a group of miRNAs with variable levels of expression in BPA-F1. Among these, shows the top 12 miRNAs with the most significant abundance difference between control and BPA-F1 animals ( , ) with miR-124-3p and miR-466i-5p being the most up-regulated. According to KEGG pathway analysis, the top pathways enriched in BPA-F1 group were those associated with obesity, including 5′ adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR), and Ras signaling pathways ( ). – Furthermore, the top 12 differentially expressed miRNAs ( ) accounted for a significant proportion of the sequence reads counts ( ). In both the control and BPA treatment groups, miR-124-3p (about 42%) and miR-466i-5p (about 22%) exhibited the highest read counts among all miRNAs sequenced, indicating their significant abundance in the samples. Taking these factors into account, further investigation focused on the role of miR-124-3p and miR-466i-5p in BPA-induced obesity in male mice (see below).
 

## Impact of Maternal Gavage of BPA during Pregnancy on Adipose and Liver Tissues in Male Offspring Mice
Among the organ coefficients measured, the liver organ coefficient in the male offspring with maternal BPA gavage or exosome injection during pregnancy showed a significant increase compared with that of the control group (Figure S4). By micro-PET/CT, we also found a greater accumulation of adipose tissue in the male offspring ( and ). In , the male offspring with prenatal BPA exposure showed a greater accumulation of adipose tissue compared with controls. In , it was the male offspring of dams injected with BPA-F1 exosomes compared with those of dams injected with Con-F1 exosomes that showed a greater accumulation of adipose tissue. H&E staining showed enlarged adipocytes and intercellular spaces in the liver tissue of BPA-L mice, and ORO staining exhibited a buildup of lipid droplets in the liver tissue of BPA-L mice ( ). These findings indicate that the liver and adipose tissue are important organs in the male offspring’s onset of obesity caused by maternal oral BPA exposure during pregnancy.
 We hypothesized that adipose tissue may secrete exosomal miRNA and reach the liver through systemic circulation. Accordingly, we followed the expression levels of miR-124-3p and miR-466i-5p in serum exosomes, liver, and adipose tissue of BPA-L male mice from weeks 3 to 12 ( ). Both miRNAs were consistently highly expressed in the adipose tissue of BPA-L male mice compared with the control group. Although their expression was initially not different from the control group in liver and serum exosomes, it gradually increased over time, becoming significantly higher than the control group from weeks 6 or 9.

## Effects of Exosomes from BPA-Treated ADSCs on Hepatocyte Function and Gene Expression
Adipose tissue can produce exosomes from both adipocytes and ADSCs. We induced 3T3-L1 cells to differentiate into adipocytes and extracted and characterized ADSCs (Figure S5). According to the cell proliferation results (Figure S6A,B), we selected of BPA (NOAEL) for adipocytes and ADSCs and then extracted cell culture supernatant exosomes (BPA-EXO) to co-culture with hepatocytes (AML12) ( ). We observed that AML12 cells exposed to ADSCs-derived BPA-EXO demonstrated insulin resistance, whereas those exposed to adipocyte-derived BPA-EXO did not ( ; Figure S6C). This suggests that BPA is more likely to promote insulin resistance in hepatocytes by affecting ADSCs rather than adipocytes. Therefore, we used only exosomes released from ADSCs for the follow-up studies.
 The ability of hepatocytes to take up BPA-EXO generated from ADSCs was next examined. These ADSCs-derived exosomes were introduced to the AML12 hepatocyte cells’ growth media after being PKH26-labeled. Hepatocytes showed effective uptake of the ADSCs-secreted exosomes after 12 h, as seen by the presence of red fluorescence labeling in these cells ( ). As shown in , treatment of hepatocytes with ADSCs-derived BPA-EXO resulted in a significantly lower insulin-stimulated cellular TG content and a higher concentration in cell culture supernatant. In addition, the expression of FGF21 and p-AKT in hepatocytes was lower after exposure to ADSCs-derived BPA-EXO ( ).
To assess BPA-EXO–induced changes in AML12 cells, we conducted RNA-seq using RNA extracted from hepatocytes co-cultured with untreated exosomes (Con-EXO) and those co-cultured with BPA-EXO. With a 2-fold difference from control and FDR , 194 DEGs (97 up- and 97 down-regulated) were found, as illustrated in . Similar to the exosomal miRNA-seq, the PPAR signaling pathway was also enriched in the top 10 KEGG-enriched signaling pathways ( ). Insulin resistance and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) signaling pathways, which have also been reported to be involved in obesity, were among the top 10. We validated the differential gene expression of a handful of genes associated with insulin resistance screened by RNA-seq [ , Fgf21, Slc2A4 ( ); Ppp1r3b, Hspa5, Nr1d1, Gale, (Figure S7A)].
 

## Functional Validation of miR-124-3p Transfer via ADSCs-Derived Exosomes in Hepatocytes
We initially examined whether ADSCs can secrete exosomal miRNAs that are subsequently transferred into target cells to show that miRNAs are the essential functional elements in ADSCs-derived BPA-EXO. Because of the lower expression of in liver cells treated with BPA-EXO, we selected miR-124-3p, which was predicted to potentially bind to mRNA (https://www.targetscan.org/) and has been reported to influence adipogenic differentiation. ADSCs and hepatocytes were co-cultured in a Transwell plate following transfection of a Cy3-labeled fluorescent miR-124-3p mimic ( ). The delivery of the Cy3-miR-124-3p mimic from the ADSCs in the upper Transwell to the recipient hepatocytes in the bottom well was shown by the presence of red fluorescent Cy3 dye in the hepatocytes. We treated hepatocytes with BPA-EXO and found that miR-124-3p was highly expressed in hepatocytes ( ). Crucially, pretreatment of ADSCs with the exosome secretion inhibitor GW4869 led to a lower level of miR-124-3p in the AML12 hepatocytes, suggesting that miRNA secretion may be exosome dependent ( ).
 We then examined the impact of miR-124-3p on insulin signaling to further investigate the mechanisms by which BPA-EXO was associated with insulin resistance. AML12 cells with overexpression of miR-124-3p had dramatically lower insulin-stimulated glucose uptake and differed in the level of TGs in both cell culture supernatants and cells ( ). BPA-EXO co-culture and miR-124-3p overexpression both resulted in a lower level of and Fgf21 expression in hepatocytes. The addition of BPA-EXO together with miR-124-3p knockdown partially restored the expression of compared with the BPA-EXO treatment group; however, Fgf21 expression did not show a similar recovery ( ). In addition, Western blot analysis confirmed that AML12 cells with overexpression of miR-124-3p expressed less and FGF21 ( ). However, miR-124-3p had no impact on the expression levels of other verified genes ( ; Figure S7A).
We next sought to determine the regulatory relationship between and FGF21. The qRT-PCR and Western blot results showed that knockdown of resulted in lower expression of FGF21, and overexpression of miR-124-3p together with overexpression of resulted in higher levels of FGF21 (compared with overexpression of miR-124-3p alone) ( ). In contrast, knockdown of Fgf21 did not show the same effect ( ). Moreover, significantly less insulin-stimulated glucose was taken up by hepatocytes when was knocked down ( ). To further evaluate as a direct target of miR-124-3p, we immunoprecipitated Ago and its bound RNAs. qRT-PCR results revealed that miR-124-3p overexpression increased the quantity of bound to Ago ( ). In addition, p-AKT did not differ AML12 cells treated with miR-124-3p compared with control (Figure S8A).
 

## Discussion
In the present study, we found that male offspring of dams exposed to BPA (but not 0.5 or ) during pregnancy exhibited characteristics of obesity-related outcomes, including more body fat and lower glucose and insulin tolerance, similar to the findings of some previous studies. , In contrast, female offspring mice did not show signs of obesity from either BPA exposure during pregnancy or intravenous injection of serum exosomes from BPA-exposed offspring mice into the tail vein during pregnancy, which may be related to the estrogenomimetic activity of BPA. Male and female fetuses have different hormonal environments, which can influence how they respond to endocrine disruptors like BPA. BPA can mimic estrogen and interfere with the hormonal regulation that is critical for male fetal development. This disruption may have a more pronounced impact on the metabolic programming in males, leading to obesity. Females also have higher levels of estrogen receptors, which might provide some protective effect against BPA-induced metabolic disturbances. Moreover, males and females have inherent differences in their metabolic pathways and energy homeostasis. These differences can result in varying susceptibility to metabolic disruptions caused by environmental factors like BPA. For instance, males might be more prone to changes in insulin sensitivity and lipid metabolism, which could contribute to the development of obesity. 
Furthermore, in our study, only the lowest dose of BPA ( ) exhibited discernible physiologic outcomes in male offspring mice, which can be attributed to endocrine disruption. BPA is a well-known endocrine disruptor, and low doses may mimic or interfere with the actions of endogenous hormones more effectively than higher doses. At low doses, BPA can bind to estrogen receptors and activate signaling pathways that lead to subtle but significant physiological changes. Higher doses may overwhelm the system, leading to receptor desensitization or activation of stress response pathways that mask the specific endocrine-disruptive effects. 
We confirmed the important role of exosomes in the obesity outcomes in male offspring of dams exposed to BPA, whereas research on the interactions between exosomes and compounds is still in its infancy. We also observed sustained up-regulation of miR-124-3p and miR-466i-5p in the adipose tissue of male offspring mice following maternal oral BPA exposure during pregnancy. However, their levels in serum and liver gradually increased over time, suggesting an extrinsic origin of miR-124-3p and miR-466i-5p in these tissues. Our results showed that exosomes derived from adipose tissue can indeed be taken up by hepatocytes, suggesting a plausible transfer pathway in vivo. We focused on the downstream effects of miR-124-3p on hepatocyte expression and lipid metabolism, reinforcing the concept that adipose-derived exosomal miRNAs play a significant role in liver physiology in mice.
Numerous studies have revealed that adipose-derived exosomes may have a role in insulin resistance associated with obesity and distant organs. According to Yu et al., adipose-derived exosomes target to reduce the expression of IRS-1 and the glucose transporter GLUT4 in skeletal muscle tissue of mice. By changing the phosphorylation status of AKT and the absorption of glucose by AML12 cells, Dang et al. showed that adipose-derived exosomes might decrease insulin sensitivity. More importantly, the alterations in the exosomal contents, such as miRNA or proteins, that mediate the effects of the dysfunctional adipocytes on recipient cells have been the subject of recent research. , , Given that exosomes carry biological contents, a thorough analysis of how these contents affect the recipient cells or play a role in the onset of disease can paint a complete picture of the pathophysiological situation. On the other hand, researching how a single exosomal miRNA contributes to the onset of a disease may provide important information for the development of exosome-based therapies.
Adipose tissue is a significant source of circulating exosomal miRNAs, which can regulate gene expression in other tissues and function as a form of adipokine that is still unknown. The level of excess adiposity determines their unique expression profile and function, and they play a critical role in the intercellular and interorgan communication necessary to maintain energy homeostasis. Thomas et al. revealed that mice with an adipose tissue-specific deletion of the miRNA-processing enzyme Dicer had considerably lower levels of exosomal miRNA. Furthermore, many circulating miRNAs were down-regulated in patients with lipodystrophy, indicating that adipose tissue contributes to the human circulating miRNA population. 
AML12 hepatocyte cells exposed to exosomes secreted by BPA-treated ADSCs, but not exosomes secreted by 3T3-L1 adipocytes, demonstrated insulin resistance and TG accumulation. This may be due to the stem cell properties of ADSCs, a type of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), including low immunogenicity, self-renewal, and action through autocrine and paracrine pathways. MSCs are derived from pluripotent stem cells in the mesoderm and are active during the embryonic developmental stage. We speculated that this is the key reason why pregnancy is an important period for the exosome to function.
ADSCs are essential for regulating metabolic abnormalities and inflammation induced by obesity. , Zhao et al. showed that giving obese mice ADSCs-derived exosomes improved insulin sensitivity and reduced adiposity and hepatic steatosis. Interestingly, low, but environmentally relevant, concentrations of BPA may contribute to a persistent, low-grade inflammatory state in exposed ADSCs, which may then impair adipose tissue insulin sensitivity. Moreover, Yasaman et al. demonstrated that autophagy-related P62, Nrf2, and Lc3 gene expression was enhanced in ADSCs by low doses of BPA. Thus, we hypothesize that maternal oral exposure to low doses of BPA during pregnancy may affect ADSCs during embryonic development, resulting in changes in the exosomes released from ADSCs.
In the present study, we conducted thorough examinations of the organ coefficients in mice, focusing on various organs to determine the primary functions and interactions of exosomal miRNAs. Our results indicated that significant changes were predominantly observed in the liver. The liver’s prominent response suggested that exosomal miRNAs exerted substantial influence on this organ. The liver plays a central role in metabolism, detoxification, and protein synthesis, which might explain its heightened sensitivity and interaction with exosomal miRNAs. Our findings align with existing literature highlighting the liver as a critical target for exosomal miRNAs. Although our study highlighted the liver’s pivotal role, we recognize that other organs are also critical in the development of obesity. Although the liver is a major site of action, the systemic effects of exosomal miR-124-3p likely extend to other tissues, amplifying the overall impact on body-wide obesity. The liver, affected by exosomal miR-124-3p, is pivotal in initiating insulin resistance and dyslipidemia. However, in our study these liver-derived signals subsequently affected adipose tissue function, promoting TG storage and adiposity. This disruption results in increased hepatic TG accumulation and insulin resistance, both of which contribute to systemic metabolic dysregulation. Elevated insulin resistance reduces glucose uptake by peripheral tissues, leading to hyperglycemia and further exacerbating lipid accumulation in adipose tissue. The increase in circulating TGs and reduced insulin sensitivity promote fat deposition throughout the body, driving the obesogenic phenotype observed in the BPA-exposed offspring. This interconnected network of organ interactions amplifies the impact of BPA exposure, leading to body-wide obesity rather than a localized effect in the liver alone.
Over the years, it has been shown that different miRNAs control a number of metabolic processes, including inflammation, lipid homeostasis, and glucose metabolism. In hepatoma cells, miR-124 promotes TG buildup by suppressing the expression of genes concerned with the breakdown of fatty acids and TGs. Furthermore, Wang et al. demonstrated that elevated miR-124-3p expression may be causally related to lipid accumulation in hepatocytes. This rise was in line with our discovery that BPA treatment might boost the expression of miR-124-3p in ADSCs. We further found that miR-124-3p directly targeted , promoting lipid accumulation and insulin resistance in hepatocytes.
The biology of and insulin sensitivity are strongly and intricately linked. Because of its numerous functions in both adipocytes and other cells, activation increases insulin sensitivity. , For instance, thiazolidinediones influence the synthesis of various inflammatory mediators that are stimulus-dependently involved in the development of an insulin-resistant state by inhibiting . , In addition to its key role in transcription processes and glucose metabolism, also has an integral function in adipogenesis, frequently impaired in pathological conditions, such as nonalcoholic fatty liver. , One of the most important transcription factors, , regulates the genes involved in the route for modifying fatty acid chains or storing fatty acids. We also found the potential importance of for FGF21 expression in the liver, which is similar the findings of other studies. , Hepatic FGF21 signals through endocrine pathways to suppress episodes of metabolic dysregulation and maintain metabolic homeostasis.
In summary, we demonstrated that adipose-derived exosomal miRNAs play a role in obesity outcomes in male offspring of dams exposed to BPA, and the exosomal miR-124-3p secreted by ADSCs was concentrated and targeted in liver tissue after entering the systemic circulation, where it directly inhibits the expression of . We also concluded that reduced expression promotes insulin resistance and TG accumulation in hepatocytes and may be associated with the development of obesity ( ). Our study provides compelling evidence that adipose-derived exosomal miRNAs play a pivotal role in regulating obesity in male mice exposed to BPA during gestation but also establishes a foundation for further research into the etiology and prevention of obesity. Exosomal miRNAs may serve as a crucial and novel molecular biomarker for the adverse effects of intrauterine chemical exposure.
 

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgments
The study’s direction, funding, and design were all under the control of C.L. and X.W. Z.H. managed the entire project, wrote the original text, and carried out the statistical analysis. Y.F. and R.Z. carried out the mouse tests. Y.Q. and Q.X. were in charge of population verification and screening. R.N. and W.H. were in charge of cell functional analysis. Y.X. and Q.X. came up with the idea for the study, took part in its planning and organization, and assisted with the manuscript’s drafting. The final manuscript was reviewed and approved by all writers.
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2023YFC2705700 and 2022YFC2702901), National Natural Science Foundation of China (81973080, 82271691 and 82103880), Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China (BK20210905 and BK20220317), and Natural Science Foundation of the Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions of China (21KJB330003 and 22KJB330001). Funders played no part in the planning of the study, gathering of the data, analysis of the data, interpretation, or preparation of the report.
The article and its Supplemental Material files contain all the data that the authors claim supports the study’s findings. The raw sequences were deposited in the National Center for Biotechnology Information database with accession number PRJNA1147850 exosome small RNA sequencing and transcriptomics sequencing.