3437canccommsCancer CommunicationsCancer Commun (Lond)AAAS Science Partner Journal ProgramPMC1009110710091107100911073691919310.1002/cac2.12414Cancer‐associated fibroblast‐derived secreted phosphoprotein 1 contributes to resistance of hepatocellular carcinoma to sorafenib and lenvatinib
EunJung Woo YoonJung Hwan AhnHye Ri KimSeokhwi KimYoung Bae LimSu Bin ParkWon KangTae Wook BaekGeum Ok YoonMoon Gyeong SonJu A WeonJi Hyang KimSoon Sun ChoHyo Jung CheongJae Youn 
1
Department of Gastroenterology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, South Korea
2
Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea
3
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ajou University Graduate School of Medicine, Suwon, South Korea
4
Department of Pathology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, South Korea
5
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, South Korea
6
The Moagen, Inc, Daejeon, South Korea*

Correspondence
, Hyo Jung Cho, MD, PhD; Department of Gastroenterology, Ajou University School of Medicine, 164 Worldcup‐ro, Yeongtong‐gu, Suwon 16499, South Korea. E‐mail: pilgrim8107@hanmail.net
, Jae Youn Cheong, M.D, PhD; Department of Gastroenterology, Ajou University School of Medicine, 164 Worldcup‐ro, Yeongtong‐gu, Suwon 16499, South Korea. E‒mail: jaeyoun620@gmail.com

✉Corresponding author.
1432023434455455–4791342023© 2023 The Authors. Cancer Communications published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. on behalf of Sun Yat‐sen University Cancer Center.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## Abstract

## Background
Cancer‐associated fibroblasts (CAFs) play an important role in the induction of chemo‐resistance. This study aimed to clarify the mechanism underlying CAF‐mediated resistance to two tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), sorafenib and lenvatinib, and to identify a novel therapeutic target for overcoming TKI resistance in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).

## Methods
We performed a systematic integrative analysis of publicly available gene expression datasets and whole‐transcriptome sequencing data from 9 pairs of CAFs and para‐cancer fibroblasts isolated from human HCC and para‐tumor tissues, respectively, to identify key molecules that might induce resistance to TKIs. We then performed in vitro and in vivo experiments to validate selected targets and related mechanisms. The associations of plasma secreted phosphoprotein 1 (SPP1) expression levels before sorafenib/lenvatinib treatment with progression‐free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) of 54 patients with advanced HCC were evaluated using Kaplan‐Meier and Cox regression analysis.

## Results
Bioinformatic analysis identified CAF‐derived SPP1 as a candidate molecule driving TKI resistance. SPP1 inhibitors reversed CAF‐induced TKI resistance in vitro and in vivo. CAF‐derived SPP1 activated rapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma (RAF)/mitogen‐activated protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphatidylinositol 3‐kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (AKT)/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) through the integrin‐protein kinase C‐alpha (PKCα) signaling pathway and promoted epithelial‐to‐mesenchymal transition (EMT). A high plasma SPP1 level before TKI treatment was identified as an independent predictor of poor PFS (P = 0.026) and OS (P = 0.047) in patients with advanced HCC after TKI treatment.

## Conclusions
CAF‐derived SPP1 enhances TKI resistance in HCC via bypass activation of oncogenic signals and EMT promotion. Its inhibition represents a promising therapeutic strategy against TKI resistance in HCC. Moreover, plasma SPP1 level before TKI treatment represents a potential biomarker for treatment response prediction.

Keywords: drug resistance, epithelial‐to‐mesenchymal transition, hepatocellular carcinoma, secreted phosphoprotein 1

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2022 Dec 13; Received 2022 Aug 1; Accepted 2023 Mar 6; Collection date 2023 Apr.

## List of abbreviations
α‐SMAalpha smooth muscle actin
AFPalpha‐fetoprotein
AKTprotein kinase B
ANOVAone‐way analysis of variance
avHCCadvanced HCC
BCLCBarcelona Clinic Liver Cancer
Bcl2B‐cell lymphoma 2
BiNGOBiological Networks Gene Oncology tool
BioGRIDThe Biological General Repository for Interaction Datasets
BRAFv‐Raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B
BrdU5‐bromo‐2'‐deoxyuridine‐5'‐monophosphate
CAFscancer‐associated fibroblasts
Casp3caspase3
Catholic LIHCCatholic University of Korea's liver hepatocellular carcinoma project
c‐Casp3cleaved caspase3
CCLECancer Cell Line Encyclopedia
CCL26chemokine (C‐C motif) ligand 26
cDCclassic dendritic cell
CHchronic hepatitis
CIconfidence interval
CMculture medium
co‐IPco‐immunoprecipitation
COMPcartilage oligomeric matrix protein
c‐PARPcleaved poly (ADP‐ribose) polymerase
CTcomputed tomography
CTGFconnective tissue growth factor
Ctrlcontrol
DAPI4′4′6‐diamidino‐2‐phenylindole
DFSdisease free survival
DMEMDulbecco's modified eagle medium
DMSOdimethyl sulfoxide
ECOGeastern cooperative oncology group
eHCCearly HCC
ELISAenzyme linked immunosorbent assay
EMTepithelial mesenchymal transition
ERKextracellular signal‐related kinase
FAM3Cfamily with sequence similarity 3
FAPfibroblast activation protein alpha
FDRfalse discovery rate
FDRfalse discovery rate
FGFfibroblast growth factor
GAPDHglyceraldehyde 3‐phosphate dehydrogenase
GeneMANIAgene multiple association network integration algorithm
GEOGene Expression Omnibus
GSEAGene Set Enrichment Analysis
H&Ehematoxylin and eosin
HCChepatocellular carcinoma
Hep3B‐RHep3B‐resistance cells
HRhazard ratio
Huh‐7‐RHuh‐7‐resitance cells
IBimmunoblotting
IC50
half maximal inhibitory concentration
ICIimmune checkpoint inhibitor
IFimmunofluorescence
IgGimmunoglobulin G
IHCimmunohistochemistry
ITGA4integrin subunit α4
ITGA5integrin subunit α5
ITGA8integrin subunit α8
ITGA9integrin subunit α9
ITGAVintegrin subunit αV
ITGB1integrin subunit β1
ITGB3integrin subunit β3
ITGB5integrin subunit β5
KRASKirsten rat sarcoma virus
LCliver cirrhosis
Lenlenvatinib;
LSECliver sinusoidal endothelial cell
LVECnon‐tumor liver vascular endothelial cell
LVECttumor liver vascular endothelial cell
MAPKmitogen‐activated protein kinase
MRmagnetic resonance
MSigDBthe Molecular Signatures Database
mTORmammalian target of rapamycin
mUICCmodified Union for International Cancer Control
NCBINational Center for Biotechnology Information
NFnormal fibroblast
NLnormal liver
NOVnephroblastoma overexpressed gene
NTnon‐tumor
NTF3neurotrophin‐3
NTMneurotrimin
OSoverall survival
PAFpara‐cancer fibroblast
PARPpoly (ADP‐ribose) polymerase
PBSphosphate buffered saline
PCAprincipal component analysis
PDprogressive disease
PFSprogression free survival
PI3Kphosphatidylinositol‐3‐kinase
PKCαprotein kinase C α
PRpartial response
qRT‐PCRquantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
RAFrapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma
RBPsreceptor‐binding proteins
RECISTresponse evaluation criteria in solid tumors
RFUrelative fluorescence units
RSEMRNA‐Seq by Expectation‐Maximization
rSPP1recombinant SPP1
RTKreceptor tyrosine kinase
Stumor stroma
SAMsscar‐associated macrophages
SDstable disease
SEMstandard error of the mean
siCtrlnegative control
siRNAsmall interfering RNA
SNNshared nearest neighbor
Sorsorafenib
Sor‐NRsorafenib non‐responder
Sor‐Rsorafenib responder
SPP1secreted phosphoprotein 1
SPP1‐APTSPP1‐aptamer
SPP1‐BPSPP1‐blocking peptide
sSPP1secretory SPP1
STAT3signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
Ttumor
TAMsTumor‐associated macrophages
TCGA LIHCThe Cancer Genome Atlas liver hepatocellular carcinoma project
TECsthymic epithelial cells
TKIstyrosine kinase inhibitors
TM1tissue monocytes
TMEtumor microenvironment
TNFSF13tumor necrosis factor ligand superfamily member 13
TPMtranscripts per million
UMAPUniform manifold approximation and projection
UMIunique molecular identifier
vSMCvascular smooth muscle cell
WTSwhole‐transcriptome sequencing
1.

## BACKGROUND
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fourth leading cause of cancer‐related deaths worldwide [ ]. HCC with extrahepatic metastasis (M1 or N1) or locally advanced HCC with portal vein invasion is considered advanced‐stage HCC and is not amenable to locoregional therapy [ ]. Patients with advanced HCC are generally treated with systemic therapeutics, such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) [ , ].
Sorafenib and lenvatinib are TKIs that suppress HCC progression by inhibiting various receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) [ ]. They have been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration as first‐line systemic therapy agents for advanced HCC. Although the treatment paradigm for advanced HCC is shifting toward ICI‐based treatments, it is expected that TKIs will remain the first‐line treatment in combination with ICIs and a form of rescue therapy after ICI treatment failure [ ]. However, since the majority of patients with advanced HCC develop innate or acquired resistance to TKIs, only 10%–30% of patients exhibit an objective response to sorafenib or lenvatinib [ , ]. Therefore, the prognosis of patients with advanced HCC remains extremely poor, even after TKI treatment [ , ]. Therefore, novel therapeutic strategies to overcome TKI resistance in patients with advanced HCC are warranted. Furthermore, biomarkers that predict treatment response are also needed since responses to TKIs vary widely.
Cancer‐associated fibroblasts (CAFs) constitute a major stromal cell type within the tumor microenvironment (TME) [ ]. Making up the bulk of the tumor stroma, CAFs stimulate tumor cell proliferation, invasiveness, and metastatic potential in various cancer types, including HCC [ , ]. According to several recent studies, CAFs play a crucial role in the induction of chemo‐resistance in different tumors, including HCC [ , , ]. However, the mechanism of CAF‐mediated TKI resistance in HCC remains to be fully elucidated. This constitutes a crucial step toward the identification of novel therapeutic targets for overcoming chemo‐resistance and biomarkers for predicting treatment response.
This study aimed to investigate the mechanism of CAF‐induced TKI resistance in HCC to identify novel therapeutic targets for overcoming this resistance. Furthermore, this study sought to identify a promising circulating biomarker for the prediction of treatment response and prognosis before TKI treatment initiation in patients with advanced HCC.

2.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1.

## Isolation of fibroblasts from surgically resected liver tissues
The liver tissues and clinical data used in this study were provided by the Biobank of Ajou University Hospital (Suwon, South Korea), a member of the Korea Biobank Network (http://www.kbn.re.kr/kbn/main.do). Cancer and paired para‐cancer tissues were collected from patients with HCC who underwent surgical resection as first‐line treatment at the Ajou University Hospital between January 2017 and December 2019, with permission from the patients. Patients were included based on the following criteria: (1) age between 18 and 80 years; (2) Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) stage A; (3) treatment with surgical resection; (4) pathologically confirmed HCC; and (5) consent for the use of surgical specimens for research purposes. Exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) diagnosed with other liver tumor such as cholangiocarcinoma; and (2) no permission from of patients for the use of their surgical specimens for research purposes.
CAFs and para‐cancer fibroblasts were isolated from HCC tissues and non‐tumor tissues adjacent to the HCC, respectively. Normal fibroblasts (NFs) were isolated and cultured from normal liver tissue acquired from a patient who did not have any chronic liver disease but had undergone surgical resection for hepatic hemangioma, which is known as benign liver tumors.
Fresh liver tissue samples were washed with phosphate‐buffered saline (PBS; GenDEPOT, Barker, TX, USA) and finely minced into small pieces (<1 mm3). Five or six minced small tissues were attached to each well of 6‐well plates and cultured. The Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM; GenDEPOT) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) and 100 units/mL penicillin‐streptomycin (GenDEPOT) was changed every two days. Fibroblasts extending from the tissues were trypsinized and transferred to a culture dish, then incubated in a fresh culture medium to promote the attachment of isolated fibroblasts to the culture dish. Cells were maintained in a completed medium, at 37°C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2.

2.2.

## Immunofluorescence
Isolated fibroblasts were identified via staining for alpha‐smooth muscle actin (α‐SMA). To avoid CAF senescence, all experiments were performed using fibroblasts up to passage 5. Paraffin‐embedded human HCC tissue sections were subjected to hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, and double immunofluorescence (IF) staining was performed with mouse α‐SMA (1:100, ab7817, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and rabbit secreted phosphoprotein 1 (SPP1) primary antibodies (1:100, ab8448, Abcam). Briefly, HCC sections were deparaffinized with xylene, rehydrated, unmasked in sodium citrate buffer (10 mmol/L, pH 6.0), and treated with a glycine solution (2 mg/mL) to quench autofluorescence signals before beginning the immunostaining procedure. After the blockade of non‐specific antibody‐binding sites by applying a solution of 1% bovine serum albumin in PBS for 1 h at room temperature, tissue slides were incubated overnight at 4°C with a mixture of mouse and rabbit primary antibodies diluted in blocking solution. The following day, the immunoreactions were revealed using fluorescent‐dye conjugated secondary antibodies (Invitrogen; Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA) diluted at 1:500 in the blocking solution. After nuclear counterstaining with 4′,6‐diamidino‐2‐phenylindole (DAPI), the immunolabeled slides were examined with an EVOS M5000 microscope (Invitrogen).
Cells were fixed in 3% paraformaldehyde for 20 min at room temperature and permeabilized in 0.5% Triton X‐100 on ice for 7 min. The cells were washed in PBS plus 0.5% normal goat serum and incubated with one of the following primary antibodies: α‐SMA (1:100, ab7817, Abcam), SPP1 (1:100, ab8448, Abcam), or integrin subunit β1 (ITGB1, 1:100, ab30394, Abcam). AlexaFluor‐488‐ or AlexaFluor‐555‐conjugated secondary antibodies were used as required. Nuclear DNA was stained with DAPI. Cells were analyzed using a fluorescent microscope (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) to visualize the endogenous level of proteins under study. Information on the primary and secondary antibodies is presented in Supplementary Tables .

2.3.

## Collection of cell culture medium
CAFs, para‐cancer fibroblasts, and NFs were seeded on 100 mm plates at 5 × 106 cells. Culture medium was removed 24 h after cell seeding, cells were washed once with PBS, and 10 mL of serum‐free DMEM (culture medium; CM) including 100 units/mL penicillin‐streptomycin was added per plate. After 24 h of incubation at 37°C, the CM was collected and passed through a 0.2 μm membrane syringe filter to remove any cells and cell debris. The CM was stored at ‐80°C until further use. To examine the effects of CAF‐, para‐cancer fibroblast‐, and NF‐derived CM, HCC cell lines Hep3B and Huh‐7 were treated with CM (10×).

2.4.

## Western blotting
Cells were treated with 10× CAF‐CM or 100 ng/mL recombinant SPP1 (rSPP1) to determine whether the signaling mechanism regulated by CAF‐CM is due to the SPP1 protein present in CAF‐CM. We examined the expression of phosphatidylinositol‐3‐kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (AKT) pathway‐related proteins, including PI3K, AKT, and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), and RAS/rapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma (RAF)/mitogen‐activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway‐related proteins, including RAS, v‐raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B (BRAF), phosphorylated protein kinase C alpha (PKCα), extracellular signal‐regulated kinase (ERK)1/2, and signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3). We also analyzed the expression of apoptosis‐related proteins, poly(ADP‐ribose) polymerase (PARP) and caspase‐3, and epithelial‐mesenchymal transition‐related proteins, including integrin subunit αV (ITGAV), neurotrimin (NTM), cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP), fibroblast activation protein alpha (FAP), E‐cadherin, Vimentin, and Snail. α‐SMA was confirmed in the isolated NFs, para‐cancer fibroblasts, and CAFs. Briefly, cells were lysed in lysis buffer composed of 150 mmol/L NaCl, 25 mmol/L Tris‐HCl at pH 8.0, 1% NP‐40, 10 mmol/L NaF, 1 mmol/L Na3VO4 and containing protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Indianapolis, IN, USA). After determining the protein concentration by Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), 20 μg of protein lysates from each sample was resolved in SDS‐PAGE and thereafter transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membrane. Blots were subjected to blocking for 1 h at room temperature and probed overnight at 4°C with specific primary antibodies followed by appropriate HRP‐linked secondary antibodies (Cell Signaling). After brief incubation of membranes with enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) solution, protein bands were visualized by LAS‐4000 Imaging System (Fujifilm, Tokyo, Japan). The membrane band optical density was quantified using the ImageJ software (Laboratory for Optical and Computational Instrumentation, Madison, WI, USA). Information regarding the primary and secondary antibodies is presented in Supplementary Tables .

2.5.

## Acquisition and analysis of the gene expression profiles in public omics databases
The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) database (https://sites.broadinstitute.org/ccle/) was used to analyze the expression of SPP1 mRNA in HCC cells. To analyze gene expression in human and mouse HCC tissues with different sorafenib responses, we obtained microarray data from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) with the accession number GSE109211 and GSE143233. Moreover, to estimate the associations between SPP1 expression and different clinicopathologic parameters, we used The Cancer Genome Atlas liver hepatocellular carcinoma project (TCGA LIHC) dataset and GSE89377 (Catholic University of Korea's liver hepatocellular carcinoma project, Catholic LIHC).

2.6.

## Cell culture and transfection
Human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines Hep3B, Huh‐7, PLC/PRF/5, SNU449, SNU368, and SNU475 cells (detailed information on cell lines can be found at https://cellbank.snu.ac.kr/main/index.html) were certified through the short tandem repeat genotyping and were acquired in March 2021 from the Korean Cell Line Bank (Seoul, South Korea) and cultured in DMEM or RPMI‐1640 containing 10% FBS and 100 units/mL penicillin‐streptomycin. The HCC cell line used in all in vivo assays was Huh‐7. Cells were transiently transfected with small interfering RNA (siRNAs) against ITGB1 (s7575, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), ITGB5 (s7590, Thermo Scientific), or negative control (4457287, Thermo Scientific) using Lipofectamine3000 transfection reagent (Invitrogen), according to the manufacturer's instructions.

2.7.

## RNA extraction and quantitative reverse transcription‐polymerase chain reaction (qRT‐PCR)
Total RNA was isolated from HCC cell lines using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen). cDNA was synthesized from 500 ng of total RNA using 5X PrimeScript™ RT Master Mix (Takara Bio, Shiga, Japan). qRT‐PCR was performed using amfiSure qGreen Q‐PCR Master Mix (GenDEPOT) and monitored in real‐time using a CFX Connect Real‐Time PCR Detection System (Bio‐Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). The cycling conditions were as follows: 95°C for 2 min, 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 s, 56−58°C for 34 s, and 72°C for 30 s, followed by a dissociation stage at 95°C for 10 s, 65°C for 5 s, and 95°C for 5 s. Relative gene expression levels were calculated using the 2−ΔΔCt method, and glyceraldehyde 3‐phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was used for normalization. The primer sequences were used as follows: SPP1: forward, 5′‐CTTCTCAGCCAAACGCCGAC‐3′; reverse, 5′‐ACACAGCATTCTGCTTTTCCTCA‐3′. GAPDH: forward, 5′‐AGTATGACAACAGCCTCAAG‐3′; reverse, 5′‐TCATGAGTCCTTCCA CGATA‐3′. All measurements were performed in triplicate.

2.8.

## Measurement of cell viability and proliferation
Hep3B and Huh‐7 cells were treated with 10× NF‐CM, 10× para‐cancer fibroblast‐CM, or 10× CAF‐CM in combination with 15 μmol/L sorafenib or 5 μmol/L lenvatinib in a 24‐well plate at a density of 7 × 104 cells/well and incubated at 37°C for 24 h. Next, 50 μL of 3‐(4,5‐dimethylthiazol‐2‐yl)‐2,5‐diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT; 1 mg/mL, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) was added to each well of the plate and incubated for 1 h at 37°C in the dark. The supernatant was carefully aspirated, and 500 μL of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; Ducksan, Gwangju, South Korea) was added, following which optical density values at 570 nm were measured using a Promega Glomax microplate reader (Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA).
To analyze cell proliferation, 5‐bromo‐2′‐deoxyuridine‐5′‐monophosphate (BrdU) incorporation was determined by estimating the DNA uptake of BrdU. Cells were plated into 24‐well plates at 5 × 104 cells per well for 24 h and measured using a BrdU enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit (11647229001, Roche) according to the manufacturer's instructions.

2.9.

## Caspase 3/7 activity assays
Apoptosis activation of cells cultured in NF‐CM, para‐cancer fibroblast‐CM, or CAF‐CM in combination with 15 μmol/L sorafenib or 5 μmol/L lenvatinib was evaluated using Caspase‐Glo 3/7 (G8090, Promega) and Cell‐titer‐Glo assays (G7570, Promega), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate.

2.10.

## SPP1‐blocking peptide and SPP1‐aptamer
SPP1‐blocking peptide (SPP1‐BP) was purchased from PromoCell (pk‐ab718‐7443p, Heidelberg, Germany), and SPP1‐aptamer (SPP1‐APT) was custom‐synthesized by Bioneer (Daejeon, South Korea). The sequence of SPP1‐APT was 5’‐CGGCCACAGAAUGAAAAACCUCAUCGAUGUUGCAUAGUUG‐3’. The aptamer was modified at the 2′‐O position with a methyl group and included phosphorothioate‐modified bases to help protect the nucleic acids from rapid attack by endo‐ and exonucleases.

2.11.

## Establishment of sorafenib‐ and lenvatinib‐resistant cells
To determine the half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of HCC cells to sorafenib (SMB2653, Sigma, Burlington, MA, USA) and lenvatinib (SML3017, Sigma), HCC cells were incubated with different concentrations of sorafenib and lenvatinib in 96‐well plates, and cell viability was measured three days later as described below. The cells were cultured in 6‐well plates at 1 × 104 cells/well and incubated with sorafenib and lenvatinib at a concentration just below their respective IC50 values. The concentrations of sorafenib and lenvatinib were slowly increased by 0.5 μmol/L per week. After five weeks, two sorafenib‐ and lenvatinib‐resistant cell lines were obtained, termed Hep3B‐resistance cells (Hep3B‐R) and Huh‐7‐resistance cells (Huh‐7‐R), respectively, and were continuously maintained by culturing them in the presence of sorafenib and lenvatinib.

2.12.

## Mouse tumor models
We designed three different in vivo experiments (Supplementary Table ).
For subcutaneous xenograft models (in vivo 1 and in vivo 2), 5‐week‐old female BALB/c nude mice, purchased from ORIENT BIO (Seongnam, South Korea), were bred in an individually ventilated cage system under pathogen‐free conditions with food and water ad libitium and regular 12 h light/12 h dark and allowed to acclimatize for one week before experiments. In the in vivo 1 assay, mice were divided into two groups, each consisting of five mice. All injections were administered into the right flank of the nude mice. The first group was injected with Huh‐7 cells and treated with sorafenib (Sor). The second group was co‐injected with Huh‐7 cells and CAFs followed by sorafenib treatment (CAF + Sor). In the in vivo 2 assay, mice were randomly divided into four groups, each consisting of five mice. All injections were administered into the right flank of the nude mice. The first group was co‐injected with Huh‐7 cells and CAFs, and observed without any treatment (CAF). The second group was co‐injected with Huh‐7 cells and CAFs followed by sorafenib treatment (CAF + Sor). The third group was co‐injected with Huh‐7 cells and CAFs followed by sorafenib and SPP1‐APT combination treatment (CAF + Sor + SPP1‐APT). The fourth group was injected with Huh‐7 cells without CAFs and treated with sorafenib (Sor). We generated mouse xenograft tumors by subcutaneously injecting 5 × 105 Huh‐7 into the left flank of each mouse, either alone or mixed with 2.5 × 105 CAFs. When tumor volumes reached 100 mm3, treatment was initiated and administered according to the protocol. Sorafenib (10 mg/kg/day; Sigma) was administered orally, and SPP1‐APT (2 mg/kg/day; Bioneer) was injected into the intraperitoneal cavity. The tumor diameter and body weight were measured every two days using a digital caliper and digital scale, respectively. Tumor volume was calculated as per the following formula: Tumor volume (mm3) = 0.52 × length × width2. Three weeks after cell injection, the mice were euthanized by CO2 inhalation, and the tumors were removed for weighing and histological analysis. All the animals were cared in keeping with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, and experiments were approved by the Ethics Committee for Laboratory Animal Research Center of Ajou University Medical Center (IACUC‐2020‐0038, Suwon, South Korea). Humane endpoints were set as follows: 20% body weight loss, loss of mobility, and activity. However, no mice reached these humane endpoints during the study.
Tumor tissue samples were fixed with 10% neutral buffered formalin for H&E and immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining. The sections were incubated with the human‐specific primary antibodies against SPP1 (1:200, AF1433, R&D systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA), Ki67 (1:500, ab15580, Abcam), E‐cadherin (1:100, 610404, BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, New Jersey, USA), α‐SMA (1:200, ab7817, Abcam) and Fibronectin (1:100, sc8422, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA). ImageJ software was used to measure and quantify the intensity of the stained area.
In the orthotopic xenograft model (in vivo 3), we anesthetized the mice with an intraperitoneal injection of a ketamine/rompun solution (50 mg/kg ketamine and 5 mg/kg rompun). We then generated mouse tumors by injection of 5 × 105 Huh‐7 cells either alone or mixed with 2.5 × 105 CAFs. The cells were mixed with Matrigel (354230, Corning, New York, USA) and kept in ice until the moment of the injection. A 1.5 cm skin incision was made in the upper abdominal wall, followed by a 1 cm incision in the peritoneum to expose the liver. Injection was performed into the left liver lobes of each mouse, and the change of color of the liver was observed during the injection. After injection, the incision and the skin were closed. One week after cell injection, treatment was initiated according to the treatment conditions (Supplementary Table ). On day 12, we opened the skin and checked for tumor development. Three weeks after cell injection, the mice were euthanized, and livers were removed for liver and tumor weights at the end of the experiment.

2.13.

## RNA‐sequencing data analysis
To investigate major CAF‐derived molecules that induce TKI resistance in HCC, we analyzed whole‐transcriptome sequencing (WTS) data of 9 pairs of CAF and para‐cancer fibroblast samples and one NF sample from surgically resected human liver tissues (Supplementary Figure ). For next‐generation RNA‐sequencing (RNA‐seq) analysis, total RNA was extracted from NFs, para‐cancer fibroblasts, and CAFs using the TRIzol reagent. RNA quality control was performed with the Agilent Bioanalyzer system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The sequencing library was prepared with Truseq Stranded Total RNA Sample Preparation Kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA), followed by library quality check using the Agilent Bioanalyzer system. Sequencing was performed on Illumina HiSeq2000 machines (Illumina) using the standard Illumina RNAseq protocol with a read length of 200 bases. All sequenced reads were quality checked using FastQC followed by mapping to the human reference genome GRCh38 and the Ensembl release‐102 version 73 gene annotation using HISAT2 (v2.2.1). To compare expression between genes within samples, gene expression was estimated using StringTie v2.1.4 from the “new Tuxedo” package. Gene abundances were normalized to library and gene length by calculating fragments per kilobase of exon per million mapped reads using featureCounts, and differentially expressed genes were identified by count data with DESeq2. The raw data had been uploaded to the GEO database (Accession Number: GSE192912) of the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI).

2.14.

## Molecular pathway mining and network analysis
To investigate molecular pathways of gene signatures, we uploaded 790 CAF‐specific gene signatures or 1,601 SPP1‐related gene signatures to the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB, http://software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/msigdb) via the Broad Institute Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA; http://www.broadinstitute.org/gsea). GSEA was conducted by computing overlaps with the canonical pathway (C2). Genes in Gene Set (K), Genes in Overlap (k), k/K ratio and P value were used to rank the pathways enriched in each phenotype.
The protein‐protein network was established via the GPS‐Prot interaction network (http://gpsprot.org), and module analysis was performed using Cytoscape 3.7.0 (http://www.cytoscape.org/, Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, DC, USA). The hub genes of SPP1 were selected for further bioinformatics analysis using the gene multiple association network integration algorithm (GeneMANIA) App of Cytoscape, which contains a comprehensive set of datasets from the Biological General Repository for Interaction Datasets (BioGRID), Pathway Commons, and GEO, as well as organism‐specific functional genomics datasets. The biological process of SPP1 hub genes was also visualized using the Biological Networks Gene Oncology (BiNGO) tool (version 3.0.3) plugin of Cytoscape.

2.15.

## Immunohistochemical assessment of SPP1 expression in human HCC tissues
IHC was performed to evaluate SPP1 expression relative to the location of CAFs and tumor cells within HCC tissues. IHC staining was performed on 4‐μm‐thick, FFPE tissue sections using an automated immunostainer (Ventana Medical Systems, Oro Valley, AZ, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The anti‐SPP1 (Osteopontin) antibody (ab8448, Abcam) was utilized at 1:300 dilution to stain the tissue samples. The staining intensity of cancer cells and fibroblasts was scored as follows: 0, no reactivity or faint staining; 1+, faint or weak staining; 2+, moderate staining; 3+, strong staining. To assess the degree of SPP1 staining, the H‐score was calculated as per the following equation: H‐score = 3 × (% of 3+ staining area) + 2 × (% of 2+ staining area) + 1 × (% of 1+ staining area).
Two board‐certificated pathologists (SK and YBK) with gastrointestinal pathology specialty independently interpreted the IHC slides. The pathologists initially made a consensus of 0/1+/2+/3+ cells of SPP1 expression with a control sample of breast cancer, which was recommended by the manufacturer of the antibody. Following the independent reading of the HCC tissue sections, any case showing a discrepant H‐score was reviewed and a consensus was arrived at by the pathologists. The participating pathologists were blinded to the clinical data of the patients.

2.16.

## Fluorescence quantitative analysis for protein expression of integrins
The fluorescence intensity of integrins and β‐actin in Hep3B and Huh‐7 cells were measured with fluorescence microplate reader (Glomax discovery, Promega). We seeded 2 × 103 cells in a 96‐well black plate and performed IF staining using each integrin and beta‐actin antibody. For IF staining, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS, and cell membrane was permeabilized using 0.5% Triton X‐100. These samples were blocked with 3% bovine serum albumin blocking solution at room temperature and then incubated with primary antibody, followed by incubation with fluorescence‐conjugated secondary antibody (Invitrogen). Finally, the fluorescence intensity was measured (integrins, λex = 475 nm, λem = 500‐550 nm; β‐actin, λex = 627 nm, λem = 660‐720 nm) using a Glomax discover microplate reader. To calculate the expression of integrins, the measured integrin fluorescence intensity was divided by the β‐actin fluorescence intensity. Information regarding primary and secondary antibodies is provided (Supplementary Tables ).

2.17.

## Wound healing assay
When Huh‐7 cell density reached 100%, wounds were created in the central area using a 200 μL pipette tip. Photos of the scrape line were taken at 0 and 24 h. Each experiment was repeated thrice. Cell migration was expressed as the percentage of wound closure in the wound area. Image analysis was performed via ImageJ software.

2.18.

## Transwell assay
Transwell chambers (Corning) without Matrigel were used to examine cell migration, and transwell chambers coated with 50 μL Matrigel (354234, Corning) were used to measure invasion; 5 × 104 cells were serum‐starved for 12 h, resuspended in 100 μL serum‐free medium and added to the upper compartment of the chamber, while the bottom chamber was filled with medium supplemented with 10% FBS. After incubation at 37°C in a 5% CO2 humidified atmosphere for 24 h, the chambers were analyzed for migration and invasion. The experiments were independently repeated thrice.

2.19.

## Co‐immunoprecipitation (co‐IP)
To identify receptors that bind to SPP1 on HCC cells, Hep3B and Huh‐7 cells were transfected with siITGB1 and/or siITGB5, or siCtrl. Then, they were cultured with CAF‐CM, and co‐IP experiments were performed. Briefly, cells were washed with PBS and lysed at 4°C with PBS, pH 7.2, containing 1.0% NP‐40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 10 mmol/L NaF, 1.0 mmol/L NaVO4, and a 1.0% protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) as previously described [ ]. Equal protein aliquots (1.0 mg) were immunoprecipitated with 2.0 μg of antibodies specific to SPP1 (STJ25679, St. John's laboratory, London, UK) plus protein A/G‐agarose (sc‐2003, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) as per the manufacturer's recommendations. Immunoprecipitated proteins were resolved on 10% SDS‐polyacrylamide gels and transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride membranes (Bio‐Rad, Richmond, CA, USA). The membranes were blocked for 1 h in PBS containing 0.1% Tween 20 (PBS‐T) and 5% non‐fat dry milk (Sigma) and reacted with antibodies against SPP1, ITGB1, ITGB5 (3629, Cell Signaling), integrin subunit α5 (ITGA5; 4705, Cell Signaling), and ITGAV (4711, Cell Signaling), each diluted to 1:1,000. The membranes were washed with PBS‐T, and incubated for 1 h at room temperature with horseradish peroxidase‐conjugated anti‐mouse (A9044, Sigma) or anti‐rabbit immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody (AP160P, Sigma), diluted to 1:5,000, and developed with luminol‐based enhanced chemiluminescence plus Western blotting detection system (Amersham Biosciences, Amersham, Buckinghamshire, UK). Immunoreactive bands were identified by co‐migration of prestained protein size markers (Fermentas, Glen Burnie, MD, USA). Information regarding primary and secondary antibodies is presented in Supplementary Tables .

2.20.

## Single‐cell RNA‐seq analysis
Unique molecular identifier (UMI) counts and metadata of filtered cells from patients with HCC, liver metastases, or cholangiocarcinomas were obtained from the NCBI GEO database under accession codes GSE151530 and GSE146409. The R Seurat package (v4.0.1) was used to perform log normalization, feature selection (method = ‘vst’), scaling of data, principal component analysis (PCA), cell clustering, non‐linear dimensional reduction (e.g., UMAP plotting), and heatmap generation. Briefly, the most variable genes (n = 3,000) across the filtered cells were selected to perform PCA on the scaled data using the FindVariableFeatures function. The FindNeighbors and FindClusters functions were used to construct a shared nearest neighbor (SNN) graph (‘dims = 1:30’) and cluster the cells (‘resolution = 1’), respectively. The RunUMAP function was used with 50 PCA dimensions (‘dims = 1:50’) to visualize cells on the 2‐D UMAP plot. Previously defined cell types [ ] were used to classify cells in the generated UMAP plot. Cells annotated as ‘CAFs’ were extracted and used to generate an independent Seurat object, wherein the same parameters were applied for the abovementioned functions except for the RunUMAP function, which used 30 PCA dimensions (‘dims = 1:30’). The Seurat object was used to identify distinct subpopulations of fibroblasts and differential expression features using the FindAllMarkers function. GSEA of the enriched genes was performed using the ‘MSigDB Hallmark’ database.

2.21.

## Patients and definition of clinical terms
To investigate whether the plasma levels of the selected CAF‐derived molecule could be used as a biomarker for predicting the response to sorafenib/lenvatinib in patients with advanced HCC, patients were retrospectively included based on the following criteria: (1) age between 18 and 80 years; (2) BCLC stage C; (3) treatment with sorafenib or lenvatinib for a period longer than 4 weeks; (4) availability of follow‐up computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance (MR) imaging for the assessment of drug response; and (5) stored available plasma acquired within 1 month prior to sorafenib/lenvatinib treatment. Exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) previous history of a primary malignancy other than HCC; (2) Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status 3 or 4; and (3) Child‐Pugh class C. HCC was diagnosed based on the European Association for the Study of the Liver guideline [ ] and the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases practice guidelines [ ]. Stipulations of the BCLC staging system and modified Union for the International Cancer Control (mUICC) staging system were used for HCC staging [ ]. Sorafenib‐treated patients received 400 mg of sorafenib twice daily, and lenvatinib‐treated patients received 8 mg (body weight < 60 kg) or 12 mg (body weight ≥ 60 kg) of lenvatinib once daily. Treatment was continued until disease progression or the development of unacceptable drug‐related adverse events (AEs). Once AEs occurred, TKI doses were modified depending on the type and grade of AEs [ ]. Medical data, including sex, age, Child‐Pugh class, tumor number, tumor size, HCC stage, duration of the treatment, progression‐free survival (PFS), disease‐free survival (DFS), and overall survival (OS), were recorded. Tumor response was assessed according to the modified Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) criteria 1.1 [ ]. PFS was defined as the time from sorafenib/lenvatinib treatment initiation to disease progression. OS was defined as the time from treatment initiation to death from any cause. Baseline laboratory data, including platelet count, total bilirubin, serum creatinine, albumin, alanine transaminase, prothrombin time, and alpha‐fetoprotein (AFP) were collected. Plasma SPP1 levels were measured using ELISA. Serum samples and clinical data were provided by the Biobank of Ajou University Hospital, a member of the Korea Biobank Network.

2.22.

## Statistical analyses
OS, DFS and PFS curves were plotted via the Kaplan‐Meier product limit method using GraphPadTM 8.0 software (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA). Significant differences between survival curves were determined using the log‐rank test and Breslow test. Receiver‐operating characteristic curve was used to determine the best cut‐off values for SPP1 that could produce the highest sensitivity and specificity to predict individual survival shorter than the median PFS or OS. We performed Cox regression analysis to determine variables associated with prognosis. Multivariate Cox regression analyses were performed with clinical variables known to be of prognostic value in TKI‐treated patients to identify independent risk factors for predicting poor PFS and OS. Model 1 was derived by backward elimination selection procedure after entering all of the listed clinical variables into the multivariate analysis. Model 2 was derived from all of the listed clinical variables without any variable selection procedure. All experiments were performed at least in triplicate. All samples were analyzed in triplicate. All data are presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Significant differences between experimental groups were assessed using paired or unpaired Welch's t‐tests and one‐ or two‐way analysis of variance (ANOVA) in GraphPadTM 8.0 software. Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05.

3.

## RESULTS
3.1.

## CAFs suppressed the sensitivity of HCC cells to sorafenib and lenvatinib
CAFs, para‐cancer fibroblasts, and NFs exhibited spindle‐shaped morphology (Supplementary Figure ). α‐SMA was overexpressed in CAFs relative to para‐cancer fibroblasts and NFs (Figure  and Supplementary Figure ). The paracrine effect of CAFs on HCC concerning sorafenib and lenvatinib sensitivity was evaluated. On cell viability, cell proliferation, and caspase 3/7 activity assays, TKI response was shown to be significantly lower in HCC cells incubated with CAF‐CM than in HCC cells incubated with para‐cancer fibroblast‐CM or NF‐CM (Figure  ‐ ).
 Next, Western blotting (Supplementary Figure ) and corresponding densitometry analyses (Supplementary Figure ) revealed that CAF‐CM exerted a protective effect on HCC cells against TKI‐induced apoptosis. These results indicate that CAF induced TKI resistance in a paracrine manner. Furthermore, in the in vivo 1 assay, the CAF + Sor group exhibited significantly higher tumor volumes than the Sor group (P < 0.001; Figure  ).

3.2.

## Identified genes specifically overexpressed in CAFs
In the cluster analysis, 790 genes were significantly overexpressed in CAFs compared to para‐cancer fibroblasts and NFs (Figure  ). GSEA indicated that genes specifically overexpressed in CAFs were enriched in various cancer‐associated pathways, including the EMT and Kirsten rat sarcoma virus (KRAS) signaling pathways (Figure  ). Of the 790 genes overexpressed in CAFs, 245 genes which were overexpressed greater than 1.5‐fold change (P < 0.001) in CAFs relative to para‐cancer fibroblasts or NFs were selected for next step (Figure  ). Then, we selected only secretory protein‐encoding genes among the 245 genes for further analyses given that CAF induced TKI resistance mainly in a paracrine manner (Figure  ). As a result, 9 secretory protein‐encoding genes were selected as candidate molecules for further investigation (Figure  ).
 
3.3.

## SPP1 was overexpressed in HCC tissues from sorafenib non‐responders
Expression levels of the 9 candidate genes were evaluated in HCC tissue expression data from the GSE109211 dataset (STORM phase III study [ ]; Figure  ). GSE109211 includes gene expression data of HCC tissues and clinical information on sorafenib response. Among the 9 candidate genes, SPP1 was identified as significantly overexpressed in sorafenib non‐responders compared to responders (Figure  , left). The same pattern was observed in another publicly available gene expression dataset (GSE143233; Figure  , right).

3.4.

## Selection of HCC cell lines for further functional study
Further studies were planned to perform using HCC cells with relatively low SPP1 expression to investigate the bio‐function of CAF‐derived SPP1 in HCC cells. The gene expression data of HCC cell lines were downloaded from the CCLE database, and SPP1 expression in each HCC cell line was evaluated to identify cell lines with low SPP1 expression (Supplementary Figure ). Further, we also performed qRT‐PCR to evaluate SPP1 expression in HCC cell lines including Hep3B, Huh‐7, PLC/PRF/5, SNU449, SNU368, and SNU475 cells (Supplementary Figure ). Hep3B and Huh‐7 demonstrated relatively low SPP1 expression compared to the other cell lines both in CCLE data and qRT‐PCR results. Therefore, we performed further functional studies using Hep3B and Huh‐7 cells.

3.5.

## CAFs were a major source of secretory SPP1 in the HCC TME
To identify the major source of secretory SPP1 within the HCC TME, SPP1 levels were evaluated in cell lysates and CM of two HCC cell lines, CAFs, para‐cancer fibroblasts, and NFs via Western blotting and relative densitometry bar graphs (Supplementary Figure ). SPP1 expression was the highest in CAF‐CM and CAF cell lysates compared to those from other cell lines.
Next, we validated the co‐localization of SPP1 and α‐SMA in paraffin‐embedded HCC tissues using IF staining (Figure  ). As expected, CAFs in the HCC tumor stroma demonstrated strong α‐SMA expression, indicating that CAFs are the major component of the HCC stroma. α‐SMA‐positive CAFs were observed in the tumor stroma located in not only the tumor periphery but also the center of the tumor bulk. The co‐expression of SPP1 in α‐SMA‐positive CAFs was observed.
Figure  shows a comparison of SPP1 expression between CAFs and para‐cancer fibroblasts in WTS data from 9 pairs of CAFs and para‐cancer fibroblasts. We categorized 5 patients with SPP1 overexpression in CAFs relative to their paired para‐cancer fibroblasts into the SPP1‐high group, and categorized the others into the SPP1‐low group. The SPP1‐high group exhibited strongly positive staining for SPP1 in the tumor stroma compared to non‐tumor fibrous tissue, the tumor core, and the tumor periphery upon IHC analysis. In the comparison of the SPP1 expression between the SPP1‐high and SPP1‐low groups, SPP1 expression in the tumor stroma was markedly higher in the SPP1‐high group compared to the SPP1‐low group (Figure  ‐ ), and it was consistent with the RNA expression data; as expected, there was no significant difference in the comparison of non‐tumor fibrous tissue, tumor core, and tumor periphery between the groups (Supplementary Figure ). Taken together, these results confirm that CAFs are the major source of secretory SPP1 within the HCC TME.
Moreover, to evaluate whether SPP1 expression changes in sorafenib‐ or lenvatinib‐resistant HCC cells, we evaluated SPP1 expression in Hep3B‐R and Huh‐7‐R cells. Hep3B‐R and Huh‐7‐R cells demonstrated significantly higher IC50 than the wild‐type Hep3B or Huh‐7 cells (Supplementary Figure ). Subsequently, we evaluated SPP1 expression in the wild‐type HCC cells, sorafenib‐/lenvatinib‐resistant HCC cells, and CAFs. While there was no significant difference in SPP1 expression between the resistant cells and the wild‐type HCC cells, SPP1 was specifically overexpressed in HCC‐CAFs (Supplementary Figure ). These results suggest that SPP1 is mainly expressed in CAFs rather than in resistant HCC cells.

3.6.

## Blockade of CAF‐derived SPP1 restored HCC cell sensitivity to sorafenib or lenvatinib
IF staining indicated that the uptake of CAF‐derived SPP1 in HCC cells was effectively blocked by SPP1 inhibitors, SPP1‐BP and SPP1‐APT (Supplementary Figure ). We subsequently investigated whether SPP1‐BP would reverse CAF‐induced resistance to sorafenib and lenvatinib in HCC cells. In cell growth, cell proliferation, cell viability, and caspase 3/7 activity assays, CAF‐derived SPP1 reduced HCC cell sensitivity to sorafenib and lenvatinib (Supplementary Figure ). However, the TKI sensitivity of CAF‐CM‐incubated HCC cells was restored via SPP1‐BP treatment. Similar results were observed when Huh‐7 cells were treated with rSPP1, with or without SPP1‐BP (Supplementary Figure ).
Wound‐healing, migration, and transwell invasion assays were performed to assess the migratory and invasive potentials of cells. Sorafenib or lenvatinib treatment significantly decreased the capacity of Huh‐7 cells for wound healing, migration, and invasion (Figure  ‐ ). Interestingly, SPP1‐BP treatment restored the decreased sensitivity of CAF‐CM‐ or rSPP1‐treated HCC, resulting in a significant decrease in wound‐healing, migration, and invasion capacities (Figure  ‐ and Supplementary Figure ).
 
3.7.

## In vivo validation of the effect of blocking CAF‐derived SPP1 on HCC resistance to TKIs
In the subcutaneous xenograft HCC model established using Huh‐7 cells (in vivo 2), the CAF group had the highest mean tumor volume and weight; the CAF + Sor group demonstrated significantly larger and heavier tumors than the Sor group; the CAF + Sor + SPP1‐APT group showed significantly reduced tumor volume and weight compared to the CAF + Sor group (Figure  ‐ ). These results suggest that inhibiting SPP1 could restore CAF‐induced sorafenib resistance. We then performed IHC analysis of the isolated tumor tissues, and differences were observed by quantifying the stained area in tumor sections (Figure  ‐ ). The levels of α‐SMA, Fibronectin, SPP1, and Ki67 expression were significantly lower and the level of E‐cadherin expression was higher in the CAF + Sor + SPP1‐APT group compared to both the CAF group and the CAF + Sor group. This suggests that the sorafenib and SPP1‐APT combination therapy effectively suppresses the proliferation and EMT of tumor cells by inhibiting CAF‐derived SPP1 in vivo. This was further confirmed using the orthotopic xenograft HCC model which more accurately represented the HCC TME [ ]. Figure  shows representative liver and orthotopic tumor images on day 0, day 12, and day 21 after cell injection. The results of the orthotopic xenograft model were quite similar to those of the subcutaneous xenograft model. There was no difference in body weight between the groups in the orthotopic xenograft model (Supplementary Figure ). The CAF + Sor + SPP1‐APT group demonstrated the smallest tumor volume compared to the other groups (Figure  ). In the comparison of tumor weight, the CAF + Sor + SPP1‐APT group had significantly reduced tumor weight compared to the CAF group (Figure  ). Furthermore, we compared the number of intrahepatic metastatic foci between the groups (Figure  and Supplementary Figure ). The CAF group demonstrated a significantly higher number of intrahepatic metastatic foci compared to the other groups. No intrahepatic metastasis was observed in the CAF + Sor + SPP1‐APT and Sor groups.
 
3.8.

## CAF‐derived SPP1 bound to integrin complexes on the HCC cell surface
We explored SPP1 receptor‐binding proteins (RBPs) in HCC cells. As reported in previous studies [ , ], the protein‐protein network analysis revealed CD44 and various integrins as important SPP1 RBPs (Supplementary Figure ). Among the candidate RBPs, ITGA5, ITGAV, ITGB1, and ITGB5 were expressed in Hep3B and Huh‐7 cells, whereas other integrins and CD44 were not (Figure  ). We subsequently confirmed the similar expression patterns of CD44 and integrins in Hep3B and Huh‐7 cells using fluorescence intensity (Figure  ). co‐IP experiments confirmed the binding of SPP1 to ITGA5, ITGAV, ITGB1, and ITGB5 in HCC cells (Figure  ). Hep3B and Huh‐7 cells were transfected with siITGB1 and/or siITGB5 to silence ITGB1 and ITGB5, respectively (Supplementary Figure ). In co‐IP experiments, binding of SPP1 to ITGAV and ITGB5 was confirmed in ITGB1‐silenced HCC cells following CAF‐CM treatment; SPP1 also bound to ITGB1, ITGB5, and ITGAV in ITGB5‐silenced HCC cells; in HCC cells deficient for both ITGB1 and ITGB5, binding of SPP1 to integrins was not detected (Figure  ). Treatment with SPP1‐BP disrupted the binding of SPP1 to integrins on HCC cells (Figure  ). Our results confirm that CAF‐derived SPP1 binds to integrin αVβ5, α5β1, and αVβ1 on HCC cells.
 Genetic silencing experiments demonstrated that CAF‐CM‐induced resistance to sorafenib and lenvatinib was dependent on the expression of ITGB1 and ITGB5. In CAF‐CM‐treated HCC cells, treatment of TKIs did not affect cell growth, proliferation, viability, and caspase 3/7 activity. However, under silencing of ITGB1 and/or ITGB5, these parameters were significantly changed depending on treatment of TKIs, even in CAF‐CM‐treated HCC cells (Supplementary Figure ).

3.9.

## Clinical implication of ITGB1 and ITGB5 expression in publicly available datasets
Subsequently, we compared the expression of ITGB1 and ITGB5 between sorafenib responders and non‐responders using the GSE109211 and GSE143233 datasets (Supplementary Figure ). As expected, ITGB1 and ITGB5 demonstrated significantly higher expression in sorafenib non‐responders in the GSE109211. In the GSE143233, the expression of ITGB1 and ITGB5 was also higher in sorafenib non‐responders than in sorafenib responders. However, this difference was not statistically significant, because the GSE143233 included only six subjects.
Correlations between the expression of SPP1 and ITGB1/ITGB5 were analyzed. As expected, SPP1 and ITGB1/ITGB5 expression showed positive correlations both in TCGA LIHC and GSE109211 datasets (Supplementary Figure ).
Moreover, survival analysis according to ITGB1/ITGB5 and SPP1 expression was performed in 371 patients with HCC in the TCGA LIHC cohort. These patients were divided into two groups according to the median values of SPP1, ITGB1, and ITGB5 expression. Patients with high SPP1, ITGB1, and ITGB5 expression had significantly shorter OS and DFS than those with low expression (OS, log‐rank P < 0.001, hazard ratio [HR] = 3.02; DFS, log‐rank P = 0.034, HR = 1.67) (Supplementary Figure ).

3.10.

## CAF‐derived SPP1 activated the RAF/ERK/STAT3 and PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathways via PKCα phosphorylation in HCC cells
Prior studies have shown that TKIs, including sorafenib and lenvatinib, suppressed tumor progression by inhibiting the RAF/MAPK/STAT3 and PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathways via targeting RTKs [ , , ]. Cytoscape analysis indicated that the SPP1 signaling pathway is initiated by the SPP1‐integrin interaction, subsequently activating MAPK and AKT pathways via the activation of PKCα (Supplementary Figure ). Therefore, we hypothesized that CAF‐derived SPP1 induces resistance to TKIs through bypass activation of the RAF/ERK/STAT3 and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways via integrin‐mediated PKCα phosphorylation. In Western blotting, treatment with sorafenib or lenvatinib was shown to significantly inhibit the phosphorylation of BRAF/ERK/STAT3 and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways in HCC cells, while PKCα phosphorylation was not affected (Supplementary Figure ). The phosphorylation of PKCα, BRAF/ERK/STAT3, and PI3K/AKT/mTOR was significantly upregulated in HCC cells treated with CAF‐CM (Figure  ‐ ). Similar results were observed when HCC cells were treated with rSPP1 (Supplementary Figure ). When HCC cells were incubated with CAF‐CM or rSPP1, the phosphorylation of PKCα/BRAF/ERK/STAT3 and PI3K/AKT/mTOR was slightly affected by sorafenib or lenvatinib treatment. However, when cells were treated with SPP1‐BP, the phosphorylation of PKCα, BRAF/ERK/STAT3, and PI3K/AKT/mTOR was markedly inhibited by TKIs even under incubation with CAF‐CM or rSPP1 (Figure  ‐ and Supplementary Figure ). We also evaluated TKI‐induced changes in PKCα, BRAF/ERK/STAT3, and PI3K/AKT/mTOR phosphorylation under ITGB1 and/or ITGB5 silencing. When HCC cells were transfected with siITGB1 and/or siITGB5, phosphorylation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR and BRAF/ERK/STAT3 in HCC cells were markedly reduced by TKI treatment even after incubation with CAF‐CM (Figure  ‐ ). Overall, these findings indicate that CAF‐derived SPP1 induces TKI resistance to bypass activation of the RAF/ERK/STAT3 and PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathways through integrin‐mediated PKCα phosphorylation.
 
3.11.

## SPP1‐related gene signatures indicated poor prognosis in patients with HCC
We examined the clinical relevance of SPP1 expression in HCC tissues using data from TCGA LIHC. SPP1 was significantly upregulated in HCC tissues compared to non‐tumor tissues in TCGA LIHC dataset, and SPP1 expression was found to gradually increase with higher histologic grade and clinical status of liver disease (Figure  ). Patients with high SPP1 expression displayed short OS and DFS (OS, log‐rank P < 0.001, HR = 2.02; DFS, log‐rank P = 0.024, HR = 1.41; Figure  ). We subsequently assessed SPP1‐related gene signatures. The gene sets that were highly correlated with SPP1 (P < 0.001; r ≥ 0.3 or r ≤ 0.3) were selected as the SPP1‐related gene signature (n = 1,601). In the TCGA LIHC dataset, patients with HCC could be categorized into two clusters according to expression patterns of the SPP1‐related gene sets (Figure  , left). The cluster with a high expression of SPP1‐related genes had significantly shorter OS and DFS compared to that with a low expression (OS, log‐rank P < 0.001, HR = 2.03; DFS, log‐rank P = 0.003, HR = 1.58; Figure  , right). These results suggest that the expression of SPP1‐related gene signatures is significantly related with the prognosis in patients with HCC.
 
3.12.

## CAF‐derived SPP1 promoted the EMT of HCC cells

SPP1‐related gene signatures were enriched in a variety of cancer‐associated pathways (Figure  ). Among these, the EMT‐associated gene set was the most highly enriched. The expression levels of four EMT‐related genes (ITGAV, NTM, COMP, and FAP), which were randomly selected from the EMT gene set, exhibited a high correlation with SPP1 expression in TCGA LIHC (Supplementary Figure ). On Western blotting and relative densitometry bar graphs (Supplementary Figure ), Vimentin and Snail were downregulated after sorafenib or lenvatinib treatment, in parallel to significantly increased E‐cadherin expression. However, the expression of EMT‐related proteins in HCC cells treated with CAF‐CM or rSPP1 was not affected by TKI treatment. Further, SPP1‐BP treatment completely reversed the effects of CAF‐CM and rSPP1 on EMT‐related protein expression.

3.13.

## EMT‐related genes were specifically expressed in SPP1‐positive fibroblasts
To assess differences in SPP1 expression across distinct fibroblast subpopulations, we processed and analyzed a publicly available single‐cell RNA‐seq dataset derived from patients with HCC (GSE151530). We identified seven cell types from the 56,721 QC‐filtered cells (Figure  ), among which fibroblasts were further clustered into six cell clusters, denoted as C0 to C5 (Figure  ‐ ). Notably, SPP1 was predominantly expressed in cells of C4 (Figure  ). Thus, we used the ‘MSigDB Hallmark’ database to identify the molecular signature of C4 fibroblasts; EMT appeared as the most enriched term (Figure  ). We verified this in another publicly available single‐cell RNA‐seq dataset from patients with malignant liver cancer such as metastatic liver cancer or cholangiocarcinoma (GSE146409). Of the 17 cell types (Supplementary Figure ), fibroblasts were further clustered into five cell clusters, and SPP1 expression was predominant in C2 cells (Supplementary Figure ). The EMT appeared again as the top enriched term in C2 fibroblasts via the ‘MSigDB Hallmark’ database analysis (Supplementary Figure ).

3.14.

## Plasma SPP1 level prior to sorafenib or lenvatinib treatment was an independent predictor of PFS or OS in patients with advanced HCC
We subsequently investigated whether plasma SPP1 levels before sorafenib or lenvatinib treatment initiation would be a useful prognostic biomarker for predicting PFS or OS in patients with advanced HCC. The baseline characteristics of included patients (n = 54) are presented in Supplementary Table . Among the 54 patients, 36 were treated with sorafenib, while 18 were treated with lenvatinib. Six patients had a partial response (PR) to treatment, 25 had stable disease (SD), and 23 demonstrated progressive disease (PD; Figure  ). Representative CT scans of patients who achieved PR to TKI are demonstrated in Figure  . Supplementary Figure shows that plasma SPP1 levels were significantly higher in patients with PD than in those with PR or SD.
 Of the included patients, those with high plasma SPP1 levels (> 2,300 pg/mL, n = 28) had significantly shorter PFS and OS compared to those with low plasma SPP1 levels (≤ 2,300 pg/mL, n = 26) (PFS, log‐rank P < 0. 001, Figure  , left; OS, log‐rank P = 0.002; Figure  , left). In the subgroup treated with sorafenib (n = 36), patients with high plasma SPP1 levels exhibited shorter PFS and OS (PFS, log‐rank P = 0. 005, Figure  , middle; OS, log‐rank P = 0.007, Figure  , middle). Moreover, in the lenvatinib subgroup (n = 18), patients with high plasma SPP1 levels had significantly shorter PFS (log‐rank P = 0.011, Figure  , right) and OS (Breslow P = 0.037, Figure  , right).
In univariate Cox regression analysis, large tumor size (> 10 cm) and high plasma SPP1 (> 2,300 pg/mL) were identified as significant risk factors for both PFS and OS. In multivariate analysis, only a high plasma SPP1 level was identified as an independent risk factor for predicting poor PFS in both model 1 and model 2 in (model 1, P = 0.026, HR = 2.48, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.11‐5.53; model 2, P = 0.022, HR = 2.96, 95% CI = 1.17‐7.51) and as an independent risk factor of poor OS only in model 1 (P = 0.047, HR = 2.54, 95% CI = 1.01‐6.35) (Supplementary Table ).

4.

## DISCUSSION
Resistance to systemic therapeutics is a major hurdle in the treatment of advanced HCC [ ]. Sorafenib and lenvatinib, which exert their anticancer effect by suppressing the RAF/ERK/STAT3 and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways via RTK inhibition, have been the standard first‐line systemic therapy for advanced HCC. Various studies have investigated the mechanisms underlying HCC resistance to TKIs in an attempt to identify novel therapeutic targets to overcome resistance [ , ]. In the present study, we determined that CAF‐derived SPP1 played a key role in inducing TKI resistance in HCC. That is, CAFs secreted SPP1, which bound to the extracellular domain of integrin complexes (integrin αVβ5, α5β1, and αVβ1) on HCC cells, subsequently phosphorylating PKCα in the cytoplasmic domain. This, in turn, activated the RAF/ERK/STAT3 and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways, driving TKI resistance. Treatment with SPP1 inhibitors, such as SPP1‐BP or SPP1‐APT, reversed CAF‐induced resistance to sorafenib or lenvatinib, suggesting CAF‐derived SPP1 as a novel therapeutic target for overcoming TKI resistance in HCC (Figure  ).
 In addition to the SPP1‐induced activation of oncogenic signal bypass, we demonstrated that CAF‐derived SPP1 could promote EMT. EMT plays a crucial role in cancer cell metastasis and invasion [ ]. Moreover, it has been described as an important driver of TKI resistance in HCC [ , ]. Thus, targeting EMT could represent a strategy for overcoming drug resistance. Mir et al. [ ] reported that the combination of EMT inhibitors and sorafenib improved the sensitivity of HCC cells to sorafenib. In the present study, SPP1 expression was highly correlated with that of EMT‐related genes in TCGA LIHC (Supplementary Figure ). EMT was equally the most enriched term of the SPP1‐positive CAF cluster (Figure  ). Further, CAF‐derived SPP1 promoted the EMT by regulating EMT‐related gene expression in vitro and in vivo (Supplementary Figure and Figure  ). Taken together, these results suggest that CAF‐derived SPP1 promotes the EMT in HCC. Several previous studies have similarly shown that SPP1 promoted a stem cell‐like phenotype as well as EMT in HCC [ , , ]. Thus, the combination of SPP1‐blocking agents with sorafenib or lenvatinib represents a promising therapeutic strategy for overcoming TKI resistance in HCC via suppression of the SPP1‐mediated EMT and SPP1‐integrin‐PKCα bypass signaling pathways.
SPP1, also known as osteopontin, is encoded by the SPP1 gene in humans. SPP1 is known as an integrin‐binding glycoprotein, which is overexpressed in various types of cancers, including HCC [ ]. Moreover, the overexpression of SPP1 in cancer tissues is considered to be associated with poor prognosis [ ]. Several previous studies have described the oncogenic properties of SPP1 [ , , ]. However, the major source of SPP1 within the HCC TME remained unclear. Thus, we sought to elucidate the major source of secretory SPP1. SPP1 was significantly overexpressed in CAF cell lysates and CAF‐CM, when compared to CM and lysates of other cells, including HCC cells, para‐cancer fibroblasts, and NFs (Supplementary Figure ). Further, IF staining confirmed co‐localization of α‐SMA and SPP1 in the tumor stroma. In addition, IHC analysis indicated that SPP1 was markedly overexpressed in the tumor stroma compared to non‐neoplastic fibrous tissue or other tumor tissues. These results suggest CAFs as the major source of secretory SPP1 within the HCC TME. Similarly, several recent studies demonstrated that CAFs secrete SPP1, which plays an essential oncogenic role in several different malignancies [ , ].
Currently, there are no reliable biomarkers for predicting the response to sorafenib or lenvatinib treatment in patients with HCC. In several previous studies, circulating SPP1 has shown promise as a diagnostic and prognostic biomarker in HCC [ , , ]. However, its relevance as a prognostic biomarker in patients with advanced‐stage HCC receiving sorafenib or lenvatinib has not yet been evaluated. Based on our results of SPP1 being a secretory protein found to play a key role in TKI resistance, we hypothesized that circulating SPP1 levels may be associated with sorafenib and lenvatinib treatment response. Consequently, a high plasma SPP1 level was identified as an independent risk factor for predicting poor PFS and poor OS in patients with HCC receiving TKIs.
Meanwhile, the present study had some limitations. First, the in vivo orthotopic xenograft model used in this study was the BALB/c female nude mice which could not reflect the tumor‐immune microenvironment. Although we demonstrated CAF‐derived SPP1 as an important mechanism of TKI resistance of HCC cells, TKI resistance may also have other mechanisms, such as CAF‐immune cell interaction. Thus, 3‐dimensional in vitro model of HCC or in vivo experiments using immune‐competent animal model would be more helpful to understand the complex mechanism of TKI resistance in patients with HCC. Second, although we showed the prognostic implication of plasma SPP1 in patients with advanced HCC, this study included a relatively small number of patients with HCC in a retrospective manner. To confirm the clinical significance of plasma SPP1 as a prognostic biomarker in patients with advanced HCC planned for TKI treatment, the current findings should be subjected to further validation in a larger external cohort.

5.

## CONCLUSIONS
In summary, we reported that CAF‐derived SPP1 induced TKI resistance in HCC. SPP1 blockade could represent a potential therapeutic strategy for overcoming resistance to sorafenib or lenvatinib in HCC. Consistently, a high plasma SPP1 level before TKI treatment was associated with poor prognosis of HCC patients, demonstrating that it may be a potential prognostic biomarker for patients with advanced HCC planned for TKI treatment.

## DECLARATIONS

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
JWE, HJC and JYC made substantial contributions to the conception and design of the present study. JHY, HRA, JHW and GOB performed the in vitro experiments. JAS and MGY performed the in vivo experiments. JWE, SBL, WP, and TWK acquired and analyzed the data. SK and YBK interpreted all the datasets in the present study. JHY, HRA and HJC drafted the initial manuscript and critically revised it for important intellectual content. JWE, SSK and JYC confirmed the authenticity of all the raw data. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.

## CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION
Not applicable.

## ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE
All experiments were performed according to the Declaration of Helsinki and the study was approved by the Institutional Review Board (AJIRB‐BMR‐SMP‐17‐188). All animal experiments were performed according to the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. The experiments were approved by the Ethics Committee for Laboratory Animal Research Center of Ajou University Medical Center (IACUC‐2020‐0038).

## Supporting information
SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Click here for additional data file.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The biospecimens and data used for this study were provided by the Biobank of Ajou University Hospital, a member of the Korea Biobank Network. This research was supported by grants from the Korea Health Technology R&D Project through the Korea Health Industry Development Institute, funded by the Ministry of Health and Welfare, Republic of Korea (HR21C1003, HR22C1734), as well as the Bio and Medical Technology Development Program of the National Research Foundation (NRF‐2021R1C1C1009619 and NRF‐2022R1A2C2092422), funded by the Korean government (Ministry of Science and Information & Communications Technology).

Eun JW, Yoon JH, Ahn HR, Kim S, Kim YB, Lim SB, et al. Cancer‐associated fibroblast‐derived secreted phosphoprotein 1 contributes to resistance of hepatocellular carcinoma to sorafenib and lenvatinib. Cancer Communications. 2023;43:455–479. 10.1002/cac2.12414

JungWoo Eun Jung Hwan Yoon Hye Ri Ahn contributed equally to this work.

## Contributor Information
Hyo Jung Cho, Email: pilgrim8107@hanmail.net.
Jae Youn Cheong, Email: jaeyoun620@gmail.com.

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
RNA‐sequencing datasets generated in this study are deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus database under accession code GSE192912. All other supporting data are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Click here for additional data file.

## Data Availability Statement
RNA‐sequencing datasets generated in this study are deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus database under accession code GSE192912. All other supporting data are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.