319nihpaCell reportsCell RepPMC126461311264613112646131NIHMS21200694100433810.1016/j.celrep.2025.116185Mutant RIT1 cooperates with YAP to drive an EMT-like lung cancer state
RomingerMary C O’BrienSiobhan GuptaSaksham MoorthiSitapriya McSharryMaria KamlapurkarShriya LoweAmy R WaldumAnnie LoApril DukeFujiko WuFeinan HeadleyMark B CromwellElizabeth GlabmanRaisa KoehneAmanda BergerAlice H 1Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA2Cancer Program, Broad Institute of MIT & Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA3Bioinformatics Shared Resource, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA4Translational Science and Therapeutics Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA5Pre-clinical Modeling Core, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA6Comparative Pathology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA7Herbold Computational Biology Program, Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA8Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA9Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
A.H.B. conceived of the study and obtained funding. A.H.B., M.C.R., S.G., S.M., M.M., S.K., S.O., A.W., F.D., A.R.L., and E.C. designed and performed experiments. A.H.B., M.C.R., S.G., S.M., M.M., S.K., S.O., A.W., F.D., A.R. L., E.C., M.B.H., and F.W. analyzed data. S.G., S.M., S.O., F.W., and A.L. performed computational analyses. R.G. and A.K. performed expert pathology review. A.H.B., M.C.R., S.O., S.G., and S.M. generated the figures. A.H. B., M.C.R., and S.O. wrote the paper. All authors read, edited, and approved the paper.
*Correspondence: ahberger@fredhutch.org
2492025441011618511618526112025This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Cell RepPrevious version available: This article is based on a previously available preprint posted on bioRxiv on November 12, 2024: "Mutant RIT1 cooperates with YAP to drive an EMT-like lung cancer state".

## SUMMARY
Mutations in “Ras-like in all tissues” (RIT1) occur in up to 2% of lung adenocarcinomas and are mutually exclusive with KRAS and EGFR mutations, suggesting that RIT1 may act as a non-canonical driver oncogene in lung cancer. However, the lack of a RIT1-mutant lung cancer model has hindered the development and testing of RIT1-targeted therapeutics. Here, we report a mouse model with conditional regulation of the cancer-associated RIT1M90I variant. We show that autochthonous expression of RIT1M90I and combined inactivation of Nf2 and p53 drives an aggressive lung cancer with 100% penetrance and short latency. Oncogenic cooperation between RIT1M90I and p53/Nf2 loss is driven by synergistic activation of AP-1 transcription factors and can be reversed by the combined inhibition of MEK and TEAD. These data identify YAP/TEAD as a mediator of RIT1’s oncogenic capability and nominate TEAD as a potential drug target in RIT1-mutant lung cancer.

## Graphical Abstract

 

## In brief
Rominger et al. present a new autochthonous lung tumor model in which mutant RIT1 drives cancer together with p53 and Nf2 tumor suppressor gene loss. Transcriptomic and chromatin profiling shows that RIT1M90I promotes an EMT-like phenotype with high ZEB1 and AP-1 activity.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoIssue date 2025 Oct 28.

## INTRODUCTION
Aberrant activation of genes in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)/Ras pathway appears central to the development and progression of non-small cell lung cancer and its most common histological subtype, lung adenocarcinoma. Following the discovery of somatic EGFR mutations in lung adenocarcinoma in 2004, – it was recognized that over ten other genes related to EGFR signaling are also commonly mutated, such as Ras genes, BRAF, ERBB2, MET, and fusions of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) genes. , – These discoveries have spurred remarkable cancer therapeutic development, resulting in US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of dozens of targeted inhibitors of proteins in the EGFR signaling pathway, including the 3rd-generation covalent inhibitor of EGFR, osimertinib, , and covalent KRAS G12C inhibitors sotorasib and adagrasib. , However, many lung adenocarcinomas do not harbor mutations in these druggable genes, limiting targeted therapy options for the remaining one-third or >30,000 patients with lung adenocarcinoma in the US every year.
“Ras-like in all tissues” (RIT1) is a Ras-family GTPase gene with significant homology to HRAS, NRAS, and KRAS. Like these canonical Ras genes, RIT1 is a recurrent target of somatic mutations and copy-number amplification in cancer, particularly lung cancer. , We previously identified somatic mutations of RIT1 in 2% of lung adenocarcinomas. , , An additional 24% of lung adenocarcinomas have amplification or overexpression of RIT1 ( and ). Also reminiscent of Ras proteins, germline mutations in RIT1 cause the “RASopathy” Noonan syndrome. In both cancer and Noonan syndrome, RIT1 variants are enriched near the switch II pocket of the GTPase, but unlike Ras proteins, RIT1 variants appear to function via the induction of increased RIT1 protein abundance. , Germline mutation of Rit1 in the mouse phenocopies human Noonan syndrome, and somatic activation of Rit1M90I in the hematopoietic compartment results in myeloproliferative disorder. However, the lack of murine and patient-derived models of mutant RIT1 function in lung cancer has limited the discovery of therapeutic approaches in RIT1-mutant lung cancer. Because RIT1 mutations are mutually exclusive with other EGFR/RAS-pathway driver oncogenes, there is an unmet medical need to develop strategies to target RIT1-mutant tumors. Availability of a mouse model of RIT1-mutant lung cancer would enable new advances for this subset of oncogene-driven lung cancers.
Here, we describe the generation of an autochthonous model of RIT1M90I-mutant lung cancer in which Cre expression induces excision of a lox-STOP-lox cassette and transgenic expression of the cancer-associated RIT1M90I variant. We find that RIT1M90I induction in the murine lung induces weakly penetrant lung tumor formation at long latency. However, combined inactivation of p53 and Nf2 tumor suppressors potently cooperates with RIT1M90I expression to drive an aggressive epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition-like (EMT-like) lung cancer state. Activation of YAP/TEAD, either by an engineered YAP1-stabilizing mutation or by Nf2 loss, synergizes with RIT1M90I to drive an oncogenic program involving the AP-1 transcription factor (TF) cJUN and the EMT TF ZEB1. Pharmacological suppression of RIT1 and YAP activity using MEK and TEAD inhibitors, respectively, suppressed tumor growth, nominating this combination for further investigation as an anti-cancer strategy in human RIT1-mutant lung cancer.

## RESULTS

## RIT1M90I synergizes with p53 and Nf2 loss to drive lung tumorigenesis
To enable in vivo study of mutant RIT1 function, we developed a conditional transgenic model of RIT1M90I, the most recurrent cancer-associated somatic variant of RIT1 ( and ; ). We inserted a lox-stop-lox-RIT1M90I cassette into the Rosa26 locus under endogenous control of the Rosa26 promoter ( and ). B6 founder mice were intercrossed with 129Sv/ImJ wild-type mice, and the line was maintained on a mixed genetic background. Germline activation of RIT1M90I resulted in embryonic lethality, possibly due to differences in Rosa26 activity compared to normal endogenous regulation of murine Rit1 ( ). To generate an autochthonous model of lung-specific RIT1M90I activation, we delivered Cre recombinase to the lungs of heterozygous LSL-RIT1M90I mice and wild-type littermate controls using intratracheal administration of adenovirus serotype 5 (Ad5)CMV-Cre (CMV-Cre) virus ( ). Although recombination of the targeted allele and expression of the transgene were readily observed in the Cre-treated lungs of LSL-RIT1M90I mice ( and ), there was no significant difference in the overall survival of RIT1M90I mice compared to littermate controls ( ). A modestly increased adenoma prevalence was observed in the RIT1M90I-positive mice compared to wild-type controls ( ).
 In human lung tumors with RIT1M90I mutation, over 73% of tumors harbor a co-occurring mutation of TP53, encoding the p53 tumor suppressor, compared to about 53% for all other non-small cell lung cancers ( – ), whereas RIT1 mutations are mutually exclusive with oncogenic KRAS mutations (p = 0.011 by Fisher’s exact test; ; and ). To determine whether RIT1M90I could drive tumor formation with combined Trp53 (hereafter p53) deletion, we generated cohorts of LSL-RIT1M90I heterozygotes in the presence and absence of a conditional Cre-regulated p53 allele. Surprisingly, no significant difference in either survival ( ) or adenoma/carcinoma incidence ( ) was observed between LSL-RIT1M90I animals with intact p53 (p53WT) or homozygous loss of p53 (p53fl/fl). These data contrast with the rapid development of lung adenocarcinomas in murine models of Kras-mutant lung cancer and suggest that RIT1M90I may require additional cooperating events to drive tumorigenesis.
We previously performed genome-wide CRISPR dependency mapping to identify gene knockouts that either suppress RIT1M90I-driven phenotypes or synergize with RIT1M90I to promote oncogenic phenotypes. We showed that loss of Hippo-pathway genes such as NF2 potently synergized with RIT1M90I in models of drug resistance and cancer growth. Importantly, human RIT1-mutant lung adenocarcinomas also show suppression of Hippo pathway gene expression and increased nuclear YAP accumulation, suggesting that Hippo inactivation and subsequent YAP activation may be important co-occurring factors in human RIT1-mutant lung cancer. Indeed, tumors from The Cancer Genome Atlas showed a significant negative correlation between expression of RIT1 and NF2 ( and ; ). NF2 was among the significantly correlated genes in a genome-wide analysis of RIT1-correlated gene expression (q < 0.01; ), whereas other notable tumor suppressors, such as PTEN, showed no correlation with RIT1 expression ( ). These data indicate that NF2 is frequently downregulated in human RIT1-mutant lung cancer.
To model the combined Hippo loss and RIT1 mutation observed in human lung adenocarcinoma, we tested whether Hippo pathway inactivation via Nf2 deletion would modify the ability of RIT1M90I to promote lung cancer. Remarkably, in the context of combined p53/Nf2 deletion, CMV-Cre-induced RIT1M90I expression drove an aggressive lung cancer phenotype, with >95% of animals succumbing to disease within 100 days and 100% penetrance by 1 year ( , , and ) and with significantly shorter latency than tumor formation in p53fl/fl/Nf2fl/fl (“PN”) controls ( ; p < 0.0001 by log rank test). Loss of p53 appeared to be required for tumor formation, as survival was significantly extended in the presence of intact p53 ( ). These data demonstrate that RIT1M90I cooperates with loss of p53 and Nf2 to promote lung tumorigenesis in vivo. Histopathological analysis of the tumors revealed an undifferentiated morphology, with areas of sarcomatoid or adenocarcinoma histology also apparent in some cases ( ). Many of the tumors exhibited mesenchymal morphology but were negative for markers of mesothelioma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and leiomyosarcoma ( ).
The cell of origin of lung adenocarcinoma is thought to be the alveolar type II (AT2) cell. We therefore next generated cohorts of RIT1M90I/p53fl/fl/Nf2fl/fl (“RPN”) and PN mice and delivered Cre via intratracheal delivery of Ad5mSPC-Cre (“SPC-Cre”), which provides AT2-specific Cre expression under control of the murine surfactant protein C promoter. Similar to mice treated with CMV-Cre, intratracheal delivery of SPC-Cre to RPN and PN mice resulted in rapid development of lung tumors ( and ) with a similar histopathology to the CMV-Cre-treated mice. The SPC-Cre RPN cohort also displayed 100% penetrance, with longer average latency than the CMV-Cre cohort ( , , and ). As with the CMV-Cre cohort, the SPC-Cre RPN tumors had more penetrance and a significantly shorter latency compared to the PN controls ( and ).
To confirm RIT1 expression in both models, we derived cell lines from one CMV-Cre-PN (“C-PN”) tumor, two SPC-Cre-RPN (“S-RPN”) tumors, and one CMV-Cre-RPN (“C-RPN”) tumor. Western blot confirmed robust protein expression of RIT1 in the three RIT1M90I-positive cell lines compared to the PN control tumor cells ( ). Tumors could be monitored by microcomputed tomography (microCT) imaging, allowing visualization of tumor growth over time ( ). We identified a tumor growth window of approximately 4 weeks between tumor initiation and deterioration of animal health status due to tumor burden ( ). Altogether, the results of this work establish the RPN model as a new genetically engineered mouse model of lung cancer that will be useful to elucidate RIT1M90I biology and serve as a platform for testing anti-RIT1 therapeutic strategies.

## The tumor microenvironment in RPN lung tumors is enriched for activated tumor-associated macrophages and neutrophils
To better understand the unexpected lineage phenotype of the RPN tumors, we performed single-cell RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) on cells isolated from tumors from two moribund S-RPN mice ( and ). An adjacent normal region of the lung and the tumor-derived S-RPN-1 cell line derived from a different SPC-Cre-treated mouse were also sequenced ( , , and ). Data from 38,192 cells passed initial quality control analysis and filtering, resulting in a dataset of 10,587 cell line-derived cells, 15,130 normal lung-derived cells, and 12,475 tumor-derived cells. Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) clustering revealed a clear cancer cell cluster consisting mainly of cell line and tumor-derived cells that could be identified by expression of the RIT1M90I transgene ( ). Further investigation of the stromal clusters identified ten broad cell types ( ) that were mapped to known cell types using canonical marker genes ( and ; ). Using this approach, we identified B and T lymphocytes, basophils, endothelial cells, epithelial cells, fibroblasts, plasma cells, plasmacytoid dendritic cells, cells of the mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS), neutrophils, and cancer cells ( ).
 To investigate and characterize the immune tumor microenvironment (TME) found in this model, we evaluated the relative proportion of each cell type in the tumor-bearing and normal lung ( ). Reminiscent of a classical pro-tumorigenic myeloid-enriched TME, we observed a marked shift in stromal composition between the tumor and normal lung, with the tumor strongly enriched for MPS cells and neutrophils ( ). MPS cells comprised 28.8% of the normal lung sample but 58.8% of the stromal cells in the tumor ( and ; ****P < 0.0001 by chi-squared test with Yates’s continuity correction). Neutrophils were present in only 8.4% of the normal lung compared to 22.7% of the tumor-bearing lung ( and ; ; ****P < 0.0001 by chi-squared test with Yates’s continuity correction). This MPS-high, neutrophil-high microenvironment is also observed in Kras-mutant mouse lung tumors and has been associated with poor prognosis in human lung cancer. Tumors were also depleted in T, B, and endothelial cells (4.2%, 2.5%, and 3.8%, respectively), whereas T, B, and endothelial cells were abundant in the normal lung (14.0%, 8.6%, and 32.0%, respectively) ( and ; ).
Next, we performed subclustering analyses on the MPS and neutrophil clusters to identify specific cell types and cell states. Fine clustering of the MPS cells identified eight subclusters that could be fine-mapped to different myeloid cell types ( , , and ; ). Conventional and patrolling monocytes (cMonos and pMonos, respectively) could be identified based on differing Ly6C expression ( ) and Vcan and ItgaI expression, respectively ( ). Both monocyte subsets were enriched in normal lung compared to the tumor TME ( and ). Similarly, alveolar macrophages that express Mrc1 and Krt19 were enriched in normal lung ( – ). Two additional macrophage subtypes were identified that both shared an Arg1-high activated macrophage phenotype typical of tumor-associated macrophages or the classic “M2” type ( and ). These two macrophage subsets differed in their expression of Ear1, an RNase involved in lung inflammation ( and ). The Arg1-high macrophage cell types together accounted for over 93% of the MPS cells in the tumor stroma compared to only 22.6% in the normal stroma ( ; ; ****P < 0.0001 by chi-squared test).
Subclustering of the neutrophil cluster revealed at least two subsets of neutrophil phenotypes that resemble the previously described healthy and tumor-associated neutrophil types ( and ). N1 neutrophils had high S100a6, RetnIg, and Ifitm1 expression compared to N2 cells, which expressed high levels of Cdkn1a and Ier3 ( ). A marked shift in the phenotype of neutrophils was observed in the tumor versus normal stroma, with over 80% of neutrophils in the TME displaying the N2 phenotype compared to only 11.1% of neutrophils in the normal stroma ( ; ****P < 0.0001 by Fisher’s exact test). Thus, the TME in tumors from the RPN model is not only enriched for myeloid cells but also undergoes a significant reshaping of myeloid differentiation phenotypes.

## Expression of RIT1M90I in alveolar epithelial cells drives an EMT-like lung cancer state
Next, we focused on the cancer cell cluster in comparison to normal alveolar epithelial cells, including Sftpc-positive alveolar epithelial cells, which are the cell of origin of the tumors generated using SPC-Cre ( ). Cancer cells from both the tumor- and cell line-derived cells retained high expression of epithelial markers such as Krt8 and Krt18 but lost expression of Sftpc and Epcam during tumor evolution ( ). Because RIT1M90I expression is triggered by irreversible Cre-mediated genetic recombination, loss of Sftpc expression does not alter continued expression of the transgene ( ).
 Loss of Nf2 would be predicted to result in the activation of YAP and upregulation of genes regulated by the YAP cofactor, TEAD. As expected, cancer cells expressed high levels of canonical YAP/TEAD targets Ccn1 (also known as Cyr61) and Ccn2 (also known as Ctgf; ), as well as Yap1, Wwtr1, and Tead genes ( ).
Gene set enrichment analysis of the cancer cells versus normal epithelial cells identified EMT and Kras signaling as the top altered pathways in the upregulated genes ( ; ). EMT is a lineage transdifferentiation process frequently observed in cancer in which epithelial cells lose markers of epithelial differentiation and gain mesenchymal markers and phenotypes. Classically, EMT is accompanied by a switch from epithelial-type cadherin (Cdh1) to mesenchymal cadherins, including Cdh2, encoding N-cadherinencoding N-cadherin. Top upregulated mesenchymal genes in the tumors cells included Cdh2, Zeb1 and Vim, encoding Vimentin ( , , , and ; ). However, cancer cells in the RPN model did not fully mimic the classic EMT switch because while some epithelial markers, such as Sftpc and Epcam ( ), were lost, others, including Cdh1 (E-cadherin), were maintained ( and ).
To further characterize the EMT-like phenotype in additional mice, pathology analysis of tumors based on morphology identified heterogeneity in the tumor phenotype ranging from more epithelial-like differentiation to more mesenchymal-like, with transitional tumors exhibiting mixed features of both ( ; ). Mesenchymal-like tumors exhibited spindled, elongated neoplastic cells arranged in bundles, streams, and whorls, with moderate pleomorphism, frequent bizarre mitoses, and multinucleated giant cells. Epithelial-like tumors consisted of neoplastic epithelial cells arranged in haphazard trabeculae and occasional acini, displaying moderate to marked pleomorphism. The transitional phenotype encompassed tumors that exhibited features of both epithelial and mesenchymal morphology.
Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of various epithelial or mesenchymal markers was performed, which further confirmed the heterogeneity of expression of epithelial and mesenchymal markers ( ). IHC analysis validated Vimentin expression either widely throughout tumors or with mixed positivity ( and ; ), and tumors variably expressed high or low levels of N-cadherin and E-cadherin ( ; ). qPCR of the tumor-derived S-RPN-1 cell line confirmed the co-expression of both Cdh2 and Cdh1 ( ), as well as the expression of canonical YAP/TEAD target genes Ccn1 and Ccn2 and others ( ).
While tumor cells therefore retained some markers of epithelial-like differentiation, they also simultaneously expressed markers of EMT ( and and ). This mixed expression of both mesenchymal and epithelial markers has been observed as a common feature in cancer, termed “intermediate EMT,” “partial EMT,” or “EMT-like.” Taken together, these data suggested to us that combined expression of mutant RIT1 and loss of p53/Nf2 results in an aggressive lung cancer with an EMT-like cellular phenotype.

## RIT1 and YAP promote cJUN expression and EMT transcriptional programs
The Nf2 tumor suppressor is a critical upstream Hippo signal transducer and negative regulator of the oncoprotein YAP1. To model the synergy observed between RIT1M90I and Hippo pathway inactivation, we used human small airway lung epithelial (SALE) cells with ectopic expression of RIT1M90I and YAP18SA, a Hippo-insensitive mutant of YAP1 with enhanced nuclear localization and stability. We previously showed that SALE cells can be transformed by the expression of RIT1M90I together with either NF2 knockout or expression of YAP18SA. We confirmed that combined RIT1M90I and YAP18SA expression synergized to promote growth in low attachment (GILA) compared to individual expression of each oncogene or the parental control cells ( ). To investigate the transcriptional programs underlying this phenotype, we analyzed bulk RNA-seq data from this isogenic series of SALE cells ( and ). Both RIT1M90I and YAP18SA independently modulated transcriptional programs compared to parental cells ( ). Furthermore, combined RIT1M90I and YAP18SA expression markedly altered the transcriptome program in SALE, with the induction and repression of hundreds of genes uniquely in the SALE-RIT1M90I/YAP18SA (SALE-RY) co-expressed cells ( and ; ). To investigate the gene programs uniquely regulated under RIT1M90I and YAP18SA co-activation, we performed gene set enrichment analysis using the MSigDB database. Similar to results in the mouse model ( ), EMT was the top hallmark pathway upregulated in SALE-RY cells compared to either vector control or cells expressing only activated YAP18SA ( ; ). A core conserved set of 45 upregulated and 259 downregulated genes was differentially expressed in both the human SALE-RY model and the S-RPN mouse model ( ), including upregulation of VIM and the YAP/TEAD target gene TNNT2 ( ).
 The extensive rewiring of the transcriptional program in SALE-RY cells suggested to us that RIT1M90I might alter transcriptional regulation. To identify TFs involved in the oncogenic phenotype of SALE-RY cells, we performed motif enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes in SALE-RY cells. Differentially expressed up- and downregulated genes in the SALE-RY cells were significantly enriched for the TGANTCA motif of the AP-1 TF family ( ). The downregulation of genes containing EMT master regulator AREB6 (ZEB1) binding sites was significantly enriched in SALE-RY cells relative to vector control ( ) and further enriched relative to cells with single expression of either RIT1M90I or YAP18SA ( ). Western blot of SALE-RY cells identified significant upregulation of the AP-1 TFs cJUN and FOSL1 (also known as FRA1) in SALE-RY cells compared to single-expressing or parental SALE cells ( – ). Thus, RIT1 and YAP1 increase levels of AP-1 TFs cJUN and FRA1 and modulate AP-1-regulated gene sets.

## RIT1 and YAP1 cooperate to promote AP-1 activity
Immunofluorescence of YAP and cJUN localization in SALE cells further confirmed the enhanced cJUN abundance in SALE-RY cells ( – ). As expected, nuclear YAP staining was increased in the YAP18SA cells ( – ). Importantly, cJUN localization was highly nuclear in SALE-RY cells and showed increased nuclear abundance compared to cells individually expressing RIT1M90I or YAP18SA ( and ). Further supporting a cooperative role for RIT1M90I and YAP18SA in stimulating AP-1 activity, the combination of RIT1M90I and YAP18SA expression induced activity of an AP-1 luciferase reporter in HEK293T cells beyond activity induced by either oncogene individually ( and ). Last, we tested whether AP-1 activity was functionally required for tumor growth driven by combined RIT1M90I and YAP18SA expression. Inhibition of AP-1 activity using a dominant-negative version of cJUN (“TAM67”) that lacks its transactivation domain inhibited tumor growth of SALE-RY cells in vivo ( – ). Together, these data show that RIT1 and YAP cooperate to promote the expression and activity of AP-1 TFs.
 

## RIT1 and YAP promote ZEB1 chromatin binding
To understand the mechanism of transcriptional reprogramming in SALE-RY cells, we performed chromatin profiling using “cleavage under targets and release using nuclease” (CUT&RUN). A high-throughput CUT&RUN experiment was performed across the four isogenic cell lines, assaying chromatin binding of six TFs and four histone modification marks. Considering the enrichment for AP-1 and ZEB1 motifs in the RNA-seq analysis, we focused on the primary AP-1 complex (cJUN and FOSL1), ZEB1, and Hippo pathway transcriptional regulators TAZ, YAP1, and TEAD, the latter of which we assayed using a “panTEAD” antibody recognizing all four TEAD-family transcription factors found in humans. Genomic loci bound by each TF ( ) were significantly enriched for known motifs of each TF ( ) with a large set of overlapping peaks. Further, strong reprogramming of differential peak binding was observed across all TFs when comparing peaks to SALE parental cells ( ). Focusing on unique peaks, for each cell line condition, SALE-RY cells showed the highest proportion of unique peaks for all TFs tested, except for panTEAD, which showed the highest proportion of unique peaks in YAP18SA cells ( ; ). Furthermore, ZEB1 had the highest number of chromatin-bound peaks in SALE-RY cells compared to other SALE isogenic lines ( and ), with increased peak occupancy in SALE-RIT1M90I and SALE-RY cells at promoter (promoter-transcriptional start site [TSS]) and intronic loci ( ). Like ZEB1, all other TFs assayed, except for panTEAD, showed a clear increase of genome-binding activity in SALE-RY cells ( ; ).
 Next, peaks were assigned to promoters if the chromosomal location was +100 bp to −1 kb from an annotated TSS. Overlap analysis was performed for all promoter-associated peaks identified in SALE-RY cells, showing that the majority of all promoter-bound peaks were bound by ZEB1, often in higher-order complexes of multiple TFs ( ). Further, ZEB1 genome-binding activity at enhancers, defined by the presence of H3K27ac and H3K4me1 and the absence of H3K27me1, was also increased in the SALE-RY cells, suggesting multiple modes of transcriptional reprogramming ( ). Interestingly, motif analysis for all TFs in SALE-RY cells finds the top hit to be the canonical AP-1 motif ( ), suggesting that ZEB1, YAP1, TEAD, and JUN coordinately bind genomic loci containing the AP-1 motif TGANTCA.
To understand the functional output of this chromatin binding, we integrated CUT&RUN peak data with the RNA-seq gene expression data ( ). Among the assayed TFs, genes with ZEB1-bound promoters were the most represented among up- and downregulated genes ( and ). Higher-order TF complexes, such as ZEB1/TAZ together or ZEB1/TAZ/JUN, were also frequently observed at the promoters of differentially expressed genes ( and ). Genes with ZEB1 bound at promoters make up 44% of the upregulated genes and 29.9% of the downregulated genes in SALE-RY, suggesting an important role for ZEB1 in directly influencing transcriptional reprogramming in these cells ( ). Gene set enrichment analysis , of ZEB1-bound peaks in upregulated ( ) and downregulated ( ) gene sets identified ZEB1 involvement in the expression of EMT-related genes, including downregulation of E-cadherin (CDH1) and upregulation of KISS1 ( – ), recently linked to enhanced metastatic potential of prostate cancer. Higher-order TF binding was evident at the known ZEB1 target gene VIM, as well as pan-TF binding to the KISS1 locus ( and ). Other known targets of these TFs were identified, including CTGF (CCN2), ANKRD1, and a ZEB1-only peak, LLGL2 ( ).
To understand the hierarchy of these TF networks, we tested whether inhibition of cJUN activity in the S-RPN-1 cell line would alter cell growth or EMT-like phenotypes ( , , and ). Knockdown of Jun resulted in growth inhibition ( ) and loss of Zeb1 protein expression ( and ), suggesting that cJun may act upstream of Zeb1 by regulating Zeb1 expression. Taken together, these data show broad activity of AP-1, YAP1/TEAD, and ZEB1 alone and in higher-order complexes in both the human-derived SALE-RY model and murine-derived S-RPN-1 model that appear to regulate EMT-related gene expression programs via direct chromatin binding.
 

## Combined MEK and TEAD inhibition suppresses growth of RIT1M90I-mutant lung cancer cells
RIT1 is a non-canonical RAS GTPase that shares with canonical RAS proteins the ability to activate MEK/ERK signaling via BRAF or CRAF. cJUN abundance is responsive to upstream mitogenic growth factor signaling by ERK and JNK and has been linked to drug resistance and phenotype switching in BRAF-mutant melanoma. , We therefore tested whether MEK inhibition with the small molecule trametinib could suppress the oncogenic growth of SALE-RY cells, alone or in combination with VT104, an analog of VT3989, a pan-TEAD autopalmitoylation inhibitor that suppresses TEAD-mediated transcription and has shown encouraging results in clinical development. Increasing doses of trametinib and VT104 completely prevented growth in low attachment of SALE-RY cells, confirming that MEK and TEAD are important mediators of the oncogenic synergy of RIT1M90I and YAP18SA ( ). S-RPN-1 cells were sensitive to single-agent trametinib treatment (IC50 = 0.426 μM), single-agent TEAD inhibition with VT104 (IC50 = 0.397 μM) or VT107 (IC50 = 0.227 μM), and, to a lesser extent, TEAD1 inhibition with VT103 (IC50 = 4.66 μM). Importantly, a less active enantiomer of VT104, VT106, showed markedly reduced activity (IC50 > 9 μM) ( ). Combined trametinib and TEAD inhibition of either pan-TEAD (VT104 or VT107) or TEAD1 (VT103) provided the best cell growth inhibition ( ; range: 43–57 nM). These data demonstrate cooperativity between MEK and TEAD inhibition in S-RPN-1 cells and suggest that combined inhibition of TEAD and MEK might provide a clinical benefit in RIT1-mutant lung cancer.
To test this hypothesis in vivo, we developed a subcutaneous allograft flank model using S-RPN-1 cells ( ). Treatment of tumor-bearing mice with single-agent VT104 or trametinib provided 30% tumor growth inhibition at day 29 (adjusted p < 0.0001 by one-way ANOVA), while combination treatment substantially reduced tumor growth, providing 65% tumor growth inhibition ( ; adjusted p < 0.0001 compared to either single agent by one-way ANOVA; and ) and extended progression-free survival ( ). Having established typical tumor growth kinetics in the autochthonous RPN model by microCT ( ), we identified a tumor-bearing S-RPN mouse and treated it with VT104 and trametinib. Combination treatment resulted in tumor regression of two lesions of −62% and −82% over 30 days of treatment ( and – ), whereas untreated tumor lesions typically grow substantially in these models ( ). These data identify the critical role of both MEK and TEAD in the growth of RPN tumors in both allograft and autochthonous models.

## DISCUSSION
RIT1 shares ~50% amino acid identity with canonical Ras proteins HRAS, KRAS, and NRAS. , Germline variants in RIT1 underlie the RASopathy, Noonan syndrome, also caused by germline variants in KRAS and NRAS. However, unlike canonical Ras genes, which are among the most frequently mutated genes in cancer, RIT1 is mutated only in 1%–2% of various solid cancers and myeloid malignancies. The biological mechanisms that may explain this difference are not understood, and insight into the mechanisms governing oncogenic activity of Ras-family GTPases has important implications for tumor therapy, as inhibition of Ras GTPases for cancer therapy has regained attention with the recent successful development of direct inhibitors of KRASG12C. , , 
RIT1 mutations in lung cancer cluster near the switch II domain, which is believed to be involved in protein-protein interactions and effector binding. 
RIT1 mutations in lung cancer are mutually exclusive with KRAS mutations and, like KRAS mutations, can confer resistance to EGFR inhibition and promote cell transformation. , Due to the extensive similarity in structure and function between RIT1 and Ras proteins, it is therefore surprising that RIT1M90I expression alone was insufficient to promote a significant tumor growth phenotype and showed little cooperation with p53 loss. One potential explanation for this disconnect between Ras and RIT1 activity in vivo could be the importance of RIT1 protein abundance to its function and the potentially weak expression of transgenic RIT1M90I driven by the endogenous Rosa26 promoter. RIT1 protein level is believed to be key to its oncogenic function, as the M90I variant disrupts LZTR1-mediated degradation of RIT1, and wild-type RIT1 overexpression phenocopies mutant RIT1. Thus, modeling RIT1M90I expression from its endogenous promoter or via transgenic overexpression might lead to increased protein expression and accelerated RIT1M90I-driven tumorigenesis. Indeed, two complementary studies recently reported additional RIT1-mutant lung cancer models using these alternative approaches , .
Another explanation for the mild lung cancer phenotype driven by RIT1M90I alone could be the requirement for cooperating genetic factors. This explanation is also consistent with the rare mutational frequency of RIT1 in cancer. If RIT1 mutations only confer a selective advantage to lung cells in the context of other genetic events, then the frequency of RIT1 mutations observed in cancer would be lower than those mutations that are sufficient to promote a selective advantage on their own, such as KRAS. KRAS is known to promote AP-1 activity, so it is conceivable that RIT1 may more weakly promote AP-1 activity compared to KRAS and therefore require separate co-activation of YAP1 to drive tumorigenesis.
Hippo pathway inactivation and YAP nuclear accumulation occur in human RIT1-mutant lung adenocarcinoma. Therefore, in the present work, we tested whether modeling combined RIT1M90I/PN mutation would result in enhanced tumor growth in vivo. Incredibly, this combined mutation resulted in lethal lung tumor development in only weeks, confirming the unique oncogenic synergy between RIT1M90I, p53 loss, and Hippo inactivation. The Hippo signaling pathway is a tumor-suppressive pathway that links signals from the external cell adhesion matrix to cell growth decisions mediated by downstream YAP/TEAD activation. Because RIT1, like Nf2, is known to bind to the plasma membrane, it seems possible that RIT1 might impart its regulation of Hippo/YAP activity near the membrane or in the cytosol. However, it was surprising that mutant RIT1 cooperated not only with upstream Hippo inactivation via Nf2 loss but also with the constitutively active YAP18SA variant. YAP18SA lacks the phosphorylation sites used by LATS kinases to phosphorylate YAP and retain it in the cytosol for degradation and should therefore be insensitive to upstream changes in Hippo pathway regulation. This knowledge led us to hypothesize that the mechanism of synergy between RIT1 and YAP lies somewhere in the nucleus, likely through transcriptional regulation. In support of this hypothesis, RNA-seq of both the murine tumor model and SALE-RY cells revealed altered regulation of genes with binding sites for the AP-1 TF cJUN, which we showed was overexpressed in SALE-RY cells. These data link RIT1 to an AP-1 transcriptional program shown to alter chromatin binding of the TEAD TFs that transmit YAP’s oncogenic signaling. Interestingly, while AP-1 and YAP1 are canonical transcriptional activators and ZEB1 is a canonical repressor, CUT&RUN chromatin profiling identified these TFs at promoters of both activated and repressed genes, alone and in higher-order complexes. This finding adds to the growing literature , that AP-1, YAP1, and ZEB1 can all function as transcriptional activators or repressors, depending on context.
The tumor phenotype in RPN and PN mice was heterogeneous but typically highly undifferentiated or mesenchymal in phenotype. Unexpectedly, this mesenchymal-like tumor could be initiated not only by CMV-Cre but also by SPC-Cre, which restricts induction of the RPN or PN mutations to AT2 cells, the likely cell of origin of lung adenocarcinoma. We propose a model that can reconcile this paradox: RPN mutation in AT2 cells likely promotes both tumor formation and a cell lineage transition resembling EMT. This model is in agreement with a growing understanding that lung squamous cell carcinoma, lung adenocarcinoma, and small cell lung cancer can all be created from multiple different cells of origin in murine models. Moreover, in both human prostate cancer and lung cancer, it is now well established that tumors can develop resistance to androgen receptor- or EGFR-targeted therapies via histologic transformation to neuroendocrine cancer. Thus, we now understand that apparent tumor cell state is not linked with fidelity to the cell of origin.
Despite decades of concerted effort in the establishment of cancer cell line models from the Cancer Cell Line Factory, Cancer Dependency Map, and others, the representation of rare molecular subtypes of cancer, such as RIT1-mutant lung cancer, is limited. Yet, cell line- and patient-derived xenograft models are essential for the discovery and pre-clinical validation of new strategies for cancer therapy. Our development of a new autochthonous model of RIT1M90I-mutant lung cancer enabled us to identify Hippo pathway inactivation as a critical synergistic event with oncogenic RIT1M90I. These functional data, combined with the frequent YAP activation and Hippo inactivation observed in human RIT1-mutant lung cancer, nominate MEK and TEAD targeting as a new approach for cancer therapy of RIT1-mutant lung cancer.

## Limitations of the study
The data presented here establish a conditional autochthonous RIT1M90I-mutant lung cancer model with utility for studying the role of RIT1 in lung cancer. The Cre-regulated allele in this model is a knockin of human RIT1M90I to the Rosa26 locus. A potential limitation of using human RIT1 is that it may stimulate an immune response in the mouse host, as can be observed for other transgenes. The Rosa26 locus will also not recapitulate normal expression patterns of the endogenous Rit1 gene, which may explain why embryonic lethality was observed in our germline model ( ). Use of models with endogenous manipulation of Rit1 therefore may be more suitable to study Noonan syndrome.
Our work to understand the mechanism of RIT1 and YAP1 synergy led us to a deep exploration of the TF networks in SALE cells, which showed that ZEB1 and cJUN are activated in cells with combined RIT1/YAP1 mutation. However, the precise role of each TF in the regulation of the hundreds of differentially expressed genes remains to be uncovered. In addition, the upstream regulation resulting in this transcriptional rewiring remains to be elucidated.
Last, the histopathology of the mouse model appeared unexpectedly mesenchymal-like, which differs from typical human lung adenocarcinomas. This difference in morphology may be due to differences between mice and humans, or it is possible that other genes co-mutated with RIT1 in human lung cancer help to promote a more well-differentiated tumor morphology. Future work using this model and others should help to clarify these uncertainties and continue to clarify the role of RIT1 in normal biology and cancer.

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Requests for further information and resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Dr. Alice H. Berger (ahberger@fredhutch.org).

## Materials availability
The LSL-RIT1M90I mouse strain and plasmids generated in this study are available from the with a completed materials transfer agreement.

## Data and code availability
Single-cell RNA-seq data and CUT&RUN genomic data have been deposited at GEO and are available under accession numbers GEO: GSE302412 and GSE302452.
RNA-seq data of SALE are from a prior publication and are available at GEO: GSE165631.
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## STAR★METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following:

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

## Mouse experiments and strains
All animal experiments were carried out with approval by and in accordance with the ethical guidelines of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (Protocol #50967, PI: Berger). Experiments were performed in the Fred Hutch Comparative Medicine facility, which is fully accredited by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC) and complies with all United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Public Health Service (PHS), Washington State and local area animal welfare regulations. Mice were housed in HEPA ventilated cages on a 12-h light-dark cycle. Support of the in vivo work was performed by trained technicians. For analysis of mice with germline activation of RIT1M90I, LSL-RIT1M90I mice were crossed with hemizygous mice expressing Cre under the SRY-box containing gene 2 promoter (Jackson Laboratory #008454). This line reportedly harbors some Cre recombinase activity in Cre-zygotes when delivered from female Cre+ breeders, although consistent recombination Cre-offspring from Cre+ dams was not observed in our hands. For analysis of lung tumor initiation, Rosa26-LSL-RIT1M90I mice were crossed with mice containing a conditional Trp53 allele (Jackson Laboratory #008462) or a conditional Nf2 allele (Riken strain RBRC02344) .

## Generation of the LSL-RIT1M90I mouse model
LSL-RIT1M90I genetically engineered mice were generated by homologous recombination of a targeting cassette containing 5′ and 3′ homology arms to the mouse Rosa26 locus and carrying an insert consisting of human RIT1 cDNA with an ATG>ATA p.M90I mutation. Human RIT1 was chosen for the utility of using this model to develop therapeutics against human RIT1, and because other mouse lung cancer models have been successfully generated using human cDNAs, such as the widely used EGFR transgenic model. Human (Uniprot ID: Q92963) and mouse RIT1 protein (Uniprot ID: P70426) are >95% identical and 99% similar by protein alignment using Clustal Omega. We previously showed that human RIT1 M90I can transform mouse cells. The targeting cassette was generated by cloning the human RIT1 p.m.90I cDNA sequence first into the pBTG plasmid using NheI and XhoI sites. pBTG (pBigT-IRES-GFP; DM#268) was a gift from Douglas Melton (Addgene plasmid # 15037; http://n2t.net/addgene:15037; RRID:Addgene_15037). The RIT1-IRES-GFP cassette was then subcloned into the pRosa26PAm1 backbone by restriction cloning using PacI and AscI sites. pRosa26PAm1 (DM#272) was a gift from Douglas Melton (Addgene plasmid #15036; http://n2t.net/addgene:15036; RRID:Addgene_15036). The targeting vector was verified by restriction digest and sequencing. Gene targeted CJ7 ES cells and chimeric mice were created at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital (BWH) Transgenic Core Facility. The construct was linearized using MluI and electroporated into CJ7 cells, followed by positive selection with neomycin and negative selection with diphtheria toxin. Selected clones were screened by three PCR assays to ensure proper recombination. First, presence/absence of the neomycin cassette was assessed with primers specific for the neomycin cassette. Second, correct integration was confirmed using PCR from the insert across the 5′ arm and into the endogenous locus. Last, correct integration on the 3′ end was assessed using PCR from the insert across the 3′ arm into the 3′ endogenous locus. Clones 5 and 6 were selected for chimera generation. Chimeras from both clones were crossed to wild-type C57BL/6 mice and both clones had successful germline transmission of the LSL-RIT1M90I allele. Offspring were genotyped by analysis of tail or ear punch tissue using genotyping assays at Transnetyx. Animals generated from clone 5 ES cells were used for all subsequent experiments and were maintained on a mixed 129/B6 genetic background. To facilitate transfer from the BWH Transgenic Core to the Broad Institute, additional mice were generated by in vitro fertilization at Charles River Laboratories. Breeding and experimental animals were then transferred to Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, with the experiments described performed at Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center.

## Cell lines and cell culture
Mouse primary cells (C-PN, S-RPN-1, S-RPN-2 and C-RPN) were isolated from mouse lung tumors, minced and plated on standard tissue culture plates in RPMI-1640 (Gibco) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) with 1% Antibiotic-Antimycotic (ThermoFisher). SALE human lung epithelial cells were a gift of Dr. William Hahn (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute). SALE cells were grown in small airway epithelial growth media (SAGM) supplemented with SAGM aliquots (Lonza) and maintained on collagen coated plates throughout the experimental assays. HEK293T (ATCC CRL-3216) cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM, Genesee Scientific) supplemented with 10% FBS. CJ7 ES cells were maintained by the BWH Transgenic Core Facility as described above. All cells were cultured at 37°C in 5% CO2 and routinely tested for mycoplasma.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Intratracheal adenovirus delivery
10–12 week old male and female mice were anesthetized with avertin and virus was delivered intratracheally as previously described . Ad5CMV-Cre and Ad5mSPC-Cre adenovirus was obtained from the University of Iowa Viral vector core (VVC-U of Iowa-5-HT and VVC-Berns-1168-HT, respectively) and administered in 75 μL of a DMEM and CaCl2 solution containing 1.13*1010 PFU/mL adenovirus. Mice were on study until the humane endpoint or 20% body weight loss was reached. At endpoint mice were anesthetized with a 2.5% solution of avertin (2,2,2-tribromoethyl alcohol, Aldrich T4,840–2) with tert-amyl alcohol (Aldrich 24,048–6) diluted in PBS. Lungs were exposed, the left renal artery was cut and PBS was perfused through the right ventricle. An incision was made in the upper trachea to inflate the lungs with low melting point agarose (Fisher Scientific, PR-V2831). Lungs were excised and collected for downstream experiments.

## RIT1 mutational analysis in human lung cancer
Mutations of RIT1 in human non-small-cell lung cancer cases were identified in data aggregated by the AACR Project GENIE v17.0 and accessed using genie.cbioportal.org. Data is provided in . Mutations, copy number alteration, and mRNA expression data for RIT1 were analyzed in data generated by The Cancer Genome Atlas for the 230 published cases with complete data. Cases with mRNA expression with Z > 2 compared to diploid samples were considered to have RIT1 overexpression. Data is provided in .

## MicroCT imaging and 3D-Slicer segmentation
Lung CT scans were acquired via respiratory-gated high-speed micro-CT lung 3D datasets (Quantum GX2 micro-CT, PerkinElmer) with 90 kV tube voltage, 88 μA tube current, 36mm FOV, 72 μm voxel size, and a total scan time of 4 min per mouse. All data analyzed was from the expiratory dataset resulting from the respiratory-gated output. A tungsten anode is the X-ray source in this scanner and a fixed filter of 0.5 mm aluminum (Al) and 0.06 mm copper (Cu) is placed in front of the exit port to remove low-energy X-rays that contribute to dose but do not improve image quality. One scan gives a radiation dose of 912 mGy. For quantification of tumor nodules, segmentation was performed in 3D-Slicer (https://www.slicer.org/) as previously described. 

## Histopathology and immunohistochemistry
Lungs were harvested as described above and fixed in 10% formalin for 24–48 h while rocking at 4°C. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, as well as immunohistochemical (IHC) staining was performed by the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center Experimental Histopathology shared resource (RRID:SCR_022612). Fixed lungs were embedded in paraffin and sectioned at 4–5 μm onto charged slides. Slides with paraffin sections were baked at 60°C, processed using an automated Stainer (Sakura Tissue-Tek Prisma) for Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining, and coverslipped with permanent mounting media. IHC was performed on a Leica Bond RX automated stainer (Leica Biosystems, Buffalo Grove, IL) using Leica Bond reagents. Endogenous peroxidase was blocked with 3% H2O2 for 5 min followed by protein blocking with TCT buffer (0.05M Tris, 0.15M NaCl, 0.25% Casein, 0.1% Tween 20, and 0.05% Proclin 300 at pH 7.6 ± 0.1) for 10 min. Heat induced epitope retrieval was performed in a pH 9.0 buffer. Primary antibodies (Desmin M0760, Vimentin NB300-223, SMA M0851, E-cadherin 3195, N-cadherin ab18203, Mesothelin MBS2528505, and Cytokeratin WS ab9377) were incubated for one hour and secondary polymers (Rabbit Polymer HRP) were applied, followed by Mixed Refine DAB (Leica DS9800) for 10 min and counterstained with Refine Hematoxylin (Leica DS9800) for 4 min after which slides were dehydrated, cleared and coverslipped with permanent mounting media. Tumors were classified as epithelial-like, mesenchymal-like, and transitional based on cellular morphology of H&E stained tumor sections. Slides were examined by two board-certified veterinary pathologists (AK and RG). Whole slides stained with H&E were scanned using TissueFAXs slide scanner at 2.5×/0.075 (air) and then the field of view (FOV) was taken at 10×/0.3 (air) then stitched together (TissueGnostics).

## Single-cell RNA-sequencing of RIT1M90I-mutant lung cancer
Two RIT1M90I/p53fl/fl/Nf2fl/fl mice were euthanized ~20 weeks after Ad5mSPC-Cre treatment and tumor tissue and adjacent normal lung (from one experimental mouse) were resected. The tissue was dissociated using the mouse Tumor Dissociation Kit (Miltenyi Biotech, 130-096-730) following the suggested manufacturer’s protocol. The dissociated cells were pelleted, resuspended in RPMI 1640 and filtered through the MACS SmartStrainer (Miltenyi Biotech). The resulting cell suspension was centrifuged at 300 rcf for 7 min at room temperature, followed by supernatant removal and resuspension of cell pellet in Red Blood Lysis Solution (Fisher Scientific, AAJ62150AP). Cells were then incubated at 4°C for 3 min and washed with 0.04% BSA in DPBS, following another centrifugation at 300 rcf for 4 min. The cell pellet was resuspended in 0.04% BSA in DPBS for use in single cell library preparation. Another sample was prepared from isolated primary cells (S-RPN-1) by standard trypsinization and washing. For all reactions a targeted recovery of 10,000 cells/reaction was prepared for each library. In total there were four distinct samples with six libraries as some samples were split into multiple reactions. Single cell sequencing libraries were generated using the Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3ʹ Library and Gel Bead kit v3.1 (Dual Index) as per the manufacturer’s protocol. Libraries were sequenced on a NextSeq 2000 (Illumina) at the Fred Hutch Genomics Shared Resource. The reads generated after sequencing were aligned in CellRanger v7.1.0 to a modified mm10 mouse reference in which the RIT1M90I transgene reference sequence was added. All further analysis of the resulting count matrices was performed in Python (v3.9) following standard scanpy pipelines. Cells with fewer than 100 genes detected were excluded. Similarly, genes were excluded if present in fewer than 3 cells. Further filtering for doublets was done using scVI. Cells with >20% mitochondrial reads were also excluded. After filtering, 38,192 cells were obtained for analysis from six 10× Chromium reactions. Count data was normalized using median count depth normalization followed by log transformation by selecting 4000 highly variable genes and then by integration of the six libraries using scVI. Finally, a neighborhood graph was constructed with cosine as the similarity matrix and the dataset was clustered using Leiden clustering and UMAP visualization. The final clustering led to formation of 11 separate subsets which were manually verified for proper separation for different major cell types. For each cluster, the top 100 ranked genes compared to other clusters were identified using the Wilcoxon test method. Through the Decoupler package, PanglaoDB was queried using these genes to find the top predicted cell type, and some of these top ranked genes were labeled as marker genes after referring to the literature. The following are the marker genes used to identify the cell types: B-cells: Cd79b, Ms4a1, Cd19; Basophils: Cpa3, Il6, Gata2; Endothelial cells: Pecam1, Egfl7, Cd93; Epithelial cells: Cldn3, Sftpc, Epcam; Fibroblasts: Col3a1, Dcn, Fbln2; Mononuclear Phagocyte System (MPS): Sirpa, Csf1r, Lyz2; Neutrophils: S100a8, S100a9, Mmp9; Plasma cells: Sdc1, Slamf7; T-cells: Cd3e, Lck, Cd3d; Cancer: Cdkn2a, RIT1, Cdh2; Plasmacytoid Dendritic cells (pDC): Siglech, Ccr9, Klk1.

## Quantitative RT-PCR
Cell lysates were collected using Trizol (Zymo Research), and total RNA extracted using the Zymo RNA extraction kit (Zymo Research) per manufacturer’s instructions, including on-column Dnase digestion. 1–2μg of RNA was moved forward to an RT reaction using the High Capacity cDNA kit (ThermoFisher). cDNA reactions were amplified using listed primers in technical triplicate, in 10 μL reactions with Power UP Sybr Green Master Mix (ThermoFisher) using the CFX384 Real-Time System (BioRad). For primer sequences see .

## SALE RNA-sequencing analysis and motif enrichment
Bulk RNA-sequencing of isogenic SALE cells (parental, RIT1M90I, YAP18SA, and RIT1M90I + YAP18SA) have been previously described and are available from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under dataset ID #GSE165631. Note that in prior work and at Addgene, the YAP18SA mutant has also been referred to as YAP5SA. Differentially expressed genes in each comparison were determined using the Broad Institute’s Morpheus software (https://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus/) marker enrichment tool by the mean difference method. The top 100 upregulated or top 100 downregulated genes were used to query MSigDB using the Investigate Gene Sets Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) method after excluding the ectopically expressed RIT1 and YAP1 genes.

## Immunofluorescence
Cells were plated on collagen-coated coverslips in a 6 well plate. After 24 h, the cells were rinsed with PBS, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with 0.25% Triton X-100 in PBS, and then blocked in 1% BSA in PBS + 0.1% Tween 20 (A9647-10G Millipore) for one hour. Primary antibodies were diluted in 50 μL 1% BSA PBST with 1:200 cJUN (60A8) (Cell Signaling Technology, 9165) and 1:50 YAP (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-101199) and incubated at 4°C overnight. Cover slips were washed in PBST and incubated in secondary antibody for an hour (see ). Cells were mounted with ProLong Diamond Antifade Mountant with DAPI (Fisher Scientific) and left overnight before imaging using a Stellaris 8 confocal microscope (Leica).

## CUT&RUN library preparation and sequencing
Isogenic SALE cells were collected and prepared for AutoCUT&RUN. Briefly, 12 million cells per cell line were collected by trypsinization, washed extensively in Wash Buffer (20mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 0.5mM Spermidine (Cell Signaling Technology), and 1 large Roche complete EDTA-free protease tablet per 50mL solution). Concanavalin A beads (Bangs Laboratories, ca. no. BP531) were activated through repeated washing in Binding Buffer (20mM HEPES-KOS pH 7.9, 10mM KCl, 1mM CaCl2, 1mM MnCl2), and prepared at 10 μL per sample. Beads were added under gentle vortex, and incubated rocking at room temperature for 8 min. Bead-cell complexes were collected by magnet separation, buffer removed, and bead-cell complexes were resuspended in Antibody Buffer (0.1% Triton X-100, 2mM EDTA). Each cell line sample was then split into two technical replicates per cell line, per antibody. The following antibodies were used: YAP1 (Abcam #ab52771); TAZ (CST #4883); panTEAD (CST #13295); cJUN (CST #9165); FOSL1 (Abcam #ab252421); H3K4me3 (CST #9751); H3K4me1 (CST #5326); H3K27me3 (CST #9733); H3K27ac (CST #8173); Pol II (CST #13523); ZEB1 (Abcam #ab155249); IgG control (CST #3900). Primary antibodies were added to a final dilution of 1:100 and incubated for 2hrs rotating at 4°C. Samples were processed for AutoCUT&RUN by arraying in a 96 well PCR plate and processed on a Beckman Biomek i7 liquid handling instrument equipped with a 96S Super Magnet Plate (Alpaqua SKU A001322) for magnetic separation of samples during wash steps, and a QInstruments ColdPlate heater-cooler thermo block (QInstruments no. 2016-0110) with a 96 well PCR plate adapter (Qinstruments no. 2016-1041) to perform the MNase digestion reaction at 4°C after the addition of 2 mM CaCl2. MNase digestion reactions are then stopped after 120 min by adding EGTA, which allows Mg2+ addition for subsequent enzymatic reactions. Chromatin fragments released into the supernatant during digestion are then used as the substrate for end-repair and ligation with barcoded Y-adapters. Prior to ligation, the A-tailing step is performed at 58°C to preserve sub-nucleosomal fragments in the library. End-repair and adapter ligation reactions are performed on a separate thermocycler. Chromatin proteins are then digested with Proteinase K, and adapter ligated DNA fragments are purified on the Biomek i7 using two rounds of pre-PCR Ampure bead cleanup with size selection. PCR enrichment reactions are performed on a thermocycler using the KAPA PCR kit (KAPA Cat#KK2502). Two rounds of post-PCR Ampure bead cleanup with size selection are performed on the Biomek i7 to remove unwanted proteins and self-ligated adapters. The size distributions of AutoCUT&RUN libraries are analyzed on an Agilent 4200 TapeStation, and gated size and quantification values are used to calculate sample library yields for pooling. Up to 96 barcoded AutoCUT&RUN libraries are pooled at equimolar concentration for paired-end 50 × 50 bp sequencing on an Illumina NextSeq P2 platform at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center Genomics Shared Resource.

## CUT&RUN data analysis
Trim Galore (https://github.com/FelixKrueger/TrimGalore) was used to examine read quality and trim adapters. Reads were aligned to the reference genome using Bowtie2. Genome coverage profiles were generated using bedtools genomecov. MACS2 was used to call peaks from each sample in both target-only and IgG-controlled modes. Reads from all IgG samples were pooled to create a common control for peak calling. For narrow peaks from transcription factors and H3K4me3, IgG-controlled peaks were kept for downstream analysis if they met the following criteria: overlapping with treatment-only peaks, q-value <0.01 and enrichment >2. For broad peaks from H3K27me3, target-only peaks were kept for downstream analysis if they met the follow criteria: overlapping with IgG-controlled peaks, q-value <0.01 and enrichment >2. For each target, differential peaks between two groups were detected using Bioconductor package edgeR 3.36.0. First, replicated peaks were generated by merging peaks called from individual samples and keeping those present in at least two replicates. Next consensus peaks were generated by merging replicated peaks across all sample groups. HOMER was used to annotate consensus peaks with respect to protein-coding and lncRNA genes in GENCODE annotation v38, and to run motif enrichment (http://homer.ucsd.edu/homer/motif/). For a comparison between two groups, consensus peaks present in either group were filtered by edgeR function filterByExpr with min.count = 10 and min.total.count = 15. The resultant count matrix was normalized using the TMM method and statistical tests were performed based on generalized linear models and quasi-likelihood method. Peaks were deemed significantly differential if fold changes were above 1.5 in either direction and Benjamini Hochberg-corrected FDRs were less than 0.05.

## In vitro dose response assays
S-RPN-1 were plated in 96 well plates using the Multidrop Combi Reagent Dispenser (Thermo Fisher). After 24 h, cells were treated with TEAD or MEK inhibitors in a serial dilution using the D300e dispenser (Tecan). 7 days after treatment, 40 μL of CellTiterGlo reagent (Promega) was added and cell viability was quantified on the LUMIstar Omega microplate reader (BMG Labtech). The fraction of cell viability was calculated from normalizing the treated cells to the DMSO control. Graphs were constructed using GraphPad Prism v10.2.3 non-linear curve fit to assess viability. Trametinib was obtained from SelleckChem (S2673) and VT compounds were provided by Vivace therapeutics: VT103, VT104, VT106, VT107. For growth in low attachment assays of SALE cells, 96 well plates were first coated with 100 μl of Anti-Adherence Rinsing Solution AARS (Cat # 07010) for one minute then washed with 100 μl PBS. SALE cells were seeded at 400 cells/well and incubated in the presence of the indicated compounds for three to nine days before assay readout using CellTiter BackspaceGlo (Promega) according to manufacturer’s instructions.

## Pre-clinical study in S-RPN-1 allografts
To construct the allografts, S-RPN-1 were resuspended to 107/mL in PBS and 200 μL was implanted subcutaneously into 1 flank of 20 female NU/J mice (JAX strain 002019). When the tumor volume reached 70 mm3 mice were randomly assigned to a drug group. Tumor measurements were performed 3 times weekly using a digital caliper and tumor volume was calculated using the formula 0.5 × L × W2 where L (length) is the largest measurement and W (width) is the dimension perpendicular to L. VT104 was provided by Vivace Therapeutics and was formulated daily in 5% DMSO, 10% Solutol, and 85% D5W. Trametinib was purchased from Selleckchem and formulated weekly in 4% DMSO + corn oil. Five animals per arm were dosed on a 5 days on/2 day off schedule via daily oral gavage with vehicle control, 10 mg/kg/day VT104, 0.5 mg/kg/day trametinib, or combination of VT104/trametinib dosed 30 min apart up to 60 days. The vehicle and drug treatments were administered via sterile flexible gavage tubes. Mice were weighed weekly for health monitoring and for dose calculations. Statistical comparison of the four arms was performed using a One-way ANOVA comparing all conditions to all other conditions using the mean of each arm on each day with multiple hypothesis correction using the Tukey method with alpha of 0.05.

## Pre-clinical study in autochthonous model
We identified a male mouse with a small tumor lesion by microCT that was previously dosed with Ad5mSPC-Cre (18 weeks post viral induction). Drug therapy was initiated with daily oral gavage of VT104 (20 mg/kg/day) and Trametinib (0.5 mg/kg/day) on a 5 days on/2 days off schedule. Formulation and delivery were the same as in the allograft model described above. Monitoring was collected weekly by microCT and drug therapy was given for 30 days until the mouse reached humane euthanasia criteria.

## SALE xenograft experiment with dominant negative cJUN
Wild-type cJUN (ENST00000371222) and a dominant negative (TAM67) version of cJUN lacking the first 122 codons of cJUN were synthesized, sequence-confirmed and cloned into a Gateway entry vector, pTwist ENTR Kozak, by Twist Bioscience. A C-terminal HA tag was included in each construct. Each insert was then subcloned into a tetracycline-inducible lentiviral backbone (pCW57. blasti; Addgene #194067) using Gateway LR Clonase II Enzyme Mix (Invitrogen, 11791020). A luciferase insert was used to generate a vector control. The plasmids were packaged into lentivirus and used to transduce SALE-RY cells using a 2 hour spinfection. Following a 6-day selection using blasticidin (5 μg/mL), cells were trypsinized and resuspended at 6 million cells/mL in PBS. 200 μL of cell suspension was injected into two flanks of 5 mice/group of NU/J 6-week old female mice (Strain 002019, Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA). The mice were group-housed and littermates of the same sex were randomly assigned to experimental cohorts. Mice were maintained on a custom doxycycline diet (TD.120769, Inotiv) throughout duration of the experiment. Twice weekly, flank tumor measurements were manually performed as described above. Mice were euthanized when tumors reached the maximum allowable size or tumor ulceration endpoint. Mice with ulcerated tumors were maintained on buprenorphine. Tumor measurements were analyzed using GraphPad Prism and a One-way ANOVA test was performed. At endpoint, flanked tumors were excised and weighed. Raw weights of tumors were compared in GraphPad Prism and compared using an unpaired two-tailed t test.

## shRNA knockdown in S-RPN-1 murine-derived cells
For the construction of shRNA plasmids, pLKO.1 backbone (Addgene #10879) was digested for 3 h at 37°C with EcoRI and AgeI (R3101S and R3552S, NEB) using T4 DNA ligase reaction kit (M0202S, NEB). Product was run on an 1% gel and purified using Zymo gel DNA recovery kit (D4007, Zymo Research). shRNA oligos were designed using the RNAi consortium web portal provided by Broad institute (https://www.broadinstitute.org/rnai-consortium/rnai-consortium-shrna-library). Oligonucleotides were ordered from Integrated DNA Technologies with standard desalting purification. Oligos were annealed at 37°C for 30 min then 95°C for 5 min ramping down to 25°C. shRNA oligos and digested backbone were ligated for 3 h at room temperature using quick ligase (T4 DNA Ligase kit, NEB). Colonies were picked and transformed into One Shot Stbl3 Chemically Competent E. coli (C737303, Invitrogen).
S-RPN-1 cells were seeded in 10 cm plates (0.4 × 106 cells) for 24 h before 1.5 mL of lentivirus containing shRNA directed against Yap1, RIT1, Jun and a non-targeting vector control (LACZ) was added. Cells were then selected for 3 days in puromycin (10 μg/mL) and seeded for experiments at day 6. Knock-down efficiency of the shRNA constructs was assessed by western blot. For the shRNA construct sequences see .
S-RPN-1 cells were seeded at 4,000 cells/well in a 48 well plate. The next day plates were imaged on the IncuCyte S3 and images were taken every 6 h. Confluency was determined in the IncuCyte software (2023A Rev2) and then normalized to the first image.

## Lentivirus production
5 million HEK293T (ATCC) cells were seeded, and transfected the following day using 6 μg target plasmid, 6 μg psPAX2 and 2 μg VSVG (see ) in 60 μg polyethylenimine (Polysciences) and Opti-MEM (Gibco). A total of 24 h post-transfection, media was replaced. Lentivirus was harvested 48 h post-transfection, filtered through a 0.45 μm filter, aliquoted, and stored at −80°C prior to use.

## Cell lysis and immunoblotting
Cells were washed with PBS (Corning) and then scraped in RIPA buffer [50 mM Tris-HCL (pH 7.4), 1 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% Sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS and ddH20] supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich and ThermoFisher). Lysates were placed on ice for 20 min, sonicated at 20 kJ using an ultrasonic homogenizer (VWR) and then spun down at 4°C for 20 min (13,000 rpm). Supernatant was combined with 4× Laemmli Sample Buffer (BioRad) and then boiled. Samples were loaded onto a 4–15% SDS-PAGE precast gel (BioRad) and run at 120 V. Gels were transferred to PVDF membranes using the Trans-blot Turbo Transfer System (BioRad) and blocked in Intercept TBS blocking buffer (LiCOR) for 1 h at room temperature followed by overnight incubation at 4°C with corresponding primary antibodies. The following day membranes were washed with TBS-T and incubated with IRDye secondary antibodies (LiCOR) for 1 h at room temperature. Membranes were imaged on the LiCOR Odyssey DLx and images were acquired with the Licor Acquisition Software (v1.1.0.61). Quantification of Western blot band intensity was performed using Licor Empiria Studio with normalization to the loading control.

## Antibodies
Primary antibodies used for immunoblotting: β-Actin 1:10000 (Cell Signaling Technology, 4970; Proteintech, 66009-1-Ig), Vinculin 1:10000 (Sigma, V9264), RIT1 1:2000 (Abcam, Ab53720), YAP (D8H1X) 1:200 (Cell Signaling Technology), cJUN 1:1000 (Cell Signaling Technology, 9165). FRA1 (D80B4) (Cell Signaling Technology, 5281), HA-Tag (C29F4) (3724, Cell Signaling Technology), ZEB1 (Abcam, ab155249), DYKDDDDK-Tag 1:500 (14793, Cell Signaling Technology). Primary antibodies for immunohistochemistry: Desmin (Dako M0760 D33 1:50), Vimentin (Novus NB300-223 1:450; Abcam ab92547 1:4000), SMA (Dako M0851 A23 1:150), Mesothelin (MyBioSource MBS2528505 H50 1:1600), Cytokeratin WS (Abcam ab9377 1:500).

## AP-1 reporter assay in HEK293T cells
Flag-tagged YAP1WT or YAP18SA constructs were synthesized (Twist Bioscience) and cloned into pTwist cDNA 3.1 and previously constructed RIT1M90I and vector control was used. HEK293T cells were plated in a 96 well plate (0.02 × 106 cells/well) and allowed to adhere for 24 h. Targets of interest were co-transfected with reporter plasmids (0.1 μg/μL) using Lipofectamine 3000 Transfection Reagent (Thermofisher). Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), a potent activator of AP-1, was given (50 μg/mL) at time of transfection as positive control. After another 24-h incubation cells were readout using the Dual-Glo Luciferase Assay System (Promega). Luciferase activity was readout on the LUMIstar Omega microplate reader (BMG Labtech) and normalized to Renilla Luciferase activity.

## Immunofluorescence quantification
Confocal datasets were analyzed in Fiji (ImageJ) using a custom script. For each image, the DAPI channel was thresholded and used as a mask for finding nuclei, which were filtered for size and shape to exclude debris, clumps, and abnormal cells. Each nucleus was quantified for its size as well as its mean fluorescent intensity (MFI) within each channel, and the results exported to a spreadsheet. Measurements for all nuclei under each condition were aggregated and plotted using GraphPad Prism v10.2.3. Data was normalized to parental SALE cells.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Survival analysis was performed using the Kaplan-Meier log-rank test with p < 0.05 considered significant. For contingency table analysis of expected versus observed genotypes, a Chi-squared test was performed with p < 0.05 considered significant. For comparison of continuous variables across two groups, an unpaired t test was used with p < 0.05 considered significant. For mutation enrichment in AACR GENIE data, a Fisher’s exact test was performed in cBioPortal with p < 0.05 considered significant. All statistical tests were performed using GraphPad Prism or R software.

## Supplementary Material
12345678SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2025.116185.

 

## Highlights
We report a new RIT1M90I-mutant autochthonous lung tumor model
RIT1M90I drives the formation of lethal lung tumors in cooperation with p53 and Nf2 loss
RIT1M90I and YAP cooperatively regulate cJUN expression and ZEB1 chromatin binding
Therapeutic MEK and TEAD targeting suppresses RIT1M90I-driven tumorigenesis

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Matthew Meyerson for providing laboratory space and support for the initial generation of RIT1 mice. We thank the Brigham and Women’s Hospital Transgenic core for technical services relating to the generation of RIT1 mice. We thank Tracy Tang and Len Post from Vivace Therapeutics for advice and discussion and providing the VT compounds. We thank Umut Demirkol and Sarah Masunaga for their hard work and dedication of endless hours assisting with our mouse xenograft and allograft models and drug delivery. We thank the Translational Research Model Services Core, specifically Siuliana Limasi and Kelsey A. Fleming, for their support with mouse monitoring and colony management. We thank Hoku West-Foyle and Lena Schroeder for their assistance with confocal imaging and quantitative analysis. We thank the preclinical imaging team who acquired the MicroCT images, spearheaded by Brianna Wrightson and Elena Carlson. This research was supported by the Genomics and Bioinformatics Shared Resource RRID: SCR_022606, Experimental Histopathology Shared Resource RRID: SCR_022612, Cellular Imaging Shared Resource RRID:SCR_022609, Comparative Medicine Shared Resource RRID:SCR_022610, Preclinical Modeling Shared Resource RRID:SCR_022617, and Preclinical Imaging Shared Resource RRID:SCR_022616 of the Fred Hutch/University of Washington/Seattle Children’s Cancer Consortium (P30 CA015704). The Experimental Histopathology Shared Resource equipment is supported by a grant from the M.J. Murdock Charitable Trust grant SR-202221337. S.O. is a Washington Research Foundation postdoctoral fellow. This work was funded in part by NIH/NCI grants R00CA197762 and R37CA252050 to A. H.B., NIH/NCI Cancer Center Support Grant P30CA015704, and NIH/NCI Lung SPORE grant P50CA228944.

## Footnotes
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
12345678

## Data Availability Statement
Single-cell RNA-seq data and CUT&RUN genomic data have been deposited at GEO and are available under accession numbers GEO: GSE302412 and GSE302452.
RNA-seq data of SALE are from a prior publication and are available at GEO: GSE165631.
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.