822acssdACS NanoACS NanoPMC1054026110540261105402613770320210.1021/acsnano.3c04161In Vivo Photoacoustic Monitoring
of Stem Cell Location and Apoptosis with Caspase-3-Responsive Nanosensors
JhunjhunwalaAnamik KimJinhwan KubelickKelsey P EthierC Ross EmelianovStanislav Y †Wallace
H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology and Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, United States‡School
of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, United States*Email: ross.ethier@bme.gatech.edu.
*Email: stas@gatech.edu.
139202317181793117931–179453092023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Stem
cell therapy
has immense potential in a variety of regenerative
medicine applications. However, clinical stem cell therapy is severely
limited by challenges in assessing the location and functional status
of implanted cells in vivo. Thus, there is a great
need for longitudinal, noninvasive stem cell monitoring. Here we introduce
a multidisciplinary approach combining nanosensor-augmented stem cell
labeling with ultrasound guided photoacoustic (US/PA) imaging for
the spatial tracking and functional assessment of transplanted stem
cell fate. Specifically, our nanosensor incorporates a peptide sequence
that is selectively cleaved by caspase-3, the primary effector enzyme
in mammalian cell apoptosis; this cleavage event causes labeled cells
to show enhanced optical absorption in the first near-infrared (NIR)
window. Optimization of labeling protocols and spectral characterization
of the nanosensor in vitro showed a 2.4-fold increase
in PA signal from labeled cells during apoptosis while simultaneously
permitting cell localization. We then successfully tracked the location
and apoptotic status of mesenchymal stem cells in a mouse hindlimb
ischemia model for 2 weeks in vivo, demonstrating
a 4.8-fold increase in PA signal and spectral slope changes in the
first NIR window under proapoptotic (ischemic) conditions. We conclude
that our nanosensor allows longitudinal, noninvasive, and nonionizing
monitoring of stem cell location and apoptosis, which is a significant
improvement over current end-point monitoring methods such as biopsies
and histological staining of excised tissue.
Keywords: nanosensors, cell engineering, stem cells, cell apoptosis, photoacoustic imaging, cell
tracking

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 May 9; Accepted 2023 Sep 6; Collection date 2023 Sep 26.

## Introduction
Stem cell therapy has shown great promise
for regenerating and/or
remodeling damaged or degenerating tissues. − Conventional approaches such as
transplantation of intact organs require invasive surgery and often
fail due to host immunity and incompatibility. In contrast, autologous stem cell therapy offers a minimally invasive
and immune-compatible therapeutic approach and, thus, has been regarded
as the next-generation of regenerative medicine. , So
far, promising preclinical and clinical outcomes of stem cell therapy
have been reported for various pathologies, including musculoskeletal
and spinal cord injuries, cardiac tissue damage, Parkinson’s
disease, and multiple sclerosis. , − However, the translation of these stem cell therapies is severely
hindered by issues such as incorrect injection location, poor retention
of transplanted cells, poor stem cell viability, and lack of stem
cell fate monitoring in vivo. − 
The general workflow for autologous stem cell
therapy involves
harvesting healthy stem cells from a patient, expanding cells in culture,
injecting them back into the patient, and evaluating therapeutic outcomes. However, methods to assess therapeutic outcomes
during the course of treatment are lacking, and the therapeutic mechanisms
are not easily monitored or well understood. − Assessment
of outcomes is based on invasive end-point analyses such as histology
and biomarker assays, which damage regenerating tissues and do not
capture the real-time dynamics of the tissue microenvironment. , Thus, we need tools to (1) accurately guide stem cell delivery to
target regions and (2) perform spatial and functional tracking of
injected cells longitudinally to better understand their biological
status in vivo. Previously our group reported an
image-guided approach to address the first point. , − Other groups have also used a variety of approaches to track stem
cells in vivo such as silicon carbide nanoparticles,
RESV-loaded PLGA nanoparticles (RESV-NPs), organic semiconducting
polymer (OSP)-based nanoprobes, and others. − But these studies, similar to our earlier work, have mostly focused
on the spatial tracking of stem cells. This study advances stem cell
monitoring by additionally providing functional information about
the apoptotic status of injected stem cells in vivo.
Ultrasound guided photoacoustic (US/PA) imaging has shown
great
potential for functional imaging coupled with deep tissue anatomical
information and fine spatial resolution. − Its noninvasive
and nonionizing imaging capabilities, familiarity of equipment to
clinical staff, small footprint, portability, and relatively low cost
make US/PA imaging attractive for clinical applications, including
stem cell therapy. − US imaging provides excellent anatomical images of
tissue with high spatial resolution, while complementary PA imaging
can convey functional information with high contrast, resolution,
imaging depth, and sensitivity. PA signals are generated by optical
absorption of endogenous or exogenous contrast agents. Thermal deposition rapidly expands the surrounding
tissue to generate an acoustic signal. By using stimuli-responsive exogenous contrast agents, we can significantly
enhance PA signals and thereby monitor cellular and molecular events
in tissues or microenvironments over time. Together US/PA imaging can visualize and monitor a highly orchestrated
set of events in tissues or microenvironments over time.
Gold
nanospheres (AuNSs) have long been considered excellent exogenous
PA contrast agents because of their strong optical absorption, biocompatibility,
and surface tunability. However, the
use of single AuNSs for in vivo US/PA imaging applications
has not been successful due to their peak optical absorption occurring
at short wavelengths, where light penetration depth is extremely limited
and the optical absorption of endogenous absorbers (e.g., hemoglobin,
melanin) generates significant background signals. Instead, clustering of multiple AuNSs with consequent plasmon
coupling between nanospheres induces redshift and broadening of optical
absorption, allowing the detection of PA signals in the near-infrared
(NIR) window at 650–900 nm, where tissue penetration is better
due to lower scattering and the optical absorption of biological tissues
is minimal. , 
Here we report an approach
for longitudinal tracking of stem cells
both spatially and functionally using real-time US/PA imaging coupled
with a nanoprobe to monitor the apoptosis of injected stem cells.
Specifically, we designed a AuNS-based nanoprobe responsive to caspase-3,
a major executioner protein in mammalian cell apoptosis. Caspase-3 is formed by cleavage of procaspase-3
via caspase8/9 or other pro-apoptotic stimuli and subsequent dimerization,
and its production is a critical point of no return in apoptosis. We focused on caspase-3, since the primary mode
of cell death in transplanted stem cells is anoikis, a form of apoptosis
in which both the extrinsic and the intrinsic pathways culminate through
activation of caspase-3. , − 
Our nanoprobe, which we term AuPD, consists of three main
components
( ): (1) a triblock
peptide containing a cell-penetrating peptide sequence (oligo arginine;
R9), a caspase-3-cleavable sequence (DEVD), and a hydrophobic amino
acid sequence ending with cysteine (AIWFFFFWLCC); (2) plasmonic AuNS
as a core material; and (3) polyethylene glycol (PEG, MW: 2k) as a
nanoparticle-stabilizing agent. The R9
segment in the triblock peptide enables efficient cellular internalization
of the nanoprobe, i.e., efficient labeling of cells, facilitating
spatial tracking during therapy. If/when
labeled cells undergo apoptosis, the DEVD moiety is selectively cleaved
by caspase-3, thereby inducing AuNS aggregation and causing an increase
in PA contrast at the NIR window. Using
our specialized nanoprobe, we carried out a series of studies where
we used US/PA to spatially and functionally track human adipose-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (hADMSCs) in vitro and in vivo in an ischemic muscular atrophy disease model.
 

## Results
and Discussion

## Synthesis and Characterization of AuPD for
PA Imaging
We first optimized the AuPD design by testing
a variety of ratios
of AuNSs, PEG chains, and triblock peptides to achieve high nanoparticle
stability under physiological conditions, low nonspecific aggregation,
and a sensitive and specific aggregation response to caspase-3. Transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) images and dynamic light scattering (DLS)
measurements showed successful modification of the surfaces of AuNSs
with no major morphological changes or severe aggregation of AuPEG
and AuPD (Figure S1a,b). In AuPD, however,
modest AuNS clustering occurred due to the hydrophobic component of
the triblock peptide, which resulted in slightly increased optical
absorption in the NIR window (Figure S1b,c). Next, caspase-3-responsive aggregation of AuPD was confirmed through
colorimetric observation and UV–vis spectrometry in an aqueous
solution. In the presence of caspase-3, there was significant aggregation
of AuPD due to the cleavage of the DEVD peptide and subsequent hydrophobic
nanoparticle aggregation, which was absent under control conditions
(incubation with bovine serum albumin [BSA]) ( a,b). The caspase-3-sensitive aggregation
kinetics of AuPD were also studied, with a ∼54% increase in
the optical absorption ratio at 800 nm vs 532 nm within 24 h ( c) of caspase-3 exposure.
Volume-weighted hydrodynamic size distributions showed far greater
aggregation of AuPD in the presence of caspase-3 versus BSA, which
was confirmed by TEM imaging ( d,e). These characterization results, notably the significant
redshift and increase in the optical absorption spectrum due to plasmon
coupling in the NIR region of 680–970 nm, supported further
testing of the AuPD nanosensor as a PA contrast agent for tracking
injected stem cells and for sensing the presence of caspase-3.
 We therefore went on to demonstrate the AuPD nanosensor
for PA
imaging using a polyethylene tube phantom containing AuPD and its
precursors in solution (Figure S1d). In
the absence of caspase-3, there was no qualitative or quantitative
difference in PA signal between AuNS and AuPEG, while AuPD showed
a slight increase in PA signal, which was attributed to minimal nonspecific
clustering of the particles (Figure S1e). This clustering and the consequent small PA signal increase in
the NIR window were consistent with the ability to spatially track
viable stem cells with negligible intracellular caspase-3. Next, caspase-3-responsive
PA signal amplification was tested in the tube phantom by incubating
AuPD with BSA (control) or caspase-3 at different concentrations and
for a range of incubation times at 37 °C ( f and S2). In
all cases, we saw similar signals from the AuPD only and AuPD incubated
with BSA groups, while AuPD incubated with caspase-3 showed a significantly
stronger PA signal ( f). Quantitatively, we observed a 22-fold increase in the
amplitude of the PA signal from AuPD at 800 nm 24 h after the addition
of caspase-3 vs BSA control ( g). Spectroscopic PA analysis from 680 to 900 nm further
demonstrated a caspase-3-responsive redshift in optical absorption,
corresponding to a 25.7-fold increase in the slope of the graph of
PA amplitude vs wavelength of the AuPD nanoprobe incubated with caspase-3
vs BSA control ( h and S2c). Finally, photostability of
the AuPD was tested using >1000 laser pulses at different wavelengths
to confirm its utility as a longitudinal PA contrast agent (Figure S3). There was no change in the PA amplitude
or the PA spectrum over time, which establishes the photostability
of our nanosensor for long-term monitoring.

## Labeling hADMSCs with AuPD
for Spatial Tracking
To
spatially and functionally track injected stem cells, we must be able
to efficiently label the cells using a AuPD nanoprobe. For this purpose,
we incorporated an R9 segment in the triblock peptide to enable efficient
cellular uptake/labeling. We tested this functionality by culturing
and labeling hADMSCs with different concentrations of AuPEG and AuPD
for 24 h. A deep purple pellet demonstrated efficient labeling of
cells using AuPD as compared to the essentially colorless AuPEG-incubated
cell pellet ( a). Bright-field (BF) imaging further confirmed enhanced stem cell
uptake of AuPD as compared to AuPEG, as indicated by the purple speckles
co-localized with the pink eosin-stained cytoplasm ( b, red arrows). Next, US/PA
imaging was conducted using a tissue mimicking 8% gelatin phantom
with dome-shaped inclusions containing identical concentrations of
cells (500 cells/μL) labeled with AuPEG or AuPD at different
concentrations ( c). It was observed that the US signal remained similar over all
conditions (left column, grayscale), while AuPD-labeled cells had
noticeably greater PA signal than the AuPEG-labeled cells at single
wavelengths, 532, 700, 750, and 800 nm (middle column, color scale),
and over the spectral range of 680–950 nm ( c–g, S4, and S5). Based on these results, an AuPD concentration
of 0.5 nM was selected as optimal for cell labeling. At this concentration,
the PA signal at 800 nm was sufficient for stem cell spatial tracking
in the absence of apoptosis ( c,d), but it was still low enough to allow for an obvious
signal increase (without saturation) in the presence of caspase-3
and subsequent AuPD aggregation (see below).
 In addition, cell–nanosensor interactions
were studied to
evaluate the effect of AuPD labeling on stem cells. Although numerous
reports have characterized AuNP-based nanoprobes as nontoxic, − toxicity evaluation of the nanoprobe was conducted to ensure there
was no false-positive signal induced by nanoprobe-triggered cell death.
Based on the standard MTT cell viability assay, no cell death was
observed even at 4.0 nM AuPD labeling, which is 8× higher than
the selected working concentration ( h). Further, an Annexin-V cell apoptosis
assay confirmed the negligible effect of AuPD on cell apoptosis, exhibiting
no qualitative and quantitative difference in the Annexin signal in
both unlabeled and AuPD-labeled cells (Figure S6). To assess the functional impact of AuPD labeling on MSC
multipotency, a tridifferentiation assay was employed. Results from
the tridifferentiation assay revealed that both the AuPD-labeled and
AuPD-negative (unlabeled) stem cells exhibited similar differentiation
capabilities, with no significant differences observed (Figure S7). Adipocyte differentiation remained
unaffected by the presence of AuPD nanosensors, as evidenced by the
presence of red lipid vacuoles stained with Oil Red O (Figure S7c,d). The development of a deep sky-blue
marbling pattern of polysaccharides stained by Alcian blue indicated
successful chondrocyte differentiation in both the AuPD-labeled and
unlabeled cells (Figure S7g,h). Additionally,
increased mineral deposition, visualized by Alizarin Red staining,
was observed in the osteogenic differentiation experiments, depicted
as deep orange-red patterning and circular deposits (Figure S7k,l). These characteristics were observed in both
the AuPD-labeled and unlabeled cells, demonstrating similar capacities
for differentiation. Importantly, the presence of AuPD nanosensors
per se did not induce any unintended differentiation, as confirmed
by labeling of AuPD-containing cells grown under control (noninducing)
conditions that did not demonstrate differentiation (Figure S7a,b,e,f,i,j). These findings indicate that AuPD labeling
does not compromise the differentiation capacity of hADMSCs, nor does
it lead to unintended differentiation outcomes. To determine whether
AuPD labeling affected several molecular phenotypic markers of hADMSCs,
we immunolabeled cells for CD90 and CD14 surface markers using FITC-conjugated
antihuman antibodies (Figure S8), since
CD90 and CD14 are known positive and negative markers for hADMSCs,
respectively. , We observed the expected high
level of CD90 labeling and almost negligible CD14 labeling on the
surface of AuPD-negative (control) cells. Importantly we also found
that AuPD labeling did not change these patterns, both qualitatively
(Figure S8a–d) and by quantification
of fluorescent signals (Figure S8e,f),
indicating that AuPD labeling did not alter several characteristic
molecular phenotypes of our cells.

## Detecting Intracellular
Caspase-3 Activity in Vitro
Next, we validated
the capability of our AuPD nanosensor
to detect intracellular caspase-3. To induce caspase-3 in hADMSCs,
0.5 nM AuPD-labeled cells were incubated with 20 μM of the cytotoxic
agent doxorubicin (DOX). We first used ELISA to quantify the amount
of caspase-3 in both labeled and unlabeled cells treated with/without
DOX. Consistent with the Annexin-V staining described above, we observed
no significant difference in caspase-3 levels between the unlabeled
and the labeled cell groups; however, there were significantly greater
caspase-3 levels in cells treated with DOX ( a and S9). Next,
the AuPD-labeled hADMSCs treated with/without DOX were harvested and
observed using BF and dark-field (DF) microscopy and with PA imaging.
BF microscopy images showed very clear and significant aggregation
of AuPD in DOX-treated hADMSCs vs no DOX control cells (Figure S10). DF microscopy images also confirmed
the aggregation of AuPD in DOX-treated apoptotic cells, as shown by
the much stronger scattering signals vs labeled cells without DOX
or other controls ( d and S11). As before, the associated
PA signal was acquired from a tissue mimicking 8% gelatin dome phantom
containing equal concentrations of AuPD-labeled cells (500 cells/μL)
with/without DOX treatment. There was no significant PA signal difference
observed at 532 nm, which was expected since peak optical absorption
of unaggregated AuPD occurs near 532 nm. However, at wavelengths in
the NIR window, including 700, 750, and 800 nm, the PA signal was
significantly enhanced in DOX-treated stem cells, an effect we ascribe
to DOX-triggered apoptosis, AuPD aggregation, plasmon coupling, and
ultimately PA spectral shifts and signal increases at longer wavelengths
( b,c and S12). Quantitatively, the average PA amplitude
from a dome phantom demonstrated no significant difference between
AuPD-labeled cells with and without DOX treatment at 532 nm but showed
a 2.4-fold increase in signal amplitude at 800 nm in DOX-treated cells
vs no-DOX controls ( e). Average PA signals at 700 and 750 nm also displayed similar
trends (Figure S12c). Spectroscopic PA
analysis confirmed these results, showing both an increase in amplitude
and a 2-fold increase in spectral slope from 700 to 900 nm between
AuPD-labeled cells with and without DOX incubated for 48 h due to
the aggregation of AuPD in response to activated caspase-3 ( f). These results
clearly demonstrate the ability of our AuPD nanoprobe to detect stem
cell location and apoptosis using US/PA imaging at an 800 nm wavelength.
 

## Longitudinal Monitoring of Stem Cell Apoptosis in Vivo
Lastly, we sought to validate our AuPD nanosensor in a
preclinical US/PA imaging scenario by demonstrating the spatial tracking
of injected stem cells and apoptosis monitoring in an animal model.
Specifically, we employed the widely used unilateral hindlimb muscle
atrophy model in mice, in which ischemia is induced by ligation of
the femoral artery and vein. , AuPD-labeled hADMSCs
suspended in Matrigel were injected intramuscularly immediately after
ischemia-inducing surgery in the hindlimb downstream from the ligated
section. In this model, we did not use the contralateral limb due
to concerns about a systemic inflammatory response. Instead, we used
two control groups: (1) a “nonischemic” group received
an injection of AuPD-labeled hADMSCs but no ischemia-inducing surgery
and (2) an “unlabeled” group of mice received an injection
of Matrigel only or unlabeled hADMSCs suspended in Matrigel. The latter
group was further subdivided: some animals received ischemia-inducing
surgery, while others did not (Figures S13 and S14). We hypothesized that the ischemic model receiving AuPD-labeled
stem cells would demonstrate significantly greater PA signal and PA
spectral slope in the NIR wavelength, i.e., 700–900 nm, due
to stem cell apoptosis vs the nonischemic model receiving AuPD-labeled
stem cells.
Following previous methods, the femoral artery and
vein were ligated and excised to create a local hypoxic environment,
ultimately resulting in muscle deterioration at and distal to the
site of surgery. The presence of hindlimb ischemia was first verified
using laser Doppler perfusion imaging (LDPI), showing substantially
reduced blood flow in ischemic (operated) legs ( a,b). The US/PA signal from injected cells
was monitored longitudinally at days 0, 3, 5, and 7 in mice and additionally
at days 10, 12, and 14 in the unlabeled and no ischemia models. At
800 nm, negligible PA signal was observed from the Matrigel-only control
limbs from day 0 to day 7 ( c, left column). The PA signal from AuPD-labeled hADMSCs
increased from days 0 to 7 in all conditions due to stem cell apoptosis,
but a significantly greater signal was observed in the ischemic limbs
( c, right column)
vs in the nonischemia model ( c, middle column). Spectroscopic PA analysis confirmed
that there was significantly greater signal in the ischemic limbs
vs in the nonischemia model ( d,e and Video S1). Quantitative
and spectroscopic PA amplitude at 800 nm on day 7 showed a 4.8-fold
increase in signal in the ischemia model, which was greater than the
2.1-fold increase observed in the nonischemia limbs ( f,g).
 The data shown in are promising, but the average PA signal
readout is not an
ideal outcome measure, since it is amplitude dependent, which can
fluctuate due to various AuPD aggregation-independent factors such
as laser energy, fluence, location (depth) of the nanosensor, and
the concentration of the nanosensor. We reasoned that the spectral
slope (slope of linear regression of PA amplitude on wavelengths of
700–900 nm) could overcome some of these drawbacks, while also
helping to eliminate noise with no defined slope, such as residual
signals from the skin. We therefore created “slope maps”
by processing the in vivo images in b to compute a spectral slope
(as defined above) for each pixel ( a and S15). We
observed that the temporal change in the spectral slope was significantly
greater for the surgical ischemia model (4.8-fold increase from days
0 to 7) vs in the nonischemic model (1.5-fold increase over the same
period), presumably due to greater aggregation of the nanosensor upon
caspase-3 activation ( b and S15). This result indicates
the ability of our AuPD nanosensor to detect the kinetics of stem
cell apoptosis in vivo. Additionally, using a translational
motor, three-dimensional (3D) US/PA imaging was performed, with US
showing the anatomy of the hindlimb region and the PA signal describing
the distribution and spread of the labeled stem cells in 3D over time
and the distribution of apoptosis in 3D over time (Figures S16, S17 and Video S2). Histology of the extracted
hindlimb tissue confirmed the presence of tissue damage and AuPD-labeled
stem cells in the hindlimbs of the mice (Figure S18). We conclude, as demonstrated in an in vivo mouse model of apoptosis, our nanosensor has utility for longitudinal
and noninvasive tracking and apoptosis monitoring of injected stem
cells.
 Compared to existing in vivo apoptosis
sensors, our US/PA approach has many
advantages. Previous
work in this area involved the design of fluorescent probes which,
although very sensitive, are limited due to poor tissue penetration
of visible light and photobleaching concerns, consequently restricting
their suitability for longitudinal in vivo imaging,
and MRI- and PET-based probes, which allow deep tissue imaging, but
do not possess real-time observational capabilities or peri-procedural
guidance. − There have been a variety of nanoparticle-based PA contrast agents
to track MSC location, but none of them provide any function information
about stem cell status. , − , Recently, contrast agents have
been developed that use PA imaging to monitor stem cell apoptosis
using reactive oxygen species (ROS) as an indicator of apoptosis. , However, ROS is abundantly present during degenerative and atrophic
disease conditions, and thus ROS-based probes can lead to significant
false-positive signals from neighboring cell death, resulting in low
specificity of determining apoptosis of injected stem cells. Furthermore, this probe also employed a PA signal
turn-off mechanism which does not distinguish between increased apoptosis
and cell escape/relocation due to the PA signal drop in both situations.
Our AuPD nanosensor improves on these existing approaches by using
caspase-3 as the cell apoptosis biomarker, a specific intracellular
factor that is highly localized within the labeled stem cells being
monitored. This allows us to utilize
a “turn-on” biosensing method, which, when coupled with
a PA signal shift to detect apoptosis, eliminates the confounding
effects of cell escape and relocation.
Our nanosensor has enormous
potential for the advancement of preclinical
stem cell research by allowing noninvasive longitudinal monitoring
of stem cell location and apoptosis in vivo, e.g.,
during studies of pharmacological agents and/or biomaterials delivered
with the stem cells. We also anticipate that our sensor will reduce
animal use in stem cell research due to the decrease in end-point
histology, staining, and assay-based examinations and will improve
research throughput with reduced in vivo study timelines
thanks to longitudinal monitoring. Further, the nanosensor can also
be used to study the pathophysiology of disease models and determine
kinetics of cell apoptosis during degenerative disease progression.
In a clinical setting, physicians could eventually use AuPD and US/PA
imaging to perform guided delivery of stem cells, then longitudinally
monitor the retention of stem cells after injection to provide better
patient outcomes, for example, using this information to determine
optimal times and dosages for stem cell reinjection. This approach
could also be used to study the effects of new procedures or pharmacological
interventions to improve implanted stem cell viability in a clinical
setting.
However, we recognize that there are important considerations
for
using US/PA coupled with AuPD in a clinical setting. Most importantly,
PA imaging has inherent limitations regarding background noise from
tissue, light scattering, and a finite depth profile that together
lead to significant signal reduction in deep tissues. Thus, monitoring
deep tissue areas will require a modified PA imaging system, including
PA tomographic systems or possibly an invasive ultrasound and photoacoustic
imaging probe. An important consideration during cell nanoengineering
is the fate of the nanoparticles after cell apoptosis or release of
nanoparticles through exocytosis, which could lead to false-positive
signals. To mitigate such effects, our lab has previously used a dual-nanoparticle
system to perform multiplex PA imaging which, through the use of preferential
labeling of nonstem phagocytotic cells vs transplanted stem cells invivo along with information about the
spatial co-localization of the signal, will result in minimal false-positive
signals. Additionally, the DEVD peptide
is also cleavable by other caspases, primarily caspase-7, which is
another effector enzyme and plays an important role in the apoptosis
cascade. However, since caspase-3 cleaves DEVD at a 5-fold greater
rate than caspase-7 and since caspase-7 is involved in the apoptosis
cascade, this cross-talk does not diminish the ability of our sensor
to detect apoptosis. , , 

## Conclusions
AuNSs modified with PEG and triblock peptides
were successfully
designed, created, and characterized as nanosensors for monitoring
the location and apoptotic status of stem cells using US/PA imaging.
The triblock peptide had two primary functions: enhancing cellular
uptake of AuPDs and acting as a sensitive detector of caspase-3. Characterization
showed substantial nanoparticle aggregation in the presence of caspase-3
and significant cellular uptake of AuPD into stem cells, as desired.
The concentration of AuPD used for cell labeling was optimized to
provide sufficient PA signal for cell tracking while allowing for
dramatic signal change upon apoptosis, with no effect on cell viability.
Specifically, PA imaging showed both a significant increase in the
PA amplitude at 800 nm and a shift in PA spectra in the NIR-I optical
window in cells undergoing apoptosis. Motivated by these positive
results, we delivered AuPD nanosensor-labeled stem cells in a mouse
model of ischemia, showing the ability of our nanoparticles to longitudinally
detect caspase-3, a hallmark of apoptosis. Thus, our approach provides
a noninvasive and nonadverse imaging method for stem cell functional
imaging in vivo. Fundamentally, we have designed
a sensing mechanism using the change in PA signal caused by the aggregation
of AuNSs, which can be used as a platform to design a multitude of
sensors through modification of the core materials or surface peptides.
Future work will involve modifying the nanosensor core material to
facilitate multimodal imaging approaches and increase imaging depth,
such as plasmonic magnetic nanoparticles to allow trimodal US/PA/MRI.
In addition, through the modification of surface peptides, we hope
to design nanosensors responsive to in vivo stem
cell differentiation and/or unintended malignancy for use in specific
regenerative applications such as spinal cord injury, glaucoma, and
macular degenerative models. This nanosensor fills a significant current
gap in stem cell research by providing an imaging approach that can
be used to track and monitor stem cell location and status in vivo and thus accelerate preclinical studies.

## Methods and Experimental

## Materials
Gold chloride trihydrate (HAuCl4, Sigma-Aldrich), sodium
citrate tribasic dihydrate (Sigma-Aldrich),
methyl polyethylene glycol thiol (mPEG-SH, MW: 2000, Biochempeg),
bovine serum albumin (BSA, Sigma-Aldrich), caspase-3 (CASP3, Abcam),
paraformaldehyde (PFA, Sigma-Aldrich), 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT, EMD Millipore), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, Sigma-Aldrich),
gelatin (MP Biomedicals), silica (0.25 μm diameter, Sigma-Aldrich),
potassium cyanide (KCN, Sigma-Aldrich), Dulbecco’s modified
Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Cytiva), fetal bovine serum (FBS, Sigma-Aldrich),
and penicillin/streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich) were used in accordance
with the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Ultrasound and Photoacoustic
Imaging
All US/PA imaging
was conducted using a Vevo LAZR 2100 system (Fujifilm VisualSonics,
Inc.), which uses a Q-switched Nd:YAG laser with a second-harmonic
generator and optical parametric oscillator (laser pulse repetition
frequency = 20 Hz, laser pulse duration = 7 ns).

## Synthesis of
the AuPD Nanosensor
Citrate-capped 15
nm diameter gold nanospheres were prepared using a bottom-up method
as previously reported, involving reduction of gold(III) chloride
(HAuCl4, 1.47 mM) using sodium citrate tribasic (0.334
M) as both the reducing agent and the stabilizing agent at 80 °C
under mild stirring for 30 min. The ruby-red-colored
AuNS colloidal solution was left overnight and then PEGylated using
mPEG-SH (MW: 2000) through ligand exchange at a 1:500 molar ratio
of AuNSs to mPEG-SH followed by bath sonication for 5 min. Excess
PEG was then removed after 24 h by centrifugation (16,100 rcf, 20
min, 3 repeats) to obtain AuPEG. The triblock peptide (GenScript USA,
Inc.), consisting of a cell-penetrating peptide sequence (oligo arginine;
R9), a caspase-3-cleavable sequence (DEVD), and a hydrophobic amino
acid sequence ending with cysteine (AIWFFFFWLCC), was used to functionalize
AuPEG at a 1:4000 molar ratio of AuPEG to peptide for 24 h under gentle
stirring. The resulting nanosensor was centrifuged to remove excess
triblock peptide (16,100 rcf, 20 min, 3 repeats), thereby creating
AuNS modified with PEG and the DEVD triblock peptide conjugate (AuPD).

## Characterization of the AuPD Nanosensor
All studies
were carried out using BSA as a control and recombinant human active
caspase-3 as a target protein. For colorimetric studies, AuPD (2 nM)
was dispersed with caspase-3 (5 μg/mL) or BSA (5 μg/mL)
and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h to induce aggregation. The optical
properties of AuPD with caspase-3 (5 μg/mL) or BSA (5 μg/mL)
and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h were measured with a UV–vis–NIR
spectrophotometer (Evo 220, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at multiple
time points over a 24 h period. Similarly, the volume-weighted hydrodynamic
size distributions of AuPD with/without caspase-3 (2 μg/mL,
5 μg/mL) incubated at 37 °C for 24 h was measured by DLS
(Zetasizer Nano ZS, Malvern Instruments Ltd.) at multiple time points
over a 72 h period. The size, morphology, and aggregation state of
the nanosensors were characterized by TEM (HT 7700, Hitachi). The
samples were prepared using drop casting, where 10 μL of the
nanoparticle solution was dropped on a copper mesh grid, followed
by air-drying overnight. The images were analyzed with Gatan Digital
Micrograph software.
PA imaging and nanosensor characterization
used a tube phantom (i.d.: 3/16 in., o.d.: 5/16, BD Intramedic polyethylene
tubing PE#160 held in a 3D-printed housing). Tubes were filled with
40 μL of AuPD solution, with AuPD solution plus BSA (2 μg/mL,
5 μg/mL), or with AuPD solution plus caspase-3 (2 μg/mL,
5 μg/mL) incubated at 37 °C for 24 or 48 h. The US/PA images
were acquired using an LZ250 transducer (256 elements, 18.5 MHz center
frequency) with the Vevo LAZR system (FujiFilm Visualsonics, Inc.).
For 3D imaging, the samples were imaged at 532, 700, 750, and 800
nm wavelengths over 10.21 mm elevational range with 0.152 mm steps.
The final tube phantom images were reconstructed in the coronal view
using maximum intensity projection in VevoLAB version 5.7.0 (FujiFilm
Visualsonics, Inc.). For spectroscopic PA analysis, the phantom was
imaged using wavelengths from 680 to 970 nm in 2 nm intervals. For
both the quantitative PA analysis and the spectroscopic PA analysis,
background subtraction was performed using water-only PA amplitude
images at corresponding wavelengths and laser fluences, and the PA
amplitudes were calculated using VevoLAB 5.7.0 software.

## Cell Culture
Human adipose-derived mesenchymal stem
cells (Lonza Biosciences, Basel, Switzerland) were cultured in DMEM,
supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were
incubated under standard conditions at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 humidified incubator (Heracell VIOS 160I, Fisher Scientific). Culture
media was changed every 3 days, and cells were passaged at ∼80–90%
confluency. hADMSCs were detached using 0.05% Trypsin-EDTA, neutralized
with DMEM, centrifuged, counted with a hemocytometer, and finally
seeded onto fresh cell culture T75 or T175 flasks at approximately
5000 cells/cm2. Only hADMSCs between passages P4 and P9
were used.

## Stem Cell Labeling with AuPD
To
study cellular uptake
of AuPD, hADMSCs were harvested, counted using a hemocytometer, and
plated in a six-well plate (200,000 cells/well, 2 mL media volume).
After 24 h, old cell media was aspirated, cells were washed with PBS
(3 times), and media containing AuPEG (control) or AuPD (0.5 1.0,
or 2.0 nM) was added. After incubation with nanoparticles for 24 h,
the labeled cells were washed with PBS (3 times) to remove any residual
nanoparticles and harvested for experimental studies. For all in vitro experiments, the AuPEG-labeled and AuPD-labeled
hADMSCs were fixed in 4% PFA (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min and washed
with PBS (3 times). Cells were then pelletized and analyzed for colorimetric
studies. To assess cell uptake with bright-field microscopy (Zeiss
AxioObserver), we fixed and stained the AuPEG-labeled and AuPD-labeled
hADMSCs with eosin.
To evaluate the US/PA signal from AuPD-labeled
hADMSCs, a tissue mimicking gelatin dome phantom was created. The
phantom base consisted of 8% gelatin (MP Biomedicals) and 0.2% silica
(Sigma-Aldrich) by mass. Dome-shaped inclusions were then prepared
by mixing equal parts of AuPEG-labeled (0.5 1.0, and 2.0 nM) or AuPD-labeled
(0.5 and 1.0 nM) hADMSCs with 16% gelatin solution to give a final
gelatin concentration of 8%. All domes had a final cell concentration
of 500 cells/μL. Each dome was imaged with US/PA imaging at
532, 700, 750, and 800 nm wavelengths. PA spectral imaging was conducted
at 680–970 nm at 2 nm intervals. All data was processed using
VevoLAB 5.7.0 software and analyzed in ImageJ (1.53n).

## In
Vitro Toxicity Evaluation of AuPD
hADMSCs were seeded
in a 96-well plate at an initial density of 10,000
cells/well and incubated at 37 °C under 5% CO2 for
24 h. Next, the cells were labeled with AuPD at concentrations of
0, 0.25, 0.50, 1.00, 2.00, and 4.00 nM. The 0 nM group acted as a
control. The cells were incubated for another 24 h, after which they
were washed thoroughly with PBS (3 times) to remove any residual nanoparticles.
Then, 0.5 mg/mL of MTT in culture media was added to each well and
incubated for 4 h. The solution was then aspirated, and 200 μL
of DMSO was added to each well for complete dissolution of the formazan
salt. The absorbance at 590 nm was measured using a multiwell plate
reader (Synergy HT, BioTek) to evaluate cell viability. Similarly,
the MTT assay was also performed after cell incubation with DOX at
multiple concentrations (0, 5, 10, and 20 μM) to determine the
DOX concentration that induced mild apoptosis. Cell survival, as determined
by the MTT assay, was normalized to readings from control cells.
Cellular apoptosis due to AuPD and DOX was also evaluated by using
an Annexin V-FITC apoptosis detection kit (Sigma-Aldrich). In brief,
hADMSCs were cultured in a six-well plate at 100,000 cells/well for
24 h, exposed to AuPD (0.5 nM) and/or DOX (20 μM) for 24 h,
washed with PBS (3 times), and harvested, followed by Annexin V-FTIC
staining according to the protocol provided by the manufacturer. Cells
were then fixed on slides and imaged by using a confocal microscope
(Zeiss LSM 700). The images were analyzed using Zen Blue software
(Zeiss Inc.).

## In Vitro Tridifferentiation
Assay
To conduct the tridifferentiation assay, hADMSCs were
first seeded
onto a six-well tissue culture plate at suitable cell densities for
the respective lineages, described in detail below. Cells with low
passage numbers (<5) were used for the differentiation experiments.
Cells in the experimental group were labeled with AuPD (0.5 nM, 24
h), while AuPD-negative (control) cells were not labeled with AuPD.
Cells were incubated at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere containing
5% CO2 throughout the process. After AuPD labeling and
incubation, the cells were washed three times with PBS to remove any
extracellular AuPD and the standard media was replaced with media
to induce adipogenic, chondrogenic, or osteogenic differentiation.
As a second control (“noninduced control”), both AuPD-labeled
cells and AuPD-negative cells were grown in standard media (DMEM,
supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin), i.e., media
that does not trigger adipogenic, chondrogenic, or osteogenic differentiation.
Adipogenic differentiation was induced with the StemPro adipogenesis
differentiation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s
guidelines. MSCs were plated in six-well tissue culture plates at
a concentration of 1 × 104 cells/cm2. Cells in some
wells were labeled with AuPD, while other wells served as a control
without AuPD addition. After labeling, standard media was replaced
with complete adipogenesis differentiation medium, or cells were maintained
in standard media (noninduced control). Media were changed for all
cells every 2–3 days. After 14 days, cells were washed and
stained with Oil Red O (Millipore Sigma, according to the manufacturer’s
instructions) for the detection of neutral lipids, which indicates
adipogenic differentiation.
Chondrogenic differentiation was
induced with the StemPro chondrogenesis
differentiation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s
guidelines. Cell solutions of 1.5 × 107 viable cells
(both AuPD-labeled and without AuPD labeling) were generated and dropped
at multiple locations on six-well tissue culture plates. After cultivating
these micromass cultures for 2 h under high-humidity conditions, standard
media was replaced with complete chondrogenesis differentiation medium,
or cells were maintained in standard media (noninduced control). Media
was changed for all cells every 2–3 days. After 16 days, cells
were washed and stained with Alcian Blue (Millipore Sigma, according
to the manufacturer’s instructions) for the detection of polysaccharides
to indicate chondrogenic differentiation.
Osteogenic differentiation
was carried out with the StemPro osteogenesis
differentiation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s
guidelines. Cells were plated in six-well tissue culture plates at
a concentration of 5 × 103 cells/cm2. After
AuPD labeling, or without AuPD present for AuPD-negative controls,
standard media was replaced with complete osteogenesis differentiation
medium or refreshed with standard media (noninduced controls). Media
were changed for all cells every 3–4 days. After 24 d, cells
were washed and stained with Alizarin Red (Millipore Sigma, according
to the manufacturer’s instructions) for the detection of calcium,
which indicates osteogenic differentiation.
All stained cells
were examined under BF microscopy (Zeiss AxioObserver),
and the resulting images were analyzed using Zen Blue software (Zeiss).

## In Vitro Surface Marker Assay
hADMSCs
with low passage numbers (<5) were seeded into a six-well tissue
culture plate at 50,000 cells/well. Cells in the experimental group
were labeled with AuPD (0.5 nM, 24 h), while negative control cells
were unlabeled. After AuPD labeling, cells were washed three times
with PBS to remove any extracellular AuPD and the media was replaced
with 4% PFA (pH 7.4) for 20–30 min to fix the cells. Cells
were then washed three times with PBS and then exposed to anti-human
CD14 (130-113-708, Miltenyi Biotec) or CD90 (130-117-684, Miltenyi
Biotec) antibodies (1:50 dilution in PBS). The cells were left at
room temperature on a shaker plate for 10 min, washed three times
with PBS to remove unbound antibodies, and visualized by confocal
fluorescence microscopy (Zeiss 700B). The resulting images were analyzed
using Zen Black software (Zeiss).

## In Vitro Sensor Activity
The levels
of caspase-3 due to AuPD-labeling or DOX treatment were first assessed
using a human active caspase-3 ELISA kit according to the protocol
provided by the manufacturer (Invitrogen). To also evaluate stem cell
apoptosis, AuPD aggregation within hADMSCs was monitored. In brief,
hADMSCs were cultured in six-well plates, labeled with AuPD (0.5 nM),
and treated with DOX (20 μM) for 48 h to induce apoptosis. Unlabeled
hADMSCs and AuPD-loaded cells without DOX were used as controls. AuPD
aggregation within labeled hADMSCs under apoptotic stress was examined
by using both bright-field microscopy (Zeiss AxioObserver) and dark-field
microscopy (Leica DM4000). To monitor the change in PA signal due
to apoptosis, a tissue mimicking 8% gelatin phantom was created as
described above. Inclusions were prepared by mixing equal parts of
the unlabeled hADMSCs, or AuPD-labeled hADMSCs with and without DOX,
with 16% gelatin solution. All domes had a final concentration of
500 cells/μL. US/PA imaging was performed using an LZ250 transducer
at 532, 700, 750, and 800 nm wavelengths. Each dome was imaged with
PA spectral scanning from 680 to 970 nm at 2 nm intervals. All the
data were processed using VevoLAB 5.7.0 software and analyzed in ImageJ
software (1.53n).

## Hindlimb Ischemia Model
All animal
procedures were
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC)
at the Georgia Institute of Technology in accordance with federal
guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals. We used a unilateral
hindlimb ischemia model following well-established methods. , In brief, all studies used 6–8-week-old (n = 3 control and n = 6 experimental) female Nu/Nu
mice (Charles River). Aseptic surgical techniques were followed. Anesthesia
was induced with 5% isoflurane and 0.4–0.8 L/min oxygen in
an induction chamber. Once immobilized, the mice were moved to a heating
pad on a sterile surgical table and placed in a supine position. The
surgical site was cleaned and swabbed with alcohol wipes and Betadine
three times. An incision was made in the skin. The skin was retracted
to expose the underlying neurovascular bundle. The femoral artery
and vein were carefully separated from the nerve and were then ligated
immediately proximal to the femoral profunda and ligated again ∼1
cm distal to the femoral profunda using 5–0 sutures. This ligated
region was excised by carefully cutting between the sutures and removing
the vessels. The skin incision was closed with wound clips and surgical
glue. A single dose of sustained release buprenorphine (0.08 mg/kg
intraperitoneal) was administered. The animal was allowed to recover
on a heating pad prior to returning to housing. Animals were monitored
following surgery, and additional pain relief was administered for
3 days following the procedure (ketoprofen; 5 mg/kg subcutaneous).

## In Vivo Sensor Activity
AuPD-labeled
hADMSCs (0.5 nM AuPD, 24 h incubation, 500,000 cells/25 μL)
were washed to remove any excess AuPD, harvested, counted with a hemocytometer,
and resuspended in phenol red-free DMEM (Cytiva). Then, they were
mixed with an equal volume of Matrigel (25 μL, Corning) to create
a final injection solution of 50 μL containing AuPD-labeled
hADMSCs. Unlabeled hADMSCs in Matrigel and Matrigel-only injections
were used as controls at similar volumes and cell concentrations.
All injections and solutions were prepared on ice and injected into
the outer hindlimb area in mice. US/PA imaging was performed longitudinally
at days 0 (immediately after injection), 3, 5, 7, 10, 12, and 14.
For imaging studies, the mice were anesthetized using inhaled isoflurane
(2–3%) mixed with 100% oxygen (0.4–0.8 L/min) and placed
on a heated, motorized translational stage with an anesthesia cone.
Per IACUC guidelines, animals were never imaged on consecutive days
and each imaging session was completed within 4 h. All in
vivo US/PA images were acquired using the LZ550 transducer
coupled with a fiber optic cable (256 elements, 40 MHz center frequency)
for better anatomical resolution. PA spectral analysis cine loops
from 680 to 970 nm were acquired at three different slices overlying
the injection site, the two extreme edge regions, and the center region,
with the center slice of the injected region being displayed as the
representative slice in c and a. Images were acquired
from 680 to 970 nm at 2 nm wavelength intervals. The two edge slices
were used as boundaries to perform further US/PA 3D imaging, with
the transducer attached to a translational motorized stage to acquire
2D cross-sectional images at wavelengths of 532, 700, 750, and 800
nm at 0.152 mm intervals. All data was exported, preprocessed, and
analyzed using VevoLAB5.7.0 software and ImageJ (1.53n).
To
construct slope analysis images, the PA spectral scans were
loaded in Matlab (R2020a) and compiled into a 3D spectral matrix with
each 2D slice containing PA amplitudes from 700 to 900 nm at 5 nm
intervals. Then, slopes were computed pixelwise by linear least-squares
regression of the PA amplitude on wavelength and used to construct
a “slope image”. This image was then filtered using
a 2D Gaussian filter with a smoothing kernel having a standard deviation
of 2.0, thresholded to remove noise, and finally overlaid onto the
corresponding US image.

## Statistics
For in vitro experiments,
at least three technical replicates were run for each set of experimental
conditions. For in vivo experiments, at least three
independent biological replicates (animals) per group were used for
control conditions as follows: (i) Matrigel-only injection without
ischemia-inducing surgery, (ii) Matrigel injection with unlabeled
hADMSCs without ischemia-inducing surgery, and (iii) Matrigel-only
injection with ischemia-inducing surgery. Six independent biological
replicates per group were used for the experimental conditions: (iv)
AuPD-labeled hADMSC injection without ischemia-inducing surgery and
(v) AuPD-labeled hADMSC injection with ischemia-inducing surgery.
Different synthesis batches of AuPD nanosensors and stem cells were
used in a randomized pattern to create the AuPD-labeled stem cells.
All replicates used for a single experiment were technical replicates
since the hADMSCs were sourced from a single donor; however the donors
were different between experiments. For experiments involving two
groups, control and experimental samples were compared by an unpaired
Student’s t test since each sample replicate
was independent of every other sample replicate, and the replicate
data arose from a randomized process. A Jarque-Bera goodness-of-fit
test was conducted on all data to confirm that the skewness and kurtosis
matched a normal distribution prior to the Student’s t test. For experiments involving three or more groups,
experimental conditions were compared using one-way or two-way ANOVA
with replicated measurements followed by a post hoc Dunnett test to calculate the effective size and the confidence
interval limits (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001) as appropriate. Unless
otherwise noted, all statistical analyses were performed using Microsoft
Excel, R, or GraphPad Prism version 8.0.1 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla,
CA, USA).

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Institute
of Health
(NIH) grants R01NS117613 (S.Y.E.), R01EY030071 (S.Y.E., C.R.E.), and
K99CA263016 (J.K.). We are grateful to A. Shaw and S. Hsieh of the
Georgia Institute of Technology for assistance with the confocal microscope.
We also acknowledge A. Yu and D. Qin of the Georgia Institute of Technology
for providing a Matlab code template for in vivo image
analysis. We thank the core facilities at the Parker H. Petit Institute
for Bioengineering and Bioscience, and the Institute for Electronics
and Nanotechnology at Georgia Institute of Technology.

## Data Availability Statement
The authors
confirm that the data supporting the findings of this study are available
within the article and its Supporting Information. Any additional
data are available from the corresponding authors upon request.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.3c04161.
In-depth characterization
of the AuPD nanosensor in
response to caspase-3; AuPD photostability; in-depth characterization
of cellular uptake of AuPD in vitro; Annexin V assay
for AuPD toxicity; Tridifferentiation assay for AuPD-labeled MSC functional
assessment; Surface marker analysis for AuPD AuPD-labeled functional
assessment; BF images of AuPD aggregation; DF images of AuPD controls;
in-depth characterization of sensor activity of AuPD in vitro; US/PA imaging of additional negative controls; 14-day longitudinal
imaging of cell tracking and apoptosis; 3D cross-sectional and maximum
intensity projection US/PA images of cell tracking and apoptosis;
postimaging histology analysis (PDF)
Spectral and 3D US/PA imaging video (MP4)
Spectral and
3D US/PA imaging video (MP4)

## Author Present Address
⊗ Department
of Surgery, School of Medicine, University
of California Davis, Sacramento, California 95817, USA; Department
of Biomedical Engineering, University of California Davis, Davis,
California 95616, USA

## Author Contributions
⊥ A.J. and J.K. contributed equally to this work. A.J. and J.K. designed
and performed all the experiments including the synthesis and the
characterization of the AuPD nanosensor, the in vitro verification, and the in vivo validation imaging
experiments. K.P.K performed the hindlimb ischemia surgery. A.J.,
J.K., and K.P.K. performed the data analysis and image processing.
A.J. and J.K. wrote the original draft of the manuscript, and K.P.K.,
C.R.E., and S.Y.E. reviewed and edited the final manuscript. C.R.E.
and S.Y.E. supervised the entire study.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
nn3c04161_si_001.pdf
nn3c04161_si_002.mp4
nn3c04161_si_003.mp4

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
nn3c04161_si_001.pdf
nn3c04161_si_002.mp4
nn3c04161_si_003.mp4

## Data Availability Statement
The authors
confirm that the data supporting the findings of this study are available
within the article and its Supporting Information. Any additional
data are available from the corresponding authors upon request.