pmcStem Cell Res TherStem Cell Res Ther1238stemcellres101527581Stem Cell Research & Therapy1757-6512BMCPMC11590572PMC11590572.111590572115905723958760410.1186/s13287-024-04066-840661ResearchIntravenous injection of BMSCs modulate tsRNA expression and ameliorate lung remodeling in COPD mice
JinTing ]. The primary pathological features of COPD include chronic bronchitis, small airway remodeling, and parenchymal remodeling (emphysema) [ ]. Inflammation is central to the development of COPD, involving the infiltration of various inflammatory cells and the secretion of inflammatory mediators [ ]. Chronic inflammation leads to remodeling of both the small airways and lung parenchyma. Airway remodeling includes epithelial cell proliferation, reticular basement membrane (RBM) thickening, collagen deposition, peribronchial fibrosis, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and bronchial smooth muscle cell proliferation [ ]. Parenchymal remodeling (emphysema) results from an imbalance between apoptosis and the replenishment of structural cells in the lung tissue. Necroptotic signaling further exacerbates inflammation, airway remodeling, and emphysema in COPD [ ]. The mechanisms underlying COPD remodeling are complex and not yet fully understood, and currently, there are no drugs specifically targeting lung remodeling.
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and their extracellular vesicles (EVs) have shown significant therapeutic potential in previous studies. MSCs are stem cells derived from adult tissues, known for their unlimited proliferative and multi-lineage differentiation abilities, low immunogenicity, and lack of ethical concerns in clinical and preclinical applications. Studies have found that MSCs rarely proliferate and differentiate at the site of transplantation. Instead, their therapeutic effects are primarily mediated through the paracrine secretion of cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, proteases, other soluble proteins, organelles, and EVs, which modulate inflammation, immunity, and tissue repair [ – ]. EVs are bilayer membrane vesicles released by cells, ranging from 40 nm to 1000 nm in diameter, and mainly comprise microvesicles and exosomes. Using ultracentrifugation and other techniques, EVs can be isolated from various sources of MSCs. Increasing evidence suggests that MSC-derived EVs (MSC-EVs) can exert functions similar to MSCs, representing a promising acellular therapy [ , ]. Since it was first demonstrated in 2006 that adipose-derived MSCs could secrete growth factors to repair emphysema [ ], numerous studies have shown that MSCs can downregulate pulmonary inflammatory mediators [ ] and matrix metalloproteinases [ ], reduce C-reactive protein levels in COPD patients [ ], improve mMRC scores, decrease the frequency of disease exacerbations, and enhance FEV1 [ ]. Recently, it has been shown that both human umbilical cord MSCs and their EVs significantly reduce the inflammatory response in a cigarette smoke-induced rat COPD model, with both having similar effects [ ]. However, there is still a lack of comparative studies on the therapeutic efficacy of BMSCs and their EVs in animal COPD models. Additionally, the advantages and disadvantages of local versus intravenous injection of MSCs or their EVs remain unclear, and determining the superior option for COPD treatment requires further investigation.
Transfer RNA-derived small RNA (tsRNA) is a small RNA fragment derived from specific cleavage of tRNA by enzymes. Initially considered as non-functional transcription products, tsRNAs has gradually been recognized as an important molecule involved in various cellular physiological processes [ ]. There is mounting evidence suggesting their involvement in biological processes such as gene expression regulation, cell proliferation, and tumor suppression [ ]. the abundance of tsRNA is second only to microRNA and has been found to have similar functions to miRNA, including its ability to interact with Argonaute (AGO) proteins to target mRNA [ – ]. tsRNAs have been implicated in various lung diseases, including lung adenocarcinoma [ ], non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) [ ], and acute lung injury [ ]. tsRNA-5001a has been shown to promote lung adenocarcinoma cell proliferation and is linked to postoperative recurrence [ ]. Another tRNA-derived fragment, AS-tDR-007333, enhances NSCLC malignancy through the HSPB1/MED29 and ELK4/MED29 pathways [ ]. Moreover, changes in tsRNA expression were observed by Y. Lin et al. during dexmedetomidine treatment for lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced acute lung injury [ ]. However, there is still a lack of research on COPD. While previous studies have shown that MSCs regulate lung disease-related processes through the modulation of miRNA expression [ , ], there is a lack of research on the impact of MSCs on tsRNA expression in COPD models.
In this context, this study aims to investigate the effects of local tracheal instillation or systemic intravenous injection of BMSCs or their EVs on pulmonary inflammation and remodeling in mice with COPD at different stages. The study seeks to identify the most suitable therapeutic products and methods for different stages of COPD. By integrating mRNA sequencing and tsRNA sequencing data, we aim to provide molecular evidence for the regulatory role of BMSCs in inflammation and lung remodeling in COPD mice and to further explore potential molecular mechanisms and regulatory networks. This research intends to supplement the scientific foundation for the application of MSCs in COPD treatment and provide new insights into the role of tsRNA in COPD.

## Materials and methods

## BMSCs culture and isolation of EVs
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) were isolated from the tibiofemoral bone marrow (BM) of 6-week-old male SD rats sourced from Hunan SJA Laboratory Animal Co., Ltd. (China). BM was thoroughly rinsed into cell culture dishes for whole bone marrow cell culture [ ]. Primary MSCs were cultured in αMEM (Gibco, USA) + 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco, USA) + 2% penicillin and streptomycin (Biosharp, China) at 37℃ with 5% CO2. Non-adherent hematopoietic cells were removed through multiple culture medium changes, and cells were passaged at 80% fusion. According to the International Society for Cellular Therapy (ISCT) criteria for MSCs, BMSCs were characterized using flow cytometric analysis and multilineage differentiation capacity [ ]. BMSCs passage 3 were cultured to evaluate surface biomarkers (CD29, CD90, CD45) via flow cytometry. Multilineage differentiation was induced following the Oricell Mouse Mesenchymal Stem Cell Differentiation Kit instructions (Cyagen, USA). BMSC-EVs were obtained from BMSCs passage 3 and passage 4, after cells culture to about 80% fusion, the serum of culture medium was replaced with EVs-free FBS prepared by gradient ultracentrifugation. After 72 h, The EV pellet was resuspended in 200 µl of 1xPBS and stored for later use. BMSCs supernatant was collected and subjected to differential centrifugation. First,. 2000×g for 10 min using a tabletop centrifuge (Eppendorf, Germany) to remove dead cells. Then 10,000×g for 45 min using an ultracentrifuge (Beckman, USA) to eliminate cellular debris and vacuoles. Finally, ultracentrifugation at 100,000×g for 70 min using a high-speed rotor to precipitate the BMSC-derived extracellular vesicles (BMSC-EVs). The BMSC-EV pellet was resuspended in 200 µl of 1xPBS and stored frozen for future use.

## BMSCs - EVs characterization
For electron microscopy analysis, 10 µL of the EVs sample was placed on a copper grid and allowed to sediment for 1 min. Excess liquid was removed and 10 µL of uranyl acetate was added for 1 min. After air drying at room temperature for 5 min, the samples were examined and imaged using a Hitachi HT-7700 transmission electron microscope (Hitachi, Japan) at 100 kV. The particle size of BMSCs-EVs was characterized using the NanoFCM N30E (NanoFCM, China). Surface marker protein expression was further analyzed using nano-flow cytometry. Specifically, EVs was incubated with fluorescent IgG (BioLegend, USA), CD9, CD63, and CD81 antibodies (BD, USA) for 30 min in the dark. Post-incubation, 1 mL of pre-cooled PBS was added, and the samples were ultracentrifuged at 110,000 × g for 70 min at 4 °C. The ultracentrifugation step was repeated. Finally, the pellet was resuspended in 50 µL of pre-cooled 1× PBS. Fluorescence detection was then performed using the NanoFCM.

## COPD animal models and treatments
Specific pathogen-free (SPF) C57BL/6 male mice, 6 weeks old and weighing 20–25 g, were obtained from Hunan SJA Laboratory Animal Co., Ltd. (China) and housed at the Experimental Animal Department of Central South University. Two batches of 48 mice were randomly selected, housed in individually ventilated cages (IVCs), and kept under a 12-hour light/dark cycle at 22 ± 2 °C with 50 ± 10% humidity. After a one-week acclimation, mice were divided into control and experimental groups. The experimental mice were exposed to cigarette smoke (CS) twice daily (Each exposure lasted 20 min, with 10-minute intervals) in a 60 × 80 cm ventilated transparent box, 8 commercial cigarettes (Baisha Hard, China) containing 10 mg tar and 1.0 mg nicotine ignited at the four corners of the box. Besides, intraperitoneal injections of cigarette smoke extract (CSE) was received every 10 days, following previously described protocols [ ] of the CSE preparation and injection. The model was maintained for 6 weeks (inflammation phase) and 16 weeks (emphysema phase). Mice that lost more than 20% body weight or did not survive were excluded from the study. The remaining mice were randomly assigned to receive intratracheal (TC) or intravenous (VC) injections of 4 million BMSCs or BMSC-EVs from 4 million BMSCs (TE and VE groups, respectively) in 100 µl PBS, or left untreated as the COPD model group. All intratracheal instillations were performed after intraperitoneal injection of sodium pentobarbital (50 mg/kg) for anesthesia. All tracheal or intravenous infusions are administered slowly with slender barrels and 0.25 mm needles to prevent blockage, single dose. Mice that did not receive complete injections were also excluded. After 2 weeks, surviving mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation under anesthesia, and lung tissues were collected. Ultimately, 30 mice, including the control group, were included in the study with 5 mice per group across 6 groups. All procedures were approved by the Ethics Committee of Xiangya Third Hospital, Central South University (Approval No. 2020-s171, approved on April 3, 2020). This study adheres to the ARRIVE guidelines 2.0 for reporting animal research.

## PKH26 fluorescence signal acquisition and analysis
PKH26 Cell Linker Kit (MKbio Cat# MX4021, China) was used to label BMSCs and BMSC-EVs so that the intrapulmonary distribution of red fluorescently labeled BMSCs and BMSC-EVs could be observed under fluorescence microscope. Lung tissues were rapidly frozen, sectioned using a cryostat microtome, and PKH26 (red) fluorescence signals were captured using a fluorescence microscope. ImageJ software quantified mean fluorescence intensity.

## H&E staining and inflammation assessment
The Hematoxylin-Eosin staining kit (G-CLONE Cat# RS3390, China) was applied to stain paraffin sections of mouse lung tissue to analyze and evaluate lung peribronchial and parenchymal inflammation. Peribronchial inflammation was semi-quantitatively analyzed, blindly coded, and scored on a scale of 0 to 4 based on inflammatory cell infiltrates: 0, normal; 1, sparse cells; 2, inflammatory cell ring 1 cell deep; 3, inflammatory cell ring 2 to 4 cells deep; and 4, inflammatory cell ring > 4 cells deep [ ]. Parenchymal inflammation (Alveolitis) scoring was performed using a grid on photographs (100x magnification) of tissue Section. [ ].

## Apoptosis assay of lung tissue
TUNEL staining was conducted to label DNA-damaged apoptotic cells with Annexin V-FITC apoptosis detection kit (Beyotime Cat# C1062M, China). The apoptotic index (AI), representing the percentage of TUNEL-positive cell nuclei, was calculated by ImageJ software [ ].

## IHC staining
Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining evaluated protein expression in mouse lung tissues using primary antibodies and Rabbit two-step detection kit. Primary antibodies used were: 1:4000 Rabbit anti-E-cadherin (Proteintech Cat# 20874-1-AP, USA), 1:2000 Rabbit anti-N-cadherin (Proteintech Cat# 22018-1-AP, USA), 1:1000 Rabbit anti-Vimentin (Proteintech Cat# 10366-1-AP, USA), Rabbit two-step detection kit (ZSGB-Bio Cat# PV-9001, China). Quantification was performed using ImageJ software with the integrated optical density (IOD)/area method [ ].

## Sirius red staining and collagen evaluation
The collagen deposition in lung tissues was assessed using the Sirius Red staining kit (G-CLONE Cat# RS1220, China). Quantitative analysis on each mouse slice was performed using ImageJ software.

## mRNA sequencing
Total RNA was enriched for mRNA using the NEBNext®Poly(A) mRNA Magnetic Isolation Module (New England Biolabs). and the product RNA was used for library construction. The constructed library was assessed using an Agilent 2100, quantified via PCR, and sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 sequencer. Following quality control and data comparison, quantitative analysis of gene expression was performed if the results were satisfactory, with expression units represented as FPKM (fragments per kilobase per million mapped reads).

## tRFs and tiRNA sequencing
Total RNA was extracted from lung tissues in each group. The extracted total RNA was subjected to pretreatment using the rtStar™ TRF&tiRNA pretreatment kit (Arraystar Cat# AS-FS-005, USA) and then sequencing libraries were prepared utilized the rtStar™ FirstStrand cDNA synthesis kit (3ʹ and 5ʹ adapters) (Arraystar Cat# AS-FS-003-02, USA). The completed libraries were identified and quantified using an Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 (Invitrogen, USA). After denaturation into single-stranded DNA molecules, the libraries were captured on Illumina flow cells, amplified in situ as a sequencing cluster, and sequenced for 50 cycles on the Illumina NextSeq500 system (Illumina, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.The abundance of tRFs and tiRNAs was assessed and normalized to counts per million (CPM) of total aligned reads.

## tsRNA target gene prediction
Previous studies have indicated that tsRNAs function similarly to miRNAs by targeting mRNAs and interacting with Argonaute (AGO) proteins. Additionally, it has been proposed that tsRNA seed sequences exhibit a similar matching spectrum to miRNAs [ ]. Therefore, potential target genes of selected tsRNAs are identified based on binding sites present in the 3’ untranslated region using two miRNA target prediction algorithms, Miranda (http://www.microrna.org/microrna/home.do) and TargetScan (http://www.targetscan.org). Candidate target genes are selected if they meet the following filtering criteria for binding with tsRNAs: miranda_score ≥ 140; miranda_energy ≤ -10; context_plus_score ≤ -0.1.

## Analysis of sequencing data
Ballgown was utilized for quantifying sample expression levels and conducting differential gene expression analysis between groups, with a threshold set at a 1.5-fold difference, P ≤ 0.05, and an average FPKM within each group ≥ 0.5 to filter differentially expressed genes (DEG). Differential expression of tsRNA (DE-tsRNA, |fold change| > 1.5 and P < 0.05) was screened using the R Package EdgeR [ ]. To present the overall characteristics of mRNA and tsRNA expression profiles, various visualization methods such as volcano plots, bubble plots, Venn diagrams, pie charts, and bar charts were utilized. For Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis, leverage either the “clusterProfile” R package [ ]or DAVID Bioinformatics (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/). Utilize Pearson correlation to assess the expression correlation between differentially expressed tsRNAs (DE-tsRNAs) and differentially expressed target genes (DE-target genes), and employ Cytoscape 8.0 software for visualizing the co-expression network. Gene sets related to inflammation, apoptosis, collagen deposition, and EMT process were downloaded from the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) [ ]. Subsequently, genes and their expression information were loaded into GSEA software for gene set enrichment analysis and core genes identification.

## RT-qPCR
Real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was used to verify the expression of DE-tsRNA. The total RNA extracted was pretreated for reverse transcription and cDNA synthesis. qRT-PCR was performed using VIIa 7 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, USA) and 2× PCR Master Mix (Arraystar Cat# AS-MR-005, USA). reaction conditions were: incubation at 95 °C for 10 min, the constant temperature at 95 °C for 10 s, and the constant temperature at 60 °C for 60 s. Finally, The expression levels of tsRNA were calculated by the 2-ΔΔCt method and normalized with U6. Primers are detailed in Table  .

 

## Statistical analysis
To minimize bias, blinding was implemented during data collection and analysis stages, conducted by personnel unaware of the group assignments. This included histological assessments, fluorescence signal acquisition, and all scoring of tissue sections. The data in this study were analyzed and graphed using R 4.2.1 software and GraphPad Prism 9.0 software. t-test was used to compare the differences between the two groups, and one-way ANOVA was used for two-by-two comparisons between more than two groups. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD). P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## Results

## Characterization of BMSCs and BMSC-EVs
BMSCs were isolated and cultured using the whole bone marrow culture method. The majority of in vitro-cultured BMSCs exhibited a spindle-shaped morphology, with some displaying irregular shapes (Fig.  A). During induction differentiation, BMSCs demonstrated the ability to form bone nodules (Fig.  B) and lipid droplets (Fig.  C). Furthermore, the results of surface antigen detection revealed high expression of mesenchymal markers CD29 (99.82%) and CD90 (99.52%), along with low expression of the hematopoietic marker CD45 (0.29%) (Fig.  D), confirming the mesenchymal identity of the cultured BMSCs. BMSC-EVs were isolated using differential centrifugation. The particles suspended in 1xPBS were characterized based on morphology, size distribution, and expression of protein markers. Transmission electron microscopy examination revealed that BMSC-EVs exhibited a discoidal shape (Fig.  E). Nanoparticle tracking analysis demonstrated an average diameter of 77.45 nm for BMSC-EVs, with Fig.  F illustrating their size distribution. Nano-flow cytometry revealed positive expression of specific exosomal markers CD9, CD63, and CD81 (Fig.  G).

 

## Differential effects of intratracheal and intravenous administration of BMSCs/BMSC-EVs on lung pathology in COPD mice
In COPD mouse models with 6-week and 16-week induction periods, PKH26-labeled BMSCs/BMSC-EVs were administered either intratracheally or intravenously. Lung accumulation of BMSCs/BMSC-EVs was observed using fluorescence detection of frozen sections (Fig.  A) and Lung tissue pathology was assessed by H&E staining of paraffin sections (Fig.  B). In the 6-week COPD model mice, compared to the Control group, the COPD group showed thickened alveolar septa and significant inflammatory cell infiltration in the lung parenchyma. The intratracheal BMSCs/EVs groups (TC/TE) exhibited less PKH26 fluorescence distribution in the lungs compared to the intravenous groups (VC/VE). The TC group had persistent inflammation and abnormal immune cell infiltration. In contrast, the TE and VE groups showed reduced inflammation, though airway and lung parenchymal inflammation persisted. The VC group had significantly reduced inflammatory cell infiltration and thinner alveolar septa, with a higher accumulation of BMSCs in the lungs following intravenous injection.

 

In the 16-week COPD model mice, there was reduced inflammatory cell infiltration in the lung parenchyma, with enlarged alveolar spaces, thinner and fragmented alveolar walls, and emphysema formation. The VC/VE groups showed less PKH26 fluorescence in the lungs compared to the TC/TE groups. However, similar to the 6-week model, the TC group had abnormal immune cell infiltration, suggesting that intratracheal administration of BMSCs might induce abnormal airway responses, whereas intratracheal EVs did not. The TE group had greater lung distribution and less severe emphysema compared to other treatment groups.

## BMSCs reduce inflammation and antagonize apoptosis of lung tissue in COPD mice
Further evaluation was conducted in view of the accumulation of intravenous bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells in the lungs of 6-week COPD mice and their beneficial effect on lung pathology. The inflammation in the lung parenchyma and peribronchial areas was evaluated in the Control, COPD, and VC groups of mice. The results showed significant inflammation in both the lung parenchyma (percentage: 11.010 ± 1.865 vs. 8.426 ± 1.561, P < 0.05) and peribronchial (score: 2.0 ± 0.70 vs. 0.8 ± 0.45, P < 0.05) regions in COPD mice compare to Control mice. H&E staining and semi-quantitative inflammation analysis (Fig.  A) demonstrated that BMSCs alleviated lung parenchymal (percentage: 8.444 ± 0.471) and peribronchial (score: 1.4 ± 1.14) inflammation in COPD mice, with a particularly notable reduction in lung parenchymal inflammation (P < 0.05).

 

The apoptotic index (AI), defined as the ratio of apoptotic cell number to the total cell number, was used to depict the apoptotic level in the samples. Figure  B presents TUNEL fluorescent staining images of lung tissue cellular structures from each group of mice, accompanied by the corresponding statistical analysis results of AI, Which showed an increased AI in alveolar septal cells of COPD group (AI: 0.113 ± 0.067) mice compared to the Control (AI: 0.037 ± 0.012) group (P < 0.05). the VC group (AI: 0.042 ± 0.012) displayed a decreased AI compared to the COPD group (P < 0.05, Fig.  B).

## BMSCs inhibit EMT and collagen deposition in lung tissue of COPD mice
The subsequent assessment of BMSCs’ impact on COPD mice delved into the processes of EMTand collagen deposition. As depicted in Fig.  A, lung tissues from the COPD group exhibited downregulated expression of E-cadherin (AOD: 0.336 ± 0.065 vs. 0.488 ± 0.050, P < 0.01), along with elevated expressions of N-cadherin (AOD: 0.375 ± 0.091 vs. 0.232 ± 0.023, P < 0.01) and Vimentin (AOD: 0.321 ± 0.086 vs. 0.213 ± 0.053, P < 0.05), indicative of EMT, compare to Control group. Notably, BMSCs demonstrated the ability to upregulate E-cadherin expression (AOD: 0.473 ± 0.047, P < 0.01) while exerting a suppressive effect on N-cadherin (AOD: 0.288 ± 0.091) and Vimentin expressions (AOD: 0.252 ± 0.110), partially reversing EMT, compare to COPD group. Simultaneously, Sirus red staining (Fig.  B) showed a significant increase in stromal collagen deposition within the COPD group (area ratio: 0.303 ± 0.027, P < 0.001), compare to Control group (area ratio: 0.207 ± 0.017). a trend alleviated by BMSCs treatment, leading to reduced collagen deposition (area ratio: 0.247 ± 0.026, P < 0.01).

 

## CS and BMSCs alter gene expression
Using high-throughput mRNA sequencing, we identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in CS-induced COPD and the BMSCs intravenous injection treatment group (VC). Genes with more than 1.5-fold change in expression (P < 0.05) were considered DEGs. In the COPD group, 522 DEGs were identified, including 503 upregulated and 19 downregulated. GO analysis showed enrichment in processes like ncRNA processing, Ras signaling, smooth muscle cell proliferation, and inflammatory response regulation (BP); nuclear specks, spliceosomes, and mitochondria (CC); and tRNA binding, catalytic activity, and receptor binding (MF) (Fig.  A).

 

In the VC group, 703 DEGs were identified, with 23 upregulated and 680 downregulated. GO analysis GO analysis revealed that these genes were involved in translation regulation, protein localization, inflammatory response and apoptotic signaling pathway (BP); apical plasma membrane, nuclear specks and cell projection membrane (CC); and tRNA catalytic activity, methyltransferase activity and ubiquitin protein ligase binding (MF) (Fig.  B).
Comparative analysis found 129 shared DEGs between the COPD and VC groups, highlighting potential key genes in COPD development and BMSC treatment. Of these, 118 were upregulated in COPD and downregulated in VC (Fig.  C). GO analysis showed enrichment in processes like ncRNA processing, histone deacetylation, ribosome biogenesis, triglyceride metabolic process, and cellular response to prostaglandin E stimulus (BP); preribosome and nuclear specks (CC); and prostaglandin receptor and tRNA catalytic activity (MF) (Fig.  D). Additionally, 11 DEGs were downregulated in COPD but upregulated in VC. Figure  E shows the interaction of proteins encoded by these 11 genes, which are closely related to oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial function, possibly indicating significant improvement in mitochondrial gene function during BMSCs treatment of COPD.

## BMSCs inhibit the expression of genes associated with inflammation and lung remodeling
Further Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) revealed that in the chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) group, the enrichment scores (ES) for genes associated with inflammation, apoptosis, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and collagen formation were predominantly greater than 0 (Fig.  A), indicating that these genes were upregulated in COPD. In contrast, in the BMSCs treatment group (VC), the ES for these genes were predominantly less than 0 (Fig.  B), indicating downregulation of these genes following BMSCs treatment. This suggests that BMSCs therapy has an inhibitory effect on these processes.

 

## CS and BMSCs alter the tsRNA expression
We analyzed tsRNA profiles in Control, COPD, and VC groups, detecting 126 tsRNAs in Control and COPD, and 116 in VC. Of these, 106 tsRNAs were commonly expressed across all groups (Fig.  A). The most abundant types were tRF-5c and tiRNA-5 (Fig.  B). A stacked bar chart (Fig.  C) showed the numbers of tsRNA subtypes originating from different tRNAs, highlighting their unique contributions to the overall tsRNA landscape. High-throughput sequencing identified 37 DE-tsRNAs in COPD (17 upregulated, 20 downregulated), while 32 were identified in VC (16 upregulated, 16 downregulated) (Fig.  D-E). tsRNAs primarily influence biological processes through targeted regulation of gene expression. Therefore, we performed GO analysis on the potential target genes of these DE-tsRNAs. The results showed that COPD DE-tsRNAs targeted genes involved in transcription regulation, cell differentiation, ion transport, lipid metabolism, phosphorylation, apoptosis, and autophagy (BP); membrane, cytoplasm, nucleoplasm, and Golgi apparatus (CC); protein and metal ion binding, transferase activity and nucleotide binding (MF) (Fig.  F). VC DE-tsRNAs targeted genes involved in transcription regulation, organism development, apoptosis, ion transport, and autophagy (BP); membrane, cytoplasm, cell surface, and Golgi membrane (CC); protein binding, RNA polymerase II transcription factor activity, DNA binding, homodimerization, and calcium ion binding (MF) (Fig.  G). Similar to the COPD DE-tsRNAs to a large extent.

 

## Co-expression network of DE-tsRNAs and their DE-target genes
We integrated data from differentially expressed tsRNA target genes (DE-target genes, Context+ < -0.25, Structure > 150, Energy < -20) identified through tsRNA and mRNA sequencing to construct a co-expression network of DE-tsRNA and DE-target genes. DE-tsRNA can regulate gene expression levels by targeting mRNA, and the stronger the correlation between the two expressions, the greater the possibility of being the target. Therefore, we analyzed the expression correlations between DE-tsRNA and DE-target genes in the COPD group (Table S1) and VC group (Table S2) and constructed co-expression networks (Fig.  ). Figure  A shows the targeting relationships and expression correlations of 32 DE-tsRNA and 72 DE-target genes in the COPD group, with significant correlations (P < 0.05) including Ces1g, Cdk18, Gatd1, Kmt2d, Sdc3, and Trpc1. Similarly, Fig.  B presents the targeting relationships and expression correlations of 30 DE-tsRNA and 107 DE-target genes in the VC group, highlighting significant correlations for genes such as Adamts2, Atp13a4, Celf1, Gmds, mt-Nd1, Sec14l2, Snrk, Ces1g, Cckar, Exosc9, Golm1, Nudt12, Trmt12, Ttpa, Ube3a, and Zbtb39. The network diagram annotates biological processes involving these significantly correlated potential target genes. In both the COPD and BMSCs treatment groups, DE-tsRNA targeting these potential target genes may regulate their expression levels, thereby influencing the biological processes they are involved in.

 

## Co-expression network of DE-tsRNAs and core target genes related to inflammation and remodeling
In our results, we observed significant inflammatory infiltration, alveolar septal cell apoptosis, EMT, and extracellular matrix collagen deposition in COPD mice, which were alleviated by BMSC treatment. Based on tsRNA and mRNA sequencing data, we further explored the potential molecular mechanisms influencing the inflammation and lung remodeling processes. We identified common differentially expressed tsRNAs (DE-tsRNAs) in the COPD and BMSCs treatment group (VC), particularly those with reversed expression trends, which might play critical roles in both the progression and alleviation of COPD airway remodeling. Our results showed that seven tsRNAs were upregulated in COPD but downregulated after BMSC intervention, while five tsRNAs were downregulated in COPD but upregulated after BMSC intervention (Fig.  A). These reversals suggest potential impacts of BMSCs on tsRNA expression dynamics. The expression information of these 12 DE-tsRNAs is presented in Table  . GSEA analysis of their potential target genes revealed that, in COPD, enrichment scores for inflammation, apoptosis, EMT, and collagen formation-related genes were predominantly positive and upregulated. In contrast, the BMSC-treated group showed mostly negative enrichment scores (Fig.  B), aligning with our previous observations of the trends in inflammation and remodeling-related phenotypic changes.

 

 

To validate the reliability of our sequencing data, we conducted RT-qPCR experiments on five candidate DE-tsRNAs that had no homologous sequences and relatively high expression levels (Fig.  C). The results showed that the expression trends of these five tsRNAs in the samples were consistent with the sequencing data. However, only tRF-+1:T16-iMET-CAT-1 and tRF-1:28-Gly-GCC-2-M3 exhibited statistically significant differences in pairwise comparisons among the three groups (n = 3, P < 0.05). Based on the GSEA analysis, we also identified core genes related to inflammation and lung remodeling processes in the COPD and VC groups. We performed expression correlation analyses (see Table S3) between these five DE-tsRNAs and their core target genes involved in inflammation, apoptosis, EMT, and collagen formation and constructed a co-expression network (Fig.  D). In the network, tRF-1:15-chrM.Gln-TTG showed significant negative correlations with Bcap31, Phip, and Socs5, and tRF-1:28-Gly-GCC-2-M3 showed significant negative correlation with P2rx7, suggesting these tsRNAs may primarily regulate gene expression through direct silencing. In contrast, tiRNA-1:35-Leu-TAG-3 exhibited significant positive correlations with its potential target genes Bdnf, Fnip2, Foxo3, Tgfb2, and Tnfrsf10b, while tRF-+1:T16-iMet-CAT-1 showed significant positive correlations with Ern1, Fnip2, Plscr3, Ripk1, Rock2, Thbs1, and Trib3, indicating the regulatory relationship between these tsRNAs and genes may extend beyond direct silencing. The complex regulatory relationships between these tsRNA-mRNA pairs may be a potential molecular mechanism by which tsRNAs modulate genes associated with inflammation and remodeling, warranting further investigation and validation.

## Discussion
The main pathological features of cigarette smoke-induced COPD are lung remodeling caused by chronic inflammation, including small airway and lung parenchyma remodeling. MSC therapy and its acellular alternative, EVs, have shown promising prospects in various diseases, including COPD. However, few studies have explored the therapeutic pathways of MSCs or MSC-EVs suitable for different stages of COPD and their effects on inflammation and lung remodeling. In this study, we used intratracheal instillation or tail vein injection of BMSCs or BMSC-EVs to treat COPD mice at different modeling stages. By examining their pulmonary distribution and observing the effects on lung tissue pathology, we investigated the potential therapeutic approaches suitable for different stages of COPD. Our results indicate that tail vein injection of BMSCs might be the recommended treatment for the high inflammation phase of COPD, as pulmonary inflammation significantly increases BMSCs accumulation in the lungs. BMSCs significantly reduced lung tissue inflammation in COPD mice, inhibited apoptosis, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and collagen deposition, all of which are processes involved in lung remodeling. Through mRNA sequencing and the first tsRNA sequencing data analysis, we further explored new molecular mechanisms in cigarette smoke-induced COPD and BMSCs-treated COPD mice. We provided molecular evidence for the observed ameliorative effects of BMSCs on COPD inflammation and lung remodeling and emphasized the potential functional role of tsRNA.
In regenerative medicine, various sources of MSCs, MSC-EVs, and even MSC-conditioned media have been used in preclinical and clinical studies for a range of pulmonary diseases, including idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), silicosis, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, acute lung injury from various causes, asthma, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and pulmonary hypertension [ , – ]. These studies have generally validated their safety and efficacy. However, the clinical and preclinical trials of MSCs and their EVs are still in the exploratory phase. A recent study indicated that human umbilical cord-derived MSCs and their EVs have similar effects in reducing lung inflammation in a rat model of COPD [ ]. Nonetheless, research on the treatment strategies of MSCs and EVs in different stages of experimental COPD models remains lacking. Furthermore, the optimal route of administration—local or systemic—for MSCs and their EVs in the treatment of specific diseases is still unclear.
In COPD studies, the inflammation and lung remodeling processes vary dynamically over time. Different preclinical COPD models (induced by various agents or with distinct genetic backgrounds) may exhibit differences in pathological features and responses to treatment. In this study, a cigarette smoke (CS)-induced COPD model was used to simulate the chronic inflammation and emphysema commonly seen in human COPD. Compared to other models, such as those induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or gene knockout, the cigarette smoke model more closely mimics the pathological mechanisms of human COPD, giving the findings a higher potential for clinical translation [ – ]. In our study, COPD mice subjected to 6 weeks of modeling exhibited significant peribronchial and pulmonary parenchymal inflammation, leading to increased airway mucus secretion. In contrast, after 16 weeks of modeling, the pathological features of COPD mice primarily included emphysema with minimal inflammation. Based on these pathological changes, tracheal instillation of BMSCs or EVs might be more suitable for 16-week COPD mice, but not the 6-week COPD mice, where excessive inflammation and mucus secretion might hinder the distribution of BMSCs or EVs. Notably, tracheal instillation of BMSCs resulted in abnormal immune infiltration around the airways, possibly related to the difficulty in cell engraftment and subsequent cell death, suggesting that tracheal instillation of BMSCs may not be recommended. Conversely, intravenous administration of BMSCs or EVs showed different outcomes. Intravenous administration of BMSC-EVs might lead to limited distribution in the lungs due to clearance by the circulatory system, making it a less optimal choice. Interestingly, we observed homing of intravenously injected BMSCs in the lung tissue of 6-week COPD mice, but not in 16-week COPD mice, which has been similarly reported in previous studies. This homing may be due to the interaction between the MSC surface receptor CXCR4 and the upregulated SDF-1 in inflamed or injured lung tissues, facilitating BMSC engraftment, which may be enhanced by factors such as TGFβ1 or hypoxia [ – ]. Therefore, for COPD characterized by airway and parenchymal inflammation and high mucus secretion, intravenous injection of BMSCs might be the more appropriate treatment. For COPD primarily characterized by emphysema, tracheal instillation of BMSC-EVs appears to be a promising therapeutic approach. This personalized treatment approach, targeting different pathological stages of COPD, represents a significant advancement in regenerative medicine and provides a theoretical basis for the clinical application of BMSCs and their EVs.
Further histopathological evaluation of lung tissue from 6-week COPD mice treated with intravenous BMSCs revealed reduced inflammation compared to untreated COPD mice. Additionally, processes associated with lung remodeling, such as apoptosis, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and extracellular matrix collagen deposition, were inhibited. Apoptosis of structural cells in the lung may be a crucial upstream event in the pathogenesis of COPD. In COPD patients, increased apoptosis of alveolar epithelial and endothelial cells occurs, and the increased proliferation of these structural cells cannot offset this, ultimately resulting in lung tissue destruction and the development of emphysema [ ]. Previous studies have reported that MSCs can suppress inflammation [ ], apoptosis [ ], and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) [ , ] in lung tissues from COPD and other respiratory disease models. Human MSCs (hMSCs) have been reported to improve lung remodeling in chronic asthma models by reversing excessive collagen deposition and altering hyaluronic acid levels [ ]. Based on mRNA sequencing data, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) of genes related to inflammation, apoptosis, EMT, and collagen formation indicated that the enrichment scores (ES) for these genes were > 0 in COPD and < 0 in BMSCs treatment groups. This suggests that BMSCs can inhibit the activation of processes related to inflammation and lung remodeling in COPD, providing molecular evidence for the observed histopathological features. Furthermore, mRNA sequencing analysis identified significantly differentially expressed genes (DEGs) during COPD and BMSCs treatment, with most DEGs upregulated in COPD and downregulated during BMSCs treatment. Interestingly, a set of mitochondrial genes were downregulated in COPD, which may impair electron transport and ATP synthesis in the ETC, leading to reduced ATP production, increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, oxidative stress, and exacerbated cellular damage and inflammation [ , ]. However, it was significantly upregulated after BMSC treatment, suggesting a potential role of BMSCs in restoring mitochondrial dysfunction in COPD. Overall, the regulation of inflammation and lung remodeling by MSCs demonstrates their therapeutic potential for COPD.
However, the long-term effects of BMSC and their EVs require further investigation. Currently, follow-up data on the long-term effects of BMSC and BMSC-EV treatment on lung function and remodeling are relatively limited. Nevertheless, some studies suggest that stem cell therapy may provide lasting positive effects [ , ]. On the other hand, some patients receiving MSC therapy have reported respiratory symptoms, possibly due to infections caused by excessive suppression of the pulmonary immune response [ ]. Therefore, it is important to determine the optimal number of MSCs to be transplanted, striking a balance between potential therapeutic benefits and the risk of immune suppression. The dosage of BMSCs and BMSC-EVs used in this study was based on therapeutic regimens for similar diseases reported in previous literature. However, to maximize their efficacy, further studies are needed to optimize the timing and dosage of administration at different stages of COPD. For instance, it remains to be determined whether early intervention offers better protective effects, or if higher doses are required to counter disease progression. Future dose-response experiments will provide crucial data to identify the optimal therapeutic regimen for BMSCs and EVs. Additionally, while BMSCs and BMSC-EVs share some mechanisms of action in COPD treatment, they also exhibit important differences. Research has shown that MSCs may primarily regulate lung inflammation and tissue repair through paracrine mechanisms, direct cell-to-cell interactions, or differentiating into functional ATII-like cells [ , ]. However, MSCs may also promote tumor growth and metastasis by suppressing anti-tumor immunity and inducing angiogenesis through the secretion of pro-angiogenic factors [ ]. Therefore, continuous monitoring and long-term follow-up of patients receiving MSC-based therapy are necessary to assess any potential pro-tumorigenic effects. MSC-EVs are membranous structures secreted by MSCs that carry a variety of proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids (including non-coding RNAs, with miRNAs [ ] and tsRNAs [ ] being the most abundant). These biological messages are transferred to recipient cells via endocytosis, receptor-ligand interactions, or direct binding, and they pose a lower risk of immune rejection [ , ]. The therapeutic effects of MSCs on diseases may also depend on these transmitted biological messages [ ]. Although, EVs have been reported to replicate some of the functions of BMSCs to a certain extent, their duration of action and therapeutic effects may vary [ ]. Future research should explore the potential for combined use of BMSCs and EVs, or their optimal application at different stages of disease progression.
Recently, with the advancement of high-throughput sequencing technology and bioinformatics, tRNA-derived small RNAs (tsRNAs) have been discovered. These tsRNAs are processed from specific cleavage sites of mature tRNA or pre-tRNA, possessing precise sequence structures and specific biological functions [ ]. Notably, tsRNAs exhibit similar functions and seed sequence match profiles to miRNAs [ – ]. Studies have shown that miRNAs play crucial roles in the development of lung diseases and the regulation of lung diseases by MSCs [ – ]. Our previous research also found that miR-21-5p is differentially expressed in serum EVs of COPD patients, lung tissues of COPD model mice, and CSE-treated human lung epithelial cells (16HBE) [ ]. miR-21 is involved in CSE-induced autophagy and apoptosis, thereby promoting the development of COPD [ ]. As for tsRNAs, differential expression has been observed in in various lung diseases, including lung adenocarcinoma [ ], non-small cell lung cancer [ ], and acute lung injury [ ]. Furthermore, R. Dou et al. discovered that MSC-EVs carrying tsRNA-21,109 could alleviate systemic lupus erythematosus by inhibiting macrophage M1 polarization [ ]. This study is the first to systematically analyze the expression changes of tsRNAs in a COPD model and reveal their potential regulatory roles in COPD pathogenesis and MSC treatment.
Based on cleavage sites and lengths, tsRNAs can be categorized into two main subtypes: tRNA-derived stress-induced RNAs (tiRNAs), which are generated by ribonuclease cleavage of mature tRNAs under stress conditions, and tRNA-derived fragments (tRFs), which are produced by various enzymes cleaving either mature or pre-tRNAs [ ]. tiRNAs are further divided into 5’-tiRNAs and 3’-tiRNAs [ ], while tRFs are categorized into five main types: tRF-5, tRF-3, tRF-2, tRF-1, and i-tRF based on their origin [ , ]. In our study, tRF-5 was the most abundant type of tsRNA detected, followed by tiRNA-5. This is consistent with previous findings in experimental animals and patient tissues [ , ]. Additionally, the different distributions of tsRNA subtypes detected in lung tissues of Control, COPD, and VC groups suggest differences in tsRNA biological processes in vivo. Our GO analysis of DEGs also indicated enrichment in tRNA binding and tRNA metabolic processes.
Earlier research has established a connection between tsRNAs and Argonautes 1, 3, and 4, found that tsRNAs can participate in RNA silencing through miRNA-like effects, indirectly regulate gene expression through interaction with RNA-binding protein (RBP), or regulate translation process [ ], and the abundance of tsRNA might also influence the effectiveness of miRNA and siRNA [ ]. The cellular localization of tsRNAs is also closely related to their respective functions, same type of tsRNA may perform different roles depending on its location [ ]. In this study, the predicted target genes of DE-tsRNAs were explored based on their reported miRNA-like RNA silencing effects. We integrated data on differentially expressed tsRNAs and their potential target genes from tsRNA and mRNA sequencing, Subsequent functional enrichment and co-expression correlation analysis of these target genes helped to elucidate the potential functional roles of DE-tsRNAs, revealing their regulatory mechanisms in inflammation and lung remodeling processes. The co-expression network highlighted 6 significantly correlated DE-tsRNA and DE-target gene pairs in COPD, and 16 in the VC group. We further explored DE-tsRNAs that might regulate genes involved in inflammation and lung remodeling during COPD and BMSCs treatment. RT-qPCR validation of 5 candidate DE-tsRNAs out of 12 DE-tsRNAs with reversed expression showed consistent expression trends with sequencing analysis, but only tRF-+1:T16-iMET-CAT-1 (tRF-1020) and tRF-1:28-Gly-GCC-2-M3 showed statistically significant differences across the three groups. This might be due to limited sample size and different statistical methods, but it also indicates the stability and reliability of the sequencing analysis to some extent.
In the regulatory network of DE-tsRNAs and DE-target genes related to inflammation and lung remodeling, tRF-1:15-chrM.Gln-TTG and tRF-1:28-Gly-GCC-2-M3 showed significant negative correlation with their potential target genes, may suggesting a primary role in direct gene silencing. In contrast, tiRNA-1:35-Leu-TAG-3 and tRF-+1:T16-iMet-CAT-1 showed significant positive correlation, indicating that their regulatory mechanisms might not be limited to gene silencing. A recent study found that tRF-+1:T16-iMet-CAT-1 reduces cell viability and proliferation in diabetic retinopathy patients by binding to the 3′-UTR of DVL-2 mRNA, inhibiting endothelial angiogenesis [ ]. In our COPD model, the upregulation of specific tsRNAs may be related to inflammation and tissue damage, while BMSC treatment may regulate these pathways by downregulating such tsRNAs. Although this study identified potential tsRNA-target gene pairs through bioinformatics analysis, experimental validation of these target relationships and regulatory mechanisms is still required. Further investigation of tsRNAs’ roles as therapeutic targets in COPD treatment could provide novel insights for targeted therapy. Currently, the expression profiles and clinical relevance of tsRNAs in COPD patients remain unclear, the functional research of tsRNA is still in the preliminary stage, which limits clinical translation of tsRNAs. Future studies should integrate clinical sample data to advance the application of tsRNAs in COPD therapy.

## Conclusion
This study elucidates the differential impacts of intratracheal and intravenous administration of BMSCs and BMSC-EVs on COPD mice at different pathological stages. Intravenous administration of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells significantly alleviates inflammation and suppresses lung remodeling processes like apoptosis, EMT, and collagen formation. Integrated analysis of mRNA and the first tsRNA sequencing data in COPD animal model revealed the regulatory effects of BMSCs on genes related to inflammation, lung remodeling, and mitochondrial function, as well as tsRNAs expression, and further speculated the potential roles of specific tsRNAs and their target genes in regulating these processes.

Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Acknowledgements
We express our gratitude to Aksomics Biotech Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China) for their generous support in providing tsRNA and transcriptome sequencing assistance for this study. The authors declare that artificial intelligence is not used in this study.

## Author contributions
LH X, SH S, GA L, and TJ conceived and designed the project. TJ and XY L conducted the experiments. TJ, GA L, XY L, and LH X analyzed the data. TJ and LH X wrote the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the submission.

## Funding
This study was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos.82070048) and Natural Science Foundation of Hunan province of China (Number 2023JJ30849).

## Data availability
The datasets used and/or analyzed during this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request. Additionally, the high-throughput sequencing data have been deposited in the GEO database under the accession number GSE262564.

## Declarations

## Ethics approval and consent to participate
All animal studies in this study were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South University. Approved Project Title: The Role and Mechanism of Mesenchymal Stem Cell Exosomes in Modulating the Epithelial-Mesenchymal Trophic Unit via miR-21/TGF-β/SMADs in COPD Airway Remodeling. Approval Number: 2020-s171, permitted on April 3, 2020.

## Consent for publication
Not applicable.

## Competing interests
The authors declared no competing interests.

## Abbreviations
COPDChronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
MSCsMesenchymal Stem Cells
EVsExtracellular Vesicles
tsRNAsTransfer Rna-Derived Small Rnas
BMSCsBone Marrow Mesenchymal Stem Cells
BMSC-EVsBMSC-derived EVs
EMTEpithelial-Mesenchymal Transition
CSECigarette Smoke Extract
AIApoptotic Index
IODIntegrated Optical Density
DEGDifferentially Expressed Gene
DE-tsRNADifferentially Expressed Tsrna
DE-target genesDifferentially Expressed Tsrna
CPMCounts Per Million
FPKMFragments Per Kilobase Of Transcript Per Million Mapped Reads
GOGene Ontology
KEGGKyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
MSigDBMolecular Signatures Database
GSEAGene Set Enrichment Analysis