pmcAutophagyAutophagy1359autoph101265188Autophagy1554-86271554-8635Taylor & FrancisPMC12366814PMC12366814.112366814123668144006651810.1080/15548627.2025.246920724692071Version of RecordResearch ArticleResearch PaperLAMP2-FLOT2 interaction enhances autophagosome-lysosome fusion to protect the septic heart in response to ILC2
R. SHAO ET AL.AUTOPHAGYhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-1082-560XShaoRongjiao https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8534-7094LiuWeizhuo FengYuxiao GuoXiaoyu RenZhenyu HouXumin ]. The cardiovascular system is a major organ victim affected by septic shock [ ]. Although multiple mediators and pathways are associated with cardiac dysfunction in sepsis, the underlying mechanisms have not been thoroughly elucidated. It is widely accepted that sepsis is driven by dysregulated immune responses and results from several clinical trials have revealed that modulating this uncontrolled immune response can improve the prognosis and even reduce mortality in sepsis [ ]. Therefore, understanding the variability of host immune responses is helpful in developing new strategies for the treatment of sepsis-induced cardiac dysfunction.
Type 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s), as a part of the innate immune system, mediate the secretion of type 2 cytokines (IL5 [interleukin 5], IL13, IL4, IL9), acting as important regulatory factors for tissue homeostasis and repair [ ]. ILC2s have been identified to be rapidly activated in response to different mucosal organ damage (such as lung [ ] and intestine [ ]). Notably, a large number of studies have indicated the protective role of ILC2s in the inflammatory process of heterogeneous cardiac diseases [ , , , ]. The production of IL4 by heart ILC2s dramatically increases and mediates the protective effects after doxorubicin treatment [ , ]. By releasing the cytokines IL4, IL5, and IL13, ILC2s control the development of atherosclerosis [ , , ]. During the murine model of myocardial infarction, ILC2s accumulate in the heart, release IL5, and attract downstream cells to alleviate cardiac fibrosis [ ]. Of interest, a rare cell population with ILC2-like characteristics is identified in the mouse heart [ ]. However, the role of ILC2 and its secreted cytokines remains to be further explored when it comes to sepsis-induced cardiac dysfunction.
Macroautophagy/autophagy is a lysosomal degradation process that culminates in the fusion of autophagosomes with late endosomes/lysosomes. Recent evidence has shown that incomplete activation of autophagy may contribute to cardiac dysfunction and cardiomyocyte apoptotic cell death during sepsis [ , ]. The left ventricles of cecal ligation and puncture (CLP)-induced septic mice show abundant autophagosomes but minimal autolysosomes [ ], indicating a downstream blockade of autophagosome-lysosome fusion. In addition, a late-stage suppression of autophagy exhibits an inflammatory response and has a lethal effect in animal models of sepsis [ , ], suggesting that maintaining the fusion between autophagosomes and lysosomes may be crucial in determining the clinical outcome of sepsis. LAMP2 (lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2) is an important component of the lysosomal membrane and is required for the proper fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes [ ]. Moreover, the disruption of LAMP2 alters lysosomal appearance and homeostasis, which are critical for intact lysosomal membrane permeability in determining cellular survival or death [ ]. FLOT (flotillin), a lipid raft-associated scaffold protein, is involved in various processes, including cell adhesion, endocytosis, migration, and membrane trafficking [ ]. Currently, evidence demonstrates that lipid rafts can transport organelles to lysosomes for degradation through the autophagy pathway [ , ]. However, how immune cells serve as a modulator of autophagosome-lysosome fusion and lysosomal function in septic hearts remains elusive.
This study aims to elucidate the role of ILC2s in regulating cardiac dysfunction during the progression of sepsis. Further investigation demonstrated that IL4, which was secreted mainly by ILC2s in response to sepsis, alleviated cardiac inflammatory responses and prevented the death of cardiac endothelial cells (ECs). Notably, IL4 improved LAMP2 protein expression to stabilize lysosomal homeostasis and rescued sepsis-induced autophagic flux blockage. Interestingly, LAMP2 was preferentially bound to FLOT2, causing autophagosome-lysosome fusion after IL4 exposure. These findings provide a new perspective on how ILC2s mitigate cardiac dysfunction through autophagy regulation following sepsis and extend the knowledge of immunoregulation in sepsis.

## Results

## Sepsis induces ILC2 accumulation in mouse heart
ILCs which include ILC1, ILC2, and ILC3, play critical roles in regulating immunity, inflammation, and tissue homeostasis. However, specific phenotypes and functions of ILCs in septic cardiac tissue remain unclear. To identify the subsets of ILCs present in septic heart tissue, we first examined ILCs expression in the heart. Single-cell suspension of lymphocytes was separated from mouse hearts subjected to CLP surgery. We identified the resident cardiac ILC population expressing surface markers (LIN− PTPRC/CD45+ THY1/CD90.2+) [ ]. IL7R/CD127 was also used to further confirm ILC2 identification. The gating strategy of heart ILC2 subsets is shown in Figure S1A. ILC1s were defined as LIN– PTPRC+ THY1+ TBX21/T-bet+, ILC2s were identified by LIN– PTPRC+ THY1+ GATA3+, and ILC3s were recognized by LIN− PTPRC+ THY1+ RORC/RORγt+ [ , ]. The percentage of ILC2s in the heart tissue after CLP was significantly increased as compared with that in sham mice, while the percentage of ILC1s or ILC3s did not show significant changes ( ). Additionally, ILC2s in the hearts at specific time points after sham or CLP surgery were further detected by flow cytometry. The percentage of ILC2s in the heart was upregulated in a time-dependent manner, peaking at 24 h and gradually decreasing by 48 h following sepsis, but there were no significant changes during sham group ( ). CLP surgery is often accompanied by cardiac injury, which can be manifested in the following aspects. Compared with those of sham group, survival rate and body weight were reduced after CLP surgery ( ). LDH (lactate dehydrogenase) and CKM (creatine kinase, muscle)-CKB (creatine kinase, brain) serve as markers for myocardial damage. As shown in , a significant elevation in the levels of LDH and CKM-CKB between 12 and 24 h subjected to CLP was seen in the mouse serum compared to the sham group, which was consistent with the change of ILC2 found in septic heart tissues. Histopathological assessment by hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) staining revealed morphological abnormalities of the myocardial tissue structure at 24 h after CLP, including disorganized cellular arrangement, extensive infiltration of inflammatory cells, and expanded cell spaces (Figure S1B). Collectively, these results suggested that ILC2 accumulation in septic hearts may play a role in cardiac dysfunction in response to CLP-induced sepsis.
 

## ILC2 is the major IL4-producing cell subset in septic heart
Previous studies have shown that ILC2 predominantly regulates the pathophysiology of vascular diseases (including coronary heart disease and cerebrovascular disease) by secreting type 2 cytokines [ , ]. However, limited information is available regarding ILC2 function in septic cardiomyopathy. Here, we first detected the levels of type 2 cytokines of ILC2 (IL4, IL5, IL9, and IL13) in mouse heart tissue. The results showed that there were no significant changes in the levels of type 2 cytokines over time following sham surgery (Figure S2A and B). IL4-positive ILC2 significantly increased at 24 h after CLP, which was consistent with the ILC2 levels ( ). Consistent with IL4-positive ILC2, IL13-positive ILC2 similarly increased after CLP, but the ratios of IL4-positive cells among ILC2 were much higher in the heart tissue compared with IL13-positive ILC2 ( ). However, IL9-positive ILC2 and IL5-positive ILC2 did not significantly change following sepsis ( ). To exclude the influence of blood, we then measured plasma concentrations of IL4, IL5, IL9, and IL13 following sepsis, and demonstrated reduced levels of IL4 in plasma between 12 and 48 h after CLP compared to those in sham mice. IL13 transiently increased and peaked at 24 h after CLP (Figure S2C and E). There were no significant changes in levels of IL5 and IL9 in plasma (Figure S2D and F). These results suggested that the expression and secretion of cytokines by ILC2 in septic heart followed a specific pattern distinct from blood-derived sources.
 
IL4 is one of the key cytokines secreted by T helper (Th) 2 cells. Therefore, we conducted an iterative approach to evaluate IL4-positive cells in septic heart tissue to determine whether up-regulated IL4 was primarily produced by ILC2. The results showed that there was no significant change in the counts of Th2 cells and Th2 derived IL4 in CLP group compared to those in sham mice ( ). Moreover, we eliminated ILC2 by injecting THY1 neutralizing antibodies in vivo [ , ], and found that anti-THY1 antibody treatment significantly reduced the septic heart ILC2 population and decreased the quantification of IL4 mean fluorescence intensity compared to mice treated with isotype control antibodies ( ). These data further demonstrated that ILC2 was the major IL4-producing cell subset in septic heart.

## ILC2-derived IL4 alleviates sepsis-induced cardiac dysfunction and inflammatory responses
To further confirm the role of ILC2-derived IL4 in septic heart, mice were injected intraperitoneally with anti-THY1 every 2 days for 14 days to deplete ILC2 and treated with IL4 complex (IL4c) after CLP surgery (Figure S3A). As shown in , echocardiography and cardiac injury biomarkers (LDH, CKM-CKB) results demonstrated a deterioration of cardiac function with the progression of sepsis, which worsened even more after ILC2 elimination. Subsequently, cardiac function improved to a certain extent after exogenous supplementation of IL4c, which was accompanied by increased body weight and survival rate (Figure S3B and C). There were no significant changes in the cardiac function of sham mice following anti-THY1 or IL4c injection (Figure S3D-F). Additionally, the heart was stained with TUNEL and cleaved CASP3 (caspase 3; active key enzyme for cell apoptosis), which are the apoptotic cell death markers. The number of apoptotic cells increased obviously in the septic heart, whereas almost no apoptotic cells were detected in the sham group. After IL4 treatment, the number of apoptotic cells decreased in mouse hearts subjected to CLP surgery while depletion of ILC2 aggravated this kind of apoptotic cell death ( ). Next, we analyzed the ultrastructure changes at the nanometer scale using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), which is crucial for understanding the biological processes of septic hearts. As shown in , sham mice showed well-aligned sarcomeres and mitochondria that were perfectly ordered along them. In contrast, sarcomere discontinuity and mitochondrial damage (derangements, swelling, and vacuolation) were observed in mouse hearts exposed to both CLP surgery and ILC2 elimination. Remarkably, supplementation of IL4 restored the size, shape, and arrangement of mitochondria in septic hearts. Cardiac inflammatory markers, which are known to be closely related to the pathology of myocardial injury, were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits. The levels of TNF/TNF-α (tumor necrosis factor), IFNG/IFN-γ (interferon gamma), IL10, IL6, IL17A, and IL1B increased in mouse hearts after CLP and ILC2 depletion but decreased after IL4 treatment ( ). There were no significant changes in levels of cardiac inflammatory cytokines of sham mice following anti-THY1 or IL4c injection (Figure S3G). These findings confirmed that ILC2-derived IL4 alleviated the cardiac dysfunction during sepsis progression, which corresponded with the change of inflammatory environment of cardiac tissue.
 

## ILC2-derived IL4 protects cardiac endothelial cells from apoptosis in sepsis
To further confirm the specific expression of IL4 and its receptor in septic hearts, we first evaluated the expression of IL4 and IL4RA (interleukin 4 receptor alpha) by western blotting. The results revealed that the levels of IL4 and IL4RA increased steadily upon sepsis progression and peaked by 24–48 h after CLP surgery ( ). As expected, after ILC2 was cleared with anti-THY1 antibody, not only the level of IL4 was decreased but the receptor of IL4 was also inhibited synchronously (Figure S4A). The target cell type of IL4RA in CLP mice was further confirmed by performing immunofluorescence staining for PECAM1/CD31 (an endothelial cell marker), VIM (vimentin; a fibroblast marker), ACTN (actinin, alpha; a cardiomyocyte marker), and ADGRE1/F4/80 (a macrophage marker) in the heart. The immunofluorescence data showed a higher number of IL4RA-positive cells in the hearts compared to sham mice, with IL4RA mostly colocalizing with cardiac EC, rather than other cell types in septic hearts ( ). Sepsis-induced endothelial dysfunction can worsen infection and organ injury systematically [ ]. Some studies have revealed that IL4 is a key regulator of cell-cycle progression in cardiac development and promotes angiogenic behaviors of ECs via upregulating early vascular markers [ , ]. However, the underlying mechanisms of IL4 in septic hearts remain unknown. Therefore, heart tissues of control and CLP-induced mice with or without IL4 treatment were collected for RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) to explore the underlying mechanisms. Differential gene clustering analysis was performed and visualized as a heatmap (Figure S4C). It was found that after CLP surgery, 2629 genes were upregulated, and 1339 genes were downregulated compared with that of sham group (Figure S4D). Interestingly, IL4 treatment significantly up-regulated the expression of 833 genes and down-regulated the expression of 810 genes in the heart of IL4-treated CLP group (p < 0.05 and log2 | fold-change |>1) (Figure S4E). Subsequently, Venn diagrams were used to illustrate the intersection of differentially expressed genes between pairwise samples (Figure S4B). Then, we used Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis to further investigate signaling pathways affected by IL4 in septic hearts. The top 24 significant KEGG terms were shown in , which were tightly correlated with apoptosis, ferroptosis, and other signaling pathways of programmed cell death. We hypothesized that ILC2-dependent IL4 could regulate the cell death of cardiac EC in sepsis. Prior to testing this hypothesis, we aimed to determine whether primary cardiac ECs express the cell surface IL4RA. As shown in Figure S4F and G, primary cardiac ECs expressed a considerable level of IL4RA under basic conditions, and the level was significantly increased in the presence of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)+TNF for 24 h in vitro. Then, we used LPS+TNF to co-stimulate the EC for 24 h in the presence or absence of IL4, and found that IL4 significantly protected the EC from death ( ). Furthermore, ILC2-EC co-culture system (an in vitro model), which can avoid contact or interactions between the cells, was used to mimic the environment of the heart ( ). Increasing numbers of apoptotic cells were shown in the ILC2-EC co-culture and LPS+TNF co-stimulation system where a neutralizing antibody against IL4 was added. However, this was not the case for the added LPS+TNF, where co-culture of ILC2 and EC resulted in substantially lower cell death ( ). Collectively, these results indicated that ILC2-derived IL4 protected cardiac endothelial cells from damage in sepsis.
 

## Sepsis-induced autophagic flux blockage is rescued after IL4 treatment in EC
Accumulating evidence has indicated that IL4 regulates autophagy and influences cell survival. For example, IL4 treatment enhances the autophagic flux of dendritic cells during LPS exposure [ ]. IL4 inhibits excessive autophagy and reduces apoptosis, which plays a protective effect on cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury [ ]. In addition, IL4-induced autophagy of pulmonary B cells exacerbates asthma pathogenesis via JAK signaling pathway [ ]. However, whether the ILC2-induced IL4 modulates autophagic flux is unknown. We established the CLP model and assessed the alterations in autophagy after sepsis. The results showed that the levels of the autophagic markers (MAP1LC3B/LC3 [microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta] and SQSTM1/p62 [sequestosome 1]) reached a peak at 24 h and then decreased by 48 h after CLP surgery (Figure S5A, D, and H). The conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II is associated with the extent of autophagosome formation, while SQSTM1/p62 acts as a receptor to link LC3-II with ubiquitinated proteins for clearance during autophagy [ , ]. The expression of BECN1/Beclin1, an autophagy effector in the initiation of autophagy, gradually declined over time following CLP (Figure S5A and C). Quantitative analysis showed a higher accumulation of autophagosomes but a lower degradation of autophagic events, suggesting an impaired autophagic flux after CLP. We also detected the colocalization of endothelial cells (PECAM1) and autophagosomes (LC3), as well as the intensity of SQSTM1/p62-LC3 by laser confocal microscopy. Quantitative analysis of colocalization and fluorescence intensity revealed a significantly higher number of LC3-positive ECs, SQSTM1/p62-LC3 colocalization, and a markedly increased number of punctuate LC3 staining in the CLP heart as compared to those in the sham heart (Figure S5E-G and I-L). Then, mice were intraperitoneally injected with chloroquine (CQ; a lysosomal inhibitor), which can block the late stage of autophagy and result in the accumulation of autophagosomes. The addition of CQ to CLP surgery group caused no differences in BECN1, LC3-II and SQSTM1/p62 levels compared with those of CLP but without CQ addition (Figure S5M-P). Together, these findings suggested that autophagic flux in cardiac EC was impaired by sepsis, with one of the late steps being blocked, and thus culminated in the accumulation of autophagosomes.
Autophagosomes are degraded in lysosomes under normal cell homeostasis, which is one of the late steps of autophagy. Conversely, damage to lysosomal function can deteriorate the autophagy-lysosome pathway and result in autophagosome accumulation [ , ]. Although LAMP1 and LAMP2 are major protein components of the lysosomal membrane and are involved in lysosomal homeostasis [ ], LAMP2 seems play more crucial role than LAMP1 in the heart. The role of LAMP2 can be elucidated in the syndromes of individuals with Danon disease (human LAMP2 deficiency), which can be exhibited as a lysosomal and autophagic disorder, accompanied by skeletal myopathy, cardiomyopathy, and cognitive impairment [ ]. To verify the mechanism of impaired autophagic flux, we found that the level of LAMP2 had a significant declining expression pattern following sepsis (Figure S5A and B). Moreover, the expression level of lysosomal protease CTSD (cathepsin D) also decreased in cardiac ECs from the LPS+TNF group in vitro ( ). These data showed that incomplete autophagic flux of cardiac ECs following sepsis may be associated with the presence of lysosomal dysfunction and a blocked autophagy-lysosome pathway.
 
To identify the effect of ILC2-induced IL4 in regulating sepsis-induced autophagic flux blockage of cardiac ECs, we subjected the primary cardiac ECs to LPS+TNF for 24 h in vitro. Interestingly, IL4 treatment manifested little impact on the initiation of autophagy, but clearance of autophagosome abnormal accumulation upon LPS+TNF co-stimulation, as indicated by no significant change of BECN1, but the decreased LC3-II and SQSTM1/p62 levels ( ). Furthermore, the immunofluorescence data showed a large number of SQSTM1/p62 puncta and LC3 puncta in the cytoplasm. Most of the LC3 dots colocalized with SQSTM1/p62-positive granules in LPS+TNF cells, but there was a dramatic decrease in LC3 puncta formation and SQSTM1/p62 puncta after IL4 exposure, consistent with the immunoblotting results ( ). The TEM results showed that autophagosomes accumulated in cardiac EC exposed to both CLP surgery and ILC2 elimination groups but reduced after exogenous supplementation of IL4 ( ). Interestingly, the level of LAMP2 increased in the LPS+TNF group after IL4 addition ( ). Consistent with the immunoblot data, the immunofluorescence results showed a decreased fluorescence intensity of LAMP2 in the LPS+TNF group compared with that of the control group, which was counteracted by conditioning with IL4 ( ). Next, we treated cardiac ECs with CQ in vitro and the results showed that CQ could reverse the IL4-mediated protective effects in cardiac ECs after LPS+TNF exposure, leading to no significant change in the protein levels of LC3-II or SQSTM1/p62 compared with those in the LPS+TNF group alone ( ). These results further investigated the effects of IL4 depending on the autophagy-lysosome pathway. Based on the above data, there are reasons to believe that sepsis-induced autophagic flux blockage, including a blocked autophagy-lysosome pathway and a decrease in lysosomal proteins, was rescued after IL4 treatment in cardiac ECs.

## IL4 promotes LAMP2 expression to modulate autophagy through STAT3 activation
The lysosomal function can affect autophagosome degradation. LAMP2 is an important component of the lysosomal membrane and a key protein involved in the proper fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes [ ]. The function of LAMP2 is more conspicuous than that of LAMP1 in the heart [ ]. Based on the above evidence, we hypothesized that the rescue of the blocked autophagosome clearance after IL4 treatment observed in this study may be due to the augmentation of lysosomal-associated protein and subsequent lysosome function improvement. To verify the hypothesis that the effect of IL4 in rescuing autophagic flux depends on the restoration of LAMP2, human cardiac microvascular endothelial cells (HCMECs) were transduced with specific shRNA to knock down LAMP2 expression and then subjected to LPS+TNF. Western blot analysis showed that silencing LAMP2 expression hindered the protective effects on autophagic flux and resulted in cell death following treatment with IL4 under LPS+TNF injury conditions in vitro, as indicated by increases in LC3-II, SQSTM1/p62, and cleaved CASP3 ( ). Further experiments were conducted to monitor autophagic flux by transfecting the HCMEC with StubRFP-sensGFP-LC3 lentivirus. The green fluorescence is sensitive to PH changes and weakens in the acidic environment after the fusion of autophagosomes and lysosomes, whereas the red fluorescence is stable. The probe can thus distinguish between autolysosomes (GFP− RFP+, red) and autophagosomes (GFP+ RFP+, yellow). Consistent with the immunoblot results, HCMEC showed a basal autophagy level (a few autophagosomes and autolysosomes puncta) cultured under normal conditions. Observation under LPS+TNF co-stimulation revealed an abundance of autophagosomes and few autolysosome puncta, but this effect was alleviated upon the addition of IL4. As expected, silencing LAMP2 expression eliminated the effect of IL4 in HCMEC exposed to LPS+TNF, as evidenced by a predominance of autophagosomes and few autolysosome puncta ( ). These results suggested that LAMP2 underscored a necessary role in IL4-induced autophagic flux during LPS+TNF exposure. Furthermore, we observed a significant increase in the mRNA level of Lamp2, but no significant change in Lc3 and Sqstm1/p62 levels after IL4 treatment compared with those in the control group or LPS+TNF group. Knockdown of Lamp2 gene, combined with IL4 addition during LPS+TNF co-stimulation in vitro, reduced primary cardiac EC Lc3 gene transcription level but did not affect Sqstm1/p62 gene transcription level ( ). Collectively, these results further demonstrated that IL4 plays a crucial role in reducing autophagosome accumulation and enhancing autophagosome clearance through transcriptional upregulation for LAMP2.
 
STAT (signal transducers and activators of transcription) proteins are transcription factors that provide a direct link between the cytokine receptors and cytokine-induced gene transcription. STAT3 and STAT6 are two STAT family members that specifically transduce signals in response to the binding of the IL4 receptor [ ]. Using the Knock TF, hTFtarget, ENCODE, GTRD, and Chip_Atlas databases, we predicted upstream transcription factors of LAMP2. By merging the results using a Venn diagram, we predicted that four transcription factors, including STAT3, SP1, CEBPB, and GTF2B, might interact with LAMP2 ( ). Therefore, we further investigated whether STAT3 could regulate LAMP2 transcription. As shown in , compared with the control group, the expression of STAT3 and LAMP2 was significantly increased after IL4 treatment. In contrast, the expression decreased after co-treatment with IL4 and stattic (a selective STAT3 inhibitor). However, we found that combined addition with IL4 and AS1517499 (a selective STAT6 inhibitor) showed little effect on the expression of LAMP2 compared with a single IL4 group ( , Figure S6A and B). Therefore, these results indicated that IL4 promoted LAMP2 expression through the STAT3 signal pathway. As STAT3 is a transcription factor that could directly activate gene transcription and expression, we thus looked for whether there are binding sites for STAT3 in the promoter of the LAMP2 gene. We predicted potential binding sites for STAT3 in the promoter of LAMP2 within the sequence using JASPAR (http://jaspar.genereg.net/) ( ). Then, we cloned the upstream 2000 bp (starting from the transcription starting site of LAMP2) into the pGL3-Basic luciferase vector containing the WT and mutant (Mut) sites and performed the luciferase reporter assay. It was observed that STAT3 significantly enhanced LAMP2-WT promoter reporter activity but not LAMP2-Mut activity ( ). Collectively, these findings confirmed that data suggest that IL4 alters LAMP2 transcription by activating STAT3

## IL4 improves lysosome function to prevent lysosomal membrane permeabilization (LMP)
Sepsis-induced lysosomal dysfunction, especially lysosomal membrane permeabilization (LMP), reduces the capacity for autophagy-lysosomal degradation [ , ]. Accumulating evidence indicates that the downregulation of lysosomal membrane proteins makes lysosomes more susceptible to LMP and causes cell death [ , ]. Conversely, the glycosylated LAMP2 protein can bind to the lysosomal membrane, thereby assisting in the establishment and maintenance of its physical integrity [ ]. Thus, we hypothesized that IL4 improved LAMP2 protein expression to protect lysosomal membrane integrity and prevent LMP. Acridine orange (AO) exhibits green fluorescence in cytoplasmic structures and red fluorescence in the intact acidic lysosome environment. Therefore, it can be an indicator for detecting changes in lysosomal acidity and integrity. As shown in , a noticeable increase of AO green fluorescence could be observed in LPS+TNF co-stimulated cells. Notably, cardiac ECs exhibited more red fluorescence after IL4 treatment than that of LPS+TNF group, suggesting that IL4 May prevent cytosolic leakage of contents from the lysosome. In addition, lysosomal CTSB (cathepsin B) and CTSD are released into the cytoplasm due to LMP [ ]. To further confirm the lysosomal leakage, we fractionated cell lysates into cytoplasm and lysosome. The cytoplasmic marker (GAPDH) and lysosomal marker (LAMP2) were detected by western blot to determine the composition of each fraction. CTSB and CTSD showed a significant increase in the cytoplasm and lysosome of HCMEC subjected to LPS+TNF compared with those of cells in the control group, while IL4 addition could alleviate the level of lysosomal leakage ( ). Furthermore, we performed immunofluorescent staining for CTSB and CTSD in cardiac ECs and examined whether lysosomal cathepsins could co-localize with LAMP2 (lysosomes). In line with immunoblotting data, IL4 treatment also ameliorated the LPS+TNF-induced LMP, as evidenced by increased Pearson correlation coefficient of CTSB-LAMP2 and CTSD-LAMP2 ( ). Acidic pH and lysosomal hydrolase activity will recover to a steady state if cells are in the absence of LMP [ , ]. We then assessed the pH value of lysosomes by using the LysoSensor Yellow/Blue probe staining and demonstrated that IL4-treated cells exhibited stronger yellow fluorescence and weaker blue fluorescence as compared with that of LPS+TNF group, indicating that IL4 promoted the acidification of the lysosomes during LPS+TNF exposure ( ). The enhancement of lysosomal hydrolase activity by IL4 was further evidenced by increased enzyme activity of the GLB1/beta-galactosidase (galactosidase, beta 1) and MAN (mannosidase, alpha) ( ). Acidic pH is maintained by the vacuolar-type H+-translocating ATPase (V-ATPase) [ , ]. We next accessed the protein levels of two V-ATPase subunits (ATP6V0D1 and ATP6V1A). Compared with the LPS+TNF group, a higher ATP6V0D1 expression level was observed in the LPS+TNF+IL4 group, while ATP6V1A protein level had no significant difference (Figure S7A-C). Consistently, there was a remarkable colocalization of ATP6V0D1 with LAMP2 in response to IL4 treatment compared with LPS+TNF cells. However, there was no colocalization of ATP6V1A with LAMP2 (Figure S7D-I), suggesting that the recovery of lysosomal function after IL4 treatment was accompanied by lysosomal acidification and activated hydrolase. Thus, IL4 improved lysosome function by maintaining lysosomal homeostasis to prevent LMP.
 

## Interaction of LAMP2 with FLOT2 is necessary to enhance autophagosome-lysosome fusion after IL4 exposure
LAMP2 is an important component of the lysosomal membrane, which is involved in both LMP and autophagosome-lysosome fusion [ ]. Indeed, several studies have reported the beneficial effects of LAMP2 in pathological conditions, contributing to its essential role in proper fusion of lysosomes with autophagosomes [ , ]. Considering that rescue of autophagic flux by IL4 depended on the increase in LAMP2 levels, we next aimed to investigate whether its restoration in the cell could contribute to autophagosome-lysosome fusion following IL4 treatment. We performed immunoprecipitation (IP) assays using anti-IgG or anti-LAMP2 antibodies after the treatment with IL4 for 24 h. The precipitates were separated by SDS-PAGE and detected by mass spectrometry (MS) experiment. Significant LAMP2-binding proteins were shown in and analyzed by gene ontology analysis. Cellular component analysis results showed that these proteins were closely related to the Flotillin complex ( ). There are two major members in the FLOT family, FLOT1 and FLOT2. FLOT1 is a lipid raft-associated scaffold protein, which can be localized to endolysosomes and transport organelles to lysosomes for degradation through the autophagy pathway [ , ]. We further investigated the interaction of FLOT1, FLOT2, and LAMP2. Endogenous IP confirmed that the interaction of LAMP2 and FLOT2 in primary cardiac ECs was significantly increased under IL4 stimulation. However, the LAMP2 complex did not bind to FLOT1 ( ). Moreover, we observed that IL4 treatment enhanced the colocalization of FLOT2 and LAMP2 using immunofluorescent staining ( ). LAMP2 has three domains: a lumenal domain, a transmembrane domain, and a C-terminal cytoplasmic domain [ ]. FLOT2 has SPFH and FLOT domains that mediate membrane binding and oligomerization of FLOTs, respectively [ ]. To further elucidate the specific binding domains between LAMP2 and FLOT2, we utilized the AlphaFold 3 prediction platform (https://alphafoldserver.com/fold) to predict three potential amino acid binding sites. The predictions, supported by confidence metrics, indicated two single-point bindings and one amino acid segment binding ( ). Subsequently, we constructed 3 LAMP2 mutants and 3 FLOT2 mutants (two individual amino acid binding sites and one truncated or deleted amino acid segment binding site). Through the transfection of mutated LAMP2 and mutated FLOT2 plasmids into HCMEC respectively, it was demonstrated that LAMP2 failed to bind to FLOT2 when the 87th amino acid of LAMP2 and the 128th amino acid of FLOT2 was mutated. In contrast, mutations in other domains of LAMP2 or FLOT2 did not affect their binding capacity ( ). Collectively, these findings indicated that the lumenal domain of LAMP2 directly interacted with the SPFH domain of FLOT2. We next examined the role of FLOT2 in the LAMP2-mediated autophagosome-lysosome fusion. Western blot analysis showed that compared with the LPS+TNF group knocking down FLOT2 reversed the reduction of impaired autophagic flux following IL4 addition, as indicated by increases in LC3-II and SQSTM1/p62 ( ). Meanwhile, we transfected the HCMEC with StubRFP-sensGFP-LC3 lentivirus and observed that knockdown of FLOT2 blocked the fusion of autophagosome and lysosome in the LPS+TNF group, LPS+TNF+IL4 group and even normal conditions, as exhibited by abundant autophagosomes ( ).
 
To further verify whether silencing Flot2 expression reduced the protective effect of IL4 in the sepsis-induced autophagic flux blockage in vivo, we injected AAV-shNC or AAV-shFlot2 virus into the mice via the tail vein. Four weeks after tail vein injection, we established the CLP mouse model and divided the animals into six groups: AAV-shNC-Sham, AAV-shNC-CLP, AAV-shNC-CLP+IL4, AAV-shFlot2-Sham, AAV-shFlot2-CLP, and AAV-shFlot2-CLP+IL4 (Figure S8A). The efficiency of knockdown was verified by immunofluorescence staining, qRT-PCR, and western blotting (Figure S8B-D). During the AAV-shNC groups, a significantly lower expression of LC3-II and SQSTM1/p62 was observed in the CLP+IL4 group compared to the CLP group. Additionally, compared with animals in the AAV-shFlot2-Sham group, both of AAV-shFlot2-CLP group and AAV-shFlot2-CLP+IL4 group exhibited significantly higher expression of LC3-II and SQSTM1/p62 proteins (Figure S8K and L). Quantification of the colocalization and fluorescence intensity in the heart indicated significantly higher PECAM1-LC3 colocalization, SQSTM1/p62 fluorescence intensity, and a markedly increased number of punctuate LC3 staining in the AAV-shNC-CLP heart compared to the AAV-shNC-CLP+IL4 heart. However, the effect of IL4 vanished after FLOT2 deficiency in the septic heart (Figure S8E-J). Conclusively, these results suggested that FLOT2 was bound with LAMP2 on lysosomes after IL4 treatment, and then enhanced autophagosome-lysosome fusion to rescue the autophagic flux blockade during sepsis. Then, we verify whether IL4 can ameliorate sepsis-induced cardiac dysfunction by rescuing autophagic flux. The results showed that a significantly lower body weight gap and higher survival rate were observed in the CLP+IL4 group compared to the CLP group during the AAV-shNC groups. On the contrary, while both the AAV-shFlot2-CLP group and the AAV-shFlot2-CLP+IL4 group exhibited significantly lower body weight and survival rate compared to the AAV-shFlot2-Sham group, no significant differences were observed between these two CLP groups (Figure S9A and B). In addition, a significant improvement of cardiac function after exogenous supplementation of IL4c was observed in the AAV-shNC-CLP+IL4 group, while silencing of Flot2 expression abrogated the cardioprotective effects of IL4 in CLP+IL4 group (Figure S9C-F). Collectively, these data confirmed the role of LAMP2 and FLOT2 in sepsis-induced cardiac dysfunction.

## Discussion
Although cardiac dysfunction is the main complication of sepsis, little is known about the molecular mechanisms involved in this process [ ]. Notably, recent evidence has provided novel insight into the ILC2, which mediates immune response and inflammation in the heart [ ]. The present study aimed to investigate the roles and mechanisms of ILC2 in a septic heart via autophagy regulation during sepsis. We found that ILC2s expanded in the heart following CLP-induced sepsis, along with a significant secretion of IL4. ILC2-derived IL4 in the heart prevented cardiac ECs from apoptotic cell death. IL4 promoted LAMP2 expression to modulate autophagy and lysosomal homeostasis through STAT3 activation. Importantly, the interaction of LAMP2 with FLOT2 was indispensable to rescuing sepsis-induced autophagic flux blockage and mitigating cardiac dysfunction, which provides valuable insight into the treatment of septic hearts ( ).
 
During sepsis, innate immune cells initiate a type 1 inflammatory by sensing invading pathogens through pattern recognition receptors in response to infection [ ]. Activation of the type 1 immune response leads to the release of a large amount of cytokines [ ]. Intriguingly, an overactive type 2 immune response can counteract the pro-inflammatory type 1 response and is generally considered to be anti-inflammatory and tissue repair [ ]. ILC2s and their secreted type 2 cytokines (IL4, IL5, IL9, and IL13) play critical roles in the type 2 immune response. For example, ILC2-derived IL9 prevents EC from death and reduces lung inflammation after sepsis [ ]. IL13 derived from ILC2 ameliorates cardiomyocyte apoptosis via phosphorylation of STAT3 [ ]. In our study, ILC2s were prone to time-dependent upregulation synchronized with the predominant increase of IL4 secretion in the heart following sepsis. Consistent with the role of the cytokine IL4 in suppressing acute inflammation during severe infections [ , ], ILC2-derived IL4 alleviates sepsis-induced cardiac dysfunction and inflammatory responses. Overall, our in vivo data indicated that ILC2s participated in the progression of sepsis through the effects of type 2 cytokine IL4.
Autophagy is a complicated and dynamic process in mitigating damage at the cellular level. However, it’s controversial whether the process of autophagy is activated or obstructed during sepsis. Moreover, the kinetics of autophagy are different for each organ. Indeed, autophagy transiently increases in the kidney at 3 h but declines from 6 h to 18 h after CLP surgery [ ], while autolysosome formation activates in the liver up to 24 h following sepsis [ ]. In this study, the levels of the autophagic markers (LC3-II and SQSTM1/p62) peaked at 24 h and then decreased by 48 h after CLP, indicating an increased number of autophagosomes. We hypothesized two mechanisms of autophagosome accumulation: 1) an increase in autophagic flux to excessive autophagosome accumulation; and 2) blockade in autophagosomal maturation and lysosomal fusion. We found that the expression of BECN1, an autophagy effector in the initiation of autophagy, decreased slowly as time progressed after CLP surgery, which may help us rule out the first hypothesis. Our data suggested that suppression of autophagy by CQ after CLP surgery caused no further change in the BECN1, LC3-II, or SQSTM1/p62 levels compared with that of CLP-operated mice. Consistent with our results, Hsieh et al. demonstrated that the fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes is blocked in the heart by 24 h after CLP surgery [ ].
Previous studies have indicated that IL4 plays a pivotal role as an effector cytokine in autophagy regulation and cell survival [ , ]. During cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury, IL4 inhibits excessive autophagy and reduces apoptosis [ ]. IL4 enhances autophagy flux in dendritic cells and resists bacterial infection in vitro [ ]. In our study, we found that increased IL4RA was primarily expressed in cardiac ECs following sepsis. ECs play a major role during septic shock [ ]. Sepsis is not only a systemic inflammatory state but also a dysregulated hemostatic condition. The endothelium regulates the tension of the vascular wall, prevents blood leakage into tissues, and reduces inflammation [ ]. Intact autophagic responses modulate the homeostasis and function of ECs [ , ]. A blurry area is how immune cells interface with autophagy in cardiac ECs, thereby modulating key processes during sepsis. Moreover, IL4 addition increased LAMP2 protein expression and transcription of Lamp2 gene through STAT3 activation. STAT3 is reportedly a panel of autophagy inducers and affects the early-phase autophagic flux [ ]. Interestingly, Lloyd-Lewis et al. reveal a direct role for STAT3 activation in the regulation and glycosylation status of LAMP2 [ ]. Our findings suggest that ILC2-derived IL4 could rescue the sepsis-induced autophagic flux blockage in cardiac ECs following sepsis, emphasizing that STAT3 played an important role in regulating lysosomal proteins and autophagic flux.
Disturbance in autophagic flux always correlates with dysregulation of lysosomal function [ ]. An obvious increase of AO green fluorescence but a decrease of co-localization between lysosomal cathepsins with LAMP2 can be observed in cells after stimulation with LPS+TNF, suggesting the cytosolic leakage of contents from the lysosome. Interestingly, the impaired function of LAMP2 is not only associated with increased accumulation of autophagic vacuoles but also alters lysosome numbers and conditions [ , ]. The glycosylated LAMP2 protein can bind to the lysosomal membrane, thereby assisting in the establishment or maintenance of its physical integrity and preventing lysosomal cell death [ ]. Our findings suggest that IL4 addition improved lysosomal homeostasis by upregulating LAMP2 to prevent LMP. However, it has also been reported that IL4 promotes the reprogramming of lysosomal gene expression through interaction between STAT6 and lysosomal gene loci, including subunits of the V-ATPase and hydrolases [ ]. Thus, we cannot exclude the influence of the above factors directly. Moreover, the defect of V-ATPase also impairs autophagic flux and results in the accumulation of enlarged autophagosomes [ ]. All these proteins that are involved in lysosomal pH homeostasis likely converge to their common role in the autophagic degradation process, emphasizing the need for further investigation into their complex interactions.
Flotillin family, FLOT1 and FLOT2, are differentially expressed in the proteomic dataset of the lysosome-enriched fraction [ ]. In HeLa and HEK293 cells, FLOT1 and FLOT2 are localized to the plasma membrane and colocalize with the lysosome, suggesting their role as lysosomal destination [ , ]. A yeast two-hybrid screening demonstrates a direct interaction between FLOT1 and LAMP2 [ ]. For the cross-linking of lysosomes, intact membrane permeability is necessary, because lysosomal luminal regions of LAMP1/2 are highly glycosylated [ ] and heavily glycosylated LAMP proteins are related to maintaining the lysosomal membrane integrity [ ]. Moreover, FLOT1 can assist ESCRT-mediated sorting of cargo proteins and transport them to lysosomes for degradation through the autophagy pathway [ , ]. These data provide further evidence that FLOTs play an important role in its localization or function. However, the role of FLOT2 in lysosomal trafficking has not been dissected. Intriguingly, our data first reported that IL4 treatment enhanced the colocalization of FLOT2 and LAMP2 and improved autophagosome-lysosome fusion during cardiac ECs following sepsis. Even though, we cannot completely rule out the possibility of IL4 promoting autophagic fusion through interactions with other molecules. Seigo et al. reported that IL4 links autophagosomes to endosome/lysosome via RUFY (RUN and FYVE domain containing 4) induction [ ]. Also, RUFY can recruit STX17 (syntaxin 17), which is involved in autophagosome formation and fusion [ ]. Further studies are required to validate this hypothesis.
There are some limitations for consideration when concluding this study. First, recent reports have shown that interactions among other type 2 cytokines interleukin (IL5, IL9, and IL13) in sepsis are paid more attention [ , , ], we cannot rule out the roles of other cytokines during cardiac dysfunction following sepsis. Second, we did not test the role of other possible cell populations that may be affected by ILC2, only showed that ILC2-derived IL4 regulates cardiac ECs following sepsis. Third, administration of anti-THY1 antibodies in vivo leads to depletion of ILC2 cells most certainly systemically, which affects the systemic immune response in septic mice. Further research is needed to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of the above-mentioned issue. In summary, our data provides new insights that ILC2-derived IL4 stabilizes lysosomal homeostasis and facilitates the rescue of sepsis-induced autophagic flux blockage in cardiac ECs. This mechanism serves as an innate pathway for regulating cardiac dysfunction and heart inflammation following sepsis.

## Materials and methods

## Animals and treatment
Healthy male C57BL/6J mice aged 6–8 weeks (Huachuang sino Co., Jiangsu, China) were housed in a specific pathogen-free environment in Shanghai Chest Hospital (Shanghai, China). The animals were supplied by the Animal Research Committee of Shanghai Chest Hospital (SYXK [Shanghai, China] 2023–0020).
To deplete ILC2, mice were treated intraperitoneally with 200 µg anti-THY1 (BioXCell, BE0066) or 200 µg isotype control (BioXCell, BE0090) in 200 µl PBS (Beyotime Technology, C0221A) every 2 days for 14 days [ ].
To stabilize the IL4 protein and expand its in vivo half-life [ , ], IL4c was intraperitoneally injected into mice 30 min before CLP surgery. IL4c is a mixture of 5 μg recombinant mouse IL4 (Peprotech, P07750) and 25 µg anti-IL4 monoclonal antibody (BD Pharmingen 559,062) dissolved in 200 µl PBS.
AAV-EGFP-shRNA-NC or AAV-EGFP-shRNA-Flot2 virus (Obio Technology, Y29724) was injected via the tail vein. The CLP model was established four weeks after tail vein injection. The shRNA sequences used in this study were: Flot2 shRNA: 5'-GCTTCACCATCAAGGATGTTT-3', NC shRNA: 5'-CCTAAGGTTAAGTCGCCCTCG-3'.

## CLP model
CLP has become the experimental model widely used in the study of sepsis and resembles the clinical relevance of patients with sepsis [ , ]. Anesthesia was administered to male mice (6–8 weeks) with 2% inhaled isoflurane. Next, mice were exposed to a 1-cm longitudinal cut in the midline of the abdomen. Then, the cecum was isolated and tightly ligated at 1/2 site from its end using 4–0 silk sutures. Two punctures were made through the cecum with a 21-gauge needle and a small amount of feces was squeezed out. The incision was closed after the cecum was returned to the abdominal cavity. Mice were injected subcutaneously with PBS (50 ml/kg) for fluid resuscitation. Sham mice were submitted to the same surgery but with no CLP. Mice were sacrificed at the end of study.

## Flow cytometry
The procedures of flow cytometry were as described previously [ ]. Briefly, the fresh mouse hearts were perfused with 20 ml cold PBS to remove peripheral blood and cut into small pieces. Subsequently, the hearts were digested with D-Hanks’ solution (Cytiva, SH30588.01) containing 10 µg/ml DNase I (Solarbio, D8071) and 1 mg/ml collagenase II (Worthington, LS004176) at 37°C for 20 min. Then, the cell suspension was obtained through a 70-μm filter and was spread on a 15% and 60% Percoll (Cytiva 17,089,101) [ ]. The cell layer between the liquid surfaces was collected, washed with PBS, and filtered through a 40-μm filter for further experiments.
Single cell suspensions were first incubated with anti-FCGR3/CD16-FCGR2B/CD32 (Biolegend 101,320) to block nonspecific binding and relative surface antigens to stain for intracellular antigens, then fixed and permeabilized at 4°C overnight according to the standard protocol. Samples were collected on a BD FACSFortessa (BD Biosciences, New Jersey, USA) and analyzed with FlowJo software (BD Biosciences, New Jersey, USA). Details of fluorescently conjugated antibodies are shown in . 

## ILC2 isolation and conditioned medium collection
Lung ILC2 (LIN− PTPRC+ IL2RA+ IL1RL1+) were sorted using BD FACSAria III (BD Biosciences, New Jersey, USA) and cultured in RPMI 1640 complete medium (Gibco 11,875,093) containing 10% FBS, 50 μM of β-mercaptoethanol (Sigma-Aldrich, M6250) and in the presence of 10 ng/ml IL2 (Peprotech, 212–12-20UG), IL7 (Peprotech, 217–17-10UG), and IL33 (Peprotech, 210–33-10UG) for 48 h.

## Primary cardiac endothelial cell isolation, cell culture, and treatment
Primary cardiac endothelial cells were extracted from 2-day-old C57BL/6J mice. In brief, the heart was surgically removed and cut into small pieces. The tissue fragments were incubated with 0.1% trypsin (Gibco 25,200,072) for 15 min at 37°C to acquire single cell suspension. Then, the cell suspension was filtered, washed, and enriched for cardiac endothelial cells using PECAM1 MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec, 130-097-41). PECAM1 enriched single cell suspension was washed and resuspended in endothelial cell medium. Endothelial cell medium (Sciencell, 1001) was used for primary endothelial cardiac cells and HCMECs. It consists of basal medium, 5% FBS (Sciencell, 0025), 1% endothelial cell growth supplement (ECGS; Sciencell, 1052) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin solution (Sciencell, 0503). The cells were incubated at 37°C in a humidified incubator (5% CO2-95% air) and were identified by immunofluorescence staining for PECAM1. HCMECs were obtained from PromoCell (Heidelberg, Germany). The cells were grown in endothelial cell medium with FBS, dual antibiotics, endothelial cell growth supplement.
For drug administration, the final concentrations of LPS (10 μg/mL; InvivoGen, tlrl-eblps), TNF (50 ng/ml; Peprotech, 300-01A), CQ (10 μmol/L; Sigma-Aldrich, C6628), IL4 (50 ng/ml; Peprotech, P07750), anti-IL4 monoclonal antibody (10 ng/ml; BD Pharmingen 559,062) or IgG (BD Pharmingen 559,072) were administered to the cells for 24 h, respectively.

## TEM
The collected mouse heart was cut into small pieces and fixed with precooled 2.5% glutaraldehyde away from light. Next, the samples were postfixed in 1% osmium tetroxide for 1 h, dehydrated using graded ethanol, and embedded with Epon 812 resin (Sigma-Aldrich 45,359). The slices were observed and scanned using an HT7800 transmission electron microscope (Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan).

## Immunohistochemical and immunofluorescence staining
Mouse heart tissues were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, embedded in paraffin, and cut into 8-μm thick sections. For immunohistochemistry, tissue sections were deparaffinized and antigenically repaired. The sections were used for histochemical staining and incubated with antibodies against cleaved CASP3 (Cell Signaling Technology, 9662).
The heart tissue cryosections were washed, permeabilized, and blocked with 10% goat serum (Beyotime Technology, C0265) for 1 h. Primary cardiac ECs or HCMECs grown on glass coverslips were fixed in 4% PFA for 20 min, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich, T8787) for 15 min, and blocked with 10% goat serum (Beyotime Technology, C0265) for 30 min. A multiplex fluorescence immunohistochemistry kit (WASci, WAS1504) was used for staining. The primary antibodies against PECAM1/CD31 (AIFang Biological, SAF005), ACTN1/α-actinin (ThermoFisher, A7811), VIM/vimentin (Abcam, ab92547), ADGRE1/F4/80 (Abcam, ab300421), IL4RA (Abclonal, A14648) were used to unravel the target cell type of IL4RA in septic heart. Immunofluorescent staining was performed with primary antibodies against IL4RA (Abclonal, A14648), LAMP2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc -118,822), LC3 (Novus Biologicals, NB100–2220), SQSTM1/p62 (Abcam, ab56416), FLOT2/flotillin 2 (Proteintech 28,208–1-AP), CTSB/cathepsin B (Proteintech 112,216–1-AP), CTSD/cathepsin D (Proteintech 21,327–1-AP), ATP6V0D1 (Proteintech 118,274–1-AP), and ATP6V1A (Proteintech 177,115–1-AP). Then, they were further incubated with Alexa Fluor 488 (Abcam, ab150077) or 594 (Abcam, ab150116) dyes. The nuclei were stained with 4'
6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, a nuclear marker; Southern Biotech, 0100–20) at room temperature, followed by observation and photography under laser confocal microscopy (Zeiss, LSM710, Germany). Image data were analyzed using ImageJ software (Version 2.3.0/1.53f; National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).

## Western blot analysis
Total protein was extracted from cells and heart tissues using ice-cold RIPA lysis buffer (Sigma-Aldrich 89,900) containing phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche 11,836,170,001). The protein concentrations of these samples were determined by a BCA assay kit (Beyotime Technology, P0009). Cell lysates were separated by 10–12.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Then, proteins were subsequently transferred to 0.22 μm-0.45 μm PVDF membranes (Millipore, IPVH00010), incubating with 5% skimmed milk and antibodies. Immunoblots were detected using ImageQuant LAS 4000 (GE-Amersham Imager 680, USA) and analyzed by ImageJ software (Version 2.3.0/1.53f; National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).
The following primary antibodies were used for immunoblotting: anti-LAMP2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc -118,822), anti-CASP3/caspase 3 (Cell Signaling Technology, D3R6Y), anti- FLOT2/flotillin 2 (Cell Signaling Technology, C42A–8), anti-CTSB/cathepsin B (Proteintech 112,216–1-AP), anti-CTSD/cathepsin D (Proteintech 21,327–1-AP), anti-LC3 (Novus Biologicals, NB100–2220), anti-SQSTM1/p62 (Abcam, ab56416), anti-BECN1/Beclin1 (Proteintech 11,306–1-AP), anti-IL4RA (Affinity, DF8567), anti-IL4 (Affinity, AF5142), anti-ATP6V0D1 (Proteintech 118,274–1-AP), anti-ATP6V1A (Proteintech 177,115–1-AP), anti-STAT3 (Abclonal, A22434), anti-STAT6 (Abclonal, A19120), anti-GAPDH (Cell Signaling Technology, D16H11), and anti-ACTB/β-actin (Cell Signaling Technology, 8H10D10). The secondary antibodies were goat anti-rabbit (Beyotime Technology, A0208) and goat anti-mouse (Beyotime Technology, A0216).

## Quantitative real-time PCR
To quantify mRNA expression, the standard protocols were performed as previously described [ ]. In brief, high-quality total RNA was extracted from mouse heart tissues and cells using a commercial RNA purification kit (EZBioscience, EZB-RN001-plus). For RT-PCR analysis, cDNA synthesis was performed using the EZscript RT Mix II for qPCR (EZBioscience, EZB-RT2GQ), and quantitative PCR analyses were performed using 2×Color SYBR Green qPCR Master Mix (EZBioscience, EZB-RT2GQ) in Applied Biosystems 7300 Plus instrument (Applied Biosystem, USA). The cycle threshold values of relative genes were normalized by Actb expression. All the primers used in this study are listed in Table S1.

## siRNA silencing and cell transfection
Cells were seeded on 6-well plates and transfected with siRNA 24 h later using Lipofectamine 3000 reagent (Invitrogen, L3000001), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The efficiency of gene silencing was verified by western blotting. LAMP2 siRNA, FLOT2 siRNA, and control siRNA were synthesized by Obio Technology (Shanghai, China). The siRNA sequences were as follows: LAMP2 (5′-GCCATCAGAATTCCATTGAAT-3′), FLOT2 (5′-CCAAGAUUGCUGACUCUAATT-3′), scrambled control (5′-UUCUCCGAACGUGUCACGUTT-3′).

## Autophagic flux assay
The progress of intracellular autophagic flux can be monitored in cells transfected with StubRFP-sensGFP-LC3 lentivirus (Genechem, LVCON258) [ ]. The cell lines were infected with StubRFP-sensGFP-LC3 lentivirus for 12 h, and after stable expression, they were incubated with vehicle control, LPS, TNF, and IL4 for 24 h. The numbers of autolysosomes (red dots) and autophagosomes (yellow dots) were photographed under laser confocal microscopy (Zeiss, LSM710, Germany).

## Luciferase reporter assay
The sequence of the LAMP2 promoter was inserted into the pGL3-Basic vector (Genomeditech, GM-1013FL01). Cells were transfected with the constructed pGL3-Basic-LAMP2 plasmid, together with STAT3 overexpression or empty vector plasmids. Following 48 h of co-transfection with the pRL-TK-Renilla luciferase plasmid, luciferase activity was detected and quantified using the Dual-Luciferase Kit (Genomeditech, GM-040503A) under the manufacturer’s instruction. All experiments were repeated three times.

## Immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry (IP-MS)
Cells were lysed with IP-lysis buffer (Sigma-Aldrich 87,787) supplemented with phosphatase (Roche 4,906,845,001) and protease (Roche 11,873,580,001) inhibitors. The cell supernatants were preincubated overnight with 10 μg of anti-LAMP2 antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc -118,822) or control IgG (Abclonal, AC005). The mixtures were incubated with protein A/G Magnetic beads (BioTNT, IK-1004) for 4 h at 4°C. The immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted with binding/wash buffer and separated using SDS-PAGE for immunoblotting analysis or MS. The MS experiment and data processing were performed by PTM Biolabs Company (Zhejiang, China).

## Echocardiography
Transthoracic echocardiography was performed on mice under isoflurane anesthesia using a Vevo 2100 instrument according to a standard protocol (FUJIFILM VisualSonics, Toronto, Canada). Parasternal M-mode long- and short-axis views were used to measure the left ventricle function, including cardiac output (CO), left ventricular ejection fraction (EF), fractional shortening (FS), LV end-systolic diameter (LVESd), LV end-diastole diameter (LVEDd), LV end-diastole volume (LVEDV), LV end-systole volume (LVESV), and the heart rate. Left ventricle function studies were analyzed through VevoStrain™ Analysis software ((FUJIFILM VisualSonics, Vevo 2100, Toronto, Canada).

## ELISA
According to the manufacturer’s instructions, pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF [Servicebio, GEM0004], IFNG [Servicebio, GEM0006], IL10 [Servicebio, GEM0003], IL6 [MULTI SCIENCES, EK206HS], IL17A [MULTI SCIENCES, EK217], IL1B [MULTI SCIENCES, EK201BHS]) in heart tissue lysates were determined using mouse ELISA kits. Serum levels of LDH (Servicebio, G1610) and CKM-CKB (Servicebio, GM1122) were tested using corresponding kits. Plasma levels of IL4 (MULTI SCIENCES, EK204), IL5 (MULTI SCIENCES, EK205), IL9 (MULTI SCIENCES, EK209), and IL13 (MULTI SCIENCES, EK213) protein levels were detected using mouse ELISA kits.

## Rna-seq analysis
Total RNA of heart tissues was extracted by utilizing the RNeasy mini kit (QIAGEN 74,106) as directed by the manufacturer. After quantification and quality assessment, RNA-seq analysis was performed by HaploX (Shenzhen, China). Differentially expressed genes between the two groups were defined with log2 | fold-change |>1 and P-value < 0.05 and for further analysis by using R package. The data presented in the study are deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus repository (GSE280661).

## AO staining
To visualize and measure the lysosomal function or membrane integrity in cellular conditions cells, AO dye (Invitrogen, A1301) was used in cells (1:1000) at 37°C for 20 min and subsequently placed under confocal microscopy (Zeiss, LSM710, Germany). AO emits green fluorescence in cytoplasmic structures and red fluorescence in acidic compartments such as lysosomes. The ratio of red to green fluorescence can indicate changes in lysosomal acidity or integrity [ ].

## Hydrolase activity assay
GLB1 and MAN activity was assayed by GLB1 Assay Kit (Solarbio, BC2580), and MAN Activity Assay Kit (Solarbio, BC5040), respectively. Cell extract was incubated with a GLB1 or MAN substrate for 30 min at 37°C. The absorbance of liberated p-nitrophenol was measured at 400/405 nm. The rate of fluorescence increases correlates with enzyme activity.

## TUNEL staining
TUNEL staining was performed according to the protocol of the Apoptosis Assay Kit (Beyotime Technology, C1088). Briefly, frozen sections were permeabilized and incubated with TUNEL reaction buffer (enzyme solution and labeling solution) and then labeled by DAPI. The green fluorescence-labeled apoptotic cells were observed and photographed using laser confocal microscopy (Zeiss, LSM710, Germany).

## Statistical analysis
All graph layouts and statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 9 software (GraphPad Software, CA, USA). Quantitative data were presented as means ± SEM Differences between groups were analyzed by unpaired Student’s t-test, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s post hoc tests, or two-way ANOVA with Turkey’s multiple comparisons tests for the comparisons among more than two groups. A Kaplan-Meier curve and the log-rank test were used to analyze the survival data. Body weights were examined by two-factor (group × time) repeated-measures ANOVA. A value of p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant, ns means no significance (p > 0.05).

## Supplementary Material

## Supplemental Material

## Acknowledgements
We thank Hongfei Ci for providing valuable suggestions and Figdraw for the icons in . We thank the Centre for Cardiopulmonary Vascular Translational Medicine for their generous support.

## Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

## Data availability statement
RNA-seq data for this study have been deposited at Gene Expression Omnibus repository (GSE280661). The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## Supplemental materials
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/15548627.2025.2469207