2616mtmMolecular Therapy. Methods & Clinical DevelopmentMol Ther Methods Clin DevAmerican Society of Gene & Cell TherapyPMC1268691212686912126869124137677510.1016/j.omtm.2025.101627Retinal organoids mirror CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing efficiency observed in vivo
PulmanJuliette MalkiHugo OudinPaul AydinEcem TranSophie VisticotLaura RobertCamille De CianAnne AsMarie GoureauOlivier ConcordetJean-Paul DalkaraDeniz 1Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la Vision, 17 rue Moreau, 75012 Paris, France2Laboratoire Structure et Instabilité des Génomes, INSERM U1154, CNRS 7196, Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, CP26 43 rue Cuvier 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France∗Corresponding author: Juliette Pulman, Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la Vision, 17 rue Moreau, 75012 Paris, France. juliette.pulman@inserm.fr
3These authors contributed equally
1011202533410162710162710122025© 2025 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
Human retinal organoids are in vitro 3D structures that recapitulate key molecular and structural characteristics of the in vivo retina. They include all essential retinal cell types including photoreceptors, making them relevant models for preclinical development of gene therapies. A critical knowledge gap exists in understanding their utility for gene editing therapy optimization. We assessed the potential of retinal organoids for optimizing CRISPR-Cas9-mediated gene editing, focusing on the therapeutically relevant RHO gene implicated in autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (adRP). Using retinal organoids, in vitro HEK293T cells, and two humanized mouse models carrying different RHO mutations, we compared editing efficiencies. We observed that retinal organoids have lower transfection efficiency compared to HEK293T cells. Notably, they exhibited editing efficiencies more closely aligned with those found in vivo. We also observed similar delivery patterns of CRISPR-Cas9 tools in both retinal organoids and mouse retinas. These delivery patterns and editing efficiencies remained consistent across dual adeno-associated virus (AAV) systems and transiently delivered ribonucleoprotein complexes. Our findings demonstrate that retinal organoids achieve editing outcomes comparable to those observed in vivo underscoring their utility as part of a preclinical testing platform for genome editing, with implications for advancing gene therapy research in inherited retinal diseases.
Keywords: gene therapy, gene editing, human retinal organoids, CRISPR-Cas9, mouse, retina, models, photoreceptors, AAV, RNP

## Graphical abstract
 
Retinal organoids can be used to mirror in vivo mouse retina to develop CRISPR therapeutics. Here, Pulman and colleagues show similar ranges of gene editing and delivery dynamics between the organoids and in vivo mouse retina, highlighting the organoid’s underexplored potential for evaluating gene editing therapies in retinal diseases.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Dec 26; Accepted 2025 Nov 6; Collection date 2025 Dec 11.

## Introduction
Organoids are lab-grown three-dimensional (3D) miniaturized structures derived from stem cells that recapitulate essential characteristics and functions of various organs. These models have become powerful tools for developmental studies, drug screening, and as a source of cells for therapeutic applications in regenerative medicine. In vision research, the differentiation of patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) into 3D retinal organoids has enabled the generation of all essential retinal cell types, including photoreceptors. , , , These human retinal organoids have proven instrumental in modeling inherited retinal dystrophies to investigate disease, and they are increasingly being leveraged to test gene therapies. , , , , , They are particularly valuable when animal models fail to recapitulate crucial disease phenotypes, such as lack of photoreceptor degeneration observed in RDH12-knockout mice or in mouse models of type 10 Leber congenital amaurosis with CEP290 mutations. They have gained recognition from regulatory authorities such as the Food and Drug Administration now allowing their use in models in preclinical testing packages. By reflecting on human genetics more accurately than animal models, retinal organoids serve as a critical intermediary, bridging the gap between preclinical studies and clinical trials of new drug products.
Human-relevant models are especially crucial for testing gene editing therapies, in the context of autosomal dominant retinal diseases, where gain-of-function or dominant-negative mutations demand targeted therapies. CRISPR-Cas9-based gene editing targets the specific mutations causing these conditions, and it can selectively disrupt the toxic allele through mutation-dependent or independent knockout strategies. Half-dozen studies thus far have targeted the RHO gene implicated in autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (adRP) in vivo, using CRISPR-Cas9. , , , , , These preclinical advances have recently led to a phase 1 clinical trial for RHO-related RP in China (NCT05805007) conducted by Peking University Third Hospital. Yet, translating research findings into clinical success remains challenging, partly due to the lack of models that faithfully recapitulate the human photoreceptor genomic environment. Retinal organoids, with their patient-specific genetic background, offer a relevant platform to screen single-guide RNAs (sgRNAs) and refine gene editing strategies for conditions such as RHO-associated adRP. Indeed, retinal organoids not only harbor the patient’s entire genomic landscape but they can also be grown to advanced stages of differentiation, where specific features such as outer segments can be observed.
Our study thus focused on using CRISPR-Cas9 to target the RHO gene and explore the potential of mature iPSC-derived human retinal organoids for testing gene editing in photoreceptors. Testing of gene editing tools has been performed in rodents , , , and non-human primates but not directly in human retinal organoids. Gene editing has predominantly been applied to iPSCs prior to generation of 3D organoids in order to observe the effect of gene correction on the disease phenotype. , , , , , Only a single study delivered CRISPR-Cas9 to the iPSC-derived retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) layer using lentiviral vectors to disrupt the VEGFA gene involved in choroidal neovascularization. The paucity in studies using the same strategy in photoreceptors in 3D retinal organoids underscores the technical challenges in targeting photoreceptors, which harbor most causative mutations in inherited retinal dystrophies. Overcoming the delivery barrier thus remains a central obstacle to effective gene editing in human photoreceptors, especially when it comes to the delivery of gene editing tools. Indeed, mRNA encoding GFP has been successfully delivered into photoreceptors of retinal organoids using lipid nanoparticles, generating detectable levels of fluorescent protein, but the same strategy showed limited efficiency for CRISPR-Cas9 delivery. We recently achieved therapeutically relevant gene editing efficiencies in vivo by direct delivery of CRISPR-Cas9 ribonucleoprotein (RNP) into mouse retinas. Our in vivo gene efficiency with direct RNP delivery was comparable to the editing efficiencies obtained using adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated CRISPR-Cas9 delivery. These advancements motivated us to compare these delivery strategies in 3D retinal organoids to understand their value in predicting gene editing outcomes.
In this study, we compared for the first time the efficiency of CRISPR-Cas9-mediated gene editing in photoreceptors of mature human retinal organoids and mouse retinas to determine whether organoids can reliably predict in vivo outcomes. Our findings demonstrate that human retinal organoids containing mature photoreceptors embedded in a 3D environment closely mimic the in vivo retina, allowing us to achieve gene editing efficiencies close to those observed in vivo. This work establishes a crucial foundation for using organoids to optimize CRISPR-Cas9 delivery strategies, ultimately contributing to the development of more effective genome editing therapies for human inherited retinal dystrophies.

## Results

## An efficient RHO-targeting sgRNA is identified through in vitro screening
To edit the RHO gene using CRISPR-Cas9 for potential future use in gene therapy, we designed sgRNAs targeting the human RHO sequence across the first three of five exons. The choice of position along the coding sequence followed the rules of the mRNA-mediated decay system, which identifies premature termination codons in transcripts, to ensure efficient gene knockout relevant for therapy. sgRNAs were ranked by the Doench’16 efficiency score using the CRISPOR tool, and then the best guides were selected for each exon. We selected nine sgRNAs: five targeting RHO exon 1, three targeting RHO exon 2, and one targeting RHO exon 3 ( A). We first performed an in vitro screening in the human HEK293T cell line. Each sgRNA was synthesized in vitro, complexed individually with the Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 (SpCas9)-GFP enzyme and then transfected into HEK293T cells. For comparison, we included an sgRNA targeting VEGFA that has already been shown to be efficient both in vitro and in vivo in mouse retinas.
 To observe the dynamics of RNP transfection and cellular interactions, we captured images of the lipofection process over 42 h. Throughout the experiment, we observed that Cas9-GFP RNP/Lipofectamine 2000 complexes gradually sedimented onto the surface of the plate. As the HEK293T cells grew and divided, they moved toward these RNP/Lipofectamine complexes. By the end of the experiment, only a few remaining GFP-positive complexes were visible, suggesting that most of the RNPs were internalized and degraded by the cells. This dynamic movement is characteristic of cells growing in 2D ( B and and ) and likely introduces a bias in the way gene editing tools access the cell’s nuclei compared to in vivo conditions.

## Video S1. Time-lapse imaging of non-transfected HEK293T cells

## Video S2. Time-lapse imaging of CRISPR-Cas9 transfection in HEK293T cells

Next, to evaluate the editing efficacy of our lipofection, we used the tracking of indels by decomposition (TIDE) assay to determine the efficacy of each sgRNA. The TIDE assay determines the editing frequency generated in a pool of cells using Sanger sequencing. As shown in the example of sgRNA 1, we observed the generation of mutations around the cut site of our sgRNA compared to control non-transfected HEK293T cells ( C). We analyzed all our tested sgRNAs and identified six sgRNAs targeting RHO as efficiently as the VEGFA sgRNA ( D). Among these, sgRNA 7 was randomly selected for further experiments on retinal organoids.

## Cas9 RNP delivery into human retinal organoids achieves RHO editing rates comparable to in vivo delivery into a human RHO knockin mice
Retinal organoids derived from human iPSCs spontaneously self-organize in 3D and develop structures naturally present in the eye’s retina, including specialized retinal neurons such as the photoreceptors ( A). Photoreceptors consist of a nucleus, an inner segment, and an outer segment. The outer segment captures light through the concerted action of the proteins involved in phototransduction. For all our experiments, we used 150-day-old organoids that already contain mature photoreceptors and outer segment-like structures harboring the phototransduction proteins. Bright-field imaging confirmed the intact structure and lamination of the retinal organoids, as well as the presence of cilia (inner and partial outer segment) on the surface, indicative of photoreceptor differentiation ( B).
 Immunostaining on cryosections of an organoid stained with rhodopsin (RHO), a rod cell marker, and human cone arrestin, a cone cell marker, illustrates the proper lamination with both rod and cone photoreceptors forming the outermost layer ( C and 2D). Also, immunostaining of an outer segment marker, Peripherin (PRPH2), showed a co-localization with rhodopsin and confirmed the presence of photoreceptor outer segment-like structures at the organoid surface ( E). The presence of both rods and cones containing outer segment-like structures allows us to test CRISPR-Cas9 delivery in a 3D context that partially mimics that of in vivo mature photoreceptors.
Since retinal organoids are an ex vivo model, we initially applied the CRISPR-Cas9 transfection conditions used for HEK293T cells directly to the organoids. We adjusted the concentration of Cas9 RNP complexed with Lipofectamine 2000 to 60 nM to maintain a consistent ratio of Cas9 RNP per cell across experiments. However, at this concentration, we could not detect any insertions or deletions (indels) in the retinal organoids compared to the non-transfected ones ( A), indicating that these complex structures have a lower transfection efficiency than 2D dividing HEK293T cells.
 To investigate if retinal organoids mimic in vivo conditions, we also tested Cas9 RNP delivery without any vector as described in our previous studies. We first confirmed that the culture medium of the organoids was not affecting the proper formation of the Cas9 RNP. Dynamic light scattering showed a homogeneous and unchanged hydrodynamic size of the Cas9 RNP in the culture medium ( ). When adding Lipofectamine 2000, however, we observe significant aggregations ( ). As a 30 μM concentration is challenging to achieve in a 100 μL of culture medium volume, we implemented a hanging drop strategy, allowing to transfect retinal organoids using only 6 μL of media ( B).
Three days after exposing the retinal organoids to Cas9 RNPs either alone or complexed with Lipofectamine, we observed that the Cas9 proteins were blocked in the outer segment-like structure of the photoreceptors, in the periphery of the organoids for both 15 and 30 μM Cas9 RNP ( C). We also observed a degradation of the outer segment-like structure in the organoids treated with the Cas9 RNP/Lipofectamine complexes, with less internalized Cas9 protein ( C). We confirmed Lipofectamine-related toxicity using bright-field images, which showed disorganization of the outer segment-like structures in organoids treated with Cas9 RNP/Lipofectamine complexes ( D). We also performed a cell cytotoxicity assay based on the measurement of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in the culture medium revealing no cytotoxicity with Cas9 RNP alone while revealing significant toxicity in those conditions including Lipofectamine 2000 ( E). We therefore noted a similar response to Lipofectamine-mediated toxicity in vivo and in organoids and discontinued experiments with Lipofectamine 2000.
We concentrated our efforts on investigating editing efficiency of the Cas9 RNP complexes coupled to our in vitro-selected sgRNA 7. We observed a dose-dependent editing on the RHO gene with these RNPs achieving a 1.5% indel efficiency when treated with 30 μM of naked Cas9 RNP ( F). Finally, we compared this efficacy to in vivo editing using the same conditions in a humanized mouse model with the p.P347S mutation integrated at a heterozygous stage ( ). In this model, the murine Rho remains present and unchanged. 
In vivo, in the hRHO.P347S mouse model, we observed a similar editing efficiency of 2% indels ( G).

## Dual-AAV-mediated CRISPR delivery to retinal organoids mirrors in vivo gene editing outcomes in two distinct mouse models of adRP
To further evaluate the response of retinal organoids to gene editing tools compared to in vivo mouse retina, we tested the most common retinal delivery method of dual AAVs. Wu et al. described an AAV construct with the sCMV (small cytomegalovirus) promoter driving expression of SpCas9 and proved its efficacy in editing photoreceptor cells in mouse retinas in vivo. We used the same dual-AAV strategy, with one AAV containing the SpCas9 and the other containing the sgRNA and a GFP reporter expression cassette ( A). As SpCas9 cDNA is relatively big (4.1 kb), the expression cassette with sCMV slightly exceeds the AAV packaging capacity (usually ∼4.7 kb). Therefore, we first quality checked the SpCas9 AAV8 production using dynamic light scattering showing 91% full capsids and a homogenous hydrodynamic size of 29.4 nm ( ).
 We then transduced in parallel retinal organoids and mouse retinas, using the dual-AAV CRISPR strategy. We injected the hRHO.P347S mice and a second hRHO mouse model carrying the p.P23H mutation subretinally with the dual AAVs. The p.P23H model harbors one humanized mutated allele replacing one wild-type murine allele and is fused to the fluorescent protein RFP. We confirmed GFP expression from the AAV carrying the sgRNA in retinal organoids and the hRHO.P347S mouse retina by immunofluorescence ( B and 4C). Transcription of SpCas9 and the sgRNA was verified by semi-quantitative quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) ( D and 4E), and Cas9 protein levels were subsequently measured by ELISA in both organoids and in vivo ( F and 4G). Our results indicate successful expression of SpCas9 and sgRNA in both models.
We analyzed the distribution of AAV after infections by assessing GFP expression on cryosections of retinal organoids and mouse retinas. In retinal organoids, a strong GFP expression was observed in the outermost layer, corresponding to the localization of recoverin-positive photoreceptors ( A and full organoid view in ). In both the mouse models, GFP expression was restricted to the photoreceptor layer ( B and 5C). We observed significant differences in the rate of retinal degeneration between the two mouse models, a much faster outer nuclear layer (ONL) loss seen in the hRHO.P347S model compared to the hRHO.P23H model ( B and 5C). In the hRHO.P347S mouse model, we also detected SpCas9 via its FLAG tag but only at a 1-log higher dose of 5E10 vg ( A). This finding suggests that SpCas9 expression driven by the sCMV promoter is relatively modest compared to GFP expression under the CAG promoter. However, this higher dose induced ONL thinning ( B), and we therefore maintained the standard dose of 5E9 vg for the following experiments.
 We assessed the cytotoxicity of the dual-AAV strategy in retinal organoids. At a dose of 5E9 vg per organoid, no significant increase of LDH levels in culture media was observed ( D), indicating minimal cytotoxicity. To validate the efficiency of our selected sgRNA 7, we compared its performance to a previously reported gRNA from Wu and colleagues. , Additionally, we included a second sgRNA from our initial panel for comparison (sgRNA 1). Each of the three sgRNAs was injected separately into hRHO.P347S mouse retinas, and the editing efficiency was assessed. No significant difference in editing efficiency was observed among the three sgRNAs ( E). Based on these findings, we proceeded with sgRNA 7 for subsequent experiments.
Finally, we compared the editing efficiency of the dual-AAV CRISPR approach in retinal organoids and mouse retinas. Editing efficiencies were found to be in the same range between the retinal organoids and the mouse retinas, from 0.7% to 2.1% of indels depending on the model ( F). We however note that the editing efficiency in the hRHO.P23H mouse retinas was higher than in the organoids and the hRHO.P347S mouse retinas ( F). In vivo, those amounts of indels did not lead to a significant decrease of hRHO mRNA expression ( ). Altogether, our results demonstrate dual-AAV CRISPR editing efficacy in mature retinal organoids, just like editing using RNP occurs at a comparable rate to those observed in mouse retinas harboring the hRHO gene. The gene editing rates remain similar between the human retinal organoids and mouse models with mutant hRHO knockin albeit differences in the number of surviving photoreceptors skewing the results for the mouse line with the faster degeneration rate.

## Discussion
In this study, we investigated whether 3D human retinal organoids can serve as a predictive model for testing gene editing efficacy, complementing the mouse models. While in vivo models are valuable, human gene sequences can only be tested after integration in the animal model’s genome and replication of human-specific chromatin accessibility, epigenetic states, and transcriptional landscapes of the human sequence in animal model photoreceptors remain limited. Indeed, those parameters are important for evaluating the efficiency of sgRNAs. Human immortalized cell lines harbor the human genome but have different gene expression and chromatin context and cannot be used to model human photoreceptors. , A complementary model, such as retinal organoids, provides a platform that closely mimics human genetic context, allowing researchers to assess sgRNAs targeting efficiency with greater relevance to clinical scenarios. Additionally, such a model enables the testing of off-target effects or genomic translocations potentially induced by Cas9 within a human genome, which cannot be evaluated in rodents. By bridging the gap between in vitro and in vivo approaches, complementary models such as retinal organoids greatly facilitate the optimization of gene editing strategies, enhancing the likelihood of successful therapeutic development for inherited retinal dystrophies.
Retinal organoids were primarily used for developmental studies or drug screening and are being increasingly used for gene therapy development. , , , Also, anti-sense oligonucleotides have been directly tested on mature organoids. , Surprisingly, they have been under-explored for testing CRISPR therapeutics. Our study demonstrates that retinal organoids can help fill this gap, particularly for assessing not only gene editing efficiency but also the delivery and safety of CRISPR tools.
Our study demonstrates that similar editing rates are achieved in human retinal organoids and mouse retinas. We treated directly the retinal organoids with naked Cas9 RNP or AAVs encoding Cas9 and compared it to mouse retina subretinal injections. The editing efficiency in retinal organoids was much closer to the in vivo results than the results in HEK293T cells. However, we observed that the in vivo editing efficiency varied depending on the mouse model. Also, we observed that delivery in 2D HEK293T cells can benefit from the sedimentation of the RNP complexes, which will not be the case for 3D floating retinal organoids. Moreover, we see a difference in the editing efficacy between our two humanized mouse models, suggesting that evaluating the editing in humanized mouse models might give misleading results compared to future human use, as the mouse models degenerate at a much quicker rate, shrinking the number of edited photoreceptors.
Beyond the mutation type, other factors such as the chromatin accessibility at the integration site of the human transgene and its epigenetic landscape could impact editing efficiency. For example, regions of heterochromatin or densely packed chromatin might limit the accessibility of Cas9 RNP, thereby reducing its ability to induce double-strand breaks. , , Additionally, the localization of the transgene within the genome could subject it to positional effects, such as differential transcriptional activity or interaction with regulatory elements, further influencing the outcome of degeneration and/or gene editing. The number of integrated transgene copies might also introduce variability, as higher copy numbers could alter the stoichiometry of editing events. Together, these factors underscore the complexity of using poorly characterized mouse models to predict editing efficiency and highlight the necessity of complementary models for a more precise evaluation.
In addition to testing the editing efficiency, retinal organoids provide a valuable platform for testing the delivery dynamics with different vectors. We showed in a previous work that subretinal injection of naked Cas9 RNP led to the RNP being predominantly blocked at the level of photoreceptors’ outer segments, which may represent a physical barrier during non-viral delivery of tools such as Cas9 RNP. Here, we found a similar pattern in retinal organoids treated with Cas9 RNP. Such findings emphasize the need for complementary models such as retinal organoids to explore these physical barriers under controlled experimental conditions for therapy development. Along the same line, we conclude that the retinal organoids also represent an interesting model to evaluate cytotoxicity. For example, Dorgau and colleagues used retinal organoids to quantify the toxicities of already licensed drugs with known responses using single-cell RNA sequencing and immunofluorescence assays. Also, the toxicity of different products including pesticides, flame retardants, and other typical environmental pollutants has been assessed in organoids, confirming their potential as a retina model. In our case, our previous work demonstrated the inherent toxicity of Cas9 RNP mixed with Lipofectamine 2000 as a non-viral vector in wild-type mouse, leading to damage and shedding of photoreceptors’ outer segments. Here, we observed a similar cytotoxicity in retinal organoids. We observed the absence of the outer segment-like structures, which were likely damaged and lost due to Lipofectamine reducing the Cas9 RNP signal in immunostaining.
However, it is important to note that retinal organoids still lack key features of the in vivo retina, such as vascularization and an immune system. Emerging technologies are rising to address these limitations. Advances like organoids-on-a-chip and co-cultures with RPE or glial cells offer promising solutions to create more physiologically relevant models. , These improvements could further enhance the utility of organoids demonstrated in our study, by enabling more accurate evaluation of gene editing tools in a microenvironment that better mimics human retinal physiology, including intercellular interactions and immune responses. The parallel between the editing efficiency should be taken with caution as the number of targeted cells, the AAV serotype, and the surrounding environment were different between retinal organoids and mouse retinas. In our study, we selected capsids based on their optimal performance for each experimental model, choosing AAV8 for in vivo mouse experiments, as published previously, , and AAV2.7m8 for human retinal organoids. , We acknowledge that this choice limits direct comparison of indel rates between models, and future studies employing matched serotypes across systems would help to clarify this aspect.
Additionally, while the two used humanized mouse models carry a degenerative RHO mutation, we used wild-type retinal organoids. However, it is interesting to note the similarity in the range of editing, suggesting that it could be a good model to test CRISPR editing efficiency, to screen human sgRNA efficacy and genotoxicity on a human genetic background and in primary photoreceptor neurons, or to evaluate the efficiency and cytotoxicity of different vectors.
Our study opens the way for using mature retinal organoids as a model to develop new gene editing therapies. The next step will be to investigate the potential of treatment of gene editing tools on a degenerative model of retinal organoids from patients with a specific mutation. We believe that human retinal organoids are a robust and versatile model for testing CRISPR-Cas9-based gene editing and that they will allow for comprehensive evaluation of editing efficiency, delivery dynamics, and cytotoxicity in a human-specific genetic background. By bridging the gap between traditional in vitro systems and in vivo models, retinal organoids hold significant potential to accelerate the development and optimization of gene editing therapies for inherited retinal diseases.

## Materials and methods

## sgRNA design
sgRNAs targeting human RHO gene were designed using CRISPOR (http://crispor.gi.ucsc.edu/). The sgRNA called “Wu” was designed according to the two publications of Tsai, Wu, and colleagues. , The sgRNA targeting the vascular endothelial growth factor A (Vegfa) gene was published by Kim and colleagues. All sgRNAs were synthesized and purified using the GeneArt Precision gRNA Synthesis Kit (Invitrogen), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. sgRNAs eluted in water were aliquoted and stored at −80°C. All 20 bp sequences targeted by each sgRNA are listed in .

## SpCas9 nuclease
For experiments on HEK293T cells, SpCas9 nuclease (Aldevron) was used. For HEK293T cells live imaging lipofection, SpCas9 nuclease fused with GFP was used. For experiments on organoids and in vivo, SpCas9 nuclease with 2 nuclear localization sequences (one on its N- and one on its C-terminal) was produced as previously described and kept at −80°C until use.

## Cell culture
Briefly, human embryonic kidney HEK293T cells were cultivated in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Gibco) complemented with fetal bovine serum (Gibco) at 10% and 1% penicillin-streptomycin antibiotics (Gibco). Cells were incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2.
The hiPSC-5F were cultured as our previously established protocol. Briefly, iPSC colonies were kept in culture in an incubator (RWD D180 Incubator) at 37°C, under 5% CO2/95% air atmosphere, 20% oxygen tension, and 80%–85% humidity. Colonies were cultured with antibiotic free mTeSR1 medium (STEMCELL Technologies), in culture dishes coated with truncated recombinant human vitronectin (STEMCELL Technologies) and were passaged once a week.

## Retinal organoid differentiation
Organoid generation was based on our previously established adherent hiPSC differentiation. , hiPSCs came from a single cell line of a healthy donor, referred to as clone 5F, reprogrammed from adult human Müller glial cells as described in Slembrouck-Brec et al. They were expanded to confluency until 80% in TeSR-E8 medium and transferred to TeSR-E6 Medium (STEMCELL Technologies), lacking fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2), to promote spontaneous differentiation. To favor the differentiation into a neuroectoderm lineage, N2 supplement was added to the media 2 days after. On day 28, identified self-forming neural-like structures were isolated and transferred to 24-well plates in pro-neural medium (DMEM/F12, 1:1, L-glutamine, 1% MEM nonessential amino acids, and 2% B27 supplement) with 10 units/mL penicillin and 10 mg/mL streptomycin. 7 days later, FGF2 was removed. At day 84, retinal organoids were cultured in pro-neural medium with 2% B27 supplement without vitamin A. The media was changed every 2–3 days during all the differentiation. For the cell cytotoxicity analysis and the immunostainings, organoids come from the same batch of differentiation. For the editing efficacy measurement, organoids come from three different batches of differentiation.

## Mouse model
All animal experiments were realized in accordance with the NIH Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (National Academies Press, 2011). The protocols were approved by the Local Animal Ethics Committees and conducted in accordance with Directive 2010/63/EU of the European Parliament. The project was evaluated by the CEEA 05 (Ethical Committee in Animal Experimentation 05) and approved by the MESRI (“Ministère de l’Enseignement Supérieur, de la Recherche et de l’Innovation,” France). The approval number of the projects from the animal facility is: B-75-12-02 and C-75-12-02. In this study, two adRP mouse models were used. The first one exhibits the RHO p.P347S mutation and has been published by Li and colleagues. The second model used harbors the RHO p.P23H mutation and was published by Robichaux and colleagues. In each case, the mutation is not located in the sgRNA on-target site to avoid any inherent editing variability between them.

## RNP lipofection on HEK293T cells
HEK293T cells were plated in 48-well plates at 1E6 cells per well at a total volume of 250 μL per well. 24 h after plating, cells (2E6 cells per well, 70% confluency) were lipofected with SpCas9 RNP at a final concentration of 100 nM and mixed with Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To ensure reliability, each SpCas9 RNP complexed with one specific sgRNA was lipofected in three different wells (internal replicates), and the experiment was replicated three times (independent repeats).
Briefly, sgRNA and SpCas9 (Aldevron) were mixed at 1:1 molar ratio by pipetting and incubated at room temperature for 5 min. Then, RNPs were mixed with Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) and Opti-MEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific), vortexed for 10 s, and incubated at room temperature for 10 min. Lipofection mix containing SpCas9 RNP was then added to corresponding wells for a total final volume of 275 μL. Lipofected cells were harvested 48 h after lipofection, and DNA was extracted using NucleoSpin Tissue Kit (Macherey-Nagel) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and conserved at −80°C for further experiments.

## Live imaging of the HEK293T lipofection
HEK293T cells were plated in 24-well plates at 1E5 cells per well at a total volume of 400 μL per well. The same protocol was used using a SpCas9-GFP. 25 μL of lipofection mix containing SpCas9-GFP RNP was added to corresponding wells after 24 h for a final volume of 425 μL. For control wells (non-lipofected cells), 25 μL of Opti-MEM was added to the wells.
45 min post lipofection, cells were observed under DMI6000b epifluorescent microscope Leica Microsystems) at 20× and images were captured every 15 min for 42 h. The microscope used for live imaging was equipped with an incubation chamber to maintain the cells at 37°C and 5% CO2 throughout the experiment. Image analysis was performed using ImageJ. Videos were edited using ImageJ and Cap Cut.

## RNP lipofection in retinal organoids in a 96-well plate
We calculated to have the same amount of Cas9 RNP mixed with Lipofectamine 2000 for the same number of cells. In vitro, we plated 1E5 cells per well in a 48-well plate. 24 h later, when we started the transfection, we had 2.16E5 cells per well. For the organoids, at day 150, we counted 1.26E5 cells per organoid. As we transfected 100 nM of Cas9 RNP in HEK293T, to keep the same ratio of Cas9 RNP per cell, we used 60 nM of Cas9 RNP with 20% Lipofectamine 2000 per organoid. The same RNP/Lipo mix procedure as for HEK lipofection was applied.

## Naked Cas9 RNP treatment of retinal organoids using a hanging drop
sgRNA and SpCas9 (Aldevron) were mixed at a 1:1 molar ratio by pipetting and incubated at room temperature for 5 min. Then, RNP were diluted in culture media. Each organoid was placed on the lid onto the cover of a 35 mm Petri dish, and excess culture media was removed. 6 μL of RNPs/media was placed as a drop onto the organoids. The bottom of the Petri dish was covered with culture media to ensure it stayed moist. The cover was turned upside down, and the organoids were placed into the incubator overnight. The next morning, the organoids were transferred back to 24 ultra-low attachment well plates, with 500 μL of fresh culture media per organoid per well, and were placed into the incubator. Retinal organoids were collected 2 weeks after transduction.

## AAV design, production, and serotypes used
The AAV construct encoding for SpCas9 was designed as published by Wu and colleagues. SpCas9 was driven by an sCMV promoter. The second AAV construct encoding for sgRNA was designed with sgRNA under the control of U6 promoter and a GFP reporter cassette under the control of CAG ubiquitous promoter. AAV plasmids were purchased from VectorBuilder.
AAV vectors were produced as previously described using the co-transfection method and purified by iodixanol gradient ultracentrifugation. AAV vector stocks were titrated by qPCR using PowerSYBR Green (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Retinal organoids were transduced with the AAV 2.7m8 variant. Mouse retinas were transduced with AAV 8.

## Retinal organoid transduction of AAV
The AAVs were mixed with culture media to achieve the dosage of 5E9 vg per organoid. Retinal organoids were transferred from their 24-well plates into a 96-well plate in a total volume media of 50 μL. The plate was placed into the incubator overnight. The following morning, 100 μL of culture media was added to each well, and the organoids were placed into the incubator. 24 h later, the organoids were transferred back to 24 ultra-low attachment well plates, with 500 μL of fresh culture media per organoid per well, and were placed into the incubator. Retinal organoids were collected 2 weeks after transduction.

## Subretinal injections in mice
Mice were anesthetized by isoflurane inhalation (Isorane, Axience). Pupils were dilated, and 1 μL subretinal injections were performed at P14 using a Hamilton syringe with a 33-gauge blunt needle (World Precision Instruments) under an operating microscope (Leica Microsystems). Ophthalmic ointment (Fradexam, TVM) was applied after surgery. Both eyes were injected with the same product (e.g., buffer, Cas9 RNP or Cas9 AAV). Eyes with extensive subretinal hemorrhage were excluded from the analysis. Animals were euthanized by CO2 inhalation and cervical dislocation. For editing analysis, the whole neural retina was isolated 7 days after injection (for RNP injection) or 3 weeks after injection (for AAV injection) and stored at −80°C prior to DNA/RNA extraction.

## Eye fundus imaging
Mice were anesthetized by isoflurane inhalation (Isorane, Axience). Pupils were dilated using 0.5% tropicamide (Mydriaticum, Thea) and 5% phenylephrine hydrochloride (Neosynephrine, Europhta). During the experiment, ophthalmic lubricant (Lubrithal, Dechra) was applied. Micron IV (Phoenix Micron) was used to generate both bright-field and fluorescence eye fundus images.

## Sample preparation for gene editing quantification
For HEK293T cells, genomic DNA was extracted using the NucleoSpin DNA tissue (Macherey-Nagel) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
For neural retina tissue or human retinal organoids, DNA and RNA were simultaneously extracted from the same sample using the Quick-DNA/RNA Microprep Plus Kit (Ozyme) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
PrimeSTAR GXL DNA polymerase (Takara) was used for PCR amplification according to the manufacturer’s instructions with a total of 50 ng of genomic DNA for each sample. Primers for the amplified region of interest are listed in and . PCR amplicons were then purified using NucleoSpin PCR and gel kit (Macherey-Nagel) following the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Sanger sequencing and TIDE analysis on HEK293T
To detect CRISPR-Cas9-mediated gene editing on targeted loci for each sgRNA, primer couples were designed to amplify on-target sites according to TIDE website recommendations (http://shinyapps.datacurators.nl/tide/). Purified PCR amplicons were sent to Eurofins Genomics Europe for Sanger sequencing. Sequences were analyzed using the TIDE algorithm to estimate the spectrum and frequency of indels from both sides of the theoretical cleavage site (sgRNA sequences were implemented in analysis). Results given by the algorithm were expressed as the total estimated editing percentage.

## Next-generation amplicon sequencing for organoids and mouse retinas
For mouse retina and retinal organoids experiments, purified PCR amplicons were sent to Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) platform at Massachusetts General Hospital DNA core facility (https://ccib.mgh.harvard.edu/). Interleaved Fastq files were then submitted to CRISPResso2 analysis. Briefly, sgRNA 5′-3′ spacer and amplicon sequences were uploaded prior to analysis. Classical analysis parameters remained unchanged. Editing percentages from the first generated figure expressing modified reads were conserved as suggested by CRISPResso2 creators.

## Reverse-transcription qPCR
Organoids and retina were collected respectively, 2 weeks or 3 weeks after transduction or injection. RNA was extracted using the Quick-DNA/RNA Microprep Plus Kit (Ozyme) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and submitted to TURBO DNAse (Invitrogen) treatment according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Reverse transcription was performed on the extracted DNA-digested RNA samples using Superscript Reverse Transcriptase IV (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer’s instructions with oligodT or random hexamers (for sgRNA) primers (Thermo Fisher Scientific). qPCR was performed using PowerSYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A total of 5 ng of cDNA was used per well, in duplicate. Duplicates that had a Ct standard deviation above 0.5 were removed. For semi-quantitative analysis, Ct values were converted into relative expression scores using the formula 35 − Ct, where 35 was used as the threshold value to determine target expression. For all conditions, the mean value from untreated samples was subtracted to normalize expression levels. Negative values resulting from this normalization were set to 0. Undetermined Ct values from untransduced samples were set on Ct = 35.
For the hRHO gene, expression levels were determined using the 2ˆ(−ΔΔCT), which used the average CT value in the control group as baseline, normalized against the photoreceptor-specific housekeeping gene Pde6b.
Primers used are listed in .

## Cytotoxicity assay
CyQUANT LDH Cytotoxicity Assay Kit (Invitrogen) was used to analyze cytotoxicity, following the manufacturer’s instructions.
The supernatant medium of floating organoids was collected 7 days post treatment and transferred to a 96-well flat-bottom plate, and LDH release was evaluated. Absorbance was read using Spark microplate reader (TECAN) at 490 and 680 nm, and the 680 nm absorbance value (background signal) was subtracted from the 490 nm absorbance value to determine LDH activity.

## DLS
Stunner (Unchained Labs) was used to measure the AAV empty versus full ratio and for dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements. A 2 μL sample was loaded onto specialized 96-well plates, which include microfluidic channels and dual cuvettes (Unchained Labs). For AAV quantification, the AAV Quant application was selected in the Lunatic & Stunner Client software, and for Cas9 RNP quantification, the protein classic Q280 application was selected. Data were acquired using 4 acquisitions of 5 s. Data analysis was performed using the Lunatic & Stunner Analysis Software.

## Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were carried out using GraphPad PRISM version 7.0. p values were determined by ordinary one-way ANOVA test, Dunnett’s multiple comparisons. ns, non-significant, ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.005, ∗∗∗p < 0.0005, ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001.

## Immunostaining and imaging
1, 3, or 7 days post infection, retinal organoids were fixed in a 4% formaldehyde solution for 1 h 1, 3, or 7 days post injection, mouse eyes were enucleated and immediately fixed in a 4% formaldehyde solution for 1 h.
To prepare cryosections, neural retinas were immersed in PBS-10% sucrose for 1 h and then PBS-30% sucrose overnight at 4°C. They were embedded in OCT medium (CellPath) and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Retinal organoids were fixed in 4% PFA for 10 min at 4°C, cryoprotected in PBS with 30% sucrose overnight, embedded in PBS with 7.5% gelatin and 10% sucrose, and frozen in isopentane at −50°C. 10-μm-thick vertical sections were cut with a CM3050S cryostat (Leica Biosystems).
After 3 PBS washes, cryosections were incubated in a blocking buffer (for retinas: PBS, 1% bovine serum albumin, 0.1% Triton X-100, and 0.1% Tween 20. For retinal organoids: 0.2% gelatin and 0.1% Triton X-100) for 1 h and then with primary antibodies diluted in blocking buffer and incubated overnight at 4°C. Primary antibodies used in this study are listed in . After three PBS washes of the sections, the secondary antibodies diluted in blocking buffer (Alexa Fluor 488, 594, or 647, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were added for 2 h at room temperature, followed by three PBS washes and counterstained with DAPI. Cryosections were mounted in Vectashield mounting medium (Vector Laboratories) and visualized using a confocal microscope (Olympus). ImageJ software was used to process the images.

## Cas9 protein expression
Total protein from whole neural retinas or whole organoids was extracted using RIPA and PI 1×. SpCas9 protein concentration was measured using the Cas9 ELISA Kit (GenScript), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Absorbance was measured using a Spark microplate reader (Tecan). Standard curve was determined using a linear regression with a R2 above 0.99. The amount of Cas9 protein in the sample is quantitatively determined based on the standard curve.

## SD-OCT imaging
Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) was performed 3 weeks post injections. For pupil dilation, 0.5% tropicamide (Mydriaticum, Thea) and 5% phenylephrine hydrochloride (Neosynephrine, Europhta) were added to both eyes. The animals were anesthetized by inhalation of isoflurane (Isorane, Axience) and placed in front of the SD-OCT imaging device (Bioptgen 840 nm HHP; Bioptgen). The eyes were kept moist with 0.9% NaCl during the whole procedure. The image with the optic nerve in the center is shown. Image acquisitions were performed using the following parameters: rectangular scan/1000 A-scan per B-scan/100 B-scan 1 frame. ImageJ software was used to process the images.

## Transgene copy number quantification
Transgene copy number in the Tg(p.P347S hRHO) mouse model was quantified using droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) following the protocol described by Bell et al. The Tg(p.P347S RHO) mouse was generated by DNA microinjection in zygotes, resulting in the integration of an unknown number of transgene copies. Genomic DNA was extracted from tail tissue samples, and 10 ng of DNA was used for ddPCR analysis after digestion with the HindIII-HF restriction enzyme (New England Biolabs) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
To quantify the transgene copy number, a multiplex ddPCR reaction was prepared using probes and primers designed for both the transgene and a reference locus, actb. The transgene-specific probe (hRHO-P347S-HEX) was labeled with HEX fluorophore, and the reference probe (actin-FAM) was labeled with FAM fluorophore. The ddPCR reaction mixture was prepared using Bio-Rad’s ddPCR Supermix for probes (no dUTP), and droplets were generated using the QX-100 Droplet generator. Amplification was run on C1000 Touch Thermal Cycler (Bio-Rad) with the following parameters: 95°C for 15 min (2°C/s) then, 40 cycles at 94°C for 30 s, 60°C for 1 min, finished by 98°C for 10 min. After amplification, droplets were analyzed using the Bio-Rad QX-100 Droplet Reader to calculate the transgene copy number relative to the reference gene actin. The probes and primers were designed using Primer3 ( ) and synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies.

## Data and code availability
The data that support the findings of current study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## Acknowledgments
We are grateful to C. Botto, Y. Rasool, and V. Barrios Guttierez for preliminary in vivo and in vitro work, sample preparation, and indel analysis, C. Nanteau for her help with iPSC-derived retinal organoid cultures, and to all the team S15 for their feedback on the manuscript and helpful discussions. We thank Dr. C. Craft (Mary D. Allen Laboratory for Vision Research, USC ROSKI Eye Institute) for the cone arrestin antibody. J.P. was supported by grants from the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale (FRM SPF201909009287) and the Foundation Fighting Blindness (PPA-0922-0840-INSERM). This work was supported by grants from AFM Trampolin Grant (Project 28641), ANR (ANR-23-CE18-0036-01 PolyCas9_RD), LABEX LIFESENSES (ANR-10-LABX-65), IHU FOReSIGHT (ANR-18-IAHU-01), Inserm, Sorbonne Université, Fondation Voir et Entendre, and DIM Thérapie Génique and DIM C-BRAINS, funded by the Conseil Régional d’Ile-de-France.

## Author contributions
J.P., H.M., P.O., and D.D. designed experiments. A.D.C. and M.A. produced Cas9 proteins under J.-P.C.’s supervision. H.M. designed sgRNAs and the AAVs. H.M. and P.O. performed transfection on cell lines. L.V. performed imaging of HEK293T cells. C.R. and E.A. produced the retinal organoids. C.R., E.A., and P.O. performed infections of the organoids. P.O., E.A., and H.M. performed the Cyquant analysis. J.P. and H.M. performed subretinal injections in mice. J.P., H.M., P.O., and L.V. dissected mice eyes. J.P., H.M., P.O., E.A., and L.V. extracted the DNA and prepared and analyzed NGS samples. S.T., J.P., H.M., P.O., and L.V. performed histology, immunostaining, and imaging. J.P. performed and analyzed the DLS recordings. H.M. performed the qPCR. J.P. and H.M. performed and analyzed the fundus images. J.P., H.M., and D.D. wrote the manuscript. O.G., J.-P.C., and D.D. provided scientific input and gave feedback on the manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
D.D. is a co-inventor on patent #9193956 (AAV virions with variant capsid and methods of use thereof), with royalties paid to Adverum Biotechnologies, and on pending patent applications on noninvasive methods to target cone photoreceptors (EP17306429.6 and EP17306430.4) licensed to Gamut Tx, now SparingVision. O.G. is a co-inventor on patents on iPSC retinal differentiation (WO2014174492 and WO2018149985) licensed to Gamut Tx, now Tenpoint Tx. D.D. and O.G. also have personal financial interests in Tenpoint Tx and SparingVision, outside the scope of the submitted work.

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtm.2025.101627.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S6 and Tables S1–S6

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Video S1. Time-lapse imaging of non-transfected HEK293T cells

## Video S2. Time-lapse imaging of CRISPR-Cas9 transfection in HEK293T cells

## Document S1. Figures S1–S6 and Tables S1–S6

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of current study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.