pmcCochrane Database Syst RevCochrane Database Syst Rev3102cochrev10090974714651858The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews1469-493X1361-6137John Wiley and Sons, Inc. and the Cochrane LibraryPMC11301992PMC11301992.111301992113019923910547410.1002/14651858.CD015064.pub2CD015064.pub2CD0150641Child healthSkin disordersTopical anti‐inflammatory treatments for eczema: network meta‐analysis
Cochrane Skin GroupLaxStephanie J ). The British National Formulary classifies depigmentation as a rare or very rare event, occurring in fewer than 1 in 1000 people treated with topical steroids. We use this hypothetical incidence rate of 0.1% to calculate potential differences in incidence between control and treatment.
Abbreviations: CI: Confidence Interval CINEMA: Confidence in Network Meta‐analysis OR: Odds ratio RCT: Randomised controlled trial SUCRA: Surface area under the cumulative ranking curve TCS: Topical corticosteroids
 

## Background

## Description of the condition
Eczema, also called atopic dermatitis or atopic eczema, is a common and burdensome skin disease. Eczema is most common in early life, affecting up to 20% of infants and about 6% of school‐age children and adolescents and 5% of adults worldwide ( ; ; ; ). It is a chronic, fluctuating condition that varies in severity. In mild eczema, individuals may have only occasional localised patches of inflamed skin that cause minimal symptoms, but severe eczema causes extensive erythema, excoriations and chronic skin changes such as lichenification.
Eczema can have a substantial impact on quality of life and psychosocial domains (social, academic, and occupational) through persistent itch and the stigma associated with having visibly affected skin ( ; ; ; ). The impact on quality of life can exceed that reported in other chronic conditions, such as asthma and diabetes, especially when eczema is severe or affects readily visible areas ( ; ; ; ). Eczema also causes an economic burden and, in the USA alone, the direct costs of eczema are estimated as over 1 billion US dollars per year ( ). Costs which affect people with eczema and their families include buying moisturisers, washing products or special clothing and taking time off work to care for a child with eczema ( ).

## Description of the intervention
While eczema often improves during early childhood or puberty, a significant proportion of individuals still require treatment in adult life ( ), and in others, eczema does not start until adulthood. Eczema is managed with long‐term treatments. For the majority of people, treatment is topical. Emollients (bland moisturisers) are a mainstay of eczema treatment, but predominantly have a preventative role through hydrating the skin and improving the skin barrier; they are inadequate to reduce inflammation, except in very mild cases. To treat actively inflamed areas, topical anti‐inflammatory agents are needed ( ).
Topical corticosteroids (TCS) are the first‐line topical anti‐inflammatory treatment for eczema ( ; ). TCS are typically applied once or twice daily to actively inflamed areas of skin for seven to 14 days, or until resolution. Prolonged, continuous use of TCS is not usually advised. However, 'weekend therapy' (i.e. the proactive regular twice‐weekly application of treatment) is used, and can improve long‐term control in people with frequent flares ( ). TCS preparations can be classified into different potency groups based on vasoconstriction assays ( ), and different potencies are used for treatment depending on the individual's age, site of application, and disease severity. Antimicrobials and salicylic acid may also be added to TCS preparations. TCS agents have a very well‐established safety profile as they have been used extensively since the 1950s. Despite this, research suggests that many people with eczema and their carers have a number of concerns about TCS ( ), including skin thinning ( ). Although such adverse effects are typically associated with inappropriate use of more potent TCS agents ( ; ), people with eczema and their carers also have concerns when using mildly potent agents ( ; ). These concerns can have important implications for treatment adherence and, consequently, disease control.
Topical calcineurin inhibitors (TCI) have been available since 2000. Current TCI agents in use include tacrolimus 0.03% ointment, tacrolimus 0.1% ointment, and pimecrolimus 1% cream. Tacrolimus 0.03% ointment and pimecrolimus 1% cream are indicated for use in individuals aged two years or older, and tacrolimus 0.1% ointment is approved in those aged 16 years or more ( ). However, TCI are commonly used in children aged under two years, and this is supported by guideline recommendations ( ; ). American Academy of Dermatology guidelines strongly recommend the use of TCI or TCS for managing eczema ( ). The European Task Force on Atopic Dermatitis (ETFAD) recommends first‐line use of TCI at sensitive sites (with a preference for pimecrolimus in mild eczema and tacrolimus in moderate and severe eczema) and for long‐term topical treatment ( ). The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) states that TCI are an option for the second‐line treatment of moderate‐to‐severe eczema in individuals aged two years or over “that has not been controlled by TCS or where there is a serious risk of important adverse effects from further TCS use, particularly irreversible skin atrophy” ( ).
While TCI are often promoted as being ‘steroid‐sparing’, there is limited evidence about their relative safety compared with TCS. In a 2016 review, more than two‐thirds of all TCI studies had not used any active comparator ( ), and in the only long‐term head‐to‐head trial comparing TCI against mild potency TCS, these agents were similarly safe and effective ( ). A 2015 Cochrane Review found that serious adverse events were rare for both TCI and TCS ( ). The most common adverse effects of TCI were local tolerability issues, such as burning or stinging on application ( ). A black‐box warning for theoretical carcinogenicity also exists for TCI, based upon postmarketing case reports of skin cancer and lymphoma. This risk of carcinogenicity is controversial as observational data have suggested no increased risk of keratinocyte carcinoma ( ), lymphoma (in vitiligo patients; ), and cancer overall ( ). Although one meta‐analysis reported a small increased risk of lymphoma , that was not confirmed in a more recent and comprehensive systematic review ( ).
TCI agents cost more than TCS per gram, and prescription costs of TCI may be difficult to justify in the absence of comparative data showing improved efficacy or safety compared with TCS. Expenditure on topical treatments for eczema may rise further as new, more costly topical anti‐inflammatory treatments come to market ( ). A topical phosphodiesterase‐4 (PDE‐4) inhibitor, crisaborole, was licenced in the USA in 2016 and in the European Union in 2020. More topical agents are likely to be approved soon, including janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors, such as ruxolitinib, tofacitinib and delgocitinib ( ; ), and aryl hydrocarbon receptor activators, such as tapinarof ( ). Reported reasons for developing new topical treatments include existing treatments having local tolerability issues, restrictions for use on sensitive skin areas, or insufficient efficacy. However, trials of new topical therapeutics have generally made few direct comparisons to available treatments to allow efficacy and safety to be compared, so it is difficult to determine whether new topical treatments meet this envisioned treatment need. Establishing whether newly approved agents are more effective or safer than TCS and TCI will be important for clinicians and people with eczema to make informed treatment decisions and to use limited healthcare resources most effectively.
 

## How the intervention might work
The discussed agents are all topical anti‐inflammatory agents that reduce pro‐inflammatory cytokine production. These cytokines are molecules secreted by cells of the immune system which escalate immune responses, so reducing them leads to improved appearance of the skin and reduced itch. Topical agents also have favourable adverse effect profiles compared to systemic immunosuppressants and do not need regular blood tests for monitoring. Topical agents are thus a cornerstone of eczema treatment.
TCS have a broad anti‐inflammatory action. They bind to glucocorticoid intracellular receptors and reduce levels of cytokines such as tumour necrosis factor (TNF), interleukin (IL) 1, IL‐2 and interferon (IFN)‐γ ( ). TCS also cause vasoconstriction (reduced blood flow) in the affected skin ( ). At sensitive sites such as the face, neck, and groin, TCS are typically limited to mild or moderate potency to reduce the risk of skin thinning.
TCI inhibit the enzyme calcineurin, which has the effect of decreasing T‐cell proliferation and the production of cytokines including IL‐2, IL‐3, IL‐4, IL‐12, TNF, and IFN‐γ ( ). They have also been demonstrated to affect mast cell activation and decrease the number and co‐stimulatory ability of dendritic cells in the epidermis ( ).
PDE‐4 inhibitors inhibit the enzyme PDE‐4, which leads to a decrease in cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels ( ). PDE‐4 activity is increased in circulating inflammatory cells of people with eczema, and inhibition of PDE‐4 in monocytes in vitro leads to reduced release of pro‐inflammatory cytokines ( ).
JAK inhibitors inhibit JAK‐STAT signalling. There are 4 JAKs ‐ JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, and tyrosine kinase (TYK) ‐ which are associated with type I and type II cytokine receptors. JAK is activated when these cytokine receptors are bound by their ligands, which comprise more than 60 cytokines and growth factors ( ). JAK then activates small molecules in the cytoplasm, which move to the nucleus and bind to DNA in order to alter gene transcription. These small molecules in the cytoplasm are called STATs due to their function ('Signal Transducers and Activator of Transcription') and speed of action ('stat' effect) ( ). Inhibition of the pathway can have anti‐inflammatory effects. For example, at least 90% of IL‐2 receptor signalling is JAK‐dependent ( ).
The aryl hydrocarbon receptor is a cytosolic ligand‐activated transcription factor that can be activated by various different molecules. It is widely expressed in the skin and plays an important role as a critical regulator of innate and adaptive immune responses, impacting the balance of Th17 and regulatory T cells ( ) and modulating gene expression important for skin barrier proteins, such as filaggrin, hornerin, and involucrin ( ). Activation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor is thus a target for new drugs, such as tapinarof ( ), and is also one of the modes of action of coal tar, which can be used in inflammatory skin diseases.

## Why it is important to do this review
A Cochrane Skin prioritisation process in 2017, which included the involvement of people with eczema, identified ‘network meta‐analysis of topical anti‐inflammatory treatments for treating eczema’ as a key priority for a Cochrane Skin review ( ). This research question was prioritised because there is currently inadequate evidence to guide treatment decisions for topical anti‐inflammatory agents in eczema. Most new topical therapies are initially compared against vehicle (a carrier system for an active treatment, which can also be used on its own as an emollient). This makes it difficult for healthcare professionals and people with eczema to make a judgement on how the new treatment compares with existing active treatments in terms of benefits and potential harms and cost ( ). The relative absence of reliable comparative clinical trial data means that treatment decisions when using topical anti‐inflammatory products for eczema are sometimes not evidence‐based.
Defining the most effective and safest topical treatments would ensure that resources are best allocated in eczema management. Commencing safe, effective topical therapy may also reduce the need for repeat primary care visits and secondary care referrals resulting from uncontrolled disease, an inability to start a certain medication, or a lack of confidence in the safety profile of certain medications.
To our knowledge, there are no large, well‐conducted and transparently reported platform trials with multiple topical anti‐inflammatory treatments to compare efficacy and safety. A well‐conducted network meta‐analysis (NMA) is therefore the best method available to make direct and indirect comparisons between the many treatments available for eczema. Our review is especially timely due to the large number of new therapeutics emerging in this area. Without undertaking this planned work, there will likely be confusion surrounding the best topical treatment for eczema, and potentially an associated increase in prescription costs without a positive impact on patient outcomes.

## Objectives
To compare and rank the efficacy and safety of topical anti‐inflammatory treatments for people with eczema using a network meta‐analysis.

## Methods

## Criteria for considering studies for this review

## Types of studies
Randomised controlled trials (RCTs), where individuals or groups are randomised, were included. Trials that did not state that they were randomised, along with trials that were explicitly quasi‐randomised or non‐randomised designs, were excluded. The first phase of cross‐over trials (due to the risk of carry‐over effects to subsequent periods), cluster‐randomised trials and within‐participant trials were included. Trials where participants might be equally likely to receive alternative treatments, so that the transitivity assumption is not violated, were also included.

## Types of participants
Trials of participants with a clinical diagnosis of eczema (i.e. atopic eczema or atopic dermatitis; ) established using diagnostic criteria for eczema (or a modified version of such criteria) or diagnosis by a healthcare professional were included. Participants with clinically infected eczema were not included. There were no restrictions on age, sex, ethnicity, or disease severity.
Specific forms of eczema that were not atopic eczema, such as irritant contact eczema, allergic contact eczema, hand eczema, discoid eczema, asteatotic eczema, frictional eczema, stasis eczema, photosensitive eczema, and seborrhoeic eczema were excluded. Where trials included both eligible and non‐eligible participants (e.g. where some participants have eczema, but others have irritant contact eczema), only trials where data on eligible participants with eczema were available separately were included.

## Types of interventions
The intervention is topical anti‐inflammatory treatments. The following interventions were included.
Topical corticosteroids (TCS), including combinations with antimicrobials (with the caveat that studies where eligibility is limited to clinically infected eczema will not be included) or salicylic acid. TCS were grouped by potency (i.e. mild, moderate, potent, and very potent);
Topical calcineurin inhibitors (TCI), such as tacrolimus and pimecrolimus;
Topical phosphodiesterase IV (PDE‐4) inhibitors, such as crisaborole;
Topical Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors, such as ruxolitinib or delgocitinib;
Topical aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) activators, such as tapinarof;
Any other well‐characterised novel anti‐inflammatory treatments.

In general, eligible interventions are listed in the (BNF) as suitable products for treating eczema, but products not included in the BNF were included if they were clinically relevant. To ensure our review was relevant and focused, trials of historical topical therapies that are no longer used worldwide for managing eczema (such as coal tar), were not included, except for trials of discontinued TCS, for which the potency of the TCS preparation can be inferred.
As topical anti‐inflammatories were assessed, trials assessing: emollients alone, topical antibiotics alone, complementary therapies, topical probiotics, bandaging/wet wraps, systemic treatments, lasers, and phototherapy were not included. Trials where systemic anti‐inflammatory treatments such as dupilumab, methotrexate, ciclosporin, corticosteroids, or phototherapy were used in combination with topical anti‐inflammatory agents were not included. These were excluded because the primary mechanism of action is not anti‐inflammatory, or because the treatment is not topically applied. Trials where participants in both intervention and comparator groups were using oral antihistamines were excluded, as these are not thought to be effective treatments for eczema.
In general, standard, licenced treatment regimens, such as once‐ or twice‐daily application of topical anti‐inflammatory cream, gel, lotion, or ointment to affected skin, were considered. Once‐ or twice‐daily frequency of application and variations in duration of treatment were pooled for meta‐analysis. Trials where anti‐inflammatory treatments are used differently to standard licenced recommendations (e.g., initiated at less than once per day or more than twice per day for TCS and TCI) or for durations of less than one week were excluded. Treatment regimens which start with a standard regimen as per licenced recommendations, but then reduce to less frequent application after the initial daily treatment period, were still included in the review, but the variations in treatment regimens used may impact the Confidence In Network Meta‐Analysis (CINeMA) certainty of evidence assessments.
Trials using the following comparators: different topical anti‐inflammatory treatments, placebo/vehicle/emollient, or no treatment were included. Vehicle is a 'carrier system' for an active pharmaceutical substance, which may also be used on its own as an emollient for dry skin. The primary focus of this review was the NMA since Cochrane Reviews and other systematic reviews are already available for direct comparisons of topical anti‐inflammatory treatments versus placebo or no treatment. Trials where the comparator was the same topical treatment but with a different method of application were excluded, as this has been evaluated for TCS in a separate Cochrane Review ( ). In the NMA, a single control node of 'placebo/vehicle/emollient' was used. 'No treatment' will be included as a separate node, but where trials using 'no treatment' allow emollient in both arms of the trial, the control group was included in the 'placebo/vehicle/emollient' node.
Classifications of potencies of TCS vary between different countries. To standardise potency classifications of TCS in our study, a classification we established as part of a separate Cochrane Review ( ) was used (mild, moderate, potent, or very potent ‐ see ). In brief, we prioritised the potency classification used in the BNF, followed by the ; and, if neither source assigned a potency, relevant guidelines, advice from clinicians in the relevant country, and available trial documents were considered. For TCI, different nodes were assigned for different potencies of tacrolimus and pimecrolimus. For other drug classes, a similar approach was taken, unless the potency classification of different concentrations of the same pharmacological agent was not known to differ. Sensitivity analysis was undertaken where an alternative TCS potency classification was used, and where we used a more pooled approach to potency classification.
 

## Types of outcome measures
Outcomes were identified by the Harmonizing Outcome Measures for Eczema (HOME) initiative as the core outcome domains for eczema treatment trials ( ).
Outcomes were divided into short‐term (1 to 16 weeks after initiation of treatment) and longer‐term (> 16 weeks after initiation of treatment). For outcomes measured at multiple time points, the time point closest to 12 weeks for short‐term and closest to one year for longer‐term outcomes were evaluated. If there were equidistant assessments of the same outcome in the same trial, for example, at eight weeks and 16 weeks, the time point with the lowest risk of bias information was used; if this was equal, the time point with the most complete data was used; and if the time points were equal, the longer outcome was used, since patient and public involvement has indicated an interest in longer‐term outcomes where they are available.

## Primary outcomes
There are two co‐primary outcomes:
Patient‐reported symptoms of eczema. Data were extracted based on the following instruments, in decreasing priority order:
Patient‐Oriented Eczema Measure (POEM) ‐ based on consensus in the HOME initiative ( );
Itch measured using an instrument recommended by HOME – currently the Peak Pruritus‐Numerical Rating Scales (PP‐NRS; );
Patient‐Oriented SCORAD (PO‐SCORAD; );
Itch measured using other instruments such as the Leuven Itch Scale (LIS; ), Itch Severity Scale (ISS; ), or Visual Analogous Scales (VAS);
Self Administered Eczema Area and Severity Index (SA‐EASI; );
Patients’ Global Assessment (PGA; );
Atopic Dermatitis Assessment Measure (ADAM; );
Any other instruments.
Clinician‐reported signs of eczema. Data were extracted based on the following instruments, in decreasing priority order:
Eczema Area and Severity Index (EASI; ) ‐ based on consensus in the HOME initiative ( );
Scoring Atopic Dermatitis (SCORAD; );
Six Area, Six Sign Atopic Dermatitis (SASSAD) severity score ( );
Body Surface Area (BSA) affected;
Any other instruments.

Investigator Global Assessment (IGA) was considered separately from other clinician‐reported signs of eczema, since the construct of IGA as a single global assessment differs from other measures of eczema signs. We are also conscious of the emphasis that some regulatory authorities place on IGA as an outcome separate from other measures of eczema signs. Therefore, IGA data were always extracted, where reported, in addition to other measures of clinician‐reported signs of eczema.
For the NMA, the IGA score was dichotomised (i.e. converted the reported score for each participant into a binary score of clear or almost clear eczema versus moderate or no improvement, measured either alone or as part of a composite measure). That means, for an individual trial, IGA was reported as the number of participants achieving the threshold closest to clear or almost clear eczema. Where there was significant heterogeneity in the NMA of IGA, the impact of these choices was explored, e.g. composite versus non‐composite measures of IGA, as one possible source of heterogeneity in a sensitivity analysis. The characterisation of IGA eczema severity was recorded and the following hierarchy of preferred measures was used:
IGA score indicating clear or almost clear eczema (e.g. a score of 0 or 1) or a comparable construct;
IGA score which uses a composite of clear or almost clear eczema together with a single measure of another aspect of IGA, for example, a specific level of BSA affected or a specific level of improvement/change (such as a 2‐point reduction in IGA score);
IGA severity of eczema measured in another binary way, which is not comparable to ‘clear or almost clear’ versus other;
IGA response of eczema reported as a binary measure;
IGA severity of eczema reported as a continuous measure;
IGA response of eczema reported as a continuous measure.

## Secondary outcomes
There are three secondary outcomes.
Health‐related quality of life. Data were extracted based on the following instruments, in decreasing priority order:
Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI; ), including Children’s DLQI; CDLQI) and Infants' Dermatitis Quality of Life Index (IDQOL);
Quality of Life Index for Atopic Dermatitis (QoLIAD; );
Skindex ( );
Any other disease‐specific health‐related quality of life instrument.
Long‐term control of eczema. Data were extracted based on the following instruments, in decreasing priority order:
Recap of Eczema Control (RECAP; );
Atopic Dermatitis Control Tool (ADCT; );
Any other instruments.
Local adverse effects, namely:
Tolerability events (e.g. application‐site reactions/stinging);
Occurrence of cosmetic effects, including pigmentation changes and skin thinning/atrophy (identified to be of particular concern to people with eczema in relation to TCS through patient and public involvement in protocol development);
Withdrawal from treatment or study due to adverse effects of the intervention.

## Search methods for identification of studies
All relevant RCTs, regardless of language or publication status (published, unpublished, in press, or in progress) were eligible for inclusion. We did not perform a separate search for adverse effects of the target interventions. We considered data on adverse effects from the included studies only.

## Electronic searches
The Cochrane Skin Information Specialist (Liz Doney) searched the following databases, initially up to 8 March 2022, and this was updated by one review author (BC) up to 29 June 2023 for relevant trials with no restriction by date using strategies based on the draft strategy for MEDLINE in our published protocol ( ):
The via the Cochrane Register of Studies (CRS‐Web) using the search strategy in ;
The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) 2023, Issue 2 in the Cochrane Library using the strategy in ;
MEDLINE via Ovid (from 1946 onwards) using the strategy in ; and
Embase via Ovid (from 1974 onwards) using the strategy in .

## Trial registers
The Cochrane Skin Information Specialist also searched the trial registers listed below on 8 March 2022 and Bridget Candy updated this on 19 January 2023 and again on 29 June 2023:
ClinicalTrials.gov (www.clinicaltrials.gov), using the search strategy in ;
World Health Organization (WHO) International Clinical Trials Registry (ICTRP) search platform (www.who.int/trialsearch), using the search strategy in .

## Searching other resources

## Searching reference lists
We examined selected bibliographies of included studies and any relevant systematic reviews identified for further references to potentially eligible studies.

## Correspondence with trialists
In general, trial authors or sponsors of missing data were not contacted, but this was carried out in cases of suspected fraud and in cases where key data points, such as standard deviations, were missing from the published reports and could not be reliably estimated.

## Errata and retractions
The Cochrane Skin Information Specialist ran a specific search to identify errata or retractions related to our included studies, and we examined any relevant retraction statements and errata that were retrieved.

## Data collection and analysis
Cochrane’s Screen4Me workflow, available on the , was used to help assess the search results ( ; ; ; ). Screen4Me comprises three components, of which two were used:
Known assessments – a service that matches records in the search results to records that have already been screened in Cochrane Crowd and have been labelled as 'an RCT' or as 'not an RCT';
The RCT classifier – a machine learning model that distinguishes RCTs from non‐RCTs.

For clarity, the unit of interest for this review is the study. Multiple reports of a single study (full papers, conference abstracts, posters, etc.) were grouped under a single study reference identification.

## Selection of studies
Two authors (of SL, BC, CR, LS, or RB) independently screened all titles and abstracts using to determine whether studies met our inclusion criteria, and all full texts were then examined to confirm suitability for inclusion. Disagreements were resolved by discussion with an experienced systematic review author (RB or AD).
We followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses (PRISMA) for Network Meta‐Analyses (PRISMA‐NMA) extension and we summarised in a PRISMA flow diagram the number of eligible studies identified ( ). This included the number of studies identified but excluded as ineligible, the total number eligible for inclusion in the qualitative synthesis, and the number included in the analysis. Reasons for exclusion were recorded.

## Data extraction and management
A standardised data extraction form was used to extract from published reports the desired outcome data detailed under and . Data were extracted from published reports and clinical trials registries. We did not access clinical study reports from regulators such as the US Food and Drug Administration. The data extraction form was piloted prior to initiation of formal data extraction. Data was extracted from the following descriptors, baseline characteristics, and effect modifiers.
Author and year of publication;
Methods: study design, sample size, duration of trial participation;
Participants: geographical location, community or healthcare setting, inclusion criteria and exclusion criteria, number of individuals randomised, number of withdrawals, baseline characteristics (age, gender, ethnicity, duration of eczema, eczema severity);
Interventions: name of interventions and comparators, frequency, duration, concurrent treatment, site treated (face included/excluded);
Outcomes: primary and secondary outcomes specified and collected, time points reported;
Notes: original language of publication, sponsorship/funding for trial, trial registration, dates trial conducted, notable conflicts of interest of trial authors.

One team member (of SJL, BC, CR, RP, EA, MD, or MF) conducted the data extraction and another team member (SJL or RB) checked it. Disagreements about data extraction or study characteristics were resolved by discussion at a weekly team meeting or by reference to another member of the study team as needed (RB or AD). Two authors (EV or SC) conducted data analyses using Stata version 17 network and mvmeta package and all authors contributed to entering findings into the Cochrane RevMan Web computer software ( ), interpreting data and exploring findings through planned or post hoc sensitivity analyses.
The characteristics of each included study are summarised in , and the approach to managing missing data is detailed in .

## Assessment of risk of bias in included studies
The RoB 2 tool was used to evaluate the risk of bias in included study outcomes ( ). This allows the risk of bias to be evaluated ‘per outcome’ rather than just ‘per study’. Focus was on the outcomes to be included in the Summary of findings tables, and the latest versions of the Microsoft Word templates for parallel‐group trials, the first phase of cross‐over trials, and cluster‐randomised trials, were used, as appropriate (from www.riskofbias.info). Signalling questions and algorithms in the RoB 2 tools and associated guidance were used to make judgements about the risk of bias for each domain. The answers to the full signalling questions are available on an online repository at the time of full review publication. The RoB 2 tool assesses the following domains.
Bias arising from the randomisation process;
Bias due to deviations from intended interventions – here we will be assessing the effect of assignment, and not the effect of adherence;
Bias due to missing outcome data;
Bias in measurement of the outcome;
Bias in the selection of the reported result.

One team member (of SJL, BC, CR, RP, EA, MD, or MF) assessed the risk of bias and another team member (SJL or RB) checked the assessments. Disagreements about risk of bias assessments were resolved by discussion at a weekly team meeting or by reference to another member of the study team as needed (AD). To reach an overall risk of bias judgement for a specific outcome, the following criteria were used.
Low risk of bias ‐ all domains considered low risk for the specific result;
Some concerns ‐ some concerns have been raised in at least one domain for the specific result, but no domains are considered at high risk of bias;
High risk of bias ‐ at least one domain is considered high risk for the specific result or there are some concerns for at least 2 domains.

## Measures of treatment effect

## Pairwise and network meta‐analyses

## Continuous outcomes
For continuous variables, if all studies used the same scale, the mean difference (MD) with an associated 95% confidence interval (CI) was reported using this scale. However, if studies used different scales to measure the continuous outcome (e.g. some studies used EASI and others used SCORAD), which was anticipated, a standardised mean difference (SMD) and the associated 95% CI were used. These were re‐expressed as recommended core outcome measures for eczema trials i.e. POEM and EASI, according to the guidance regarding Cohen’s effect sizes in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( ). The control group scores were mean scores from studies in the same NMA without a high risk of bias. It is not possible to include both change from baseline and follow‐up scores within the same meta‐analysis if the meta‐analysis is reporting SMDs. Therefore, the focus was on follow‐up outcome data rather than change from baseline. Any obvious baseline differences were noted and incorporated into the RoB2 assessment.

## Binary outcomes
For binary outcomes, odds ratios (OR) with 95% CI were calculated. If there were outcomes with zero events or 100% of events in all arms, they were shown on the relevant forest plot but excluded from the statistical meta‐analysis, as these outcomes do not provide any information on relative effects. Where studies contributed zero events or 100% of events in at least one but not all arms, a continuity correction of 0.5 was used ( ).

## Outcomes with continuous and binary data
It is not possible to include both continuous and binary data within the same meta‐analysis. For the outcome ‘eczema signs’, both continuous and binary data were extracted as many studies reported either or both measures; these were analysed in separate pairwise and network meta‐analyses. As most studies measuring IGA reported binary data representing treatment successes, these were extracted in preference to continuous data. For other outcomes, such as ‘eczema symptoms’ or ‘quality of life’, only binary outcome data were extracted for trials where no continuous outcome data were reported that were suitable for data extraction.

## Additional considerations for network meta‐analyses
The NMA enables relative treatment effects and relative treatment rankings to be derived from the extracted data.

## Unit of analysis issues
In parallel‐group RCTs, the unit of analysis is the participant. For trials with differences in the level at which randomisation occurred (e.g. cross‐over trials, cluster‐randomised trials), guidance from the CochraneHandbook was used to consider the potential impact of this when conducting our analysis ( ).

## Cluster‐randomised trials
We planned to include cluster‐randomised trials, but none were identified.

## Cross‐over trials
Cross‐over trials were included, but data were only included from the first phase of the trial due to the risk of carry‐over effects in subsequent periods.

## Within‐participant trials
Within‐participant trials were included but, due to concerns about these trials, a sensitivity analysis was performed excluding these trial designs (see ). When included, paired data were extracted from within‐participant trials where the unit of analysis was the separate body part. For paired data from studies with no suspicion of contamination across intervention sites, analysis was performed using the generic inverse‐variance method after accounting for within‐participant variability ( ). If paired data were not available, attempts were made to estimate the paired data using methods and guidance from the Cochrane Handbook ( ), and correct the variance using the Becker‐Balagtas method ( ). An intraclass correlation coefficient of 0.5 was assumed in all calculations. Findings from within‐participant trials were presented with variance‐adjusted denominators, and denominators were labelled as 'participants' rather than 'sides'. For outcomes which affected the whole body (e.g. systemic adverse events), data were not extracted from within‐participant trials as it was not possible to determine which treatment caused the event.

## Multiple intervention groups
Trials assessing multiple interventions in different arms were included, after judging whether multiple interventions were eligible for inclusion in pairwise meta‐analysis. For pairwise meta‐analysis, we planned to split treatment arms into two or more groups to avoid double‐counting of participants if required (i.e. if more than one treatment comparison was eligible for a trial per analysis). The nature of multi‐arm trials was taken into account by the Stata network and mvmeta commands for network meta‐analyses.
Further details can be found in .

## Dealing with missing data
For continuous outcomes, means and standard deviations were required for meta‐analysis. Where the standard deviation was missing, an attempt was made to calculate the value from the standard error of the mean difference as reported from 95% CIs or P values ( ). Where data were reported as interquartile ranges or ranges, the Cochrane Handbook guidance was followed for estimating standard errors where the underlying data appeared likely to be normally distributed. In general, trial authors or sponsors of missing data were not contacted, but contact was made with one author team to confirm trial eligibility, detailed in the acknowledgements section.
Where numerical data were unavailable and data reported in figures or graphs needed to be extracted, the WebPlotDigitizer tool was used to extract the data ( ).
For both continuous and binary data, in primary analyses and in any sensitivity analyses, the intention‐to‐treat (ITT) principle was followed in the analyses by including data from all participants included in the trials who had outcome data available, irrespective of their compliance with the assigned intervention. Hence, all randomised participants who had data available were included in the analysis, which required measuring all participants’ outcomes. Where outcomes for some participants were missing, we used available case analysis data based on all participants with outcome data available. Where the total number of participants analysed was missing, denominators were imputed in a sensitivity analysis using numbers randomised (see below). The proportion of missing data and reasons for missingness contributed to the RoB 2 evaluation.

## Assessment of heterogeneity
Conceptual (clinical and methodological) and statistical heterogeneity was explored between the included studies. Clinical heterogeneity was explored by assessing differences between studies in the characteristics of included participants, interventions, and outcomes. Methodological variability included assessments of differences in study design and risk of bias between trials. Statistical heterogeneity was quantified within pairwise analyses using the I2 statistic, considering the thresholds defined in the CochraneHandbook for interpretation ( ):
0% to 40%: might not be important;
30% to 60%: may represent moderate heterogeneity;
50% to 90%: may represent substantial heterogeneity;
75% to 100%: considerable heterogeneity.

Where there was substantial or considerable heterogeneity (I2 ≥ 50%), possible sources for heterogeneity were explored including, where appropriate, sensitivity analyses excluding any studies identified as outliers. Heterogeneity was also explored by other sensitivity analyses and subgroup analyses for potential effect modifiers (see and ).

## Assessment of reporting biases
To assess reporting bias, funnel plots were produced. These investigate the relation between study effect size and its precision. The premise is that small studies are more likely to remain unpublished if their results are non‐significant or unfavourable, whereas larger studies get published regardless, leading to funnel‐plot asymmetry ( ). Where validity conditions were met (i.e. low heterogeneity, 10 or more studies, at least one study with significant results, and a ratio of the maximal to minimal variance across studies greater than four ( )), funnel plots were produced and used for visual inspection and Egger's funnel plot asymmetry tests to assess for possible reporting bias at the outcome level. For network meta‐analyses, comparison‐adjusted funnel plots were produced using the netfunnel command in Stata.
Our search strategy also encompassed clinical trial registries, so trials that should have published results but had not done so would be identified, which would aid in our understanding of reporting bias at the whole trial level.

## Data synthesis

## Network meta‐analysis
For all outcomes, where feasible, a full NMA was used to explore all direct and indirect comparisons. The primary NMA was planned to only include those outcome data rated overall as having low risk of bias or some concerns (i.e. excluding data at high risk of bias). However, NMA for low/some concerns risk of bias data was not possible for most outcomes, due to high risk of bias for most information. We thus made a post hoc decision to analyse all available data, rather than just low/some concerns risk of bias data, for the primary analysis.
Networks were produced for the following outcomes.
Clinician‐assessed signs of eczema (continuous, short‐term);
Clinician‐assessed signs of eczema (binary – using instruments other than IGA, short‐term);
Clinician‐assessed signs of eczema (binary ‐ using IGA categorised as clear/almost clear versus not, short‐term);
Patient‐reported symptoms of eczema (binary, short‐term);
Patient‐reported symptoms of eczema (continuous, short‐term);
Safety ‐ application‐site reactions (binary), pigmentation changes (binary), skin thinning/atrophy (binary), withdrawals due to adverse events (binary), all short‐term.

No networks were possible for the HOME‐recommended core outcome domains, long‐term control or HRQoL. It was not possible to produce networks for long‐term assessment of any outcomes.
Interventions which included a combination of topical anti‐inflammatory and additional product(s) that are unlikely to have a direct anti‐inflammatory effect, such as topical antibiotics, were included in the relevant node with the topical anti‐inflammatory alone.
The NMA was performed using a random‐effects model in Stata with the mvmeta command within the network suite of commands for NMA ( ) and the Stata commands for graphing, ranking and reporting network results ( ). A frequentist framework was used. For the whole network, heterogeneity was quantified using the heterogeneity parameter Tau, which is the estimated standard deviation of underlying effects across studies. Contour‐enhanced comparison‐adjusted funnel plots were used to evaluate reporting bias for the NMA ( ). To rank the efficacy for all treatments, Surface Under the Cumulative Ranking (SUCRA) values were used, together with corresponding treatment effect CIs, to indicate the uncertainty of rankings ( ). Rank probabilities of all the groups were estimated by estimating the SUCRA values of each group, ranging from zero to one, where larger SUCRA values indicate a better outcome.

## Assessment of transitivity and consistency in the network meta‐analysis
The treatment network was described and presented graphically. This determined whether NMA was feasible, as severe imbalance in the amount of evidence for each intervention may affect the power and reliability of the overall analysis. The geometry of the network described the number of included interventions by node size and the extent to which there were trials comparing different pairs of interventions by edge width ( ; ). Considerations of heterogeneity and coherence were also important in determining whether synthesising the results across trials in an NMA was justifiable.
The transitivity assumption is that there are no important differences between trials making different comparisons other than the treatments being compared. As such, estimates of an intervention's effect from indirect comparisons should be similar to those generated from direct comparisons. To assess similarities between trials, heterogeneity was assessed as well as the distribution of effect modifiers (baseline eczema severity, treatment duration). Consistency/coherence was assessed between evidence sources (i.e. that the treatment effects from direct and indirect evidence are equivalent); both global and local approaches were used.
To evaluate local consistency, the standard node‐splitting approach was used (also known as SIDE: Separating Indirect from Direct Evidence) and implemented via Stata’s sidesplit command, which is part of the network command suite. This allows the estimates given for each pairwise comparison to be split into direct and indirect components, and the difference between these components can be assessed for incoherence ( ).
To evaluate global design inconsistency within the whole network, the 'design by treatment interaction' model ( ) was used, which estimates a global Chi2 statistic for network coherence. Statistical significance was set at 5%. When interpreting incoherence tests, the inconsistency factors were considered as well as their uncertainty and the impact on clinical implications, based on visual inspection of the 95% CIs of direct and indirect odds ratios and the range of equivalence. Inconsistency factors were eczema severity, age, risk of bias, method of outcome assessment (HOME‐approved versus not HOME‐approved), treatment duration, and trial design (within‐ versus between‐participant comparison).

## Pairwise meta‐analysis
The primary focus of this systematic review was NMA, so the extracted data were only used to create pairwise comparison meta‐analyses where NMA was not possible, for example, for long‐term outcomes. We also described narratively any extracted data which were unsuitable for meta‐analysis. We did not make adjustments for multiple testing, and results were interpreted in totality with the emphasis on estimated intervention effects rather than significance tests.
Pairwise meta‐analysis was performed for each comparison with a random‐effects model using the DerSimonian and Laird method ( ). This adjusts for heterogeneity between studies, which is likely. For dichotomous data, where results are estimated for individual studies with low numbers of events (< 10 in total) or where the total sample size is < 30 participants and a risk ratio is used, the proportion of events in each group together with a P value from a Fisher’s Exact test was reported.

## Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity
Subgroup analyses for each pairwise and network meta‐analysis (all outcomes) were undertaken according to the following characteristics, where reported in sufficient trials:
Site of treatment: studies that included facial application versus studies that did not;
Disease severity: moderate/severe versus mild/moderate disease;
Age: < 12 years versus ≥ 12 years.

How best to treat sensitive sites such as facial skin is of interest to people with eczema and healthcare professionals because of concerns over adverse effects of topical treatments. Milder or more severe eczema, or eczema in different age groups, may also respond differently to different treatments, and the trade‐off of treatment benefits versus harms may be different for these groups.
A statistical test of interaction was used to evaluate the possibility of subgroup effects, and we considered a P value of < 0.05 to indicate a significant interaction. All treatment estimates were accompanied by two‐sided 95% CIs.

## Sensitivity analysis
The following sensitivity analyses were undertaken for outcomes included in the 'Summary of findings' tables (see Summary of findings and assessment of the certainty of the evidence).
Information rated as low risk of bias or 'some concerns', by excluding high risk of bias information. We had originally intended for this to be the primary analysis, with a sensitivity analysis that included high risk of bias data. However, due to a paucity of low or some concerns risk of bias information, we reversed this so that the primary analysis was all information regardless of the risk of bias rating; and the risk of bias sensitivity analysis excluded data with high risk of bias.
Using an alternative TCS potency classification system, the United States 7‐point Classification system (1 = super potent, 2 = potent, 3 = upper mid‐strength, 4 = mid‐strength, 5 = lower mid‐strength, 6 = mild, 7 = least potent), expressed as a consolidated 4‐category scale ( ).
Outcomes reported using the HOME core outcome measurement instruments only. These are currently:
EASI for clinical signs;
POEM or (for individuals old enough to self‐report symptoms) PP‐NRS for symptoms;
DLQI, CDLQI, or IDQoL for quality of life;
RECAP or ADCT for long‐term control.

These additional sensitivity analyses were performed for NMA.
Analysis excluding within‐participant data for the eczema signs and symptoms networks only, due to concerns about the validity of these study designs;
Class‐level sensitivity analysis, by condensing treatment nodes:
TCS combined into mild/moderate and potent/very potent (i.e. 2 nodes);
TCI combined into mild (pimecrolimus 1%/tacrolimus 0.03%) and potent (tacrolimus 1%/3%) (i.e. 2 nodes);
Other classes of topical anti‐inflammatories, included as a single node for each class of medication, i.e. one node for PDE‐4 inhibitors, one node for JAK inhibitors, one node for AHR activators.

Post hoc sensitivity analyses included:
Analysis imputing the number randomised, where no denominator was reported;
Analysis of continuous outcome data using alternative correlation coefficients of 0.25 and 0.75 for within‐participant data or where change from baseline was converted to an end of treatment score.

## Summary of findings and assessment of the certainty of the evidence
As mentioned in , the primary focus of this Cochrane review was the NMA. To assess confidence in the evidence of the network of interventions, the Confidence in NMA (CINeMA) approach was used ( ). Full details of this process are listed in . This was undertaken by two review authors (of EV, SC, or RB), with team meetings to resolve any discrepancies, where necessary. CINeMA software was used for CINeMA assessments of the six domains detailed below.
Within‐study bias (majority rule);
Reporting bias;
Indirectness;
Imprecision;
Heterogeneity;
Incoherence.

We based our overall assessments of confidence on the grading in all the six domains of CINeMA. We started at high confidence and dropped the level of confidence by one step for each domain with major concerns, or for more than one domain with some concerns. However, the possibility that single issues might impact multiple domains was taken into account, to avoid inappropriate multiple downgrades for single NMA issues. Therefore, for major concerns with both within‐study bias and reporting bias, we only downgraded once; and for major concerns with both heterogeneity and incoherence, we also only downgraded once.
'Summary of findings' tables for NMA were performed using the approach recommended by Cochrane and GRADE ( ), with a cautious approach to the interpretation of rankings due to concerns about the reliability of ranking information in summaries of NMA findings. A separate NMA 'summary of findings' table was created for each of the network outcomes for which a network was possible. CINeMA judgements and 'summary of findings' tables were taken into account in relation to the results in both the main analysis and the sensitivity analyses and any subgroup effects or narrative information identified.

## Results

## Description of studies
See: , , and .

## Results of the search
Our search of the six electronic databases (see ) retrieved 12,630 records. Our citation searching identified 16 additional studies that appeared to meet the inclusion criteria. Our screening of the reference lists of the included publications did not reveal additional RCTs. We therefore had a total of 12,646 records. We screened a total of 5031 records after de‐duplication, and excluded 4188 based on titles and abstracts. We obtained the full‐text reports of the remaining 843 records. We excluded 143 studies (in 151 full‐text reports) ( ). We classified 25 studies as awaiting classification ( ), and we identified 95 ongoing studies ( ).
We included 291 trials reported in 590 references. Twenty‐three required translation into English from several languages: Chinese ( ; ; ); Czech ( ; ); Danish ( ); French ( ); German ( ; ; ; ; ; ); Italian ( ; ; ; ); Japanese ( ; ; ; ), Korean ( ); Portuguese ( ); Spanish ( ). For eleven of these, the translation was undertaken previously by the author team of another Cochrane review ( ). For a further description of our screening process, see the study flow diagram ( ).
 

## Included studies

## Design
Most trials were of parallel design (288/291): between‐participant (206) or within‐participant (82). The other three trials were cross‐over within‐participant ( ; ; ). Fifty‐six had more than two treatment arms. There were no cluster‐randomised trials or factorial trials.

## Sample size
Where reported, trials included a total of 45,846 participants (samples ranged from 3 to 2439 participants). See .

## Setting
Where settings were reported, 54 of 274 (19.7%) studies were conducted in more than one country; of these, four involved settings in 10 or more countries ( ; ; ; ).
Using the classification by the World Bank Group for 2023 to 2024 ( ), we found most trials were conducted in high‐income economies (243): including European countries (107); US (105); Canada (35); Japan (24); Australia (14); South Korea (6); Israel (4); New Zealand (3); Chile (1); Hong Kong (1); Israel (1); Singapore (2); Taiwan (1). Of these, nine were also conducted in upper‐middle income countries: South Africa (6); Argentina (1); Bulgaria (1); Brazil (1); China (2); Colombia (1) Ecuador (1); Guatemala (1); Mexico (1); Peru (1); Russia (1); Turkey (1). Two trials were also conducted in lower‐middle income countries: Morocco and Tunisia ( ; ), and another was also conducted in Venezuela, an unclassified economy ( ).
Seventeen trials were conducted exclusively in an upper‐middle income country: China (8); Brazil (2); Mexico (4); Thailand (2); Malaya (1). Twelve were conducted exclusively in lower‐middle income countries: Bangladesh (4), India (5), Iran (2), Egypt (1). It was not possible to report or infer where the remaining 19 trials were conducted.
Most trials (189) were reported or assumed, based on the author's descriptions, to be conducted in secondary‐care settings. Four other studies were specifically conducted in private dermatology clinics ( ; ; ; ). The nature of the study setting was unspecified in the remaining 98 trials.

## Interventions
The most common type of treatment (172) was a topical corticosteroid (TCS). Using the British National Formulary ( ) potency classification followed by the WHO classification ( ), the TCS most commonly evaluated were potent (130); others were mild (60), moderate (55), very potent (20) or more than one potency.
Topical calcineurin inhibitors (TCI) were evaluated in 134 comparisons: pimecrolimus 1% (56); tacrolimus 0.1% (33), tacrolimus 0.03% (31), or other TCI drug/potency.
Topical phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE‐4) inhibitors were evaluated in 55 comparisons: crisaborole (22); difamilast (14); deoxynortryptoquivalone (9); roflumilast (6); cipamfylline 0.15% (2); PF‐07038124 0.01% (1); or AN2898 1% (1).
Topical janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors were evaluated in 30 comparisons: brepocitinib (6); delgocitinib (15); ruxolitinib (8); tofacitinib 2% (1).
Topical aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) activators were evaluated in 10 comparisons: tapinarof 1% (6); tapinarof 0.5% (4), and five comparisons were a combination of TCS with another anti‐inflammatory.
Twenty‐one further comparisons involved another well‐characterised novel anti‐inflammatory treatment: ammonium trichlorotellurate (AS101) (2); the cyclooxygenase inhibitors bendazac (2), suprofen (1), and ufenamate (2); the protein kinase inhibitor CT 327 (1); the polyunsaturated fatty acid DS107 (2); the G protein‐coupled receptor 19 agonist HY209 (2); the selective glucocorticoid receptor agonist mapracorat (3); the multi‐functional anti‐inflammatory drug MRX‐6 ( ) (1); the nitric oxide‐releasing cream SB414 (2); and the nuclear factor of activated T cells inhibitor UR‐1505 (3).
Many comparators/controls were vehicle (170).
The interventions are summarised in .
 Duration of intervention was stated in 280 trials, with a median of three weeks (ranging from 7 days to 5 years). For most trials (260), the intervention duration was less than 16 weeks. Duration of study participation was stated in 272 trials, with a median of three weeks (ranging from 7 days to 5 years). For most trials (252), the duration of participation was less than 16 weeks.

## Participants
Most trials included both younger (aged < 12 years) and older (≥ 12 years) participants (108) (age range 1 month to 70 years), or were restricted to participants aged 12 years or over (111) (range 18 to 85 years). Others were restricted to children up to the age of 12 years (31) (range from 2 months to 12 years). In 41 trials, participant age was not specified.
Two hundred and twelve trials involved both male and female participants, three involved male participants only, and one female only. Seventy‐five studies did not specify whether participants were male or female.
One hundred and ninety‐three studies did not report the ethnicity of participants. Most other trials (76) involved multiple ethnic groups; of these, 67 included participants who were white (where this group often accounted for most participants); other ethnic groups included in trials of multiple ethnic groups were black/African‐American (57), Asian (35), mixed ethnicity (9), Hispanic‐Latino (8) and unknown or other groups (36) including American‐Indian and Pacific Islander. Other trials included only one ethnic group: white (7), Asian (14) (often Japanese), and African‐American (1).
Eighty‐three trials did not report eczema severity in participants at baseline. Ninety‐seven trials only included participants whose eczema was not severe: mild‐to‐moderate eczema (87); mild only (2); moderate only (8). Seventy‐five trials included participants with severe eczema: moderate‐to‐severe (65); moderate‐to‐very‐severe (1); severe only (4); severe‐to‐very‐severe (2); very severe (1); eczema moderate or greater (2). Thirty‐six trials had a broader range of disease severity, covering both non‐severe and non‐mild: mild to severe (7); mild to very severe (4), "multiple categories" (24); up to severe (1).
Most studies did not report the site of eczema (186). Where reported, 49 involved non‐facial eczema, 46 involved both facial and non‐facial, and 10 facial only. Duration of eczema varied widely: in studies where participants both below and over age 12 years were eligible, duration ranged from three months to six years; in studies restricted to participants age 12 years or over, duration ranged from six months to 71 years; in studies with participants aged 12 years or younger, duration ranged from three months to 10 years. Sixty‐four trials did not report the duration of eczema.

## Outcomes
One hundred and twenty‐nine trials used an instrument to measure patient‐reported symptoms of eczema; of these, 11 used the HOME‐recommended instrument 'Patient‐Oriented Eczema Measure' (POEM). One hundred and seventy‐seven trials used an instrument(s) to measure clinician‐reported signsof eczema; of these, 93 used the HOME‐recommended instrument 'Eczema Area and Severity Index' (EASI). Twenty‐four trials used an instrument to measure health‐related quality of life; of these, 12 used the Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI), six used the Children’s DLQI (CDLQI), and two used the Infants' Dermatitis Quality of Life Index (IDQOL). Two trials reported long‐term control of eczema, neither of which used the HOME‐recommended instrument, Recap of Eczema Control.
One hundred and forty‐eight trials reported adverse events; of these, 28 reported skin atrophy.

## Funding sources/conflict of interest
Most trials (199, 68%) were industry‐funded; of these, one was also charity co‐funded. Other trials were supported by government funding (6), university funding (1), or did not specify the funding source (85). Trials which didn't specify a funding source also did not specify whether authors had any conflict of interest (84), or reported no author conflicts of interest (1).

## Excluded studies
A total of 143 studies were excluded (see ). The most common reason for excluding trials was that the study included an ineligible intervention (64). Other reasons were: ineligible comparator (21); same potency TCS (29); did not meet the criteria for eczema diagnosis (18); no relevant outcomes recorded (9); and ineligible study design (2).

## Studies awaiting classification
We identified 25 studies as potentially eligible and awaiting classification ( ). They were not included in the review as they lacked sufficient details to establish their eligibility. Most commonly this was related to a lack of detail about the intervention (n = 23); other reasons were lack of clarity about the comparator group (5) or study design (4).

## Ongoing studies
We identified 95 ongoing studies that appeared to be eligible but had not yet reported any outcomes ( ). Ongoing trials evaluated TCI (31) such as tacrolimus and pimecrolimus; PDE‐4 inhibitors (19); JAK inhibitors (12); TCS (12); AHR activators (3), highly selective S1PR1 agonists (3); and other anti‐inflammatories (15).

## Risk of bias in included studies
 and summarised the ‘Risk of bias’ assessments (by study) for the 272 trials which reported at least one relevant outcome. The risk of bias assessments were similar across outcomes within each trial, so the summary risk of bias assessments represent the outcome with the lowest risk of bias for each study. The overall risk of bias was high for 242 (89.0%), some concerns for 24 (8.8%) and low for 6 (2.2%) trials. Of note, NMA for low risk of bias data was not possible for most outcomes. We thus made a post hoc decision to analyse all available data, rather than just the low risk of bias data, for the primary analyses.
 Our detailed risk of bias assessments, with consensus responses to the signalling questions of the RoB 2 tool, can be accessed in the Open Science Framework (OSF) repository: https://osf.io/6ujga/?view_only=81e37bc34a514a938764fd610a0cb761.

## Domain 1: Randomisation
Two hundred and twenty (80.9%) trials had some concerns either due to lack of detail about the method used to ensure allocation concealment or, for within‐participant studies, due to some potential for contamination. Forty‐seven (17.3%) trials described the method used for generating the allocation sequence and allocation concealment in sufficient detail and were therefore judged as having low risk of bias. Five (1.8%) were judged as at high risk of bias, as the method of sequence generation was not described or was unclear.

## Domain 2: Deviations from intended interventions
One hundred and thirty‐six (50.0%) trials were judged as having low risk of bias. Eighty (29.4%) were judged as at high risk of bias, mainly due to poor reporting of the numbers of randomised participants included in analysis; high numbers excluded from analysis for potentially inappropriate reasons such as adverse effects or treatment changes; and lack of clarity around data analysis in studies with high post‐randomisation losses to follow‐up. The remaining 56 (20.6%) trials were judged as having some concerns, due to uncertainty in relation to blinding of participants/investigators and small numbers of participants inappropriately excluded from analysis.

## Domain 3: Missing outcome data
One hundred and forty‐three (52.6%) trials were judged as having low risk of bias. Thirty (11.0%) trials had some concerns and 99 (36.4%) were at high risk of bias; mainly due to a high proportion of randomised participants not being accounted for in the analysis, or uncertainty about how many participants were used to generate the results presented.

## Domain 4: Measurement of outcome
Two hundred and thirty‐six (86.8%) trials were judged as having low risk of bias, and eight (2.9%) were judged as having some concerns, due to missing information on how the outcome was measured. The remaining 28 (10.3%) trials were judged as having high risk of bias. These were mainly open‐label trials or trials with lack of clarity around blinding procedures, where outcome assessment may have been influenced by knowledge of the intervention received by participants or researchers.

## Domain 5: Selection of reported result
Two hundred and forty (88.2%) trials were judged as having some concerns, mainly due to lack of pre‐trial registration or publicly available trial protocols, making it difficult to determine whether the outcomes were presented based on a prespecified plan. Two (0.7%) trials were considered to be at high risk of bias from selective outcome reporting. For these trials, outcomes were reported in a potentially misleading manner; for example, focusing on early time points where later time points were not significantly different between groups. The remaining 30 (11.0%) trials were judged as being at low risk of bias.

## Effects of interventions
See: ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; 
The effects of interventions are summarised by outcome. Further details of subgroup and sensitivity analyses and narrative information categorised by outcome and intervention are available in the OSF repository. Summary of findings tables and the text describing NMA findings focus on the interventions that were licenced, or likely soon to be licenced at the time of publication in at least one region, for managing eczema or another inflammatory skin condition. These interventions are: TCS; TCI tacrolimus 0.1% and 0.03%, pimecrolimus 1%; JAK inhibitors ruxolitinib 1.5%, delgocitinib 0.25% and delgocitinib 0.5%; PDE‐4 inhibitors crisaborole 2%, roflumilast 0.15%, difamilast 1% and 0.3%; and AHR activator tapinarof 1%.
Outcomes for combination treatments and other topical anti‐inflammatory treatments which are classified as JAK inhibitors, PDE‐4 inhibitors, or others/not specified are included in the OSF repository but are not summarised in this section. For some outcomes and their subgroup/sensitivity analyses, suitable data for NMA were not available. For brevity, when a pre‐planned NMA, subgroup analysis, or sensitivity analysis was not possible, it has not been commented on below. All available data and analyses are summarised in this section.

## Patient‐reported symptoms of eczema (binary)

## Network meta‐analysis
Primary NMA (short‐term) included 40 trials (n = 6482) of TCS, TCI, PDE‐4 inhibitors, JAK inhibitors, an AHR activator, and other interventions ( ). NMA showed most topical anti‐inflammatory treatments to be more effective than vehicle ( ). NMA ranked potent TCS (odds ratio (OR) 5.99, 95% confidence interval (CI) 2.83, 12.69), the TCI tacrolimus 0.1% (OR 6.27, 95% CI 1.19, 32.98), and the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5% (OR 5.64, 95% CI 1.26, 25.25) as most effective ( ). Mild TCS (OR 1.35, 95% CI 0.51, 3.53) and the PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15% (OR 1.03, 95% CI 0.12, 9.23) and crisaborole 2% (OR 1.15, 95% CI 0.17, 7.71) were ranked as least effective. For very potent TCS, mild TCS, tapinarof 1%, crisaborole 2% and roflumilast 0.15%, direct evidence was limited to a single trial with fewer than 100 data points and, for tacrolimus 0.1% and tacrolimus 0.03%, estimates were based on indirect evidence only.
 There was no significant inconsistency (incoherence) for comparisons in this network ( ). However, CIs for effect estimates were wide for most comparisons, and confidence in evidence evaluated using CINeMA was moderate for roflumilast (0.15%) and low for all other interventions. All CINeMA judgements included a downgrade for within‐study bias. Interventions which had wide CIs including both no effect and a clinically significant effect compared with placebo were also downgraded for imprecision (very potent TCS, tacrolimus 0.03%, tapinarof 1%, crisaborole 2%, roflumilast 0.15%, and mild TCS). Potent TCS, tacrolimus 0.1%, ruxolitinib 1.5%, pimecrolimus 1%, and moderate TCS, were downgraded for heterogeneity. Indirectness was an additional concern for mild TCS; however, when considered alongside the extent of within‐study bias and imprecision, a further downgrade was not considered to be needed. A funnel plot of studies with placebo comparators showed no evidence of publication bias ( ).
 

## Subgroup and sensitivity analyses from NMA (short‐term)
NMA at class level (36 trials; n = 6132) ranked potent TCI and potent/very potent TCS as the most effective, with mild/moderate TCS and PDE‐4 inhibitors ranked the least effective. There was no significant inconsistency for comparisons in the class‐level network. Potent TCS had similar effectiveness to potent TCI (OR 0.97, 95% CI 0.21, 4.56) and were more effective than mild TCI (OR 1.77, 95% CI 0.75, 4.14), a difference that was statistically significant for direct evidence but was not seen in the indirect estimate. Potent TCS were more effective than PDE‐4 inhibitors (OR 4.01, 95% CI 1.33, 12.12), based on both direct and indirect evidence. There were no network estimates for TCS versus the AHR activator or JAK inhibitors.
Other subgroup and sensitivity analyses did not identify important differences from the main NMA, and are summarised below.
In the subgroup analysis of trials in people with non‐severe eczema (17 trials; n = 2682), potent TCS and the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5% were ranked as most effective, with mild and moderate TCS and the PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15% and crisaborole 2% ranked as the least effective. There was significant inconsistency for three comparisons. For potent TCS versus pimecrolimus 1%, indirect effects suggest similar effectiveness, but direct evidence suggests potent TCS was more effective than pimecrolimus 1%. For potent TCS versus vehicle, indirect effects suggest greater effectiveness of potent TCS compared with vehicle, compared with direct effects, although both estimates supported effectiveness. For crisaborole 2% versus pimecrolimus 1%, indirect effects suggest pimecrolimus 1% was more effective than crisaborole 2%, but direct evidence suggests similar effectiveness.
In a subgroup analysis of studies in people with severe eczema (11 trials; n = 1892), potent TCS and the TCI tacrolimus 0.1% were ranked as most effective, with mild and moderate TCS and the TCI pimecrolimus 1% ranked as least effective. There was no significant inconsistency for comparisons in this network.
In the subgroup analysis of trials in people with eczema over age 12 years (17 trials; n = 2602), potent TCS, the TCI tacrolimus 0.1% and the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5% were ranked as most effective, with the PDE‐4 inhibitor roflumilast 0.15% ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency for the comparison of potent TCS versus pimecrolimus 1%, where indirect effects suggest similar effectiveness, but direct evidence suggests potent TCS was more effective than pimecrolimus 1%.
In a sensitivity analysis using an alternative classification for TCS potency (42 trials; n = 6571), the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5% and potent and very potent TCS were ranked as most effective and mild TCS, PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15% and crisaborole 2% were ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency between the comparison of moderate TCS versus pimecrolimus 1%, where indirect effects suggest similar effectiveness, but direct evidence suggests moderate TCS was more effective than pimecrolimus 1%.
In the sensitivity analysis excluding within‐participant studies (32 trials; n = 5978), potent TCS, the TCI tacrolimus 0.1% and the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5% ranked as most effective, and PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15% and crisaborole 2% and mild TCS ranked as least effective. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In sensitivity analysis imputing missing denominators (48 trials; n = 8006), the TCI tacrolimus 0.1%, the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5% and potent TCS were ranked as most effective, with mild TCS, PDE‐4 inhibitors crisaborole 2% and roflumilast 0.15% as least effective. There was significant inconsistency between the comparison of potent TCS versus pimecrolimus 1%, where indirect effects suggest similar effectiveness, but direct evidence suggests potent TCS was more effective than pimecrolimus 1%.
In sensitivity analyses with alternative correlation coefficients of 0.25 or 0.75, potent TCS, the TCI tacrolimus 0.1% and the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5% were ranked as most effective. Mild TCS and the PDE‐4 inhibitors crisaborole 2% and roflumilast 0.15% were ranked as least effective. As was the case for the primary analysis, there was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.

## Narrative information
Eight trials involving more than 3452 participants did not have appropriate data for inclusion in NMA. Trials reported significantly increased treatment response compared with vehicle for mild, potent, or very potent TCS, tacrolimus 0.1%, or crisaborole 2%.

## Patient‐reported symptoms of eczema (continuous)

## Network meta‐analysis
Primary NMA (short‐term) included 29 trials (n = 3839) of TCS, TCI, PDE‐4 inhibitors, JAK inhibitors, AHR activators, and other interventions ( ). NMA ranked very potent TCS (SMD ‐1.99, 95% CI ‐3.25, ‐0.73), tacrolimus 0.03% (SMD ‐1.57, 95% CI –2.42, ‐0.72), potent TCS (SMD ‐1.37, 95% CI ‐2.04, ‐0.69) and ruxolitinib 1.5% (SMD ‐1.12, 95% CI ‐1.71, ‐0.53) the highest ( ). The JAK inhibitors delgocitinib 0.5% (SMD ‐0.41, 95% CI ‐1.14, 0.33), tapinarof 1% (SMD ‐0.36, 95% CI ‐1.40, 0.68), delgocitinib 0.25% (SMD ‐0.21, 95% CI ‐0.94, 0.53), and roflumilast 0.15% (SMD ‐0.06, 95% CI ‐1.14, 1.02) were ranked lowest. Direct evidence was limited to single trials with fewer than 100 data points for the TCI tacrolimus 0.03%, tacrolimus 0.03% or 0.1% together, and the PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15% and crisaborole 2%. For very potent TCS, moderate TCS, and tacrolimus 0.1%, the estimate was based on indirect evidence only ( ).
 For all network comparisons, there was no significant difference between direct and indirect estimates ( ). Confidence in evidence evaluated using CINeMA was moderate for potent TCS, mild TCS, tacrolimus 0.03%, and ruxolitinib 1.5%, but low or very low for all other licenced interventions. Data for all interventions was downgraded for within‐study bias. Imprecision, heterogeneity, and incoherence were additional concerns about several interventions. Indirectness was also present for crisaborole 2%. A funnel plot of comparisons with placebo showed no evidence of publication bias ( ).
 

## Subgroup and sensitivity analyses from NMA (short‐term)
NMA at class level (28 trials; n = 3723) ranked potent/very potent TCS, mild TCI and JAK inhibitors as most effective, with mild/moderate TCS and PDE‐4 inhibitors ranked least effective. There was significant inconsistency between the comparison of JAK inhibitors with vehicle, where indirect effects suggest JAK inhibitors were relatively more effective than vehicle, in comparison to the estimates from direct evidence. Potent/very potent TCS had similar effectiveness to potent TCI (SMD 0.44, 95% CI ‐0.48, 1.37) and similar effectiveness to JAK inhibitors (SMD 0.47, 95% CI ‐0.20, 1.14). Mild/moderate TCS were less effective than potent/very potent TCS (SMD ‐0.48, 95% CI ‐0.94, ‐0.02) and had similar effectiveness to mild TCI (SMD ‐0.24, 95% CI ‐0.93, 0.46). There were no network estimates for TCS versus PDE‐4 inhibitors or the AHR activator.
In a subgroup analysis of non‐severe eczema and in sensitivity analysis using HOME‐recommended outcome assessments, tacrolimus 0.03% was no longer ranked as one of the most effective treatments. Subgroup and sensitivity analyses did not identify other important differences from the main NMA, and are summarised below.
In the subgroup analysis of trials in people with non‐severe eczema (12 trials; n = 1508), the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5%, potent TCS, and mild TCS were ranked as most effective, with the PDE‐4 inhibitors difamilast 0.3% and 1% and the TCI pimecrolimus 1% ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency between three comparisons: potent TCS versus mild TCS, mild TCS versus vehicle, and ruxolitinib 1.5% versus placebo. For potent TCS versus mild TCS and for mild TCS versus vehicle, direct evidence suggests greater superiority than indirect evidence. For ruxolitinib 1.5% versus placebo, indirect evidence suggests greater superiority than direct evidence.
In a subgroup analysis of studies in people aged over 12 years (17 trials; n = 2384), the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5% and the TCI pimecrolimus 1% ranked most effective, and potent and moderate TCS were ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency between three comparisons: potent TCS versus moderate TCS, moderate TCS versus vehicle, and ruxolitinib 1.5% versus placebo. For potent TCS versus moderate TCS, indirect evidence suggests greater superiority than direct evidence. For ruxolitinib 1.5% versus placebo, and moderate TCS versus placebo, direct evidence suggests greater superiority than indirect evidence.
In a sensitivity analysis using an alternative classification for TCS potency (26 trials; n = 3432), the TCI tacrolimus 0.03% alone or with 0.1%, very potent TCS, and the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5% were ranked as most effective and PDE‐4 inhibitors difamilast 0.3%, tacrolimus 0.1% and roflumilast 0.15% were ranked as least effective. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this sensitivity analysis.
In a sensitivity analysis of HOME‐recommended outcome assessments (11 trials; n = 1837), potent TCS and the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5% were ranked as most effective and PDE‐4 inhibitors difamilast 0.3% or 1% and the JAK inhibitor delgocitinib 0.5% were ranked as least effective. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this sensitivity analysis.
In a sensitivity analysis excluding within‐participant studies (22 trials; n = 3161), the TCI tacrolimus 0.03% alone or with 0.1%, the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5% and potent TCS were ranked as most effective and the PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15% and difamilast 0.3%, TCI pimecrolimus 1% and moderate TCS were ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency between three comparisons: potent versus moderate TCS, potent TCS versus vehicle, and moderate TCS versus vehicle. For potent TCS versus moderate TCS and potent TCS versus vehicle, indirect evidence suggests greater superiority than direct evidence. For moderate TCS versus vehicle, direct evidence suggests inferiority of moderate TCS.
In sensitivity analysis imputing missing denominators (35 trials, n = 5193), very potent TCS, the TCI tacrolimus 0.03% alone or with 0.1%, and the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5% ranked as most effective. Moderate TCS and the PDE‐4 inhibitors crisaborole 2%, roflumilast 0.15%, and difamilast 0.3% ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency between three comparisons: potent versus moderate TCS, potent TCS versus vehicle, and moderate TCS versus vehicle. For potent TCS versus moderate TCS, indirect evidence suggests greater superiority than direct evidence, whereas the reverse was true for potent TCS versus vehicle.
In the sensitivity analyses with alternative correlation coefficients of 0.25 or 0.75, the TCI tacrolimus 0.03% alone or with 0.1%, and the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5% were ranked as most effective, consistent with the primary analysis. PDE‐4 inhibitors crisaborole 2%, roflumilast 0.15%, difamilast 0.3% and moderate TCS were ranked as least effective. There was still significant inconsistency between potent versus moderate TCS, potent TCS versus vehicle, and moderate TCS versus vehicle.
In a sensitivity analysis excluding , very potent or potent TCS and tacrolimus 0.03% or 0.1% were ranked as most effective. Roflumilast 0.15% was ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency in the comparison of ruxolitinib 1.5% versus vehicle. Indirect evidence suggests greater superiority than direct evidence. There was no significant inconsistency between other comparisons. This sensitivity analysis was undertaken due to the surprisingly high ranking of tacrolimus 0.03%, which persisted despite the exclusion of .
In a sensitivity analysis using four‐week outcome data from in place of eight‐week outcome data, very potent and potent TCS, tacrolimus 0.03% and 0.1% and ruxolitinib 1.5% were ranked as most effective. Delgocitinib 0.5% and 0.25%, tapinarof 1% and roflumilast 0.15% were ranked as least effective. There was no significant inconsistency in this network. This sensitivity analysis was undertaken due to the shorter duration of potent TCS use (4 weeks) compared with ruxolitinib 1.5% use (8 weeks) in .

## Narrative information
Fifty studies (n = 9636) did not have appropriate data for inclusion in NMA. Studies reported significantly reduced eczema symptoms compared with vehicle for moderate or potent TCS, tacrolimus 0.03% or 0.1%, crisaborole 2%, difamilast 0.3% or 1%, roflumilast 0.15%, delgocitinib 0.25%, 0.5%, 1% or 3%, and tapinarof 0.5% or 1%. In active comparator studies, potent TCS was more effective than mild or moderate TCS, tacrolimus 0.03%, and pimecrolimus 1%; outcomes for comparisons between potent TCS and tacrolimus 0.1% were inconsistent between studies. Moderate TCS, tacrolimus 0.03%, and tacrolimus 0.1% were more effective than pimecrolimus 1%, and there was no difference between crisaborole 2% and pimecrolimus 1%.

## Clinician‐reported signs of eczema (binary)

## Network meta‐analysis
Primary NMA (short‐term) included 32 trials (n = 4121) of TCS, TCI, PDE‐4 inhibitors, JAK inhibitors, AHR activator and other interventions ( ). NMA showed most topical anti‐inflammatory treatments to be more effective than vehicle ( ). NMA ranked potent TCS (OR 8.15, 95% CI 4.99, 13.57), the TCI tacrolimus 0.1% (OR 8.06, 95% CI 3.30, 19.67), the JAK inhibitors ruxolitinib 1.5% (OR 7.72, 95% CI 4.92, 12.10) and delgocitinib 0.5% (OR 7.61, 95% CI 3.72, 15.58) as most effective ( ). Mild TCS (OR 2.22, 95% CI 0.74, 6.64), PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15% (OR 2.43, 95% CI 0.88, 6.70) and crisaborole 2% (OR 2.98, 95% CI 1.42, 6.26), and the AHR activator tapinarof 1% (OR 2.45, 95% CI 1.00, 6.02) were ranked as least effective. For tacrolimus 0.1%, moderate TCS, mild TCS and roflumilast 0.15%, direct evidence was limited to a single trial with fewer than 100 observations.
 For the comparison of ruxolitinib 1.5% with placebo there was significant inconsistency with indirect evidence suggesting greater effectiveness than direct evidence ( ). For all other network comparisons, there was no significant difference between direct and indirect estimates. However, confidence intervals for effect estimates were wide for most comparisons. Confidence in evidence evaluated using CINeMA was moderate or high for most licenced interventions but low for tapinarof 1% and for mild TCS. The main reason for CINeMA downgrades was within‐study bias. For the interventions which did not show a statistically significant improvement compared with placebo (roflumilast 0.15%, tapinarof 1%, mild TCS), there were additional downgrades for imprecision; for roflumilast 0.15% and tapinarof 1%, there were also further downgrades for significant heterogeneity. A funnel plot of comparisons with placebo showed no evidence of publication bias ( ).
 

## Subgroup and sensitivity analyses from NMA
Subgroup and sensitivity analyses did not identify important differences from the main NMA, and are summarised narratively below.
NMA at class level (26 trials, n = 3210) ranked potent TCS and JAK inhibitors as most effective, with mild/moderate TCS, mild or potent TCI, PDE‐4 inhibitors and AHR activators ranked least effective. There was significant inconsistency between comparisons of JAK inhibitors with vehicle or potent TCS, where indirect effects suggest JAK inhibitors were relatively less effective than potent TCS and relatively more effective than vehicle, in comparison to the estimates from direct evidence. Potent TCS were more effective than potent TCI (OR 2.47, 95% CI 0.52, 11.64), based on direct evidence only, and potent TCS were more effective than mild TCI (OR 2.01, 95% CI 1.01, 3.97), based on both direct and indirect evidence. Potent TCS were more effective than JAK inhibitors in indirect evidence only (direct evidence OR 0.60, 95% CI 0.26, 1.40; indirect OR 2.08, 95% CI 0.99, 4.38). Potent TCS were also more effective than PDE‐4 inhibitors (OR 2.05, 95% CI 1.03, 4.10), and mild TCI had similar effectiveness to PDE‐4 inhibitors (OR 1.02, 95% CI 0.53, 1.96) based on both direct and indirect evidence. There was no network estimate for TCS versus AHR activator.
In the subgroup analysis of trials in people with non‐severe eczema (14 trials, n = 1802), moderate or potent TCS, the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5% and the PDE‐4 inhibitor difamilast 1% were ranked as most effective, with the PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15% and crisaborole 2% ranked as least effective. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In a subgroup analysis of studies in people with eczema over the age of 12 years (18 trials, n = 2788), the TCI tacrolimus 0.1% and the JAK inhibitors ruxolitinib 1.5% and delgocitinib 0.5% were ranked as most effective, with the PDE‐4 inhibitor roflumilast 0.15% and the AHR activator tapinarof 1% ranked as least effective. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In a sensitivity analysis using an alternative classification for TCS potency (34 trials, n = 4312), potent TCS were ranked as most effective, with the TCI tacrolimus 0.1%, JAK inhibitors ruxolitinib 1.5% and delgocitinib 0.5%, and moderate TCS ranked as effective. The PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15%, crisaborole 2% and difamilast 0.3%, and the AHR activator tapinarof 1% ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency in the comparison of potent versus moderate TCS, where indirect effects suggest similar effectiveness, but direct evidence suggests potent TCS were more effective than moderate TCS.
In a sensitivity analysis limited to the studies reporting the HOME‐recommended outcome measure EASI (19 trials, n = 3498), potent TCS, the TCI tacrolimus 0.1%, the JAK inhibitors ruxolitinib 1.5%, delgocitinib 0.5% and delgocitinib 0.25% ranked as most effective, and PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15% and crisaborole 2%, and AHR activator tapinarof 1% ranked as least effective. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In the sensitivity analysis excluding within‐participant trials (25 trials, n = 3737), moderate and potent TCS, the TCI tacrolimus 0.1%, JAK inhibitors ruxolitinib 1.5% and delgocitinib 0.5% ranked as most effective, and PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15% and crisaborole 2%, and AHR activator tapinarof 1% ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency in the comparison of TCI tacrolimus 0.1% with potent TCS, where indirect effects suggest tacrolimus 0.1% may be more effective than potent TCS, but direct evidence suggests potent TCS may be more effective than tacrolimus 0.1%.
In a sensitivity analysis imputing missing denominators (35 trials, n = 5559), the TCI tacrolimus 0.1%, JAK inhibitors ruxolitinib 1.5%, delgocitinib 0.5% and delgocitinib 0.25% and potent TCS were ranked as most effective, with mild TCS, PDE‐4 inhibitors crisaborole 2%, roflumilast 0.15% and difamilast 0.3%, and AHR activator tapinarof 1% as least effective. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In the sensitivity analyses with alternative correlation coefficients of 0.25 or 0.75, potent TCS, the TCI tacrolimus 0.1%, the JAK inhibitors ruxolitinib 1.5% and delgocitinib 0.5% were ranked as most effective. Mild TCS, PDE‐4 inhibitor roflumilast 0.15% and the AHR activator tapinarof 1% were ranked as least effective. As was the case for the primary analysis, for comparison of ruxolitinib 1.5% with placebo, there was significant inconsistency in these networks.
In a sensitivity analysis using 4‐week outcome data from in place of eight‐week outcome data, potent TCS, tacrolimus 0.1%, ruxolitinib 1.5% and delgocitinib 0.5% were ranked as most effective. Mild TCS, roflumilast 0.15%, tapinarof 1% and crisaborole 2% were ranked as least effective. There was no significant inconsistency in this network. This sensitivity analysis was undertaken due to the shorter duration of potent TCS use (4 weeks) compared with ruxolitinib 1.5% use (8 weeks) in .

## Narrative information
Six parallel‐group trials in 2550 children and one within‐participant trial in eight children and adults with eczema did not have appropriate data for inclusion in NMA. Trials reported significantly increased treatment response compared with vehicle for pimecrolimus 1%, roflumilast 0.15% and tapinarof 1% and also for tacrolimus 0.1% compared with moderate TCS.

## Clinician‐reported signs of eczema (continuous)

## Network meta‐analysis
Primary NMA (short‐term) included 49 trials (n = 5261) of TCS, TCI, PDE‐4 inhibitors, JAK inhibitors, AHR activator and other interventions ( ). NMA showed most topical anti‐inflammatory treatments to be more effective than vehicle (49 trials, n = 5261; ). NMA ranked tacrolimus 0.03% (SMD ‐2.69, 95% CI ‐3.36, ‐2.02) and very potent TCS (SMD ‐1.87, 95% CI ‐2.69, ‐1.05) as most effective ( ). PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15% (SMD ‐0.42, 95% CI ‐1.16, 0.33) and difamilast 0.3% (SMD ‐0.47, 95% CI ‐0.89, ‐0.05), and the AHR activator tapinarof 1% (SMD ‐0.64, 95% CI 1.35, 0.07) were ranked as least effective. For tacrolimus 0.03%, potent TCS and roflumilast 0.15%, direct evidence was limited to a single trial with fewer than 100 observations, and for very potent TCS, the estimate was based on indirect evidence only.
 For the comparison between licenced interventions and vehicle, there was no significant inconsistency ( ). However, confidence intervals for effect estimates were wide for most comparisons, and confidence in the evidence evaluated using CINeMA was low (pimecrolimus 1%, tapniarof 1% and difamilast 0.3%) or moderate for all other licenced interventions. The main reasons for CINeMA downgrades were within‐study bias and heterogeneity. A funnel plot of comparisons with placebo showed no evidence of small study effects or publication bias ( ).
 

## Subgroup and sensitivity analyses from NMA
Most subgroup and sensitivity analyses did not rank tacrolimus 0.03% as amongst the most effective treatments. Subgroup and sensitivity analyses did not identify other important differences from the main NMA, and are summarised below.
NMA at class level (48 trials, n = 5057) ranked mild, potent, and very potent TCS and JAK inhibitors as most effective, with PDE‐4 inhibitors and AHR activators ranked as least effective. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network. Potent/very potent TCS had similar effectiveness to potent TCI (SMD 0.03, 95% CI ‐0.60, 0.65) and mild/moderate TCS were more effective than mild TCI (SMD 0.45, 95% CI ‐0.05, 0.95). Potent or potent/very potent TCS had similar effectiveness to JAK inhibitors (potent TCS, SMD 0.02, 95% CI ‐0.61, 0.65; potent/very potent TCS, SMD 0.04, 95% CI ‐0.49, 0.58). There was no network estimate for TCS versus PDE‐4 inhibitors or TCS versus AHR activators.
In the subgroup analysis of trials in people with non‐facial eczema (15 trials, n = 1184), very potent TCS, pimecrolimus 1%, tacrolimus 0.1% and potent TCS were ranked as most effective, with moderate TCS and the PDE‐4 inhibitors difamilast 0.3%, 1% and crisaborole 2% ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency between multiple comparisons in this network involving tacrolimus 0.1%, moderate TCS and potent TCS.
In the subgroup analysis of studies in people with severe eczema (15 trials, n = 1397), very potent TCS was ranked as most effective, followed by mild TCS, pimecrolimus 1% and tacrolimus 0.1%. Moderate TCS and the JAK inhibitor delgocitinib 0.25% or 0.5% were ranked as least effective. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In the subgroup analysis of trials in people with non‐severe eczema (15 trials, n = 1384), mild TCS, moderate TCS and the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5% were most effective. Tacrolimus 0.1% and the PDE4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15% and difamilast 0.3% were least effective. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In the subgroup analysis of studies in people aged over 12 years (30 trials, n = 3398), very potent TCS and the JAK inhibitors ruxolitinib 1.5% and delgocitinib 0.5% were most effective. PDE‐4 inhibitors difamilast 0.3%, roflumilast 0.15% and JAK inhibitor delgocitinib 0.25% were ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency only in the comparisons of UR 1505 1% with vehicle or tacrolimus 0.1%.
In sensitivity analysis using an alternative classification for TCS potency (44 trials, n = 4781), tacrolimus 0.03%, very potent TCS, potent TCS and ruxolitinib 1.5% were ranked as most effective, with the PDE‐4 inhibitors difamilast 0.3% and 1% and roflumilast 0.15% and the AHR activator tapinarof 1% ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency between the comparison of UR 1505 1% and vehicle or tacrolimus 0.1%, and for tacrolimus 0.1% or pimecrolimus 1% versus moderate TCS or vehicle.
In sensitivity analysis limited to the trials reporting the HOME outcome measure EASI (37 trials, n = 5788), ruxolitinib 1.5%, mild TCS were ranked as most effective, and roflumilast 0.15%, difamilast 0.3% and tapinarof 1% as least effective. There was significant inconsistency in the comparison of crisaborole 2% with potent TCS, but no significant consistency for other comparisons in this network.
In sensitivity analysis excluding within‐participant studies (38 trials, n = 6031), tacrolimus 0.03% and 0.1% and ruxolitinib 1.5% were ranked as most effective. PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15%, difamilast 0.3% and AHR activator tapinarof 1% were ranked as least effective. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In sensitivity analysis imputing missing denominators (61 trials, n = 7413), tacrolimus 0.1% and 0.03%, JAK inhibitors ruxolitinib 1.5% and delgocitinib 0.5% and very potent and potent TCS were ranked as most effective, with mild TCS, PDE‐4 inhibitors crisaborole 2%, roflumilast 0.15% and difamilast 0.3%, and AHR activator tapinarof 1% as least effective. There was significant inconsistency between comparisons of tacrolimus 0.03% with mild TCS and with tacrolimus 0.1%, for potent TCS, for pimecrolimus 1% versus vehicle, and for pimecrolimus 1% versus mild TCS. There was no significant inconsistency between other comparisons in this network.
In sensitivity analyses with alternative correlation coefficients of 0.25 or 0.75, tacrolimus 0.03%, very potent and mild TCS and ruxolitinib 1.5% were ranked as most effective and roflumilast 0.15% and difamilast 0.3% as least effective. There was significant inconsistency between comparisons of UR 1505 1% with vehicle and with tacrolimus 0.1% in these networks, and no significant inconsistency between other comparisons in these networks.
In sensitivity analysis excluding , very potent, potent or mild TCS, ruxolitinib 1.5% and delgocitinib 0.5% were ranked as most effective. Roflumilast 0.15%, difamilast 0.3% and 1% and tapinarof 1% were ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency between comparisons of UR 1505 1% with vehicle and with tacrolimus 0.1% in this network, and no significant inconsistency between other comparisons. This sensitivity analysis was undertaken due to the surprisingly high ranking of tacrolimus 0.03% which was driven by one small study ( ).
In sensitivity analysis using four‐week outcome data from in place of eight‐week outcome data, tacrolimus 0.03% and very potent TCS were ranked as most effective, followed by mild TCS, ruxolitinib 1.5% and potent TCS. Roflumilast 0.15%, difamilast 0.3% and tapinarof 1% were ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency between comparisons of UR 1505 1% with vehicle and with tacrolimus 0.1% in this network, and no significant inconsistency between other comparisons. This sensitivity analysis was undertaken due to the shorter duration of potent TCS use (4 weeks) compared with ruxolitinib 1.5% use (8 weeks) in .

## Narrative information
One hundred studies (n = 22,814) did not have appropriate data for inclusion in NMA. Studies reported significantly reduced eczema signs compared with vehicle for potent or very potent TCS, tacrolimus 0.03% or 0.1%, pimecrolimus 1%, crisaborole 2%, difamilast 0.3% or 1% and tapinarof 1%. Studies reported similar effectiveness of potent TCS and tacrolimus 0.1%, and greater effectiveness of mild/moderate TCS compared with pimecrolimus 1%.

## Investigator Global Assessment

## Network meta‐analysis
Primary NMA (short‐term) included 140 trials (n = 23,383) of TCS, TCI, PDE‐4 inhibitors, JAK inhibitors, an AHR activator and other interventions ( ). NMA showed most topical anti‐inflammatory treatments to be more effective than vehicle ( ). NMA ranked very potent TCS (OR 8.34, 95% CI 4.73, 14.67), potent TCS (OR 5.00, 95% CI 3.80, 6.58), the JAK inhibitors ruxolitinib 1.5% (OR 9.34, 95% CI 4.8, 18.18), delgocitinib 0.5% (OR 10.08, 95% CI 2.65, 38.37) and delgocitinib 0.25% (OR 6.87, 95% CI 1.79, 26.33), and the TCI tacrolimus 0.1% (OR 5.06, 95% CI 3.59, 7.13) as most effective ( ). Mild TCS (OR 1.38, 95% CI 0.94, 2.02), the PDE‐4 inhibitors crisaborole 2% (OR 2.14, 95% CI 1.22, 3.76), roflumilast 0.15% (OR 2.43, 95% CI 0.65, 9.01), difamilast 0.3% (OR 2.56, 95% CI 1.37, 4.78) and difamilast 1% (OR 3.45, 95% CI 1.97, 6.02), and the TCI tacrolimus 0.03% (OR 3.53, 95% CI 2.60, 4.80) and pimecrolimus 1% (OR 2.39, 95% CI 1.78, 3.21) were ranked as least effective. Direct evidence was limited to a single trial with fewer than 100 data points for mild TCS and roflumilast 0.15%.
 There was significant inconsistency between direct and indirect evidence for several clinically important comparisons ( ). For the comparison of moderate TCS versus tacrolimus 0.03%, indirect evidence suggests similar effectiveness, whereas direct evidence suggests moderate TCS was more effective. For mild TCS versus vehicle, indirect evidence suggests mild TCS was more effective, whereas direct evidence suggests similar effectiveness.
 CIs for effect estimates were wide for most comparisons, and confidence in evidence evaluated using CINeMA was low or moderate for most licenced interventions. The main reason for CINeMA downgrades was within‐study bias. Imprecision was a concern for roflumilast 0.15%, but not considered sufficient for a further downgrade in addition to the within‐study bias. Heterogeneity was a concern for crisaborole 2%, difamilast 0.3%, and pimecrolimus 1%, but not sufficient to justify an additional downgrade for difamilast 0.3% and pimecrolimus 1%. Mild TCS had concerns in several CINeMA domains (within‐study bias, imprecision, heterogeneity, and incoherence) which, when taken together, resulted in low confidence. A funnel plot of studies with placebo comparators showed no evidence of publication bias ( ).
 Longer‐term data over 6 to 12 months follow‐up for this outcome were insufficient for NMA, but were sufficient for a pairwise meta‐analysis of pimecrolimus 1% versus vehicle ( ), showing a possible increase in long‐term IGA response with pimecrolimus 1%. There was significant statistical heterogeneity, with one smaller study in adults reporting a significant difference in favour of pimecrolimus 1% at 24 weeks, and three larger studies in children reporting no significant difference between pimecrolimus 1% and vehicle at six to twelve months. Longer‐term data over 12 months follow‐up were available from one trial comparing pimecrolimus 1% versus mild/moderate TCS, which reported more treatment success with mild/moderate TCS than pimecrolimus 1% ( ; OR 1.37, 95% 1.12, 1.69; n = 2045). All five trials were funded by the manufacturer of pimecrolimus 1%.

## Subgroup and sensitivity analyses from NMA
NMA at class level (126 trials, n = 21,414) ranked JAK inhibitors, potent/very potent TCS and potent TCI as most effective, with mild TCI, mild/moderate TCS and PDE‐4 inhibitors ranked least effective. There was significant inconsistency for mild/moderate TCS versus vehicle, where direct effects suggest a greater difference in favour of mild/moderate TCS than indirect evidence. Potent/very potent TCS had similar effectiveness to potent TCI (OR 1.09, 95% CI 0.71, 1.67), and potent/very potent TCS were more effective than mild TCI (OR 1.80, 95% CI 1.27, 2.55). Mild/moderate TCS had similar effectiveness to mild TCI (OR 0.89, 95% CI 0.61, 1.28), and mild/moderate TCS were less effective than potent TCI (OR 0.54, 95% 0.34, 0.84). Potent/very potent TCS were more effective than PDE‐4 inhibitors (OR 2.08, 95% CI 1.30, 3.30), and had similar effectiveness to JAK inhibitors (OR 0.69, 95% CI 0.37, 1.28). There were no network estimates for TCS versus AHR activators.
In other subgroup and sensitivity analyses, mild TCS and/or pimecrolimus 1% were usually ranked amongst the least effective treatments. Subgroup and sensitivity analyses did not identify other important differences from the main NMA, and are summarised below.
In a subgroup analysis of studies in people with non‐facial eczema (21 trials, n = 1873), very potent, potent and moderate TCS were ranked as most effective, with TCI pimecrolimus 1% and mild TCS ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency in the comparison of potent versus moderate TCS, where indirect effects suggest potent TCS were less effective, but direct evidence suggests potent TCS were more effective than moderate TCS. There was also significant inconsistency in the comparison of potent TCS versus placebo, where indirect evidence suggests a greater difference in favour of potent TCS compared with direct evidence.
In a subgroup analysis of trials in people with non‐severe eczema (40 trials, n = 7666), the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5%, moderate TCS and potent TCS were ranked as most effective with mild TCS and crisaborole 2% ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency in the comparison of potent TCS versus pimecrolimus 1%, where indirect effects suggest similar effectiveness, but direct evidence suggests potent TCS were more effective than pimecrolimus 1%.
In the subgroup analysis of studies in people with severe eczema (43 trials, n = 6318), very potent TCS, potent TCS, tacrolimus 0.1% and the JAK inhibitor delgocitinib 0.5% or 0.25% were ranked as most effective, with TCI pimecrolimus 1% and mild TCS ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency between direct and indirect evidence for three comparisons. Indirect effects suggest moderate TCS were more effective than potent; direct effects suggest potent TCS were more effective. Indirect effects suggest tacrolimus 0.03% and moderate TCS were similarly effective; direct effects suggest moderate TCS were more effective. Direct effects suggest a greater difference in effectiveness between tacrolimus 0.03% and vehicle than indirect effects.
In the subgroup analysis of trials in people with eczema over the age of 12 years (54 trials, n = 8715), the JAK inhibitor ruxolitinib 1.5% and very potent TCS were ranked as most effective, with the PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15%, difamilast 0.3% and 1%, pimecrolimus 1% and TCI tacrolimus 0.03% ranked as least effective. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In a subgroup analysis of trials in people with eczema under the age of 12 years (9 trials, n = 3462), potent TCS was ranked as most effective, and mild TCS least effective. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In a sensitivity analysis limited to outcomes at low risk of bias (12 trials, n = 1639), potent TCS and the JAK inhibitors delgocitinib 0.5% and delgocitinib 0.25% were ranked as most effective, and the TCI pimecrolimus 1%, PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15%, difamilast 1% and difamilast 0.3% ranked as least effective. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In a sensitivity analysis using an alternative classification for TCS potency (136 trials, n = 22,764), very potent TCS and the JAK inhibitors delgocitinib 0.5% and ruxolitinib 1.5% were ranked as most effective, and mild TCS, PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15%, difamilast 0.3% and crisaborole 2% and TCI pimecrolimus 1% ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency between direct and indirect evidence for three clinically relevant comparisons. Indirect effects suggest a greater difference in effectiveness in favour of moderate TCS versus mild TCS, and in favour of mild TCS versus vehicle, than direct effects. Direct effects suggest a greater difference in effectiveness in favour of moderate TCS versus vehicle, than indirect effects.
In a sensitivity analysis excluding within‐participant studies (97 trials, n = 20,303), the JAK inhibitors delgocitinib 0.5% and ruxolitinib 1.5% ranked as most effective, and mild TCS, PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15%, crisaborole 2% and difamilast 0.3% ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency between direct and indirect evidence for comparison of tacrolimus 0.03% with moderate TCS. Indirect effects suggest the two interventions were similarly effective, but direct effects suggest moderate TCS was more effective than tacrolimus 0.03%.
In a sensitivity analysis imputing missing denominators (156 trials, n = 27,856), very potent TCS and the JAK inhibitors delgocitinib 0.5% and ruxolitinib 1.5% ranked as most effective, and mild TCS, PDE‐4 inhibitors roflumilast 0.15%, crisaborole 2% and difamilast 0.3% and TCI pimecrolimus 1% ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency between direct and indirect evidence for two clinically relevant comparisons. Direct effects suggest greater effectiveness for moderate TCS versus tacrolimus 0.03%, compared with indirect effects. Indirect effects suggest greater effectiveness for mild TCS versus vehicle, compared with direct effects.
In sensitivity analyses with alternative correlation coefficients of 0.25 or 0.75, very potent TCS and JAK inhibitors ruxolitinib 1.5% and delgocitinib 0.5% were ranked as most effective, consistent with the primary analysis. Mild TCS, PDE‐4 inhibitor crisaborole 2% and TCI pimecrolimus 1% were ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency in these networks across key comparisons, consistent with the primary analyses.
In a sensitivity analysis using four‐week outcome data from in place of eight‐week outcome data, very potent and potent TCS, ruxolitinib 1.5%, delgocitinib 0.5% or 0.25% and tacrolimus 0.1% were ranked as most effective. Mild TCS, crisaborole 2%, pimecrolimus 1% and roflumilast 0.15% were ranked as least effective. There was significant inconsistency between comparisons of mild TCS versus vehicle, where direct effects suggest a greater difference in favour of mild TCS than indirect evidence. There was no significant inconsistency between other comparisons. This sensitivity analysis was undertaken due to the shorter duration of potent TCS use (4 weeks) compared with ruxolitinib 1.5% use (8 weeks) in .

## Narrative information
Twenty‐six trials in more than 3750 participants did not have appropriate data for inclusion in NMA. Trials reported significantly increased treatment response compared with vehicle for mild or potent TCS, tacrolimus 0.03% or 0.1%, pimecrolimus 1%, delgocitinib 0.5%, roflumilast 0.15% and tapinarof 1%, increased treatment response for potent TCS compared with tacrolimus 0.1% and for tacrolimus 0.1% compared with moderate TCS.

## Health‐related quality of life (binary)
NMA was not possible for this outcome. Pairwise meta‐analysis was possible for two studies comparing pimecrolimus 1% versus vehicle ( ), showing a possible improvement in health‐related quality of life with pimecrolimus.

## Narrative information
Twenty‐three other trials (n = 6878) reported this outcome. Trials reported significantly improved health‐related quality of life compared with vehicle for crisaborole 2%, difamilast 1%, tacrolimus 0.03% or 1% and ruxolitinib 1.5%. Findings for pimecrolimus 1% versus vehicle were not consistent, with most trials reporting no difference, but one trial (n = 272) reported improved longer‐term quality of life with pimecrolimus. Active comparator trials suggest potent TCS is more effective than tacrolimus 0.1%.

## Long‐term control
NMA was not possible for this outcome. Pairwise meta‐analysis for two trials comparing pimecrolimus 1% versus vehicle over six to 12 months follow‐up ( ) showed a possible improvement in long‐term control with pimecrolimus. There was no significant difference in a trial of children under 12 years old ( ), but improved long‐term control with pimecrolimus in a trial of adults ( ).

## Local adverse events: application‐site reactions

## Network meta‐analysis
Primary NMA (short‐term) included 83 trials (n = 18,992) of TCS, TCI, PDE‐4 inhibitors, JAK inhibitors, an AHR activator and other interventions ( ). NMA suggests TCI and crisaborole 2% are more likely than vehicle to cause application‐site reactions and TCS less likely ( ). The TCI tacrolimus 0.1% (OR 2.09, 95% CI 1.46, 3.00), tacrolimus 0.03% (OR 1.49, 95% CI 1.08, 2.04), pimecrolimus 1% (OR 1.49, 95% CI 1.05, 2.12), and the PDE‐4 inhibitor crisaborole 2% (OR 2.11, 95% CI 1.19, 3.76) were ranked as most likely to cause local application‐site reactions. NMA ranked TCS as safest: very potent TCS (OR 0.33, 95% CI 0.13, 0.81), potent TCS (OR 0.35, 95% CI 0.22, 0.55), moderate TCS (OR 0.49, 95% CI 0.25, 0.93), and mild TCS (OR 0.51, 95% CI 0.30, 0.85) ( ). CIs were wide, including the possibility of no difference between vehicle and tapinarof 1% or roflumilast 0.15%. For roflumilast 0.15%, direct evidence was limited to a single trial with fewer than 100 participants.
 For the comparison of very potent TCS with potent TCS, there was significant inconsistency, with indirect evidence suggesting greater risk of application‐site reactions with very potent TCS, but no difference seen in direct evidence ( ). For all other network comparisons, there was no significant difference between direct and indirect estimates.
 Confidence in evidence evaluated using CINeMA was low or moderate for all licenced interventions except crisaborole 2%, which was judged high. The main reasons for CINeMA downgrades were within‐study bias and imprecision. Incoherence was a concern for very potent TCS. Heterogeneity was a concern for crisaborole 2% (although not sufficiently to downgrade), tacrolimus 0.03%, pimecrolimus 1%, moderate TCS and mild TCS. A funnel plot of comparisons with placebo showed no evidence of publication bias ( ).
 Longer‐term data for this outcome over 6 to 12 months were insufficient for NMA, but were sufficient for a pairwise meta‐analysis of pimecrolimus 1% versus vehicle ( ), showing no evidence for a long‐term increase in application‐site reactions with pimecrolimus 1%.

## Subgroup and sensitivity analyses from NMA (short‐term)
Subgroup and sensitivity analyses did not identify important differences from the main NMA, and are summarised below.
NMA at class level (75; n = 17,316) ranked JAK inhibitors, TCI and PDE‐4 inhibitors as most likely to cause application‐site reactions and mild/moderate and potent/very potent TCS ranked least likely. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network. Potent/very potent TCS were less likely to cause application‐site reactions than potent TCI (OR 0.17, 95% CI 0.11, 0.25), mild TCI (OR 0.23, 95% CI 0.16, 0.35) and PDE‐4 inhibitors (OR 0.20, 95% CI 0.10, 0.39). Mild/moderate TCS were less likely to cause application‐site reactions than potent TCI (OR 0.24, 95% CI 0.15, 0.38) or mild TCI (OR 0.34, 95% CI 0.22, 0.51).
In a subgroup analysis for non‐facial use (16; n = 2456), very potent TCS, pimecrolimus 1% and tacrolimus 0.1% and 0.03% were ranked as most likely to cause application‐site reactions and mild, moderate, and potent TCS ranked as least likely. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In people with non‐severe eczema (36; n = 6950), tacrolimus 0.1%, crisaborole 2% and pimecrolimus 1% were ranked as most likely to cause application‐site reactions and roflumilast 0.15%, mild TCS, moderate TCS, and potent TCS ranked as least likely. There was significant inconsistency in the comparison of potent TCS versus crisaborole 2%.
In people with severe eczema (28; n = 7466), tacrolimus 0.1% and 0.03%, and pimecrolimus 1% were ranked as most likely to cause application‐site reactions and mild, moderate, and potent TCS ranked as least likely. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In people with eczema over the age of 12 years (38 trials; 8007 participants), tacrolimus 0.1% and 0.03%, and pimecrolimus 1% were ranked as most likely to cause application‐site reactions and mild, moderate, and potent TCS ranked as least likely. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In a sensitivity analysis limited to outcomes at low risk of bias (20; n = 4939), tacrolimus 0.1% and 0.03%, crisaborole 2% and pimecrolimus 1% were ranked as most likely to cause application‐site reactions and roflumilast 0.15%, mild TCS, moderate TCS, and potent TCS ranked least likely. There was significant inconsistency in the comparison of tacrolimus 0.03% versus vehicle with direct evidence indicating increased risk with tacrolimus 0.03%, but indirect evidence was inconclusive.
In a sensitivity analysis using an alternative classification for TCS potency (79; n = 18,717), tacrolimus 0.1% and 0.03%, crisaborole 2% and pimecrolimus 1% were ranked as most likely to cause application‐site reactions and roflumilast 0.15% and all potencies of TCS ranked least likely. There was significant inconsistency in the comparison of very potent versus moderate TCS.
In a sensitivity analysis excluding within‐participant trials (63; n = 17,623), tacrolimus 0.1%, crisaborole 2%, tacrolimus 0.03% and pimecrolimus 1% were ranked as most likely to cause application‐site reactions and roflumilast 0.15%, mild TCS, moderate TCS, and potent TCS ranked least likely. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In sensitivity analyses with alternative correlation coefficients of 0.25 or 0.75, (83; n = 18,956), tacrolimus 0.1% and 0.03%, crisaborole 2% and pimecrolimus 1% were ranked as most likely to cause application‐site reactions than vehicle, consistent with the primary analysis. All potencies of TCS ranked least likely.

## Narrative information
Twenty‐three trials with at least 3118 participants did not have appropriate data for inclusion in NMA. Trials reported low rates of application‐site reactions with mild, moderate, potent and very potent TCS, and PDE‐4 inhibitors but increased application‐site reactions with tacrolimus 0.03%, 0.1%, and pimecrolimus 1% when compared with vehicle or with TCS.

## Local adverse events: pigmentation changes

## Network meta‐analysis
Primary NMA (short‐term) included 8 trials (n = 1786, 3 events) of TCS and a PDE‐4 inhibitor ( ). NMA showed that none of the topical anti‐inflammatory treatments had a significant increase in the odds of pigmentation changes compared to vehicle ( ). All CIs were wide, and direct evidence for potent TCS versus vehicle was limited to a single trial with fewer than 100 participants. For moderate TCS versus vehicle, the effect estimate was based on indirect evidence only ( ). There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network and there were insufficient trials for assessment of publication bias ( ). Confidence in evidence evaluated using CINeMA was low for mild, moderate, and potent TCS, and moderate for crisaborole 2%.
 

## Subgroup and sensitivity analyses from NMA (short‐term)
Sensitivity analysis by class (8; n = 1786) differed from the primary analysis as mild and moderate TCS were collapsed into a single TCS mild/moderate node. The resulting NMA was consistent with the primary analysis, showing that none of the topical anti‐inflammatory treatments had a significant increase in the odds of pigmentation changes compared to vehicle, and there was no significant inconsistency. Sensitivity analysis by class showed all treatments had a comparable, and very low, risk of pigmentation changes.
Other subgroup and sensitivity analyses did not identify important differences from the main NMA. There were trivial numerical differences from the primary analysis in the subgroup analysis of studies in people with non‐severe eczema (8; n = 1768), as there were only 16 participants with severe eczema removed in the latter.

## Narrative information
No narrative information for pigmentation changes was identified.

## Local adverse events: skin thinning/atrophy

## Network meta‐analysis
Primary NMA (short‐term) included 25 trials (n = 3691, 36 events) of TCS, TCI and a combination therapy ( ). NMA showed that none of the topical anti‐inflammatory treatments had a significant increase in the odds of skin thinning compared to vehicle ( ). NMA ranked mild TCS (OR 0.72, 95% CI 0.12, 4.31) and pimecrolimus 1% (OR 0.15, 95% CI 0.01, 1.59) as safest, with potent TCS (OR 0.96, 95% CI 0.21, 4.43) and moderate TCS (OR 0.91, 95% CI 0.16, 5.33) as least safe ( ). All CIs were wide, with direct evidence for moderate TCS, tacrolimus 0.1%, and pimecrolimus 1% limited to single trials with fewer than 100 participants or indirect evidence only. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network ( ). Confidence in evidence evaluated using CINeMA was low for all interventions due to within‐study bias and imprecision. There were insufficient trials for assessment of publication bias.
 Longer‐term data over six to 60 months for this outcome were insufficient for NMA but were reported for TCS versus TCI in three studies ( ), showing an increase in long‐term skin thinning with TCS (6 events in 2044 participants with TCS vs. 0 events in 2025 participants with TCI; P = 0.031, Fisher's exact test). The three included trials evaluated potent TCS versus tacrolimus 0.1% over six months follow‐up ( ), moderate TCS versus pimecrolimus 1% over one year follow‐up ( ), and mild/moderate TCS versus pimecrolimus 1% over five years follow‐up ( ). The three trials were all funded by TCI manufacturers and included treatment of both facial and non‐facial areas affected by eczema. The study authors did not comment on the reversibility of the skin thinning changes identified, nor did they provide details about the location and nature of the changes identified.

## Subgroup and sensitivity analyses from NMA
Subgroup and sensitivity analyses did not identify important differences from the main NMA, and are summarised below.
NMA at class level (22; n = 3417) ranked a combination as most likely to cause skin thinning compared to vehicle, but this was based on indirect evidence only and with wide confidence intervals, which included no effect for all interventions. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network. The odds of skin thinning and related signs did not differ between potent/very potent TCS and potent TCI (OR 1.00, 95% CI 0.02, 59.99) or between mild/moderate TCS and mild TCI (OR 5.06, 95% CI 0.69, 37.27) but confidence intervals were wide.
In a subgroup analysis of studies in people with non‐severe eczema (8; n = 1853), pimecrolimus 1%, moderate TCS, mild TCS and potent TCS were not more likely than vehicle to cause skin thinning, but confidence intervals were wide. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In a subgroup analysis of studies in people with severe eczema (13; n = 1608), very potent and potent TCS were ranked as most likely to cause skin thinning, with mild and moderate TCS ranked as least likely with wide CIs, which included no effect for all interventions. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In a sensitivity analysis using an alternative classification for TCS potency (19; n = 3312), moderate and potent TCS were ranked as most likely to cause skin thinning and roflumilast 0.15%, pimecrolimus 1% and mild TCS ranked as least likely with wide confidence intervals which included no effect for all interventions. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In a sensitivity analysis excluding within‐participant studies (19; n = 3547), very potent and potent TCS were ranked as most likely to cause skin thinning and pimecrolimus 1% and mild TCS ranked as least likely with wide confidence intervals which included no effect for all interventions. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In sensitivity analyses with alternative correlation coefficients of 0.25 or 0.75, 25 trials (n = 3691), findings were similar to the primary analysis.

## Narrative information
Two trials (n = 381) of moderate TCS versus vehicle reported short‐term outcome data which could not be included in the NMA. One case of telangiectasia was reported in a moderate TCS treatment arm.

## Withdrawals due to adverse events

## Network meta‐analysis
Primary NMA (short‐term) included 11 trials (n = 2404) of TCS, TCI, JAK inhibitors, and other interventions ( ). NMA showed that none of the topical anti‐inflammatory treatments had a significant increase in the odds of withdrawal due to adverse effects of the intervention compared to vehicle ( ). NMA ranked potent TCS (OR 0.39, 95% CI 0.04, 4.24) and mild TCS (OR 0.61, 95% CI 0.05, 7.94) as safest and the TCI tacrolimus 0.1% (OR 3.31, 95% CI 0.13, 84.33) and tacrolimus 0.03% (OR 1.92, 95% CI 0.13, 29.09) as least safe; however, CIs were wide and included no effect ( ). Direct evidence for all interventions was limited to single trials in fewer than 100 participants or indirect evidence only, except for moderate TCS and delgocitinib 0.25%. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network ( ).
 Confidence in evidence evaluated using CINeMA was low for all licenced interventions in the network. The main reasons for CINeMA downgrades were within‐study bias and imprecision. Indirectness was also a concern for potent TCS. A funnel plot of comparisons with placebo showed no evidence of small study effects or publication bias ( ).
 

## Subgroup and sensitivity analyses from NMA (short‐term)
Subgroup and sensitivity analyses did not identify important differences from the main NMA, and are summarised below.
NMA at class level (11; n = 2404) ranked mild and potent TCI as most likely to cause withdrawal and potent/very potent TCS ranked least likely, with wide confidence intervals which included no effect. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network. Potent/very potent TCS were associated with lower risk of withdrawal than mild TCI (OR 0.18, 95% CI 0.03, 1.07) and mild/moderate TCS were also associated with lower risk of withdrawal than mild TCI (OR 0.37, 95% CI 0.06, 2.19) but with wide confidence intervals which included no effect.
In a sensitivity analysis using an alternative classification for TCS potency (11; n = 2404), tacrolimus 0.1%, tacrolimus 0.03%, and pimecrolimus 1% were ranked as most likely to cause withdrawal and potent and moderate TCS ranked least likely with wide confidence intervals which included no effect. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In a sensitivity analysis excluding within‐participant studies (9; n = 2278), tacrolimus 0.1%, delgocitinib 0.5%, and delgocitinib 0.25% were ranked as most likely to cause withdrawal and mild and potent TCS ranked least likely with wide confidence intervals which included no effect. There was no significant inconsistency between comparisons in this network.
In sensitivity analyses with alternative correlation coefficients of 0.25 or 0.75, (11; n = 2404), the findings were consistent with the primary analysis and there were no significant inconsistencies for comparisons in this network.

## Narrative information
Six trials (n = 1484) did not have appropriate data for inclusion in NMA or pairwise meta‐analysis. Trials reported low rates of withdrawal due to adverse effects of treatment for mild TCS, pimecrolimus 1%, tacrolimus 0.03%, and tacrolimus 0.1%.

## Discussion

## Summary of main results
This Cochrane review compares topical anti‐inflammatory treatments for eczema. A total of 291 trials and 45,846 participants with eczema were included. The largest NMA synthesising findings on IGA included data from 140 trials (n = 23,383). We identified that treatments from five different classes had the most trial evidence: TCS (n = 172), TCI (n = 134), PDE‐4 inhibitors (n = 55), JAK inhibitors (n = 30), and AhR activators (n = 10). Experimental therapies were also included but our 'Summary of findings' tables focus on treatments that are licenced for use in people with inflammatory skin conditions. The NMA evidence addresses two questions that are relevant for people with eczema, their carers and healthcare practitioners.

## 1. Which topical anti‐inflammatories are the most effective for treating eczema?
For efficacy, we included two domains from the HOME Core Outcome Set: patient‐reported symptoms and clinician‐reported signs. We also included a binary outcome, IGA, as this enabled us to include a large volume of data from older trials of commonly‐used topical anti‐inflammatory treatments, and is required by key regulators. We considered binary and continuous measurements separately. Potent TCS, JAK inhibitors and tacrolimus 0.1% were consistently ranked as amongst the most effective topical anti‐inflammatory treatments for eczema and PDE‐4 inhibitors as amongst the least effective. Mild TCS and tapinarof 1% were ranked amongst the least effective treatments in three of five efficacy networks. Confidence of findings rated using CiNEMA was low to moderate.
Results from NMAs for different efficacy measures were largely consistent but, for NMA of continuous outcomes (clinician‐reported signs and patient‐reported symptoms), tacrolimus 0.03% and mild TCS were ranked amongst the most effective treatments. This is counter‐intuitive, as these interventions are widely believed to be less effective than more potent interventions in the same class (i.e. tacrolimus 0.1% and potent TCS). We identified a single, small study at high risk of bias which accounted for the high ranking of tacrolimus 0.03% ( ) in clinician‐reported signs, but did not appear to account for the high ranking in patient‐reported symptoms. We also note that continuous outcome meta‐analysis can more easily detect potential small study effects than binary outcome measure meta‐analysis ( ). For continuous efficacy outcomes, only 33 to 40% of trials with relevant information could be included in NMA, due to reporting issues where variance or numbers evaluated were not clearly stated. This compares with 82 to 91% for binary efficacy outcomes, meaning that there was less comprehensive incorporation of available evidence in the continuous outcome networks. In the narrative information for both clinician‐reported signs and patient‐reported symptoms, continuous outcomes accounted for the majority of available trials and trial participants reporting these outcomes. For both continuous outcomes, narrative information suggests that mild TCS and tacrolimus 0.03% are less effective than potent TCS or tacrolimus 0.1%.
There was insufficient evidence to conduct NMA for longer‐term efficacy outcomes (> 16 weeks after treatment initiation).

## 2. Which topical anti‐inflammatories are the safest for treating eczema?
Local application‐site reactions, pigmentation changes and skin thinning/atrophy were identified as important concerns during patient and public engagement work for this project. NMA identified an increased risk of application‐site reactions (e.g. burning/stinging) relative to vehicle with tacrolimus 0.1% (moderate confidence), crisaborole 2% (high confidence), tacrolimus 0.03% (low confidence), and pimecrolimus 1% (low confidence). For tacrolimus and pimecrolimus, both TCI, burning/stinging is a well‐recognised adverse effect and is often included in information for people with eczema and their carers. Local site reactions may reduce over time, and cooling the medication has been recommended to mitigate this adverse effect ( ; ). Local application‐site reactions were less common with mild, moderate and potent TCS (all moderate confidence) or very potent TCS (low confidence) than vehicle.
Pigmentation changes can mean hypopigmentation (lighter areas of skin) or hyperpigmentation (darker areas of skin) and are a common consequence of eczematous inflammation. NMA did not identify any evidence for increased hypo‐ or hyperpigmentation with mild, moderate or potent TCS (low confidence) or crisaborole 2% (moderate confidence).
Skin thinning is characterised clinically by translucent skin with prominent vasculature ( ). NMA did not identify any increased risk of skin thinning with mild, moderate, potent or very potent TCS (all low confidence) relative to vehicle during short‐term use (median of 3 weeks). However, when compared to TCI, longer‐term use of mild to potent TCS, over six months to five years, was associated with skin thinning in approximately 1 in 300 people with eczema.

## Overall completeness and applicability of evidence
Overall, the results are applicable to people in higher‐income countries: currently available interventions and report short‐term effects on symptoms, signs and local adverse reactions. More studies are needed of people in low or middle‐income countries, reporting long‐term efficacy and safety outcomes.

## Participants
Our findings are predominantly based on trials conducted in higher‐income countries. Race or ethnicity was only reported in one‐third of studies; however, when it was recorded, a range of racial/ethnic groups were represented in the trials. Where eczema severity was reported, most trials included people with eczema that was not severe, or with a range of eczema severity. This reflects the general population where most people have mild eczema. Age was reported in most trials, but only about one in ten trials focussed on participants less than 12 years. Eczema prevalence peaks in the first two years of life, often remitting in early childhood, so the low number of paediatric studies is an under‐representation of young children in eczema treatment trials ( ).

## Interventions and comparators
We identified a large number of trials of TCS and TCI, with fewer clinical trials of PDE‐4 inhibitors, JAK inhibitors and tapinarof. This reflects the currently available treatments and the treatments most commonly used to gain control of eczema flares. As some TCS evaluated are no longer marketed, and the availability of individual TCS products differs internationally, we grouped TCS by potency to consolidate nodes and improve generalisability of the findings. There was a relative lack of active comparator trials, especially for pimecrolimus, where there were over 20 trials comparing pimecrolimus 1% to vehicle without another active comparator arm. This is consistent with previous literature highlighting the lack of active comparator trials in topical eczema treatments, and was one of the reasons for conducting this NMA ( ).

## Efficacy outcomes
Trials more often reported clinician‐evaluated signs of eczema than patient‐reported symptoms of eczema, and the most commonly reported clinician‐evaluated sign was the IGA. Consistent with a previous systematic review of IGA ( ), the scales and construct of reported IGA outcomes varied. We anticipated this variation, so developed a hierarchy of preference for extracting IGA data in our study protocol, such that most IGA data extracted in this review represented 'clear/almost clear' on a 5 or 6 point IGA scale. Trials should focus on patient‐important outcomes such as patient‐reported symptoms, in order to give consumers and healthcare practitioners confidence that treatments are impacting on symptoms. Less than 10% of trials measuring patient‐reported symptoms reported POEM or NRS‐11, which are the HOME‐recommended instruments in this domain. Whilst it is encouraging that 44% of trials had some data on patient‐reported symptoms, trials often relied on a 10‐point visual analogue scale of pruritus. Future trials should ensure that the validated, HOME‐recommended instruments are used for measuring patient‐reported symptoms. Half of trials measuring clinician‐reported signs reported the HOME‐recommended instrument EASI, indicating the now widespread use of validated instruments in this domain. The HOME Core Outcome Set also recommends measuring quality of life and long‐term control of eczema. However, only 8% of trials reported data on quality of life and long‐term control was only reported in two trials, neither using the HOME‐recommended instruments RECAP nor ADCT ( ). This reflects the relatively new addition of these outcome domains to HOME, and hopefully subsequent trials will measure and report these more consistently.
Most of the included trials were short term and NMA was not possible for longer‐term outcomes. While anti‐inflammatories are frequently used to get control of eczema flares, eczema is often a long‐term condition and long‐term outcomes from intermittent use of anti‐inflammatories are of high interest to people affected by eczema.

## Safety outcomes
Adverse events of interest to consumers were not clearly reported in most trials. Application‐site reactions were reported in over one‐third of trials, but pigmentation changes attributed to interventions were reported in only eight trials, and skin thinning in less than 10% of trials. Long‐term safety, and local adverse effects related to facial application of topical anti‐inflammatories were rarely reported. Although study withdrawal was often reported, withdrawal from treatment or study due to an adverse effect of a study intervention was only reported in 17 studies.

## Quality of the evidence

## CINeMA: Within‐study bias
Almost all information was rated down for within‐study bias, due to significant risk of bias issues in most trial outcomes. The main within‐study bias issues identified were unclear description of allocation concealment; lack of pre‐trial registration or publicly available trial protocol; and reporting issues around participants excluded from analysis or unavailable due to missing outcome data. While some of these issues were more common in older studies, where guidance for reporting clinical trials was less well‐developed, the prevalence of reporting issues in modern trials continues to be high.

## CINeMA: Reporting bias
We did not identify significant evidence of study‐level reporting bias through assessment of potential small study effects using funnel plot and Egger's test assessments, or through evaluation of clinical trial registrations listed under ongoing studies. No downgrades were therefore made for this CINeMA domain.

## CINeMA: Indirectness
There were concerns about indirectness for binary patient‐reported symptoms (mild TCS), continuous clinician signs (crisaborole) and for pigmentation changes (moderate and potent TCS) but no other downgrades were made for this CINeMA domain. Where most evidence contributing to an effect estimate was derived from within‐participant trials, evidence was downgraded for indirectness.

## CINeMA: Imprecision
Downgrading for imprecision was made when the 95% confidence intervals extended beyond the range of equivalence on both sides of the no effect line, so that the estimate was compatible with clinically important effects in both directions. Downgrades for imprecision were common, especially for patient‐reported symptoms, pigmentation changes, atrophy and withdrawal outcomes, where numbers of trials and participants were relatively sparse, leading to wide confidence intervals. Ranges of equivalence were defined using published minimally clinically important differences for specific instruments such as EASI (6.6) and POEM (3.4) ( ) and OR 0.8 to 1.2 for binary outcomes.

## CINeMA: Heterogeneity
Downgrades for heterogeneity were made for at least one intervention in most networks, but were especially common in the patient‐reported symptoms and application‐site reactions networks. These downgrades were made when confidence intervals and prediction intervals led to different conclusions with an important impact on decision‐making.

## CINeMA: Incoherence
We used both global (design by treatment interaction) and local (node‐splitting) approaches to evaluate incoherence, the agreement between direct and indirect evidence informing network effect estimates. Downgrades for incoherence were not commonly made, and were most common in the two continuous outcome efficacy networks ‐ patient‐reported symptoms and clinician‐reported signs.

## Potential biases in the review process
This was a comprehensive Cochrane systematic review with NMA of topical anti‐inflammatory treatments for eczema. Although the search strategy was comprehensive and was cross‐checked with another recent NMA on this topic ( ) for completeness, we did not conduct a separate search for adverse effects and the review was limited to randomised controlled trials. Systematic reviews of randomised controlled trials may not be the best way to identify adverse effects of interventions, and observational studies including pharmacovigilance databases have an important role. We also did not contact authors/sponsors of trials to request original data or query methodological details, due to the large number of trials conducted over several decades and the resource limitations of the project team.
Although we extracted data for all concentrations of all anti‐inflammatory treatments, we did not use unlicenced concentrations in analyses, where data for a licenced concentration was available. We also did not evaluate topical treatments without a well‐characterised mechanism of action, and we excluded topical anti‐inflammatory treatments which have either been evaluated elsewhere and found not to be effective for managing eczema ( ) or have anti‐inflammatory mechanisms which are not likely to be relevant to the inflammation associated with eczema. Such exclusions may, or may not, importantly influence all effect estimates in each network, and evidence certainty.
As with all systematic reviews, we were constrained by the availability and reporting quality of clinical trials in this field. Concerns about selective reporting were a common issue, highlighted in the risk of bias assessments, and an absence of relevant outcome information often limited opportunities for meta‐analysis. This was most notable for the continuous outcomes, where the majority of trials and participants could not be included in NMA. We did not access clinical study reports from regulators such as the US Food and Drug Administration, which can be a useful source of safety data. While a significant proportion of studies reported EASI scores, core outcome measures recommended by HOME were not commonly reported in other domains. This meant we had to rely on pooled assessments of heterogeneous measures of similar outcomes for primary meta‐analyses. In general, long‐term outcomes, which are of most interest to patients and their carers, were rarely reported. No NMA was possible in this systematic review for long‐term outcomes. The limited longer‐term safety data available for TCS treatments has also been discussed elsewhere ( ). The lack of comprehensive long‐term outcome data limits any conclusions that can be drawn about the effectiveness or safety of topical anti‐inflammatory treatments for eczema.
NMA relied on an assumption of transitivity, and it is possible that we failed to identify relevant impacts of transitivity because eczema severity was not reported consistently across studies and a range of eczema severities was included in the trials, from mild to very severe.
Finally, data extraction and risk of bias assessment were not undertaken in duplicate, although all primary data extractions and risk of bias assessments were thoroughly reviewed, checked and revised, where necessary, by a second reviewer. Optimal practice is to have full duplicate data extraction and risk of bias assessments, which we were unable to do due to resource limitations.

## Agreements and disagreements with other studies or reviews

## Comparison with other NMAs
A previous network meta‐analysis of topical treatments for eczema included evaluation of the safety and effectiveness of topical anti‐inflammatory treatments ( ). Key similarities and differences between the previous NMA and our work are summarised in . Search strategies were similar, but there were differences in inclusion criteria, approaches to data extraction and pooling, risk of bias assessment, rating the certainty of evidence, and approaches to summarising overall results. This has led to differences in effectiveness rankings and classification, although both reviews concluded that TCS and potent TCI are amongst the most effective treatments. We also focussed on different safety outcomes in the previous review. For example, local application‐site reactions were prioritised in this review, and overall adverse event rates and infections were prioritised in . This difference is explained by differences in the outcomes of each group's patient and public involvement work. Differences in patient and public priorities for safety may reflect cultural differences between populations surveyed, or differences in awareness of potential issues associated with commonly‐used topical eczema treatments in different settings. The safety outcomes that we focussed on have been highlighted as common concerns in relation to TCS ( ), namely site reactions, pigmentation changes, and skin atrophy. addressed concerns which are more commonly associated with TCI and JAK inhibitors, such as infection and cancer risk ( ; ; ). Of note, did not explicitly address our prioritised safety outcomes, but they were subsequently addressed during the preparation of a linked guideline ( ).
 Both reviews found high‐potency TCS and tacrolimus 0.1% were likely to be amongst the most effective short‐term treatments for improving eczema severity. also included studies of topical anti‐inflammatory treatments for maintaining control of eczema, without an initial randomised daily treatment regimen. They found that moderate potency TCS and TCI were the most studied and amongst the most effective treatments for maintaining control of eczema.
Pimecrolimus 1% was either mid‐ranked or amongst the least effective treatments in our review, and was similarly classified in for inducing remission. The short‐term outcome data from both reviews is in agreement that pimecrolimus 1% is a relatively weak topical anti‐inflammatory treatment for induction of remission in people with eczema. Systemic calcineurin inhibitors carry safety concerns around malignancy, especially lymphoma. Malignancy and lymphoma risk associated with TCI were not evaluated in , but have been evaluated elsewhere ( ).
We found evidence that JAK inhibitors may be amongst the most effective short‐term treatments for eczema, with low‐to‐moderate confidence. found moderate‐to‐high‐certainty evidence for topical ruxolitinib and topical delgocitinib JAK inhibitors to have intermediate effectiveness for clinician‐evaluated eczema signs and patient‐reported itch. This small difference in ranking is likely to relate to differences in analytical approaches and the totality of the evidence included in the networks. For example, we limited analyses to licenced potencies of drugs and pooled different potencies of the same drug if they showed similar treatment effects. The treatment arms with lower potencies of ruxolitinib in general showed slightly lower treatment effects than the 1.5% concentration in the ruxolitinib trials ( ; ; ). A second potential explanation for our slightly higher ranking of ruxolitinib is the potency classification of triamcinolone 0.1% cream, used as an active comparator up to four weeks in . Triamcinolone 0.1% cream was classified as potent in our primary analysis, but is classified as lower potency in the classifications used by . Triamcinolone 0.1% cream is classified as lower mid‐strength (5) in the 7‐point United States classification system and moderate in the shorter four‐point United States classification. By classifying triamcinolone 0.1% cream as potent, we may have spuriously increased the relative ranking of ruxolitinib, since other TCS classified as potent TCS in the networks may be more potent than triamcinolone 0.1% cream. However, sensitivity analyses using the four‐point US system showed a similar ranking of ruxolitinib as in the primary analysis. Similarly, a sensitivity analysis using four‐week outcome data from in place of eight‐week outcome data for these outcomes did not materially change the rankings. This was undertaken because there was a difference in treatment duration between interventions in , with eight weeks' treatment for ruxolitinib but only four weeks' treatment for triamcinolone. Finally, the two reviews had different approaches to inclusion of data in NMA. We were careful not to include data in NMA unless the denominators were clearly stated, due to the risk of exaggerating selectively reported data by imputing denominators. This may partly explain our inclusion of a lower proportion of the potentially eligible outcome data in NMA compared with , especially for continuous outcome measures. However, we undertook sensitivity analyses imputing missing denominators and both these and the summarised narrative data were consistent with the primary NMA findings. included a higher proportion of eligible studies and participants in NMA, and also combined continuous and binary measures of the same outcome in each NMA, resulting in larger NMA networks for each comparable outcome. Taken together, these differences are likely to explain the small difference in ruxolitinib rankings between the two NMAs, for comparable outcomes.
TCS had good safety profiles in both reviews, with JAK inhibitors also ranked as likely to reduce discontinuation due to adverse events amongst the short‐term studies in . Systemic JAK inhibitors carry safety concerns around increased risk of serious infection, thrombosis or cytopenias, and overall mortality, which were not evaluated in our review ( ). Differences in other safety outcomes are accounted for by a focus on different outcome measures of safety between the two reviews, in turn accounted for by different patient and caregiver priorities identified by each review group. Currently, there are no agreed core outcome measures for adverse events in eczema trials.
Overall, it is reassuring that despite potentially important differences in inclusion criteria, analytical approach and outcome priorities, most findings are consistent between these first two NMAs of topical anti‐inflammatory treatments for eczema.

## Comparison with other pairwise meta‐analyses
The increased effectiveness of potent TCS relative to mild TCS has been shown in a previous review comparing different strategies for using TCS to treat eczema; however, there was insufficient evidence that potent TCS were any more or less effective than moderate or very potent TCS, respectively ( ). The low rate of skin thinning with longer‐term TCS found in the present NMA also confirms the findings of and a systematic review of the long term safety of topical corticosteroids ( ). While skin thinning is a well‐known adverse effect of prolonged, inappropriate/continuous TCS use, the evidence from clinical trials suggests that skin thinning is rare. None of the trials commented on the location or reversibility of identified cases of skin thinning.
In our NMA, the TCI tacrolimus 0.1% ranked favourably across patient‐reported and clinician‐reported outcomes, especially the binary data analyses, with comparable effectiveness to potent TCS relative to vehicle. The findings for pimecrolimus 1% and tacrolimus 0.03% suggest lower effectiveness than potent TCS but similar to mild/moderate TCS. These findings are consistent with a previous systematic review which reported similar effectiveness between TCI and TCS ( ). We found TCI were most likely to cause application‐site reactions but did not increase skin thinning or withdrawal rates, which is also consistent with the findings of .
Two previous systematic reviews reported that topical JAK inhibitors were associated with significant improvements in effectiveness relative to placebo ( ; ). Tsai and colleagues also found that JAK inhibitors were associated with a significant increase in the number of treatment‐emergent adverse events and adverse events leading to discontinuation. However, the nature of these events was not reported, so we cannot compare those findings to our data focussed on adverse events of particular interest to patients.
A systematic review of the effectiveness and safety of PDE‐4 inhibitors showed that, in mild‐to‐moderate eczema, they had favourable effectiveness compared to vehicle ( ). In considering the relative effectiveness of all topical anti‐inflammatories for eczema, this NMA ranked PDE‐4 inhibitors, such as crisaborole 2%, as amongst the least effective treatments across outcomes, and less favourable than more conventional treatments such as potent TCS. Whilst there was no difference in withdrawals due to adverse events between PDE‐4 inhibitors and vehicle, there were significantly more treatment‐related events overall, most commonly application‐site reactions. Yang and colleagues concluded that PDE‐4 inhibitors are much safer than TCS and TCI for the treatment of eczema; in contrast, our review found TCI and crisaborole increase application‐site reactions, whereas TCS do not. A second systematic review of the safety of PDE‐4 inhibitors evaluated treatment‐emergent adverse events overall, application‐site pain, application‐site pruritus, and exacerbation of eczema ( ). PDE‐4 inhibitors did not significantly differ from vehicle for any outcome. The difference in findings may be explained by our approach of evaluating specific treatment‐related local adverse events of interest to patients, taking care to avoid counting events that were not directly related to the intervention.
To our knowledge, there have been no pairwise systematic reviews of tapinarof for people with eczema.

## Comparison with guideline recommendations
Our findings are largely in agreement with current guidelines for eczema treatment, when recognising that topical JAK inhibitors are not yet approved for use in Europe. European Guidelines recommend TCS and TCI ( ); Japanese guidelines recommend TCS, topical tacrolimus, and topical JAK inhibitor (delgocitinib 0.25‐0.5%) ( ); and one recent US guideline ( ) recommends TCS and TCI. The recent US guideline also conditionally recommends against ruxolitinib 1.5% as first‐line therapy, partly due to low‐certainty class‐level safety concerns, and conditionally recommends crisaborole 2% for mild/moderate eczema for those who prefer not to use TCS or TCI ( ). Another recent US guideline, , strongly recommends TCS, TCI, topical JAK inhibitors and PDE‐4 inhibitors for managing eczema. In both our NMA and the previous NMA, PDE‐4 inhibitors had a lower efficacy than TCS, TCI, and topical JAK inhibitors.

## Authors' conclusions

## Implications for practice
Our Cochrane review identified, with low‐to‐moderate confidence, that the most efficacious topical anti‐inflammatory treatments for eczema are potent and very potent TCS, potent TCI (tacrolimus 0.1%), and a topical JAK inhibitor (ruxolitinib 1.5%).
The choice of topical treatment for eczema involves many nuances specific to individual cases, including body site and severity, and thus our NMA cannot universally recommend a single treatment. Important decision‐making considerations that we did not evaluate in this review include patient and carer preferences, and cost. As mentioned in , there is a huge difference in cost between TCS and the newer, more expensive topical anti‐inflammatory treatments ( ). For example, the cost of TCI is more than ten times greater than potent topical corticosteroids in the UK and the US. Other considerations that might also be important for clinical decision‐making include anatomical site, patient age, and eczema severity and chronicity. For example, the small risk of skin thinning associated with TCS may be much more relevant in areas such as the central face area, where some patients and carers might place a high value on avoiding skin thinning ( ). In contrast, for eczema on the palms, soles, or at eczematous sites that are thickened and lichenified, prolonged TCS treatment may be more acceptable to some patients and carers where there is a need to restore the abnormally thickened skin to a more normal look and feel. Licencing status is also relevant to clinical decision‐making. For example, the TCI pimecrolimus 1% is approved from three months of age, tacrolimus 0.03% from two years of age, and tacrolimus 0.1% from 16  years in Europe ( ). Approval ages are similar in Canada and the US, except for pimecrolimus 1%, which is approved from 2 years of age only in the US. Topical ruxolitinib 1.5% is approved from age 12 years in the US, but approval is limited to short‐term and non‐continuous chronic treatment of less than 20% of body surface area ( ) due to concerns about systemic absorption and consequent adverse effects.
Safety considerations are important for clinical decision‐making and patient/carer preference. The safety profile of TCS is a major patient concern, and this phenomenon has been termed “steroid phobia” or “corticophobia”( ; ; ). Historically, steroid phobia centred on skin thinning and systemic absorption causing adrenal suppression ( ) but the most common concern is now reported to be topical steroid withdrawal, also termed topical steroid addiction ( ; ; ). Steroid phobia is important because TCS is the most commonly used topical anti‐inflammatory treatment for eczema ( ). In this review, we found reassuring evidence that short‐term use of mild to very potent TCS may not be associated with increased skin thinning. Longer‐term TCS use was associated with a small risk of skin thinning, of uncertain clinical significance due to limited reporting details. This is consistent with previous understanding that prolonged continuous application of TCS, especially potent TCS, can cause skin thinning ( ; ; ). Such studies suggest that skin thinning is initially reversible, but becomes irreversible if TCS use continues ( ).
A caveat to our safety data is that data were collected in the setting of an RCT, where the amount of medication provided is typically controlled and the time period for evaluating adverse effects is typically short term. RCTs are often underpowered for detecting rare but potentially important adverse effects. We were unable to evaluate the phenomenon of topical corticosteroid withdrawal in this Cochrane review, but this is thought to occur after the prolonged application of moderate‐to‐high potency TCS ( ). In one systematic review of more than 1000 participants with topical steroid withdrawal, TCS had been used daily for more than six months on the face or genitalia in more than 90% of participants ( ). A recent case series similarly reported that 92% of patients had used mid‐ to high‐potency TCS for more than three months continually ( ). The contrast between safety with controlled TCS use in RCTs and the inappropriate treatment regimens associated with adverse effects of TCS highlights a need for clear messaging on appropriate TCS use ( ; ). Potency is not clearly understood by many patients, and clear labelling of potency on TCS is not provided with medications, even though many patients believe this would be helpful ( ).
Other topical therapies may serve as useful adjuncts for eczema, particularly at sensitive sites. TCI do not appear to cause skin thinning, consistent with previous literature ( ). However, together with crisaborole 2%, we found that TCI increase local application‐site reactions. In some countries, such as the US, both TCI and topical JAK inhibitors also have black box warnings for potential cancer risk ( ; ). These warnings for topical ruxolitinib 1.5% are partly related to adverse effects of other JAK inhibitors used orally to treat other inflammatory conditions ( ). In some countries, such as Canada, TCI do not carry a warning about cancer risk. We were not able to assess cancer risk in this review. Other reviews which include observational studies have explored cancer risk related to topical anti‐inflammatory treatments. Topical calcineurin inhibitors are associated with increased cancer risk in animal models, and increased lymphoma risk when used orally after organ transplants in humans. Lymphoma risk with TCI was found to be very small in one systematic review ( ), and a subsequent, more comprehensive systematic review found moderate certainty that TCI for eczema did not cause an important increase in cancer risk, either all‐cause cancer or specific cancers such as lymphoma ( ; ; ; ). For topical JAK inhibitors, PDE‐4 inhibitors, and AHR activators, long‐term safety is uncertain due to limited available data, especially for the inappropriately higher, more prolonged dosing than those used outside clinical trials.

## Implications for research
We identified a number of research needs in this field. These include increased transparency and independence, reporting of core outcome instruments, generalisability of study populations, evaluation of long‐term outcomes, consistent adverse event reporting, and active comparator trials.
We identified significant issues of potential bias due to selective reporting and an almost complete absence of clinical trials undertaken by independent groups without a conflict of interest in relation to manufacturers or distributors of topical anti‐inflammatory products. Transparency and independence of clinical trial teams are important ways to optimise the credibility and utility of clinical trials. Information from independent studies would also be valuable regarding long‐term safety issues, such as the risk of skin thinning from TCS use for eczema, and this may be best achieved through prospective cohort studies. To our knowledge, this is the second completed NMA of topical anti‐inflammatory treatments for eczema ( ). Whilst some degree of replication with another high‐quality review can be useful, updating or replicating this evidence base will only be important when the body of evidence for newer treatments has increased sufficiently, to avoid research duplication and waste. In psoriasis, more than 50 NMAs of systemic treatments have been published ( ). Most of these NMAs were funded by pharmaceutical companies and tended to report in favour of the company product ( ; ). Independence and transparency are as important in NMA as in original clinical trials.
We observed that data from many trials could not be included in NMA. Clinical trial participation is an investment of patients’ time and frequently involves randomisation to vehicle, which is associated with inferior response and, consequently, the morbidity associated with skin inflammation. The failure to include trial data in subsequent evidence analyses not only disregards patient contributions and contributes to research waste ( ), but also impairs the ability of evidence synthesis to accurately guide clinical practice. To maximise trial inclusion in evidence syntheses, trial outcomes should be comprehensively and transparently reported, including reporting of denominators. Trials should also collect outcome data using harmonised, validated measurement tools across the domains important to patients and clinicians, developed for eczema by the HOME initiative ( ; ). We found relatively few studies reporting outcome data using HOME‐recommended instruments for patient symptoms or quality of life, and we did not identify any outcome data using the HOME‐recommended instruments for long‐term control. Consistent reporting of HOME outcome measures in clinical trials of topical anti‐inflammatory treatments for eczema will improve opportunities for meta‐analysis in the future.
Generalisability of findings was limited to higher‐income countries, secondary care settings and adult or older child populations. More studies are needed from low‐ or middle‐income countries, in community settings, and by enroling young children, where the burden of eczema is highest. Studies in non‐white ethnic groups would also be useful given the different patterns of eczema, such as follicular lichenification that occur more frequently in people with darker skin.
Our PPI work emphasised the importance of including long‐term outcomes for efficacy and safety, but our review was unable to perform NMA for long‐term outcomes due to a lack of long‐term outcome data. More comprehensive characterisation of long‐term efficacy and safety outcomes is required. Agreed measurement tools for adverse events, including skin thinning and tolerability, would facilitate future analyses ( ).
NMA is a valuable tool to compare therapies from different trials, but there are limitations ( ). Head‐to‐head active comparator trials remain the gold‐standard to provide the most reliable comparison of available treatments ( ). Although placebo‐controlled trials are necessary to establish the efficacy and safety of new agents relative to vehicle, once established across age groups, the use of an appropriate active comparator is important ( ). Future research should avoid repeated, potentially redundant vehicle comparator trials and develop active comparator trials early in product development ( ).

## History
Protocol first published: Issue 7, 2022

## Acknowledgements

## Acknowledgements from the authors
This project is funded by the National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) under its Research for Patient Benefit (RfPB) Programme (Grant Reference Number NIHR201993). The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care.
The authors would like to thank Harley Kwok (School of Public Health, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong) and Dawn Wong (University College London, MSc graduate) for assistance with screening Chinese texts; Joanne Chalmers from the Centre of Evidence‐Based Dermatology for her contribution to development of this project and the grant application; and Peter Arkwright for clarification about whether randomisation was used in a potentially eligible trial.
We would also like to thank the Centre of Evidence Based Dermatology Patient Panel and Eczema Care Online stakeholders for their valued contributions in defining the scope and prioritising the key outcomes of concern to people with eczema.

## Editorial and peer‐reviewer contributions
Cochrane Skin supported the authors in the development of this review. Liz Doney, Cochrane Skin Information Specialist, is acknowledged for developing the search methods and the draft search strategies. The following people conducted the editorial process for this review:
Sign‐off Editor (final editorial decision): Robert Dellavalle, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus
Managing Editor (collated peer‐reviewer comments, provided editorial guidance to authors, edited the article): Joey Kwong, Cochrane Central Editorial Service
Editorial Assistant (selected peer reviewers, conducted editorial policy checks, supported editorial team): Jacob Hester, Cochrane Central Editorial Service
Copy Editor (copy‐editing and production): Anne Lethaby, c/o Cochrane Central Production Service
Peer‐reviewers (provided comments and recommended an editorial decision): Robin Guelimi, EpiDermE, Université Paris Est Créteil, Créteil, France (clinical/content review); Andrea Correa‐Pérez, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad Francisco de Vitoria, Madrid, Spain; Hospital Pharmacy and Medical Devices Department, Hospital Central de la Defensa "Gómez‐Ulla", Madrid, Spain (clinical/content review); Malcolm Brewster, Ferry Road Health Centre, East Sussex, UK (consumer review); Steve McDonald, Cochrane Australia (search review); Jen Hilgart, Cochrane Evidence Production and Methods Directorate (methods review)*.

*With contributions from Jo‐Ana Chase and Clare Miles, Cochrane Evidence Production and Methods Directorate

## Appendices

## Appendix 1. Cochrane Skin Specialised Register via the Cochrane Register of Studies (CRS‐Web) search strategy
1 eczema or neurodermatiti* AND INREGISTER 2 atopic next dermatiti* AND INREGISTER 3 #1 OR #2 4 (topical NEXT (corticosteroid* OR corti‐costeroid* OR steroid* OR glucocorticoid* OR gluco‐corticoid* OR corticoid$)) AND INREGISTER alclometasone OR amcinonide OR beclometasone OR beclomethasone OR betamethasone OR budesonide OR clobetasol OR clobetasone OR clocortolone pivalate OR crisaborole OR deprodone OR desonide OR desoximetasone OR dexamethasone OR diflorasone OR diflucortolone OR difamilast OR fluclorolone OR fludroxycortide OR flumetasone OR flumethasone OR fluocinolone OR fluocinonide OR fluocortin OR fluocortolone OR fluprednidene OR flurandrenolide OR flurandrenolone OR fluticasone OR halcinonide OR halobetasol OR halometasone OR hydrocortisone OR hydro‐cortisone OR cortisol OR masipredone OR methylprednisolone OR methyl‐prednisolone OR mometasone OR phosphodiesterase inhibitor* OR pimecrolimus OR prednicarbate OR prednisolone OR pimecrolimus OR fk506 OR tapinarof OR WBI‐1001 OR tacrolimus OR delgocitinib OR ruxolitinib OR triamcinolone OR ulobetasol AND INREGISTER 5 calcineurin inhibitor* AND INREGISTER 6 JAK inhibitor* or jakinib* or janus kinase inhibitor* AND INREGISTER 7 aryl hydrocarbon receptor* AND INREGISTER 8 AHR activator* AND INREGISTER 9 PDE‐4 or phosphodiesterase AND INREGISTER 10 anti inflammator* or antiinflammator* AND INREGISTER 11 topical* OR cutaneous OR emollient* OR oil OR oils OR ointment* OR cream* OR salve* OR unguent* OR lotion* OR moisturi* AND INREGISTER 12 #4 OR #5 OR #6 OR #7 OR #8 OR #9 OR #10 OR #12 OR #11 13 #3 AND #13

## Appendix 2. CENTRAL (Cochrane Library) search strategy
#1 MeSH descriptor: [Eczema] this term only #2 MeSH descriptor: [Dermatitis, Atopic] this term only #3 MeSH descriptor: [Neurodermatitis] this term only #4 eczema*:ti,ab #5 neurodermatiti*:ti,ab #6 (atopic next dermatiti*):ti,ab #7 {or #1‐#6} #8 MeSH descriptor: [Emollients] this term only #9 emollient*:ti,ab #10 moisturi*:ti,ab #11 MeSH descriptor: [Oils] this term only #12 (oil or oils):ti,ab #13 MeSH descriptor: [Ointments] this term only #14 ointment*:ti,ab #15 (cream* or salve* or unguent* or lotion*):ti,ab #16 (topical* next corticosteroid*):ti,ab #17 (topical* next cortico next steroid*):ti,ab #18 (topical* next steroid*):ti,ab #19 (topical* next glucocorticoid*):ti,ab #20 (topical* next gluco next corticoid*):ti,ab #21 (topical* next corticoid*):ti,ab #22 alclometasone dipropionate:ti,ab #23 amcinonide:ti,ab #24 beclometasone dipropionate:ti,ab #25 [mh Betamethasone] #26 betamethasone benzoate:ti,ab #27 Betamethasone butyrate propionate:ti,ab #28 betamethasone dipropionate:ti,ab #29 (betamethasone near valerate):ti,ab #30 [mh Clobetasol] #31 clobetasol:ti,ab #32 clobetasone:ti,ab #33 clocortolone pivalate:ti,ab #34 Deprodone propionate:ti,ab #35 [mh desonide] #36 desonide:ti,ab #37 [mh desoximetasone] #38 desoximetasone:ti,ab #39 diflorasone:ti,ab #40 [mh Diflucortolone] #41 diflucortolone:ti,ab #42 fluclorolone:ti,ab #43 (fludroxycortide or flurandrenolide or flurandrenolone):ti,ab #44 [mh Flurandrenolone] #45 (flumetasone or flumethasone):ti,ab #46 [mh Flumethasone] #47 fluocinolone acetonide:ti,ab #48 [mh "Fluocinolone Acetonide"] #49 [mh Fluocinonide] #50 fluocinonide:ti,ab #51 fluocortin:ti,ab #52 [mh Fluocortolone] #53 fluocortolone:ti,ab #54 fluprednidene:ti,ab #55 [mh Halcinonide] #56 halcinonide:ti,ab #57 (halobetasol or ulobetasol):ti,ab #58 halometasone:ti,ab #59 hydrocortisone butyrate:ti,ab #60 hydrocortisone aceponate:ti,ab #61 hydrocortisone acetate:ti,ab #62 hydrocortisone valerate:ti,ab #63 masipredone hydrochloride:ti,ab #64 prednicarbate:ti,ab #65 Prednisolone valerate acetate:ti,ab #66 triamcinolone:ti,ab #67 [mh Triamcinolone] #68 MeSH descriptor: [Calcineurin Inhibitors] this term only #69 calcineurin inhibitor*:ti,ab #70 [mh tacrolimus] #71 tacrolimus:ti,ab #72 fk506:ti,ab #73 pimecrolimus:ti,ab #74 {or #8‐#73} #75 MeSH descriptor: [Janus Kinase Inhibitors] this term only #76 (JAK inhibitor* or jakinib* or janus kinase inhibitor*):ti,ab #77 #75 or #76 #78 (delgocitinib or ruxolitinib or tofacitinib):ti,ab #79 JTE‐052:ti,ab #80 MeSH descriptor: [Receptors, Aryl Hydrocarbon] this term only #81 aryl hydrocarbon receptor*:ti,ab #82 (AHR next activator$):ti,ab #83 #80 or #81 or #82 #84 (tapinarof or WBI‐1001):ti,ab #85 MeSH descriptor: [Phosphodiesterase 4 Inhibitors] this term only #86 ((PDE‐4 or phosphodiesterase) near/3 inhibitor*):ti,ab #87 #85 or #86 #88 difamilast:ti,ab #89 crisaborole:ti,ab #90 [mh Beclomethasone] #91 beclomethasone:ti,ab #92 budesonide:ti,ab #93 [mh budesonide] #94 [mh cortisone] or cortisone:ti,ab #95 [mh Hydrocortisone] #96 (hydrocortisone or hydro next cortisone or cortisol):ti,ab #97 MeSH descriptor: [Dexamethasone] this term only #98 dexamethasone:ti,ab #99 fluticasone:ti,ab #100 [mh Methylprednisolone] #101 (methylprednisolone next (aceponate or acetate)):ti,ab #102 (methyl next prednisolone next (aceponate or acetate)):ti,ab #103 mometasone:ti,ab #104 [mh Prednisolone] or prednisolone:ti,ab #105 [mh "Adrenal Cortex Hormones"] #106 [mh Glucocorticoids] #107 MeSH descriptor: [Anti‐Inflammatory Agents] this term only #108 (anti inflammator* or antiinflammator*):ti,ab #109 {or #90‐#108} #110 MeSH descriptor: [Administration, Topical] this term only #111 MeSH descriptor: [Administration, Cutaneous] this term only #112 MeSH descriptor: [Emollients] this term only #113 MeSH descriptor: [Oils] this term only #114 MeSH descriptor: [Ointments] this term only #115 (topical* or cutaneous or emollient* or oil or oils or ointment* or cream* or salve* or unguent* or lotion*):ti,ab #116 {or #110‐#115} #117 #77 and #116 #118 #83 and #116 #119 #87 and #116 #120 #109 and #116 #121 #74 or #78 or #79 or #84 or #88 or #89 or #117 or #118 or #119 or #120 #122 #7 and #121 CENTRAL search narrative
Lines 1‐7: disease terms
Lines 8‐15: generic topical treatment terms
Lines 16‐67: steroids usually used in topical form
Lines 68‐74: topical calcineurin inhibitors
Lines 75‐79: JAK inhibitors
Lines 80‐84: aryl hydrocarbon receptor activators
Lines 85‐87: Phosphodiesterase 4 Inhibitors
Lines 88‐109: steroids which can be administered in various ways, including topically, along with broad anti‐inflammatory terms. The terms have been combined with a set of topical terms (lines 110‐116).

## Appendix 3. MEDLINE (Ovid) search strategy

## Ovid MEDLINE(R) ALL
*Please note: the resulting numbers are for the first search from March 1946 to March 07, 2022.
1 exp Eczema/ or eczema$.ti,ab. 24634 2 Dermatitis, Atopic/ 22443 3 atopic dermatiti$.ti,ab. 23617 4 neurodermatiti$.ti,ab. or Neurodermatitis/ 1767 5 or/1‐4 49529 6 exp Emollients/ 5304 7 emollient$.ti,ab. 1949 8 moisturi$.ti,ab. 2958 9 exp Oils/ or oil.ti,ab. or oils.ti,ab. 206666 10 Ointments/ or ointment$.ti,ab. 19940 11 (cream$ or salve$ or unguent$ or lotion$).ti,ab. 25494 12 (topical$ adj3 (corticosteroid$ or corti‐costeroid$)).ti,ab. 7427 13 (topical$ adj3 steroid$).ti,ab. 6293 14 (topical$ adj3 (glucocorticoid$ or gluco‐corticoid$)).ti,ab. 603 15 (topical$ adj3 corticoid$).ti,ab. 145 16 alclometasone dipropionate.ti,ab. 23 17 amcinonide.ti,ab. 45 18 beclometasone dipropionate.ti,ab. 136 19 Betamethasone/ or betamethasone benzoate.ti,ab. 6178 20 Betamethasone butyrate propionate.ti,ab. 15 21 betamethasone dipropionate.ti,ab. 570 22 (betamethasone adj2 valerate).ti,ab. 693 23 clobetasol.ti,ab. or Clobetasol/ 1946 24 clobetasone.ti,ab. 114 25 clocortolone pivalate.ti,ab. 13 26 Deprodone propionate.ti,ab. 0 27 Desonide/ or desonide.ti,ab. 147 28 desoximetasone.ti,ab. or Desoximetasone/ 117 29 diflorasone.ti,ab. 37 30 Diflucortolone/ or diflucortolone.ti,ab. 138 31 fluclorolone.ti,ab. 9 32 (fludroxycortide or flurandrenolide or flurandrenolone).ti,ab. 69 33 Flurandrenolone/ 133 34 (flumetasone or flumethasone).ti,ab. 181 35 Flumethasone/ 311 36 fluocinolone acetonide.ti,ab. or Fluocinolone Acetonide/ 1690 37 fluocinonide.ti,ab. or Fluocinonide/ 288 38 fluocortin.ti,ab. 44 39 Fluocortolone/ or fluocortolone.ti,ab. 313 40 fluprednidene.ti,ab. 4 41 halcinonide.ti,ab. or Halcinonide/ 90 42 (halobetasol or ulobetasol).ti,ab. 93 43 halometasone.ti,ab. 35 44 hydrocortisone butyrate.ti,ab. 94 45 hydrocortisone aceponate.ti,ab. 25 46 hydrocortisone acetate.ti,ab. 753 47 hydrocortisone valerate.ti,ab. 10 48 ma?ipredone hydrochloride.ti,ab. 1 49 prednicarbate.ti,ab. 103 50 Prednisolone valerate acetate.ti,ab. 1 51 triamcinolone.ti,ab. or Triamcinolone/ 10317 52 Calcineurin Inhibitors/ 4213 53 calcineurin inhibitor$.ti,ab. 7822 54 Tacrolimus/ 17039 55 tacrolimus.ti,ab. 17558 56 fk506.ti,ab. 6261 57 pimecrolimus.ti,ab. 836 58 or/6‐57 310545 59 Janus Kinase Inhibitors/ 938 60 (JAK inhibitor$ or jakinib$ or janus kinase inhibitor$).ti,ab. 2968 61 59 or 60 3292 62 delgocitinib.ti,ab. 31 63 ruxolitinib.ti,ab. 1833 64 tofacitinib.ti,ab. 1868 65 JTE‐052.ti,ab. 9 66 Receptors, Aryl Hydrocarbon/ or aryl hydrocarbon receptor$.ti,ab. or AHR activator$.ti,ab. 8784 67 (tapinarof or WBI‐1001).ti,ab. 39 68 Phosphodiesterase 4 Inhibitors/ 1330 69 ((PDE‐4 or phosphodiesterase) adj3 inhibitor$).ti,ab. 13509 70 68 or 69 14162 71 difamilast.ti,ab. 3 72 crisaborole.ti,ab. 128 73 Beclomethasone/ or beclomethasone.ti,ab. 3908 74 Budesonide/ or budesonide.ti,ab. 6721 75 exp Cortisone/ or cortisone.ti,ab. 23566 76 Hydrocortisone/ or hydrocortisone.ti,ab. or hydro cortisone.ti,ab. or cortisol.ti,ab. 103466 77 Dexamethasone/ or dexamethasone.ti,ab. 76419 78 fluticasone.ti,ab. 4135 79 Methylprednisolone/ 19781 80 (methylprednisolone adj (aceponate or acetate)).ti,ab. 828 81 (methyl adj prednisolone adj (aceponate or acetate)).ti,ab. 63 82 mometasone.ti,ab. 1056 83 Prednisolone/ or prednisolone.ti,ab. 48245 84 exp Adrenal Cortex Hormones/ 413211 85 Glucocorticoids/ 68465 86 Anti‐Inflammatory Agents/ 88468 87 (anti inflammator$ or antiinflammator$).ti,ab. 204631 88 or/73‐87 685830 89 administration, topical/ or administration, cutaneous/ 63523 90 Emollients/ 2039 91 Oils/ 12546 92 Ointments/ 13119 93 (topical$ or cutaneous or emollient$ or oil or oils or ointment$ or cream$ or salve$ or unguent$ or lotion$).ti,ab. 464369 94 or/89‐93 498032 95 88 and 94 38868 96 61 and 94 275 97 66 and 94 307 98 70 and 94 439 99 58 or 62 or 63 or 64 or 65 or 67 or 71 or 72 or 95 or 96 or 97 or 98 331411 100 randomized controlled trial.pt. 560324 101 controlled clinical trial.pt. 94719 102 randomized.ab. 552851 103 placebo.ab. 226123 104 clinical trials as topic.sh. 199418 105 randomly.ab. 377352 106 trial.ti. 257833 107 100 or 101 or 102 or 103 or 104 or 105 or 106 1430930 108 exp animals/ not humans.sh. 4968174 109 107 not 108 1316202 110 5 and 99 and 109 1584 Search narrative
We contacted the North West Medicines Information Centre & National Dental Medicines Information Service (via email 24 November 2021) for advice on new topical medications for eczema that we should search for. They replied (1 December 2021) having run a report in their horizon scanning database suggesting crisaborole, ruxolitinib and delgocitinib. These terms have been incorporated into our search strategy.
Lines 1‐5: disease terms
Lines 6‐11: generic topical treatment terms
Lines 12‐51: steroids usually used in topical form
Lines 52‐57: topical calcineurin inhibitors
Lines 59‐65: JAK inhibitors
Lines 66‐67: aryl hydrocarbon receptor activators
Lines 68‐69: Phosphodiesterase 4 Inhibitors
Lines 71‐87: steroids which can be administered in various ways, including topically, along with broad anti‐inflammatory terms. The terms have been combined with a set of topical terms (lines 89‐93).
Lines 100‐109: Cochrane Highly Sensitive Search Strategy for identifying randomised trials in MEDLINE: sensitivity‐ and precision‐maximising version (2008 revision); Ovid format, from section 3.6.1 in Lefebvre C, Glanville J, Briscoe S, Littlewood A, Marshall C, Metzendorf M‐I, et al. Technical Supplement to Chapter 4: Searching for and selecting studies. In: Higgins JPT, Thomas J, Chandler J, Cumpston MS, Li T, Page MJ, et al (eds). Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions Version 6. Cochrane, 2019. Available from: www.training.cochrane.org/handbook

## Appendix 4. Embase (Ovid) search strategy
*Please note: the resulting numbers are for the first search from March 1946 to 7 March 2022.
1 eczema/ 27367 2 eczema$.ti,ab. 28557 3 atopic dermatitis/ 49614 4 atopic dermatiti$.ti,ab. 37715 5 neurodermatiti$.ti,ab. 764 6 neurodermatitis/ 2515 7 or/1‐6 84646 8 emollient agent/ 6711 9 emollient$.ti,ab. 3530 10 moisturi$.ti,ab. 4828 11 oil/ 18475 12 (oil or oils).ti,ab. 216675 13 ointment/ 12497 14 ointment$.ti,ab. 16975 15 skin cream/ 916 16 salve/ 86 17 lotion/ 2724 18 (cream$ or salve$ or unguent$ or lotion$).ti,ab. 35929 19 (topical$ adj3 (corticosteroid$ or corti‐costeroid$)).ti,ab. 11436 20 (topical$ adj3 steroid$).ti,ab. 10453 21 (topical$ adj3 (glucocorticoid$ or gluco‐corticoid$)).ti,ab. 852 22 (topical$ adj3 corticoid$).ti,ab. 253 23 alclometasone dipropionate/ 314 24 alclometasone dipropionate.ti,ab. 57 25 amcinonide/ 414 26 Betamethasone/ 18205 27 amcinonide.ti,ab. 98 28 beclometasone dipropionate.ti,ab. 316 29 betamethasone benzoate.ti,ab. 11 30 Betamethasone butyrate propionate.ti,ab. 39 31 betamethasone dipropionate/ 2951 32 betamethasone dipropionate.ti,ab. 906 33 (betamethasone adj2 valerate).ti,ab. 913 34 clobetasol.ti,ab. or clobetasol/ 4628 35 clobetasone/ or clobetasone.ti,ab. 411 36 clocortolone pivalate.ti,ab. or clocortolone pivalate/ 105 37 Deprodone propionate.ti,ab. 5 38 desonide/ 1112 39 desonide.ti,ab. 171 40 desoximetasone.ti,ab. or desoximetasone/ 848 41 diflorasone/ or diflorasone.ti,ab. 137 42 diflucortolone/ or Diflucortolone.ti,ab. 289 43 fludroxycortide/ 394 44 (fludroxycortide or flurandrenolide or flurandrenolone).ti,ab. 51 45 fluclorolone/ or fluclorolone.ti,ab. 25 46 flumetasone.ti,ab. or flumetasone/ 417 47 flumethasone.ti,ab. 144 48 fluocinolone acetonide.ti,ab. or fluocinolone acetonide/ 2985 49 fluocinonide/ or fluocinonide.ti,ab. 1762 50 fluocortin/ or fluocortin.ti,ab. 91 51 Fluocortolone.ti,ab. or fluocortolone/ 871 52 fluprednidene/ or fluprednidene.ti,ab. 75 53 halcinonide.ti,ab. or halcinonide/ 601 54 (halobetasol or ulobetasol).ti,ab. 137 55 halometasone.ti,ab. or halometasone/ 189 56 hydrocortisone butyrate/ or hydrocortisone butyrate.ti,ab. 1421 57 hydrocortisone acetate.ti,ab. or hydrocortisone acetate/ 2106 58 hydrocortisone aceponate.ti,ab. or hydrocortisone aceponate/ 80 59 hydrocortisone valerate.ti,ab. or hydrocortisone valerate/ 242 60 ma?ipredone hydrochloride.ti,ab. 1 61 prednicarbate.ti,ab. or prednicarbate/ 800 62 Prednisolone valerate acetate.ti,ab. or prednival acetate/ 87 63 triamcinolone/ or triamcinolone.ti,ab. 22036 64 calcineurin inhibitor/ or pimecrolimus/ or tacrolimus/ 99937 65 calcineurin inhibitor$.ti,ab. 14445 66 tacrolimus.ti,ab. 36148 67 fk506.ti,ab. 7649 68 pimecrolimus.ti,ab. 1174 69 or/8‐63 343283 70 (JAK inhibitor$ or jakinib$ or janus kinase inhibitor$).ti,ab. 6098 71 janus kinase inhibitor/ 4493 72 70 or 71 8074 73 delgocitinib/ or ruxolitinib/ or tofacitinib/ 13263 74 (delgocitinib or ruxolitinib or tofacitinib).ti,ab. 8476 75 JTE‐052.ti,ab. 14 76 aromatic hydrocarbon receptor/ 10247 77 ((aryl adj hydrocarbon adj receptor$) or (AHR adj activator$)).ti,ab. 8834 78 76 or 77 11975 79 tapinarof/ 92 80 (tapinarof or WBI‐1001).ti,ab. 62 81 phosphodiesterase IV inhibitor/ 3132 82 ((PDE‐4 or phosphodiesterase) adj3 inhibitor$).ti,ab. 17782 83 81 or 82 19473 84 difamilast/ 56 85 difamilast.ti,ab. 7 86 crisaborole/ 401 87 crisaborole.ti,ab. 229 88 beclometasone/ 7667 89 beclomethasone.ti,ab. 3981 90 budesonide/ 22847 91 budesonide.ti,ab. 9596 92 cortisone/ 13024 93 cortisone.ti,ab. 8329 94 hydrocortisone/ 133709 95 (hydrocortisone or hydro‐cortisone or cortisol).ti,ab. 98890 96 dexamethasone/ 167924 97 dexamethasone.ti,ab. 85378 98 fluticasone/ 8854 99 fluticasone.ti,ab. 7458 100 methylprednisolone/ 107858 101 methylprednisolone aceponate/ 616 102 (methylprednisolone adj (aceponate or acetate)).ti,ab. 1018 103 methylprednisolone acetate/ 3743 104 (methyl adj prednisolone adj (aceponate or acetate)).ti,ab. 89 105 mometasone furoate/ 5605 106 mometasone.ti,ab. 1869 107 prednisolone/ 136053 108 prednisolone.ti,ab. 42261 109 corticosteroid/ or glucocorticoid/ 344762 110 antiinflammatory agent/ 69060 111 (anti inflammator$ or antiinflammator$).ti,ab. 282957 112 or/88‐111 1091969 113 topical drug administration/ or cutaneous drug administration/ 84802 114 emollient agent/ 6711 115 ointment/ 12497 116 oil/ 18475 117 (topical$ or cutaneous or emollient$ or oil or oils or ointment$ or cream$ or salve$ or unguent$ or lotion$).ti,ab. 602665 118 skin cream/ 916 119 salve/ 86 120 lotion/ 2724 121 or/113‐120 653543 122 72 and 121 551 123 78 and 121 462 124 83 and 121 809 125 112 and 121 70101 126 69 or 73 or 74 or 75 or 79 or 80 or 84 or 85 or 86 or 87 or 122 or 123 or 124 or 125 391529 127 Randomized controlled trial/ 698809 128 Controlled clinical study/ 465161 129 random$.ti,ab. 1762880 130 randomization/ 93238 131 intermethod comparison/ 280636 132 placebo.ti,ab. 337541 133 (open adj label).ti,ab. 95072 134 ((double or single or doubly or singly) adj (blind or blinded or blindly)).ti,ab. 254105 135 double blind procedure/ 192954 136 parallel group$1.ti,ab. 29022 137 (crossover or cross over).ti,ab. 115114 138 ((assign$ or match or matched or allocation) adj5 (alternate or group$1 or intervention$1 or patient$1 or subject$1 or participant$1)).ti,ab. 374454 139 (controlled adj7 (study or design or trial)).ti,ab. 401608 140 trial.ti. 352612 141 or/127‐140 2825646 142 exp animal/ or exp invertebrate/ or animal experiment/ or animal model/ or animal tissue/ or animal cell/ or nonhuman/ 30219903 143 human/ or normal human/ 23345315 144 142 and 143 23345315 145 142 not 144 6874588 146 141 not 145 2527908 147 7 and 126 and 146 2866
Search narrative:
Lines 1‐6: disease terms
Lines 8‐18: generic topical treatment terms
Lines 19‐63: steroids usually used in topical form
Lines 64‐68: topical calcineurin inhibitors
Lines 70‐75: JAK inhibitors
Lines 76‐80: aryl hydrocarbon receptor activators
Lines 81‐82: Phosphodiesterase 4 Inhibitors
Lines 84‐111: steroids which can be administered in various ways, including topically, along with broad anti‐inflammatory terms. The terms have been combined with a set of topical terms (lines 113‐121).
[Lines 127‐146: Based on terms suggested for identifying RCTs in Embase (section 3.6.2) in Lefebvre C, Glanville J, Briscoe S, Littlewood A, Marshall C, Metzendorf M‐I, et al. Technical Supplement to Chapter 4: Searching for and selecting studies. In: Higgins JPT, Thomas J, Chandler J, Cumpston MS, Li T, Page MJ, et al (eds). Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions Version 6. Cochrane, 2019. Available from: www.training.cochrane.org/handbook]

## Appendix 5. ClinicalTrials.gov search strategy
Advanced search:
Condition or disease: Eczema OR Atopic Dermatitis Other terms: topical OR topically OR emollient OR emollients OR ointment OR ointments OR cream OR creams OR moisturizer OR moisturizers OR moisturiser OR moisturisers OR oil OR oils OR salve OR salves OR unguent OR unguents OR lotion OR lotions
Applied filters: Interventional studies (Clinical trials) Limited to Phase 2‐4 trials

## Appendix 6. WHO ICTRP search strategy
Advanced search: eczema OR atopic dermatitis in the Title topical OR topically OR emollient OR emollients OR ointment OR ointments OR cream OR creams OR moisturizer OR moisturizers OR moisturiser OR moisturisers OR oil OR oils OR salve OR salves OR unguent OR unguents OR lotion OR lotions in the Intervention Recruitment status: All Limited to Phase 2‐4 trials

## Appendix 7. Statistical analysis supplement

## Additional study inclusion criteria
We included within‐participant trials but, due to concerns about these trials, we performed a sensitivity analysis excluding these trial designs. When included, we extracted paired data from within‐participant trials where the unit of analysis was the separate body part. For paired data from studies with no suspicion of contamination across intervention sites, we performed analysis using the generic inverse‐variance method after accounting for within‐participant variability ( ). If paired data were not available, we attempted to estimate the paired data using methods and guidance from the Cochrane Handbook ( ), and correct the variance using the Becker‐Balagtas method ( ). We assumed an intraclass correlation coefficient of 0.5 in all calculations but undertook post hoc sensitivity analyses, exploring the effect of varying this to 0.25 or 0.75. We did not extract data on outcomes which affect the whole body (e.g. systemic adverse events) from within‐participant trials as it is not possible to determine which treatment caused the event. We didn't identify any cluster‐randomised trials, but had planned for the unit of analysis to be the groups of participants randomised to different interventions. If data from a cluster‐randomised trial had been inappropriately analysed, we would have considered inclusion by adjusting for the study design using intra‐cluster correlation coefficients – either those reported in the study or calculated using data from the study, if appropriate.

## Additional information on Confidence in NMA (CINeMA) approach

## CINeMA: Within‐study bias
This combines the risk of bias judgements for each contributing study outcome with a quantification of the contribution that each study makes to the relative treatment effect using a percentage contribution matrix. The single risk of bias judgement for each comparison is defined by a majority rule. We summarised these, for each network estimate, as follows.
No concerns;
Some concerns;
Major concerns.

The overall judgement was informed by the sensitivity analysis which included the low risk of bias data, where possible.

## CINeMA: Reporting bias
Factors influencing reporting bias were as follows.
Suspected reporting bias, for example, where we were unable to access unpublished data, where data were restricted to early evidence about a new intervention or to industry‐funded trials, or where prior data suggested reporting bias in relation to the interventions studied;
Undetected reporting bias, where prospective trial registries, protocols, and statistical analysis plans were available and suggested close adherence to prospective plans in the published studies, or where empirical evaluation of patterns of results did not indicate small study effects;
Funnel plots were used to assess whether there were any small‐study effects or evidence of reporting bias through asymmetry in the plot.

## CINeMA: Indirectness
Each study included in the network was evaluated according to its relevance to the research question, classified into low, moderate, or high indirectness. We made study‐level judgements considering participant, intervention, and outcome characteristics that were likely to be associated with the relative effect of an intervention (i.e. effect‐modifying variables, in our case, baseline eczema disease severity and duration of treatment). We also assessed the relevance of the study design to the research question. We combined these study‐level judgements about indirectness related to effect‐modifying variables with the percentage contribution matrix. Where most of the evidence was derived from studies with significant concerns about indirectness, for example, within‐participant studies, certainty was downgraded for indirectness.

## CINeMA: Imprecision
We evaluated imprecision by assessing the range of effects incorporated by the two‐sided 95% CIs. In order to do this, we defined the range of equivalence for each of the networks as below.
A rating of ‘major concerns’ was given for 95% CIs which extended beyond the area of equivalence on the opposite side of the no effect line to the point estimate, so that the estimated treatment effect was compatible with clinically important effects in both directions;
A rating of ‘some concerns’ was given if the CI extended into but not beyond the area of equivalence on the opposite side of the no effect line;
‘No concerns’ was assigned if the CI was entirely on one side of the no‐effect line or entirely within the area of equivalence.

Ranges of equivalence:
For mean difference using specific instruments such as EASI ( ), POEM ( ) or SCORAD ( ), we used published minimally clinically important differences: 8.2 for SCORAD, 6.6 for EASI and 3.4 for POEM ( );
For SMD – a SMD equivalent to a small effect (< 0.2);
For binary measures – odds ratio from 0.8 to 1.2.

## CINeMA: Heterogeneity
We calculated Tau2 for each network and compared the CIs and prediction intervals to evaluate heterogeneity, using the ranges of equivalence defined above. Outcomes were as follows.
No concerns where the CIs and prediction intervals led to the same conclusions;
Some concerns where CIs and prediction intervals led to different conclusions with less impact for decision‐making;
Major concerns where heterogeneity was high and likely to have an important impact on decision‐making.

## CINeMA: Incoherence
This is a specific form of heterogeneity, the agreement between direct and indirect evidence. We used both global and local approaches to evaluate incoherence.
To evaluate local consistency, we used the standard node‐splitting approach (also known as SIDE: Separating Indirect from Direct Evidence), implemented via Stata’s sidesplit command, which is part of the network command suite. This allowed the estimates given for each pairwise comparison to be split into direct and indirect components, and the difference between these components was assessed for incoherence ( ).
To evaluate global design inconsistency (within the whole network), we used the 'design by treatment interaction' model ( ), which estimated a global Chi2 statistic for network coherence. Statistical significance was set at 5%. When interpreting incoherence tests, we considered the inconsistency factors as well as their uncertainty and the impact on clinical implications, based on visual inspection of the 95% CIs of direct and indirect odds ratios and the range of equivalence. Inconsistency factors included eczema severity, age, risk of bias, method of outcome assessment (HOME‐approved versus not HOME‐approved), treatment duration and trial design (within‐ versus between‐participant comparison).

## Overall assessments of confidence
Overall assessments of confidence were based on the grading in all six domains of CINeMA. We started at high confidence and dropped the level of confidence by one step for each domain's major concerns, or two domains with some concerns. However, we took account of the possibility that single issues might impact on multiple domains and avoided inappropriate multiple downgrades for single NMA issues.
We produced summary of findings tables for summarising NMA findings using the approach recommended by Cochrane and GRADE ( ), but were cautious in our interpretation of rankings due to concerns about the reliability of ranking information in summaries of NMA findings. We created a separate NMA summary of findings table for each of the outcomes for which a network was possible. Overall assessments of effectiveness and safety took into account the results of the main analyses and their CiNEMA ratings, the planned sensitivity analyses, and any subgroup effects, pairwise analyses or narrative information identified.

## Summary of findings and assessment of the evidence for pairwise meta‐analyses
The primary focus of this systematic review was the NMA, since Cochrane Reviews and other systematic reviews are already available for direct comparisons of topical anti‐inflammatory treatments versus placebo or no treatment. However, for any primary, subgroup or sensitivity analyses where NMA was not possible, as described below, we undertook pairwise meta‐analyses. Together with summaries of narrative information, these informed our overall conclusions about the relative effectiveness and safety of different topical anti‐inflammatory treatments for eczema.
For summary of findings tables, we included effects of the following licenced topical anti‐inflammatory treatments compared with vehicle or no treatment:
Mild TCS
Moderate TCS
Potent TCS
Very potent TCS
Pimecrolimus 1%
Tacrolimus 0.03%
Tacrolimus 0.1%
Crisaborole 2%
Difamilast 0.3%
Difamilast 1%
Roflumilast 0.15%
Ruxolitinib 1.5%
Delgocitinib 0.5%
Delgocitinib 0.25%
Tapinarof 1%

The outcomes for inclusion in the summary of findings tables, where suitable data for NMA were available, were:
Clinician‐assessed signs of eczema – binary;
Clinician‐assessed signs of eczema ‐ continuous;
Investigator global assessment ‐ binary;
Patient‐reported symptoms of eczema ‐ binary;
Patient‐reported symptoms of eczema ‐ continuous;
Safety – withdrawal from treatment or trial due to adverse events related to the study intervention;
Safety – local application‐site reactions;
Safety ‐ local pigmentation changes;
Safety ‐ local signs of skin thinning/atrophy.

## Data and analyses
 

## Characteristics of studies

## Characteristics of included studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of excluded studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of studies awaiting classification [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of ongoing studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Differences between protocol and review
The protocol stated that risk‐of‐bias assessments would be performed in duplicate but, due to resource limitations, these were done by one data extractor and checked by another. One reviewer (of SJL, BC, CMR, RP, EA, MD, or MF) produced both the initial data extraction and risk‐of‐bias assessments. All were subsequently checked for accuracy and consistency by an independent reviewer (SJL or RB for data extraction; RB for risk‐of‐bias assessments).
The protocol stated that treatment combinations including co‐interventions would not be included as nodes in the network. However, these were included in networks where the combination treatment was a combination of two or more eligible interventions, and were included as a separate treatment node to the individual interventions, e.g. .
The protocol stated the primary analyses would exclude studies judged at high risk of bias, with a sensitivity analysis including all available numerical data. As most data were judged at high risk, excluding them meant that network meta‐analysis was not possible for most outcomes and interventions of clinical interest, resulting in an uninformative review. We therefore made a post hoc decision to analyse all available data for the primary analysis, with a sensitivity analysis excluding data at high risk of bias. The single NMA for non‐high risk of bias data is presented as a sensitivity analysis in the review, for the outcome IGA binary.
The protocol stated (i) pairwise meta‐analysis would be performed for all study data suitable for meta‐analysis and (ii) for all outcomes, where feasible, we would undertake a full network meta‐analysis to explore all direct and indirect comparisons. Due to the large number of studies and treatment nodes and to avoid duplication with direct comparisons in the network meta‐analysis, pairwise meta‐analysis was only performed where study data was suitable for pooling, but insufficient for network meta‐analysis to be feasible.
As stated in the protocol, we were most interested in standard, licenced treatment regimens. Whilst unlicenced concentrations were eligible for the review and data were extracted, we excluded unlicenced treatment regimens from network meta‐analysis for those treatments with both licenced and unlicenced concentrations, since the unlicenced concentrations are not likely to be relevant for clinical practice. This decision was taken in order to reduce the complexity of the networks and rationalise the number of treatment nodes.
Within the network meta‐analysis, we planned to quantify the contribution that each study makes to the relative treatment effect using a percentage contribution matrix. However, due to the large number of studies and treatment nodes, it was not possible to produce this in the currently available software in Stata.
To be eligible for meta‐analysis, a study had to report the number of participants included in the analysis, which was missing for a larger number of trials than expected. An additional post hoc sensitivity analysis was conducted using the number randomised for those trials.
Post hoc sensitivity analyses were also undertaken using alternative correction factors of 0.25 and 0.75 for network meta‐analyses where a correction factor was assumed to account for correlations in within‐participant studies.
Network meta‐analysis was undertaken for key local adverse events of application‐site reaction, pigmentation changes and skin thinning. These were identified as important outcomes after submission of the protocol for publication through patient and public involvement feedback and focus groups.
We did not include league tables as planned (Table 3 in protocol) because these were difficult to read due to the large number of interventions.

## Contributions of authors
SL and RB co‐ordinated contributions from the co‐authors and wrote the final draft of the review.
SL, BC, CR, LS, and RB screened papers against eligibility criteria.
SL, BC, CR, RP, EA, MD, MF, and RB extracted data for the review.
SL, BC, CR, RP, EA, MD, MF, and RB assessed the risk of bias in included studies.
EV, BC and SC entered data into RevMan.
EV, SL, BC, LS, CR, BS, EA, AR, DC, MF, MS, HW, SC, AD and RB analysed and interpreted data.
AR was the consumer co‐author and checked the review for readability and clarity, as well as ensuring outcomes were relevant to consumers.
EV, BS, EA, and SC were the statistical and methodological co‐authors.
LS, DC, MF, MS, HW, AD and RB were the clinical co‐authors.

## Disclaimer
This project is funded by the National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) under its Research for Patient Benefit (RfPB) Programme (Grant Reference Number NIHR201993). The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care. This project was also supported by the National Institute for Health and Care Research via Cochrane Infrastructure funding to Cochrane Skin. The views and opinions expressed therein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Systematic Reviews Programme, NIHR, NHS or the Department of Health and Social Care.

## Sources of support

## Internal sources
Nil, Other
No internal sources of support

## External sources
The National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR), UK
The NIHR, UK, is the largest single funder of Cochrane Skin
The National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR), UK
Research for Patient Benefit Grant (NIHR201993)

## Declarations of interest
Stephanie J Lax: NIHR (grants 201993 and RP‐PG‐0216‐20007); previously published evidence syntheses and knowledge mobilisation work on the subject which are referenced fully in the review: ; ; ; previously published an editorial on one of the included studies: 
Eleanor Van Vogt: none known
Bridget Candy: none known
Lloyd Steele: none known
Clare Reynolds: none known
Beth Stuart: none known
Roses Parker: no relevant interests; Commissioning Editor, The Cochrane Collaboration; not involved in the commissioning of this review and work on this review conducted prior to beginning the role as Commissioning Editor
Emma Axon: no relevant interests; employed by Cochrane as an Evidence Synthesis Methodology Editor within the Cochrane Methods Support Unit
Amanda Roberts: none known
Megan Doyle: Imperial College London (conference); University of Nottingham Medical Student
Derek Chu: no relevant interests; author on AAAAI/ACAAI Atopic Dermatitis topical treatments systematic review and guideline; allergist‐immunologist, remunerated through government funds
Masaki Futamura: Maruho, Otsuka Pharmaceutical, Torii Pharmaceutical (speaking engagement, end April 2019); paediatric allergist, National Hospital Organization, Nagoya Medical Center; Director, Japanese Society of Pediatric Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Miriam Santer: no relevant interests; published blog in BMJ about topical treatments for eczema; General Practitioner within the NHS at Denmark Road Medical Centre, Bournemouth, UK; member of the board of the NIHR School for Primary Care Research. I was previously a subpanel member for the NIHR Programme Grants for Applied Research 2018‐2023.
Hywel C Williams: no relevant interests; investigator on the following trial published in the BMJ 19 years ago: Thomas KS, Armstrong S, Avery A, Po AL, O'Neill C, Young S, Williams HC. Randomised controlled trial of short bursts of a potent topical corticosteroid versus prolonged use of a mild preparation for children with mild or moderate atopic eczema. BMJ. 2002;324(7340):768; doi: 10.1136/bmj.324.7340.768.
Suzie Cro: NIHR advanced fellowship
Aaron M Drucker: no relevant interests; published and author of Canadian Dermatology Today; dermatologist at Women's College Hospital; Vice Chair of Scientific and Medical Advisory Committee and has received research grants from the National Eczema Association (non‐profit). Consultant for Canadian Association for Drugs and Technology in Health; Editor of Cochrane Skin
Robert J Boyle: no relevant interests; paediatric allergist and helps manage eczema in children and young people. The organisations that I work for are Imperial Healthcare NHS Trust and as a self‐employed paediatric allergist at HCA Healthcare and Sterling Health; Joint Co‐ordinating Editor, Cochrane Skin (2018‐2023), Senior Editor for Children and Families (2018‐2021), Senior Editor for Mental Health and Neuroscience (2020‐2021), Deputy Co‐ordinating Editor, Cochrane Skin (2023‐current); receives fees for editorial work from Wiley and the British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology, and has received fees for expert witness work in relation to allergy.
EA, RB, HW, RP, and AD have had editorial roles at Cochrane, but were not involved in the editorial process or decision‐making for this review.