2749ebiomeBioMedicineeBioMedicineElsevierPMC1266366912663669126636694123766510.1016/j.ebiom.2025.106026PROTAC-mediated structure–function disruption of CD26: a therapeutic strategy for driver-negative non-small cell lung cancer
ZhangGuangjian LiuBohao QiaoDeqian GaoShan ZhuXingzhuo HuangJiaqi HeWenbo GaoRui ZhangLinjuan WangJizhao HuangYinjuan GongQiuyu aDepartment of Thoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, PR ChinabState Key Laboratory of Porous Metal Materials, Shaanxi International Research Center for Soft Matter, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710049, PR ChinacDepartment of Nuclear Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, PR ChinadKey Laboratory of Enhanced Recovery After Surgery of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine of Shaanxi Province, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, PR ChinaeDepartment of Anaesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, PR ChinafKey Laboratory of Optic-Electric Sensing and Analytical Chemistry for Life Science, Ministry of Education, Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao, 266042, PR China∗Corresponding author. Department of Thoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, PR China. wangjz1104@xjtu.edu.cn
∗∗Corresponding author. huangyj@xjtu.edu.cn
∗∗∗Corresponding author. Department of Thoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, PR China. gongqiuyu@xjtu.edu.cn
gThese authors contributed equally to this work.
1311202512210602610602630112025© 2025 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).

## Summary

## Background
Previous targeted therapies for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) have focused on targeting driver mutations (e.g., EGFR/ALK), leading to approximately 30–40% of patients with negative mutations lacking effective treatments. Therefore, there is an urgent need for innovative therapeutic strategies for these patients.

## Methods
CD26-targeted proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs: P4-1 to P4-4) were designed and synthesised. The binding strengths between degraders and CD26 were evaluated through surface plasmon resonance (SPR). The ternary complex formations were confirmed by NanoBRET™ live-cell ternary complex profiling assay. Driver-negative NSCLC (NCI-H460 and NCI-H1299) and BEAS-2B cells were used to study the degradation performances of degraders. The therapeutic efficacies of the optimal degrader (P4-3) were assessed via cell line-derived xenografts (CDX), in situ lung cancer and patient-derived organoids (PDOs) models. Mechanistic studies incorporated co-immunoprecipitation, immunofluorescence, reactive oxygen species (ROS)/DNA damage detection, apoptosis assays and transcriptomics.

## Findings
CD26 underwent clathrin-dependent endocytosis induced by P4-3 and ternary complex were formed before protein degradation. Degradation of CD26 by P4-3 resulted in the cytoplasmic translocation of membrane-bound adenosine deaminase (ADA), leading to adenosine depletion, mitochondrial ROS accumulation, metabolic stress, DNA damage, and intrinsic apoptosis in vitro, in vivo and in PDOs (negative mutations) models. Mechanistically, degradation of CD26 uniquely eliminates both its enzymatic activity and non-enzymatic functions, achieving a dual effect unattainable with conventional inhibitors.

## Interpretation
Targeted CD26 degradation represents a valuable therapeutic strategy for driver-negative NSCLC. And this approach also addresses the limitations of driver mutation-targeted based therapies, providing a promising method for NSCLC patients with negative mutations.

## Funding
This study was funded by the Key Research and Development Project of Shaanxi Province (2023-YBSF-292), the opening foundation (M2022-3) from Key Laboratory of Optic-Electric Sensing and Analytical Chemistry for Life Science, Ministry of Education, Qingdao University of Science and Technology, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82102976, 52203337), the Youth Top Talent Program (11301223010722) from Xi’an Jiaotong University, the Key Research and Development Project of Shaanxi Province (2024SF-ZDCYL-02-09) and Capacity Improvement Plan of Shaanxi Health Committee (2024PT-09).

Keywords: Molecular targeted therapy, CD26, Non-small cell lung cancer, Proteolysis-targeting chimeras, Organoids

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Jul 19; Revised 2025 Oct 30; Accepted 2025 Oct 30; Collection date 2025 Dec.

## Research in context

## Evidence before this study
Molecular targeted therapies for NSCLC are primarily effective in patients with specific driver mutations (e.g., EGFR/ALK), leading to approximately 30–40% of patients with negative mutations lacking effective treatments. CD26 (DPP4), a transmembrane glycoprotein overexpressed in over 85% of NSCLC cases, has emerged as both a diagnostic biomarker and a potential therapeutic target. However, conventional small-molecule inhibitors that target CD26's enzymatic activity have demonstrated limited clinical efficacy in cancer, likely because they fail to disrupt its critical scaffolding function and interactions, such as those with membrane-bound ADA. Nowadays, PROTACs represent an emerging therapeutic strategy for NSCLC. Although PROTACs targeting kinases such as EGFR and ALK have been previously explored, the potential therapy efficiency of PROTACs targeting CD26 in NSCLC without driver mutations remains unknown.

## Added value of this study
This study developed and characterised PROTAC degraders specifically targeting CD26 for driver-negative NSCLC therapy. We identified P4-3 as an optimal degrader that effectively eliminates CD26 protein in driver-negative NSCLC cell lines. Importantly, we demonstrated that CD26 degradation via P4-3 uniquely abolishes both its enzymatic activity and essential non-enzymatic scaffolding roles, achieving a therapeutic effect that traditional inhibitors cannot attain. Mechanistically, degradation disrupts the CD26-ADA interaction, leading to ADA cytoplasmic translocation, adenosine depletion, mitochondrial ROS accumulation, metabolic stress, DNA damage, and intrinsic apoptosis. P4-3 exhibits robust and selective anti-tumour effects in vitro and in vivo, specifically targeting CD26-high expressed NSCLC cells while sparing normal bronchial cells, as evidenced in subcutaneous xenograft and in situ lung cancer models. Notably, P4-3 demonstrated efficacy for PDOs from NSCLC patients with negative mutations, highlighting its therapeutic potential for driver-negative NSCLC. Furthermore, the favourable biosafety performances of P4-3 in preclinical models including the absence of pancreatitis risk associated with some CD26 inhibitors further supported its translational potential.

## Implications of all the available evidence
Our findings establish PROTAC-mediated CD26 degradation as a promising therapeutic target for driver-negative NSCLC. CD26 PROTACs show striking preclinical efficacies in vitro and in vivo. Although our current data supports the applications of CD26 PROTACs in driver mutation-negative NSCLC therapy, their potential as a complementary strategy for patients with acquired resistance to EGFR/ALK inhibitors will be explored. The combination therapies with CD26 PROTACs and other drugs or extension the PROTACs to other cancers with CD26 dysregulation will be focused on in the future.

## Introduction
Lung cancer remains the predominant global oncological challenge, responsible for 18.7% of cancer-related mortality, with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) comprising 85% of cases. , , The advent of precision oncology has revolutionised therapeutic paradigms, as evidenced by landmark clinical trials demonstrating unprecedented overall survival benefits from epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (gefitinib, erlotinib, dacomitinib, osimertinib) , , , and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) inhibitors (crizotinib, alectinib, brigatinib) in mutation-defined subsets. , , Nevertheless, two critical gaps remain in the era of personalised precision lung cancer therapy. Firstly, 36% of treatment-naïve NSCLC lacks an actionable mutation(s), rendering the majority of patients ineligible for targeted therapy. Secondly, the hallmark of current targeted therapy is the inhibition (reversible or irreversible) of critical kinases responsible for signal transductions and cell proliferation, therefore, resistance will, although newly developed agents can indeed significantly lengthen the time to resistance, ultimately culminate in disease progression and mortality.
Proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs) overcome limitations of traditional inhibitors by catalytically degrading disease-relevant proteins via an event-driven mechanism, offering advantages including reduced drug resistance, enhanced selectivity, lower effective dosage, and expanded targeting of non-enzymatic oncoproteins (e.g., transcription factors, membrane proteins) beyond conventional enzymatic inhibition. , , , , , However, earlier explorations into the utilisation of PROTACs for NSCLC remained on focussing on a kinase-centric approach akin to enzymatic inhibition, with EGFR/ALK/KRAS degraders , , , showing promising but limited therapeutic potential in driver-negative ones. We therefore are setting our frontier on expanding the proteolytic profile towards multifunctional membrane-associated proteases with divergent ligand interfaces and low mutational propensity-shifting to modality that better exploiting PROTACs' dual capacity to ablate enzymatic and structural oncogenic drivers.
CD26 (dipeptidyl peptidase-4, DPP4), a transmembrane glycoprotein stably overexpressed in NSCLC, could act as a therapeutic target role in NSCLC/lung cancer. , , , Meanwhile, CD26 binds and co-localises with adenosine deaminase (ADA), which catalyses the irreversible deamination of adenosine and deoxyadenosine, resulting in the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), facilitating its extracellular compartmentalisation—a process critically implicated in adenosine metabolism reprogramming and T-cell immunosuppression within the tumour microenvironment. This functional duality positions CD26 as both a diagnostic biomarker and a therapeutic vulnerability—while its catalytic inhibition shows limited clinical efficacy, proteolytic elimination via PROTACs could simultaneously ablate its enzymatic activity and non-canonical roles. The development of CD26-directed degraders capitalises on PROTACs' event-driven mechanism to circumvent compensatory pathway activation, offering a multidimensional therapeutic strategy against CD26-high NSCLC subtypes refractory to conventional targeted therapies.
Herein, we developed a series of CD26-targeting PROTAC degraders (P4-1 to P4-4), among which P4-3 exhibited potent and selective degradation efficacy at low concentrations (∼500 nM) without cross-reactivity to related isoenzymes. P4-3 demonstrated significant anti-proliferative effects against driver-negative NSCLC cell lines (NCI-H460 and NCI-H1299), cell line-derived xenografts (CDX) and tumour organoids (negative mutations), while maintaining negligible cytotoxicity in normal bronchial epithelial cells (BEAS-2B) and paracancerous organoids, both in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistic studies revealed that P4-3-induced CD26 degradation triggers cytoplasmic translocation of membrane-anchored ADA, provoking mitochondrial metabolic dysregulation through adenosine exhaust, which ultimately activates ROS-mediated apoptotic pathways. These findings establish CD26 degradation as a promising therapeutic paradigm for driver-negative NSCLC and provide a strategic framework for targeting multifunctional membrane proteins through precision proteolysis.

## Methods

## Reagent validation
All reagents used in this study, including antibodies and cell lines, were commercially sourced. Reagent and antibody information, including catalogue numbers, CAS numbers, vendors and Research Resource Identifier (RRID), is provided in . The un-cropped full Western blot is provided in . Cell lines were authenticated through STR profiling, and the STR results are provided in . The shRNA and siRNA sequences used are shown in .

## Cell lines and cell culture
NCI-H1299 (RRID: CVCL_0060), NCI-H460 (RRID: CVCL_0598), A549 (RRID: CVCL_0023), MCF-10A (RRID: CVCL_0598), THP-1 (RRID: CVCL_0006), and BEAS-2B (RRID: CVCL_0168) cell lines were purchased from the National Collection of Authenticated Cell Cultures (Beijing, China). The human lung adenocarcinoma cell line PC9 (RRID: CVCL_B260), normal human liver epithelial cell line THLE-2 (RRID: CVCL_3803), and human umbilical vein endothelial cell line HUVEC (RRID: CVCL_9Q53) were acquired from Wuhan Pricella Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Wuhan, China). H1299, H460, and PC9 cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum (FBS); A549 and BEAS-2B were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS. THLE-2 cells were maintained in THLE-2 cell complete medium. HUVEC cells were maintained in HUV-EC-C [HUVEC] cell complete medium. MCF-10A was cultured in human mammary epithelial MCF-10A complete medium. THP-1 cells were cultured in THP-1 cell complete medium. All cultures were incubated at 37 °C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2. All cell lines were authenticated by STR profiling upon receipt and routinely tested and confirmed negative for mycoplasma contamination. To preserve genetic stability, cells were passaged every 20 generations and replenished from early-passage stocks. Cell cultures were inspected daily for sterility, adherence, and characteristic morphology, with routine mycoplasma screening performed to prevent cross-contamination.

## Surface plasmon resonance
The CM5 sensor chip (Catalogue number: 29149603, Cytiva) was activated with a 1:1 mixture of NHS and EDC at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. CD26 was diluted to 40 μg/mL in 10 mM sodium acetate buffer (pH 4.0) and immobilised onto the chip surface at 10 μL/min. Remaining active groups were blocked with 1 M ethanolamine-HCl (pH 8.5). The kinetic experiments were performed using the Kinetics/Affinity wizard template with the following parameters: flow path: 4-3/6-5, flow rate: 30 μL/min, contact time: 90/60 s, dissociation time: 120/90 s, and temperature: 25 °C. The running buffer consisted of PBST (PBS with 0.05% Tween 20) supplemented with 2% DMSO. Serial dilutions of each analyte were injected in duplicates from a 96-well plate. Startup cycles were set to 3 for system stabilisation. Data were recorded via Biacore™ 1 series SPR systems (Cytiva) and processed using Biacore Insight Evaluation Software.

## Molecular docking and dynamics simulation
Molecular docking was performed in sequential stages using crystallographic structures of CD26 (PDB: 3G0B) and CRBN (PDB: 5FQD). For semi-flexible docking, proteins were prepared in AutoDock Tools 1.5.2: protonation at pH 7.4, addition of polar hydrogens, assignment of Gasteiger charges, and energy minimisation (AMBER ff14SB force field). The docking grid was centred at 37.909, 134.128, 15.345 with a 40 × 40 × 40 Å3 box (0.375 Å spacing). Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm executed 50 independent runs per ligand to generate optimal poses. For ternary complex modelling, pre-formed complexes underwent rigid-body docking via HDOCK using the ITScorePP scoring function (negative energy values denote favourable binding). Molecular dynamics simulations were performed for two distinct ternary complexes: CD26-P4-3-CRBN and CD26-P4-4-CRBN using GROMACS with unified 100 ns protocols. Protein topologies employed the AMBER14SB_OL15.ff force field, while ligand parameters (P4-3/P4-4) utilised the GAFF force field via the ACPYPE web service. Systems were solvated in TIP3P water boxes extending 10 Å beyond each complex, with Na+/Cl− ions added for charge neutralisation. Energy minimisation implemented consecutive 2500-step steepest descent and 2500-step conjugate gradient algorithms. Equilibration involved sequential NVT ensemble simulations (100 ps, 298.15 K) followed by NPT ensemble simulations (100 ps, 1 bar pressure), establishing thermodynamic stability prior to production runs. Final 100 ns NPT simulations applied periodic boundary conditions, PME electrostatics, and LINCS bond constraints, with trajectory frames archived every 10 ps for comparative stability analyses.

## Vector constructions
The pNLF1-N [CMV/Hygro] Vector was used as the expression backbone for constructing the CD26-NanoLuc® fusion plasmid. This vector contains an ampicillin resistance marker (Amp+) for prokaryotic selection. During the cloning process, the 5′ end of the synthesised CD26 insert was designed with an XhoI restriction site (5′-CTCGAG-3′), to which a single protective base 'C' was added upstream to facilitate efficient enzymatic cleavage. No additional bases or sequence modifications were introduced. The insert was ligated into the linearised vector using T4 DNA ligase, and the construction was transformed into Escherichia coli TOP10 cells. Positive clones were selected on ampicillin-containing LB agar plates and validated by colony PCR and sequencing to ensure accurate reading frame fusion with the N-terminal NanoLuc® tag. The resulting plasmid was purified under endotoxin-free conditions and used for subsequent functional assays.

## Cell ternary complex formation assay
H460 cells were seeded in 6-well plates at a density of 8 × 105 cells per well. Cells were co-transfected with a 1:100 ratio (0.02 μg:2 μg) of plasmid DNA encoding the N-terminal NanoLuc®-CD26 fusion donor and the HaloTag®-CRBN acceptor (or HaloTag® Control vector for background measurements) with Lipofectamine™ 3000 for 24 h. After that, cells were trypsinised and re-suspended in phenol red-free DMEM Reduced Serum Medium supplemented with 4% FBS. Cells density was adjusted to 200,000 cells/mL. Cells were divided into two groups: one is added HaloTag NanoBRET 618 Ligand at a final concentration of 100 nM and the other is added the same volume of DMSO. Cells were plated on 96-well plates (100 μL/well) and placed overnight. After that, the medium was replaced with 100 μL of DMEM containing 10 μM of MG-132 without phenol red. Cells were incubated at 37 °C for 1 h, and P4-1 to P4-4 was added. DMSO was added into medium as negative control groups. Cells were then incubated at 37 °C for 3–6 h, and 25 μL of 5× solution of NanoBRET™ Nano-Glo® substrates were added. The plates were immediately placed on an orbital shaker for 30 s. Luminescence emissions were measured kinetically using the Tecan Spark multimode reader. Donor emission: 460 nm and acceptor emission: 610 nm. The milliBRET ratio (mBU) was calculated as (acceptor emission/donor emission) × 1000. The final corrected ΔmBU values were obtained by subtracting the average mBU of the no-ligand (DMSO vehicle) control wells from the ligand-treated wells.

## Protease, chloroquine or endocytosis inhibition test
Cells were incubated with Alogliptin (10 μM) or MG132 (5 μM) for 9 h only or followed by addition of the P4-3 (0.1 or 1 μM) for an additional 9 h. Subsequently, proteins were extracted, and the degradation efficacy was evaluated using Western blot assays. The procedures of effects of chloroquine, dynasore, pitstop 2, NYST, EIPA and heparin on the CD26 degradation efficacy were similar.

## Extracting membrane protein and cytoplasmic protein
Cells were lysed with lysis buffer containing 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) on ice for 10 min and then centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 15 min. For membrane protein and cytoplasmic protein extraction, the cells were collected at 4 °C and washed with pre-cooled phosphate buffered saline (PBS, 0.1 M). The membrane protein and cytoplasmic protein were extracted using a membrane protein extraction kit according to the protocols.

## siRNA transfection
Cells (H460, H1299 and BEAS-2B cells, 1 × 105 cells/well) were cultured in 6-well plates for 24 h. And CD26 or CRBN or p97 siRNAs and Lipofectamine™ 3000 were mixed to prepared transfection. The mixed solutions were then added into each well and the final concentration of siRNA was controlled to 100 nM; at the same time, negative control (NC) was also transfected simultaneously. Cells were cultured for further 24 h and prepared to Western blot experiments to verify the transfection efficiency. The successfully transfected cells were used for further experiments.

## Western blot
The protein samples were prepared according to the demand, and the protein concentrations were determined through the bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). The current for film transfer was 250 mA and the transfer time was determined based on protein molecular weight. The blot imaging was performed through Amersham ImageQuant™ 800 Western blot imaging systems (Cytiva).

## Proteomics sample preparation
H460 cells were seeded in a 6-well plate. Based on different interventions, the following groups were established: P4-3 group (1 μM with 0.5% DMSO as co-solvent) and DMSO group (0.5% DMSO). The cells were incubated with different P4-3 for 9 h and were washed 2–3 times with pre-cooled PBS at 4 °C. The cells were then digested with trypsin and collected and rapid frozen in liquid nitrogen for proteomics analysis.

## Proteomics
The samples in liquid nitrogen were transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (with 1% of protease inhibitor: cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication 3 min on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit. The protein solutions were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature without light. The protein samples were then diluted by adding 200 mM triethanolamine borate (TEAB) to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratios for a second 4 h-digestion. Finally, the peptides were desalted by Strata X SPE column. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A, directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 100 μm i.d.). The mobile phase consisted of solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Peptides were separated with following gradient: 0–9 min, 6–24% B, 9–11 min, 24–35% B, 11–13 min, 35–80% B, 13–15 min, 80% of B, and all at a constant flow rate of 500 nL/min on a NanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). The peptides were subjected to capillary source followed by the TIMS-TOF Pro mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.75 kV. Precursors and fragments were analysed at the TOF detector. The timsTOF Pro was operated in data independent parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (dia-PASEF) mode. The full MS scan was set as 300-1500 (MS/MS scan range) and 20PASEF (MS/MS mode)-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The MS/MS scan range was set as 400–850 and isolation window was set as 7 m/z. After that, the DIA data were processed using DIA-NN search engine (v.1.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20231220.fasta concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 1 missing cleavage. Excision on N-term Met and carbamidomethyl on Cys were specified as fixed modification. FDR was adjusted to <5%. The structural domain of a protein is a specific protein region in a protein that is conserved in sequence and can generally perform a function independently, and is a structural component of molecular function, generally consisting of 25–500 amino acids. These areas are relatively spatially compact, structurally stable, and capable of being independently folded into functional structures. A protein may have multiple domains, and a domain may also exist in multiple proteins. In the project data, protein structural domain annotation was performed on the identified proteins based on the Pfam database and the corresponding PfamScan tool. The KEGG integrates currently known protein-protein interaction network information, such as pathways and related complexes (Pathway database), genes and gene products (Gene database), biological complexes and related reactions (Compound and Reaction databases), and other information. The KEGG pathways mainly include metabolism, genetic information processing, environmental information processing, cellular processes, human diseases and drug development. We annotate protein pathways based on the KEGG pathway database and identify proteins through BLAST comparison (blastp, evalue ≤ 1e−4); for each sequence, the annotation is based on the top-scoring comparison result. Lastly, we used PSORTb software to perform subcellular structure prediction analysis of proteins identified in eukaryotes.

## Cell viability tests
Unless otherwise stated, all the cell viability tests were performed according to the following procedure. Cells (5.0 × 103 cells/well) were cultured in 96-well plates for 24 h. Different compounds with suitable final concentrations were added in to each well (0.5% DMSO was used as co-solvent, and no compound was added in cell proliferation experiment), and cells were cultured for different time. The culture medium was then discarded, and cell viabilities were measured according to the CCK-8 protocols. The absorbance value of each well was recorded through the BioTek Synergy LX multimode micro-plate reader (Agilent).

## Transwell assays
The transwell assays were performed according to the following procedure. Cells (1.0 × 105 cells/well) were cultured without FBS in the upper chamber of 6-transwell well, culture medium with FBS was placed in the lower chamber. And different compounds with suitable final concentrations were added in to upper chamber (0.5% DMSO was used as co-solvent, and no compound was added to siRNA-transfected cells). Then cells were cultured for different time. The culture medium was discarded and the cells in the lower chamber were stained with crystal violet, counted and photographed.

## shRNA transfection
Cells (H460 and H1299 cells, 1 × 104 cells/well) were cultured in 96-well plates for 24 h. The multiplicities of infection (MOI) values of both cells were about 100. The transfection processes were strictly complied with the protocols provided by Genechem. Cells were performed to fluorescent image and Western blot experiments to verify the transfection efficiency. The successfully-transfected cells were used for further experiments.

## RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) sample preparation
H460 cells were seeded in a 6-well plate. Based on different interventions, the following groups were established: P4-3 (9 μM) and DMSO group. The cells were incubated for 24 h and were washed 2–3 times with pre-cooled PBS at 4 °C. The cells were then digested with trypsin and collected and rapid frozen in liquid nitrogen for RNA-seq analysis.

## RNA-seq
Total RNA was extracted from the cells using TRIzol® Reagent according the manufacturer's instructions. Then RNA quality was determined by 5300 Bioanalyser (Agilent) and quantified using the ND-2000 (NanoDrop Technologies). RNA purification, reverse transcription, library construction and sequencing were performed at Shanghai Majorbio Bio-pharm Biotechnology Co., Ltd. according to the manufacturer's instructions (Illumina, San Diego, CA). The human RNA-seq transcriptome library was prepared following Illumina® Stranded mRNA Prep, Ligation from Illumina (San Diego, CA) using 1 μg of total RNA. Messenger RNA was isolated according to polyA selection method by oligo (dT) beads and then fragmented by fragmentation buffer firstly. Then double-stranded cDNA was synthesised using a SuperScript double-stranded cDNA synthesis kit (Invitrogen, CA) with random hexamer primers (Illumina). The synthesised cDNA was subjected to end-repair, phosphorylation and ‘A’ base addition according to Illumina's library construction protocol. Libraries were selected for cDNA target fragments of 300 bp on 2% low range ultra agarose followed by PCR amplified using Phusion DNA polymerase (NEB) for 15 PCR cycles. After being quantified by Qubit 4.0, paired-end RNA-seq sequencing library was sequenced with the NovaSeq 6000 sequencer (2 × 150 bp read length). To identify differential expression genes (DEGs) between different groups, the expression level of each transcript was calculated according to the transcripts per million reads (TPM) method. Essentially, differential expression analysis was performed using the DESeq2 or DEGseq method. DEGs with |log2FC| ≧ 1 and FDR ≤ 0.05 (DESeq2) or FDR ≤ 0.001 (DEGseq) were considered to be significantly different expressed genes. In addition, functional-enrichment analysis: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes (KEGG) was performed to identify which DEGs were significantly enriched in metabolic pathways at Bonferroni-corrected P-value ≤0.05 compared with the whole-transcriptome background. KEGG pathway analysis was carried out by KEGG orthology based annotation system (KOBAS).

## Adenosine concentrations
Cells (H460 and BEAS-2B cells, 1 × 105 cells/well) were cultured in 6-well plates for 24 h. Then cells were treated with P4-3 (1 μΜ) for 9 h. The adenosine concentrations in lysates were determined according to the adenosine colorimetric assay kit protocols. The absorbance value of each well was recorded through the BioTek Synergy LX multimode micro-plate reader (Agilent).

## Co-immunoprecipitation (CO-IP)
H460 cells were treated with P4-3 (1 μΜ) for 9 h, and the cells were lysed by NP-40 lysis buffer according to the protocols. Then the antibody–protein complex was treated with Dynabeads™ protein G immunoprecipitation kit. The experiment group was added with 6 μg of CD26 antibody and NC group was added with 6 μg of mouse IgG for further Western blot assays.

## ROS fluorescent imaging
Cells (H460, H1299 and BEAS-2B cells, 1 × 105 cells/well) were cultured in 6-well plates for 24 h. Then cells were treated with P4-3 for 24 h (siRNA-transfected cells were treated without P4-3) and cultured with DCFH-DA (final concentrations: 10 μM) according to the ROS assay kit protocols for 1 h. Lastly, the cells were prepared to fluorescent image.

## DNA damage fluorescent imaging
Cells (H460, H1299 and BEAS-2B cells, 1 × 105 cells/well) were cultured in 6-well plates for 24 h. Then cells were treated with P4-3 for 24 h (siRNA-transfected cells were treated without P4-3) and cultured with γ-H2AX (final concentrations: 50 μM) according to the DNA damage assay kit protocols. Lastly, the cells were prepared to fluorescent image.

## Mitochondrial membrane potential confocal fluorescent imaging
Cells (H460 and H1299 cells, 5 × 104 cells/mL) were cultured in confocal dishes for 24 h. Then cells were treated with P4-3 for 24 h and cultured with JC-1 probe according to the mitochondrial membrane potential assay kit protocols. Lastly, the cells were placed to confocal fluorescent image through Leica TCS SP5 confocal laser scanning microscope.

## MDA assay
Cells (H460, H1299 and BEAS-2B cells, 1 × 105 cells/well) were cultured in 6-well plates for 24 h. Then cells were treated with P4-3 for 24 h (siRNA-transfected cells were treated without P4-3) and lysed. The MDA concentrations in lysates were determined according to the lipid peroxidation MDA assay kit protocols. It should be noted that the MDA concentrations in organoids and animal samples were detected through the similar procedures. The absorbance value of each well was recorded through the BioTek Synergy LX multimode micro-plate reader (Agilent).

## Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
The cells were treated without or with P4-3 (9 μM, 0.5% DMSO was used as co-solvent) for 24 h. Then cells were centrifuged and the precipitations were re-suspended in the fixative and then fixed at 4 °C for 4 h. The fixed cells were centrifuged and washed with 0.1 M PBS for 3 times and were wrapped in the 1% agarose. The samples were then fixed with 1% OsO4 (in PBS) for 2 h at room temperature without light. After that, the samples were washed with 0.1 M PBS for 3 times. Samples were then dehydrated at room temperature and embedding at 37 °C overnight. The embedding models were polymerised at 60 °C for 48 h. After that, the samples were cut into flakes (60–80 nm) and transferred onto the 150 meshes cuprum grids. Samples were successively stained with 2% uranium acetate for 8 min without light and 2.6% lead citrate without CO2 for 8 min for experiments. The images were obtained through a HT7800/HT7700 TEM (Hitachi) with accelerating voltage of 80.0 kV. The procedures for tumour tissues and organoids TEM images were similar.

## Flow fluorescence analysis
Cells (H460 and H1299 cells, 1 × 105 cells/well) were cultured in 6-well plates for 24 h. Then cells were treated with P4-3 for 24 h (siRNA-transfected cells were treated without P4-3) and placed to stain with annexin V-FITC according to the kit protocols. Lastly, the stained cells were analysed through NovoCyte flow cytometer (Agilent).

## H&E
Major organs or tumours were successively fixed, embedded, and sectioned. The samples were preprocessed with pretreatment liquid for 1 min and then stained with Haematoxylin for 5 min. After that, samples were washed and stained with Eosin for 15 s. Samples were then dehydrated and sealed up for imaging (Eclipse E100 optical microscope, Nikon).

## Immunofluorescence or Tunel or immunohistochemical staining
The tumours were collected and paraffin sectioned. The samples were then repaired with corresponding primary and secondary antibodies. After that, the samples were sealed with 3% bovine serum albumin (BSA) or 10% donkey serum. The samples were incubated with corresponding primary antibodies at 4 °C overnight. Subsequently, samples were washed with PBS for 3 times and incubated with corresponding secondary antibodies for 50 min without light. Lastly, the samples were washed with PBS for 3 times and stained with 2-(4-amidinophenyl)-6-indolecarbamidine dihydrochloride (DAPI) for 10 min without light. The samples were washed with PBS for 3 times firstly and auto-fluorescence quencher for imaging (Eclipse C1 fluorescence microscope, Nikon). The procedures for immunohistochemical staining were similar and the procedures for Tunel staining were also similar without sealing and incubation of antibodies.

## Ethics statement
The animal experiments were permitted by the Institutional Animal Ethics Committee of Xi'an Jiaotong University (Approval numbers: XJTUAE2023-1611/XJTUAE2024-1849). Human tissue usage were strictly complied with complied with institutional guidelines (Approval number: XJTU1AF2021LSK-484), with informed consent obtained from patients. All animals were maintained on a 12-h light/12-h dark cycle with regular feeding/cage cleaning and co-housed in the same room to minimise environmental confounders. Animals were euthanised by isoflurane inhalation after the study completed. Investigators who performed dosing, tumour measurements, and data analysis were blinded to group assignments throughout the study to eliminate bias.

## Biosafety evaluation of P4-3 in vivo
Healthy C57BL/6 mice (6 weeks, male, Laboratory Animal Center of Xi'an Jiaotong University) were randomly assigned to control or P4-3 groups (N = 5/group) using a computer-generated sequence: control and P4-3 group. The mice in P4-3 group were intravenous injected with P4-3 (0.6 mg/kg, 1.0% DMSO was used as co-solvent, q3d × 4) and mice in control group were intravenous injected with phosphate buffered saline containing 1.0% DMSO without P4-3. Subsequently, mice were sacrificed and the main organs: heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney and pancreas were sliced for haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining experiments to evaluate the biosafety of P4-3. Whole blood was collected for complete blood count (CBC). Serum was collected to measure relevant biochemical indicators. The spleen was excised and grinded. The grinding solution was filtered through a 40-μm cell strainer (Biosharp) to obtain a single-cell suspension for flow cytometry experiments (BioTek Synergy LX multimode micro-plate reader, Agilent).

## The anti-tumour evaluation effects on subcutaneous tumour
For P4-3 intervention experiment, BALB/c nude mice (healthy, 5–6 weeks) were randomly divided into 2 groups (N = 5): control group and P4-3 group. The mice in P4-3 group were firstly subcutaneous injected with H460 cells (3 × 106 cells, 100 μL) and mice were feed for 10 days. After tumour formation, mice in P4-3 group were intravenous injected with P4-3 (0.6 mg/kg, 1.0% DMSO was used as co-solvent, q3d × 4), and mice in control group were intravenous injected with phosphate buffered saline containing 1.0% DMSO without P4-3. The weights and tumour volumes were recorded every 3 days. After treatment, mice were sacrificed and the tumours were weighed and sliced or mashed for further experiments. For shRNA-transfected injecting experiment, BALB/c nude mice (healthy, 5–6 weeks) were randomly divided into 2 groups (N = 5): CD26 shEV group and CD26 shRNA group. The mice in shRNA group were firstly subcutaneous injected with shRNA-transfected H460 cells (3 × 106 cells, 100 μL) and mice in E. V. group were firstly subcutaneous injected with E. V.-transfected H460 cells (3 × 106 cells, 100 μL). Mice were feed for 10 days and the weights were recorded every 3 days. Mice were euthanised after 17 days or upon reaching tumour volume ≥2000 mm3 or >20% body weight loss, with tumours processed for analysis.

## The anti-tumour evaluation effects on in situ lung cancer
For P4-3 intervention experiment, BALB/c nude mice (healthy, 5–6 weeks) were randomly divided into 2 groups (N = 5): control group and P4-3 group. The mice in P4-3 group were firstly thoracic injected with H460 cells (3 × 106 cells, 100 μL) and mice were feed for 10 days. After tumour formation, mice in P4-3 group were intravenous injected with P4-3 (0.6 mg/kg, 1.0% DMSO was used as co-solvent, every 3 days one time, 4 times), and mice in control group were intravenous injected with phosphate buffered saline containing 1.0% DMSO without P4-3. The weights were recorded every 3 days. After treatment, mice were sacrificed and the tumours were weighed and sliced or mashed for further experiments. For shRNA-transfected injecting experiment, BALB/c nude mice (healthy, 5–6 weeks) were randomly divided into 2 groups (N = 5): CD26 shEV group and CD26 shRNA group. The mice in shRNA group were firstly thoracic injected with shRNA-transfected H460 cells (3 × 106 cells, 100 μL) and mice in E. V. group were firstly intravenous injected with E. V.-transfected H460 cells (3 × 106 cells, 100 μL). Mice were feed for 10 days and the weights were recorded every 3 days. After 17 days or when mice showed >20% body weight loss, mice were euthanised, with tumour volumes recorded and tumours sliced for further experiments.

## The anti-cancer evaluation effects of P4-3 on organoids
All organoids were obtained from Shaanxi Weiyuan Biomedical Research Institute Co., Ltd. 3 patient-derived organoids were successfully constructed (Cases 2, 4 and 5) and were selected for anti-cancer evaluation. Firstly, tumour organoids were treated with P4-3 with different concentrations for 9 h and then the degradation of CD26 was tested. After that, tumour and paracancer organoids were treated with different compounds for different time, the inhibition rates of cells were performed through CellTiter-Glo® 3D cell viability assay kit, and the lysates were prepared to perform other experiments.

## Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 9.0 and Origin 9 software. All data are determined from at least three independent experiments and presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Statistical significance between two groups was calculated using two-tailed test. Differences between multiple groups were assessed by ANOVA followed by Dunnett post-hoc test (ANOVA Dunnett't test). P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## Role of the funding source
Funders had no role in the study design, data collection, data analyses, interpretation, or writing.

## Results

## Screening of CD26 degraders
The CD26 PROTAC-based degraders were designed according to the previous strategies. , The candidate CD26 degraders (named P4-1 to P4-4) contained three parts: protein-of-interest (POI) ligand Alogliptin were used here due to its superior binding capability, , a linker and E3 ligase ligand (Lenalidomide here, A). The linker structure was optimised to obtain the molecule with degradation performance. The synthetic routes P4-1 to P4-4 were shown in B as well as in , and the products were characterised by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) ( ). In order to evaluate affinity strengths between degraders and CD26, SPR assay was performed. As illustrated in C, the dissociation constants (KD value) of P4-1 to P4-4 was 7.43 μΜ, 5.45 μΜ, 2.11 μΜ and 3.36 μΜ, respectively (KD for Alogliptin is 1.77 μΜ, , positive control), meaning that the binding force between P4-3 and CD26 was stronger than those of other degraders. Moreover, ternary complexes formation (CD26:degrader:CRBN here) is vital for PROTAC-mediated protein degradation; hence molecular docking and NanoBRET™ live-cell ternary complex profiling assay were performed. The docking results showed that CD26:Degrader:CRBN ternary complexes could be formed ( D). Importantly, the milliBRET ratio (mBU) of degraders systems were higher than corresponding DMSO groups ( E), confirming that the CD26:degrader:CRBN ternary complexes were present. Interestingly, the mBU value from CD26:P4-3:CRBN group was the highest, implying its best complex stability. Furthermore, the binding sites of our degraders towards CD26 are located in the shallow cleft near CD26's extracellular domain ( ), which suggested that CRBN could be recruited by degraders. The docking scores were −179.77 for CD26:P4-1:CRBN, −187.63 for CD26:P4-2:CRBN, −193.16 for CD26:P4-3:CRBN and −192.73 for CD26:P4-4:CRBN, respectively, suggesting that P4-3 and P4-4 may possess better degradation performances. In addition, molecular dynamics results exhibited that the change range of root mean square deviation (RMSD) of CD26:P4-3:CRBN was slightly smaller than that of CD26:P4-4:CRBN ( ), and the results of H-bond analysis revealed that the occupancy of hydrogen bonds in CD26:P4-3:CRBN was higher (0.72 bonds/ns) than CD26:P4-4:CRBN (0.57 bonds/ns, ). These results suggested that CD26:P4-3:CRBN ternary complex was more stable and P4-3 was a slightly better degrader than P4-4.
 

## Degradation performances of CD26 degraders
Next, the degradation abilities of all candidates' degraders were explored to confirm the above speculation. Firstly, we examined the distribution of CD26, it was observed that CD26 is primarily localised in cell membranes ( ). Then, H460, H1299 and BEAS-2B cells (human lung normal epithelial cells) were selected as model cells to study the degradation performances of candidate degraders. As shown in A, with increasing concentrations, CD26 from H460 cells was degraded by the degraders and P4-3 was found have the satisfied degradation ability (effective concentration ∼ 500 nM). Hence, both the SPR and protein degradation results confirm that P4-3 is an optimal degrader, which is used for further performances studies. The selectivity of P4-3 was examined by assessing its degradation efficacy against structurally homologous iso-enzymes, addressing PROTAC-mediated selectivity issue. As shown in A and , negligible P4-3-mediated degradation of DPP7/8/9 and FAP across different cells (H460, H1299 and BEAS-2B) was demonstrated, confirming its pronounced selectivity within the DPP family. Importantly, proteomics results exhibited that little protein (fold change >4) was down-regulated upon treatment of P4-3 ( B), suggesting the superior selectivity of P4-3. Subsequently, CD26 was found to be degraded by P4-3 within 9 h ( C and ). Lastly but importantly, the degradation pathways of P4-3 were systematically investigated. The endocytosis of CD26 upon treatment with P4-3 was firstly studied.
 As shown in D and , the degradation of CD26 was inhibited by dynasore and pitstop 2, suggesting the clathrin-mediated endocytosis as the predominant route for P4-3-induced CD26 internalisation. Interestingly, we observed the degradation of CD26 was mildly suppressed by NYST (a caveolin-specific inhibitor, ), meaning that the caveolin-mediated endocytosis was secondary to CD26 internalisation. In addition, it was shown that EIPA (inhibitor of pinocytosis) and heparin (inhibitor of heparin sulfate proteoglycans) failed to reduce CD26 internalisation, indicating that pinocytotic pathway or heparin sulphate proteoglycans were not a major route herein. Then we found that p97 (Valosin-containing protein) inhibitors (CB-5083) or p97 knockdown ( ) significantly reduced P4-3-induced CD26 degradation ( D), suggesting that p97 might play an important role in shuttling CD26 from endosomal compartments to the proteasome, which was similar to previous results. Afterwards, Alogliptin or Lenalidomide-C5-acid had no effects on CD26 internalisation, while P4-3 treatment led to a decrease in surface CD26 expressions, confirming its ability to trigger internalisation ( ). Moreover, addition of chloroquine (a kind of autophagy inhibitor) has no effect on the degradation results ( E), which meant that the CD26 degradation was independent of autophagy pathways. Meanwhile, rescue assays were performed in order to further verify that the degradation process was via the proteasome pathway. It was shown that P4-3-mediated CD26 degradation was suppressed by MG132, Alogliptin and CRBN knockdown ( F–H, ), confirming that the proteasomal pathway was the priority process for CD26 degradation.

## The inhibitory effects of degraders on driver-negative NSCLC cells
Subsequently, the inhibitory effects of degraders on driver-negative NSCLC cells were studied. The driver gene mutation statuses in H460 and H1299 cell lines were presented in , and it could be seen that there were no actionable driver mutations in these NSCLC cells. Then the effects of Lenalidomide, Alogliptin and degraders on cell viabilities of H460, H1299, A549 and PC9 cells were investigated ( ), the degraders had stronger inhibitory abilities towards H460 and H1299 cells than those of Lenalidomide and Alogliptin, while the cell viabilities of A549 and PC9 cells were still above 50% after treatment with degraders. Meanwhile, as illustrated in , no significant cytotoxicity of degraders (P4-3) was observed against several normal cells including BEAS-2B, HUVEC, MCF-10A, THLE-2 and THP-1, confirming its super biocompatibility. And the different cell viabilities among cells could be attributed to different CD26 expression across different cell lines ( ), i.e., the inhibitory effects of degraders were closely related to the expression levels of CD26. Then the half maximal effect concentration (EC50) values of degraders towards H460 and H1299 cells were investigated. As shown in A, P4-3 had lower EC50 values towards H460 cells than those of P4-1 and P4-2 and exhibited similar inhibitory capacity towards H460 cells compared with P4-4. Considering the better degradation and affinity performance of P4-3, it was chosen as our research object. Transwell migration assays demonstrated P4-3-mediated suppression of H460 cell motility ( B), suggesting that targeted CD26 degradation significantly impaired driver-negative NSCLC cell migration capacity. This conclusion was further confirmed by CD26 siRNA interference results ( C and D). Lastly, it was observed that the proliferations of H460 cells were also repressed by the knock-down of CD26 ( E). Same phenomena were observed in H1299 cells ( ). To explore the potential biological mechanism of the treatment effects towards NSCLC cells, whole genome RNA expression sequencing (RNA-seq) in H460 cells was conducted. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis was performed to obtain biological process in different samples. As shown in F, 426 up-regulated genes and 705 down-regulated genes were found in the P4-3 treated group compared to the control group (DMSO). Based on this result, several biological processes were significantly affected by P4-3 ( G), among them, apoptotic signalling cascades in cells arouses our interest ( G), so next the detailed apoptosis process will be studied.
 

## The detailed mechanism of therapeutic effect in vitro
The above results demonstrated that proliferations and migrations of driver-negative NSCLC cells were inhibited by P4-3, and the detailed mechanism of such effects was studied here. As mentioned before, the irreversible deamination of adenosine and deoxyadenosine can be catalysed by ADA, which will result in the production of ROS-one of the key factors in the apoptosis process. So the relationship between H460 cell death and ROS production was investigated here. The direct binding between CD26 and adenosine deaminase (ADA) in H460 lysates was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) assays ( A). This interaction was further validated by the knocking-down of CD26, which resulted in concomitant depletion of ADA protein levels.
 The concentration of adenosine was decreased with the addition of P4-3 or unchanged with Alogplitin ( B), suggesting the higher expressions of ADA in cytoplasm under the treatment of P4-3. In order to clarify this, expressions of ADA in whole cells were studied and the results showed that the overall ADA contents are unchanged with P4-3 or Alogplitin ( C), indicating that the ADA was released from cell membrane into cytoplasm upon degradation of CD26. Surprisingly, we found that a concomitant increase of the cytoplasmic expression and a decrease of membranous expression of ADA in H460 cells with treatment of P4-3 ( D), while similar phenomenon could not be observed in BEAS-2B cells, which could be attributed its low expression of membranous ADA. The releases of ADA were further confirmed by the immunofluorescence (IF) results ( E). So, it could be summarised that the distribution changes of ADA would lead to the adenosine deamination reaction disorder, resulting in the mitochondria metabolic disorders. Therefore, P4-3-induced ROS production was investigated. As shown in F, the addition of P4-3 or knocking down of CD26 caused the production of ROS in H460 cells. Meanwhile, the contents of intracellular malondialdehyde (MDA, one important oxidative stress indicator) were increased by P4-3 or the knocking-down of CD26 ( G). High level of ROS tended to promote DNA damage, as shown in H, it was observed that degradation or knocking-down of CD26 led to the serious DNA damage in H460 cells. Subsequently, the metabolic disorders of mitochondria were studied, as shown in I, addition of P4-3 or knocking-down of CD26 could lead to the reduction of red fluorescence of H460 cells, which reflects the reversion of mitochondrial membrane potential. Meanwhile, we observed that some cavitations appeared in mitochondria and the length of cristae become shorted under the treatment of P4-3 or after the knockdown of CD26 ( J), suggesting the functions of mitochondria were destroyed. It was reported that DNA damage was one reason for cell apoptosis, , and the Annexin V/Propidium Iodide (PI) kits were performed to verify arises of apoptosis. As shown in K and L, cell ratios of apoptotic cells were increased with the P4-3 treating time or CD26 siRNA treatment, which meant that the apoptosis were induced by degradation of CD26. In order to further confirm the apoptosis, some important biomarkers were analysed. As shown in M and , cytochrome c (Cyt c), which were usually distributed in the mitochondrial inner membrane, were high expressed after the treatment of P4-3 or knocking-down of CD26, suggesting the damage of mitochondria. Bcl2 (one kind of apoptosis inhibitory factor) was down expressed in the P4-3 treated or CD26 knockdown group ( M and ). On the contrary, Bax (one key protein in the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway) was high expressed in the P4-3 treated or CD26 knocking-down group ( M and ), which indicated that the degradation of CD26 could lead to the apoptosis. And this is further affirmed by the high expression of cleaved caspase 3 (cle. cas3, M and ). The same phenomenon was observed in H1299 cells ( ). Lastly, as shown in D and , addition of P4-3 caused no changes of ADA and adenosine concentrations, resulting in no increase of ROS and MDA levels in BEAS-2B cells ( ), as well as no DNA damages ( ), which was the main reason for no toxicity of P4-3 towards BEAS-2B cells, suggesting that the degradation of CD26 led to the apoptosis of driver-negative NSCLC cells caused by ROS-induced apoptosis, which was clearly elaborated by the usage of P4-3. Collectively, these findings demonstrated that P4-3-induced degradation of CD26 drives driver-negative NSCLC cell apoptosis via ROS-dependent activation of intrinsic apoptotic pathways.

## Anti-tumour effects in vivo
Considering the excellent therapeutic effect of P4-3 against driver-negative NSCLC cells mentioned above, it is necessary to explore its anti-tumour performance in vivo. Firstly, the biosafety of P4-3 was studied. As depicted in , the haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining results exhibited that no tissue damages were emerged in major organs of mice treated with P4-3. Meanwhile, the gross weight, alanine transaminase (ALT), creatinine (CREA) and α-amylase concentrations of mice were unaffected by P4-3 ( ). It should be pointed out that an increased risk of pancreatitis was associated with the usage of CD26 inhibitors, so we conducted a thorough examination of the pancreatic tissue in our mice models treated with P4-3. And no obvious pancreatic damages ( ) and inflammation ( ) were observed, indicating P4-3 had a favourable safety profile. In addition, the types of T cells in mice spleen and concentrations of monocytes in mice serums were also unchanged upon the treatment of P4-3 ( ). The numbers of lymphocytes increased a little but were within reference range, which was the normal response against P4-3
in vivo ( ). These data suggested that P4-3 exhibits a favourable safety profile, making it as a promising therapeutic candidate for NSCLC. Next, we constructed H460 CDX subcutaneous tumour model to investigate the anti-tumour effect of P4-3. As shown in A, the mice bearing subcutaneous tumours were intravenous (I.V.) injected with P4-3 every 3 days one time (0.6 mg/kg) for 4 times. The volumes of tumours treated with P4-3 were significantly smaller than those of control group ( B), and no significant body weights change were observed ( B). It can be clearly seen that the tumours from mice treated with P4-3 were obviously suppressed ( C). As mentioned above, P4-3 could induce apoptosis of driver-negative NSCLC cells, so the tumour suppression mechanism was explored. After treated with P4-3, the MDA levels in tumours are increased ( ), suggesting that the tumours might be inhibited through the apoptosis manners. As illustrated in D, we observed that there existed some complete mitochondria in tumours from control groups ( D), while nuclear chromatin was present in the central position in tumours from P4-3 treated mice ( D), further implying that the tumours were in the state of apoptosis. This hypothesis was further proved by the H&E and TUNEL staining results ( D and E). Apoptosis in tumours was evidenced by Bcl2 down-regulation and cytochrome c/Bax/cleaved caspase-3 up-regulation in P4-3-treated cohorts ( F), validating the hypothesised mechanism.
 In order to clarify the role of CD26 in tumour apoptosis, we employed lentivirus loaded small hairpin RNAs (shRNA) to knock down CD26 in driver-negative NSCLC cells (H460 and H1299 cells). As shown in , the expressions of CD26 in cells are knocked down effectively through CD26 shRNA3 (Abbreviation: CD26 shRNA in the further experiments). Then the empty vector (EV, CD26 shEV) and CD26 shRNA-transfected H460 cell were subcutaneously injected to construct CDX model, and it can be seen that the CD26 was also low expressed in tumours ( ). Interestingly, the tumours constructed by the CD26 shRNA-transfected H460 cells ( ) grew slowly ( , ) accompanied by the high levels of MDA concentrations in CD26 shRNA group ( ). The apoptosis of tumours are confirmed by several evidences ( , ).
Furthermore, we explored the therapeutic effect of P4-3 against in situ lung cancer. The in situ lung cancer constructed through normal and CD26 shRNA-transfected H460 cells was established successfully ( ). It could be seen that tumours in lungs were repressed successfully by P4-3 through apoptosis manner ( B and C). And the tumours in lung derived from CD26 shRNA-transfected H460 cells grew little and apoptosis in tumours was also observed ( D–F). No significant body weights changes were observed ( ). All above results indicated that P4-3 is a promising agent for driver-negative NSCLC therapy in vivo.
 

## The inhibitory performance of P4-3 against driver-negative organoids
To investigate the clinical application potential of P4-3, we further extended our study to a more translational model by utilising patient-derived organoids. The patients' basic information was shown in , the driver gene mutation statuses in different tissues were summarised in , and it could be seen that there were no actionable driver mutations in these tissues. Then it is necessary to study the expressions of CD26 in patients' NSCLC tumour tissues. As shown in A and B, the expression levels of CD26 in tumour were higher than those of paracancer tissues, suggesting the clinical significance of CD26 in driver-negative NSCLC. The degradation effects of P4-3 on CD26 in tumour organoids were explored. As described in C and , CD26 was degraded successfully by P4-3 in organoids. Echoing in earlier results, tumour organoids could also be significantly suppressed by P4-3 or staurosporine ( D and ). The results showed an increase in MDA concentration in tumour organoids under P4-3 treatment ( E). TEM and Western blot results further confirmed that tumour organoids experienced the apoptotic processes induced by P4-3 ( F and G, ). Besides, the biosafety of P4-3 for paracancer organoids was of great importance. It was shown that the inhibition rates of P4-3 were significantly lower than those of staurosporine ( ), indicating that P4-3 could be a safe agent clinically. Together, all these results above confirmed that P4-3 is a promising agent against driver-negative NSCLC.
 

## Discussion
The advent of precision therapies targeting oncogenic drivers such as EGFR and ALK has undeniably transformed the landscape of advanced NSCLC management. However, two critical challenges remain pervasive: the emergence of acquired resistance, with a median progression-free survival ranging from 10 to 14 months, and the substantial proportion of patients (30–40%) who present with driver-negative tumours that lack actionable targets. , While PROTAC-based strategies targeting resistant mutations, such as EGFR T790M/C797S, have shown promise in partially restoring therapeutic efficacy, their applicability is often restricted to specific genomic contexts, thereby failing to address the complexities associated with resistance in tumours characterised by extensive mutational burden. 
In response to these challenges, our study shifts the focus from the traditional "driver gene-centric" paradigm to the exploration of CD26, a transmembrane glycoprotein that is overexpressed in more than 85% of lung cancers and exhibits a low propensity for mutation. This shift presents CD26 as a novel PROTAC target, offering a new therapeutic strategy that holds the potential to extend treatment options to a broader spectrum of NSCLC patients, particularly those who are currently underserved by existing targeted therapies. As a multifunctional molecule, CD26 is involved in various biological processes, including metabolism and immune modulation. This strategy presents a unique advantage of PROTAC in cancer therapy. 
Our research led to the development of four CD26-directed PROTACs, with P4-3 and P4-4 demonstrating optimal degradation efficiency. A critical aspect of our findings is the influence of linker design on PROTAC activity. While flexibility is a hallmark of effective PROTACs, , , excessive chain length can introduce entropic penalties that impair functionality. Notably, P4-3, which incorporates a moderately elongated and flexible linker, achieved over 80% CD26 degradation within 12 h in both EGFR wild-type H460 and H1299 cell lines. This substantial degradation translated into potent anti-proliferative effects, evidenced by a 24-h EC50 of 9.18 ± 0.48 μM, while exhibiting minimal toxicity in normal lung epithelial BEAS-2B cells, which maintained over 90% viability. This selective toxicity is particularly significant given the tumour-specific overexpression of CD26, as confirmed by comparative immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry of tumour versus adjacent tissues.
Mechanistically, clathrin-mediated endocytosis was identified as the predominant route for P4-3-induced CD26 internalisation—a key process enabling cytoplasmic PROTAC delivery and subsequent degradation. Conversely, alogliptin or lenalidomide-C5-acid failed to induce significant CD26 internalisation. Previous results suggested that diffusion model of biomolecules into cells could be transferred from free diffusion to active endocytosis by compounds with MW > 500 Da, , , which is well consistent with our results here. In addition, our results suggested that p97 might play an important role in shuttling CD26 from endosomal compartments to the proteasome, resulting subsequent degradation. Such mechanistic insights highlight a unique advantage of CD26 degraders over conventional inhibitors: i.e., their abilities to leverage size-dependent cellular trafficking machinery to enhance target engagement and degradation efficacy, which a feature critical for potently ablating multifunctional membrane proteins like CD26. The loss of CD26 triggers the dissociation of membrane-bound ADA into the cytosol, leading to a depletion of intracellular adenosine levels. This depletion of adenosine may lead to the inhibition of ATP synthesis in tumours, inducing mitochondrial oxidative stress which characterised by elevated levels of ROS and a collapse of the mitochondrial membrane potential, ultimately activating caspase-3-dependent apoptosis ( ). Importantly, while conventional CD26 inhibitors may partially suppress enzymatic activity, P4-3's ability to simultaneously target both enzymatic and structural functions pertly reflects the unique advantage of PROTACs in targeting multifunctional proteins.
 The clinical implications of this innovative strategy are profound. CD26 overexpressions in driver-negative tumours provide a rationale for target. Moreover, the metabolism-centric mechanism of P4-3, which operates independently of established EGFR/AKT pathways, supports the potential for synergistic interactions with existing targeted therapies. In preclinical models, including patient-derived organoids and CDX, P4-3 monotherapy resulted in significant tumour regression without evidence of hepatic or renal toxicity, both suspected complications associated with CD26 inhibition. These findings imply the potential of P4-3 as a genotype-independent therapeutic agent, hoping for addressing the unmet needs of a diverse patient population. Our findings show that CD26 can be degraded by P4-3 can effectively, and this degradation will induce apoptosis in driver-negative cancer cells. To further validate its clinical translation potential, future studies should evaluate P4-3 in a wider range of preclinical models, including diverse cell lines and patient-derived tumour xenograft models. It is particularly important to assess its efficacy in varying tumour microenvironments, such as its ability to penetrate the blood-brain barrier in cases of brain metastases.
While our results indicate that degradation of CD26 could be a promising strategy for driver-negative NSCLC, several limitations remain. Firstly, the integration of our multi-omics data revealed a temporal dissociation between proteomic and transcriptomic responses—while proteomic analysis at 9 h showed selective CD26 degradation, RNA-seq at 24 h captured broad transcriptional reprogramming (426 up-regulated and 705 down-regulated genes). The apparent discrepancy between significant transcript-level changes and limited protein-level alterations can be attributed to several factors: temporal mismatches (9 h proteomics vs. 24 h RNA-seq sampling), the stringent fold-change threshold applied in proteomic analysis, and potential limitations in proteome coverage that may mask moderate functional changes. Although we have provided complete differential gene and protein lists in the (Differential RNA list and Differential protein list) to enhance reproducibility, future studies would benefit from multi-time point designs to resolve the kinetic relationship between degradation and transcriptional adaptation. Secondly, the potential synergistic effects of P4-3 with targeted inhibitors in driver-positive NSCLC models remain unexplored, and validation in larger patient-derived cohorts is necessary to confirm the broad applicability of this degrader. Mechanistically, despite the clathrin/dynamin-dependent endocytosis pathway as the primary internalisation route of CD26 induced by P4-3, the subsequent precise mechanism of and p97-mediated extraction of CD26 is still unclear. Although the results that CD26 can be degraded through the proteasome pathway under normal physiological conditions are supported by our data and previous reports together, what triggers it remains unclear. Additionally, the long-term biocompatibility should be evaluated in the near future.
In conclusion, the development of CD26-PROTACs represents a promising approach in driver-negative NSCLC therapy. Harnessing PROTAC-mediated non-enzymatic proteolytic properties a shift focus from mutation-centric to protein-structure targeting has been realised. This strategy may also offer a framework to address the challenges posed by limited options after targeted therapy resistance. Future research should focus on optimising PROTACs design for enhanced efficacy, elucidating the detailed mechanisms of CD26 in tumour biology, and validating the clinical relevance of CD26 as a therapeutic target across diverse patient populations. This multifaceted approach may ultimately lead to more effective and inclusive treatment strategies for all types of NSCLC, significantly improving patient outcomes.

## Contributors
G. J. Zhang, B. H. Liu, and Q. Y. Gong conceptualised and designed the project. B. H. Liu, D. Q. Qiao, X. Z. Zhu, and J. Q. Huang performed the experiments and analysed the results. R. Gao and L. J. Zhang provided suggestions on cell line and animal models construction. W. B. He assisted to complete molecular docking and dynamics calculations. Y. J. Huang provided suggestions on compound synthesis. G. J. Zhang, J. Z. Wang, Y. J. Huang, and Q. Y. Gong supervised the project. G. J. Zhang, B. H. Liu, S. Gao, and Q. Y. Gong wrote the manuscript. G. J. Zhang, B. H. Liu, D. Q. Qiao, and Q. Y. Gong have accessed and verified the underlying data. All authors meet the requirement for data access and verification, with G. J. Zhang ensuring alignment with study objectives. All authors discussed and commented on the manuscript. All authors contributed to the work and have read and approved the final version of the manuscript.

## Data sharing statement
RNA-seq data have been deposited in the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database (PRJNA1334514, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/PRJNA1334514). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD068995. All the data are available upon request to the corresponding authors.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

## Acknowledgements
Authors thank the support from the Centre for Translational Medicine, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University and Shaanxi Weiyuan Biomedical Research Institute Co., Ltd. This study was funded by the Key Research and Development Project of Shaanxi Province (2023-YBSF-292), the opening foundation (M2022-3) from Key Laboratory of Optic-Electric Sensing and Analytical Chemistry for Life Science, Ministry of Education, Qingdao University of Science and Technology, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82102976, 52203337), the Youth Top Talent Program (11301223010722) from Xi’an Jiaotong University, the Key Research and Development Project of Shaanxi Province (2024SF-ZDCYL-02-09) and Capacity Improvement Plan of Shaanxi Health Committee (2024PT-09).

## Footnotes
Appendix ASupplementary data related to this article can be found at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2025.106026.

## Contributor Information
Jizhao Wang, Email: wangjz1104@xjtu.edu.cn.
Yinjuan Huang, Email: huangyj@xjtu.edu.cn.
Qiuyu Gong, Email: gongqiuyu@xjtu.edu.cn.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary data

## Supplementary Information

## Full Western Blots

## Cell Line STR Results

## Differential protein list

## Differential RNA list

## Reagent Validation

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Supplementary Information

## Full Western Blots

## Cell Line STR Results

## Differential protein list

## Differential RNA list

## Reagent Validation