pmciScienceiScience3532isciiScience2589-0042ElsevierPMC12341531PMC12341531.112341531123415314079938910.1016/j.isci.2025.113149S2589-0042(25)01410-51131491ArticleMyoD is essential in rhabdomyosarcoma by promoting survival through differentiation and CYLD
OlesAlexander R. YuPeter Y. UdemeAbasi-ama SharmaSudarshana LondhePriya PryceBenjamin R. TalbertErin E. HillEric M. MirandaCarlos J. KasparBrian K. ArnoldMichael A. HylandJack LondonCheryl A. HoughtonPeter J. WangDavid J. RobertsRyan D. GuttridgeDenis C.guttridg@musc.edu 1Department of Pediatrics, Darby Children’s Research Institute, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA2Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, The Ohio State University Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA3Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA4Department of Health and Human Physiology, and the Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA5Department of Pediatrics, Center for Gene Therapy, Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH 43205, USA6Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children’s Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA7Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA8Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, USA9Greehey Children’s Cancer Research Institute, University of Texas, San Antonio, TX 23220, USA10Department of Pediatrics, Center for Childhood Cancer, Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH 43205, USA∗Corresponding author guttridg@musc.edu11Lead contact
1582025187202528849331311314993202322420251552025180720251208202513082025© 2025 The Author(s)2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Summary
Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft tissue cancer among children, characterized by a skeletal muscle lineage that is impaired from undergoing terminal differentiation. NF-κB is constitutively active in cancer cells and plays a critical role in cell survival. Although NF-κB is also activated in RMS, surprisingly, we find that these tumors are far less dependent on NF-κB for their survival. Instead, RMS cells survive, paradoxically, by being partially differentiated under the control of the myogenic transcription factor MyoD. Loss of MyoD, or cellular reprogramming, dedifferentiates RMS tumor cells and sensitizes their death under stress. MyoD enhances RMS survival by regulating DNA methyltransferases, which in turn suppresses the tumor suppressor and pro-apoptotic gene CYLD. From these findings, we propose that MyoD acts as an oncogene in RMS by enhancing survival through pro-differentiation and anti-cell death activities.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•RMS cell survival is not dependent on NF-κB
•MyoD promotes RMS survival by maintaining cells in a partially differentiated state
•MyoD regulates DNA methyltransferases to suppress CYLD-mediated cell death
•MyoD exhibits oncogenic activities in RMS fusion positive and negative subtypes

Cell biology; Cancer

## Subject areas
Cell biologyCancerpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesPublished: July 18, 2025

## Introduction
Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a soft-tissue sarcoma diagnosed in approximately 350 children and teenagers in the United States each year. , , Multimodal therapy is curative in most cases, but for patients with high-risk RMS, the 5-year survival rate is less than 20%, a level that has not changed in the last 40 years , , Recent World Health Organization guidelines recognize four histological subtypes of RMS, but the majority of cases in the pediatric population are either embryonal (ERMS) or alveolar (ARMS) RMS. , These two subtypes often have distinct clinical characteristics, but more recently, genetics have contributed in distinguishing their diagnosis and risk-stratification for treatment protocols. , While ERMS tumors account for a majority of cases, ARMS tumors are much more clinically aggressive, implying a difference in underlying biology. 
ERMS is genetically diverse, with a greater mutational burden and aneuploidy rate than the ARMS subtype. ERMS mutations typically involve loss of heterozygosity at chromosome 11p15 or mutations in the RAS, FGFR4, TP53, NF1, PIK3CA, BCOR, or FBXW7 gene that correlate with worse outcomes. , Conversely, nearly 80% of ARMS tumors contain an oncogenic fusion gene consisting of the DNA binding domain of myogenic homeobox transcription factors, PAX3 or PAX7, and the transactivation domain of FOXO1, resulting in a PAX3::FOXO1 or PAX7::FOXO1 fusion gene. The presence of the fusion gene itself has been implicated as a marker of poor survival in patients. , As such, the denotation of fusion positive (FP) or fusion negative (FN) RMS is now a standard reference because of its clinical meaningfulness. , Additionally, a recent international effort linked the presence of TP53 or MYOD1 mutations to poor outcomes in intermediate-risk group patients. , 
While the two subtypes vary in driver mutations, phenotypically, all RMS subtypes are thought to share origins with skeletal muscle or its precursor tissue. In order to diagnose a sarcoma as RMS, there must be evidence of embryonic skeletal myogenesis, as indicated by expression of myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs) and other skeletal myogenic markers such as desmin or myosin. , MRFs are a family of four basic-helix-loop-helix E-box binding transcription factors which include MyoD (MYOD1), Myf5, myogenin, and MRF4 (Myf6). , These factors function in concert to control the stepwise process of skeletal muscle determination and differentiation. , Unlike normal skeletal muscle, terminal differentiation is impaired in RMS cells due to the perturbation of the MRF transcriptional network, preventing growth arrest and myofiber formation. , Although recent comprehensive genomic analyses support the hypothesis that RMS tumor cells are partially differentiated along the skeletal muscle lineage, , a longstanding paradigm in the field has been that overcoming the differentiation block may provide a therapeutic strategy for this lethal pediatric cancer that would be applicable to all RMS subtypes. , 
Our own laboratory conformed to this paradigm and previously reported that the classical signaling pathway of NF-κB is constitutively active in RMS and contributes to this pathology by inhibiting differentiation, analogous to how classical NF-κB impairs skeletal myogenesis. , However, because NF-κB functions generally in oncogenesis as a regulator of survival, , , , , , we asked whether NF-κB survival activity regulates RMS pathogenesis. Surprisingly, we discovered that unlike seemingly every other solid or hematopoietic tumor cell, RMS cells do not require NF-κB to survive. Instead, RMS tumors are protected from cytotoxic or genotoxic stress by their partially differentiated state induced and maintained by MyoD, but not other MRFs. We further find that MyoD mediates RMS cell survival by directly regulating DNA methyltransferases (DNMT), linked to the repression of the tumor suppressor and pro-apoptotic gene, cylindromatosis (CYLD). These results challenge the longstanding paradigm for how MyoD functions in RMS pathogenesis.

## Results

## RMS tumor cells resist stress-induced cell death independent of NF-κB
We previously showed that NF-κB is constitutively active in RMS, and functions by impairing differentiation through epigenetic silencing of the pro-myogenic microRNA, miR-29. , In normal muscle, this miR contributes to skeletal myogenesis and prevents RMS by targeting the anti-myogenic transcription factor YY1 and silencing the pro-tumorigenic activity of the mRNA binding protein HuR, respectively. In addition to inhibiting differentiation, we asked whether NF-κB could also function in RMS as a survival factor. To make this determination, we virally transduced FP (alveolar; RH30) and FN (embryonal; RD) RMS cells with a transdominant inhibitor of NF-κB, referred to as the IκBα-Super Repressor (IκBα-SR; A). Vector control and IκBα-SR expressing cells were subsequently stressed with the addition of the cytokine, tumor necrosis factor (TNF; 5 ng/mL), or the chemotherapeutic compound, doxorubicin (DOX; 1 μM), both of which accentuate apoptosis in cells lacking NF-κB. To our surprise, IκBα-SR expressing RH30 and RD cells were resistant to TNF and DOX mediated killing, as compared to vector control cells, and irrespective of the vehicle ( A). This was not cell line specific, as similar results were confirmed with other RMS FP (RH3, RH5, RH18, and RH36), and FN (RD2) tumor cells ( B). As a control, a similar approach was taken with a panel of epithelial (A549 – lung, Panc2 – pancreas, DU145 – prostate, LNCAP – prostate, MDA231 – breast) and hematopoietic (Jurkat – T cell, 697 – B cell) tumor lines ( B and S1C). As anticipated, and supported by a widely accepted literature, , epithelial and lymphoid tumor cells expressing IκBα-SR were sensitive to cytokine and genotoxic stress-induced apoptosis ( C and 1D). To ensure the inactivation of NF-κB in RMS cells, we clonally selected an RH30 cell line stably expressing the IκBα-SR transgene and tested for NF-κB activity. Despite nearly complete absence of NF-κB DNA binding ( E), RMS cells continued to resist stress mediated killing by TNF or DOX ( F). Furthermore, doubling the concentrations of TNF on RH30 IκBα-SR cells did not significantly increase cell death compared to similarly treated MDA231 IκBα-SR breast cancer cells ( D). This resistance to stress was also not specific to DOX, since RH30 IκBα-SR cells were resistant to other chemotherapeutic compounds, etoposide and camptothecin ( E). To account for any nonspecific effects of the IκBα-SR transgene, NF-κB was also inhibited using an siRNA targeting the p65 subunit of the transcription factor in A549 lung cancer cells and RH30 cells ( F and S1G). Knockdown of p65 in A549 cells significantly enhanced TNF-induced cell death, while having little to no effect on survival in RH30 cells ( H). Together, these data reveal that unlike epithelial and hematopoietic tumors, RMS possesses a unique ability to overcome a susceptibility to stress-induced cell death in the absence of NF-κB. 
Since RMS is linked to a myogenic lineage, we asked whether a similar survival mechanism existed in skeletal muscle. C2C12 myoblasts stably expressing IκBα-SR were visibly more sensitive to TNF-induced cell death than vector control ( G). However, once differentiated into myotubes, IκBα-SR expressing C2C12 cells appeared resistant to cell death. To determine if this difference was due to differentiation of myoblasts, we induced vector and IκBα-SR expressing C2C12 myoblasts to differentiate for various times and subsequently added TNF for 24 h. Whereas TNF again sensitized IκBα-SR expressing myoblasts, cell death was significantly reduced in differentiating IκBα-SR cells ( H). This resistance to cell death in differentiated muscle was not due to a post-mitotic condition, since IκBα-SR expressing C2C12 myoblasts forced to exit the cell cycle with mitomycin C treatment remained sensitive to TNF ( I). Cell-cycle arrest was confirmed with BrdU staining and cell growth curves ( J and S1K). Collectively, these results suggest that differentiated myocytes resist cell death when lacking NF-κB signaling.

## RMS survival is mediated by the selective activity of MyoD
Although RMS tumors are considered incapable of completing terminal differentiation, given our results obtained in differentiated muscle cells, we questioned whether the unique ability of RMS cells to resist cell death when lacking NF-κB related to their muscle lineage. , To test this, we probed for expression of myogenic differentiation markers in RH30 cells. The mRNA and protein levels of MRFs, MyoD and myogenin, and contractile protein, myosin heavy chain (MyHC), were markedly greater in RH30 cells compared to human muscle myoblasts, with similar findings with troponin T (TnnT) mRNA ( A). Although expression of MyoD and myogenin in RMS is well documented, , the drastic difference in expression of MyHC in these cells was surprising. To probe whether clonal variance among RH30 cells accounted for elevated levels of myogenic genes, we performed single cell qRT-PCR analyses. Results from violin plots showed that levels of MyoD, myogenin, MyHC, and TnnT were uniformly expressed in RH30 cells ( A and ). A further investigation of an RMS patient dataset, , analyzed by the R2 Genomics Analysis and Visualization Platform, showed expression of terminally differentiated myogenic genes, including MyoD and myogenin ( C). Together, these results reveal that RMS tumors exhibit characteristics of terminal differentiation. 
Next, we tested whether, similar to C2C12 myotubes, this differentiation phenotype of RMS cells could serve as a survival mechanism in the absence of NF-κB. Since MyoD is a master regulator of muscle differentiation, , , we depleted this factor with a targeted sh-RNA (sh-MyoD) in FP and FN IκBα-SR expressing cells (RH30-SR and RD-SR; B). We confirmed that knocking down MyoD reduced expression of differentiation genes, myogenin, MyHC, TnnT, and myomaker ( D). Significantly, knocking down MyoD in RH30-SR and RD-SR cells also reversed resistance to cytokine and genotoxic mediated killing ( E). Deletion of MyoD using CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing (MyoDΔ; C) produced an even greater stress-induced cell death response (expressed as both relative and absolute cell death, respectively; F, D, and S2E). This again correlated with reduced expression of differentiation genes ( F), which we further verified by performing a transcriptomic analysis comparing MyoDΔ to control cells. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis revealed that downregulated genes, due to loss of MyoD, associated with pathways of muscle contraction and differentiation ( G). These results support the conclusion that decreasing differentiation of RMS cells leads to stress-induced cell death. To further test the specificity of MyoD in regulating cell survival, we reconstituted MyoDΔ cells with a wildtype copy of MyoD (MyoDWT; G). Results showed that MyoDWT rescued death in RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells ( H), but a similar rescue was not achieved with the MyoD mutant, MYOD1L122R which impairs myoblast differentiation. 
Myogenin belongs to the same family of skeletal muscle-specific transcription factors as MyoD. , Although both MRFs are expressed in RMS alveolar/FP and embryonal/FN subtypes, immunohistochemical staining of patient samples showed that expression of MyoD and myogenin was significantly higher in the more aggressive and treatment-resistant alveolar/FP subtype ( A, 3B, and A). A similar increase in MyoD and myogenin was demonstrated in alveolar/FP and embryonal/FN Orthotopic-Patient Derived Xenografts (O-PDXs) ( B and S3C). We hypothesized from these results that myogenin should phenocopy the survival function of MyoD in RMS cells exposed to stress. However, when myogenin was depleted with a targeted sh-RNA (sh-myogenin) in RH30-SR cells, results showed that these cells remained resistant to stress ( C and D). In addition, although myogenin shares similar functions to MyoD in regulating myogenesis, myogenin knockdown in RH30-SR cells had no significant effect on MyHC, TnnT, or myomaker gene expression ( D). This was confirmed by performing single cell qRT-PCR analysis where we observed that unlike MyoD whose expression in RH30 cells correlates highly with expression of MyHC and TnnT, this correlation is profoundly reduced for myogenin ( E). Therefore, in contrast to MyoD, myogenin does not function as a survival factor in RMS tumor cells due to its lack of regulation of differentiation. Since myogenesis is also regulated by MRFs, Myf5 and MRF4, as well as cooperative myocyte enhancing factors (MEF2), , we asked if any of these factors could contribute to RMS survival. Using a similar sh-RNA targeting strategy, results showed that only the loss of MyoD, but not Myf5, MRF4, MEF2C, or MEF2D, sensitized RMS cells to stress-induced cell death ( E and F). Our data were further supported by DepMap results that showed in a panel of RMS cell lines that MyoD had the strongest dependence on cell survival compared to other MRFs ( F). , Using the same RMS patient dataset as described in , we also observed that high expression of MyoD, but not myogenin or other MRFs or MEF2 factors, correlated with significantly worse patient survival outcomes ( G, 3H, and G). Notably, when RMS cell lines were ranked based on their dependency on MyoD, RH30 scored at −1.29 ( H), an indication that these tumor cells are dependent on MyoD (<−1.0). Yet, when we deleted MyoD from RH30 cells, we observed only minimal effects on survival and proliferation, compared to vector cells ( I and S3J). In contrast, similar deletion of MyoD from RD and RH4 cells, whose Chronos scores on DepMap are −1.55 and −1.58, respectively, caused significantly more death, and to the best of our abilities we were unsuccessful in maintaining these cells in culture, indicative of their high dependence on MyoD for survival activity ( K). Furthermore, RMS cells showed no dependency on the p65 subunit of NF-κB ( I), which supports our earlier conclusion that survival of these tumors is independent of NF-κB. 

## RMS survival is mediated through a partial differentiation phenotype
If differentiation provides a survival advantage for RMS tumors, we speculated that forcing RMS cells to exit the myogenic lineage into a more primitive, pluripotent state should render these cells even more sensitive to dying in the presence of stress. To test this, we infected RH30-SR cells with lentiviruses expressing the Yamanaka factors (Oct3/4, Klf4, c-Myc, Sox2; referred to as OKMS) ( A) to induce cellular reprogramming. Compared to control cells, expression of OKMS factors caused the induction of some stem cells markers, FoxA1 and FoxA3 ( A), as well as the reduced expression of mesenchymal lineage genes (myogenesis, chondrogenesis, and osteogenesis) ( B). This showed that RH30-SR cells were successfully reprogrammed. Importantly, treatment of reprogrammed RH30-SR cells with TNF caused a dramatic increase in cell death, a level 6-fold higher than what was achieved with TNF treated RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells ( C). This supported the notion that RMS cells depend on their differentiation phenotype as a survival mechanism against stress. 
To examine the in vivo relevance of our findings, we injected RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells into SCID mice, expecting that a stronger biological stress under in vivo conditions would consequently affect tumor development due to the absence of both NF-κB and MyoD. While SCID mice injected with RH30-SR vector cells produced tumors that reached endpoint at a median of 42 days ( D and 4E), mice injected with two separate RH30-SR MyoDΔ clonally selected cell lines failed to develop tumors even after 180 days of observation. This inability to form tumors was not due to a proliferation defect since growth in culture was comparable to vector cells ( B). Furthermore, soft agar colony formation assays revealed no difference between RH30-SR and RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells in anchorage independent growth ( C), suggesting that deletion of MyoD in these cells did not affect their transformation potential.
The ability of tumor cells to overcome immune surveillance is essential for tumor development. Because SCID mice retain an innate immune system that includes inflammatory macrophages secreting TNF, we speculated that the failure of RH30-SR MyoDΔ tumors to form in mice was related to the sensitivity to the biological stress caused by infiltrating immune cells. To test this, we injected RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells into the peritoneum of SCID mice. Results showed that equal amounts of macrophages were recruited in response to injection of RH30-SR MyoDΔ compared to of RH30-SR vector control cells ( D). Next, we co-cultured RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells with increasing ratios of primary, activated inflammatory macrophages (0:1–20:1). Results showed that RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells were significantly more sensitive to macrophage-mediated killing compared to vector control RH30-SR cells ( F). Findings also showed that this sensitivity could be recapitulated with increasing ratios of secreted macrophage factors, TNF and nitric oxide (SNP) ( G), and further, that such killing was attenuated when RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells were co-cultured with TNF−/− macrophages ( E). Thus, it is likely that in vivo, developing RMS tumors use MyoD to resist stress from the immune surveillance activity of pro-inflammatory macrophages.
Since we observed that RH30-SR vector cells could establish tumors, we next asked whether such tumors could be sensitized to stress upon their dedifferentiation, as shown in vitro. Therefore, we repeated subcutaneous injections of RH30-SR cells in SCID mice, and once tumors were palpable, intratumorally injected retroviruses expressing the OKMS reprogramming factors, using GFP virus as a control. Results showed that intra-tumoral expression of OKMS factors reprogrammed tumors by reducing levels of differentiation factors, MyoD, myogenin, and TnnT1 ( F). To test the translational potential of these findings, mice were treated with standard of care chemotherapy, vincristine, one week post retrovirus injections. Compared to GFP-injected tumors, reprogrammed RH30-SR tumors responded to vincristine administration, and tumor regression continued throughout the course of treatment ( H). Collectively, these in vivo results are consistent with in vitro findings and strongly suggest that RMS tumors resist cell death through MyoD regulating a partially differentiated phenotype.

## MyoD directly regulates DNA methyltransferases to inhibit death genes in RMS
To gain further insight on the mechanism by which MyoD regulates RMS survival, we mined publicly available ChIP-seq datasets from the ENCODE Consortium and examined genome-wide coverage of MyoD in RMS tumor cells. When genes enriched for MyoD peaks were queried for pathway enrichment analysis, surprisingly, networks of stemness-related pathways (PSCs; pluripotent stem cells) were more prominently displayed than pathways related to myogenesis, muscle movement, and muscle contraction ( A). Examination of these stemness networks revealed genes with MyoD enrichment peaks corresponding to stemness genes CDH2, FOXA1, FOXA3, Hes1, and Zeb1. From this in silico evidence we considered that MyoD might function as a negative regulator of stemness genes to maintain RMS cells in a partially differentiated state. However, after repeated attempts, we were unable to confirm that stemness genes we had identified could be uniformly repressed by MyoD ( B).
We then took an alternative approach and compared transcriptomes between RH30-SR and RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells to identify RMS genes regulated by MyoD, but independent of NF-κB survival activity. Of the 2,474 differentially expressed genes (DEGs, FC > 25%, FDR <0.05), 1,358 were downregulated and 1,116 were upregulated, which represented genes that were activated and repressed by MyoD, respectively ( A). We then combined transcriptomics with MyoD ChIP-seq datasets obtained from RH4 and RD cell lines, , and observed that of the 1,116 upregulated genes, 82% in RH4 and 60% in RD cells lacked MyoD enrichment peaks ( C). This was revealing given that MyoD is an established transcriptional activator that binds to E box consensus sites in promoters and enhancers of myogenic genes. Such results indicated that MyoD can function in RMS as a transcriptional repressor independent of DNA binding. To gain greater insight into the identity of these 1,116 repressed genes, we used GO pathway analysis. Interestingly, regulators of cell death and apoptotic pathways were notably enriched ( B), implying that MyoD might enhance RMS cell survival through the suppression of cell death-related genes. Upon additional analysis, the 160 death genes identified belonged to the regulation of programmed cell death ontology (GO:0043067). Further annotation using the UCSC genome browser revealed that 123/160, or 77%, of these death genes contained CpG islands, compared to 747/1116, or 67%, of all upregulated genes ( D). , Since we previously described that MyoD is capable of altering the chromatin status during skeletal muscle differentiation, we assessed if chromatin remodeling occurs upon deletion of MyoD by performing an ATAC-seq analysis between RH30-SR and RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells. Results revealed that there was an approximately equal distribution of opened (8,624) and closed (8,483) chromatin regions upon loss of MyoD ( C). However, within the 160 death genes identified, 97/160, or 60%, exhibited areas of chromatin in a more open state ( E), and of those 97 death genes, 84/97, or 87%, contained CpG islands ( E). 
The methylation of CpG islands is controlled by DNMTs as an epigenetic mechanism to repress gene expression. Based on our multiomic analysis, we hypothesized that MyoD regulates RMS survival by inhibiting pro-death genes through DNMTs. Therefore, we treated RH30-SR cells with the DNMT inhibitor, decitabine (5-aza-2-deoxycytidine). Results showed that RMS cells were susceptible to decitabine, and cell death was significantly enhanced following the addition of TNF ( D). Since DNMT3A was identified as a downregulated gene in our RH30-SR MyoDΔ transcriptomic dataset ( F), we examined whether MyoD was a direct transcriptional activator of DNMTs. In RH30 MyoDΔ cells, DNMT1 and DNMT3A mRNA were significantly reduced, as compared to control cells ( E). In contrast, no changes were seen with levels of DNMT3B. Similar findings with respect to DNMT1 mRNA were observed in RH5 MyoDΔ cells ( G). In addition, regulation of DNMTs appeared specific to MyoD since similar regulation was not seen in RH30 Myf5Δ cells ( E). Furthermore, regulation of DNMTs by MyoD was also observed at the protein level ( F). Moreover, analysis of RMS MyoD ChIP-seq datasets revealed MyoD enrichment peaks throughout the DNMT3A gene in FP (RH4) and FN (RD) RMS cells ( G). This was supported by our own ATAC-Seq assays, which showed that regions of chromatin mapping to the DNMT3A gene were less accessible in RH30 MyoDΔ compared to vector cells, with several regions aligning with ChIP-seq MyoD peaks ( G, with composite, and H). Further analysis of RMS ChIP-seq datasets identified MyoD binding sites on the DNMT1 promoter and on several regions of the DNMT3B gene ( H). ChIP assays confirmed the binding of MyoD on multiple sites of all three DNMT genes ( I). Together, these results suggest that MyoD regulates DNMT expression to mediate the suppression of death genes in RMS tumor cells.

## Identification of CYLD as a MyoD regulated gene mediating RMS survival
To identify which death genes are repressed by MyoD to mediate RMS survival, we combined an in-silico analysis with a CRISPR Cas9 knockdown screen. From 160 death genes that were originally found to be upregulated in RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells, genes were filtered by the following criteria: (1) those that were upregulated >1.6-fold; (2) those that did not contain MyoD peaks; and (3) those genes that contained CpG islands. We also included genes that were upregulated in RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells belonging to other related pathways (autophagy, senescence, etc.) that fit these same criteria. Ultimately, 77 death related genes were identified and probed by qRT-PCR to identify genes repressed by MyoD ( A). That analysis narrowed the number of genes to 25, whose expression was upregulated >1.5-fold in RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells compared to vector control ( A and A). We then designed two pairs of sgRNAs for each of these 25 target genes and cloned these into lentiviruses to generate a mini sgRNA library. This CRISPR library was used to infect RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells (at 0.5 virus particles per cell) stably expressing Cas9. Following limited selection, we performed 4 cycles of stress with TNF treatment for 24 h ( B). Using this dosing scheme, we speculated that RH30 cells expressing sgRNA to target pro-death genes repressed by MyoD would be enriched in MyoD knockdown cells, as these RMS cells lacking MyoD would become resistant from TNF-induced cell death. After TNF treatment, qPCR was utilized to analyze sgRNA encoding sequences from genomic DNA extracted from both TNF treated and control cells. Results revealed significant enrichment for the CYLD gene ( C). A separate screen was repeated, with the exception that ∼16 virus particles per cell were utilized to account for the possible interaction of multiple gene interactions. Following TNF treatment and qPCR amplification, surviving cells were again enriched for CYLD ( B). A third screen was performed to test the validity of our findings by increasing the duration of TNF (10 ng/mL) to 48 h. Compared to scrambled sgRNA, infections with targeted sgRNAs led to significant survival, and once again amplifications of those sequences corresponded to CYLD ( C). Combined, these results identify CYLD as a putative repressed target of MyoD mediating RMS survival. 
To address the relevance of CYLD in RMS, we investigated its expression levels from the St. Jude Pediatric Tumor Gene Expression Dataset. Results showed that across multiple patient FP/ARMS and FN/ERMS tumors, CYLD was repressed relative to myoblasts and myotubes ( D). However, by ATAC-seq we observed that depleting MyoD from RH30 cells did not have a general effect on chromatin accessibility in the 5′ region of the CYLD gene ( D). Given that MyoD regulates DMNTs and CYLD was predicted to contain a CpG island, we then analyzed methylation of the CYLD gene using the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) dataset, generated from the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 (450K) BeadChip array platform, which targets 96% of CpG islands in the human genome. The CYLD promoter contains a CpG island measuring approximately 1Kb. However, methylation in this island was low or undetectable in multiple RMS cell lines ( E). In contrast, the 450K array platform identified three distinct methylation sites downstream of the CYLD promoter occupied in multiple RMS cells. Since the last two of these sites are located >18Kb outside the CYLD gene, we focused on the most proximal site to the promoter. We employed bisulfite PCR analysis on 6 loci between introns 6 and 9 from RH30 vector and RH30 MyoDΔ cells. From these loci, 5 were successfully amplified and cloned. Locus 3 and 5, which both exhibited a relatively high degree of methylation, showed reduced methylation in RH30 MyoDΔ cells compared to RH30 vector cells ( E). The remaining loci with low to moderate levels of methylation showed no observable dependence on MyoD. Together, these data suggested that the CYLD gene is methylated under the control of MyoD. Consistent with our bisulfite sequencing data, RH30 and RH5 RMS cells treated with decitabine showed elevated expression of CYLD ( E and 6F).

## MyoD targets CYLD to mediate survival in RMS by modulating necroptosis
In addressing the functional relevance of CYLD in RMS survival, western blot confirmed that RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells that survived TNF stress and enriched for CYLD sgRNAs were depleted in CYLD protein ( A). RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells were then infected with both pairs of CYLD sgRNA and treated with TNF to validate viability. Compared to scrambled sgRNAs (Vector) infected cells where TNF induced significant cell death, CYLD knockdown (CYLDΔ) exhibited a significant rescue on cell viability ( B and 7C). Notably, cell death induced by treating RH30-SR cells with TNF and decitabine was also rescued by CYLDΔ ( D). 
Because CYLD function has mainly been studied in the context of TNF signaling, we asked whether CYLD could mediate RMS survival in response to other stressors. RH30-SR MyoDΔ and RH30-SR MyoDΔ CYLDΔ cells were treated with DOX or other chemotherapeutics, vincristine, actinomycin D, etoposide, or camptothecin, and tested for viability. In contrast to the viability rescued by CYLDΔ in TNF treated in RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells, CYLDΔ was unable to rescue the viability of RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells following chemotherapeutics treatments ( A). Together, these findings suggest that MyoD suppression of CYLD leads to RMS survival in response to TNF stress-induced killing.
CYLD is a tumor suppressor mutated in familial cylindromatosis, a genetic condition that predisposes patients to neoplasms of the skin, and more recently, mutations in CYLD have been described in other cancers. , CYLD functions as a deubiquitinase (DUB) and promotes cell death by two major mechanisms; one through the cleavage of polyubiquitin linkages on RIPK1, which activates the kinase and upregulates RIP3 to promote necroptosis, and second by deubiquitinating several upstream regulators of the NF-κB signaling pathway, which inhibits cell survival through the activation of caspase mediated apoptosis. To further explore the functional relevance of CYLD in RMS, we examined downstream targets of CYLD when cell death is induced in response to TNF in RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells. Results showed that RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells were capable of phosphorylating RIPK1 when treated with TNF ( E). However, cells were partially rescued from death following treatment with a RIPK1 inhibitor ( F), suggesting that MyoD regulates CYLD in RMS to limit necroptosis. When we then examined effects on NF-κB signaling in RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells treated with TNF, no significant changes were observed compared to RH30 cells, either by assaying NF-κB reporter activity or NF-κB target genes ( G and 7H). Such data demonstrated that the IκBα-SR functionally maintains NF-κB inhibition, regardless of CYLD function. Together, these findings suggest that in response to cytokine stress, RMS survival is dependent on the suppression of CYLD, mediated by DNMTs under the control of MyoD.

## Discussion
In this study, we initially probed into the relevance of the survival activity of NF-κB in RMS, but in the end discovered new mechanisms by which these cancer cells resist conditions of stress that might be meaningful to RMS pathogenesis. Our findings highlight the following conclusions: (1) In contrast to most epithelial and hematopoietic tumor cells that require NF-κB activity for survival, RMS cells, which are of mesenchymal lineage, are less dependent on NF-κB for survival; (2) in lieu of NF-κB, RMS tumor cells depend on their partially differentiated phenotype as a resistance mechanism against stress; (3) survival of RMS tumor cells through their differentiation phenotype is mediated by MyoD; (4) besides maintaining RMS tumors in a partially differentiated state, MyoD also functions in these tumors as a repressor of death related genes; (5) repression of these death genes is associated with CpG methylation and MyoD regulation of DNMTs; and (6) the tumor suppressor, CYLD, represents one type of death gene whose repression in RMS is mediated by MyoD, and required to promote RMS survival in response to cytokine stress.
Studies from the late 1990s deduced that NF-κB functions as a survival factor through direct transcriptional regulation of anti-apoptotic genes. Soon after, it was surmised that tumor cells treated with chemotherapeutic agents that activated NF-κB had a greater propensity to survive, a finding that has since proven to be a major mechanism of chemoresistance. , , Whether related to chemotherapy or cytokines such as TNF, which independently induce cell death, the last 25 years have produced a myriad of publications that have consistently shown that deletion of NF-κB activity in tumor cells accentuates stress-induced killing. As anticipated, our data recapitulated this dependence on NF-κB in a panel of epithelial and hematopoietic cell lines; however, we were unable to demonstrate similar dependence with FP and FN RMS tumor cells. Likewise, we previously showed in vivo that NF-κB signaling activity is required to suppress the differentiation of RMS, but this block is not sufficient to inhibit the development and progression of RMS. This leads us to conclude that unlike most solid and hematopoietic tumors that require NF-κB to overcome stress-induced killing, RMS represents a unique tumor type where the survival activity of NF-κB appears largely dispensable.
Our findings show that one mechanism that RMS tumor cells use to overcome their dependence on NF-κB is related to their partially differentiated phenotype. This was demonstrated in cultured myoblasts, where our data revealed that undifferentiated muscle cells lacking NF-κB were sensitive to stress, while those differentiated to myotubes were resistant to a similar stress. This was then confirmed when we reprogrammed both RMS cells and tumors with Yamanaka factors and showed that dedifferentiation caused their stress-induced death. Our findings are consistent with recent single cell and single nuclei RNA sequencing results, which revealed that clinically aggressive FP tumors correlate with a more differentiated phenotype. Still, to this point, what promotes RMS tumor cells to adopt this differentiation phenotype had not been determined.
In our study, we speculated that such a regulation could involve MRFs, since these factors are essential in establishing differentiation of muscle progenitors, and at least two of these MRFs, MyoD and myogenin, have been shown to be essential for post-natal muscle regeneration and development, respectively. , In addition, both MyoD and myogenin are used as diagnostic markers of RMS. , Our in vitro findings clearly showed that MyoD protects RMS tumor cells from stress to mediate their survival, results that were extrapolated to an in vivo setting. However, our results could not demonstrate a similar level of protection by myogenin, or to that matter, any of the other MRFs or MEF2 proteins. These data are well supported by results from the Broad Institute’s DepMap and the R2 Genomics Analysis and Visualization Platform. In both cases, among the MRFs and MEF2s tested, MyoD was identified as the most essential gene in RMS cell lines and displayed the strongest correlation with a negative patient outcome, respectively, which is consistent with earlier findings. , Together, these data support that MyoD regulates a partial myogenic differentiation phenotype in RMS tumor cells, which serves as a survival mechanism against stress. Furthermore, we propose that this role of MyoD might be one reason why RMS tumors overcome dependence on NF-κB’s pro-survival activity.
One additional avenue of investigation that we pursued in this study was to determine the mechanism by which MyoD regulated the differentiation phenotype of RMS tumor cells. Through an in silico analysis of MyoD ChIP-seq datasets, we were surprised to discover that aside from established binding of MyoD on differentiation genes, such as MyHC and TnnT, whose expression in RMS tumor cells we had shown to be dependent on MyoD, enrichment peaks were also significantly displayed on stemness genes. We hypothesized that MyoD functioned in repressing these stem genes to thereby promote a differentiation phenotype in RMS tumor cells. However, we were unable to experimentally support this hypothesis. We therefore undertook an alternative line of investigation that led us to uncover a novel regulatory pathway by which MyoD represses the expression of death related genes. Our data suggest that repression of death genes occurs through an epigenetic mechanism via CpG methylation, mediated indirectly through MyoD activation of DNMT gene expression. A targeted CRISPR screen identified the gene CYLD, , as a downstream target of MyoD. Results showed that the CYLD gene is repressed in RMS cells by DNMT activity and in addition is methylated at distinct CpG sites downstream of its promoter in a MyoD dependent manner. Although the functional relevance of CpG sites in the CYLD gene remain to be defined, knocking down CYLD rescued cell death in RMS tumor cells in response to TNF and use of a RIPK inhibitor supported that CYLD functions as a tumor suppressor in RMS through its established necroptotic signaling pathway. Collectively, these data provide fresh insight into the pathogenesis of RMS, by implicating MyoD as a direct regulator of DNMTs to mediate repression of CYLD, which in turn enhances survival of RMS. We suspect that future CRISPR screens will reveal additional unique death genes repressed by MyoD and DNMTs that lead to RMS survival under chemotherapy or other stress conditions.
Cumulatively, our findings are in line with a previous report that MyoD functions in RMS as an oncogene, rather than as a tumor suppressor as it has long been suggested. A standing paradigm in the RMS field has been that MyoD is impaired in regulating myogenesis, and that rescuing MyoD to promote differentiation might be an efficacious therapeutic strategy to combat this childhood cancer. , Based on our current results, we suspect that such a strategy would be effective in inducing growth arrest, but in promoting this static condition would also allow tumor cells a survival advantage to overcome stress conditions imposed by chemotherapy or other treatment regimens, thereby potentially worsening patient outcome.

## Limitations of the study
Our functional data indicate that the effects of MyoD loss on cell survival in RH30 and RD cells were significantly amplified by concurrent suppression of NF-κB activity. As such, the relative contribution of MyoD to survival when NF-κB signaling is intact remains unresolved and will need to be further explored. In addition, the reliance on TNF in our CRISPR screen may have limited the identification of genes involved in more generalized stress responses. Future screens exposed to diverse stress conditions are needed to yield a more complete picture of MyoD-regulated survival networks. Lastly, our study did not define the mechanism by which MyoD regulates DNA methylation at the CYLD locus. A follow up study will determine whether MyoD recruits DNMTs or functions through intermediate chromatin remodeling pathways.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Denis C. Guttridge (guttridg@musc.edu).

## Materials availability
Reagents generated in this study will be made available from the lead contact upon request.

## Data and code availability

•ATAC-seq and microarray raw datasets and analyzed data generated for this manuscript can be found on the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO GSE224179).
•Original code for data analysis code has been deposited at Zenodo and is available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15747354.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
We thank V. Spadafora and S. Miller of the Guttridge laboratory for their feedback and discussions throughout the course of this study. We are also grateful to members of the Roberts laboratory for their advice in bioinformatics and The Ohio State University Sarcoma Research Laboratory for their support and guidance during the early phases of this project. We are also extremely thankful to K. Kelly and C. Plass from the German Cancer Research Center and A. De Cubas from MUSC for their collective assistance in analyzing the CYLD gene for methylation. Support for this study was provided by NIH/NCI grants R01 CA235074 to D.C.G., R.D.R., and D.J.W., P01 CA163995 to P.J.H., C.A.L., D.C.G., R.D.R., D.J.W., and P.L., F30 CA265071 to A.R.O. and an 10.13039/100006108NIH NCATS award TL1 TR001451 to A.R.O.

## Author contributions
A.R.O., D.J.W., P.L., B.R.P., A.-A.U., S.S., P.Y.Y., E.E.T., E.M.H., C.J.M., B.K.K., J.H., C.A.L., P.J.H., and D.C.G. conceptualized, designed, and performed the experiments. A.R.O., D.J.W., B.R.P., S.S., M.A.A., R.D.R., and D.C.G. were involved in the methodology and A.R.O., S.S., P.Y.Y., and R.D.R. performed the bioinformatics and statistical analysis. A.R.O., P.Y.Y., B.R.P., and P.L. validated the data. D.C.G. planned and outlined the manuscript and the original draft was written by A.R.O. and D.C.G., while editing was performed by all the authors. A.R.O., D.J.W., and D.C.G. led the supervision and D.C.G. the project administration. A.R.O., E.E.T., C.A.L., P.J.H., R.D.R., and D.C.G. were involved in acquiring the funding to support the work.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing conflicts of interests.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and subject details

## Animals
This study was performed in accordance with ARRIVE guidelines. All animal experiments were approved by The Ohio State University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee under protocol 2010A00000177 and the Medical University of South Carolina by the Animal Research Multiple Project Assurance (MPA# MUSC—D16-00268 (A3428-01)). All animals were housed in the animal facility at the MUSC with constant temperature and humidity and fed a standard diet ad libitum with free access to water. All procedures and mouse treatments in conforming with appropriate regulation and guideline were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) under our animal protocol, IACUC-2024–01711, at MUSC. Female 10–12 -week-old SCIDICR mice (RRID:IMSR_TAC:icrsc) weighing 22–30 grams were randomly divided into control or experimental groups prior to experiments.

## Cell lines and culture conditions
The cell lines A549 (Cat# CCL-185, RRID:CVCL_0023), Panc2 (Cat# CRL-2553, RRID:CVCL_1633), DU145 (Cat# HTB-81, RRID:CVCL_0105), LNCAP (Cat# CRL-1740, RRID:CVCL_1379), MDA231 (Cat#HTB-26, RRID:CVCL_0062), C2C12 (Cat# CRL-1772, RRID:CVCL_0188) and 293T (CRL-3216) were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and cultured in DMEM (Corning Cat# 10-017-CV) supplemented with 10% heat inactivated FBS (R&D systems Cat# S11150H) and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (Corning Cat# 30-001-CI). Rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines RH30 (male, RRID:CVCL_0041), RD (female, RRID:CVCL_1649), RH18 (RRID:CVCL_1659), RH5 (RRID:CVCL_5917), RH3 (RRID:CVCL_L415), RH36 (RRID:CVCL_M599), RD2 and leukemia cell lines Jurkat (RRID:CVCL_0065) and 697 (RRID:CVCL_0079) were cultured in RPMI (Corning Cat# 10-040-CV) with 10% heat inactivated FBS and 1% antibiotics. C2C12 mouse myoblasts were differentiated in DMEM containing 2% horse serum (Corning). Human skeletal muscle myoblasts (hSk, Lonza Cat# CC-2580) were cultured in growth media per the supplier’s instructions. All cells were cultured in a humidified tissue culture hood at 37 with 5% CO2.

## Method details

## Materials
Chemicals for cell treatment included TNF (Roche, 11271156001), doxorubicin (DOX, Sigma-Aldrich Cat# D1515), etoposide (ETOP, Selleckchem Cat# S1225), camptothecin (CPT, Selleckchem Cat# S1288), vincristine (VIN, Tocris Cat# 1257), actinomycin D (ACTD, Selleckchem Cat# S8964), decitabine (Sigma Cat# A3656). Reagents for specific assays are listed below.

## Virus preparation and transduction of cell lines
Retrovirus expression plasmids were generated using with pBABE vector system. IκBα-Super Repressor (SR) was subcloned into both pBABE-puro (RRID:Addgene_1764) and pBABE-hygro (RRID:Addgene_1765) plasmids. The human MyoD coding sequence, derived from pEMC11s, was subcloned into pBABE-puro with an FLAG tag and was subjected to site-directed mutagenesis to produce pBABE-puro.MYOD.L122R. The Yamanaka factor retroviral expression vectors pMXs-hKLF4 (RRID:Addgene_17219), pMXs-hOCT3/4 (RRID:Addgene_17217), pMXs-hc-MYC (RRID:Addgene_17220), and pMXs-hSOX2 (RRID:Addgene_17218) were purchased from Addgene for cellular reprogramming experiments. All viruses were prepared by calcium phosphate mediated transfection kit (Promega Cat# PAE1200) with 293T cells using a mixture of standard retroviral or lentiviral packaging plasmids. Viruses were harvested from supernatant 48 h post transfection and purified by centrifugation 2,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C, followed by filtration with a 45 μm SFCA membrane filter (Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# 723–2545). Except otherwise indicated, approximately 5-10pfu/cell of viruses in a total volume of 4 mL/100 mm dished containing 4 mg/mL of polybrene (Sigma-Aldrich Cat# TR-1003) was utilized to transduce cells for 16 h. Infected cells were selected using antibiotics at empirically decided doses [puromycin (Gibco Cat# A1113803), hygromycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific 10687010), neomycin/G418 (Corning Cat# 61-234-RG), or blasticidin (Gibco Cat# A1113903)].

## siRNA and sh-RNA knockdown
A self-designed small interfering RNA (siRNA) scrambled and siRNA targeting the p65/RelA subunit of NF-κB were transfected into target cells using Lipofectamine 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# 11668027) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations ( ). Small hairpin RNA (sh-RNA) lentiviral plasmids were purchased from Horizon/Dharmacon to target Myogenic Regulatory Factors (MRFs) or Myocyte Enhancing Factors (MEFs). These included MyoD (Cat# V3LHS_370537, V3LHS_409996, V2LHS_15209), Myf5 (V2LHS_62144, V3LHS_340745, V3LHS_340746), myogenin (Cat# V2LHS_152118, V3LHS_398736, V3LHS_398737, V3LHS_398740), MRF4 (Cat# V2LHS_152060, V3LHS_395481, V3LHS_395482), MEF2C (Cat# V2LHS_151683, V2LHS_151686, V3LHS_370639, V3LHS_370640, V3LHS_370642), MEF2D (Cat# V3LHS_410959, V3LHS_376783, V3LHS_410961). A scramble sh-RNA (Horizon Cat# RHS4346) was used as a control. These sh-RNAs were either transfected into target cells using Lipofectamine 2000 or prepared into lentiviral particles and infected into cells followed by antibiotic selection. Degradation of target RNA and loss of protein were quantified by qRT-PCR or Western blot analysis, respectively.

## CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing
Small guide RNA (sgRNA) coding sequences were designed with CHOPCHOP (https://chopchop.cbu.uib.no/). After removing palindromic DNA sequence NGG, adequate sequences were added in front and after the coding sequence pairs to promote ligation into vectors and initiation of transcription. Oligos coding for sgRNA were synthesized by IDT DNA (https://www.idtdna.com/). In a total of 5 p.m., each forward and reverse synthesized oligos were annealed into double strand DNA in 50 μL solution containing 1× PCR buffer (Thermo Fisher, #14966001) on a thermocycler with a program as follows: 95°C (5 min) → 0.2°C/s → 85°C (incubate 30 s) → 0.1°C/s → 80°C (3 min) → 0.1°C/s → 75°C (4 min) → 0.1°C/s → 60°C (5 min) → 0.1°C/s → 37°C (60 min) → hold at 10°C. After annealing, 1 μL of annealed oligos were utilized for ligation into pX330 (RRID:Addgene_140610) or lenti-sgRNA (puro RRID:Addgene_104990 or neo RRID:Addgene_104992) vectors for expressing gene specific sgRNAs for Cas9 mediated gene knockout. For gene deletion with pX330, single cell clones were selected after lipofectamine mediated gene transfection. For lentivirus CRISPR technology, Cas9 enzyme was expressed on a separate lentiCas9-Blast construct (RRID:Addgene_52962) and infected cells were directly checked for gene knockout and used for experiments after antibiotic selection. An sgRNA designed from a random genomic DNA sequence without any similarities to human genome was utilized as a scramble control. See for sequences of sgRNA insert and their annealing oligos with adaptor sequences. Lentiviruses containing sgRNA targeting genes or Cas9 enzyme were prepared as mentioned above and co-infected in respective cell lines. Loss of protein expression was confirmed by Western blot analysis post antibiotic selection.

## CRISPR sgRNA library screen
A custom library containing two sgRNAs for each gene were synthesized to target 25 genes found regulated by MyoD ( ). After ligation into lenti-virus sgRNA expression vectors, equal amount of plasmid DNA was mixed and packaged into lentivirus particles as outlined above. RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells stably expressing the Cas9 enzyme were infected with the lentivirus library with undiluted virus or at a level of 0.5 particles per cell, determined empirically. Cells were maintained under antibiotic selection. Media was changed without selection 24 h before TNF treatment. Cells were treated with either 10 ng/mL TNF for 24 or 48 h. After treatment, cells were re-cultured in selection media and were allowed to recover for 72 h. This process was repeated for a total of 4 cycles in the 24 h treatment scheme or 2 cycles in the 48 h treatment regimen. A control plate of infected cells was passaged throughout each experiment. Genomic DNA was isolated with the DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (Qiagen Cat# 69504). The amount of sgRNA was quantified by qPCR of genomic DNA, standardizing the TNF treated samples to the untreated control.

## Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA)
EMSAs were performed to assess for NF-κB DNA binding activity as previously described. , 

## Immunoblotting and antibodies
Cell pellets were lysed with RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Abcam Cat# ab201111) and phosphatase inhibitors NaVO3 (1.25 mM, Sigma-Aldrich Cat# 5.08605) and PMSF (2 mM, Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# 36978). Protein concentration was measured with Bradford Assay Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# 23238). A total of 20 μg of protein sample was denatured in 4X SDS sample loading buffer at 95°C for 5 min. Lysate was resolved in 10–12% SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to nitrocellulose (GE Healthcare Cat# 10600002) or activated PVDF membrane (Millipore Cat# IPVH00010). Membranes were blocked in TBST (TBS, 0.1% Tween 20) buffer containing 5% non-fat milk (AppliChem Cat# A0830) while being agitated for 1 h at room temperature or 4°C overnight. Primary antibodies were incubated in 5% non-fat milk in TBST with NaN3 (0.02%). Membranes were washed with TBST 3–5 times for a minimum duration of 5 min before proceeding to incubation with HRP conjugated secondary antibody in 2.5% non-fat milk in TBST. Membranes were washed again in TBST prior to incubation with ECL (Cytiva Cat# RPN2232V1/2). Blots were imaged on a ChemiDoc (Biorad Cat# 12003153). Blots were stripped with stripping buffer (2% SDS, 62.5 mM Tris pH 6.8, 100 mM 2-mercaptoethanol) for re-probing. Antibodies used in this study included, IκBα (Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 9242, RRID:AB_331623), α-tubulin (Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# A11126, RRID:AB_2534135), p65/RelA (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Cat# sc-109, RRID:AB_632039), MyoD (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Cat# sc-377460, RRID:AB_2813894), Myf5 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Cat# sc-518039), myogenin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Cat# sc-52903, RRID:AB_784707), MRF4 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology sc-514379), MEF2C (Abcam Cat# ab211493, RRID:AB_2864417), MEF2D (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Cat# sc-271153, RRID:AB_10614669), MYHC (Sigma-Aldrich Cat# M8421, RRID:AB_477248), TnnT (Sigma-Aldrich Cat# SAB4200717, RRID:AB_2892079), CYLD (Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 4495, RRID:AB_10557111), p-RIPK1 (Proteintech Cat# 66854-1-Ig, RRID:AB_2882194), RIPK1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# PA5-20811, RRID:AB_11154790), DNMT1 (Novus Cat# NB100-56519, RRID:AB_838131), DNMT3A (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Cat# sc-365769, RRID:AB_10844010), DNMT3B (Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 67259, RRID:AB_2799723), and HRP conjugated secondary antibodies anti-mouse IgG (Promega Cat# W4021, RRID:AB_430834) and anti-rabbit IgG (Promega Cat# W4011, RRID:AB_430833).

## Semi-quantitative PCR (qPCR)
For qPCR Analysis, total RNA was isolated from either cell pellets or tumor samples using the High Pure RNA Isolation Kit (Roche, Cat# 11828665001) or TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen, Cat# 15596026). cDNA synthesis was performed using 3 μg of total RNA, oligo(dT) primers, and M-MLV reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Cat# 28025-013).
For single-cell qPCR, RH30 cells were harvested by trypsinization, washed with PBS, and resuspended at 1 million cells per mL in PBS containing 0.1% BSA and 1 μL/mL of cell survival dye (Invitrogen, Cat# L34975). RH30 cells were sorted into 96-well plates at 1 cell/well, with each well containing 2 μL of 50 mM guanidine thiocyanate.

## Reverse transcription (RT) for single-cell qPCR
Sorted cells were reverse transcribed into cDNA using SuperScript IV Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen, Cat# 18090200) with the following reaction setup in each well.(1)Add:a.OligodTVN (2 pmol/μL) – 1 μL.
b.10 mM dNTP mix – 1 μL.

(2)Incubate at 65°C for 10 min, then cool to room temperature for 5 min.
(3)Add 6 μL of reverse transcription solution, containing:a.1× First-Strand Buffer.
b.5 mM DTT.
c.20 U RNase Inhibitor (NEB, Cat# M0314S).
d.40 U SuperScript IV Reverse Transcriptase.

(4)Incubate at:a.50°C for 30 min.
b.55°C for 15 min.
c.80°C for 10 min (to inactivate the enzyme).

## Pre-amplification and qPCR
From each well, 4 μL of cDNA was pre-amplified using Hot Start Taq Polymerase (Invitrogen/Thermo Fisher, Cat# 14966001) with primers for MyoD, Myogenin, TNNT, MyH1, and Pax7 at 0.2 pmol/μL each, for 11 cycles. The amplified cDNA was then diluted to 100 μL, and 2 μL was used for further qPCR amplification. For GAPDH qPCR, 2 μL of reverse-transcribed cDNA was directly used. All qPCR reactions were performed using the QuantStudio 3 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Cat# A28567) with FASTStart Universal SYBR Green Master Mix (Roche, Cat# 4913914001). Oligonucleotides were synthesized by IDT DNA Technologies. A complete list of sequences is provided in . GAPDH was used as an internal control.

## ChIP assays
ChIP assays were done following standard protocols. In brief, log phase growing RH30 cells were fixed in 1% formaldehyde (Fisher Cat# BP531-25) for 8 min. Formaldehyde was quenched with 125 mM Glycine while shaking for 5 min at room temperature. Cells were washed twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and harvested by scraping. Cell pellets were lysed in LB3 ChIP lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5% N-lauroylsarcosine, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate), and sonicated with Bioruptor NGS (Diagenode Cat# UCD-600) at empirically optimized conditions. Sonicated cell lysates were centrifuged, and supernatants were precleared with protein G magnetic beads (Invitrogen Cat# 10004D) saturated with herring sperm DNA (75 ng/μL, Invitrogen Cat# 15634-017) and bovine serum albumin (0.1 μg/μL, Fisher Cat# BP9700100). Precleared lysates were precipitated with monoclonal mouse anti-human MyoD antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Cat# sc-377460, RRID:AB_2813894) or mouse IgG (Millipore Cat# CS200261) bound to protein G magnetic beads (saturated with herring sperm DNA and bovine serum albumin). Precipitated DNA was de-crosslinked and subjected to qPCR as described above to amplify putative MyoD binding sites in RMS. A complete list of primer sequences is listed in .

## Luciferase assays
Luciferase reporter assays were performed as previously described. Briefly, cells were transfected with NF-κB luciferase reporter derived from p1242 3x-κB-Luc (RRID:Addgene_26699) using Lipofectamine 2000 and the manufacturer’s instructions and seeded into 24 well plates. Cells were then treated with 5 ng/mL of TNF for 2 h, washed with PBS and lysed with M-PER Mammalian Protein Extraction Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# 78501) at room temperature while shaking for 5 min. Cell debris was cleared by centrifugation (16,000 × g, 4°C, 10 min) and supernatant was stored at −80°C. Luciferase activity was monitored in protein lysate using D-Luciferin (Invitrogen Cat# L2916) and a SpectraMax iD5 (Molecular Devices), and light units were recorded. Caspase activity of C2C12 cells following TNF was quantified by Caspase-Glo 3/7 Assay System (Promega Cat# G8090) via detection of luciferase activity due to caspase degradation of substrate, as described by the manufacturer’s protocol.

## Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis
FACS analysis for death assays was performed as previously described. Briefly, cells cultured in selection media were changed into selection free media 24 h prior to collection. Harvested cells were plated at 6 × 105 cells/60 mm dish and cultured overnight before further treatments. All cells were harvested with trypsinization. Cell pellets were washed with PBS and with Annexin V staining buffer (0.01 M HEPES pH 7.4, 140 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM CaCl2). Cells were then stained with Annexin V (BioLengends Cat# PE: 640947, FITC: 51-65874X, APC: 640941) and live/dead fixable near-IR dead cell stain kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# L10119). Cells were then fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde in staining buffer and washed with PBS. FACS analysis of peritonium infiltrating macrophages was performed as previously described. In brief, 1 × 106 RH30-SR or RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells were injected into the peritoneal cavity of SCID mice. Five days after injection, mice were euthanized and the peritonium membrane exposed. Then 9 mL of DMEM plus 10% FBS were injected into the peritoneal cavity with a syringe attached with a 26G needle. After swirling for 30 s, cells were harvested with a paster pipette. Harvested cells were centrifuged and incubated on ice in 100 μL of PBS containing 5% BSA and 0.5 μg rat anti mouse CD16/CD32 (Biolegend Cat# 156604, RRID:AB_10766954) for 15 min and then 1 μL of PE anti-mouse F4/80 (BioLegend Cat# 157303, RRID:AB_2832546) was added and incubated for 30 min. After washing twice with PBS, cells were suspended into 1 mL PBS/0.5% BSA for quantification of F4/80 positive peritoneal macrophages in response to inoculation of RMS tumor cells as previously described. All Flow cytometry was performed with the BD LSR Fortessa or BD CytoFLEX LX cytometers. FCS files were processed using FlowJo software (RRID:SCR_008520).

## Mitomycin C treatment
Mitomycin C (5 μg/mL, Sigma-Aldrich Cat# M5353) was added into C2C12 cell cultures at 75–80% confluency for 4 h with DMSO treatment used as a control. Treated cells were harvested by trypsinization and plated at 1 × 104 cells/well in 24 well plates for cell counting. For TNF induced cell death analysis, Mitomycin C treated cells were further treated with TNF at 5 ng/mL overnight. Harvested cells were stained with Annexin V and fixable cell survival dye as described above for FACS analysis.

## Cell cycle assays
Mitomycin C treated cells were pulsed with BrdU at 10 μM for 4–6 h and harvested by trypsinization. BrdU staining was performed using a BrdU detection kit from (BD Biosciences Cat# 559619) with a protocol suggested by the manufacturer. In brief, harvested cells were fixed for 30 min by adding ice-cold ethanol to 50%. Fixed cells were permeabilized with 2 M HCl, 0.5% Triton X-100 for 30 min. Cells were then washed once with 0.1 M sodium tetraborate pH 8.5 and twice with PBS containing 1%BSA, followed by staining with 10 μg/sample FITC conjugated anti-BrdU in PBS containing 0.5% Tween 20 and 1% BSA followed by 50 μg/mL 7-AAD for 30 min as recommended by manufacturer. Another 1 mL PBS was added into each tube and stained cells were analyzed by Fortessa X-20. Cell growth analysis on C2C12-SR cells with or without treatment of mitomycin was performed as previously described. 

## Colony assay
Bottom agar (1%) or top agar (0.3%) was made by mixing 4% Noble Agar with DMEM containing 10% FBS at 50°C. None tissue culture treated 6 well plates (Fisher Scientific, cat# 07-000-646) were overlayed with 2 mL bottom agar and equilibrated to room temperature. Cells in culture media pre-warmed to 40°C were added into top agar at the same temperature in a 1:20 cell volume to top agar volume. Cell containing top agar solution (2 mL) were immediately overlayed on top of 6 wells plates with 2 mL bottom agar and equilibrated to room temperature. After cooling at rt for 5 min, these 6 well plates were transferred into 37°C humidified incubators with 5% CO2. Cells were cultured for 10–20 days and stained with 0.005% crystal violet in PBS for 1 h before colony counting.

## Coculture assays
C57BL/6J (RRID:IMSR_JAX:000664) or C57BL/6J TNF−/− (RRID:IMSR_JAX:003008) mice were euthanized at 8–10 weeks of age by CO2 inhalation. Both femurs of mice were isolated and bone marrow cells were flushed into 10 mL of full culture media (DMEM containing 10% Heat inactivated FBS, 1% antibiotics). Isolated cells were dispersed by repeated pipetting and filtered through 40 μM cell strainer to remove debris. RBC lysis was performed for 10 min at room temperature with 160 mM NH4Cl and halted with addition of 30 mL of PBS. Cells were washed with PBS and cultured overnight with full media in tissue culture dishes. Suspension cells were counted the following day and cultured at 3 × 106 cells/100 mm dish in full culture media supplemented with 25 ng/mL CSF-1 (R&D Systems Cat# 216-MC-010/CF) for 5 days. For macrophage activation, LPS (50 ng/mL final, Sigma-Aldrich Cat# 916374) and IFNγ (2 ng/mL final, R&D Systems Cat# 285-IF-100/CF) were added to induce M1 polarization. Activated macrophages were harvested by trypsinization and cell scraping. Log phase growing RH30-SR or RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells were harvested by trypsinization, and plated in 24 well plate for overnight. Next day, either wildtype or TNF−/− bone marrow derived macrophages were applied in 20:1, macrophage:RH30 ratio in DMEM supplemented with heat-inactivated FBS. After 48 h, cells were trypsinized and surviving cells were counted by a trypan blue exclusion assay. Control conditions contained RH30-SR or RH30-SR MyoDΔ cells without macrophages.

## RMS patient data and DepMap portal
RMS patient dataset analyzed by the R2 Genomic Analysis and Visualization Platform (https://hgserver1.amc.nl/cgi-bin/r2/main.cgi?open_page=login) were utilized to perform Kaplan-Meier Survival analysis correlated to MyoD, myogenin, MRF4, MEF2C, and MEF2D expression. Survival data was limited to 5 years after diagnosis. Expression dot plots for all tumors from these patients in the R2 dataset were generated for MyoD, myogenin, MYHC (MYH1) and TNNT1. The Broad Institute’s Cancer Dependency Map Portal (RRID:SCR_017655) CRISPR dependency screen, Project Achilles (https://depmap.org/portal/achilles/), was used to determine the CHRONOS score, or dependency score as previously described, , for MyoD, Myf5, Myf6/MRF4, myogenin, MEF2C, and MEF2D across all sarcoma cell lines.

## Immunohistochemistry
Formalin-fixed paraffin embedded patient embryonal and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma tumor samples were sectioned at 4 μm thickness. Immunoperoxidase staining for MYOD1 (Abcam Cat# ab133627, RRID:AB_2890928) and myogenin (Cell Marque Cat# 296M-18, RRID:AB_1158682) were scored following sample randomization, using previously published standards of 1+ to 4+ based on total percentage of positively stained nuclei. Stained sections were evaluated by a trained pathologist (MAA) and scores for each section were estimated as an average over the entire tumor area.

## Xenograft tumor assays
RH30-SR cells were infected with Cas9 and either Vector control sgRNA or sgRNA targeting MyoD lentiviruses. To ensure complete ablation of MyoD, two independent clones of RH30-SR MyoDΔ, (CMD2 and CMD29) were selected for xenograft assays. A total of 3 × 106 cells were injected subcutaneously into the flank of randomly selected 10–12 week-old female SCIDICR mice (RRID:IMSR_TAC:icrsc, n = 7). Tumor diameter measurements were performed every other day with a digital caliper and volume was estimated through the formula π/6∗ (larger diameter)∗(shorter diameter). Kaplan-Meier survival curves were calculated for mice which were euthanized by reaching tumor endpoint criteria. For reprogramming experiments, mice were injected with RH30-SR cells and divided into equal groups when tumor volumes reached approximately 1 cm3 (n = 5). Tumors were directly injected with either a GFP control virus or retroviruses containing three Yamanaka factors. Mice were then treated with 1 mg/kg vincristine at 7 and 14 days post viral infection and tumor volumes were subsequently measured. Total RNA was isolated from the periphery of the tumor outside of the necrotic core and assayed for expression of MyoD, myogenin, Tnnt1, and Pax7 by qPCR. All procedures in mice were carried out according to protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at The Ohio State University and Medical University of South Carolina.

## Microarray
Differential gene expression was performed by microarray analysis at The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center Genomics Core. The GeneChip Human Transcriptome Array 2.0 (Affymatrix Cat# 902162) is comprised of >6 million unique probes including coding and non-coding RNA transcripts, for a total of 67,000 human genes (transcript clusters). Differential expression analysis was carried out in R. Briefly, CEL files were opened with the oligo package (RRID:SCR_015729) and normalized using the RMA function. Expression set data was annotated with the Bioconductor packages affycoretools and pd.hta.2.0. Annotations were subsequently mapped to human genes symbols and ENTREZ IDs. The LIMMA R package (RRID:SCR_010943) was used for differential expression analysis between the three groups: RH30, RH30-SR, and RH30-SR MyoDΔ. To test the pairwise comparison of each condition, we used a standard LIMMA pipeline. First, we established a design matrix accounting for each group and fit linear models to the expression data. We then fit a contrast matrix to the data comparing all combinations of conditions. The t statistics were then calculated with the empirical Bayes method. Genes were filtered for a fold change >25% and an adjusted p-value <0.05 with the Benjamini-Hochberg correction. ToppGene Suite (https://toppgene.cchmc.org/, RRID:SCR_005726) was used for all Gene Ontology (GO) analyses. Raw sequences and analyzed files were deposited on the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO, RRID:SCR_005012; GEO GSE224179).

## ATAC-seq
Cells were trypsinized and frozen in 10% DMSO and 50% FBS containing media. Samples were sent to Quick Biology Inc. (Monrova, CA), where libraries were prepared with Nextera Tn5 transposase, amplified, assessed for quality control, and sequenced with Illumina High-throughput sequencing, with >60 million total reads of paired-end sequencing at 75–150 bp range. Analysis was performed in R. Briefly, raw sequences were mapped to the human reference genome hg38 (UCSC) using Rsubread (RRID:SCR_016945), followed by sorting and indexing with Rsamtools. , Proper pairs were identified with the GenomicAlignments, with reads normalized per million mapped reads and visualized in the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV, Broad Institute, RRID:SCR_011793). Peak calling was accomplished in R through use of Herper to establish a miniconda environment in R studio and subsequent use of the MACS2 package (RRID:SCR_013291). Blacklisted regions of the genome were excluded using the DAC exclusion list regionguttrs of the hg38 human reference genome (ENCSR636HFF). Annotation was performed with the ChIPseeker package (RRID:SCR_021322) and UCSC hg38 gene models. DESeq2 (RRID:SCR_015687) was used for differential accessibility analysis between RH30 scramble vs. RH30 MyoDΔ cell samples. , Differentially accessible peaks of genes were filtered for a fold change >25% and a false discovery rate (FDR) of <0.05 with the Benjamini-Hochberg correction. Raw sequences and analyzed files were deposited on GEO (GEO GSE224179).

## ChIP-seq
Raw sequencing files which captured DNA sequences bound by MyoD in the human FN-RMS cell line, RD, and the FP-RMS cell line, RH4, were retrieved through GEO and analyzed for genes bound by MyoD in RMS (GEO GSE50413, GEO GSE83726). , ChIP-seq analysis was carried out with the same pipeline outlined for ATAC-seq analysis.

## Bisulfite PCR
In silico investigation of CYLD gene methylation status in RMS cells was performed using Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) dataset. A total of 155,584 bp of long genomic DNA sequence was downloaded from the NCBI Gene database, starting from Chr 16 at position 50,694,216, with the CYLD gene located between 47,871 and 107,720 bp, containing all highly methylated loci identified in our in silico data divided into a total of 8 loci ( ). An Ubuntu program was developed with C++ to generate a new genomic DNA sequence by converting all cytosines (C) to thymines (T). This program is also utilized to select primer sets for different loci from the newly created genomic DNA sequence. MyoD in RH30 cells was knocked out using CRISPR technology, using two different sets of sgRNA targeting MyoD gene as MyoD sgRNA G1 + MyoD sgRNA C2 (as Pair 1) and MyoD sgRNA G2 + MyoD sgRNA C3 (as Pair 2), as described above. RH30 cells, either with or without MyoD knockout, were harvested by trypsinization, washed twice with PBS, and pelleted for DNA isolation using the Qiagen DNA Blood Kit (Qiagen, cat# 51104). Bisulfite treatment of the isolated DNA was performed using the Epitect Bisulfite Kit (Qiagen, cat# 59104), following the manufacturer’s protocol. Two micrograms (2 μg) of isolated DNA per sample was diluted in autoclaved DDW to a final volume of 20 μL. Then, 85 μL of bisulfite mix and 35 μL of DNA protection buffer were added to each DNA sample. Bisulfite treatment was carried out using a thermocycler under the following conditions: 95°C (5 min) → 60°C (25 min) → 95°C (5 min) → 60°C (85 min) → 95°C (5 min) → 60°C (175 min) → hold at 20°C. The bisulfite-treated DNA was purified using the spin column provided in the kit and eluted in 40 μL of EB buffer. The eluted DNA was further diluted to 100 μL with DDW, and 2 μL of the bisulfite-treated DNA was used for PCR amplification with Platinum II Taq hot-start DNA polymerase (Thermo Fisher, #14966001 or #11304011). The PCR reaction was set up with.(1)1× Platinum II buffer.
(2)200 μM of each dNTP.
(3)0.5 pmol/μL of each primer.
(4)0.4 μL Taq polymerase.
(5)Final reaction volume: 50 μL.

The amplified PCR products were mixed with an additional 50 μL of PCR reaction mixture (without template DNA) and A-tailed for 1 h at 72°C (only #14966001 Taq was used in this step). A-tailed DNA was separated on a 2% agarose gel, and PCR bands were excised and purified using the Qiagen Gel Extraction Kit (#28704). The extracted DNA was then ligated into the pCRII-Topo vector using the TOPO TA Cloning Kit (Thermo Fisher, #K457502), following the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, 1 μL of high-salt solution was added to 4 μL of the purified PCR product, followed by the addition 1 μL of the pCRII-Topo vector. The ligation reaction was incubated at room temperature for 5 min. Ligated DNA was transformed into One Shot TOPO10 chemically competent E. coli and plated on LB agar plates containing 20 μg/mL X-GAL and 1 mM IPTG. White colonies were selected, grown in LB broth, and plasmid DNA was purified using the Qiagen Plasmid Mini Prep Kit (#27106). Sanger sequencing was performed on the purified plasmid DNA. The sequencing results were formatted into FASTA format, along with the original genomic DNA sequence downloaded from the NCBI Gene database. Sequence alignment was carried out using Clustal Omega (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/jdispatcher/msa/clustalo).

## Quantification and statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed with appropriate statistical tests on GraphPad Prism (Dotmatics, Version 8, RRID:SCR_002798) or in R. Unless otherwise noted, unpaired Student’s t test were used to calculate p-values. RNA expression by qPCR analysis was calculated with the ddCT method with GAPDH as the internal control. Enrichment of MyoD binding in ChIP assays was calculated with the percent input method. In cell death experiments, percent cell death was normalized to dead cells of control treated cells for all experiments, unless otherwise noted. All data represent the mean ± Standard Error of the Mean. Corresponding appropriate statical tests are shown in footnotes of Figure legends when appropriate.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S7 and Tables S1 and S2

## Table S3. Oligonucleotide sequences, related to Star★Methods

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2025.113149.