pmcACS Infect DisACS Infect Dis822acssd101654580idACS Infectious Diseases2373-8227pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC11091902PMC11091902.111091902110919023869166810.1021/acsinfecdis.4c001151ReviewNavigating Antibacterial
Frontiers: A Panoramic Exploration
of Antibacterial Landscapes, Resistance Mechanisms, and Emerging Therapeutic
Strategies
RalhanKrittika IyerKavita A. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5955-9595DiazLeilani Lotti https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6965-975XBirdRobert MaindAnkush https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6711-369XZhouQiongqiong Angela †ACS
International India Pvt. Ltd., Pune 411044, India‡CAS,
A Division of the American Chemical Society, Columbus, Ohio 43210, United States*Email: qzhou@cas.org.010520241005202410546232314831519100220241504202411042024140520241505202415052024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2024The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
The development of
effective antibacterial solutions has become
paramount in maintaining global health in this era of increasing bacterial
threats and rampant antibiotic resistance. Traditional antibiotics
have played a significant role in combating bacterial infections throughout
history. However, the emergence of novel resistant strains necessitates
constant innovation in antibacterial research. We have analyzed the
data on antibacterials from the CAS Content Collection, the largest
human-curated collection of published scientific knowledge, which
has proven valuable for quantitative analysis of global scientific
knowledge. Our analysis focuses on mining the CAS Content Collection
data for recent publications (since 2012). This article aims to explore
the intricate landscape of antibacterial research while reviewing
the advancement from traditional antibiotics to novel and emerging
antibacterial strategies. By delving into the resistance mechanisms,
this paper highlights the need to find alternate strategies to address
the growing concern.

antimicrobial resistancemultidrug resistanceantibioticsantibacterialbacterial infectionpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9id4c00115document-id-new-14id4c00115ccc-price

## Introduction
The
emergence of drug-resistant bacterial strains and their associated
challenges continue to be responsible for a sustained economic burden
to the whole world, exemplified by the fact that the World Health
Organization (WHO) declared antimicrobial resistance (AMR) as one
of the top 10 primary health concerns affecting humanity. , Bacterial infections comprise the majority of microbial infections
because of their prevalence in diseases, public health impact, variability
of virulence, development of resistance, and ease of transmission;
therefore, antibacterial agents are the most common method to prevent
and treat these infections. The spectrum of antibacterial activity
encompasses a wide range of bacteria; however, certain bacterial strains,
such as Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella
pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter spp., and Escherichia coli—collectively
called ESKAPEE—have garnered public interest because they are
known to “escape” commonly used antibiotic treatment
because of multidrug resistance (MDR). − Data from the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) for the year 2020 suggests that 6 out of the
18 listed antimicrobial-resistant bacterial threats, namely vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE), carbapenem-resistant A. baumannii (CRAB), methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA),
carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales (CRE), multidrug-resistant P. aeruginosa (MDR-PA), and extended-spectrum β-lactamase
(ESBL)-producing Enterobacterales, incur a collective cost of more
than $4.6 billion annually. MRSA strains
remain a leading cause of infections worldwide ranging from skin and
soft tissue infections to more serious conditions, such as bacteremia
and endocarditis. Because of the rise in resistant species, some bacterial
infections have become public health threats. Constantly evolving
antibiotic-resistant bacterial species emphasize the need for a systematic
literature review and analysis in the antibacterial field.
In
this report, we provide an overview of the current knowledge
on antibiotic resistance, antibiotics, and antibacterial materials.
Furthermore, we provide a landscape of the antibacterial field on
the basis of data from the CAS Content Collection, the largest human-curated collection of published scientific
knowledge, which has proven useful for quantitative analysis of global
scientific publications. Our analysis focuses on mining the CAS Content
Collection for recent documents (2012 onward) to uncover trends in
journal and patent publications, the use of various substances, and
to provide insights linking antibiotics with bacteria and disease
indications. Additionally, we review the antibiotic resistance mechanisms,
diverse classes of antibiotics, their modes of action, and emerging
antibacterial strategies. The overarching aim of this report is to
serve as a useful resource for understanding the current state of
the field of antibacterials and global research efforts in this field.

## Antibiotic
Resistance
According to WHO, a resistant organism is one
that is not killed/inactivated
upon completion of the entire course of treatment. According to data
presented by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
more than 2.8 million antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections occur
each year leading to >35 000 deaths per year. According to projections made by the World Bank, by the year 2050, 10 million people are projected
to die because of MDR bacterial infections, thereby incurring a loss
of up to USD 100 trillion to the global economy. Antibiotic resistance occurs when bacteria evolve to render
existing antibiotics ineffective, thereby leading to difficult or
ineffective treatment. , , While many factors have led to the rise in MDR, one significant
factor is the inability of antibacterial drug discovery and development
to keep pace with bacterial drug resistance. Over 100 antibiotics
are available for treating bacterial infections, but overuse and misuse
of antibiotics in both humans and livestock have also played a significant
role in the rise of antibiotic resistance as it creates a selective
pressure favoring resistant strains. , Inadequate
prescription practices, a rise in self-medication, and noncompliance
with prescribed antibiotic regimens can exacerbate these issues. Highly
resistant bacterial strains include various Gram-positive bacteria,
such as Enterococcus faecalis, E. faecium, coagulase-negative Staphylococci (CNS), and methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), and Gram-negative bacteria, such as multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter, Enterobacter, E.
coli, P. aeruginosa, Klebsiella, etc. − 
Antibiotic resistance in bacterial species can be intrinsic
or
acquired. Intrinsic antibiotic resistance occurs primarily because
of the inherent structural/genetic composition of a particular bacterial
species, while acquired antibiotic resistance arises because of the
gain of new genetic material or from a mutation arising in the bacterial
genome to provide novel capabilities mediating survival in bacterial
species. , Mutations (contributing to acquired resistance)
can be of several types—spontaneous, adaptive, and random,
among others—that arise because of errors during replication
or by inefficient repair of damaged DNA. In certain instances, selection
pressure arising because of nonlethal antibiotics can result in hypermutations.
In these cases, bacteria enter a state of high-mutation rate called
the “hypermutable” state wherein they acquire mutations
to survive. In certain cases, adaptive mutations can occur in nondividing
or slowly dividing cells due to selection pressure. These mutations
are responsible for the development of antimicrobial resistance in
bacteria under natural conditions. Vertical gene transfer is the transfer
of genes from a parent bacterium to its offspring, while horizontal
gene transfer is the transfer of genes between unrelated bacteria. Horizontal gene transfer is the most prevalent
method for antimicrobial resistance gene transfer and it can take
place by conjugation, transduction, or transformation. Random genetic mutations can also lead to antibiotic
resistance, for instance, the acquisition of the extended-spectrum
β-lactamase cefotaximase, CTX-M-15, by a highly virulent strain
of E. coli, ST131. This
has led to a rise in community-acquired antibiotic resistance in bacterial
species. 
At the bacteria level,
decreased drug uptake, increased antibiotic
efflux pump expression, enzymatic inactivation, target alteration,
alterations in bacterial metabolism to bypass antibiotic inhibition,
and overproduction of drug targets are some common mechanisms of antibacterial
resistance ( ). − 
 

## Decreased
Drug Uptake
Gram-negative bacteria, unlike
Gram-positive species, are naturally resistant to various drugs because
of the presence of a bilayer, outer membrane that is impermeable/impenetrable
to most drugs. Structurally, the outer
membrane contains lipopolysaccharides that stiffen bacterial membranes,
which reduces both membrane fluidity and permeability. Additionally,
modifications in porins—diffusion channel-forming proteins—are
also known to restrict the influx of antibiotics in bacteria by several
mechanisms, including size limitation, hydrophobicity, or charge-based
drug repulsion. In certain cases, mutations lead to a reduction in
the expression/loss of porins. These mutations can result in reduced
permeability/ complete exclusion of drugs from porins. , 

## Efflux Pumps
The permeability of antibiotics is affected
by the type and number of efflux pumps present. Some bacteria have
MDR efflux pumps that allow bacteria to reject and export toxic compounds
and, thus, can also allow them to resist antibiotics. MDR pumps can
be specific to one antibiotic or may target a broad spectrum of antibiotics.
A variety of families of efflux pumps are present in bacteria, such
as the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family, the multidrug and toxin
extrusion (MATE) family, the major facilitator superfamily (MFS),
the small multidrug resistance (SMR) family, the resistance–nodulation–cell
division (RND) superfamily and the proteobacterial antimicrobial compound
efflux (PACE) family. , These pumps are responsible for
the majority of induced resistance in bacteria.

## Modified Drug
Target Site
This is a common drug-resistant
mechanism and occurs because of the spontaneous mutation of bacterial
genes and selection in the presence of antibiotics. They can also occur because of enzymatic modification or
by replacement of the original target. For instance, modifications
in bacterial RNA polymerase and DNA gyrase result in resistance to
the rifamycins and quinolones, respectively. − Similarly,
vancomycin-resistant bacteria typically acquire resistance through
modification of the drug’s target site in bacterial cell walls,
which results in a reduction in the binding affinity of vancomycin,
thereby making it less efficient in disrupting cell walls. 

## Target Amplification
Target amplification
involves
increasing the production of target molecules that the antibiotic
acts upon. It can be observed in the case of resistance to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
(TMP-SMX) due to mutations that can lead to an increase in the production
of dihydrofolate reductase, a drug target of trimethoprim. 

## Enzymatic Degradation/Modification
Bacteria produce
enzymes that can degrade antibiotics by modifying their structure
(mostly through redox reactions or group transfer). For instance,
β-lactamases are a group of enzymes that deactivate β-lactam
antibiotics by hydrolyzing the β-lactam ring. β-Lactamases are mostly present in Gram-negative
bacteria and a few Gram-positive ones, such as S. aureus, E. faecalis, etc. , In P. aeruginosa, β-lactamases are present in their periplasmic
spaces. , Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE) possess metallo-β-lactamases, such as New Dehli metallo-β-lactamase-1, K. pneumoniae carbapenemase-2, and other metallo-β-lactamases
encoded by genes including bla(NDM-1), bla(KPC), bla(IMP), and bla(CMY).
CRE Enterobacteriaceae are resistant not only to
penicillins and cephalosporins but also to carbapenems, which makes
them a serious global health threat. − 
In certain bacterial species,
one or combinations of these factors play a role in developing resistance.
For instance, A. baumannii is resistant to carbapenems
because of a combination of decreased expression of porins, increased
expression of three RND-type efflux pumps, and the presence of β-lactamases. A newly discovered antibiotic class, zosurabalpin,
works by blocking a molecular machine called LptB2FGC that transports
the lipopolysaccharide toxin from the inside barrier to the outside
one and has shown efficacy in controlling carbapenem-resistant A. baumannii (CRAB). Apart
from resistance, certain bacteria also show “tolerance,”
which is the ability of bacterial cells to withstand antibiotics due
to them being in a physiological state of dormancy or slow growth. In addition, certain subpopulations of bacteria,
known as “persisters,” are nongrowing and transiently
tolerate antibiotic treatment. , Persistent bacteria
are often linked to chronic bacterial infections. Other mechanisms used by bacteria to exhibit tolerance
and virulence include biofilm formation; endospores; the adoption
of certain morphologies, such as filamentous and L-form (cell wall-deficient
bacteria); the use of survival techniques, such as quorum sensing;
having secretory proteins and toxins, such as type III secretion systems
(T3SS); and siderophores, among others. − 

## Antibiotics
This section describes
traditional approaches used as antibiotics
and novel approaches emerging to counter problems such as antimicrobial
resistance in bacteria. Structures for antibiotic drugs mentioned
in this section can be found in Supplementary Table 1.

## Antibiotic Classes

## Sulfonamides
Sulfonamides form the
core of the sulfa
drugs, the first synthetic antibiotics discovered. They were discovered
by Domagk as related arylazosulfonamides, which were prepared as dyes
but found to cure bacterial infections when given to people. Subsequent
work showed that the azo compound found by Domagk underwent reductive
cleavage to the active aminobenzenesulfonamide; the aminobenzenesulfonamide
acts as a mimic of p-aminobenzoic acid, which inhibits
dihydropteroate synthetase, an enzyme necessary for folate synthesis
( ) and, thus,
for growth and metabolism. While bacteria
can synthesize folates, mammals must obtain them through their diet;
thus, bacteria are susceptible to folate inhibition but not mammals. Sulfa drugs are bacteriostatic against both
Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria but are not bactericidal.
Seven sulfa drugs have been approved by the US FDA as antibiotics:
sulfanilamide (1937, R = H), sulfadiazine (1941, R = 2-pyrimidinyl),
sulfapyridine (1942, R = 2-pyridinyl), sulfasalazine (1950, an azo
prodrug of sulfapyridine), sulfamethizole (1953, R = 5-methyl-1,3,4-thiadiazol-2-yl),
sulfacetamide (1970, R = MeCO), and sulfamethoxazole (1982, R = 5-methyl-3-isoxazolyl)
(Supplementary Table 1). Bacteria have multiple resistance mechanisms for sulfonamides.
Modification of dihydropteroate synthetase to prevent the binding
of sulfonamides with substituents at the sulfonamide nitrogen in combination
with other mutations to improve the activity of the mutant enzyme
can restore growth to sulfonamide-inhibited bacteria. Alternatively, acylation or hydroxylation of the aniline
nitrogen of sulfonamides abrogates binding to dihydropteroate synthetase. 

## β-Lactams
First reported by
Alexander Fleming
in 1929, β-lactams are one of the
most commonly prescribed drug classes. Penicillin G, the “wonder drug” produced by the Penicillium fungus, is the oldest member of this family,
was clinically used in the 1930s, and played a very important role
in saving lives during WWII. , These drugs have an
essential structural feature, a highly reactive four-membered amide
ring known as a “β-lactam” or “azetidinone.”
The antibacterial properties of β-lactams come from their inhibition
of bacterial transpeptidases that catalyze the cross-linkage of peptidoglycan,
a main component in bacterial cell wall synthesis. , These transpeptidases, known as penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs),
irreversibly and covalently bind to β-lactams via the nucleophilic
attack of the serine residue in the PBPs active site to the lactam
carbonyl, which results in a stable acyl–enzyme complex. , , The structure, geometry, and
stereochemical characteristics of β-lactams play a key role
in this inhibition because it mimics the enzyme–substrate, d-Ala-d-Ala dipeptide in peptidoglycans of the bacterial
cell wall. Gram-positive bacteria are
more susceptible to β-lactams than Gram-negative bacteria, mostly
because of the higher concentration of peptidoglycan in the cell wall.
This broad family of antibiotics can be divided into the structural
classes shown in Supplementary Table 1.
While β-lactams have been highly successful antibiotics,
their widespread use has led to antibiotic resistance. β-Lactamses,
a family of hydrolytic enzymes that inactivate all β-lactams,
are of particular concern because of high catalytic efficiency and
rapid distribution via horizontal transfer on plasmids. β-Lactamase
inhibitors (sulbactam, clavulanate, tazobactam, avibactam, and vaborbactam)
have little antibacterial activity by themselves but can inactivate
β-lactamases to restore the antibacterial activity of β-lactams.
More recently, compounds incorporating two β-lactam groups have
been developed as dual-β-lactamase inhibitors and antibiotics
to circumvent drug resistance. The combination
of a β-lactam moiety with another class of antibiotic is another
approach. For example, TD-1792 (cefilavancin) is a novel covalently
linked heterodimer of a glycopeptide (vancomycin) and a cephalosporin
for the treatment of serious Gram-positive infections, like acute
bacterial skin and skin structure infection; it has completed phase
II clinical trials in the US and is currently under the filling process
in Russia. − Another approach is the conjugation of β-lactams to bacterial
transporters, like siderophores. A successful example of this is cefiderocol,
a siderophore-containing cephalosporin with activity against carbapenem-resistant
and multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacilli that is currently available
commercially under the brand name Fetroja for the treatment of complicated
urinary tract infections. , 

## Aminoglycosides
The isolation of the first aminoglycoside
with antibiotic properties, streptomycin, was first reported in 1944. It was isolated from two strains of actinomyces
related to Streptomyces griseus. Since then, many
aminoglycosides have been obtained via the fermentation of Streptomyces (neomycin from S. fradiae, kanamycin from S. kanamyceticus, tobramycin from S. tenebrarius( , )) and Micromonospora (gentamicin
from M. purpurea, sisomicin
from M. inyoensis( )) or
through chemical modification of aminoglycoside scaffolds (amikacin, − netilmicin, , arbekacin, , and plazomicin − ).
Aminoglycosides are hydrophilic molecules
that have one or more aminated sugars joined in glycosidic linkages
to a dibasic cyclitol (aminocyclitol), which is most commonly a 2-deoxystreptamine. , They can be classified into two broad categories on the basis of
the aminocyclitol moiety: those with a deoxystreptamine ring and those
without (streptomycin). This first category can be further divided
on the basis of the substitution of the deoxystreptamine ring: monosubstituted
(apramycin), 4,5-disubstituted (neomycin, ribostamycin), and 4,6-disubstituted
(gentamicin, amikacin, tobramycin, and plazomicin). , This family of molecules is bactericidal and has a broad spectrum
of activity against Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria, though
it is particularly potent against Enterobacteriaceae. , These molecules inhibit bacterial protein
synthesis via binding to prokaryotic ribosomes. The primary mechanism of action is via binding to the 16S
rRNA at the tRNA acceptor aminoacyl-site (A-site) on the 30S ribosome,
thereby altering the conformation of the A-site. This inhibits the
translation process by causing codon misreading and/or by hindering
the translocation of tRNA from the A-site to the peptidyl tRNA, which
causes defective protein synthesis that can cause damage to the cell. , , Some aminoglycosides can also
block the elongation of translation or directly inhibit initiation. , 
The most prevalent resistance mechanism is the enzymatic modification
caused by aminoglycoside modifying enzymes, specifically by aminoglycoside
acyltransferases (AACs), aminoglycoside phosphotransferases (APHs),
and aminoglycoside nucleotransferases (ANTs). , Other resistance mechanisms are target site modification via methylation
of 16S rRNA or chromosomal mutation; efflux, uptake, and permeability
mutations; and highly efficient membrane proteases. , Strategies to combat this resistance, as well as new developments
in these strategies, have been discussed by Becker and Cooper, Krause et al., , and Tevyashova
and Shapovalova. In addition to resistance,
adverse effects, like ototoxicity, nephrotoxicity, and in some cases,
neuromuscular blockade, are also an issue. Decreasing the associated toxicities is also a focus when it comes
to developing new derivatives. − 

## Tetracyclines
Tetracyclines are
a broad-spectrum bacteriostatic
antibiotic class whose structure is based on a DCBA naphthacene core.
Aureomycin, 6-chlorotetracycline, was the first member of this antibiotic
class to be reported and was discovered by Benjamin Minge Duggar at
Lederle Laboratories in 1948. This was
followed by terramycin, which was reported in 1950 and discovered
by Alexander Finlay from Pfizer. These
first tetracyclines were natural products obtained from Streptomyces from soil samples, specifically via fermentation of Streptomyces
aureofaciens (aureomycin) and Streptomyces rismosus (terramycin). Additional natural product tetracyclines are tetracycline
(teracyn) and demeclocycline, while other members of this class are
semisynthetic tetracyclines (lymecycline, methacycline, minocycline,
rolitetracycline, sarecycline, omadacycline, and doxycycline), glycylcyclines
(tigecycline), and synthetic tetracyclines (eravacycline, TP-271). 
This class of antibiotics is effective
against a wide range of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.
Members of this family are effective against: Yersinia pestis, Vibrio cholera, Salmonella enterica, Treponema pallidum, Legionella pneumophila, Bacillus anthracis, Borrelia burgdoferi, Borrelia afzelii, Borrelia garinii, Borrelia recurrentis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Coxiella burnetii, Rickettsia ricketsii, Mycobacterium leprae, Mycobacterium marinum, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, S. aureus (including MRSA), Vibrio vulnificus, and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus. , Their main mechanism
of action is the inhibition of protein synthesis in bacteria. They
bind reversibly to the A-site of the 30S ribosomal unit to interfere
with the binding of the aminoacyl-tRNA to the acceptor site of the
mRNA–ribosome complex, which prevents the addition of new amino
acids to the growing peptides and impairs the cells’ ability
to grow or replicate. Still, bacterial resistance has developed via
reduction of intracellular concentration by active efflux, disruption
of the interaction with the 30S subunit by ribosomal protective proteins
(TetM and TetO), deactivation via hydroxylation of position C-11a
(TetX and Tet 37), and mutation of the binding site. Recent literature has further discussion on resistance,
synthesis, photoactivation, new applications, modifications, and the
new generation of tetracyclines. − 

## Polymyxins (Polymyxin B and Colistin)
Polymyxins are
lipopeptide antibiotics isolated from Paenibacillus polymyxa. They contain a peptide lactam macrocycle
core with an attached peptide terminally substituted with a lipid
acyl group; their diaminobutane carboxylate moieties contribute positive
change under biological conditions, thereby rendering the polymyxin
antibiotics pentacationic. Two polymyxins, polymyxin B and colistin,
are in clinical use. Polymyxin B (as its sulfate) is used to treat
infections of the urinary tract, meninges (when administered intrathecally),
and bloodstream and as a topical or subconjunctival agent for eye
infections caused by susceptible strains of P. aeruginosa. It may be used for serious meningeal or urinary tract infections
or for bacteremia by susceptible strains of Haemophilus influenzae,
E. coli, Enterobacter aerogenes, or K. pneumoniae if less toxic antibiotics are not effective. Colistin (as its penta-N-methanesulfonate
prodrug) is used to treat acute or chronic infections due to sensitive
strains of P. aeruginosa, E. aerogenes, E. coli,
or K. pneumoniae (but not Proteus or Neisseria species). , The polymyxins have limited activity against Acinetobacter,
P.aeruginosa, Klebsiella, and E. coli species
because of resistance. Acinetobacter species can
exhibit heteroresistance, in which a drug-resistant population coexists
with a drug-susceptible population, making drug susceptibility testing
difficult or impossible. The mechanism of polymyxin antibactericidal
activity is not completely defined. The
binding of polymyxins to negatively charged lipopolysaccharide phosphates
in bacterial membranes disrupts their outer membranes, causing membrane-membrane
contact and lipid exchange between membranes with consequent loss
of membrane integrity (because Gram-positive pathogens possess a cell
wall that cannot be disrupted by polymyxins). Polymyxin also causes
the buildup of reactive oxygen species in membranes, likely by inhibiting
the inner membrane type II NADH-quinone oxidoreductase, which oxidizes
and cleaves membrane lipids and further compromises bacterial membrane
integrity. Finally, polymyxins bind
to and inactivate endotoxins. Bacteria
circumvent these mechanisms in a variety of ways. As for other antibacterial
agents, efflux pumps can export polymyxins from bacteria. Bacteria
modify their membranes to reduce their negative charge (and to hinder
the binding affinity of cationic polymyxins) by incorporating amino
group-containing components, such as phosphoethanolamine and 4-amino-l-arabinose, into lipopolysaccharides. The suppression of lipid
A incorporation and replacement by amino-substituted components is
controlled by the two-component system (TCS). Bacteria also upregulate the production of proteins needed
to maintain lipid asymmetry in the outer membrane. Acinetobacter
baumanii can respond to polymyxins by removing lipid A from
its membranes, which prevents polymyxin binding; however, purging
lipid A renders its membranes more permeable, thereby making it susceptible
to other antibiotics.
Polymyxins have significant toxicity on
parenteral administration. Nephrotoxicity is often observed (30–60%)
because tubular reabsorption concentrates colistin and polymyxin B
in the kidneys and generates toxic concentrations of polymyxins. The
toxicity can be partially mitigated by coadministration of antioxidants.
Neurotoxicity (with paresthesia, nausea and vomiting, neuropathy,
or other sequelae) is observed in nearly 7% of patients. Extended
exposure or conditions, such as myasthenia gravis or renal dysfunction,
predispose to neurotoxicity. Skin hyperpigmentation and lung toxicity
(for inhaled colistin or polymyxin B) are also observed.
Combinations
of polymyxins with one or two other antibiotics (doripenem
or meropenem, rifampicin, tigecycline, fosfomycin, vancomycin, or
teicoplanin) have been used to circumvent resistance mechanisms. Analogues
of polymyxins have entered preclinical work or clinical trials as
antibiotics. For example, QPex Biopharma developed a polymyxin, QPX9003,
in which the alkanoyl chain is replaced by a 2,4-dichlorobenzoyl moiety with improved antibacterial activity and reduced
nephrotoxicity; the compound showed appropriate toxicity, pharmacokinetic,
and pharmacodynamic data from phase I studies. Spero Therapeutics developed N-aryl analogues
of polymyxin B by developing the compound SPR206, which entered phase
1 clinical trials. MicuRx Pharmaceuticals
developed a lactone-containing analogue of polymyxin, MRX8, which
showed antibacterial activity against Gram-negative bacteria, including
carbapenem-resistant A. baumanii; the compound is in phase I clinical trials in the US. Northern Antibiotics in Finland developed the
polymyxins NAB739 and NAB815 and found them to be more effective against
pyelonephritis in mice than polymyxin B; a related polymyxin analogue, NAB741, entered phase I clinical trials
in 2017. 

## Chloramphenicol and Analogues
(Amphenicols)
Chloramphenicol
is an antibiotic isolated from Streptomyces venezuelae in 1948 and approved by the US FDA
in 1949. It is a broad-spectrum antibiotic
that inhibits the growth of Gram-negative aerobic (H. influenzae, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitides, Neisseria gonorrhea, Brucella species, and Bordetella pertussis) and Gram-positive
and -negative anaerobic bacteria (cocci, Clostridium, and Bacillus fragilis); most E. coli and K. pneumoniae are also susceptible to chloramphenicol.
It is, thus, used for treating typhoid fever, bacterial meningitis,
anaerobic bacterial infections, and rickettsial and mycoplasmic infections
in susceptible strains or when other antibiotics are ineffective. , Chloramphenicol binds to the 50S subunit of the bacterial ribosome
at the peptidyltransferase center (PTC), thereby inhibiting protein
synthesis. Chloramphenicol, however, leads to dose-related reversible
anemia, leucopenia, and thrombosis and also to an irreversible aplastic
anemia that (while uncommon) is often fatal; analogues lacking the
nitro group show dose-dependent reversible blood cell suppression
but do not cause aplastic anemia. The
toxicity of chloramphenicol and its analogues is attributed to its
damage to mitochondria via suppression of mitochondrial protein synthesis.
Chloramphenicol is also associated with “grey baby syndrome,”
cyanosis, and low blood pressure in neonates caused by the lack of
liver-mediated metabolism of chloramphenicol. As a result, chloramphenicol
is no longer approved for human use in the US. Chloramphenicol succinate
was developed as a prodrug of chloramphenicol and approved by the
US FDA but is no longer available; it has similar toxicity to chloramphenicol. Thiamphenicol and florfenicol replace the nitro
group of chloramphenicol with a methylsulfonyl group and a fluoro
moiety replacing the hydroxyl group of chloramphenicol; while neither
cause irreversible aplastic anemia, they still cause reversible bone
marrow suppression, which deprecates their use. Further analogues of chloramphenicol have been studied
to attempt to provide novel and useful antibiotics with reduced side
effects. For example, the replacement of the chloramphenicol primary
alcohol with an l-lysine amide yields a compound that binds
strongly to the ribosome and inhibits puromycin effects on the ribosome,
which is an inhibition characteristic of binding to the ribosome A-site. 

## Macrolides
Macrolides are macrocycles,
most commonly
derived from polyketide metabolism, substituted with sugars. They
have broad-spectrum antibacterial activity against both Gram-positive
and Gram-negative bacteria, including Moraxella catarrhalis, S. pneumoniae, Legionella pneumoniae, Streptococcus pyogenes, Helicobacter pylori,
H. influenzae, Haemophilus parainfluenzae, Mycobacterium avium/intracellulare,
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and Chlamydia pneumoniae. They are, however, generally inactive against E. coli and K. pneumoniae.
At least six macrolides
have been approved by the US FDA for treating bacterial infections.
Erythromycin (discovered in 1952) is still used to treat a variety
of infections, including skin infections, syphilis, and acne. Dirithromycin
was approved in 1995 for bacterial infections
related to chronic bronchitis and for uncomplicated skin or skin-structure
infections by nonresistant S. aureus, but was withdrawn
in 2004. Clarithromycin was approved
in 2001 for acute bacterial exacerbation of chronic bronchitis in
adults, acute maxillary sinusitis, community-acquired pneumonia, pharyngitis/tonsillitis,
uncomplicated skin and skin structure infections, acute otitis media
in pediatric patients, treatment and prophylaxis of disseminated mycobacterial
infections, and H. pylori infection and duodenal
ulcer disease in adults with methicillin-susceptible S. aureus, S. pneumoniae, and S. pyogenes. Azithromycin was approved in 2002
for treating acute bacterial exacerbations of chronic bronchitis,
acute bacterial sinusitis in adults, uncomplicated skin and skin structure
infections, urethritis and cervicitis in adults, genital ulcer disease
in men, acute otitis media in pediatric patients, community-acquired
pneumonia in adults and pediatric patients, and pharyngitis/tonsillitis
in adults and pediatric patients from Gram-positive and Gram-negative
bacteria. Fidaxomicin was approved in
2011 for treating Clostridium difficile-associated
diarrhea. Telithromycin is a ketolide
(a macrolide in which a ketone replaces an aminocarbohydrate-substituted
alcohol moiety). It was approved by
the US FDA in 2004 but withdrawn from sale in 2016 because of severe
side effects (liver damage, respiratory failure in myasthenia gravis
patients) and resulting restrictions on the approved indications for
use. , 
Macrolides bind (as with many other
antibiotics) to the 50S subunit
of the bacterial ribosome but not to the PTC and instead block the
exit tunnel, thereby preventing peptides from leaving the ribosome.
Macrolides, however, tend to have larger molecular weights than other
antibiotic classes (730–860 Da as opposed to 300–630
Da for others) and to be less polar, which makes them less generally bioavailable to cells and, thus,
less effective. Mutations in the 23S
rRNA sequence, acquisition of a methyltransferase to modify the rRNA,
generation of a peptide to displace macrolides from the ribosome,
phosphorylation or lactone hydrolysis, and efflux pumps can confer
resistance to macrolides. Macrolides are generated either directly
from Streptomyces species or by semisynthesis from
erythromycin or other macrolide isolates. The Myers group (among others) developed modular syntheses of macrolides,
which allowed variation in substituents, ring size, and polarity that
are not possible for semisynthetic macrolides; the complexity of macrolides,
their polarity, metabolic stability (to lactone cleavage), and effective
charge can be readily varied to yield amine-substituted macrocycles
with improved activity against drug-resistant bacteria and to broaden
antibacterial scope. Macrolide Pharmaceuticals
was established in 2015 to use the Myers group’s methodology
to develop novel antibiotics. 

## Rifamycins
First discovered in 1957 by Sensi at the
Dow-Lepetit Research Laboratory in Milan, Italy, from the fermentation
of Streptomyces mediterranei, rifamycins are polyketides that are part of the ansamycin
class of natural products, contain a naphthalene aromatic moiety,
and demonstrate antibiotic properties against Gram-positive and some
Gram-negative bacteria. Their antibacterial
properties come from interfering with RNA synthesis by targeting RNA
polymerase; they inhibit transcription and block the elongations path
by binding to the B subunit of RNA polymerases. , There are currently four US FDA-approved antibiotics in this family:
rifampicin, rifabutin, rifapentine, and rifaximin. Rifampicin, rifabutin,
and rifapentine are used to treat, among other things, tuberculosis
and M. avium, while
rifaximin is used to treat gastrointestinal and liver diseases. The high frequency of endogenous resistance
development, via the mutation of rpoB encoding the B subunit of the
RNA polymerase, , , is of great concern. Further literature on the resistance mechanisms, , on new analogues, and on combination strategies to improve efficiency
can be found. , − 

## Pyrimidines
A variety of pyrimidines with antibiotic
activity that have been prepared because of the relative facility
of assembling the pyrimidine ring and pyrimidine-containing antibiotics,
such as sulfadiazine (an N-2-pyrimidinyl p-aminobenzenesulfonamide), are in clinical use. However, two antibiotics with pyrimidine cores
are used clinically. Pyrimethamine is used as an antimalarial and
antitoxoplasmic agent; at low doses, it is used to suppress non-Falciparum malaria, while at high doses, it is used to treat
toxoplasmosis. Trimethoprim is a pyrimidine-containing antibacterial
used most often in a fixed combination with the sulfonamide sulfamethoxazole. Trimethoprim inhibits dihydrofolate reductase,
which helps bacteria synthesize folates, which are necessary cofactors
for DNA synthesis. Sulfamethoxazole
is a mimic of p-aminobenzoic acid, a building block
for folate synthesis; thus, Daraprim (pyrimethamine) attacks two steps
in bacterial folate synthesis simultaneously to reduce the rate of
resistance. As a result, it inhibits most strains of S. pneumoniae,
E. coli (including susceptible enterotoxigenic strains implicated
in traveler’s diarrhea), Klebsiella and Enterobacter species, H. influenzae, Morganella morganii, Proteus mirabilis, Proteus vulgaris, Shigella flexneri, Shigella sonnei, and Pneumocystis jiroveci. Daraprim (pyrimethamine) is used to treat bacterial ear infections,
urinary tract infections (UTIs), bacterial complications of bronchitis, P. jiroveci pneumonia, and traveler’s diarrhea.
There are some liabilities to Daraprim (pyrimethamine), however.
Trimethoprim is a substrate for bacterial P/gp drug transporters. K. pneumoniae and Serratia marscens show resistance to Daraprim (pyrimethamine)
because they alter their cell membranes to inhibit passive transport,
which prevents drugs from exerting their effects. In addition, sulfa
drugs may have severe hypersensitivity reactions. 
To avoid sulfonamide-induced hypersensitivity reactions,
researchers
have sought trimethoprim analogues that can be used as monotherapies.
One such compound is iclaprim, which has been tested as a monotherapy
against acute bacterial skin and skin structure infections and community-acquired
pneumonia. Two different companies, Arpida AG and Motif BioSciences,
have attempted to gain approval for iclaprim. Arpida’s application
to the US FDA was rejected because it was not sufficiently noninferior
to the standard of care. , Motif performed multiple
phase III studies on iclaprim; − however, its approval would have required
additional studies to address potential liver toxicity. , 

## Quinolones
Quinolones are a family of synthetic broad-spectrum
antibiotics whose basic structure is an N-1-alkylated 3-carboxypyrid-4-one
ring fused to another aromatic ring, i.e. a bicyclic core structure
related to a 4-quinolone. Usually included
with the quinolone family is the 1,8-naphthyridone core (X = N). The
first publication of quinolone structures having antibacterial activity
was a patent by Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI) published in 1960; this was followed by Sterling disclosing the
antibacterial properties of 1,8-naphthyridones and nalidixic acid. , Modifications to the
base structure can enhance activity, control potency, and influence
pharmacokinetics, though positions 3 and 4 are crucial for enzyme
binding and should not be altered. The
most common modifications are substitutions on carbon 5, 6, 7, and
8. The addition of fluoro to the C-6 position is the key characteristic
of a large subset of quinolones called fluoroquinolones. This includes
ciprofloxacin, gemifloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, norfloxacin,
ofloxacin, sparfloxacin, delafloxacin, trovafloxacin, and many others.
This family of antibiotics, depending on the member, can target
Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria by inhibiting bacterial topoisomerase
II, DNA gyrase, and DNA topoisomerase IV enzymes; this mechanism of
action interferes with DNA synthesis and prevents the replication
process. , , Still, growing
bacterial resistance is raising concerns in the use of this class
of antibiotics. Three main mechanisms of resistance have been documented:
target-mediated resistance, plasmid-mediated resistance, and chromosome-mediated
resistance. More information on these mechanisms can be found in recent
reviews by Maxwell et al., Tang and
Zhao, and Ruiz. 
Apart from increasing antimicrobial resistance, the
debilitating
side effects of quinolones and fluoroquinolones are a concern that
is restricting their use. − Monga et al., Mittal et al., and Nikolić
and Radić et al., on the topic of quinolones, thoroughly discuss
synthetic advances, emerging antibiotics, and the application of metal complexes in the
context of quinolones. 

## Lincosamides
Lincosamides (or lincosamines) are (alkylpyrrolidinecarbonylamino)trideoxyoctopyranoside
antibiotics. Of the lincosamides, lincomycin (R = H) and clindamycin
(R = Cl) (Supplementary Table 1) are the
only two lincosamides in clinical use. Lincosamides are bacteriostatic against Gram-positive cocci, Staphylococcus, group A and B Streptococcus, Clostridium species, Corynebacterium diphtheriae, B. anthracis, and Gram-positive anaerobes but
are not effective against Neisseria species, enterococci, H. influenzae, or M. catarrhalis. Clindamycin
also inhibits the growth of Plasmodium berghei and Toxoplasma gondii. Lincomycin is, thus, used for Gram-positive
skin, skin structure, and bone infections, while clindamycin is used
for anaerobic bacterial infections, particularly intestinal and vaginal
infections. The lincosamides are administered intravenously but are
incompatible with ampicillin, magnesium sulfate, calcium gluconate,
phenytoin, B vitamins, and barbiturates. Lincosamides bind to the
peptidyltransferase center of the 50S subunit of the bacterial ribosome
to prevent peptide transfer and, thus, inhibit bacterial protein synthesis
(a mechanism common to multiple antibiotic classes because of its
conservation). However, bacteria have
multiple pathways to resist lincosamide-mediated toxicity. The cell
walls of Gram-negative bacteria reduce passive diffusion of antibiotics,
which can be further reduced if efflux pumps are also present (a mechanism
also available to Gram-positive bacteria). Methylation of the 23S
rRNA by the methyltransferase produced by the CFR gene reduces the
ability of lincosamides to bind to the ribosome, as it does for streptogramins
and macrolides. In S. aureus, an O-nucleotidyltransferase mediates the adenosine monophosphorylation
of the 4′-hydroxyl group of lincosamides to ablate binding.
Finally, alterations of membrane permeability in Gram-positive bacteria
can reduce the cellular concentrations of lincosamides and, thus,
their effectiveness.

## Streptogramins
Streptogramin antibiotics
are produced
by Streptococcus species. A-class streptogramins, such as virginiamycin M2 and the semisynthetic
dalfopristin, contain 23-membered macrocycles with fragments derived
from both polyketides and amino acids. B-class streptogramins contain
19-membered depsipeptide (peptides with ester linkages) lactones;
one example is quinupristin. Dalfopristin and quinupristin, together,
comprise the antibiotic Synercid, which was approved by the US FDA
in 1999 for treating multidrug-resistant (MDR) skin infections, including
those caused by VRE. Class A streptogramins bind to the 50S subunit
of the bacterial ribosome at its PTC, while the class B streptogramins
bind to the 50S subunit of 70S ribosome at the exit tunnel; the binding of class B streptogramins to the
bacterial ribosome is increased in the presence of the class A streptogramins
so that the combination of class A and B streptogramins is bactericidal,
while class A or B streptogramins, alone, are bacteriostatic. Inhibition
of the bacterial ribosome prevents protein synthesis and, thus, kills
bacteria. Streptogramins are useful against aerobic Gram-negative
and Gram-positive bacteria, such as vancomycin- or multidrug-resistant E. faecium (not faecalis), S. aureus, and S. pyogenes. 
Resistance to the streptogramins class of antibiotics is difficult
because the PTC is highly conserved and tolerates minimal alterations. Export of streptogramin antibiotics from bacterial
cells occurs through transporters encoded by genes, such as lsa(E). In addition, O-methylation of A2503 in the bacterial ribosome blocks
the binding of antibiotics to the PTC and, thus, reduces or negates
inhibition. In addition, acetylation of A2503 with virginiamycin acetyltransferases
also reduces streptogramin antibiotic activity. Other mechanisms include
the presence of efflux pumps. While
the use of streptogramins is limited, the development of synthetic
methods and the modularity of their structures makes them accessible
to chemical synthesis, which allows significant modification of the
cores not available through semisynthesis. The Li and Seiple group
has developed analogues of streptogramins and the related lankacidins
as potential antibiotic agents with expanded scope, with the synthesis of streptogramins reaching up to the
10 g scale. For example, the replacement of the methyl group β
to the ester oxygen in virginiamycin M2 with an allyl group and of
the right-hand ketone with a fluoromethylene moiety yields a highly
active analogue with improved activity against drug-resistant strains
of S. aureus. 

## Oxazolidinones
Oxazolidinones is the class of antibiotics
that inhibits protein synthesis. Two aryl-substituted oxazolidinones
have been approved as antibacterial agents. Linezolid (R = MeCONH;
R1 = 4-morpholinyl) was approved by the US FDA in 2000
for treating vancomycin-resistant E. faecium, drug-resistant
and -susceptible S. aureus and S. pneumoniae, Streptococcus agalactiae, and S. pyogenes. Tedizolid [R = HO; R1 =
2-(5-tetrazolyl)-5-pyridinyl] phosphate ester was approved by the
US FDA in 2014 for bacterial skin and skin structure infections by E. faecalis, drug-resistant and -susceptible S.
aureus and S. pneumoniae, S. agalactiae, and the Streptococcus anginosus group. Oxazolidinones bind to the bacterial 50S ribosome
subunit at the PTC to inhibit protein synthesis by hindering the formation
of the initiation complex. Resistance
to oxazolidinones is slow to develop but has been observed—O-methylation of A2503 in the 50S subunit of the bacterial
ribosome (mediated by the methyltransferase Cfr) abrogates binding,
as does the G2576T mutation in domain V of the 23S rRNA. Mutations
in the genes rplC and rplD for the
ribosomal proteins L3 and L4 also yield resistant bacterial phenotypes.
The simplicity of oxazolidinones and the availability of aryl-nitrogen
coupling reactions, such as Buchwald–Hartwig coupling, enables
drug developers to rapidly generate analogues to circumvent bacterial
resistance. Linezolid, however, has limited aqueous solubility, which
makes its administration more difficult. In addition, reversible myelosuppression
and irreversible optic and peripheral neuropathies are observed on
long-term administration (six months or more) of linezolid, and it
acts as an inhibitor of monoamine oxidases, thereby making it incompatible
with a variety of foods and drugs.

## Pleuromutilins
Pleuromutilin (R = HO) is an antibiotic
natural product isolated from Clitopilus scyphoides and Clitopilus passeckerianus (originally Pleurotus mutiliz). , Four analogues of
pleuromutilin are used as antimicrobial agents. Tiamulin and valnemulin
are both used as veterinary drugs. Retapamulin (Altabax) was approved
by the US FDA in 2007 for treating impetigo caused by methicillin-susceptible S. aureus or S. pyogenes. Lefamulin (Xenleta) was approved by the US FDA in 2019
as a treatment for community-acquired bacteria pneumonia. Pleuromutilins are effective against a variety
of Gram-positive pathogens, including Streptococcus and Staphylococcus species and E. faecalis and faecium; they also are effective against Gram-negative
bacteria, including Haemophilus and Neisseria species, M. catarrhalis, L. pneumoniae,
M. tuberculosis, Mycoplasmas, Ureaplasmas, and Chlamydia species are inhibited by pleuromutilins.
Lefamulin can potentially cause QT prolongation and, thus, severe
or fatal arrhythmia. , , 
Pleuromutilins bind to the 50S subunit of the bacterial ribosome at the PTC, thereby preventing protein synthesis;
bacteria can evade resistance to them by methylating the rRNA at A2503
or mutating the L3 ribosomal protein to block the binding of pleuromutilins.
Resistance can also be due to the presence of efflux pumps. In addition, Enterobacteriaceae possesses the AcrAB/TolC efflux pump to export pleuromutilins from
the cell and avoid their effects. Finally, the lipophilicity of pleuromutilins
can reduce their bioavailabilities; prodrugs, however, can improve
the permeability of pleuromutilins into cells and, thus, their antibacterial
activities. Analogues of pleuromutilin have been prepared to expand
the antibacterial scope of pleuromutilins, mostly by modification
of the acyl moiety on the C14 alcohol. − Some recent work has disclosed methods for modification of the pleuromutilin
skeleton in addition to the pendant ester. 
Development of newer antibiotic classes has been an ever-evolving
field. Several classes of antibiotics have failed during the due course
of development and are beyond the scope of the current article, which
focuses on emerging antimicrobial strategies. For an article focused
on failed antibotics targeting Gram-negative bacteria, please see
Prasad et al. A good resource of antibacterial
agents in clinical and preclinical development can be found in an
article by Butler et al. 

## Alternatives
to Conventional Antibiotics
The continued
and growing threat from antibiotic resistance coupled with a lack
of newer antibiotics has necessitated the use of alternatives to combat
these formidable bacterial infections. shows a trend landscape map representing
the number of documents, including journal and patent publications
from 2012 onward for data retrieved from the CAS Content Collection
associated with emerging antibacterial strategies. The number of documents
directly correlates with the interest of researchers in any particular
antibacterial strategy or the form of antibacterials being used in
the past decade. On the basis of the numbers in the map, a selected
few of them are discussed briefly in this section.
 

## Stringent
Response Inhibitors
Persistent infections
affect many; while they are often asymptomatic, the persisting bacteria
may be reactivated at any time to cause renewed infection. The quiescent
pathogens are termed “persister bacteria.” Many different mechanisms by which persistent
infection is thought to be achieved have been proposed and include
stringent response, SOS response, toxin-antitoxin response, and oxidative stress response. Stringent response is a mechanism by which bacteria counter extreme
nutritional starvation (amino acids, fatty acids, iron) and other
stresses that allow for survival. , Classified
as a stress response, the expression and accumulation of guanosine
5′-diphosphate 3′-diphosphate (ppGpp) and guanosine
5′-triphosphate 3′-diphosphate (pppGpp) are the hallmarks
of the stringent response. Both ppGpp
and pppGpp, often collectively referred to as (p)ppGpp, are produced
by (p)ppGpp synthetase, which includes the RelA/SpoT homologue and
small alarmone synthetase proteins. The
exact mechanism by which these molecules achieve stringent response
is thought to be varied, one of which includes binding directly to
RNA polymerase to lead to decreased transcription. , While initially discovered in E. coli, stringent response has also subsequently been
identified in many other bacterial species, including Mycobacterium( ) and Bacillus. It is now increasingly believed that activation
of stringent response might be an important determinant of antibiotic
efficacy and might contribute to antibiotic resistance. , One avenue that has been explored in recent years is the use of
structurally similar compounds, such as 2′-deoxyguanosine-3′,5′-di(methylene
bisphosphonate), and analogues leading to competitive inhibition of
(p)ppGpp synthetase and decreased production of (p)ppGpp, which puts a halt to further downstream signaling.
Other examples of structurally similar analogues of (p)ppGPpp explored
as stringent inhibitors include relacin and its derivatives. Peptide-based
derivatives that bind to and trigger degradation of (p)ppGpp have
also been developed and were shown to
be effective against multidrug-resistant ESKAPEE pathogens. In recent years, similar efforts have been
made for M. tuberculosis( , ) by designing small molecule (p)ppGpp synthetase inhibitors on the
basis of ppGpp and relacin and identification
of novel/new leads by screening a 2 million compound library. Other bacterial strains for which this avenue
is being explored include Neisseria( ) and Bacillus. 

## Bacterial Vaccines
In lieu of the development of novel
antibiotics, prevention of bacterial infections via the use of vaccines
might be a key alternative strategy available. Additionally, the use
of vaccines and prevention or minimization of bacterial infections
leads to decreased antibiotic consumption and is, therefore, likely
to help with antibiotic resistance. Finally,
by reducing or eliminating drug-resistant strains, vaccines could
aid in decreasing antibiotic resistance. Vaccines designed could either be prophylactic or therapeutic, the
latter being useful for preventing the infection from relapsing again
and appearing to be more common in the context of tuberculosis. Vaccine can be composed of (i) live-attenuated
bacterial cells, (ii) inactivated bacterial cells, and (iii) a subunit
vaccine that contains just enough material from bacterial cells to
elicit an immune response and might include specific proteins or polysaccharides. Finally, inactivated toxins isolated from bacterial
cells can also be used to design “toxoid” vaccines; examples include the DPT vaccine and tetanus
vaccine, among others. 
A report
released by the WHO in 2021 provided details of >60 and >90
vaccines
in clinical and preclinical development. , The report was focused on identifying vaccines that have been designed
for the bacterial strains that are listed in the 2017 WHO Bacterial
Priority Pathogens List. , The report indicates
a lack of vaccines in development for E. faecium and Enterobacter spp., both of which are classified as high
and critical priority in terms of requirement of new/novel antibiotics
by the WHO.
Despite obvious benefits, the development of vaccines
against multidrug-resistant
strains has been slow. In recent years, bacterial vaccine-related
research has branched out into the incorporation of nanoparticles
for improved delivery, as well as increased/improved
antigenicity. Another avenue of interest
is the development of vaccines against multiple bacterial strains. The critical role of vaccinations in helping
to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic is bound to help generate interest
in and accelerate the development of bacterial vaccines, especially
mRNA-based vaccines. Indeed, in early 2023, Kon et al. reported an
mRNA-based lipid nanoparticle vaccine for the deadly bacteria Y. pestis responsible for plague. 

## Antimicrobial Peptides
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs)
are gaining popularity in the treatment of drug-resistant bacteria
as alternatives for more traditional small molecule antibiotics. They
are mostly bioactive proteins naturally produced by all types of living
organisms as a host defense system, though
some artificial AMPs have also been synthesized. AMPs are typically short (<100 amino acids) amphiphilic
cationic peptides with a broad spectrum of antimicrobial activity,
an overall net charge of +2 to +11 with around 50% of hydrophobic
residues, many positive residues (arginine, lysine, histidine), and
a molecular weight of <10kD. , − They can be divided into many ways: ribosomally synthesized peptides
and nonribosomally synthesized peptides, , linear and cyclic peptides, or on
the basis of their secondary structure. , In general, AMPs target the cell membranes of pathogens; more details
on their mechanisms of actions can be found in reviews by Moretta
et al., Zhu et al., and Zhang et al. There are
over 3000 natural AMPs as of November 2022 according to the Antimicrobial
Peptide Database; some examples of them
are glycopeptides, lipopeptides, lipoglycopeptides, lantibiotics, − defensins, and thiopeptides. − We will be briefly discussing the first three categories, but for
more general information on emerging antibiotic peptides, structure–activity
relationship (SAR) studies, strategies to improve AMP activity and
biocompatibility, AMP applications, resistance, AMPs in clinical trials,
etc., please refer to previous reviews cited in this paragraph. Self-assembled
peptide nanomaterials are used to inhibit bacterial growth. suggests that AMPss show a steady growth until 2020 in both
journal and patent publications. Interestingly, the growth in patent
publications is faster than journal publications, which indicates
commercial interest in this area. Notable categories of AMPs are discussed
in the following sections.
 

## Glycopeptides
Glycopeptides are glycosylated nonribosomal
peptides that are composed of a tricyclic or tetracyclic polypeptide
scaffold and typically a heptapeptide scaffold made by proteogenic
and nonproteogenic amino acids alongside sugar residues, chlorine
atoms, methyl groups, or lipid chains. , They display
antibacterial activity against Gram-positive bacteria typically by
inhibiting cell wall biosynthesis due to binding to the C-terminal d-Ala-d-Ala moiety of the peptidoglycan precursor lipid
II, which prevents transglycosylation and transpeptidation for cell
wall synthesis. − They are effective against S. aureus (including
MRSA), Enterococcus spp., C. difficile, and healthcare-associated infections that are
resistant to other antibiotics like E. faecalis and E. faecium. Some members of approved drugs of this group
are vancomycin (1958), teicoplanin (1988), telavancin (2009), dalbavancin (2014), and oritavancin
(2014). Many novel derivatives and new
glycopeptides are also being developed, studied, and optimized. − , Known resistance mechanisms
include target site modification, cell wall thickening, enzymatic
modification of vancomycin, and efflux pumps. 

## Lipopeptides and Lipoglycopeptides
As the name suggests,
lipopeptides consist of a lipid moiety attached to peptide molecules.
Daptomycin, which gained US FDA approval in 2003, remains the only lipopeptide that is currently in use against
Gram-positive bacteria. Structurally,
daptomycin is a cyclic lipopeptide consisting of 13 amino acids out
of which 10 amino acids form a macrolide ring. Over the years, SAR efforts have been made to identify
structural features required for daptomycin’s antibacterial
effect and to try and improve them. , Daptomycin
functions by disrupting the bacterial cell membrane directly by binding
to phosphatidylglycerol and in an indirect
manner by tampering with the synthesis of peptidoglycans , with the antibacterial effect observed appearing to be dependent
on the presence of and binding with calcium. , Other examples of calcium-dependent antibiotics include lipopeptides isolated and purified from natural
sources, such as octapeptins, friulimicin
B, and amphomycin, among others. Octapeptins,
which are cyclic lipopeptides, function by inserting into bacterial
cell membranes. They have shown an increase in interest, especially
in the last 5 years or so, − with efforts being made to systematically
study them in order to design newer and more efficacious analogues. − 
Lipoglycocpeptides consist of carbohydrate and lipid moieties
attached to peptide molecules. Examples of US FDA-approved lipoglycopeptides
include telavancin, dalbavancin, , and oritavancin. , The lipoglycopeptide class of
antibiotics tends to act via bacterial cell wall disruption by interfering
in the synthesis of peptidoglycans similar
to glycopeptides, such as vancomycin. Most likely as a result of the
large size, lipoglycopeptides tend to be absorbed poorly upon oral
administration and have to be administered intravenously. They tend to be long-acting with half-lives
in the range of several hours. , A recent study highlighted
lower healthcare costs associated with the treatment of recurrent
and serious bacterial infections in individuals with substance use
disorder with long-acting lipoglycopeptide, and a 2020 review described similar outcomes/findings. 

## Bacteriophages
Bacteriophages are
viruses capable of
targeting and destroying bacterial cells selectively. While the discovery of bacteriophages can be
traced back to the late 1800s, their subsequent development was overshadowed
by the discovery and popularization of antibiotics. Broadly speaking, the lytic cycle of bacteriophages involves
the following major steps: (i) attachment to bacterial cells via receptors,
(ii) injection of viral DNA into bacterial cells, (iii) replication
of viral proteins and components within bacterial cells, and (iv)
packing and release of replicated viruses after bacterial cell lysis. The exact series and mechanism of events may
differ depending on the bacteriophage and the host bacterial cell.
In contrast, in a lysogenic cycle, incorporation of viral DNA into
host DNA occurs. Bacteriophages tend
to be specific in terms of the receptors they interact with and the
species they can affect/target. , Advantages
associated with bacteriophage therapy include effectiveness against
MDR bacteria, , specificity in terms of species
and/or strains, and leaving the patient’s gut microbiome largely
unaltered. , Furthermore, bacteriophage therapy
has been shown to have an excellent safety profile in human beings. , − All of these features mean that as the threat
of MDR strains becomes more imminent, bacteriophage therapy has seen
a promising resurgence in interest. − In a recent study, a group of
researchers designed and administered personalized bacteriophage therapy
to an individual suffering from lung infection caused by MDR P. aeruginosa and appeared to be successful in stopping
antibiotic therapy completely. Other
instances of successful personalized bacteriophage therapy against
MDR strains have also been reported. However, there are still challenges that need to be addressed in
order to make bacteriophage therapy more viable—poor in vivo
efficacy in terms of targeting bacterial species in the gut upon oral
administration is an important one. , There are
also noted instances of resistance against bacteriophages, though
their prevalence is far lower than antibiotic resistance. , 

## Microbiota Interventions

## Probiotics
The
use of antibiotics kills not only disease-causing
bacterial species but other beneficial bacterial species prevalent
in the human gut. Alteration of the complex and dynamic gut microbiota
has been increasingly linked to several diseases, , including mental health disorders. Furthermore, evidence suggests
that disruptions/alterations of the gut microbiome following antibiotic
therapy can be long-lasting and anywhere from weeks up to several
months. It has been shown that coadministration
of probiotics, live beneficial micro-organisms, along with antibiotics
could be beneficial to counter the negative impact of antibiotics
on the gut microbiome. Consequently,
this practice is becoming more prevalent; however, there have been
concerns raised about the actual benefit of consuming probiotics in
rebalancing the gut microbiome. Micro-organisms
that are often administered as probiotics include the bacterial strains Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium and can
be consumed as part of the diet itself (fermented foods, such as yogurt,
sauerkraut, and pickles, among others), or as dietary supplements
(in the form of tablets and capsules). After the initial frenzy of
interest in probiotics, in recent years, the outlook toward use of
probiotics has cooled down considerably. A 2020 study looked at the use of probiotics in the geriatric
population (65 years and older) in a clinical trial comprising 310
individuals and utilized a combination of Lactobacillus rhamnosus and Bifidobacterium animalis as the probiotic.
The study concluded/determined that the use of probiotics could not
help reduce administration of antibiotics. Researchers from the Semmelweis
University in Hungary published an article in 2023 describing their
findings from a meta-analysis of published/conducted clinical trials
examining the supplementary use of probiotics in antibiotic therapy. The analysis concluded that probiotic supplementation
was not beneficial during antibiotic administration. As noted by the
authors of the 2023 study, the pool
of available data for use of probiotics in antibiotic therapy remains
relatively small, and additional comprehensive, systematic and standardized
studies are necessary to more effectively examine the role and importance
of probiotics.

## Fecal Microbiota Transplantation (FMT)
Also known more
colloquially as stool transplant, FMT is the process of collecting
stool samples from healthy donors and transplanting them in the gut
of a patient. Used most often in the context of recurrent C. difficile infections, FMT is also being explored for
other bacterial infections, as well as other diseases, with >500
clinical
trials listed on www.clinicaltrials.gov. Interest in FMT as a viable treatment option against C.
difficile dates back to the 1980s. , In 2023, the US FDA approved Vowst, the first fecal microbiota product
that can be administered orally. Meant
to be consumed after completion of an antibiotic course, Vowst consists
of live bacteria isolated from fecal matter obtained from healthy
individuals and is thought to help re-establish gut microbiota. , 

## Importance of Antibiofilm Materials
Biofilms are a
complex community of monospecies or multispecies microbes that are
attached to a surface and each other and are embedded in a self-produced
extracellular matrix that consists of proteins, polysaccharides, and
environmental DNA. − This allows bacteria to withstand hostile
environments, starvation, desiccation, and to be protected from fluctuations
in humidity, temperature, pH, etc. Bacteria in biofilms can evade
the host defense systems and can cause local tissue damage and acute
infection. These biofilms can develop
in catheters, pacemakers, joint prostheses, dentures, contact lenses,
prosthetic heart valves, and implants. Biofilms also protect bacteria and increase bacterial resistance
against conventional antibiotics. Dry surface biofilms, which might
contribute to healthcare-acquired infections, can be difficult to
remove and allow bacteria to tolerate or resist attacks by other pathogens,
disinfectants, antiseptics, heavy metals, and other antimicrobial
agents. This means that the development
of new antimicrobial materials that also have antibiofilm properties
is of utmost importance in the healthcare industry. Specific antibiofilm
materials have been developed, such as metal nanoparticles, especially
silver nanoparticles, and have been incorporated into various materials,
such as catheters, implants, and wound dressings to inhibit biofilm
formation. , Similarly, chitosan, polyethylene
glycol (PEG), graphene, quaternary ammonium compounds (QACs), and
natural products have also been explored because of their antibiofilm
properties. − AMPs can also be used to develop antibiofilm materials since they
can be tuned to act on different stages of biofilm formation and have
diverse modes of action. They can exhibit antibiofilm properties by
acting on different stages of biofilm formation, such as inhibiting
bacterial adhesion, preventing quorum sensing within the biofilm,
and in disrupting preformed biofilm, which is more difficult than
preventing biofilm assembly. Nisin A
and CAMA peptide can disrupt or degrade biofilms of the MRSA strain
of S. aureus. , Similarly, other peptides,
such as LL-37, Hepcidin 20, SMAP-29, KT2, and RT2, act on biofilms
resulting from P. aeruginosa, S. epidermidis, Burkholderia thailandensis, and MDR E.
coli biofilms. − Certain enzymes, such as deoxyribonuclease
I; protease; and the glycoside hydrolases dispersin B, PgaB, PelA,
Sph3, amylase, and cellulase alginate, are used as antibiofilm agents. , 

## Emerging Antibacterial Forms
A variety of purposes
require prolonged antimicrobial activity or repulsion of microorganisms
for which conventional antibacterial administration is less likely
to be effective. The use of materials to deliver antibiotics rather
than conventional drug delivery methods requires more invasive methods
but can provide localized, prolonged, and stimulus-dependent antibacterial
activity. Various forms, such as hydrogels, films, coatings, scaffolds,
implants, and nanobased forms, such as nanoparticles, are being used
to design antibacterial strategies. Medical devices, such as catheters
and intravenous lines, can be sources of microbial infection that
can potentially be prevented with antimicrobial materials; in addition,
the formation of biofilms can impede their functions, thereby making
antimicrobial or antibiofilm materials necessary for their continued
function. Similarly, implants for bone may be necessary to induce
bone regeneration but can also act as sources of infection, which
impedes their effectiveness. Surfaces that are touched by many people
can act as vectors of infection; antimicrobial coatings on such surfaces
can reduce the transmission of microbes. Antimicrobial films can be
useful in preventing food spoilage and reducing food waste and food-borne
illness. Fabrics with antimicrobial coatings can reduce disease spread
and the energy costs and need for cleaning. The forms of materials
are important for their activities. Some commonly used examples are
described in more detail.

## Hydrogels
Hydrogels are moldable
and injectable materials,
and their low density and degradability make them useful for drug
delivery and wound healing. Their solvent accessibility also makes
them effective at stimuli-sensitive materials. As with many of the
materials noted, hydrogels are not inherently antibacterial and require
antibiotics or other antimicrobial components to exert antibacterial
activity. The surface area of hydrogels can allow them to act in place
while being exposed to cells or bodily fluids, which allows either
diffusible antibiotics or gel-bound antibiotic agents, such as AMPs,
to be used. The hydrogel material can
also protect the antibiotic agents against degradation, thereby allowing
them to be more effective at the same dosage or to be equally effective
at a lower dosage. Hydrogels are useful as stimulus-responsive materials.
Antimicrobial hydrogels may respond to acidity, either reversibly
(through conformational shifts) or irreversibly (by chemical reactions,
such as hydrazone cleavage). They can also be degraded by enzymes,
such as hyaluronidase, which are specific to pathogenic bacteria,
or by toxins secreted by bacteria, which enables selective antimicrobial
activity. shows
that journal publications related to the use of antibacterial hydrogels
have shown a constant increase in the last 5 years.
Biologically
derived polymers can also be used for antimicrobial hydrogels. Lignin,
in particular, has been used because of its broad availability and
tunable stiffness that makes a variety of forms accessible. For example, lignin-containing hydrogels containing
silver nanoparticles have been used as antibacterial agents. A copolymer of lignin with PEG and poly(co-vinyl methyl ether-maleic acid) containing curcumin has
been shown to be active against S. aureus and P. mirabilis biofilms. Lignin-based
nanoparticles combined with a poly(oxazoline) triazole have been used
as anti-inflammatory agents. 

## Nanoparticles
Nanoparticles are the most used nanobased
form in the antibacterial field. The small size of nanoparticles makes
them easy to deliver, while their high surface area-to-volume ratio
allows them to deliver drugs effectively. Surface modification of
nanoparticles can be used to tailor them for specific targets and
locations, and the surface chemistry and composition control the timing
of activity, drug release, and of duration of action. In addition,
alteration of the morphologies of nanoparticles also alters their
aggregation, movement, and persistence. All of these properties increase
the attractiveness of nanoparticles as antimicrobial agents. Changes in composition can allow nanoparticle-bound
drugs to evade or reduce drug resistance mechanisms; for example,
poly(co-lactic acid-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles
containing metronidazole were as effective against juvenile periodontitis
as tetracycline, though metronidazole was previously found to be ineffective
against the contributing bacterium Aggregibacter actinomycetecomitans. , PLGA or polyamidoamine (PAMAM) nanoparticles
containing platensimycin were more effective against S. aureus in mice than free platensimycin and were even effective against
MRSA in mice. PLGA nanoparticles containing
azithromycin showed improved activity against MRSA and E.
faecalis but not P. aeruginosa; improvement
corresponded to the presence of efflux pump-derived resistance as
nanoparticle encapsulated antibiotics are reported to bypass the efflux
activity in bacteria. Metal or alloy
nanoparticles can also be effective antibacterial agents. Silver nanoparticles
have been used to prevent bacterial growth and treat infections, but
their toxicity may limit their use. Copper
nanoparticles also show antimicrobial activity. 

## Films or Coatings
Films occlude
microbial access to
surfaces, thereby preventing their adherence, preventing biofilm formation,
and killing bacteria. Hospitals are high-traffic areas with objects
and surfaces being handled/touched by many people, which makes them
foci of disease spread. Antibacterial copper nanoparticle-containing
coatings have been suggested for application to surfaces in hospitals,
such as bed rails and chairs, to reduce the viability of bacteria
and viruses on those surfaces. For example,
poly(ethylene glycol diacrylate) films containing copper nanoparticles
were prepared as antibacterial films. 
Catheters and intravenous lines are also common sources of
infection: they can carry bacteria from the environment into patients,
bypass the defenses of the skin and mucous membranes, and increase
the population of microbes in people of special concern, i.e., immuno-compromised
individuals, who have reduced energy or resources to fight off infection.
Reducing the ability of medical devices to transmit infection would
be an effective way to improve the health and survival of hospital
patients. To this end, polycationic polymers (including quaternary
ammonium salt-containing polymers), zwitterions, PEGs, and antibacterial
peptides are promising materials to be used as antibacterial coatings
for the prevention of medical device-associated infections. − Flat surfaces can be used to harvest UV and visible light and used
to generate reactive species, such as singlet oxygen. While UV light
is lethal to many microbes, it is also harmful to human and animal
cells, so materials that can use visible light to generate reactive
species are preferable. A photoactive polymer was prepared and shown
to generate singlet oxygen, which killed nearby cells. The anatase form of titanium dioxide (TiO2) generates reactive oxygen species upon irradiation, which
are toxic to microbial cells. This activity
also underlies the use of TiO2 in self-cleaning window
coatings. 
Antimicrobial films
may also serve other purposes. Antifouling
coatings can be formed without the use of antimicrobial agents by
the generation of superhydrophobic surfaces in which the feature sizes
(on a micron or nanometer scale) and shapes prevent both water and
other solvents from binding effectively to the surface. Surfaces that
can repel water and other solvents can also prevent dirt and microorganisms
from adhering to a surface. − Superhydrophobic films can also
be used on fabrics to repel water and dirt, thereby reducing their
need for laundering, but previous coatings have used fluorinated polymers
whose degradation products, intermediates, and precursors are persistent
pollutants with unknown toxicities, which deprecates their use. Antibacterial
films can also be used to reduce bacterial degradation of food, which
would reduce food waste. Edible films using chitosan, starches modified
to improve their durability in the presence of water, carboxymethylcellulose
and cyclodextrins, pectin, zein, whey protein, and the Maillard adducts
of soy protein and carbohydrates have been tested for food preservation
to preserve food while reducing fossil fuel use. 

## Scaffolds and Implants
Networks
also have a high surface
area-to-volume ratio but are localized to specific sites and generally
are more persistent than hydrogels. They are useful as substrates
for cell growth and, thus, are useful for wound and bone healing.
For wound healing, networks of chitosan and sodium alginate with poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) can both facilitate healing and inhibit infection. Bone
matrixes require yet more persistence to allow the growth of new bone
and greater rigidity because of the stiffness of bone. Antibacterial
agents are important because bone infections are likely less accessible
to antimicrobial agents and, thus, are more difficult to treat; preventing
them would be more efficient than treating them. One example is a
gentamicin-containing porous implant for bone healing; a quaternized chitosan/polyester/hydroxyapatite
scaffold was also implanted in rats and rabbits and had antibacterial
and bone-healing activities. Implants
using cationic polymers or copper nanoparticles
were effective at preventing infections, and the copper/polyetheretherketone
implant was effective against MRSA. An
alternative antibacterial method is the use of nitric oxide-releasing
agents in concert with bone matrixes to kill microbes. 

## Composites
Composites use multiple
materials in concert.
One example of an antibacterial composite is the combination of copper
compounds with an anion-exchange resin to kill bacteria in water for
purification. The addition of tetrachlorocuprate(II)
salts to an anion exchange resin and reduction with ascorbic acid
yielded a composite resin containing Cu2O; exposure of
Gram-positive E. faecalis to the material reduced
bacterial load by 105, while the resin did not affect Gram-negative E. coli. Antimicrobial composite materials are useful for
medical devices, such as dental implants, where infections may be
difficult to treat or may cause secondary structural damage. For example,
silver and zinc oxide nanoparticle-containing composite resins for
dental use were tested and inhibited Streptococcus mutans and Lactobacillus species. Polylysine was incorporated into a dental composite to
prevent caries-induced demineralization and repair failure, and noncovalent assemblies of N-Fmoc-pentafluorophenylalanine bound to a dental resin reduced bacterial
growth of S. mutans at 0.25–1% concentrations
and nearly abolished it at 2% concentration.
The variety of
materials capable of exerting antimicrobial activity provides options
not only for treating microbial infection but also for preventing
microbial transmission and infection. They are also capable of reducing
some of the other effects of bacterial and microbial growth, such
as fouling and food spoilage. The alternative antibiotic delivery
systems are likely to have disadvantages, as well. Hydrogels and nanoparticles
are likely to require delivery by injection and, thus, administration
by medical professionals. The rate of drug release from hydrogels
is difficult to control because of their rapid degradation. Their
mechanical stabilities also are low (greater stiffness would make
their delivery by injection difficult) but can be improved by alteration
of the polymers in the hydrogel framework. Nanoparticles require specialized
coatings for treatment of specific organs and infections. Metal nanoparticles
are likely toxic to bacteria through their generation of reactive
oxygen species; , while this mechanism is less
amenable to evasion by bacteria, metal nanoparticles also can potentially
be toxic to normal cells and to cells upon emission into the environment.
Antibacterial films (if used internally), implants, and composites
are mechanically stable, but the release of coatings or fragments
from films or implants may lead to undesired toxicity. Implants and
devices with films require surgical implantation, and if the coatings
or implants either no longer show antibiotic activity (either through
resistance or by depletion of the antibiotic component) or are toxic,
they will require surgical removal. If the mechanism of action of
the antibacterial films is susceptible to resistance, their durability
prolongs the exposure time and, thus, potentially the frequency of
resistance.
While materials are subject to evolutionary strains
in microbes
and, thus, require monitoring, they provide broader and longer-term
means to deal with a variety of problems related to microbial growth
and infection. Various emerging antibacterial forms and therapeutic
strategies are currently in clinical trials (Supplementary Figure 1 and Supplementary Table 2).

## Landscape View of Antibacterial Research—Insights
from
CAS Content Collection
The CAS Content Collection is the largest
human-compiled collection of published scientific information representing
a valuable resource to access and keep up to date on scientific literature
with over 59 million records across disciplines, including chemistry,
biomedical sciences, engineering, materials science, agricultural
science, and many more, from all over the world. Comprehensive data
from the CAS Content Collection allows quantitative analysis of global
research publications across various parameters, including time, geography,
scientific area, medical application, disease, and chemical composition.
To apprehend the research landscape for antibacterials in the past
decade, a search query was developed to extract the data set and was
analyzed extensively to give insights into publication trends, patent
activities, CAS-indexed concepts, and substances.
In the past
decade, there have been over 35 000 scientific
publications (mainly journal articles and patent publications) related
to antibacterial research in the CAS Content Collection indicating
continual research, development, and commercialization efforts being
made in this field. Journal publications dominate the field, while
patent publications amount to one-fifth of the journal publications.
This trend suggests that vast amounts of academic research in the
past decade have not yet resulted in commercialization. There has
been an overall growth in journal publications over the last 5 years
with a >15% increase in the last year ( A) correlating well with the post-COVID19
increase in nosocomial infections. China,
India, the United States, Iran, and South Korea are the world leaders
with respect to the number of journal publications ( B); China has nearly twice
as many publications as India. It is noteworthy that Iran, India,
and Italy have a much higher number of published journal articles
than patent publications, while China has ∼3-fold greater number
of journal and patent publications, respectively, than the United
States, which indicates differential allocation of research funds
in each country or region.
 We identified leading organizations for journal
publications in
research related to antibacterials ( A) with respect to both the number of journal
publications and the average number of citations per publication (an
indicator of the influence of that publication in the field). Unsurprisingly,
research institutes from the United States and China account for nearly
half of the top journal publications and are followed closely by institutes
in Canada. One institute each from India, Israel, Portugal, South
Korea, and Australia features in the list of top institutes. The journal Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy appears to publish
the highest number of articles related to antibacterial research ( B) and is the most
cited journal in the field ( C).
 Patent publications were analyzed to identify leading
patent assignees
and their geographical distribution. In terms of the number of patent
publications, patents by noncommercial assignees outnumber commercial
ones, which indicates that noncommercial organizations are engaged
in more antibacterial research and are trying to find ways to patent
and commercialize them. Interestingly, the number of patents by noncommercial
assignees has shown a steady increase in the past decade, while the
number remains more or less steady for commercial assignees ( A). China dominates
patents in the field of antibacterials as it has the highest number
of commercial and noncommercial patent assignees ( ). Chinese universities account
for all of the top 15 spots in the top noncommercial assignees. Unsurprisingly,
the number of patents by noncommercial assignees from China is ∼4
times higher than the USA and ∼3 times higher than that of
South Korea. China, the USA, Japan, Korea, India, the UK, and Italy
are the top assignees for commercial patents. Wockhardt Limited, the
leading commercial organization in the field of antibacterials, has
notable patents on the use of nitrogen-containing compounds as antibacterials. , Other companies, such as F. Hoffmann-La Roche, have patents related
to sequence-specific antibacterial testing and peptide macrocycles against drug-resistant strains of A. baumannii, among many others.
Notable journal and patent publications from recent years are included
in Supplementary Table 3 and Supplementary Table 4, respectively.
 Patent protection is influenced by the country/region
of
the applicant;
consequently, the same invention can be filed for patent protection
in several jurisdictions or it can be filed through the World Intellectual
Property Organization (WO) and later filed to patent offices in different
countries. This accounts for certain patent families being counted
more than once, which represents them being filed at multiple patent
offices. represents
a chronological flow of filing individual patent applications within
patent families in various national patent offices, the World Intellectual
Property Organization, and the European Patent Office (EP). The left
column shows the top 10 patent assignee countries/regions in terms
of the number of patent activities (here, an activity is defined as
an event where a patent document, either an application or a granted
patent, is published). The extreme right column shows the patent office
where the patent activity took place. The center column connecting
the two indicates the office where the first patent in the family
was filed. Unsurprisingly, China and USA have the highest patent flow
activity, which correlates well with their high patent numbers. Interestingly,
most countries tend to have a higher number of patent filings at their
home country’s patent office followed by their initial filings
at the WO.
 We further explored distribution
and trends in the published documents
(journals and patents) dealing with various antibacterial-related
concepts. A
shows the number of publications corresponding to the most prominently
occurring bacteria in the field of antimicrobials. S. aureus shows the maximum number of publications followed by E.
coli; this is unsurprising as these microorganisms are the
most common causes of hospital-associated infections and bacteremia
(the presence of bacterial infection in the blood) in predisposed
populations. , MRSA remains a prominent cause
of bacteria-related deaths worldwide. Interestingly, all the bacteria from the “ESKAPEE”
list, including E. faecium, S. aureus, K. pneumoniae, A. baumannii,
P. aeruginosa, Enterobacter spp., and E. coli, feature in this list, which indicates that significant research
efforts are being directed toward combating these bacteria. In terms of the number of publications mentioning
specific bacterial diseases or conditions, tuberculosis was the most
common bacterial disease found ( B). This is consistent with the frequency of indexing
of bacterial species in which M. tuberculosis is
most often seen in publications ( A). Urinary tract infections, nosocomial,
and respiratory infections have also been frequent subjects of published
research ( B).
Quinolones and fluoroquinolones appear to head the top antibiotic
classes followed closely by tetracyclines and aminoglycosides ( C). 
 To understand the co-occurrence of major classes
of antibiotics
and various bacterial species, we generated a heat map as shown in . Here, the relative
frequencies of each bacterial species have been calculated within
each class of antibiotics and are indicative of the relationship between
each antibiotic class and the top species of bacteria. Overall, S. aureus and E. coli have the highest
relative frequencies for each major antibiotic class, which indicates
a higher amount of research documents present for these bacteria.
Certain classes of antibiotics are selectively effective against Gram-positive
or Gram-negative species. For instance, aminoglycosides are documented
to be more effective against Gram-negative bacteria, particularly E. coli, K. pneumoniae, and P. aeruginosa, which comprise more than 50%
of co-occurrences. Similarly, a higher use of polymyxins against Gram-negative
bacteria, especially A. baumannii and K.
pneumoniae, correlates with the literature. However, lipopeptides and glycopeptide-based antibiotics
have higher document frequencies with Gram-positive bacteria, such
as S. aureus. 
 Data analysis for substances in
the field of antibacterials for
the past decade depicts a steady number over the years. Substance
analysis was confined to relevant roles, including therapeutic (THU)
and pharmacological activity (PAC). represents the growth of substances associated
with the antibacterial field in the past decade. In the initial years,
the number of substances reported in journal publications was higher
than the number reported in patent publications, but the trend reversed
between 2018 and 2020. Interestingly, the number of substances reported
in journals and patents is nearly identical in 2022.
 Further investigation into the
classes of substances suggests that
organic and inorganic small molecules, protein/peptide sequences,
polymers, elements, and alloys are the major classes of importance
in the field of antibacterials. represents the growth of various substance
classes in the past decade. The number of substances classified as
organic and inorganic small molecules is 40–50 times higher
than the next class of substances—protein/peptide sequences.
Other classes, such as polymers, elements, and alloys, while important,
still account for a much smaller fraction of substances being used
in the field of antibacterials. Among the major classes, organic/inorganic
small molecules show a marginal decrease post-2020, thereby indicating
the shift in interest from small molecules toward more novel/alternative
forms of antibiotics, such as materials and forms. depicts the distribution
of substances from journal and patent publications, respectively.
Overall, the distribution varies slightly between journals and patents
where the percentage of small molecule substances is slightly less
in patents when compared with journal publications, whereas peptide-based
substances are reported more in patent publications.
 As seen in , there are over 216 000 small molecule substances
associated with
publications in our data set. Among the small molecule category, ciprofloxacin
and levofloxacin (both belonging to the quinolone class of antibiotics)
have the highest number of occurrences, and this agrees with C wherein the number
of publications for quinolones and fluoroquinolones were the highest.
Other antibiotics featured in the list belong to various classes,
such as β-lactam antibiotics (imipenem, ceftazidime, ampicillin,
meropenem, cefepime, penicillin, etc.), aminoglycosides (amikacin),
and macrolides (erythromycin), among others. Among the proteins/peptides
found in the field of antibacterials, a total of ∼26 000
substances have been reported. Unsurprisingly, peptide-based antibiotics,
such as vancomycin—a glycopeptide antibacterial —exhibit the highest number of occurrences
followed by the lipopeptide antimicrobial, daptomycin. AMPs, such as cathelicidin LL-37, nisin, magainin
2 (MG2a), and streptogramin B, among others, also feature in top protein/peptide
substances. Polymers with antibacterial properties have various advantages
over their small molecule counterparts, such as higher efficacy, reduced
toxicity, fewer environmental problems, and less susceptibility to
antimicrobial resistance. Natural polymers,
such as chitosan, cellulose, and starch, and synthetic polymers, such
as PEG, PVA, and polycaprolactone (PCL), are among the top-ranking
polymer-based substances in this field. Metals, such as silver, gold,
titanium, gold, etc., feature among the top element-based substances.
Substances from other categories, such as ceramics, plastics, and
MXenes, are also used in the antibacterial field, which indicates
substance diversity.
Correlation between various substance classes
and different bacterial
genera is shown as a Sankey graph for journal and patent publications
( ). Staphylococcus, Escherichia, Pseudomonas, Klebsiella, and Bacillus have the highest number of reported substances
associated with both journal and patent publications. Interestingly,
a greater number of protein/peptide-based substances associated with
journal publications appear to be focused on Acinetobacter and Actinobacteria, while for patent publications, Staphylococcus, Escherichia, and Pseudomonas are the top bacterial genera.
 Since antimicrobial resistance is a growing threat,
the CDC has
maintained a list of microbes that could represent urgent antimicrobial
resistance (AMR) threats, serious AMR threats, or AMR watchlist (microbes
that could become serious threats in the future because of their propensity
of becoming MDR) in 2019. , These lists serve
as strategic tools to prioritize and address the most pressing antimicrobial
threats. represents the growth of substances associated with bacteria belonging
to each of these lists from journal and patent publications in the
past decade. A shows growth for bacteria from the CDC’s urgent threat list
comprising drug-resistant Acinetobacter, Neisseria gonorrheae,
Clostridioides difficile, and Enterobacterales. Acinetobacter has the highest number of reported substances. Substances for N. gonorrheae have shown more or less steady growth in the
past three years. B represents substance growth over the years for bacteria
in the CDC’s serious threat list. The highest number of substances
are reported for S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, Enterococcus, and M. tuberculosis. Almost all bacterial species
show sustained interest with the number of substances associated with
them being steady. Salmonella typhi, in particular,
appears to show a modest and steady increase in the number of substances
for the last three years. C depicts substance growth over the years for bacteria
in the CDC’s watchlist. Interestingly, Mycoplasma genitalium shows a spike in the number of substances in 2022. M. genitalium
is the causative agent for urethritis in men (urethral inflammation)
and cervicitis in women (cervical inflammation) and is resistant to
azithromycin. B. pertussis, meanwhile, is responsible
for whooping cough and shows a steady increase in substances over
the last three years, nearly doubling in 2022, which is indicative
of interest in this direction. Finally, D represents substance growth in the last
10 years for ESKAPEE pathogens—E. faecium, S. aureus,
K. pneumoniae, A. baumannii, P. aeruginosa, Enterobacter spp.,
and E. coli—showing that overall number of
reported substances show a slight decrease in the past few years.
 

## Capital Investment
Data from Pitchbook, an online platform
for investment data, reveals a steady increase in invested capital
over the past decade ( A). The exceptions appear to be 2017, 2019, and 2022, which
show a curious dip in the amount of invested capital ( A), the exact reason for which
remains unspecified. Similar dips, especially around 2016 and 2019,
are also observed in our substance data (with a far less noticeable
dip in publications) from the CAS Content Collection. In terms of
geographical distribution, the US continues to lead in terms of capital
invested in 2022 to 2023, followed closely by Europe and Asia ( B). Among the leading
countries or regions, the United Kingdom (GBR) and India (IND) are
the only two that show an increase in capital investments from 2022
to 2023 compared with the previous years, 2020 to 2021 ( C). Despite this,
the USA leads in terms of the sheer volume of capital invested, which
is ∼5 times that of China (CHN) in 2022 and 2023 ( C). Growth in capital
invested over the past decade for a few of the leading countries or
regions indicates a curious periodic trend showcased most notably
by the USA, Germany (DEU), and China, and to a smaller extent by India
and South Korea (KOR). This trend appears to be characterized by spikes
in capital invested between 2013 and 2016 and 2017–2021 ( D) led by Germany,
a country with a strong pharmaceutical research and development initiative/presence/sector.
Overall, investments in 2022 and 2023 in the field of antibiotics
appear to be lower for most countries or regions except for Italy
(ITA) ( D)
and could be a sign of waning interest. In terms of industry type,
unsurprisingly, the healthcare sector accounts for most of the capital
invested over the past decade ( E). This is followed by the business-to-business
and business-to-consumer sectors. The materials and resources sector
also shows a decent volume of investment, which is perhaps indicative
of increasing commercial interest ( E). Finally, the information technology
sector accounts for a very small portion of capital invested ( E).
 Overall, the problem
of antibiotic resistance is a worldwide concern,
especially with the rise of infections from the ESKAPEE list and CDC’s
lists of urgent and serious threat bacteria. Trends indicate that
funding and research from big pharmaceutical companies have reduced
slightly in the past few years because of the failure of various antibiotics
and longer timelines required for the development of new antibiotics
leading to enormous costs and lesser returns on investment. Various
government/nongovernment-funded research institutes have stepped up
to fund research in this field, which is evident from the high number
of patents by research institutes and newer forms of antibacterials
being developed. Trends indicate that in terms of geographical distribution
of funding initiatives, the US, Europe, and Asian countries like China,
India, etc., lead the market with major focus on the development of
newer antibacterials and using futuristic antimicrobial approaches.

## Emerging
Antibacterial Approaches
As antibiotic resistance poses a
growing threat to global public
health, it necessitates innovative approaches that can be used to
fight bacterial infections. In the recent years, many such technologies,
such as CRISPR, the use of artificial intelligence (AI), bacterial
protein degradation (BAC-PROTAC), and antisense oligonucleotides have
emerged as powerful approached to combat antibacterial resistance.
CRISPR gene editing offers high precision, AI can help with enhancing
analytical capabilities of antibacterials, BAC-PROTAC can help in
targeted degradation of bacterial proteins, while antisense oligonucleotides
can be used to inhibit bacterial gene expression. This section explores
each emerging antibacterial approaches and highlights their applications
and benefits.

## Role of CRISPR-Based Gene Editing in Antibacterials
Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-based
gene editing systems originated in bacteria as a defense mechanism
against bacteriophages. However, CRISPR-Cas nucleases, especially
CRISPR-Cas9 systems, can be used to produce antimicrobials ( and ). They are used for designing
antibacterial therapies by using engineered CRISPR-Cas systems for
gene editing to destroy specific bacterial DNA, thereby offering an
alternative for traditional antibiotics. It can be used for “phage
therapy enhancement” where bacteriophages can be engineered
to offer specific treatment against bacterial infections. CRISPR systems
can also be used to understand bacterial pathogenesis and resistance
mechanisms, which can help in designing targeted therapies. In addition,
they can also be used for developing diagnostic tools, such as specific
high-sensitivity enzymatic reporter (SHERLOCK) for rapid and accurate
identification of pathogenic bacterial strains. CRISPR-based systems
have been used for targeting biofilm formation genes in P.
aeruginosa.

## Role of AI in Antibacterials
The
development of any
antibiotic is a tedious and time-intensive process. Low success rates
of most candidate drug molecules in combination with lesser returns
of investments to companies are major challenges in the field of antibacterial
development. The advent of AI has led to an acceleration in drug development
with algorithms being developed to identify viable hit molecules.
With the rapid advancements in this field, algorithms that are being
created using machine learning (ML) and neural networks (NN) are being
leveraged for larger in silico exploration and identification of newer
antibacterials and combating high AMR rates. − depicts
a clear accelerated growth in journal publications related to the
use of AI in antibacterial research in the past decade. However, the
increase in the number of patent publications remains relatively low,
which indicates nascency in this field and that most research is still
in the academic stage and has yet to reach commercialization.
 represents
a VOSviewer analysis for various concepts
in the field of AI in antibacterial research. In the network visualization,
items are represented by their label and, by default, also by a circle.
The size of the label and the circle are directly correlated to the
weight of the item. Distance between two items indicates the relatedness
of the concepts: the closer the items, the stronger they are related.
VOSviewer, by default, also assigns the nodes in a network to clusters
(each indicated by a different color). A cluster is a set of closely
related nodes. Each node in a network is assigned to exactly one cluster.
This figure represents the top 150 co-ocurring concepts that appear
more abundantly discussed in academic literature; thus, not all existing
concepts on AI in antibacterials are represented in this figure. VOSviewer
is also meant to be an interactive image, so some of the information
is lost in because of its 2D representation (see the Supporting Information Methods).
 The VOSviewer analysis shows that
in the past decade, the use of
AI in antibacterial research has been carried out to a larger extent
for bacteria such as E. coli, S. aureus, M. tuberculosis, and P. aeruginosa, though research on K. pneumoniae, B. subtilis, and methicillin-resistant staphylococcus, among others, also make an appearance in
a much smaller scale. AI-related concept terms, such as “machine
learning,” “simulation and modeling,” and “algorithm,”
form more and intense connections with various bacteria indicating
the increased interest and applicability of AI in this field ( ). This analysis
also demonstrates potential areas of growth in this field through,
for example, targeting other bacteria apart from the ones previously
mentioned; analysis of potential antibacterials in the realm of biocompatibility,
cytotoxicity, stability, and metabolites; increasing the use of AI
in antibacterial resistance studies, screening, and development of
a larger scope of potential antibiotics of different classes; application
of AI in nanoparticle and nanomaterial construction, use, and screening
as potential antibacterial agents; the application of certain statistical
and AI models, such as regression analysis and random forest ML algorithms;
and the drastic need for improving the processing of all the information
generated by this new technology. Various reviews discussing the use
of AI and its limitations in resistance studies and drug discovery
have been published. , , − 

## Role of Bacterial Protein Degradation Systems (BAC-PROTAC)
Bacterial PROTACs or BAC-PROTACs are an emerging approach to antibacterial
therapy. These are chimeric molecules that target specific proteins
in bacteria that are no longer needed or are damaged and, in turn,
recruit bacterial proteasomal machinery to degrade these proteins. This system targets a wide range of proteins,
and since the mechanism is different from traditional antibiotics,
it is less likely to cause resistance. In addition, it is also useful
against MDR bacteria that are difficult to kill by traditional antibiotics. Mechanistically, a bifunctional BAC-PROTAC
targets caseinolytic protease complex (ClpC-ClpP) for specific protein
degradation by binding to both the target protein and activating ClpC
component. In recent studies, scientists have developed BAC-PROTACs
targeting M. tuberculosis. This technology is in nascent stages and can be explored further
for treating resistant bacterial infections.

## Role of Antisense Oligonucleotides
Antisense oligonucleotides
are emerging as new tools in antibacterial research, these are short
strands of single-stranded DNA or RNA molecules designed to target
a specific bacterial mRNA, thereby preventing target protein synthesis.
Most often, proteins involved in vital and housekeeping processes,
such as those responsible for bacterial replication and survival,
are targeted. Newer methods of delivering antisense oligonucleotides,
such as by using nanoparticles and cell penetrating peptides, are
being explored. , 

## Perspectives and Future
Scope
The global spread of MDR bacteria is an alarming problem
causing
a threat to human health. The statistics from reputable sources, such
as the WHO, CDC, and World Bank, have revealed the severity of the
threat that resistant bacteria can cause. They regularly publish reports
that provide insights into the impact of resistant bacterial infections
on the public health domain. In line with preventing and addressing
bacterial infections, the CDC’s lists of urgent threats, serious
threats, and watchlist species are periodically updated, thereby suggesting
the dynamic nature of challenging and ever-evolving resistance among
bacterial species. Various research endeavors are being made toward
the development of novel antibiotics, but such developments come with
their own challenges. For efficient drug delivery, various factors
are needed to be considered, such as understanding the pharmacological
properties of antibiotics and optimizing drug formulations. In addition,
adequate knowledge is needed for specific targeting of antibiotics
at the correct target site. The antibiotics should be enhanced for
overcoming drug resistance, enhancing drug stability, and shelf life.
Similarly, adequate information is also required for addressing host
factors for efficient drug delivery.
Development of novel antibiotics
requires a deeper understanding
of the host immune system, and individual-level differences in the
host immune system are responsible for differential results of the
same antibiotic treatment in any population. While traditional antibiotic
approaches continue to be utilized for the treatment of bacterial
infections, the biggest challenge remains the development and persistence
of AMR. Bacteria are either naturally resistant to some antibiotics
or they develop antibiotic resistance through gene transfer. The problem
is compounded by the fact that the development of AMR in bacterial
species is much faster than the pace of development of any novel antibiotic. , Moreover, the development of antibiotics is more challenging for
Gram-negative bacteria because they have an outer membrane that prevents
the entry of various drugs. Another major challenge is the treatment
of bacterial infections if the bacteria form biofilms because biofilms
prevent the entry of antibiotics and the lowest concentration of antibiotics
entering the biofilm can promote the development of AMR. Therefore, there is a dire need for novel antibacterial
materials, such as peptides, bacteriophages, enzymes, biopolymeric
materials, and hydrogels that can help mitigate the issues with currently
available antibacterial drugs. Another major advancement is the use
of AI and ML-based approaches and CRISPR-based gene editing methodologies
that have slowly started entering the field of antibiotics, which
can significantly reduce the timeline for the development of any new
antibiotic. The widespread use of AI is still in the nascent stages
and requires more research efforts in the future. A better understanding
of resistance in bacteria can help in the development of novel antibiotics
and treatment strategies to manage bacterial infection.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsinfecdis.4c00115.Supplementary Table 1,
major antibiotic classes and
antibiotics belonging to each class; Supplementary Table 2, list of
notable clinical trials focusing on antibacterial and antibiotic strategies/methods/therapies
; Supplementary Table 3, list of notable journal articles in the field
of antibacterials published in recent years (2021 onward); Supplementary
Table 4, list of notable patents published in the field of antibacterials;
and Supplemental Figure 1, distribution of various stages of clinical
trials related to antibacterial research (PDF)

## Supplementary Material
id4c00115_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
The authors sincerely appreciate the CAS Data,
Analytics
& Insights team; Nilesh Tawari and his team for help with data
extraction; and Dharmini Patel for project coordination. The authors
are grateful to Manuel Guzman, Michael Dennis, Dawn Riedel, Dawn George,
and Hong Xie for executive sponsorship. The authors also appreciate
the rest of the Science Connect team at CAS and ACSI India for their
support and insightful discussions.