pmcACS Appl Mater InterfacesACS Appl Mater Interfaces822acssdamACS Applied Materials & Interfaces1944-82441944-8252www.acsami.orgpmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC13067242PMC13067242.113067242130672424188102910.1021/acsami.5c245811Research ArticleBiological and Medical Applications of Materials and InterfacesProgrammable
Lipid Functionalization of Nucleic Acid
Nanoparticles Modulates Liver Cell-Type Targeting
5961100KimHyun Min a and S1). TriGalNAc
and cholesterol were chosen as ligands to target the ASGPR and LDLR
pathways, respectively. b). ICO-6C minimally migrated, likely due to the incorporation
of hydrophobic cholesterol molecules, which generally impedes NANP
mobility in AGE, consistent with previous reports.
 c). ζ-Potential measurements confirmed that these
NANPs are negatively charged with ζ-potentials between −20
and −30 mV. The incorporation of ligands minimally altered
the particle size, polydispersity, and charge. Transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) additionally confirmed the size, morphology, and
structural integrity of the NANPs. When the NANPs were incubated in
55% human serum, to mimic in vivo biomolecular corona
formation, d).

## Modeling the Association of Ligand-Modified
NANPs with Hepatocytes,
LSECs, and Kupffer Cells In Vitro

We evaluated
the in vitro cellular association of TriGalNAc- and
cholesterol-modified ICOs with the three major liver cell types using
human HepG2 cells to model hepatocytes,
 a–c, S2, and S3). a).
To confirm the bioactivity of TriGalNAc after formulation
with
NANPs, we assayed binding of recombinant, soluble ASGPR to ICO-30T
in a gel mobility shift assay. ICO-30T had reduced mobility when ASGPR
was present, confirming TriGalNAc was present and bioactive in the
formulations (Figure S5a). To ensure the
failure of the TriGalNAc targeting strategy was not an assay artifact,
we conducted a similar cell association study with TriGalNAc-modified
20mer dsDNA duplex, a previously published, multivalent Holliday junction, b), while we did not observe any cell association with
TriGalNAc-functionalized NANPs ( c). For the J774A.1 model of Kupffer cells, we anticipated
significant cell association independent of ligand functionalization,
given well-established precedence that NANPs strongly associate with
macrophages due to abundant scavenger receptor expression.
 d and S7). Occasionally,
larger and/or brighter AF647-positive structures consistent with multiparticle
clusters were observed. We hypothesized that cholesterol-functionalized
ICOs associate with hepatocytes via LDLR and SR-B1, similar to how
lipoprotein-mimicking LNPs are internalized via LDLR. To test this
hypothesis, we performed antibody blocking experiments to perturb
specific putative ligand–receptor interactions. HepG2 cells
were preincubated with monoclonal antibodies against LDLR and SR-B1,
followed by exposure to either ICO or ICO-6C. Sterically blocking
these receptors with monoclonal antibodies had no effect on the cellular
association of ICO, which had negligible baseline association. In
contrast, ICO-6C cell association was significantly reduced by each
antibody blocking treatment ( e), supporting our hypothesis that LDLR and SR-B1 contributed
to the association of cholesterol-modified ICOs with HepG2 cells.
To build on these findings, we then investigated whether and how
ICO-6C was internalized using chemical perturbations. Specifically,
we pretreated cells with Pitstop 2, cytochalasin D, dextran sulfate,
polyinosinic acid (poly-I), methyl-β-cyclodextrin (MβCD),
and colchicine to inhibit clathrin-mediated endocytosis, actin-dependent
macropinocytosis, Class A scavenger receptors, Class A and B scavenger
receptors, caveolin/lipid raft-associated pathways, and microtubule-dependent
endocytic trafficking, respectively. f). Treatment
with MβCD also significantly reduced HepG2 association of ICO-6C,
suggesting that membrane cholesterol plays a critical role in ICO-6C
internalization; this may reflect disruption of cholesterol-dependent
receptor dynamics as ICO-6C was preincubated with human serum prior
to cell exposure but may also indicate impairment of any residual
direct membrane insertion. This is consistent with prior findings
that LDLR becomes confined to cholesterol-rich membrane domains and
that cholesterol depletion alters receptor dynamics and reduces ligand
binding and internalization efficiency.
 a and S1b–f). Previous studies found that increased spacing
of cholesterol on spherical NANPs heighten endothelial cell (HUVEC)
association, b). Flow cytometry revealed that symmetrically dispersed cholesterol
led to a higher association with HepG2 cells compared to clustered
configurations.
 Linker length is another critical parameter in
ligand-based cell
targeting that modulates multivalent binding by influencing avidity
and spatial complementarity between ligands and receptors. d). We observed that
ICO-6C with a 1 nm linker had minimal association with the HepG2 cells,
whereas the constructs using 7 and 14 nm linkers showed significantly
increased association with HepG2 cells ( c). We found no significant difference between
the 7 and 14 nm configurations, suggesting a critical length threshold
exists to mediate this interaction.
Lipid chemistry is a critical
parameter of cellular delivery efficiency
in ASO and siRNA delivery;
 d, S1d and Supporting Note S1). At equivalent valences, cholesterol-functionalized
ICOs exhibited the highest association in HepG2 cells, followed by
C18- and then palmitate-functionalized ICOs ( b).
Having observed these
design-specific HepG2 targeting properties,
we next investigated the potential mechanisms underpinning these findings.
We hypothesized that the HepG2 association was directly associated
with lipoprotein recruitment within the biomolecular corona. Specifically,
because apolipoproteins ApoB100 and ApoE are integral components of
VLDLs, LDLs, and LNPs that enter hepatocytes through LDLR,
 e,f and S8a–d). Further, ApoB100 recruitment increased for
longer linker lengths, with the NANP construct with 1 nm linker lengths
being unable to recruit apolipoprotein ( g). Cholesterol-functionalized NANPs adsorbed
the least ApoB100 compared with C18- and palmitate-functionalized
NANPs, which is inconsistent with our flow cytometry results that
showed cholesterol, followed by C18 and palmitate, led
to the highest cell association ( d,h). This observation suggests that ApoB100
recruitment is not the sole or primary factor that dictates cell association,
which may occur through distinct mechanisms such as direct cell-membrane
association of the NANP. We also investigated ApoE recruitment. We
did not observe ApoE recruitment in any of the NANP constructs, potentially
due to low affinity for the lipid-modified ICOs, or its relatively
low abundance of 5–8 mg/dl present in human serum (Figure S8e).
Collectively, these results
demonstrated that engineering the lipophilicity
of NANPs can modulate cell targeting. For HepG2 targeting through
an LDLR-based mechanism, we identified that symmetrical, dispersed
ligands displayed several nanometer linker lengths above a critical
threshold, and highly lipophilic lipid chemistry, enhance cell association
through mechanisms involving ApoB100 recruitment, LDLR and SR-B1 engagement,
and clathrin-mediated endocytosis.

## Benchmarking Cell Targeting
Capabilities of NANP, Conjugate,
and LNP Systems
To assess the capability of ICO origami NANPs
to deliver siRNA to liver cells, we conjugated siRNAs targeting ALDH2
(Table S4), a and S9). We benchmarked its performance against two
state-of-the-art delivery platforms: a TriGalNAc-siRNA conjugate similar
in formulation to nedosiran, an siRNA drug made using
Dicerna’s GalXC technology, and an LNP-siRNA formulation similar
to patisiran, Alnylam’s LNP-siRNA delivery
system. We assessed their cell association across the three previously
mentioned major liver cell types and evaluated their RNAi potency
in HepG2 cells.
To assess whether incorporation of siRNAs into
our NANPs altered their cell association with respect to bare particles,
we tested different siRNA valences (2, 6, 12, and 24 siRNAs per NANP)
in HepG2 cells by flow cytometry and found that increasing the siRNA
valency of cholesterol-modified ICOs decreased cell association monotonically
(Figure S10). To balance loading ratios
and cell targeting capabilities, we selected ICO-6C-12siRNA to benchmark
against the conjugate and LNP systems. The sense strands of the siRNAs
were modified with AF647 to ensure consistent dosing and accurately
benchmark siRNA delivery efficiency. Flow cytometry analysis in HepG2
cells revealed that at 1 h, the ICO-6C-12siRNA exhibited significantly
higher cellular association than both the TriGalNAc-siRNA conjugate
and LNP-siRNA ( a). However, upon extending the incubation time up to 4 h to probe
early internalization kinetics while minimizing downstream intracellular
processing, LNP-siRNA showed a time-dependent increase in cell association,
surpassing ICO-6C-12siRNA. This is consistent with patisiran’s design, which incorporates a stealth PEG coating that gradually
disassociates to facilitate ApoE recruitment and LDLR-mediated endocytosis.
Importantly, TriGalNAc-siRNA also did not bind to HepG2 cells, even
when incubated at considerably higher concentrations ( a). In contrast, a dsDNA of
similar size conjugated to TriGalNAc showed binding to HepG2 cells
at the same concentrations (Figure S5b).
 In SK-HEP-1 cells, TriGalNAc-siRNA showed minimal
association,
in line with its specificity for the ASGPR receptor, which is largely
absent in this cell type ( b). In contrast, ICO-6C-12siRNA exhibited robust association,
likely due to interactions with LDLR and SR-B1. c), with ICO-6C-12siRNA demonstrating the highest association. This
result was consistent with other reports that Kupffer cells can sequester
both conjugate- and LNP-based delivery systems.
 a). Importantly, the TriGalNAc-siRNA conjugate did
lead to robust RNAi in vivo after intravenous administration
(Figure S12c), suggesting that the lack
of RNAi observed in vitro is likely due to a model
artifact rooted in the HepG2 cell line.

## Nonhepatocytic Modulation
of NANP Cell Association through Lipid
Modifications
While lipid-based ligands were initially explored
to enable siRNA delivery to the liver, these ligands are now increasingly
explored as avenues to realize delivery in extrahepatic organs and
systems. a–c). Cholesterol-functionalized ICOs
consistently exhibited the highest levels of association, followed
by C18 and palmitate, a trend similar to that observed
in the HepG2 model. For cholesterol, clustering the lipids provided
no added benefit over dispersed presentation. However, for C18 and palmitate, clustering enhanced cell association compared with
dispersed arrangements at the same copy number. This suggests that
nanostructuring of less hydrophobic lipids may improve their effective
presentation or membrane interaction, compensating for their lower
intrinsic affinity. Hence, the effects of lipophilicity and lipid
nanostructuring on cell association of NANPs clearly differ based
on the cell model under investigation.
 We next focused on constructs
with the highest levels of cell association
to probe the underlying mechanisms. Cells were seeded in 48-well plates
and incubated for 1.5 h with ICOs functionalized with 5 copies of
cholesterol, C18, or palmitate, either dispersed across
the structure or clustered at a single vertex. Cell association was
first quantified via flow cytometry following incubation in serum-free
medium ( d).
To investigate internalization mechanisms, we drew upon previous studies
of cholesterol-conjugated oligonucleotides, which suggest a two-step
uptake process: initial membrane anchoring via lipid–membrane
interactions followed by receptor-mediated endocytosis. To test this
mechanism, we therefore pretreated N2a cells with either MβCD
to disrupt lipid rafts and caveolin-mediated uptake or Pitstop 2 to
inhibit clathrin-mediated endocytosis ( e). These inhibitors allowed us to probe
the contributions of membrane lipid domains and endocytic pathways
driving NANP uptake.
Flow cytometry analysis revealed that MβCD
significantly
reduced cell association for cholesterol-, C18-, and palmitate-functionalized
NANPs, suggesting the involvement of lipid raft-mediated interactions.
Pitstop 2 treatment led to a much more moderate but statistically
significant reduction in association, consistent with clathrin-dependent
internalization as a secondary uptake mechanism. In contrast, neither
inhibitor significantly affected the baseline association of unmodified
ICOs. These data suggest that the enhanced uptake observed with lipid-functionalized
NANPs in N2a cells relies on lipid–membrane interactions and,
to a lesser extent, receptor-mediated endocytosis, with dependence
on these pathways varying by the lipid type and nanoscale organization.
Together, these findings reinforced the importance of lipid chemistry,
valency, and spatial arrangement in controlling NANP cell interactions.
While cholesterol enabled robust association, largely irrespective
of structural arrangement, less hydrophobic lipids, such as C18 and palmitate, benefited from clustering. These results
demonstrated that the lipidation strategy investigated in hepatic
models are extensible to nonhepatic cell types including N2a cells.
More broadly, they highlight the potential utility of NANPs as a programmable
platform for targeted nucleic acid delivery across diverse tissues.

## Conclusion
We investigated the roles of composition
and
spatial presentation
of lipids on cell association and the uptake of NANPs with and without
siRNA cargo. Using an icosahedral NANP as a model system, we explored
lipids of varying lipophilicitycholesterol, C18, and palmitateand systematically varied lipid chemistry,
valency, density, and linker distance to modulate cellular association
in representative model liver cell lines. We also cross-examined these
findings in a model neuronal cell line. Specifically, when presented
at stoichiometrically defined valences from the NANP surface, cholesterol
conjugation significantly increased cellular association across HepG2,
SK-HEP-1, and J774A.1 cells. Notably, bare ICOs exhibited minimal
association with HepG2 and SK-HEP-1 cells but substantial uptake by
J774A.1 macrophages. This high macrophage association is likely due
to their innate phagocytic activity and proclivity to clear foreign
genetic material, as well as their endogenous role in scavenging cell-free
DNA.
,,
 Ligand modification
further enhanced uptake, potentially by increasing recognition through
scavenger receptors or by promoting interactions with lipid- or glycan-binding
proteins involved in receptor-mediated endocytosis. PEGylation used
in combination with targeting ligands provides a future strategy to
evade macrophages while targeting specific cells, although this strategy
may be more applicable to active rather than passive targeting strategies.

LDLR and SR-B1, while highly expressed
in hepatocytes, are also
present on endothelial cells and macrophages, which may contribute
to the broader association profile observed with cholesterol-modified
NANPs. While observed only in the in vitro and model
cell lines, the observed association with SK-HEP-1 cells raises potential
safety concerns, as endothelial uptake has been implicated in liver
toxicity with LNP-based delivery systems. Further studies with primary
cells and in vivo cells will be needed to assess
the implications of this uptake pattern for NANP safety and specificity.
Mechanistic studies including chemical inhibitors, confocal microscopy,
antibody blocking, and ELISA support a model in which cholesterol-modified
NANPs associated with lipoproteins in serum, engaged with LDLR and
SR-B1, and underwent receptor-mediated endocytosis through clathrin-mediated
pathways, in addition to other internalization pathways. This is similar
to how FDA-approved LNP patisiran endogenously targets
hepatocytes to deliver siRNAs. Notably, confocal imaging occasionally
revealed larger and/or brighter AF647-positive structures indicating
multiparticle clusters with atypical membrane interactions. Because
cholesterol itself can partition into lipid bilayers, it is plausible
that a fraction of cholesterol NANPs may exhibit an increased plasma
membrane association via hydrophobic insertion, which could contribute
to the observed cell-surface and intracellular signal, alongside LDLR-
and SR-B1-dependent uptake pathways.
Interestingly, we found
that dispersing cholesterol across the
NANP surface symmetrically yielded higher HepG2 association than clustering
lipids on a single vertex for ICO, consistent with prior reports highlighting
the importance of ligand accessibility.
,
 Extending
cholesterol away from the NANP surface improved uptake, supporting
a model in which there exists a critical display length away from
the surface in which cholesterol is bioavailable for the recruitment
of lipoproteins and engagement with receptors. Importantly, this critical
length may be different for active and passive targeting strategies
and highlights the significance of individual optimization of linker
design for each targeting strategy employed in a delivery system.
By varying lipid chemistries with identical valences, we found cholesterol
led to more cell association than C18 and palmitate, in
agreement with their theoretical hydrophobicity. While our observation
that more lipophilic lipids enhance HepG2 association is consistent
with in vivo findings that more hydrophobic siRNAs
demonstrate higher liver accumulation, experimentation with primary
cells and in vivo will be needed to corroborate this
finding. Notably, ELISA demonstrated
that the less hydrophobic lipids resulted in larger ApoB recruitment,
suggesting total ApoB recruitment is only partially correlated with
cell association and that other factors such as lipid–lipoprotein
affinity and direct insertion that may be modulated by lipid orientation
could influence downstream LDLR recognition and hepatocytic uptake.
Surprisingly, in contrast to the cholesterol-targeting strategy,
TriGalNAc-functionalized NANPs did not associate with HepG2 cells,
despite evidence of ligand bioactivity from biochemical binding assays
and cell studies with smaller nucleic acid nanostructures, namely,
the Holliday junction and tetrahedron employed in this study. This
suggested that factors such as size, charge, geometry, and/or steric
hindrance from the NANP might impair ligand–receptor interactions
at the cell surface. Notably, P-VLPs of similar size and larger LNPs can internalize
via TriGalNAc-ASGPR, suggesting that the size limits observed with
alternative delivery systems may not directly extend to highly charged
NANP systems that may also be subject to competitive off-target scavenger
receptor interactions. Although we evaluated NANP association under
serum-free conditions to exclude potential effects from protein corona
formation and explored charge-shielding through oligolysine–PEG
treatment, neither strategy improved HepG2 association, implying that
serum protein interference and electrostatic effects were unlikely
to fully account for the observed lack of binding. Given the lack
of binding observed with the TriGalNAc-siRNA positive control, despite
the observed HepG2 association with a similarly TriGalNAc-conjugated
and AF647-labeled DNA duplex, artifacts of the HepG2 cell model itself
may be the cause. This is suggested by TriGalNAc’s functional
behavior in vivo as a hepatocyte targeting ligand,
as demonstrated in this study and in others. Limitations of the HepG2 model may be due to insufficient receptor
expression levels or deficient receptor-mediated endocytosis and recycling,
despite the observed association with TriGalNAc-Holliday junctions.
Follow-up studies investigating these NANPs in primary human and murine
hepatocytes, as was performed during the development of GalNAc conjugate
technologies, should provide additional
insight, but are beyond the scope of the present study.
To understand
NANP performance as cell delivery vectors using the
lipids examined, given that HepG2 association was not observed using
TriGalNAc, we benchmarked them against clinically relevant TriGalNAc-siRNA
and LNP-siRNA formulations. In flow cytometry studies, ICO-6C-12siRNA
exhibited a rapid and robust association with hepatocytes, endothelial
cells, and Kupffer cells. In time-series studies, LNP association
with HepG2s increased over time, consistent with delayed PEG deshielding
and ApoE-mediated uptake. The differences in cell association kinetics
between NANP, conjugate, and LNP systems affirm that the cellular
uptake kinetics of these materials are distinct, as anticipated, which
might offer the potential for differential distribution properties in vivo. Pharmacokinetic studies in animal models comparing
these technologies are therefore of highest importance, together with
primary cell assays, to build on the foundational studies performed
here in model cell lines. Notwithstanding, our findings provide valuable
benchmarks for how cholesterol-functionalized NANPs interact with
diverse liver cell types, relative to established delivery technologies.
Moving forward, leveraging the modular programmability of NANPs to
enhance cell-type selectivity and reduce off-target uptake in nonhepatocyte
populations such as LSECs and macrophages via passivation strategies
such as PEGylation may be useful for achieving hepatocyte-specific
delivery.
,
 Further, investigating whether passivation
strategies like PEGylation in the context of both active (e.g., TriGalNAc)
and passive (e.g., cholesterol) targeting ligands will maintain the
requisite biomolecular corona and receptor interactions while removing
undesired off-target binding. In addition, covalent versus noncovalent
PEG may be important to compare.
Despite their association with
and internalization by HepG2 cells,
cholesterol-functionalized NANPs did not induce gene knockdown in
the absence of additional transfection reagents. This may potentially
be due to a failure to escape endosomes needed to deliver the siRNAs
to the cytosol, which warrants future studies together with siRNA
release from the NANP itself within endosomes. Unlike LNPs, these NANPs have no components designed to disrupt
or modulate the endosomal membrane. While incorporation of chemical
or structural features that promote endosomal disruption may be important
to realize autonomous gene silencing with NANPs, endosomal leaking
or receptor recycling may alternatively be sufficient for siRNA release
and silencing. Notably, when transfected into HepG2 cells, NANP-siRNA
formulations decreased transcript levels, suggesting the siRNA was
indeed able to release from the NANP, potentially via intracellular
nucleases degrading the nonchemically modified NANP structure. Given
that the TriGalNAc-siRNA positive control also failed to associate
with HepG2 cells and induce RNAi in the absence of the transfection
reagent, the intrinsic properties of HepG2 cells, as noted above,
may contribute to the observed lack of silencing.
Finally, we
investigated whether principles of engineering NANP
lipophilicity observed in liver cell lines were extensible to nonhepatic
cells. In a neuronal cell model, we observed that increasing the lipid
valency and hydrophobicity also enhanced NANP association. Chemical
inhibition studies suggested that the mechanisms of internalization
were distinct from those in the hepatocyte cell model. Notably, these
distinct cell associations occurred without biomolecular corona interactions,
suggesting that lipophilic modulation of NANPs might offer a more
general strategy to pursue both passive and active targeting strategies,
which remains to be explored in vitro and in vivo.
Taken together, our findings help elucidate
the roles of NANP surface
properties on interactions with cell line models representative of
hepatocytes, liver endothelial cells, and macrophages, and in the
nonhepatic context of model neurons. These results provide foundational
insight into the mechanisms governing NANP receptor targeting, internalization,
and cargo delivery specifically, which may generalize to other nanomaterials
and nanoparticles. While substantial further work is needed to understand
siRNA delivery using NANPs including tissue- and cell-level biodistribution
and RNAi, the programmability and modularity of NANPs offer important
potential for tailoring delivery for distinct therapeutic applications.

## Methods

## Ethics Statement
Animals were housed and handled in
the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal
Care (AAALAC)-accredited facilities with experimental methods as specifically
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees at MIT
(MIT CAC Protocol #2303000478).

## Materials
Magnesium
chloride (#M2670), 10× TAE
(#574797), drop dialysis membranes (#VSWP02500), PBS containing 0.05%
Tween-20 (#524653) and 4 mL, 100 kDa (#UFC8010) Amicon filters, cytochalasin
D (C2618200UL), and poly-I (P415410MG) were acquired
from MilliporeSigma. Nuclease-free water (#11-05-01-04) was acquired
from IDT. PBS (#21-040-CM) was acquired from Corning. Oligonucleotide
synthesis reagents and consumables were acquired from Glen Research.
Bovine serum albumin (#37525), Ultra TMB-ELISA substrate (#34021),
Wheat Germ Agglutinin Alexa Fluor 488 (#W11261), Alexa Fluor 647 NHS
Ester (#A20006), PBS containing magnesium and calcium (#14040133),
poly-d-lysine (#A3890401), SYBR Safe (#S33102), High-Capacity
cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (#4374966), Taqman probes for human
ALDH2 FAM (#4331182), human HRPT VIC (#4331182), mouse ALDH2 FAM (#4331182),
mouse HRPT VIC (#4331182), cell scrapers (#179693), methyl-β-cyclodextrin
(J66847.06), and colchicine (J61072.ME) were acquired from ThermoFisher
Scientific. Oligolysine-PEG was acquired from Alamanda Polymers (#mPEG5K-b-PLKC10). Molecular-biology-grade agarose (#87004-980),
sodium chloride (#BDH9286), HPLC-grade acetonitrile (#BDH83639.402),
water (#BDH23595.400), and Triton-X-144 (#M144) were acquired from
VWR. One kb Plus DNA Ladder (#N0550S) and 6× Gel Loading Dye
(#B7025S) were acquired from New England BioLabs. Paraformaldehyde
(#15710), TEM grids (#CF200H-CU-50), and uranyl acetate (#22400) were
acquired from Electron Microscopy Sciences. Recombinant ASGR1 (AS1-H5243)
was acquired from ACROBiosystems.
HepG2 (#HB-8065), SK-HEP-1
(HTB-52), J774A.1 (TIB-67), and Neuro-2A cells (CCL-131), DMEM medium
(#30-2002), fetal bovine serum (#30-2020), penicillin–streptomycin
(#30-2300), and 0.05% Trypsin-EDTA (1×) (ATCC, 30-2101) were
purchased from ATCC. 2× Yeast Extract Tryptone Medium (2×
YT) dry powder (Y2377-250G), carbenicillin (#C3416-1G), chloramphenicol
(#C0378-25G), sulfuric acid (#258105-500 ML-PC), dextran sulfate sodium
salt (42876-5G), PEG8000 flakes (#89510-1KG-F), and sterile-filtered
human male plasma Type AB human serum (#H4522) were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich. Zombie UV Live–Dead stain (#423107), antihuman
CD36L1 (SCARB1, SR-BI) antibody (#363201), antihuman
CD204 antibody (#371905), and 96-well Nunc Maxisorp plates
were purchased from BioLegend Inc. Antihuman antibodies against LDLR
(#MAB2148), ASGPR (#FAB43941R), apolipoprotein B (#MAB4124-SP), and
apolipoprotein E (#MAB41444-SP) were purchased from R&D Systems.
Pitstop 2 (ab120687) and DAPI staining solution (ab228549) were purchased
from Abcam. Twelve well chamber removable microscopy slides (#81201)
were purchased from ibidi. Prolong Gold Antifade Mountant (P36934),
Alexa Fluor 647 azide, and triethylammonium salt (#A10277) were purchased
from Invitrogen. Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated goat antimouse
IgG secondary antibody (#1706516), iScript RT-qPCR Sample Preparation
Reagent (#1708899) was purchased from BioRad. HiSpeed EndoFree Giga
Kit (#1054575) and RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (#74136) were acquired from
Qiagen. Endosafe LAL-based Gel-Clot Endotoxin Test (#R135) was purchased
from Charles River Laboratories. Trivalent β-GalNAc-PEG3-azide
(#MV10020) was purchased from Sussexresearch Laboratories. Liver tissues
were homogenized with Spex SamplePrep using the Geno/Grinder in 4
mL vials from OPS Diagnostics using 5/16″ stainless steel balls.

## Equipment
Custom-length DNA scaffolds were produced
by using an Eppendorf Innova 44i Shaker-Incubator. Oligonucleotide
synthesis was conducted on a Biolytic Dr. Oligo 192c Synthesizer.
Oligonucleotide purification was performed on a Waters ACQUITY liquid
chromatography system with an XBridge C18-BEH 130 Å column. Oligonucleotides
were dried by using a ThermoFisher SPD300 rotary SpeedVac system,
and DNA concentrations were measured using a ThermoFisher Scientific
NanoDrop 2000. Liquid handling for NANP staple pools was conducted
using a Formulatrix FLO i8. NANPs were self-assembled using an Eppendorf
Thermomixer C. Agarose gel electrophoresis (AGE) was performed using
BioRad equipment. Gel imaging occurred on a Typhoon FLA 7000. Dynamic
light scattering (DLS) was performed using a Malvern ZetaSizer and
Wyatt Dyna Pro Plate reader (AF647-labeled NANPs). Transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) was conducted by using an FEI Tecnai transmission
electron microscope. All flow cytometry analyses were conducted on
a FACS LSR Fortessa High Throughput Sampler II. Confocal microscopy
was conducted on a Leica SP8 laser scanning microscope with a 63×
oil objective. A Tecan Spark plate reader was used for measuring ELISA
absorbance as well as cellular association in Neuro-2A cells. cDNA
synthesis was performed by using a BioRad T100 Thermal Cycler. Quantitative
PCR (qPCR) analysis was done on a Roche Light Cycler 480 II Real-time
PCR machine with a 384-well plate format. Cell counting was done using
the Cellometer Auto 2000 instrument from Nexcelom Bioscience.

## Scaffold
Production
Custom scaffold DNA sequence of
length 3120 nt for ICO52 NANPs was biologically produced as previously. In brief, SS30Escherichia coliwas cotransformed with M13 cP helper plasmid (originally provided
as a gift from Andrew Bradbury, Los Alamos National Laboratories)
and miniphage constituting only a f1 origin, β-lactamase-encoding
antibiotic resistance gene to produce the corresponding circular single-stranded
DNA sequence. Precultures were prepared from a discrete colony of
transformed cells and grown overnight in 2× YT media supplemented
with 100 μg/mL carbenicillin and 15 μg/mL chloramphenicol
at 37 °C. The following day, precultures were transferred at
an optical density (OD) of 0.05–0.1 to 1 L Erlenmeyer flasks
containing 2× YT media supplemented with 100 μg/mL carbenicillin,
15 μg/mL chloramphenicol, and 5 mM MgCl2 solution
and grown at 37 °C and 200 rpm for 8 h or an OD ∼8.0–10.E. colicells were pelleted once by centrifugation
at 4 °C, and the supernatant was collected in a separate container
containing 3% (w/v) PEG8000 flakes and 3% (w/v) NaCl and incubated
overnight under gentle shaking at 4 °C for phage precipitation.
Next day, the phages are harvested by centrifugation at 4000g for 1 h at room temperature and subsequently lysed to
isolate and purify the custom-length DNA using the Qiagen Endofree
Gigaprep kit protocol with a few modifications: proteinase K was added
at 400 ug per liter culture to P1 buffer followed by incubation at
37 °C for 1 h, addition of P2 buffer, and incubation at 70 °C
for 10 min. Following purification of circular ssDNA, residual endotoxins
were removed using Triton-X-144. Endotoxin levels were measured using
the LAL-based Gel-Clot Endotoxin Test. DNA scaffold purity was validated
by AGE.

## Oligonucleotide Synthesis and Modification
Modified
oligonucleotides were fabricated in-house. A (#10-1000), C (#10-1010),
G (#10- 687 1020), T (#10-1030), cholesteryl-TEG (#10-1976), stearyl
(#10-1979), palmitate (#10-1978), and DBCO-TEG (#10-1941) phosphoramidites
and ancillary synthesis reagents were acquired from Glen Research
and used following the manufacturer’s recommendations. Oligonucleotides
were synthesized on a Biolytic Dr. Oligo 192c oligonucleotide synthesizer,
at a 200 nmol scale with CPG 1000 Å standard base supports (#20-2001,
#20-2011, #20-2021, #20-2031) in normal mode under nitrogen. Synthesis
success and yield was observed by monitoring the penultimate trityl-cleavage.
Following the synthesis, oligonucleotides were cleaved and deprotected
under pressure at 55 °C for 2 h in 30% ammonium hydroxide (ThermoFisher
Scientific, cat# 423305000). The cleaved strands were desalted with
acetonitrile and eluted in nuclease-free water. Modified oligonucleotides
were then purified with HPLC with the following reverse-phase protocol:
0–1 min: 90:10 A:B; 1–11 min: 90:10 A:B to 55:45 A:B
over a linear gradient; 11–16 min: 55:45 A:B to 20:80 A:B over
a linear gradient; 16–20 min: 20:80 A:B to 90:10 A:B over a
step gradient (A: 0.1 M aqueous triethylammonium acetate; B: acetonitrile).
Oligonucleotides were dried under vacuum and then resuspended in nuclease-free
water for further analysis and use. Oligonucleotide concentrations
and yields were determined via UV–vis measurements. Two equivalents
of TriGalNAc-azide or AF647-azide were incubated with DBCO-oligonucleotides
at 37 °C for 48 h before HPLC purification using the reverse-phase
protocol above, dried under vacuum, and resuspended in nuclease-free
water to yield TriGalNAc-oligos for hepatocyte targeting, and AF647-oligos
for tracking NANPs in flow cytometry and confocal microscopy experiments.
Yields were determined by UV–vis measurements, and the purity
was confirmed by HPLC. To track the siRNA in flow cytometry experiments,
the sense strand (SS) of siRNAs was functionalized with an Alexa Fluor
647 dye using NHS chemistry. Briefly, the SS oligonucleotides were
reacted with 10-fold excess AF647-NHS ester in HEPES buffer (pH 8.2,
100 mM) for at least 4 h at room temperature and 1000 rpm. Excess
dye was removed by ethanol precipitation, and oligonucleotide-dye
conjugates were purified by HPLC using the reverse-phase protocol
above, dried under vacuum, and resuspended in nuclease-free water.
Yields were determined by UV–vis measurements, and purity was
confirmed by HPLC.

## Nucleic Acid Assembly Design, Fabrication,
Purification
dsDNA duplexes were annealed by mixing the sense
strand, modified
with or without TriGalNAc, and the complementary strand, modified
with AF647. Hybridization was performed in a total volume of 50 μL
at a final concentration of 10 μM, by heating at 65 °C
for 5 min followed by cooling from 65 to 25 °C at 1 °C per
minute.
Holliday junctions were assembled as per a published
protocol by mixing three LNA-modified strands, modified with or without
TriGalNAc, and a final strand modified with AF647 in PBS at a final
concentration of 1 μM at room temperature for 1 h and storing
at 4 °C.

The tetrahedron structures
were folded in a one-pot self-assembly
reaction by mixing AF647-modified strand 5 with the remaining strands
bearing no DNA extension (TET-0×) or with DNA extensions for
TET-1×, 3×, or 5× in PBS with a final concentration
of 150 mM NaC. Folding occurred by incubation at 90 °C for 2
min and subsequent immediate incubation at 4 °C for minimum 10
min.
Icosahedral NANPs were designed using previously reported
DNA origami
frameworks for 3D wireframe structures. Custom modifications were introduced by using Tiamat to enable external
overhangs for downstream functionalization. Staple sets were adapted
to ensure outward-facing nicking positions for the modular assembly.
NANPs were assembled in a one-pot reaction by mixing scaffold ssDNA
at a final concentration of 30 nM with a 5-fold molar excess of staple
strands at a final concentration of 150 nM in 1× TAE buffer containing
12 mM MgCl2. Ligand–oligonucleotide conjugates were
added into the folding mix with a 2.5-fold molar excess per hybridization
site. Folding mixtures were incubated in a thermal cycler using the
following annealing program: 65 °C for 15 min, 61 °C for
90 min, 60 °C for 90 min, and held at 25 °C. Folded NANPs
were purified into 1x PBS using Amicon Ultra centrifugal filters with
a MWCO of 100 kDa at 2000g and stored at 4 °C.
For flow cytometry assays, all NANPs were fabricated with one single
dye per particle, whereas NANPs for confocal microscopy were prepared
with 6 dyes for improved detection.
For in vitro knockdown studies, purified NANPs
with ssDNA overhangs were incubated with 2-fold molar excess siRNA
per hybridization site at 37 °C for 10–12 h. Excess siRNA
was removed using drop dialysis membranes (0.025 μm pore size)
in 1× PBS at RT for 16 h. siRNA-loaded NANPs were validated for
purity and monodispersity by gel electrophoresis and DLS.

## Biomolecular
Corona Formation
Purified NANPs were incubated
in 55% (v/v) human serum for 1 h at 37 °C to enable adsorption
of serum proteins and facilitate the formation of a physiologically
relevant biomolecular corona. To preserve the integrity of the formed
protein corona and ensure that the corona composition remains unperturbed
when modeling physiological interactions, NANPs were used directly
in cell association experiments without further purification or storage.

## NANP Oligolysine10-PEG5K Formulation
Oligolysine10-PEG5K was formulated with NANPs
as previously described. Briefly, K10-PEG5k was dissolved in dH2O and sonicated
at 37 °C for 10 min. 750 nM NANPs were incubated with 1000 μM
oligolysine10-PEG5K at an amino group:base pair
ratio of 1 for 30 min at room temperature, before being freshly used
for cell association studies.

## Agarose Gel Electrophoresis
All NANPs were analyzed
by AGE using 1.6% agarose, 1× TAE buffer supplemented with 12
mM MgCl2, and SYBR Safe. All gels were run at 60 V for
150 min in a water bath at room temperature. Gel images were acquired
on a Typhoon FLA 7000 scanner using excitation wavelengths 473 and
635 nm for SYBR safe and AF647, respectively, and processed using
Fiji ImageJ software.

## Dynamic Light Scattering
Dynamic
light scattering (DLS)
was performed to assess the hydrodynamic diameter, dispersity, and
charge of NANPs. Samples were diluted to 50 nM in 1× PBS and
DLS and ζ-potentials were measured using a Malvern Zetasizer
Ultra instrument; the results were analyzed using ZS XPLORER 2.0.1.1,
Malvern Panalytical. LNP size, polydispersity index, and ζ-potentials
were measured by using a Malvern ZetaSizer.

## Transmission Electron Microscopy
TEM grids were prepared
by subjecting carbon-coated copper grids to glow discharge treatment
prior to negative staining of NANPs with uranyl formate. Five μL
of diluted NANPs (5 nM) was deposited onto the grid for 30 s and subsequently
removed by blotting with a filter paper. Hereafter, the grids were
washed with 5 μL of freshly prepared 2% uranyl formate solution
with 5 mM NaOH, immediately blotted, and then washed again with 15
uL of 2% uranyl formate solution with 5 mM NaOH for 40 s. The grid
was blotted and let air-dry prior to imaging on an electron microscope
at 120 keV power. Images were processed in Fiji ImageJ.

## ASGPR Binding
in Buffer
ICO or ICO-30T were prepared
at 100 nM with 5 uM recombinant human ASGR1 in PBS, supplemented with
2 mM calcium chloride, to a total volume of 10 uL. The solution was
incubated at 37 °C for 1 h and subsequently analyzed with AGE.

## Mammalian Cell Culture
HepG2, SK-HEP-1, J774A.1, and
Neuro-2A cells were cultured in DMEM media supplemented with 10% FBS
and 1% penicillin–streptomycin (complete medium) at 37 °C
and 5% CO2. For plating for flow cytometry, HepG2, SK-HEP-1,
and Neuro-2A cells were rinsed with PBS and released by incubation
with 0.05% Trypsin-EDTA (1×) for 5–10 min at 37 °C
and 5% CO2, whereas J774A.1 cells were released using cell
scrapers. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 200g for 5 min and resuspended in complete medium. Cell count and viability
were determined using Trypan Blue stain.

## Flow Cytometry
HepG2, SK-HEP-1, and J774A.1 cells were
seeded (1 × 105 cells/well) in a 48-well plate. After
24 h, the cells were washed with PBS and incubated with AF647-labeled
NANPs at a final concentration of 50 nM in 100 μL of serum-free
media for 1 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. We limited the
cell incubation with NANPs to 1 h because LDLR recycling reaches a
steady state of receptor-bound and intracellular LDL levels within
2 h.
,
 Cells were then washed with PBS and detached
via Trypsin-EDTA. After centrifuging the cells for 5 min at 1000g, the cells were washed with PBS and stained with Zombie
UV Live–Dead for 10 min. After a final wash with PBS, the cells
were resuspended in 150 μL of PBS and analyzed via flow cytometry.
10,000 cells were analyzed in triplicates, and after gating for live
singlets, their geometric mean AF647 fluorescence intensities were
calculated and normalized to untreated cells to determine relative
cell association. The FlowJo software was used for the analysis of
flow cytometry data.

## Antibody Blocking and Pharmacological Endocytosis
Inhibition
Antihuman LDLR antibody, antihuman CD36L1 (SCARB1,
SR-BI) antibody,
and antihuman CD204 antibody were used to block LDL, SR-B1, and SR-A1
receptors, respectively. The cells were pretreated with 10 μg/mL
antibody in 200 μL for 1 h at 4 °C followed by PBS wash
and then incubated with AF647-labeled NANPs for 1 h at 37 °C
and 5% CO2. As previously, the cells were washed, stained
with Zombie UV Live–Dead stain for 10 min, and resuspended
in 150 μL PBS prior to analysis on a flow cytometer.
To
inhibit individual endocytic pathways, HepG2 cells were treated with
10 μM (100 μL, 1% DMSO final) Pitstop 2, dextran sulfate
(40 g/mol), poly-I (40 μg/mL), methyl-β-cyclodextrin (5
mM), colchicine (25 μM), or cytochalasin D (0.25 μM).
All inhibitors were incubated for 30 min except for cytochalasin D,
which was incubated for 15 min at 37 °C and 5% CO2. The cells were then washed with PBS and incubated with AF647-labeled
NANPs for 1 h under similar conditions as previously described to
assay cell association using flow cytometry.

## Confocal Microscopy
HepG2 cells were seeded (80,000
cells/well) in 12 well chamber removable microscopy slides. After
24 h, the cells were rinsed with PBS and incubated with 100 nM NANP
preincubated with 55% human serum in a final volume of 100 uL serum-free
DMEM media for 24 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. The following
day, the cells were washed with PBS three times and then stained with
Wheat Germ Agglutinin (WGA) Alexa Fluor 488 (2.5 μg/mL) for
15 min at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Subsequently, the cells
were rinsed with PBS twice and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA)
for 20 min at room temperature. Following PBS washes, the cells were
stained with DAPI nucleic acid stain (1 μg/mL) for 20 min at
room temperature. Following two PBS washes, the chambers were removed
and the slide was rinsed with Milli-Q water, dried, and mounted using
ProLong Gold Antifade mounting medium overnight prior to confocal
imaging using 63× objectives. All images were acquired with identical
laser and filter settings and subsequently visualized as maximum intensity
Z-projections with brightness and contrast equally adjusted in Fiji
ImageJ. Orthogonal XY/XZ views were generated from the corresponding
raw Z-stacks for the ICO-6C particle.

## Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent
Assay (ELISA) for the Quantification
of Apolipoprotein
To assess apolipoprotein recruitment to
DNA nanoparticles, high-binding 96-well Nunc Maxisorp plates were
coated with 100 μL of 10 μg/mL poly-d-lysine
at 37 °C for 30 min. The plates were washed once with phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS), and 50 μL of NANP solution (20 μg/mL in
PBS) was added to each well and incubated overnight at 4 °C.
The following day, the plates were washed once with PBS and blocked
with 50 μL of blocking buffer, constituting PBS containing calcium
and magnesium supplemented with 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for
2 h at room temperature. The plates were then washed four times with
PBS containing 0.05% Tween-20 (PBS-T), with blotting between each
wash.
To simulate in vivo conditions and facilitate
biomolecular corona formation, plated NANPs were incubated in 55%
human serum diluted in blocking buffer (100 μL/well) for 1 h
at 37 °C. After four PBS-T washes, the plates were incubated
with 50 μL of 10 μg/mL mouse antihuman apolipoprotein
B (ApoB) or apolipoprotein E (ApoE) antibodies diluted in blocking
buffer for 1 h at room temperature. The plates were washed again four
times with PBS-T, followed by a 1 h incubation with 50 μL of
horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated goat antimouse IgG secondary
antibody diluted 1:5000 in blocking buffer. After a final set of four
PBS-T washes, 50 μL of 1-Step Ultra TMB-ELISA substrate was
added to each well and developed for 5 min in the dark. The enzymatic
reaction was quenched with 25 μL of 2 M sulfuric acid, and absorbance
was measured at 450 nm with a reference wavelength of 540 nm.
Standard curves for ApoB and ApoE were generated by plating serial
dilutions of each protein and measuring the absorbance. Data were
fit to a four-parameter logistic model to establish the relationship
between concentration and absorbance and enable the interpolation
of protein concentrations from sample absorbance values.

## LNP-siRNA
Formulation
Nanoparticle formulations were
done as previously described. Briefly,
DLin-MC3-DMA (MC3), 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(DSPC), cholesterol, and DMG-PEG2000 were mixed in ethanol at a molar
ratio of 50:10:38.5:1.5 as the organic phase. RNA was prepared in
10 mM citrate buffer, pH 3, at an RNA concentration such that the
final RNA concentration is 0.1 μg/μL following microfluidic
mixing. The formulated aqueous and organic phases were mixed at a
ratio of 3:1, respectively, using a syringe pump and microfluidic
chip setup as previously described. Subsequently, nanoparticles were
buffer-exchanged into PBS by several rounds of centrifugation using
Amicon centrifugal filters with MWCO = 100 kDa. Encapsulation efficiency
and RNA concentrations were measured using Quant-iT Ribogreen assay
as previously described. Briefly, RNA
concentrations were determined in Tris-EDTA buffer (TE) and Tris-EDTA,
1% Triton-X 100 buffer (TX). Encapsulation efficiency (EE) was determined
by using the following formula: EE = (TX – TE)/TX × 100%.

## 
In Vitro RNAi Experiments
HepG2 cells
were seeded onto a 96-well plate (1 × 104 cells/well).
After 24 h, the cells were washed with PBS and incubated with siRNA
and/or NANP in a final volume of 100 μL of serum-free media.
Media was exchanged 24 h later to complete DMEM. Total RNA was isolated
using 50 μL of iScript RT-qPCR Sample Preparation Reagent per
well. 10 μL was then transferred to generate cDNA using the
High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit. ALDH2 expression was
analyzed via RT-qPCR using Taqman probes for ALDH2 (FAM) and HPRT
(VIC) primers in a dual-probe assay. The delta–delta Ct method
was used to analyze Ct values and compute the fold reduction in ALDH2
expression.

## 
In Vivo RNAi Experiments
Female C57BL/6
mice (strain no. 000664) were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory
(Bar Harbor, ME). 200 μL of either PBS, bare siRNA, or TriGalNAc-siRNA
diluted in PBS were administered intravenously via the tail vein.
72 h later, mice were euthanized by CO2 asphyxiation and
cervical dislocation and the livers were harvested and flash-frozen
in liquid nitrogen. Frozen livers were homogenized to dry powder using
a Genogrinder TissueLyzer. 5 mg of liver tissue was collected into
an Eppendorf tube for subsequent RNA isolation using the Qiagen RNEasy
Mini (Plus) kit following the manufacturer’s guidelines with
some modifications. Briefly, 350 μL of RLT buffer supplemented
with β-mercaptoethanol was added to the tissues and vortexed
rigorously before adding 70% ethanol. The lysate was transferred to
a RNeasy spin column and centrifuged at 8000g for
30 s. 700 μL of RW1 buffer was added to the spin columns and
centrifuged for 30 s following addition of 500 μL of RPE buffer.
The latter step was repeated in total thrice; the column was then
centrifuged for 1 min to dry followed by elution of the RNA with 30
μL of nuclease-free water. 10 μL of purified RNA was used
for subsequent cDNA synthesis and qPCR analysis.

## Statistical
Analysis
All statistical analyses were
conducted in GraphPad Prism v.10. All data are presented as the mean
± standard deviation. P-values are indicated
in the individual figure panels. The specific statistical method used
and the number of replicates are described in the figure legends.

## Supplementary Material

H.M.K., G.A.K., M.O., D.A.L., and
M.B. were supported by ARO
ISN UARC W911NF2320121 and the Novo Nordisk Foundation Greenhouse
Initiative. M.O. was supported by a Novo Nordisk Foundation Fellowship
NNF23OC0082848. G.A.K. was additionally supported by the National
Science Foundation under a Graduate Research Fellowship 4000189657.
P.M and A.P. were supported by an NIH Grant R33AI161805. D.A.L. gratefully
acknowledges the NIH NIBIB NBETP Program T32 EB019940. We thank the
Koch Institute’s Robert A. Swanson (1969) Biotechnology Center
for technical support, specifically the Flow Cytometry Core facility,
the Microscopy Core facility, the Preclinical Imaging & Testing
Facility, and the High Throughput Sciences core. This work was supported
in part by the Koch Institute Support (core) Grant P30-CA14051 from
the National Cancer Institute and in part by the National Institute
of Environmental Health Sciences of the NIH under Award P30-ES002109.
This work was carried out in part through the use of MIT.nano’s
facilities. The authors graciously acknowledge Emiliano Clo and the
Global Nucleic Acid Therapies team for their technical guidance and
for the siRNA materials used in this study. We thank Aurora A. Burds
for their assistance with animal experiments.
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsami.5c24581.Raw data (XLSX)
Lipophilicity
calculation; additional NANP and LNP characterization;
additional flow cytometry and cell association characterization; additional
confocal microscopy characterization; additional ELISA characterization;
RNAi assessment; and sequence information (PDF)

Conceptualization:
H.M.K., G.A.K., M.B.; methodology: H.M.K., G.A.K., M.O., P.M.; investigation:
H.M.K., M.O., G.A.K., P.M., D.A.L., A.P.; visualization: H.M.K., M.O.,
G.A.K.; supervision: M.B., D.G.A.; writingoriginal draft:
H.M.K., M.O., G.A.K., M.B.; writingreview and editing: H.M.K.,
M.O., G.A.K., P.M., D.A.L., A.P., D.A.G., M.B.
The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): M.B. is an
academic co-founder of Kano Therapeutics, Inc. and Cache DNA, Inc.
D.G.A. receives research funding from Sanofi/Translate Bio and is
a Founder of oRNA Tx. The other authors have no competing interests
to disclose.