pmcSaudi Pharm JSaudi Pharm J2116saudipharmj9705695Saudi Pharmaceutical Journal : SPJ1319-01642213-7475SpringerPMC12644391PMC12644391.112644391126443914128421610.1007/s44446-025-00049-9491ReviewMolecular mechanisms attributed to colistin renal proximal tubular epithelial cytotoxicity
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5651-5618MahmoudMohamed A. ; Falagas et al. ; Falagas and Michalopoulos ). The emergence of multi-drug resistant gram-negative bacteria and the drying pipeline of antibiotics has raised interest in colistin as the last-line option against life-threatening severe bacterial infections (Li et al. ; Talbot et al. ; Velkov et al. ). Colistin is an antibiotic belonging to the family of polymyxin antibiotics, a group of cationic nonribosomal polypeptides first discovered in the late 1940 s (Velkov et al. ). It shares the same cationic cyclic heptapeptide structure linked to a hydrophobic tripeptide chain and an N-terminal fatty acyl tail with polymyxin B, differing only in the type of amino acid (D-leucine for colistin and D-phenylalanine for polymyxin B) situated at position 6 of the cyclic structure (Poirel et al. ; Nation et al. ). The cyclic structure is responsible for colistin solubility in the aqueous medium, while the hydrophobic tail allows colistin to be inserted into bacterial membranes (Ezadi et al. ). To this date, polymyxin B and colistin remain the only clinically relevant polymyxins, whereas other polymyxins (A, C, and D) never made it to the clinic (Landman et al. ).
Colistin is a bactericidal antibiotic with a narrow spectrum of activity, mainly against members of the Enterobacteriaceae family, such as Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia coli, as well as other common gram-negative bacteria, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter baumannii. Gram-positive bacteria, gram-negative cocci, and anaerobic bacteria are inherently resistant to colistin (Ezadi et al. ; Nang et al. ). Moreover, colistin administration is usually in the form of an inactive prodrug, colistin methanesulfonate (CMS), due to its more favorable toxicity profile than colistin sulfate (Bergen et al. ). CMS is less toxic than colistin sulfate due to the differential renal handling of colistin sulfate and CMS. Colistin sulfate is extensively reabsorbed from the glomerular filtrate (99%) by the renal proximal tubular epithelial cells (RPTECs), whereas CMS is reabsorbed to a much lesser degree (30%−40%), owing to the presence of negatively charged methanesulfonate groups in CMS (Azad et al. ). Colistin administration occurs through the parenteral route because it lacks oral bioavailability; the oral route is for decontaminating the digestive tract (Kassamali et al. ).
Colistin was first isolated from the spore-forming gram-positive bacteria Paenibacillus polymyxa in Japan nearly seven decades ago (Falagas et al. ; Kumazawa and Yagisawa ). At that time, physicians extensively used colistin to treat complicated gram-negative bacterial infections. However, due to its dose-limiting nephrotoxicity, it was gradually replaced by newly discovered antibiotics with a broader spectrum of activity and lesser toxicity, such as aminoglycosides and quinolones (Ortwine et al. ). From that point onwards, scientific and medical interest in colistin and polymyxins dwindled, and they were rarely studied or used in clinical settings. The only exceptions were ophthalmic and topical use and systemic and nebulized forms of colistin reserved for cystic fibrosis patients (Poirel et al. ). Consequently, studies analyzing colistin and polymyxin B's pharmacological and toxicological activities in the twentieth century were scarce (Lim et al. ; Li ). However, this situation has changed radically in the past decade due to the renewed interest of the scientific community in polymyxins as a last resort therapy to rescue critically ill patients suffering from multi-drug resistant (MDR) gram-negative bacterial infections, in particular, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Klebsiella pneumoniae (Biswas et al. ).
The main toxicities attributed to the clinical use of colistin are neurotoxicity and nephrotoxicity. Neurotoxicity is less common and mainly presents as paresthesia, vertigo, and ataxia. Nephrotoxicity is more common, occurring in between 30 to 60% of patients, and manifests as an increase in serum creatinine, reduction in creatinine clearance, proteinuria, or oliguria (Nang et al. ; Falagas and Kasiakou ; Javan et al. ; Kubin et al. ). The significance of colistin-induced nephrotoxicity is evident in a recently published meta-analysis of five randomized controlled trials including more than 300 patients (Eljaaly et al. ). In this study, colistin-induced nephrotoxicity occurred at 36.2%, and the risk of nephrotoxicity was 140% compared to beta-lactams. Colistin-induced acute kidney injury (AKI) emerges rapidly, often during the first week of treatment in most patients, and is associated with higher mortality compared to late-onset renal toxicity (Ja Ko et al. ; Shields et al. ; Miano et al. ; Fiaccadori et al. ). The extent of renal damage appears to be dose- and time-dependent increasing in severity with higher doses and longer durations of treatment (Nation and Li ; Spapen et al. ; Falagas et al. ; Chiu et al. ). Irreversible kidney damage can occur in some patients, particularly high-risk intensive care patients who may eventually require renal replacement therapy. Critically ill patients are more susceptible to colistin-induced nephrotoxicity, with nearly 55% developing renal damage following therapy (Inci et al. ). Although most patients are likely to endure mild and moderate renal injury that is reversible upon therapy discontinuation, monitoring renal function in all patients treated with colistin is critical, given that renal function can independently predict treatment failure and mortality (Spapen et al. ; Chien et al. ). Interestingly, the incidence of nephrotoxicity appears to be significantly higher in patients treated with colistin than polymyxin B at the currently recommended doses (Aggarwal and Dewan ). In a different study, the in vitro cytotoxicity of colistin and polymyxin B against human embryonic kidney (HEK-293) and normal rat kidney (NRK-52E) cells were deemed similar (Phe et al. ). However, CMS was associated with higher nephrotoxicity rates than polymyxin B in patients with matched risk factors. Acute tubular necrosis is the primary pathophysiological manifestation of colistin-induced nephrotoxicity, involving the epithelial cells that line the proximal tubules. Histologically, the kidneys extracted from rats treated with colistin show abnormal tubular dilation, vacuolization of epithelial cells, and tubular epithelial cell necrosis (Ghlissi et al. ).
Several studies were undertaken in the past two decades to decipher the molecular perturbations associated with colistin-induced nephrotoxicity, as we will see in the upcoming sections of this review. Although the exact mechanism through which colistin induces renal toxicity remains elusive, the studies reviewed in this article can form the basis for elucidating the exact mechanism of colistin renal toxicity. Moreover, pinpointing the mechanistic toxicity pathway presents an opportunity for the logical choice of natural and synthetic compounds that can exert a potential protective effect against colistin-induced nephrotoxicity. Doing so will allow the optimal colistin dosing in critically ill patients and prevent the development of bacterial resistance to colistin due to suboptimal dosing. Only half of the patients treated with colistin achieve a steady-state plasma concentration sufficient to kill bacteria due to adverse renal effects, despite having normal renal function prior to therapy (Tran et al. ; Satlin et al. ). Uncovering the mechanistic scenarios can guide the future design of safer polymyxin-like antibiotics to treat MDR gram-negative bacterial infections.
In this review, we have summarized and integrated findings from the major in vitro and in vivo studies undertaken in the past two decades to study the mechanisms of colistin-induced nephrotoxicity. In addition, we have suggested a unifying mechanism for colistin-induced nephrotoxicity based on findings from prior studies, which is in line with the emerging concept of cross-organelle stress response (CORE). In addition, we have utilized studies undertaken to study both colistin- and polymyxin B-induced nephrotoxicity. Mechanistically, CMS/colistin sulfate and polymyxin B share similar antibacterial and nephrotoxic activities (Nation et al. , ). The reported difference in the incidence and severity of nephrotoxicity between CMS/colistin sulfate and polymyxin B is related to their different pharmacokinetic properties (Aggarwal and Dewan ; Zavascki and Nation ). However, a recent study have reported that there was no significant difference in the incidence of nephrotoxicity between colistin and polymyxin B among 290 patients, suggesting that the previously reported differences were probably due to dosing and pharmacokinetics factors rather than due to a difference in nephrotoxicity potential between the two polymyxins (Aysert-Yildiz et al. ). The sources for this review were acquired from PubMed through an extensive literature search for previous studies investigating both CMS/colistin sulfate- and polymyxin B-induced nephrotoxicity. Significant studies are thoroughly explained, and important findings are rationally connected to previous studies. Whenever possible, we have highlighted areas for further research throughout this review.

## Colistin renal handling precipitates its nephrotoxicity
The Shai-Matsuzaki-Huang (SMH) model was commonly used to explain the nephrotoxicity associated with colistin therapy (Falagas and Kasiakou ; Javan et al. ; Gai et al. ). According to this model, antimicrobial peptides interact, displace, and insert between the lipids that make up cell membranes leading to pore formation in a detergent-like manner. These interactions between antimicrobial peptides and membranes lead to loss of membrane integrity and cell leakage or rupture (Baltzer and Brown ). This view is controversial, given that cationic colistin requires the presence of lipopolysaccharides to affect the membrane cohesion, whereas mammalian cells lack the anionic lipid A moiety present in bacterial lipopolysaccharides. Consequently, mammalian cells are resistant to colistin-induced membrane damage at clinically relevant concentrations (Sabnis et al. ; Vila-Farrés et al. ). In addition, the spatial arrangement of anionic phospholipids is different in eukaryotic membranes compared to prokaryotic membranes (Zasloff ). The latter tends to have anionic phospholipids such as cardiolipin and phosphatidylglycerol in the outer leaflet of the membrane, resulting in increased electrostatic interactions with cationic colistin (Lin and Weibel ; Zasloff ). On the other hand, anionic phospholipids such as phosphatidylserine and phosphatidylinositol are almost exclusively concentrated in the inner leaflet of eukaryotic membranes, making them inaccessible to colistin (Zasloff ; Hirama et al. ). In addition, eukaryotic cell membranes are rich in cholesterol that stabilizes the membrane through interactions with anchored peptides, further reducing the membrane destabilization ability of colistin and other antimicrobial peptides (Matsuzaki ). Therefore, colistin cannot engage directly with the membranes of eukaryotic cells at therapeutic levels as it does with prokaryotic cells. Collectively, these observations render the application of the SMH model to explain colistin-induced nephrotoxicity implausible.
Recent studies have indicated that polymyxins induce nephrotoxicity secondary to accumulation in the RPTECs. One of these studies employed in situ immunostaining using polymyxin B-specific mouse IgM monoclonal antibody to investigate the disposition of polymyxin B in renal tissue of mice (Yun et al. ). Mice were treated with polymyxin B at a cumulative dose of 175 mg/kg for three days. Polymyxin B appeared to have accumulated in the renal cortex of mice, specifically in the RPTECs and to a much lesser degree in the distal tubular cells. The accumulation of polymyxin B in the renal cortex positively correlated with observed histological damage in the tissue specimens retrieved from these animals. The authors concluded that polymyxin B-induced nephrotoxicity was linked to its ability to gain intracellular access and accumulate in RPTECs through renal reabsorption from the glomerular filtrate. Another study has reported that colistin was extensively reabsorbed by the kidney (Li et al. ). In this study, rats were treated with colistin sulfate at 1 mg/kg. High-performance liquid chromatography was employed to measure the concentration of colistin sulfate in the plasma and urine. Only a tiny fraction of the administered dose of colistin was recovered in the urine, despite the calculated high glomerular filtration rate of colistin, indicating that the tubular renal reabsorption of colistin was extensive. The renal cortex appeared to be the only site of accumulation of polymyxins. Polymyxins could not be traced in the lungs, liver, or heart (Azad et al. ). In another study, colistin accumulated to a higher degree in the kidney compared to liver (7 to 14 folds higher) in CMS-treated rats (Jeong et al. ).
The concentration- and time-dependent intracellular accumulation of polymyxins in the NRK-52E and human kidney (HK-2) cells, has been rigorously demonstrated using multiple microscopy techniques (fluorescence microscopy, X-ray fluorescence microscopy, mass spectrometry imaging, scanning electron microscopy and immunostaining), in order to detect and quantify the accumulation of fluorescent polymyxin probes in these cells (Yun et al. , ; Nilsson et al. ; Abdelraouf et al. ; Azad et al. ; Vattimo et al. ; Manchandani et al. ). A study reported that the intracellular concentration of a fluorescent polymyxin probe (FADDI-096) was over 4000 times higher as compared to the bathing solution in cultured rats and human RPTECs following exposure for four hours (Azad et al. ). Given the polycationic nature of polymyxins at physiologic pH levels, it is impossible to imagine that they can diffuse freely across the lipid bilayer membrane; therefore, carrier-mediated transport is a more plausible explanation for their accumulation in RPTECs. In support of this notion, an ex vivo study has utilized perfused isolated rat kidneys exposed to colistin sulfate in the perfusate (Ma et al. ). The authors reported that colistin was extensively up taken by the kidney, and less than 10% of absorbed colistin was excreted in the urine. The renal clearance of colistin was increased when co-administered with tetraethylammonium, as competition between the cationic compounds, colistin, and tetraethylammonium, for the transporters on the surface of RPTECs, led to a reduction in colistin reabsorption and an increase in its renal clearance. Experiments utilizing polymyxin fluorescent probes have revealed that polymyxin accumulation in RPTECs is saturable; increasing the extracellular concentration of polymyxin does not linearly increase its intracellular concentration, a consequence of carrier saturation (Abdelraouf et al. ). This was demonstrated by observing that the intracellular concentration of a fluorescent polymyxin probe in NRK-52E cells increased by only five-fold, following a ten-fold increase in its extracellular concentration (Azad et al. ). In addition, the tubular reabsorption of colistin was higher than that of water, further supporting the role of carrier-mediated transport by specialized transporters in the renal reabsorption of colistin from the glomerular filtrate (Ma et al. ).
Several specialized transporters highly expressed on the surface of RPTECs have been implicated in the intracellular accumulation of colistin and polymyxin B. These transporters include megalin, which plays a role in the endocytic intake of colistin, and two solute carrier transporters, oligopeptide transporter 2 (PEPT2) and carnitine/organic cation transporter 2 (OCTN2) (Suzuki et al. ; Lu et al. ; Visentin et al. ; Manchandani et al. ). Suzuki et al. reported a reduction in the renal accumulation of colistin in megalin-shedding rats, indicating that megalin-associated endocytic uptake of colistin plays a role in its renal accumulation (Suzuki et al. ). Moreover, treating rats exposed to colistin by cytochrome c or albumin fragments, typical megalin ligands, or colchicine, a microtubule destabilizing agent, reduced the renal accumulation of colistin and protected against colistin-mediated renal damage. This was evidenced by a reduction in N-acetyl-β-d-glucosaminidase (NAG) level, a sensitive marker of RPTECs damage. The role of megalin in the reabsorption of colistin was further confirmed by the ability of cilastatin to eliminate colistin-induced nephrotoxicity in an animal model (Hori et al. ). Cilastatin has been shown to reduce the nephrotoxicity of various nephrotoxic antibiotics, including gentamicin and vancomycin, as well as cisplatin, through the blockade of megalin. This transporter is highly expressed on the apical membranes of RPTECs facing the glomerular filtrate. The accumulation of nephrotoxic drugs in RPTECs through uptake by megalin may prove to be a common phenomenon that results in tubular cell injury and nephrotoxic AKI. In a different study, co-administration of colistin and gelofusine attenuated colistin-induced renal injury in mice, as evidenced by a reduced histological semiquantitative score in kidney tissue of mice treated by the combination (colistin and gelofusine) compared to the kidney tissue retrieved from mice treated by colistin alone (Sivanesan et al. ). The pharmacokinetic parameters of colistin in rats treated with colistin alone and in combination with gelofusine were similar, indicating that gelofusine does not interfere with the disposition of colistin. The nephroprotective effect of gelofusine was attributed to its ability to compete with colistin for transporters involved in its reabsorption from the glomerular filtrate. The authors implicated gelofusine-mediated competitive inhibition of colistin reabsorption by megalin and consequent modification of colistin's endosomal and lysosomal trafficking in precipitating the observed protective effect.
The role of PEPT2, a transporter highly expressed on the apical membrane of S2 and S3 segments of proximal tubules, in renal uptake of colistin and polymyxin B, was shown by the ability of either polymyxin to inhibit the uptake of glycylsarcosine, a ligand of PEPT2 (Lu et al. ). The time-dependent and saturable accumulation of MIPS-9541, a fluorescent polymyxin probe, in cells overexpressing PEPT2 compared to cells transfected by an empty vector indicated that PEPT2 was indeed involved in the uptake of polymyxins. The accumulation of MIPS-9541 in cells overexpressing PEPT2 was reduced by co-treatment with either glycylsarcosine, colistin, or polymyxin B. Similar findings were obtained with radiolabeled polymyxin B1. Interestingly, the cationic diaminobutyric acid residues were implicated in the PEPT2-mediated uptake of polymyxins. This was confirmed by the reduced interaction of CMS with PEPT2. In CMS, the cationic diaminobutyric acid residues are replaced by methanesulfonate groups, negating the cationic nature of colistin and reducing the interactions with transporters and consequent reabsorption. In a more recent study, cefadroxil targeting of PEPT2 led to reduced colistin mediated renal toxicity in cultured human and murine RPTECs and mice (Fernandez-Prado et al. ). In another study, Visentin et al. demonstrated that OCTN2 plays a role in the reabsorption of colistin from the glomerular filtrate (Visentin et al. ). In HEK-293 cells transfected with OCTN2, treatment by colistin inhibited the uptake of substrates of OCTN2, including radiolabeled L-carnitine and tetraethylammonium bromide. Coincubation of the mouse proximal tubular cells with colistin in the presence of increasing concentrations of L-carnitine protected against colistin-mediated toxicity, increased cell viability, and reduced colistin accumulation in these cells. Taken together, colistin appears to exert its nephrotoxic effect secondary to accumulation in RPTECs that express high levels of megalin, PEPT2, and OCTN2.
More recently, a genome-wide clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) screen undertaken in HK-2 treated by polymyxin B has implicated the inwardly rectifying potassium channels Kir4.2 and Kir5.1 in mediating polymyxin B-induced nephrotoxicity (Lu et al. ). Kir4.2 and Kir5.1 opening in response to direct interactions with polymyxin B1 lead to depolarization of the cell membrane and accumulation of polymyxin B1 in the cytosol. The knockout of KCNJ15 and KCNJ16 genes, which encode Kir4.2 and Kir5.1, respectively, leads to an increase in HK-2 viability when exposed to polymyxin B compared to wild-type cells. RNA sequencing of HK-2 cells treated with 100 μM polymyxin B indicated that the KCNJ16 gene was downregulated 3.6 folds, implying that HK-2 cells reduced the ion channel expression as an adaptive response to limit polymyxin B accumulation. Pre-treatment of HK-2 with barium chloride, an inhibitor of Kir channels, rescued HK-2 cells following treatment with 25 μM polymyxin B. In addition, VU0134992, a selective Kir4.2 inhibitor, maintained the viability of HK-2 cells treated with 25 μM of polymyxin B for 24 h. Patch-clamp electrophysiology confirmed the role of Kir4.2 and Kir5.1 potassium channels in mediating the depolarization of HK-2 cell membrane upon exposure to polymyxin B. The knockout of KCNJ15 and KCNJ16 genes in HK-2 cells treated with 50 μM polymyxin B abolished the membrane depolarization observed in wild-type HK-2 cells treated similarly. The role of Kir4.2 and Kir5.1 potassium channels in mediating polymyxin B-induced nephrotoxicity was further confirmed by using a kidney explant. Pre-treatment of kidney culture with either barium chloride (50 μM) or VU0134992 (5 μM) significantly reduced the level of apoptotic cells in the culture to levels comparable to untreated cells following 24-h polymyxin B treatment. In the same study, the authors reported that knockout of the clathrin adaptor complex AP-2, which mediates endocytosis, reduced the polymyxin-induced toxicity in HK-2 cells, indicating that clathrin-mediated endocytosis may play a role in the accumulation of polymyxin in HK-2 cells. The genome-wide CRISPR screen failed to detect a change in the expression of megalin, OCTN2, and PEPT2, suggesting that these receptors may aid in accumulating polymyxins following the membrane depolarization caused by polymyxin-mediated interaction and the opening of the inwardly rectifying potassium channels Kir4.2 and Kir5.1 (Lu et al. ). In addition, targeting Kir4.2 and Kir5.1 may be vital in attenuating polymyxin-induced nephrotoxicity, and further studies are required to confirm the feasibility of targeting the inwardly rectifying potassium channels to reduce polymyxin accumulation in RPTECs.

## Molecular pathophysiological mechanisms of colistin nephrotoxicity
Previous studies have shown that colistin induces nephrotoxicity by activating multiple pathways, including the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) associated unfolded protein response (UPR), mitochondrial apoptotic pathways, and nuclear events leading to oxidative stress, inflammation, DNA damage, and apoptosis. Some of the molecular mechanisms associated with colistin-induced nephrotoxicity are described in detail below.

## Endoplasmic reticulum stress
The ER functions as a cellular hub for the biosynthesis, folding, and secretion of cellular proteins critical for cell survival. It is also responsible for maintaining cellular Ca2+ homeostasis, lipid metabolism, and the degradation of structurally compromised proteins (Voeltz et al. ). Several stressors can interfere with the physiological functions of the ER, including certain xenobiotics, reactive oxygen species (ROS), perturbed glucose levels, and inflammatory cytokines (Cnop et al. ; Demine et al. ; Foufelle and Fromenty ; Fujii et al. ). Molecular chaperones are proteins synthesized by the ER that aid in and maintain correct protein folding. Stressors that interfere with chaperone function can accumulate unfolded, and aggregated protein in the ER's lumen, triggering the ER-specific UPR (Ma and Hendershot ; Slavotinek and Biesecker ).
Previous studies have shown that colistin interferes with the function of heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90), a chaperone responsible for maintaining correct protein folding. In mammals, Hsp90 is an evolutionary preserved ubiquitously distributed protein that serves essential functions related to protein stability and degradation in stressed and normal cells (Zuehlke et al. ; Marzec et al. ; Chen et al. ). The N-terminal domain of Hsp90 is highly conserved, with a sequence homology shared among all Hsp90 paralogs. Colistin binds to the prokaryotic homolog of Hsp90, High-temperature protein G (HtpG), at the N-terminal domain, precipitating HtpG oligomerization, and inhibition of chaperone activity, resulting in the loss of its protein thermal aggregation, inhibitory activity (Minagawa et al. ). These interactions lead to an increase in the surface hydrophobicity of HtpG. Moreover, this increase in the surface hydrophobicity of the HtpG molecules, secondary to conformational changes precipitated by interactions with colistin at the N-terminal domain, leads to an increase in hydrophobic interactions between HtpG molecules, resulting in their oligomerization and aggregation. The authors of this study concluded that upon the interaction between colistin and HtpG, the HtpG molecules aggregate together, preventing their interaction with unfolded client proteins. Interestingly, divalent cations such as Mg2+ and Mn2+ induced the oligomerization and loss of HtpG chaperone activity (Minagawa et al. ). The effect of these divalent cations on HtpG is similar to that of colistin. Consequently, the cationic nature of colistin might be responsible for interaction with HtpG. Similar observations were made in human cultured cells exposed to high concentrations of colistin (Togashi et al. ). The authors reported that colistin binds Hsp90 at the N-terminal domain, precipitating its aggregation and attenuation of chaperone activity, resulting in reduced cell viability. Recently, a gene networking analysis has indicated that colistin-mediated proteotoxicity is a significant event in the nephrotoxicity attributed to colistin therapy (Lee et al. ). The study carried out in rats reported a reduction in the expression of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) target genes (Hsp105, Hsp90, and Hsp40) in CMS-treated rats (25 or 50 mg/kg/day for seven days) compared to control animals. The authors have hypothesized that colistin perturbs proteostasis by inhibiting chaperone activity, culminating in a state of proteotoxicity. HSF1 target genes are associated with proteostasis and proper protein function (Hayashida et al. ). The reduction in their transcriptional activity may initiate ER stress (ERS) and downstream signaling cascades, culminating in ROS accumulation, mitochondrial dysfunction, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis or necrosis (Lee et al. ; Livezey et al. ).
Apart from their effect on the cellular chaperone activity, polymyxins have been shown to directly interfere with the eukaryotic translation machinery (McCoy et al. ). In an in vitro setting, McCoy et al. demonstrated that polymyxins and their derivatives bind to the eukaryotic 18S RNA decoding site construct and interfere with the eukaryotic translation process in a concentration-dependent manner. This interference can be a result of inhibition of translation or mistranslation. An acute increase in mistranslation can generate a high load of defective protein, unable to be correctly folded in the ER, causing the accumulation of protein aggregates and triggering the activation of the UPR (Quiros et al. ; Garcia-Huerta et al. ; Das et al. ). Intriguingly, although polymyxins and their derivatives could bind to the bacterial 16S RNA decoding site construct, no effect on translation was noted in this study. This finding contrasts aminoglycosides, potent inhibitors of bacterial translation, and binds both the eukaryotic 18S and bacterial 16S RNA decoding site constructs (McCoy et al. ). These intriguing findings highlight an important observation on the similarities between aminoglycosides and polymyxins concerning their polycationic nature and shared toxicity profile, including nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity. Consequently, polymyxins and aminoglycosides may share similar initiating events and a unifying mechanism of nephrotoxicity. The polycationic nature of polymyxins allows them to interact and intercalate with the RNA scaffold through hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions (McCoy et al. ). These interactions could be responsible for interference with eukaryotic translation observed in this study. Interestingly, CMS was neither able to bind to the 18S and 16S RNA constructs nor interfere with in vitro translation, indicating that the polycationic nature of polymyxins may play a significant role in the observed perturbations. Future studies are required to investigate the effect of polymyxin interference with eukaryotic translation in RPTECs on their nephrotoxicity and whether this apparent ribotoxic stress can be experimentally linked to ERS and induction of the ER-specific UPR.
The highly conserved UPR pathway is activated when the unfolded protein level in the ER's lumen overwhelms its protein folding and degradation capacities (Hampton ). This ER-to-nucleus signaling pathway is activated by the cell in response to ERS to aid cell survival and coping (Fig.  a) (Livezey et al. ). For details regarding the signaling pathways involved in the UPR please refer to previous articles (Hetz et al. ; Cao and Kaufman ). The expression levels of heavy chain binding protein (BiP) and cleaved activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) increased in a dose-dependent manner in the renal tissue of mice treated with colistin for seven days, implying that the UPR pathway is activated in response to colistin-mediated ERS (Dai et al. ). In another study, HK-2 cells treated with 25 μM polymyxin B demonstrated a time-dependent increase in BiP expression (Yun et al. ). The top canonical pathways regulated by the differentially expressed genes in renal tissue isolated from rats treated by CMS at a dose of 50 mg/kg/day for seven days were assessed using ingenuity pathway analysis software (Lee et al. ). The top canonical pathways identified by the software were eukaryotic initiation factor 2, eukaryotic initiation factor 4, 70-kDa ribosomal protein S6 kinase, and mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR). Genes involved in protein translation, cell cycle control, and apoptosis were significantly upregulated by colistin treatment. The authors interpreted the upregulation of genes involved in protein translation as a normal response to proteotoxic stress. This response is required for kidney regeneration after injury and to increase the synthesis of heat shock proteins to counteract colistin-induced proteotoxic stress. 
The prolonged or excessive stress and failure of the UPR to reestablish proteostasis shifts the UPR from survival to death through the upregulation of C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), a proapoptotic protein involved in ERS-induced cell death (Xu et al. ). A significant increase in expression of CHOP was reported in mice treated with a high-dose colistin regimen (15 mg/kg/day) compared to a low-dose regimen (7.5 mg/kg/day) for the same period seven days (Dai et al. ). The excessive stress caused by the high-dose colistin regimen, compared to the low-dose regimen, shifts the UPR from survival to death through the upregulation of CHOP. In another study, HK-2 cells treated with 25 μM polymyxin B showed a time-dependent increase in the expression of CHOP (Yun et al. ). Interestingly, in this in vitro study, the induction of CHOP was more rapid; the expression of CHOP nearly doubled within 8 h compared to the negative control. Intriguingly, although the expression of CHOP significantly doubled within this time frame, the activities of executioner caspases remained unchanged compared to the negative control. These observations can be explained by the rapid dynamics of ATF6 that shape the early expression of CHOP during the initial adaptive phase of the UPR (Yang et al. ). ATF6 is implicated in the induction of an early peak in CHOP expression. Although CHOP peaks early, its full pro-apoptotic transcriptional activity is realized only once the protein kinase RNA-like ER kinase (PERK) arm of the UPR induces its sustained expression through activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). In a more recent study, rats treated with 300,000 IU/Kg colistin per day for six days exhibited an increased expression of ATF4 and CHOP (Shafik et al. ). The increase in ATF4 and CHOP coincided with an increase in caspase-3 and caspase-12, indicating activation of apoptosis. This was replicated in another study (Hassan et al. ). CHOP is a significant orchestrator of cell death due to ERS through several pathways (Oyadomari and Mori ). CHOP induces the expression of Growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible protein 34. Upregulated Growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible protein 34 dephosphorylates alpha subunit of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2α), thus reversing PERK-mediated inhibition of global mRNA translation (Novoa et al. ). Consequently, the flux of unfolded protein to the ER lumen resumes, and upregulated oxidative protein folding results in the generation of excessive ROS (Sano and Reed ; Yoboue et al. ). The ER is responsible for nearly 60% of cytosolic ROS generation (Yoboue et al. ). CHOP induces oxidoreductase-1, an enzyme in the ER that aids in oxidative disulfide bond formation required for the protein to maintain a proper three-dimensional conformation (Marciniak et al. ). Upregulation of the ER-resident oxidoreductase-1 activates the inositol triphosphate receptor (IP3R), possibly through a redox-mediated mechanism (Joseph et al. ). ER-to-mitochondria Ca2+ flux ensues through the IP3R-Glucose regulated protein 75-Voltage-dependent anion-selective channel 1-Mitochondrial Ca2+ uniporter axis, part of the mitochondrial-associated ER membranes (Seervi et al. ; Li et al. ). The influx of Ca2+ to the mitochondria, though initially favorable to maintain mitochondrial adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production required to support the energetically unfavorable oxidative protein folding in the ER, eventually leads to mitochondrial Ca2+ overload, generation of mitochondrial ROS, and induction of apoptotic cell death (Deniaud et al. ; Mattson and Chan ).
Previous studies have shown that the induction of ERS and activation of the UPR perturb lipid metabolism in the ER (Sun et al. ; Figueroa-Juárez et al. ). The accumulation of unfolded protein in the lumen of the ER leads to the proteolytic cleavage and activation of sterol regulatory element-binding protein-2 (SREBP-2) (Colgan et al. ). Active SREBP-2 is implicated in the upregulation of genes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis and uptake. In this regard, Weber et al. reported that polymyxin B treatment of primary human donor RPTECs and cell lines cultured on a microphysiologic (organ-on-chip) system revealed that cholesterol accumulated in RPTECs (Weber et al. ). The accumulation of cholesterol correlated with an increase in the effluent kidney injury molecule-1 (KIM-1), a sensitive marker for RPTECs damage. The authors implicated an increase in cholesterol biosynthesis and a reduction in cholesterol efflux in the apparent accumulation of cholesterol in RPTECs. This was evidenced by the upregulation of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase transcript, a rate-limiting enzyme in the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway, and downregulation of ATP-binding cassette family transporter, a cholesterol efflux regulatory protein. Genes involved in the UPR, nuclear factor-erythroid 2 related factor 2 (Nrf2) antioxidant response, and cholesterol biosynthesis were upregulated by polymyxin B. Cholesterol biosynthesis, regulation, and transport were the top canonical pathways that significantly overlapped with the differentially regulated genes.
Prolonged ERS can result in the excessive leakage of Ca2+ to the cytosol (Bahar et al. ; Mohsin et al. ; Park et al. ). Perturbations in Ca2+ signaling were reported in a study that examined the effect of escalated doses of colistin on cultured neuronal cells (Dai et al. ). The authors reported an increase in intracellular free Ca2+ levels, as well as a reduction in the gene expression of calmodulin. In a different study, a mouse model microarray revealed that several genes, including Myosin Light Chain 9, Parvalbumin, and Solute Carrier Family 24 member 3 that encode proteins responsible for binding Ca2+, were downregulated following treatment by colistin (Eadon et al. ). In another study, the accumulation of a fluorescent polymyxin probe in cultured RPTECs positively correlated with an increase in intracellular free Ca2+ levels (Azad et al. ). Ca2+ appeared to be the only element that positively correlated with the accumulation of the fluorescent polymyxin probe. The authors linked this disequilibrium in Ca2+ homeostasis to the induction of apoptosis secondary to the fluorescent polymyxin probe accumulation in cultured RPTECs (Azad et al. , ; Mattson and Chan ).
A previous article extensively reported on the existence of complex bidirectional crosstalk between the UPR and mTOR signaling (Appenzeller-Herzog and Hall ). Adaptive activation of the ATF6 branch of UPR activates protein kinase B/Akt and its downstream signaling cascades that promote cell survival (Fig.  b) (Yamazaki et al. ). Chronic UPR activation is accompanied by heightened mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) signaling and inactivation of Akt through maladaptive UPR-mediated signaling pathways and mTORC1-mediated negative feedback mechanisms (Appenzeller-Herzog and Hall ). In this scenario, mTOR, a survival-promoting serine/threonine kinase, paradoxically functions as a promoter of cell death through activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) mediated apoptosis, accumulation of CHOP, and an increase in protein synthesis, resulting in an elevated ER protein load and the potentiation of maladaptive UPR signaling pathways (Kato et al. ; Dong et al. ). However, it remains to be seen whether colistin-induced activation of the UPR can be experimentally linked to heightened mTORC1 signaling. Previous studies have shown a link between UPR-mediated heightened mTORC1 signaling and downregulation of Akt survival signaling in in vitro and in vivo murine models of tunicamycin- and thapsigargin-induced nephrotoxicity (Kato et al. ; Dong et al. ). However, it is important to note that tunicamycin and thapsigargin induce ERS at much lower concentrations than polymyxins, which is expected because they are direct ER stressors (Kato et al. ; Dong et al. ). Therefore, it is important to point out that ER stress may not be a primary target of colistin-induced nephrotoxicity. The importance of the phosphatidyl inositol-3 kinase (PI3K)/Akt/mTORC1 pathway in polymyxin-induced nephrotoxicity has been shown in a genome-wide CRISPR screen (Lu et al. ). The knockout of the tuberous sclerosis protein 1/2 (TSC1/2) increased HK-2 cell viability and resistance to polymyxin B-induced cell death. The authors postulated that the activation of mTORC1 is required for cell survival as TSC1/2 are negative regulators of mTORC1. However, the knockout of TSC2 is associated with an increase in adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activity (Lacher et al. ). The increased AMPK activity is attributed to Ras homolog enriched in brain, which becomes constitutively active due to loss of TSC2, leading to an increase in autophagy, which is protective during ERS (Kapuy et al. ). In support of this, the knockout of TSC2 in HEK-293 cells exposed to olaquindox increased autophagy and protected the cells from oxidative stress and apoptosis (Li et al. ). In contrast, the overexpression of TSC2 was associated with reduced autophagy and increased olaquindox-induced oxidative stress and apoptosis in HEK-293 cells, indicating that TSC2 plays an antagonizing role against autophagy (Li et al. ).

## Mitochondrial dysfunction
The mitochondrion is a rod-shaped organelle found in most eukaryotic cells. It is responsible for energy production in the form of ATP (Frey and Mannella ). The kidney is the second-highest organ enriched in mitochondria after the heart (Tang and Dong ). Mitochondria are specifically concentrated in the RPTECs (Forbes ). They produce a high amount of energy, mainly through mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, to drive high energy-demanding transporters that reabsorb nearly 80% of the glomerular filtrate (Bhargava and Schnellmann ). According to the endosymbiotic theory, mitochondria evolved from prokaryotic cells, α-proteobacteria, that were incorporated into archaic eukaryotic cells through endosymbiosis (Margulis ; Gray and Archibald ). Although this theory is controversial, there are similarities between prokaryotic cells and mitochondria. Mitochondria are semi-autonomous organelles; they possess their genetic material and replicate through binary fission like prokaryotic cells (Ralto and Parikh  ). Studies have consistently shown that various antibiotics induce mitochondrial dysfunction, albeit through different mechanisms (previously reviewed here, (Gai et al. )). This can likely be explained by the prokaryotic origin of mitochondria and the presence of shared targets between them and bacterial cells.
Recently, phylogenetic analysis has clustered the human flavoprotein apoptosis-inducing factor-homologous mitochondrion-associated inducer of death (AMID) with prokaryotic enzyme type II NADH: quinone oxidoreductase (NDH-2), which is a target of colistin non-competitive inhibition (Gai et al. ). AMID is localized on the surface of the outer mitochondrial membrane and might prove to be the initial target of colistin-induced mitochondrial perturbations. The protein AMID binds to DNA like the canonical caspase-independent mitochondrial apoptotic factor, apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF), but it is unclear how it induces apoptosis (Demine et al. ). AIF induces apoptosis through translocation from the mitochondria to the nucleus, where it binds to nuclear DNA, causing chromatin condensation and DNA fragmentation (Foufelle and Fromenty ; Fujii et al. ). Several theories were proposed to explain the mechanism through which AMID induces apoptosis, including direct disruption of the outer mitochondrial membrane, chromatin condensation, and reduced survival signaling (Demine et al. ; Ma and Hendershot ; Slavotinek and Biesecker ). In contrast to AIF, AMID is not localized within the mitochondria, as it lacks a mitochondrial targeting sequence; it is mainly present in the cytosol or attached to the outer mitochondrial membrane forming a ring-like structure (Ma and Hendershot ). Interestingly, deletion mutations at the N-terminal domain of AMID resulted in the nuclear localization of AMID and failure to initiate cell death, a consequence of an inability to associate with the outer mitochondrial membrane (Ma and Hendershot ). The finding suggests that AMID induces cell death in a manner unlike AIF; thus, association with the outer mitochondrial membrane is a requisite for AMID to induce caspase-independent apoptosis. In light of these findings, AMID's disruption of the outer mitochondrial membrane in response to upstream apoptotic signals generated by exposure of RPTECs to colistin or as a result of direct colistin binding to AMID seems to be the most plausible mechanism by which it induces apoptosis. An interesting study showcased the physiological redox role of AMID in maintaining cellular levels of critical superoxide and peroxide radicals required to sustain signaling through survival pathways. The binding of AMID to cytosolic DNA abrogates its physiological redox activity leading to a reduction in survival signaling through Ras, nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB), or activator protein-1 (AP-1) (Slavotinek and Biesecker ). The binding of colistin or mitochondrial DNA to AMID may as well interfere with its physiological redox activity, resulting in a reduction of survival signaling and a shift towards cell death pathways in RPTECs exposed to colistin. Another probable mitochondrial target is cardiolipin, an essential phospholipid in mitochondrial and bacterial membranes. In eukaryotes, cardiolipin is exclusively present in the inner mitochondrial membrane and translocates to the outer mitochondrial membrane upon sensing even mild mitochondrial oxidative damage. Externalized cardiolipin acts as a signal to initiate the autophagolysosomal removal of damaged mitochondria (Li et al. ; Kagan et al. ). Cardiolipin is a negatively charged phospholipid, and interactions with polycationic colistin are plausible. The extent and significance of these interactions should be a subject of future research, particularly concerning colistin-induced mitochondrial damage and possible impairment of mitophagy. Pathological alterations in cardiolipin, such as peroxidation under severe oxidative damage, can interfere with the mitochondrial electron transport chain (Kagan et al. ). This interference can be a significant source of ROS and trigger mitochondrial apoptogenic factors' release into the cytosol (Gai et al. ).
Studies investigating the mechanistic nature of colistin-induced mitochondrial dysfunction are lacking, and the exact mitochondrial target(s) remain to be elucidated (Gai et al. ). A previous article reported that colistin directly dissipates the mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) of isolated intact mouse mitochondria in a concentration-dependent manner, suggesting that colistin directly targets the mitochondria (Gai et al. ). A study in colistin-treated HEK-293 cells has revealed that colistin depolarized the mitochondrial membrane, as evidenced by the reduction in the accumulation of rhodamine-123 dye in the mitochondria of colistin-treated cells compared to colistin untreated control cells (Gantenbein ). Interestingly, this marked MMP depolarization was not accompanied by loss of integrity of the mitochondrial membrane, indicating that mitochondrial membrane depolarization is an early event in colistin-induced mitochondrial dysfunction. Furthermore, isolated intact mitochondria from HEK-293 cells and mouse kidneys treated with colistin exhibited a blunted dynamic fluorescence quenching ability of rhodamine-123 dye in a concentration-dependent manner compared to the colistin untreated mitochondria. Co-incubation with adenosine diphosphate, an inhibitor of mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP) opening, reduced the depolarization of the mitochondrial membrane and recovered the mitochondrial dynamic fluorescence quenching ability of the rhodamine-123 dye to levels comparable to that of colistin untreated mitochondria. Interestingly, colistin appeared to shrink the intact isolated mitochondria in a concentration-dependent manner (Gantenbein ). Mitochondrial shrinkage can increase the concentration of Ca2+ in the mitochondrial matrix leading to the pathological opening of MPTP and subsequent dissipation of the MMP. The author suggested that colistin can mechanically damage the outer mitochondrial membrane, increasing its permeability, thus allowing colistin to access the mitochondrial intramembranous space and interfere with the electron transport chain. In a recent study, colistin-treated human RPTEC/TERT1 cell line exhibited a reduced MMP, as evidenced by an increase in the JC-1 monomer to JC-1 aggregate ratio. JC-1 is a voltage-sensitive dye that forms aggregates upon accumulation in mitochondria (Worakajit et al. ). The accumulation of JC-1 in mitochondria depends on the MMP. The authors concluded that colistin increased ROS leading to mitochondrial dysfunction and activation of apoptosis. The detrimental effects of colistin were reduced by co-treating cells with either panduratin A or N-acetyl cysteine. In another study, a dose-dependent increase in mitochondrial permeability transition (MPT) was noted in mitochondria isolated from a murine model of colistin-induced nephrotoxicity (Dai et al. ). Likely, colistin initially targets the ER and mitochondria through different mechanisms. Consequent crosstalk between these two tethered organelles causes severe oxidative stress, cell cycle arrest, and cell death.
Mitochondrial dysfunction is a central pathophysiologic feature of AKI (Tang and Dong ; Ralto and Parikh ). The high-energy demanding tubular cells are susceptible to mitochondrial damage, loss of mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation, and reduced ATP production impairs tubular cell function. This leads to an increase in renal lipid droplet deposition secondary to impaired mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation, dedifferentiation of tubular epithelial cells, and apoptosis (Li and Suszta ). Mitochondria are the primary cell death regulators; they can initiate apoptotic cell death by releasing apoptogenic factors such as cytochrome c, AIF, and Endonuclease G (Tait and Green ). They are significant regulators of Ca2+ in the cell, acting as a firewall to protect against Ca2+ overload (Duchen ). Colistin induces several signals that promote the activation of the mitochondrial cell death pathway, such as activation of CHOP and JNK, oxidative stress, and disequilibrium of Ca2+ homeostasis (Fig.  ) (Azad et al. ; Dai et al. , ; Jeong et al. ). These changes are consistent with the two-hit hypothesis, which posits that two hits, of which one is mitochondrial Ca2+ overload, are required for mitochondrial ROS accumulation and cell death (Brookes et al. ). CHOP and JNK can directly increase the expression of the proapoptotic BH3-only proteins such as Bcl2-like protein 11, p53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis (PUMA), and Phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate-induced protein 1 leading to activation and mitochondrial recruitment of pro-apoptotic cytosolic Bcl2-associated x protein (Bax) and downregulation of the anti-apoptotic protein B-cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2) (Eletto et al. ; Urra et al. ). Animal models and cell culture studies have consistently shown that colistin induces an imbalance in the levels of Bax/Bcl-2, suggesting that the mitochondrial apoptotic death pathway is activated in these models (Dai et al. ; Worakajit et al. ; Jiang et al. ; Lu et al. ). Bax oligomerizes on the outer mitochondrial membrane, where it colocalizes with and recruits cytosolic Dynamin-related Protein 1 (Drp1) to the outer mitochondrial membrane to initiate mitochondrial fragmentation (Wasiak et al. ; Maes et al. ). Mitochondrial fragmentation plays a vital role in the early stage of apoptosis, prior to caspase activation, and is implicated in mitochondrial dysfunction in different models of AKI (Brooks et al. , ; Suen et al. ). The mitochondria isolated from the renal tissue of mice treated with colistin showed a dose-dependent increase in pathological morphological alterations. Electron microscopy imaging revealed spherical, fragmented, and swollen mitochondria in the colistin-treated group compared to normal filamentous morphology in the control group (Dai et al. ). In another study, polymyxin B-treated NRK-52E cells displayed a concentration- and time-dependent increase in fragmented mitochondria compared to normal filamentous mitochondria observed in control cells (Azad et al. ). 
The oligomerization of Bax on the mitochondrial surface can also lead to the formation of oligomeric pore complexes and subsequent mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP) (Tait and Green ). Fragmented mitochondria are highly vulnerable to Bax insertion and outer membrane permeabilization (Brooks et al. ). MOMP allows the leakage of mitochondrial DNA to the cytosol and subsequent activation of cyclic GMP-AMP synthase stimulator of interferon genes pathway (Maekawa et al. ). This culminates in the nuclear translocation of nuclear factor kappa-B subunit p65 (NF-κB/p65) from the cytosol, further aggravating renal tubular inflammation. Colistin-induced ROS can directly damage the mitochondrial structure and genetic material, resulting in mitochondrial dysfunction and pathological opening of MPTP (Dai et al. ). Mitochondrial DNA is highly vulnerable to damage by ROS; the unopposed accumulation of ROS in the mitochondria can cause mutations in mitochondrial DNA, which leads to a reduction in the transcript levels of mitochondrial DNA-encoded respiratory complex subunits (Che et al. ). In contrast to nuclear DNA, mitochondrial DNA lacks the protection offered by histones and has a non-efficient DNA repair machinery. Mitochondrial Ca2+ overload interferes with the respiratory complex activity leading to disturbance in oxidative phosphorylation and excessive mitochondrial ROS formation (Dai et al. ). Mitochondrial ROS is especially deleterious in this scenario, as it can disseminate wave-like MOMP signals throughout the mitochondrial network structure, amplifying the original apoptotic signal (Tait and Green ). Additionally, mitochondrial ROS can escape to the cytosol and activate stress-related mitogen-activated protein kinases, JNK, and p38. Active JNK and p38 further exaggerate the pro-apoptotic signal through activation of transcription factors, p53 and AP-1, involved in the upregulation of apoptotic programs, and through the formation of complex ROS-mediated self-amplified positive feedback loops (Eletto et al. ). Cultured NRK-52E cells exposed to increasing concentrations of polymyxin B for 24 h exhibited increased mitochondrial superoxide formation and oxidative stress in a concentration- and time-dependent manner (Azad et al. ). This increase in mitochondrial superoxide production coincided with an increase in executioner caspase activities and apoptosis. In another study, polymyxin B treatment of NRK-52E cells at a concentration of 0.75 mM increased mitochondrial superoxide production compared to the control (Azad et al. ). In this study, mitochondrial oxidative stress was abolished by co-treatment with an antioxidant methionine.
Mitochondrial studies have consistently reported the loss of MMP, increased MPT, reduced mitochondrial respiratory complex activity, reduced mitochondrial ATP level, reduced mitochondrial antioxidant capacity, and increased mitochondrial superoxide generation and mitochondrial lipid peroxidation in mitochondria isolated from different in vitro and in vivo models of polymyxin B and colistin-induced nephrotoxicity (Dai et al. ; Azad et al. ; Heidari et al. ; Kook et al. ; Arjmand et al. ; Samodelov et al. ). Mitochondrial-dependent cell death occurs secondary to loss of MMP, MOMP, increased MPT, and prolonged MPTP opening secondary to an increase in mitochondrial ROS generation and Ca2+ overload, resulting in the release of cytochrome c and other apoptogenic factors such as second mitochondria-derived activator of caspase/direct inhibitor of apoptosis-binding protein with LOw pI and high-temperature requirement protein A2/Omi (HtrA2/Omi) (Vaux ). In the cytosol, cytochrome c binds and activates Apoptotic protease activating factor-1 (Apaf-1), leading to the apoptosome (Song and Steller ). This is followed by the recruitment and activation of caspase-9 in the presence of ATP. The formed apoptosome-active caspase-9 complex then activates the effector caspases, caspase-3 and −7, which execute apoptosis. Second mitochondria-derived activator of caspase/direct inhibitor of apoptosis-binding protein with LOw pI and HtrA2/Omi inhibit X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein, which is constitutively expressed in the cytosol to antagonize unintended apoptotic death through constitutive inhibition of caspase-3, −7, and −9 (Tait and Green ). Several in vitro and in vivo studies have shown that the mitochondrial apoptotic death pathway is activated in polymyxin-induced nephrotoxicity. A dose-dependent increase in the expression of Bax, cytochrome c, cleaved caspase-9, cleaved caspase-3, cleaved Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP-1), and a decrease in Bcl-2 was reported in mice treated by 7.5 mg/kg/day and 15 mg/kg/day colistin for seven days (Dai et al. ). In another study, an increased expression of cytosolic cytochrome c was noted in a murine model of polymyxin B-induced nephrotoxicity compared to saline-treated animals (Vattimo et al. ). Similarly, colistin and polymyxin B increased the activities of cleaved caspases −3, −7, and −9 in HK-2 and NRK-52E cells, respectively (Jeong et al. ; Azad et al. ).

## Inflammation and perturbation of survival signaling
Accumulation of Ca2+ and ROS in the cytosol activates the NF-κB, responsible for the transcription of inflammatory mediators such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), interleukin 1 beta (IL-1β), and interleukin 6 (IL-6) (Pahl and Baeuerle ; Zhang and Kaufman ). In addition, phosphorylated eIF2α represses nuclear factor-κB inhibitor alpha (IκBα) mRNA translation. IκBα binds NF-κB in the cytosol, keeping the nuclear localization sequence sequestered, thereby preventing NF-κB nuclear recruitment and binding to DNA (Zhang and Kaufman ; Deng et al. ). The half-life of IκBα is shorter than NF-κB. As a consequence, repression of global mRNA translation increases the NF-κB to IκBα ratio, thus permitting translation attenuation mediated activation of NF-κB and the nuclear translocation of NF-κB. In mammals, the IRE1 arm of the UPR is involved in the canonical activation of NF-κB through the recruitment of nuclear factor-κB inhibitor alpha kinase (IκBKα) (Zhang and Kaufman ). IκBKα phosphorylates IκBα, which is subsequently degraded, freeing NF-κB to translocate to the nucleus. The expression level of NF-κB/p65 was increased in a dose-dependent manner in renal tissue of mice treated with colistin (Dai et al. ). In a different study, colistin was administered to mice at a dose of 18 mg/kg/day for seven days, and the authors reported that colistin treatment increased the gene expression of NF-κB (Dai et al. ). Furthermore, the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and TNF-α were also increased in the colistin-treated animals compared to the control. The authors implicated increased ROS and downregulation of the antioxidant status in the upregulation of expression of NF-κB and consequent infiltration of inflammatory cells. In another study, the levels of CD68 positive cells, TNF-α, and IL-1β were elevated in the renal tissue of rats treated with colistin at a dose of 10 mg/kg/day for six days (Lee et al. ). Studies have also linked ERS to the activation of the inflammasome pathway through the activation of thioredoxin interacting protein (TXNIP) (Bronner et al. ; Kim et al. ; Yuan et al. ). Assembled inflammasomes activate caspase-1, the inflammatory caspase, leading to cleavage and release of IL-1β and interleukin-18, further aggravating the inflammatory insult (Franchi et al. ). Immunohistochemistry studies in renal tissue retrieved from rats treated with colistin at a dose of 300,000 IU/kg/day for seven days revealed a significant increase in the level of caspase-1 compared to control rats (Ozkan et al. ). The dysregulated cytosolic Ca2+ level activates calpain-1, a calcium-dependent cysteine protease, that catalyzes the activation of murine caspase-12, leading to the activation of caspase-3 and subsequent cleavage of nuclear DNA (Tan et al. ). The levels of calpain-1 and caspase-3 were significantly higher in the renal tissue of rats treated with colistin compared to control untreated rats (Ozkan et al. ). Additionally, mice treated with colistin showed a higher renal expression of cleaved caspase-12 and caspase-3 (Dai et al. ). In this study, the cleaved caspase level increased with the higher dose colistin regimen.
A recent study has reported that the kidney tissue obtained from rats treated with colistin sulfate at a dose of 480,000 IU/Kg/day for seven days showed an increase in the expression of toll-like receptor 4 (TLR-4) and NF-κB/p65 (Kabel and Salama ). TLR-4 is a pattern recognition receptor responsible for detecting pathogen-associated molecular patterns and activating pro-inflammatory and chemotactic responses (Jha et al. ). In the same study, the authors noted a reduction in the level of renal tissue nerve growth factor-β (NGF-β) and an increase in the level of tissue transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) in rats treated with colistin compared to control (Fig.  ) (Kabel and Salama ). The changes in the levels of tissue NGF-β and TGF-β1 correlated with an increase in tissue caspase-3 activity and renal histomorphological alterations. In another study, genes involved in TLR-1, TLR-2, and TLR-4 were differentially expressed in HK-2 cells treated with 100 μM polymyxin B and less nephrotoxic analogues (FADDI 251 and FADDI 287) (Li et al. ). Interestingly, IκBK was upregulated by all polymyxin B and its analogues, indicating that an inflammatory response is a central to the cellular response to polymyxins. The importance of pro-inflammatory response in CMS-induced nephrotoxicity was reported in a recent study undertaken in rats treated with 50 mg/kg (high-dose), 25 mg/kg (low-dose) CMS, or vehicle for one week (Long et al. ). The high dose CMS was associated with significant alterations in kidney gene expression profile and almost all genes related to NF-κB signaling were upregulated compared to the vehicle treated group. In a different microarray analysis study undertaken in kidney tissue extracted from rats treated by 50 mg/kg colistin for seven days the TNF signaling pathway was upregulated compared to control animals (Yen et al. ). NGF-β is a growth factor essential for normal renal development and response to renal injury in rodents and humans (Bonofiglio et al. ; Alpers et al. ). In a different study, the level of neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) was higher in colistin-treated rats than in control (Ozyilmaz et al. ). Interestingly, an imbalance in the level of NGF-β and NT-3 can promote apoptosis by activating the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR), a member of the TNF receptor superfamily (Casaccia-Bonnefil et al. ). Under homeostatic conditions, NGF-β, through its action on the Trobomyosin receptor kinase A (TrkA), inhibits the pro-apoptotic activity of p75NTR; however, upon the reduction in the level of NGF-β, the p75NTR emits apoptotic signals that culminate in oxidative stress and activation of JNK and p38 (Casaccia-Bonnefil et al. ; Wang et al. ). A previous study has reported that colistin treatment reduced the expression of NGF-β in mouse neuroblastoma-2A cells (Dai et al. ). This reduction in NGF-β was accompanied by a reduction in p-Akt and p-mTOR levels. In another study, the increase in the level of NGF-β correlated with the phosphorylation and activation of Akt and attenuation of renal damage in a murine model of streptozotocin-induced AKI (Gezginci-Oktayoglu et al. ). 
The PI3K/Akt pathway is protective against renal injury in different experimental models of AKI (Meng et al. ; Chai et al. ; Liu et al. ). Akt is a major survival-promoting serine/threonine kinase with downstream signaling targets that include a multitude of proteins such as glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK3β) and BCL2 agonist of cell death (Bad), involved in the regulation of the levels of pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic B-Cell Lymphoma 2 family proteins (Havasi and Borkan ). Phosphorylation of Bad by Akt increases its interaction with the cytosolic 14–3-3 proteins that act to sequester it, thus reducing the pro-apoptotic activity of Bad (Datta et al. ; Masters et al. ). In addition, Akt is involved in reducing ER-mitochondrial apoptotic Ca2+ flux by phosphorylating the IP3R (Szado et al. ). Consequently, reduced PI3K/Akt signaling increases pro-apoptotic Bax to anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 ratio leading to activation of the mitochondrial-dependent apoptotic pathway and reduction in cell viability. Akt is also involved in the activation of Nrf2-mediated antioxidant response and autophagy, both protective in models of AKI (Huang et al. ; Zhang et al. ). In this context, Shafik and colleagues reported that colistin treatment of rats at a dose of 300,000 IU/Kg for six days upregulated the expression of PH domain and leucine-rich repeat protein phosphatase (PHLPP2) leading to the reduced expression of p-Akt and activation of GSK3β (Shafik et al. ). Active GSK3β upregulates Fyn kinase expression that phosphorylates Nrf2 leading to Nrf2 nuclear export to the cytosol and consequent Nrf2 ubiquitination and degradation in the cytosol. Reduced Nrf2 expression leads to reduced GSH content and blunted SOD activity and increased caspase-3 leading to renal toxicity. Dai et al. reported that the treatment of a murine model of colistin-induced neurotoxicity by NGF-β protected against colistin-induced peripheral neurotoxicity (Dai et al. ). Tissue obtained from mice treated with colistin had a lower transcript level of Akt and higher transcript levels of Bax, caspase-3, and caspase-9 compared to control. Treatment by NGF-β increased the transcript level of Akt in a dose-dependent manner and reduced the transcript levels of Bax, caspase-3, and caspase-9. In a more recent study, polymyxin B alone and not the less nephrotoxic analogues (FADDI 251 and FADDI 287) perturbed fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling in HK-2 cells by downregulating fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) (Li et al. ). The FGF signaling pathway is upstream to PI3K/AKT pathway and reduced FGF signaling due to reduced FGFR2 expression may reduce PI3K/AKT survival signaling leading to apoptosis. Moreover, polymyxin B alone perturbed JUN, a transcription factor closely related to mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), indicating that MAPKs signaling plays a role in polymyxin B-mediated toxicity in HK-2 cells.
A high level of cytosolic Ca2+ activates signaling through JNK, a serine/threonine stress-activated protein kinase, resulting in the potentiation of cytosolic ROS formation by cytosolic nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 3-phosphate oxidases (NOXs) (Brnjic et al. ). The stress kinases JNK, and p38, are activated by Inositol-requiring transmembrane kinase/endoribonuclease 1alpha (IRE1α)—apoptosis signaling kinase-1 pathway through the recruitment of TNF receptor-associated factor 2 by IRE1α, feeding into the apoptotic signaling cascade (Eletto et al. ). Indeed, phosphorylated JNK and p38 accumulated in a dose-dependent manner in the renal tissue of mice treated with colistin compared to untreated animals (Dai et al. ). In another study, colistin-treated HK-2 cells demonstrated an increase in the phosphorylation of MAPKs JNK, p38, and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) (Jeong et al. ). The activation of MAPKs in this study was reduced by treatment with transforming growth factor-β1 receptor inhibitor. TGF-β1 is a pro-fibrotic cytokine that has been shown to induce apoptosis in both in vitro and in vivo models of AKI (Havasi and Borkan ; Dai et al. ; Cho et al. ; Gewin et al. ). Activation of ERK is implicated in the epigenetic reduction of NAD+ biosynthesis in settings of AKI (Collier and Schnellmann ). ERK is involved in the upregulation of miR34a and consequent reduction in the expression of nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase, an enzyme critical for NAD+ biosynthesis. This reduction in the level of NAD+ results in the inactivation of sirtuins, a group of NAD + -dependent class III histone deacetylases, which exert nephroprotective effects in AKI, through deacetylation of several transcription factors including p53, NF-κB, HSF1, hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF1), forkhead box O, Nrf2, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1 alpha (Ren et al. ; Hong et al. ; Vaziri et al. ; Rodgers et al. ; Yeung et al. ; Brunet et al. ; Motta et al. ; Westerheide et al. ; Peasley et al. ). Moreover, the resulting increase in NADH/NAD+ ratio is implicated in the formation of mitochondrial ROS, resulting in mitochondrial dysfunction (Murphy ).

## Oxidative and nitrative stress
Oxidative stress is a state of imbalance between free radicals and the cellular antioxidant system. ROS is not considered entirely detrimental to cells; in fact, moderate ROS is required to facilitate redox signaling responsible for maintaining cellular survival (Tan et al. ). Pathological conditions that increase ROS or reduce the cellular antioxidant capacity can precipitate oxidative stress (Schieber and Chandel ). Elevated levels of free radicals can damage the cellular structural components such as lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids. Mitochondria are the major source of ROS in the cell, particularly superoxide radicals produced as a result of oxidative phosphorylation. Under normal conditions, superoxide dismutase (SOD) neutralizes mitochondrial ROS, resulting in prevention of their accumulation (Shadel and Horvath ). NOXs are another source of superoxide radicals; they are required to maintain physiological functions and redox signaling in the cell (Magnani and Mattevi ). The vast majority of previous studies focusing on colistin-induced nephrotoxicity connect the development of intra-renal oxidative stress to colistin-mediated renal damage (Worakajit et al. ; Dai et al. , ; Ozyilmaz et al. ; Ceylan et al. ; Hanedan et al. ; Talih et al. ; Dumludag et al. ; Edrees et al. ; Vazin et al. ; Joo et al. ; Liu et al. ; Nasrullah et al. ; Alharbi et al. ).
A previous study has demonstrated that colistin induces the expression of NOX-4 through upregulation of TGF-β1 signaling in cultured HK- 2 cells (Jeong et al. ). Elevated NOX-4 has been correlated with the accumulation of ROS, activation of MAPKs (JNK, p38, and ERK) and apoptosis. Knockdown of NOX-4, pre-treatment with a selective NOX-4 inhibitor, or TGF-βR inhibitor attenuated oxidative stress, reduced the phosphorylation of JNK, p38 and ERK, reduced apoptotic markers such as Bax, and attenuated caspase −3 and −7 activities in cells exposed to colistin. In rats treated by colistin, the pharmacological inhibition of NOX-4 attenuated kidney injury through reduction in oxidative stress, as shown by the reduced level of 8-hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG), a sensitive marker for oxidative DNA damage, and reduced apoptosis as evidenced by a reduction in terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) positive nuclei compared to rats treated by colistin alone. In another study carried out in rats, treatment by CMS significantly increased the transcript levels of p22phox, the docking subunit for NOX, and of NOX-4 (Oktan et al. ). Treatment by an antioxidant alpha-lipoic acid significantly reduced the transcript levels of p22phox and NOX-4 in renal tissue of rats. Moreover, the upregulation of NOX-4 correlated with an increase in the level of cleaved caspase-3 that was attenuated by alpha-lipoic acid treatment. Reduced NOX-4 and cleaved caspase-3 levels correlated with an improvement in the tubular injury score and reduced the transcript and urinary levels of KIM-1. CMS increased the level of p-p38, TNFα, lipid peroxidation, and the total oxidant status in renal tissue of rats. Dai et al. implicated oxidative stress in playing a critical role in colistin-induced nephrotoxicity. The study in mice revealed that the level of crucial antioxidant enzymes SOD and catalase (CAT) were reduced in the renal tissue of colistin-treated animals compared to the control group (Dai et al. ). Moreover, the level of malondialdehyde (MDA), a by-product of lipid peroxidation, was increased. In addition, the authors reported a decrease in the level of reduced glutathione (GSH) and an increase in the level of indices indicative of nitrative stress such as nitric oxide (NO) and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). The accumulation of NO interferes with mitochondrial respiration, recruits pro-apoptotic proteins to the mitochondrial membrane, and induces apoptosis in RPTECs (Vattimo et al. ). A gene networking analysis undertaken in rats has revealed that the levels of Nrf2-mediated antioxidative stress genes and glutathione-mediated detoxification signaling were downregulated in colistin-treated rats compared to untreated control animals (Lee et al. ). In another study, the antioxidant pathways, including glutathione and methionine metabolism, were downregulated in the kidney gene expression profile of rats treated with 50 mg/kg CMS for one week compared to vehicle-treated animals (Long et al. ). A recent study undertaken by Xiao and colleagues reported that polymyxin B-mediated renal toxicity in NRK-52E cells and mice through reduced Nrf2-mediated antioxidative stress signaling (Xiao et al. ). Polymyxin B treatment of NRK-52E cells at a concentration of 1000 μM and of mice at 18.7 mg/kg reduced Nrf2 protein expression and reduced the protein expression of its downstream antioxidative stress enzyme NAD(P)H dehydrogenase [quinone] 1 (NQO1). The reduced Nrf2/NQO1 signaling in NRK-52E cells and in mice was accompanied by accumulation of ROS, reduced GSH content, reduced CAT, and SOD activities, and increased MDA level. Moreover, apoptosis was activated in NRK-52E cells and in mice kidney as evident by an increase in Bax protein level, reduced Bcl-2 level, and increase in caspase −9 and −3 levels. Nrf2 is a transcription factor responsible for the expression of antioxidant enzymes through its actions on the antioxidant response element including SOD, CAT, HO-1, and glutathione peroxidase (GPx) (Dai et al. ). In a different study, rats treated by colistin at a dose of 300,000 IU/Kg/day for six days demonstrated an increase in the level of renal tubular iNOS and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), suggesting that nitrative stress plays a role in colistin-induced nephrotoxicity (Ozyilmaz et al. ). Interestingly, co-administration of N-acetyl cysteine and colistin to rats in this study ameliorated colistin-induced nephrotoxicity and reversed the increase in the level of iNOS; however, the level of eNOS was not reversed, indicating that only iNOS plays a pathologic role in colistin-induced renal toxicity. In contrast, another study reported that the level of eNOS was reduced in colistin-treated rats compared to the control and was recovered in rats treated by N-acetylcysteine in combination with colistin (Ceylan et al. ). These findings are in accordance with studies that have shown that the excessive activation of iNOS is detrimental to renal tissue, whereas eNOS plays a protective role by maintaining mitochondrial biogenesis (Goligorsky et al. ; Nisoli et al. ; Valerio et al. ). The activation of iNOS is accompanied by the continuous production of large quantities of NO and accumulation of the highly malicious peroxynitrite anions that are involved in lipid peroxidation and DNA damage. In addition, high concentration of NO released by iNOS suppresses eNOS, thus negating its protective activity without altering its abundance. Several animal studies reported that the levels of crucial antioxidant enzymes such as SOD and CAT diminished; this was coupled with an increase in MDA and decreased level of GSH in renal tissue following treatment with colistin (Dai et al. , , ; Ceylan et al. ; Hanedan et al. ; Talih et al. ; Vazin et al. ; Aslan et al. ; Yavuz et al. ; Ghlissi et al. , ). The level of GSH is critical in this setting because it is responsible for neutralizing excessive ROS produced as a by-product of UPR-mediated upregulated oxidative protein folding in the ER (Chakravarthi et al. ; Molteni et al. ; Zhang et al. ). The RPTECs are sensitive to low levels of glutathione as they lack the ability to synthesize glutathione, and instead rely on the uptake of pre-formed glutathione from the bloodstream (Visarius et al. ). Azad et al. reported that colistin treatment dysregulated the taurine-hypotaurine pathway in HK-2 and NRK-52E cells (Azad et al. ). Taurine is an essential amino acid that has a role in the cellular redox homeostasis. Taurine is not synthesized by the RPTECs, but is instead up-taken from the extracellular environment through active transport (Chesney et al. ). The uptake of taurine requires the sodium-dependent protein transporter TauT. Studies have shown that the TauT gene is a direct transcriptional target of p53 (Han et al. , ). Increased p53 activation was found to repress the expression of the TauT protein. Colistin-induced nephrotoxicity is known to activate p53 in RPTECs, and it can be hypothesized that the findings of Azad et al. may be a result of the reduction in active uptake of taurine by RPTECs exposed to colistin. In a more recent study, the level of taurine in rats treated with 50 mg/kg CMS for four weeks was less compared to vehicle treated animals, indicating that colistin treatment invokes severe metabolic imbalance in the kidney (Long et al. ). The mechanism of the antioxidant activity of taurine is disputed, it is considered a scavenger of free radicals, a regulator of cellular antioxidant defenses, and an inhibitor of mitochondrial ROS (Seidel et al. ). Taurine supplementation reduced colistin-induced lipid peroxidation, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction in mice treated by colistin (Heidari et al. ).
Recently, in vitro and in vivo mechanistic studies were carried out to study the epigenetic mechanisms by which colistin downregulates the level of Nrf2-mediated oxidative stress genes. Under normal conditions, Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1) binds the Nrf2 in the cytosol; therefore, shortening the half-life of Nrf2 and reducing its translocation to the nucleus and the subsequent activation of the antioxidant response element (Kansanen et al. ). However, under oxidative stress, Keap1 is inactivated by oxidation of its cysteine residues; therefore, stabilizing Nrf2 and allowing its constitutive translocation to the nucleus. Wang et al. have reported that the level of the histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1), a chromatin modifying enzyme, was induced in kidney tissue obtained from mice following treatment with colistin at a dose of 15 mg/kg/day for seven days and in mouse renal tubular epithelial cells (Wang et al. ). The authors have implicated histone deacetylation by the enzyme HDAC1 at the histone 3 lysine 27 (H3K27) residue situated at the promoter region of Nrf2 in the epigenetic downregulation of Nrf2 expression and in reduced cellular antioxidant capacity, a consequence of blunted Nrf2 transcriptional activity. Kidney tissue obtained from mice and cells treated by colistin had a reduced level of nuclear Nrf2 protein expression compared to control, this correlated with a reduced expression of nuclear HO-1, an increase in MDA level, reduced SOD and CAT, increased ROS, increased caspase −3 and −9 activities, deterioration in renal function, and reduced cell viability. Moreover, knockdown of HDAC1 by small-interfering RNA ameliorated colistin toxicity in mouse tubular epithelial cells through an increase in the level of acetylation at the H3K27 and consequent increase in the nuclear expression of Nrf2, increase in nuclear HO-1, reduced oxidative stress, and reduced caspase −3 and −9 activities. The same lead author had previously implicated colistin in the downregulation of Nrf2 expression through a mechanism that involved the reduction of N6-adenosine methyltransferase (METTL3) activity (Wang et al. ). METTL3 is involved in N6-methyladenosine (m6a) modification of premature miR-873-5p; therefore, reduction in m6a modification of premature-miR-873-5p leads to blunted miR-873-5p maturation, a consequence of reduced recognition of the premature-miR-873-5p by the microprocessor complex subunit DiGeorge syndrome critical region 8 (DGCR8). Colistin treatment of mouse renal tubular epithelial cells increased the relative expression of pre- to mature miR-873-5p. Luciferase reporter assay confirmed that the target of mature miR-873-5p was the transcript of the Keap1 gene. Mature miR-873-5p negatively regulates the translation of Keap1 transcript, thus leading to a reduction in expression of Keap1; therefore, allowing cytosolic Nrf2 to translocate to the nucleus to enhance the transcription of the antioxidant response element. The reduction in the maturation of premature-miR-873-5p in colistin-treated mouse renal tubular epithelial cells correlated with a reduced cell viability, an increase in the expression of Keap1 and cytochrome-c, reduced expression of Nrf2 and HO-1, increased MDA level, reduced SOD, CAT, and GPx, increased caspase −3 and −9 activities, increased level of ROS, and DNA fragmentation. Overexpression of METTL3 or treating cells with miR-873-5p mimic ameliorated colistin-induced toxicity, reduced the expression of Keap1, and increased the expression of Nrf2. In another more recent research, kidneys extracted from colistin-treated mice at a dose of 15 mg/kg two times daily for seven days had a reduced METTL3 level than the control animals, which correlated with an increase in apoptotic indices (Xia et al. ). Similar to the previous study, the reduced METTL3 level correlated with a reduced m6a-mediated RNA modifications. However, unlike the previous study, which linked the reduced m6a modifications to a reduced DGCR8-mediated maturation of the premature-miR-873-5p. This study focused on the positive correlation between METTL3 and DGCR8 levels at gene and protein levels and their negative correlation with apoptosis indices. The kidneys of colistin-treated mice had lower METTL3 and DGCR8 than the control animals. Moreover, the level of Bax, Apaf-1, Cytochrome-c, cleaved caspase-3, −9, and −8 increased, whereas the level of Bcl-2 decreased; thus, indicating the activation of apoptosis. In addition, ROS was higher in the colistin-treated group than in the control animals. The high level of ROS is due to the reduced transcriptional activity of Nrf2, a consequence of an increase in Keap1, leading to a reduced antioxidant capacity in the kidney of colistin-treated animals. The reduced antioxidant capacity was evident by the reduced SOD, HO-1, and GPx and the increased MDA and hydrogen peroxide levels. The pathological increase in ROS can damage essential organelles in the cell leading to activation of apoptosis. In line with this, the ultrastructure of the kidneys extracted from colistin-treated animals exhibited the typical morphological features of apoptosis, including chromatin marginalization and nuclear pyknosis. Furthermore, the typical trapezoidal bands were only evident in the colistin-treated group, indicating that DNA fragmentation has occurred in this group consistent with the activation of apoptosis. In a different study, Shafik et al. reported that colistin treatment of rats at a dose of 300,000 IU/Kg per day for six days reduced the expression of Nrf2 compared to the control animals (Shafik et al. ). The authors linked the reduced Nrf2 expression to the downregulation of miR-205 expression leading to an increased expression of Egl-9 family hypoxia-inducible factor 2 (EGLN2). The increased expression of EGLN2 increases the degradation of HIF1 leading to reduced Nrf2 expression and blunting the GSH content and reducing SOD activity. Pre-treatment of rats with rosuvastatin followed by colistin upregulated miR-205 expression, reduced EGLN2 expression, and restored Nrf2 protein expression to ameliorate colistin-induced nephrotoxicity in this model.

## DNA damage, cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, and necrosis
Studies in in vitro and in vivo models of polymyxin B-induced nephrotoxicity have confirmed that DNA damage is involved in polymyxin-mediated renal toxicity. HK-2 cells treated by 12.5–100 μM polymyxin B for 24 h showed an increased frequency of micronuclei formation, abberant mitotic events, and multi-lobular nuclei compared to control untreated cells (Yun et al. ). Polymyxin B-treated HK-2 cells were shown to have concentration-dependent defects in chromosomal seggregation. Missegregated chromosomes were observed in the form of chromosomal bridging and lagging chromosomes. Both polymyxin B-treated HK-2 cells and mice showed a concentration/dose- and time- dependent increase in double strand DNA breaks (DSBs), as evidenced by increased gamma-H2AX (γ-H2AX) staining, a sensitive marker for DSBs, compared to control untreated cells and animals. Interestingly, HK-2 cells treated by low concentration polymyxin B (25 μM) failed to activate apoptosis, as shown by unaltered caspase −3 and −9 activities compared to control, despite showing significant DNA damage (Yun et al. ). The authors concluded that these apparent polymyxin B-induced mitotic defects are an early event and not a downstream effect of apoptosis. The expression levels of γ-H2AX, CHOP, and BiP increased in a time-dependent manner in polymyxin B-treated HK-2 cells at a concentration of 25 μM, indicating that even at this low concentration polymyxin B does indeed stress the ER in a time-dependent manner. DNA electrophoretic migration assay revealed that polymyxin B at a dose of 25 μM and higher significantly reduced DNA migration compared to the control. This signifies direct binding of polymyxin B to DNA. This is further corroborated by earlier studies that have reported direct interactions between polymyxin B and DNA (Kong et al. ; Wang et al. ). DNA is negatively charged, therefore, electrostatic interactions with the positively charged diaminobutyric acid residues of polymyxins are plausible. The presence of five diaminobutyric acid residues in polymyxin B may lead to DNA crosslinking and potentially precipitate chromosomal instability and mitotic defects. The importance of this study is clear, it has demonstrated the ability of polymyxins to cause early direct DNA damage and mitotic defects prior to accumulation of ROS, cell cycle arrest, and induction of apoptosis. This study also demonstrates the high sensitivity of the ER to low concentrations of polymyxin B. In a stressed state, the ER can interfere with DNA repair by increasing the proteasomal degradation of RAD51, an enzyme involved in the repair of DSBs (Yamamori et al. ). In a different study, NRK-52E cells treated by polymyxin B at a concentration of 1 mM for 24 h showed an increase in caspase activation as evidenced by positive caspase substrate Red-VAD-FMK staining, DNA breakage as shown by detection of TUNEL positive nuclei, and externalization of phosphatidylserine evidenced by positive Annexin V staining (Azad et al. ). Concentration- and time- dependent increase in apoptosis was noted in HK-2 and NRK-52E cells using fluoresence-activated cell sorting and Annexin V/Propidium iodide staining. Minimal apoptosis was noted at lower concentrations of polymyxin B in agreement with the previously described study of Yun et al. (Yun et al. ), however, a sharp increase in apoptosis was detected following treatment of HK-2 and NRK-52E cells with higher concentrations of polymyxin B as evidenced in this study (Azad et al. ). These findings clearly show that at low concentrations polymyxin B directly triggers DNA damage, but this damage is not enough to induce apoptosis, probably due to intact, albeit suboptimal DNA repair. However, at high concentrations apoptosis is more pronounced due to activation of the ER and mitochondrial death pathways, and subsequent oxidative stress causing disseminated irreparable oxidative DNA damage and activation of p53-dependent apoptotic pathways.
High level of ROS leads to oxidative mitochondrial and nuclear DNA damage, thus sensitizing cells to apoptosis (Yun et al. ; Yakes and Van Houten ; Indo et al. ). In this regard, Yousef et al. have demonstrated that rats treated by colistin for five days had a significantly higher percentage of apoptotic cells, as revealed by TUNEL assay and fragmented DNA (Yousef et al. ). Similar results were obtained from NRK-52E cells treated by colistin for 24 h. Co-administration of ascorbic acid with colistin significantly reduced renal cellular apoptosis in both models. The same author had demonstrated that co-administration of colistin at increasing doses (0.5 to 4.0 mg/kg) and melatonin at a dose of 5 mg/kg to rats led to the reduction in renal damage than colistin alone, as indicated by the reduced level of urinary NAG and imporvement of histological abnormalities that were evident in the colistin-treated group (Yousef et al. ). The significance of colistin-induced apoptosis was confirmed in another study that reported the presence of significantly higher apoptotic cells in colistin-treated rats compared to the control (Arslan et al. ). In this study, co-administration of colistin and luteolin reduced the level of apoptotic cells and ameliorated colistin-induced nephrotoxicity as evident by the imporvement in renal histological damage. The antioxidant activity of ascorbic acid, melatonin, and luteolin may partly explain the reduced renal damage in animals and cells exposed to colistin, and highlights the role of oxidative stress in colistin-induced nephrotoxicity. In another study, a dose-dependent increase in the level of 8-OHdG was noted in the kidney tissue of mice treated by colistin, indicating that colistin induces oxidative DNA damage (Dai et al. ). Damaged mitochondrial DNA impairs mitochondrial bioenergetics, resulting in loss of ATP production and mitochondrial dysfunction (Singh et al. ). Damaged nuclear DNA activates the tumor suppressor p53 through activation of DNA damage-related kinases (Lanz et al. ). Transcriptionally active p53 activates target genes involved in cell cycle arrest and DNA repair (Lakin and Jackson ). The cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 1 A (CDKN1A)/p21 gene is a direct target of p53 transcriptional activity. The expression of p53 and p21 increased in a dose-dependent manner in renal tissue of mice treated by colistin compared to control animals (Dai et al. ; Eadon et al. ). Eadon et al. revealed that the cells in renal tissue isolated from mice treated by 16 mg/kg/day colistin for 15 days were arrested at the G2/M phase (Eadon et al. ). The authors employed microarray analysis to study the differential expression of genes in renal tissue of mice treated by colistin compared to untreated animals. Genes encoding cyclin B1, cyclin dependent kinase-1 (CDK-1) and CDKN1A/p21 were upregulated in the renal tissue of mice treated by colistin. The cyclin B1- CDK-1 complex is responsible for the progression of the cell cycle at the G2/M checkpoint (Jang et al. ). CDKN1A/p21 phosphorylates/dephosphorylates cyclin B1- CDK-1 complex at specific residues leading to its inactivation and subsequent arrest of the cell cycle at the G2 phase. The upregulated expression of cyclin B1, CDK-1 and CDKN1A/p21 genes, along with the unaltered expression of genes encoding cyclin dependent kinase-2, cyclin D1 and cyclin E1 point towards a G2/M cell cycle arrest. In support of this conclusion, the authors noted that cyclin B1 was localized to a higher degree in the nucleus. This is consistent with changes observed at the beginning of the M phase of the cell cycle, cyclin B1 translocates to the nucleus to drive the progression of cell cycle at the G2/M checkpoint before returning to normal levels once the cell has progressed through M phase. Eadon et al. detected proliferating cell nuclear antigen in the renal tissue of mice treated by colistin for 3 days (Eadon et al. ). The authors interpreted this finding as a sign of early subclinical renal injury due to blockade of DNA replication at the S phase. The authors concluded that p53 upregulates p21 to halt the progression of the cell cycle at the G2/M checkpoint in order to allow time for DNA repair mechanisms to fix the damaged DNA before committing to the energy consuming M phase (Fig.  a). In a more recent study, microarray gene expression analysis of kidney tissue extracted from rats treated by 50 mg/kg colistin for seven days revealed that p53 signaling pathway was upregulated compared to control animals (Yen et al. ). In addition, genes related to cell cycle disturbance and apoptosis were upregulated. The authors linked the upregulation of these processes to ROS accumulation. 
Irreparable DNA damage induces p53-mediated apoptosis through the extrinsic or death receptor-mediated and intrinsic apoptotic pathways (Aubrey et al. ). Mechanistic studies in different in vitro and in vivo models have reported the activation of the death receptor apoptotic pathway in polymyxin-treated cultured murine cells and in renal tissue of mice treated by colistin. In mice treated by colistin, the expression levels of the Fas ligand (FasL) and receptor (FasR) were increased in a dose-dependent manner compared to control (Dai et al. ). Increased signaling through Fas receptor activates Fas-associated protein with death domain (FADD), which subsequently activates caspase 8. The activated caspase cleaves cytosolic BH3 interacting-domain death agonist (Bid) to form truncated Bid (tBid), which translocates to the mitochondria to activate Bax-dependent MOMP and release of apoptogenic factors (Tait and Green ). The expression levels of FADD, cleaved caspase-8, and tBid increased in a dose-dependent manner in mice treated by colistin (Dai et al. ). Similarly, polymyxin-treated NRK-52E cells demonstrated a concentration- and time-dependent increase in the expression of FasL and subsequent activation of downstream pro-apoptotic signaling (Azad et al. ). It is important to note that CHOP can also induce apoptosis through the death receptor pathway (Hu et al. ). Unsurprisingly, the death receptor pathway appeared to be the most sensitive pathway to trigger apoptosis in NRK-52E cells treated by polymyxin B (Azad et al. ). This was evidenced by the marked activation of caspase-8 as compared to caspase-9 in polymyxin B-treated NRK-52E cells. Another study in mice treated by colistin shared a similar view (Dai et al. ). Studies have also shown that p53 is a positive transcriptional modulator of proapoptotic BH3-only proteins, in particular PUMA. Upon activation, PUMA inhibits Bcl-2 allowing Bax to translocate to the mitochondrial outer membrane to initiate the caspase-dependent mitochondrial apoptotic pathway (Fig.  b) (Nakano and Vousden ; Yu and Zhang ). Moreover, cytosolic p53 can directly translocate to the mitochondrial outer membrane to initiate MOMP, independent of PUMA and Bax (Vaseva and Moll ). However, the role of cytosolic p53 has not been elucidated in colistin-induced nephrotoxicity. The mitochondrial non-caspase dependent death pathway can be activated by mitochondrial calpain. Mitochondrial calpain is activated by an increase in mitochondrial Ca2+ level leading to direct calpain-mediated cleavage of the peptide bonds tethering AIF to the inner mitochondrial membrane (Dai et al. ; Tait and Green ). Additionally, AIF can be freed, in a context-dependent manner, by the action of poly (ADP-ribose), a polymer produced as a result of PARP-1 hyperactivation secondary to severe oxidative DNA damage (Wang et al. ). Once released AIF translocates to the nucleus where it binds to DNA causing chromatin condensation and DNA fragmentation. The expression level of AIF was increased in renal tissue of mice treated by colistin compared to untreated mice (Dai et al. ). RPTECs can undergo necrotic cell death secondary to a bioenergetic crisis mediated by the depletion of NAD+ (Devalaraja-Narashimha et al. ). PARP-1, a NAD + -dependent DNA repair enzyme is rapidly recruited to the DNA in order to repair DSBs caused by oxidative DNA damage (Caron et al. ). Disseminated oxidative DNA damage can cause PARP-1 hyperactivation. The hyperactivation of PARP-1 consumes the cellular stores of NAD+ leading to arrest of cellular respiration and depletion of ATP level (Zhang et al. ). Apoptosis, an energy consuming process, is blocked in cells lacking ATP, whereas necrosis is energy-free (Wiman ). Dai et al. reported an increased expression of PARP-1 in mice treated by colistin at a dose of 15 mg/kg/day for seven days (Dai et al. ). The authors linked the increase in the level of DNA repair enzyme with an increase in oxidative DNA damage, as evidenced by high level of 8-OHdG in kidney tissue of mice treated by colistin. The renal expression of cleaved PARP-1, a marker of apoptotic cell death, was also increased in a dose-dependent manner in mice treated by colistin compared to control (Dai et al. ). It can be speculated that exposure of RPTECs to very high concentrations of colistin is likely to cause PARP-1 hyperactivation due to massive oxidative DNA damage, and consequent NAD+ and ATP depletion, resulting in necrotic death. On the other hand, exposure to lower concentrations that preserve the cellular ATP level is likely to lead to apoptotic cell death.
Recent studies have highlighted the role of regulated necrosis in renal tubular cell death (Berghe et al. ; Wang and Yang ; Wang et al. ; Linkermann et al. ). It is now evident that similar to apoptosis, necrotic cell death is a form of programmed cell death that can be pharmacologically manipulated. It is increasingly likely that different forms of regulated necrosis such as parthanatos, necroptosis, pyroptosis, ferroptosis, and mitochondrial permeability transition-dependent regulated necrosis are involved in colistin-induced acute tubular necrosis. A recently published article reported that ferroptosis is involved in polymyxin B-induced nephrotoxicity (Li et al. ). RNA sequencing of HK-2 cells treated with 100 μM polymyxin B for 24 h revealed that the gene expression of glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4), a critical ferroptosis regulatory enzyme, was reduced compared to control cells. This was accompanied with an increase in MDA level, reduced GSH level, and an increased Fe2+ level. In addition, bioinformatics analysis of the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) identified ferroptosis as the most highly enriched pathway related to the DEGs. Moreover, pre-treatment of HK-2 cells with the ZVAD-FMK (an apoptosis inhibitor) and Fer-1 (a ferroptosis inhibitor) followed by treatment with 100 μM polymyxin B recovered cell viability to levels close to the control, indicating that both apoptosis and ferroptosis are involved in polymyxin B-mediated cell viability loss. RNA sequencing and protein expression study revealed that polymyxin B treatment upregulated p53 mRNA and protein levels (Li et al. ). p53 induces ferroptosis through reducing the expression of SLC7A11 and increasing the expression of transferrin receptor 1 (TFR1). Silencing p53 in polymyxin B-treated HK-2 cells reversed the effects on SLC7A11 and TFR1 and blocked ferroptosis. Moreover, p53 silencing increased GPX4, reduced MDA level, increased GSH level, and reduced Fe2+ level. Overexpressing SLC7A11 and silencing TFR1 had similar effects as p53 silencing on blocking ferroptosis and its downstream effects in polymyxin B-treated HK-2 cells. Metallothionein-1 (MT-1), a cysteine-rich protein involved in metal detoxification and ROS scavenging, was upregulated in polymyxin B-treated HK-2 cells (Li et al. ). MT-1 is upregulated as a protective response against ferroptosis. Urine from polymyxin B-treated AKI patients had a higher level of MT-1 and iron compared to normal group. The levels of MT-1 and iron recovered to normal levels when the renal function of AKI patients recovered. A similar finding was noted by Weber et al. they reported that the metallothionein family was transcriptionally upregulated in a human kidney 3-D microphysiologic system exposed to 50 μM polymyxin B for 48 h (Weber et al. ). Moreover, genes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis were upregulated in this study, which may possibly denote a protective response against ferroptosis. Recent findings have identified a link between cholesterol biosynthesis (mevalonate pathway) and ferroptosis inhibition (Sun et al. ). The metabolites of cholesterol biosynthesis, including cholesterol and desmosterol, increase the resistance of cells to ferroptosis through increasing the intracellular levels of squalene and coenzyme Q. These intermediates protect against ferroptosis by reducing the lipid peroxidation, which is a hallmark of ferroptosis. In a different study, Li et al. reported that 100 μM polymyxin B and two less nephrotoxic analogues (FADDI 251 and FADDI 287) commonly upregulated pathways involved with the metallothionein family, indicating that it may be a part of an early generalized stress response against polymyxin accumulation in HK-2 cells (Li et al. ). In another study, treatment of HK-2 cells with 100 μM polymyxin B for 24 h reduced the level of silent information regulator 1 (SIRT1) leading to an increased acetylation and activation of p53, which mediated the downstream effects of ferroptosis, including reduced GPX4 expression, reduced SLC7A11 expression, increased MDA levels, increased Fe2 + level, and reduced cell viability (Yu et al. ). The importance of SIRT1 in this study was confirmed by the failure of baicalein pre-treatment, a SIRT1 activator, from rescuing SIRT1 silenced HK-2 cells exposed to 100 μM polymyxin B for 24 h from p53 acetylation and ferroptosis.

## Autophagy
Macroautophagy or autophagy is an essential conserved biological process that directs cellular components and damaged organelles to lysosomal degradation (Klionsky ). Autophagy is activated in response to oxidative stress to repair the damage caused to cellular components by excessive ROS. Autophagy is also activated by starvation or amino acid deprivation, to recycle cellular components and provide essential building blocks required to sustain metabolic demands of the cell (Levine and Kroemer ). ROS and AMP induce and sustain autophagy through the activation of AMPK and inhibition of mTORC1, allowing for the activation and recruitment of UNC51-like kinase 1 (ULK-1) complex and initiation of autophagy (Filomeni et al. ). Autophagy is closely interrelated to all three canonical arms of the UPR (Høyer-Hansen and Jäättelä ). A complex series of events ensue, Beclin-1, a component of the class III PI3K complex, is involved in the initial nucleation phase that includes the formation of pre-autophagosomes. The microtubule-associated protein 1 Light Chain 3B-I (LC3B-I) is converted to microtubule-associated protein 1 Light Chain 3B-II (LC3B-II) to drive the elongation phase and to form a mature autophagosome (Glick et al. ). The mature autophagosome fuses with lysosome forming the autophagolysosome, followed by degradation of the targeted components. An increase in the levels of Beclin-1 and LC3B-II/LC3B-I ratio were detected in renal tissue of mice treated with colistin at a dose of 7.5 mg/kg/day for 7 days compared to untreated mice (Dai et al. ). This is consistent with electron microscopy imaging that reported an increase in autophagolysosomal presence in renal tissue of mice treated with the low-dose colistin regimen (7.5 mg/kg/day for seven days). In contrast, renal tissue obtained from mice treated with the high-dose colistin regimen (15 mg/kg/day) for the same period had a lower expression of Beclin-1 and a much lower LC3B-II/LC3B-I ratio, indicating reduced autophagic flux in mice treated with the higher dose colistin regimen (Dai et al. ). These findings can be related to heightened mTORC1 signaling that accompanies the activation of maladaptive UPR signaling pathways in the tubular epithelial cells of mice exposed to excessive stress imposed by the high-dose colistin regimen (Appenzeller-Herzog and Hall ). The increase in mTORC1 signaling is associated with reduced autophagic flux, as mTORC1 negatively regulates the ULK-1 complex (Jung et al. ). An interesting study investigating the relationship between ER stress, autophagy, and apoptosis has shown that mTORC1 signaling plays a critical role in balancing life and death under the UPR (Kapuy et al. ). Overactivation of mTORC1 during the maladaptive phase of the UPR leads to reduced autophagic flux, which is cytoprotective during the adaptive phase of the UPR; thus, the balance shifts towards apoptosis. Inhibition of mTORC1 extends the period in which autophagy is active, increasing cell viability. Interestingly, marked ER expansion was observed in mice treated with the high-dose colistin regimen. ER expansion can accompany the activation of the UPR to increase ER protein folding capacity to reestablish proteostasis (Bommiasamy et al. ; Bernales et al. ). The expansion of the ER can also signify tighter connection to mitochondria (Zheng et al. ). This is required to facilitate the movement of Ca2+ from the ER to mitochondria through the mitochondrial-associated ER membranes. The UPR controls the balance between autophagy and apoptosis in stressed cells. It is likely that the increased stress imposed by the high-dose colistin regimen shifted the UPR in favor of apoptosis, as evidenced by an increase in expression of CHOP, Bax, and cleaved caspases, resulting in reduced autophagic flux (Dai et al. ; Matsumoto et al. ). In this respect, it is hypothesized that JNK acts in a dual manner. It aids in activating autophagy during the initial pro-survival phase of the UPR to aid in cell survival through phosphorylating Bcl-2 and freeing Beclin-1 to initiate autophagy. However, if the stress persists or is beyond autophagic repair, JNK activates Bax mitochondrial translocation by inactivating Bcl-2. Thus, JNK serves as a promotor of autophagy and apoptosis, depending on the severity and duration of the damage (Lu et al. ; Wei et al. ). The involvement of autophagy in colistin-induced nephrotoxicity was also noted in an in vitro study in HK-2 cells (Lee et al. ). Colistin-treated HK-2 cells revealed a significant increase in the ratio of LC3-II to LC3-I, 2 h post-treatment. Suppression of autophagosome formation increased colistin-induced damage in Hk-2 cells, suggesting that autophagy is activated in HK-2 cells to protect against colistin-mediated injury. Furthermore, acridine orange staining revealed a considerably higher fluorescence signal in colistin-treated HK-2 cells compared to control, indicating higher autophagolysosomal formation in this group. Induction of autophagy by treatment with rapamycin, an mTOR inhibitor, reduced the activities of caspase −3 and −7 in colistin-treated HK-2 cells and attenuated apoptosis. Conversely, treatment with the autophagy inhibitor, 3-Methyladenine, increased the activity of caspase −3 and −7 and elevated the proportion of apoptotic cells in the colistin-treated group compared to control (Table  ).
 
N/A; Not Applicable, HtpG; High-temperature protein G, CMS; Colistin methanesulfonate, HSF1; Heat shock factor 1, Hsp; Heat shock protein, Nrf2; Nuclear factor-erythroid 2 related factor 2, eIF2; eukaryotic initiation factor 2, eIF4; eukaryotic initiation factor 4, p70S6K; p70S6 kinase, mTOR; mechanistic target of rapamycin, ERS; ER stress, BiP; Immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein, ATF6; activating transcription factor 6, CHOP, C/EBP homologous protein, p-JNK; phosphorylated c-Jun N-terminal kinase, MMP; mitochondrial membrane potential, MPT; mitochondrial permeability transition, FADD; Fas-associated protein with death domain, Bid; BH3 interacting-domain death agonist, Bax; Bcl2-associated x protein, cyt-c; cytochrome-c, PARP-1; Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase, Bcl-2; B-cell lymphoma-2; AIF; apoptosis-inducing factor; 8-OHdG; 8-hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosine; LC3B-II; microtubule-associated protein 1 Light Chain 3B-II, MAPKs; mitogen-activated protein kinases, miR-205; microRNA-205, EGLN2; Egl-9 family hypoxia-inducible factor 2, GSH; reduced glutathione, SOD; superoxide dismutase, CDK-1; Cyclin dependent kinase-1, MMP; Mitochondrial membrane potential, MPTP; Mitochondrial permeability transition pore, TUNEL; Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling, ROS; Reactive oxygen species, TGF-β1; Transforming growth factor-β1, NOX-4; NADPH oxidase-4, p-ERK; Phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase, ATP; Adenosine triphosphate, iNOS; Nitric oxide synthase, NF-κB; Nuclear factor kappa B, IL-1β; Interleukin 1 beta, TNF-α; Tumor necrosis factor-alpha, MDA; Malondialdehyde, NO; Nitric oxide, HO-1; Hemeoxygenase-1, CAT; Catalase, eNOS; Endothelial nitric oxide synthase, PHLPP2; PH domain and leucine-rich repeat protein phosphatase, GSK3β; Glycogen synthase kinase-3β, MMP3; Matrix metalloproteinase 3, KIM-1; Kidney injury molecule-1, METTL3; N6-adenosine methyltransferase, m6a; N6-methyladenosine, DGCR8; DiGeorge syndrome critical region 8, GPx; Glutathione peroxidase, H2O2; Hydrogen peroxide, Keap1; Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1, Apaf-1; Apoptotic protease activating factor-1, HDAC1; Histone deacetylase-1, TLR4; Toll-like receptor 4, NF-κB/p65; Nuclear factor kappa-B subunit p65, NGF-β; Nerve growth factor-β, NT-3; Neurotrophin-3.

## Cross organelle stress response disruption: A possible unifying mechanism for colistin nephrotoxicity
The concept of CORE has gained traction in recent years. It is increasingly appreciated that cellular organelles are dependent on each other to function properly under normal and stress conditions. Organelle stress is now considered a central player in the pathophysiology of kidney disease (previously reviewed here (Hasegawa and Inagi )). The mitochondrial-associated ER membranes have emerged as the focal point where the CORE resides and maintains cellular proteostasis in the face of stressors that perturb the cellular protein folding capacity (Inagi ). The CORE coordinates ER protein folding with mitochondrial function, allowing cells to maintain critical proteins in their folded functional structures (Kaufman and Malhotra ). Disruption of the CORE secondary to intraorganellar stress precipitated by colistin, can theoretically provide a unifying mechanism that incorporates colistin-induced ERS and mitochondrial dysfunction along with oxidative stress. This view is supported by an imaging experiment that has reported the partial intracellular colocalization of polymyxins with the ER and mitochondria in NRK-52E cells (Yun et al. ). In this experiment, Yun and colleagues designed and synthesized several polymyxin fluorescent probes in order to trace their accumulation in NRK-52E cells. The authors detected an increase in apoptotic indices that positively correlated with the accumulation of the probes inside the cells. The probes accumulated mainly in the cytosol and around the nucleus. Interestingly, one of the probes lacking a N-terminal fatty acyl tail showed very low accumulation and induction of apoptotic death in NRK-52E cells even at a concentration of 1 mM (Yun et al. ). Accumulation of the probes in the ER and mitochondria indicate the involvement of these organelles in polymyxin-induced tubular epithelial cell damage. The CORE is at the heart of ER-mitochondrial network and disruption of CORE by accumulation of polymyxins in the ER and mitochondria is likely responsible for cell death (Malhotra and Kaufman ). Moreover, an in vitro study in HK-2 cells utilizing the major lipopeptide components of polymyxin B (polymyxin B1 and polymyxin B2) and colistin (colistin A and colistin B) has revealed a higher, more than three-fold, apoptotic activity of polymyxin B1 and colistin A compared to polymyxin B2 and colistin B, respectively (Roberts et al. ). Polymyxin B1 and colistin A contain an extra carbon in their terminal fatty acyl tail, therefore, the tails of polymyxin B1 and colistin A are more hydrophobic compared to polymyxin B2 and colistin B. The increased hydrophobicity of the fatty acyl tails contribute to the differential apoptotic activity of the lipopeptide components. This observation can be linked to an increased accumulation of the polymyxin components with the more hydrophobic N-terminal fatty acyl tail, as well as their ability to perturb the ER and mitochondrial function, thus precipitating intraorganellar stress. The higher hydrophobicity of the N-terminal fatty acyl tails of polymyxin B1 and colistin A allow them to accumulate to a higher degree in tubular epithelial cells, and to colocalize with the ER and mitochondria to a higher degree perturbing their function and precipitating cell death. A study by Li et al. reported that the less hydrophobic analogues of polymyxin B (FADDI-251 and FADDI-287) were less toxic to HK-2 cells than polymyxin B and led to reduced perturbation of HK-2 cell transcriptomics, confirming the importance of polymyxin hydrophobicity in mediating its nephrotoxicity (Li et al. ). In the face of perturbed proteostasis the ER upregulates oxidative protein folding, thus increasing the energy demand and in turn mitochondrial respiration through an increase in Ca2+ flux to the mitochondria (Fig.  ) (Kaufman and Malhotra ; Knupp et al. ; Bravo-Sagua et al. ; Rainbolt et al. ). Mitochondrial Ca2+ overload and unresolved ERS increases the production of mitochondrial ROS (Peng and Jou ). The accumulation of mitochondrial ROS causes mitochondrial dysfunction and impairs mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (Morris et al. ). Failure to reestablish proteostasis leads to mitochondrial fragmentation and apoptosis secondary to upregulation of CHOP, inactivation of Akt, and the perturbation of cellular Ca2+ homeostasis. These events contribute to cellular oxidative stress, a result of excessive ROS produced during UPR-mediated upregulation of ER oxidative protein folding. Moreover, upregulated protein folding by the enzyme protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) contributes to an increase in the expression of ER NOXs (Zhang et al. ; Jaronen et al. ). Cytosolic Ca2+ and ROS produced from the aforementioned perturbations activate cytosolic Drp1, likely, through post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation or S-Nitrolysation, allowing its recruitment to the outer mitochondrial membrane, resulting in mitochondrial fragmentation, mitochondrial cristae remodelling, increased insertion of Bax, and release of the mitochondrial apoptogenic factors to the cytosol (Igwebuike et al. ). Thus, proteotoxicity that occurs secondary to intraorganellar stress, hyperoxidized ER, and mitochondrial-specific oxidative stress, elicited by colistin-mediated perturbations of chaperone activity, reduced ribosomal fidelity, and interference with the cellular protein folding machinery, can prove to be a unifying mechanism for colistin-induced nephrotoxicity. The abovementioned hypothesis is in line with the previously mentioned study of Lee and colleagues, wherein the authors implicated colistin-induced proteotoxicity in precipitating colistin-mediated renal damage (Lee et al. ). It is also in line with a landmark study undertaken by Igwebuike et al. that has utilized RNA interference technique to discern the pathways affected by gentamicin exposure in HK-2 cells (Igwebuike et al. ). The authors implicated gentamicin-induced perturbations of CORE in initiating the nephrotoxicity associated with gentamicin. Geranylgeranylacetone, a HSF1 activator, reversed CORE disruption associated with gentamicin exposure, reduced the upregulation of CHOP, maintained healthy mitochondrial morphology, reduced ER-mitochondrial dissociation and reduced oxidative stress in HK-2 cells. This view is supported by an earlier study showing that gentamicin inhibits Hsp70 protein folding capacity by interfering with substrate recognition, resulting in loss of its chaperone activity (Yamamoto et al. ). Studies have also shown that gentamicin inhibits the chaperone activity of calreticulin and PDI, molecular chaperones responsible for proteostasis in the ER (Horibe et al. , ). In addition, gentamicin inhibits the chaperone activity of Hsp73 (Yamamoto et al. ; Miyazaki et al. ). The degree of inhibition of the chaperone activity of Hsp73 by different aminoglycosides correlated well with their previously reported in vivo nephrotoxic activity. In this study, gentamicin was second to neomycin in the degree of interaction with Hsp73 (Yamamoto et al. ). In a different study, Denamur et al. reported that different aminoglycosides, delivered by direct electroporation into the cytosol of pig renal tubular epithelial cells (LLC-PK1) were able to induce the apoptosis of these cells (Denamur et al. ). The apoptotic potential of cytosolic aminoglycosides correlated well with their renal toxicity in humans and in previous animal studies (El Mouedden et al. ). Intriguingly, the nephrotoxic potential of aminoglycosides correlated with the number of cationic amino groups present in their structure (Denamur et al. ). The highest nephrotoxic aminoglycosides were neomycin followed by gentamicin containing six and five amino groups, respectively. Less nephrotoxic aminoglycosides included isepamicin and amikacin both with four amino groups. It is important to note that in this study the antibiotics were delivered directly into the cytosol of LLC-PK1 cells; therefore, the cationic charge did not play a part in the accumulation of different aminoglycosides in the cells and in their subsequent toxicity. Thus, it can be concluded that the polycationic nature of these antibiotics and of polymyxins plays a role in interactions with intracellular components, following their accumulation in renal tubular cells. Further studies are required to delineate the relationship between the polycationic nature of these antibiotics and their intracellular apoptogenic potential. Though conclusions can be drawn from previous studies that have shown that these antibiotics can interfere with the chaperone activity of different molecular chaperones precipitating ERS. In support of this, ER preconditiong has been shown to afford protection to different renal tubular epithelial cell lines against a wide range of nephrotoxic drugs (Peyrou and Cribb ). ER preconditioning increases the resting-state folding capacity and the level of BiP, therefore permitting a reduction in activation of apoptosis upon introduction of the nephrotoxicant (Erguler et al. ). These studies further confirm the notion that the ER plays a major role in drug-induced renal toxicity. The groundbreaking study undertaken by Igwebuike et al. may have far-reaching implications (Igwebuike et al. ). Disruption of CORE can prove to be a unifying mechanism for drug-induced AKI, in particular those nephrotoxins that accumulate in the RPTECs. Studies around CORE disruption and its implications in AKI, may eventually pave the way for the discovery of protective agents that may exert a near-universal protective activity against drug-induced renal damage. The RPTECs reabsorb the majority of filtered protein from the glomerular filtrate, and are therefore highly sensitive to CORE disruption, reduced chaperone function, accumulation of unfolded protein, and impairment of degradation of functionally compromised protein (Birn and Christensen ). Proteotoxicity that results from CORE disruption can prove to be a common pathologic phenomenon that culminates in oxidative stress and downstream signaling events that lead to RPTECs death (Igwebuike ). Undertaking similar experiments to the one reported by Igwebuike et al. using different nephrotoxic drugs will prove critical in establishing a common mechanism involved in the death of RPTECs and drug-induced renal injury. 

## Conclusions and future perspectives
Colistin has emerged as a drug of last resort in the post-antibiotic era. Lack of experience with dosing, narrow therapeutic index and risk of mortality among intensive care patients contribute to the challenges faced by physicians when confronted by colistin-induced nephrotoxicity (Nation et al. ). In addition, this nephrotoxicity is associated with a high economic burden, as a consequence of an increased hospital length of stay and hemodialysis (Tuon et al. ). Therefore, it is of paramount importance to study the molecular mechanisms involved in this limiting adverse effect. Research undertaken in the past decade have contributed to our partial understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in colistin-induced nephrotoxicity, but there is still more to unravel. The execution of renal tubular epithelial cell death is a complex process that involves the cell cycle, apoptosis, necrosis and also autophagy. Multiple pathways including but not limited to, the unfolded protein response, mitochondrial apoptotic pathways and nuclear events, result in the activation of common downstream signaling pathways that lead to cell death. In this review, we have presented and connected the majority of the currently available, albeit limited, mechanistic literature concerning colistin-induced nephrotoxicity. Oxidative stress is a common finding in nearly all of the previous studies. It is not surprising, given the high mitochondrial load present in the tubular epithelial cells and high protein synthesis undertaken by these cells, coupled with the fact that these cells reabsorb and concentrate xenobiotics within them. Previous studies have focused on antioxidants to ameliorate renal damage in animal and cell culture models of colistin-induced nephrotoxicity (previously reviewed here, (Nation et al. ; Jafari and Elyasi )). Although these studies have revealed antioxidant-mediated mitigative effects in animal models, these effects have not been replicated in clinical studies (Gai et al. ). In previous clinical studies, ascorbic acid, N-acetylcysteine and vitamin E all failed to provide significant amelioration of nephrotoxicity when co-administered with colistin (Bozkurt et al. ; Sirijatuphat et al. ; Samsami et al. ). Another culprit is the mitochondria, previous studies have cemented the fact that mitochondrial dysfunction is at the heart of colistin-induced renal damage (Dai et al. ; Azad et al. ; Heidari et al. ). The RPTECs rely, almost exclusively, on oxidative phosphorylation to generate high amount of ATP required to drive active-uptake of nutrients from the glomerular filtrate (Schaub et al. ). Therefore, these cells are highly vulnerable to mitochondrial dysfunction, given that their mitochondria are constantly in a an oxidized state (Hall et al. ). Studies that focus on mitochondrial targeted therapies may be key (previously reviewed here, (Ishimoto and Inagi )). Therapies that target mitochondrial biogenesis such as activators of AMPK and SIRT1, can reduce the activation of transcription factors involved in the amplification of pathways implicated in renal injury and promote autophagic repair, thus counteracting the effects of the toxicants (Tran et al. ). Drugs that target mitochondrial fragmentation have shown promise in different models of AKI. Antioxidants, specifically targeting mitochondrial ROS, can prevent the amplification of apoptotic signals and stabilize the mitochondrial network, allowing pro-survival pathways such as autophagy to repair the damage. Inhibitors of MPTP opening, prevent mitochondrial swelling and release of apoptogenic factors to the cytosol. Activators of mitophagy target dysfunctional mitochondria for degradation, thus allowing functional mitochondria to fuse and expand in their place. The ER is another major contributor to renal damage induced by colistin. The RPTECs are highly susceptible to ERS due to their high basal protein synthesis and ER protein folding activity (Zhuang and Forbes ). Mechanistic studies are required to determine the complex interactions between the ER and mitochondria to reveal druggable targets that amplify the apoptotic signals or increase ROS generation.

Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Mohamed A. Mahmoud and Metab Alharbi contributed equally to this work.

## Acknowledgements
Not applicable.

## Author contributions
Mohamed A. Mahmoud: Writing and editing the manuscript, collected data.
Metab Alharbi: Conceptualization, editing the manuscript, funding acquisition.

## Funding
Not applicable.

## Data availability
Not applicable.

## Declarations

## Ethical approval
Not Applicable.

## Competing interests
The authors have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose.

## Abbreviations
γ-H2AXGamma-H2AX
8-OHdG8-Hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosine
AIFApoptosis-inducing factor
AKIAcute kidney injury
AMIDApoptosis-inducing factor-homologous mitochondrion-associated inducer of death
AMPKAdenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase
AP-1Activator protein-1
Apaf-1Apoptotic protease activating factor-1
ATF4Activating transcription factor 4
ATF6Activating transcription factor 6
ATPAdenosine triphosphate
BadBCL2 agonist of cell death
BaxBcl2-associated x protein
Bcl-2B-cell lymphoma-2
BidBH3 interacting-domain death agonist
BiPHeavy chain binding protein
CATCatalase
CDK-1Cyclin dependent kinase-1
CDKN1ACyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 1A
CHOPC/EBP homologous protein
CMSColistin methanesulfonate
CORECross-organelle stress response
CRISPRClustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
DEGsDifferentially expressed genes
DGCR8DiGeorge syndrome critical region 8
Drp1Dynamin-related Protein 1
DSBsDouble strand DNA breaks
EGLN2Egl-9 family hypoxia-inducible factor 2
eIF2αEukaryotic initiation factor 2
eNOSEndothelial nitric oxide synthase
EREndoplasmic reticulum
ERADER-associated protein degradation
ERKExtracellular signal-regulated kinase
ERSER stress
FADDFas-associated protein with death domain
FasLFas ligand
FasRFas Receptor
FGFFibroblast growth factor
FGFR2Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2
GPxGlutathione peroxidase
GPX4Glutathione peroxidase 4
GRP78Glucose-regulated protein 78
GSHReduced glutathione
GSK3βGlycogen synthase kinase-3β
H3K27Histone 3 lysine 27
HDAC1Histone deacetylase-1
HEK-293Human embryonic kidney
HIF1Hypoxia-inducible factor 1
HK-2Human kidney-2
HSF1Heat shock factor 1
Hsp90Heat shock protein 90
HtpGHigh-temperature protein G
HtrA2/OmiHigh-temperature requirement protein A2/Omi
IL-1βInterleukin 1 beta
IL-6Interleukin 6
iNOSInducible nitric oxide synthase
IP3RInositol triphosphate receptor
IRE1αInositol-requiring transmembrane kinase/endoribonuclease 1alpha
IκBαNuclear factor-κB inhibitor alpha
IκBKαNuclear factor-κB inhibitor alpha kinase
JNKC-Jun N-terminal kinase
Keap1Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1
KIM-1Kidney injury molecule-1
LC3B-IMicrotubule-associated protein 1 Light Chain 3B-I
LC3B-IIMicrotubule-associated protein 1 Light Chain 3B-II
m6aN6-methyladenosine
MAPKsMitogen-activated protein kinases
MDAMalondialdehyde
MDRMulti-drug resistant
METTL3N6-adenosine methyltransferase
MMPMitochondrial membrane potential
MOMPMitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization
MPTMitochondrial permeability transition
MPTPMitochondrial permeability transition pore
mRNAMessenger RNA
MT-1Metallothionein-1
mTORMechanistic target of rapamycin
mTORC1Mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1
NAGN-acetyl-β-d-glucosaminidase
NDH-2Type II NADH: quinone oxidoreductase
NF-κBNuclear factor kappa B
NF-κB/p65Nuclear factor kappa-B subunit p65
NGF-βNerve growth factor-β
NONitric oxide
NOXsNicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 3-phosphate oxidases
NQO1NAD(P)H dehydrogenase [quinone] 1
Nrf2Nuclear factor-erythroid 2 related factor 2
NRK-52ENormal rat kidney-52E
NT-3Neurotrophin-3
OCTN2Carnitine/organic cation transporter 2
p75NTRP75 neurotrophin receptor
PARP-1Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase
PDIProtein disulfide isomerase
PEPT2Oligopeptide transporter 2
PERKProtein kinase RNA-like ER kinase
PHLPP2PH domain and leucine-rich repeat protein phosphatase
PI3KPhosphatidyl inositol-3 kinase
PUMAP53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis
ROSReactive oxygen species
RPTECsRenal proximal tubular epithelial cells
SIRT1Silent information regulator 1
SMHShai-Matsuzaki-Huang
SODSuperoxide dismutase
SREBP-2Sterol regulatory element-binding protein-2
tBidTruncated Bid
TGF-β1Transforming growth factor-β1
TLR-4Toll-like receptor 4
TNF-αTumor necrosis factor-alpha
TrkATrobomyosin receptor kinase A
TSC1/2Tuberous sclerosis protein 1/2
TUNELTerminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling
ULK-1UNC51-like kinase 1
UPRUnfolded protein response