pmcCell RepCell Rep319nihpa101573691Cell reports2211-1247pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC11648993PMC11648993.11164899311648993NIHMS20388783953592110.1016/j.celrep.2024.114972NIHMS2038878NIHPA20388781ArticleCancer-associated fibroblasts maintain critical pancreatic cancer cell lipid homeostasis in the tumor microenvironment
HanXu BurrowsMichelle KimLaura C. XuJimmy P. VostrejsWill Van LeTran Ngoc PoltorackCarson JiangYanqing CukiermanEdna StangerBen Z. ReissKim A. ShafferSydney M. MesarosClementina KeithBrian SimonM. Celeste 1Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA2Centers for Cancer Pharmacology and Excellence in Environmental Toxicology, Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA3Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA4Cancer Signaling & Microenvironment Program, Marvin & Concetta Greenberg Pancreatic Cancer Institute, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Temple Health, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA5Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA6Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA7Division of Hematology-Oncology, Penn Medicine Abramson Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA8Department of Bioengineering, School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA9Department of Pathology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA10Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
X.H. and M.C.S. conceived the project and designed the experiments; B.K. and M.C.S. supervised the overall study. X.H., M.B., L.C.K., C.M., J.P.X., W.V., T.N.V.L., C.P., and Y.J. performed the experiments. B.Z.S., K.A.R., S.M.S., and E.C. provided materials and reagents used in this study. X.H., B.K., and M.C.S. wrote the paper. B.Z.S., E.C., B.K., and M.C.S. revised the manuscript. All authors revised and approved the final version of the manuscript.
*Correspondence: celeste2@pennmedicine.upenn.edu2611202412112024431147710211497211497211122024161220241612202418032026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## SUMMARY
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an aggressive malignancy with abundant cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) creating hallmark desmoplasia that limits oxygen and nutrient delivery. This study explores the importance of lipid homeostasis under stress. Exogenous unsaturated lipids, rather than de novo synthesis, sustain PDAC cell viability by relieving endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress under nutrient scarcity. Furthermore, CAFs are less hypoxic than adjacent malignant cells in vivo, nominating them as a potential source of unsaturated lipids. CAF-conditioned medium promotes PDAC cell survival upon nutrient and oxygen deprivation, an effect reversed by delipidation. Lysophosphatidylcholines (LPCs) are particularly enriched in CAF-conditioned medium and preferentially taken up by PDAC cells, where they are converted to phosphatidylcholine (PC) to sustain membrane integrity. Blocking LPC-to-PC conversion inhibits PDAC cell survival and increases ER stress. These findings show a critical lipid “cross-feeding” mechanism that promotes PDAC cell survival, offering a potential metabolic target for treatment.

## Graphical Abstract

 

## In brief
Han et al. identify crosstalk between CAFs and pancreatic cancer cells under hypoxia and nutrient scarcity. Lysophosphatidylcholines (LPCs), as the key mediators, can be utilized for phosphatidylcholine biogenesis in PDAC cells under hypoxia. Targeting LPC metabolism reactivates lipid saturation stress and resensitizes cancer cells to O2 and nutrient deprivation.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## INTRODUCTION
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the third-leading cause of cancer-associated mortality in the United States, with a 5-year overall survival rate of only 12%. When diagnosed at late stages, this drops to just 3%, highlighting the urgent need for better treatment options. PDAC features a desmoplastic tumor microenvironment (TME) where cancer cells are surrounded by various nontransformed cell types and a dense extracellular matrix (ECM). This TME impairs vascular function, restricting nutrient and oxygen delivery, which leads to severe tissue hypoxia. – PDAC is considered one of the most hypoxic human cancers, , with increasing hypoxia linked to more advanced disease stages and resistance to radiation and chemotherapy.
Hypoxic cancer cells alter their metabolism by increasing glucose and glutamine catabolism and reducing their reliance on oxidative phosphorylation. Hypoxia also inhibits fatty acid desaturation, particularly the conversion of stearate (C18:0) to oleate (C18:1) by Δ9 stearoyl-coenzyme A (CoA) desaturase 1 (SCD1), which requires oxygen as a terminal electron acceptor ( ). Consequently, hypoxia renders cancer cells dependent on the import of zexogenous unsaturated fatty acids to maintain lipid homeostasis and membrane function. , For example, abnormal lipid accumulation and storage in clear cell renal cell carcinomas (ccRCCs) increases cytoplasmic ceramide and acyl-carnitine levels, which can lead to mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis. , We have also demonstrated that an imbalance in lipid saturation induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress responses, particularly activating inositol-requiring enzyme 1α (IRE1α). , ER stress responses appear to be a double-edged sword in cancer cells. The IRE1α pathway induces SCD1 gene expression to restore lipid homeostasis and prevent cell death in Myc-driven cancers, , whereas it also promotes apoptosis in ccRCC , and multiple cell types experiencing constitutive mTORC1 signaling. Other ER stress arms may function differently from the IRE1α pathway; for example, protein kinase R-like ER kinase (PERK) activation represses overall mRNA translation and promotes protein folding until the stress is resolved. Despite this, how ER stress affects hypoxic PDAC cells remains poorly understood.
In addition to rewiring their own metabolic pathways, cancer cells rely on adjacent stromal cells to sustain their biosynthetic and bioenergetic demands in hypoxic and nutrient-limited TMEs. – Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are crucial in supporting tumor cell proliferation and survival while modifying the ECM. , – CAFs can originate from various fibroblastic lineages, including normal tissue-resident fibroblasts, transdifferentiated pericytes, adipocytes, endothelial cells, and other cell types. For example, pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs) can be activated and differentiated into CAFs and exert a profound influence on PDAC progression. , These CAFs supply alanine for protein synthesis in PDAC cells as well as lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) species that convert to lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), activating the AKT signaling pathway. Moreover, CAFs promote pancreatic fibrosis by inducing lipoprotein metabolism. However, the comprehensive network of metabolic crosstalk between CAFs and cancer cells in PDAC tumors remains incompletely defined.
In this study, we demonstrate that PDAC cell survival is highly dependent on unsaturated LPCs secreted by CAFs due to markedly reduced SCD1 activity in tumor cells. In addition, we observed a striking inverse spatial pattern in which regions consisting of primarily malignant cells exhibit hypoxia markers, whereas CAF-rich regions do not, providing an explanation for how CAFs can produce unsaturated LPCs within an otherwise severely hypoxic tumor. Blocking the utilization of unsaturated LPCs sensitizes PDAC cells to ER stress-induced apoptosis via IRE1α activation. These findings reveal a novel mechanism of CAF-PDAC interaction and highlight LPC availability as a potentially targetable metabolic vulnerability in PDAC tumors.

## RESULTS

## Pancreatic cancer cells are sensitive to tumor-like stress
Cell viability and organelle fitness depend on the balance of saturated (e.g., palmitoyl-CoA, stearoyl-CoA) and unsaturated fatty acids (e.g., oleoyl-CoA, linoleoyl-CoA), as saturated fatty acids can increase membrane stiffness and activate apoptotic pathways. Cells acquire unsaturated lipids through exogenous import or de novo biosynthesis and desaturation. We have shown previously that hypoxia disrupts unsaturated fatty acid biogenesis by inhibiting SCD1 enzymatic activity ; however, hypoxic Ras-transformed cells compensate by increasing exogenous lipid import. To mimic hypoxic and nutritional stress caused by the dense desmoplasia of PDAC, we cultured a panel of PDAC cell lines under “tumor-like conditions,” where limited nutrition was assured using 0.5% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and hypoxia by sustaining 0.5% O2, termed “SO stress” ( ). Multiple PDAC cell lines, including PANC-1, Su.86.86, and Capan-2, exhibited reduced cell viability under SO conditions ( ), which appeared to be mediated by both apoptosis and ferroptosis ( and ). While the normal pancreas typically has an O2 concentration of 5%–7%, pancreatic cancer cells maintain viability under these physiological conditions ( ), consistent with their phenotype at 21% O2 (termed “normoxia”), a condition commonly used in tissue culture experiments.
Other PDAC cell lines (MiaPaCa-2, PL-45, and AsPC-1) maintained viability under SO conditions with reduced proliferation ( and ), a phenotypic difference that may reflect distinct metabolic profiles. Of note, the SO-sensitive cell lines PANC-1 and Su.86.86 have elevated oxidative phosphorylation and de novo lipogenesis (DNL), which are features of the previously characterized “lipogenic” PDAC subtype. In contrast, SO-insensitive MiaPaCa-2 and PL-45 cells are highly glycolytic and engage in less DNL, consistent with the “glycolytic” PDAC subtype. Interestingly, SO-insensitive glycolytic cells were less proliferative under hypoxia with 10% FBS, suggesting that reduced biosynthetic demands might protect them from SO stress-induced death ( ).
Increased lipid saturation alters cellular membrane composition and diminishes membrane fluidity, which can generate ER stress and trigger the IRE1α-dependent arm of the unfolded protein response (UPR). The inherent RNase activity of activated IRE1α splices out a 26-base sequence from the X-box binding protein (XBP1) mRNA, thereby encoding spliced XBP1 to initiate a critical UPR program ( ). Spliced XBP1 is a transcription factor that regulates lipid homeostasis in part by promoting SCD1 gene expression to enhance fatty acid desaturation. PANC-1, Su.86.86, and Capan-2 cells cultured under SO conditions activated IRE1α signaling, as indicated by increased ratios of spliced (XBP1s) to total (XBP1t) transcripts ( ). Genetic ablation of XBP1 in these lines partially suppressed SO stress-mediated cell death, indicating that ER stress and IRE1α contribute to cell apoptosis under O2− and nutrient-deprived conditions ( – , , and ).
As expected, the lipid “saturation index” (the ratio of saturated stearate to unsaturated oleate levels) was elevated in hypoxic PANC-1 cells ( and ). Exogenously supplied oleic acid reduced ER stress by alleviating IRE1α/XBP activation and restored viability in the PANC-1, Su.86.86, and Capan-2 cell lines ( and ). In contrast, oleic acid supplementation did not rescue proliferation under SO stress ( ), suggesting that the reduced fatty acid saturation index was insufficient to restore all anabolic pathways.
Although our SO conditions used 0.5% FBS and DMEM under hypoxia, we acknowledge that DMEM contains higher glucose and glutamine levels than tumor interstitial fluid or blood. To ensure that SO-induced cell death is specifically due to disruption of lipid homeostasis, we cultured hypoxic PANC-1 cells in 0.5% FBS human plasma-like medium (HPLM) containing more “physiological” nutrient levels. PANC-1 cells exhibit reduced viability similar to DMEM culture ( ). Moreover, oleic acid addition rescued cell survival regardless of culture medium metabolite availability. Similarly, SO-insensitive Mia PaCa-2 cells maintain viability under both DMEM and HPLM conditions ( ) but also have reduced proliferation. We conclude that SO stress affects cell viability primarily through unsaturated fatty acid availability other than base medium.
Oleic acid restored lipid droplets (LDs) in PANC-1 cells under SO stress ( and ), consistent with prior work showing that LDs protect cells against cytotoxic ER stress responses by mobilizing stored unsaturated lipids. A recent study also noted that reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) generation under nutrient scarcity can limit fatty acid biosynthesis and inhibit cell proliferation. However, addition of pyruvate, whose reduction to lactate will generate NAD+, only modestly restored PANC-1 cell viability under SO conditions ( ). We suggest that NAD+ is less crucial than SCD1 activity under stress conditions. Hypoxia also increases intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels that, in turn, trigger apoptosis if unresolved. We observed that oleic acid prevented SO stress-induced cytosolic ROS accumulation in PANC-1 cells ( ). However, while the antioxidant N-acetyl-l-cysteine reduced ROS levels, it did not prevent PANC-1 cell death ( and ), demonstrating that ROS were not a significant factor under SO conditions.
Our data implicate unsaturated fatty acid availability as a key determinant of PDAC cell survival under SO conditions ( ). To test this directly, we exposed PDAC cells to an SCD1 inhibitor that blocks fatty acid desaturation even in the presence of O2 ( ), mimicking SCD enzymatic activity inhibition by hypoxia. Although Mia PaCa-2, PL-45, PANC-1, Su.86.86, and KPC4662 cells were viable in 0.5% serum, additional treatment with an SCD1 inhibitor induced cell death ( ), which was reversed by the caspase inhibitor Z-VAD ( ) but not ferrostatin ( ). In this case, SCD1 inhibition under normoxia induced apoptosis but not ferroptosis, since ferroptosis sensitivity is mainly enhanced by antioxidant enzyme GPX4 impairment, hypoxia-induced iron uptake, and lipid peroxidation. Exogenously supplied oleate fully negated the effects of SCD1 inhibition on cell viability ( ) and IRE1α activation ( ). Therefore, decreased availability of unsaturated lipid species is principally responsible for inducing ER stress and apoptosis in lipogenic PDAC cells experiencing tumor-like stress.

## Pancreatic cancer cells and fibroblastic stromal cells have distinct hypoxic signatures in vivo
Our findings raise the question of how PDAC cells can obtain unsaturated lipids to maintain viability and proliferate despite the severely hypoxic and desmoplastic PDAC TME. Crosstalk between PDAC and stromal cells has been intensively studied, and CAFs provide a variety of nutrients to PDAC cells. , Surprisingly, we observed that fibroblast-enriched locations within the PDAC tumor mass were demonstrably less hypoxic than immediately adjacent malignant epithelial cells in both murine KPC (KrasLSL-G12D/+; Trp53
fl/fl; p48-Cre) and human PDAC tissues ( , , and ). Specifically, tumor-bearing mice were injected with pimonidazole, which forms covalent bonds with cellular macromolecules at O2 levels below 1.3% and detected by hypoxyprobe immunohistochemistry. Sections of hypoxyprobe-stained PDAC tumor masses revealed hypoxic locations and clearly denoted selected areas that remained unstained, suggesting that the latter were locations with O2 levels greater than 1.3% ( ). Interestingly, these non-hypoxic subregions were enriched with cells positive for alpha smooth muscle actin (α-SMA+) and podoplanin (PDPN+), denoting possible myofibroblast-enriched locations. Of note, the same areas that were clearly not stained by hypoxyprobe were also negative for hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF1α) expression, suggesting that these cells were not under hypoxic stress. As an orthogonal approach, we confirmed that the same observation was true in an additional murine model, KPCY (KrasLSL-G12D/+; Trp53
LSL-R172H/+; Pdx1-Cre; Rosa26YFP/YFP). In this case, we noted that the hypoxic regions overlapped specifically with the YFP+ malignant epithelial cells, while fibroblastic α-SMA+ cells remained unstained with pimonidazole ( ). We hence hypothesized that myofibroblastic stromal cells within the PDAC TME could be sufficiently oxygenated to support desaturation of de novo-synthesized fatty acids.
Additionally, immunofluorescent staining of murine PDAC samples revealed that myofibroblasts (myCAFs) are less hypoxic due to their proximity to blood vessels ( ). Combined with CD31 staining, this indicated that hypoxic malignant ductal cells are located farther from CD31+ endothelial cells compared to fibroblastic α-SMA+ cells. We determined that CAFs are less hypoxic than cancer cells because of their close localization to blood vessels, suggesting that CAFs may serve as potential suppliers of unsaturated lipids in the PDAC stroma.
To explore this observation further in both mouse and human PDAC, we analyzed previously reported single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data. A 44-gene hypoxia signature revealed that hypoxic gene expression was decreased in PDAC CAFs compared to hypoxic ductal cells in mouse samples ( ). We then examined the hypoxia gene signature in three transcription-informed CAF subtypes: myCAFs, inflammatory fibroblasts (iCAFs), and antigen-presenting fibroblasts (apCAFs).
Interestingly, both murine KPC tumor myCAFs and iCAFs did not display hypoxic transcriptional signatures, whereas apCAFs did ( ). In human PDAC samples, fibroblastic cells transcriptionally defined as myCAFs were also consistently less hypoxic than tumor cells ( ), although iCAFs appeared to be more hypoxic. The contribution of iCAFs to PDAC lipid homeostasis will be an interesting area for future study.
A systematic examination of whether CAFs have better access to vasculature than cancer cells in human PDAC tumors employed spatial transcriptomics using the 10× Genomics Xenium platform. Specifically, we aimed to learn whether CAFs, on average, are closer to the endothelium compared to malignant cells. Gene expression profiling of 694,624 single cells across eight treatment-naive PDAC surgical resections identified 17 major cellular populations, including basal-like and classical-like malignant cells, myCAFs, iCAFs, and endothelial cells ( and ). We next computed distributions of distance to nearest endothelial cells for all CAF and malignant populations and found that myCAFs are, on average, closer to endothelial cells than malignant cells and other fibroblast populations ( ). The spatial distribution of myCAFs being more proximal to endothelial cells than iCAFs corroborates our HIF signature gene expression analysis showing high HIF activity in iCAFs and low HIF activity in myCAFs ( ). Finally, a recent study using multiplexed imaging mass cytometry on nine human PDAC sections also revealed that stromal/ECM populations are closer to endothelial cells and highly enriched in the vascular neighborhood compared to tumor cells. 
Of note, both murine and human myCAFs were more resistant to SO stress ( ) and less proliferative ( ) than their PDAC cell counterparts. These results suggested that a higher proliferation rate may correlate with greater O2 consumption, thereby potentially sensitizing cells to hypoxic stress. Further, these data are consistent with the observed slower-proliferating PDAC cell lines described above ( ).

## CAFs promote murine pancreatic cancer cell growth in vivo and in human organoid models
To identify key components that regulate a molecular crosstalk between CAFs and PDAC cells, we obtained murine and human PSC cell lines ( ), but note that all of these are essentially myCAFs (i.e., α-SMA+, desmin+) derived from PDAC tumors , ; as such, we refer to them here as “CAFs.” We first generated media conditioned by CAFs cultured in serum-free medium for 48 hours under either 21% O2 or 0.5% O2, after which the media were collected and concentrated as described previously ( ). CAF-conditioned media rescued PANC-1 and Su.86.86 cell survival under SO stress, whereas concentrated unconditioned medium did not ( – and ). Conditioned media also reduced IRE1α activation in PDAC cells ( ). Interestingly, conditioned media from CAFs cultured under either hypoxic or normoxic conditions were equally effective at rescuing PDAC cell viability and ER stress responses by relieving the activation of the IRE1α/XBP pathway ( and ). Of note, hypoxic CAFs did not exhibit an increased saturation index, indicating that hypoxia induces higher lipid saturation stress in cancer cells than CAFs ( ). CAFs were also less sensitive to lipotoxic stress (i.e., SCD inhibitor treated) than PDAC cells ( ). CAF-conditioned media sustained the viability of PANC-1, Su.86.86, MiaPaCa-2, and KPC4662 cells under lipotoxic stress ( – ). Finally, we demonstrated that conditioned media from murine CAFs also sustained murine KPC4662 PDAC cell numbers under hypoxia and nutrient stress ( ). Collectively, these results indicate that CAFs secrete molecules required to maintain PDAC cell survival under tumor-like conditions, even in the context of SCD inhibition. These intriguing results will be discussed further below.
To determine whether the rescue of PDAC cells is specific to CAFs, PANC-1 cells were cultured in human pancreatic microvascular endothelial cell-conditioned media and maintained viability under SO stress ( ), suggesting a supportive role for endothelial cells in vitro. However, CAFs are the predominant stromal cells in the PDAC TME, with endothelial cells being a minor component. Previous studies have highlighted the role of blood vessels as conduits for lipid delivery ; for example, low-density lipoprotein particles can rapidly enter blood vessels and diffuse into the interstitial fluid. These observations suggest that endothelial cells may also contribute to tumor progression by modulating lipid homeostasis, while CAFs play a dominant role due to abundance and proximity to hypoxic PDAC cells.
To explore CAF-PDAC interactions in vivo, we subcutaneously co-injected KPC4662 cells and murine CAFs into syngeneic mice. Tumors derived from combined CAF-PDAC samples exhibited an increased growth rate and weight relative to “PDAC alone” controls ( and ). Similar to autochthonous PDAC tumors, subcutaneous PDAC tumors contained hypoxic regions that colocalized with cancer cells but not with myofibroblasts ( ). We observed that subcutaneous PDAC tumors contained a similar proportion of fibroblasts even without co-injected CAFs, demonstrating the inherent ability of PDAC cells to recruit nearby tissue-resident fibroblasts into tumor regions. To distinguish injected from endogenous CAFs in these tumors, we co-implanted mCherry-labeled CAFs with KPC4662 cells, collected tumors at an early stage (10–14 days), stained for α-SMA and mCherry, and observed a large proportion of non-injected CAFs (α-SMA+ mCherry−) in these tumors ( ). Moreover, based on quantification of α-SMA+ immunohistochemistry, co-injected CAFs contributed little to overall tumor size, as only a minor difference in the number of total infiltrated CAFs was noted between “PDAC alone” (control) and CAF-PDAC co-implanted tumors at endpoint analyses ( ). However, tumors derived from combined CAF-PDAC co-implantation contained more proliferating cancer cells than controls ( ), indicating that the co-injected CAFs promote tumor cell proliferation in vivo, especially at early stages.
To extend these experiments to primary human PDAC samples, we collected tumor tissue from patients with PDAC and cultured them in a three-dimensional mitogen-rich organotypic system. , Organoids cultured in human CAF-conditioned media exhibited increased proliferation and reduced cell death under hypoxia ( ), demonstrated by more live cells in spheres and larger organoid diameter than those untreated controls ( and ). In aggregate, CAFs clearly support murine PDAC tumor growth in vivo and human PDAC organoid growth in vitro, extending the conclusions drawn from prior work with established PDAC cell lines.

## LPC is the key metabolite in CAF-PDAC crosstalk supporting lipid homeostasis
Our findings indicate that PDAC cells are dependent on exogenous unsaturated lipids for survival under tumor-like conditions, which CAFs may supply in vivo. To test this, we removed lipids from CAF-conditioned medium using silica resin. Importantly, silica-treated medium was not toxic to PDAC cells ( ), but it no longer supported cell viability under SO stress ( , , and ). We next performed a lipidomic profiling assay using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) ( ) and identified 90 distinct lipid species with LPCs significantly enriched in CAF-conditioned media ( ; ). Strikingly, LPCs secreted by CAFs were specifically depleted from conditioned media by PANC-1 cells under SO conditions ( – ), while other lipids remained unaffected ( and ). These results are consistent with previous reports that LPCs can regulate cancer cell proliferation and metastasis , ; however, the role of LPCs in protecting cancer cells from apoptosis under hypoxic and nutritional stress has not been studied. Interestingly, unsaturated LPC levels were similar in hypoxic and normoxic CAF media ( ), consistent with the ability of both to rescue PDAC cell viability ( and ). Further, these results also agree with the in vivo observation that PDAC CAFs sustain O2 levels higher than 1.3% and do not exhibit hypoxia-induced stress denoted by HIF1α expression and transcriptional signatures ( – ).
These findings indicate that CAFs have either a larger unsaturated lipid storage capacity or that their capability for de novo unsaturated lipid biosynthesis is more resistant to hypoxia than cancer cells. To validate the impact of specific LPC species on PDAC cell survival, saturated or unsaturated LPCs were added independently to PDAC cell cultures. Unsaturated, but not saturated, LPCs restored viability and ER homeostasis in PANC-1 and Su.86.86 cells cultured under SO conditions or lipotoxic stress ( , , , and ). Along these lines, expression of ER stress-associated genes, spliced XBP1, CHOP (the C/EBP homologous protein), and BiP (immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein) was suppressed by unsaturated LPC-treated cells. LPCs also supported primary PDAC cell survival in organoid culture under hypoxic stress ( ). Moreover, LPCs were more efficient than phosphatidylcholine (PC) species at preserving PDAC cell viability under SO stress ( ). These results demonstrate the importance of unsaturated LPCs secreted by CAFs in supporting malignant cells in the PDAC TME.
Unsaturated LPCs likely exert their effects through multiple mechanisms. A previous study demonstrated that LPCs are converted to LPA by cleavage of a choline head group via the enzyme autotaxin. LPA is a signaling ligand that binds to LPA receptors (LPARs) and activates the AKT pathway to stimulate cell proliferation. To investigate whether LPC-derived LPA is the critical step in our crosstalk model under nutritional and hypoxic stress, we treated PANC-1 cells with CAF-conditioned media and added an autotaxin inhibitor (HA130) or an LPAR inhibitor (Ki16425) ( ). Interestingly, CAF-conditioned media maintained PANC-1 and Su.86.86 cell viability in the presence of either inhibitor ( and ), indicating that CAF-PDAC crosstalk under lipotoxic stress conditions is independent of LPA. A modest but statistically significant decrease in cell viability was observed for LPC-supplemented PANC-1 cells treated with HA130 or Ki16425, although that effect is masked in the context of conditioned media ( and ).
We hypothesized that blocking LPC uptake would sensitize PDAC cells to hypoxia and nutritional stress. Lipids are typically conjugated to albumin in the serum, and cancer cells can import albumin via macropinocytosis to support cell metabolism under tumor-like stress. Furthermore, pancreatic cancer cells display increased levels of macropinocytosis ( ). Thus, we investigated the role of macropinocytosis in oleic acid or LPC-mediated rescue of PANC-1 cell viability. PANC-1 cells treated with EIPA (5-[N-ethyl-N-isopropyl] amiloride), an Na+/H+ exchanger inhibitor that suppresses macropinocytosis, did not show a significant blockade of oleic acid or LPC import ( ). This is despite clearly inhibiting the uptake of high-molecular-weight dextran, suggesting that macropinocytosis is not the principal mechanism of unsaturated lipid uptake. Although relatively little is known about LPC transporters, MFSD2A has been reported to import LPCs in immune cells. However, MFSD2A depletion by short harpin RNAs (shRNAs) had no significant effect on inhibiting BODIPY-labeled LPC uptake by PANC-1 cells ( and ). Lipid transport is a multistep process that likely involves multiple coordinators or redundant transporters across cell membranes. Furthermore, previously undefined LPC transporters or uptake pathways may play a dominant role in this CAF-PDAC crosstalk under hypoxic and nutritional stress. Despite current challenges in targeting LPC transport, blockade of further LPC metabolism in PDAC cells should disrupt this crosstalk, as explored below.

## Blockade of LPC utilization disrupts CAF-PDAC crosstalk
To determine the biochemical fate of LPCs imported into PDAC cells, we cultured PANC-1 cells with LPC (17:0) or LPC (17:1) and traced the fate of acyl chain C17 via LC-MS. This tracing assay distinguishes exogenous LPCs from native LPCs, as native LPCs contain only even carbon numbers in acyl chains ( ). We verified that exogenous LPCs with C17 acyl chains were highly enriched in PDAC cells under treatment, and no native LPC interference was detected ( ). With increased culture time, elevated levels of C17 incorporated into PCs and triglycerides (TGs) were detected in PANC-1 cells ( and ). PCs are the most abundant and important lipid component in cell membranes, and increased unsaturated PC levels reduce membrane stiffness, enhance membrane fluidity, and suppress activation of membrane-related stress pathways.
LPCs and PCs can be interconverted through the action of specific acyltransferases and lipases, known as the Lands cycle. LPC acyltransferase (LPCAT) proteins catalyze PC synthesis by adding one acyl chain to the LPC glycerol backbone. Analysis of transcriptome data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) revealed elevated LPCAT1, LPCAT2, and LPCAT4 expression in PDAC tissue ( ). Different LPCAT enzymes exhibit specific acyl-CoA substrate preferences; for example, LPCAT1 is selective for saturated CoA (16:0-CoA) whereas LPCAT4 preferentially incorporates unsaturated CoA (18:1-CoA). Bulk RNA-seq analysis showed that LPCAT2 and LPCAT4 expression positively correlate with the 44-gene HIF signature ( ). This suggests that increased unsaturated lipid synthesis is critical for alleviating membrane stress and maintaining cellular health under hypoxia and nutrient scarcity. Nevertheless, unsaturated LPCs still rescued cell viability in LPCAT1, LPCAT2, or LPCAT4 knockdown PDAC cells, indicating that other acyltransferases or pathways may have redundant functions ( and ).
To block LPC utilization in PDAC cells, we applied a pan-LPCAT inhibitor (TSI-01) in the following studies. PANC-1 cells treated with the LPCAT inhibitor TSI-01 ( ) displayed a significant reduction in PC/LPC ratios, confirming its inhibitory effects ( ). Of note, TSI-01 treatment abolished the ability of LPCs to sustain PDAC cell viability under SO stress ( and ); in contrast, TSI-01 did not block the rescue of PANC-1 cell viability by exogenous oleic acid ( ). Moreover, TSI-01 elevated PDAC cell ER stress despite the presence of LPCs ( and ), suggesting that the conversion of LPCs to PCs is essential to maintain membrane homeostasis and reduce cytotoxic ER stress. Importantly, TSI-01 failed to disrupt the LPC-mediated rescue of PDAC cell viability in XBP1 knockdown cells, indicating that TSI-01 causes cytotoxicity partly through inducing ER stress ( ). Furthermore, TSI-01 treatment in subcutaneous mouse models demonstrated significant inhibition of tumor progression in both KPC4662 and murine CAF co-implanted groups ( ). These observations indicate that the conversion of imported unsaturated LPCs to unsaturated PC is critical for PDAC cell survival under TME-like stress conditions.

## A caloric restriction diet combined with fatty acid synthesis inhibition disrupts CAF-PDAC crosstalk in vivo
Nutrient availability in tumor interstitial fluid (TIF) influences cancer cell metabolism, and TIF composition can be altered by dietary modifications. A recent study indicated that caloric restriction (CR) inhibits tumor growth by reducing lipid availability in plasma and TIF. Unsaturated fatty acids were significantly reduced in the TIF of CR diet-fed mice concomitant with reduced SCD1 gene expression. We therefore repeated the syngeneic co-injection of KPC4662 cells and murine CAFs, only this time we kept mice on a CR diet ( ). As expected, CAFs promoted tumor growth, and larger tumors were observed in the co-injection group than in controls with this dietary regimen ( – ). Feeding a CR diet and abrogating Fasn expression in CAFs ablated their ability to promote tumor cell proliferation ( and ).
Our results are consistent with a model where CAFs maintain PDAC cell survival and proliferation in vivo by secreting unsaturated lipids, notably LPCs, which PDAC cells take up and use to synthesize unsaturated PCs ( ), thereby avoiding lipotoxic ER stress, apoptosis, and ferroptosis. The surprising finding that CAFs are not demonstrably hypoxic in PDAC tumors provides an explanation for how fatty acids can be synthesized in the otherwise metabolically “arid” PDAC TME.

## DISCUSSION
PDAC has been described as a highly hypoxic cancer type due to dense desmoplasia, leading to poor vascularization and low O2 and nutrient levels. Multiple studies across different types of cancer have demonstrated that cancer cells are sensitive to reduced availability of unsaturated fatty acids, – , , resulting in reduced cell proliferation or increased cell death. However, cancer cells can adapt to environmental stress and enhance growth and metastasis, often educating adjacent normal cells to adopt tumor-promoting traits. As a major stromal cell type, CAFs support PDAC cell growth via metabolic exchanges, such as lactate shuttle, amino acid supply, and exosome production. , We now add unsaturated LPCs to the list of CAF-mediated nutrient support in the stressful TME. Our study reveals a striking heterogeneity of O2 distribution in PDAC tissues; i.e., a distinct pattern of hypoxia staining between cancer cells and CAFs. CAFs (α-SMA+ PDPN+ cells) experience less hypoxic stress than PDAC cells in vivo. HIF signaling levels are particularly low in myCAFs. We observe that CAFs are less proliferative but more resistant to SO stress than PDAC cells, suggesting an inverse correlation between intracellular O2 consumption and biomass synthesis for proliferation. Furthermore, CAFs can originate from activated PSCs, which have been shown to play critical roles in PDAC progression. Quiescent PSCs are characterized by a cytoplasmic abundance of vitamin A, implying that PSCs have a more active lipid biosynthetic metabolism than other stromal cells. Additionally, another CAF subtype, iCAFs, are more hypoxic, as shown through scRNA-seq data and the Xenium platform to visualize their spatial distribution relative to endothelial cells. Overcoming the challenges of expanding iCAFs in vitro will allow more promising investigations into their metabolic role in PDAC survival and progression.
Moreover, in the context of pathological tissue fibrosis, myofibroblasts can be activated by environmental factors like transforming growth factor β from B cells. Interestingly, aberrant B cell accumulation limits tissue regeneration, accelerates pancreatic neoplasia, and elevates fibrosis in HIF1α mutant models (LSL-KrasG12D; Hif1αfl/fl; p48-Cre and Hif1αfl/fl; p48-Cre). , B cell depletion alleviates stromal fibrosis, restrains pancratic intraepiteliel neoplasia (PanIN) progression, and slows carcinoma development, suggesting tumor-promoting roles for fibroblasts in PDAC progression. Our study reveals lipid-mediated crosstalk between PDAC and CAFs under nutritional stress, further explaining our previous B cell observations. The spatial distribution of hypoxic PDAC cells or better oxygenated fibroblasts near blood vessels might explain this distinct pattern. Fewer hypoxic fibroblasts are more proximal to blood vessels and therefore more accessible to O2 than hypoxic PDAC cells, indicating that CAFs likely maintain lipid biosynthesis, particularly unsaturated lipids, to support cancer cell lipid homeostasis and viability under hypoxia and nutritional stress.
Our findings demonstrate critical lipid-mediated crosstalk between CAFs and PDAC cells in the TME. The CAFs employed in our studies were initially called “hPSC#1,” “hPSC#2,” and “murine PSC,” established from human and mouse tumors. , These fibroblasts appear to be myCAFs, expressing α-SMA, vimentin, and desmin, though their PSC derivation remains uncertain. A genetic PSC labeling and lineage tracing model showed that PSC-derived CAFs may account for only approximately 10%–20% of all fibroblasts in orthotopic mouse models and human PDAC tumors. However, they play a specific non-redundant role in shaping the stromal microenvironment and promoting PDAC aggressiveness. PSCs are activated at early events in pathogenesis, such as PanIN, where hypoxia is already detectable. Crosstalk between PSC-derived CAFs and PanINs and their role in supporting pancreatic cells to overcome this early hypoxic stress has not been comprehensively studied. Quiescent PSCs exhibit distinct lipid storage characteristics, and their activation enhances fibroblast traits while decreasing lipid storage gene expression, favoring lipid secretion. These unique features may enable PSCs to produce a distinct lipid secretome, facilitating lipid-mediated crosstalk with PDAC cells. Future studies could compare lipidomic profiles of PSC-derived CAFs with those from other sources. Moreover, PDAC cells appear to be highly capable of recruiting local tissue fibroblasts to subcutaneous TMEs independent of their coexistence with implanted CAFs. However, cancer cells co-implanted with CAFs exhibit elevated proliferation potential and growth rates, implying that injected CAFs benefit tumor growth earlier than when endogenous CAFs are recruited.
We reveal that CAFs secrete LPCs to support PDAC cell survival under hypoxia and nutritional scarcity. In addition to supporting cancer cell proliferation under replete conditions, we discovered that unsaturated LPCs are critical precursors to PCs and further prevent membrane rigidity and ER stress. However, LPC transport mechanisms have not been fully defined. While MFSD2A is a known LPC transporter in immune cells and the brain, , LPC uptake remains efficient in PDAC cells lacking MFSD2A. Moreover, multiple complex regulatory mechanisms govern lipid uptake, such as lipid transfer proteins, vesicle trafficking, and even passive diffusion. We also detected LPCs in CAF exosomes (data not shown), suggesting alternative lipid transport methods. Although macropinocytotic activity is enhanced under tumor-like stress as a survival response for nutrient absorption, neither unsaturated fatty acid nor LPC uptake appear to be dependent on this pathway. Future exploration of lipid transport pathways by unbiased screening methods could develop novel therapeutic targets that induce a lipid “crisis” in PDAC cells and promote cell death.
To disrupt CAF-PDAC crosstalk by blocking LPC metabolism in PDAC cells, we first established that LPCs play a critical role in acyltransferase-catalyzed PC biosynthesis, which helps alleviate ER stress and supports PDAC cell survival. We demonstrate that TSI-01 effectively inhibits acyltransferase activity, disrupting LPC-mediated rescue of PDAC cell viability. However, despite depletion of LPCATs in PDAC cells, LPCs still sustained cancer cell survival, indicating that alternative acyltransferases exist in catalyzing PC production from LPCs. In support of this, a recent report showed that lysophospholipid (lyso-PL) can be catalyzed during phospholipid generation by the lyso-PL acyltransferase (LPLAT). These findings suggest that LPLATs may be functionally redundant with LPCATs in the PC biogenesis from LPCs. Overall, our study reveals the application of TSI-01 in impairing LPC metabolism in PDAC cells, which could be potentially expanded to future preclinical applications.
In conclusion, CAF-PDAC crosstalk via unsaturated LPCs is critical for PDAC cell survival under hypoxia and-nutrient scarce conditions. CAFs are more resistant to hypoxia and able to secrete unsaturated LPCs, which are preferred by PDAC cells to maintain their viability during lipotoxic stress. LPCs are efficiently imported by PDAC cells and converted to PCs for membrane integrity restoration. Therefore, we propose that blockade of LPC metabolism in PDAC cells is an attractive future therapeutic modality for the benefit of patients with PDAC.

## Limitations of the study
Enzymes involved in lipid metabolism are highly diverse and redundant, making it challenging to inhibit LPC production by targeting CAF desaturases or phospholipases. Although we prove the importance of LPCs as PC precursors in PDAC cell survival, significant barriers remain to genetically eliminate SCD and LPCAT expression and inhibit PC biogenesis from LPCs. Nevertheless, TSI-01, which pharmacologically blocks LPC-to-PC conversion in PDAC cells, suppressed tumor progression in vivo, strengthening our argument. Although orthotopic models are superior alternatives to subcutaneous models for studying PDAC-CAF crosstalk in vivo, we validated the role of CAFs in supporting PDAC cell survival under lipid deficiency through cell culture, organoids, and primary PDAC sample evaluations. Additionally, bioinformatic analysis confirmed that CAFs have greater access to O2 than cancer cells within tumors, suggesting that CAFs can supply unsaturated lipids to cancer cells in hypoxic regions. Comparing lipid metabolism between myCAFs and hypoxic cancer cells in situ warrants further investigation.

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Requests for further information, resources, and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, M. Celeste Simon (celeste2@pennmedicine.upenn.edu).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents and materials.

## Data and code availability
The lipidomics data have been submitted to the National Metabolomics Data Repository (NMDR: ST003517). The Xenium special transcriptomic data have been submitted to the NCBI GEO Repository (GEO: GSE280634), and analysis can be accessed at GitHub.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

## STAR★METHODS

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

## Cell culture
Human pancreatic cancer cell lines (PANC-1, Mia PaCa-2, PL-45, Su.86.86, Capan-2, AsPC-1) were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). For the genetic background of the main cell lines we used, PANC1 has a KRAS mutation to 12 Asp and a p53 mutation to 273 His. Su.86.86 has a KRAS mutation to 12 Asp and a p53 mutation to 245 Ser. Mia PaCa-2 has a KRAS mutation to 12 Cys and a p53 mutation to 248 Trp. PL-45 has a KRAS mutation to 12 Asp and a p53 mutation to 255 Asn. Murine KPC4662 has a Kras mutation to 12 Asp and a p53 mutation to 172 His. , Pancreatic CAF cell lines (human “PSC#2” and murine “PSC”) were kindly provided by Dr. Alec Kimmelman and human “PSC#1” was kindly provided by Dr. Rosa Hwang. KPC4662 was gifted by Dr. Robert Vonderheide, derived from primary tumors in KPC (KrasLSL-G12D/+; Trp53LSL-R172H/+; Pdx1-Cre) mice. All CAF cell lines and PANC-1, Mia PaCa-2, PL-45, KPC4662 were routinely maintained in DMEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 11965092) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (Gemini Bio-Products, 900–108) and penicillin/streptomycin and cultured in 5% CO2 at 37°C. Su.86.86 and AsPC-1 were passaged in RPMI-1640 (Gibco, 11-875-093) with 10% FBS. Capan-2 was cultured in McCoy’s 5a Medium Modified (ATCC, 30–2007) containing 10% FBS. All cell lines were maintained for no more than 20 to 25 passages. Pancreatic Microvascular Endothelial Cells were purchased from iXCell Biotechnologies and cultured in Endothelial Cell Growth Media (iXCell, MD-0010). Pancreatic Microvascular Endothelial Cells were maintained lower than 5 passages. Cells were routinely tested for Mycoplasma (Lonza MycoAlert) every 3 months.

## Syngeneic mouse models
The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUC) of the University of Pennsylvania.
(Philadelphia, PA) approved all animal procedures. 1 × 105 KPC4662 were subcutaneously injected or co-implanted with 5 × 105 murine CAFs into each flank of C57BL/6J female mice at 6–8 weeks of age (Jackson ImmunoResearch, Strain#: 000664). CAFs were either wild type, or expressing shScramble or shFasn, or expressing mCherry for co-injection. Both cell lines were derived from KPC mice of C57BL/6J background. Before injection, cells were cultured in complete media (DMEM containing 10% FBS) in 15-cm dishes. Cells were then resuspended in ice-cold PBS and were mixed 1:1 with Matrigel (BD Biosciences, cat. 356234) in a final volume of 200μL per injection. Tumor dimensions were manually taken twice per week, and tumor volume was calculated with the formula (width2 × length)/2. Tumor volume was measured once tumors were established with a volume of ~100mm. Upon completion of the experiment, the animals were sacrificed by CO2 inhalation, followed by cervical dislocation, and xenograft tumors were collected for downstream analyses. For hypoxyprobe labeling, mice were intraperitoneally injected with pimonidazole hydrochloride (60 mg/kg, Hypoxyprobe, Inc., HP-100mg) and were sacrificed after 90 min.
For calorie restricted (CR) diet experiments, 1 × 105 KPC4662 were subcutaneously injected or co-implanted with 5 × 105 murine CAFs into each flank of C57BL/6J female mice at 10–12 weeks of age. Once tumor size reached ~100mm3, mice were randomly separated into two groups, then mice were fed with AIN-93G diet (Envigo, TD.94045) as control diet or CR diet (Envigo, TD.17011). AIN-93G diet was formulated with 17.7% protein, 60% carbohydrates and 7.2% fat (by diet weight). CR diet was formulated with similar amounts of protein (29.5%), fat (12%), 40% reduced calories from carbohydrates (38.6% by diet weight). Retroorbital blood collection was performed to overnight fasted mice and blood glucose level was measured by a glucometer. For the LPCAT inhibitor treatment (TSI-01, Cayman, 17628), TSI-01 was administered via intraperitoneal injection daily for 7 consecutive days at the indicated concentration. The vehicle control consisted of 10% DMSO in corn oil.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Annexin V-PI cell viability assay
5 × 104 cells of each cell line were plated in triplicate in 6-well plates and grown in replete medium. The next day, cells were washed twice with PBS and replaced with indicated conditions. After 96-h culture, cells and supernatant were collected. Cell viability was detected using FITC-Annexin V PI Kit (BD Bioscience, 556547) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 60μM oleic acids (Sigma, O3008), 10μM LPC 18:1 (Avanti Polar Lipids, 845875P), 10μM LPC 18:0 (Avanti Polar Lipids, 855775P) were used for lipid treatment. For drug experiments, cells were treated with 50μM Z-VAD-FMK (Selleck Chem, S7023), 10μM ferrostatin-1 (Millipore Sigma, SML0583), 10μM HA130 (Selleckchem, S0424), 10μM KI16425 (Selleckchem, S1315), or 10μM TSI-01. DMSO was used as a control. Flow cytometry was performed using the BD FACSCalibur instrument, with live cells represented as the Annexin V and PI double-negative population. Data were analyzed with FlowJo software.

## EdU incorporation assay
Cells were cultured with indicated conditions and labeled with 10mM EdU over 4 h, collected by trypsinization and fixed (4% PFA). Intracellular incorporated EdU was detected by a ‘click-It reaction’ with Alexa Fluor 488 according to manufacturer’s instructions of Click-iT EdU Cell Proliferation Kit (Invitrogen, C10499). Data were recorded by flow cytometry and proliferating cells were represented as EdU+ population.

## Cell growth assay
PDAC cells were seeded in 384-well plates with 1 × 103 cells per well. Cells were given indicated culture conditions and drug treatments. At indicated time point, cell growth was analyzed by CellTiter-Glo 2.0 assay (Promega, G9242). For the clonogenicity assays, PDAC cells were seeded with 5 × 104 cells per well and cultured with CAF-conditioned medium in 12-well plates for 72 h under hypoxia and fixed for crystal violet staining. To quantify cell number, crystal violet in each well was dissolved in methanol and measured at OD570 with a plate reader.

## RNA isolation and quantitative RT-PCR
Total RNA was isolated by RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, 74104). cDNAs were synthesized using a High-Capacity RNA-to-cDNA kit (Applied Biosystems, 4368814). qRT-PCR was performed using ViiA7 Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems) with TaqMan master mix (Life Technologies, 4444965). Pre-designed Taqman primers (Life Technologies) were: XBP1t (HS00231936_M1), XBP1s (HS03929085_G1), DDIT3/CHOP (Hs00358796_G1), HSPA5/BiP (Hs00946084_G1), MFSD2A (Hs00293017_m1), LPCAT1 (Hs00227357_m1), LPCAT2 (Hs01044164_m1), LPCAT4 (Hs00405723_m1), 18S (HS03928985_G1). Gene expression levels were normalized to 18S ribosomal RNA.

## Western blot
Cells were harvested in lysis buffer (150mM NaCl, 10mM Tris pH 7.6, 0.1% SDS, and 5mM EDTA) containing cOmplete ULTRA Protease/Phosphatase Inhibitor (Roche, 05892791001). Protein concentration was quantified with Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23225). Cell lysates were resolved by Tris-Glycine SDS-PAGE and were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Bio-Rad, 162–011). Primary antibodies, spliced XBP1 (Cell Signaling Technology, 40435), FASN (Cell Signaling Technology, 3180) and actin (Abcam, ab3280) were diluted at 1:1,000 in 5% w/v BSA. Primary antibodies were detected with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies followed by exposure to ECL reagents (PerkinElmer, NEL105001EA).

## Transfection and viral transduction
1 × 105 cells per well were seeded in 6-well plates for all transfection experiments. To knock down LPCAT expression in PANC-1 cells, cells were transfected with small-interference RNA (siRNA), LPCAT1 (Horizon Discovery, L-010289-00-0005), LPCAT2 (Horizon Discovery, L-010285-01-0005), LPCAT4 (Horizon Discovery, L-016375-01-0005) and non-targeting control (Horizon Discovery, D-001810-01-20). Transfections were performed using lipofectamine RNA MAX reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 13-778-150) following the protocol: 10pmol of the siRNA diluted in 50μL of optiMEM (Life Technologies, 31985–070) was mixed with 3μL of lipofectamine diluted in 50μL of optiMEM; the mixture was added into each well. 72 h after the transfection, cells were collected for RNA extraction or treatment.
Mature antisense human XBP1 shRNA sequence (clone ID: TRCN0000019804 and TRCN0000019806), human FASN sequence (clone ID: TRCN0000075703 and TRCN0000075706) along with scrambled (SCR) control were purchased from Horizon Discovery and cloned into a pLKO lentiviral plasmid. 293T cells were co-transfected with shRNA of interest along with packaging plasmids psPAX2 and pMD2.G using FuGENE 6 transfection reagent (Promega, E2691). Lentiviruses were collected 48 h after transfection. Virus infection was performed by incubating cells with medium containing lentivirus and 8 μg/mL polybrene (Sigma, 107689) for 24 h. Cells were allowed to recover in complete medium for 24 h and then selected with puromycin for 48 h.

## ROS measurement
5 × 104 cells of each cell line were plated in triplicate on 6-well plates with indicated culture conditions. Cells were treated with 5mM N-acetyl-l-cysteine (Millipore Sigma, A9165) or DMSO for 72 h. Live cells were washed twice in PBS and incubated in DCFDA (Abcam, 113851) for 1 h at 37°C. After staining and trypsinization, cells were washed twice in PBS and resuspended in PBS with 1%BSA, passed through a cell strainer, and flow cytometry was performed on a BD Accuri C6 instrument.

## Lipid droplet staining
Oil red O staining was performed on cells plated on 4-well chamber slides (Themo Fisher Scientific, 154526) and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 28908) for 15 min. Samples were stained with Oil Red O (Sigma-Aldrich, P6148) for 30 min at room temperature. Oil Red O working solution was prepared by diluting 3.5 mg/mL stock (in 100% isopropanol) 6:4 with distilled water. The slides were rinsed in distilled water and counterstained with hematoxylin before mounting with Vectashield and imaged using a Leica DM2000 bright-field microscope.

## Oleate, LPC, and dextran uptake assay
Cells were starved in 0.5% BSA overnight and treated with Top Fluor-Oleate (Avanti Polar Lipids, 810259) and Top Fluor-LPC (Avanti Polar Lipids, 810284) for 30 min under hypoxia, 0.5% FBS. Cells were collected and washed with PBS, and then analyzed by FACS using the FITC channel to measure mean fluorescent intensity. Dextran uptake assay was adapted from Commisso et al. (PMID: 24385148). Cells were treated with Dextran-FITC (Invitrogen Molecular Probes, D1822) for 30 min in serum-free media plus hypoxia, and dextran uptake was subsequently quantified via FACS.

## Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence
Human pancreatic tissue sections were obtained from the Cooperative Human Tissue Network and handled at the University of Pennsylvania with the approval of institutional review board committees. Mouse samples were obtained from the KPC mouse model (p48-Cre; LSL-KrasG12D/+; LSL-Trp5fl/+). Samples were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde/PBS (4°C, overnight) and processed for paraffin embedding by the Molecular Pathology and Imaging Core (MPIC) at the University of Pennsylvania.
For immunohistochemistry (IHC), slides were deparaffinized, rehydrated, quenched in 0.6% hydrogen peroxide/methanol for 15 min. Slides were boiled for 20 min in 10 mmol/L sodium citrate (pH 6.0) for antigen retrieval. 5% serum/1% BSA/0.5% Tween 20 were used for blocking. Slides were incubated with primary antibodies (4°C, overnight), and incubated with biotinylated secondary antibodies followed by Vectastain Elite ABC reagents (Vector Labs, PK-6100) and developed with DAB peroxidase substrate kit (Vector Labs, SK-4100). Slides were counterstained with hematoxylin, dehydrated, and mounted with Permount (Thermo Fisher Scientific, sp15–500). Primary antibodies were used as follows: Hypoxyprobe-1-MAb1 (1:100, Hypoxyprobe, Inc., HP2–100Kit), α-SMA (1:200, Abcam, ab5694), podoplanin (1:200, Biolegend, 127403), HIF1α (Abcam, ab2185).
For immunofluorescence, KPCY (KrasLSL-G12D/+; Trp53
LSL-R172H/+; Pdx1-Cre; Rosa26YFP/YFP) murine cryosections were provided by Ben Stanger’s lab. Xenograft tumor samples were collected from mCherry-CAF and KPC4662 co-implanted mice and immediately embedded in OCT for cryosectioning. Cryosections were incubated with 0.25% Triton X-100 (room temperature, 10min) and blocked in 4% BSA and 2% serum in PBS (room temperature, 1 h), followed by primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. Cryosections were incubated with fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibodies (room temperature, 1 h) and mounted with ProLong Gold Antifade Mountant with DAPI (Thermo Fisher, H-1500–10). Primary antibodies were Hypoxyprobe-1-MAb1, α-SMA, mCherry (ThermoFisher, M11217), Alexa Fluor 647 conjugated anti-CD31 (BioLegend, 102415), Streptavidin-BV480 (BD Biosciences, 564876). All slides were examined, and images were captured on a Leica DM5000B microscope.

## Conditioned media production
Murine or human CAFs were seeded in DMEM containing 10% FBS. Cell culture media were changed to DMEM with 0.5% BSA (Sigma, A1595) at 80% confluency and cultured for 48 h under 21% O2 or 0.5% O2. Human pancreatic microvascular endothelial cells were cultured in Endothelial Cell Basal Medium (iXCells, MD-0010B) cultured for 48 h under 21% O2 or 0.5% O2. Conditioned media were collected and centrifuged at 300 × g to remove cell debris and transferred to 3KDa Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filter (Millipore, UFC900308) and concentrated ~30-fold. Control medium was collected and concentrated from 0.5% BSA, DMEM. Concentrated conditioned media or control media were resuspended in DMEM with 0.5% FBS and applied to PDAC cell culture with indicated conditions. To produce delipidated conditioned media, silica (Millipore Sigma, S5130–100G) was added into conditioned media (20 mg/mL, 4°C, overnight on a shaker). Media were collected after centrifugation at 300 × g. Silica-treated media were centrifugated at 2,000 × g for 15 min to remove pelleted silica. Supernatant was transferred to an Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filter for media concentration.

## Liquid chromatography-high resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS)
Cells were scraped in 1mL cold 80% MeOH and 20 μL Lipids Splash Mix (Avanti, 330707), 33nmoles 13C18-stearic acid and 25pmoles 13C4-palmitoyl-carnitine internal standard. Cells were sonicated and transferred to 10mL glass Pyrex tubes. For media extraction, 1mL media was spiked with same internal standards as the cells. 5mL methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE) was added to each of the tubes. After vortexing and shaking, to each tube was added 1.2mL water, vortexed and centrifuged at 300 × g. The top layer was moved to clean glass Pyrex tubes and dried down under nitrogen. To each tube was added with 100 μL of MTBE/MeOH = 1/3, vortexed for 30 s, spined for 10 min at room temperature at 300 × g. Samples were analyzed with a Dionex 3000 coupled to QE Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), exactly as described in PMCID: PMC9399481. Samples were run in both positive and negative mode and the lipids were identified with Lipids Search 4.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Lipids from each class were normalized to the corresponding lipid from Lipids Splash Mix from the same class. All lipid amounts were normalized to the original protein amount per plate.
For LPC tracing assay, cells were treated with 10 μM 17:1 Lyso PC (Avanti, 855677) or 17:0 Lyso PC (Avanti, 855676) with indicated culture conditions. Cells were washed with 0.9% NaCl. Each plate was added 1mL cold 80% MeOH, 20 μL Lipids Splash Mix, 20 μL LPC internal standard. Lipid extraction was described as above. Lipids extracted from each plate were run with QE Exactive-HF mass spectrometer.

## Macropinocytosis imaging
Macropinocytotic imaging assay was based on the published protocol. Mia PaCa-2 cells were plated in 24-well plates with a circular cover glass plated in each well and cultured in replete media. Cells were changed to serum-free media at ~60–70% confluency for another 12–16 h. Media were replaced with TMR-dextran (Invitrogen Molecular Probes, D1818) cell culture media, for 30 min of incubation. Fixation buffer was added to the cells for 30 min at room temperature followed by three times PBS washes. Cells were incubated in DAPI staining solution was applied for 15 min at room temperature and applied to a glass slide with mounting medium. Images were captured on a Leica DM5000B microscope.

## Human patient-derived PDAC organoids
Tissue samples were received from resections and biopsies at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania (HUP). Samples were minced and digested for 45 min using a digestion medium containing Human Wash Medium Advanced DMEM/F12 (Thermo Fisher, 12491015), 10mM HEPES Buffer (Thermo Fisher, 15630080), 1x GlutaMAX Solution (Thermo Fisher, 35050061), 100 μg/μL Primocin (Invivogen, ant-pm-1), and 0.1% Bovine Serum Albumin (Thomas Scientific, A9576)), 5 mg/mL Collagenase from Clostridium histolyticum (Sigma-Aldrich, c9407), 10.5μM Y-27632 (Sigma Aldrich, 129830-38-2), and 10 μg/mL DNAse I (Sigma-Aldrich, 10104159001). Digested cells were seeded in 50μL domes of three-dimensional Growth Factor Reduced Matrigel (Corning, 356231) and were fed with 500μL of Human Complete Feeding Medium (hCPLT) (Human Wash Medium, 1x Wnt3a-Conditioned Medium, 1x R-spondin1-Conditioned Medium, 1X B27 Supplement (Thermo Fisher, 17504044), 10mM Nicotinamide (Sigma-Aldrich, N0636), 1.25mM N-acetylcysteine (Sigma-Aldrich, A0737), 100 ng/mL mNoggin (Peprotech, 250–38), 50 ng/mL hEGF (Peprotech, AF-100–15), 100 ng/mL hFGF (Peprotech, 100–26), 10nM hGastrin I (Tocris, 3006), 500 nM A 83–01 (Tocris, 2939), and 10.5μM Y-27632 (Sigma Aldrich, 129830-38-2) in 24-well plates. Cells were maintained at 37°C in 5% CO2. The hCPLT medium was changed every three days. For propagation, confluent Organoids were passaged by digestion in Accutase (Sigma-Aldrich, A6964) and replated in fresh matrigel and hCPLT. Organoids were split at low ratios: 1:2, 1:3 etc. All lines were passaged at least nine times before use in experiments to ensure cell line viability.
Mutant KRASG12D Organoids were identified via digital droplet PCR (ddPCR) and Sanger Sequencing. Organoids were plated and cultured under normoxia (conditions described above at 21% O2) or hypoxia (0.5% O2). For hypoxic-cultured Organoids, 5x CAF conditioned media or 10μM LPC (18:1) or 5x concentrated 0.5% BSA DMEM were added into culture. After 7 days, the organoids were imaged using an Olympus IX71 inverted microscope in Brightfield Mode and a DP71 camera at 103 magnification. Images were analyzed using ImageJ. Finally, organoid viability was measured via CellTiterGlo 3D (Promega, G9681). An equal volume of CellTiter-Glo was added to each well, the cells were lysed, and the plate was incubated for 25 min at room temperature. Luminescence values were recorded using a Tecan microplate reader and the results were analyzed using GraphPad Prism.

## Xenium spatial transcriptomic analysis of human PDAC tumors
Treatment-naive human PDAC tumors (FFPE) were acquired from the Cooperative Human Tissue Network (CHTN) as part of a standing order. Blocks ranged from 0 to 10 years old and were stored at room temperature prior to cutting for Xenium. Blocks were chosen for Xenium after pre-screening for RNA quality and histology. Briefly, RNA was extracted from four 10-μm sections of tissue from FFPE blocks with the FFPE RNeasy kit (Qiagen 73504). The degree of RNA fragmentation was assessed with the RNA 6000 Pico Kit and blocks were chosen based on distribution of RNA fragment length, prioritizing blocks with a higher proportion of longer RNAs. Corresponding H&E was performed for these blocks to ensure intact tissue morphology. Blocks were sectioned onto Xenium slides and stored in a dessicator until use in the Xenium assay (10x Genomics). Xenium spatial transcriptomics was performed according to manufacturer protocol using the 280-gene human breast cell typing probeset. Data were analyzed using the Scanpy and Scimap python packages. Cellular neighborhoods were generated by first computing the neighborhood vector for k = 10 neighbors and overclustering to n = 30 neighborhoods. Neighborhoods with similar cellular stoichiometries were manually merged and cells were assigned to one of 17 total neighborhoods. Neighborhoods were named for their dominant cell type, though they contain a mixture of interacting cell types.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
All results were obtained from three independent experiments, using three technical replicates per condition, unless stated otherwise. For quantification of IHC staining, 3–5 representative images with 200x fields of view (FOV) were quantified with ImageJ for each sample. Statistical analyses per experiment is indicated in figure legends. Statistical tests were performed in GraphPad Prism 9.0.0 using Student’s two-tailed unpaired or paired t test for pairwise comparisons or one-way ANOVA for multiple comparisons. Data are presented as mean ± SEM of at least three independent experiments or mean ± SD of at least three technical replicates of representative data (raw data in ). Tumor growth curves are presented as mean ± SEM with at least 5 tumors per group. A p-value less than 0.05 was considered significant. Statistical significance was defined as *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. ns, not significant.

## Supplementary Material
123

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the entire Simon laboratory as well as Charline Ogier and Igor Astsaturov for comments and discussions on the manuscript. We also thank John Tobias for help with processing scRNA-seq data and human TCGA data. This work was supported by National Cancer Institute (NCI) R01CA276512 (to M.C.S. and B.Z.S.), NCI R35CA220483 (to M.C.S.), NCI R01CA252225 (to B.Z.S.), NCI R01CA269660 (to E.C), NCI U54CA272686 (project #2) (to E.C.), U.S.-Israel Binational Science Foundation 2021086 (to E.C.), NCI 5T32CA009140 (to L.C.K.), American Cancer Society Postdoctoral Fellowship PF-23-1034739-01-TBE (to L.C.K.), and the Basser Center for BRCA and Penn Center for Molecular Studies of Digestive and Liver Diseases (P30DK050306). We collectively thank the patients who consented to donate tissues used for this project’s research purposes as well as our Research Resource Identifier (RRID: SCR_022420). We also thank the National Metabolomics Data Repository (NMDR), supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) U2C-DK119886 and NIH Common Fund Data Ecosystem OT2-OD030544, for enabling us to share our lipidomics data. BioRender was used for the creation of graphic and schematic models.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114972.
 

## Highlights
Hypoxia increases lipid saturation and induces pancreatic cancer cell death
CAFs serve as a key source of unsaturated lipids in the tumor microenvironment
PDAC cells import unsaturated LPCs as PC precursors to relieve ER stress
Inhibiting LPC metabolism shows a potential therapeutic strategy for PDAC