379blackwellopenGliaGliaPMC1231301012313010123130104040172910.1002/glia.70043What Does Iron Mean to an Oligodendrocyte?
WadeQuinn W ConnorJames R 
1
Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA
2
Department of Neurosurgery, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA*

Correspondence:
 
James R. Connor (jconnor@pennstatehealth.psu.edu)

✉Corresponding author.
225202573917841784–1804182025© 2025 The Author(s). GLIA published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## ABSTRACT
Iron is essential for life and plays a key role in multiple fundamental cellular functions. The brain has the highest rate of energy consumption, and within the brain, oligodendrocytes have the highest level of oxidative metabolism per volume. Oligodendrocytes also stain the strongest for iron. The high requirement for iron is related to an oligodendrocyte's primary function to produce the myelin sheath, which requires iron as a cofactor. In addition to the high‐energy demands that accompany the production of such dense and extensive membranous sheaths, iron is also required for lipid synthesis. Although the involvement of iron in oligodendrocyte functioning is clear, how iron is specifically acquired and utilized by oligodendrocytes is not completely understood. The purpose of this review is to provide a complete and thorough overview of the role of iron in oligodendrocytes. Here, we discuss in detail what is currently known about key iron transport proteins that participate in the balance of iron in oligodendrocytes. Understanding how oligodendrocytes utilize iron is beneficial in understanding dysmyelinating diseases, and the knowledge could be utilized to develop treatment options.
Keywords: H‐ferritin, iron, myelin, oligodendrocytes, transferrin

## Main Points

Iron is essential for oligodendrocyte (OL) biology and myelin production, with deficiencies leading to severe neurological impairments.
Understanding iron trafficking in OLs is crucial for developing treatments for dysmyelinating conditions.

 

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2025 Apr 30; Received 2025 Jan 19; Accepted 2025 May 9; Issue date 2025 Sep.

1.

## Introduction
Iron is a critical micronutrient that is necessary for numerous biological processes such as DNA synthesis, oxidative phosphorylation, and erythropoiesis. Iron balance within the body is crucial because too much iron can lead to the formation of damaging reactive oxygen species (ROS) through Fenton chemistry, while too little iron impairs vital physiological processes. The brain has the highest rate of oxidative metabolism, and iron within the central nervous system (CNS) is also required for neurotransmitter synthesis and myelin formation. Oligodendrocytes (OLs), which are the cells that synthesize the multilamellar myelin sheath that encircles axons to support saltatory conduction, have the highest level of oxidative metabolism of any cell per volume in the brain. OLs also stain the strongest for iron in the rat brain (Benkovic and Connor  ; Connor and Menzies  ), mouse brain (LeVine and Macklin  ), and adult human brain (Dwork et al.  ; Gerber and Connor  ) where the staining occurs in a patchy distribution (Connor et al.  ; Connor and Menzies  ). Technically, it should be noted that the patchy appearance is only detectable in thicker tissue slices (LeVine and Macklin  ) or using laser capture technology (Hare et al.  ). While the functional relevance is currently unclear, it appears the patchy appearance begins around blood vessels during development, which is similar to the onset of myelination in the white matter tracts (Burdo et al.  ; Connor and Menzies  ; Taylor and Morgan  ). Consistent with the histochemical observations, oligodendrocyte iron concentration was measured at 3.05 mM, while microglia contained 1.76 mM iron, astrocytes contained 1.29 mM iron, and neurons contained the lowest amount with 0.57 mM iron (Reinert et al.  ). Iron staining is seen in the cell bodies and processes of OLs in addition to the myelin sheath itself in adult mouse brains (LeVine and Macklin  ), and the temporal and spatial pattern of iron accumulation in the brain coincides with that of myelination (Crowe and Morgan  ). Numerous iron‐requiring enzymes (Connor  ) involved in cellular respiration, such as NADH dehydrogenase, cytochrome oxidases, and glucose‐6‐phosphate dehydrogenase (Wigglesworth and Baum  ), and myelin synthesis, such as HMG‐CoA reductase and lipoxygenases (Cammer  ; Shimizu and Wolfe  ) are enriched in oligodendrocytes (Wigglesworth and Baum  ). Clearly, iron is crucial for oligodendrocyte biology and myelination; however, how the cells specifically acquire iron and process it during proliferation, differentiation, and myelin formation has yet to be fully elucidated. It is therefore the purpose of this review to provide a comprehensive overview of the current literature on the role of iron and its transport mechanisms in oligodendrocytes. A schematic of iron uptake and transport proteins in oligodendroglial cells is provided in Figure  , and a table of the relevant animal models discussed here is available in Table  .
 
2.

## Iron Deficiency and Myelin
Iron deficiency is the most common nutrient deficiency in the world, reportedly affecting approximately two billion people (Radlowski and Johnson  ). Dietary iron deficiency is the leading cause of disability‐assisted life years (DALYs) in children (Kyu et al.  ), and it contributed to an estimated 30 million DALYs in 2017 (Kyu et al.  ). Although iron deficiency can affect individuals of all ages, it is most common in infants and young children (McLean et al.  ). The developing central nervous system (CNS) requires a significant amount of iron that must also be delivered in a coordinated manner to establish time‐sensitive connections. Studies have shown that iron deficiency during development can lead to long‐lasting neurological deficits (Lukowski et al.  ; Tamura et al.  ), such as behavioral problems and poor school performance, that are attributed to hypomyelination (Oski et al.  ). Iron‐deficient infants had increased latencies in auditory brainstem responses and visually evoked potentials (Algarín et al.  ), which are indicative of impaired myelination. Another study showed that iron‐deficient infants had slowed conduction velocities of the auditory pathway, which still persisted after 1 year of iron therapy (Roncagliolo et al.  ).
Research using rodent models of dietary iron deficiency has provided key insights on the direct impact of insufficient brain iron. Iron deficiency during gestation and lactation resulted in significant hypomyelination (Yu et al.  ) and downregulated myelin protein genes such as myelin basic protein (MBP), proteolipid protein (PLP), and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) in rat pups (Clardy et al.  ). Moreover, mice on marginal iron diets had significant alterations to the fatty acid components of brain myelin, some of which persisted even after multiple weeks on an iron‐replete diet (Kwik‐Uribe et al.  ). Even when iron‐deficient rat pups were fed an iron‐sufficient diet for multiple weeks after weaning, myelin proteins, PLP and MBP, and galactolipids, phospholipids, and cholesterol in the myelin were significantly reduced and white matter deficits were not completely normalized (Ortiz et al.  ). These data demonstrate how iron deficiency early during development can significantly impair the protein and lipid components of myelin, and iron supplementation has been shown to be ineffective at fully restoring these deficits. Iron deficiency after weaning has also been shown to have deleterious effects. Weaned rat pups that were given an iron‐deficient diet for 2 weeks had oligodendrocytes of a more immature phenotype, which did not completely return to the fully matured phenotype even after multiple weeks of iron supplementation despite brain iron reaching control levels (Erikson et al.  ). An additional study showed that P21 rat pups subjected to an iron‐deficient diet post‐weaning had impaired myelin as measured by decreased CNP (2′,3′‐cyclic nucleotide 3′‐phosphodiesterase) protein and activity in addition to decreased MBP protein (Beard et al.  ). Thus, even iron deficiency after lactation is capable of altering oligodendrocyte biology and myelination, and there is still little evidence that iron administration can fully reverse the effects. Furthermore, in vitro studies have demonstrated that iron chelation inhibits proliferation of rat oligodendrocytes (OLN‐93 cells), and adding iron by ferric ammonium citrate (FAC) is able to reverse this effect (Hohnholt et al.  ). Also, adding FAC to primary rat glial‐restricted precursor (GRP) cells resulted in a significant increase in GalC+ (galactocerebroside) oligodendrocytes (Morath and Mayer‐Pröschel  ). Therefore, iron itself is undoubtedly important for the maturational status of the oligodendrocyte and myelination, and depriving OLs of iron significantly affects their development and ability to produce healthy myelin.
Interestingly, administering iron through ferrous sulfate or ferrous bis‐glycinate chelate daily in P2‐P14 healthy rats did not affect myelin‐associated glycoprotein (MAG), MBP, nor PLP mRNA in the hippocampus even though systemic measures of iron status (hemoglobin and hematocrit) were elevated (McMillen and Lönnerdal  ). It is unclear whether this effect is specific to the hippocampus or if adding iron to iron‐sufficient animals does not increase myelination. Brain iron uptake is tightly regulated at the level of the blood‐brain barrier (BBB); therefore, the amount of iron that reaches the oligodendrocytes is not equivalent to the amount administered, which is the case for single‐cell cultures. Some studies have found that administering iron to healthy animals does not significantly increase total brain iron (Crowe and Morgan  ; Dwork et al.  ; Johnstone and Milward  ; Papanastasiou et al.  ) while others have found that iron supplementation is capable of increasing brain iron levels in certain regions (Chang et al.  ; Chua and Morgan  ; Peters et al.  ; Piñero et al.  ; Yu et al.  ). It is important to note that animal age and species, route and duration of iron administration, and developmental timing are all variables that must be considered when determining whether brain iron status is altered and how this leads to functional changes. In addition to regional differences, cellular differences that were masked by total brain iron assays may also result from iron loading in healthy animals. Most research has focused on the impact of iron deficiency on OLs and myelin, while studies on the effects of iron loading on myelin are lacking. This lack of scientific interest in iron overload effects on myelin production probably stems from the limited concerns that iron overload is a public health issue and that excess iron entry into the brain would be limited by the BBB. Overall, these data demonstrate how iron depletion early during development can disrupt the myelination process through a disruption in metabolic support for myelin production as a whole because no single protein or lipid component is exclusively regulated by iron depletion. The data strongly suggest that once the developmental time window has passed, iron supplementation is unlikely to fully correct these changes. Iron is clearly essential for proper myelination, and understanding iron uptake and transport mechanisms in oligodendrocytes is crucial for developing effective therapies to treat iron deficiency and also dysmyelinating disorders. As we better understand the different molecular pathways involved in iron transport in OLs, novel therapeutic approaches to promote OL development and myelinogenesis may arise.

3.

## Transferrin
Transferrin (Tf) is a ubiquitously expressed iron transport protein. It is an 80 kDa glycoprotein that is capable of binding two atoms of ferric iron (Fe3+) with a high affinity of 1022 M−1 (Aisen et al.  ). When bound to iron, it is known as holo‐transferrin (holoTf), and when it is not bound to iron, it is known as apo‐transferrin (apoTf). HoloTf binds to its cognate receptor, transferrin receptor (TfR1), which is expressed on the cell surface; then the Tf‐TfR complex is internalized by receptor‐mediated endocytosis. The lower pH of the endosome permits reduction of the ferric iron by metalloreductases (STEAP2, STEAP3), which dissociates from Tf and is then transported out of the endosome and into the cell by a divalent metal transporter: DMT1. This ferrous iron is then added to the labile iron pool where it is available to the cell, and Tf and TfR are recycled back to the membrane. The transferrin‐transferrin receptor cycle is depicted in Figure  .
 In both rats (Connor and Fine  ) and humans (Dwork et al.  ; Gerber and Connor  ), most of the Tf protein in the brain resides in oligodendrocytes. Evidence has shown that the appearance of iron and transferrin is coincident with myelination during development in rodents (Connor and Fine  ; Lin and Connor  ). Within the central nervous system, oligodendrocytes, along with the epithelial cells of the choroid plexus, are capable of synthesizing transferrin; however, the transferrin synthesized by oligodendrocytes is reportedly not secreted by them (de Arriba Zerpa et al.  ; Duchange et al.  ). The transferrin produced by oligodendroglial cells in vitro (human OL cell line and primary rat oligodendrocyte progenitor cells [OPCs]) and in vivo in the mouse and rat brain lacks the signal peptide sequence due to alternative splicing (de Arriba Zerpa et al.  ; Duchange et al.  ). The lack of Tf secretion is unique to oligodendrocytes in the CNS and demonstrates the importance of intracellular transferrin for iron mobilization within oligodendrocytes.
The connection between transferrin and myelin is also emphasized by a significant decrease in Tf mRNA levels and protein levels seen in the myelin deficient (md) rat, which has severe hypomyelination and lacks a mature oligodendrocyte population (Roskams and Connor  ) with virtually no Tf‐positive oligodendrocyte staining (Connor et al.  ). Similarly, Tf protein levels are more than halved in shiverer mice, which have a normal amount of total oligodendrocytes but display abnormal myelination (Connor et al.  ). Thus, the compromised ability to produce myelin is reflected in severely reduced Tf levels, which demonstrates the intertwined relationship between Tf and myelination. There is also a 30% reduction in myelin thickness in hypotransferrinemic (hpx) mice, which have less than 1% of the normal levels of transferrin and must be supplemented with weekly transferrin injections for survival (Dickinson and Connor  ). It is surprising that these mice are still able to form some amount of myelin, but it is unclear if this is due to the exogenously delivered Tf protein or a compensatory mechanism, such as our more recent discovery of H‐ferritin as an iron delivery protein (see below) that is able to supply iron to oligodendrocytes in the absence of Tf. Transcriptomic analyses of the mouse brain at multiple ages (P17, 2–3 months old, and 21–23 months old) have revealed that the mean Tf expression is higher in myelinating OLs compared to OPCs (Ximerakis et al.  ; Zhang et al.  ) and that Tf mRNA is upregulated in these cells in 12‐week‐old animals compared to 2‐week‐old animals (Hoshino et al.  ), which provides additional evidence demonstrating the importance of intracellular Tf for myelinating OLs. As a whole, these studies suggest that Tf is necessary for the production and maintenance of healthy myelin, including a role of intracellular mobilization of iron that may be unlike any other cell.
Studies using intracranial injections (ICI) of exogenous apoTf have demonstrated the trophic potential of Tf for oligodendrocyte development and myelinogenesis. Specifically, a single intracranial injection of 350 ng apoTf into healthy P3 Wistar rats resulted in a 50% increase in MBP and CNP mRNA when analyzed 2 weeks later (Escobar Cabrera et al.  ). It also resulted in a significant decrease in the percentage of proliferating OPCs, a significant increase in the percentage of differentiated MBP+ cells (Marta et al.  ), and an increased percentage of myelinated axons in the corpus callosum (Marta et al.  ). Interestingly, there was no effect on PLP mRNA levels (Escobar Cabrera et al.  ) and no difference to the percentage of PLP+ cells (Marta et al.  ). These data demonstrate that apoTf is shifting oligodendrocytes towards a more mature state by inhibiting proliferation and/or promoting myelination, but the absence of an effect on PLP is puzzling. However, there is evidence of abnormal compaction in these animals as measured by an increase in the widths of the major dense line and intraperiod space, which could result from an altered MBP:PLP composition since MBP is a component of the major dense line and PLP is a component of the intraperiod space (Marta et al.  ). This demonstrates that not all myelin constituents are impacted equally by the trophic effects of Tf. Moreover, apoTf‐injected rats also had increased tubulin and actin mRNA that was isolated from the myelin fraction, indicating an altered cytoskeletal network of OLs (Cabrera et al.  ). As a whole, the data show that administering apoTf promotes oligodendrocyte differentiation and cytoskeletal reorganization. Furthermore, the pro‐myelinating effect of apoTf on P3 rats was able to persist into adulthood as shown by a significant increase in total proteins, phospholipids, and galactolipids in the myelin fraction isolated from 2‐month‐old animals (Escobar Cabrera et al.  ). Interestingly, the benefits of apoTf administration are temporally restricted because injecting apoTf into P20 rats did not alter myelin composition (Escobar Cabrera et al.  ) suggesting a developmental window similar to that seen for iron utilization.
The effect of apoTf administration on oligodendrocytes and myelin in vivo has also been examined during pathological states of hypomyelination. Injecting P3 iron‐deficient rat pups with a single ICI of apoTf increased the levels of cholesterol, phospholipids, and galactolipids in the myelin seen 3 weeks later compared to iron‐deficient rats that received a saline ICI (Badaracco et al.  ). There was also an increase in myelin proteins such as MAG, PLP, and MBP (Badaracco et al.  ) and an increase in O4 (oligodendrocyte marker) and MBP immunoreactivity in the corpus callosum (Rosato‐Siri et al.  ). Administering apoTf also elicited behavioral benefits as evidenced by the normalized latencies and amplitudes of visually evoked potentials (VEPs) that were compromised as a result of iron deficiency (Rosato‐Siri et al.  ). Although the hypomyelination that resulted from the developmental iron deficiency was not completely rescued by apoTf since values did not reach control levels, there still was a difference between the apoTf‐injected and saline‐injected iron‐deficient animals, which is evidence for a therapeutic potential of apoTf administration following iron deficiency. When OPCs were cultured from these iron‐deficient animals and treated with apoTf, there was a significant decrease in the percentage of PSA‐NCAM+ OPCs and a significant increase in the percentage of MBP+ cells that reached numbers comparable to those in control cultures (Badaracco et al.  ).
Similarly, after cerebral hypoxia and ischemia (H/I) to P7 rats, ICI of apoTf 24 h later rescued the hypomyelinating effects of the injury as measured by increased MBP immunoreactivity in the corpus callosum, increased number of proliferative PDGFRα+ cells in the subventricular zone (SVZ), and decreased apoptotic Caspase 3+ cells in the SVZ compared to saline‐injected controls (Clausi et al.  ). Also, neurospheres grown from these rats (H/I injury at P7 followed by apoTf injection after 24 h) had significantly increased volume and a significant increase in the number of O4+ and O4+/MBP+ cells that originated from the neurospheres (Clausi et al.  ). Evidence of the therapeutic effect of apoTf has also been demonstrated in the cuprizone model of demyelination and remyelination. Cuprizone is a copper chelator, and although the exact mechanism is unclear, feeding rodents cuprizone elicits robust and reproducible demyelination in the CNS, which can be followed by spontaneous remyelination after withdrawal from the diet. A single dose of apoTf injected intracranially to Wistar rats that have been on a 0.6% cuprizone diet resulted in a myelin composition that was not significantly different from controls in addition to MBP immunoreactivity that was actually greater than controls, which shows that apoTf can prove beneficial during remyelination (Adamo et al.  ). MBP staining is undetectable in the brainstem of md (myelin‐deficient) rats, but a single injection of Tf into the brain parenchyma of these animals resulted in detectable MBP immunoreactivity 2 weeks post‐injection (de Espinosa los Monteros et al.  ). Recent work by Clausi and colleagues further demonstrated the trophic effects of apoTf following hypoxic/ischemic insult using a more clinically feasible route of administration through inhalation (Clausi et al.  ). Intranasal administration of apoTf immediately following hypoxic/ischemic insult was able to penetrate the neonatal mouse brain and resulted in a significant reduction in the loss of MBP protein and CNP+ cells that result from the injury (Clausi et al.  ). Moreover, there was also an increased number of PDGFRα+ cells in the SVZ, reduced number of demyelinated axons, and decreased apoptotic OLs that were of comparable levels to uninjured control rats (Clausi et al.  ). These results provide strong evidence for the therapeutic potential of Tf following white matter damage.
In addition to the results seen in vivo, in vitro studies have similarly demonstrated the promyelinating effects of apoTf and revealed underlying mechanistic pathways. Adding apoTf to primary rat OPCs resulted in a significant increase in transcription of MBP (Espinosa‐Jeffrey et al.  ), a decrease in A2B5+ precursor cells, and an increase in more mature O4+ and MBP+ cells (Paez et al.  ). There was also a change in the phenotype of the cells as measured by an increased percentage of cells with medium‐high to high complexity in morphology (Paez et al.  ). This morphological change was also seen when cultures were taken from P4 rat pups, but not from P10 rats (García et al.  ). Thus, apoTf administration past a certain time point in early development is unable to exert its pro‐differentiating effects on oligodendrocytes, similar to what was seen in the P20 rats in vivo (Escobar Cabrera et al.  ). Adding apoTf reduced migration and increased protein levels of N‐cadherin, which promotes myelination, and decreased protein levels of PSA‐NCAM, which negatively regulates myelination (Paez et al.  ). Fyn, which regulates the reorganization of the cytoskeleton of oligodendroglial cells and is activated during early stages of myelination (Umemori et al.  ), levels were increased in primary rat OPCs with apoTf added (Pérez et al.  ). As a whole, these data suggest that apoTf is altering the developmental state of the oligodendrocyte and promoting maturation. Within the cell, apoTf colocalized with kinesin and dynein in the cell body and processes of primary rat oligodendroglial cultures (Ortiz et al.  ). The apoTf is transported to the tips of the cellular processes for microtubule stabilization (E. H. Ortiz et al.  ). Moreover, adding apoTf to primary rat OPCs resulted in a significant decrease in the percentage of cells in S phase, a reduction in the percentage of dividing BrdU+ cells, and an increase in cell cycle time compared to untreated controls (Paez et al.  ). It also increased the percentage of O4+, GalC+, and MBP+ cells in addition to increasing the cell cycle inhibitor p27kip1 (Paez et al.  ). This further supports that apoTf is inhibiting cell cycle progression and promoting differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells. Similar results were observed when apoTf was added to mouse oligodendrocyte cell lines N19 and N20.1 (Paez et al.  ). The activation of Fyn kinase also occurred much earlier and levels of active RhoA were decreased (Pérez et al.  ), which has been shown to occur during OL differentiation (Liang et al.  ). Adding apoTf to primary rat OPCs has been shown to promote maturation through the Fyn/MEK/ERK and PI3K/Akt pathways (Pérez et al.  ). Furthermore, ex vivo analyses revealed that adding apoTf to brain tissue slices from P3 Wistar rats resulted in increased MBP, CNP, and tubulin mRNA, which was blocked when a TfR antibody was added (Marta et al.  ), which demonstrates that the Tf acts through the transferrin receptor to exert its effects on oligodendrocyte differentiation. When interpreting these studies, it is important to note that apoTf has a very high affinity for iron (1022 M−1) (Aisen et al.  ); therefore, although apoTf is administered, these experiments have not shown whether the apoTf has acquired iron and functions as holoTf because apoTf does not bind to TfR but holoTf does. Until experiments are performed using a mutant form of apoTf that fails to bind iron, the functional significance of apoTf cannot be fully ascertained. Nonetheless, this concern does not detract from the observations that demonstrate delivery of apoTf can be therapeutic even in conditions when iron availability is low. Moreover, we have recently demonstrated that infusion of apoTf into the lateral ventricle increases iron uptake into the brain (Baringer et al.  ). Thus, the effects attributed to apoTf infusion on oligodendrocytes may result from increased iron release into the brain. Transferrin and/or the iron it contains are clearly vital for oligodendroglial cell development and the production of myelination, and further studies investigating the therapeutic potential of Tf for remyelination are warranted.

4.

## Transferrin Overexpression
Research using genetic overexpression of transferrin has demonstrated the importance of intracellular transferrin. Adult transgenic mice overexpressing human Tf have increased MAP1B (microtubule‐associated protein), tubulin, tau, and STOP (stable tubule only peptide) protein levels in the cytoskeleton fraction compared to wildtype mice (Paez et al.  ). These animals also have increased MBP and CNP protein and more than a 30% increase in myelin components such as galactolipids and phospholipids (Saleh et al.  ). Interestingly, there were no changes to PLP and MAG protein levels nor to myelin thickness or compaction (Saleh et al.  ). These data demonstrate how Tf within the cell promotes differentiation, but not necessarily to the point of hypermyelination. This was also seen in Tf‐overexpressing mice, which have increased PLP, CNP, MBP, and MAG mRNA levels in the brain along with more myelin in the corpus callosum (Sow et al.  ). Oligodendrocytes cultured from the Tf‐overexpressing mice also had more O4 and PLP immunoreactivity (Sow et al.  ). Although this contrasts with previously mentioned studies that showed exogenous apoTf does not affect PLP (Escobar Cabrera et al.  ; Marta et al.  ), Tf‐overexpressing mice have continuously high levels of Tf compared to a one‐time administration, which could explain the difference in effects on PLP. Essentially, high expression levels of Tf within the cell are able to augment oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelin production similar to exogenously supplied Tf.
N19 and N20.1 mouse oligodendrocyte cell lines that were transfected to overexpress human transferrin also had increased indices of differentiation as measured by increased GalC immunoreactivity, increased MBP mRNA, decreased percentage of cells with low and medium complexity, and increased percentage of cells with medium‐high to high complexity (Paez et al.  ). Co‐culture of the Tf‐overexpressing N19 and N20.1 mouse oligodendrocytes with primary rat neurons resulted specifically in an increase in N‐CAM, which is involved in forming contacts with neurons (Paez et al.  ). F3/contactin, which mediates neuron–glia contacts (Hu et al.  ), and Fyn protein levels were also increased in these co‐cultures (Paez et al.  ). Overexpression of Tf in N19 and N20.1 cells also resulted in upregulated genes involved in lipid metabolism and mitochondrial function (García et al.  ). Thus, transferrin within the oligodendrocyte is clearly heavily involved in cellular differentiation, metabolic activity, and myelin synthesis. Future studies should develop oligodendrocyte‐specific knockout of Tf to provide more insight into how intracellular Tf impacts iron handling, OL health, and myelination.

5.

## Transferrin Receptor
Although transferrin plays an important role in oligodendrocyte maturation, transferrin receptor (TfR) is not detected in mature oligodendrocytes. Immunoreactivity to TfR was not detected in any glia (astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, microglia) in 8‐weekweek‐old male NMRI mice (Moos  ). In general, there is little TfR and iron staining overlap in the brain (Hill et al.  ). White matter areas displayed practically no detectable TfR staining, and the minimal TfR staining observed was mostly localized to blood vessels in adult BalbC mice (Dickinson and Connor  ). TfR was not detected in white matter tracts including the corpus callosum, anterior commissure, and internal capsule in the Sprague–Dawley rat brain (Mash et al.  ). No TfR immunoreactivity was seen in the white matter of 1–3‐week‐old Wistar rats (Kaur and Ling  ) and very weak staining was detected in OLs in the 1–4‐month‐old Sprague–Dawley rat brain (Giometto et al.  ). TfR staining occurred lightly in oligodendrocytes in white matter tracts in the human brain (Connor and Menzies  ). One study found that protein expression of TfR in the rat optic nerve was seen prior to Tf, MBP, or GalC expression (Lin and Connor  ); therefore, it is possible that TfR appears very early on in the oligodendrocyte lineage. However, in myelin‐deficient md rats, which are severely hypomyelinated with oligodendrocytes unable to mature, TfR staining was not detected on oligodendrocytes (Lin and Connor  ), but this could be a reflection of the mutation itself as the OLs themselves are abnormal.
A binding study with radiolabeled Tf did not reveal any binding in the white matter in rats or humans (Hulet et al.  ), which further supports a lack of TfR on mature OLs. Perhaps the most strikingly convincing data for the inability of mature OLs to express TfR is that in models of iron deficiency that result in hypomyelination, the OLs still do not express TfR even at the mRNA level (Han et al.  ). Conversely, the presence of TfR on oligodendrocytes in vitro has been demonstrated by radiolabeled transferrin binding to primary rat oligodendrocytes in culture (Espinosa de los Monteros and Foucaud  ). This could be due to the fact that the cultured cells are progenitor cells and TfR expression is downregulated with differentiation. In line with this, TfR staining has been observed on OPCs in vitro in Olig2+ cells isolated from the P1 mouse brain (Cheli et al.  ).
Moreover, knocking out TfR in OPCs in vitro resulted in significantly reduced iron content and blocked OPC maturation (Cheli et al.  ). Specifically, there was an increased proportion of immature cells (Olig2/NG2+ and Olig2/Olig1+) and a decreased proportion of mature cells (CC1+, CNP+, MOG+) (Cheli et al.  ). Among the MOG+ cells, there was also a visible morphological difference with significantly fewer cells of medium‐high to high complexity and significantly more cells displaying a low complexity (Cheli et al.  ). This maturational blockade was not due to impaired proliferation, as the percentage of Ki67+ cells was not different from controls. These data demonstrate the importance of TfR for OPC development and iron uptake in vitro. In vivo TfR knockout (KO) studies similarly revealed the importance of TfR on oligodendroglial cells (Sox10+) or OPCs (NG2+) during development. Specifically, KO during the first postnatal week resulted in a significant reduction in the number of mature OLs, decreased myelin proteins (MBP, PLP, and CNP), and decreased myelin (Cheli et al.  ). It also resulted in decreased iron staining, thinner myelin, and a decreased percentage of myelinated axons. Transcriptomic analyses of NG2+ OPCs isolated from these mice revealed downregulated genes involved in mTORC1 signaling and the mitochondrial protein complex, indicative of impaired energy metabolism that likely leads to the inability to form mature myelinating OLs (Cheli et al.  ). When the KO was induced later at P30, myelin protein levels were also reduced, albeit to a lesser extent. On the contrary, TfR KO on Sox10+ OLs in adult mice (P60) had no impact on myelin synthesis or OL development and only resulted in a slight reduction in myelin thickness (Cheli et al.  ). Altogether, these data suggest that TfR is essential for OL maturation and myelination during development but not necessarily during adulthood. Taken together, this lack of response in the adult mice is expected considering the multitude of studies demonstrating limited to no expression of TfR on mature OLs.
In contrast to what has been found in vivo, one group found that TfR protein expression actually increased during differentiation of primary rat oligodendrocytes (Li et al.  ). This finding is in direct opposition to the majority of data in the field; however, this could be due to aspects of the cell culture system used. Interestingly, TfR mRNA has been detected in myelinating OLs from the P17 mouse cortex (Zhang et al.  ) and OLs from 2 to 3‐month‐old mice and 21 to 23‐month‐old mice (Ximerakis et al.  ). However, TfR gene expression levels are downregulated in the corpus callosum of 12‐week‐old mice compared to 2‐week‐old mice (Hoshino et al.  ). While this bears further experimentation, the great abundance of data indicates that mature oligodendrocytes do not express TfR, suggesting that iron uptake in these cells must be through an alternative mechanism. Identifying when TfR protein is expressed in the oligodendrocyte lineage and at what point during mouse development would lead to a better understanding of the iron dynamics in these cells. What does appear clear is that the iron uptake mechanism for mature oligodendrocytes does not involve TfR.

6.

## H‐Ferritin
Since mature oligodendrocytes lack TfR, the method of iron acquisition by these cells must be due to some form of non‐transferrin‐bound iron (NTBI) transport. Recent studies looking into iron uptake in oligodendrocytes have provided evidence for H‐ferritin (FTH) as the primary iron delivery protein to these cells. Ferritin is a ubiquitously expressed iron storage protein that is capable of holding up to 4500 atoms of iron within its core. It typically holds several hundred atoms of iron and is composed of 24 subunits of H‐ferritin (FTH) and L‐ferritin (FTL). The FTH subunit possesses ferroxidase activity, meaning it can convert ferrous Fe2+ to ferric Fe3+ while the FTL subunit aids in nucleating the ferric iron for storage. Although traditionally considered an iron storage protein due to its ability to neutralize and sequester ferrous iron, making it unable to form harmful reactive oxygen species, recent evidence has implicated FTH in an iron delivery capacity as well.
FTH protein has been detected as early as P7 in the wild‐type mouse brain, and staining was primarily located in white matter tracts (Chiou et al.  ). FTH protein was only found in neurons and oligodendrocytes in adult male Sprague–Dawley rats, and interestingly, protein did not correlate with mRNA in adult rats (Han et al.  ). This could be due to the post‐transcriptional regulation of FTH expression or FTH protein being secreted from or taken up by the cells. FTH staining in oligodendrocytes has also been seen in the porcine brain (Blissman et al.  ), nonhuman primate brain (Connor et al.  ), and in the human brain where it occurs in a patchy distribution (Connor and Menzies  ) similar to iron. In wild‐type mice, FTH colocalization with the mature oligodendrocyte marker, CC1, increases significantly from 2–6 to 12–24 months of age (Mukherjee et al.  ), which suggests oligodendrocytes accumulate FTH with age. Oligodendrocyte cultures from 3 to 6‐month‐old lamb brains increase FTH mRNA expression after becoming adherent, which leads to differentiation (Sanyal et al.  ), and FTH protein expression increases during the differentiation of primary rat oligodendrocytes (Li et al.  ). Transcriptomic analysis from the P17 mouse brain has also shown that the mean FTH expression levels are much higher in myelinating OLs compared to OPCs (Zhang et al.  ). Further, FTH mRNA is upregulated in the corpus callosum and in myelinating OLs from 12‐week‐old mice compared to 2‐week‐old mice (Hoshino et al.  ). These data demonstrate that FTH in oligodendrocytes is related to cellular maturation, which aligns with the high levels of iron that mature oligodendrocytes contain.
The relationship between FTH and OLs has also been explored in a model where FTH is limited, which occurs in FTH heterozygous mice (FTH1+/−). FTH null mutants die in utero, but FTH heterozygotes are viable. These hypoferritinemic mice have an 83% decrease in FTH protein levels in the brain, no difference in total brain iron, and no difference in cellular iron staining (Thompson et al.  ). Interestingly, no difference in FTH staining is seen in the OLs of 6–8 month‐old mice; however, the iron‐stained OLs in the white matter had more processes, which is suggestive of an immature phenotype (Thompson et al.  ). Although it appears that OLs were able to acquire or produce similar amounts of FTH, this disruption affected the progression of OL development. Moreover, 6‐month‐old mice FTH1+/− mice have decreased total phospholipids and galactolipids in addition to decreased PLP (Ortiz et al.  ). This suggests that while oligodendrocytes in FTH‐deficient animals still acquire iron, lower levels of FTH impact cellular maturation and myelination. Although total brain iron content was not affected in these animals, there was decreased brain iron uptake of 59Fe‐FTH over a 48 h period compared to wild‐type mice (Fisher et al.  ). Therefore, reduced FTH levels could also impact the timing of iron delivery to the brain and oligodendrocytes.
Studies knocking out FTH specifically from oligodendrocytes have further demonstrated the importance of FTH in oligodendrocyte biology and myelination. Primary murine OLs had decreased MBP and PLP, decreased number of mature OLs, increased proportion of immature cells, and simpler morphology after FTH knockout (KO) (Wan et al.  ). FTH KO in Sox10+ OLs (cells of oligodendroglial lineage) during the first postnatal week resulted in decreased myelin proteins (MBP, PLP, and CNP), decreased myelin, and decreased number of mature OLs. It also resulted in decreased iron staining, thinner myelin, and decreased percentage of myelinated axons, and some of these alterations were still present at 2 months of age (Wan et al.  ). Transcriptomic analysis on NG2+ OPCs isolated from these animals at P15 revealed downregulated genes involved in iron metabolism, myelination, OPC process extension, and OL development (Cheli et al.  ). Knocking out FTH in Sox10+ OLs during the third postnatal week also resulted in decreased myelin proteins and decreased number of mature OLs, but this was only seen at P30 and did not persist through adulthood (Wan et al.  ). This transient effect suggests the importance of FTH expression by oligodendrocytes earlier during development. Interestingly, inducing FTH KO during adulthood in 2‐month‐old mice did not affect myelin protein expression nor the number of mature OLs, but there was a slight reduction in total number of OLs, decreased myelin thickness, and decreased percentage of myelinated axons, which indicates that Sox10+ OLs continuously require FTH to maintain the volume of myelin sheath even after development (Wan et al.  ). FTH KO in mature PLP‐expressing oligodendrocytes in 2‐month‐old mice did not impact myelin thickness nor the total number of oligodendrocytes when analyzed at 6 or 12 months (Mukherjee et al.  ). These data suggest that FTH production by mature OLs in the adult mouse is not critical for maintenance of the myelin sheath and oligodendrocyte population in contrast to what was observed with earlier FTH KO. Furthermore, knocking out FTH in NG2+ OPCs during cuprizone‐induced demyelination led to a reduction in MBP and PLP and decreased number of mature OLs with no difference in total OLs (Wan et al.  ), which establishes the importance of FTH expression in oligodendrocyte progenitor cells also during demyelination and remyelination. Overall, KO studies have revealed that FTH expression in cells of oligodendrocyte lineage is required for proper development and production of the myelin sheath.
Moreover, in vitro work has demonstrated that FTH also acts extracellularly and can even replace Tf as an iron source for oligodendrocytes. Adding recombinant FTH increased the cellular iron content and reversed the loss of viability that resulted from culturing primary rat oligodendrocytes in low Tf media (Todorich et al.  ). Culturing primary rat OPCs in complete media (containing Tf) supplemented with FTH results in an increased percentage of MBP+ cells, increased MBP protein, and increased Olig2 protein (pan‐oligodendrocyte marker) with no change in proliferation (Todorich et al.  ). Therefore, FTH‐mediated iron delivery is also able to elicit a pro‐myelinating effect on the cells. The addition of iron by the lipophilic compound TMH‐Fe did not induce maturation of the oligodendrocytes (Todorich et al.  ) indicating that it is not just iron delivery provided by FTH but that FTH itself is important in the process.
To further support FTH as an external iron delivery source for oligodendrocytes, it has been shown that primary rat oligodendrocyte progenitors and CNP+ oligodendrocytes internalize FTH after 1 h incubation (Hulet et al.  ). Incubating primary rat oligodendrocyte progenitors with inhibitors of receptor‐mediated uptake resulted in significantly decreased internalization of FTH, indicating that FTH uptake is through receptor‐mediated endocytosis with clathrin‐coated pits (Hulet et al.  ). After incubation with FTH, there was a 10% decrease in IRE/IRP binding activity in these cells, which indicates that FTH is contributing to the labile iron pool (increased iron, decreased iron‐response protein [IRP] binding to iron‐response elements [IRE]) (Hulet et al.  ). Therefore, FTH is endocytosed and taken up by OLs, where the iron it contains is made available to the cell. Intriguingly, studies using radiolabeled 59Fe‐loaded FTH have shown that FTH brain iron uptake peaks around P14 in wild‐type mice (Chiou et al.  ), which is coincident with peak myelination. These data provide strong evidence for FTH binding to and delivering iron to oligodendrocytes during the maturational process, and the iron it supplies contributes to myelinogenesis.
Radiolabeled FTH binding is first seen in the P12 C57BL/J6 mouse brain (absent at P7) in the brainstem and cerebellum (Hulet et al.  ). At P15‐16, FTH binding is detectable in the mouse corpus callosum, and at P23‐34, FTH binding expands into striatal white matter (Hulet et al.  ). Recombinant FTH specifically binds to adult mouse brain membrane homogenates and white matter tracts, and binding was not inhibited by either transferrin or L‐rich horse spleen ferritin (Hulet et al.  ) indicating a unique binding site on OLs. In P19 jimpy mice, where the oligodendrocytes fail to produce myelin (Hulet et al.  ), no difference in FTH binding (dissociation constants or receptor densities) to brain membrane homogenates was seen. Although a significant reduction in receptor densities of FTH binding would be expected in these hypomyelinated animals, analyses were conducted on whole brain membrane homogenates so spatial and cellular resolution is lost. Therefore, it cannot be concluded if FTH receptor expression on oligodendrocytes in these mice is actually affected. Essentially, these data demonstrate that the ability of oligodendrocytes to both express and also receive extracellular FTH is important for their metabolism and myelination. While the data clearly demonstrate that FTH is capable of delivering iron to cells of oligodendrocyte lineage, it is still unknown exactly at what point during oligodendrocyte and mouse development that FTH becomes predominant. Determining when FTH replaces Tf as an iron source would lead to a better understanding of iron metabolism within these cells and when FTH could be considered as a potential vehicle for iron supplementation to promote remyelination.

7.

## Iron Source for Oligodendrocytes
It appears from the literature that both Tf and FTH are capable of iron delivery and both of these proteins are known to cross the BBB (Chiou et al.  ; Fisher et al.  ; Fishman et al.  ; Jefferies et al.  ). Tf likely delivers iron to OPCs since they express TfR, and while there is compelling evidence for FTH‐mediated iron delivery, it is unclear when this mode of iron transport first appears in the oligodendrocyte lineage. In addition to the potential for iron delivery directly from Tf and FTH at the level of the BBB, there is strong evidence that other glia provide iron to oligodendrocytes. In the md rat, which lacks mature myelinating oligodendrocytes, iron accumulates in astrocytes and microglia (Connor and Menzies  ). Although this could simply represent iron accumulation in these cells due to the lack of oligodendrocytes, it could also represent a backup of iron in these cells that cannot be released to the dysfunctional oligodendrocytes. This idea stems from the following observations. Ferritin staining is predominantly found in microglia in the P5 rat; then the localization shifts as it becomes strongly associated with oligodendrocytes at P30 (Cheepsunthorn et al.  ). It was suggested in this study that microglia accumulate iron first, which is then transferred to oligodendrocytes. This concept was explored in a cell culture study which showed that conditioned media from iron‐loaded primary rat microglia promoted oligodendrocyte survival, and FTH was detected in the media (Zhang et al.  ). Knocking down FTH in the microglia eliminated the trophic effect of the conditioned media on the oligodendrocytes (Zhang et al.  ), which demonstrates that microglia release FTH, which is available for utilization by oligodendrocytes.
In addition, conditioned medium from astrocytes rescued the immature phenotype of iron‐deficient oligodendrocytes as evidenced by an increase in mature MBP+ cells and a decrease in immature PDGFRα+ cells (Rosato‐Siri et al.  ). Although the components of the conditioned media were not analyzed, it can be hypothesized that astrocytes released iron to correct the iron‐deficient phenotype of the oligodendrocytes. In the same line, knocking out FTH from astrocytes specifically severely impacted the oligodendrocyte population and myelin. Specifically, KO of astrocytic FTH early in development significantly reduced myelin proteins MBP, PLP, and CNP, myelin thickness, the percentage of myelinated axons, and the number of mature OLs (Cheli et al.  ). Knocking out FTH exclusively from astrocytes in 2‐month‐old animals had a similar effect as it resulted in decreased MBP, PLP, and the number of mature OLs (Cheli et al.  ). FTH KO in astrocytes while on the cuprizone diet resulted in more demyelination and reduced myelin proteins both during the demyelination and remyelination phases of the paradigm (Cheli et al.  ). These data suggest that FTH expression by astrocytes is necessary for oligodendrocyte health and myelinogenesis during early development, young adulthood, and pathological states of demyelination, but additional studies are required to determine if the astrocyte‐derived FTH is supplied directly to OLs. It is unknown how much FTH is provided by astrocytes and microglia to oligodendroglial cells, but KO studies from microglia specifically or both astrocytes and microglia would supply additional insight. The data overwhelmingly support that FTH is a primary iron source for oligodendrocytes and strongly suggest that FTH can originate from other glia within the brain, so determining how FTH and the iron it contains are specifically trafficked from astrocytes and microglia to cells of oligodendrocyte lineage should be the focus of future investigations.

8.

## 
TIM‐1/Tim‐2 (T‐Cell Immunoglobulin Domain Containing Protein‐1/2)
While the mechanism for Tf‐mediated iron uptake is well‐established, how oligodendrocytes acquire iron through FTH is a newer area of investigation. Recent work by our laboratory and others has found that Tim‐2, or T‐cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain‐containing protein 2, is a receptor for FTH (Chen et al.  ; Han et al.  ) on oligodendrocytes in mice (Todorich et al.  ). Tim‐2 is a cell surface glycoprotein that belongs to the Tim family, which consists of four receptors in mice: Tim‐1, Tim‐2, Tim‐3, and Tim‐4, and three in humans: TIM‐1, TIM‐3, and TIM‐4 (Kuchroo et al.  ; Santiago et al.  ) that are involved in immune system regulation. Expression of Tim proteins has also been found outside of the immune system in the liver and kidneys (Chen et al.  ) and in the brain where Tim‐2 has been detected on rodent oligodendrocytes (Todorich et al.  ). Tim‐2 staining is localized to white matter tracts and OLs in the adult C57BL/6 mouse (Todorich et al.  ), and Tim‐2 and CC1 colocalization is evident in the corpus callosum of the P7 mouse brain indicating the presence of this receptor on mature oligodendrocytes during development (Chiou et al.  ). Tim‐2 staining is seen in primary rat OLs (CNP+), bipolar oligodendrocyte progenitors (A2B5+), and branched pro‐oligodendrocytes (O4+), which suggests its presence throughout oligodendrocyte development (Todorich et al.  ). However, using a rat glial cell line (CG4 cells), Tim‐2 is only seen when the cells have been differentiated, which coincides with the appearance of FTH binding (Todorich et al.  ). This disparity in differential Tim‐2 expression could be due to the undifferentiated cells not having fully committed to the oligodendroglial lineage but may also reflect the difference between primary cells and a cell line. In addition, Tim‐2 staining was not seen in GFAP+ primary rat astrocytes (Todorich et al.  ), but it was present on GFAP+ astrocytes in the mouse hippocampus (Chiou et al.  ). This conflicting data could be due to a species‐specific difference in cellular expression or a matter of in vivo versus in vitro models. Further investigation into when specifically Tim‐2 is expressed during OL and mouse development is needed and would provide more information regarding when oligodendroglial cells are receptive to FTH‐mediated iron delivery.
In vitro studies have revealed that FTH interacts with Tim‐2 to deliver iron to the cell. Specifically, 55Fe‐loaded FTH was taken up by Tim‐2‐expressing cells in a time‐dependent manner (Han et al.  ), and adding excess unlabeled FTH was able to inhibit 55Fe‐FTH uptake. Using electron microscopy, FTH was observed in endosomes followed by lysosomes, and entry into the cell was inhibited by an endocytosis inhibitor (Han et al.  ). The iron from the exogenous FTH was delivered to the cell and increased expression of endogenous FTH (Han et al.  ). These findings are consistent with the study showing that FTH binding to primary rat oligodendrocyte progenitors was prevented by inhibiting receptor‐mediated uptake (Hulet et al.  ). Thus, there is compelling evidence that FTH binds to Tim‐2 on oligodendrocytes where it is internalized in endosomes (Chen et al.  ) and then undergoes lysosomal degradation to release the iron into the cell (Kidane et al.  ).
Tim‐2 does not exist in humans (Kuchroo et al.  ), but recent work by Chiou et al. ( ) offers supporting data revealing similar functionality between human TIM‐1 and mouse Tim‐2. Human TIM‐1 is 41% homologous to mouse Tim‐1 and 36% homologous to mouse Tim‐2 (Chen et al.  ). Cultured mature myelinating oligodendrocytes that have been isolated from primary human brain tissue stain for TIM‐1 (Chiou et al.  ), and oligodendrocytes in the white matter of human brain tissue also stain for TIM‐1 (Chiou et al.  ). Both primary human oligodendrocytes as well as mature OLs from the human oligodendrocyte cell line MO3.13 cells take up FTH (Chiou et al.  ). When TIM‐1 expression is knocked down in the MO3.13 cells using siRNA, FTH is not taken up by the cells (Chiou et al.  ). These data indicate that FTH uptake in oligodendrocytes is mediated by TIM‐1 in humans and Tim‐2 in rodents (Figure  ).
 Another binding partner of human TIM‐1 and mouse Tim‐2 is Semaphorin4A (Sema4A), which is a member of the Semaphorin family of proteins that are involved in the immune response and axon guidance during development (Kumanogoh et al.  ). Specifically, Sema4A has been shown to induce apoptosis in mature but not immature human oligodendrocytes (MO3.13 cell line) through interaction with TIM‐1 (Chiou et al.  ). When TIM‐1 siRNA was administered to knock down receptor expression on mature oligodendrocytes, the cytotoxic effect of Sema4A was rescued (Chiou et al.  ). The cytotoxic effect of Sema4A on oligodendrocytes has also been demonstrated in vivo, as a single injection of Sema4A into the corpus callosum of 6‐month‐old mice resulted in significant demyelination, decreased myelin proteins: MBP and CNP, decreased CC1+ mature oligodendrocytes, and decreased number of total Olig2+ oligodendrocytes (Chiou et al.  ). Interestingly, Sema4A protein levels have been shown to be significantly elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from individuals with multiple sclerosis (MS), which is characterized by demyelination in the CNS (Chiou et al.  ). These data provide evidence for a novel oligodendrocyte‐immune axis, and the involvement of a receptor also involved in iron transport (TIM‐1) further emphasizes the prominence of iron in oligodendrocyte biology.

9.

## Divalent Metal Transporter 1
Another important iron import protein is divalent metal transporter 1 (DMT1) also known as NRAMP2 (natural resistance‐associated macrophage protein 2), which is a proton‐metal symporter that has been shown to transport multiple divalent metals such as Fe2+, Cu2+, Zn2+, Cd2+, and Mn2+ (Gunshin et al.  ). In most cells studied to date, the role of DMT1 is to transport ferrous iron from the acidic environment of the endosome after it is reduced and released from transferrin (Dautry‐Varsat et al.  ; Tabuchi et al.  ). However, little to no DMT1 staining has been detected in oligodendrocytes in rats (Burdo et al.  ; Gunshin et al.  ; Song et al.  ), nonhuman primates (Wang et al.  ), or in the human brain (Moos and Morgan  ). It is thus a gap in knowledge how ferrous iron exits the endosome/lysosome into the oligodendrocyte cytosol to be used in metabolic processes. Because of the high intracellular iron content of oligodendrocytes, the absence of DMT1 is surprising. It can be postulated that there must be some additional mechanism that allows for iron that is taken up by the oligodendrocyte to be moved from the endolysosome to the cytosol for use by the cell. Research using the Belgrade rat, which has mutant DMT1 that leads to lower levels of brain iron and decreased myelination, demonstrates that DMT1 is important for brain iron uptake through the blood‐brain barrier (Burdo et al.  ), but the decreased myelination noted in these animals is likely due to the brain iron deficiency rather than a direct effect of DMT1 in oligodendrocytes.
There is an extensive but single study on DMT1 in the mouse that reports detectable DMT1 immunoreactivity in primary mouse oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs), and both DMT1 mRNA and protein expression levels were increased with cellular maturation (Cheli et al.  ). The fact that DMT1 would be expressed in mouse OLs but not in other species is difficult to explain given the current state of knowledge. The cell culture experiments report that DMT1 knockdown in cultured primary OPCs resulted in decreased cellular iron content, decreased staining of mature oligodendrocyte markers CC1, MBP, and MOG, decreased morphological complexity, and increased proliferation (Cheli et al.  ). The effects of DMT1 knockout were also investigated in vivo using NG2‐DMT1 KO and Sox10‐DMT1 KO mice, but it is important to note that immunoreactivity of DMT1 in cells of oligodendroglial lineage was not verified. When DMT1 was ablated from NG2+ OPCs during the second postnatal week, there was decreased iron content in OLs, decreased myelin staining, decreased MBP, MOG, and CNP, decreased percentage of myelinated axons, and decreased number of mature OLs (Cheli et al.  ), which strongly suggests the importance of DMT1 in developing mouse oligodendrocytes. Similarly, knockout of DMT1 from Sox10+ oligodendroglial cells during the first postnatal week resulted in decreased MBP and PLP, decreased number of mature OLs, and decreased number of total OLs at P15 and P30 (Cheli et al.  ). A similar effect was seen when DMT1 was ablated in 2‐month‐old animals (Cheli et al.  ), which demonstrates the importance of DMT1 in Sox10+ cells even in adulthood. In the cuprizone model of demyelination/remyelination, knocking out DMT1 from NG2+ cells during the last week of cuprizone administration and the first week of recovery resulted in decreased MBP, PLP, and CNP, decreased percentage of myelinated axons, decreased number of mature OLs, and reduced myelin thickness seen 2 weeks following cessation of the cuprizone diet (Cheli et al.  ). These data demonstrate that DMT1 is needed for oligodendrocyte health and myelination during development, young adulthood, and for remyelination.
In addition to DMT1, there are other ferrous iron transport proteins that are expressed in oligodendrocytes. Specifically, mucolipin‐1 (Mcoln1 gene) also known as TRPML1, is a ubiquitously expressed cation channel that is permeable to Fe2+ and localizes to late endosomes and lysosomes (Grishchuk et al.  ; Kiselyov et al.  ; Miedel et al.  ; Vergarajauregui and Puertollano  ). Lysosomal iron handling has also been shown to be impaired in Mcoln1‐deficient cells and brain tissues (Coblentz et al.  ; Dong et al.  ; Grishchuk et al.  ; Mepyans et al.  ). Additionally, Mcoln1 KO mice have significant hypomyelination (Grishchuk et al.  ), delayed oligodendrocyte maturation (Mepyans et al.  ), reduced number of oligodendrocytes (Grishchuk et al.  ), and reduced MAG and MOBP (myelin‐associated oligodendrocyte basic protein) mRNA levels (Grishchuk et al.  ). DMT1 mRNA (Slc11a2 gene) and Mcoln1 mRNA have both been detected in OPCs, newly formed OLs, and myelinating OLs in the P17 mouse cortex (Zhang et al.  ), and in both the 2–3‐month‐old and 21–23‐month‐old mouse brain (Ximerakis et al.  ). Interestingly, Mcoln1 expression is upregulated in the corpus callosum of 12‐week‐old mice compared to 2‐week‐old mice (Hoshino et al.  ) and future studies could interrogate the role it plays in OL biology by using an OPC or OL‐specific KO animal. Altogether, the data suggest there is a significant role for DMT1 in the myelination of the mouse brain and possibly TRPML1, but the limited studies offer the opportunity to further explore how iron gets into the oligodendrocyte beyond the endolysosome (Figure  ).

10.

## Ferroportin
When it comes to maintaining iron homeostasis, iron levels in the cell are not only regulated by import but also by export. Ferroportin (Fpn), also known as metal transport protein 1 (MTP1) or iron‐regulatory protein 1 (IREG‐1), is the only known iron exporter, and its expression is pervasive throughout the body. Ferrous iron is transported out of the cell through Fpn on the cell membrane, which can then be oxidized to ferric iron with membrane‐associated ferroxidases such as hephaestin and ceruloplasmin. Data have shown that oligodendrocytes in the subcortical white matter of the rat brain display varied staining intensity for Fpn (Burdo et al.  ), and slight staining was seen in oligodendrocytes in the cerebellar peduncles of the P21 rat brain (Moos and Rosengren Nielsen  ). In cell culture, Fpn is expressed in mature rat oligodendrocytes (GalC+) but not in early (A2B5+) or late (O4+) OPCs (Schulz et al.  ), likely consistent with the relatively lower iron levels in the immature cells with a reduced need to eliminate iron. In contrast, Fpn mRNA (Slc40A1) is downregulated in the corpus callosum of 12‐week‐old mice compared to 2‐week‐old mice (Hoshino et al.  ). It is unclear why Fpn levels would be lower in older animals; however, it can be speculated that this is due to a difference in cellular composition and developmental timing at 2 weeks when myelination is taking place versus 12 weeks when myelination is largely complete. More research is needed to determine if Fpn expression peaks during active cellular differentiation as this could explain why Fpn transcript levels are lower in adult mice compared to pre‐weaning mice despite Fpn being expressed on mature cells and not OPCs.
Iron export in the brain has largely been understudied, but the presence of Fpn on oligodendrocytes suggests the importance of iron export in these cells. Specifically, Fpn mRNA levels have been detected at low levels in OPCs and OLs from the P17, 2–3‐month‐old, and 21–23‐month‐old mouse brain (Ximerakis et al.  ; Zhang et al.  ). Oligodendrocytes may also benefit from iron release via Fpn from other cells in the brain. For example, after lysophosphatidylcholine‐induced demyelination to the spinal cord, Fpn ablation in astrocytes resulted in impaired remyelination and a reduced number of OLs (Schulz et al.  ). Thus, iron export through Fpn in other neural cells could potentially be a source of iron import for oligodendrocytes. Future studies knocking out Fpn in oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, and microglia at different developmental time points would provide further clarity into iron transport to and from OLs via Fpn.

11.

## Hephaestin and Ceruloplasmin
As mentioned previously, Fe2+ that is exported through Fpn must be oxidized to Fe3+ by means of membrane‐bound ferroxidases, such as hephaestin and ceruloplasmin. Similar to Fpn, hephaestin (Heph) expression is seen in mature rat oligodendrocytes (GalC+), but not in early (A2B5+) or late (O4+) OPCs (Schulz et al.  ). Low levels of Heph mRNA are found in OPCs and OLs isolated from the P17, 2–3‐month‐old, and 21–23‐month‐old mouse brain (Ximerakis et al.  ; Zhang et al.  ), and expression increases significantly in the 12‐week‐old corpus callosum compared to the 2 week old corpus callosum (Hoshino et al.  ). Primary wild‐type mouse oligodendrocytes express Heph mRNA (Chen et al.  ), and Heph has been shown to be expressed in the adult mouse CNS (Schulz et al.  ). Specifically, about 80% of mature oligodendrocytes express Heph, around 90% of Heph‐expressing cells are mature oligodendrocytes, and higher Heph expression is seen in white matter oligodendrocytes compared to gray matter oligodendrocytes (Schulz et al.  ). Sla mice, which have a truncated heph gene leading to a protein with partial ferroxidase activity, have impaired iron export from oligodendrocytes (Schulz et al.  ). Even though iron efflux was hindered in oligodendrocytes, there was no difference in Fpn expression, and all of the 55Fe iron administered was taken up by the oligodendrocytes (Schulz et al.  ). Moreover, there was no difference in TfR or DMT1 mRNA in the spinal cord tissue, but there was a significant reduction in Tim‐2 mRNA (Schulz et al.  ), which is suggestive of reduced Tim‐2‐mediated iron uptake as a result of impaired iron efflux. Interestingly, there was no loss in mature oligodendrocytes, no difference in myelin staining, and no difference in myelin thickness; however, behaviorally there was an earlier latency to fall on the rotarod in 6 and 9‐month‐old mice (Schulz et al.  ). Upon closer inspection, it was revealed that the Sla mice had paranodal abnormalities in the myelin as evidenced by reduced Caspr and Nogo A expression in the spinal cord (Schulz et al.  ). In addition, ceruloplasmin (Cp) expression was shown to be increased in mature oligodendrocytes in the white matter of the spinal cord (Schulz et al.  ). This demonstrates an apparent compensatory response by Cp to the loss of Heph function although this upregulation is not fully corrective indicating the predominant role for Heph in oligodendrocytes. While there were compensatory responses with downregulation of iron‐importer Tim‐2 and upregulation of ferroxidase Cp in these mice, there were still functional alterations to the myelin and decreased iron efflux, which emphasizes the importance of Heph and balance of iron in these cells. In another study using Heph KO mice, an increase in Cp mRNA was detected in oligodendrocytes (Chen et al.  ). This ability of OLs to use Cp when Heph functionality is altered demonstrates the importance of iron export in oligodendrocytes.
In contrast to the effects of Heph manipulation, oligodendrocytes do not appear to be affected in adult Cp mutant mice as myelination is normal (Jeong and David  ), which is consistent with reports that primary wild‐type mouse oligodendrocytes do not have detectable levels of ceruloplasmin (Chen et al.  ). Transcriptomic analyses reveal higher mRNA levels in OPCs and lower levels in OLs isolated from the cortex of both young 2–3‐month‐old and aged 21–23‐month‐old mice (Ximerakis et al.  ). Thus, the relative importance of Heph and Cp may be dependent on the maturational status of the cell. RNA‐sequencing analysis of cells isolated from the pre‐weaning mouse brain revealed that Cp mRNA expression is highest in OPCs with significantly lower expression in newly formed and myelinating OLs (Cahoy et al.  ; Zhang et al.  ), which is the opposite of what is seen with Heph. This finding is unexpected because immature cells have relatively low levels of iron (Schulz et al.  ); however, the number of iron import and storage proteins also must be considered when evaluating the net iron levels of the cell. It can also be speculated that supporting iron export instead of limiting iron import is how these cells maintain lower intracellular iron. Understanding the balance of iron import and export is critical, and more research into the functional differences between Heph and Cp on oligodendroglial cells is required. One group did investigate Cp ablation from Sox10+ OLs during the first week of postnatal development and saw decreased MBP, PLP, and CNP, decreased myelin thickness, decreased mature myelinating OLs, and increased apoptotic OLs (Santiago González et al.  ). Only a moderate reduction in the number of mature OLs was seen when Cp was knocked out in 1‐ to 2‐month‐old mice (Santiago González et al.  ). Nonetheless, Cp KO in 8‐month‐old adult mice produced similar results to Cp KO at P7: significantly reduced MBP and PLP, decreased myelin thickness, decreased mature myelinating OLs, and increased apoptotic mature myelinating OLs (Santiago González et al.  ). This is in direct contrast with the normal myelination seen in Cp mutant mice (Jeong and David  ) and reduced Cp expression in myelinating OLs (Cahoy et al.  ; Zhang et al.  ). These data indicate that Cp must be involved in oligodendrocyte viability during early development and late adulthood but not necessarily during the juvenile period. The results from the Sox10‐Cp KO mice demonstrate that expression of Cp by oligodendrocytes is important for cell viability during development and in late adulthood. It can be postulated that Cp expression in OPCs allows for the maintenance of lower iron levels in the proliferative state while Cp expression might be more critical to protect against iron overload in older animals. Overall, there are limited studies related to the role of ceruloplasmin in oligodendrocytes, and more research is required to rectify the conflicting data that are currently available.

12.

## Conclusion
Overall, the importance of iron and iron transport proteins in oligodendrocyte biology and myelination is indisputable. Beginning at the earliest age, iron promotes the differentiation of oligodendrocytes. The ongoing metabolic demands of an actively myelinating oligodendrocyte necessitates that these cells have a high iron storage capacity as well as a dynamic uptake mechanism throughout the life of the cell. Dietary iron deficiency is consistently associated with disruption in myelinogenesis and myelin maintenance, leading to serious neurological impairments that are difficult to correct with iron supplementation. Transferrin is important for the differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells into mature myelinating oligodendrocytes, and data have shown that it acts by stabilizing cellular processes. As oligodendrocytes mature, it appears that the iron requirement for these cells is met by FTH‐delivered iron instead of Tf. The ability of oligodendrocytes to utilize iron once it is taken up into the cell should be mediated by DMT1 like most cells, but the data are mixed regarding DMT1 expression in oligodendrocytes. Perhaps the iron delivery proteins are handled slightly differently in oligodendrocytes, especially if the main iron source is FTH, which requires full degradation in the lysosome to release the iron. TRPML1 could be the critical intracellular component for making iron available after cellular uptake. Although more research on iron export from oligodendrocytes is needed, the current state of the field suggests it involves the standard iron efflux proteins ferroportin, hephaestin, and ceruloplasmin. In summary, iron is a critical trophic factor throughout life that enables oligodendrocytes to meet the metabolic demands of producing and maintaining myelin. The novel uptake mechanism of FTH with its ability to deliver several hundred atoms of iron exemplifies the unique iron demands of the oligodendrocyte. Moreover, the potential that Sema4A interacts with the Tim receptor on oligodendrocytes offers a unique oligodendrocyte‐immune system axis that has long been sought in multiple sclerosis (MS) and other demyelinating diseases. This review helps to clearly establish the importance of iron elucidating iron trafficking to, within, and from OLs as critical to developing potential therapeutics for effectively treating iron deficiency, dysmyelinating disorders, and promoting remyelination following injury.

## Author Contributions
Q.W.W. and J.R.C. conceptualized the review and contributed to the writing of the manuscript. Both authors approved the final manuscript.

## Conflicts of Interest
James R. Connor is a founder and chairman of the board of Sidero Biosciences LLC, a company that focuses on a product designed to treat iron deficiency through oral ferritin consumption. Quinn W. Wade declares no conflicts of interest.

## Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the Penn State Department of Neurosurgery for their support. BioRender was used to create the figures and the graphical abstract image.

Wade, Q. W.
, and Connor J. R.. 2025. “What Does Iron Mean to an Oligodendrocyte?.” Glia
73, no. 9: 1784–1804. 10.1002/glia.70043.

Funding: The authors received no specific funding for this work.

## Data Availability Statement
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.