2546jareJournal of Advanced ResearchJ Adv ResElsevierPMC1195481411954814119548143849273410.1016/j.jare.2024.03.007Nuclear transport of phosphorylated LanCL2 promotes invadopodia formation and tumor progression of glioblastoma by activating STAT3/Cortactin signaling
ZhaoHua-fu LiuYun-sheng WangJing WuChang-peng ZhouXiu-ming CaiLin-rong LiuJing LiuXiao-jia XuYan-wen LiWei-ping HuangGuo-dong aDepartment of Neurosurgery, Institute of Translational Medicine, Shenzhen University First Affiliated Hospital, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, Shenzhen 518035, ChinabDepartment of Neurosurgery/Neuro-oncology, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangdong Provincial Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou 510060, ChinacDepartment of Neurosurgery, Shenzhen Longhua New District People's Hospital, Shenzhen 518109, ChinadEpilepsy Center, Guangdong 999 Brain Hospital, Guangzhou 510510, ChinaeDepartment of Pathology, Shenzhen University First Affiliated Hospital, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, Shenzhen 518035, China⁎Corresponding authors. zhaohf0416@email.szu.edu.cnhuangguodong@email.szu.edu.cn
1These authors contributed equally to the work.
153202469139139–1553132025© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Cairo University.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Graphical abstract
 Keywords: Glioblastoma, LanCL2, Nuclear transport, Invadopodia, Tumor progression

## Highlights
•LanCL2 promotes in-vitro invadopodia formation of glioblastoma cells and in-vivo orthotopic GBM progression by activating STAT3/Cortactin signaling.
•Phosphorylation of Tyr295 residue drives nuclear transport and activation of LanCL2.
•c-Met is identified as the upstream tyrosine kinase of LanCL2 Tyr295 residue.
•A novel c-Met/LanCL2/STAT3/Cortactin signaling involved in GBM cell invasion and tumor progression was proposed.

## Abstract

## Introduction
Our previous study showed that the abscisic acid receptor lanthionine synthetase C-like 2 (LanCL2) is a significant prognostic factor for overall survival in young glioblastoma patients. However, the role of LanCL2 in glioblastoma remains unclear yet.

## Objectives
This study aims to investigate the role of LanCL2 in regulating in-vitro cell invasion and in-vivo tumor progression of glioblastoma and its underlying mechanism.

## Methods
Tyrosine 198 or 295 residue of LanCL2 was mutated using site-directed mutagenesis to block its phosphorylation. The role of LanCL2 in glioblastoma was investigated using transwell or 3D invasion assay, matrix degradation assay and intracranial xenograft model.

## Results
This study showed that nuclear transport of LanCL2 was enhanced by overexpression of LanCL2 or its ligand abscisic acid in glioblastoma cells. Knockdown of LanCL2 suppressed migration, invasion and invadopodia formation of glioblastoma cells, whereas overexpression of wild-type LanCL2 enhanced them. Blocking of Tyr295 residue phosphorylation of LanCL2 impeded its nuclear transport, retarded glioblastoma cell motility and invadopodia formation, and deceased the phosphorylation of Cortactin and STAT3. c-Met was identified as the upstream tyrosine kinase of Tyr295 residue of LanCL2, and inhibition of c-Met markedly suppressed the nuclear transport of LanCL2. Moreover, overexpression of wild-type LanCL2 significantly promoted orthotopic tumor growth of glioblastoma in vivo and led to poor survival of mice with median survival time of 33.5 days, whereas Tyr295 mutation rescued it with median survival time of 49 days.

## Conclusion
Our findings suggested that Tyr295 phosphorylation is crucial to the activation and nuclear transport of LanCL2, as well as invadopodia formation and tumor progression of glioblastoma, providing the evidence of a novel signaling axis c-Met/LanCL2/STAT3/Cortactin and the first observation of the importance of Tyr295 phosphorylation to LanCL2.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Jan 23; Revised 2024 Feb 28; Accepted 2024 Mar 13; Collection date 2025 Mar.

## Introduction
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), is the most common malignant and aggressive primary central nervous system tumor with a high mortality rate , . It is characterized by rapid growth, extensive infiltration to neighboring normal brain parenchyma, and angiogenesis, leading to the frequent tumor recurrence and poor prognosis of GBM patients. Identification of the pivotal signaling pathways and molecules driving glioblastoma recurrence may guide the development of more effective targeted therapies.
Abscisic acid (ABA) is not only a phytohormone but also an endogenous mammalian hormone that mediates inflammation and glycemic control , . Lanthionine synthetase C-like 2 (LanCL2), served as the receptor of ABA in mammal, is required for ABA binding on the cell membrane and activation of the ABA signaling pathway . LanCL2 has been shown to be involved in the stress response, inflammation and glucose metabolism, and aberration of LanCL2 may give rise to the chronic inflammatory and immune-related diseases, and diabetes , . A novel oral LanCL2 agonist Omilancor (BT-11) has completed phase II clinical trials for the treatment of inflammatory bowel diseases (NCT03861143) , . Activation of LanCl2 using BT-11 enhances immune responses of Treg cells in guts through elevating the stability and immunosuppression of Treg cells, mediating mitochondrial metabolism, and activating IL-2/CD25 signaling axis . ABA release is stimulated in response to hypoxia, which then increases NO production, glucose uptake, NADPH levels and prolongs cell survival of cardiomyocytes via elevating the phosphorylation of Akt, AMPK and eNOS . Overexpression of LanCL2 in cardiomyoblasts or LANCL2 agonists BT-11 and AR-42 increase the number, proton gradient and DNA content of mitochondria by triggering the transcriptional activation of the ERRα/AMPK/PGC-1α/Sirt1 signaling axis , . These findings above suggest the essential roles of ABA-LANCL2 hormone-receptor system in mitochondrial metabolism and immune response.
LanCL2 also plays important roles in the regulation of tumorigenesis and tumor progression. Evidence shows that LanCL2 enhances sensitivity of tumor cells to adriamycin through reducing P-glycoprotein and MDR1 expression . LanCL2 is a novel regulator of Akt, and positively regulates Akt phosphorylation via direct interaction with Akt and mTORC2, but not through the canonical insulin-signaling pathway or the Akt phosphatase PP2A . Knockdown of LanCL2 enhances apoptosis and cleavage of PARP in HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cells . Lai et al. report that LanCL2 adds GSH to dehydroamino acids, removes reactive electrophiles from the proteome, and protects the proteins from damage, indicating a LanCL2-meidated protection mechanism to facilitate tumor survival and progression . In addition, mRNA expression of LANCL2 and EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptor) has a strong correlation and LANCL2 gain-of-function is significantly associated with the poor survival of lung adenocarcinoma patients. LanCL2 also promotes cell proliferation and drug resistance to gefitinib and pemetrexed in EGFR-mutant lung adenocarcinoma cells . LANCL2 and EGFR genes are in the same amplicon at chromosomal 7p11.2, resulting that LANCL2 amplification and its co-amplification with EGFR are frequent in glioblastoma , .
Our previous study confirmed the co-amplification of LANCL2 and EGFR genes in glioblastoma tissues, and showed that LANCL2 gene amplification was a potential diagnostic marker for GBM patients and a significant prognostic factor for overall survival in young GBM patients. Moreover, overexpression of LanCL2 protein was common in relapsing glioblastoma samples, and was significantly correlated with tumor recurrence . However, the biological roles of LanCL2 in glioblastoma cells and in which signaling pathway it participates are still not clear. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the biological function of LanCL2 in GBM, and find out its upstream and downstream molecules to elucidate the mechanism of LanCL2 activation. Here, this study addressed nuclear transport and Tyr295 residue phosphorylation of LanCL2, and their importance of driving glioblastoma invadopodia formation and in-vivo orthotopic tumor growth through activating STAT3/Cortactin signaling for the first time. We also identified c-Met as the upstream tyrosine kinase of Tyr295 residue of LanCL2. These findings will broaden our knowledge on the mechanisms underlying LanCL2 activation and its function in glioblastoma, and provide the first observation of the importance of Tyr295 phosphorylation of LanCL2 and the novel c-Met/LanCL2/STAT3/Cortactin signaling axis in glioblastoma.

## Materials and methods

## Cell culture
Glioblastoma cell lines U-87 MG, U-118 MG, A-172 and U-251 MG were purchased from the Cell Bank of Chinese Academy of Sciences. U-138 MG, U-343 MG, U-373 MG, LN-Z308 and SK-MG3 cells were kindly provided by Dr. Shing-shun Tony To (The Hong Kong Polytechnic University). We also purchased human astrocytes from ScienCell Research Laboratories. Cells were cultured in the α-MEM medium supplemented with 10 % (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Thermo Scientific).

## Lentivirus production and infection
The lentiviral plasmids pHBLV-CMVIE-GFP-Puro and pHBLV-U6-MCS-CMV-GFP-PGK-PURO purchased from Hanbio Biotechnology Comapany (Shanghai, China) were used for full-length human LanCL2 overexpression and shRNA-mediated knockdown in glioblastoma cells, respectively. The lentivirus was generated in 293 T cells. For protein overexpression, the wild-type LanCL2 and the 3xFLAG-tagged site-directed LanCL2 mutants (Y198A or Y295A) were constructed in which the protein sequence of phosphorylation sites was mutated from tyrosine to alanine (TAT → GCT). The lentiviral empty vector was served as the vehicle control. For the sake of effective gene knockdown, three lentiviral vectors carrying three independent short hairpin RNA (shRNA) sequences targeting LANCL2 (Supplementary ) were constructed, and the lentivirus packaging these three vectors were mixed in equal proportion (1:1:1) during lentiviral infection to reduce the off-target effect. Cells were cultured until they reached 40 %-60 % confluency and then incubated with lentivirus (MOI = 3) and polybrene (5 μg/mL). The medium containing lentivirus was replaced with the fresh medium with polybrene (5 μg/mL) on the next day, and cell incubation was continued for 72 hrs. Infected cells were placed under puromycin (1–2 μg/mL) selection.

## RNA interference
Small interfering RNA (siRNA) synthetic duplexes targeting LANCL2 gene (Cat.No: SI03050250 and SI03109036) and the AllStars Negative Control siRNA (Qiagen) were used for RNA interference experiments. In brief, 1.5 × 105 GBM cells were seeded onto each well of 6-well plates and transfected with siRNA duplexes (100 pmol) using Lipofectamine 2000 (Thermo Scientific). Cell incubation was continued till further analysis.

## Wound healing assay
As described before , a 2-well culture-insert (Ibidi) was used for wound healing assay according to manufacturer’s instructions. It contained two cell culture reservoirs separated by a 500 µm wall. Briefly, the culture-insert was placed onto the well of 12-well plates and tightly adhered to the surface of the well. GBM cells (3.5 × 104 cells/insert) were seeded into the culture-insert and cultured to 100 % confluence. The culture-insert was then removed and a cell-free gap of approximately 500 µm was created. Cells were then pretreated with 5 μg/mL mitomycin C for 1 hr to eliminate the interference of cell proliferation. After repeated rinses with PBS, cells were culture with α-MEM medium (5 % FBS) and photographed immediately (time zero) and at 24 hrs. ImageJ software was used to measure migration rate, which was referred to the area of cells migrating into the original gap.

## Transwell migration and invasion assay
As described before , GBM cells (2.5 × 104 cells/insert) were seeded into the polyester membrane 24-well transwell inserts with 8 μm pores (Corning). The insert maintained uncoated for migration assay, while it was pre-coated with Matrigel (2–3 ng) for invasion assay. α-MEM medium (5 % FBS) was served as a chemoattractant in the companion plate. For migration assay or invasion assay, cells were incubated for 6 hrs or 24 hrs, respectively. Cells on the outer surface of membrane were stained with 0.1 % crystal violet solution and then photographed. Data were analyzed using ImagePro Plus software.

## Matrix degradation assay
Matrix degradation assay was performed using QCM Gelatin Invadopodia Assay (EMD Millipore). In short, a sterile coverslip was coated with poly-L-lysine and followed by glutaraldehyde activation at room temperature for 20 min. Subsequently, the coverslip was coupled with fluorescein (FITC)-gelatin (0.4 mg/mL) in the dark for 10 min. The residual free aldehydes were quenched by incubation with α-MEM medium (10 % FBS) in the dark for 30 min. GBM cells (2.5 × 104 cells) were seeded onto the FITC-gelatin-coated coverslip and incubated at 37 °C for 24 hrs. After that, cells were stained with phalloidin-iFluor 555 reagent (CytoPainter, Abcam) and DAPI. After air drying, the coverslip was mounted with ProLong Gold Antifade Mountant (Thermo Scientific). Images were acquired under the confocal laser scanning microscope (Leica). Matrix degradation was quantified as the degradation area per cell in approximate 15 images.

## Three-dimensional (3D) tumor spheroid invasion assay
GBM cells (3 × 103 cells/well) were seeded into the ultra-low attachment 96-well round bottom plates and incubated at 37 °C for 4 days till the formation of tumor spheroid. 100 μL of medium was removed and then 100 μL of Cultrex Spheroid Invasion Extracellular Matrix (R&D Systems) was added carefully to each well. After the extracellular matrix was solidified, tumor spheroids were then incubated at 37 °C for 15 days and photographed on day 1, 3, 5, 7, 15. The relative invasion area was referred to the whole area minus the center area of spheroid, measured by ImageJ software.

## Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP)
Co-IP experiments were carried out using Immunoprecipitation Kit Dynabeads Protein A (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacture’s instruction. In briefly, 1––10 μg of anti-FLAG (Cat.No 14793) or anti-Cortactin (Cat.No 3503) (Cell Signaling Technology) primary antibody was incubated with the Dynabeads for antibody binding, by ten-minute rotation. The tube containing Dynabeads-Ab complex was placed on the magnet and the supernatant was removed. Cell lysates (typically 1 mg total protein) were prepared using nondenaturing lysis buffer (Cell Signaling Technology) and incubated with Dynabeads-Ab complex for 10 min at room temperature by rotation. For immunoblotting, the immunoprecipitates were eluted with elution buffer and heated with sample loading buffer for 10 min at 70 °C.

## Proteomic LC/MC analysis
For the mass spectrometry (MS) experiment, the immunoprecipitates in the Co-IP experiment were eluted with SDT lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, 4 % SDS, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.6). Proteins were separated on a 12 % SDS-PAGE gel and visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250. According to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method described by Wisniewski, proteins were added into SDT buffer for protein digestion . Repeated ultrafiltration was then performed with UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) to wash the proteins. To block reduced cysteine residues, iodoacetamide prepared in UA buffer was added and then incubated for 0.5 h without light. Subsequently, protein solutions were added into NH4HCO3 buffer with trypsin, followed by the overnight incubation at 37 °C. Desalination of the peptides after protein digestion was executed on C18 Cartridges (Sigma). The peptides were then enriched by centrifugal vacuum drying and reconstituted in 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. For HPLC separation, the peptides were added into the reversed-phase C18 HPLC columns (a trap column connected to an analytical column) (Thermo Scientific) in 0.1 % formic acid. Peptide separation was performed using the buffer (84 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid) with a linear gradient procedure at 300 nL/min flow rate. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out with the Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated, and MS data was acquired and analyzed using the methods described by Bai .

## iTRAQ phosphoproteomic analysis
SDT lysis buffer was used for lysis and protein extraction, and protein digestion was performed as described above. Peptides were labeled using the iTRAQ reagent (Thermo Scientific). Fractionation of labeled peptides was performed by strong cation exchange chromatography. The fractions were then desalted on C18 Cartridges and concentrated by vacuum centrifuge. Enrichment of phosphopeptides was carried out using TiO2 method. The phosphopeptides were reconstituted in the loading buffer (2 % glutamic acid, 65 % ACN, 2 % TFA). TiO2 beads were added into the mixture and agitated. After rinses with buffer I (30 % ACN, 3 %TFA) and buffer II (80 % ACN, 0.3 % TFA) for three times, the phosphopeptides were eluted and concentrated, then dissolved in 0.1 % formic acid for MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis and MS/MS spectra search were searched was performed as described by Bai . The score threshold for peptide identification were set at 1 % False discovery rate (FDR) and PhosphoRS site probability cutoffs of 75 %.

## Immunocytochemistry (ICC)
As described before , GBM cells (2.5 × 104 cells/well) were seeded onto a sterile coverslip in the 24-well plate. Cell were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with 0.25 % Triton X-100, and then blocked with 1 % BSA. After incubation with primary antibody and Alexa Fluor-conjugated secondary antibody (Thermo Scientific), DAPI dye was added. Coverslips were taken out from the plates, air-dried, and then mounted with ProLong Gold Antifade Mountant (Thermo Scientific). Images were acquired under the confocal laser scanning microscope (Leica). In each group, approximately 50 cells were photographed and representative cells were demonstrated.

## Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining
As described before , Paraformaldehyde-fixed tissues were embedded in paraffin, and then sliced into 5-μm sections. For H&E staining, tissue sections were stained by hematoxylin and eosin. For IHC, sections were immunostained with appropriate primary antibody and biotin-conjugated secondary antibody. DAB detection kit (Boster) was then used for detection, and counterstain was performed by hematoxylin.

## Western blotting
As described before , total proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and then transferred to PVDF membranes (Millipore). After blocking, membranes were incubated with primary antibodies and then HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies. Positive signals were detected by ECL chemiluminescence.

## In vivo orthotopic xenograft model
Balb/C nude mice (4–5 weeks old, male, 16–20 g) (Vital River Laboratories) were continuously anesthetized with inhaled isoflurane using an animal anesthesia machine (RWD Life Science). The mice were fixed in the automated stereotaxic instrument (RWD Life Science) using ear bars. A 1 cm sagittal scalp incision was made to exposure the bregma, and the periosteum was gently scraped. A small hole was opened in the skull with a cranial microdrill (0.6 mm diameter) at 0.5 mm anterior and 2 mm dextral to the bregma. A microliter syringe was inserted beneath the skull 3.5 mm in depth and then retracted 0.5 mm to generate a room for implantation of cells. GBM cells (1 × 106 cells in 5 μL) were then slowly injected into the area with an injection speed of 0.5 μL/min using a syringe pump (RWD Life Science). After the injection, the microliter syringe stayed for 5 min to prevent reflux. The hole was sealed with bone wax and the incision was sewed up with surgical sutures. Mice were kept warm using a heating lamp until recovery. GBM cells were infected with lentivirus carrying firefly luciferase expression vector prior to implantation. Tumor progression were monitored weekly by using IVIS Spectrum In Vivo imaging system (PerkinElmer). Mice were sacrificed on day 28 and transcardiac perfusion was performed. The whole brain was then harvested for immunohistochemistry. All experiments involving animals were conducted according to the ethical policies and procedures approved by the ethics committee of Shenzhen Second People’s Hospital.

## Statistical analysis
Independent in-vitro experiments were carried out in triplicate. Data were presented as mean ± S.E.M. For statistical analysis, GraphPad Prism 8 and SPSS Statistic 22.0 software were used. Hierarchical clustering, GO (Gene Ontology) and KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathway enrichment analyses were performed using the OmicShare tools, a free online platform for data analysis (https://www.omicshare.com/tools). Statistical comparisons among groups in in-vitro experiments were evaluated by One-way or Two-way ANOVA with Post Hoc multiple comparison Tukey HSD test. For in-vivo study, comparisons among groups were assessed by Two-way repeated measures ANOVA and Post Hoc multiple comparison Tukey HSD test. Animals’ survival was analyzed using the Kaplan-Meier method and the log-rank test. The significant difference was determined when p < 0.05. The licenses of software are available under any requirement for permission for use.

## Results

## Knockdown of LanCL2 suppressed glioblastoma cells motility and invadopodia formation
To investigate the role of LanCL2 in GBM, the expression pattern of LanCL2 in GBM cells was firstly studied. Results showed that LanCL2 was overexpressed in the most (7 of 9) of GBM cell lines, compared with human normal astrocytes. The expression of LanCL2 was the highest in SK-MG3 cells, which was the lowest in U-343 MG and U-138 MG cells ( A). In addition, immunocytochemistry showed that LanCL2 was located in the cytoplasm and nucleus of GBM cells U-87 MG and U-118 MG ( B). Using specific siRNA duplexes targeting LANCL2, migration and invasion of A172 cells were significantly suppressed ( C). In addition, LANCL2 silencing was carried out in U-251 MG cells using lentivirus expressing LANCL2-targeted shRNA (shLANCL2). shLANCL2_3 and the mixture (1:1:1) of shLANCL2_1,_2 and_3 (shLANCL2_pool) exhibited decreased GBM cell migration and invasion ( D-E). Both siRNA and shRNA targeting LanCL2 showed reduced protein expression of LanCL2 and the phosphorylation of Akt, whereas the activation of ERK signaling was not affected ( F-G). Moreover, knockdown of LanCL2 using siRNA duplexes inhibited the phosphorylation of MARCKS (myristoylated alanine rich protein kinase C substrate), as well as the phosphorylation and protein expression of ROCK2 (Rho associated coiled-coil containing protein kinase 2) and Cortactin ( F). Similarly, shLanCL2 treatment displayed deceased phosphorylation and protein expression of Cortactin, ROCK2 and Myosin IIa ( G). Since focal adhesions (FAs) and invadopodia are critical for tumor cell motility, the matrix degradation assay and ICC were subsequently carried out to evaluate the role of LanCL2 in the formation of invadopodia and FAs in GBM cells. Results showed that siLanCL2 duplexes markedly suppressed the area of invadopodia and the degree of matrix degradation in GBM cells U-251 MG and U-118 MG. The percentage of invadopodia area in U-251 MG cells by siLanCL2_8 and siLanCL2_10 decreased to 21.30 % and 11.17 % respectively, while those in U-118 MG cells reduced to 75.99 % and 47.59 % ( A). Invadopodia and FAs were visualized by immunofluorescence labeling of Cortactin and Vinculin, respectively. Knockdown of LanCL2 significantly decreased the number of invadopodia and FAs in U-251 cells. The number of invadopodia and FAs per cell decreased to about 43/44 and 61/64 in siLanCL2_8 and siLanCL2_10 groups, while the number in the negative control was 76 and 122, respectively ( B).
 

## Activation of LanCL2 by abscisic acid (ABA) triggered its nuclear transport
To confirm whether ABA could activate LanCL2, GBM cells U-87 MG were treated with ABA in different concentrations. After treatment of U-87 MG cells with ABA (≥10 μM) for 3 hrs, the phosphorylation of Akt at Thr308 residue was increased without changing the total expression of LanCL2 and Akt ( A). In addition, invasive capacity of U-87 MG cells was elevated about three times by ABA at the concentration of 10 μM ( B). Intriguingly, the invasive capacity of U-87 MG cells was conversely decreased when the concentration of ABA increased. Subsequently, we found that activation of LanCL2 by ABA led to its nuclear transport. Prediction of nuclear localization signal (NLS) using NLS Mapper (https://nls-mapper.iab.keio.ac.jp/cgi-bin/NLS_Mapper_form.cgi) showed that an N-terminal sequence GETMSKRLKLH was the NLS of LanCL2 with a score of 4, suggesting that LanCL2 localized in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm ( C). ICC and western blotting results also demonstrated that ABA (10 μM) treatment markedly increased the expression of LanCL2 in nucleus of U-87 MG and A-172 cells ( D-E). These findings indicated that ABA could induce the activation of LanCL2/Akt signaling, and promote the nuclear transport of LanCL2.
 Co-immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry (CoIP-MS) was performed to identified the proteins that bound to LanCL2. In brief, anti-FLAG antibody was used to pull down FLAG-tagged LanCL2 in lysate of U343 cells overexpressing wild-type LanCL2 (LanCL2wt), while anti-IgG antibody was used as negative control. The protein was considered to bind to LanCL2 if the fold change of iBAQ protein intensity in anti-FLAG group relative to anti-IgG control was larger than 2. Results showed that 83 proteins were identified as LanCL2-binding proteins. Among these, 26 proteins were only detected in anti-FLAG group, including cytoskeleton-related proteins such as Cortactin, Gamma-actin and LIMA1, nuclear proteins mediating transcription and RNA splicing such as SLTM, CHTOP and SRSF family proteins, and proteins involving translation progress in ribosome such as EIF6, NHP2, RSL1D1 ( A). Among these, a small GTP-binding protein Ran (Ras-related nuclear protein), which is crucial for the nuclear transport of RNA and proteins, was identified as the LanCL2-binding protein. Co-IP analysis revealed that Ran could bind to FLAG-tagged LanCL2, and reciprocal Co-IP performed with Ran and endogenous LanCL2 further confirmed this interaction ( B). GO analysis showed that these 83 LanCL2-binding proteins participated in a variety of biological progresses including RNA progressing, mRNA splicing, nuclear transport, gene expression and ribosome biogenesis, were mainly enriched in the cellular components like nuleus, ribonucleoprotein complex, spliceosomal complex, lamin filament and actin cytoskeleton, and had molecular functions such as RNA and DNA binding, heterocyclic compound and organic cyclic compound binding, and protein-containing complex binding ( C). KEGG pathway analysis demonstrated that the LanCL2-binding proteins were significantly enriched in spliceosome, ribosome biogenesis, apoptosis, necrosis, mismatch repair, DNA replication, homologous recombination and RNA transport pathways (p < 0.05) ( D). Network analysis of all the enriched KEGG pathways showed that apoptosis, regulation of actin cytoskeleton, and RNA transport pathways were the central nodes of the network ( E). Furthermore, protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks of the LanCL2-binding proteins were mapped and clustered using STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes) tool (https://cn.string-db.org/). 4 central clusters were identified, which were involved in mRNA splicing (red), apoptosis and necrosis (yellow), ribosome biogenesis (lime green), and actin filament organization (green), respectively ( F).
 

## Phosphoproteomic profiling of glioblastoma cells expressing wild-type LanCL2 revealed its roles in cell motility and mRNA processing
We predicted the phosphorylation sites of LanCL2 using PhosphoSitePlus tool (https://www.phosphosite.org), and found two tyrosine phosphorylation sites Tyr198 and Tyr295 ( A). U-343 MG and U-138 MG cells overexpressing wild-type LanCL2 (LanCL2wt), and LanCL2 mutants at Tyr198 or Tyr295 residue (LanCL2Y198A or LanCL2Y295A) were constructed by lentiviral expression systems. Cells infected with lentivirus carrying empty vectors (GFP) was served as the vehicle control. Compared with GFP control group, 3xFLAG-tagged LanCL2 was successfully overexpressed in LanCL2wt, LanCL2Y198A and LanCL2Y295A groups ( B). ICC results showed that compared with GFP control, overexpression of LanCL2wt significantly promoted the nuclear transport of LanCL2, whereas expression of LanCL2Y198A or LanCL2Y295A retarded its nuclear transport in U-138 MG cells ( D). In addition, compared with LanCL2wt group, the cytoplasmic expression of exogenous FLAG-tagged LanCL2 in U343-LanCL2Y295A cells was increased, while its expression in nucleus was decreased. However, 3xFLAG-LanCL2 expression in LanCL2Y198A cells in cytoplasm and nucleus were not significantly affected ( C). It indicated that mutation of LanCL2 Tyr295, rather than Tyr198, suppressed the nuclear transport of LanCL2.
 To investigate the complex mechanism of LanCL2-mediated signaling network in GBM cell motility, phosphoproteomics profiling was performed using U-343 MG cells expressing GFP control, LanCL2wt, LanCL2Y198A or LanCL2Y295A. In total, 10,513 phosphorylation events mapping to 3261 proteins were quantified. The overwhelming majority of phosphorylation events occurred on serine residues (86.66 %), followed by threonine residues (13.34 %), whereas phosphorylation on tyrosine was not measured ( A). Motif analysis of phosphopeptides using Motif-x tool (http://motif-x.med.harvard.edu/motif-x.html) demonstrated the top five conservative motifs containing phosphorylated serine/threonine residues with the highest fold increases ( B). Phosphorylation events with intensity fold changes > 1.2 or < 0.83 (p < 0.05) were considered to have significant difference. There were 1230 up-regulated and 1319 down-regulated differentially phosphorylated peptides in LanCL2wt group relative to GFP control. In the comparison group of LanCL2Y198A versus LanCL2wt, 2292 peptides (1244 increased, 1048 decreased) were differentially phosphorylated. Compared with LanCL2wt group, 440 up-regulated and 384 down-regulated peptides were differentially phosphorylated in LanCL2Y295A group ( C). Compared with control group, 1115 proteins were differentially phosphorylated in LanCL2wt cells, and the markedly phosphorylated proteins (including MARCKS, Cortactin, STAT3, ROCK2, MARCKSL1, HSPB1, RPS6, AGFG1, SRRM2 etc.) were displayed ( E-F, ). These proteins were shown to be participated in genetic information processing (including DNA replication, RNA transcription & transport, protein translation & degradation), signaling transduction (including mTOR, ErbB, AMPK, Hippo and insulin signaling), and cellular processes (including cell motility, death, cell cycle, autophagy) ( G, D). GO enrichment analysis also demonstrated that these proteins were involved in various biological progresses including RNA splicing, gene expression, mRNA metabolism and cytoskeleton organization, had molecular functions such as nucleic acid binding, transcription factor binding, cytoskeletal protein binding, and cell adhesion molecule binding, and they were mainly enriched in the cellular components like nucleoplasm, nuclear periphery, ribonucleoprotein complex, cytoplasm and actin cytoskeleton ( A-C).

## Tyr295 phosphorylation of LanCL2 played essential roles in the regulation of actin cytoskeleton and gene expression
To interpret the function and underlying regulatory mechanism of Tyr198 and Tyr295 phosphorylation in LanCL2, integrated analysis of the three comparison sets (LanCL2wt versus control, LanCL2Y198A versus LanCL2wt, and LanCL2Y295A versus LanCL2wt) was performed. Venn diagram showed that 364 differentially phosphorylated peptides corresponding to 264 proteins were overlapped ( A). After removing the uncharacterized proteins, 294 peptides corresponding to 197 proteins were then screened out, which were considered as the key phosphoproteins involved in LanCL2 activation. These proteins were plotted to the ternary scale and divided into two clusters, demonstrating the proteins enriched in GBM cells expressing wild-type or mutant LanCL2 ( B). Subsequently, these overlapping phosphopeptides and their corresponding proteins were analyzed by hierarchical clustering, GO and KEGG pathway enrichments, protein–protein interaction (PPI). Hierarchically-clustered heatmap demonstrated the top 20 up-regulated and 20 down-regulated phosphopeptides corresponding to MARCKSL1, MARCKS, CTTN, STAT3, AHNAK, BAG3, FLG, AKT1S1 etc ( C). KEGG pathway enrichment analysis showed that differentially phosphorylated proteins participated in a series of signaling pathways including mTOR signaling pathway, VEGF signaling pathway, proteoglycans in cancer, adherens junction, focal adhesion, spliceosome, RNA transport, which suggested that phosphorylation events were very active in cell motility and growth, and genetic information processing ( D-E). GO enrichment analysis revealed that the molecular function of these proteins were categorized into several groups including RNA binding, cytoskeletal protein binding, enzyme binding and cadherin binding etc. Based on the biological process and cellular component, these phosphorylated proteins were involved in cytoskeleton organization, cell morphogenesis, microtubule-based process, mRNA metabolic process, post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression etc., and mainly located in cytoskeleton, adherens junction, focal adhesion, nucleoplasm, ribonucleoprotein complex etc ( F). A PPI network of significantly regulated phosphoproteins were generated using STRING, which clustered these proteins into 15 nodes using Markov Cluster Algorithm (MCL). The largest node consisted of 91 proteins including CTTN, STAT3, MAPK1, MAPK3, MAP and RB1 etc. The most linked phosphoproteins were MAPK1, MAPK3, HSP90AA1, HNRNPC, RPS6, STAT3, RB1, GJA1, etc ( G).
 

## Tyr295 phosphorylation of LanCL2 triggered the activation of Cortactin and STAT3, and invadopodia formation of glioblastoma cells
To validated the roles of Tyr198 and Tyr295 phosphorylation in LanCL2 activation, transwell migration/invasion and three-dimension invasion assays were carried out. Transwell migration and invasion capacities were increased in U-138/LanCL2wt cells, while those were decreased in U-138/LanCL2Y295A cells rather than U-138/LanCL2Y198A cells ( A). In addition, three-dimension invasion assay also found that the invasion area of U-138 MG cell spheroids expressing wild-type LanCL2 was markedly enlarged after 15-day incubation, compared with GFP control. On the contrary, the invasive capacity of U-138 MG cell spheroids expressing LanCL2Y295A mutant was attenuated, compared with those expressing LanCL2wt ( B). Similarly, invadopodia formation of U-138 MG cells was enhanced when wild-type LanCL2 was over-expressed, while it was impeded in U-138 MG cells expressing LanCL2Y295A mutant. Compared with the GFP control, the percentage of invadopodia area in U-138 MG/LanCL2wt cells increased to 232.67 %, while those in LanCL2Y198A and LanCL2Y295A groups fell back to 157.20 % and 74.13 % respectively ( C). These findings confirmed that Tyr295 phosphorylation of LanCL2 was more important to LanCL2 activation and GBM cell motility. In accordance with the migration/invasion results, we found that expression of wild-type LanCL2 increased Akt phosphorylation at Ser473 and Thr308 relative to GFP control, while mutation of LanCL2 Tyr295 then suppressed Akt phosphorylation in both U-343 MG and U-138 MG cells ( D). Phosphoproteomic analysis had identified that Cortactin, STAT3 and MARCKS were the downstream molecules of LanCL2 ( C). We found that compared with GFP control group, U-138 MG cells expressing LanCL2wt displayed increased the phosphorylation levels of MARCKS, Cortactin, STAT3 and ROCK2, which were then decreased in cells expressing LanCL2Y198A or LanCL2Y295A mutant ( E). It's worth noting that GBM cell expressing LanCL2Y295A showed more phosphorylation reduction of these protein than LanCL2Y198A. Interestingly, the protein expression of Cortactin, STAT3 and ROCK2 also changed along with the phosphorylation in LanCL2wt or LanCL2Y295A group ( E). In addition, proteomic identification of LanCL2-binding proteins had revealed the interaction between LanCL2 and Cortactin ( A). We also found that Cortactin could bind to exogenously expressed FLAG-LanCL2, and reciprocal Co-IP performed with Cortactin and endogenous LanCL2 further confirmed this interaction ( F).
 Subsequently, we predicted the upstream tyrosine kinase of Tyr295 residue of LanCL2 using GPS 5.0 software (http://gps.biocuckoo.cn/). Ranking by score, c-Met, VEGFR2, RET, VEGFR, VEGFR3 and SRC were the most likely tyrosine kinases of LanCL2 Tyr295 residue, in which c-Met won the highest rate of 92.097 ( ). To verify that, specific c-Met inhibitor PHA-665752, VEGFR2 inhibitor KI8751, and RET inhibitor Pralsetinib were used to observe the LanCL2 activation in GBM cells. Results found that 10 μM of PHA-665752 significantly suppressed the nuclear transport of LanCL2 in U-87 MG cells, while KI8751 and Pralsetinib failed ( A-B). In addition, cell morphology of U-87 MG cells was changed from big and broad with many protrusions to long and lanky by PHA-665752, indicating that inhibition of c-Met led to the inactive and quiescent state of GBM cells ( A). Inhibition of c-Met by PHA-665752 suppressed the phosphorylation of c-Met, Akt, Cortactin and STAT3 ( C). On the contrary, activation of c-Met by hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) in turn promoted the nuclear transport of LanCL2 in U-87 MG cells and led to the increased phosphorylation of c-Met, Akt, Cortactin and STAT3 ( D-F). Considering activation of LanCL2 induced by Tyr295 phosphorylation could promote the nuclear transport of LanCL2, it indicated that c-Met may be the upstream tyrosine kinases of LanCL2 Tyr295 residue. To investigate whether ABA also activated LanCL2 Tyr295 phosphorylation, U-138 MG cells overexpressing LanCL2wt and LanCL2Y295A were treated with ABA. Compared with wild-type LanCL2 expression, mutation of LanCL2 Tyr295 significantly suppressed cell invasion under ABA treatment. Moreover, ABA dramatically increased cell invasion and migration of U138/LanCL2wt cells, whereas ABA could not significantly enhance it when Tyr295 residue of LanCL2 was mutated ( G, ). It suggested that ABA promoted GBM cell motility via activating LanCL2 at Tyr295 phosphorylation site. These findings suggested a novel ABA/LanCL2 or c-Met /LanCL2/STAT3/Cortactin signaling axis leading to increased invadopodia formation and invasive capacity in GBM cells ( H).
 

## Enhancement of in-vivo tumor growth by LanCL2 was rescued by Tyr295 mutation
To further confirm the role of LanCL2 in tumor growth of GBM, orthotopic GBM mice model was generated by stereotaxic intracerebral inoculation. U-87 MG cells stably expressing vehicle control, LanCL2wt, LanCL2Y198A or LanCL2Y295A with luciferase marker were constructed by lentiviral expression systems. Nude mice were intracranially injected with these U-87 MG cells. The bioluminescence imaging showed that overexpression of wild-type LanCL2 significantly promoted in-vivo tumor growth compared with vehicle control, which was rescued by mutation of Tyr198 or Tyr295 residue ( A-B). H&E staining also confirmed the larger tumor size of GBM xenograft in LanCL2wt group compared to control group, and the smaller tumor size in LanCL2Y198A and LanCL2Y295A group compared to LanCL2wt group ( C). Furthermore, Kaplan-Meier survival analysis revealed that the median survival time of the mice in control, LanCL2wt, LanCL2Y198A and LanCL2Y295A group was 44, 33.5, 44, and 49 days respectively ( D). Overall survival time and body weight of the mice in LanCL2wt group were significantly reduced compared to control group, which were also rescued by mutation of Tyr295 residue ( D-E). Ki67 staining also demonstrated more proliferating cells in LanCL2wt group compared to control group, and less proliferating cells in LanCL2Y198A and LanCL2Y295A group compared to LanCL2wt group ( F). In addition, compared with control group, the expression of STAT3 and phospho-Akt at Thr308 was elevated in LanCL2wt group, which was significantly reduced in LanCL2Y198A and LanCL2Y295A group ( F).
 

## Discussion
Since Eley et al. reported LANCL2 and EGFR genes co-amplification in GBM patients in 2002, very few studies investigated the biological role of LanCL2 in GBM . Our previous study showed that LANCL2 gene amplification was a significant diagnostic biomarker for GBM and a prognostic factor for overall survival in young GBM patients . Moreover, the protein expression and intracellular localization of LanCL2 were correlated with the grade of gliomas. The higher the glioma grade, the higher expression level of LanCL2. LanCL2 was mainly found in the nucleus and cytoplasm of high-grade gliomas (grade III-IV), whereas it was expressed round the nuclear membrane of low-grade (grade I-II) gliomas . These findings suggested that LanCL2 may be activated and transported to the nucleus in the malignant glioblastoma, while it maintained quiescence and stayed in the cytoplasm in the low-grade gliomas. Other studies also showed that N-terminal myristoylation caused LanCL2 anchoring to the plasma membrane, while demyristoylation of LanCL2 or ABA could trigger its nuclear transport , . LanCL2 was also named Testis-specific Adriamycin Sensitivity Protein (TASP), and early studies found that myristoylation of LanCL2 promoted sensitivity of tumor cells to adriamycin . However, recent studies revealed that LanCL2 enhanced cell viability and drug resistance of tumor cells, through binding to Akt and activating Akt signaling , . Since myristoylation of LanCL2 contributed to the anchoring of LanCL2 to the plasma membrane, it indicated that the nuclear transport of LanCL2 may promote cell proliferation and anti-cancer drug resistance, whereas it was contrary when LanCL2 was confined to the plasma membrane. Here, this study predicted the nuclear localization signals of LanCL2 and confirmed its activation and nuclear transport induced by ABA. Overexpression of wild-type LanCL2 promoted its nuclear transport and GBM cell motility, suggesting that nuclear transport of LanCL2 is essential to GBM cell migration and invasion.
Phosphoproteomic analysis showed that overexpression of wild-type LanCL2 was involved in the regulation of adherens junction, tight junction, focal adhesion and actin cytoskeleton. The significant upregulated phosphorylated proteins included MARCKS, Cortactin, STAT3 etc. MARCKS is an ubiquitously-distributed membrane-associated protein with an effector domain which can bind to protein kinase C (PKC), Ca2+/calmodulin, and actin filaments. Phosphorylation of MARCKS disrupts its interaction with actin filaments, and then softens actin cytoskeleton, leading to enhanced chemotaxis and cell motility . Studies showed that overexpression of MARCKS is frequently observed in melanoma, kidney cancer and lung cancer, and the hyperphosphorylation of MARCKS promotes cancer cell proliferation and motility , , . Cortactin (encoded by CTTN gene) is also a ubiquitous actin‑binding protein that regulates cell migration and invasion. It is enriched in cellular cortical structures such as membrane ruffles, lamellipodia and invadopodia. Phosphorylation of Cortactin is crucial to the formation of lamellipodia and filopodia, as well as cell migration in glioma cells . Invadopodia is the key to maintain high invasiveness of tumor cells and determine the progression of tumor invasion and metastasis. Cortactin also plays an important role in all steps of invadopodia formation, including initiation, assembly, maturation and disassembly. Src kinase causes Cortactin phosphorylation, and then promotes the binding of Cortactin, actin-related protein 2/3 (Arp2/3) complex and neural Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (N-WASP), and triggers actin polymerization, leading to the assembly of invadopodia in breast cancer cells , .
Here, this study found that overexpression of wild-type LanCL2 increased the capacities of cell migration/invasion and promoted in-vivo tumor growth of GBM via elevating the phosphorylation of MARCKS, STAT3 and Cortactin. CoIP-MS analysis revealed that LanCL2 could directly bind to Cortactin, suggesting that LanCL2 may regulate the phosphorylation of Cortactin through interacting with it. Intriguingly, the protein expression of Cortactin was also increased by LanCL2. Considering that LanCL2 could transport to the nucleus, we speculated that nuclear transport of LanCL2 may be involved in the regulation of mRNA progressing and then increased protein expression of downstream molecules. Phosphoproteomic analysis showed that LanCL2 participated in the mRNA splicing, transport and post-transcriptional regulation. In addition, CoIP-MS analysis identified the proteins binding to LanCL2, including SRSF family, RAN, SLTM, CHTOP, EIF6, NHP2 and RSL1D1, which were also involved in mRNA splicing, RNA transport and ribosome biogenesis. These findings confirmed that LanCL2 increased protein expression of downstream molecules through mediating mRNA progressing, transcription and protein translation. STAT3 is a transcription factor that mediates cellular signaling triggered by a variety of cytokines and growth factors. Overexpression and activation of STAT3 promoted the invasion and metastasis of cancer cells, including head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, small cell lung cancer, glioblastoma , , . Phosphorylated STAT3 could bind to the promoter of CTTN gene, enhance its transcription, and then lead to the upregulated Cortactin expression , . This study demonstrated that LanCL2 increased the phosphorylation and protein expression of STAT3, indicating that LanCL2 may promote Cortactin expression through activating STAT3/CTTN transcriptional axis.
It is known that ABA could bind to myristoylated LanCL2 on the plasma membrane and then activate the downstream signaling pathway , . This study confirmed that ABA activated LanCL2 and its downstream molecule Akt, and promoted the nuclear transport of LanCL2. However, the mechanism of LanCL2 activation by ABA is unclear. As yet, no study reports the phosphorylation sites of LanCL2 and their importance to LanCL2 activation. Here, we reported two tyrosine phosphorylation sites Tyr198 and Tyr295 of LanCL2 predicted by PhosphoSitePlus tool. Both Tyr198 and Tyr295 mutation of LanCL2 changed the phosphoproteomic profiles of GBM cells, compared with cells expressing wild-type LanCL2. Further, in-vitro migration/invasion assays and western blotting showed that Tyr295 phosphorylation site was of more importance to LanCL2 activation and nuclear transport, GBM cell motility, and the activation and expression of downstream molecules such as Akt, Cortactin and STAT3. In addition, in-vivo orthotopic GBM mice model showed that although mutation of both Tyr198 and Tyr295 decreased tumor sizes and prolonged the median survival of mice, LanCL2Y295A group displayed more significance.
Mutation of LanCL2 Tyr295 led to the failure of enhanced GBM cell migration and invasion triggered by ABA, suggesting that ABA promoted GBM cell motility via triggering LanCL2 activation at Tyr295 phosphorylation site. We also identified that c-Met was the upstream tyrosine kinase of LanCL2 Tyr295 residue, and found that c-Met promoted the nuclear transport of LanCL2. c-Met is a member of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), which are involved in the proliferation, survival, migration and invasion of cancer cells. After binding to its ligand HGF, c-Met recruits and activates Gab1. Grb2, Src, FAK, PLC-γ etc, leading to the activation of downstream PI3K/Akt, RAS/MAPK, and STAT3 signaling pathways . Studies showed that HGF-mediated c-Met activation led to the binding of c-Met and STAT3, triggering STAT3 phosphorylation at Tyr705 and nuclear transport , . In turn, STAT3 could promote HGF transcription and transactivate c-Met through a positive feedback loop , . In addition, c-Met promoted tumor cell invasion and invadopodia formation through triggering the formation of Gab1-cortactin scaffold complex and increasing the phosphorylation of Cortactin . Here, this is the first report on the role of Tyr295 phosphorylation of LanCL2, and we will further prepare its specific antibody and clarify in detail how the Tyr295 residue is phosphorylated by ABA and c-Met.

## Conclusions
In summary, hormone ABA triggered GBM cell migration and invasion, and promoted the activation and nuclear transport of LanCL2. Knockdown of LanCL2 inhibited GBM cell migration, invasion, and invadopodia formation, whereas overexpression of wild-type LanCL2 enhanced them. Tyr295 phosphorylation of LanCL2 was crucial to its activation and nuclear transport, as well as in-vitro cell motility and invadopodia formation, and in-vivo tumor growth of GBM through activating STAT3/Cortactin signaling axis. ABA and tyrosine kinase c-Met triggered the phosphorylation of LanCL2 Tyr295 residue. Taken together, this study suggested a novel signaling c-Met/LanCL2/STAT3/Cortactin involved in GBM cell invasion and invadopodia formation. It broadened our knowledge on the mechanisms underlying LanCL2 activation and its nuclear transport, by providing the first observation of the importance of LanCL2 Tyr295 phosphorylation to GBM.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Hua-fu Zhao: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation, Visualization, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Yun-sheng Liu: Validation, Data curation, Visualization, Resources, Funding acquisition, Writing – review &editing. Jing Wang: Resources, Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing. Chang-peng Wu: Investigation. Xiu-ming Zhou: Investigation. Lin-rong Cai: Investigation. Jing Liu: Investigation. Xiao-jia Liu: Investigation. Yan-wen Xu: Investigation. Wei-ping Li: Supervision, Resources. Guo-dong Huang: Supervision, Resources, Writing – review &editing.

## Availability of data and materials
The mass spectrometry phosphoproteomics and proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (https://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the iProX partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD037054.

## Ethics statement
All procedures performed in studies involving animals were in accordance with the ethical standards of the Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care and the ethics committee of Shenzhen Second People’s Hospital (Approval no. 20220051).

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (No.2021A1515012143, No.2017A030313531, No.2023A1515011707), Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Program (No. JCYJ20220530151209021), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.81772677 and No.82073109).

## Footnotes
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2024.03.007.

## Contributor Information
Hua-fu Zhao, Email: zhaohf0416@email.szu.edu.cn.
Guo-dong Huang, Email: huangguodong@email.szu.edu.cn.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary data
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

## Supplementary data 1

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Supplementary data 1

## Data Availability Statement
The mass spectrometry phosphoproteomics and proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (https://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the iProX partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD037054.