3294toxrepsToxicology ReportsToxicol RepElsevierPMC1076763610767636107676363818711310.1016/j.toxrep.2023.06.012Chitosan nanoparticle toxicity: A comprehensive literature review of in vivo and in vitro assessments for medical applications
ZoeLiaw Hui DavidSheba R RajabalayaRajan aPAPRSB Institute of Health Sciences, Universiti Brunei Darussalam, BE1410 Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei DarussalambSchool of Pharmacy, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071, USA⁎Corresponding author. rajanmpharm@gmail.com
2962023118383–106512024© 2023 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract

## Topic definition
This literature review aims to update the current knowledge on toxicity of chitosan nanoparticles, compare the recent findings and identify the gaps with knowledge that is present for the chitosan nanoparticles.

## Methods
The publications between 2010 and 2020 were searched in Science Direct, Pubmed.gov, Google Scholar, Research Gate, and ClinicalTrials.gov, according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria. 30 primary research studies were obtained from the literature review to compare the in vitro in vivo toxicity profiles among the chitosan nanoparticles.

## Major highlights
Chitosan nanoparticles and other types of nanoparticles show cytotoxic effects on cancer cells while having minimal toxicity on normal cells. This apparent effect poses some considerations for use in incorporating cancer therapeutics into chitosan nanoparticles as an administration form. The concentration, duration of exposure, and pH of the solution can influence nanoparticle cytotoxicity, particularly in zebrafish. Different cell lines exhibit varying degrees of toxicity when exposed to nanoparticles, and of note are liver cells that show toxicity under exposure as indicated by increased alanine transaminase (ALT) levels. Aside from ALT, platelet aggregation can be considered a toxicity induced by chitosan nanoparticles. In addition, zebrafish cells experience the most toxicity, including organ damage, neurobehavioral impairment, and developmental abnormalities, when exposed to nanoparticles. However, nanoparticles may exhibit different toxicity profiles in different organisms, with brain toxicity and liver toxicity being present in zebrafish but not rats. Different organs exhibit varying degrees of toxicity, with the eye and mouth apparently having the lowest toxicity, while the brain, intestine, muscles and lung showing mixed results. Cardiotoxicity induced by chitosan nanoparticles was not observed in zebrafish embryos, and nanoparticles may reduce cardiotoxicity when delivering drug. Toxicity found in an organ may not necessarily mean that it is toxic towards all the cells found in that organ, as muscle toxicity was present when tested in zebrafish but not in C2C12 myoblast cells. Some of the studies conducted may have limitations that need to be reconsidered to account for differing results, with some examples being two experiments done on HeLa cells where one study concluded chitosan nanoparticles were toxic to the cells while the other seems to have no toxicity present. With regards to LD50, one study has stated the concentration of 64.21 mg/ml was found. Finally, smaller nanoparticles generally exhibit higher toxicity in cells compared to larger nanoparticles.

## Scope for future work
This literature review did not uncover any published clinical trials with available results. Subsequent research endeavors should prioritize conducting clinical trials involving human volunteers to directly assess toxicity, rather than relying on cell or animal models.

Keywords: Chitosan, Nanoparticles, Cell lines, Deacetylation

## Graphical abstract
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Mar 11; Revised 2023 Jun 21; Accepted 2023 Jun 22; Collection date 2023 Dec.

1.

## Introduction
1.1.

## Chitosan
Chitosan is a linear structural polysaccharide, deacetylated form of chitin, containing fewer acetyl groups , . The molecular structure of chitosan consists of N-acetylglucosamine units (2-acetamino-2-deoxy-β-d-glucopyranose) attached to β-(1,4)-linked glucosamine units (2-amino-2-deoxy-β-d-glucopyranose) . The semi-crystalline chitosan requires at least 60% of residues to contain D-glucosamine . It is derived from chitin, which is found in various sources such as crustaceans (e.g., crabs and shrimp), fungi cell walls, insect cuticles, and green algae , , .
Chitosan offers several benefits, including its ability to adhere to mucosal surfaces, prolong drug retention at specific body sites, and facilitate enhanced drug penetration , . Compared to its parent compound chitin, chitosan exhibits water solubility at low pH levels due to its positive charge, allowing it to dissolve in acidic due to amino group protonation enabling electrostatic interactions with negatively charged components, such as sialic acid present in mucus and surface epithelial cells , or neutral solutions .
Chitosan finds applications in various fields, including cosmetics, pharmaceutics, medicine, food, and agriculture . For example, chitosan is used in hair and skin products, as well as for oral health purposes, including delivering herbal extracts, dental varnishes, and buccal tablets . Mohire, Yadav , , . In medicine, chitosan has been incorporated into wound dressings, such as HemCon, approved in the United States in 2003 for controlling hemorrhaging . It has also shown efficacy in reducing bleeding duration and improving healing after tooth extractions . Furthermore, chitosan contributes to food preservation and safety by extending the shelf life of products and exhibiting antimicrobial properties. Studies have demonstrated the antimicrobial effect of chitosan, including its ability to inactivate Staphylococcus aureus at low concentrations . Chitosan has also exhibited antifungal properties, inhibiting the growth of Fusarium solani, C. lagenarium, and B. cinerea in various studies , , .
While some studies suggest that chitosan is non-toxic and suitable for drug delivery , , with one study even stating that an FDA Generally Recognized As Safe (GRAS) designation (GRN n° 73, 170, 397 and 443) was given to the chitosan material , other studies have reported toxic effects in cell lines and zebrafish exposed to chitosan nanoparticles, resulting in decreased hatching rates, increased mortality, and developmental defects , . However, some studies have shown toxicities exhibit by cell lines and also in zebrafish, such as the studies presented in Table. Many of these studies showed a decrease in hatching rate and increase in mortality and also defects in development were seen when chitosan nanoparticles were exposed. It is important to consider these findings and the potential toxicities associated with chitosan nanoparticles.

1.2.

## Nanoparticles
The definition of nanoparticles (NPs) typically refers to particles within the size range of 1–100 nm, as defined by the ASTM 2456–06 Standard Terminology Relating to Nanotechnology and the IUPAC , However, some studies have expanded this size range, up to 2000 nm, exceeding the upper limit by 20-fold , .
When nanoparticles are compared against their bulk material counterparts, unique properties that distinguish them from each other. These differences encompass changes in melting point , reactivity, and magnetism . These variations are attributed to size-dependent quantum effects and scalable effects, with the former observed in metals and semiconductors , . Moreover, the reduced size of nanoparticles results in a lower occurrence of point defects compared to bulk materials . However, nanoparticles can still exhibit point defects, as observed using high-resolution electron microscopy . The unique properties of nanoparticles arise from the specific formation of point defects within them. For instance, adhesion, elastic modulus, friction, hardness, stress, and strain exhibit differences when comparing nanoparticles to bulk materials .
Furthermore, the stability, self-assembly behavior , optical properties , and magnetic properties of nanoparticles make them valuable in various fields, particularly in energy technology, information storage technology , environment protection , and biomedical areas such as imaging .

1.3.

## Chitosan nanoparticles
The usage of chitosan nanoparticles is comparable to that of bulk chitosan in various applications such as food, biotechnology, agriculture, medicine, cosmetics, and drug delivery . The potential of chitosan nanoparticles to enhance active pharmaceutical ingredients or nutraceutical has been demonstrated in several studies listed in . This aligns with the notion that chitosan nanoparticles can disrupt tight junctions between epithelial cells, thereby increasing drug permeability . Many of the applications listed in involve chitosan nanoparticles serving as carriers for active pharmaceutical ingredients, aiming to reduce medication dosage and frequency to minimize side effects or enhance drug absorption. However, some studies explore the inherent properties of chitosan nanoparticles themselves, such as their ability to inhibit biofilm formation on denture materials , and their role as a reactive oxygen species modulator in wound healing .
 Among the various applications of chitosan nanoparticles, some of them prove to be noteworthy for their potential use in the field of medicine, particularly as innovative administration methods compared to established approaches.
A notable example is the utilization of chitosan to enhance the delivery of rifampicin, a drug used in tuberculosis treatment . Rifampicin faces challenges related to its low bioavailability due to enzyme induction and subsequent increased clearance . Incorporating chitosan nanoparticles shows promise in altering the administration route, minimizing the first-pass effect. Although studies have explored pulmonary administration of rifampicin via chitosan nanoparticles, ensuring proper patient technique during inhalation therapy remains a concern lungs , , , .
Continuing with the theme of preventing metabolism, insulin administration via the oral route is another venture of using chitosan nanoparticles. Chitosan nanoparticles also hold potential for oral delivery of insulin. Oral administration of insulin is hindered by proteolytic degradation by gastrointestinal enzymes and poor penetration through intestinal walls resulting in poor bioavailability. However, studies indicate that chitosan nanoparticles could mitigate enzyme effects, providing a needle-free method of insulin administration . However, the stability and shelf life of insulin need to be considered as temperature fluctuations can affect its effectiveness.
The study performed by Sudakhar et al. (2020) shows results that seem to be able circumvent the effects of the enzymes, providing a potential novel method of administering insulin that removes the need for needles and swabs. However, many of the insulin products on their own are sensitive to temperature fluctuations, and a corollary of this is that the effective shelf life of the insulin itself will be affected. For example, the vial of human soluble insulin under the brand Actrapid® states on their product literature that once a vial is opened for use, it is recommended that the vial of insulin is kept for only 6 weeks if it is stored below 25°C . However, if left out at 25°C, the recommended duration then would shorten to 4 weeks . Considerations of storage needs to be considered should there be further studies of this new administration route.
Nanoparticle technology can also facilitate the delivery of proteins, such as LSC proteins that carry subunits, which offer protection against gut infections , . Careful investigation of potential side effects of the vaccination is necessary, as seen with the development of COVID-19 vaccines .
Meanwhile, in the case of fungal eye infections, chitosan nanoparticles show promise in prolonging the contact time of antifungal medication in the precorneal layer. Amphotericin B more generally used for systemic infections . Should amphotericin B be used, it is most often prescribed as an intraocular injection form , . However, this suggests the potential use of chitosan nanoparticles in eye drop formulations, providing an alternative to intraocular injections. Chhonker et al., .
Lastly, there are considerations of use in treating toxoplasmosis with spiramycin . However, there may be some hurdles to the extent of its use as currently it still remains as an unlicensed use in pregnancy, seeing as they are not readily available in some countries, and requires special orders as per the British National Formulary . In addition, there has been some concerns over the increased rate of impurities in one brand of spiramycin reported in Madagascar, where a decision to withdraw the product was made . Future research should then also test if stability is improved with the chitosan nanoparticles and its ability to prevent formation of the impurities. Further research from then on could then assess its appropriateness as a potential treatment of fetal toxoplasmosis using nanoparticles while bearing in mind toxicities that may be imparted by nanoparticles themselves on to the fetus .

1.4.

## Rationale
A recent review performed in 2019 provided an overview of chitosan-based nanoparticles, encompassing their production methods, applications, and toxicity which concluded that chitosan nanoparticles exhibited biodegradability and compatibility with various cell types, suggesting relative safety based on the included studies. Furthermore, it warranted for further research on the safety and toxicity of chitosan nanoparticles, given the limited current knowledge in this area . Despite the considerable advantages of nanomaterials in the field of biomedicine, additional investigation is essential to comprehensively understand the safety profile of chitosan nanoparticles.
Chitosan nanoparticles are now increasingly prevalent in medicinal research, thus it is important to understand their interaction with organ systems, and the possible implications with different routes of administration. Understanding the safety profile of chitosan nanoparticles is essential for the successful translation into clinical applications and ensuring patient safety. This literature review aims to contribute to the existing knowledge by consolidating and critically evaluating the current research on chitosan nanoparticle toxicity both in in vivo and in vitro tests. Additionally, the review will provide a comparison of the safety of chitosan nanoparticles in medical applications, in relation to previous literature published before 2019. Moreover, this review will compile a list of cell lines and organisms used in testing. Finally, this review will critically look into some of the implications of the test results of any notable cases found within this review.

2.

## Method
2.1.

## Protocol development
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015 guidelines were utilized to design and develop the procedures of this systematic review .

2.2.

## Inclusion and exclusion criteria
The publications between 2010 and 2020 were included in the search. Research articles with in vitro, in vivo or ex vivo, or any articles that have tested the toxicity of chitosan nanoparticles were included. Non-English articles, gray literature, papers earlier than 2010, studies that do not include the toxicity of the nanoparticles, studies that does not have the chitosan being in the form of nanoparticles, and chitosan nanoparticles used for either diagnostic or non-medical uses were excluded. Additionally, articles that had abstracts only or have unpublished results were also excluded.

2.3.

## Information sources and search strategy
The literature databases used were Science Direct, Elsevier, Pubmed.gov, Google Scholar, Research Gate, and ClinicalTrials.gov. The listed databases were researched using the keywords for the related articles and as per the inclusion criteria, only papers from 2010 to 2020 were included. shows the keywords and the alternative keywords used in performing the search for articles.
 The obtained journal articles were screened according to the inclusion criteria. Titles and abstract filters were first searched; later when those were inadequate, the whole paper was screened for the search strategy. After screening the journal articles from the research results as per the inclusion and exclusion criteria, 30 articles were obtained from the literature review. Clinicaltrials.gov was searched for clinical trials however there were no clinical papers published during that period. .
 

3.

## Results and discussion
Google Scholar returned 10,700 articles with the keywords included for the search. After screening the records duplicate records were removed. The eligible full text articles to be assessed, which adhered to the inclusion and exclusion criteria requirements, were 37. The full text articles were read carefully for assessed eligibility requirements resulting in 30 studies to be included in the qualitative synthesis of this literature review. A list of the articles with pertinent details has been tabulated. Furthermore, articles with the chitosan toxicity studies were critically analyzed to review the parameters influencing the toxicity of chitosan nanoparticles. Consequentially, the parameters size, cell lines, organisms, dose dependence, and organs were found to be the important parameters influencing the toxicity of the chitosan nanoparticles.
3.1.

## In vitro toxicity of chitosan nanoparticles
 presents comprehensive information pertaining to the characteristics of chitosan nanoparticles, including their type, size, concentration or dose, mode of administration, testing method, results, and corresponding citations. It is important to note that within each experimental study, diverse parameters were examined across different cell lines, various substances were loaded into the chitosan nanoparticles, and multiple types of chitosan nanoparticles were tested. Furthermore, the column preceding the relevant citation provides insights into the toxicity implications as suggested by the respective research papers. Toxicity grades such as toxic, nontoxic, or undeterminable are assigned, with additional contextual notes provided for experiments where toxicity was observed. In instances where a specific experiment explicitly asserts non-toxicity despite observing cellular effects, the experiment was categorized as "nontoxic" only if the authors have conducted a significance calculation demonstrating the insignificance of the observed toxicity.
 
3.2.

## In vivo toxicity of chitosan nanoparticles
Similar to the in vitro toxicity, displays a comprehensive summary of the chitosan nanoparticles used in the study, encompassing their specific type, size, concentration or dose, mode of administration, testing methodology, resulting outcomes, and relevant citations. In each experimental trial, variations in parameters, cellular models, loaded substances within chitosan nanoparticles, and occasionally multiple types of chitosan nanoparticles were tested. Subsequently, the preceding column prior to the relevant citation will present the toxicity implications as suggested by the respective paper. Lastly, a toxicity classification of toxic, nontoxic, or inconclusive will be assigned, accompanied by supplementary annotations in certain experiments to provide contextual information on the observed toxicity, if any. Nonetheless, if a study has indicated the absence of toxicity of the nanoparticle despite observing cellular effects, it was categorized as "nontoxic". However, this classification was contingent upon the author explicitly stating it, as well as conducting a significance calculation based on the observed toxicity results and demonstrating that the toxicity is statistically insignificant. The organisms used for the experiments included this review are zebrafish, Wistar rats, Sprague Dawley Rats, Mice, albino rabbits, and Swiss male mice.
 Lastly, shows the explanation for the methods used in table that has presented the results from each study. Each test will have its mechanisms explained briefly to give context to the the method of which each test is being conducted.
 
3.3.

## Toxicity of chitosan based on different parameters
3.3.1.

## Size
The impact of size on cellular toxicity has been observed, although the nature and extent of the effect vary. Several studies have demonstrated that decreasing particle size leads to increased inhibitory effects , , . The two studies have shown a cytotoxic effect only on cancer cell lines as opposed to normal cell lines and cancer cell lines both. As seen in one of the studies, no toxicity was seen at all in normal cell lines, namely the MCF12 cell lines . However, other literature suggests that smaller particles are associated with greater toxicity. For instance, a study investigating chitosan/streptokinase on human fibroblast cell lines found that decreasing the size of nanoparticles increased cytotoxicity, while factors such as chitosan concentration, stirring duration, and pH did not directly affect cytotoxicity . Another study on BEL7402 cancer cell lines using chitosan nanoparticles loaded with copper showed higher cytotoxicity for smaller nanoparticles (40 nm) compared to larger ones (70 and 100 nm), although no cytotoxicity was observed in L-02, liver cell lines .
Similar observations have been made with other types of nanoparticles, not limited to chitosan. For example, realgar nanoparticles of sizes 100 nm and 150 nm exhibited inhibitory effects on ECV-304 cells, while larger sizes (200 nm and 500 nm) did not .
The smaller realgar nanoparticles were suggested for anti-neoplasia treatment due to their ability to suppress angiogenesis with less toxicity compared to bulk arsenic compounds like arsenic trioxide (As2O3). In another experiment, poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) and titanium oxide (TiO2) nanoparticles of various sizes were tested on RAW264.7 and BEAS-2B cell lines. While no cytotoxic effects were observed with PLGA nanoparticles, TiO2 nanoparticles of sizes 10 nm and 20 nm exhibited significant cytotoxicity, whereas the 100 nm size showed reduced cell viability . The exact mechanism underlying the inverse relationship between nanoparticle size and cytotoxicity is not well-established, although studies suggest that smaller particles may adsorb more biomolecules and enter cells more easily , , This concurs with the toxicity results of the dose dependent toxicity as discussed in section 4.3.3.
In conclusion, smaller nanoparticles tend to exhibit higher toxicity, not only for chitosan nanoparticles but also for other types of nanoparticles. Nanoparticle manufacturers should consider size as a critical parameter. Further research is needed to confirm the proposed mechanisms underlying the increased toxicity of smaller nanoparticles.

3.3.2.

## Cell lines
Both normal cells and cancer cell lines are tested, with the sources coming from different organisms. Most of the tests that are reported in this literature review are done on human cells and have showed little to no toxicity, although some studies such as the ones performed the on the liver cells and platelets in human blood cells exhibit more significant toxicities.
The first test with the human liver cells showed that 0.5% w/v chitosan nanoparticles exposure was tolerable for the liver cells incubated, however only up to four hours. Meanwhile, concentrations above 0.5% w/v chitosan nanoparticles showed cells to have disrupted cell membranes and alanine transaminase leaked. Alanine transaminase (ALT) is an enzyme that is responsible for respiration in that it is converted to pyruvate via a process called the Cahill cycle or the glucose-alanine cycle . As a measurement, ALT is widely used as a measure of liver function in a series of tests called the liver function test. In terms of ALT, ALT is used as a measure of the extent of liver damage, as the higher the concentration, the more cells that have died and allowed the ALT leaked in the first place . Some diseases that are indicated with a high ALT level include nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and cirrhosis , . In this study, nanoparticle concentrations of 0.5% and 1% showed a significant rise in ALT levels when compared to the medium. It is clear with the evidence provided that there is toxicity elicited in the liver cells as the ALT levels in the collected supernatant indicates ALT to have leaked out of the cells which mirror the liver cell death in liver damage. It is also interesting to note that this experiment also looked into the time dependence of the toxicity, in which 4 h was the given time in which liver cells started showing any signs of apparent toxicity. Time dependence is a pertinent consideration as the duration of exposure can result in different results with respect to toxicity. Signs of this can be seen as far back as 1982, where a study conducted on chemotherapy showed that exposure time can impart higher cytotoxicity despite being given at a lower dose when compared to a higher dose in a shorter amount of time .
The second test with the blood cells tested for multiple parameters, however only one parameter successfully showed any toxicity that is induced by the chitosan nanoparticles, whereas the other parameters failed to show any toxicities. The reason why platelet aggregation can be considered a toxicity is due to the fact that when platelet aggregates, thrombi can form and can cause episodes of thrombosis as a result of the thrombi forming from the aggregation of platelets . The toxicity that is observed in the nanoparticles seems to be due to the deacetylation degree. One study does show that in rabbit red blood cells, the chitosan samples with a moderate deacetylation degree showed a shorter coagulation time compared to chitosan nanoparticles that had the lowest and the highest deacetylation degree . However, in other studies looking in cell viability rather than platelet aggregation, the relationship between the degree of deacetylation and toxicity can affect the relationship between the concentration and molecular weight of the chitosan nanoparticles . What this then entails for future considerations is that if nanoparticles are to be introduced into patients, there may be a need to check if there are any contraindications of nanoparticle use in patients with high risk of venous thromboembolism. This is a concern as already other existing medication are usually avoided in patients with high venous thromboembolism risk, such as some oral contraceptives and tricyclic antidepressants . Conversely, there could also be considerations of whether there may be interactions with antiplatelets and anticoagulants in terms of affecting blood clotting balance and any incompatibilities in terms of using chitosan nanoparticles as a vehicle containing anticoagulants. For example, degradation has occurred in smoking cessation medication, varenicline, has shown to react with the oxidative degradants of polyethylene glycol (PEG) .
On the other hand, cancer cell lines exposed to chitosan nanoparticles have shown to have toxicity. For example, MTT assays, reactive oxygen species and senescence assays were conducted and THP-1 white blood cell cancer cells showed to have suffered the most toxicity as all results from all the results has shown that there is a significant decrease in cell viability in the MTT assay, and showed an increased amount of cells undergoing senescence when stable chitosan nanoparticles loaded with plasmid DNA where incubated with the THP1 cells . While the HeLa cervical cancer cells and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells also showed similar results in the test for senescence, neither of the cells showed significant decrease in cell viability for the MTT assay . As a footnote, the senescence that was induced in the cells were unaffected by the gene loaded into the chitosan nanoparticles and was considered to be inert and does not contribute to the toxicity observed . A second example to this would be experiments conducted on A549 lung cancer cells, Hep G2 and Huh-7 liver cancer cells with chitosan nanoparticles adorned with hyaluronic acid which were further encapsulated with hyaluronic acid . The lung cancer cells were shown to undergo apoptosis when the levels of nitric oxide were increased while exposed to the loaded chitosan nanoparticles. Blank nanoparticles, also named as “Nano-void”, exposed to the apoptotic cells showed no significant increase in the apoptotic cells for A549 cells. However, when the free raloxifene drug was compared to the nanoparticle groups, the nanoparticles showed a significant and larger proportions of apoptotic cells, most notably late apoptotic cells. Additionally, the proportion of necrotic A549 cells are also much higher in the groups that were exposed to raloxifene chitosan nanoparticles, both adorned and unadorned with hyaluronic acid when compared to the free drug, blank chitosan nanoparticles, raloxifene loaded in hyaluronic acid nanoparticles.

3.3.3.

## Organisms
All of the toxicity studies that were performed on the zebrafish cells showed some form of toxicity and were concluded to be toxic. For example, the study on zebrafish liver cells have shown that the membranes of the cells were destroyed, which thereby caused the death of both the zebrafish larvae and mature fish . Another example would be the gill lamella damage, which suggests oxygen starvation before death and is also referred to in the study as its major cause. One more point that can be observed from the study is that the study also mentioned that larval zebrafish epithelial cells also experienced toxicity with signs including epithelial cell protrusion, yolk extension breaking, and tissue fluid bubbles forming. It is mentioned, however, that the toxicity of these chitosan nanoparticles may be limited as the toxicity was exclusively observed in acidic pH due to the fact that chitosan can dissolve only in acidic pH levels when compared to a neutral or alkali environments. Other in vivo experiments also show the same results. For example, one study done on TPP nanoparticles showed an increase in the levels of ROS, Heat shock protein, mortality, and hatching rate, and another one showed deformations in not only the development of the zebrafish from larvae to adult fish, but also in their neurobehavior as evidenced by the swimming behavior that is observed in one of the studies . The neurobehavioral impairment is also observed in another study, where the contraction of the embryo, a test for the tactile sensitivity, and the free-swimming activity when exposed to darkness or light has been recorded, and the groups treated with chitosan showed a notable decrease in terms of tactile sensitivity as more larvae failed to swim out of the circles that were prepared for the larvae . Within the same study, a modified version of the nanoparticles was being observed, and that was the Tween-80 modified chitosan nanoparticles, which showed a similar result compared to the chitosan nanoparticles. Meanwhile the contractions from the embryo, the tween modified chitosan nanoparticles did showed a significant drop in the times of tail-bends after 1 min when the embryos 20 and 21 h after fertilization. Both of these results were claimed to be proof of movement disorders, which is postulated as a possible corollary of swim bladder defect as it is an important part of zebrafish locomotion.
In spite of this, toxicity that is found within zebrafish is not shared by most if not all the animal studies. For example, the Wistar rats that were used to test piperine-loaded chitosan nanoparticles showed that the authors concluded that the chitosan nanoparticles were safe to use and that the chitosan nanoparticles could significantly help treat nasal irritation caused piperine and showed no brain toxicity . This contrasts the results obtained in the zebrafish as the zebrafish showed significant toxicity in the neurobehavioral development of zebrafish larvae, which also mentioned that both nanoparticles regardless of the presence of the tween 80 modification made to the chitosan, showed primary and secondary motor neuron development were both inhibited . Aside from the neurobehavioral toxicity, muscle structure was affected, in which it is speculated that the deterioration of muscle was the reason that the space between muscle fibers became enlarged. Last but not least, the developmental toxicity of the nanoparticles was observed as it decreased the rate of zebrafish larvae hatching, increasing the death rate and malformation incidences among the zebrafish larvae, similar to other studies already mentioned within this paper , .
Notably, the tests with zebrafish listed in this review all had the nanoparticles being exposed to the fish at their embryo and larval stages and not during the adult stages of the fishes’ life cycle. One study on nanoparticles, though not on chitosan nanoparticles, has revealed that nanoparticle exposure to embryo results in a higher mortality when compared to adult zebrafish . The paper did mention in the discussions that while this is the case, the regulations being used as a reference for toxicity testing showed that the toxicity found in the embryos were the same in most of the nanoparticles tested. Notwithstanding this, the paper also has stated that for the tests with magnesium oxide nanoparticles being less toxic to the embryos than to the adult fish. As this review could not find a comparative study within the search parameters, future studies with chitosan nanoparticles tested on zebrafish may need to consider testing in adults as there may possibilities that toxicity studies in embryos, while can produce comparable toxicity results seen in adults for other compounds , , it is not always the case .
The findings that are produced from experiments using Wistar rats and Zebrafish are important because both show contrasting results and are both being extensively used in experimentation. If these contrasting results are not resolved or explained, complications in terms of supporting evidence can occur, especially in planning future trials of the chitosan nanoparticle in humans.

3.3.4.

## Dose dependence
By far, dose dependence toxicity seems to be notably consistent characteristic to be observed, with nine studies in this literature confirming this. However, one study does state that there is no dose dependence observed. The study in question in particular is the one studying vancomycin . The study failed to show any dose dependence because the experiment not only failed to show any toxicity, all concentrations used in testing against HeLa cells showed no significant change between each of the concentrations . However, one study that performed experiments on HeLa cells showed there was a toxicity associated with HeLa cells being incubated with the chitosan nanoparticles and contradicts the finding to the former study. This may indicate that there were some limitations in the 2012 study that severely affected the results when compared to the more recent results.
Dose dependence toxicity is also observed in different nanoparticles, with some examples being iron oxide nanoparticles , zinc oxide and silicone dioxide nanoparticles .

3.3.5.

## Organs
In this literature review, different organs exhibited different ranges of toxicity and the toxicities to be discussed are the toxicities to the liver, intestine, muscles, heart, lungs, eyes and mouth.
Chitosan is metabolized by lysozymes and enzymes from bacteria present in the colon . However, this does not discount the liver for being a source of potential toxicity. For example, an experiment conducted on zebrafish embryos to observe the hepatotoxicity that may be present revealed that liver size impairment was present in the embryos, while other toxicities that were observed such as neurobehavioral impairment and cardiotoxicity were slight and have no significant effect observed . This seems to concur with the result shown by the in vitro experiments conducted on the liver cells , . However, these results are not seen when Wistar rats are used instead. One such experiment is when Wistar rats are fed with docetaxel loaded chitosan nanoparticles, no changes to liver function were observed, alongside the absence of other toxicities such as mortality, irritation, ocular toxicity and kidney function disruptions. It was also then concluded to be non-toxic to the Wistar rats . Additionally, another experiment has reported that the chitosan nanoparticles being antioxidants and protects the liver against hepatotoxicity that is induced in albino rats by using diethylnitrosamine . It is stated that the chitosan nanoparticle treatment was able to decrease liver enzymes such as ALT, AST, GGT, alkaline phosphatase after the chitosan nanoparticles were fed to the albino rats. One more experiment showed that within Wistar rats given chitosan nanoparticles, the liver kidney tests which not only includes the ALT, alkaline phosphatase, and AST but also the bilirubin, urea and creatinine . In this third experiment, both the control group and the test group showed similar levels of the parameters tested and the authors have concluded that the chitosan nanoparticles showed good safety and biocompatibility .
Meanwhile, toxicity is also observed in the intestines of zebrafish larvae when they were exposed to low molecular weight chitosan nanoparticles after a hematoxylin and eosin staining . However, other studies seem to show somewhat conflicting results. For example, one experiment showed that when Wistar rats were fed chitosan nanoparticles loaded with hydrochlorothiazide, it showed less destruction to intestinal epithelium when compared to free hydrochlorothiazide administration . Nevertheless, this study also showed some damage from the chitosan nanoparticles, with some examples of the damages to the intestine include loss of epithelium in some areas, desquamation of epithelial cells, decreased microvilli present on microvilli and an opposite effect of a higher number of goblet cells. An experiment that puts the result of the zebrafish experiment into doubt is an experiment that was performed on rainbow trout fish, where the fish were treated with nanochitosan/zeolite composite would improve the structure of the cells within the intestine of rainbow trout as opposed to damaging them .
Muscle toxicity reported in the zebrafish embryos is another example of organ toxicity reported in this review (Z. ). Once again, some experiments have results that seem to suggest otherwise. A study that was completed with C2C12 myoblast cells showed that after a treatment lasting for 12 h, no cytotoxicity was induced to the cells, with all of the samples showing a cell viability of more than 80% and that any difference observed from the control group was not significant . Cell proliferation inhibition and heightened levels of apoptosis were shown in another experiment done on human smooth muscle cells from human umbilical cords, where the cells are treated with hydroxybutyl-chitosan nanoparticles loaded with small interfering RNA (siRNA) . However, the second experiment actually reveals a usefulness in this finding, in that vascular smooth muscle cells replicating represents one of the occurrences in cardiovascular conditions developing , , so by increasing the apoptosis and inhibiting replication of cells via tissue factor, it will mitigate the process of the cardiovascular diseases arising .
The fourth domain that has toxicity observed in it is the nervous system, where two studies have shown some signs of neurobehavioral impairment , . Meanwhile in contrast, one study failed to show any toxicities in the brains of Wistar rats that were intranasally given the nanoparticles . For the case of nanoparticles being toxic to the brain, one study showed that in the cerebellum and frontal cortex of male Sprague-Dawley rats to have chitosan nanoparticles modified with polysorbate-80 concentrating in those parts when introduced into the rats . Not only did the Sprague Dawley rats lost weight, affected areas exhibit cell apoptosis, inflammation, and oxidative stress . However, another experiment showed that instead of the destruction of cells, chitosan nanoparticles seem to help in increasing the concentration of acetyl-11-keto-β-Boswellic (AKBA) when it is loaded into O-carboxymethyl chitosan nanoparticles, which then enhances the protective effect to Sprague-Dawley rat cortical neurons when exposed to the nanoparticles . In the experiment, the nanoparticles were shown to be significantly more effective in reaching in the plasma as compared to the free AKBA which was soluble in fat instead of water , . Other than in the plasma, other organs such as the brain and liver showed a significantly higher concentration of the nanoparticles loaded with the AKBA when compared against the free AKBA, whereas the opposite was true when organs such as the kidney and the spleen was observed . The most important finding relevant to the neural toxicity in the paper, however, will be the cell viability and the LDH levels after the cortical neurons were incubated with the free AKBA and the nanoparticles loaded with the AKBA. Here, two models to simulate ischemia, oxygen glucose deprivation (OGD) and middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) were utilized. To summarize the OGD process, cells would be placed in a medium that is lacking in oxygen, and instead have nitrogen and carbon dioxide culture medium with no glucose . On the other hand, middle cerebral artery occlusion is performed by inserting a suture from an isolated external carotid artery to the middle cerebral artery to occlude it . Evidently, with the higher levels in the brain, the nanoparticles loaded with the AKBA showed a significantly higher percentage of cell viability when compared to the free AKBA with a p-value of less than 0.05 within the OGD model . The MCAO model also showed the AKBA nanoparticles showed a lower score of neurological deficit scores, and also a lower volume of infarct .
Nanoparticles and lung damage have been recorded on multiple occasions. For example, the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has stated that with nanoparticles made from titanium oxide (TiO2) have the potential to cause cancers and that it can happen to workers that have to work with these nanoparticles at the relevant occupations . Other types of nanoparticles that can cause lung cancers include carbon nanotubes , cerium oxide (CeO2) nanoparticles, and silver nanoparticles . One concern of inhaling nanoparticles causing toxicity is that it can accumulate as The International Commission on Radiation Protection (ICRP) has stated that 50% of nanoparticles can reach to the alveoli of lungs in people, and that if the nanoparticles are insoluble, 25% of remains in situ indefinitely . Chitosan nanoparticles, meanwhile, have shown mixed results. For example, one experiment that had Wistar rats inhaled rifampicin filled chitosan nanoparticle showed that the nanoparticles performed favorably to free rifampicin in that the nanoparticle group showed a higher number of surviving and viable cells . However, results that contrast the rifampicin experiment are found in another experiment using A549 lung cancer cells treated with raloxifene, where the nanoparticles showed a higher toxicity when compared to raloxifene administered without the use of any nanoparticle system . Meanwhile, a comparison of A549 treatment with uncoated poly(lactic-co glycolic acid) nanoparticles to chitosan coated nanoparticles revealed that both groups showed similar cell viabilities in a cytotoxic assay and stated that chitosan is not the only parameter for the extent of cytotoxicity in these cells .
Ocular toxicity studies of chitosan nanoparticle seem to show minimal toxicity. For example, a modified Draize test performed on albino rabbits showed that there are no toxicities observed in the eyes , the description of the Draize test is given in Table. Another experiment using TPP chitosan nanoparticles also failed to show ocular toxicity when Wistar rats were administered 2 g/kg of nanoparticles while they were simultaneously being tested for oral toxicity . Additionally, another method of using chicken hen eggs, called the HET-CAM method, a score of 0 was recorded in one study and suggested that it was appropriate to use chitosan nanoparticles to deliver antibiotics, with the added boon of less frequent dosing and longer exposure to the drug applied in the eye . This benefit of not only having a non-toxic drug delivery system and also increasing the duration of drug release has been recorded in one experiment which showed this property in chitosan grafted polyethylene glycol methacrylate nanoparticles loaded with a monoclonal antibody, bevacizumab . Additionally, chitosan nanoparticles with rosmarinic acid showed no toxicity to retinal and corneal cell lines ARPE-19 and HCE-T cells respectively . In general, the ocular toxicity of chitosan results from the different experiments appear to agree with one another and shows to be a promising delivery method that is safe for the eyes and can also be used as a method of either sustained or controlled drug release.
Cardiotoxicity induced from chitosan nanoparticles seem to be not present according to the experiment performed on the zebrafish embryos . Other studies seem to have suggested by introducing drugs via nanoparticles instead of the free drug seems to be beneficial in terms of the toxicity experienced. One such example of that is an experiment conducted with cancer cells of the liver when albumin-chitosan nanoparticles were adorned with retinoic acid was used to deliver doxorubicin hydrochloride in a targeted manner . This experiment showed that because the concentration at which doxorubicin loaded in chitosan nanoparticles was recorded to have its inhibitory effect on growth of HepG2 cells was higher when compared to than when the same concentration of the drug was not put in a system and free . It was also postulated that in spite of the need to have in vivo tests to verify the potential benefit the nanoparticles can give, this formulation can decrease the amount of doxorubicin required to give to a patient requiring the medication, which then consequently reduces the cardiotoxicity of the drug via the chitosan nanoparticles . This result seems to be also seen in another experiment with another two types of chemotherapeutic drugs simultaneously, paclitaxel and doxorubicin , loaded into magnetic chitosan nanoparticles with red blood cell membrane coating, also showed an increased duration of the drug’s circulation and release, augmenting the cumulation and intake of the nanoparticles in tumors when compared to a more traditional method of using polyethylene glycol to modify the chitosan nanoparticles .
Lastly, oral toxicity is to be discussed. In general, toxicity in the oral region remains largely absent. For example, one study that experimented with Wistar rats checked their rate of mortality, physical appearance and also weighed them as the experiment is conducted . The results of the chitosan nanoparticles as compared to the control used in the experiment showed that both groups did not show any illness signs, both have comparable body weights recorded at all days where the measurement was taken, that is on day 1, 7 and, 14, both did not show one rat with irritation or toxicity to the skin and eyes, and both groups did not have any mortality recorded . Moreover, another experiment that also tested on Wistar rats showed similar results . This second experiment used an immunosuppressant called 6-mercaptopurine, which can also be used as a treatment for cancer such as some forms of cancers of the white blood cells (leukemia) . Toxic adverse effect reduction and lethal dose improvement by two times relative to the treatment of using unmodified 6-mercaptopurine are two of the highlights of the study ,. However, unlike the first experiment where neither group showed any fatalities in rats, this experiment did show some rats dying, where on the 14th day of the experiment using 300 mg per kg body weight had one died in the traditional 6-mercaptopurine group whereas none in the nanoparticle treated group. The next step that was taken was then to dose three of the rats at 2000 mg for every kilogram of the rats’ body weight for each group. Two out of the three rats tested in the increased dose of nanoparticles died whereas all three of the rats tested with the increased dose of normal 6-mercaptopurine. When a necropsy was performed, however, no irregularities were found in any of the organs of the rats.
To summarize, the organs that showed the least amount of toxicity amongst all that were discussed are eyes and the mouth and the results of the studies presented seems to point that chitosan is a promising delivery that not only is non-irritating to the eyes but also proven to be able to act as a modified release formulation. This seems to be the case with the heart as well, however, the evidence found for this toxicity are mainly in vitro experiments as opposed to the eyes where in vivo results were provided. Whereas for the liver, intestine, muscles, lungs and brain, results obtained for these organs are conflicting between different organisms and therefore needs more research to elucidate the trend in toxicity.
Chitosan nanoparticles exhibit minimal cardiotoxicity based on zebrafish embryo experiments, showing potential benefits in targeted drug delivery. Oral toxicity studies on Wistar rats confirm the safety of chitosan nanoparticles, with no adverse effects observed. The results highlight the suitability of chitosan nanoparticles for ocular and oral applications, while further research is needed to investigate toxicity trends in the liver, intestine, muscles, lungs, and brain.

3.4.

## Recommendations for future research
Many of the results that contradict each other seem to stem from when Wistar rats are compared to Zebrafish models in this report. This may be simply due to the fact now more zebrafish experiments are conducted as it is now a model that is being used more in the present timing and setting , thus increasing the amount of studies that have zebrafish models in the first place to be searched. Nevertheless, with such contrasting results in both the Wistar rats and Zebrafish models, one possibility of research is to conduct a study on the differences in the organisms when the same type of chitosan nanoparticle is being administered in terms of looking at the not only the mortality rate of the organisms but also the differences in the development of the organisms as is done in studies that experimented on zebrafish alone. This will allow a direct comparison of the two organisms in terms of knowing the sensitivity of each of the organisms toward chitosan nanoparticles.
At least as of writing this literature review, not one clinical research paper on chitosan nanoparticle toxicity in humans has been published with results. One suggestion for future research would be to research the toxicities of the chitosan nanoparticles in human participants, using different methods of administration.

3.5.

## Limitations
A limitation of this study is that it does not consider any non-English articles in the review and can miss valuable information on the toxicities of chitosan nanoparticles. With the limited number of staff and no official translator to properly transcribe the non-English articles, they were excluded.
Another limitation of this study is that it did not consider any organisms in which excretory systems are impaired, that is, no tests were done on organisms that had pre-existing liver damage or kidney damage. This is important with respects to any of the systemic formulations as there are important implications in which these nanoparticles are used with potential patients should any of these formulations reach that point of development and use in the medicinal field.
The long-term effects of chitosan nanoparticles on organ systems are crucial to assess their safety. Short-term studies may not capture potential delayed or cumulative toxicity effects that could occur with prolonged exposure.
A larger sample size would provide more robust data and increase the generalizability of the results. Most studies in the research articles have not provided a comprehensive analysis of other potential toxic effects. Thus, the limited scope of toxicity assessment may not capture all potential risks associated with chitosan nanoparticles.
The studies mentioned primarily use animal models, such as albino rabbits and Wistar rats, to assess ocular and oral toxicity. While animal models provide valuable insights, the results may not always directly translate to human responses. Differences in anatomy, physiology, metabolism, and genetic factors between animals and humans can influence the toxicity outcomes. There is lack of clinical trials; without data from human trials, it is challenging to draw definitive conclusions about the safety of chitosan nanoparticles in a clinical setting.
In summary, while the research mentioned in the suggests that chitosan nanoparticles have minimal toxicity in various organs on application, it is important to acknowledge the limitations of the studies. Further research, including larger sample sizes, longer-term studies, comparative assessments, human clinical trials, and a broader range of toxicity evaluations, is needed to comprehensively evaluate the safety and potential risks of chitosan nanoparticles.

4.

## Conclusion
While toxicity is present in some of the tests given, most of the tests described in this paper showed relatively low to no toxicity. Nevertheless, the exact toxicities in humans are not reported. Furthermore, the results of the different organs and cell lines vary, some of which appear to contradict one another. Moreover, the method of testing the cytotoxicity of each nanoparticle for each cell line and organs differ in terms of not only the reagents, but also the guideline on determining toxicity as well. Potential areas of safe nanoparticle use seems to be favoring oral, ocular and cardiac system for drug delivery, however blood clotting and other organ systems will require further investigation. Recommendations for future studies will have to research the chitosan nanoparticle toxicities in human test subjects so that clinically relevant decisions such as choosing the correct formulation in drug production can be made.

## Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Rajan Rajabalaya reports administrative support and writing assistance provided by the Universiti Brunei Darussalam.

Handling Editor: Dr.Prof. L.H. Lash

## Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
No data was used for the research described in the article.