822acssdACS Biomaterials Science & EngineeringACS Biomater Sci EngPMC1155955711559557115595573941235110.1021/acsbiomaterials.4c00474Nanoparticles
Fueled by Enzyme for the Treatment of
Hyperlipidemic Acute Pancreatitis
ChenGeer HuangYunfeng YuHaohui WangJunru LiHaobing ShenShuqi ZhouXingjian ShiKeqing SunHongwei †Department
of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province 325000, PR China‡Translational
Medicine Laboratory, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325000, PR China§Cixi
Biomedical Research Institute, Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou 325035, Zhejiang, China*Email: skochilly@wmu.edu.cn.
*Email: sunhongwei1@163.com. Phone: (86) 577-57778960. Fax: (86) 577-55578999.
16102024101171767176–719016102025© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Hyperlipidemic acute pancreatitis (HAP) is a serious
inflammatory
pancreatic disease commonly seen in patients with disorders of lipid
metabolism. Decreasing blood triglyceride levels and proinflammatory
factors can alleviate hyperlipidemic pancreatitis. The lipase that
enhanced the Brownian motion of mesoporous silica in triglyceride
solutions could accelerate decomposition of the lipid and improve
the efficiency of absorption. In this study, we developed a mesoporous
silica nanoparticle with dual modification of IL-6 aptamer and lipase
for the treatment of HAP. The nanoparticle could increase the ability
of particles to absorb inflammatory factor IL-6 and decompose triglycerides.
For every 10 mg of the dual-modified nanoparticles, the efficiency
of capturing IL-6 was approximately 9.67 pg/mL and of decomposing
triglycerides was approximately 3.88 mg/mL in the plasma of HAP patients
within 2 h. In summary, the mesoporous silica nanoparticle could absorb
the IL-6 inflammatory factor through IL-6 aptamers and decompose triglycerides
through lipase. Furthermore, based on clinically available plasma
exchange technology, combined with our developed dual-modified nanoparticles,
we designed an absorption device for the treatment of hyperlipidemic
pancreatitis; it works to promote the treatment of hyperlipidemic
pancreatitis.
Keywords: mesoporous silica, nanoparticle, IL-6 aptamer, lipase, hyperlipidemic acute pancreatitis

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Mar 11; Accepted 2024 Oct 8; Revised 2024 Oct 6; Collection date 2024 Nov 11.

## Introduction
Hyperlipidemic acute pancreatitis (HAP)
is a group of inflammatory
pancreatic diseases characterized by the manifestation of disorders
of lipid metabolism and secondary to acute pancreatitis (AP). − It is generally believed that the occurrence of HAP is more closely
related to elevated triglycerides in the blood. The prevalence of AP in people with serum triglyceride
levels above 500 mg/dL and above has been reported in the literature
to be approximately 11%. The higher the
serum level of triglycerides, the higher the risk of secondary AP. , Animal experiments have demonstrated that hyperlipidemia exacerbates
the course of acute edema and acute necrotizing pancreatitis in rats. HAP produces a multitude of inflammatory factors.
In the acute phase of HAP, IL-6 is one of the main inflammatory factors,
mainly released by activated mononuclear macrophages, and the elevated
level of IL-6 in the blood is positively correlated with the severity
of AP within a certain range. − A previous report showed that
IL-6 is thought to contribute to the induction of systemic inflammatory
response, acute phase inflammatory response, and multiorgan failure
in patients with AP. In experiments with
IL-6 transgenic mice, treatment with anti-IL-6 antibodies helped reduce
the progression of severe acute pancreatitis (SAP) when plasma IL-6
was at high levels (200 ng/mL). , However, there is still
a lack of effective therapeutic means for HAP. − 
Mesoporous silica nanomaterials (MSNs) have
a controlled and uniform
particle size (50–300 nm), unique
pore size, and high specific internal surface area, and the surface can be modified with amino, sulfhydryl,
and carboxyl groups. MSNs also have good
biocompatibility in biological applications, and the smaller particle
size also facilitates mesoporous silica being better cleared in vivo. , An aptamer is an oligonucleotide sequence (DNA or RNA) that can
be obtained from a library of nucleic acid molecules by in vitro screening
techniques. Nucleic acid aptamers also have similar functions to antibodies,
and each nucleic acid aptamer binds specifically to a particular ligand
(antigen-like). − Compared to monoclonal antibodies, nucleic acid aptamers
have high stability (dry powder can be stored at room temperature),
low production cost, easy modification, and small molecular weight
and can be cleared faster in vivo. Lipase
can hydrolyze triglycerides into fatty acids and glycerol in living
cells. However, the use of free enzymes
is limited by their instability, nonreproducibility, and nonrecoverability, while enzyme immobilization can ameliorate these
drawbacks. , The MSN surface is modified to
link aptamers and immobilize lipases. − Various types of nanoparticles
with motility ability have been designed inspired by the fact that
enzymes can use their catalytic conversion ability to convert other
forms of energy into mechanical energy. , Also, these
types of nanoparticles are used for drug delivery. It has been reported that lipase can act as a motor in
triglyceride solutions to both enhance Brownian motion and accelerate
the decomposition of triglycerides, while triglycerides can also act
as a “fuel” for the nanoparticle, thus achieving enhanced
diffusion of the mesoporous silica nanoparticles after modification
of lipase. − 
Therefore, taking advantage of the role of
lipase as a “power
motor” on MSN, , combining the properties of MSN
and MSN dual-modified with IL-6 aptamer and lipase, − we investigate
the ability of the dual-modified nanoparticle to enhance the decomposition
of triglycerides and capture of IL-6. The MSN was modified with lipase
and IL-6 aptamer, which may play the role of decomposing triglyceride
and capturing IL-6 for eventually achieving a therapeutic purpose
of HAP. A series of experiments confirmed that MSN modified with lipase
and IL-6 aptamer had a satisfactory function of decomposing triglyceride
and adsorbing IL-6. On this basis, we then further developed therapeutic
devices with the modified MSN for the treatment of HAP. In brief,
based on the use of clinically available plasma replacement technology, combined with our development and design of
IL-6 aptamer and lipase double-modified MSN as the active ingredient
in it, a device was developed for the decomposition of triglycerides
and adsorption of IL-6. − The plasma passes through the
device as the blood separated from the blood cells, allowing the plasma
to pass through the adsorption column, resulting in a decrease in
the triglyceride and IL-6 levels in the patient’s plasma, and
finally passing through the plasma displacer, where the purified plasma
is reunited with the blood, ultimately serving to promote the treatment
of HAP.

## Materials and Methods

## Materials
Mesoporous silica (xfnano), 3-aminopropyl
triethoxysilane (99%, APTES, Sigma-Aldrich), lipase (from porcine
pancreas, Sigma-Aldrich), and glutaraldehyde (GA, 25% in water, Sigma-Aldrich),
IL-6-specific human aptamer (sequence 5-NH2-GGT GGC AGG
AGG ACT ATT TAT TTG CTT TTC T-3′) 5′ modified with the
carboxyl group and 3′ modified with 6-FAM were synthesized
and purified by Sangon Biotech (Shanghai, China). , 1-Ethyl-3-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl) carbodiimide (EDC, Sigma-Aldrich), N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS, Sigma-Aldrich), fluorescein 5(6)-isothiocyanate
(FITC, Sigma-Aldrich), TAMRA-azide (FITC, Sigma-Aldrich), rhodamine
B (Sigma-Aldrich), agarose (Sigma-Aldrich), bicinchoninic acid (BCA)
protein concentration assay kit (Enhanced) (Beyotime), recombinant
human IL-6 (PeproTech), FITC-labeled IL-6 (Customized by Company GenScript),
human IL-6 high sensitivity ELISA Kit (MultiSciences), triglyceride
content test kit (Solarbio), hemoglobin (Hb) content test kit (Solarbio),
albumin content test kit (Solarbio), total bilirubin (TBIL) content
test kit (Solarbio), direct bilirubin (DBIL) content test kit (Solarbio),
triglyceride (Solarbio), glyceryl triacetate (≥99.0%, Sigma-Aldrich),
litmus (aladdin), anti-IL-6 antibody (abcam), Poloxamer 407 (Sigma-Aldrich), l-arginine (Sigma-Aldrich), phosphate buffer saline (PBS), other
Western blotting, and nucleic acid agarose related reagents were purchased
from Beyotime.

## Experimental Methods

## Amine Functionalization of MSN (MSN-NH2)
Mesoporous silica was suspended in anhydrous ethanol (2 mg/mL) and
sonicated for 15 min. Then, APTES (10 μL/mg of MSN) was added
directly to the solution, and the mixture was shaken with an oscillator
for 3 min and shaken vigorously on a shaker for 24 h at hourly intervals.
The functionalized particles were centrifuged and washed 3 times in
ethanol (1350 rcf, 10 min) and 3 times in water (1928 rcf, 10 min),
with ultrasonication for 20 min between each centrifugation. Finally,
the washed particles were dried in a freeze-dryer, and the final product,
aminated mesoporous silica (MSN-NH2), was obtained after
drying. , 

## IL-6 Aptamer-Modified Aminated Mesoporous Silica (MSN-APT)
A 5 μL portion of 100 μM carboxyl modified IL-6 aptamer
with 10 mg of EDC was added to 0.5 mL of ultrapure water and shaken
for 15 min at room temperature to activate the carboxyl group. Five
milligrams of MSN-NH2 with 10 mg of N-hydroxysuccinimide
(NHS) was added to the above solution and stirred for 12 h at room
temperature. Then, the mixture was centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10
min. Finally, the particles were washed three times with ultrapure
water, sonicated for 10 min each time, centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for
3 min, and suspended with ultrapure water for use. , 

## Lipase-Modified Mesoporous Silica–IL-6 Aptamer (MSN-APT-LP)
MSN-APT particles were centrifuged at 1350 rcf for 10 min and resuspended
in PBS solution (0.1 M PH = 7.45) (5 mg/mL) after centrifugation and
sonicated for 20 min. Next, 2.5% glutaraldehyde was added to the mixture,
shaken for 30 s, placed on a shaker at 200 rpm, and shaken at room
temperature for 3 h, removed every hour for vigorous shaking and then
placed back on the shaker for shaking. The mixture was centrifuged
at 1350 rcf for 10 min, and the supernatant was removed. The particles
were washed three times with PBS solution, each time by centrifugation
at 1350 rcf for 10 min and sonication for 20 min. The particles were
resuspended in PBS solution containing lipase at room temperature
and placed on a shaker at 200 rpm overnight (12 h or more). Finally,
the mixture was removed, centrifuged at 1350 rcf for 10 min, and sonicated
for 10 min, and the particles were washed three times with PBS solution
in the same way as before and suspended with ultrapure water for use. , 

## FITC-Labeled Lipase
An excess of FITC solution (concentration
of 1 mg/mL) was added to 10 mL of lipase solution, and the solution
was protected from light and placed at 4 °C for 24 h. The liquid
was removed and loaded into a 34 mm diameter semipermeable membrane
with a molecular cutoff of 8000–12,000 D. The semipermeable
membrane was placed in pH 7.56 PBS solution and stirred for dialysis,
and the buffer was changed after the first interval of 1 h. The buffer
was then changed every 2 h for 2 days. The fluorescently labeled lipase
solution was removed from the dialysis bag for use.

## Morphological Characterization
MSN and MSN-NH2 were examined using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR)
to further detect that NH2 was attached, and MSN, MSN-APT
and MSN-APT-LP were examined using a UV–vis spectrophotometer
to verify that IL-6 aptamer and lipase were attached to MSN. The MSN,
MSN-APT, and MSN-APT-LP were then characterized for their microscopic
morphology using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) coupled with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
(EDS), and then, the particle size and zeta potential of MSN, MSN-NH2, MSN-APT, and MSN-APT-LP were determined by the Morphologi4-ID
(Malvern pAnalysis) system. The samples were diluted to a concentration
of 0.5 mg/mL, followed by light scattering and zeta potential analysis
with an acquisition time of 5 s. Each measurement was performed three
times. A total of 9 measurements were performed to obtain statistically
relevant data. Pore characteristics were determined by using the BJH
(Barret–Joyner–Halenda) and BET (Brunauer–Emmett–Teller)
methods.

## Amount of MSN-APT Immobilized Lipase
The rate of lipase
immobilization on MSN-APT was quantified using the BCA assay kit.
BCA quantifies the amount of total protein by quantifying the reduction
of Cu2+ to Cu1+ by peptide bonds of the protein.
According to Q = (Ci – Cf) × Vi/Ci × Vf, Ci denotes the initial lipase concentration of
the solution, Cf denotes the lipase concentration
after the reaction, Vi denotes the initial
volume of the solution, and Vf denotes
the volume of the solution after the reaction.
Ten milligrams
of MSN-APT-LP was added to the protein solution extracted from mouse
pancreatic tissue containing lipase and shaken at room temperature
for 5 h for routine Western blotting. The primary antibody is pancreatic
lipase polyclonal antibody (1:1000). The secondary antibody is goat
antirabbit HRP conjugated IgG (1:5000), and the results of Western
blotting were analyzed using ImageJ software.

## Fluorescence Staining
MSN-NH2 was added
to an excess of tetramethylrhodamine solution (1 mg/mL), protected
from light, placed on a bed shaker, and shaken for 30 min, and then,
the mixture was centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 5 min; the particles
were washed three times with ultrapure water, sonicated for 5 min
each time, centrifuged, and resuspended with ultrapure water, after
which IL-6 aptamer with carboxyl and Atto425 modification was added,
as previously described. The washed particles were resuspended in
ultrapure water, lipase solution with FITC fluorophore was added,
and lipase with FITC was attached to MSN-APT, as previously described,
and the washing steps were repeated. The washed particles were resuspended
with ultrapure water, and a small amount of the reacted liquid was
taken on a slide and observed under a confocal fluorescence microscope.

## Quantification of IL-6 Aptamer Linkage on MSN-NH2
One mg of MSN-NH2 was reacted with different
concentrations of IL-6 aptamer (with 6-FAM), and the reacted particles
were washed with ultrapure water (the washing procedure was the same
as described above). The washed particles were resuspended in a 96-well
plate with ultrapure water, and the absorbance (A) value was measured at a wavelength of 485 nm using an enzyme standardization
instrument to calculate the amount of 1 mg of MSN-NH2 connected
to IL-6 aptamer.

## MSN-APT-LP Adsorption Capture of IL-6
A certain amount
of MSN-APT-LP was resuspended in 100 pg/mL of IL-6 solution, and the
control group was MSN. The reaction solution was placed on a shaker
and shaken at room temperature for 2 h. After the reaction, the supernatant
of the solution was collected and the concentration of IL-6 in the
supernatant was detected by the conventional method using an IL-6
ELISA detection kit. By changing the amount of MSN-APT-LP added and
the reaction time, different masses of MSN-APT-LP and the reaction
supernatant after different times were collected, and the concentration
of IL-6 was detected using the IL-6 ELISA assay kit and then plotted.
IL-6 with FITC fluorescence labeling was reacted with rhodamine
B-stained MSN-APT-LP, placed on a shaker, and reacted at room temperature
for 2 h. After the reaction, the solution was washed three times using
PBS solution and resuspended with PBS solution; a small amount of
the solution was taken on a slide and placed under a confocal fluorescence
microscope for observation.
Ten milligrams of MSN-APT-LP was
added to the protein solution
containing IL-6 extracted from mouse pancreas tissue and shaken at
room temperature for 5 h. Routine Western blotting was performed with
primary antibodies as IL-6 rabbit monoclonal antibody (1:1000).
The secondary antibody was goat antirabbit HRP conjugated IgG (1:5000).
The Western blotting results were analyzed using ImageJ software.

## Decomposition Rate of Triacetin
Triacetin droplets
were obtained by shaking the triacetin/PBS mixture (50:2, v/v) for
1 min with a shaker. Typically, 500 μL of PBS solution and 20
μL of triglyceride were added to 1.5 mL of Eppendorf tubes and
then shaken vigorously for 1 min. MSN-APT-LP was added to the mixture
solution, while MSN was added to the control group. The solution was
sonicated for 5 min, followed by vigorous shaking for 1 min. An appropriate
amount of the mixture was then dropped onto a 35 mm culture plate.
The grease droplets were observed under a microscope, and their changes
were recorded. The obtained results were analyzed using ImageJ. The
decomposition rate of the triacetin was calculated using the following
equation.
 Ai represents the area at the beginning of the triacetin droplet reaction; At represents the area at the
end of the triacetin droplet reaction.

## MSN-APT-LP Decomposition Triacetin
Two mL portions
of 10 and 100 mM triacetin were, respectively, added to 1 mL of 10
mg/mL litmus solution, followed by 20 mg of MSN-APT-LP. The mixture
was shaken on a shaker, and the color of the solution was recorded
at 0.5 h; NaOH was added to neutralize the produced acid, and the
amount of neutralized NaOH was observed. One mg of MSN-APT-LP was
added to a litmus solution containing 10 mg/mL; the control group
was added with MSN, and then, the appropriate amount of triacetin
was added to the above solution, placed on a shaker, and shaken at
room temperature. The mixture was taken out every half hour to observe
and record the color change of the solution by taking photos for a
total of 1.5 h. Triglyceride can be decomposed to produce acetic acid,
which can turn the litmus solution from purple to red. The particles
in the above solution were washed three times with ultrapure water,
and the above steps were repeated again twice, photographed, and recorded.
9 mg/mL triglyceride solution was added to 5 mg of MSN-APT-LP,
the control was MSN, placed on a shaker and shaken at room temperature,
and the supernatant after the reaction was collected every 20 min.
The collected supernatant was assayed for the triglyceride content
in the supernatant with a triglyceride assay kit.
Different
masses of MSN-APT-LP were added to 9 mg/mL triglyceride
solution, and the solution was placed on a bed shaker and shaken at
room temperature; the supernatants were collected after 2 h. The level
of triglycerides in each supernatant was measured by a triglyceride
assay kit.

## Video Recording and Analysis Using Metallographic Microscopy
Video of the movement of the MSN-APT-LP particles was observed
and recorded using a microscope. MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles containing
different concentrations of glycerol triacetate were placed on ground-edge
single fluted slides and mixed thoroughly, and then, each sample was
videotaped with a camera.
The obtained video was processed using
ImageJ to acquire the trajectory of the particles from the obtained
video and calculate the distance and velocity using the following
equations.
 where i = 2 for two-dimensional
analysis, t represents the time interval, St represents the total distance
traveled, and Tt represents
the total time.

## Agarose Gel Electrophoresis
MSN-NH2 was
reacted with IL-6 aptamer as described previously, and the prereaction
IL-6 aptamer solution, postreaction IL-6 aptamer solution, and postreaction
particles were subjected to nucleic acid agarose gel electrophoresis;
then, the agarose gels were exposed to the exposure machine, and the
electrophoresis results were analyzed using ImageJ software. The MSN-APT-LP
was placed in patient plasma for a period of time, the particles were
removed for conventional nucleic acid agarose gel electrophoresis,
and the control group was IL-6 aptamer alone and MSN-APT-LP in PBS.

## Adsorption of IL-6 by MSN-APT-LP in Triacetin
5 mg
each of MSN, MSN-APT, and MSN-APT-LP was added to 100 pg/mL IL-6 solution,
and triacetin was added to the mixture at the same time to make the
concentration of triacetin in the mixture 10 mM. The mixture was placed
on a shaker and shaken at room temperature, and then, the supernatant
solution after the reaction was collected; and the concentration of
IL-6 was detected using the IL-6 ELISA assay kit.
Separately,
5 mg of MSN-APT-LP was added to two 100 pg/mL solutions of IL-6, one
mixture containing triglyceride at a concentration of 10 mM and one
mixture without triglyceride. The mixture was shaken on a shaker and
reacted at room temperature for 140 min. The supernatant solution
after the reaction was collected, and the concentration of IL-6 was
measured using the IL-6 ELISA assay kit.

## Effect of MSN-APT-LP in the Plasma of Patients with Hyperlipidemic
Pancreatitis
Blood plasma samples were obtained from patients
with hyperlipidemic pancreatitis at the First Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University. (The project has been approved by the Clinical
Ethics Committee of the First Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University.
Approval number: KY2023-R004.)
First, we performed nucleic acid
agarose gel electrophoresis experiments by keeping simple IL-6 aptamer
and MSN-APT-LP particles in human plasma for a period of time. Then,
5 mg of MSN-APT-LP was added to the plasma of patients with hyperlipidemic
pancreatitis, and the plasma supernatant was collected at intervals
at room temperature. After the reaction, the plasma levels of IL-6
and triglyceride were measured by using the IL-6 ELISA kit and the
triglyceride kit. Then, 0, 1, 2, 5, 10, and 15 mg of MSN-APT-LP were
added to the plasma of patients with hyperlipidemic pancreatitis for
2 h after the reaction, and the postreaction supernatant was collected
to detect the levels of IL-6 and triglycerides. Similarly, we recorded
and analyzed the movement trajectory, movement speed, and movement
distance of MSN-APT-LP in human plasma.

## Animal Experiments
Induction of hyperlipidemic pancreatitis:
male C57BL/6 mice (from Viton Lever), 6–8 weeks of age, with
free access to conventional laboratory chow and water. Five mice per
experimental group were used in a 12–12 h light–dark
cycle at 24 °C. Animal Care and Use Committees (The First Hospital
of Wenzhou Medical University, Approval number: WYYY-AEC-2021-309)
approved all of the animal experimental protocols. Mice were treated
according to the Guiding Principles in the Care and Use of Animals.
At the end of the experiment, the mice were euthanized in a CO2 chamber. Referring to the previous literature, , , in order to better simulate AP
triggered by hyperlipidemia in patients, mice were first induced to
develop hyperlipidemia by intraperitoneal injection using Poloxamer
407 at a dose of 200 mg/kg administered every other day for 7 days,
and control mice were given an equal amount of PBS intraperitoneally;
then, on day 5, AP was induced in mice using arginine, which was administered
by intraperitoneal injection at 5 g/kg, and a second injection of
arginine was given intraperitoneally at an interval of 1 h, and again,
the control group was replaced with an equal amount of PBS solution.
On the 7th day, mice were anesthetized using sodium pentobarbital
(50 mg/kg), and ocular venous blood samples were collected by anticoagulation
with sodium heparin. Red cells were separated by centrifugation at
12,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C, and mouse plasma was collected.
Then, the pancreatic tissues of mice were removed and fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde for routine histological treatment, paraffin-embedded
sections, and 4 mm sections, and the success of modeling hyperlipidemic
pancreatitis in mice was verified by hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining.
Particle treatment: 5 mg of MSN-APT-LP was added to mouse plasma,
placed on a shaker, and shaken at room temperature, and the supernatant
of the plasma was collected at regular intervals. After the reaction,
the triglyceride level in the plasma was measured by using a triglyceride
assay kit.

## Safety Evaluation of MSN-APT-LP
A male C57BL/6 mouse
blood of volume about 1 mL was taken and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for
10 min; the supernatant was removed, and the precipitated erythrocytes
were washed with PBS as described above until the supernatant did
not show red color. The resulting erythrocytes were prepared into
2% erythrocyte suspension with PBS. The experiment was divided into
8 groups; each group took 1 centrifuge tube, in each group, each tube
was added with particles weighing 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, and
15 mg, with PBS set as the negative control group and Triton X-100
(2%) as the positive control group. 0.1 mL of 2% erythrocyte suspension
was added to each tube and gently mixed. The supernatant was then
aspirated and transferred to a 96-well plate, and the absorbance (A) value was measured at 540 nm with an enzyme marker to
calculate the hemolysis rate.
 Blood was drawn from male C57BL/6 mice
and incubated with MSN-APT-LP at concentrations of 0, 1, 2, 5, 10,
and 15 mg/mL. After 2 h of incubation, the samples were centrifuged,
and the supernatant was collected. The levels of total bilirubin and
direct bilirubin were measured by using a reagent kit, and the level
of indirect bilirubin was calculated by subtracting the direct bilirubin
level from the total bilirubin level.
Plasma from patients with
hyperlipidemic pancreatitis was incubated
with MSN-APT-LP at concentrations of 0, 1, 2, 5, 10, and 15 mg/mL.
After 2 h of incubation, the supernatant was collected, and the levels
of hemoglobin and albumin were measured using reagent kits.

## Statistics
The statistical analysis was conducted using
SPSS version 25. To compare two data sets, the Student’s t-test was employed to determine the p-values.
For comparisons involving three or more data sets, p-values were calculated using one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s
post hoc test.

## Results

## Structure of Mesoporous Silica Double-Modified with IL-6 Aptamer
and Lipase
The mesoporous silica in the current study is
microspherical star-shaped nanoparticles of uniform size, with a size
of around 80 nm, and the surface of the mesoporous silica was made
to carry enough amino groups by APTES. After FTIR characterization
( a), the aminated
mesoporous silica shows wave peaks at 1560 and 2800–3300 cm–1, which are mainly due to the N–H bending of
primary amines and tensile vibrational properties of primary amines.
From the infrared image, we can clearly see a clear wave peak at 1560
cm–1, which indicates that the mesoporous silica
surface has been successfully attached to the amine. The IL-6 aptamer
is attached to the mesoporous silica based on the reaction between
the amino group and the carboxylated IL-6 aptamer to form a peptide
bond, and then, the lipase is cross-linked to the surface of the mesoporous
silica using glutaraldehyde cross-linking to obtain the IL-6 aptamer
and lipase double-modified mesoporous silica. The change of nanoparticle
size during the reaction was examined using a particle size analyzer
( b), from which
it can be seen that the mesoporous silica increases in size from the
initial size of about 80 nm to about 255 nm after the modifications.
We also examined the zeta potential of MSN, MSN-NH2, MSN-APT,
and MSN-APT-LP ( c), and the simple MSN showed a negative surface charge of −10.89
± 2.71 mV, which increased to 11.70 ± 0.22 mV after amination.
Modification of the IL-6 aptamer and immobilized lipase in PBS solution
(phosphate buffer, pH 7.4) resulted in a decrease in surface charge
to −7.68 ± 1.21 mV, from the start of MSN after each step
of potential change, also confirming the particle changes after MSN
modification. These changes in MSN-APT and MSN-APT-LP were further
confirmed by the presence of peaks at 260 and 280 nm in the UV spectrum
( d).
 In addition, we also examined the concentration
changes of IL-6
aptamer solution and lipase solution before and after the reaction
by nucleic acid agarose gel electrophoresis ( e and S2a) and
Western Blot ( f,g), respectively, to reflect the IL-6 aptamer and lipase attached
to the MSN indirectly. The nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms
of MSN, MSN-APT, and MSN-APT-LP were typical type IV isotherms according
to the IUPAC classification, characteristic of mesoporous materials,
with the inflection of the capillary condensation observed at a P/P0 value of about 0.7 for
the adsorption isotherms ( h). The changes in surface area, pore volume, and pore
size of MSN, MSN-APT, and MSN-APT-LP showed that the introduction
of IL-6 and lipase had a significant effect on the surface area and
pore characteristics of the carriers ( i). Meanwhile, we used tetramethylrhodamine
to stain the MSN orange ( a,e), modified the IL-6 aptamer with blue fluorescence
( b,f), and
the lipase with green fluorescence ( c,g), and the three overlapping fluorescence
maps ( d,h)
strongly indicate that the IL-6 aptamer and lipase have been connected
to the MSN. The characterization of MSN ( i), MSN-APT ( j), and MSN-APT-LP ( k,l) by TEM provides a more visual illustration
of the results after particle modification, which also indicated that
the MSN was modified with IL-6 aptamer and lipase. Furthermore, the
SEM-EDS analysis of the MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles detected the presence
of carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and phosphorus elements (Figure S1). This result indirectly indicates
that the material contains lipase and IL-6 aptamers.
 

## Motion Capability of MSN-APT-LP Nanoparticles
We observed
and recorded the motion trajectory of MSN-APT-LP under a microscope
(Video S1), initially with glycerol triacetate
(10 mM) as the substrate because glycerol triacetate can be decomposed
by lipase and act as a fuel and due to the insolubility of glycerol
triacetate (the solubility of glycerol triacetate is 0. 133 mg/mL),
which facilitates the observation of the MSN-APT- LP nanoparticle
around the lipid droplet ( a). We observed the process of the glyceryl triacetate
droplet being decomposed under the action of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles
( b), which
indicates that MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles have the ability to decompose
glyceryl triacetate as a fuel for acting as a power motor. Next, we
used different concentrations of glycerol triacetate as the substrate
to describe the motion trajectory of MSN-APT-LP specifically ( c and S3a–d, Videos S2, S3, and S4), and the motion velocity of the particles in each concentration
( d) and the
movement of the particles over time were calculated based on the distance
traveled by the particles in different concentrations of the fuel
( e). The motion
trajectory, motion velocity, and relative displacement distance of
the motion of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles increased with the concentration
of glycerol triacetate during the study time, which became insignificant
when the fuel concentration increased to 100 mM in the concentration
gradients. This indicates that the motility of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles
in glycerol triacetate increases with the increase of glycerol triacetate
concentration, while the increase of this particle motility is not
obvious after the glycerol triacetate exceeds 100 mM. This implies
that there may also be an upper limit to the motility of MSN-APT-LP,
which will not increase limitlessly with the addition of fuel.
 

## Validation of the Ability of MSN-APT-LP to Decompose Triglyceride
We measured the immobilization rate of lipase on different amounts
of MSN-APT-LP by BCA, and the higher the amount of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles,
the higher the immobilization rate of lipase ( a). The lipase immobilization rate of 12
mg of MSN-APT-LP can reach about 37.15%. In order to visualize whether
the immobilized lipase is still active, we chose glycerol triacetate
as the substrate and added MSN-APT-LP to react for 0.5 h. Glycerol
triacetate will produce acetic acid while being decomposed, and after
adding litmus reagent, using the property that litmus reagent turns
red when it meets acid, we can see that the solution with the addition
of MSN-APT-LP (0.5 mg/mL) turns significantly red. Then, based on
the acid–base titration principle of NaOH, it was estimated
that 500 μL and 800 μL of NaOH were required to change
the color from red to purple in 2 mL of 10 mM and 100 mM glycerol
triacetate solutions, respectively ( b). This result clearly demonstrates the
efficient triglyceride degradation capability of MSN-APT-LP. At the
same time, the same amount of MSN-APT-LP at higher concentrations
of triglyceride will decompose more lipids. To better investigate
whether the immobilized lipase can be used repeatedly, we washed the
reacted MSN-APT-LP with PBS and then performed the reaction with glycerol
triacetate containing litmus reagent again to observe the color change
of the solution, and this was repeated three times. We found that
the recycled MSN-APT-LP could still turn the solution of glycerol
triacetate containing litmus reagent red ( c). This is sufficient proof that the immobilized
lipase can be recycled.
 We also recorded the change in lipid droplet area
under the microscope
for MSN-APT-LP and MSN at 0, 10, and 45 min ( e), comparing the large changes in droplet
area between the two groups ( f). The droplets in the MSN-APT-LP group gradually
shrink and disappear with time (Figure S2d), while there is no obvious change in the control group (Figure S2c), according to the droplet calculation
of the decomposition rate of lipids by area change. In 45 min, the
decomposition rate of the experimental group added with 5 mg/mL MSN-APT-LP
reached about 93.48%, which suggests that the MSN-APT-LP nanoparticle
has a strong ability to decompose lipids. To further explore, we used
a triglyceride assay kit to detect the concentration of MSN-APT-LP
after the reaction with lipids. First, we quantified the lipase activity
immobilized on 5 mg of MSN-APT-LP, which was repeated three times
(Figure S2e), and the relative activity
of MSN-APT-LP for lipid decomposition ranged from a relative activity
of about 2.82 mg/mL per hour in the first time to about 1.77 mg/mL
per hour in the third time. And it can be found that the lipase activity
slightly decreased after several cycles but still had good ability
to decompose lipid, and this decrease in lipase activity was more
likely due to particle loss of MSN-APT-LP during the washing process.
Therefore, the lipase on MSN-APT-LP can be repeatedly used to decompose
the lipids several times.
 Then, we also tested and compared the efficiency
of triglyceride
catabolism by different masses of MSN-APT-LP ( h), showing that 12 mg of MSN-APT-LP decomposes
approximately 76.56% of triglycerides at 9 mg/mL. In addition, we
also investigated the decomposition efficiency of 5 mg of MSN-APT-LP
on triglycerides over time ( g). The results demonstrate that 5 mg of MSN-APT-LP
decomposed triglycerides at a concentration of approximately 1.58
mg/mL per hour.
The final results all fully confirmed the effect
of MSN-APT-LP
on triglyceride decomposition.
To verify the efficiency of lipase
immobilized on nanoparticles
and the motility of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles, we compared the relative
activity of immobilized lipase and free lipase. We added MSN-APT-LP
and lipase with the same amount of immobilization as that in MSN-APT-LP
to PBS solution containing triglyceride for 2 h separately and then
compared the relative activities of the free lipase bound to MSN ( d). It is obvious
to notice that when the amount of lipase attached to the particles
is lower than 0.16 mg/mL, its ability to decompose lipids is lower
than that of free lipase. However, when the lipase immobilized on
MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles exceeded 0.35 mg/mL, decomposition of lipids
was superior to that of free lipase, which may be related to the enhanced
motility of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles, which improves the ability to
decompose lipids. Therefore, it is suggested that when the lipase
of MSN-APT-LP was immobilized too little, the MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles
could not perform well at motility. Meanwhile, we found that keeping
the number of lipases immobilized on MSN consistent, there was no
significant difference in catabolic lipid efficiency between MSN-LP
and MSN-APT-LP (Figure S2f). Since the
motility of MSN-APT-LP performed relatively well at a concentration
of 10 mM triglyceride, we used this concentration for all subsequent
experiments.

## Validation of the Adsorption Capacity of MSN-APT-LP on IL-6
First, we evaluated the maximum amount of IL-6 APT that can be
attached to 1 mg of MSN, and the maximum amount of IL-6 APT that can
be attached to 1 mg of MSN is about 1.2 μg ( a). Second, to demonstrate
the ability of MSN-APT-LP to adsorb IL-6, we added 0, 1, 2, 5, 10,
and 15 mg of MSN-APT-LP and MSN, respectively, to PBS solution containing
IL-6 (100 pg/mL) and reacted fully for 2 h at room temperature. Compared
with MSN alone, MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles had a significant ability
to adsorb IL-6 ( b), and the efficiency of capturing IL-6 (100 pg/mL) could reach
about 91.67% when MSN-APT-LP reached 15 mg, while the concentration
of IL-6 solution did not change significantly in the control group,
indicating that MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles had good performance in capturing
IL-6. We also recorded changes in the adsorption capacity of 5 mg
of MSN-APT-LP on IL-6 with increasing reaction time, and the amount
of IL-6 adsorbed by MSN-APT-LP increased with increasing time, while
the concentration of IL-6 in the control group did not change significantly
( c). For better
visualization of MSN-APT-LP adsorption IL-6, we used rhodamine to
stain MSN-APT-LP and reacted with IL-6 protein labeled with FITC.
The confocal fluorescence images ( d–f) showed that MSN-APT-LP with red
fluorescence was completely merged with IL-6 with green fluorescence,
which fully confirmed that MSN-APT-LP has the ability to bind to IL-6
protein, similar to the binding of antigen–antibody. Furthermore,
we performed Western blot analysis on the IL-6 solution before and
after the addition of MSN-APT-LP, and the results ( g,h) showed that the concentration
of IL-6 solution decreased after the reaction with MSN-APT-LP. Quantitative
analysis of the results of Western blot bands with ImageJ software
can clearly shows that the concentration of IL-6 solution decreased
significantly after the reaction with MSN-APT-LP, which fully indicates
that MSN-APT-LP has a better ability to capture IL-6.
To check
whether the MSN-APT-LP nanoparticle can promote the adsorption and
capture efficiency, we added 5 mg/mL each of MSN, MSN-APT, and MSN-APT-LP
to IL-6 solution (100 pg/mL) containing triglyceride (10 mM), allowing
the nanoparticles to fully react with the solution for 2 h. After
2 h, we detected the remaining IL-6 in the solution ( i). There was almost no significant
change in the IL-6 solution in the MSN group, and the IL-6 solution
in both the MSN-APT and MSN-APT-LP groups was significantly lower.
The decrease of IL-6 in the MSN-APT-LP group was better than that
in MSN-APT, and the MSN-APT-LP nanoparticle adsorption efficiency
for IL-6 reached 93.19%. This indicates that the MSN-APT-LP nanoparticle
can enhance the adsorption ability of the particles for IL-6, and
lipase is an important component of the MSN-APT-LP nanoparticle. We
also analyzed the amount of IL-6 in the solutions of the three groups
every 20 min for 2 h and recorded the change of IL-6 solution concentration
with time ( j). This also showed that the adsorption of IL-6 by MSN-APT-LP was
superior to that by both MSN and MSN-APT groups. These demonstrate
that the MSN-APT-LP nanoparticle can promote the adsorption and capture
of IL-6.
To further validate the effect of lipids on the adsorption
and
capture capacity of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles, we added 5 mg of MSN-APT-LP
to IL-6 solution (100 pg/mL) containing triglyceride (10 mM) and to
IL-6 solution without triglycerides. We found that the capture efficiency
of IL-6 by MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles in a lipid-free environment was
significantly lower than that of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles in a lipid-containing
environment ( ). This phenomenon shows that the MSN-APT-LP nanoparticle is driven
by lipids, and only in an environment containing lipids can the MSN-APT-LP
perform the function of the motor better.

## Application of MSN-APT-LP in Blood Plasma
First, MSN-APT-LP
still possessing motility in blood was observed (Video S6). We obtained blood plasma from 8 HAP patients to
detect the ability of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles to capture IL-6 and
decompose triglycerides, specifically. Five milligrams of MSN or MSN-APT-LP
was added to 1 mL of plasma from a patient with hyperlipidemic pancreatitis
and reacted for 2 h, and plasma IL-6 and triglyceride concentrations
were detected periodically ( a,c and S6a,b). Then, the
concentration of IL-6 and triglycerides in the solution after 2 h
of reaction were detected and compared to the concentration of IL-6
and triglycerides in the initial solution, and the efficiency of the
MSN-APT-LP nanoparticle to capture IL-6 and decompose triglycerides
in the plasma of different patients was calculated ( b,d). The results demonstrated
that different from the control MSN nanoparticles, MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles
possess the ability to capture IL-6 and decompose triglycerides in
the plasma of patients with HAP, a capability that the MSN nanoparticles
lack. Additionally, the higher the concentration of triglycerides,
the higher the efficiency of the particles in capturing IL-6 and decomposing
triglycerides. Meanwhile, we compared the efficiency of different
amounts of MSN-APT-LP in capturing IL-6 and decomposing triglycerides
in the plasma of patients ( h,i). The results showed that the efficiency of MSN-APT-LP
for IL-6 capture and triglyceride decomposition in plasma was enhanced
with the increase of particle concentration (Videos S7, S8, S9, S10, and S11). When the MSN-APT-LP nanoparticle reached 15 mg/mL, its efficiency
of capturing IL-6 was about 61.28% and the efficiency of decomposing
triglycerides was 51.45%. The experiments at different time scales
and concentration gradients of IL-6 adsorption and triglyceride decomposition
by MSN-APT-LP strongly confirm the powerful potential for effective
treatment of HAP.
 In addition, we have demonstrated that the nucleic
acid aptamer
is stable in plasma for at least 6 h by nucleic acid agarose gel electrophoresis
(Figure S2b), which indirectly indicates
that the aptamer is stable in plasma for a certain period of time.
This suggests that the aptamer can work well in plasma for at least
6 h.
At the same time, we also verified the motility of MSN-APT-LP
in
the plasma of HAP patients by following the trajectory described for
the motility of MSN-APT-LP in the plasma of HAP patients ( e), in the same way
as before. The motility velocity of the particles in the plasma of
each patient ( f) and the distance of the motility in a certain time were calculated
( g). The results
demonstrated that the MSN-APT-LP nanoparticle still had a similar
motility trajectory in the plasma of HAP patients to that previously
in triglycerides, and its motility velocity and distance of movement
were relatively higher in the plasma of patients with higher triglyceride
concentrations. By these experimental results, it is well demonstrated
that the MSN-APT-LP nanoparticle also has some movement ability in
the plasma of patients with hyperlipidemic pancreatitis. By comparison,
we found that the decrease in IL-6 and triglycerides in the plasma
of patients with higher lipid concentrations was also larger. Among
the plasma of the five groups of patients with the highest triglyceride
concentration, the efficiency of capture IL-6 and decomposition of
triglycerides by 5 mg of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles could reach approximately
44.63 and 7.78 mg/mL per hour, respectively. And the plasma of the
group of patients with the lowest triglyceride concentration could
reach the IL-6 capture and triglyceride decomposition efficiency of
about 23.19 and 3.55 mg/mL per hour, respectively, which confirmed
that MSN-APT-LP still had movement ability in the plasma of HAP patients,
and the high concentration of triglycerides could play a significant
role in enhancing the motility of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles, thereby
increasing the adsorption of IL-6 and decomposition of triglycerides.
In addition, we also tested the ability of MSN-APT-LP to decompose
lipids through animal experiments, referring to the previous modeling
method of HAP mice, comprising injection of arginine and poloxamer
407 by intraperitoneal injection, thereby obtaining an animal model
with HAP. The pancreatic glands were removed from the modeled mice,
fixed with conventional paraformaldehyde, paraffin-embedded tissue
sections, and stained with HE (Figure S4a). The successful modeling of HAP in mice was determined from the
results of HE sections. The mouse plasma was obtained by blood sampling
from the eye of the successful modeling mice; then, 5 mg of MSN-APT-LP
was added to 500 μL of the mouse plasma for 2.5 h, and the changes
of triglyceride concentration in the mouse plasma were examined before
and after the reaction (Figure S4b,c).
We examined and successfully modeled five mice, and the experimental
results demonstrated that MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles also have the ability
to decompose triglycerides in mouse plasma, which is similar to the
results of previous experiments on the decomposition of triglycerides
in plasma of HAP patients.

## Prospective Application of MSN-APT-LP as an Absorption Column
HAP is one of the more common acute abdominal diseases, and one
of the most important features of this disease is the high level of
lipids in the blood; in the early stage of AP, inflammatory factors
are increased, such as IL-6 and TNF-α, which cause a storm of
inflammation and aggravate the progress of the disease. Based on
this, we aim to use MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles to adsorb IL-6 and decompose
triglycerides, thereby reducing IL-6 and triglyceride levels to treat
HAP. In a hyperlipidemic environment, lipids can enhance the motility
of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles to improve the adsorption and decomposition
efficiency of nanoparticles. Through the clinically available plasma
replacement technology, we designed an adsorption column device for
the treatment of HAP by using the excellent performance of the motility
of MSN-APT-LP, using MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles as the active ingredient,
extracting blood from HAP patients, separating the plasma through
plasma replacement, passing the separated plasma through an adsorption
column filled with MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles to react fully to achieve
the effect of decreasing blood triglycerides and inflammatory factor
IL-6, and then transfusing the purified plasma, mixed with blood cells,
back into the body.
In order to check the safety of MSN-APT-LP,
we performed a hemocompatibility test on the nanoparticles, and the
results showed that the hemolysis rate of MSN-APT-LP was in a relatively
safe range when the concentration of MSN-APT-LP was below 5 mg/mL
(Figure S5a,b). To further assess hemocompatibility,
indirect bilirubin levels were measured in mouse blood 2 h after nanoparticle
exposure. No significant increase was observed at MSN-APT-LP concentrations
below 5 mg/mL, but levels increased significantly at concentrations
above 5 mg/mL (Figure S5c). We have derived
the adsorption rate of different amounts of MSN-APT-LP on IL-6 and
the decomposition rate of triglycerides from previous experiments
in the serum of patients with HAP (Figure S5). The efficiency of the particles increases as their concentration
increases, but at the same time, the risk of hemolysis also increases.
When the concentration of MSN in the absorption column reaches 15
mg/mL, the absorption efficiency of IL-6 and the decomposition efficiency
of triglyceride both exceed 50% within 2 h, which can effectively
contribute to the reduction of the plasma inflammatory factor and
triglyceride. Finally, to verify whether MSN-APT-LP affects the protein
components in blood, we measured the changes in hemoglobin and albumin
levels in patient plasma after adding MSN-APT-LP (Figure S5d,e). The results showed that when the concentration
of MSN-APT-LP was below 5 mg/mL, there was a minimal impact on hemoglobin
and albumin levels. At a concentration of 5 mg/mL, a slight decrease
in albumin was observed, but levels remained above 40 mg/mL. However,
when the concentration exceeded 5 mg/mL, both hemoglobin and albumin
levels showed varying degrees of reduction.
Therefore, a combination
of plasma exchange and adsorption column
was developed, which can fully take into account the safety and effectiveness
of MSN-APT-LP and can maximize the therapeutic effect of the nanoparticles.

## Discussion
In this investigation, we initially characterized
the products
of each step in the synthesis of MSN-APT-LP via infrared, ultraviolet,
particle size, and potential variations. As the results of our figures
suggest, the presence of a noticeable peak of MSN after ammoniation
at 1560 cm–1 in the infrared image indirectly confirmed
the successful modification of MSN with an amino group. As shown from
the variations of the particle size and potential plots, the particle
size was increased with the attachment of IL-6 aptamer as well as
lipase on MSN, and the shift of positive and negative potentials implicitly
verified the successful decoration of IL-6 and lipase on MSN. The
peaks at 260 and 280 nm in the UV diagram corresponded to the modification
of IL-6 and lipase, respectively. In addition, we also exploited the
difference in the content of the raw materials reacted before and
after the reaction, that is, via nucleic acid agarose electrophoresis
and protein blotting techniques to detect whether there was a decrease
in the content of IL-6 aptamer and lipase before and after the reaction,
where the eventual experimental results laterally indicated that the
aptamer and lipase had been successfully attached to the MSN simultaneously.
To visualize more vividly how the aptamer and lipase were indirectly
connected to the MSN, fluorescence staining was performed separately
and all colors could be clearly observed to be overlapped by means
of confocal fluorescence microscopy. Lastly, we also utilized TEM
and SEM-EDS to characterize the morphology of the products at each
step during the synthesis process, which provides a more direct visualization
of the MSN surface being modified.
To examine the motion capabilities
of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles,
a metallographic microscope was utilized to observe and record the
motion trajectory of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles around the lipids, and
the grease disintegrated with the interaction of the nanoparticles.
Then, taking glycerol triacetate as the substrate, the motility of
the MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles was observed and recorded at different
concentrations. Furthermore, within a certain range, an enhanced concentration
of lipids could substantially promote the motility of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles,
whereas the nanoparticle motility inconspicuously increases after
exceeding a certain limit value.
We further probed the capacity
of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles to decompose
lipids. First of all, the lipase fixed on MSN was quantified. Then,
utilizing the principle that the decomposition of triglyceride could
generate acetic acid and the litmus reagent would turn red in an acidic
circumstance, we plainly witnessed the decomposition of grease by
MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles, and the capability of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles
to decompose lipids was roughly quantified after the solution turned
red while neutralizing the acid with alkali. The area variations of
grease were selected to denote the rates of lipid degradation of nanoparticles,
from which it was observed that MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles exhibited
a highly significant degradation of lipid droplets over the control
group. A triglyceride assay kit was applied to determine the specific
triglyceride content of the solution so as to better quantify the
performance of the nanoparticles to degrade lipids in concentration-
and time-dependent manners. Ultimately, by comparison of the cured
lipase with the free lipase, the final figures indicated that when
immobilized lipase on nanoparticles exceeded a certain limit, it started
to outperform free lipase in terms of lipolysis capability.
Likewise, the adsorption capacity of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles for
IL-6 was investigated. To quantify the IL-6 aptamers attached to the
MSN, the efficiency of IL-6 adsorption by nanoparticles was examined
by the IL-6 Elisa assay of IL-6 in solution with concentration- and
time-dependent manners. The capture of IL-6 by MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles
could be directly observed by fluorescence staining of the nanoparticles
and IL-6. Similar to the previous method, the difference in IL-6 concentration
before and after the assay reaction was detected by protein blotting
to speculate about the adsorption activity of IL-6 by nanoparticles.
For a further demonstration of how the motor function being exerted
by MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles in grease conditions might enhance the
adsorption efficiency of themselves, three groups, namely, MSN, MSN-APT,
and MSN-APT-LP, were designed for comparison, and the experimental
outcomes were in accordance with our previous assumption that the
MSN-APT-LP group displayed the highest adsorption efficiency for IL-6.
To make the analytical conclusion more reliable, MSN-APT-LP was placed
in the conditions with and without lipids, respectively, to react,
which revealed that MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles exhibited higher efficiency
in the lipid atmosphere. Therefore, it could be inferred from the
above experimental results that grease could provide power for MSN-APT-LP
nanoparticles, and as lipase is a crucial component, MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles
functioned better under greasy conditions.
Eventually, the practical
implementation of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles
in plasma was also evaluated. MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles with the plasma
of HAP patients interacted to detect the difference between triglyceride
and IL-6 before and after the reaction, suggesting that the MSN-APT-LP
nanoparticles were still equipped with the capability of adsorbing
IL-6 and decomposing lipids in the plasma. Simultaneously, the motility
of the nanoparticles in plasma was documented and characterized. Results
confirmed that MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles had promising potential for
human blood applications. In light of the above-mentioned, MSN-APT-LP
nanoparticles could enhance motility in lipids, strengthening the
capability of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles to capture inflammatory factors
(IL-6) and degrade triglycerides in the plasma. Hence, we envisaged
that with the assistance of clinically existing plasma exchange techniques,
the specific steps would begin with extracting blood from HAP patients,
separating the plasma from the blood cells as the blood flows through
the plasma displacer, and then allowing the plasma to travel through
the adsorption column, which would downregulate the triglyceride and
IL-6 levels in the patient’s plasma, and ultimately, the purified
plasma would be reunited with the blood cells through the plasma displacer,
serving to facilitate the management of hyperlipidemic pancreatitis.
To verify the security of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles, hemocompatibility
assays were performed on nanoparticles, and the experimental results
indicated that the hemolysis rate of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles was
in a relatively secure range at levels when their concentration was
below 5 mg/mL. The absorption rate of IL-6 and the decomposition rate
of triglycerides obtained by various amounts of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles
from previous experiments in the plasma of HAP patients are demonstrated
in the table ( f), indicating an increase in efficiency as the concentration of
particles was increased, yet accompanied by an increased risk of hemolysis.
Therefore, attention shall be focused on the safe range of application
when the MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles were utilized as the principal ingredient
of the adsorption column, balancing efficacy and safety.

## Conclusions
In summary, we have successfully designed
and synthesized an IL-6
aptamer and lipase dual-modified mesoporous silica nanoparticle for
the treatment of HAP. The modified IL-6 aptamer can act as a specific
capture for IL-6 and lipase acts as a lipolytic enzyme, and the immobilized
lipase can be reused many times (at least three times). MSN-APT-LP
has a better lipolytic ability than free lipase and better adsorption
of IL-6 in solutions containing triglycerides than MSN with modified
IL-6 APT alone. MSN-APT-LP can use lipids to provide energy to itself
in the rich lipids and improve the efficiency of nanoparticle adsorption
of IL-6 and decomposition of triglyceride. This property of MSN-APT-LP
is suitable for the treatment of HAP and other related diseases in
biomedicine. Combined with some existing clinical techniques, such
as the plasma exchange technique, MSN-APT-LP can act as a good inflammatory
adsorbent and lipolytic agent. At the same time, MSN-APT-LP can also
be modified with other aptamers, which can be used for certain specific
diseases to capture the corresponding pathogens and play a good therapeutic
role for the diseases, and MSN-APT-LP also has good biocompatibility;
therefore, MSN-APT-LP has broad prospects in related biomedical applications.

## Acknowledgments
This work
was supported by grants from the National
Natural Sciences Foundation of China (82241031) and National Health
Commission Research Fund (WKJ-ZJ-2342). We also gratefully acknowledge
Dr. Keqin Shi and the staff of the Translational Medicine Laboratory
at the First Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University for their valuable
assistance in the successful completion of the experiments.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
APacute
pancreatitis
HAPhyperlipidemic acute pancreatitis
APTaptamer
LPlipase
MSNmesoporous silica nanoparticle
MSN-NH2amine functionalization of MSN
MSN-APTIL-6 aptamer-modified
aminated mesoporous silica
MSN-APT-LPlipase and
IL-6 aptamer-modified mesoporous silica
APTES3-aminopropyl triethoxysilane
NHSN-hydroxysuccinimide
EDC1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylamino)
carbodiimide
Argarginine
P407poloxamer
407
GAglutaraldehyde

## Data Availability Statement
Data will be
made available on request.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsbiomaterials.4c00474.
EDS mapping and sum spectrum analysis of MSN-APT-LP
nanoparticles; nucleic acid agarose electrophoresis of MSN-NH2 and MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles with IL-6 aptamer; time-dependent
degradation studies of triglycerides by MSN and MSN-APT-LP; hemocompatibility
tests including hemolysis rates and indirect bilirubin levels; and
time-dependent efficiency graphs for IL-6 capture and triglyceride
decomposition by MSN-APT-LP in hyperlipidemic pancreatitis patient
plasma (PDF)
Degradation of glycerol triacetate using MSN-APT-LP
nanoparticles (MP4)
Representative MSN-APT-LP nanoparticle motor with marked
trajectory in PBS solution without triacetin (AVI)
Representative MSN-APT-LP
nanoparticle motor with marked
trajectory in PBS solution with 10 mM triacetin (AVI)
Representative MSN-APT-LP
nanoparticle motor with marked
trajectory in PBS solution with 100 mM triacetin (AVI)
Representative MSN-APT-LP
nanoparticle motor with marked
trajectory in PBS solution with 200 mM triacetin (AVI)
Movement of MSN-APT-LP nanoparticles
in the blood of
HAP patients (MP4)
Representative MSN-APT-LP nanoparticle motor with marked
trajectory in plasma from human 1 (AVI)
Representative MSN-APT-LP nanoparticle motor
with marked
trajectory in plasma from human 2 (AVI)
Representative MSN-APT-LP nanoparticle motor
with marked
trajectory in plasma from human 3 (AVI)
Representative MSN-APT-LP nanoparticle
motor with marked
trajectory in plasma from human 4 (AVI)
Representative MSN-APT-LP nanoparticle
motor with marked
trajectory in plasma from human 5 (AVI)

## Author Contributions
Geer Chen:
methodology, investigation, and writing original draft. Yunfeng Huang:
formal analysis and validation. Haohui Yu: formal analysis. Junru
Wang: formal analysis. Shuqi Shen: formal analysis. Haobing Li: formal
analysis. Xingjian Zhou: formal analysis and investigation. Hongwei
Sun: conceptualization and resources. Keqing Shi: conceptualization,
funding acquisition, and resources.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Notes
Ethics approval and consent to participate:
The blood samples from patients with hyperlipidemic acute pancreatitis
in this study were obtained from the Pancreatitis Diagnosis and Treatment
Center of the First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University.
The use of blood samples from patients with hyperlipidemic acute pancreatitis
in this experiment has been approved by the Clinical Ethics Committee
of the First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University (Approval
no.: KY2023-R004). All animal procedures in this experiment have been
approved by the Ethics Committee of the First Affiliated Hospital
of Wenzhou Medical University and the Animal Experimentation Ethics
Committee of Zhejiang Province (Approval no.: WYYY-AEC-2021-309).

## Supplementary Material
ab4c00474_si_002.pdf
ab4c00474_si_003.mp4
ab4c00474_si_004.avi
ab4c00474_si_005.avi
ab4c00474_si_006.avi
ab4c00474_si_007.avi
ab4c00474_si_008.mp4
ab4c00474_si_009.avi
ab4c00474_si_010.avi
ab4c00474_si_011.avi
ab4c00474_si_012.avi
ab4c00474_si_013.avi

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
ab4c00474_si_002.pdf
ab4c00474_si_003.mp4
ab4c00474_si_004.avi
ab4c00474_si_005.avi
ab4c00474_si_006.avi
ab4c00474_si_007.avi
ab4c00474_si_008.mp4
ab4c00474_si_009.avi
ab4c00474_si_010.avi
ab4c00474_si_011.avi
ab4c00474_si_012.avi
ab4c00474_si_013.avi

## Data Availability Statement
Data will be
made available on request.