4348gbbGenes, Brain, and BehaviorGenes Brain BehavWileyPMC1006740610067406100674063678120210.1111/gbb.12844Identification of candidate genes for nicotine withdrawal in C57BL/6J × DBA/2J recombinant inbred mice
SmithMaren L MignognaKristin M RokitaJo L MacLeodLorna DamajM Imad MilesMichael F 
1
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, USA
2
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
3
VCU Alcohol Research Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, USA*

Correspondence
, Michael F. Miles and M. Imad Damaj, Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA. 
Email: michael.miles@vcuhealth.org and m.damaj@vcuhealth.org

✉Corresponding author.
1322023222e12844e12844442023© 2023 The Authors. Genes, Brain and Behavior published by International Behavioural and Neural Genetics Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## Abstract
Nicotine is the reinforcing ingredient in tobacco. Following chronic exposure, sudden cessation of nicotine use produces negative symptoms of withdrawal that contribute to dependence. The molecular mechanisms underlying nicotine withdrawal behaviors, however, are poorly understood. Using recombinant inbred mice, chronic nicotine was delivered by minipump and withdrawal induced using mecamylamine. Somatic signs of withdrawal, and anxiety‐like behavior using elevated plus maze, were then assessed. Interval mapping was used to identify associations between genetic variation and withdrawal behaviors, and with basal gene expression. Differential gene expression following nicotine exposure and withdrawal was also assessed in progenitor mice using microarrays. Quantitative trait loci mapping identified chromosome intervals with significant genetic associations to somatic signs of withdrawal or withdrawal‐induced anxiety‐like behavior. Using bioinformatics, and association with basal gene expression in nucleus accumbens, we implicated Rb1, Bnip3l, Pnma2, Itm2b, and Kif13b as candidate genes for somatic signs of withdrawal, and Galr1, which showed trans‐regulation from a region of chromosome 14 that was associated with somatic signs of withdrawal. Candidate genes within the chromosome 9 region associated with anxiety‐like withdrawal behavior included Dixdc1, Ncam1, and Sorl1. Bioinformatics identified six genes that were also significantly associated with nicotine or alcohol traits in recent human genome‐wide association studies. Withdrawal‐associated somatic signs and anxiety‐like behavior had strong non‐overlapping genetic associations, respectively, with regions of chromosome 14 and chromosome 9. Genetic, behavioral and gene expression correlations, and bioinformatics analysis identified several candidate genes that may represent novel molecular targets for modulating nicotine withdrawal symptoms.
Keywords: anxiety, elevated plus maze, microarrays, mouse genetics, nicotine, somatic signs, withdrawal

Nicotine withdrawal is an important aspect contributing to continued nicotine usage. This work uses mouse genetics to identify novel chromosomal intervals and candidate genes contributing to two types of nicotine withdrawal behavior. Further, candidate genes were identified that show significant overlaps with recent human genome wide association studies on nicotine.
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2023 Jan 10; Received 2021 Sep 16; Accepted 2023 Feb 1; Collection date 2023 Apr.

## Abbreviations
AMYbasolateral amygdala
B6C57BL/6J mice
bQTLbehavioral quantitative trait loci
BXDC57BL/6J X DBA/2J recombinant inbred mice
Chrchromosome
D2DBA/2J mice
eQTLexpression quantitative trait loci
FDRfalse discovery rate
LODlogarithm of odds
Mbmegabase
NAcnucleus accumbens
nAChRsnicotinic acetylcholine receptors
PFCprefrontal cortex
QTLquantitative trait loci
RIrecombinant inbred
RINRNA integrity number
RMArobust multi‐array average
SAMsignificance analysis of microarrays
SIsupport interval
SNPsingle nucleotide polymorphism
VTAventral tegmental area
1.

## INTRODUCTION
Nicotine use is a serious public health issue that is of growing concern because of continued use of tobacco products and the emergence of inhaled nicotine vapor devices. , The marginal success of current pharmacotherapies for smoking cessation indicates a need to explore new targets for treating nicotine dependence. While nicotine use is a complex behavior, in which many environmental factors are involved, genetic‐epidemiology studies provide compelling evidence that genetic factors also play a significant etiologic role. , By acting on a diverse family of neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs), nicotine directly or indirectly modulates the signaling pathways of many neurotransmitters involved in addiction. Not surprisingly, many human genetic studies have identified variants in nAChRs that may contribute to nicotine dependence. In particular, variants on chromosome 15 (rs16969968 and rs578776), in the region of the α5‐α3‐β4 family of nicotinic receptor genes, have been shown to influence risk for nicotine dependence in humans. However, the proportion of phenotypic variance explained by these genetic variants is somewhat modest. Therefore, significant work is still required to characterize the complete genetic contribution to the symptoms and behaviors associated with nicotine addiction.
Withdrawal is one of the phenotypes related to nicotine addiction that describes a collection of somatic and affective symptoms observed within a few hours of discontinuation of nicotine use. The most prominent withdrawal symptoms are irritability, anxiety, anger, difficulty concentrating, sleep disturbance, increased appetite, and weight gain. There is also a particularly high risk of relapse during withdrawal, with 50%–75% of smokers relapsing during the first week of abstinence. , It has been established that craving, high negative affect, and low positive affect are related to the likelihood of smoking reinstatement. , Association has also been observed between lower anxiety sensitivity and a more rapid decrease in withdrawal symptoms. Finally, certain nicotine withdrawal studies suggest that cue‐induced cravings may be resistant to existing pharmacological interventions for smoking cessation, further highlighting the need to identify new pharmacological targets. To this end, animal models offer important opportunities to study the physiological effects of nicotine. Models of chronic nicotine exposure, as well as reward and withdrawal, expand the available tools to examine the underlying genetic pathways in nicotine dependence. Indeed, recombinant inbred mice were recently used to identify genetic variation associated with nicotine withdrawal‐associated deficits in hippocampus‐dependent learning. 

We recently used a systems genetics approach with C57BL/6J X DBA/2J (BXD) recombinant inbred (RI) strains to explore the association of galanin and galanin receptor (GalR1) gene expression with nicotine withdrawal (somatic signs) and reward (conditioned place preference) across 25 BXD strains. , , These behaviors showed continuous variation across BXD lines, suggesting contributions from multiple genetic loci. In this current study, we expanded the testing of nicotine withdrawal to 34 BXD lines and mapped genome‐wide quantitative trait loci (QTL) associated with nicotine withdrawal phenotypes for either somatic signs or anxiety‐like behavior (elevated plus maze; EPM). We further analyzed these QTL by correlating behavioral data with publicly available gene expression data from the nucleus accumbens (NAc) of drug‐naïve mice, in order to prioritize candidate genes and identify significant expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL). Gene expression in the NAc was of interest because this brain region plays a key role in the negative reinforcing effects of acute nicotine withdrawal. In addition, we investigated gene expression profiles in the NAc of DBA/2J (D2) and C57BL/6J (B6) mice chronically exposed to nicotine, or undergoing nicotine withdrawal, as these two strains are the progenitors of the BXD panel, and they differ markedly in severity of nicotine‐related dependence behaviors such as tolerance, withdrawal and reward. Using this combination of approaches, we pinpointed a region of chromosome (Chr) 14 with a significant behavioral QTL relating to somatic signs of withdrawal and a QTL on Chr 9 that was associated with nicotine withdrawal‐induced anxiety‐like behavior in the EPM. No significant association was seen between Chr 14 and elevated plus maze behavior, suggesting that somatic signs of nicotine withdrawal are regulated by different physiological processes, and regions of the genome, than anxiety‐like behavior during withdrawal. This approach produced a group of strong candidate genes as potential modulators of somatic and anxiety‐like signs of withdrawal, providing novel insights into the genetic mechanisms influencing nicotine dependence, and may potentially aid in the development of new therapeutics for nicotine cessation.

2.

## METHODS
2.1.

## Animals
Male C57BL/6J, DBA/2J, and 34 BXD recombinant inbred lines derived from these progenitor strains, were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME, United States) at 7–8 weeks of age and habituated to the vivarium for at least 1 week prior to initiating experimental studies. To avoid age as a confounding factor, all animals were age‐matched to be 9 weeks old at the beginning of the experiments and were group‐housed (four animals per group with ad libitum access to food and water, under a 12‐h light/dark cycle, in a 21°C environment). Experiments were performed in the light phase. All experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Virginia Commonwealth University and followed the National Institutes of Health Guidelines for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.

2.2.

## Drugs
Nicotine, in the form of (‐)‐Nicotine hydrogen tartrate [(‐)‐1‐methyl‐2‐(3‐pyridyl) pyrrolidine (þ)‐bitartrate], was purchased from Sigma‐Aldrich Inc. (St. Louis, MO, United States). Nicotine was dissolved in sterile physiological saline (0.9% sodium chloride) and infused through 14‐day subcutaneous osmotic minipumps (model 2002, Alzet, Palo Alto, CA, United States) at 24 mg/kg/day. The doses were expressed as the free base of the drug.

2.3.

## Chronic nicotine and induction of withdrawal
For microarray genomic studies on chronic nicotine and nicotine withdrawal, B6 and D2 mice were implanted subcutaneously with osmotic minipumps for 14 days (model 2002, Durect Corporation, Cupertino, CA). In one cohort (chronic nicotine or saline), B6 and D2 mice were exposed to saline or nicotine (24 mg/kg/day, n = 6/strain/group) for 14 days and then brain tissues were collected by microdissection at the end of day 15. In a parallel cohort (saline or nicotine withdrawal), B6 and D2 mice were exposed to saline or nicotine (24 mg/kg/day) for 14 days via subcutaneous osmotic minipumps, and, at the beginning of day 15, spontaneous nicotine withdrawal was induced by surgically removing the minipumps under isoflurane anesthesia. Brain tissues were then collected by microdissection 24 h after minipump removal (Figure  ).
 For behavioral genetic studies on nicotine withdrawal, mice from 34 BXD lines were anesthetized by inhaled isoflurane/oxygen vapor (1%–3%) and similarly implanted with Alzet osmotic minipumps (model 2002, Durect Corporation, Cupertino, CA) filled with nicotine (delivered at 24 mg/kg/day). A prior publication from our laboratory included behavioral pharmacology studies on the Galanin neuropeptide using 25 of these BXD lines (initial cohort). Those data were extended by separate studies under identical conditions on an additional 9 BXD lines (BXDs 22, 48, 65a, 78, 83, 84, 85, 86, and 87) and the combined dataset studied for the work presented here. These additional strains were studied to increase power for QTL mapping but also served to validate the Chr 14 QTL for somatic signs of withdrawal as noted in Section  (Figure  ). For all studies, the concentration of nicotine was adjusted according to animal weight and minipump flow rate for 7 days. On day 8, the non‐selective nicotinic acetylcholine receptor antagonist mecamylamine (2 mg/kg) was administered subcutaneously in order to precipitate nicotine withdrawal in the withdrawal group, while the control group was given saline (n = 3–8/strain/treatment group) (Figure  ). Measurement of withdrawal signs was initiated 10 min after mecamylamine injection. The mice were first evaluated for 5 min in the plus‐maze test for anxiety‐related behavior and then observed for somatic signs of withdrawal for 20 min starting 15 min after mecamylamine injection. This specific testing sequence was chosen because preliminary studies in our laboratory showed that this particular scheme reduced within‐group variability and produced the most consistent results.
The elevated plus maze, prepared with gray Plexiglas (Falken Design, Lynwood, CA, USA), consisted of two open arms (23 × 6.0 cm) and two enclosed arms (23 × 6 × 15 cm in wall height) that extended from a central platform (5.5 × 5.5 cm). It was mounted on a base raised 60 cm above the floor. Fluorescent lights (350‐lux intensity) located in the ceiling of the room provided the only source of light to the apparatus. The animals were placed in the center of the maze and allowed to roam freely between the open and closed arms. The time spent in the open and closed arms was automatically recorded by a photocell beam system. Following testing for 5 min, the apparatus was thoroughly cleaned after removal of each animal. A lower amount of time spent on the open arms was considered indicative of higher anxiety‐related behavior. Results were expressed as the mean ± SEM number of seconds spent in the open arms (Figure  ). As a control for locomotor activity, we also measured the number of infrared beam interrupts between arms of the elevated plus maze, noted as the average number of beam interrupts, for the 25 BXD strains in the initial cohort, with no significant difference in overall locomotor activity seen between saline and mecamylamine treated animals (Figure  ).
Mice were evaluated for somatic signs of withdrawal as measured by paw and body tremors, head shakes, backing, jumps, curls, and ptosis during the 20‐min observation period. Somatic sign scores were calculated as previously described by taking the arithmetic mean and SE for each BXD strain. Because of non‐normal distribution of data, somatic sign scores and elevated plus maze data were 1 + log2 transformed (1 added to each score because of presence of 0 scores) for further analysis (Figures  and ).

2.4.

## 
RNA processing
C57BL/6J and DBA/2J mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation for genomic studies at the times mentioned above. Immediately thereafter, brains were extracted and chilled for 1 min in cold phosphate buffered saline before being microdissected as previously described. Excised regions were placed in individual tubes, flash‐frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C. Total RNA was extracted from individual nucleus accumbens samples (n = 6 strain/treatment group). The nucleus accumbens was selected for gene expression analyses because of the established role this brain region plays in the negative reinforcing effects of withdrawal. RNA quality was assessed by Experion Automated Electrophoresis System (BioRad, Hercules, CA, United States). All samples had RNA integrity (RIN) numbers >8. RNA was then processed and hybridized to Mouse Transcriptome 1.0 arrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, United States) according to the manufacturer's protocol.

2.5.

## Statistical analyses
2.5.1.

## Microarray data generation and analyses
Microarrays were scanned and CEL files generated using Affymetrix GeneChip Operating Software (Affymetrix). Gene expression differences between each strain/nicotine group were compared using an updated version of the S‐Score package for R called GCSscore. , This new S‐Score allows for analysis of newer generation Affymetrix/Fisher microarrays. S‐Scores were assessed by comparing each strain (C57BL/6J or DBA/2J) and treatment group (chronic nicotine or nicotine withdrawal) to its corresponding saline control. Each individual strain/treatment group was compared with each individual strain/treatment group saline control, and the arithmetic mean was then taken for each individual nicotine treated mouse (comparisons detailed in Table ). One way significance analysis of microarrays (SAM) was then used to determine the significance of gene expression difference. One way SAM determines significance by measuring the mean and variance of a single group dataset, and determining which S‐Scores significantly differ from the mean. The Storey method of false discovery rate (FDR) was used to adjust for multiple testing. For the purposes of this study, significance was determined by FDR ≤0.2 combined with S‐Score ≥|1.5|. All gene expression data was submitted to the GEO database (accession number: GSE181547).

2.5.2.

## 
QTL and correlation analyses
Somatic signs scores for each BXD strain, and elevated plus maze percent time spent in open arms, were submitted to the GeneNetwork data and analysis repository (http://genenetwork.org/; Traits: BXD_15572‐15575). As noted above, somatic signs and elevated plus maze data were normalized by 1 + log2 transformation prior to interval mapping in GeneNetwork by Hayley‐Knott regression. QTL results were then verified using the genome‐wide efficient mixed model association (GEMMA) method, again within GeneNetwork. Genome‐wide significance (p < 0.05) for LOD scores were determined by permutation analysis using 2000 permutations. QTL support intervals (SIs) were calculated using Bayes credible intervals. The behavioral QTLs identified by somatic signs, or percent time in open arms of the elevated plus maze, following mecamylamine‐induced nicotine withdrawal were named according to conventions set by the Mouse Genome Informatics database (http://www.informatics.jax.org/mgihome/nomen/gene.shtml). Genes within the SI of each QTL were obtained using the Ensembl Genome Browser (version 107, GRCm39 genome reference assembly).
Somatic sign scores, and percent time spent in open arms, were also correlated to microarray (Affymetrix M430 2.0 arrays) data previously generated by our laboratory across the BXD RI panel and publicly available in GeneNetwork expression databases. , Expression data from NAc (dataset #GN156), ventral tegmental area (VTA, dataset #GN228) or prefrontal cortex (PFC, dataset #GN135) were obtained as described previously, , normalized using the robust multi‐array average (RMA) method, and correlated with somatic signs of withdrawal using Spearman Rank correlation. Additionally, somatic signs of withdrawal were correlated with gene expression datasets available in GeneNetwork. Brain regions included in these datasets were: basolateral amygdala from C57BL/6J, DBA/2J, and 50 strains of BXD mice (AMY, dataset #GN323); and striatum (dataset #GN399) from 30 strains of BXD mice and their progenitors. Of these, 26 BXD strains from the NAc, PFC, and VTA datasets overlapped with those assessed for nicotine somatic signs of withdrawal; 19 BXD strains from the AMY dataset overlapped with the somatic signs dataset; and 24 BXD strains from the striatum dataset overlapped with the somatic signs dataset.
Expression QTL mapping was run on the same NAc basal gene expression dataset (GN156) in GeneNetwork. Significant cis‐eQTL mapping within the Chr 14 Nic_ssw1 bQTL were identified using a custom query within GeneNetwork. The top 500 genes most highly correlated with somatic signs were also used for cis‐ or trans‐eQTL mapping within GeneNetwork. Potential false‐positive eQTLs were minimized by eliminating any probesets containing multiple SNPs within oligonucleotide probes.

2.6.

## Bioinformatics
In order to determine whether regions of the genome significantly associated with somatic signs or anxiety‐like nicotine withdrawal, might also influence other behaviors, the GeneWeaver repository and MGI database (http://www.informatics.jax.org) , were used to search for published QTLs overlapping QTLs identified in this work.
The biological processes affected by nicotine and nicotine withdrawal in B6 and D2 mice were also explored using genes regulated by either nicotine or nicotine withdrawal as defined in Section  . Functional biological enrichment of this geneset was determined using the ToppGene Suite (https://toppgene.cchmc.org/navigation/database.jsp). Differentially expressed genes for each comparison were run for Gene Ontology enrichment, mouse and human phenotypes, drugs, and disease states. Correction for multiple testing was performed using Benjamini & Hochberg false discovery rate. Gene Ontology results were then reduced into overarching categories based on semantic similarity measures using the REVIGO web server (http://revigo.irb.hr). Additionally, genes within confidence intervals were probed for associations with nicotine, or other misused substances, as well as anxiety or stress disorders, by submitting gene lists to the ToppGene Suite over‐representation analysis resource and confirming associations in PubMed.

3.

## RESULTS
3.1.

## Mecamylamine‐induced somatic signs of withdrawal and anxiety‐like withdrawal behaviors show distinct bQTLs

Following 8 days of saline versus nicotine treatment by subcutaneous minipump, testing for mecamylamine‐induced somatic signs of withdrawal across 34 BXD strains and their B6 and D2 progenitors showed widely divergent responses across strain and treatment (Table  ). Analysis of variance (ANOVA) of these results showed main effects of strain and treatment and significant interactions (p < 0.0001). Intraclass correlation analysis for somatic signs showed an estimate for heritability of 0.668 in mecamylamine treated animals and 0.318 in saline treated mice, consistent with the highly significant increase (p < 0.0001) in somatic signs caused by mecamylamine treatment of nicotine‐exposed mice (11.82) versus saline treatment (3.24). Plotting mecamylamine‐induced somatic signs across mouse strains (Figure  ) showed a continuous distribution of the phenotype, consistent with a complex genetic trait.
 Interval mapping with Hayley‐Knott regression and GEMMA (Figures  and ) identified a 12 Mb region of Chr 14 significantly associated (peak LOD 6.5, p < 0.05) with somatic signs of mecamylamine‐induced withdrawal in mice given nicotine (Figure  , Table  ). We refer to this Chr 14 QTL as Nic_ssw1 (Nicotine somatic signs of withdrawal QTL 1). The SI of Nic_ssw1 (Chr 14: 61.54076–73.64646) contained 69 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers with significant LOD scores. LOD scores within this region showed significance when mapped using both log2 normalized and raw somatic sign scores (Figures  , , and ). However, this region did not show a significant QTL in mice given saline instead of mecamylamine (Figure  ), indicating that this association resulted from nicotine withdrawal rather than nicotine exposure. Further, using mice from the 9 BXD strains of the validation cohort run at a separate time from the initial 25 BXD strains, we confirmed that there was a significant difference in somatic signs upon nicotine withdrawal between mouse strains having a B6 allele (BXD48, BXD65a, BXD78, BXD83, BXD84, BXD86) versus a D2 allele (BXD22, BXD85, BXD87) at a SNP marker (rs31329861) with the highest LOD score for Nic_ssw1 (Figure  ). Accessing the SI for Nic_ssw1 through the Ensembl Genome Browser showed 278 genes requiring further analyses to prioritize candidate genes (Table  ).
 As an additional measure of behavioral responses to mecamylamine‐induced nicotine withdrawal, we also characterized anxiety‐like behavior in the elevated plus maze (Figure  ). ANOVA showed main effects of strain and treatment and significant interactions (p < 0.0001). There was a highly significant decrease (p < 0.0005) in percent time spent in the open arms by mecamylamine treatment of nicotine‐exposed mice (5.28) versus saline treatment (7.55). Intraclass correlation analysis for the elevated plus maze percent time spent in the open arms showed an estimate for heritability of 0.399 in mecamylamine treated animals and 0.661 in saline treated mice. Interval mapping identified a significant QTL on Chr 9 at 29.93903–53.91935 Mb (peak LOD 4.0, p < 0.05) (Figure  ), associated with percent time spent in the open arms of elevated plus maze in mice given mecamylamine, but not in mice given saline (Figure  ). Interval mapping with GEMMA also identified this QTL (Figure  ). We refer to this QTL as Nic_ptow1. This QTL region contained 697 genes (Table  ).
 
3.2.

## Basal gene expression QTLs in nucleus accumbens overlap with genes in SIs for Nic_ssw1 and Nic_ptow1 behavioral QTLs

As an initial effort to prioritize candidate genes for the identified QTL regions, we employed a two‐step process that first analyzed existing basal gene expression datasets for genes showing strong correlations with somatic signs of withdrawal or percent time spent in open arms of the elevated plus maze and then using these gene sets, second identified genes having a significant expression QTL (eQTL) within behavioral QTL SIs for Nic_ssw1 or Nic_ptow1.
Somatic signs of withdrawal and percent time spent in EPM open arms were correlated to basal gene expression in NAc using a published microarray expression dataset (Table  ). The top 500 genes with the strongest Spearman correlations were then used for eQTL mapping within GeneNetwork (Figure  ). This analysis identified a set of very strong cis‐eQTLs (genome‐wide p ≤ 0.05) on Chr 14 in a region that overlapped the Nic_ssw1 somatic signs QTL. The top 50 genes most highly correlated with nicotine somatic signs showed the strongest cis‐eQTLs (Figures  , , and ). Rb1 emerged as a strong candidate gene within this region because two Affymetrix probesets for Rb1 showed significant cis‐eQTLs on Chr 14, and this gene was nominally correlated with somatic signs of withdrawal (p ≤ 0.05, |ρ| ≥ 0.5, Figures  and ). Other genes within the Nic_ssw1 SI that were strongly correlated (|ρ| ≥ 0.5, p ≤ 0.05) to somatic signs of withdrawal included Bnip3l, Itm2b, Pnma2, and Kif13b (Table  , Figure  ). Bnip3l, Pnma2, and Rb1 were the only genes within the Chr 14 SI (61.5–73.6 Mb) that showed significant cis‐eQTLs and NAc expression correlations with somatic signs of withdrawal (Tables  and ). Other genes showing significant cis‐eQTLs but lacking significant expression correlations with somatic signs of withdrawal were 5330429L19Rik, 9630015K15Rik, Dleu2, A030013D21, Ephx2, Nudt15, and Rcbtb2 (Table  ).
 Additionally, among the genes showing NAc expression correlations with somatic signs of nicotine withdrawal was the galanin R1 receptor (Galr1) located on Chr 18 (Table  ). This finding replicated aspects of our previous report with the first cohort of 25 BXD strains showing that Galr1 expression correlates with nicotine withdrawal symptoms. Additionally, here we found that the Nic_ssw1 SI contained a significant trans‐eQTL (Chr14:61.698 Mb, LOD 14.1) for Galr1 (Figure  ). Together, these results suggest that a gene within Nic_ssw1 may trans modulate Galr1 expression to influence somatic signs of nicotine withdrawal.
Within the Nic_ptow1 anxiety‐like behavioral QTL on Chr 9, there were 13 genes that showed correlation between percent time spent in open arms and basal NAc expression, 11 of which had significant cis‐eQTLs (Tables  and ). There were also 38 additional genes in the Chr 9 SI that had significant eQTLs but that did not significantly correlate with percent time spent in the open arms (Table  ).

3.3.

## 
BXD founder strains vary in nucleus accumbens gene expression response to nicotine exposure and withdrawal
Building on the hypothesis that basal gene expression differences in the nucleus accumbens between BXD founder strains influences nicotine withdrawal, the gene expression response to both chronic nicotine exposure and nicotine withdrawal was assessed in B6 and D2 mice using microarrays. A spontaneous nicotine withdrawal model, precipitated by minipump removal 24 h prior to brain dissection, was utilized to avoid potential gene expression complexities induced by mecamylamine. A longer nicotine treatment regimen (14 days) was utilized for these studies since prior work has shown that spontaneous withdrawal requires longer treatment periods to illicit similar behavioral responses to nAChR antagonist‐precipitated withdrawal. S‐Scores were used to determine the magnitude of gene expression difference between animals that received nicotine and corresponding control animals that received saline (Figure  ) because of their documented resilience against probe polymorphism effects in microarray data. At a false discovery rate of 0.2 both B6 and D2 mice showed more significant differences in gene expression when sacrificed during chronic nicotine exposure compared with during withdrawal. B6 mice showed 235 significantly differentially expressed genes in chronic nicotine exposed mice, compared with 126 in mice with nicotine withdrawal, and D2 mice showed 990 significant DE genes in chronic nicotine exposed mice, compared with 591 in withdrawal (Figure  ). These findings indicate that nicotine exposure impacts gene expression in NAc more than nicotine withdrawal at the doses and time points studied, and both nicotine and nicotine withdrawal influence NAc gene expression more in D2 mice than in B6. Importantly, there were a total of 15 genes regulated by nicotine exposure or withdrawal in B6 or D2 mice that were also located within the SI for Nic_ssw1, and 23 that were located within the SI for Nic_ptow1 (Table  ). However, genes within the Nic_ssw1 SI that were regulated by nicotine or nicotine withdrawal were different than those that correlated with somatic signs of withdrawal and they did not show significant cis‐eQTLs (Table  ). However, Ubash3b and Vwa5a, two genes that had significant cis‐eQTLs and were correlated to percent time in open arms, were also significantly differentially regulated by nicotine withdrawal in B6 mice. Sorl1 and Ncam1 had significant cis‐eQTLs and were differentially regulated by withdrawal in D2 mice, but were not correlated to percent time in open arms (Table  ).
 Bioinformatics analysis for Gene Ontology showed differential pathways regulated by nicotine compared with nicotine withdrawal (Figures  and , Table  ). Both B6 and D2 mice showed regulation of extracellular matrix pathways. D2 mice showed more enrichment for processes related to membrane potential, synaptic transmission and rho GTPase activity under chronic nicotine. Whereas, in B6 mice, pathways related to cellular metabolism, lipid and nucleotide processing, and serotonin secretion were seen (Figures  , , Table  ). During nicotine withdrawal, B6 mice showed more enrichment for cellular membrane components and neurotransmitter transport compared with during chronic nicotine exposure (Figure  , Table  ). Differential expression of components of the myelin sheath were regulated in B6 mice both with chronic nicotine and during withdrawal (as well as in D2 mice during withdrawal) (Figures  , , Table  ). Following nicotine withdrawal, DBA/2J also showed differential expression of genes involved in synaptic transmission, both chemical transmission and vesicle‐mediated transport, regulation of cellular metabolism, and components of axons and glutamatergic synapses (Figure  , Table  ).

3.4.

## Correlation of somatic signs and anxiety‐like withdrawal behaviors with gene expression in other brain regions
The nucleus accumbens is one of the brain regions most often associated with the rewarding effects of drugs of abuse and the aversive stimulating effects of nicotine withdrawal. However, other brain regions that make up the mesolimbocortical dopamine system also respond to nicotine administration, and have been documented to show modulation in dopamine signaling during nicotine withdrawal. Therefore, to further enhance candidate gene analysis for the Nic_ssw1 and Nic_ptow1 QTLs, we conducted correlations of somatic signs of withdrawal or percent time in open arms withdrawal behaviors with existing basal gene expression from PFC, VTA, AMY, and striatum. Table  shows lists of genes within each brain region having nominal correlations with somatic signs or percent time in open arms withdrawal behaviors at an uncorrected p ≤ 0.05 and |ρ| ≥ 0.5 and also were located within the SI for either Nic_ssw1 or Nic_ptow1. No genes in any of these brain regions showed significant correlations for either phenotype upon correction for multiple testing (false discovery rate <0.05).
Importantly, Table  indicates that multiple genes having correlations for either phenotype often showed correlations across multiple brain regions. In particular, of the genes from analysis of NAc expression data above (Table  ), those showing significant eQTL and correlations with nicotine withdrawal behaviors in NAc often had behavioral correlations across 2–3 brain regions. For Nic_ssw1, genes Bnip3l, Pnma2, and Rb1 identified in NAc expression data all showed correlations with somatic signs in expression data from at least two other brain regions. Rcbtb2 was the only gene identified for Nic_ssw1 that showed a cis‐eQTL in NAc but only had correlation with somatic signs in another brain region (AMY). eQTL analysis was not performed across multiple brain regions because of such strong genetic variation in gene expression is generally seen across multiple brain regions (and tissues).
For the Nic_ptow1 SI, NAc showed the largest number of genes (n = 11) having correlations with percent time in the open arms and had cis‐eQTLs in NAc basal expression data. Of these genes, 8/11 were also correlated with this behavior in at least one other brain region. Sorl1 and Srpr, which had cis‐eQTL in NAc but did not correlate with anxiety behavior in that brain region, were identified as correlating with open arm time in AMY or VTA, respectively. The Ncam1 gene, which is located within the Nic_ptow1 SI, had a cis‐eQTL in NAc expression data and was regulated in NAc by chronic nicotine or withdrawal in B6 or D2 mice (Table  ), also showed correlations with open arm time using expression data from AMY or PFC. Thus, the cross‐regional expression correlations verified much of the data from NAc studies and added several additional possible candidate genes.

3.5.

## 
Nic_ssw1 and Nic_ptow1 overlap with published mouse genetic associations and human genome‐wide association studies for misused substances
By querying GeneWeaver and the MGI databases, we were able to identify 10 published QTLs associated with response to nicotine or other misused drugs in mouse genetic models and that overlapped, fully or partially, with Nic_ssw1. These overlapping QTLs were for nicotine sensitivity and nicotine induced locomotor activity ; ethanol withdrawal seizures ; methamphetamine‐induced climbing behavior, home cage activity, chewing spans, and body temperature during methamphetamine response ; and cocaine‐induced seizures. Some of these reports had multiple QTLs overlapping the Nic_ssw1 interval. Within these previously identified QTLs, expression of probesets for Pnma2, Bnip3l, and Rb1 were nominally correlated (p ≤ 0.05, |ρ| ≥ 0.5) with cocaine induced tonic seizures, but significance did not survive FDR adjustment (Table  , sheet 8). Within the methamphetamine QTLs, one Rb1 probeset nominally correlated with climbing activity, and a Pnma2 correlated with body temperature but these two correlations also did not survive FDR adjustment (Table  , sheet 1 and 5). Together, however, these data suggest that the Nic_ssw1 interval influences behavioral responses to nicotine and possibly other misused drugs.
We also identified four published QTLs for ethanol or cocaine that overlapped with Nic_ptow1. Two ethanol preference QTLs, , one for time spent in an open field with cocaine, and one for ethanol consumption. Again, all of these prior QTL studies had large SIs. Of these, only the cocaine anxiety‐like behavior QTL both used BXD mice and was cataloged in the GeneNetwork database (GN #10329). When phenotypic data from this cocaine trait was correlated with the same basal NAc gene expression data used to assess nicotine withdrawal‐related candidate genes in this study (Table  ), a total of nine genes were found to have a nominally significant cocaine phenotype correlation (p ≤ 0.05, |ρ| ≥ 0.5), were located within the Nic_ptow1 SI, and had significant cis‐eQTL (Cbl, Dlat, Fxyd2, Hyou1, Ncam1, Scn4b, Sorl1, and Ube4a). None of these genes showed correlation with percent time in the open arms following nicotine withdrawal in NAc expression data (Table  ). However, Ncam1 and Sorl1 did both show nominal correlations to the nicotine withdrawal‐induced anxiety phenotype with expression data from AMY, and Ncam1 also showing correlation with PFC expression data (Table  ). Ncam1 and Sorl1 were also both regulated by chronic nicotine or nicotine withdrawal in D2 mice (Table  ). These complex findings suggest there may be a role for genes in the Nic_ptow1 SI for both nicotine withdrawal‐induced anxiety and behavioral responses to other misused substances.
As a final bioinformatic query for prioritizing candidate genes for Nic_ssw1 and Nic_ptow1, we screened the SI for these QTL for nicotine‐related genetic associations in humans using genome‐wide association studies (GWAS) Catalog (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/home). Syntenic human chromosome regions were identified (https://syntenybrowser.jax.org/browser) and searched in the GWAS Catalog for genome‐wide associations significant for nicotine and alcohol given their high co‐morbidity. For the Nic_ssw1 SI, two genes had significant GWAS associations. Brip3l was associated both with smoking initiation and alcohol consumption, while Ephx2 was significantly associated with smoking phenotypes. For the Chr 9 Nic_ptow1 SI, GWAS association for smoking initiation was found for Dixdc1, which had both cis‐eQTLs and NAc expression correlations with the percent time in open arms withdrawal phenotype. Additionally, Ncam1 and Sorl1 showed associations for alcohol consumption and multiple smoking phenotypes. Thus, a total of six genes showing genome‐wide significance for nicotine traits in recent GWAS meta‐analyses were found in our genetic analysis of nicotine withdrawal in BXD mice (Table  ).

4.

## DISCUSSION
Here we present a genetical‐genomic analysis of behavioral measures associated with nicotine withdrawal. The purpose of this study was to assess the influence of genetic variation on withdrawal symptoms, and to identify candidate genes and mechanisms underlying variation in severity of withdrawal. Such analyses may contribute to improved intervention in nicotine dependence. BXD mice were used as model organisms because they are an extensively studied recombinant inbred line of mice whose progenitors show differential responses to nicotine. , Our results show that somatic signs of withdrawal vary widely across BXD strains, producing a highly significant behavioral QTL on Chr 14 that we have called Nic_ssw1. This QTL for somatic signs of withdrawal was unique from the Chr 9 QTL, that we have called Nic_ptow1, seen with withdrawal related anxiety‐like behavior measured by elevated plus maze. These results indicate genetic differences in the mechanisms underlying these two behavioral metrics of nicotine withdrawal. Further, we identified significant correlations between basal gene expression in nucleus accumbens and the number of withdrawal signs observed across BXD strains. Looking at significant cis‐eQTLs and withdrawal correlated genes, we were able to identify Bnip3l, Ephx2, Pnma2, and Rb1 as rational candidate genes for Nic_ssw1I (Table  , Figure  ). We similarly identified Ncam1, Dixdc1, and Sorl1 as specific candidate genes within the Nic_ptow2 Chr 9 QTL region associated with percent time spent in open arms of elevated plus maze (Table  ). Our finding that a considerable number of our candidate genes have recently been discovered as associated with nicotine and alcohol behaviors in human GWAS points to both the validity and significance of the studies described here.
Nicotine withdrawal was induced in these BXD studies through the use of mecamylamine. Mecamylamine is a nAChR antagonist that blocks the action of nicotine by noncompetitively binding to nAChR receptors and preventing their activation. This allowed assessment of acute nicotine withdrawal without concern for possible variations in nicotine pharmacokinetics across BXD strains. Mice were assessed for both somatic withdrawal symptoms based on a standardized scoring of behavioral signs, and for withdrawal‐related anxiety‐like behavior as indicated by time spent in the open arms of the elevated plus maze after mecamylamine administration. As expected, we observed continuous variation for both of these traits across the 34 BXD strains studied, strongly suggesting these are complex traits influenced by multiple genes (Figures  and ). Taken together, these findings indicate that genetic background plays a role in nicotine withdrawal and that multiple genes may influence these traits. This hypothesis is further supported by our use of behavioral QTL mapping, which identified a region of Chr 14 (Nic_ssw1) with high association to somatic signs of withdrawal and a region of Chr 9 (Nic_ptow1) with high association with elevated plus maze percent time spent in open arms.
Through publicly available databases we were able to identify 10 published QTLs that overlapped with Nic_ssw1. For Nic_ssw1, these included QTLs for cocaine seizures, methamphetamine induced locomotor behaviors, ethanol withdrawal, and nicotine sensitivity. Chr 14 has also been identified as containing a QTL for nicotine induced locomotor activity. All of these QTLs were identified from studies of mouse models, although not all used the BXD RI panel. It is also important to note that these prior nicotine, ethanol, and methamphetamine QTLs on Chr 14 had large SIs, likely because of testing fewer strains, and the cocaine seizure QTLs only partially overlapped with Nic_ssw1. However, the identification of QTLs on this region of Chr 14 across multiple mouse models strengthens the hypothesis that genes in this region play a role in the physiological response to nicotine and other drugs of abuse. The analyses outlined in this manuscript have showed an association of this region of Chr 14 with nicotine somatic signs of withdrawal specifically, and limited the QTL to a 12 Mb region of this chromosome, allowing for more accurate identification of potential candidate genes.
An additional analysis supporting the validity of the Chr 14 somatic signs QTL comes from the fact that these studies were conducted in two major cohorts, with 9 additional BXD strains being studied after the initial 25 strain analysis. We thus were able to analyze allele‐specific somatic sign results for these 9 strains to confirm the differences between strains having D2 versus B6 alleles at the site of the Nic_ssw1 QTL (Figure  ), thus providing an internal replication of data from the initial 25 strains.
In addition to somatic signs of withdrawal, anxiety‐like withdrawal behaviors were assessed using the elevated plus maze. QTL mapping of percent time spent in the open arms of elevated plus maze, with mecamylamine administration following 8 days of nicotine exposure, identified a significant QTL on Chr 9, one suggestive QTL on Chr 7 and another on Chr 12 (Figure  ). We identified four previously published QTLs that overlapped with Nic_ptow1, for ethanol preference, , ethanol consumption, time spent in open field following cocaine administration. Our analyses identified Ncam1 as a potential candidate gene in this region, as this gene is differentially expressed in D2 mice with nicotine withdrawal and this gene had a significant cis‐eQTL in the Nic_ptow1 SI (Table  ). Ncam1 is part of the Ncam1‐Ttc12‐Ankk1‐Drd2 tight cluster of genes that has been repeatedly implicated in genetic studies of anxiety, stress and substance misuse, including prior human and animal model studies of nicotine dependence. , , Our QTL, therefore, may represent further evidence of the influence of these genes on substance use disorders and anxiety‐like behavior.

Sorl1 (sortillin‐related receptor 1) was another candidate gene within Nic_ptow1 on Chr 9. This gene had a significant eQTL within the Nic_ptow1 QTL region, and was differentially expressed in D2 mice following nicotine withdrawal (Table  ). Genetic variation in the Sorl1 gene has been associated with Alzheimer's disease, this is perhaps expected because Sorl1 plays an important role in regulating production of amyloid β. This finding is very interesting, as previous studies have shown that nicotine may be protective against amyloid β toxicity and nAChR agonists have even been explored as treatments for Alzheimer's disease. , As seen with Ncam1, Sorl1 has also been found associated with nicotine behaviors and alcohol consumption with recent human GWAS studies. This suggests that our mouse models replicate at least part of the genetic variance governing nicotine traits in humans and may thus be useful for future mechanistic studies.
Importantly, withdrawal induced anxiety‐like behavior, based on percent time in open arms, did not show any significant QTLs that overlapped with Nic_ssw1 on Chr 14. QTL mapping for percent time in open arms in saline control mice did show suggestive, but not significant, QTL on chromosomes 6 and 14, but the suggestive QTL on Chr 14 was very broad, and did overlap with Nic_ssw1 (Figure  ). The presence of this QTL could potentially indicate that this region of Chr 14 contains a mecamylamine responsive, rather than withdrawal responsive, QTL. Comparative studies between mice given mecamylamine, and mice not given mecamylamine, in order to eliminate the possibility that Nic_ssw1 is a mecamylamine responsive QTL rather than a nicotine withdrawal QTL, will, therefore, be the subject of future studies.
An additional consideration for future studies will be to determine that the Nic_ssw1 QTL does not reflect an indirect nicotine withdrawal response because of genetic differences in mecamylamine pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics. We do not believe this is likely as prior behavioral studies have shown that a dose of mecamylamine (1.5 mg/kg) similar to that employed in this study (2.0 mg/kg) fully blocked nicotine drug discrimination in both B6 and D2 mice and dose–response studies on mecamylamine in B6 and D2 mice showed no differences in inducing a mnemonic impairment. 

One of the candidate genes that emerged from our somatic signs QTL analyses was Rb1. This transcript showed a very significant LOD score for a cis‐eQTL on Chr 14. Rb1 has previously been identified as differentially expressed between C57BL/6J and DBA/2 J mice, to be regulated by chronic nicotine or ethanol exposure , and other drugs of abuse, , and to be contained within a behavioral QTL associated with ethanol withdrawal. The canonical function of this gene is regulation of cell‐cycle progression through inhibition of E2F family proteins. , Variation of Rb1 expression is usually associated with cancer or other conditions of cell proliferation, as it is considered the first tumor suppressor gene defined. Tobacco smoking has been shown to disrupt Rb1 pathway expression in association with various lung carcinomas, , however, effects on Rb1 expression in neuronal tissue are not as well documented. Our analyses also showed a significant negative correlation between Rb1 expression and somatic signs of withdrawal, which survived removal of outlier strains (Figures  and ). Human studies have showed that nicotine withdrawal leads to an increase in pain and neurogenic inflammation. , The relationship between inflammation and Rb1 expression is an area still in need of investigation, however, some studies suggest that Rb1 inactivation may lead to an increase in pro‐inflammatory cytokine activity, specifically through IL‐6. The negative correlation between Rb1 expression and somatic signs of withdrawal may, therefore, indicate variation in neuroinflammation across BXD strains through cellular mechanisms that involve Rb1 protein, that, in turn, influence the amount of withdrawal somatic signs each mouse strain displays. This hypothesis has wider implications for tobacco cessation in humans, as it potentially indicates that variation in the expression and activity of cellular proteins that are not directly associated with neuronal responses to nicotine may have an effect on severity of withdrawal symptoms. Recent studies also support a role for pro‐inflammatory signaling in nicotine withdrawal. Adeluyi et al. found that nicotine withdrawal induces morphological changes in microglia in NAc. Another study recently found that cannabidiol suppresses nicotine withdrawal‐associated memory impairment in mice. 

Interestingly, expression of all the candidate genes in the Chr 14 SI, except for Ncam1 and Sorl1, did not significantly change in C57BL/6J or DBA/DJ mice in withdrawal states (nor in chronically exposed states) (Tables  and ). However, the lack of significant change in the gene's expression during withdrawal does not rule out the possibility that basal Rb1 expression in the NAc may influence somatic signs of withdrawal through modulation of one or more proteins that interact with Rb1. Furthermore, the behavioral BXD studies here evoked nicotine withdrawal with mecamylamine while the B6 and D2 gene expression data utilized spontaneous nicotine withdrawal. These technical differences could have contributed to a lack of overlap between the BXD behavioral QTL analysis and the studies on spontaneous withdrawal in B6 and D2 mice. It must also be noted that, because of its importance as a tumor suppressor gene, Rb1 is likely not an appropriate target for pharmacological modulation as part of smoking cessation. This is also true of the Pnma2 and Itm2b. These genes are ubiquitously expressed and play roles in cellular proliferation and neuronal differentiation. , This fact makes it all the more important to further explore the molecular mechanisms underlying the correlations we have observed between Rb1 expression in the nucleus accumbens and withdrawal severity. Such efforts may lead to the identification of a downstream molecular process that could be temporarily altered to aid in efforts to stop nicotine use, but that are less likely to have the detrimental effects of modulating the canonical cell‐cycle arrest pathways associated with Rb1.
Alternatively, it is possible that the correlation we observed between Rb1 expression in the nucleus accumbens and somatic signs of withdrawal is not the result of Rb1 signaling pathways underlying withdrawal, but rather are the result of linkage disequilibrium between Rb1 and another gene within this region of Chr 14. Bnip3l and Kif13b are two such possible genes within this region. These genes, or their protein products, have been shown to be significantly modulated, in lung tissue, in response to cigarette smoke. , Data about the expression of these genes in the brain is relatively limited, although one study of miRNA‐mRNA interaction in the ventral tegmental area identified a significantly ethanol and nicotine responsive miRNA that was predicted to target Bnip3l. Importantly, our studies here documented that Bnip3l expression correlated with somatic signs of withdrawal, the gene had a cis‐eQTL in NAc expression data, and a large recent human GWAS meta‐analysis showed Bnip3l to be associated with alcohol consumption, which is frequently co‐morbid with nicotine dependence. Candidate genes in Nic_ssw1, such as Bnip3l and Kif13b, will also be the focus of future studies.
We also explored the correlation between somatic signs of nicotine withdrawal and gene expression in other brain regions. These analyses found that somatic signs tend to correlate with different genes in each brain region. This indicates that nicotine withdrawal may activate signaling between brain regions, leading to brain‐region specific gene expression modulation, rather than by activating the same signaling pathway across the mesolimbocortical dopamine system. It is important to note that we did not correlate somatic signs with gene expression from the habenula specifically, as we did not have access to a publicly available habenula basal gene expression study in BXD RI mice. Nicotine withdrawal has been shown to induce hyperactivity via cholinergic neurons, which are highly localized in habenula. Therefore, this analysis will be important for future studies.
In summary, through studies of gene expression, behavior and genetic variation, using the BXD RI mouse panel as a model, we have identified a novel Chr 14 interval and candidate genes for the mechanisms associated with somatic signs of nicotine withdrawal. This is in contrast to a previous paper that identified a behavioral QTL on Chr 4 for impairment of hippocampus‐dependent learning with nicotine withdrawal. Furthermore, our findings of a Chr 9 QTL for anxiety‐like behavior in the elevated plus maze following mecamylamine‐induced withdrawal, indicated that somatic signs of nicotine withdrawal are influenced largely by a unique genetic region. The Nic_ssw1 region showed multiple genes with correlated basal expression in NAc to somatic signs of withdrawal and a number of these showed robust cis‐eQTLs, strongly suggesting their regulation by adjacent genetic polymorphisms. Significantly, the Nic_ssw1 QTL SI also contained a trans‐eQTL for the galanin receptor 1 gene (Galr1), which is located on chromosome 18 (Figure  and Table  ). We have previously reported, in a behavioral pharmacology analysis across some of the BXD data shown here, that expression of Galr1 is positively correlated with somatic signs of nicotine withdrawal and that the galanin receptor antagonist, galnon, reduced nicotine somatic signs of withdrawal. This prior finding, combined with data presented here, suggests that the Chr 14 Nic_ssw1 region may regulate expression of the Galr1 gene, implicating Galr1 as a possible downstream effector of the Chr 14 locus on physical signs of nicotine withdrawal.
Together, the studies here have produced highly significant new data regarding genes involved in both the genetic variance and possible mechanisms of nicotine withdrawal behaviors such as somatic signs and anxiety‐like behavior. Despite somewhat large genetic SIs for our QTLs, our layered incorporation of genomic data, prior mouse genetic studies and human GWAS findings, has produced a workable set of candidate genes for future studies on the mechanisms of nicotine withdrawal. The existing overlaps of recent human GWAS findings with our results here suggests that our findings may inform future human studies on understanding the mechanisms and possible interventions for nicotine dependence, as well as possibly impacting studies on other misused drugs such as alcohol.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
None declared.

## Supporting information

FIGURE S1: Comparison of number of arm crosses in the elevated plus maze as a measure of total locomotor activity between nicotine + mecamylamine and nicotine + saline mice. p values assessed by T‐test.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S2: a) Raw somatic sign scores for each BXD strain. b) Log2 normalized somatic sign scores for each BXD strain.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S3: a) Raw percent time in open arms of elevated plus maze for each BXD strain. b) Log2 normalized percent time in open arms of elevated plus maze for each BXD strain.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S4: a) QTL mapping with GEMMA of somatic sign scores in BXD mice that received nicotine + mecamylamine. b) QTL mapping with GEMMA of somatic sign scores in BXD mice that received nicotine + saline.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S5: a) QTL mapping with Haley‐Knott of raw somatic sign scores (not log2 normalized) in BXD mice that received nicotine + mecamylamine. b) QTL mapping with Haley‐Knott of raw somatic sign scores (not log2 normalized) in BXD mice that received nicotine + saline.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S6: Comparison of somatic signs in BXD mice from the validation cohort with a B6 (BXD48, BXD65a, BXD78, BXD83, BXD84, BXD86) or a D2 allele (BXD22, BXD85, BXD87) at a SNP (rs31329861) for the Nic_ssw1 QTL peak LOD on Chr 14 in mice given nicotine + mecamylamine or nicotine + saline. P‐values assessed by ANOVA.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S7: a) QTL mapping with GEMMA of percent time in open arms of EPM in BXD mice that received nicotine + mecamylamine. b) QTL mapping with GEMMA of percent time in open arms of EPM in BXD mice that received nicotine + saline.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S8: Heatmap showing expression QTL mapping results of top 500 highest correlated genes between somatic signs of nicotine withdrawal and basal gene expression in nucleus accumbens. Each column (x‐axis) represents a gene from NAc expression data, each row (y‐axis) represents a chromosomal location. Orange arrowheads represent the genomic location of each gene. Blue regions represent those in which the C57BL/6J parental alleles are associated with higher expression values, red regions represent those in which the DBA/2 J parental alleles are associated with higher expression values.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S9: Spearman rank correlation plot of somatic signs of withdrawal with Itm2b, Pnma2, Kif13b, and Bnip3l basal expression in NAc.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S10: Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment, biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions for genes differentially expressed between C57BL/6J (B6) chronic nicotine vs chronic saline.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S11: Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment, biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions for genes differentially expressed between C57BL/6J (B6) withdrawal nicotine vs withdrawal saline.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S12: Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment, biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions for genes differentially expressed between DBA/2 J (D2) chronic nicotine vs chronic saline.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S13: Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment, biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions for genes differentially expressed between DBA/2 J (D2) withdrawal nicotine vs withdrawal saline.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S14: Overlapping Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment for each comparison of: C57BL/6J chronic nicotine vs chronic saline (B6 chronic), C57BL/6J withdrawal nicotine vs withdrawal saline (B6 withdrawal), DBA/2 J chronic nicotine vs chronic saline (D2 chronic), DBA/2 J withdrawal nicotine vs withdrawal saline (D2 withdrawal).
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S15: a) Spearman rank correlation plot of somatic signs of withdrawal with Rb1 basal expression in NAc. b) Spearman rank correlation plot of somatic signs of withdrawal with Rb1 basal expression in NAc with outlier strain BXD48 removed.
Click here for additional data file.

TABLE S1: S‐Scores
Click here for additional data file.

TABLE S2: • • •
Click here for additional data file.

TABLE S3: • • •
Click here for additional data file.

TABLE S4: • • •
Click here for additional data file.

TABLE S5: • • •
Click here for additional data file.

TABLE S6: • • •
Click here for additional data file.

TABLE S7: • • •
Click here for additional data file.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank members of the Damaj and Miles laboratories for their generous input on this work. This work was supported by grant R01DA032246 (Damaj M. Imad, Miles Michael F.) from the National Institute on Drug Abuse.

Smith ML, Mignogna KM, Rokita JL, MacLeod L, Damaj MI, Miles MF. Identification of candidate genes for nicotine withdrawal in C57BL/6J × DBA/2J recombinant inbred mice. Genes, Brain and Behavior. 2023;22(2):e12844. doi: 10.1111/gbb.12844

## Contributor Information
M. Imad Damaj, Email: m.damaj@vcuhealth.org.
Michael F. Miles, Email: michael.miles@vcuhealth.org.

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The gene expression data supporting these studies are available through the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database: accession number: GSE181547. The behavioral data associated with this study is available in the supplementary material of this article. Authors agree to provide all data and files related to this manuscript on simple request to the corresponding author, and remain available for assistance if necessary.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

FIGURE S1: Comparison of number of arm crosses in the elevated plus maze as a measure of total locomotor activity between nicotine + mecamylamine and nicotine + saline mice. p values assessed by T‐test.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S2: a) Raw somatic sign scores for each BXD strain. b) Log2 normalized somatic sign scores for each BXD strain.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S3: a) Raw percent time in open arms of elevated plus maze for each BXD strain. b) Log2 normalized percent time in open arms of elevated plus maze for each BXD strain.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S4: a) QTL mapping with GEMMA of somatic sign scores in BXD mice that received nicotine + mecamylamine. b) QTL mapping with GEMMA of somatic sign scores in BXD mice that received nicotine + saline.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S5: a) QTL mapping with Haley‐Knott of raw somatic sign scores (not log2 normalized) in BXD mice that received nicotine + mecamylamine. b) QTL mapping with Haley‐Knott of raw somatic sign scores (not log2 normalized) in BXD mice that received nicotine + saline.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S6: Comparison of somatic signs in BXD mice from the validation cohort with a B6 (BXD48, BXD65a, BXD78, BXD83, BXD84, BXD86) or a D2 allele (BXD22, BXD85, BXD87) at a SNP (rs31329861) for the Nic_ssw1 QTL peak LOD on Chr 14 in mice given nicotine + mecamylamine or nicotine + saline. P‐values assessed by ANOVA.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S7: a) QTL mapping with GEMMA of percent time in open arms of EPM in BXD mice that received nicotine + mecamylamine. b) QTL mapping with GEMMA of percent time in open arms of EPM in BXD mice that received nicotine + saline.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S8: Heatmap showing expression QTL mapping results of top 500 highest correlated genes between somatic signs of nicotine withdrawal and basal gene expression in nucleus accumbens. Each column (x‐axis) represents a gene from NAc expression data, each row (y‐axis) represents a chromosomal location. Orange arrowheads represent the genomic location of each gene. Blue regions represent those in which the C57BL/6J parental alleles are associated with higher expression values, red regions represent those in which the DBA/2 J parental alleles are associated with higher expression values.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S9: Spearman rank correlation plot of somatic signs of withdrawal with Itm2b, Pnma2, Kif13b, and Bnip3l basal expression in NAc.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S10: Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment, biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions for genes differentially expressed between C57BL/6J (B6) chronic nicotine vs chronic saline.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S11: Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment, biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions for genes differentially expressed between C57BL/6J (B6) withdrawal nicotine vs withdrawal saline.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S12: Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment, biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions for genes differentially expressed between DBA/2 J (D2) chronic nicotine vs chronic saline.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S13: Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment, biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions for genes differentially expressed between DBA/2 J (D2) withdrawal nicotine vs withdrawal saline.
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S14: Overlapping Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment for each comparison of: C57BL/6J chronic nicotine vs chronic saline (B6 chronic), C57BL/6J withdrawal nicotine vs withdrawal saline (B6 withdrawal), DBA/2 J chronic nicotine vs chronic saline (D2 chronic), DBA/2 J withdrawal nicotine vs withdrawal saline (D2 withdrawal).
Click here for additional data file.

FIGURE S15: a) Spearman rank correlation plot of somatic signs of withdrawal with Rb1 basal expression in NAc. b) Spearman rank correlation plot of somatic signs of withdrawal with Rb1 basal expression in NAc with outlier strain BXD48 removed.
Click here for additional data file.

TABLE S1: S‐Scores
Click here for additional data file.

TABLE S2: • • •
Click here for additional data file.

TABLE S3: • • •
Click here for additional data file.

TABLE S4: • • •
Click here for additional data file.

TABLE S5: • • •
Click here for additional data file.

TABLE S6: • • •
Click here for additional data file.

TABLE S7: • • •
Click here for additional data file.

## Data Availability Statement
The gene expression data supporting these studies are available through the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database: accession number: GSE181547. The behavioral data associated with this study is available in the supplementary material of this article. Authors agree to provide all data and files related to this manuscript on simple request to the corresponding author, and remain available for assistance if necessary.