pmcMol Ther Methods Clin DevMol Ther Methods Clin Dev2616mtm101624857Molecular Therapy. Methods & Clinical Development2329-0501American Society of Gene & Cell TherapyPMC10482902PMC10482902.110482902104829023769394210.1016/j.omtm.2023.08.018S2329-0501(23)00133-X1Original ArticleApolipoprotein A-I vascular gene therapy reduces vein-graft atherosclerosis
BiLianxiang WackerBradley K. KomandurKaushik SanfordNicole DichekDavid A.ddichek@uw.edu 1Department of Medicine, University of Washington, 1959 NE Pacific St., Seattle, WA 98195, USA∗Corresponding author: David A. Dichek, Department of Medicine, University of Washington, 1959 NE Pacific St., Seattle, WA 98195, USA. ddichek@uw.edu149202322820233043816755857221420232182023220820230809202322072024© 2023 The Author(s)2023https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Coronary artery venous bypass grafts typically fail because of atherosclerosis driven by lipid and macrophage accumulation. Therapy for vein-graft atherosclerosis is limited to statin drugs, which are only modestly effective. We hypothesized that transduction of vein-graft endothelium of fat-fed rabbits with a helper-dependent adenovirus expressing apolipoprotein AI (HDAdApoAI) would reduce lipid and macrophage accumulation. Fat-fed rabbits received bilateral external jugular vein-to-carotid artery interposition grafts. Four weeks later, one graft per rabbit (n = 23 rabbits) was infused with HDAdApoAI and the contralateral graft with HDAdNull. Grafts were harvested 12 weeks later. Paired analyses of grafts were performed, with vein graft cholesterol, intimal lipid, and macrophage content as the primary endpoints. HDAd genomes were detected in all grafts. APOAI mRNA was median 63-fold higher in HDAdApoAI grafts versus HDAdNull grafts (p < 0.001). HDAdApoAI grafts had a mean 15% lower total cholesterol (by mass spectrometry; p = 0.003); mean 19% lower intimal lipid (by oil red O staining; p = 0.02); and mean 13% lower expression of the macrophage marker CD68 (by reverse transcriptase-mediated quantitative PCR; p = 0.008). In vivo transduction of vein-graft endothelium achieves persistent APOAI expression and reduces vein-graft cholesterol, intimal lipid, and CD68 expression. Vascular gene therapy with APOAI has promise for preventing vein-graft failure caused by atherosclerosis.

## Graphical abstract
 
HDAdApoAI in vein grafts of hyperlipidemic rabbits decreased cholesterol and intimal lipid accumulation. Because vein graft atherosclerosis and its complications (including plaque rupture leading to occlusion) are driven by lipid accumulation, this gene therapy has the potential to increase long-term vein graft patency.

## Keywords
adenovirusapolipoprotein AIatherosclerosiscarotid arterycholesterolgene therapyrabbitCD68vein graftspmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Introduction
Despite major advances in prevention and treatment, ischemic heart disease (primarily caused by coronary artery atherosclerosis) remains the leading cause of health loss in the world. Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is the treatment of choice—and is superior to percutaneous interventions—for most patients with complex coronary artery atherosclerosis. , , Accordingly, >350,000 CABG procedures are carried out annually in the United States. The long-term success of CABG depends on continued patency of the bypass graft conduits. , , However, saphenous vein grafts (SVGs), which account for >80% of CABG conduits and are used in >90% of CABG operations, , have a high rate of stenosis and occlusion, with ∼50% occluded within 10 years. , 
SVG stenosis and occlusion are caused by three mechanisms. Early occlusion (<1 month) is caused by technical failures and thrombosis. SVG failure from 1 month to 1 year postoperatively is caused by intimal hyperplasia. The vast majority of SVG failures occur >1 year postoperatively and are caused by obstructive atherosclerosis. , , , SVG atherosclerosis progresses more rapidly than native vessel atherosclerosis and is characterized by rupture-prone lesions that are relatively rich in lipids and macrophages and have poorly defined fibrous caps. Lipid-lowering therapy (e.g., with statin drugs) can improve SVG patency, and almost all CABG recipients are treated with statins. However, systemic lipid-lowering therapy may have reached its limit in improving SVG patency. In a retrospective study, aggressive lowering of mean low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol to <70 mg/dL versus <100 mg/dL did not improve SVG patency. In a more recent study of SVG recipients, 92% were taking statins with a mean LDL cholesterol of <70 mg/dL. Nevertheless, 100% of the recipients had at least one intermediate SVG atherosclerotic lesion. Intermediate and advanced SVG lesions are exceedingly difficult to treat, with percutaneous interventions complicated by distal embolization, high rates of restenosis, and atherosclerosis progression. , 
Hypotheses to explain the propensity of SVG to develop atherosclerosis—despite aggressive statin therapy , —include (1) an endothelial layer that is more susceptible to damage than arterial endothelium, (2) presence of relatively large inter-endothelial cell junctions that facilitate lipoprotein entry, (3) comparatively low levels of endothelial nitric oxide, and (4) smooth muscle cells that are more susceptible to proliferation and migration and synthesize larger amounts of extracellular matrix proteins than arterial smooth muscle cells. Extracellular matrix proteins contribute to lipid retention, accelerating atherosclerosis progression. Beyond lipid-lowering therapy, efforts to decrease SVG atherosclerosis have included modification of vein-harvesting protocols, including endoscopic harvesting ; the no-touch technique, whereby adjacent tissue is harvested and implanted along with the vein ; external vein-graft stenting ; and oligonucleotide therapy. However, none of these interventions has extended vein graft patency in a large clinical study, and an editorialist recently commented that “10-year SVG patency remains at 60% despite all efforts to improve this.” 
To provide a novel therapy for vein-graft atherosclerosis that would be additive to systemic lipid-lowering drugs, we and others , developed gene therapies targeted to vein-graft cells. We first showed that a helper-dependent adenoviral (HDAd) vector can express a therapeutic transgene (apolipoprotein AI [APOAI]) in vein grafts of normolipidemic rabbits for ≥24 weeks (with stable expression after 4 weeks), and we developed a rabbit model of vein-graft atherosclerosis for testing gene therapy. We used APOAI as a therapeutic transgene because HDAd-mediated expression of APOAI in carotid arteries of hyperlipidemic rabbits reduces both lipid and inflammation (the two major components of atherosclerosis). Here we report evidence that an HDAd vector expressing APOAI decreases accumulation of cholesterol and intimal lipid—major drivers of vein graft atherosclerosis , , , —in vein grafts of severely hyperlipidemic rabbits.

## Results

## Surgeries, graft patency, and plasma cholesterol
Using data from our model development study, we calculated that a sample size of 50 bilateral grafts (i.e., 25 rabbits) would enable us to detect or exclude ∼25% reductions in cholesterol and macrophage content in helper-dependent adenovirus expressing apoAI (HDAdApoAI)-transduced grafts versus contralateral HDAdNull-transduced controls. To achieve this sample size, 39 rabbits were fed a high-cholesterol diet and received bilateral external jugular vein-to-common carotid artery interposition grafts ( ). Twenty-three of the rabbits were alive 4 weeks after the grafting surgery with bilaterally patent grafts and were enrolled at that time in the gene therapy study, receiving HDAdApoAI in one graft and HDAdNull in the contralateral graft (see for details on attrition and randomization of treatments). Twenty-two of the 23 rabbits survived to vein-graft harvest 12 weeks later. Vein-graft patency was 84% after the grafting surgery and 100% after the vector infusion surgery. Except as noted, experimental endpoints were analyzed on these 22 pairs of vein grafts. We compared median values of the HDAdApoAI and HDAdNull groups; however, we performed all statistical tests for therapeutic endpoints on paired grafts from the same rabbit. This approach prevents systemic factors such as lipid levels, plasma apoAI levels, or blood pressure from acting as uncontrolled variables. Moreover, because experimental and control grafts are compared within the same rabbit, reliance on paired comparisons to support our conclusions eliminates any unexpected—but potentially confounding—effects of the HDAdApoAI vector on plasma lipid or apoAI levels. From the time of vein grafting to harvest, mean plasma cholesterol levels were ∼500 mg/dL (range, 212–929 mg/dL) ( ). 

## HDAd genomes and APOAI expression persist for 12 weeks
HDAd genomes were present in 44 of 44 (100%) vein grafts: 0.09 (0.05–0.21) genomes/vascular cell in the group of HDAdNull grafts and 0.06 (0.04–0.09) genomes/vascular cell in the group of HDAdApoAI grafts (p = 0.04 for comparison of paired grafts in the same rabbit) ( A). Transgene expression in this model is predominantly in luminal endothelial cells, , , with endothelial cells comprising ∼2% of total vein-graft cells. Assuming that all vector genomes are in endothelial cells, there were ∼4.5 (2.5–10) HDAd genomes/endothelial cell in HDAdNull grafts and ∼3.0 (1.8–4.6) HDAd genomes/endothelial cell in HDAdApoAI treated grafts (p = 0.04 for paired comparisons) ( B). Using primers that detect both endogenous and transgenic APOAI mRNA, APOAI mRNA was detected in 22 of 22 (100%) HDAdApoAI grafts and—at a far lower level—in 16 of 22 (73%) HDAdNull grafts (63-fold difference; p < 0.001 for paired comparisons) ( C). Transgene-specific APOAI primers detected APOAI mRNA in 22 of 22 (100%) HDAdApoAI grafts. A far lower signal was present in 5 of 22 (23%) HDAdNull grafts (155-fold difference; p < 0.001 for paired comparisons) ( D). ApoAI protein (which could derive from the HDAdApoAI vector or from plasma) was detected by western blotting of graft-conditioned medium in 8 of 21 HDAdApoAI grafts (38%) and 4 of 21 HDAdNull grafts (19%) ( ) (p = 0.3). 

## Hemodynamics are equivalent in HDAdApoAI and HDAdNull grafts
We measured vein-graft hemodynamics during both the vector-infusion surgeries and the harvest surgeries. We performed these measurements not as therapeutic endpoints but to determine whether graft hemodynamics (which depend, at least in part, on technical aspects of graft anastomosis construction) were matched between the experimental and control groups. Matching of hemodynamics is important, because variables such as shear stress and pulsatility can impact vascular inflammation and atherosclerosis development. , Blood flow did not differ between the group of HDAdNull grafts and the group of HDAdApoAI-treated grafts, either at the time of vector infusion (52 ± 20 mL/min vs 53 ± 19 mL/min, respectively; p = 0.9) ( A) or at harvest (38 ± 12 mL/min vs 39 ± 14 mL/min; p = 0.9) ( B). As reported in our model development study, mean blood flow decreased between the vector-infusion surgery and harvest surgery (∼25% decrease for both groups; p < 0.001) ( A and 3B). Pulsatility indices also did not differ between the groups either at vector infusion (1.8 ± 0.6 vs 1.8 ± 0.6; p = 0.8) ( C) or harvest (3.7 ± 1.7 vs 3.3 ± 1.9; p = 0.7) ( D). For both groups, mean pulsatility indices increased between vector infusion and harvest (∼94% for both groups; p < 0.001). Shear stress did not differ between the groups at either time point: 8.4 ± 6.2 dyn/cm2 vs 8.7 ± 5.3 dyn/cm2 at vector infusion (p = 0.8) ( E) and 3.2 ± 3.5 dyn/cm2 vs 3.1 ± 3.0 dyn/cm2 at harvest (p = 0.8) ( F). Mean shear stress decreased between vector infusion and harvest (∼64% for both groups; p < 0.001). Therefore, critical hemodynamic parameters did not differ between the two groups of grafts and were therefore not uncontrolled variables in this study. 

## Overexpression of APOAI lowers vein-graft cholesterol, intimal lipid, and CD68 expression
Median total cholesterol content (measured with mass spectrometry) was reduced by 28% in the group of HDAdApoAI grafts compared with the group of HDAdNull grafts ( ). Paired analyses of grafts in the same rabbits showed a mean 15% reduction in the total cholesterol content of HDAdApoAI grafts versus their contralateral controls (p = 0.003) ( A; ). Cholesterol was primarily esterified (∼88%) in both HDAdNull and HDAdApoAI grafts with no difference between the groups (p = 0.7) ( B; ). Cholesterol esters were reduced by 25% in the group of HDAdApoAI grafts versus the group of HDAdNull grafts, with paired analyses showing a mean 15% lower cholesterol ester content of HDAdApoAI grafts versus their contralateral controls (p = 0.003) ( C; ). Free (unesterified) cholesterol was also reduced in the group of HDAdApoAI grafts (20%), with paired analyses showing a mean 9% reduction in HDAdApoAI grafts versus their paired HDAdNull grafts (p = 0.09) ( D; ). We also measured vein-graft lipid content by staining histologic sections with oil red O (ORO) (stains neutral lipids) ( A–5D). For ORO and other stains, n = 17–18 because of technical issues (see ). The median ORO-positive intimal area and percentage of intimal area stained with ORO were reduced by 14% and 12%, respectively, in the group of HDAdApoAI grafts versus the group of HDAdNull grafts ( ). Analyses of paired grafts in the same rabbits showed statistically significant or near-significant mean reductions of total and percentage ORO-positive intimal areas in HDAdApoAI grafts (19% and 14%; p = 0.02 and 0.05, respectively) ( E and 4F; ). 
Median mRNA levels for CD68 (a widely used marker for macrophages) , , , were reduced by 17% in the group of HDAdApoAI-transduced grafts compared with the group of HDAdNull grafts ( ). Paired analyses showed a mean 13% reduction in CD68 mRNA in HDAdApoAI grafts versus their contralateral controls (p = 0.008) ( G; ). Because of technical difficulties with the commonly used RAM-11 antibody , (see ), we used the RbM2 antibody to detect intimal macrophages in stained sections ( E–5H). Median RbM2-stained intimal area and percentage of intimal area stained with RbM2 were reduced by 11% and increased by 5%, respectively, in the group of HDAdApoAI grafts ( ). Paired analyses showed a mean 2% increase in total RbM2-positive intimal area and a median 14% decrease in percentage RbM2-positive intimal area in HDAdApoAI grafts. These differences fell short of statistical significance (p = 0.7 and 0.4, respectively) ( H and 4I; ). To further explore a potential difference in macrophage abundance between the two groups, we measured ITGAM (CD11b) mRNA in vein graft extracts. Median ITGAM mRNA was 12% lower in the group of HDAdApoAI-transduced grafts; however, paired analyses showed only a mean 1% reduction (p = 0.3) ( ).

## Overexpression of APOAI does not alter vein graft lumen diameter, intimal area, luminal stenosis, or smooth muscle cell area
In vivo ultrasound measurements of lumen diameters of grafts revealed no differences between the groups of HDAdNull and HDAdApoAI grafts either at vector infusion (3.8 ± 0.7 mm vs 3.9 ± 0.9 mm, respectively; p = 0.4) or at graft harvest (5.0 ± 1.0 mm vs 5.4 ± 1.4 mm; p = 0.6). Similarly, the calculated lumen areas did not differ at either time point (12 ± 4.0 mm2 vs 12 ± 5.9 mm2 at vector infusion, respectively; p = 0.4; 21 ± 7.9 mm2 vs. 23 ± 12.3 mm2 at harvest; p = 0.8). As expected, , mean lumen diameter in both groups increased between the vector infusion and harvest surgeries (∼30%; p < 0.001). Measurements made on hematoxylin and eosin- and Verhoeff van Gieson-stained histologic sections ( I–5P) also revealed no significant differences in intimal area, lumen diameter, lumen area, or percent lumen stenosis between HDAdApoAI grafts and their paired contralateral controls ( ). In addition, total and percentage intimal area stained with the HHF35 antibody (detects muscle actin) were slightly but non-significantly increased between paired HDAdApoAI versus HDAdNull grafts (11% and 9% increases in HDAdApoAI grafts; p = 0.7 and 0.6, respectively) ( ).

## Overexpression of APOAI does not alter expression of inflammatory cytokines and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1
In extracts of full-thickness vein grafts, we measured mRNA for several cytokines, including cytokines associated with the M1 and M2 macrophage phenotypes ( ). Compared with contralateral HDAdNull grafts, HDAdApoAI grafts had similar levels of mRNA encoding M1-associated inflammatory cytokines [tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α (TNFA), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 [MCP-1] (CCL2), interferon [IFN]-γ (IFNG), IL-1β (IL1B), and IL-6 (IL6)] ( A–6E), M2-associated anti-inflammatory cytokines [IL-10 (IL10), TGF-β1 (TGFB1)] ( F and 6G), and M2 markers (MRC1 and ARG1) ( H and 6I). In medium conditioned by explanted vein-graft segments, there were no significant differences in the abundance of any of the 10 cytokines detected by a rabbit cytokine antibody array, although many cytokines were below the limit of assay detection in several or all samples ( ). Immunostaining showed expression of vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM)-1 by endothelial and other intimal cells ( Q–5T). Median VCAM-1-stained intimal area and percentage of intimal area stained for VCAM-1 were nearly identical in the groups of HDAdApoAI and HDAdNull grafts ( ). Paired analyses revealed no significant differences between HDAdApoAI and HDAdNull grafts in either total or percentage intimal VCAM-1 staining (9.2% increase and 10.2% increase respectively; p = 0.8 and 0.5 respectively) ( ). 

## Discussion
We used a rabbit model of vein-graft atherosclerosis and an HDAd vector to test whether expression of APOAI in vein-graft endothelial cells would reduce atherosclerosis. Our major findings are that (1) vector genomes and elevated APOAI expression persisted for the duration of the study, (2) the expression of APOAI significantly reduced vein-graft cholesterol content and intimal lipid, (3) the expression of APOAI significantly reduced levels of the macrophage-associated antigen CD68, and (4) the expression of APOAI had no significant effect on vein-graft intimal area and did not significantly reduce vein-graft expression of inflammatory cytokines or the adhesion molecule VCAM-1. Our study was powered to detect statistically significant reductions in vein-graft cholesterol and macrophages and may not have been adequately powered to confidently detect or exclude small differences in several of the secondary endpoints (e.g., intimal area, intimal smooth muscle area, lumen diameter, percent stenosis, and expression of individual cytokines, and VCAM-1).
The present study builds on our previous work showing atheroprotective effects of HDAdApoAI in rabbit carotid arteries. , To test HDAdApoAI gene therapy in the more challenging and more clinically relevant setting of vein-graft atherosclerosis, we first developed a rabbit model of jugular-vein-to-carotid interposition graft atherosclerosis and documented HDAd vector persistence in transduced grafts for ≥20 weeks. In the current study, we tested whether expression of APOAI could reduce vein graft atherosclerosis. Because cholesterol accumulation and inflammation are the underlying causes of vein graft atherosclerosis and predispose vein-graft atherosclerotic lesions to rupture and occlusion, , , , we designed and powered this study to detect or exclude significant ∼25% reductions in accumulation of intimal lipid, cholesterol, and macrophages (the predominant inflammatory cell in vein-graft atherosclerosis). 
HDAdApoAI gene therapy reduced vein graft total and esterified cholesterol, with a trend toward lower free cholesterol. We are confident in these results because vein graft cholesterol content was measured with mass spectrometry, a highly quantitative and reproducible technique ( ). Moreover, ORO staining confirmed significantly reduced intimal lipid in HDAdApoAI-transduced vein grafts. Our results demonstrate that gene therapy can reduce vein-graft cholesterol and intimal lipid content, two commonly used measures of atherosclerosis. , We speculate that HDAdApoAI reduces vein graft cholesterol content by increasing the local concentration of lipid-poor apoAI, stimulating ABCA1-mediated cholesterol efflux and initiating reverse cholesterol transport. Interventions that reduce vein graft cholesterol and intimal lipid are likely to be of clinical value because both arterial and vein graft atherosclerosis are fundamentally driven by accumulation of cholesterol and triglycerides in the vascular intima, , , and lowering of plasma lipids (which likely reduces lipid entry into the vein graft wall) is the only therapy that has improved long-term coronary artery venous bypass graft patency. We anticipate that local APOAI gene therapy will act synergistically with plasma lipid-lowering therapy to prolong vein graft patency.
Because macrophages are also important drivers of arterial and vein graft atherosclerosis, , , , and because high lesion macrophage content is associated with lesion instability and plaque rupture leading to thrombotic occlusion, , we also designed this study to detect the impact of HDAdApoAI on vein graft macrophage content. As in our previous studies, , we planned to measure intimal macrophage content primarily with the RAM-11 antibody. However, because of technical difficulties, we were unable to use RAM-11. We initially pursued two alternative approaches to quantify macrophages: immunostaining with the RbM2 antibody and measuring CD68 mRNA (an antigen often used to measure macrophages in atherosclerotic plaques). , , HDAdApoAI did not reduce RbM2 intimal staining; however, it significantly reduced CD68 mRNA. We considered two explanations for this discrepancy. First, because macrophage CD68 expression is increased by exposure to cholesterol, lower cholesterol levels in HDAdApoAI-transduced grafts could reduce CD68 expression without reducing macrophage number. Second, because CD68 is also expressed by cholesterol-loaded SMC, reducing lesion cholesterol could lower SMC CD68 expression without affecting either macrophage CD68 expression or macrophage number. Results of ITGAM (CD11b) mRNA measurements—which we interpret with caution because CD11b is not a specific macrophage marker in mice, and little is known about its expression pattern in rabbits—were consistent with a failure of HDAdApoAI to reduce lesion macrophage content. For these reasons, despite significantly reduced CD68 mRNA in HDAdApoAI-transduced grafts, we cannot conclude that HDAdApoAI reduced lesion macrophages.
Congruent with the absence of an effect of HDAdApoAI on lesion macrophage content—and again in contrast with our carotid artery gene therapy study —HDAdApoAI did not significantly reduce intimal area, or expression of inflammatory cytokines and VCAM-1. These differences might be attributable to the increased susceptibility of vein grafts versus arteries to atherosclerosis, leading to more severe and difficult-to-treat disease, as discussed above. Alternatively, the primary effect of apoAI in this animal model may be to stimulate cholesterol efflux and increase reverse cholesterol transport rather than to reduce inflammation. Another possibility is that our cytokine results are falsely negative either because we measured cytokine expression at only one time point or because many cytokines were below the limit of detection.
Some of our results were unanticipated. Despite infusion of both HDAd at 2 × 1011 vp/mL, vector genomes were ∼50% more abundant in HDAdNull grafts. After obtaining this result, we transduced cultured endothelial cells with the two HDAd and found more genomes in HDAdNull-transduced cells (data not shown). Therefore, increased genomes in HDAdNull-transduced veins likely results from imprecision in measuring vector concentration. We considered whether the larger number of genomes in HDAdNull-transduced grafts might somehow increase cholesterol retention or CD68 expression. However, we strongly doubt both possibilities because among the 22 HDAdNull-transduced grafts the level of vector genomes did not correlate with either graft total cholesterol or CD68 mRNA (r2 = 0.01 and 0.09, respectively). Detection of low levels of both endogenous and vector-derived APOAI mRNA in HDAdNull-transduced grafts was also unexpected. These signals could reflect endogenous APOAI expression from lesion macrophages or low-level contamination of reverse transcriptase (RT)-qPCR reactions with HDAdApoAI RNA or DNA. We were unable to detect a significant increase in apoAI protein in medium conditioned by HDAdApoAI-transduced grafts. We cannot exclude that our failure to detect increased apoAI protein is caused by an antibody response to transgenic apoAI protein. However, we consider this unlikely because apoAI is a highly abundant plasma protein and HDAdApoAI also expresses rabbit apoAI, in comparatively low amounts. Instead, we attribute this negative result to a high background of plasma-derived apoAI protein in HDAdNull-transduced grafts and to the relative insensitivity of western blotting compared with RT-qPCR.
Our study has limitations. We used HDAd vectors for this study because HDAd achieves efficient gene transfer and durable transgene expression in grafted veins. However, clinical application of HDAd is limited by vector-induced local inflammation and widespread human immunity against adenovirus type 5. Clinical application of local APOAI gene therapy may require transient immunosuppression or a different vector. Our approach of delayed in vivo vein-graft transduction is not easily translated clinically. Vein-graft transduction currently requires a second surgical procedure because transduction before or at the time of grafting results in rapid loss of transgene expression, likely caused by loss of the transduced endothelial cells. If vein-graft-directed gene therapy continues to show efficacy, in vivo graft transduction might be achieved with a percutaneous catheter-based approach. Alternatively, APOAI-expressing vectors might be delivered systemically, with vascular targeting. Our approach should also be compared with gene-therapy strategies that increase systemic apoAI levels by transducing hepatocytes via systemic injection of APOAI-expressing vectors. This approach reduces atherosclerosis in mouse models , ; however, systemic injection of large amounts of either adenoviral or adeno-associated viral vectors in humans is toxic, and can be fatal. , 
In summary, we report significant progress in developing gene therapy for vein-graft atherosclerosis, a common and potentially life-threatening disease that is inadequately treated. HDAdApoAI decreased vein-graft cholesterol and lowered intimal lipid accumulation in a highly atherogenic environment (mean plasma cholesterol levels ∼500 mg/dL). Future experiments will test efficacy at later time points and in animals with less severe—and, therefore, more clinically relevant—hyperlipidemia, in which HDAdApoAI might be even more effective. We will also continue to develop vectors that express higher levels of APOAI , , and test complementary therapies , that—by increasing expression of the cholesterol transporter ABCA1 in endothelial and other intimal cells—could act synergistically with endothelial cell-derived apoAI to further reduce vein-graft atherosclerosis.

## Materials and methods

## Adenoviral vectors
We used two HDAd vectors ( ): HDAdApoAI (expresses rabbit apoAI) and HDAdNull (lacks the rabbit apoAI gene but is otherwise identical to HDAdApoAI). We used HDAdNull as a control instead of vehicle-only to control for any effects of exposure to virions, the HDAd genome, or the expression cassette (which includes an active cytomegalovirus promoter). Both vectors were amplified in 293Cre4 cells and purified by cesium chloride ultracentrifugation. Vector stock concentrations (measured by spectrophotometry) were 0.9 × 1012 and 1.7 × 1012 viral particles (vp)/mL for HDAdApoAI and 3 × 1012 vp/mL for HDAdNull. E1A-containing genomes were <1 in 106 total genomes and helper virus contamination was ≤0.05% in all vector preparations. E1A-containing genomes and helper virus DNA were both measured by real-time qPCR (see for primers and probes). All vector stocks were diluted with DMEM (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) to 2 × 1011 vp/mL for infusion in vivo.

## Animal studies
All animal studies were approved by the University of Washington Office of Animal Welfare. Our study design, conduct, and reporting comply with the ARRIVE guidelines. Blinding was not present at the time of vector infusion; however, observers who measured endpoints were blinded to treatment. Specific pathogen-free adult male and female New Zealand White rabbits (3.0–3.5 kg; ages approximately 14 weeks) were purchased (Western Oregon Rabbit Company, Philomath, OR). After arrival, rabbits were acclimated to the animal facility and fed for 2 weeks with 150 g/day of a regular laboratory diet (Albers 16% rabbit PLT, Pacific Northwest Milling, Bellevue, WA). Rabbits were then fed 150 g/day of a high-fat diet including 0.3% cholesterol with 3% soybean oil (Dyets, Bethlehem, PA). Plasma total cholesterol was measured 2 weeks after starting this high-fat diet and every 2 weeks thereafter using a colorimetric assay (Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL). To maintain the plasma cholesterol concentration in the range of 200–800 mg/dL, individual rabbit diets (150 g/day) were adjusted by mixing the regular diet with the high-fat diet as needed to yield diets with 0.3%, 0.2625%, 0.225%, 0.1875%, 0.15%, 0.1125%, 0.075%, 0.0375%, or 0% cholesterol.
Thirty-nine rabbits (21 males and 18 females) were begun on the 0.3% cholesterol diet ( ). Two rabbits died from anesthesia-related complications during the vein-grafting surgery. Three rabbits (all with bilateral patent grafts) were euthanized after experiencing post-operative respiratory complications. Four rabbits with a unilateral vein-graft occlusion and one rabbit with bilateral vein-graft occlusions were euthanized 4 weeks after vein-grafting surgery. We then decided to keep rabbits with unilateral patent grafts in the study and use their patent grafts for assay development. Accordingly, six additional rabbits with unilateral vein-graft occlusions as well as 23 rabbits with bilateral patent grafts underwent vector-infusion surgery. One rabbit (with bilateral patent grafts) developed severe diarrhea and was euthanized 7 weeks after vector infusion. Twelve weeks after vector infusion, the remaining 28 rabbits were euthanized, and their vein grafts harvested. The 22 rabbits with bilateral patent grafts (10 males and 12 females) provided grafts for the study (44 total grafts).

## Survival surgeries
Bilateral external jugular vein-to-common carotid interposition grafting was performed 4 weeks after starting the high-fat diet. Rabbits were anesthetized with intramuscular ketamine (30 mg/kg) and xylazine (3 mg/kg), intubated, and maintained under general anesthesia with 1%–3% inhaled isoflurane. Adequacy of anesthesia was assessed by confirming absence of response to painful stimuli. Briefly, a 6-cm longitudinal incision in the neck midline was made, both common carotid arteries were dissected free of surrounding tissues and their branches were ligated. Approximately 3 cm of external jugular vein was exposed bilaterally by dissection of surrounding tissue. Intravenous heparin (150 U/kg) was injected, and the right external jugular vein was ligated, excised, flushed with heparinized normal saline (10 U/mL), and anastomosed into the right carotid artery in a reversed, end-to-side, interposition manner using interrupted 7-0 Polypropylene sutures. This procedure was repeated on the left side. Four weeks later, one graft in each of the rabbits with bilaterally patent grafts (n = 23) was treated with intraluminal HDAdApoAI and the contralateral graft was infused with HDAdNull. We delayed transduction until 4 weeks after grafting because vein transduction at the time of grafting is associated with rapid loss of transgene expression, likely caused by loss of luminal endothelial cells. The side receiving HDAdApoAI was selected randomly, using a random number generator. Rabbits were anesthetized as above, and the neck was re-opened. The bilateral vein grafts were exposed along with the adjacent artery by dissection of surrounding tissue. The right graft was temporarily isolated from the blood circulation with vascular clips. An arteriotomy was performed in the carotid artery caudal to the graft. The isolated vein-graft lumen was rinsed with DMEM and infused via the arteriotomy with HDAd at 2 × 1011 vp/mL in DMEM and incubated for 20 min. The HDAd-containing solution was aspirated, the vein-graft lumen was rinsed with DMEM, the arteriotomy was closed with interrupted 7-0 Polypropylene sutures, and the vascular clips were released, restoring blood flow. The same procedure was repeated on the left side.

## Transcutaneous ultrasound examination
We measured vein-graft patency and lumen diameter with a SonoScape S8 portable color Doppler ultrasound instrument (SonoScape, Shenzhen, China). Measurements were performed under general anesthesia, before skin incision, at both the vector-infusion and harvest surgeries. The rabbit’s neck was extended, covered with ultrasound gel, and examined with a 5–10 MHz probe (wavelengthMP, Jorgensen Laboratories, Loveland, CO). Vein grafts were considered patent if intraluminal pulsatile flow was visualized by Doppler examination. We measured the internal diameter of each vein graft in its caudal, medial, and cranial portions and averaged these three measurements to obtain a single vein-graft diameter.

## Hemodynamic measurements
We used a 2-mm perivascular flow probe and volume-flow meter (Model T402 Transonic Systems, Ithaca, NY) to measure vein-graft blood flow during both the vector-infusion and harvest surgeries. After exposure of vein grafts and adjacent carotid arteries, the surgical wound cavity was filled with warm saline. The sterile flow probe was placed around the carotid artery caudal to the graft and the flow rate and tracings were recorded with a PowerLab 4/30 recording unit with LabChart software (ADInstruments, Colorado Springs, CO). The pulsatility index was calculated using the formula: Pulsatility = (Maximum blood flow rate – Minimum blood flow rate)/Mean blood flow rate. Shear stress (Ƭ, dynes/cm2) was calculated using the formula: Ƭ = 4ηf/πr3, where η = blood viscosity (0.046 P); f = blood flow (mL/s); and r = radius of vein graft (cm).

## Vein graft harvests
Grafts were harvested 12 weeks after transduction ( ) because atherosclerosis in this model is largely stable between 12 and 20 weeks after transduction (the latest time point tested). Rabbits were anesthetized as described above, their necks opened surgically, and their vein grafts isolated from surrounding tissue and ligated by placement of silk ties around the adjacent carotids. The grafts were excised and flushed with normal saline and the rabbit was euthanized with intravenous pentobarbital and bilateral thoracotomies. The remaining graft tissue was cut into 8 equal segments for use in histologic and biochemical analyses ( ).

## Processing of vein graft segments for analysis of secreted protein and vector DNA
Vein graft segments 3 and 7 were transferred to a single well in a 24-well tissue-culture plate and placed in a tissue-culture incubator (37°C and 5% CO2) for 3 h. To attempt to remove adsorbed plasma proteins, the segments were rinsed three times in 500 μL DMEM, incubated in 1 mL DMEM for 3 h, and rinsed another three times in 500 μL DMEM. The two segments were transferred to a single well of a 96-well plate with 130 μL DMEM and incubated for 20 h at 37°C and 5% CO2. The conditioned media and the vessel segments were placed in separate tubes and frozen at −80°C for protein and DNA analyses, respectively.

## Measurement of apoAI protein
DMEM conditioned by explanted vein graft segments (30 μL) was separated by 10% SDS-PAGE (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). Gels were blotted onto Immobilon membranes (Millipore, Billerica, MA) and blocked with 5% (w/v) nonfat dry milk. Blots were probed with a custom-made goat anti-rabbit apoAI primary antibody (1:1,000, Pacific Immunology, Ramona, CA) and a secondary HRP-conjugated mouse anti-goat antibody (1:1,000, SC-2354, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX). Bound antibody was detected with a chemiluminescence reagent kit (Amersham ECL Select; GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences Corp., Marlborough, MA) and images acquired with a Bio-Rad ChemiDoc MP system (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). One HDAdApoAI graft and one HDAdNull graft had insufficient conditioned medium, leaving n = 21 for both. Purified rabbit apoAI was a positive control. 

## Measurement of vector genomes
Two frozen segments from each graft were placed together in liquid nitrogen and pulverized with a liquid nitrogen-cooled mortar and pestle. The pulverized tissue was resuspended, and DNA extracted using the DNeasy blood and tissue kit (Qiagen Sciences, Germantown, MD) and quantified by spectrophotometry (NanoDrop; Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE). HDAdNull and HDAdApoAI genomes were measured by real-time quantitative PCR, using 100 ng DNA, Luna Universal Probe qPCR Master Mix (New England Biolabs Inc., Ipswich, MA), and the CFX384 TouchTM Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). The primers and probes (all at 250 nM) (sequences in ) target a sequence of noncoding stuffer DNA in the HDAd backbone. Amplification conditions were 2 min at 95°C, 40 cycles of 15 s at 95°C, and 60 s at 60°C. The concentration of vector genomes was calculated with reference to a standard curve constructed by serial dilution of the pC4HSU HDAd backbone plasmid (Microbix Biosystems, Toronto, ON, Canada). DNA extracted from untransduced vein grafts (from an earlier study) was a negative control. Vector genomes per vascular wall cell were calculated by dividing the number of vector genomes detected in a well by the number of diploid cells represented by 100 ng DNA. All samples were measured twice, and the values averaged. Vector genomes per endothelial cell were calculated by multiplying genomes/vascular wall cell by 50, based on our finding that endothelial cells comprise ∼2% of vein graft cells. 

## Measurement of mRNA
The frozen halves of segments 2 and 6 of each graft were placed together in liquid nitrogen and pulverized with a liquid nitrogen-cooled mortar and pestle. The pulverized tissue was homogenized (Polytron Devices, Paterson, NJ) in RLT buffer (RNeasy mini kit, QIAGEN Sciences, Germantown, MD), with 1% β-mercaptoethanol. Total RNA was extracted, quantified by spectrophotometry (NanoDrop) and treated with DNase I (Thermo Scientific). The levels of mRNA for APOAI (total and transgene-specific), TNFA, IL1B, IL6, IFNG, CCL2 (MCP-1), CD68, IL10, MRC1 (CD206), ARG1, TGFB1, and ITGAM (CD11b) were measured by RT-qPCR using 50 ng total RNA, Luna Universal Probe qPCR Master Mix (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA), and the CFX384 Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad). Values were normalized to GAPDH mRNA measured in the same samples. In all cases, mRNA levels were measured with reference to standard curves constructed by RT-qPCR amplification of dilutions of a vessel extract. Primer (0.4 μM) and probe (0.2 μM) sequences are in . Amplification conditions were 10 min at 55°C, 1 min at 95°C, 40 cycles of 10 s at 95°C, and 60 s at 60°C.

## Measurement of tissue cholesterol
Tissue cholesterol was quantified by mass spectrometry, with modifications of our published methods, as indicated below. Pulverized vein-graft tissue (13–68 mg) was spiked with internal standards (1 μg [d7] cholesterol and 1 μg 17:0-cholesteryl ester (CE) per mg of tissue, rounded to the nearest 10 mg) and lipid was extracted by Folch extraction. CE and free cholesterol (derivatized to cholesteryl acetate) were quantified by direct infusion of 10 μL of sample into 0.1% ammonium in methanol mobile phase at a flow of 0.1 mL/min with isocratic elution for 2.4 min. The previously optimized settings were used for liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometric analysis on an AB Sciex Triple Quad 6500 mass spectrometer. A blank sample (chloroform only) was run between each sample to reduce carryover between samples. Free cholesterol and CE signal intensities were quantified for the entire isocratic elution and normalized to the appropriate internal standard. The CE signal for each species was normalized by the response factors for CE ammonium adducts, and combined to determine total CE content. For each sample, final cholesterol and CE quantifications were normalized to the mass of extracted tissue. The final data are the mean of two independent measurements for each vein graft (i.e., two separate derivatizations of cholesterol to cholesteryl acetate followed by measurement on the mass spectrometer). These independent measurements were highly reproducible (r2 = 0.8 with median inter-assay variability of only 10%–15%) ( ). One sample was lost in processing, leaving n = 21 pairs.

## Histochemical and immunohistochemical staining
Optimal cutting temperature blocks containing three segments of each vein graft were sectioned at two steps, separated by 200 μm. At the first step, 10 serial sections (6-μm thick) were cut and placed on 10 different slides (VWR cat. #48311-703, Superfrost Plus White). This process was repeated at the second step, using the same 10 slides. Each slide has six sections: two sections from each of segments 1, 4, and 8, with the two sections separated by 200 μm. Slides with 6-μm-thick sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), Verhoeff Van Gieson (VVG), ORO, and antibodies that detect rabbit macrophages (RbM2; 10 μg/mL; KAL-KT015, Cosmo Bio USA, Carlsbad, CA), muscle actin (HHF-35; 1:200 dilution; MA 1–10046, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), and VCAM-1 (Rb 1/9, 1:50 dilution; a kind gift from Dr. M. I. Cybulsky, University of Toronto). Positive controls for immunostaining included sections of rabbit blood vessels from previous experiments. Negative controls included omission of the primary antibody and isotype-matched mouse IgG. The secondary antibody was biotinylated goat anti-mouse IgG (1:200 dilution, BA-9200, Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). For a graft to be included in the final analyses, we required data from at least two of three segments per graft. Morphometric analyses were performed on one section per segment (i.e., 2–3 sections per graft). Because torn sections prevented data acquisition from at least two segments in one or both grafts of 4 rabbits, we performed paired histological analyses on grafts from 18 of the 22 rabbits that completed the study.
Stained sections were photographed with a Leica DFC295 image system (Leica Microsystems, Buffalo Grove, IL) and evaluated by observers blinded to the treatment group using image analysis software with color thresholding (ImagePro Premier 9.3, Rockville, MD or ImageJ v1.53c, Bethesda, MD). The intimal area and perimeter of the internal elastic lamina (IEL) were measured directly on either VVG- or H&E-stained sections (if VVG-stained sections were damaged) by computer-assisted planimetry. Luminal areas, diameters and percent stenosis were calculated. We primarily used VVG-stained sections because the IEL was easily identified at the intimal/medial border in these sections. Because we could not reliably identify the medial-adventitial border, we did not measure medial area.
We calculated the graft lumen areas by subtracting the intimal area from the area inside the IEL [calculated as (IEL circumference) /4π; assumes circular geometry in vivo)]. The graft lumen diameters were calculated using the formula: diameter = sqrt(4 × lumen area/π). Percent luminal stenosis was calculated by dividing intimal area by the area inside the IEL. The stained areas of ORO, RbM2, HHF-35, and VCAM-1 in the intima were measured using color thresholding. The percentage of intima positive for each of the stains was calculated by dividing the stained area by the total intimal area from the same section or an adjacent section. To assess reproducibility of the image-analysis data for each of the stains, two to three observers independently set color thresholds and analyzed four to six sections per stain. The observers then analyzed reproducibility of stained-area measurements using linear regression and Bland-Altman plots. In all cases interobserver reproducibility was high.

## Cytokine arrays
The protein concentration of culture medium conditioned by the explanted vein-graft segments was measured using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockland, IL). We used the rabbit cytokine antibody array (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) to measure 10 cytokines in conditioned medium. To avoid artifactual results, we prospectively excluded samples if either of a pair of samples had a low protein concentration (<200 μg/mL) or if the ratio of protein concentration between paired samples exceeded 2.0. After application of these criteria, 17 pairs of samples remained. Briefly, 100 μL cytokine standards (300 μg/mL) or samples were loaded into each well, incubated at 4°C overnight, and the wells washed. The wells were incubated with biotinylated detection antibody at 4°C overnight and washed. The Cy3 equivalent dye-conjugated streptavidin was added to each well, incubated in a dark room at room temperature for 1 h and washed. Signals were measured using InnoScan 1100 AL Fluorescence Scanner (Innopsys, Chicago, IL) and analyzed using GenePix Pro 6.1 (Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA). The concentration of each cytokine in the sample was calculated with reference to a corresponding standard curve.

## Statistical analyses
All statistical tests were performed with the SigmaStat program (Systat, San Jose, CA). Group data are presented as mean ± SD if normally distributed (by Shapiro-Wilk test) and median (25%–75% range) if not. For the hemodynamic and ultrasound data, we compared groups of HDAdApoAI and HDAdNull grafts by using the unpaired t test when data were normally distributed with equal variances and the Mann-Whitney rank-sum test when these conditions were not met. To control for systemic variables such as blood pressure and plasma cholesterol levels and because atherosclerotic lesion masses in the left and right carotid arteries of individual rabbits are highly correlated, for all other endpoints we performed statistical tests on the differences between paired HDAdApoAI and HDAdNull grafts in the same rabbits. We used the paired t test when these differences were normally distributed and the signed-rank test when the differences were not normally distributed. We used the Fisher exact test for categorical data. Inter-observer reproducibility was evaluated with linear regression and Bland-Altman plots. Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated to analyze the relationship between vector genomes and either vein graft cholesterol content or CD68 mRNA and for quantifying the correlation between independent cholesterol and cholesterol ester measurements of the same samples.
In our measurements of ORO-stained slides, we noted that the paired graft data from a single rabbit appeared to be an outlier ( D). Accordingly, we used an objective approach (Grubb’s test) to determine whether this graft pair was an outlier. Moreover, to avoid bias that could be introduced by testing for outliers only in the ORO results, we applied Grubb’s test to all other datasets. Because Grubb’s test assumes normality after outlier removal, we removed outliers only from datasets that were—by Shapiro-Wilk test—normally distributed after outlier pair removal. Guided by this approach, we removed single outlier graft pairs from 5 datasets: total ORO-stained area, total cholesterol, and cholesterol ester (in which the outlier pairs were identified), and percent ORO positive area as well as percent esterified cholesterol (in which these outlier pairs were used for calculating other values). The 5 datasets with the outlier pairs included are in .

## Data and code availability
The data underlying this article will be shared on reasonable request to the corresponding author.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S7 and Table S1

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Myron Cybulsky (University of Toronto) for providing antibodies to rabbit VCAM-1, the University of Washington Veterinary Services for outstanding support of animal care and surgery, Dr. Paul Lampe (Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA) for assistance with cytokine array experiments, and AdVec, Inc. for permission to use the HDAd reagents. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health [HL114541 to D.A.D.] and the John L. Locke, Jr. Charitable Trust. K.K. was supported by the Mary Gates Endowment and the Levinson Scholar Program of the University of Washington. D.A.D. is a member of the University of Washington Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine.

## Author contributions
L.B. – methodology, investigation, formal analysis, writing - original draft, writing - review and editing, visualization, and project administration. B.K.W. – methodology, investigation, formal analysis, writing - original draft, writing - review and editing, visualization. K.K. –investigation, formal analysis, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing. N.S. – investigation, formal analysis, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing. D.A.D. – conceptualization, methodology, writing - original draft, writing - review and editing, supervision, funding acquisition, project administration.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtm.2023.08.018.