1894elifeeLifeeLifeeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC1154887711548877115488773951393410.7554/eLife.101221FABP4-mediated lipid accumulation and lipolysis in tumor-associated macrophages promote breast cancer metastasis
YorekMatthew JiangXingshan LiuShanshan HaoJiaqing YuJianyu AvellinoAnthony LiuZhanxu CurryMelissa KeenHenry ShaoJianqiang KanagasabapathyAnand KongMaying XiongYiqin SauterEdward R SuggSonia L LiBing ReaganMichaela RReviewing Editor PostovitLynne-MarieSenior Editor 1Department of Pathology, Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States2Department of Bioinformatics and Biostatistics, University of Louisville, Louisville, United States3Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, United States4Iowa Institute of Human Genetics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States5Central Microscopy Research Facility, University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States6Division of Cancer Prevention, NIH/NCI, Rockville, United States7Department of Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States8Maine Health Institute for Research, United States9Queens University, Canada†These authors contributed equally to this work.
✉Corresponding author.
811202413RP101221RP1012218112024This is an open-access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.Previous version available: This article is based on a previously available preprint posted on bioRxiv on July 4, 2024: "
FABP4-mediated lipid accumulation and lipolysis in tumor associated macrophages promote breast cancer metastasis
".Previous version available: This article is based on a previously available preprint with doi: .

## Abstract
A high density of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) is associated with poorer prognosis and survival in breast cancer patients. Recent studies have shown that lipid accumulation in TAMs can promote tumor growth and metastasis in various models. However, the specific molecular mechanisms that drive lipid accumulation and tumor progression in TAMs remain largely unknown. Herein, we demonstrated that unsaturated fatty acids (FAs), unlike saturated ones, are more likely to form lipid droplets in murine macrophages. Specifically, unsaturated FAs, including linoleic acids (LA), activate the FABP4/CEBPα pathway, leading to triglyceride synthesis and lipid droplet formation. Furthermore, FABP4 enhances lipolysis and FA utilization by breast cancer cell lines, which promotes cancer cell migration in vitro and metastasis in vivo. Notably, a deficiency of FABP4 in murine macrophages significantly reduces LA-induced lipid metabolism. Therefore, our findings suggest FABP4 as a crucial lipid messenger that facilitates unsaturated FA-mediated lipid accumulation and lipolysis in TAMs, thus contributing to the metastasis of breast cancer.
Research organism: Human, Mouse

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoCollection date 2024.

## Introduction
As a main arm of innate immunity, macrophages are present in almost all tissues of an organism, where they play pivotal roles in maintaining tissue homeostasis or contributing to disease pathogenesis ( ). In breast cancer, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are the most abundant immune cells in the tumor microenvironment (TME), actively participating in tumor progression and metastasis ( ; ; ). A high presence of TAMs in the TME correlates with a poorer prognosis of cancer patients in clinical studies ( ; ; ). Moreover, macrophage deletion via genetic or therapeutic approaches results in inhibition and regression of mammary tumors in pre-clinical studies ( ; ; ). These ample lines of evidence corroborate a crucial role for macrophages in facilitating breast cancer progression.
Macrophages are known for their heterogeneity regarding origin, phenotypes, and functional states ( ). In response to diverse environmental stimuli from the environment, macrophages are believed to acquire a spectrum of functional states in vivo ( ; ). To understand their functional versatility, macrophages are commonly divided into the M1/M2 paradigm based on the concept of adaptive Th1/Th2 polarization ( ; ). Generally, Th1-derived cytokines polarize macrophages to M1 phenotype, which express inducible nitric oxide synthase and exhibit anti-tumor activities. Th2-cytokines polarized M2 macrophages highly express arginase 1, CD206, VEGFs, IL-10, TGFβ, etc., supporting angiogenesis and favoring tumor growth ( ; ). However, given the complex functional states of macrophages in vivo ( ), the M1/M2 classification is likely oversimplified. Many studies demonstrate that TAMs do not follow the two extreme M1/M2 activation states in vivo ( ; ). Considering that various extrinsic and intrinsic factors in the TME can cooperatively shape TAM phenotypes and functions ( ; ), identification of these factors is essential for targeting TAM-mediated cancer immunotherapy.
There is a growing realization that macrophage metabolism determines their functional outcome ( ; ). Several recent studies in multiple cancer models, including breast cancer ( ; ; ; ), reported that lipid accumulation in TAMs promotes tumor growth and metastasis. Specifically, lipid accumulation promoted the expression of Arg1, VEGFα, MMP9, IL-6, PD-L1, CCL-6, etc., thus conferring TAMs with immune suppressive and pro-tumorigenic phenotypes. Lipid droplet formation was as a characteristic feature of the pro-tumor TAMs, but the underlying molecular mechanisms driving lipid droplet formation in TAMs remain to be determined.
Despite morphological and compositional differences, lipid droplets are all formed by a phospholipid monolayer enclosing a neutral lipid core ( ). A key step of lipid droplet formation is to synthesize neutral triacylglycerol (TAG), which requires the esterification of activated fatty acids (FA) to diacylglycerol (DAG) ( ). During this step, enzymes including glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase (GPAT), acyl-CoA:1-acyl-glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase (AGPAT), DAG acyltransferases (DGATs), are key in the biogenesis of neutral lipids. As such, factors engaging with FA transport and regulating key enzyme activity are deemed to be critical for lipid droplet formation in TAMs.
Due to the insolubility of hydrophobic FAs, fatty acid binding proteins (FABPs) have evolved to solubilize FAs, facilitating their transport and responses ( ). Among FABPs, adipose FABP (A-FABP or FABP4) is the most well studied given its striking biology in regulating macrophage lipid metabolism and functions in multiple disease settings ( ; ). Our pre-clinical studies demonstrated that a subset of macrophages with the phenotype of CD11b+F4/80+Ly6C-CD11c-MHCII- highly express FABP4, facilitating macrophage lipid processing and patrolling functions ( ; ). Moreover, FABP4 was identified as a functional marker for protumor TAMs by enhancing the oncogenic IL-6/STAT3 signaling ( ). Given the emerging role of lipid accumulation in protumor TAMs, we hypothesized that FABP4 might function as a key molecular sensor promoting lipid accumulation and utilization in TAMs.
Utilizing a combination of in vitro cellular studies with various species of FAs, in vivo macrophage single-cell sequencing in mouse models, and macrophage/FABP4 analysis in human breast cancer specimens, we demonstrate that FABP4 plays a pivotal role in mediating lipid droplet formation and subsequent lipolysis for tumor utilization, thus contributing to TAM-mediated tumor growth and metastasis in breast cancer.

## Results

## Unsaturated FAs promote lipid accumulation in macrophages
Hostile TME, especially in breast cancer, is characterized by enriched FAs and other lipid species, which foster immunosuppression and support tumor growth and metastasis ( ; ). Since palmitic acid (PA, 16:0), stearic acid (SA, 18:0), oleic acid (OA, 18:1), and linoleic acid (LA, 18:2) are the most common FAs in humans, as shown in , we treated macrophages with individual albumin-conjugated FAs and determined their fate. Using a macrophage cell line, we demonstrated that all the FAs studied were oxidized by mitochondria as evidenced by the increased oxygen consumption rate (OCR) when compared to the bovine serum albumin (BSA) control ( ). Interestingly, when measuring their impact on other cellular organelles, FAs exhibited dichotomous effects, with saturated FAs increasing lysosome contents ( ), while unsaturated FAs promoting ER ( ) and, more dramatically, lipid droplet (LD) formation ( ) in macrophages. Using primary peritoneal macrophages ( ) and bone-marrow-derived macrophages ( ), we observed the similar phenomenon that unlike saturated FA, unsaturated FA significantly induced LD formation in these macrophages. Oil Red O staining confirmed the presence of LD formation ( ). Of note, the observation of unsaturated FA-induced LD formation in macrophages was consistent regardless of FA concentrations ( ) and treatment durations ( ). With a multispectral imaging analysis, we demonstrated that OA/LA-induced LD accumulation was not associated with the lysosome, but colocalized in the ER ( ). Transmission electron microscope further confirmed that OA and LA specifically induced LD formation in the cytoplasm ( ), which were bud from ER ( ). Collectively, these data suggest that unsaturated FA-induced LD biogenesis in macrophages mainly occurs in the ER.
 

## Unsaturated FAs upregulate key enzymes for LD biogenesis
It is well known that key enzymes, including GPATs, AGPATs, LIPINs, DGATs, are involved in TAG synthesis and LD biogenesis ( ). To determine how unsaturated FAs, but not saturated FAs, induced LD biogenesis in macrophages, we treated macrophages with either LA or PA, and measured their impact on LD biogenesis-related enzymes. In response to PA or LA treatment, Acs1, Cpt1a, Cpt1b, HMGCR, Acat1, and Acat2 had similar expression pattern in macrophages ( ), suggesting that both FA types exerted similar effects on FA activation, mitochondrial oxidation, cholesterol synthesis and esterification. Interestingly, genes encoding rate-limiting enzymes in TAG synthesis, including Gpam1, Dgat1 and Dgat2, were significantly increased by treatment with LA, but not PA ( ), suggesting a unique role of LA in transcriptional upregulation of neutral lipid synthesis pathways. We observed by confocal microscopy that macrophages treated with LA, but not BSA or PA, exhibited elevated levels of LipidTOX, GPAT1, and DGAT1 ( ). Quantitative measurements showed a significant increase of lipid accumulation (LipidTOX), GPAT1 and DGAT1 proteins in the LA-treated vs. the BSA or PA groups ( ). Moreover, intracellular flow cytometric staining ( ) and quantification by mean fluorescent intensity (MFI) ( ) also confirmed our observations that unsaturated FAs significantly increased lipid accumulation by enhancing GPAT/DGAT-mediated lipid accumulation in macrophages.
 

## C/EBPα transcriptionally controls LA-induced TAG synthesis
To determine how unsaturated LA transcriptionally upregulated gene expression in the TAG synthesis pathway, we searched for transcription factor binding sites, focusing on the pooled genes related to TAG synthesis pathways. Two transcriptional factors, C/EBPα and C/EBPβ, were predicted to commonly bind the promotor regions of these genes ( ). When macrophages were treated with PA or LA, C/EBPα ( ), but not C/EBPβ ( ), was significantly upregulated by LA treatment. Confocal microscopy showed that C/EBPα was mainly localized in the cytosol with BSA and PA treatment but was significantly upregulated in the nuclei with LA treatment ( ). In contrast, C/EBPβ was present in both cytosol and nuclei regardless of PA or LA treatment ( ). These results suggest that LA treatment induces specific activation of C/EBPα in macrophages.
 
To further dissect the role of C/EBPs in LA-treated macrophages, we knocked down C/EBPα ( ) and C/EBPβ ( ), respectively, in macrophages. LA-induced gene expression of Gpam1, Dgat1, Dgat2 was abrogated when C/EBPα was silenced ( ). Moreover, the uptake of FA (Cd36), lysosome lipase (Lipa) and mitochondrial oxidation (Cpt1b) were significantly increased in C/EBPα-knockdown macrophages ( ), suggesting that C/EBPα knockdown not only inhibited lipid synthesis, but also promoted lipolysis and oxidation. As such, C/EBPα knockdown significantly inhibited LA-induced neutral lipid accumulation as shown by the staining of BODIPY ( ) and Oil Red O ( ) in macrophages. By contract, C/EBPβ silencing did not affect the expression of Gpam1, Cd36, and Lipa expression ( ). Although C/EBPβ knockdown appeared to inhibit the expression of Dgat1 and Dgat2, it also inhibited Cpt1b-mediated FA oxidation ( ). Overall, C/EBPβ knockdown resulted in lipid accumulation in response to LA treatment in macrophages ( ). Altogether, these data suggest that C/EBPα, but not C/EBPβ, is a critical transcriptional factor controlling LA-induced TAG synthesis and LD formation in macrophages.

## FABP4 mediates LA-induced C/EBPα activation
Given the insolubility of long chain FAs, it was of great interest to dissect how LA, unlike SA, specifically activated C/EBPα in macrophages. As FA chaperones, FABPs bind different FAs, facilitating their transport and responses. We measured the profile of common FABP members in macrophages and demonstrated that FA treatment mainly induced expression of FABP4, but not FABP3 and FABP5, in macrophages ( ). Analyzing the TCGA human breast cancer database, we found that compared to other FABP family members FABP4 was mostly correlated with C/EPBα ( ), but not with other C/EBP members ( ). The positive associations of FABP4 with C/EBPα and key TAG synthesis genes were also evidenced in multiple GEO datasets ( ).
 
To gain insights into our observations, we performed single cell RNA-sequencing using splenic macrophages. UMAP plots showed that macrophages consisted of 13 clusters based on untargeted gene expression profiles ( ). FABP4 was enriched in clusters 0, 1, and 2 ( ). Compared to other non-enriched clusters (Fabp4-), GO molecular function analysis showed that FABP4 was mainly involved in protein-lipid complex, lipid binding and signaling receptors ( ). Moreover, Fabp4 enriched clusters (Fabp4+) were highly associated with genes known to be critical for lipid uptake and accumulation, including Cd36, PPARγ, CEBPA, Plin2 ( ). In contrast, Fabp4 enrichment was not related to Fabp5, Acsl1, Lipa, Fasn, and Cpt1b ( , ), suggesting a unique role of FABP4 in lipid uptake and storage in macrophages.
Confocal microscopy showed that FABP4 was mainly expressed in the cytosol in BSA- or PA-treated cells, whereas LA treatment led to FABP4 present both in the cytosol and nuclei ( ), suggesting a LA-induced FABP4 nuclear translocation effect for potential nuclear transactivation. To confirm the role of FABP4, we measured C/EBPα expression in FABP4-deficienct macrophages. Deletion of FABP4 in macrophages abrogated LA-induced C/EBPα expression in nuclei ( ). We further confirmed that FABP4 deficiency significantly blocked LA-induced expression of C/EBPα ( ), but not C/EBPβ ( ), in primary peritoneal macrophages and bone-marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs). Collectively, these data demonstrated a pivotal role for FABP4 in mediating LA-induced C/EBPα activation in macrophages.

## FABP4 expression enhances lipid accumulation in macrophages
Given the critical role of FABP4 in activating the LA-C/EBPα axis, we reasoned that FABP4 deficiency suppressed LA-induced lipid accumulation in macrophages. To this end, we first measured if FABP4 deficiency reduced key enzymes of TAG synthesis in different macrophages. Using FABP4 wild type (WT) and knockout (KO) macrophage cell lines ( ), we demonstrated that upregulation of Gpam1, Dgat1, and Dgat2, but not Gpam4 and Agpat2, in response to LA treatment in WT macrophages, was significantly reduced when FABP4 was genetically depleted ( ). Similarly, using peritoneal macrophages purified from WT and KO mice, we confirmed that FABP4 deficiency significantly reduced the expression of LA-induced Gpam1, Dgat1, Dgat2 ( ). Of note, FABP4 deficiency also reduced expression of other lipid transporters, including Cd36 and Fabp5 ( ), suggesting a general inhibition of fatty acid uptake and metabolism in the absence of FABP4 in primary macrophages.
 
To evaluate the role of FABP4 in lipid accumulation, we measured GPAT1 and DGAT1 protein expression and lipid droplet formation in LA-treated WT and KO macrophages. Confocal microscopy showed that GPAT1, DGAT1, and lipidTOX were colocalized in the cytoplasm of WT macrophages whereas FABP4 deficiency reduced the expression of GPAT1, DGAT1, and lipidTOX in KO macrophages ( ). Quantitative analysis demonstrated that GPAT1, DGAT1, and lipidTOX levels were significantly reduced when FABP4 was absent ( ). Using transmission electron microscopy, we further confirmed that FABP4 deficiency compromised LA- and OA-induced lipid accumulation in macrophages ( , ). The role of FABP4 in lipid accumulation was corroborated by analysis of primary peritoneal macrophages from FABP4 WT and KO mice. As shown in , LA-induced neutral lipid accumulation in macrophages was significantly reduced when FABP4 was deficient. Collectively, these data suggest that FABP4 plays a pivotal role in TAG synthesis and neutral lipid accumulation in macrophages.

## Macrophage expression of FABP4 promotes breast cancer migration
To further dissect the functionality of FABP4 in TAMs, we analyzed FABP4-associated gene pathways in the TCGA breast cancer datasets. Interestingly, FABP4 expression was highly associated with the lipolysis regulation pathway, including genes of β-adrenergic receptors (Adrb2), G-protein-coupled receptor signaling (Adcy4), and lipolysis enzymes (Pnpla2, Lipe) ( ). When FABP4 WT and KO macrophages were treated with PA or LA, FABP4 deficiency impaired LA-induced lipolysis in macrophages as evidenced by significantly reduced levels of Adrb2, Adcy4, Pnpla2, and Lipe ( ), suggesting a critical role of FABP4 in mediating lipolysis-associated pathways in macrophages. Given the protumor role of lipid accumulation in TAMs, we treated FABP4 WT or KO macrophages with PA, LA, or BSA, and evaluated their protumor function using trans-well tumor migration assays ( ). As shown in , compared to BSA- or PA-treated WT macrophages, LA-treated macrophages greatly promoted MDA-MB-231 cell migration. Notably, FABP4 deficiency significantly reduced LA-mediated tumor migration. Using E0771 mammary tumor cells, we confirmed the essential role of FABP4 in mediating LA-induced tumor migration effect in macrophages ( ). The FABP4/LA-induced tumor migration effect was not due to tumor proliferation as Ki67 expression was similar among different FA-treated groups ( ). Instead, lipid droplets formed by LA in WT macrophages were depleted following coculture with tumor cells ( ), showing the pro-migration effect of FABP4-mediated lipolysis. Furthermore, we collected the conditioned media collected from FA-treated macrophages and demonstrated that only media from LA-treated macrophages promoted migration of MDA-MB-231 and E0771 in a FABP4-dependent manner ( ). These data suggested that intracellular FABP4 was secreted from macrophages into the extracellular environment to mediate the pro-migration effect. Indeed, LA-treated macrophages exhibited the highest levels of FABP4 compared to other groups ( ). Altogether, FABP4 expression in macrophages was essential for LA-induced pro-tumor effects.
 

## High expression of FABP4 in TAMs is associated with breast cancer metastasis
Recently, meta-analysis demonstrated that a high density of TAMs, especially CD163+ TAMs, predicted poor survival outcomes in breast cancer ( ). When we analyzed pro-tumor activity of TAMs using human breast cancer tissue, we verified that high expression of the macrophage marker CD163 was significantly associated with a reduced overall survival of these breast cancer patients in multiple breast cancer datasets ( ). To verify the results from these publicly accessible datasets, we collected breast cancer tissue specimens from a cohort of 59 women with different subtypes of breast cancer ( ) and performed immunohistochemical (IHC) staining. Interestingly, CD163+ TAMs were positively correlated with breast tumor size ( ), corroborating the pro-tumor function of CD163+ macrophages in breast cancer. We also noticed that compared to lean patients, obese patients had more CD163+ macrophages in the TME ( ), suggesting that dysregulated lipids in obese patients promoted macrophage tumor infiltration. Given the pivotal role of FABP4 in lipid metabolism in macrophages, we analyzed FABP4 expression in CD163+ TAMs. Interestingly, FABP4 expression significantly correlated with CD163+ macrophages (p<0.001; ). Among the cohort, 22% of patients exhibited lymph node and distant metastasis ( ). When we compared macrophages and FABP4 expression in tumor tissues in patients with or without tumor metastasis ( ), we showed that tumors from metastatic patients had higher expression of CD163+ macrophages ( ) and FABP4 expression ( ). We also examined the association of other variables, including age, tumor grade, multifocality, lymphovascular invasion, mortality, hormone status, with CD163 and FABP4 expression in tumor tissues. Higher tumor grade and mortality were associated with more FABP4 expression in macrophages ( , ). Moreover, triple negative breast cancer exhibited higher FABP4 expression in macrophages than ER+ or HER2+ breast cancer ( ). Collectively, CD163+ TAMs, especially those with FABP4 expression, are positively associated with tumor growth and metastasis in breast cancer patients.
 

## Discussion
Breast cancer is the most prevalent cancer in women globally ( ). The World Health Organization reported in 2020 that 2.3 million women were diagnosed with breast cancer, with 685,000 deaths from the disease ( ; ). Given that metastatic breast cancer is the leading cause of breast cancer-related death ( ), identifying new cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying breast cancer metastasis is an urgent need for breast cancer research. The TME of breast cancer is lipid enriched, and these lipids can be taken up by macrophages, leading to their alternative activation ( ). Alternative activated macrophages are known to stimulate angiogenesis and promote tumor progession ( ). However, the molecular mechanisms by which extracellular lipids contribute to intracellular lipid accumulation and pro-tumor functions in macrophages are largely unexplored.
As professional phagocytes, macrophages are engaged with uptake of extracellular lipids to mitigate their toxicity and to process them for use by themselves or adjacent cells ( ). Macrophages have evolved to mainly express FABP4 and FABP5 to facilitate FA transport and metabolism. We previously demonstrated that heterogenous macrophages exhibit different FABP expression profiles and activities. For instance, FABP5 expression in skin macrophages facilitates high fat diet-induced IL-1 family cytokine responses (e.g. IL-1β, IL-36γ) while FABP4 expression in TAMs promotes oncogenic IL-6/STAT3 signaling ( ; ; ). We further demonstrated that heterogenous macrophages exhibit a unique FABP expression profile. FABP4 is prominently expressed in CD11b+F4/80+CD11c-MHCII- macrophage subsets whereas FABP5 is mainly expressed in CD11b+F4/80+MHCII+CD11c+ macrophage subsets ( ; ; ), suggesting a distinct role of individual FABP family members in macrophages ( ; ). Interestingly, when macrophages were exposed to different species of dietary FAs, FABP4 appeared to be more responsive to FA treatment. Notably, FABP4 was mainly located in the cytoplasm under PA treatment but translocated to the nucleus in response to LA treatment. This was consistent with previous studies showing LA as an activating ligand for FABP4 nuclear translocation and PPARγ activation ( ). Considering that PPARγ induces CEBPα expression by binding to its enhancer and they synergistically enhance lipid accumulation in adipocytes ( ; ), we demonstrated that LA treatment specifically upregulated CEPBα expression and induced lipid droplet formation in macrophages. Importantly, CEBPα transcriptionally upregulated key enzymes for TAG synthesis, including GPAT1 and DGATs. Moreover, silencing CEBPα expression significantly inhibited LA-induced GPAT1 and DGAT1 expression and lipid droplet accumulation. Therefore, our data suggest a previously underappreciated axis of LA/FABP4/CEBPα in mediating lipid accumulation in macrophages.
To determine the role of the accumulated lipids in macrophages, we noticed that FABP4 expression was not only associated with the LA/CEBPα/DGAT-mediated lipid accumulation pathway, but also highly correlated with the β-AR/ATGL/HSL-mediated lipolysis pathway in breast cancer. Genetic deletion of FABP4 inhibited both lipid accumulation and lipolysis pathways, confirming a critical role of FABP4 in lipid metabolism in macrophages. When breast cancer cells were cocultured with FA-exposed macrophages, LA-treated macrophages dramatically promoted breast cancer cell migration as compared to PA- or BSA-treated cells, suggesting a specific effect of LA-mediated lipid accumulation and utilization in macrophages. Moreover, FABP4 deficiency impaired LA-mediated protumor migration effect of macrophages, further supporting that FABP4-mediated lipolysis in macrophages was critical for lipid utilization by breast cancer cells.
TAMs are the most abundant immune cells in breast cancer. To interrogate TAM’s role in the TME, M1/M2 dichotomy has been commonly proposed to polarize TAM functions. However, there have been no convincing markers or precise molecular mechanisms to determine TAM functions in vivo. By analyzing FABP4 expression in TAMs with human breast cancer specimens, we found that FABP4 expression in TAMs, especially CD163+ TAMs, correlated directly with tumor size, grade, metastasis and even patient survival. Considering the critical role of FABP4 in mediating lipid accumulation and lipolysis, it might function as a key player linking extracellular lipids to lipid storage and utilization in TAMs. Of note, compared to lipid-processing macrophages, most epithelial-cell-derived cancer cells do not express FABP4, thus FABP4 may serve as a functional marker for lipophilic pro-tumor TAMs.
It is worth noting that dietary fats are linked to both breast cancer incidence and survival in epidemiologic studies ( ). However, the exact role of major dietary FAs, including PA, SA, OA, and LA, in breast cancer risk and progression remains unclear. Given the observations that saturated fat intake increases the risk of cardiovascular diseases, the American Dietary Guidelines recommend the consumption of unsaturated fats over saturated fats in our diets (https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/). However, data from the present study raise the concerns about the consumption of unsaturated fats, especially LA, in patients with breast cancer. Unsaturated FAs can induce lipid accumulation in macrophages, which can subsequently be mobilized to facilitate breast cancer migration and metastasis. Furthermore, we demonstrated that FABP4 plays a critical role in facilitating unsaturated FA-induced storage and lipolysis. Upon activation of LA, FABP4 trafficks between the cytosol and nucleus to mediate lipid accumulation. In the presence of external factors (e.g., tumors), FABP4 can be secreted from macrophages during lipolysis, which in turn enhances the utilization of FA ligands by cancer cells. Thus, blocking FABP4 lipid binding and secretion might represent novel strategies for preventing lipid utilization by cancer cells.
In summary, our studies have several implications. First, as professional phagocytes, macrophages uptake different lipids. Unlike saturated FAs, unsaturated FAs are preferentially accumulated in macrophages through the FABP4/CEBPα pathway. Secondly, TAMs with lipid accumulation facilitate breast cancer progression through the FABP4-dependent lipolysis and lipid utilization pathways. Thirdly, secreted FABP4/FAs might offer a previously underappreciated mechanism for promoting breast tumor metastasis potential ( ). Thus, developing therapies that block the activity of the secreted FABP4 might provide a new avenue for the treatment of breast cancer.

## Limitations of the study
In this study, we have identified FABP4 as a crucial lipid chaperone responsible for mediating lipid accumulation and lipolysis in TAMs. However, the mechanisms by which FABP4/FA complexes secreted from TAMs interact with tumor cells and mediate tumor metastasis remain unknown. While some potential FABP4 receptors, such as membrane phospholipids ( ), desmoglein 2 ( ), cytokeratin 1 ( ), have been reported in various cell types, further investigations are needed to determine how FABP4 and its lipid ligands facilitate tumor metastasis - either by initiating oncogenic signals, by providing energy sources or both.

## Materials and methods

## Mice
Fabp4–/– mice and their wild-type (WT) mice (C57B/6 background) were maintained and bred under specific pathogen free conditions with water and regular chow ad libitum in the animal facility of the University of Iowa in accordance with the approved protocol by the University of Iowa Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (#1042385). As breast cancer mainly occurs in female, female mice at 8–12 weeks age were used for collection of primary peritoneal macrophages, splenic macrophages and culture of BMMs.

## Patient specimens
Fresh or formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded breast cancer tissues were collected from the Breast and Molecular Epidemiology Resources (BMER) or Department of Pathology, University of Iowa. Breast sections were cut and transported to the study team without further patient identifiers. The University of Iowa Institutional Review Board approved the study protocol (#201003791, 202107133) prior to sample acquisition.

## Cell culture
WT and age matched Fabp4-/- mice were euthanized by CO2 inhalation and death was confirmed via subsequent cardiac puncture. Peritoneal macrophages were isolated by injecting 10 mL PBS (Gibco) into the mouse peritoneal cavity and incubated with 3 min with periodic abdominal palpation. EtOH was used to sterilize the surgical site and the skin of the abdomen was reflected. Using a 10 mL syringe coupled with a 25 G needle (Becton Dickinson and Company), PBS from the peritoneal cavity was aspirated, moved to a 15 mL conical (Avantor) tube, centrifuged, and resuspended in RPMI media with 10% FBS. To obtain bBMMs, femurs were dissected, muscle tissue was thoroughly removed, and marrow was flushed with PBS into a 15 mL conical tube by way of a 10 mL syringe coupled with a 25 G needle. Isolated marrow cells were resuspended in red blood cell lysis buffer (Tonbo Biosciences) for 15 min on ice, washed with PBS, filtered through 40 µm cell strainers (VWR) and plated on 100 mm culture dishes (Greiner Bio-One) at a concentration of 5x106 cells/mL in RPMI media with 10% FBS and 30 ng/mL recombinant mouse macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF; BioLegend). After 48 hr and again after 120 hr from initial plating cell culture media was replaced with fresh media containing M-CSF. Cells were scrutinized after 168 hr in culture.
Immortalized macrophage cell lines were established from FABP4-/- (FABP4−/− macrophages) or WT mice (WT macrophages) as described previously ( ; ; ). Briefly, BMMs were culture as outlined above however following differentiation J2-virus conditioned media was used for 2 hr and replaced with M-CSF media. This procedure was repeated after 24 hr. Subsequently M-CSF media was removed step-wise over the course of 2 weeks at which point cells could be effectively passages. This procedure was completed for marrow cells obtained from a C57Bl/6 J mouse as well as aged match FABP4-/- mouse. Breast cancer cell migration assays were completed using E0771 mouse mammary gland cells and MDA-MB 231 human mammary gland cells (ATCC).

## Free fatty acid (FFA) preparation
Due to their insolubility, all FFAs were conjugated with bovine serum albumin (BSA) as described previously ( ; ; ; ). Briefly, all FFAs used in the current study were purchased from Nu-Chek Prep (MN). PA (5 mM, S1109), SA (5 Mm, S-1111), OA (5 Mm, S-1120) or LA (5 Mm, S-1127) were respectively conjugated with 2 mM of endotoxin-free, FA-free BSA (Proliant, Cat# 69760) in PBS. FA-BSA conjugates were sonicated until dissolved. All FA-BSA conjugates or BSA control were filtered through a 0.2 μM sterile filter before use in cellular studies.

## RNAi
Predesigned duplex small interfering RNA was obtained from Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT) specific to C/EBPα and C/EBPβ. J2-Immortalized macrophages were transfected using jetPRIME (Polyplus) as instructed by the manufacture. Efficacy of RNAi was confirmed by RT-PCR for each experiment.

## Quantitative RT-PCR
Cells were lysed and RNA was extracted using the PureLink RNA mini kit (Invitrogen) as per manufactures instructions. RNA concentration was determined and standardized by the aid of a photospectrometer and complementary DNA was synthesized by use of QuantiTect reverse transcription kit (QIAGEN). Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) was included with target primers ( ) on MicroAmp optical 384-well reaction plates (Applied Biosystems) and a QuantStudio 7 Flex (Thermo Fisher) and the provided softeware (Design and Analysis Software V2.3, Thermo Fisher) was used to determine relative mRNA concentration by way of ΔΔCt method with hprt1 as an internal control. Standard PCR reaction parameters were used: 95 °C hold stage for 10 min, 40 cycles of PCR reaction of 95 °C for 15 s and 60 °C for 1 min, and a melt curve stage used 0.5 °C steps from 60°C to 65°C.

## Seahorse cell mito stress
The Seahorse mitochondrial stress test (Agilent) was performed as specified by the manufacturer. Briefly, cells were plated at a concentration of 5x104 per well in RPMI media with 10% FBS. Before the assay cells were wash twice with RPMI-XF media with no FBS and incubated at 37 °C for 15 min during equipment initialization. supplemented with 100 µM BSA, PA, SA, OA, or LA. The acute injection protocol was utilized where some wells (n=5 for each FA for each genotype) received injections of RPMI-XF supplemented with 200 µM BSA, PA, SA, OA, or LA, and all wells subsequently received injections of 2.5 µM oligomycin, 1 µM FCCP, and finally 1 µM Rotenone/Antimycin/Hoechst. Assays were ran using the XFe96 extracellular flux analyzer (Agilent) coupled with automated normalization based on live cell number at the conclusion of the assay.

## Breast cancer tissue immunohistochemistry
Formalin fixed Paraffin Embedded (FFPE) tissue specimens were deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated through exposure to graded ethanol solutions. Antigen retrieval was performed by incubating the slides in 10 mM Citrate buffer pH6.0 at 95 °C for 15 min. Then, quenching of endogenous peroxidase activity was performed by incubating the slides in BLOXALL Endogenous Blocking Solution (Vector Laboratories, SP-6000) for 10 min at room temperature. Slides were incubated with a primary antibody overnight at 4 °C, a secondary antibody for 30 min at room temperature (All the primary and secondary antibodies used in this study are summarized in key resources table). DAB peroxidase substrate (Vector Laboratories, SK-4100) or Vector Red alkaline phosphatase substrate (Vector Laboratories, SK-5100) were used for staining. Counterstain was performed by incubating the slides in Hematoxylin (Leica Gill III 3801541) for 10 s at room temperature. Slides were mounted with VectaMount Express Mounting Medium (vector laboratories, H-5700–60), and were scanned by slide scanner (Leica Aperio GT 450) for quantification analysis. Hot spot quantification of CD163 and FABP4 expression in macrophages (per 1x2 mm2 area within the tumor tissue) was automatically calculated by the HALO software (Indica Labs).

## Transmission electron microscopy
Cells were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde (in 0.1 M Sodium cacodylate buffer [pH 7.4]) overnight at 4 °C. samples were postfixed with 1% Osmium tetroxide for 1 hr and then rinsed in 0.1 M Sodium cacodylate buffer. Following serial alcohol dehydration (50%, 75%, 95%, and 100%), the samples were embedded in Epon 12 (Ted Pella, Redding, CA). Ultramicrotomy was performed, and ultrathin sections (70 nm) were poststained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. Samples were examined with a Hitachi HT-7800 transmission electron microscope (TEM) (Tokyo, Japan).

## Immunogold analysis for FABP4 in macrophages
Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA), and then were dehydrated in graded concentrations of ethanol and embedded in LR White resin (Electron Microscopy Sciences, 14380). Ultrathin sections (70 nm) on grids were incubated with blocking solution (Aurion, 905.003) for 1 hr, and then incubated with primary antibody overnight at 4 °C, and then incubated with secondary antibody (Aurion, Rabbit-anti-Goat IgG (H&L) Ultra Small) for 2 hr. Grids were re-fixed with 1% glutaraldehyde for 15 min and were incubated in sliver enhancement (Aurion, 500.033) for 25 min. Sections were then stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and examined with a Hitachi HT-7800 transmission electron microscope (TEM; Tokyo, Japan).

## Oil Red O staining
For each use Oil Red O powder (Alfa Aesar) was solubilized in 100% isopropanol (75 mg in 25 mL) and mixed on a orbital shaker for 30 min to make a stock solution. For a working solution Oil Red O stock solution was used at a ratio of 3 parts Oil Red O to 2 parts ddH2O and mixed on an orbital shaker for 10 min. The working solution was filtered twice through 0.2 µm syringe filter and used immediately on 4% PFA fixed cells. During the second of three washes with ddH2O, DAPI was included at 1:5000 for nuclear identification. Images were taken with an ECHO Revolution2 (ECHO) epifluorescence microscope and processed using ImageJ/Fiji. Following image collection, for the purpose of semi-quantitative analysis, samples were washed with 60% isopropanol three times for 5 min each and the residual Oil Red O was solubilized with 100% Isopropanol and absorbance was assessed by spectrophotometer at 492 nm, 100% isopropanol was used as a background.

## Flow cytometry
The following anti-mouse conjugated antibodies were used to label macrophages surface receptors from peritoneal and bone marrow derived cells: PE/Cyanine7-F4/80, BV711-CD11c, BV605-I-A/I-E (BioLegend), BUV737-CD11b, and BUV563-CD45 (BD Biosciences). Unconjugated antibodies were used for quantification of intracellular markers: m/rFABP4 (R&D Systems), GPAM (Invitrogen), DGAT1 (Sigma-Aldrich), C/EBPα (Cell Signaling), C/EBPβ (DSHB). The following organelle dyes were used: BODIPY 493/503 (Lipid Droplets; Molecular Probes), Cell Navigator Live Cell Endoplasmic Reticulum Staining Kit Red (ATT Bioquest), and LysoTracker Blue DND-22 (Invitrogen). Dead cells were identified and removed from analysis via Ghost Dye Violet 510 (Tonbo Biosciences). Briefly, live cells were scrutinized unless fixation was required for intracellular targets in which case 4% PFA was used for 30 min to fix the cells and 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS was used for permeabilization. Antibodies or organelle dyes were incubated with cells for 30 min on ice in the dark. When necessary secondary antibodies were incubated with cells for 1 hr on ice in the dark. Data was acquired using a Cytek Aurora 5-laser flow cytometer or ImageStream cytometer (CytekBio) and subsequently analyzed FlowJo V10 (BD Biosciences).

## Migration assay
For the migration assay, we treated WT and FABP4 KO macrophages with BSA, PA, or LA (100 μM) for 4 hr in a 24-well plate. After washing them three times with PBS, we seeded E0771 or MDA-MB 231 cells (5×104) into transwell inserts with a pore size of 8 μm (Corning). These cells were incubated with the FA-treated macrophages, respectively, to allow tumor cells to migrate. After a 24 hr culture at 37 °C, we removed the tumor cells inside the transwells that had not migrated using cotton swabs. The tumor cells that had migrated to the outside of the insert membrane were fixed with 4% PFA for 20 min and then stained with 0.1% crystal violet for 10 min. We counted the numbers of migrated E0771 and MDA-MB 231 cells in 12 random high fields under a microscope. Each assay was performed in triplicate wells. Additionally, in some experiments, we used conditional media (RPMI-1640 without FBS) collected from BSA or FA-treated WT and KO macrophages to coculture with tumor cells and observe medium-induced tumor cell migration.

## Single-cell RNA-seq assay
Macrophages from mouse spleen were used for the 10 x Genomics 3’ expression single cell assay. Briefly, splenocytes were isolated from two pairs of age-matched WT and FABP4-/- female mice. Dead cells were excluded using Zombie-Violet and anti-CD16/32 antibody was used to block Fc receptors before additional staining with Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-mouse F4/480 antibody and APC-conjugated anti-mouse CD11b antibody. The F4/80+/CD11b+/Zombie-Voilet- cells were sorted using a FACS Aira III instrument and resuspended at a concentration of 1000 cell/μL cold PBS with 0.04% non-acetylated BSA. An equal number of 5000 targeted cells from each sample were prepared to create GEMs. The GEM generation/barcoding, post GEM-reverse transcription cDNA amplification, and library construction were performed according to the manufacturer’s guidelines.

## Single-cell data analysis
Single-cell gene counting was performed by Cell Ranger (10 X Genomics, version 7.1.0) using the refdata-gex-mm10-2020-A reference transcriptome. The resulting data matrices were subsequently imported into R (version 4.2.3) and analyzed using the Seurat package (version 4.9.9). Cells with less than 200 features or with percent mitochondrial gene expression greater than 5% were excluded from the analysis. The data across samples was integrated using the Integrate Data function. Gene expression was normalized and scaled using the default parameters. Based on visual inspection of the elbow plot, the first 30 Principal Components (PC) were used in UMAP-based dimensional reduction. The FindClusters function, with a resolution of 0.5, was then used to assign cells to clusters. The FindMarkers function was used to identify genes differentially expressed between wild-type and knockout samples or between different clusters within the same sample type. Feature plots and violin plots were used to visualize the results.

## ELISA for FABP4 analysis
FABP4 excreted from cultured cells were analyzed with CircuLex Mouse FABP4 ELISA Kit (Medical and Biological Laboratories) as instructed by the manufactures. Briefly, for the ELISA 100 µL of conditioned media was incubated in a 96-well plate precoated with FABP4 antibody, washed four times, incubated with the supplied secondary antibody, washed, and incubated with the developer to finally analyze with a spectrophotometer using a ratio of the absorbance at 450 nm and 550 nm.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
All data were presented as the mean ± SD unless notified specifically. All experiment as indicated were performed by at least three independent experiments or technical replicates. For in vitro experiments, a two-tailed, unpaired student t-test, two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test, were performed by GraphPad Prism 9. For in vivo experiments analyzing associations of FABP4, TAMs and other factors in breast cancer patients, the Kruskal-Wallis test was applied to compare whether the outcome variable is significantly different across the different levels of a categorical predictor variable. Multiple linear regression models were employed to examine the association between the predictor variables and the outcome, where log transformation and Box Cox transformation were used to meet the underlying model assumption for normality. All statistical analyses were carried out in the statistical analysis software R. A statistics test is claimed to be significant if the p-value is less than 0.05.

## Acknowledgements
We thank the Iowa Institute of Human Genetics at the University of Iowa for single cell RNA-sequencing and analysis. We also thank the Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center’s P30 grant which partially funds the Breast Molecular Epidemiology Resource (BMER) (P30CA086862). BL thank the funding support from NIH grants U01CA272424, R01CA180986 and R01AI137324. This material should not be interpreted as representing the viewpoint of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the National Institutes of Health, or the National Cancer Institute.

## Appendix 1
 

## Funding Statement
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.

## Contributor Information
Bing Li, Email: bing-li@uiowa.edu.
Michaela R Reagan, Maine Health Institute for Research, United States.
Lynne-Marie Postovit, Queens University, Canada.

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:

National Institutes of Health

U01CA272424 to Bing Li.

National Institutes of Health

R01CA180986 to Bing Li.

National Institutes of Health

R01AI137324 to Bing Li.

## Additional information

## Competing interests
No competing interests declared.

## Author contributions
Data curation, Investigation, Methodology.
Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology.
Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology.
Data curation, Methodology.
Data curation.
Methodology.
Formal analysis, Methodology.
Resources, Writing – review and editing.
Formal analysis, Methodology.
Data curation, Methodology.
Resources, Writing – review and editing.
Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing – review and editing.
Resources, Writing – review and editing.
Conceptualization, Writing – review and editing.
Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Writing – review and editing.
Conceptualization, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Writing – original draft.

## Ethics
All of the animals were handled according to approved institutional animal care and use committee (IACUC) protocols (#1042385).

## Additional files
Supplementary file 1.

## Patient information.
Supplementary file 2.

## Summary statistics for categorical variables and their association with outcome variables.
Supplementary file 3.

## Realtime PCR primer sequences.
MDAR checklist

## Data availability
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in the manuscript and supporting files.
The following previously published datasets were used:

Clarke C, Madden SF, Doolan P, Joyce H, Aherne S, O' Driscoll L, Gallagher WM, Hennesy B, Moriarty M, Crown J, Kennedy S, Clynes M. 2013. Breast Cancer Gene Expression Analysis. NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus. GSE42568

Schaefer C, Kemmner W. 2011. Expression profiling of human DCIS and invasive ductal breast carcinoma. NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus. GSE21422

Cuadros M, Cano C, Lopez FJ, Blanco A, Concha A. 2011. Identifying breast cancer biomarkers. NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus. GSE29431

Schroeder M, Haibe-Kains B, Culhane A, Sotiriou C, Bontempi C, Quackenbush J. 2002. Genexpression dataset published by van't Veer et al. [2002] and van de Vijver et al. [2002] (NKI) BreastCancerNKI. 

Weigman VJ, Perou CM. 2011. Basal-like Breast Cancer DNA copy number losses identify genes involved in genomic instability, response to therapy, and patient survival. NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus. GSE10893

Prat A, Perou CM. 2010. Phenotypic and Molecular Characterization of the Claudin-low Intrinsic Subtype of Breast Cancer. NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus. GSE18229

Chanrion M, Vincent N, Fontaine H, Salvetat N, Bibeau F, MacGrogan G, Mauriac L, Katsaros D, Molina F, Theillet C, Darbon JM. 2008. A gene expression signature predicting the recurrence of tamoxifen-treated primary breast cancer. NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus. GSE9893

## References
 

eLifeeLife10.7554/eLife.101221.2.sa0eLife Assessment
ReaganMichaela RReviewing Editor 1Maine Health Institute for Research, United StatesKeywords: Important

Keywords: Incomplete

This important paper uses elegant models, including genetic knock outs, to demonstrate that FABP4 contributes to lipid accumulation in tumor-associated macrophages, which seems to increase breast cancer migration. While the work is of high interest, the strength of the evidence relating to some of the conclusions is incomplete and the paper would benefit from some refinement. The work will be of interest to those researchers trying to link metabolism, the immune system, and cancer.
eLifeeLife10.7554/eLife.101221.2.sa1Reviewer #1 (Public review):
AnonymousReviewerSummary:
In the manuscript "FABP4-mediated lipid accumulation and lipolysis in tumor-associated macrophages promote breast cancer metastasis", Yorek, et al. provide a novel mechanism explaining how unsaturated fatty acids induce macrophages to accumulate lipid droplets, which when contained in tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are associated with increased metastasis in breast cancer. The authors conclude that unsaturated fatty acids are transported into macrophages by the chaperone FABP4 where they induce C/EBPalpha expression and transcriptional activity resulting in upregulation of enzymes involved in triacylglycerol and lipid droplet biosynthesis. The resulting accumulation of lipid droplets in macrophages creates a store of fatty acids that can subsequently be released through FABP4-dependent lipolysis and thereby stimulate the migration of nearby breast cancer cells. While generally well-written and developed, there are a few concerns about the rigor of experimental evidence that supports some conclusions, including the existence of a FABP4-C/EBPalpha pathway. Overall, the mechanism identified is a valuable contribution to our understanding of how tumor-associated macrophages may influenced by available metabolites to promote the aggressiveness of certain cancers. FABP4 has the potential to be used as a novel biomarker of macrophage-induced cancer aggressiveness and/or a therapeutic target to prevent metastasis.
Strengths:
(1) The study is logically organized and provides extensive evidence in support of the overall model proposed.
(2) Multiple complementary techniques are used to identify and quantify lipid droplets.
(3) Primary macrophages and macrophage cell lines are used and provide consistent data.
(4) Knock-down and knock-out cells are used to assess the contributions of FABP4 and C/EBPalpha to gene expression.
(5) Public gene expression data (GEO, TCGA) is used effectively throughout.
Weaknesses:
(1) After Figure 1, a single saturated (palmitic acid; PA) and a single unsaturated (linoleic acid; LA) fatty acid are used for the remaining studies, bringing into question whether effects are in fact the result of a difference in saturation vs. other potential differences.
(2) While primary macrophages are used in several mechanistic studies, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are not used. Rather, correlative evidence is provided to connect mechanistic studies in macrophage cell lines and primary macrophages to TAMs.
(3) C/EBPalpha and FABP4 clearly regulate LA-induced changes in gene expression. However, whether these two key proteins act in parallel or as a pathway is not resolved by presented data.
(4) It is very interesting that FABP4 regulates both lipid droplet formation and lipolysis, yet is unclear if the regulation of lipolysis is direct or if the accumulation of lipid droplets - likely plus some other signal(s) - induces upregulation of lipolysis genes.
(5) In several places increased expression of genes coding for enzymes with known functions in lipid biology is conflated with an increase in the lipid biology process the enzymes mediate. Additional evidence would be needed to show these processes are in fact increased in a manner dependent on increased enzyme expression.
eLifeeLife10.7554/eLife.101221.2.sa2Reviewer #2 (Public review):
AnonymousReviewerThe manuscript by Yorek et al explores the role of fatty acids, particularly unsaturated fatty acids, in lipid droplet accumulation and lipolysis in tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). Using flow cytometry, immunofluorescent imaging, and TEM, the authors observed that unsaturated fatty acids, such as linoleic acids (LA), tend to induce lipid droplet accumulation in the ER of macrophages, but not in the lysosomes. This phenomenon led them to examine the key enzymes involved in lipid droplet/TAG biosynthesis, where they found incubation of LA upregulates GPAT/DGAT and C/EBPα. In vitro studies, data from public databases, single-cell RNA sequencing of splenic macrophages, and more show that FABP4 emerges as an important mediator for C/EBPα activation. This is further confirmed by FABP4-knockout macrophages, where lipid accumulation and utilization of unsaturated fatty acids were compromised in macrophages through inhibition of LA-induced lipolysis. Using the co-culture system and immunohistochemical analysis, they found that the high FABP4 expression in TAMs, which are observed in metastatic breast cancer tissue, promotes breast cancer cell migration in vitro.
This study is important since the impact of tumor microenvironment is crucial for the development of breast cancer. The individual experiments are well-designed and structured. However, the logic connecting to the next step is a bit difficult to follow, especially when combined with incomplete statistical analysis in some figures, making the conclusion less convincing. For instance, the comparison of macrophage FABP4 expression between breast cancer patients with or without metastasis illustrates the importance of FABP4 expression in metastasis, yet there is no examination of the expression of other key enzymes in the lipolysis or lipid biosynthesis pathway nor there is any correlation with parameters that would reflect patients' consumption of fatty acids. Similarly, an in vivo study comparing FABP4 knockout mice with or without unsaturated fatty acids would yield more compelling evidence. The statistical analysis was largely focused on the sets of unsaturated fatty acids when data from both types of fatty acids were present. In some cases, significant changes are observed in the sets of saturated fat, but there is no explanation of why only the data from unsaturated fats are important for investigation.
Overall, there is solid evidence for the importance of FABP4 expression in TAMs on metastatic breast cancer as well as lipid accumulation by LA in the ER of macrophages. A stronger rationale for the exclusive contribution of unsaturated fatty acids to the utilization of TAMs in breast cancer and a more detailed description and statistical analysis of data will strengthen the findings and resulting claims.
eLifeeLife10.7554/eLife.101221.2.sa3Reviewer #3 (Public review):
AnonymousReviewerSummary:
Regulated metabolism has only recently been recognized as a key component of cancer biology, and even more recently recognized as a significant modulator of the tumor microenvironment (TME). TAMs in the TME play a major role in supporting cancer cell survival and growth/spread, as well as generating an immunosuppressive ME to suppress anti-tumor immunity. Specific regulation of lipid metabolism in this context, in particular how lipids are stored and subsequently mobilized for metabolism, is largely unexplored - especially in the immunological components of the TME.
In this manuscript, the authors build on their previous observations that the fatty acid-binding protein FABP4 plays an important role in macrophage function and that FABP4 expression in tumor associated macrophages (TAM) promotes breast cancer progression. They demonstrate:
(1) Unlike saturated fatty acids (FA), unsaturated FA promotes lipid droplet (LD) accumulation in murine macrophages. LD is the primary intracellular storage depot for FA.
(2) Unsaturated FA activates the FABP4-C/EBPalpha axis to upregulate transcription of the enzymes involved in the synthesis of neutral triacylglycerol (TAG) is an essential step in the formation of the neutral lipid core of LD. It should be noted that the authors speculate that UFA-activated FABP4 translocates to the nucleus to activate PPARgamma, which is known to induce C/EBPalpha expression, but do not directly test the involvement of PPARgamma in this axis.
(3) FABP4 deficiency compromises unsaturated FA-mediated lipid accumulation and utilization in murine macrophages.
(4) FABP4-mediated lipid metabolism in macrophages (TAMS) contributes to breast cancer metastasis, in in-vitro of tumor migration induced by murine macrophages and in correlative studies from human patient breast cancer biopsies.
From these studies, the manuscript concludes that FABP4 plays a pivotal role in mediating lipid droplet formation and lipolysis in TAM, which provides lipids to breast cancer cells that contribute to their growth and metastasis.
These are significant findings, as they provide new insight into the mechanistic regulation of TAM biology via regulation of lipid metabolism, as well as define new biomarkers and potential novel therapeutic targets.
The findings are strong in the studies that mechanistically define the role of FAB4 in lipid accumulation and utilization in murine macrophages. However, evidence is less compelling regarding TAM biology and human breast cancer in 3 main areas:
First, while there is clear in vitro evidence that co-cultured murine macrophages genetically deficient in FABP4 (or their conditioned media) do not enhance breast cancer cell motility and invasion, these macrophages are not bonafide TAM - which may have different biology. The use of actual TAM in these experiments would be more compelling. Perhaps more importantly, there is no in vivo data in tumor-bearing mice that macrophage deficiency of FABP4 affects tumor growth or metastasis - which are doable experiments given the availability of the FABP4 KO mice.
Second, no data is presented that the mechanisms/biology that are elegantly demonstrated in the murine macrophages also occur in human macrophages - which would be foundational to translating these findings into human breast cancer. It seems like straightforward in vitro studies in human monocytes/macrophages could be done to recapitulate the main characteristics seen in the murine macrophages.
Third, while the data from the human breast cancer specimens is very intriguing, it is difficult to ascertain how accurate IHC is in determining that the CD163+ cells (TAM) are in fact the same cells expressing FABP4 - which is the central premise of these studies. Demonstrating that IHC has the resolution to do this would be important. Additionally, the in vitro characterization of FABP4 expression in human macrophages would also add strength to these findings.
In summary, the strengths of this manuscript are the significance of metabolic regulation of the immune tumor microenvironment (TME), and the careful mechanistic delineation of FABP4 involvement in mediating lipid droplet formation and lipolysis in murine macrophages. The weaknesses of the work are the lack of direct experimental evidence that human macrophages behave in the same way as murine macrophages, the incomplete characterization of the role of FABP4 expression in TAM in modulating tumor growth in vivo (in murine models), and whether it can be definitively determined that FABP4 is being primarily expressed in the CD163+ macrophages in human breast cancer samples.
Strengths:
(1) Regulated metabolism has only recently been recognized as a key component of cancer biology, and even more recently recognized as a significant modulator of the tumor microenvironment (TME). TAMs in the TME play a major role in supporting cancer cell survival and growth/spread, as well as generating an immunosuppressive ME to suppress anti-tumor immunity.
(2) Regulation of lipid metabolism in this context is largely unexplored, especially in the immunological components of the TME.
(3) The work builds on the authors' previous work on the role of FABP4 plays an important role in macrophage function including FABP4 expression in TAM promotes breast cancer progression (Hao et al, Cancer Res 2018). This paper identified FABP4-expressing macrophages as being pro-tumorigenic via upregulation of IL-6/STAT3 signaling.
(4) The careful and thorough mechanistic delineation of FABP4 involvement in mediating lipid droplet formation and lipolysis in murine macrophages.
(5) The intriguing observations that FABP4-mediated lipid metabolism in macrophages contributes to breast cancer metastasis, in in vitro of tumor migration induced by murine macrophages and in correlative studies from human patient breast cancer biopsies that CD163+ cell numbers (putatively TAM) and FABP4 expression was associated with increased metastatic disease and poor overall survival.
(6) Identification of FABP4 both a prognostic biomarker and a potential therapeutic target to modulate the pro-tumor immune TME.
Weaknesses:
(1) While the authors speculate that UFA-activated FABP4 translocates to the nucleus to activate PPARgamma, which is known to induce C/EBPalpha expression, they do not directly test involvement of PPARgamma in this axis.
(2) While there is clear in vitro evidence that co-cultured murine macrophages genetically deficient in FABP4 (or their conditioned media) do not enhance breast cancer cell motility and invasion, these macrophages are not bonafide TAM - which may have different biology. Use of actual TAM in these experiments would be more compelling. Perhaps more importantly, there is no in vivo data in tumor bearing mice that macrophage-deficiency of FABP4 affects tumor growth or metastasis.
(3) Related to this, the authors find FABP4 in the media and propose that macrophage secreted FABP4 is mediating the tumor migration - but don't do antibody neutralizing experiments to directly demonstrate this.
(4) No data is presented that the mechanisms/biology that are elegantly demonstrated in the murine macrophages also occurs in human macrophages - which would be foundational to translating these findings into human breast cancer.
(5) While the data from the human breast cancer specimens is very intriguing, it is difficult to ascertain how accurate IHC is in determining that the CD163+ cells (TAM) are in fact the same cells expressing FABP4 - which is central premise of these studies. Demonstration that IHC has the resolution to do this would be important. Additionally, the in vitro characterization of FABP4 expression in human macrophages would also add strength to these findings.
eLifeeLife10.7554/eLife.101221.2.sa4Author response
YorekMatthewAuthor JiangXingshanAuthor LiuShanshanAuthor HaoJiaqingAuthor YuJianyuAuthor AvellinoAnthonyAuthor LiuZhanxuAuthor CurryMelissaAuthor KeenHenryAuthor ShaoJianqiangAuthor Rajan KDAnandAuthor KongMayingAuthor XiongYiqinAuthor SauterEdwardAuthor SuggSoniaAuthor LiBingAuthor 1University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States2University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States3University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States4University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States5University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States6University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States7University of Louisville, Louisville, United States8University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States9University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States10University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States11University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States12University of Louisville, Louisville, United States13University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States14National Cancer Institute, Rockville, United States15University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States16University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States811202413RP101221RP101221Collection date 2024.

Reviewer #1:

(1) After Figure 1, a single saturated (palmitic acid; PA) and a single unsaturated (linoleic acid; LA) fatty acid are used for the remaining studies, bringing into question whether effects are in fact the result of a difference in saturation vs. other potential differences.
PA, SA, OA and LA are the most common FA species in humans (Figure 1A in manuscript). Among them, PA predominantly represents saturated FAs while LA is the main unsaturated FAs, respectively. Of note, although both SA and OA were included in our studies, their effects were comparable to those of PA and LA, respectively. Due to space constraints, the data of SA and OA are not presented in the figures.
(2) While primary macrophages are used in several mechanistic studies, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are not used. Rather, correlative evidence is provided to connect mechanistic studies in macrophage cell lines and primary macrophages to TAMs.
The roe of FABP4 in TAMs has been demonstrated in our previous studies using in vivo animal models1. Therefore, we did not include TAM-specific data in the current study.
(3) CEBPA and FABP4 clearly regulate LA-induced changes in gene expression. However, whether these two key proteins act in parallel or as a pathway is not resolved by presented data.
Multiple lines of evidence in our studies suggest that FABP4 and CEBPA act as a pathway in LA-induced changes: (1) FABP4-negative macrophages exhibit reduced expression of CEBPA in single cell sequencing data; (2) FABP4 KO macrophages exhibited reduced CEBPA expression; (3) LA-induced CEBPA expression in macrophages was compromised when FABP4 was absent.
(4) It is very interesting that FABP4 regulates both lipid droplet formation and lipolysis, yet is unclear if the regulation of lipolysis is direct or if the accumulation of lipid droplets - likely plus some other signal(s) - induces upregulation of lipolysis genes.
Yes, it is likely that tumor cells induce lipolysis signals. Multiple studies have shown that various tumor types stimulate lipolysis to support their growth and progression2-4. In this process, lipid-loaded macrophages have emerged as a promising therapeutic target in cancer5, 6. Consistent with findings that lipolysis is essential for tumor-promoting M2 alternative macrophage activation7, our data using FABP4 WT and KO macrophages demonstrate that FABP4 plays a critical role in LA-induced lipid accumulation and lipolysis for tumor metastasis.
(5) In several places increased expression of genes coding for enzymes with known functions in lipid biology is conflated with an increase in the lipid biology process the enzymes mediate. Additional evidence would be needed to show these processes are in fact increased in a manner dependent on increased enzyme expression.
We fully agree with the reviewer that increased gene expression does not necessarily equate to increased activity. The key finding of this study is that FABP4 plays a pivotal role in linoleic acid (LA)-mediated lipid accumulation and lipolysis in macrophages that promote tumor metastasis. Numerous lipid metabolism-related genes, including FABP4, CEBPA, GPATs, DGATs, and HSL, are involved in this process. While it was not feasible to verify the activity of all these genes, we confirmed the functional roles of key genes like FABP4 and CEBPA through various functional assays, such as gene silencing, knockout cell lines, lipid droplet formation, and tumor migration assays. Supported by established lipid metabolism pathways, our data provide compelling evidence that FABP4 functions as a crucial lipid messenger, facilitating unsaturated fatty acid-driven lipid accumulation and lipolysis in tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), thus promoting breast cancer metastasis.

Reviewer #2:

Overall, there is solid evidence for the importance of FABP4 expression in TAMs on metastatic breast cancer as well as lipid accumulation by LA in the ER of macrophages. A stronger rationale for the exclusive contribution of unsaturated fatty acids to the utilization of TAMs in breast cancer and a more detailed description and statistical analysis of data will strengthen the findings and resulting claims.
We greatly appreciated the positive comments from Reviewer #2. In our study, we evaluated the effects of both saturated and unsaturated fatty acids (FA) on lipid metabolism in macrophages. Our results showed that unsaturated FAs exhibited a preference for lipid accumulation in macrophages compared to saturated FAs. Further analysis revealed that unsaturated LA, but not saturated PA, induced FABP4 nuclear translocation and CEBPA activation, driving the TAG synthesis pathway. For in vitro experiments, statistical analyses were performed using a two-tailed, unpaired student t-test, two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test, with GraphPad Prism 9. For experiments analyzing associations of FABP4, TAMs and other factors in breast cancer patients, the Kruskal-Wallis test was applied to compare differences across levels of categorical predictor variable. Additionally, multiple linear regression models were used to examine the association between the predictor variables and outcomes, with log transformation and Box Cox transformation applied to meet the normality assumptions of the model. It is worth noting that in some experiments, only significant differences were observed in groups treated with unsaturated fatty acids. Non-significant results from groups treated with saturated fatty acids were not included in the figures.

Reviewer #3

(1) While the authors speculate that UFA-activated FABP4 translocates to the nucleus to activate PPARgamma, which is known to induce C/EBPalpha expression, they do not directly test involvement of PPARgamma in this axis.
Yes, LA induced FABP4 nuclear translocation and activation of PPARgamma in macrophages (see Figure below). Since these findings have been reported in multiple other studies 8, 9, we did not include the data in the current manuscript.
 (2) While there is clear in vitro evidence that co-cultured murine macrophages genetically deficient in FABP4 (or their conditioned media) do not enhance breast cancer cell motility and invasion, these macrophages are not bonafide TAM - which may have different biology. Use of actual TAM in these experiments would be more compelling. Perhaps more importantly, there is no in vivo data in tumor bearing mice that macrophage-deficiency of FABP4 affects tumor growth or metastasis.
In our previous studies, we have shown that macrophage-deficiency of FABP4 reduced tumor growth and metastasis in vivo in mouse models1.
(3) Related to this, the authors find FABP4 in the media and propose that macrophage secreted FABP4 is mediating the tumor migration - but don't do antibody neutralizing experiments to directly demonstrate this.
Yes, we have recently published a paper of developing anti-FABP4 antibody for treatment of breast cancer in moue models10.
(4) No data is presented that the mechanisms/biology that are elegantly demonstrated in the murine macrophages also occurs in human macrophages - which would be foundational to translating these findings into human breast cancer.
Thanks for the excellent suggestions. Since this manuscript primarily focuses on mechanistic studies using mouse models, we plan to apply these findings in our future human studies.
(5) While the data from the human breast cancer specimens is very intriguing, it is difficult to ascertain how accurate IHC is in determining that the CD163+ cells (TAM) are in fact the same cells expressing FABP4 - which is central premise of these studies. Demonstration that IHC has the resolution to do this would be important. Additionally, the in vitro characterization of FABP4 expression in human macrophages would also add strength to these findings.
The expression of FABP4 in CD163+ TAM observed through IHC is consistent with our previous findings, where we confirmed FABP4 expression in CD163+ TAMs using confocal microscopy. Emerging evidence further supports the pro-tumor role of FABP4 expression in human macrophages across various types of obesity-associated cancers11-13.
References
(1) Hao J, Yan F, Zhang Y, Triplett A, Zhang Y, Schultz DA, Sun Y, Zeng J, Silverstein KAT, Zheng Q, Bernlohr DA, Cleary MP, Egilmez NK, Sauter E, Liu S, Suttles J, Li B. Expression of Adipocyte/Macrophage Fatty Acid-Binding Protein in Tumor-Associated Macrophages Promotes Breast Cancer Progression. Cancer Res. 2018;78(9):2343-55. Epub 2018/02/14. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-17-2465. PubMed PMID: 29437708; PMCID: PMC5932212.
(2) Nieman KM, Kenny HA, Penicka CV, Ladanyi A, Buell-Gutbrod R, Zillhardt MR, Romero IL, Carey MS, Mills GB, Hotamisligil GS, Yamada SD, Peter ME, Gwin K, Lengyel E. Adipocytes promote ovarian cancer metastasis and provide energy for rapid tumor growth. Nat Med. 2011;17(11):1498-503. Epub 20111030. doi: 10.1038/nm.2492. PubMed PMID: 22037646; PMCID: PMC4157349.
(3) Wang YY, Attane C, Milhas D, Dirat B, Dauvillier S, Guerard A, Gilhodes J, Lazar I, Alet N, Laurent V, Le Gonidec S, Biard D, Herve C, Bost F, Ren GS, Bono F, Escourrou G, Prentki M, Nieto L, Valet P, Muller C. Mammary adipocytes stimulate breast cancer invasion through metabolic remodeling of tumor cells. JCI Insight. 2017;2(4):e87489. Epub 20170223. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.87489. PubMed PMID: 28239646; PMCID: PMC5313068.
(4) Balaban S, Shearer RF, Lee LS, van Geldermalsen M, Schreuder M, Shtein HC, Cairns R, Thomas KC, Fazakerley DJ, Grewal T, Holst J, Saunders DN, Hoy AJ. Adipocyte lipolysis links obesity to breast cancer growth: adipocyte-derived fatty acids drive breast cancer cell proliferation and migration. Cancer Metab. 2017;5:1. Epub 20170113. doi: 10.1186/s40170-016-0163-7. PubMed PMID: 28101337; PMCID: PMC5237166.
(5) Masetti M, Carriero R, Portale F, Marelli G, Morina N, Pandini M, Iovino M, Partini B, Erreni M, Ponzetta A, Magrini E, Colombo P, Elefante G, Colombo FS, den Haan JMM, Peano C, Cibella J, Termanini A, Kunderfranco P, Brummelman J, Chung MWH, Lazzeri M, Hurle R, Casale P, Lugli E, DePinho RA, Mukhopadhyay S, Gordon S, Di Mitri D. Lipid-loaded tumor-associated macrophages sustain tumor growth and invasiveness in prostate cancer. J Exp Med. 2022;219(2). Epub 20211217. doi: 10.1084/jem.20210564. PubMed PMID: 34919143; PMCID: PMC8932635.
(6) Marelli G, Morina N, Portale F, Pandini M, Iovino M, Di Conza G, Ho PC, Di Mitri D. Lipid-loaded macrophages as new therapeutic target in cancer. J Immunother Cancer. 2022;10(7). doi: 10.1136/jitc-2022-004584. PubMed PMID: 35798535; PMCID: PMC9263925.
(7) Huang SC, Everts B, Ivanova Y, O'Sullivan D, Nascimento M, Smith AM, Beatty W, Love-Gregory L, Lam WY, O'Neill CM, Yan C, Du H, Abumrad NA, Urban JF, Jr., Artyomov MN, Pearce EL, Pearce EJ. Cell-intrinsic lysosomal lipolysis is essential for alternative activation of macrophages. Nat Immunol. 2014;15(9):846-55. Epub 2014/08/05. doi: 10.1038/ni.2956. PubMed PMID: 25086775; PMCID: PMC4139419.
(8) Gillilan RE, Ayers SD, Noy N. Structural basis for activation of fatty acid-binding protein 4. J Mol Biol. 2007;372(5):1246-60. Epub 2007/09/01. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.07.040. PubMed PMID: 17761196; PMCID: PMC2032018.
(9) Bassaganya-Riera J, Reynolds K, Martino-Catt S, Cui Y, Hennighausen L, Gonzalez F, Rohrer J, Benninghoff AU, Hontecillas R. Activation of PPAR gamma and delta by conjugated linoleic acid mediates protection from experimental inflammatory bowel disease. Gastroenterology. 2004;127(3):777-91. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2004.06.049. PubMed PMID: 15362034.
(10) Hao J, Jin R, Yi Y, Jiang X, Yu J, Xu Z, Schnicker NJ, Chimenti MS, Sugg SL, Li B. Development of a humanized anti-FABP4 monoclonal antibody for potential treatment of breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res. 2024;26(1):119. Epub 20240725. doi: 10.1186/s13058-024-01873-y. PubMed PMID: 39054536; PMCID: PMC11270797.
(11) Liu S, Wu D, Fan Z, Yang J, Li Y, Meng Y, Gao C, Zhan H. FABP4 in obesity-associated carcinogenesis: Novel insights into mechanisms and therapeutic implications. Front Mol Biosci. 2022;9:973955. Epub 20220819. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.973955. PubMed PMID: 36060264; PMCID: PMC9438896.
(12) Miao L, Zhuo Z, Tang J, Huang X, Liu J, Wang HY, Xia H, He J. FABP4 deactivates NF-kappaB-IL1alpha pathway by ubiquitinating ATPB in tumor-associated macrophages and promotes neuroblastoma progression. Clin Transl Med. 2021;11(4):e395. doi: 10.1002/ctm2.395. PubMed PMID: 33931964; PMCID: PMC8087928.
(13) Yang J, Liu S, Li Y, Fan Z, Meng Y, Zhou B, Zhang G, Zhan H. FABP4 in macrophages facilitates obesity-associated pancreatic cancer progression via the NLRP3/IL-1beta axis. Cancer Lett. 2023;575:216403. Epub 20230921. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2023.216403. PubMed PMID: 37741433.
Associated Data

## Data Citations
 

## Supplementary Materials
Supplementary file 1.

## Patient information.
Supplementary file 2.

## Summary statistics for categorical variables and their association with outcome variables.
Supplementary file 3.

## Realtime PCR primer sequences.
MDAR checklist

## Data Availability Statement
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in the manuscript and supporting files.
The following previously published datasets were used:

Clarke C, Madden SF, Doolan P, Joyce H, Aherne S, O' Driscoll L, Gallagher WM, Hennesy B, Moriarty M, Crown J, Kennedy S, Clynes M. 2013. Breast Cancer Gene Expression Analysis. NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus. GSE42568

Schaefer C, Kemmner W. 2011. Expression profiling of human DCIS and invasive ductal breast carcinoma. NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus. GSE21422

Cuadros M, Cano C, Lopez FJ, Blanco A, Concha A. 2011. Identifying breast cancer biomarkers. NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus. GSE29431

Schroeder M, Haibe-Kains B, Culhane A, Sotiriou C, Bontempi C, Quackenbush J. 2002. Genexpression dataset published by van't Veer et al. [2002] and van de Vijver et al. [2002] (NKI) BreastCancerNKI. 

Weigman VJ, Perou CM. 2011. Basal-like Breast Cancer DNA copy number losses identify genes involved in genomic instability, response to therapy, and patient survival. NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus. GSE10893

Prat A, Perou CM. 2010. Phenotypic and Molecular Characterization of the Claudin-low Intrinsic Subtype of Breast Cancer. NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus. GSE18229

Chanrion M, Vincent N, Fontaine H, Salvetat N, Bibeau F, MacGrogan G, Mauriac L, Katsaros D, Molina F, Theillet C, Darbon JM. 2008. A gene expression signature predicting the recurrence of tamoxifen-treated primary breast cancer. NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus. GSE9893