3810mtbioMaterials Today BioMater Today BioElsevierPMC1215923512159235121592354051083710.1016/j.mtbio.2025.101881Engineering 3D-BMSC exosome-based hydrogels that collaboratively regulate bone microenvironment and promote osteogenesis for enhanced cell‐free bone regeneration
XiangKai HaoMuwei ZhangZheng ZhangKeyi SunHan ZhangLei aSchool of Pharmacy, Wannan Medical College, Wuhu, 241002, ChinabArticular Orthopaedics, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 185 Juqian Street, Changzhou, 213003, Jiangsu, ChinacState Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, 211198, China⁎Corresponding author. sh4060@suda.edu.cn
⁎⁎Corresponding author. School of Pharmacy, Wannan Medical College, Wuhu, 241002, China. dg1634031@smail.nju.edu.cn
2052025321018811018811262025© 2025 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Large bone defects are a significant clinical challenge due to their frequent failure to heal spontaneously. Recently, BMSC-derived exosomes (Exo) based cell-free bone regeneration offer several distinct advantages over BMSCs themselves in the repair of damaged tissue, including enhanced repair ability and superior biocompatibility, which can be further augmented under 3D-cultured conditions. However, their therapeutic efficacy for bone regeneration is significantly constrained by hypoxic bone microenvironment and short retention time in bone defect region. Thus, judiciously regulating bone microenvironment and extending retention time are crucial for bone regeneration. Herein, we developed Superparamagnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticles (SPION) -modified 3D-cultured Exo, termed as 3D-SExo, to enhance Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) scavenging and promote bone regeneration in response to the needs of bone defect. After entrapment in bone-targeting peptide-modified GelMA (Gel-DSS6), the composite hydrogel (3D-SExo/DGel) was obtained, which can prolong the retention of exosomes, and thereby enhancing bone repair ability. In addition, miR-122-5p, detected via microRNA (miRNA) array from 3D-cultured Exo, were observed to promote osteogenesis by activating Wnt/β-catenin pathway, which was further verified by miRNA transfection. Through the in vitro and in vivo studies, 3D-SExo/DGel could decompose ROS to relive hypoxia and alleviate the inhibitory effect of ROS on β-catenin production, demonstrating significant clinical therapeutic potential to improve cell-free bone regeneration.
Keywords: Engineered 3D-BMSC Exosome, Reactive oxygen species, Bone-targeted hydrogels, Collaboratively promote osteogenesis, Wnt/β-catenin pathway, Enhanced cell‐free bone regeneration

## Graphical abstract
This study has proposed that engineered 3D-BMSC exosome-based hydrogels can collaboratively regulate the bone microenvironment and promote osteogenesis, thereby enhancing cell-free bone repair.
 

## Highlights
•3D-SExo can enhance ROS scavenging and promote bone regeneration in response to the needs of bone defect.
•3D-SExo/DGel prolonged the retention of exosomes, thereby enhancing the bone repair ability.
•3D-SExo/DGel promoted osteogenesis by activating the Wnt/β-catenin pathway.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Feb 26; Revised 2025 Apr 28; Accepted 2025 May 18; Collection date 2025 Jun.

1.

## Introduction
Critical-sized bone defects, demonstrating compromised intrinsic healing capacity despite implementation of standardized clinical protocols and advanced stabilization techniques, still pose a significant clinical challenge and are often associated with a substantial social burden [ , , , ]. Currently, bone engineering emerges as a promising clinical solution by developing engineered exogenous scaffolds capable of orchestrating cellular dynamics through precisely regulated growth factor delivery systems [ , , ]. Bone injury and the subsequent chain reactions are critically influenced by the generation of free radical species, specifically ROS [ , ]. Several lines of evidence have shown that ROS impair the long-term stability of bones and implants, instigating osteoblast and osteocyte apoptosis [ , , ]. This cellular demise promotes osteoclastogenesis, thereby promoting bone resorption [ , ]. Following implantation, localized oxidative stress and bacterial infections precipitate apoptosis, culminating in bone resorption and, ultimately, implant failure [ , , ]. In patients with diseases, fractures, or advanced age that contribute to implantation, oxidative stress can isolate the implant material from the surrounding tissue and cause cytotoxicity [ ]. Our group's previous investigations [ ], corroborated by other researchers [ , ], have conclusively demonstrated that oxidative stress is the primary impediment to bone repair. Conversely, ROS scavenging has been shown to augment osteoblast activity, thereby expediting bone regeneration [ ]. Nevertheless, an efficacious therapeutic strategy that concurrently addresses bone self-repair and oxidative stress remains elusive. There is, therefore, still a clear need for further research aimed at devising alternative treatment modalities.
Current bone-regeneration paradigms predominantly bifurcate into two strategic pathways: scaffolds implanted with exogenous stem cells and scaffolds loaded with factors to recruit endogenous stem cells [ , ]. Both methods are thought to facilitate bone regeneration via paracrine actions of stem cells (MSCs). However, the ischemic environment in bone defects causes extreme deficiencies in nutrients and oxygen, making it difficult for transplanted MSCs, expanded ex vivo under optimal oxygen tension and nutrient-replete conditions, struggle to establish niche dominance over endogenous progenitor cells due to their maladaptation to the ischemic milieu [ , ]. Within weeks after transplantation, the MSCs undergo cell death and are subsequently cleared by macrophage-mediated phagocytosis [ ]. Beyond technical and commercialization challenges, safety concerns and regulatory complexities further impede the widespread clinical adoption of cell- and tissue-based therapeutics. To accelerate translational progress, the development of therapeutic strategies that circumvent ex vivo autologous cell expansion presents a significant advantage. Consequently, cell-free tissue engineering approaches, coupled with innovative biomaterial design, have emerged as promising alternatives to enhance intrinsic bone regeneration capacity [ , ]. Notably, MSC-derived exosomes (Exo) play a pivotal role in mediating intracellular signaling during this paracrine process [ ]. In contrast to stem cells and protein-based pharmaceuticals, the inherent multicomponent nature of Exo elicits complex and sustained cellular responses. This approach offers a safe, economical, and efficient alternative that circumvents the immunological and ethical constraints [ , ]. Numerous studies have shown that Exo can augment bone formation, blood vessel development, and mineral deposition, underscoring the promise of exosome-driven, cell-free therapeutic approaches [ , ]. Although mesenchymal stem cells-derived exosomes exhibit clear therapeutic potential, their therapeutic potential is significantly constrained when bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) are expanded using standard two-dimensional (2D) culture conditions monolayer culture systems [ ]. Compared with 2D monolayer cultivation, MSC three-dimensional (3D) aggregates have improved biological properties, leading to improved anti-inflammatory, angiogenic, and tissue regenerative effects [ , ]. Therefore, 3D-cultured MSCs-Exo (3D-Exo) exert improved regenerative potential via the transfer of functionally specialized cargo molecules. In particular, it has been demonstrated that 3D culture systems can enhance the overall production of exosomes more than 19-fold compared with traditional 2D culture methods [ ]. Therefore, 3D-cultured MSC-derived exosomes demonstrate increased yield and optimized internalization, resulting in significantly enhanced therapeutic performance.
Tissue regeneration involves dynamic, two-way interactions between cells and their extracellular matrix [ ]. This sophisticated interplay is markedly potentiated by biomaterial systems designed to sense and respond to local cellular dynamics, allowing precise tuning of their functional properties in accordance with native biological cues [ ]. In addition, bone defects frequently coincide with disruptions in the local microvasculature, thus presenting a major challenge for bone regeneration in hypoxic conditions caused by blood flow obstruction [ , ]. However, research on sustained oxygen supply systems for bone regeneration is still in the nascent phase, having issues that remain unsolved for clinical translation. In the field of bone regeneration, superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPION) have been shown to promote bone regeneration via enhanced osteogenesis and angiogenesis in bone models [ , ]. Due to their exceptional properties, including superior biocompatibility and superparamagnetic characteristics, superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPION) have emerged as an ideal candidate for magnetic hyperthermia therapy and MRI contrast enhancement. Given their significant role in promoting bone regeneration, SPION-incorporated bone scaffolds represent a promising strategy for bone defect repair [ , ]. Importantly, enzyme-mimicking SPION with good ROS scavenging ability and biocompatibility hold ample promise for the treatment of ROS-related inflammation [ ]. To further enhance the therapeutic efficacy of 3D-Exo, surface modification of metal nanoparticles via physical adsorption or chemical conjugation has great potential for bone repair.
Exosome-integrated bone scaffolds provide mechanical support for bone defect repair and create an optimal microenvironment conducive to bone regeneration [ , ]. While the majority of scaffolds demonstrate osteogenic potential, the incorporation of exosomes significantly augments their regenerative performance [ , ]. Bone engineering scaffolds integrated with exosomes demonstrate the ability to enhance osteogenic differentiation, vascularization, and inflammatory response modulation, with applications across multiple bone defect models [ ]. However, the long-term preservation of exosomes delivered via hydrogel encapsulation remains problematic, underscoring the demand for more stable and low-cost delivery methodologies [ ]. There is, therefore, the development of scaffold materials with superior osteoconductivity, robust osteoinduction, enhanced osteogenesis, and optimal mechanical support is urgently needed. DSS peptide exhibits preferential binding to bone-forming surfaces as opposed to resorption pits, which are characterized by low-crystallinity HA [ , ]. Notably, DSS6 exhibits a favorable affinity for mantle dentin, a structure composed of small and randomly oriented crystals, in contrast to the enamel surface, composed of elongated and well-aligned HA crystals. These characteristics render it an appealing targeting ligand because of its propensity to localize to newly formed bone, as opposed to established bone tissue [ ]. Therefore, DSS6-modified scaffolds can prolong exosome retention and enhance cell-free bone regeneration.
Exosomes derived from three-dimensional (3D) -cultured cells have emerged as a promising therapeutic strategy for bone tissue regeneration and repair, demonstrating significant potential in preclinical applications [ , ]. However, conventional methods for culturing 3D cell spheroids, including mold-based techniques, magnetic levitation, and rotational approaches [ , , ], are characterized by significant limitations such as time-consuming procedures, labor-intensive operations, poor cost-effectiveness, and technical complexity. In this study, 3D-Exo were isolated from 3D cell spheroids generated through the liquid overlay method, which offers distinct advantages including operational simplicity, enhanced exosome yield with superior biological efficacy, and improved cost-effectiveness compared to conventional approaches. Oxidative stress represents a persistent and primary impediment to bone repair, often lasting for several months during the healing process [ ].
Bone regeneration and repair are complex physiological process of bone formation, which is limited by hypoxic bone microenvironment and inefficient therapeutical agents for bone repair [ , ]. Although Bone tissue engineering (BTE) strategy containing scaffolds implanted with exogenous stem cells represents a promising therapeutic approach to bone repair [ , , ], however, the long-termed inhibition of hypoxic bone microenvironment for osteogenic differentiation and the short retention time of therapeutical agents are not considered simultaneously. Here, we developed a SPION-modified 3D-Exo, termed as 3D-SExo, for enhanced ROS scavenging and effective bone regeneration according to the needs of the bone defect site. After entrapment in bone-targeting peptide-modified GelMA, a composite hydrogel was obtained (3D-SExo/DGel), which can prolong the retention of exosomes to enhance cell-free bone regeneration. In addition, miRNA array technology was utilized to detect RNA composition differences in 3D-Exo, enabling a deeper understanding of the mechanisms and signaling pathways driving 3D-Exo-induced osteogenic differentiation, with miRNA transfection experiments providing functional validation. After implanting 3D-SExo/DGel into the bone defect region, 3D-SExo relief oxidative stress within 21 d and alleviate the inhibitory effect of ROS on β-catenin production, and the 3D-Exo releases microRNA (miR-122-5p) to activate the Wnt/β-catenin signal pathway, thereby increasing the content of β-catenin and facilitating cell-free bone regeneration.

2.

## Materials and methods
2.1.

## Preparation and characterization of 3D-Exo
3D-BMSC aggregates were prepared by using a liquid overlay method [ ]. Briefly, 2 % m/v agarose matrix was coated on the bottom of 96-well plates. OriCell® mouse BMSC were seeded in the agarose matrix pre-coated 96-well plates at a density of 104 cells/well. The complete medium of the OriCell® mouse BMSC was changed every day for one week, after which the BMSC aggregates were obtained. To prepare exosomes derived from BMSC aggregates, the complete culture media were changed to an exosome-free medium. Previous studies have demonstrated that cell viability within 3D spheroids remains relatively high during the initial three-week period post-preparation. To minimize potential interference from exosomes released by necrotic cells and ensure optimal therapeutic efficacy, we established a standardized protocol in which 3D-Exo were harvested within a two-week window, with culture supernatants systematically collected for subsequent exosome isolation [ , ]. Exosomes were purified and enriched from the culture supernatants of BMSC aggregates using ultracentrifugation techniques [ ], as outlined below. For exosome isolation, a centrifugation step at 10,000×g for 20 min was performed to remove cells and cellular debris. Larger extracellular vesicles were then removed by centrifugation at 100,000×g for 90 min. Finally, the precipitate was resuspended in PBS (KGL2206-500, KeyGen Biotech, Nanjing, China) and filtered through a 0.22 μm filter to obtain 3D-Exo, and protein quantification was performed using a NanoDrop™ One (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA). To detect exosome markers (CD9 and TSG 101), western blotting (WB) was performed with anti-CD9 (1:500, AF5139) and anti-TSG 101 antibodies (1:5000, AB125011).

2.2.

## Synthesis of 3D-SExo
0.3 mM 2-azidoacetic acid was subjected to a pretreatment procedure involving 0.1 M N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) and 0.2 M 1-(3-(dimethylamino) propyl)-3-ethylcarbodiimide (EDC) to activate the carboxyl groups of the linkers, enabling their reaction with the amino groups of SPION (1 mg/mL). Therefore, azide-modified SPION were synthesized. The purified 3D-Exo (1 mg/mL) were mixed with 3 mM DBCO-Sulfo-NHS and stirred in an ice bath for 4 h, resulting in the modified 3D-Exo. The 3D-SExo were then prepared using click chemistry [ ]. The azide-modified SPION and DBCO-modified 3D-Exo were mixed and stirred in an ice bath for 4 h, and the 3D-SExo were then purified by ultrafiltration to remove residue NHS/EDC.

2.3.

## Preparation of 3D-SExo/DGel
3D-SExo/DGel composite hydrogels were generated by mixing equal volumes (50 μL) of 3D-SExo (Exo protein concentration: 1 mg/mL) with 20 % w/v GelMA solution. After adding 5 μL of 0.25 % w/v photo initiator LAP, 3D-SExo/DGel composite hydrogels were obtained by exposure to a 405 nm UV light source for 1 min.

2.4.

## In vitro osteoblast assay
BMSC were cultured in a 6-well plate and maintained in co-culture with 3D-SExo/DGel in a hypoxic microenvironment. Upon achieving a cell fusion degree of 60 %, the BMSC culture medium was changed to OriCell® BMSC osteogenic differentiation culture medium (MUXMX-90021, OriCell®, Guangdong, China). After 3 days of induction, the cells were washed twice with PBS for 3 min under gentle conditions. After fixation with 1 mL of 4 % paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 15 min, ALP activity was determined by ALP staining using a BCIP/NBT Alkaline Phosphatase Color Development Kit (Beyotime, Shanghai, China). After 7 d of induction, the cells were gently washed twice with PBS for 3 min. Following this step, fixation was performed with 1 mL of 4 % PFA for 15 min, the calcium nodule formation was stained by an ARS Alizarin Red S kit (ALIR-10001, OriCell®) for 5 min.

2.5.

## In vitro miRNA interference
Overexpressed miR-122-5p (sequence: 5′UGGAGUGUGACAAUGGUGUU UUG 3′) was synthesized based on the sequencing results. BMSC were inoculated in 6-well plates. RNATransMate/siRNA complexes were prepared in accordance with the instructions provided by the manufacturer. Following transfection, the BMSC were continuously co-cultured with various materials in an anaerobic system for osteogenic induction. After 7 d of induction, the proteins of the cells in the 3D-SExo/DGel were extracted using a Whole Cell Lysis Assay (KeyGen Biotechnology Co. Ltd., Jiangsu, China) whole protein extraction kit. Western blotting was employed to measure the expression levels of proteins with antibodies against OCN (1:500, ab52903), β-Catenin (1:1000, 8084S), RNUX2 (1:300, A11753), OCN (1:600, A20800) and Collagen I (1:500, A22349).

2.6.

## The establishment of the mouse skull defect model and the implantation of 3D-SExo/DGel
All procedures were carried out in strict compliance with the Chinese National Guidelines for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Eight-week-old C57BL/6 wild-type mice were procured from Jiangsu Qing Longshan Biotechnology Co. The surgical operations and the handling during the perioperative period were carried out in line with the protocols sanctioned by the Ethics Committee of Wannan Medical College's Medical School (WNMC-AWE-2023393). The mice were housed in separate cages for a week prior to the surgery to acclimatize them to the environment. Isoflurane inhalation was used to induce anesthesia. A bone defect with a circular shape and full thickness (2.5 mm diameter) was created on top of the head using a drill [ , ]. 3D-SExo/DGel was then implanted into the defective areas of the mice. 4 and 8 weeks after implantation, the specimen of skull with different treatments were harvested and scanned using micro-computed tomography (SkyScan™ 1276, Bruker, Massachusetts, USA) to assess the regenerative status of the damaged regions. The calvarium's 3D morphology was reconstructed using Mimics software, and critical parameters, including bone volume/tissue volume (BV/TV) and bone mineral density (BMD), were computed. [ ]. In addition, the regions of skull defect after implantation of 3D-SExo/DGel were sectioned and stained with antibodies against OPN, NRF2, RUNX2, α-SMA, CD31, and β-catenin for immunofluorescence imaging.

2.7.

## In vivo ROS detection after 3D-SExo/DGel treatments
After treating mice with 3D-SExo/DGel for either 4 or 8 weeks, the skull bone defect regions of the mouse cranial defect model were analyzed using ROS Brite™ 700 (AAT Bioquest, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) to evaluate ROS production within the defect site. Prior to imaging, anesthesia was induced in the mice via isoflurane administration, and ROS Brite™ 700, at 100 μM in Hanks' balanced salt solution supplemented with 20 mM HEPES (HHBS), was injected directly into the cranial region. The C57BL/6 mice were then maintained under isoflurane anesthesia during imaging using an IVIS® Spectrum system (Caliper, USA). Regions of interest (ROIs) encompassing the defect sites were manually delineated and quantification of fluorescence intensities was performed with Living Image software (PerkinElmer).

3.

## Results and discussion
3.1.

## Preparation and characterization of engineered 3D-cultured MSC-Exo-based bone-targeted hydrogel (3D-SExo/DGel)
It has been shown that 3D-Exo have better therapeutic effects compared with 2D exosomes as a result of being able to transfer specific cargoes [ ]. Nevertheless, whether 3D-Exo promote bone repair has not been investigated to date. Therefore, we isolated 3D-Exo from the serum-free supernatants of BMSC aggregates prepared by using a liquid overlay method [ ]. As shown in , the BMSC in the 3D culture system underwent spontaneous aggregation, resulting in the formation of dense multicellular spheroids with diameters of 200 μm after 14 d of incubation. In addition, clear green signals of the ROS dye were observed in the 3D-BMSC spheroids compared with the 2D-BMSC ( ). Calcein-AM/PI double staining revealed a distinct population of dead cells (red fluorescence) ( ), indicating the presence of scattered dead cells in the periphery of 3D spheroids, though their quantity was relatively limited. Existing studies have revealed that dead cells primarily release apoptotic bodies rather than actively secreting exosomes. Numerous studies have demonstrated the detrimental effects of apoptosomes, including their roles in promoting inflammation, tumorigenesis, and autoimmune diseases [ , , ]. Previous investigations have shown that cell spheroids maintain minimal cell death within two weeks post-fabrication [ ]. As evidenced by live/dead staining in , no significant apoptotic cells were observed in the spheroid core at the two-week time point. In addition, sparse dead cell fragments were occasionally detected at the periphery. We therefore exclusively isolated 3D-Exo from the supernatant spheroids within two-weeks to avoid the negative influence of apoptosomes for bone repair. It has been reported that exosomes derived from hypoxic conditions demonstrate superior therapeutic efficacy compared to normoxic exosomes in promoting spinal cord injury repair and promoting angiogenesis [ , ], indicating that 3D-BMSC spheroid-derived exosomes have great promise for tissue repair. 3D-Exo were purified using a standard serial ultracentrifugation method [ ]. The exosome pellets were resuspended in PBS and maintained at −80 °C for subsequent applications [ ]. Hypoxic conditions represent a primary factor contributing to the diminished therapeutic efficacy in bone regeneration [ , ]. Furthermore, hypoxic conditions elevate the production of proinflammatory mediators, including ROS [ ]. We performed Hypoxyprobe™ staining of fracture sites in humans at different times. As shown in , stronger levels of green signals (Hypoxyprobe™ signal: ROS) were observed at fracture nonunion than at 1 month after bone fracture, which was three-fold higher than that at 1 d after bone fracture. Some large detached tissues were visible when the fracture was nonunion. Although many ROS-scavenging systems have been reported for bone regeneration, they are still in the early stages of development, with unsolved issues for clinical translation [ ]. SPION, approved by the FDA as magnetic resonance imaging contrast agents, have been shown to promote bone regeneration in bone models via enhanced osteogenesis and angiogenesis [ , ]. Owing to key properties of SPION, due to their superior biocompatibility and superparamagnetic characteristics, they are highly effective as ROS scavengers [ , ]. Therefore, we engineered 3D-Exo with SPION that effectively relieved hypoxia to improve bone regeneration ( B). First, the surface proteins of the 3D-Exo were modified using DBCO-sulfo-NHS to carry out the click chemistry reaction [ ]. As shown in , D-SExo were acquired through the use of copper-free click chemistry. In this process, the DBCO groups on the exosomes were linked to azide-functionalized SPION, resulting in the formation of stable triazole linkages. The 3D-Exo exhibited an average diameter of around 79 nm and zeta potential of −30 mV were round ( ) and well-dispersed, as measured by TEM ( B and S7). After engineering with SPION, the exosomes' mean diameter increased to 108 nm, and the zeta potential of the 3D-Exo remained almost constant ( ). NTA was also utilized to evaluate the size distributions, and the results indicated that the highest peak of both profiles was about 139 nm ( C and S8), which was slightly bigger than that of the 3D-Exo (133 nm). Significantly, Western blot (WB) experiments validated the existence and enrichment of crucial surface antigens, including CD9 and TSG 101 on both the 3D-Exo and 3D-SExo ( D), indicate that the SPION modification process did not compromise the functional integrity of 3D-Exo.
 GelMA, which is a photosensitive hydrogel with the properties of biocompatibility and biodegradability, is widely employed in various tissue engineering scenarios [ ]. The high-water content inherent in GelMA hydrogel furnishes a 3D environment similar to that of tissues and with good biocompatibility for the culture of bone-related cells. In addition, the loose internal environment is conducive to the generation of bone tissue [ , , ]. To further enhance osteoconductivity, we conjugated the bone-targeting peptide DSS6 to the GelMA hydrogel (Gel-DSS6) [ , ] ( A). 3D-BMSC exosome-based hydrogels (3D-SExo/DGel) were constructed by encapsulation of 3D-SExo in Gel-DSS6 solution ( E). Gel-DSS6 exhibited a porous structure in the SEM images at low magnification, and rounded 3D-SExo were observed on the surface of the 3D-SExo/DGel at high magnification ( F and S9). In the 3D-SExo/DGel, the pores permitted the effective spread of oxygen, nutrients, and waste within a 3D setting. Additionally, they facilitated cell motility, which led to its great potential in facilitating the generation of bone tissue [ , ]. Moreover, we performed elemental mapping of the Gel-DSS6 and 3D-SExo/DGel, and we found a large amount of iron on the surface of the 3D-SExo/DGel, which, by contrast, was not found on the surface of the Gel-DSS6 ( G and S10). Moreover, the ratio of iron to exosome mass in the 3D-SExo was approximately 3.3 ng/mg as measured by ICP-MS ( ). These results indicated successful modification of SPION on 3D-SExo. Moreover, according to the mechanical test results, the Young's modulus of the composite hydrogels with 3D-SExo content was comparatively low (9 %) ( H), suggesting that the encapsulation of 3D-SExo did not affect the resilience of the DSS-modified hydrogel. More importantly, the 3D-SExo/DGel could effectively eliminate ROS, with a residual ROS fluorescence intensity of 16 % of that of the 3D-Exo ( I), indicating good ROS scavenging by the 3D-SExo/DGel.
The burst release of growth factors or drugs is prone to cause poisoning or waste because of high local concentrations, or it may be rapidly eliminated due to the absence of protection [ ]. Many studies have revealed that when GelMA is added to microcarrier or nanocarrier systems, it can bring about the long-term release of growth factors, therefore, it can be employed for local factor or drug delivery, with excellent bioavailability in vivo being achieved [ , ]. As shown in J, compared with exosomes, the release of exosomes from the 3D-SExo/DGel was distinctly slower, with 85 % of the exosomes released under physiological conditions (pH 7.4) over a 15-day period, demonstrating that GelMA significantly extends the sustained release of exosomes.

3.2.

## 3D-SExo/DGel promotes angiogenesis in vitro
Although hydrogels can eliminate ROS during the initial stages of tissue repair, the prolonged duration of vascular and tissue healing often exceeds the 3D-Exo supply capacity. To address this issue, we investigated the effect of the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel on human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) migration ( A). HUVEC migration in the 3D-SExo group was approximately 2.9-fold higher compared with the control (Con) and GelMA groups, which was 86 % of that of the 3D-SExo/DGel group ( B and C). These results suggest that sustained release of 3D-SExo from 3D-SExo/DGel enhances the migration of endothelial cells under hypoxic conditions. Furthermore, an angiogenic potential assessment of the 3D-SExo/DGel was carried out by performing a tube formation assay with Matrigel®. Extensive primary vascular-like networks characterized by tubular structures radiating from cellular aggregates were observed in the 3D-SExo/DGel group ( D and E), which were much higher than those in the 3D-SExo group. In addition, the 3D-SExo/DGel group outperformed the other groups in terms of the total junction count ( F) and cumulative vessel length ( G), confirming its potential efficacy in promoting endothelial cell organization into vascular structures under hypoxic conditions in vivo [ , ].

3.3.

## 3D-SExo/DGel promote osteoblasts in vitro
Developed from mesenchymal progenitor cells that exist in the inner and outer periosteum and the bone marrow matrix alike, osteoblasts are cells arranged monolayer-wise on the bone surface [ ]. These cells assume essential responsibilities in the processes of bone matrix synthesis, secretion, and mineralization, thereby influencing both bone formation and remodeling [ , ]. Studies have indicated that hypoxic conditions and excessive ROS production can impede osteoblast growth and differentiation [ , ]. The inhibitory phenomenon could be traced back to the decreased expression level and enfeebled activity of RUNX2 (early marker of osteogenic differentiation) [ , ] within such conditions. As a result, the development of pluripotent mesenchymal cells into immature osteoblasts was impeded [ ]. We therefore evaluated the ability of 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel on the scavenging of ROS and osteogenic differentiation capacity by co-culturing the hydrogel along with BMSC in an oxygen-deficient environment ( A). As shown in , the fluorescence intensity of the 3D-Exo group was significantly lower than that of the 2D-Exo group, indicating that 3D-Exo possess a stronger ROS scavenging ability compared to 2D-Exo. In addition, BMSC treated with 3D-SExo/DGel exhibited a significant reduction in ROS levels ( B), visualized by green condition of BMSC under hypoxic conditions was significantly reduced by the 3D-SExo/DGel. Quantitative analysis showed ROS levels in the 3D-SExo/DGel group were 49 % of those in the Con group ( C). The highest RUNX2 expression level, a crucial transcription factor for osteogenic differentiation [ , ], was found in the 3D-SExo/DGel group ( D). The 3D-SExo/DGel group also showed absolute superiority in the expression of OCN (late stage of the process) [ ] ( E and F), the predominant non-collagenous protein in bone tissue, with specific expression localized to osteoblasts [ ].
 To further confirm the impact of 3D-SExo/DGel on the complete osteogenic differentiation process, Staining methods including ALP staining and alizarin red staining were utilized to inspect the early-phase osteogenic differentiation and the generation of late-phase calcium nodules, respectively. The osteogenic induction of BMSC is passage-dependent, with earlier passages demonstrating better osteogenic induction effects and requiring shorter induction times [ ], we therefore applied P3 passage of BMSC to evaluate the osteogenic induction of 3D-SExo/DGel with ALP staining on day 3 and ARS staining on day 7 [ , , ]. As shown in G and H, the ALP staining in the 3D-SExo/DGel group outperformed that in the 3D-Exo group, suggesting enhanced ALP expression during the early phases of osteogenic differentiation. The modified 3D-SExo exhibited significantly enhanced osteogenic induction capacity, as demonstrated by the prominent calcium nodule formation visualized through Alizarin Red staining as early as day 7 [ ]. In addition, alizarin red staining result of cells following 7-day induction exhibited a parallel trend to the ALP staining result. The expression of calcium nodules stained with alizarin red in the 3D-Exo group was 1.4-fold higher than that in the Con group by quantitative analysis, whereas in the 3D-SExo/DGel group, the value reached up to three times that of the Con group ( I and J). Importantly, 3D-SExo/DGel group exhibited a remarkable two-week acceleration compared to the osteogenic differentiation timeline previously reported for conventional 3D-Exo [ ]. These results show that the 3D-SExo/DGel reduced ROS in BMSC, thereby promoting osteogenic differentiation in vitro.

3.4.

## 3D-SExo/DGel enhances osteogenic differentiation in vitro through the Wnt/β - catenin pathway
Exosomes regulate physiological processes in cells and tissues by carrying microRNAs (miRNAs) [ , ]. miRNAs play crucial roles as important components of signal transmission in exosomes and regulate physiological and pathological processes [ , , ]. 3D-Exo have higher yields and better therapeutic effects compared with 2D-Exo [ , ]. Moreover, the 3D-SExo/DGel exhibited excellent osteogenic and proangiogenic effects in vitro. Meanwhile, we have performed the experiment to evaluate the osteogenic differentiation capacity of 2D-Exo and 3D-Exo in vitro and in vivo. As shown in , compared with the 2D-Exo group, the 3D-Exo group exhibited significantly stronger positive staining signals of ALP in the in vitro osteogenic induction assay, indicating that 3D-Exo has a stronger osteogenic induction capacity over 2D-Exo. Importantly, as shown in , Micro-CT analysis revealed that the bone volume repaired by the 3D-Exo group was greater than that in 2D-Exo group, further confirming the superior osteogenic potential of 3D-Exo. Therefore, we speculate that the increased expression of certain miRNAs in 3D-Exo compared with 2D-Exo could activate the regulation of physiological processes to promote osteogenesis. Hence, we carried out miRNA sequencing to detect the miRNAs that were differentially expressed in 2D-Exo and 3D-Exo. Compared with the 2D-Exo group, there were 138 upregulated miRNAs and 347 downregulated miRNAs (≥2-fold, P < 0.05) in the 3D-Exo group ( A). In addition, we filtered out miRNAs with relatively low abundance and selected 5 upregulated and 10 downregulated DEGs between 2D-Exo and 3D-Exo ( B). Among the upregulated DEGs, miR-122-5p [ ] has been shown to promote osteogenesis, while miR-363-3p [ ] and miR-144-5p [ ] have the potential to inhibit osteogenesis. Importantly, miR-122-5p expression demonstrated a significantly higher value compared to miR-144-5p and miR-363-3p in 3D-Exo. It has been reported that miR-122-5p can activate the TGF-β/SMAD3 pathway [ , ] and the Wnt/β-catenin pathway to enhance tissue regeneration [ ]. Moreover, the enrichment maps from GO and KEGG pathways indicate that the DEGs are enriched in the Wnt and TGF-β pathways, which regulate cell differentiation [ ] and proliferation [ ], respectively ( C and D). TGF-β can promote phosphorylation of receptor-activated SMAD3 on two sites close to the COOH-terminus, and then upregulate the expression of markers for osteoblast differentiation [ ]. Moreover, TGF-β promotes osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells by activating the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway.
 ROS can reduce β-catenin production by inhibiting tissue repair. Therefore, we performed miRNA transfection experiments to investigate whether the 3D-SExo/DGel activates the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway by reducing ROS. As shown in E, compared with the Con group, the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel group could significantly upregulate TGF-β1, SMAD3, p-SMAD3, and β-catenin levels in BMSC under hypoxic conditions, resulting in the upregulation of osteogenic-related proteins, including Col I and OCN. In addition, the Con and SPION groups showed increased expression of osteogenic pathway-related proteins in BMSC under hypoxic conditions following miR-122-5p transfection. The expression profiles of multiple proteins in the SPION group transfected with miR-122-5p were similar to those in the 3D-SExo/DGel group without miR-122-5p transfection. In addition, the expression levels of TGF-β1, SMAD3, p-SMAD3, and β-catenin were clearly increased in the 3D-SExo/DGel group with miR-122-5p transfection compared with the Con group ( ), demonstrating the enhanced osteogenic differentiation of BMSC. As shown in F, the count of BMSC exhibiting ALP-positive staining in the Con and SPION groups transfected with miR-122-5p was two-fold higher than that in the Con group, which was slightly lower than that in the 3D-SExo/DGel group without miR-122-5p transfection ( ). The ALP positivity rate of the BMSC in the 3D-SExo/DGel group further increased after miR-122-5p transfection, indicating that miR-122-5p can increase the expression of ALP during early osteogenic differentiation. Furthermore, Consistent patterns were detected during the late phase of osteogenic differentiation, as assessed by alizarin red staining ( G and S16B). This indicates that miR-122-5p can significantly enhance the formation of the mineralized matrix in the Con and SPION groups.
Therefore, these results indicate that the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel can alleviate the inhibitory effects of ROS on β-catenin production and promote osteogenic differentiation of BMSC through miR-122-5p in 3D-Exo by activating the Wnt/β-Catenin pathway ( H).

3.5.

## 3D-SExo/DGel promotes osteogenesis in vivo
3D-SExo/DGel reduced the ROS levels in BMSC under hypoxic conditions, thereby promoting osteogenic differentiation in vitro ( D). To evaluate the ability of the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel is utilized to facilitate the regeneration of bone defects in vivo, we constructed a mouse model of cranial bone defects ( A). As shown in B, through 3D reconstruction of the micro-CT images, it was observed that the Con group still possessed a large range of bone defects at both 4 and 8 weeks. Since DSS6 modification can improve bone osteoconductivity, in comparison with that in the Con group, the bone defect area was diminished after implantation with Gel-DSS6. However, the defect was still evident at 8 weeks and exhibited a slight reduction relative to the 3D-Exo group. In addition, although the bone defect area of the 3D-SExo group was further reduced compared with that of the aforementioned three groups, the bone defect failed to be completely repaired after 4 and 8 weeks of implantation. For cell-free bone regeneration, engineering tools and the application of biological knowledge of smart materials can enhance the innate regenerative capacity of bone [ ] 3D-SExo can promote osteogenic differentiation of BMSC under hypoxic conditions through miR-122-5p in 3D-Exo. Gel-DSS6 was designed to improve the retention time in the bone defect region. The 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel showed the best bone-defect regenerative ability at both observation time points, and at 8 weeks, the bone defects had become barely discernible. These experimental results demonstrate that the 3D-SExo/DGel shows a remarkable capacity for bone defect regeneration in vivo. Quantitative analysis of the bone volume fraction (BV/TV) and bone mineral density (BMD) within the defect site further validated this observation [ , ]. As shown in C and D, the quantitative results showed that at 4 weeks of implantation of Gel-DSS6 containing 3D-SExo, the BV/TV and BMD in the defect area were 3-fold and 2.3-fold greater than those in the control group when contrasted. After 8 weeks of implantation, the BV/TV value in the 3D-SExo/DGel group was approximately 4-fold higher than that in the control group. Moreover, the BMD of the 3D-SExo group was slightly higher than that of the Con and Gel-DSS6 groups, but half that of the 3D-SExo/DGel group. H&E staining was carried out to explore the micromorphological features of the 3D-SExo/DGel treated defects. ( E). In the Con group, at 8 weeks, only a substantial quantity of new bone formation was observed, accompanied by large segmental bone loss. A substantial quantity of new bone formation was observed in the Gel-DSS6, 3D-Exo, and 3D-SExo groups, all of which exhibited similar histological results. In contrast to the Con group, the bone defect area in these three groups was remarkably diminished. However, owing to the lack of osteoinductivity in the Gel-DSS6 group and the lack of osteoconductivity in the 3D-Exo and 3D-SExo groups, the regenerative efficiency of these groups was limited and the bone defect was not completely repaired. Correspondingly, the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel can simultaneously promote the proliferation and differentiation of BMSC, ultimately mediating new bone formation and complete bridging of the injury site. Overall, the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel-based cell-free bone regeneration exhibited excellent bone regenerative capacity at the implantation site.
 The bone-targeting peptide DSS6 has been shown to preferentially bind to bone-forming surfaces over resorption pits where there is low crystallinity HA [ ]. We performed in vivo imaging study to evaluate whether 3D-SExo/Gel can prolong the retention time of exosome. DiR-labeled 3D-SExo was entrapped GelMA without DSS modification, and DiR labeled 3D-SExo/Gel was obtained. After implanted into the defect site, in vivo images were acquired at designated time points post-implantation using an IVIS® Spectrum system (Caliper Life Sciences, USA), and regions of interest (ROIs) were drawn around the defect area to analyze fluorescence intensity with Living Image® software. As shown in Fig. S17, the fluorescence intensity of 3D-SExo/DGel decreased more slowly in the bone defect regions, compared to 3D-SExo/Gel within 9 days-post implantations. The results indicated that DSS6 modification on 3D-SExo/DGel can enhance bone adsorption, prolongs the retention time of exosome, and therefore improve cell-free bone regeneration. Considering that most bones take several weeks or months to heal fully, DSS6 modification significantly prolongs the retention time of exosomes at bone defect sites, thereby enhancing the bone repair. capability of 3D-SExo/DGel. In addition, the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel prolonged the in vitro release time of Exo over the course of 34 d ( J). As DSS6 modification of the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel can improve bone osteoconductivity in vivo, we investigated the in vivo retention time of DiR-labeled 3D-SExo/DGel using an IVIS® imaging system. The distribution of DiR-labeled 3D-SExo/DGel in the brain region was visualized, and the intensity of the DiR signal was measured within 21 days ( F). As shown in G, the fluorescence intensity in the cranial defect area of mice in the DiR-3D-Exo and DiR-3D-SExo groups decreased significantly by day 7, indicating that the 3D-Exo were almost fully released. Correspondingly, in the mice in the 3D-SExo/DGel group, significant fluorescence was still observed after 7 d, and the total release time of the 3D-Exo in vivo exceeded 21 d. These results indicate that bone-targeting peptide-modified GelMA hydrogel can reduce the release rate of internally encapsulated growth factors from 3D-Exo, which can effectively enhance cell-free bone regeneration.
Therefore, the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel could prolong the release time of 3D-Exo by 21 d in vivo, which could promote bone repair in mice with cranial bone defects. Through H&E staining ( ) and blood tests, we found that the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel had good in vivo biological safety ( , ).

3.6.

## 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel relieves the hypoxic microenvironment of bone defect regions in vivo
Ruptured blood vessels in bone defects create a hypoxic environment, and metabolic waste can further exacerbate osteocyte hypoxia in a reversible manner [ , ]. In addition, oxidative stress occurs in the bone-defect area under hypoxic conditions, and the resulting ROS significantly inhibit bone regeneration [ ]. In this study, we determined that the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel can scavenge ROS ( B), promote tube formation ( E), and enhance osteogenesis via activation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway. Therefore, we performed in vivo ROS imaging to investigate whether the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel could alleviate the hypoxic conditions within the bone defect regions of mice ( A).
 The results of the in vivo ROS imaging are shown in B and D. In the Con group, cells within the bone defect region were confirmed to be under oxidative stress, with ROS levels significantly elevated compared to other groups at both 4 and 8 weeks. In contrast, the ROS levels in the 3D-Exo and 3D-SExo groups were substantially lower than those in the Gel-DSS6 group. Furthermore, and the 3D-SExo group exhibited better results than the 3D-Exo group. These results indicate that the 3D-Exo had a partial ROS-scavenging effect in vivo, and this ability was further enhanced when loaded with SPION. Notably, compared with those at 4 weeks, the levels of ROS in the 3D-Exo and 3D-SExo groups showed a restricted decline at 8 weeks. This could be associated with the fast release of Exo in the bone defect area. Among all groups, the 3D-SExo/DGel group exhibited the greatest ROS scavenging ability, with ROS levels being 40 % of those in the Con group at 4 weeks and only 12 % of those in the Con group and 25 % of those in the 3D-SExo group at 8 weeks. These findings indicate that cells in the bone defect area are exposed to high levels of oxidative stress and that the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel can effectively eliminate oxidative stress by continuously and stably releasing 3D-SExo.
SPION convert ROS into oxygen, enabling the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel to reverse the hypoxic microenvironment [ ]. To further verify the ROS-scavenging ability of the 3D-SExo/DGel, Ex vivo ROS imaging studies were performed using Hypoxyprobe™ [ ]. As shown in C and E, after 4 weeks, a significant quantity of green signals (Hypoxyprobe™ signal: ROS) was detected in the cranial defect sections of the Con group. This finding corroborated that the cells within the bone defect area were hypoxic, and this result was consistent with the previous literature reports [ ]. Quantitative examination of the Hypoxyprobe™ signal illustrated that the relative fluorescence intensity of the bone defect area after Gel-DSS6 hydrogel implantation was not markedly different from that of the Con group. Although it was observed that the 3D-Exo group could mitigate the oxygen-deficient conditions in the bone defect area to some extent, there were still obvious differences compared with the 3D-SExo group, which could be attributed to the effect of SPION. Owing to the more sustained release of 3D-SExo, the 3D-SExo/DGel group had the lowest level of hypoxia in the bone defect area, the fluorescence intensity of which was only 10 % of that in the Con group. These results indicated that the 3D-SExo in the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel helped relieve the hypoxic microenvironment, and 3D-SExo/DGel prolonged the time of hypoxic alleviation to 8 weeks. Therefore, the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel, which can effectively restore the hypoxic conditions of the bone microenvironment and extend the retention time, has great potential for promoting bone repair in cell-free approaches.

3.7.

## 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel promotes bone repair by activating β-catenin signaling in vivo
Since the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel could promote bone repair in a bone defect mouse model at 8 weeks, we further identified the function of the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel at the protein level using immunofluorescence (IF) staining experiments ( F). In bone tissue, OPN serves as one of the primary constituents of the extracellular matrix [ ]. As shown in F, lower expression of OPN (green signal) was detected in the newly formed bone in the Con and Gel-DSS6 groups than in the other groups. However, OPN expression was significantly upregulated in the 3D-Exo and 3D-SExo groups relative to the Gel-DSS6 group, while showed lower expression compared to the 3D-SExo/DGel group ( ). The trend of these results was consistent with the in vitro experiments ( G), indicating that 3D-SExo/DGel can promote the formation of OPN during both in vivo and in vitro osteogenic differentiation.
NRF2 is a critical regulatory protein that plays a central role in redox homeostasis [ ]. Under oxidative stress, NRF2 in cells can be activated to resist the damage caused by ROS [ ]. RUNX2 is an important transcription factor that is involved in osteogenic differentiation [ ]. To investigate whether the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel can regulate these two proteins in osteoblasts in vivo, we performed colocalization studies of NRF2 and RUNX2 in the bone defect region. In the Con group, clear expression of NRF2 (green signal) was observed on the surface of the newly formed bone periosteum, which mainly contained osteoblasts [ ]. However, negligible expression of RUNX2 (red signal) was observed in the same region. The NRF2 and RUNX2 expression in the Gel-DSS6 group were similar to those in the control group. However, it was difficult to observe NRF2 expression in the periosteum in the 3D-SExo/DGel group, and the RUNX2 fluorescence intensity significantly increased in the same region ( ). These results indicate that the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel could effectively downregulate NRF2 in the bone-defect region by scavenging ROS, thereby promoting the expression of RUNX2.
We preliminarily verified that the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel promotes HUVEC tube formation. Therefore, we further performed co-localization studies of CD31 and α-SMA in bone defect regions to evaluate the angiogenic ability of the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel. CD31 (red signal) is an endothelial marker while α-SMA (green signal) is a smooth cell marker, and the combined expression of these two markers can help with accurate assessment of the formation of blood vessels [ , ]. Only a few newly formed blood vessels were observed in the Gel-DSS6 and Con groups ( ). However, there was a large amount of neovascularization in the bone defect area of the 3D-SExo/DGel group, which was greater than that in the 3D-SExo and 3D-Exo groups. These results hence show that the 3D-SExo/DGel can facilitate angiogenesis in vivo.
By conducting in vitro experiments, we demonstrated that β-catenin exerts a crucial influence in facilitating bone repair. Moreover, we also examined the expression of β-catenin in osteoblasts at the site of bone defects in vivo. As shown in F, the expression of β-catenin in the periosteum of newly formed bone was challenging to detect in the Con and Gel-DSS6 groups, while a small number of β-catenin-positive osteoblasts could be discerned in the 3D-Exo and 3D-SExo groups. In the 3D-SExo/DGel group, large β-catenin positive areas could be observed at the periosteum, indicating that the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel alleviated the inhibitory effect of ROS on β-catenin production ( ).
Therefore, 3D-SExo/DGel can improve the oxidative stress microenvironment, restore cell function, and promote the expression of osteogenesis-related proteins such as OPN and RUNX2 by upregulating β-catenin.

4.

## Conclusion
In this work, we developed an engineered 3D-BMSC exosome-based hydrogel capable of collaboratively regulating the bone microenvironment and promoting osteogenesis to enhance cell-free bone regeneration. This 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel exerted osteoconductivity in the bone defect area through bone-targeting peptide-modified GelMA (Gel-DSS6) and controlled the release of 3D-cultured MSC-derived exosomes with SPION modification, designated 3D-SExo. These 3D-SExo can alleviate oxidative stress in BMSC through the combined action of 3D-Exo and SPION, which is capable of further enhancing the hypoxic microenvironment in the bone defect area by converting ROS into oxygen. More importantly, the 3D-SExo/DGel hydrogel can also able to facilitate osteogenic differentiation via the Wnt/β-catenin pathway mediated by miR-122-5p from 3D-Exo, ultimately significantly facilitating bone regeneration. Consequently, a newly-developed functional hydrogel with the capacity to regulate the release of engineered 3D - Exo is anticipated to offer a novel and efficient treatment approach for bone defects.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Kai Xiang: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation. Muwei Hao: Validation, Supervision, Software. Zheng Zhang: Supervision, Software. Keyi Zhang: Validation, Data curation. Han Sun: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Lei Zhang: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Anhui Provincial Natural Science Foundation(2308085Y45), National Science Foundation of China (Grant No 82404747, 32371408), The Open Project of State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines (SKLNMKF200310), Program for Excellent Sci-tech Innovation Teams of Universities in Anhui Province(2023AH010073), Wuhu Science and Technology Department project (2023jc22), Natural Science Research Project of Anhui Educational Committee (2024AH040237), Doctoral Scientific Research Start-up Foundation of Wannan Medical College(WYRCQD2023016), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2023M740374), Jiangsu Provincial Association for Science and Technology Youth Science and Technology Talent Training Project (TJ-2023-026), Top Talent of Changzhou “The 14th Five-Year Plan” High-Level Health Talents Training Project (2022260).

## Footnotes
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2025.101881.

## Contributor Information
Han Sun, Email: sh4060@suda.edu.cn.
Lei Zhang, Email: dg1634031@smail.nju.edu.cn.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary data
The following is the Supplementary data to this article.

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Data availability
Data will be made available on request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Data Availability Statement
Data will be made available on request.