pmcAnn NeurosciAnn Neurosci2424annneuro101523367AONAnnals of Neurosciences0972-75310976-3260SAGE PublicationsPMC10829571PMC10829571.1108295711082957110.1177/0972753123120577210.1177_097275312312057721AbstractsXLI Annual Meeting of the Indian Academy of Neurosciences and
International Conference on BRAIN: CHEMISTRY TO COGNITION
PatroIshanPatroNishaSchool of Studies in Zoology and Neuroscience, Jiwaji
University 474 011, India.
E-mail:
ishanpatro@gmail.com

E-mail:
nishapatro@gmail.com
3012024122023301 Suppl4546753139011220230102202408092025© The Author(s) 20232023Indian Academy of Neurosciences
(IAN)https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access page (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NCtypesetterts7
October 4–6, 2023 Jiwaji University, Gwalior

## Foreword
I take the opportunity to congratulate the Academy for choosing such an important,
currently relevant subject for the International Conference. I deeply regret my
inability to be personality participating in this academic feast. However, I wish to
share with you some historical vignettes on the subject through this message.
The use of drugs—chemical or plant derived—to affect conscious state in
humans goes back almost to the origin of humanity. The pollens of eight medicinal
plants were deposited in a 60,000 years old tomb in Iraq. Opium poppies and cannabis
were mentioned in prehistoric documents. Alcohol use has been mentioned in both the
old and the new testament. It was used by Bacchus community in ancient Greece.
In respect to India, as far as the recorded history goes, the earliest instances of
rational medical knowledge are found in the Rigveda and
Atharvaveda, both of the second millennium B.C. Archaeological
excavations of the third century. These indicate a high level of knowledge of
physical and chemical sciences, likely to be matched by a similar knowledge of
medicinal plants and drugs derived thereof.
Coming to more recent times, it was not till 1897 when Sherrington described the
synapse that the role of chemicals in the functioning of the nervous system
stimulated research in this field. It was John Langley, a contemporary of
Sherrington, who provided evidence that at most synapses signalling between neurons
was chemical in nature. However, Langley’s studies were restricted to
peripheral and autonomic nervous system. Around the same time Adrian, Eccles and
others were investigating the role of electrical activity at the synapses.
The intense debate about the role of chemical or electrical activity in
inter-neuronal transmission continued till 1920 when experiments carried out by Otto
Loewi and Henry Dale established the primary role of chemical transmission as
against the proposed electrical theory. This was further confirmed a few years later
by the work of Julius Axelrod and Raymond Ahlquist.
With advances in research methodologies like intracellular recording,
microiontophoresis on single cells and fluorometric techniques for measuring the
neurotransmitters, Arvid Carlsson, a pharmacologist from Sweden, established the
role of chemical neurotransmitters in the central nervous systems around the 1950s.
Interestingly, he and his colleagues used reserpine to study its effect on cerebral
catecholamines. As you know reserpine, a derivative of Rauwolfia Serpentina, has
been the subject of pioneering studies by Colonel R.N. Chopra, Professor B.B. Bhatia
and a host of their pharmacological colleagues and Dr Rustom J.L. Vakil in India
established its therapeutic use as an antihypertensive and a sedative, the first
such drug for the treatment of these two clinical conditions. The work on Serpasil
in USA and Sweden was triggered by these Indians studies (Tandon 2021). After
persistent efforts, Carlsson along with a number of his Swedish
Colleagues—chemists and pharmacologist—established the methodology to
localise dopamine, nor epinephrine and serotonin in the brain. This ultimately led
to the use of L-DOPA as a treatment for Parkinson’s disease and laid the
foundation for the role of chemicals in cognitive activity disorders.
The past couple of decades following the advent of non-invasive neuroimaging and
other investigations have witnessed an explosion of development of the cognitive
science. This is further enhanced by the study of cognitive functions in healthy
volunteers.
I am sure the multifaceted contribution of the participants of this International
Conference would add to the development of this field.
I once again congratulate the organisers of this conference, specially its President
Prof. Ishan Patro and his team, to collect such distinguished investigators.

P.N. Tandon

National Research Professor

Reading Material Suggested

Bose DN, Sen SN, Subbarayappa BV (eds.). A Concise History of Science in
India, Second Edition. Indian National Science Academy, 2009.
D’Esposito M (ed.). Neurological Foundation of Cognitive
Neuroscience. MIT Press, 2003.
Tandon PN, Chandra PS. Evolution of Neurosciences: A Historical Review with Brief
Biographics of Its Selected Pioneers. Neuro India 2022 Jul 1;
70(7): 1.
Tandon PN. Indian Rauwolfia Research Led to the Evolution of Neuropsychopharmacology
and the 2000 Nobel Prize (Part I & II). Indian J Med Res 2021;
154(1): 163–168, 169–174.
The Brain. Daedalus, Spring 1998; 127(2).

## B.K. Bachhawat Life Time Achievement Award

## Epidemic of Misdiagnosis Vitamin B12 Deficiency: Time to Act

U.K. Misra1,2

1TSM Medical College, Apollo Medics Super Specialty Hospital, Lucknow,
Uttar Pradesh, India
2Vivekanand Polyclinic & Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow,
Uttar Pradesh, India
The history of vitamin B12, ‘nature’s most beneficial
cofactor’, is a saga of clinical research in which ironically the
treatment preceded the understanding of pathogenesis and is credited by two
Nobel prizes. Vitamin B12 deficiency (VBD) is often undiagnosed or blindly
treated. Somatosensory-evoked potentials are most frequently abnormal
(87%) compared to visual (63%) and motor (57%), suggesting
the vulnerability of somatosensory pathways to vitamin B12. In VBD patients with
and without parietal cell antibodies, there was no difference in the
presentation, severity or outcome probably to final common pathway. Diverse
neuropsychiatric symptoms (anxiety, depression, delirium, psychosis,
schizophreniform psychosis, dementia) are associated with VBD, which overshadows
the typical symptoms. The neuropsychiatric evaluation in 32 patients with VBD
suggested the involvement of fronto-temporal cortex which was supported by SPECT
studies. The cognitive-evoked potential (P300) was prolonged and imported
following treatment. In 30% hospitalised patients with VBD, micturition
disturbance was noted and urodynamic study revealed detrusor are flexia and
neurogenic over activity with high pressure voiding. Optic nerve involvement of
VBD revealed asymptomatic prolongation of P100 of visual-evoked potential
without any visual impairment. There is a controversy about the presence of
peripheral neuropathy in B12 deficiency. A nerve conduction study in 68 patients
revealed mixed sensory motor changes which improved following treatment. Sural
nerve biopsy revealed axonal breakdown, myelin loss and remyelination Rarely VBD
can result in acute discriminated encephalomyelitis like picture, seizure and
status epilepticus. Vitamin B12 deficiency is associated with venous sinus
thrombosis and stroke with possibility of prevention by vitamin B12. In children
the clinical picture is very different from adults leading to physical and
mental retardation, seizure and movement disorders. The underlying pathology in
VBD is myelin dysfunction and glial dysfunction as evidenced by a nitrous oxide
model. Vitamin B12 deficiency is easy to diagnose and treat. More work is needed
regarding genetic susceptibility and mechanism of CNS damage.

## Keynote Address

## Serotonin and Brainstem Dysfunctions in Neuropsychiatric and Sensory
Disorders

Harry W.M. Steinbusch1

1Department of Translational Neuroscience, Faculty of Health, Medicine
and Life Sciences, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The
Netherlands
Despite the fundamental role of the brainstem in regulating vital functional
abilities such as arousal, breathing, autonomic nervous system activity as well
as regulating all higher cerebral functions via neurotransmitter projections of
systems originating in the brainstem, the role of the brainstem has received
relatively little attention in most neuropsychiatric disorders. Besides the
dorsal and median raphe nuclei complex comprising mainly serotonin-producing
neurons, the brainstem also contains noradrenalin, dopamine and
histamine-producing nuclei, that is, resp. the locus coeruleus, the substantia
nigra and the mammillary bodies. The brainstem is furthermore the relay station
of afferent and efferent projections between the autonomic nervous system in the
peripheral body and higher cerebral brain regions. The current presentation aims
to review the neuroanatomy of the brainstem as well as the current status on
findings, derived from a wide range of studies using molecular, cellular and
imaging technologies, of brainstem involvement in neurodevelopmental (i.e.,
autism, schizophrenia) and neurodegenerative disorders (Alzheimer’s and
Parkinson’s disease).
Over the past decades, the incidence of age-related, neurological and psychiatric
disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Parkinson’s disease
(PD), but also depression has considerably increased. Mood disorders are
strongly related to the exposure to stress. The hippocampus and other forebrain
structures are the apex of the stress hormone control mechanism and damage to
them may be one way in which stress hormone secretion escapes from inhibitory
control in depression. In turn, stress, probably through toxic effects of
glucocorticoids, decreases neurogenesis and cell survival while anti-depressants
enhance these processes in experimental animals. Therefore, since treatment
strategies are not yet available, primary prevention in these age-related and
stress-related neurological disorders is of importance. As mentioned before,
most of the focus on neurobiological questions on above-mentioned disease is
related to forebrain structures since they are often associated with cognitive
dysfunction. The brainstem is a highly neglected brain area in neurodegenerative
diseases, including Alzheimer’s (AD) and Parkinson’s (PD) disease
and frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Likewise, despite a long-standing
recognition of brainstem involvement, relatively few studies have addressed the
exact mechanisms that underlie brainstem autonomic dysfunction. Improved insight
in the cellular and molecular characteristics of brainstem function is pivotal
to study the developmental origins. As brainstem dysfunction also possesses
health issues in several other neurodegenerative disorders (like AD and PD),
progress in these neurological fields will benefit from scientific advancement
in the current proposal as well. In the area of depression, several observations
have been made in relation to changes in one particular brain structure: the
Dorsal Raphe Nucleus (DRN). In addition, dysfunction of the cerebellum is also
observed in AD and is associated with pulmonary deregulation. The DRN is also
related in the circuit of stress-regulated processes and cognitive events.
In order to gain more information about the underlying mechanisms that may govern
the neurodegeneration, for example, amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles and
impaired synaptic transmission in AD, a rat dissociation culture model was
established that allows mimicking certain aspects of our autopsy findings. We
observed a similar phenomenon in brains from patients suffering from
neurodegenerative disease since this is also related to changes in BDNF levels.
The ascending projections and multi-transmitter nature of the DRN in particular
and the brainstem in general stress its role as a key target for AD/PD research
and autonomic dysfunction. It also points towards the increased importance and
focus of the brainstem as key area in various neurodevelopmental and age-related
diseases.

## Distinguished Lectures

## DL: RNA in Neuroscience

Timothy W. Bredy1

1UQ Centre for RNA in Neuroscience, Queensland Brain Institute, The
University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Queensland, Australia
RNA, once thought to simply represent an intermediate step in the transition from
the DNA code to the proteome, has increasingly been recognised as a critical
feature of information processing in the brain. This is due, in part, to the
discovery that the majority of our genes do not code for protein but instead
generate a diverse population of regulatory RNAs that function in a cell-type
and state-dependent manner. In addition, dysregulated RNA metabolism is
associated with a variety of neuropsychiatric conditions, including depression,
phobia, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and the addictions as well as
age-related neurodegenerative disorders. RNA therefore represents a new frontier
in the quest to design new treatment approaches for brain disorders. This talk
will focus on my labs journey through the world of RNA in neuroscience over the
past 15 years, highlighting new avenues for exploration.

## K.T. Shetty Oration

## Novel Neuromodulatory Approaches for Functional Recovery in Spinal Cord
Injury

Suman Jain1

1Department of Physiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
New Delhi, India
Traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI) is a debilitating condition that initiates a
cascade of biochemical, vascular, metabolic and immune alterations, leading to
progressive neurodegeneration and partial or complete loss of motor, sensory and
autonomic functions. Decompression or fusion surgeries induce minimal recovery,
leaving patient completely dependent on others for daily living, implying the
need for new neural tissue activity-modulatory strategies that can repair,
regenerate and restore the structure and function. We explored and compared the
potential of two most recent advanced techniques for amelioration of SCI
aetiology: 1, transcranial magnetic stimulation (MF) and 2, magnetic
nanoparticles. In both complete and contusion injury rats, we observed a
significant improvement in locomotor behaviour, reduction in lesion volume,
abolition of glial scar and increase in the expression of GAP-43, indicating
axonal regeneration. Notably, magnetic nanoparticles significantly augmented the
beneficial effects of MF, suggesting its therapeutic potential in SCI. We have
been able to move our research work from bench to bedside and initiated first
phase of clinical trials in complete SCI patients. Intermittent theta burst
stimulation has been given to 16 complete SCI patients (ASIA A score) on the leg
area of the primary motor cortex. An improvement in SCI independence measure
score, walking index, pain, depression and anxiety and cortical excitability is
evident. We conclude that magnetic nanoparticles as well as transcranial
magnetic stimulation have the potential to modulate neural tissue activity and
promote functional recovery providing hope for SCI patients who currently have
limited therapeutic options. However, further research and larger-scale clinical
trials are required to confirm the safety and efficacy of these techniques in
human patients over the long term.

## S.S. Parmar Oration

## Targeting Epigenetics and Epitranscriptomics in Stroke Therapy

Raghu Vemuganti1,2

1Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA
2William S. Middleton Veterans Administration Hospital, Madison,
Wisconsin, USA
In mammals, DNA and RNA undergo several chemical modifications that modulate the
fitness, functionality and the diversity of the cells. These are also sensitive
to external and internal stimuli and their dysfunction promotes pathologic
states. Importantly, dynamics of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) and
5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) on DNA is a major epigenetic modification in the
CNS that decides the neuronal fate. Our studies show that the levels of 5hmC and
TET3 (enzyme that catalyses its formation) significantly elevate in the
peri-infarct cortex after stroke in rodents of both sexes. While TET3 knockdown
exacerbated the post-stroke brain damage, its induction by ascorbate was
neuroprotective. Importantly, many of the genes that were hydroxymethylated
after stroke are neuroprotective that controls oxidative stress, inflammation,
DNA damage, apoptosis and angiogenesis. In addition, our studies show that
scaffolding by specific long noncoding RNAs with TET3 is important for the
5hmC-mediated neuroprotection after stroke. Coding and noncoding RNAs undergo
>175 epitranscriptomic modifications that increase the functionality of
RNAome. Our studies showed significant induction of methylation of adenosine
(N6-methyladenosine; m6A) after stroke in the
peri-infarct cortex. We observed the shut-down of FTO that mediates
m6A demethylation. Many of the m6A-hypermethylated
transcripts in the post-ischemic brain are those that promote apoptosis and
inflammation. Reversing m6A methylation by restoring FTO with an AAV9
reduced ischemic brain damage and promoted functional recovery in mice of both
sexes. We further report that activating FTO by NADPH administration decreases
post-stroke grey and white matter damage and improves motor, cognitive and
neuropsychiatric recovery after stroke. In addition, induction of m6A
reader YTHDF1 also modulates ischemic brain damage. YTHDF1 knockout mice showed
better motor function recovery smaller secondary brain damage after stroke.
Thus, we propose epigenetic and epitranscriptomic modifications as novel stroke
therapeutic targets.

## P.N. Tandon Oration

## Situational Awareness to Create a Platform for Translational Research for
Neurosciences

P. Sarat Chandra1

1All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India
Translational research is challenging, and creating a practically useful paradigm
for utility in clinical practice is even more.
Team research is the foundation for creating such programs. Having all verticals
of research with the clinicians and researchers being able to talk on a common
platform and interact every day is the only manner in which clinically useful
research may be produced.
The author has spent over 25 years in clinical and basic science research and has
published over 600 papers during his academic career and operative experience
over 25,000 cases. He would be presenting briefly his journey, challenges,
difficulties and some of ecstasies in conducting research in a busy clinical
scenario.

## P.K. Seth Memorial Lecture

## Virokines Hit Hard to the Brain Microvascular Endothelial Cells

Sunit K. Singh1

1Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Center for Biomedical Research (ACBR), University
of Delhi (North Campus), New Delhi, India
Viral virulence is encoded in the viral genome and expressed through their
structural and non-structural proteins. Viruses utilise multiple routes to
affect cellular functions through virus-encoded virokines by altering the cell
signal transduction pathways and gene expression. Virokines are virally encoded
proteins secreted from the productively infected host cell and proved to be
quite toxic for the brain microvascular endothelial cells. These proteins are
capable enough to modulate different aspects of the cellular homeostasis.
Virokines are also known to affect expression pattern of non-coding RNAs
especially microRNAs. MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs which play an
important role in gene regulation as fine gene tuners. Given the importance of
microRNAs in cellular homeostasis, viruses have evolved to take advantage of
these cellular microRNA pathways. Viruses have been reported to affect the key
proteins of the different cell signalling pathways by exploiting the cellular
microRNAs through virokines to get their immediate gains such as viral immune
evasion or cellular invasion. Overall virokines play an important role in such
practices for the virus during viral infections. Furthermore, virokines can
exert a profound impact on the cellular functions, and affect the functionality
of Blood brain barrier adversely.

## Plenary Lectures

## PL.1: Studying the Neural Basis of Real-world Vision and Cognition in Freely
Moving Monkeys

S.P. Arun1

1Center for Brain Research, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru,
Karnataka, India
Most visual tasks involve searching for specific visual features, like the face
of a friend or your cycle keys. But we also often perform generic tasks where we
look for specific property, such as finding an odd item, deciding if two items
are same, or if an object has symmetry. These tasks have no defining visual
feature to look for but rather a property in the image that we seem to
effortlessly find. How does our brain solve such tasks?
Using simple neural rules, we show that displays with repeating elements can be
distinguished from heterogeneous displays using a property we define as visual
homogeneity. In behaviour, visual homogeneity predicted response times on visual
search and symmetry tasks. Brain imaging during these tasks revealed that visual
homogeneity in both tasks is localised to a region in the object-selective
cortex. I will also present some ongoing work in which we are exploiting the
versatility of this task to answer a variety of questions about visual
perception.

## PL.2: Phosphoregulation of Intracellular Transport in the Axon and
Cilium

Krishanu Ray1

1National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, Haryana, India
2Department of Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India
Imagine a city run by autonomous vehicles that can continuously recognise the
needs of different parts of the city and adjust the supply and pickup
accordingly. Now, zoom into a cell—a neuron in particular—where
the supply to synapse at the end of a long axon, the dendrites or the cilia are
precisely timed and balanced with the right amount of resources like specific
types of proteins, lipids and other organelles. A significant part of this
logistics is powered by microtubule-dependent motors that can apparently pick
the correct type of cargo and move them to appropriate destinations to mitigate
the metabolic, physiological and environmental demands. A cell consists of
multiple kinesins, kinases and phosphatases which compounds the complexity of
the problem. How are these logistics managed in real time? I will discuss this
question by describing the roles of kinases and phosphatases that orchestrate
the microtubule-dependent movements of kinesins and their interactions with
cargoes inside a cell.

## Symposia Lectures

## Symposium 1: Recent Advances in Neuropsychiatric and Neurodegenerative
Disorders

## S1.1. Emerging Role of Microglia in Synaptic Plasticity

S.T. Dheen1, G. Saw1, D. Kandilya1, S.
Wong1 and J. Polepalli1

1Department of Anatomy, National University of Singapore,
Singapore
Background: Several lines of studies have reported that
microglia are involved in modification of neuronal synapses, and synaptic
pruning. We have performed a high throughput miRNA microarray analysis and
shown a database of differentially expressed miRNAs in activated rat primary
microglia. This study revealed that microglial miR-21-5p targets PI3K which
regulates synaptic plasticity by modulating BDNF involved in learning and
memory. Understanding the mechanisms of microglial PI3K-BDNF signalling
pathway that contributes to neuronal long-term potentiation (LTP) is
clinically relevant, since microglia in the aging brain undergo cellular
senescence and dystrophic changes which may be associated with age-related
dementia and neurodegeneration such as such as Alzheimer’s disease.
This study explores the role of miR-21-5p in regulation of synaptic
plasticity by modulating PI3K/AKT signalling in microglia.
Material and Methods: Microglia were exposed to amyloid β
and subjected to miRNA microarray analysis. Subsequently, selected miRNA was
validated using qPCR, western blot and luciferase assays.
Electrophysiological recording of LTP in pyramidal neurons of rat CA1
hippocampus was performed.
Results: The expression level of miR-21-5p predicted to target
PI3K (as revealed by luciferase assay) was elevated in microglia exposed to
amyloid β. Moreover, miR-21-5p inhibition upregulated PI3K and its
downstream targets including phosphorylation of Akt and CREB as well as BDN
in microglia, while its overexpression downregulated the PI3K pathway. Next,
impaired LTP that was recorded in hippocampal slices after ablation of
microglia was restored by addition of PI3K or BDNF.
Discussion and Conclusion: Microglial miR-21-5p targets PI3K,
which subsequently regulates BDNF expression and synaptic plasticity. This
study also revealed that amyloid β elevates microglial miR-21-5p,
leading to down regulation of PI3K-BDNF pathway, resulting in impaired LTP.
Understanding the mechanisms by which microglial PI3K is regulated may
provide insights into the ways by which microglia-neuronal interactions
leading to cognitive decline can be modulated, especially in the case of
neurodegenerative diseases.
Acknowledgements: This study was funded by NUS Strategic
Research Grant (Memory Networks in Rodent and Primate) DPRT/944/09/14
(R185-000-271-646) and HLCA20Jan-0095 (R-181-000-194-213).

## S1.2. Synaptic Architecture of Remote Memory Recall

Louise Goh1,2,3 and Jai Polepalli1,2,3

1Department of Anatomy, National University of Singapore,
Singapore
2CeLS Neurobiology Program, National University of Singapore,
Singapore
3Healthy Longevity Translational Research Program, National
University of Singapore, Singapore
Background: The prefrontal cortex (PFC) is involved in the
formation and retrieval of memories. The PFC circuits exhibit diversity in
synaptic properties, enabling them to perform precise computations in a
fool-proof manner that result in normal behavioural output. Neurexins and
neurexin-interacting proteins, including cerebellins play crucial role in
determining synapse specificity.
Results: One member of the Cerebellin family, Cerebellin-4
(Cbln4) is enriched in the PFC. We show that Cbln4 in the PFC mediates
long-term storage of memories. Deletion of Cbln4 in the PFC diminishes
recall of remote contextual memory but not recall of recently formed
memories. At the synapses, loss of Cbln4 leads to reduced numbers of
GABAergic and glutamatergic synapses.
Discussion and Conclusions: Mutations in cerebellins and the
complex formed by cerebellins are penetrant in a multitude of diseases. Our
recent findings highlight the importance of defining the molecular
architecture of circuits that are responsible for behavioural abnormalities
caused by manipulations of proteins that are genetically associated with
brain disorders.
Acknowledgement: This research is being funded by NUSMed
Start-up grant, MOE Tier 2 grant to Jai Polepalli.

## S1.3. Mitochondrial Control of Microglial Function in Alzheimer’s
Disease

Lai Kei Onn1, Jia Hui Wong1, Lauren H.
Fairley1, Wei Jing Chong1 and Anna M.
Barron1

1Neurobiology of Aging and Disease Laboratory, Lee Kong Chian
School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University Singapore,
Singapore
Background: Mitochondria are emerging as the command centres of
innate immune responses, controlling inflammatory responses via metabolic
programming. Here we investigated the neuroimmune function of the
mitochondrial translocator protein (TSPO), which is a PET-visible
inflammatory biomarker and potential immunotherapeutic target in
Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
Materials and Methods: Unbiased omics approaches were used to
identify functional pathways and downstream molecular effectors of TSPO.
Findings were validated using pharmacological and genetic loss of function
studies in cultured mouse microglia and models of AD.
Results: We show that TSPO and the key glycolytic enzyme,
hexokinase-II (HK), play critical roles in the coordination of microglial
respiratory-glycolytic metabolism and phagocytosis, an important protective
function in AD. Microglia lacking TSPO resembled dysfunctional microglia
observed in aging and AD. In the absence of TSPO, HK is recruited to the
mitochondria, inducing glycolysis and contributing to phagocytic
dysfunction. Based on these findings we developed an optogenetic tool to
control microglial glycolytic metabolism.
Discussion and Conclusions: We propose that mitochondrial TSPO
and HK together are a key mitochondrial hub regulating
glycolytic-respiratory balance and phagocytosis of microglia, and are
promising targets for the development of novel immunotherapeutics in AD.
Acknowledgements: This project was funded by the Nanyang
Assistant Professorship Award from Nanyang Technological University
Singapore (A.M.B.) and the Ministry of Education, Singapore, under its
Academic Research Fund Tier 1 (Project ID RG23/21; A.M.B.).

## S1.4. Gut Microbiome: A Source of Diagnostics or Therapeutics for
Neuropsychiatric Disorders

Joyappa Nikhil1, Chinnasamy Thirumoorthy1,
Sandhya Narasimhan1, Shivarama Varambally2 and
Kuppan Gokulakrishnan1

1Department of Neurochemistry, National Institute of Mental Health
and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
2Department of Psychiatry, National Institute of Mental Health and
Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
Background: Recently, there has been a growing interest in
research on the relationship between gut-microbiota and neurological
disorders. The link between intestinal permeability, the gut microbiota and
the aetiology of schizophrenia (SCZ) is not well understood. We studied how
zonulin, lipopolysaccharide-binding protein (LBP), and gut microbiota
profile differed between drug-naïve (DN SCZ) and risperidone-treated
SCZ patients (RISP SCZ) compared to healthy controls (HCs).
Materials and Methods: We recruited a total of 60 participants,
from the clinical services of a large neuropsychiatric hospital, which
included DN SCZ, RISP SCZ and HCs (n = 20 each). Plasma
levels of zonulin, and LBP were quantified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay. Faecal samples were analysed using 16s rRNA sequencing in this
cross-sectional study.
Results: Plasma levels of both LBP and zonulin were higher
(p < .05) in patients with SCZ compared to
healthy controls and also associated with neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio
(NLR): a marker of systemic inflammation. No significant differences were
found in taxa richness (alpha diversity), but microbial composition differed
between SCZ patients and HCs (PERMANOVA, p = .02). A
specific genus-level microbial panel of Ruminococcus, UCG005,
Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1 and
Bifidobacterium could discriminate SCZ patients from
HCs, RISP SCZ vs HCs with the best sensitivity and specificity.
Discussion and Conclusions: Our study identified distinct
microbial signatures that could aid in the differentiation of DN SCZ, RISP
SCZ and HCs, and demonstrates an association of zonulin, LBP, in SCZ
patients. Our findings contribute to a better understanding of the role of
the gut microbiome/intestinal permeability in SCZ pathophysiology and to
identify high risk individuals using gut microbiome signatures. Further
research in this area has potential for the development of novel
neuropyschobiotic-based therapeutics to treat neuropsychiatric diseases.
Acknowledgements: This work is supported by research grants from
NIMHANS and DHR, Govt. of India. JN was supported by fellowship from
ICMR.

## S1.5. Self-propagating Neurotoxicity of APP-C31 Drives Key Pathogenic
Pathways Implicated in Alzheimer’s Disease

Pawan Kumar1,2,3 and Gavin S.
Dawe1,2,3

1Healthy Longevity Translational Research Programme, Yong Loo Lin
School of Medicine, Singapore
2Department of Pharmacology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
Singapore
3Neurobiology Programme, Life Sciences Institute, National
University of Singapore, Singapore
Background: The amyloid-β precursor protein (APP)
undergoes caspase cleavage, resulting in the formation of the cytotoxic
APP-C31 fragment. APP-C31 potentially plays a crucial role in
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) progression. However, our understanding of
this neurotoxin is still limited, particularly concerning the mechanisms
that trigger its generation and continued production.
Materials and Methods: We investigated caspase cleavage of APP
in post-mortem brain and dermal fibroblasts from AD patients. We studied
effects of APP-C31 on phosphorylation of APP and activity of caspase 3 in
SH-SY5Y neuronal cells, and explored interferon-γ-mediated neurotoxic
effects in BV2 microglial and SH-SY5Y cell cultures.
Results: We found an association of caspase-cleaved APP with AD
in human subjects. In cellular models, we identified that APP-C31 could
enhance its own neurotoxicity by increasing the availability of a competent
substrate, the phosphorylated form of APP, and the activity of the catalytic
enzyme, caspase 3. We also found potential neuron-glia interactions whereby
APP-C31 can raise interferon-γ levels and stimulate the Stat1
inflammatory pathway in microglia, which in turn compromises neuronal
health.
Discussion and Conclusions: Our findings indicate that APP-C31
may sustain its own neurotoxicity, potentially contributing cumulatively to
the progression of underlying pathology in AD. Therefore, developing
therapeutic strategies to target the APP-C31 neurotoxin could potentially
mitigate the pathophysiology associated with AD.
Acknowledgements: This research was supported by the Ministry of
Education, Singapore, under its MOE AcRF Tier 3 Award MOE2017-T3-1-002.

## Symposium 2: Deciphering Neural Functions in Health and Diseases: Emerging
Fronts

## S2.1. A Drosophila Genetic Model to Study the Molecular and
Physiological Pathways of Epileptic Disorder

Shamprasad Varija Raghu1

1Division of Neuroscience, Yenepoya Research Centre (YRC), Yenepoya
(Deemed to University), Deralakatte, Mangalore, Karnataka, India
Epilepsy is a chronic neurological disorder that affects more than 70 million
people worldwide with a considerable social and economic burden. Relapses and
unprovoked spontaneous seizures characterise the disorder. The most common
antiepileptic treatments are pharmaceutical. However, in most epilepsy patients,
drug therapy cannot control seizures. Despite different alternative treatments
such as dietary control, nerve stimulation and surgery, some patients still do
not improve. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop more effective
protocols for the diagnosis and treatment of epilepsy. The genetically amenable
model Drosophila melanogaster offers several genetic tools to
mimic different human neuronal disorders, including epilepsy. We are using the
Drosophila genetic model to study the molecular and
physiological pathways of epileptic disorders by applying different behavioural
and molecular analyses.

## S2.2. The Role of NMDA Receptor Subtypes and Synaptic Plasticity in the
Epileptic Brain

Pradeep Punnakkal1

1Department of Biophysics, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education
and Research Chandigarh, India
Epilepsy is a common neurological disorder, affecting about 1% of
India’s population. The main reason behind epilepsy is the change in the
ratio of excitatory to inhibitory neurotransmission. It is commonly observed
that patients with epilepsy suffer memory-related problems. Hippocampus is the
region in the brain, which is mainly associated with learning and memory.
Long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD) are the two main
models to study memory at the cellular level. LTP has been studied extensively
in animal models and patients, but very little is known about LTD in epilepsy.
Here, we studied the effect of epileptic activity in LTD by studying the
Schaffer collateral pathway in the rat brain hippocampal slices. LTD was induced
in the Schaffer collateral pathway by the application of low-frequency protocol
(1Hz, 900 pulses), which induced 20% LTD in control hippocampal slices.
But when we induced epileptic activity in the hippocampal slices and then
applied the LTD protocol induced 20% LTP instead of LTD. The change in
the direction of synaptic plasticity was NMDA receptor subtype dependent. We
also studied the excitatory and inhibitory ratio in control and epileptic slices
by performing whole-cell patch clamp experiments in CA1 pyramidal neurons. We
found that there was no change in excitatory current amplitude and inter-event
interval, but epileptic activity reduced the GABA A current amplitude and
inter-event interval significantly when compared with control slices. The change
in GABA A currents and loss of LTD in epileptic slices may explain the learning
and memory impairments in patients with epilepsy.

## S2.3. Mitochondrial Disorders: Diagnostic Approach Using Clinical,
Biochemical and Genetic Aspects

Christhunesa S. Christudass1, Sanjith Aaron1, Ajith
Sivadasan1, Maya Thomas1, Sangeetha
Yoganathan1 and Poornima Sivamani1

1Department of Neurological Sciences, Christian Medical College,
Vellore, Kilminnal, Tamil Nadu, India
Mitochondrial disorders are a clinically heterogeneous group of disorders and may
present at any age. As the mitochondrial respiratory chain (MRC) is the
essential for aerobic metabolism, tissues and organs which are highly dependent
on aerobic metabolism are chiefly involved in mitochondrial disorders. Apart
from common clinical features like proximal myopathy, exercise intolerance and
so on, the central nervous system features include encephalopathy, seizures,
dementia, migraine, stroke-like episodes, ataxia and spasticity. The term
‘mitochondrial disorder’ generally refers to primary mitochondrial
disorders, which are genetic and arise as a result of dysfunction of the MRC,
affecting oxidative phosphorylation. Apart from them, many genetic and
non-genetic disorders manifesting mitochondrial dysfunction as a secondary
feature.
Clinical, biochemical and genetic tests play a vital role in the diagnosis of
mitochondrial diseases. When the clinical picture is highly suggestive, we
usually start with plasma or CSF lactate, plasma acylcarnitines and urinary
organic acids. Neuroimaging and neurophysiologic studies are warranted in
individuals with suspected CNS involvement. Conventionally, the diagnosis of
mitochondrial disorders involves the demonstration of mitochondrial dysfunction
in a relevant tissue biopsy followed by targeted molecular testing of specific
mtDNA and/or nuclear genes. But the recent advent of next generation sequencing
has been changing the diagnostic approach drastically. Blood may not be ideal as
many mtDNA pathogenic variants are heteroplasmic and large-scale deletions. If
molecular genetic testing does not yield or confirm a diagnosis, further
investigations with muscle biopsy or skin fibroblast culture will be needed.
This lecture presents a comprehensive approach to the diagnosis of mitochondrial
disorders.

## S2.4. Data Management in Neuroscience Using AI Techniques

Arun Anirudhan1

1Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute, Trivandrum, Kerala, India
Frequently, bedside monitors in neurocritical care gather persistent, abundant
brain signals of considerable volume and frequency, including intracranial
pressure (ICP) and electroencephalographic (EEG) waveforms. Although these
signals frequently contain initial indications of neurological decline,
effectively identifying these indications in real-time using conventional data
processing techniques, primarily tailored for retrospective examination, has
proven to be exceedingly difficult. These techniques are ill-equipped to manage
the substantial quantities of waveform data generated by bedside monitors.
Consistently, the system receives electrocardiographic and ICP signals,
examining the morphology of ICP pulses for any irregularities from a stable
condition. To facilitate thorough examination of neurosurgical anaesthesia,
specialised software is necessary to amalgamate and assess information from
various patient monitors. This undertaking explored the potential of creating
such software to assist in conducting meaningful analysis of neurosurgical
anaesthesia. Additionally, we are in the process of creating a web interface
that can promptly exhibit the outcomes of this analysis within a web browser in
real time. Through this interface, medical professionals can conveniently
monitor their patients’ conditions and directly comprehend and interpret
the patients’ current states as they evolve. AI techniques are employed
to forecast the potential outcomes. The software also facilitates the digital
capture of data, prepared for subsequent manual or batch analysis. It allows for
the generation of virtual signals, such as critical closing pressure and
cerebral compliance, and the assessment of how they correlate with primary
modalities. An amassed repository of cases and signals establishes a potent
reference resource for delving into and comprehending the intricate
pathophysiology.

## S2.5. Genetic Dissection of a Novel Molecular Player in Obesity?

Shobi Veleri1 and Anjusha Bhasker1

1Drug Safety Division, Department of Health Research, ICMR-National
Institute of Nutrition, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of
India, Hyderabad, Telangana, India
Obesity is a health menace and is a major risk factor for non-communicable
diseases that account for >70% of early deaths in the world.
Obesity has multifactorial aetiology. Hence the treatment for obesity remains a
challenge. The disruption of leptin signalling pathway is largely implicated in
obesity; mutations in leptin and its receptor is central to
obesity phenotype. However, the search for genetic causes of obesity shown that
without mutations in leptin signalling pathway obesity exists in animals and
humans. This indicates role of additional molecular players in the onset of
obesity, and they remain elusive. We have a mutant obese rat with an unknown
mutation. Previous analysis suggested a putative genetic locus 4.43 cM region
flanking D5Rat256 and D5Wox37 on chromosome 5, which is upstream of Leptin
receptor. We have used Whole Genome sequencing method to identify the elusive
mutation. We have pre-screened more 12 mutant genes (single nucleotide
polymorphisms) and excluded chromosome 5. We are applying transcriptomic and
histopathological analyses to characterise the mutant gene. Our preliminary data
indicate the role of a novel gene in the onset of obesity in Wistar rat. This
finding may open new avenues for devising novel treatment for obesity in
human.

## Symposium 3: Stress, Aging and Neurodegeneration—Building Basic and
Interventional Understanding Through Cell Culture and Mouse Models

## S3.1. Basic and Interventional Understanding of Stress, Ageing and
Neurodifferentiation: Lessons from Cell Culture Studies

Renu Wadhwa1, Anissa Nofita Sari1, Yoshiyuki
Ishida2, Keiji Terao2 and Sunil C.
Kaul1

1AIST-INDIA DAILAB, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
& Technology (AIST), Tsukuba, Japan
2CycloChem Bio Co. Ltd., Kobe, Japan
Chronic stress has been linked to a variety of diseases, including brain
dysfunction and cancer. The response of cultured cells to stress, which induces
adaptations in their biochemical and metabolic pathways, forms the basis for
their use in basic and interventional studies. Normal and stressed cells can be
easily identified by their morphology, and adaptations in their molecular
signalling pathways, determined by upregulation/downregulation of gene
expression, extend their use in disease models and drug development. In cell
culture systems, stressed cells have been shown to age prematurely and prolonged
stress has been shown to induce carcinogenesis. Such a link between stress,
ageing and cancer is well documented by molecular studies of Collaborator of ARF
(CARF) in our group. While CARF-compromised cells undergo apoptosis, CARF
overexpression and super-expression lead to premature senescence and malignant
transformation, respectively. In addition, cell-based screens and molecular
analyses have led to the identification of some natural anti-stress compounds
(e.g., bioactive compounds from honey bee propolis—caffeic acid phenethyl
ester, CAPE and Ashwagandha—withaferin A, Wi-A and triethylene glycol,
TEG) that have been shown to promote neurodifferentiation in
vitro and memory and brain function in in vivo
stress/disease models. More recently, under the premise of COVID-19 pandemic, an
extreme stress situation, by combining computational and cell culture assays, we
reported the anti-COVID-19 potential of Ashwagandha and propolis-derived
bioactive compounds, which is beginning to be supported in the clinic.

## S3.2. Role of Computational Biology in Basic and Interventional Understanding
of Stress, Aging and Neurodegeneration

Durai Sundar1

1Indian Institute of Technology Delhi (IIT Delhi), India
Cancer is a disease marked by genetic instability and thus specific inhibition of
individual proteins or signalling pathways holds a great potential for
subversion of this genetic plasticity of cancers. Many active compounds from
traditional medicinal sources could serve as good scaffolds for rational drug
design. Combinatorial chemistry approaches based on natural product scaffolds
are being used to create screening libraries that closely resemble drug-like
compounds. Most of these compounds are part of routinely used traditional
medicines and hence their tolerance and safety are relatively better known than
any other chemical entities that are new for human use. Thus, traditional
medicine-based bio-prospecting offers unmatched structural variety as promising
new leads. Recent surge towards usage of high-specificity drugs having reduced
side effect profile is urging explorations with naturally occurring herbal drug
candidates. Computational tools can be used to elucidate the interactions
between the drug and its target molecules and to identify the stability of such
interactions. The understanding obtained from these studies will help in
developing future approaches towards cure of these nefarious cancerous diseases.
This talk will describe the progress in computational approaches for drug
discovery and its potential application in biomedicine.

## S3.3. Narcolepsy: Sleep Stress and Orexin: Towards Development of New
Therapies

Mahesh K. Kaushik1

1International Institute for Integrative Sleep Medicine (WPI-IIIS),
University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
Orexins/Hypocretins are hypothalamic neuropeptides secreted from orexinergic
neurons located in the lateral hypothalamus. Orexins orchestrate their action by
activating two G-protein coupled receptors, orexin receptor type-1 (OX1R) and
type-2 (OX2R). Narcolepsy/Cataplexy, a neurological disorder is caused by the
loss of orexin-producing neurons. While orexin effectively mitigated narcolepsy
in rodents through intracerebroventricular (ICV) delivery, its application in
humans is hindered by its inability to penetrate the blood-brain barrier. Hence,
we showed that orexin delivered via the intrathecal route at the lumbar level
inhibited narcolepsy symptoms and improved sleep-in narcolepsy model mice. Since
orexin signalling is crucial for brain physiology and pathology, it became the
potential drug target to treat neurological disorders such as insomnia,
hypersomnia, narcolepsy, post-traumatic stress disorder, Alzheimer’s
disease and so on. One such successful example is the approval of orexin
receptor antagonists to treat primary insomnia in human patients. We reported
that the orexin receptor antagonist, suvorexant executes its actions in two
ways; (a) inhibiting the orexin receptors and thus downstream signalling and (b)
decreasing the orexin peptide synthesis. Further, under certain conditions, a
high dose of orexin receptor antagonist can induce narcolepsy due to its dual
actions. Since enhanced orexin signalling is observed in several neurological
disorders and orexin receptor antagonists downregulate orexin signalling,
orexin-based therapies could improve neurological pathologies in aging brains.
However, our data suggested a cautious use of such therapies for patients with
co-morbid neurological diseases.

## S3.4. Fears to Fierce-tracking the Molecular Path of Post-traumatic
Aggressive Behaviour

Arpita Konar1

1Institute of Health Sciences, Presidency University, Kolkata, West
Bengal, India
Traumatic experiences of fear, abuse and neglect leaves lasting impact on higher
order brain functions and behaviour posing risk for psychopathy, though
molecular culprits are not understood well. In particular, trauma surrounding
puberty comprising of childhood and adolescence has been linked with adulthood
pathological aggressive behaviour, indicative of violence and anti-social
personality. We demonstrated that predator fear (fox odour) and height (elevated
platform) exposures around puberty leads to escalated aggression in adult male
mice and the hyper-aggressive phenotype was perpetuated in male progenies of
subsequent generations. Interestingly, females that showed early life fear
responses did not show any signs of later aggression. Monoamine oxidase A,
considered crucial for aggression was altered in peripubertal stress induced
aggressive males. Further, brain region (prefrontal cortex and hypothalamus) and
sex specific transcriptome analysis revealed a number of differentially
expressed protein coding genes and long-non coding RNAs. Functional analyses of
top-ranking genes by brain region targeted manipulations suggested potential
contribution of brain thyroid hormone availability irrespective of circulating
hormone states in post-traumatic aggression and its inheritance. We also
characterised the novel lncRNAs of our DEG list and based on preliminary
observations hypothesise that non-coding RNA mediated long-term epigenetic
programming of genes including brain thyroid hormone pathway could underlie
lasting impact of traumatic stress on abnormal aggressive behaviour and related
psychopathologies.

## S3.5. Link Between Hypoxia and Neurodifferentiation Signalling: Experimental
and Computational Perspectives

Jaspreet Kaur Dhanjal1, Renu Wadhwa2 and Sunil C.
Kaul2

1Department of Computational Biology, Indraprastha Institute of
Information Technology Delhi, India
2AIST-INDIA DAILAB, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
& Technology (AIST), Tsukuba, Japan
Oxygen is one of the critical requirements for most of the eukaryotic organisms
as it ensures the healthy state of the cells by removing harmful electrons and
hydrogen. Reduced availability of oxygen, often termed as hypoxia, activates a
cascade of gene transcription as a protective measure. However, if the hypoxic
condition prevails for long, it may cause physiological or pathological
disorders. Hypoxia has been associated with various disorders like cancer,
chronic heart and kidney diseases, reproductive diseases and metabolic
disorders. Hypoxia has also been shown to be detrimental to the brain and is
implicated in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. Therefore,
identification of pro-hypoxic compounds as preventative and prognostic
therapeutic agents holds immense potential. In line with this, we have
previously reported caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE) as an effective
pro-hypoxia and anti-stress molecule. CAPE has also been studied for its
effective anti-cancer and neuro-differentiation properties. We have now
identified other naturally occurring small molecules like Withaferin-A and
Tectorigenin with pro-hypoxic potential that also possess anti-cancer and
neuro-differentiation properties, respectively. In conclusion, nature is a
repertoire of therapeutic compounds that offers solution for most of the
prevailing health related challenges, and warrant extended exploration.

Keywords

Hypoxia, neurodifferentiation, CAPE, Withaferin-A, Tectorigenin, natural
compounds.

## S3.6. Response of Iron-induced Experimental Epilepsy to Anti-peroxidant
Treatment

Shanuja Beri1 and Rameshwar Singh2

1Kalindi College, University of Delhi, India
2School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,
India
Iron released from extravasated haemoglobin catalyses the formation of
oxygen-derived free radicals which in turn cause lipid peroxidation of the
neuronal membranes and mediate clinical post traumatic epilepsy confirmed by
epileptic electrophysiological activity. As lipid peroxidation is the cause, use
of antioxidants was studied by us to counter the effect and resultant
progression of epileptic activity. Iron induced post-traumatic epilepsy
experimental animal model was used to study the effects of antioxidants on the
progression of iron-induced epileptic activity in the rat brain cortex.
Intracortical injection of FeCl3 in the animals were followed by
administration of antioxidant drugs at different intervals. In the present
study, the development and occurrence of epileptic activity was monitored
electrocorticographically, biochemically as well as was supported by electron
micrography of the focal point. The result showed significant attenuation of the
electrographic seizures in the ipsilateral epileptogenic focus. Our data
provides experimental evidence in support of the view that treatment of post
traumatic epilepsy by antioxidants is therapeutically rational. Previous
experimental studies concerning the anti-peroxidant prevention of iron epilepsy
dealt with only whether pre-treatment with an antioxidant could prevent the
development of epileptic activity. It was however of more interest to determine
whether anti-peroxidant treatment could prevent the progression of epileptic
activity after it has developed.

## S3.7. Acute and Chronic Stress Differentially Affect Hippocampal
Coding

Anupratap Tomar1

University of Bristol, UK
Chronic exposure to uncontrollable stress caused by physical or psychological
stressors induces anxiety, depression and cognitive impairments. Notably,
deficits in cognitive functions, particularly in learning and memory, are often
attributed to compromised functionality of the hippocampus—an integral
brain region responsible for encoding names, places, routes and contextual
information. Acute stress is thought to have facilitatory effect on hippocampal
information processing. However, it remains unclear if and how the facilitatory
effects of acute stress on hippocampal information coding are disrupted as the
stress becomes chronic. To examine this, we compared the impact of acute and
chronic stress on neural activity in the CA1 sub-region of male mice subjected
to a chronic immobilisation stress (CIS) paradigm. We observed that following
first exposure to stress (acute stress), the spatial information encoded in the
hippocampus sharpened. However, following repeated exposure to the same stress
(chronic stress), spatial tuning was poorer. In addition, gamma oscillations in
the local field potential (LFP) were affected. Specifically, the power of both
the slow-gamma (30–50 Hz) and fast-gamma (55–90 Hz) oscillations,
which correlate with excitatory inputs into the region, decreased. These results
support the idea that acute and chronic stress differentially affect neural
computations carried out by hippocampal circuits and suggest that acute stress
‘may’ improve cognitive processing.

Symposium 4: The Social and Emotional Brain: A Game Changer for Education
and Learning

## S4.1. Introduction to Social and Emotional Learning: Why Might It Be a Game
Changer for Education?

Nandini Chatterjee Singh1

UNESCO MGIEP, New Delhi, India
The existing design of education systems focuses on academic skills and cognition
development in order to build human capital for economic growth. Accumulating
research indicates this sole focus on economic growth has led to increasing
anxiety, depression and poor mental health in addition to poor learning
outcomes. Building on recent research from the neurosciences that demonstrates
that learning is a cognitive social emotional process, we postulate that
education systems must include training in social and emotional learning (SEL).
SEL is the process of developing competencies and attitudes necessary to
recognise and control emotions, develop caring and concern for others, form
positive relationships, make responsible decisions and deal with challenging
situations. Explicit training in SEL enables deep learning but also trains
learners to experience positive emotions, exhibit prosocial behaviour and
cultivate brain networks for mental well-being. I will discuss the impact of SEL
training on both teachers and school children.

## S4.2. Decision-making: A Social and Emotional Brain’s
Perspective

K.M. Sharika1

1Department of Cognitive Science, Indian Institute of Technology
Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India
According to the social brain hypothesis, primate brains evolved in size to adapt
to the increasing demands of navigating a complex social network. Recent
evidence has corroborated this by demonstrating how social interactions (or its
lack of) can have measurable consequences on an organism’s biological
fitness. However, the neural mechanisms underlying our everyday decisions in a
social context are still not well-understood. In this talk, I will briefly
introduce some aspects of social cognition research with a special focus on the
role of valence in decision-making. This is particularly relevant, not only
given the common tendency among us to overweigh negative stimuli over that of
positive valence across multiple domains of behaviour (a phenomenon known as
negativity bias), but also because of the crucial role that negative valence
plays in empathy research. I will highlight some of our own attempts to
investigate this in a modified version of the standard cue association learning
task and share some evidence for the role of acetaminophen, an active ingredient
in the common painkiller, paracetamol, in valence-based social decision-making.
We hope that these preliminary findings will, in the long run, help elucidate
the behavioural and neural processes at play and pave the way for the
development of optimal strategies for improved health and life outcomes.

## S4.3. Social Emotional Learning and Self-regulation: Efficacy of a
Video-game-based Intervention for Prosocial Behaviour

Bhoomika R. Kar1 and Renuguha D1

1Centre of Behavioural and Cognitive Sciences, University of
Allahabad, Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh, India
Social and emotional learning (SEL) is the process of gradually acquiring and
effectively applying knowledge and skills required to recognise and manage
emotions; developing care and concern for others; making responsible decisions;
establishing and maintaining positive relationships and handling tough
situations with confidence and resilience. It helps to foster regulation of
one’s thoughts, emotions and behaviour. The development of prosocial
behaviours is important during early years to develop social and emotional
competence. The movement known as ‘Positive Technology’ was born
out of a growing interest in how digital technologies may help people,
organisations and Interaction partners grow positively. Research on SEL needs
more objective measures such as experiment-based research that enables
comparison among studies and can supplement self-reports, teacher reports and
indirect measures of social and emotional skills. The current study focused on
pro-sociality as an important component of the SEL programs. Sky:
Children of Light will be presented. A video game based
intervention for prosocial behaviour and trust was used and an experimental
approach was applied to validate Sky: Children of light as an
intervention to build prosocial behaviour. Performance of adolescents on two
allocation paradigms, a resource allocation task to assess pro-sociality and a
trust task, was examined. The resource allocation game examined prosocial
behaviour in the form of giving and sharing in social interactions including
friends, antagonists, neutral and anonymous peers, highlighting the role of
social context in the development of pro-sociality. The trust game was used to
assess reciprocity and trust in social interactions. The Pro-sociality scale
showed normative variations in prosocial behaviour among children in the age
range of 12–15 years. Results based on post intervention assessment
suggest improvements in prosocial behaviour in terms of fair considerations for
the antagonist, neutral and anonymous peers in the prosocial game. The
significance of digital game based SEL programs, their empirical validation and
challenges will be discussed in the presentation.

Symposium 5: Neurocognitive Mechanisms Underlying Working Memory

## S5.1. Neural Substrates of Working Memory Deficits in Addictive
Disorder

Simran Kaur1

1Stress and Cognitive Electroimaging Lab, Department of Physiology,
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India
Working memory is an indispensable cognitive domain that enables encoding,
updating, maintenance and manipulation of information to ensure successful task
execution. Inherent defect in working memory in the subjects with addictive
disorder can lead to impairment in volition and irrational heights to attain the
substance of abuse despite being well aware of the ominous consequences it
brings with it. Even though such studies on cognitive deficits in individuals
with addictive disorders exist, a considerable lacuna in the existing studies is
about the underlying neural substrates during working memory related
performance.128 channel Quantitative EEG was acquired, pre-processed and was
further analysed for sLORETA-based source and Cartool-based pre-stimulus
microstate analyses in subjects with addictive disorder (alcohol and opioid)
compared to matched healthy controls. Network specific cortical source analysis
revealed failure of deactivation of default mode network areas and reduced
activity in executive function areas, which led to working memory deficit in
these patients. Further, novel EEG microstate analysis also substantiated
aberrant activity in default mode and fronto-parietal attentional network, as
revealed by lower mean duration of microstate maps (Maps 2 and 3) in subjects
with addictive disorder compared to controls. Thus, inability to suppress
default mode network areas, inhibits reallocation of neural resources to
executive areas as reflected by pre-stimulus EEG microstate and source analysis,
may potentially form the basis of functional impairments in the subjects with
addictive disorders.

## S5.2. Distractors in Working Memory: Mechanisms and Models

Sridharan Devarajan1

1Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
Working memory is our ability to momentarily store and recall items or events,
even when these have vanished from our immediate environment. In everyday life,
working memory must function dependably even in noisy, distracting environments.
How are the contents of working memory protected from interference by
distractors? In this talk, I will show that a salient, unpredictable distractor
can bias the contents of working memory at the neural level. The extent of such
interference depends on where the distractor occurs in space, its timing and the
extent of its gating. I will also present a computational model that
parsimoniously explains the experimental findings. This research could help
better understand how working memory can be protected or enhanced, even in noisy
environments.

## S5.3. Visuospatial Working Memory: An Endophenotypic Marker in
Schizophrenia

Ratna Sharma1

1Department of Physiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
New Delhi, India
The process of linking brain function and behaviour is an important aspect of
pathophysiological states. The novel visuospatial working memory task,
simulating day-to-day activities was administered in patients with
schizophrenia, their first-degree relatives and healthy controls. Patients
committed higher number of errors than controls in higher loads and total
errors. Errors in higher loads were significantly higher than in lower load for
all groups. Using EEG microstates, neural correlates of visuospatial working
memory were assessed. Patients deactivated DMN, RSN, auditory cortex more
compared to controls during search period to perform VSWM task. Relatives showed
altered activation of right medial and inferior frontal gyri during different
events and loads of task in lower frequencies compared to controls. Relatives
also showed hyperactivity in right cingulate and parahippocampal gyri compared
to controls. This is suggestive of genetic predisposition in schizophrenia and
could act as vulnerability markers, further strengthened by no significant
differences between patients and relatives. Altered processing of simultaneous
ongoing events in patients and relatives can serve as state and trait-specific
features of schizophrenia. To conclude, the findings of the study can serve as
state markers and trait markers of schizophrenia which in turn will provide
objectivity to the diagnosis of schizophrenia.

## S5.4. Clinical Assessment and Therapeutic Interventions for Working Memory
Deficits in Addictive Disorders and Dual Disorders

Yatan Pal Singh Balhara1

1NDDTC and Department of Psychiatry, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi, India
Working memory deficits among persons with addictive disorders and dual disorders
have a significant impact on the daily functioning and worsen the quality of
life among these individuals. These also play a crucial role in continuation of
the substance use, the addictive behaviour and the co-occurring mental disorder.
Hence it is imperative that these deficits are systematically evaluated. The
impact of these deficits on the course and outcome of addictive disorders also
warrants that the interventions plan should also target these. This presentation
shall focus on the approach to clinical assessment of working memory deficits in
addictive disorders and dual disorders. Also, the available interventions, their
impact and limitations shall also be discussed. The presentation shall also
offer an overview of the ongoing research in this area.

Symposium 6: Yogic Interventions for Tackling Mental Health Issues: A
Desideratum for Contemporary Issues

## S6.1. The Role of Pre-natal Yoga Protocol in Managing Pregnancy: Mechanistic
Insights for Memory Enhancement

Akshay Anand1

1Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh,
India
Our study aimed to investigate the impact of prenatal Yoga on pregnancy outcomes
and the potency of umbilical cord blood (UCB) derived lineage negative (Lin-ve)
stem cells. We examined pregnant women aged 18–35 years who practiced
Yoga from the 16th to 18th week of pregnancy until delivery. The study also
involved an animal model of brain injury induced by Amyloid beta (Aβ)
administration in mice. After Yoga intervention, UCB was collected from the
participants, and Lin-ve stem cells were analysed. Flow cytometry revealed an
increased number of CD34+ve cells in the Lin-ve population in Yoga group
participants, indicating enhanced stemness. For the animal model, Lin-ve stem
cells from Yoga practitioner mothers and usual care group mothers were injected
into mice with Aβ-induced memory loss. Neurobehavioural tests showed
improved memory in both transplantation groups, with the Yoga group showing
greater improvement. mRNA expression of BDNF, Nestin and CREB was marginally
increased in the Yoga group. Protein expression of BDNF was significantly higher
in the brain of mice who received stem cells from Yoga group as confirmed by
IHC. These results suggest that Yoga during pregnancy can impact stem cells at a
cellular level, potentially enhancing the efficacy of UCB-derived stem cells.
Embracing Yoga as a lifestyle during pregnancy may lead to improved outcomes,
and Lin-ve SCs derived from Yoga practitioners could be.

## S6.2. Yoga: Mental Health and Wellbeing

Krishan K.1

Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India
Yoga is a vast subject to discuss and number of experiments has been done by
using various kind of yoga to cure mental health issues. However, the practice
of yoga is now as common as used as a part of healthy life style for all the age
group both in western countries as well as in India. Yoga is the one of the most
powerful and time tested spiritual technique to go beyond the body,
consciousness and experience subconscious and later on the superconscious states
of the self. A positive feature of yoga interventions may in fact be very
supportive for the execution and maintenance of a lifestyle changes due to the
experience of well-being and the changes in mind and body awareness that occur
over time with continued yoga practice. It also supports a desire to adopt and
maintain healthy behaviours. Yoga may have potential to be implemented as a
beneficial supportive/adjunct treatment that is relatively cost effective and
can be practiced at least in part as a self-care behavioural treatment as it
provides a life-long behavioural skill, enhances self-efficacy and
self-confidence. Yoga interventions are curative treatments remains to be
determined and safe to suggest, because of low risk for side effects and
potential for actual positive side effects. Nevertheless, there is currently
insufficient data on contraindications or side effects related to yoga practices
in patients with psychological disorders. Thus, Larger-scale and more rigorous
research is highly encouraged for further studies in which patients may benefit
from the interventions and which aspects of the yoga interventions (i.e.,
physical activity and/or meditation and subsequent life style modification) or
which specific yoga styles were more effective than others.

## S6.3. Spectrum of Yogic Relaxation Techniques

Jyoti Dvivedi1

1Himalayan Institute of Medical Sciences, Dehradun, Uttarakhand,
India
Yoga is a holistic science that is relevant to all systems of human physiology.
Yoga provides a sound framework to understand and deal with stress. It is a
useful technique to look at the unconscious parts of the mind to understand the
habits and patterns leading to stress. The guided technique of yogic relaxation
practices helps to improve insomnia, ameliorate stress, decrease depression and
anxiety and thus lower tendency for cardiovascular diseases. Interestingly, the
relaxation response, a meditative technique described by Herbert Benson, has
been found to reduce the symptoms of AIDS, cancer and other diseases in
scientific studies. The relaxation response seems opposite to the
fight-or-flight response observed under perceived threatening situation. With
the relaxation technique the heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate and
metabolism decreases. Besides this, the ancient yogic literature speaks volumes
of ‘shavasana’ popularly referred to as the relaxation technique
by the western world. The other relaxation technique is
‘Shavyatra’, which is well established technique of Hatha yoga for
the body and mind. Further there are many modified relaxation techniques for the
ease to understand by a modern man, one of them being the 61-point relaxation
exercise. It should be practiced for about 20 min per day in isolation. It does
not require specialised equipment. Regular practice helps to elicit the
relaxation response easily.

## S6.4. Yogic Intervention in Occupational Stress: Trends and Advances

Pramod Avti1,2, Akshay Anand2,3, Saurabh
Kumar2, Prashant Verma2, Kanu Priya3,
Monica Gautam2, Hosakote S Vadiraja4 and Rao M
Raghavendra4

1Department of Biophysics, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education
and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India
2CCRYN-Collaborative Centre for Mind Body Intervention through Yoga,
PGIMER, Chandigarh, India
3Neuroscience Research Lab, Department of Neurology, PGIMER,
Chandigarh, India
4Central Council for Research in Yoga & Naturopathy (CCRYN), New
Delhi, India
Stress arising in the public-professional systems due to their fulfilling
occupational duties is emerging to a greater extent. This has adverse effects
not only on the physiological, physical and mental responses but also
drastically impacts the mind-body co-ordination. The overall effects lead to
poor quality of life and performance to discharge their professional duties.
Various trials undertaken on providing regular and systematic yoga training,
though the yoga protocols followed are different, for specific defined time
scales have shown ameliorating effects at different molecular, amperometric,
physiological and neuropsychological levels. The use of common yoga protocol
(CYP) based studies seem to be emerging. In the present talk the use of CYP in
the public-professional systems will be presented to evaluate the mechanistic
approaches in understanding the ameliorating benefits from the molecular to
neuropsychological approaches involved in improving the overall quality of life
of the professional employees.

## S6.5. Physiological Insights to Yogic Interventions

Seema Singh1

Era’s Lucknow Medical College, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
Yoga, an ancient Principle, is now considered a tool for comprehensive health
benefits. The world ‘Yoga‘ originates from a Sanskrit word
‘Yu‘ that relates to uniting or joining. It involves directing and
concentrating one’s attention. Yoga is considered reliable curative
therapy for various physical, mental and biochemical disorders affecting the
body although it takes time for the beneficial effects. Yoga helps as an adjunct
to routine medical treatment by: Reducing the symptoms, improving energy levels,
calming the mind, giving hope and motivation, improving the regenerative
processes. Yoga helps in improving the performance in: Sports, competitive exams
and in various skills. The yogic interventions affect the body functions and the
physiological effects of various yogic exercises have been investigated and
reported in the literature. In this talk the physiological insight to yogic
interventions will be discussed.

## S6.6. Quantitative EEG Application in Assessing Effects of Kriya Yoga on
Brain

Pooja Ojha1, Naresh Nebhinani1 and Ambika
Chandani2

1All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur, Rajasthan,
India
2Indra Yoga Sansthan, Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India
Our current lifestyle exposes us to physical and mental exhaustion and stressful
situation. It brings to fore the need to take up a lifestyle intervention with a
positive impact on mental health. Kriya yoga combines several techniques like
mantra chanting, breath modulation, pranayam and asana holding. It can be easily
learned and practiced. The participants enrolled in the study were taught the
yoga by a trained yoga practitioner and were required to practice it for six
weeks. The effects of this technique were investigation on brain waves through
the electroencephalogram (EEG). EEG is chosen as it is a non-invasive tool with
high temporal resolution. The quantitative EEG comprise digital encoding of the
raw data and its subsequent statistical analysis. The EEG signals were acquired
before and after six weeks of Kriya Yoga practice. The data were analysed
quantitatively for brain wave powers over several regions of the brain. The
results revealed the benefits of Kriya yoga practice and will be discussed in
the presentation.

## Symposium 7: Long-term Sequel of Neuro-COVID: Ghosts of a Bygone Pandemic

## S7.1. Epidemiological Aspects of Long-term Neuro-COVID

Adil Asghar1

1Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Patna, Bihar, India
Background: Several studies have reported prolonged symptoms
especially neurological symptoms following acute infection in patients with
COVID-19, known as long COVID-19. There are only few studies investigating this
population and relatively less known, including nervous system involvement. A
systematic review and meta-analysis of these studies are required to
understanding the prevalence of persistent neurological manifestations after
COVID-19.
Objective: To conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis on the
persistent neurological manifestations in COVID-19 survivors.
Methods: Authors conducted a literature search through all major
databases till June 2023 according to PRISMA guideline. Furthermore, the authors
added additional sources by re-viewing related references. Studies presenting
the neurologic features of long COVID-19 patients in their data were included.
Case reports and case series also included in this review. The quality of the
studies was assessed based on the Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine
guidelines. Selected studies were included in the meta-analysis of proportion
and heterogeneity test.
Findings: Most of the included studies had mean duration of
follow-up after COVID-19 onset of less than six months. Fatigue was the most
common (52.8%, 95%CI 19.9–84.4) symptoms of long COVID,
followed by cognitive disorder (35.4%, 95%CI 2.1–81.7);
paraesthesia (33.3%, 95%CI 2.7–76.6); sleep disorder
(32.9%, 95%CI 6.5–67.4); musculoskeletal pain
(27.8%, 95%CI 12.7–46) and dizziness (26.4%,
95%CI 4.6–57.9).
Conclusion: Neurological manifestations are prevalent and persisting
in patients with long COVID. The duration of the symptoms varies among
literatures. However, the frequency is mostly observed during the first six
months after the illness onset.

## S7.2. Evidence Favouring Viral Injury of Brain Cells as a Pathogenetic
Mechanism of Long-Term Neuropsychiatric Illness in COVID-19

Ishani Bora1

1Department of Virology, PGIMER, Chandigarh, India
SARS-CoV-2 (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Corona Virus-2) causes coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) and associated medical complications. This virus has
both neurotropic as well as neuro-invasive properties and has a potentiality to
cause injury to the central nervous system (CNS). There has been evidence that
viral injuries to brain cells may serve as a plausible pathogenic mechanism
underlying long-term neuropsychiatric illnesses in individuals affected by
COVID-19. There has also been a possible link associated in neuropathological
changes in the brain with neuropsychiatric symptoms, behavioural disturbances
and also cognitive dysfunction. The potential biological mechanisms encompass
direct micro-invasion of neurons, disruptions within the neuro-immuno-endocrine
system, and potential modifications to neuronal excitability. It has been shown
that, SARS-CoV-2 utilises the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor as
a means of cellular entry. This discovery prompts an inquiry into the expression
of ACE2 within neurological tissues, as well as an exploration of the potential
implications of neurological tissue damage on overall morbidity and mortality
caused by COVID-19. Recent indications propose that individuals affected by
COVID-19 may experience neurological manifestations including symptoms like
headaches, changes in consciousness and sensations of paraesthesia. Autopsies
have revealed instances of cerebral oedema and limited neurodegeneration in
brain tissue. Furthermore, there are indications suggesting the virus’s
capacity to induce harm to the nervous system. These collective observations
imply a potential link between the virus and the emergence of immediate
psychiatric symptoms and persistent neuropsychiatric consequences stemming from
COVID-19. Consequently, the neurological complications linked to COVID-19
infection may exert enduring effects on cognitive functions and understanding
these mechanisms is crucial for the development of targeted interventions and
therapies to alleviate the burden of long-term neuropsychiatric consequences in
COVID-19 survivors.

## S7.3. Pathogenesis Mechanisms for Long-term Neuro-COVID

Sujeet Kumar1

1Centre for Proteomics & Drug Discovery, Amity University, Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India
The emergence of COVID-19 pandemic by the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 and its
sub-variants have imposed long-term health implications. The SARS-CoV-2 virus,
primarily thought to infect lungs through the internalisation mediated by the
host-cell entry mediators angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) and
transmembrane protease, serine 2 (TMPRSS2), has later been observed to infect
multiple organs lacking these mediators. The involvement of organs other than
the lungs often involved a non-ACE2 dependent mechanism and the studies have
suggested that an alternative host cell entry receptor, neuropilin-1 (NRP1), can
mediate the entry of furin-cleaved SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins into host-cells.
The protein expressions of NRP1 and furin are observable in the brain
tissue’s neuronal cells, neuropil and glial cells. The pathological
involvement of the nervous system in COVID-19 patients poses a long-term risk of
developing a neuropsychiatric illness in survivors that may persist for years.
Although mental health conditions such as anxiety and depression return to
normalcy over time, but the increased risks of cognitive impairment (brain fog),
seizures, dementia, psychosis and other neurocognitive conditions persist for at
least two years. Possible mechanisms for these neuropathologies include
neuroinflammation, damage to blood vessels by coagulopathy and endothelial
dysfunction, and injury to neurons. Although the current findings are critical
to understanding long COVID, to prioritise and strengthen long-term neuro-COVID
research, the future studies must engage patients meaningfully throughout the
research process and be inclusive of marginalised populations.

## S7.4. Long-term Risks of Neurodegenerative Diseases in Recovered COVID-19
Patients

Ashok K. Datusalia1

1Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, National Institute of
Phar­maceutical Education and Research (NIPER), Raebareli, Uttar Pradesh,
India
In the recent years, the mankind has faced the pandemic caused by the severe
acute respiratory syndrome 2 coronavirus (COVID-19), which caused around 10
million deaths and approximately 700 million positive infections with survival
worldwide. Although COVID-19 mainly affects the respiratory tract level, there
are several evidence, indicating that other organs such as the heart, kidney,
pancreas and brain are badly affected in individuals on infection. A
characteristic observed in blood serum samples of patients suffering COVID-19
disease in moderate and severe stages, is a significant increase in
pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interferon-α, interleukin-1β,
interleukin-2, interleukin-6 and interleukin-18, as well as the presence of
autoantibodies against interferon-α and interferon-λ.
Interestingly, it has been described that the chronic cytokinemia is related to
alterations of blood-brain barrier permeability and induction of neurotoxicity.
Similarly, Evidence also indicates accelerating the Parkinson’s disease
Alzheimer’s disease phenotype in surviving individuals after COVID
infections. Furthermore, the generation of virus specific antibodies and
autoantibodies alter the processes of neurogenesis, neuronal repair, myelination
and the optimal astrocytes-microglia axis. These observations indicate that
COVID-19 subjects may show neurological sequelae and neuropsychiatric disorders
on short and long term after survival.

## S7.5. G6PD Deficiency-Mediated Dysregulation of Redox Equilibrium
Contributing to COVID-19-mediated Neuroinflammation

Abir Mondal1, Subrata Munan2, Isha
Saxena1, Soumyadeep Mukherjee1, Prince
Upadhyay1, Waseem Dar1, Nutan Gupta3,
Animesh Samanta2, Shailja Singh3 and Soumya
Pati1

1Department of Life Sciences, School of Natural Sciences, Shiv Nadar
Institution of Eminence, Delhi, India
2Department of Chemistry, School of Natural Sciences, Shiv Nadar
Institution of Eminence, Delhi, India
3Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University,
New Delhi, India
Background: Glucose 6 Phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is located in
the X-chromosome, and it is a key enzyme for the pentose phosphate pathways
which contributes 70% of total cellular reduced nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) production. This NADPH plays a critical role in
the regulation of redox equilibrium and nucleotide biosynthesis. Additionally,
G6PD-derived NADPH can follow pro- oxidative and anti-oxidative pathways for the
generation and removal of ROS respectively in a tissue- specific manner.
Therefore, the deficiency of G6PD leads to alteration of fundamental metabolic
and regulatory pathways which causes several neurological and metabolic
disorders. G6PD deficiency is considered a very common enzymatic disorder that
affects more than 1 million individuals per year in India and worldwide.
Besides, several clinical reports suggested that G6PD deficient patient shows
aggravated Covid-19 response and severe neuroinflammation.
Aim: The mechanism of G6PD deficiency-mediated Covid-19 responses is
still ambiguous. In this study, we are investigating the functional dichotomy of
G6PD in Covid-19 mediated neuroinflammation.
Methods: We generated a CRISPR-mediated G6PD deficient
in-vitro model to study the response of human microglia
under foreign pathogenic stimulus. To study covid-19 mediated neuroinflammation,
we used in-vitro translatable Covid-19 RNA. Transfection of
Covid-19 RNA and its downstream expression of viral protein triggers
inflammatory responses in human microglia which were characterised by PCR using
inflammatory markers. Further, nitric oxide and ROS production and their
localisation were characterised by confocal microscopy using specific
probes.
Results: Our data indicated that G6PD-derived NADPH followed a
pro-oxidative pathway by generating ROS and NO in human microglia which may
further promote the destruction of Covid-19. On the contrary, G6PD deficiency
causes a reduction of ROS and Nitric oxide production in-vitro.
Surprisingly, we also observed a decrease in lysosomal acidification in G6PD
deficient cells which could possibly be due to the reduction of cellular NADPH
which affects the acidification of lysosomes by altering the function of the
proton pump.
Conclusion: G6PD is the most crucial enzyme for restricting
SARS-CoV-2-mediated neuroinflammation. A deficiency of G6PD leads to
dysregulation redox equilibrium which further causes aggravated COVID-19
responses. However, we are also generating clinically relevant G6PD variants to
study its responses in neuro-glia interaction for a detailed understanding of
neuroinflammation.

## Symposium 8: Cellular and Molecular Insights into CNS Disorders: Possible
Therapeutic Approach

## S8.1. Regulation of Glioblastoma through Mitochondrial Quality
Control

Pransu Srivastava1, Sabya Abbas1, Ved Prakash
Maurya2, Meenakshi Tiwari3 and Lokendra Kumar
Sharma1

1Department of Molecular Medicine and Biotechnology, Sanjay Gandhi
Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences (SGPGIMS), Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh,
India
2Department of Neurosurgery, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of
Medical Sciences (SGPGIMS), Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
3Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS), Patna, Bihar, India
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most challenging type of High-Grade Glioma
(HGG) with high recurrence and chemotherapeutic resistance contributing to its
poor survival rate. Studies have shown that a small population of cells commonly
referred as glioblastoma-initiating cells (GICs) is thought to cause tumour
relapse and therapeutic resistance. However, mechanism of GICs survival during
carcinogenic insult and/or therapeutic stress remains unclear. Although
increased glycolysis is a hallmark of cancer (Warburg effect), reprogramming of
mitochondria is now recognised as an important event in the adaptation of cancer
cell for survival and proliferation. Mitochondrial functions are regulated
through its quality control such as biogenesis, dynamics (fusion and fission)
and clearance (mitophagy). Although, changes in mitochondrial functions have
been reported in GBM; mitochondrial contribution to GICs survival and
therapeutic resistance is not known. We utilised three dimensional (3D)
spheroids as a GICs model derived from human GBM cells lines or from primary
cultures and investigated their mitochondrial functions and quality control
pathways. We found that GICs display stemness potential and differ in
mitochondrial functions compared to their monolayer counterparts. In addition,
these GICs show significant alterations in mitochondrial dynamics and autophagic
clearance pathways, contributing to their survival. Our results also indicated
that pharmacological agents targeting specific mitochondrial pathways (alone or
in combination with GBM therapeutics) could effectively sensitise GICs
population and inhibit their growth potential. Altogether, alteration in
mitochondrial pathways contributes to GICS survival and therapeutic targeting of
specific mitochondrial quality control pathway could be useful to combine with
existing therapeutics for effective GBM treatment.

## S8.2. Critical Role of Mitochondrial Metabolism in Drug Resistance of
Glioblastoma Multiforme

Ashutosh Shrivastava1 and Manendra Singh
Tomar1

1Center for Advance Research, Faculty of Medicine, King
George’s Medical University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is the primary brain
neoplasm with a low median survival of ~15 months after the initial diagnosis.
Temozolomide (TMZ) is a first-choice alkylating agent inducted as a standard
therapy for GBM. However, efficacy of TMZ is limited due to development of
intrinsic and extrinsic drug resistance.
Material and Methods: We established a model of acquired
TMZ-resistance in GBM. We performed cell cytotoxicity assay to find out IC-50 of
sensitive and resistant U-87 and LN-229 GBM cells. We used Gene expression. Flow
cytometry and Metabolomics to understand the mechanism of TMZ resistance in
GBM.
Results: The IC-50 of sensitive U-87MG and LN-229 was ~60 µM and ~10
µM respectively compared to 365.5 µM of U-87MG and 135.3 µM for the LN-229
resistant cells. The mitochondrial copy numbers were significantly decreased
while membrane potential was significantly higher in the resistant cell lines
compared to sensitive cells. There was a decrease in the expression of TFAM and
PGC –α gene in the resistant cells. We also found elevated level
of ROS in sensitive cell lines on TMZ treatment but no significant change in ROS
levels in the resistant cells. We subsequently performed Metabolomics and found
TCA cycle, Warburg effect, Pentose Phosphate Pathway, glutathione metabolism and
nucleotide metabolism to be upregulated in the resistant GBM.
Discussion and Conclusion: Based on these preliminary findings, it
can be concluded that TMZ resistant cell lines have decreased mitochondrial DNA
number. On the other hand, upregulated TCA cycle and Warburg effect for energy
production provide these cells with survival advantage.

## S8.3. Exploring the Role of Autophagy in Temozolomide-Induced Glioma Cancer
Stem Cells Population

Meenakshi Tiwari1, Suraj Kumar Singh1, Sabiya
Abbas1, Pransu Srivastava1, Lokendra Kumar
Sharma2

1Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Patna, Bihar, India
2Department of Molecular Medicine & Biotechnology, Sanjay Gandhi
Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
Glioblastomas (GBM) are highly recurrent and aggressive tumours that are
associated with poor prognosis. The existence of glioma stem cell (GSC)
populations has been identified in these tumours that are associated with
aggressiveness and recurrence of the tumours. These GSCs possess properties of
stem cells that include self-renewability, proliferation and therapeutic
resistance, contributing to the poor clinical outcome. Thus, targeting these
stem cells in tumours offers a reliable and potential target to improve
treatment outcomes in glioblastoma. Our laboratory focuses on understanding the
role of autophagy in the existence of cancer stem cells (CSCs) in tumours,
specifically in high grade gliomas. We have identified the role of autophagy in
the maintenance of GSCs as well as Temozolomide (TMZ)-induced therapeutic
response, the most commonly used treatment against GBM. Using primary and
well-established cell lines of human origin, we have demonstrated the role of
autophagy in maintaining the glioma stem cell population. Further, our
experimental data suggested that autophagy provides a survival advantage to
glioblastoma cells in response to chemotherapy. More interestingly, we have
identified that TMZ treatment significantly increases the population of GSCs
that is associated with upregulation of autophagy. Our findings implicate that,
inhibition of autophagy prevented TMZ-induced increased GSC population,
suggesting a critical role for autophagy in therapy-induced generation of the
GSC pool. Currently, we are generating some exciting data that suggests the
important role of autophagy in GSCs and the use of various autophagy modulators
as combinational agents to overcome chemoresistance in these GSCs. CSC is a
relatively unexplored field with high potential, and the present study is
providing some important data that may form the basis for defining the mode of
therapy in the future.

## S8.4. Neurotoxins Therapeutics: Small Molecule Inhibitor a Ray of
Hope

Nandita Saxena1

1Defence Research and Development Establishment, Gwalior, Madhya
Pradesh, India
Neurotoxins are synthetic or naturally occurring substances that destroy, or
impair the functioning of the central and/or peripheral nervous system.
Botulinum toxin is one of the neurotoxins (BoNTs) that target motor neurons and
block acetylcholine neurotransmitter release. This action results in the
life-threatening flaccid paralysis that defines the disease botulism. Current
therapeutic options are of a predominantly prophylactic nature and cannot be
used in mass population, new strategies and ultimately potential treatments are
desperately needed to combat any widespread release of these neurotoxins. Small
molecule, non-peptidic inhibitors offer the best opportunity for the development
of post-exposure therapeutics. Small molecule inhibitors are potent, effective,
safe and possess suitable absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion and
toxicity (ADMET). Our laboratory is trying to identify the small molecule
inhibitor against the neurotoxin and other toxin which may cause neurotoxicity.
Targeting catalytic domain of BONT is specific approach and hold promise for
selective therapy. Studies were performed to screen inhibitors in
silico followed by high throughput screening via in house developed
Fluorescence Based Thermal Shift Assay (FTSA) and in vitro assays. Interaction
of small molecules with toxin is confirmed via SPR. Endopeptidase assay and cell
free translation assay is also done to validate functionality of the molecules.
Shortlisted molecules were finally evaluated in in vivo to
confirm their efficacy. Amide based derivative and quinol molecules were found
to be lead compound and may be considered for further development as post
exposure therapeutics.

## S8.5. Restoration of Nerve Demyelination by Methylcobalamin in an Excitotoxic
Brain Disorder Model

Surendra Kumar Trigun1, Anima Roy1,
Anamika1, Debashmit Mallick1 and Archita
Khanna1

1Biochemistry Section, Department of Zoology, Institute of Science,
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
Nerve demyelination is considered a common neuronal aberration of all
neurodegenerative brain disorders. Methylcobalamin (MeCobl) is a widely used
supplement for the patients with neurological complications. However, the
mechanism by which MeCobl does so remains largely unexplored. We have studied
the effect of MeCobl on the neurochemical, neuroarchitectural and
neurobehavioural aspects using moderate grade hepatic encephalopathy (MoHE)
model of neuroexcitotoxicity. The neurobehaviourily characterised MoHE was
induced in rats by administration of 100 mg/kg b.w of thioacetamide i.p. for 10
days. In experimental group, MoHE rats were post treated with 500 mg/Kg. b.w.
MeCobl, i.p. Followed by neurochemical, neuroarchitectural and neurobehavioural
studies. In comparison to the control rats, a significant decline in the level
of the myelin basic protein (MBP) vs enhanced level of neurodegenerative changes
could be observed in the MoHE rats. This was consistent with the similar changes
in the methyl group transfer enzymes, immunochemically detected deranged
myelination of the hippocampus neurons and a compromise in the dendritic
arborisation and number of synaptic knobs in the CA1 pyramidal neurons of those
MoHE rats. However, when these MoHE rats were treated with MeCobl, all these
aberrations could be normalised back resulting into recovery in the
neurobehavioural deficits observed with the MoHE pathogenesis. Taking together,
it is evident that MeCobl treatment recovers MoHE associated neuronal
derangements by modulating MeCobl utilising neurochemistry vs re-myelination of
the hippocampus neurons.

## Acknowledgement
This work was financially supported by the A DAE-BRNS project to SKT and
award of CSIR SRF to AR.

## Ethical Statement
The animal study was approved by the institutional animal ethical committee
(IAEC) of Banaras Hindu University, for the care and use of Laboratory
animals.

## S8.6. Neuro-acoustic Methodologies for Diagnosis and Treatment of Various
Neuropsychiatric Disorders at Early Stage

Shahzad Aasim1, Rakesh Banal1, Sanjeev
Rana1, Ranjeet Kumar1, Hilal Ahmad1 and
Suhail Ahmad1

1Kashmir Advanced Scientific Research Centre, Cluster University,
Srinagar, J&K, India
Dementia and Alzheimer’s being an irreversible neurodegenerative disease
that impairs memory and cognitive development of brain. It is estimated that
more than 25 million people around the world have been affected by Dementia and
Alzheimer’s disease (AD). It is also estimated that every year new 5
million are added and total cases get doubled every 20 years. Having such an
enormous impact on the health of mostly old age people has promoted researcher
around the world to go for an innovative therapeutic approach for curbing this
menace. These approaches are mostly symptomatic, regenerative and disease
modifying in nature. We are proposing a non-invasive novel therapeutic
interventional approach using Neuro Acoustic stimulation for the early
diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of Dementia and AD. This can aid in the
reduction of pathology and symptoms of Dementia and AD. The proposed therapeutic
methodology will be focussing on stimulating brain waves that are falling in a
certain narrow range of principle frequencies and are classified as alpha, beta,
theta, delta and gamma. The intervention stages will involve identification of
the specific and selective acoustic loops/sub-frequencies among the huge set of
available principal frequencies. It will also involve stimulation of these
selective frequencies for analysing the effect and impact on the brain wave
patterns. These interventions will be analysed using ML and DL algorithms. This
can also be followed by the correlation with various bio-chemical parameters
that will be analysed with regards to the changes effected by these
interventions.

## Variables

Independent variable:
 The independent variable
is the use of specific neuro acoustic loops as non-invasive therapeutic
intervention. 
Dependent variables:
 Acoustic
Loop effect: Impact of specific therapeutic acoustic loop/s on subject
patient with recorded response. Memory Record and Retention: This involves
storing of long and short-term memories. Memory Retrieval: These involves
accessing and retrieval of these short and long-term memories. Memory
Transition Specificity: Involves enabling of episodic memories. Excepted
Outcome: The identification and intervention of these specific acoustic loop
stimulations will aid in treatment of Dementia and AD. It will also aid in
slowing down the cognitive declination of the subjects/patients. It may aid
in slowing down the cholinergic neuro degeneration process by reducing the
levels of amyloid-beta and phosphorylated tau proteins and also stimulating
the neuro transmitters like acetylcholine and dopamine.

## Symposium 9: Drug-Resistant Epilepsy: Mischievous Networks—From Bench to
Bedside

## S9.1. Surgical Strategies to Tackle the Networks in Drug-Resistant
Epilepsy

P Sarat Chandra1, Ramesh Doddamani1, Madhavi
Tripathi2, CS Bal2, S. Gaikwad1 and
Manjari Tripathi3

1Department of Neurology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences and
MEG resource facility, New Delhi, India
2Department of Neurosurgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
and MEG resource facility, New Delhi, India
3Department of Nuclear Medicine and Neuroradiology, All India
Institute of Medical Sciences and MEG resource facility, New Delhi, India
India has an estimated 20 million persons with Epilepsy and over 5 million are
likely to have drug resistant epilepsy (DRE). The only definitive treatment for
DRE is surgery as of now. Surgery involves localising the abnormal networks and
either disconnecting or removing them. Likewise, the surgical strategies could
be evolved on 2 basic techniques, disconnective or resective surgeries.
Localisation of abnormal networks is done by both pre-operative investigations,
that is, MRI as per epilepsy protocol, video EEG, ictal SPECT, PET and
magnetoencephalography. A third strategy includes neuromodulation, that is, a
mechanism to modify the abnormal networks. Stereoencephalography is a technique
whereby very thin calibre electrodes are implanted into brain using a robotic
guidance. They provide excellent recordings, whereby network localisation may be
provided which allows creating a good hypothesis for a surgical strategy even if
other investigations may be negative. The following lecture provides a brief
overview, demonstrating the role of various surgical strategies based on a
centre’s experience of over 3,000 cases over 25 years with over 400
publications on this subject.

## S9.2. Evaluation of Mischievous Aberrant Networks in Epilepsy

Manjari Tripathi1 and P. Sarat Chandra1

1Department of Neurology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS), New Delhi, India
It is important for the neurologist to clearly define whether the patient really
has drug resistant epilepsy. It is not un-common to find ‘pseudo
refractory epilepsy’. The common causes of this include, pseudo seizures,
poor drug compliance, poor drug combination for polytherapy, selection of wrong
first drug, for example, carbamazepine for juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME),
sub-optimal dosage of drug, non-epileptic conditions mimicking epilepsy, for
example, syncope and so on. At our centre, we start working up the patient for a
possible epilepsy surgery when the seizures are not controlled with 2 drugs.
This is done as soon as the patient referred to our centre. Children require a
more expeditious work up as they are prone to epileptic encephalopathy. The
following investigations are performed to localise the networks. These include
video EEG. In a cohort of over 200 patients with drug resistance in our centre,
we found that presence of structural lesion (Odds ratio 20.4), on-response to
first drug (OR 19), mental retardation (OR 9) and high initial seizure frequency
(OR 6) had the highest predictors for drug resistance. An MRI as per epilepsy
protocol, which includes 0.5 mm thin perpendicular slices to hippocampus. In
addition, advanced investigations like ictal SPECT, PET and
Magnetoencephalography. Intra-operative mapping techniques includes
electrocorticography and stereo encephalography. Multi modal imaging in recent
times has become a key strategy for better localisation of networks. A study of
ours studying the concordance between the PET and ictal SPECT demonstrated a
good clinical outcome especially for extra temporal epilepsies if both the
modalities were concordant with each other and with video EEG and MRI. The
presentation will include a brief overview of the techniques of localising the
abnormal networks based on the author’s experience of over 25 years and
with an extensive research experience of over 400 publications.

## S9.3. Drug-resistant Temporal Lobe Epilepsy (TLE): Cellular Basis of Abnormal
Neuronal Networks

Jyotirmoy Banerjee1, Vivek Dubey1, Aparna
Dixit2, Manjari Tripathi3, M.C.
Sharma4, Ramesh Doddamani5 and P. Sarat
Chandra5

1Department of Biophysics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS), New Delhi, India
2Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Center for Biomedical Research (ACBR), University
of Delhi, India 3Department of Neurology, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, India 4Department of
Neuropathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi,
India 5Department of Neurosurgery, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi, India
Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE), commonest DRE pathology, is associated with
large-scale network abnormalities involving hippocampal and extra-hippocampal
structures. The underlying cellular mechanisms responsible for generation of
abnormal neuronal networks is poorly understood. We utilised cellular and
molecular strategies to determine the configuration of the synaptic networks,
particularly to ascertain the presence of more than one abnormal network in
different brain structures. We investigated the abnormal neuronal networks in
resected brain samples obtained from patients with TLE as well as from animal
model of TLE. Whole cell patch-clamp technique was used to record excitatory
postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) from pyramidal neurons in slice preparations of
brain samples. Frequency and amplitude of spontaneous EPSCs was higher in both
the TLE samples compared to non-seizure controls. The magnitude of contribution
of the action potential-dependent excitatory activity to hyper excitability in
anterior temporal lobe (ATL) samples was higher than that in the case of the
hippocampal samples. Similar results were also observed in animal model of TLE.
This was the first direct evidence at cellular level that two epileptogenic
networks are present in TLE, one emanating from the hippocampus and the other
from ATL. This indicated that the reinforced glutamatergic synaptic connectivity
to form a network in the hippocampus was different from that in the ATL in TLE.
mRNA and protein expression of glutamate receptor subunits were checked by qPCR
and western blot. We demonstrated region-specific differential alterations of
glutamate receptor subunits in TLE, both in patients’ samples as well as
in animal model, suggesting independent cellular mechanisms contributing to
generation of independent epileptogenic networks in different temporal lobe
structures. Further we found that neuroanatomical changes and alterations in
dendritogenesis contribute to development of independent networks in the
hippocampus, ATL and frontal neocortex of TLE rats. Large-scale networks exist
even at the cellular level in TLE, further confirming the conjecture that TLE is
a distributed network disorder and not a focal disorder. He will also discuss
the clinical relevance of these findings with respect to resective surgery being
performed on patients with TLE. The surgical procedures used for the treatment
of TLE include standard anterior temporal lobectomy, combined with
amygdalo-hippocampectomy and selective amygdalo-hippocampectomy. Thus, an
anterior temporal lobectomy along with amygdalo-hippocampectomy is likely to
have a better outcome than selective amygdalo-hippocampectomy, which spares the
anterior temporal lobe.

## S9.4. Altered Lipid Profiles in Brain Tissues Resected from Patients with
Focal Cortical Dysplasia (FCD): With a Potential Role in Defining the
Epileptogenic Zone During Surgery

Aparna Dixit1, Krishan Kumar2, Nitin Yadav1,
Jyotirmoy Banerjee3, Manjari Tripathi2, M.C.
Sharma4, Sanjeev Lalwani5, Fouzia
Siraj5, P, Sarat Chandra6 and Shantanu
Sengupta7

1Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Center for Biomedical Research (ACBR), University
of Delhi, India
2Department of Neurology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS), New Delhi, India
3Department of Biophysics, AIIMS, New Delhi, India
4Department of Neuropathology, AIIMS, New Delhi, India
5Department of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology, AIIMS, New Delhi,
India
6Department of Neurosurgery, AIIMS, New Delhi, India
7CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, New Delhi,
India
FCD, being one of the most common pathologies of drug-resistant epilepsy (DRE),
accounts for one-third of the cases referred to surgery. Failure to precisely
localise the epileptogenic zone (EZs) is a major reason for poor surgical
outcomes in FCD. Currently, no molecular or cellular biomarkers are available to
aid in defining EZs. Dr Dixit used liquid chromatography coupled high-resolution
tandem mass spectrometry to identify altered lipid profiles in the resected
tissues from FCD patients obtained during electrocorticographically
(ECoG)-guided surgery compared to autopsy. Lipids were extracted from frozen
brain tissues using a modified Bligh & Dyer method and separated on an
ExionLC™ system with a Waters AQUITY UPLC BEH HILIC column. A SCIEX
QTRAP® 6500+ LC-MS/MS system with polarity switching, Turbo V™
source, and electrospray ionisation probe was used. For identification and
relative quantification of all the lipid species, theoretical multiple reaction
monitoring (MRM) library was generated using LIPIDMAPS. Lipids were quantified
by MultiQuant™ 3.0.2 quantitation software. The intensity values (mz/rt)
were normalised with spiked internal standards. MetaboAnalyst software (v5) was
used for missing values imputation. Mass spectral profiles of a total of 1,224
lipids with 607 in positive mode and 617 in negative mode were detected. A total
of 13 lipids (8 upregulated and 5 downregulated) were altered in FCD compared to
autopsy (p<0.05 and fold-change ≥2). The upregulated lipids in FCD
comprised neutral triacylglycerols (TAGs) and downregulated lipids included
phosphatidylcholine (PC) and phosphatidylethanolamine (PE). Dr Dixit will
discuss distinct lipid mass spectra of TAGs, DAGs, PC and PE which were observed
in FCD tissue in comparison to controls. As a proof-of-concept the lipid library
might prove to be useful in defining the epileptogenic zone and aid in iKnife
strategy. Further research on understanding the TAG and DAG metabolism in FCD
may prove to be insightful in understanding the role of lipid metabolic pathways
and enzymes in the process of epileptogenesis in FCD.

## Symposium 10: Learning and Memory in Invertebrate Systems

## S10.1. Learning from Visceral Malaise in Drosophila

Gaurav Das1

1Narional Centre for Cell Science, Pune, Maharashtra, India
Learning to avoid experiences that cause visceral malaise/sickness is an adaptive
behaviour that promotes survival. However, malaise-reinforced learning can also
be maladaptive. The exact neural circuitry that mediates this kind of aversive
anticipatory learning are poorly understood in any species. Our ongoing work
shows that flies show signs of distress and vomiting upon ingestion of toxins
(CuSO4, nicotine). They also learn to associate an odour with toxin ingestion
and its consequences. Later, re-exposure to the same odour induces learned
emesis even in the absence of the toxin. I am going to talk about what we have
found out about the underlying gut-brain connections.

## S10.2. Miles to Go Before I Sleep: The Neuroethology of Colour Vision in
Bees

Hema Somanathan1

1Indian Institute of Science Education & Research,
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India
Bees are well-known for their role in human nutrition and for the pollination
services they render. Colour is a primary visual cue by which bees detect and
remember flowers, and flower colour is adaptive to colour vision of bees and
other pollinators. Bees are primarily day-active and have apposition compound
eyes, the typical eye design of diurnal insects. Most bees are trichromats with
photoreceptors sensitive in the UV, blue and green. While diurnal colour vision
was established a century ago in bees, it was accepted that bees were
colour-blind in dim light. Here, I present the first evidence of nocturnal
colour vision in two bees: the solitary Indian carpenter bee Xylocopa
tranquebarica which is obligately nocturnal, and more recently, the
Asian Giant honeybee Apis dorsata, a facultatively nocturnal
bee. These findings indicate remarkable visual adaptations because the
insensitive apposition eyes were thought incapable of supporting nocturnal
colour vision. Exactly how nocturnal colour vision is achieved in apposition
eyes remains to be understood, but increasing experimental and theoretical
evidence suggests that neural summation mechanisms are likely to be
necessary.

## S10.3. Interplay of Temporal Patterning and Oscillations in Olfactory
Learning in Honeybees

Joby Joseph1

1University of Hyderabad, India
Temporal patterning and oscillations are two features of the conditioned stimulus
(CS) in olfactory pathway. PER conditioning is a classical conditioning paradigm
where olfactory stimulus as CS is associated with sugar reward (US). We
manipulate the CS sequencing, CS-US intervals and the inter stimulus interval of
the PER conditioning paradigm to get at the interplay of these phenomena and its
consequences in learning and memory, and discrimination ability. We use
modelling and simulations to arrive at sufficient mechanisms to explain these
observations.

## S10.4. Bidirectional Long-distance Transport of Organelles During Synapse
Formation, Maintenance and Plasticity

Sathya Puthanveettil1

1UF Scripps Biomedical Research, Jupiter, Florida, USA
Despite the decades of research on the mechanisms of synapse formation, we still
do not know how the communication between neuronal soma and its terminals
results in proper formation of synapses, and the maintenance of appropriate
synaptic connections. Organelles such as mitochondria help provide energy to the
cell, and lysosomes assist in the recycling and degrading macromolecules.
However, whether and how the availability of these biologically essential
organelles is modulated for synapse function remain elusive. To address this
question, we explored the advantages of the well described pre- and
post-synaptic neurons of Aplysia gill withdrawal reflex to
perform quantitative live imaging and assess the flux and velocities of
anterograde and retrograde transport of mitochondria and lysosome related
organelles (LROs). These experiments show that in the presynaptic sensory
neurons of the Aplysia gill withdrawal reflex, the formation of
functional synapses leads to a bidirectional progressive enhancement in
mitochondrial flux whereas retrograde transport of LROs were significantly
reduced following synapse formation and induction of long-term plasticity. Gene
expression and systematic characterisation of signalling pathways suggest that
cAMP-PKA and signalling from Golgi bodies modulate the retrograde transport of
LROs. Taken together, our results suggest a new mechanism for the synapse
formation, maintenance and plasticity. Specifically, the long-distance
bidirectional transport of organelles is selectively and temporally modulated
for dynamic changes at the synapse.

## S10.5. Understanding Memory Formation Using C. elegans; The
Old, the New and the Strange

Kavita Babu1

1Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
I will present a model for studying long term memory in Caenorhabditis
elegans
and how we are using this model to study aspects of communication between animals
during the process of memory formation. Our assay has allowed us to study
long-term associative memory in C. elegans using pairing of a
positive stimulus (Isoamyl alcohol odour) with an aversive stimulus (heat).
These two stimuli are paired, and the animals are treated to this airing through
a training protocol. Twenty to twenty-two hours after this training the animals
that would in the naïve condition be attracted to Isoamyl alcohol, now
show no response or aversion to the chemical. In this talk I will discuss this
paradigm and the mechanistic basis of this behaviour is C.
elegans.

## Symposium 11: Novel Mechanisms and Therapies to Mitigate Secondary Brain
Damage

## S11.1. Epitranscriptomic Modulation as a Novel Therapy to Mitigate Secondary
Brain Damage

Vijay Arruri1, Anil K Chokkalla1, Suresh L.
Mehta1 and Raghu Vemuganti1,2

1Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
Wisconsin, USA
2William S. Middleton Veterans Administration Hospital, Madison,
Wisconsin, USA
Mammalian RNAs undergo >175 chemical modifications that are collectively
known as epitranscriptomic modifications. These increases the diversity and
functionality of RNAome. The major RNA modification seen in CNS is addition of
the methyl group to form N6-methyladenosine (m6A). Our
studies show that experimental stroke in rodents significantly increased
m6A methylation in the peri-infarct cerebral cortex. We further
observed that downregulation of m6A writer FTO is responsible for
increased RNA methylation after stroke. Many of the m6A
hypermethylated transcripts in the post-ischemic brain are those that promotes
apoptosis and inflammation. Furthermore, reversing post-stroke m6A
methylation by restoring FTO with an AAV9 ameliorated the ischemic brain damage
and promoted functional recovery in mice of both sexes. As we observed that the
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) is a potent activator of
FTO, we tested its efficacy in adult male and female C57BL/6J mice subjected to
focal ischemia. Intravenous administration of NADPH at 2h of reperfusion
following transient middle cerebral artery occlusion induced cerebral FTO
expression. NADPH treatment also significantly decreased post-stroke grey and
white matter damage and improved the recovery of motor function, cognition and
lowered depression in mice of both sexes. Furthermore, stroke led to
upregulation of m6A reader YTHDF1 in the ischemic cortex. When YTHDF1
knockout male mice were subjected to focal ischemia, post-ischemic motor
recovery (evaluated by rotarod test and beam walk test) was lower and the
infarct volume was bigger compared with the wild-type mice. We currently
targeting these proteins to modulate RNA methylation to protect the post-stroke
brain.

## S11.2. Brain Microvascular Energetics: Impact of Sex, Aging and
Stroke

Venkata Sure1, Siva Sakamuri1, Lokanatha
Oruganti1 and Prasad Katakam1

1Department of Pharmacology, Tulane University School of Medicine, New
Orleans, Louisiana, USA
Background: Bioenergetics play an important role in cellular
responses to pathophysiological processes and cerebral microvasculature display
functional impairments during aging and following stroke. The objective of the
study was to study the sex and aging-related alteration of bioenergetics in
brain microvessels (BMVs).
Methods: BMVs were isolated from young (3-4 months) and aged (18-20
months) C57Bl/6 mice by subjecting the brain homogenates to a combination of
gradient centrifugation and filtration. Extracellular acidification rate and
oxygen consumption rate were measured utilising Agilent Seahorse
XFe24 analyser.
Results: Real-time ATP rate assay observed reduced total ATP
production rate in female BMVs versus male BMVs. Compared with males, female
BMVs showed reduced ATP derived from both glycolysis and %oxidative
phosphorylation (OxPhos) despite a significant increase in contribution of
%glycolysis to overall energy production relative to % OxPhos.
Mito Stress test in female BMVs showed reduced basal and maximal respiration
that was accompanied by reduced spare respiratory capacity and proton leak
versus male BMVs. Similarly, glycolytic rate assay observed diminished basal and
compensatory glycolysis compared to male BMVs. Paradoxically, old female BMVs
displayed greater total ATP production rate with increased ATP generation from
mitochondria and reduced contribution to energy production from
%glycolysis.
Conclusions: BMVs rely on mitochondria/OxPhos for energy contrary to
existing claims. Aging induces an energy deficient phenotype in mouse BMVs.
Female microvasculature displayed sex and age dependent paradoxically diminished
mitochondrial respiration and glycolysis in contrast to small arteries which
display increased mitochondrial respiratory parameters. Reduced spare
respiratory capacity and compensatory glycolysis in female BMVs compared to
males indicate an inability to meet the excess energy demands consistent with
the evidence of stroke-related microvascular vulnerability in women.

## Acknowledgement
This work was supported by funding from National Institute of Health
(AG074489 and NS114286).

## S11.3. Targeting Neutrophil Integrin α9 Improves Long-term Functional
Outcomes After Stroke in Mice with Obesity-induced Hyperglycaemia

Anil K. Chauhan1

1Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA
Background: Obesity-induced hyperglycaemia is a significant risk
factor for stroke. Integrin α9β1 is expressed on neutrophils and
stabilises adhesion to the endothelium via ligands, including fibronectin
containing extra domain A (Fn-EDA) and tenascin C. Following ischemic stroke,
both Fn-EDA and tenascin C, are elevated in the circulation. While myeloid
deletion of α9 reduces susceptibility to ischemic stroke, it is unclear
whether this is mediated by neutrophil-derived α9. The role of α9
in neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) formation is also unclear. We
determined the mechanistic role of neutrophil-specific α9 in NETosis and
stroke in a mice model with obesity-induced hyperglycaemia.
Methods: α9Neu-KO
(α9fl/flMRP8Cre+) and littermate control
α9WT (α9fl/flMRP8 Cre) mice were fed on
a 60% high-fat diet for 20 weeks to induce obesity-induced
hyperglycaemia. Functional outcomes were evaluated up to 28 days after stroke
onset in mice of both sexes using a transient (30 min) middle cerebral artery
ischemia. Infarct volume (MRI) and post-reperfusion thrombo-inflammation
(thrombi, fibrin, neutrophil, p-NFκB, TNFα and IL1β levels,
markers of NETs) were measured post 6 or 48 h of reperfusion. Functional
outcomes (mNSS, rotarod, corner and wire-hanging test) were measured for up to 4
weeks.
Results: Stroke upregulated neutrophil α9 expression more in
obese mice (P<0.05 vs. lean mice). Irrespective of sex, deletion of
neutrophil α9 improved functional outcomes up to 4 weeks, concomitant
with reduced infarct, improved cerebral blood flow, decreased post-reperfusion
thrombo-inflammation, and NETosis (P<0.05 vs. α9WT
obese mice). Obese α9Neu-KOmice were less susceptible to
thrombosis in FeCl3 injury-induced carotid thrombosis model.
Mechanistically, we found that α9/cellular fibronectin axis contributes
to NETosis via ERK and PAD4, and neutrophil α9 worsens stroke outcomes
via Fn-EDA but not tenascin C. Obese wild-type mice infused with anti-integrin
α9 exhibited improved functional outcomes up to 4 weeks (P<0.05
vs. vehicle).
Conclusion: We identified neutrophil-specific α9β1 as
a novel regulator of NETosis and thrombo-inflammation in the stroke setting. As
a translational potential, we found that targeting α9 with a blocking
antibody improves long-term functional outcomes in a mice model with
obesity-induced hyperglycaemia.

## S11.4. Sex-dependent Mechanisms Underlying Cognitive Deficits Following
Repeated Mild TBI in Adolescent Rats

Ramesh Raghupathi1, Taylor McCorkle1 and Laura
Giacometti1

1Program in Neuroscience and Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy,
Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Sports-related concussions (SRC, a subset of mild traumatic brain injury, TBI)
affect approximately 1.5 million adolescents annually in the United States.
Post-traumatic deficits in prefrontal cortex-dependent working memory as well as
hippocampal-dependent learning and memory are frequently reported short- and
long-term impairments. Whereas dopamine is implicated in working memory,
acetylcholine regulates hippocampal-dependent cognition. Following a single mild
TBI, female rats exhibited a deficit in novel object recognition (NOR) memory at
3 days (p<0.01), but not at 8 days, whereas male brain-injured rats did
not exhibit deficits at either time point. This deficit was associated with an
increase in the area of hypocretin (HCRT, a neuropeptide implicated in NOR
memory) immunoreactivity within the prelimbic cortex at 3 days’
post-injury. A HCRT receptor 1 antagonist administered immediately following
injury and subsequently on days 1 and 2 reversed NOR memory deficits. In
addition, systemic administration of a D1 receptor antagonist at the time of
behavioural testing completely reversed the injury-induced NOR memory deficits.
These data suggest that alterations in HCRT expression and activation of the
dopamine D1 receptor may be involved in mild TBI-induced acute working memory
deficits. When adolescent male and female rats were subjected to repeated mild
TBI, we observed that male brain-injured animals exhibit early and sustained
spatial learning deficits whereas female brain-injured animals show a delayed
onset of impairment; these deficits were associated with decreased choline
acetyltransferase (ChAT) expression in the medial septum (MS) and decreased
activity of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR) in the dorsal hippocampus.
Infusion of a corticotrophin releasing factor receptor 1 antagonist into the MS
reduced spatial learning deficits and restored ChAT immunoreactivity in female
but not male animals. In contrast, systemic administration of a nAChR antagonist
reversed the learning deficits in both sexes. Together, these data underscore
the complex relationship between sex and neurotransmission in the cognitive
deficits following mild TBI.

## S11.5. Regulatory RNAs as Therapeutic Targets to Mitigate Brain
Damage

Sarra Limam1, Ankit Patel1, Sandeep
Miryala1, Maria Sara Cueto1 and Ashutosh
Dharap1,2

1Department of Molecular Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa,
Florida, USA
2Byrd Alzheimer’s Center and Research Institute, University of
South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA
Background: Enhancer RNAs (eRNAs) are a novel class of regulatory
noncoding RNAs that are transcribed by enhancer elements in a stimulus-dependent
manner. The eRNAs are known to play roles in enhancer-mediated gene regulation
and phenotypic outcomes, but their expression and functions in stroke are
largely unknown.
Methods: Adult C57BL/6 mice underwent a 1h middle cerebral artery
occlusion and 6h of reperfusion. Ipsilateral cortices were used for genome-wide
H3K27ac ChIP-seq, high- throughput RNA-seq and Hi-C (n =
3/group) to map active enhancers, transcribed eRNAs and higher order chromatin
interactions, respectively. The cellular localisation of the eRNAs was mapped
using single-molecule FISH.
Results: We identified 77 eRNAs that were significantly upregulated
in the cortex in response to stroke versus sham controls. Of these, 55 eRNAs
were exclusively expressed during stroke. We pinpointed direct,
stroke-responsive DNA looping between the enhancers and distal genes facilitated
by higher-order chromatin reorganisation in 3D genomic space, indicating
potential gene regulatory relationships. We mapped the cell-type and subcellular
localisation of the eRNAs and found that the majority of the activated
enhancers/eRNAs were in neurons.
Conclusions and Discussion: This study presents the first report
identifying stroke- responsive eRNA expression, stroke-dependent enhancer-gene
looping across the 3D genome, and eRNA cell-type and subcellular localisation
that together may comprise an immediate-early, cell-type-specific gene
regulatory response that drives the subsequent post- stroke pathophysiology. The
findings of this study will drive future investigations into the cell-
type-specific functions and effects of the eRNAs with the overarching goal of
identifying specific RNAs for targeted therapeutic manipulation.

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders
And Stroke of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number
R01NS115835.

## Symposium 12: RNA and Brain Disorder

## S12.1. Synapse-enriched lncRNA: Implications in Memory During Early Life
Stress

Sourav Banerjee1

1National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, Haryana, India
Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) is emerging as a key regulatory RNA in the nervous
system. However, physiological relevance of this regulatory RNA in sculpting
neural circuits and governing input-specific cognitive functions
via spatial resolution of gene expression control remains
elusive. We have performed a genome-wide transcriptomics analysis using total
RNA purified from synaptodendritic compartment from hippocampus to identify
synapse-enriched lncRNAs. We have highlighted a hitherto unknown regulatory
function of lncRNAs that operates at spatial scale to regulate excitatory
synapse development and memory. Furthermore, our study defined highlighted the
importance in memory deficits due to early life stress.

## S12.2. FMRP Determines the Epitranscriptome of Ribosomes Through Which It May
Regulate the Development

Ravi Muddashetty1

1CBR, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
FMRP is an RNA-binding protein the absence of which significantly impacts
neuronal development and causes Fragile X syndrome (FXS). The function of FMRP
is primarily studied in neurons, particularly at the synaptic connections. We
recently identified a novel interaction of FMRP with a class of small nucleolar
RNA (C/D box snoRNAs) in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). Through this
interaction, FMRP determines the 2’O methylation marks on ribosomal RNA
which is a major epitrascriptome modification on ribosomes. 2’O
methylation on rRNA is critical for ribosome biogenesis, turnover and to
generate ribosome heterogeneity. Ribosome heterogeneity is thought to be
essential for specialised ribosomes which may regulate the differentiation and
cell fate determination from embryonic stem cells. FMRP controls the 2’O
methylation of rRNA and thus influences the neuronal differentiation process.
This FMRP-mediated regulation of ribosome epitranscriptome predominantly happens
in embryonic stem cells and significantly reduces with lineage specificity. This
finding indicates a very exciting possibility that FMRP has a critical role in
the very early stages of neuronal differentiation and also the role of
epitrascriptome modification in development.

## S12.3. Towards Understanding Molecular Mechanisms of Memory

Amitava Majumdar1

1National Centre for Cell Science, Punem Maharashtra, India
How proteins with a limited half-life can help in maintaining memory over a
lifetime is one of the central questions in understanding the molecular
mechanism of memory. Previously a protein synthesis regulator CPEB was
implicated in this process. CPEB behaves like a functional prion and was shown
to be essential for the maintenance of long-term facilitation in Aplysia. It was
further suggested this prion-like behaviour helps CPEB to maintain the altered
state of synapse and long-term memory. The Drosophila homolog of CPEB, Orb2 was
found to exhibit prion-like properties, and blocking its prion-like
oligomerisation interfered with the persistence of memory. Orb2 is one of the
first identified physiologically beneficial functional prions. Since this
prion-like oligomerisation of Orb2 is the key to regulating the persistence of
memory, it is very important to understand how this oligomerisation is regulated
in the brain. In my talk, I will discuss our findings on this question.

## S12.4. Nuclear FMRP: Implications in Fragile-X-Syndrome

Carole Gwizdek1

1CNRS, Paris, France
Dysfunction of Fragile-X-Mental Retardation protein (FMRP), a key RNA binding
protein in the brain, leads to the neurodevelopmental disorder known as
Fragile-X-Syndrome. Established functions of FMRP characterised so far are
attributed to its cytoplasmic fractions. However, emerging studies have
identified specific regulatory functions of FMRP restricted in nucleus.
Mutations of FMRP affecting the nuclear function have also been reported.
However, our understanding of nuclear FMRP function and its importance in the
Fragile-X-Syndrome are limited. The presentation will highlight how distinct
function of nuclear FMRP is regulated via its interacting partner and how
nucleus specific functions of FMRP influences neuronal development and
plasticity.

## Symposium 13: Development of Nervous System

## S13.1. Understanding Critical Molecular Signals in Oligodendrocyte
Development: From the Perspective of Treating Neonatal Neurodegenerative
Disorders Like Cerebral Palsy

S. Tyagi1, V. Shrivastava1, D. Dey1, S.
Rani1, J. B. Sharma2, J. K.
Palanichamy1, S. Sinha1, P. Seth3 and
S. Sen1

1Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
New Delhi, India
2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India
3Department of Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience, National Brain
Research Centre, Manesar, Haryana, India
Background: Understanding oligodendrocyte (OL) maturation and
development is a critical aspect of understanding and eventually treating the
molecular events in cerebral palsy (CP). Understanding the mechanistic pathways
of OL development is a prerequisite to developing therapeutic strategies to
overcome OL maturation arrest commonly seen in CP.
Materials and methods: Analysing RNA-seq data generated from human
foetal neural stem cells (FNSC) differentiating into primary OL cells, revealed
the unique involvement of the JAK-STAT cell signalling pathway in terminal OL
maturation. To validate our findings, we used the Mo3.13 cell line resembling
premyelinating OL, which can be differentiated into mature OL over seven days,
using phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA).
Results and Discussion: Morphological changes, along with changes in
the expression of mature-OL marker MBP and premyelinating OL markers NG2 and O4
confirmed the differentiation of Mo3.13 into mature OL (n = 5).
Flow cytometry (MBP) also confirmed this OL differentiation (n
= 3). Upregulation of critical players of the JAK-STAT pathway (IL-6 and STAT3),
validated its involvement during OL maturation in Mo3.13 cells
(n = 3). Increased phosphorylated STAT3 (pY705) levels
during Mo3.13 differentiation (western blotting) reinforced our findings
(n = 3). Flow cytometry demonstrated a decrease in
MBP-positive cells (when treated with STAT3-specific inhibitor) thus confirming
the involvement of the JAK-STAT pathway in terminal OL maturation
(n = 3).
Conclusion: These novel findings underline the involvement of the
JAK-STAT pathway in OL maturation and may have potential therapeutic options in
demyelinating disorders like cerebral palsy.

## S13.2. Establishment of Neural Circuits in the Developing Human Auditory
Cortex

Soumya Iyengar1

1National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, Haryana, India
A detailed knowledge of the sensitive periods of plasticity in the human auditory
cortex is important for planning interventions such as cochlear implants for
deaf children and understanding the neural basis for the ability to learn
multiple languages. We had earlier demonstrated that excitatory thalamocortical
and cortico-cortical synapses were established during prenatal development in
the human auditory cortex. Whereas cortico-cortical synapses underwent pruning
by ~7 postnatal years, which correlates with the sensitive period for learning
speech, thalamocortical synapses underwent pruning between adolescence and
adulthood. Our recent findings suggest that changes in the density of excitatory
synapses are accompanied by a significant increase in the density of inhibitory
synapses in the human auditory cortex between the foetal period and childhood in
the supragranular layers (2 and 3) and Layer 4 of the primary auditory cortex.
This is followed by pruning and a significant decrease in their density between
childhood and adolescence, which coincides with the changes observed in
excitatory cortico-cortical connections. Besides studying inhibitory synapses,
we also demonstrated changes in the patterns of distribution and structure of
somatostatin-positive (SOM) interneurons across development in the human
auditory cortex. Our results demonstrate that there were significant increases
in the density of these interneurons in the human auditory cortex between the
third trimester and childhood, followed by a significant decrease in this
measure between childhood and adolescence. Furthermore, there was a significant
decrease in the complexity of their neurites between the foetal period and
adulthood. Taken together, our results suggest that the density of both
excitatory and inhibitory synapses undergoes significant changes in the auditory
cortex during the sensitive period for learning speech and language.

## S13.3. Modelling a Spectrum of Early-onset Human Neurodevelopmental
Disorders: Timing and Mechanisms

Achira Roy1

1Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR),
Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
Background: The PI3K-AKT-MTOR and RAS-MAPK pathways are crucial for
cell growth and metabolism. Mutations in these pathways cause cancers and
early-onset developmental brain malformations including cortical dysplasia,
developmental hydrocephalus, epilepsy and autism. Many such patients are
unresponsive to conventional medications. Understanding mutation-specific
pathophysiology is thus critical for developing molecularly targeted
therapies.
Materials and Methods: We use genetic mouse models of clinically
relevant mutations to recapitulate the key pathological features. Using these
models and different cre lines, we sought to determine cellular
mechanisms underlying cortical malformations, using histology and
immunohistochemistry. Specific pathway inhibitors were administered to
pre-clinically study their potential therapeutic actions on these anomalies.
Results: We identified that mutations in PI3K-AKT-MTOR and RAS-MAPK
pathways affect the size of brain, cortical lamination and lateral ventricles,
only when acquired during embryogenesis. We also found some having complicated
motor dysfunction, the reason behind which is yet to be elucidated. By
repurposing inhibitors of signalling pathways originally developed to treat
cancer, we were able to attenuate both ventriculomegaly and epilepsy
pre-clinically.
Discussion and Conclusions: Our findings indicate a distinct
mechanistic milieu underlying certain developmental hydrocephalus and
intractable epilepsy and promise potential precision therapeutics towards their
treatment. We also identified differential critical developmental periods behind
a spectrum of early-onset human neurodevelopmental disorders using conditional
mouse models. In my talk, I will highlight some of these studies that establish
a platform to our lab’s future goals of finding convergent mechanisms
across the range of developmental brain disorders.

## Acknowledgements
We thank Suzanne J. Baker, Jean J Zhao, Kathleen J Millen, Jackson
Laboratories, USA and BliSC Animal Care and Resource Center (ACRC), India,
for gifting mouse lines. We thank the animal facility of JNCASR for the
maintenance of mouse lines. This work was funded by the Ramalingaswami
Re-entry Fellowship from the Department of Biotechnology (DBT), India (AR),
a research donation from M-CM Foundation, USA (AR) and the intramural
funding from the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research,
India (AR). We are also grateful to DBT (Govt. of India) for research
funding.

## S13.4. Regeneration of Spinal Cord Connectivity by Endogenous Forces in
Zebrafish

Subhra Prakash Hui1 and Samudra Gupta1

1S. N. Pradhan Centre for Neurosciences, University of Calcutta,
Kolkata, West Bengal, India
Background: Unlike mammals, teleost zebrafish, possess a remarkable
capacity for spinal cord regeneration, providing a model to understand how
axonal regeneration in spinal cord might be induced in human. Advantages in
available genetic techniques has been established zebrafish as a unique model
for studying natural mechanisms of spinal cord regeneration.
Materials and Methods: Here, we have used novel genetic tools of
zebrafish along with standard cellular, molecular and behavioural assays to
study the functional role of immune cell and epigenetic modifier in spinal cord
regeneration.
Results: In this study, we investigated the potential role of the
immune cells and epigenetic modifiers in regulating spinal cord regeneration in
zebrafish. By characterising the immune cell types and epigenetic modifiers in
the regenerating zebrafish spinal cord and identified their key contribution in
development of pro-regenerative niche after injury. The functional role of the
identified immune cell population and the epigenetic modifier during the
regeneration of the spinal cord will be discussed in the meeting.
Discussion and Conclusions: Our results reveal a novel
pro-regenerative role of immune cell and necessary epigenetic modification
during spinal cord regeneration in adult vertebrates, a finding that may have a
significant therapeutic implication for future regenerative medicine.

## Acknowledgements
Our research supported by SERB (CRG/2022/001663), Govt. of India; Australian
Research Council, NHMRC, Australia; DBT and CSIR, Govt. of India as
Ramalingaswami Fellowship award and Junior Research Fellowship award to SPH
and SG respectively.

## Symposium 14: Understanding Cognitive Tuning Through Lens of Sleep
Process

## S14.1. Multivariate Brain Dynamics in EEG During Sleep

Arun Sasidharan1, Vrinda Marigowda2, Ravindra
P.N.1 and Bindu M. Kutty1

1Centre for Consciousness Studies, Department of Neurophysiology,
NIMHANS, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
2Axxonet Brain Research Laboratory, Axxonet System Technologies Pvt
Ltd., Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
Background: Conventionally, sleep is studied as repeated transitions
of distinctive stages (N1, N2, N3 and REM) lasting at least 30s, with
characteristic EEG features (like spindles). But recent studies using
multivariate EEG data-driven approaches show that neural state transitions
during sleep are much more dynamic and warrants further exploration.
Materials and Methods: We relooked our existing full-night sleep EEG
data across illness-to-wellness spectrum (Vipasana meditators, controls and
patients with Schizophrenia patients; n = 15 each). From 4s EEG
epochs of 3 channels (Fz, Cz and Pz), >50 features (spectral and
non-linear) were used to compare the dynamics of EEG multifeatured- clusters
across stages and groups.
Results: We find that EEG multifeatured-clusters show different
transition dynamics within 30s epochs, with some sequences more often observed
in certain sleep stages. The duration and proportion of the EEG
multi-featured-clusters also showed distinct differences between meditators,
patients and controls. We also observed increased contribution from non-linear
features in the sleep clusters.
Discussion and Conclusions: As in recent studies, we could replicate
the increased dynamics in sleep EEG using a multi-featured-based clustering
approach. We also demonstrated the applicability of such ‘sleep EEG
microstate dynamics’ in capturing unique differences between meditators,
general population and patients with mental disorders. Overall, these add
further support for brain dynamics occurring within the 30s scoring duration and
studying such approaches in individuals across the illness-to-wellness would
help better understand sleep neurophysiology (beyond conventional
hypnograms).

## Acknowledgements
The primary research works of all the above sleep datasets were done at
Department of Neurophysiology, NIMHANS, Bengaluru, India. We thank the other
authors of the primary work that includes: Sulekha S., Nirmala Maruthai,
Gulshan Kumar, Rahul Venugopal, Pranay, Sunil Kumar, Ajay Kumar Nair, Ammu
Lukose, Sumit Sharma, Chetan Mukundan and John P. John. We also thank
interns/JRFs (Adla Zubair, Sruthi S Kuriakose and Deepankan) whose
preliminary work helped conduct the above exploration. The funding for the
primary works were partially supported by Indian Council for Medical
Research (ICMR), Government of India (Senior Research Fellowship; Ref. No.:
3/1/3/37/Neuro/2013-NCD-I) and Department of Science and Technology (DST,
SATYAM), Government of India (Grant No. Ref. No. SR/SATYAM/18/2015).

## S14.2. ERPs During Wake and Sleep to Tap Maladaptive Emotion Processing in
Patients with Chronic Pain

Vrinda Marigowda1, Arun Sasidharan2, Bindu M
kutty2 and Geetha Desai3

1Axxonet Brain Research Laboratory (ABRL), Axxonet System Technologies
Pvt. Ltd., Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
2Centre for Consciousness Studies (CCS), Department of
Neurophysiology, NIMHANS, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
3Department of Psychiatry, NIMHANS, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
Background: Chronic pain (CP) is associated with unpleasant sensory
and emotional experiences. The acute to chronic pain transition involve numerous
aberrant plasticity changes, resulting in maladaptive emotional processing. We
used event related potential (ERP) to understand this among CP subjects during
wake and then also conducted a pilot study during sleep.
Materials and Methods: For awake emotion-ERP assessment, sixteen CP
subjects and age-matched controls of both genders participated, and data
captured using a 64-channel EEG system during Emo-ANGEL paradigm. For the pilot
sleep emotion-ERP assessment, short auditory clips primed with emotional videos
were used during sleep in two participants.
Results: Two ERP components were assessed from the wake ERP
paradigm, EPN (Early Posterior Negativity) and LPP (Late Positive Potentials).
Both groups exhibited higher EPN and LPP for negative emotional images. However,
compared to the control, CP subjects showed a significant reduction in LPP for
negative images, whereas EPN was comparable. In pilot study, CP subject showed a
differences in sleep-ERP components (P200, N550, P900) to negative- primed
auditory stimuli compared to neutral-primed, in both NREM and REM stages.
Discussion and Conclusion: Reduced LPP in CP group suggests lesser
perturbation of brain processing by negative-valenced stimuli, compared to
controls. This could mean reduced emotional engagement for waking task and
higher allocation of attention away to bodily sensations. Interestingly, during
sleep, negative-primed auditory stimuli evoked greater perturbation in CP
subject. This could mean greater emotional engagement was possible during sleep
and hence overreaction to negative emotion. This warrants further studies on
ERPs during wake and sleep.

## Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to DST-CSRI for their financial
support, NIMHANS for providing the lab facility that enable this research
study. I would also like to acknowledge all the participants of the study
and Axxonet Brain Research Laboratory, Axxonet System Technologies Pvt Ltd,
Bengaluru, India.

## S14.3. Circadian Rhythm Manipulations Help to Reverse Sleep Abnormalities in
Ventral Subicular-lesioned Rats

Bindu M. Kutty1

1Centre for Consciousness Studies (CCS), Department of
Neurophysiology, NIMHANS, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
The phenomenon of dreams is always an enigma as we need to elucidate much about
the phenomenon. Dreams and dream recall are associated with distinct
electrophysiological characteristics. Moreover, the electrophysiological
features of dreams differ across different stages of sleep, contributing to the
occurrence of dreaming. In this presentation, we try to explain the phenomenon
of dreaming through the lens of electrophysiological features as the mechanisms
underlying dream recall remain unclear, motivating the present study to identify
specific features of dream recall during both REM and NREM sleep. Building on
previous research, it was hypothesised that the electrophysiological factors
influencing dream recall differ between NREM and REM sleep due to their distinct
physiological and neurobiological underpinnings. Additionally, the study
explores whether learned events could be integrated into dream experiences.
We have studied 25 participants, both male and females, aged 20-35 recruited from
NIMHANS campus and polysomnography was conducted for three consecutive nights.
On the first night, all participants underwent whole night polysomnography with
64 electrodes in place for EEG recordings. This is to get the baseline sleep
architecture. During the second night, participants were randomly awakened
during the second half of the night through a serial awakening paradigm to study
about the dream reports. On the third night, before sleep, participants were
taught specific audio-visual task to look at the impact of sensory cues on
dreams.
The results from the second night demonstrated the electrophysiological
correlates of dreams. We found that REM sleep dream recall was associated with
increased beta activity in the frontal region, whereas NREM dream recall was
linked to decreased delta activity at the temporo-parietal region. The study
revealed that dream reports occurred in 59.6 percent of awakenings from N2 sleep
and 78.7 percent of awakenings from REM sleep. Furthermore, during the third
night, 11.5 percent of audio cue presentations led to the incorporation of video
content into dreams.
The study highlights that cortical EEG activity plays a role in successful dream
recall, and the electrophysiological characteristics could potentially predict
dream recall experiences during sleep. Conscious experience recall during sleep
may be correlated with beta activity during REM sleep and delta activity during
NREM sleep. Moreover, the study suggests that newly learned experiences can be
integrated into dreams, potentially altering the dreaming experience. These
findings offer promising avenues for addressing conditions such as PTSD or
nightmares during sleep. However, further investigations are warranted to
explore methods for incorporating positive events into dreams to modify the
dreaming experience concerning negative experiences.

## S14.4. Sleep Structure and Brain Morphometry in Older Adults

Nasreen Akhtar1

1Department of Physiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
New Delhi, India
Sleep plays a crucial role in synaptic plasticity, information processing and the
execution of various functions. When left untreated, sleep disturbances and
disorders can have detrimental effects on physical, psychological, social and
economic well-being. Among the various factors influencing sleep patterns
(duration and frequency), aging has been consistently identified as the most
significant and influential factor. The most pronounced alterations due to age
are observed in non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep characteristics, with
reduced density and amplitude of slow waves, K-complexes and sleep spindles.
Age-related changes also impact the phase-locked synchrony between slow waves
and sleep spindles. Additionally, primary sleep disorders such as insomnia,
restless leg syndrome, REM behaviour disorder and sleep-disordered breathing are
more prevalent in older adults. The findings of some studies suggest that good
sleepers with larger right hippocampal volumes are more likely to generate
spindles during sleep, which may support better memory consolidation. These
results highlight the importance of adequate and high-quality sleep for memory
processing, as well as the role of the hippocampus in this process. This
relationship is lost in poor sleepers, emphasising the importance of good
quality sleep in memory consolidation. Sleep spindles have been observed to be
coupled with hippocampal sharp wave ripples in rodents. Understanding the
relationship between sleep quality and cognitive/brain health in older adults is
imperative, particularly considering the increasing global prevalence of
dementia.

## Symposium 15: Unmasking the Puzzle: Novel Insights into Neurodegenerative
Disorders and Therapeutic Targets

## S15.1. Genomic Architecture of Alzheimer’s Disease: Lessons from Human
and Mouse Models of the Disease
Emily Miyoshi1,2,†, Samuel
Morabito2,3,4,†, Caden M.
Henningfield1,2, Negin Rahimzadeh2,3,4, Sepideh
Kiani Shabestari1,5, Sudeshna Das1,2, Neethu
Michael1,2, Fairlie Reese4,6, Zechuan
Shi1,2, Zhenkun Cao1, Vanessa
Scarfone5, Miguel A. Arreola1,2, Jackie
Lu1, Sierra Wright2, Justine Silva2, Kelsey
Leavy2, Ira T. Lott7, Eric Doran7,
William H. Yong8, Saba Shahin1,2, Mari
Perez-Rosendahl2,8, Elizabeth Head2,8, Kim N.
Green1,2, Arshi Shahin1,2,4 and Vivek
Swarup1,2,4
1Department of Neurobiology and Behaviour, University of California,
Irvine, California, USA
2Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders (MIND),
University of California, Irvine, California, USA
3Mathematical, Computational, and Systems Biology (MCSB) Program,
University of California, Irvine, California, USA
4Center for Complex Biological Systems (CCBS), University of
California, Irvine, California, USA
5Sue and Bill Gross Stem Cell Research Center, University of
California, Irvine, California, USA
6Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of
California, Irvine, California, USA
7Department of Paediatrics, University of California Irvine School of
Medicine, Orange, California, USA
8Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
California, Irvine, California, USA
†These authors contributed equally.
The pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is influenced by
environmental and heritable factors, exhibiting differences at the molecular
level between individuals. We conducted a transcriptomic survey using spatial
transcriptomics (ST) and single-nucleus RNA-seq in cortical samples from
early-stage AD, late-stage AD and AD in Down Syndrome (DS-AD) donors. Studying
DS-AD offers a unique perspective on the AD transcriptome, potentially
connecting genetic mouse models to sporadic AD.
Our analysis uncovered spatial and cell-type specific alterations in the disease,
with similarities between sporadic AD and DS-AD. Further ST experiments were
performed in 5xFAD and wild-type mice for cross-species comparisons.
Additionally, amyloid plaque and fibril imaging in the same samples used for ST
allowed direct correlation between gene expression changes and pathology
accumulation.
The findings of this study reveal essential connections between genetic
expression, disease stages and pathology, providing insights that could guide
future research and therapeutic development. By integrating advanced techniques
and cross-species comparisons, our work contributes to the comprehensive
understanding of AD, emphasising the potential for personalised approaches in
diagnosis and treatment. In conclusion, our study provides novel insights into
the molecular landscape of AD, highlighting the utility of spatial and
single-nucleus transcriptomics in revealing the intricate connections between
genetic expression and disease pathology. The results from this study contribute
significantly to the evolving understanding of AD and lay the groundwork for
more focused and personalised therapeutic strategies.

## S15.2. Potential Reversal of Alzheimer’s Disease Pathology by Antibody
TB006 Targeting Galectin-3, the Root Cause of Oligomerisation of Amyloid
Proteins

Suhail Rasool1, Jenny Johansson1, Ludmila
Voloboueva1, Sangmi Lee1, Xi Lan1,
Taufeeq Ahmed1 and Dongxu Sun1

1
True Binding, Inc., Foster City, California, USA
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a chronic progressive neurodegenerative
disorder caused by multiple pathogenic factors including Amyloid-β
(Aβ), phospho-Tau (pTau), alpha-synuclein and ApoE4, etc. It is widely
accepted that intermediate oligomeric forms, rather than monomers
or mature fibrils, are more neurotoxic. Galectin-3 (Gal-3) was
reported to be involved in Aβ oligomerisation. In vivo, in three mouse
models of AD, cognitive deficits were strongly attenuated after just two weeks
of mTB001 treatment. Mechanistically, Gal-3 antibody blocked the initiating
events in AD (Aβ aggregates), reduced inflammation and rescued neuronal
damage. Furthermore, microhemorrhages, a potential safety liability seen in
clinical stage drugs, were reduced. Here, we show that Gal-3 promotes
oligomerisation of Aβ and other pathogenic factors, and
TB006, a monoclonal antibody targeting Gal-3, acts
as a possible treatment for AD by degrading neurotoxic oligomers. Pre-clinical
studies show that TB006 is an efficacious therapeutic entity through degradation
of toxic oligomers and blocking or even reversing AD progression. Clinically,
TB006 has shown a superior safety profile without any drug-related adverse
events in healthy volunteer trial. Promising efficacious data are expected from
the ongoing phase II AD trial.

## S15.3. Neuroprotective Strategies to Prevent Neuroinflammation and Cognitive
Dysfunction in Cranial Radiation-induced Brain Injury

Robert P. Krattli1,*, An Do1,*, Sanad
El-Khatib1, Leila Alikhani1, Mineh
Markarian1, Arya R. Vagadia1, Manal T.
Usmani1, Shreya Madan1, Janet E.
Baulch2, Richard J. Clark3, Trent M.
Woodruff3, Andrea J. Tenner4 and Munjal M.
Acharya1

1Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology, University of California,
Irvine, California, USA
2Department of Radiation Oncology, University of California, Irvine,
California, USA
3School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Queensland, St
Lucia, Brisbane, Australia
4Department of Molecular Biology & Biochemistry, University of
California, Irvine, California, USA
*These authors contributed equally.
Cranial radiation therapy (CRT) for brain cancers leads to long-term,
irreversible impacts on cognitive function. We have shown that CRT-induced
cognitive deficits (RICD) are linked with (i) elevated microgliosis,
astrogliosis, (ii) aberrant CNS complement cascade activation and (iii)
excessive synaptic loss. CNS complement system mediates reactive gliosis and
regulates synaptic pruning, which is detrimental if dysregulated. Complement
components also promote glioma proliferation and invasiveness. Thus, complement
cascade inhibition would be beneficial against RICD and glioma. We used gene
knockdown and pharmacologic approaches: microglia-selective C1q-KO, C5aR1-KO,
and an orally active, BBB-permeable, C5aR1 antagonist (PMX205) to reverse RICD.
C1q-KO mice lack C1q expression in the CNS without affecting circulating C1q,
thus designed to determine CNS-specific impact of C1q-KO. Adult WT C57 mice
received 9 Gy CRT and PMX205 treatment in drinking water for 1-month. Adult
C1q-KO and C5aR1-KO mice received CRT. Cognitive function, tissue and cellular
studies were carried out one-month post-CRT. CRT significantly impaired
cognitive function compared to the irradiated C1q-KO, C5aR1-KO, or irradiated WT
mice+PMX205 on the frontal cortex and hippocampal-dependent behaviour tasks.
C1q-KO, C5aR1-KO and PMX205 reduced microglial activation and synaptic loss in
the irradiated brains. Importantly, either C1q-KO, C5aR1-KO or PMX205 treatment
to the syngeneic, orthotopic astrocytoma and glioblastoma-bearing mice did not
interfere with the therapeutic efficacy of CRT in killing tumour in vivo. In
summary, inhibition of CNS complement signalling is neuroprotective from toxic,
overzealous inflammatory effects of CRT without interfering with the therapeutic
efficacy for glioma and thereby supports the translational applicability of this
novel approach.

## S15.4. Sex-specific Locus Coeruleus Dysfunction Expedites Disease Progression
in APP/PS1 Mice

Srishti Kushwaha1†, Rupsa Roy
Choudhury1†, Jyotirmoy Biswal2 and Smitha
Karunakaran1

1Centre for Brain Research, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
2Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
†These authors contributed equally.
Background: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is more prevalent in
women than men above the age of 65. Early symptoms include sleep disturbances
and neuropsychiatric symptoms, and involves a brainstem nucleus called locus
coeruleus (LC). However, fundamental biology of LC, and how they may drive the
prodromal stages of AD is not known.
Materials and Methods: Stereological assessment of LC neurons, and
LC terminal density in the hippocampus were evaluated in the APP/PS1 mice using
ImageJ. LC was stimulated using environmental enrichment (EE), and structural
changes in hippocampus astrocytes were studied using ImageJ. Evans blue tail
vein injections were performed to account for blood brain barrier breach.
Results: Our research utilising an amyloidogenic mouse model,
APP/PS1, indicates that the LC is sexually dimorphic. In the presence of
amyloid-β oligomers, sex-specific differences were observed in the LC
terminals projecting to the hippocampus, with the neuronal numbers remaining
intact. Stimulating the dysfunctional LC using EE induced aberrant plastic
changes in the hippocampus astrocytes in a sex-dependent manner, culminating in
blood brain barrier breach at 9-months-of age.
Discussion and Conclusions: Considering AD disproportionately
affects women, the sexual dimorphic nature of the LC could play a role in
driving the early stages of AD. Stimulating a dysfunctional LC may cause an
increase in NE release, resulting in post-synaptic sensitisation, elevated
neuronal firing rates and subsequent cognitive decline. Based on our findings,
LC neuroimaging shows promising potential as an early biomarker for diagnosing
individuals who are predisposed to conditions like AD.

## S15.5. N-Acetylcysteine Amide Protects Neurons Form Degeneration in In-vitro
STZ-Model of Alzheimer’s Disease

Muddanna S. Rao1 and Smitha S.1

1Department of Anatomy, College of Medicine, Kuwait University, Kuwait
City, Kuwait
Introduction: Initiation of Alzheimer’s disease is claimed to
be through oxidative stress (OS). Antioxidant therapy to alleviate the
neurodegeneration in AD is most explored research area recently.
N-Acetylcysteine amide (NACA), an antioxidant substance proved to be effective
in neuroprotection in several neural injury models including AD. Recent findings
suggest AD is an insulin resistant brain’s state. Streptozotocin (STZ) is
a glucosamine-nitrosourea compound commonly used to induce type-1 diabetes in
rodents. Administration of STZ into rodent’s cerebral ventricles or into
neural culture has been shown to produce pathophysiological changes such as
neuroinflammation, oxidative stress and biochemical changes as in AD. Hence,
STZ-model of AD is one of the established animal models of AD. Neuroprotective
effects of NACA in the in-vitro Aβ1-42 model of AD is well established
but not in STZ-induced in-vitro model.
Objectives: The present study was aimed to evaluate the
neuroprotective effects of NACA against STZ-induced AD-like pathology in an
in-vitro model.
Methods: Primary culture of cerebral cortical tissue from E18 day
foetus was done in advanced DMEM media containing 10% foetal calf serum,
and 100 IU antibiotics. Cultures were grown for six days in a CO2 incubator
maintained at 37oC, with 5% CO2. Cultures were then divided
into Control, STZ-10µM, STZ-10µM + NACA-10µM, STZ-10µM+NACA-20µM groups and
treated with 10µM STZ, 10 and 20µM NACA either for 24-hours or 72-hours
duration. For all dose and duration triplicate culture were maintained. After
treatment period, all cultures were fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde and
immunostained with Tuj1 to stain the neurons and with GFAP to stain Astrocytes,
Iba1 to stain the microglia. Number of neurons, their processes, number of
astrocytes and number of microglia were quantified. Results were analysed with
One-way ANOVA, followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test.
Results: STZ-decreased the neuronal size, number of processes and
neurite length compared to control group. STZ astrogliosis and enhanced reactive
microglial cells. Treatment with NACA prevented neurons from degeneration at
both doses, however effect was significant at 20µM concentration for 72hrs
treatment. NACA also reduced the astrogliosis and microgliosis in STZ treated
culture.
Conclusions: This study demonstrates the neuroprotective effects of
NACA in the in-vitro STZ model of AD. This model may be used to study
AD-pathology in in-vitro.

## Symposium 16: Neuromodulation Strategies in Health and Disease

## S16.1. Application of Low Intensity Electromagnetic Fields in Ameliorating
Cognitive Dysfunction and Synaptic Pruning in Streptozotocin-induced Sporadic
Alzheimer’s Disease Rat Model

Suman Jain1, Avishek Roy1, Jyotirmoy
Banerjee2 and Soumya Iyengar3

1Department of Physiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
New Delhi, India
2Department of Biophysics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
New Delhi, India
3National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, Haryana, India
Background: Electromagnetic field stimulation (EMF) is a
neuromodulation procedure that alters the activity of neural tissue to repair,
regenerate and restore the structure and function. In the present study, we
investigated the therapeutic efficacy and mechanism of action of EMF in i.c.v.
streptozotocin induced rat model of AD.
Materials and Methods: A group of rats were exposed to EMF (17.96µT,
50Hz, 2hr/day), 24h after STZ injection (3mg/kg bwt, bilaterally, single bolus)
for 60 days in a customised MF chamber. A battery of behavioural tests followed
by Golgi Cox staining and assessment of oxidative stress was done at the end of
study.
Results: A statistically significant improvement in spatial and
recognition memory upon exposure to EMF was observed, which was associated with
increase in GSH content and catalase activity in hippocampus. Scholl profile of
CA1 pyramidal cells of hippocampus exhibited a significant increase
(p<0.05) in length, bifurcations and intersections as a function of
distance from soma both in apical and basal dendrites in spatial dendritic
complexity after EMF treatment to AD rats.
Discussion: The present study provides scientific evidence for the
1, development of Alzheimer’s disease rat model by injecting
streptozotocin (3mg/kg bwt) intra-cerebroventricularly; 2, therapeutic potential
of electromagnetic field stimulation in Alzheimer’s disease; and 3,
amelioration of cognitive impairment in AD rats by EMF is through enhancement of
synaptic plasticity and attenuation of oxidative stress.

## Acknowledgement
We acknowledge Indian Council of Medical Research, Delhi for providing Senior
Research fellowship and funds to carry out this research work.

## S16.2. Utility of Neuromodulation in Mood and Movement Disorders

Kaviraja Udupa1

1Departments of Neurophysiology, NIMHANS, Bengaluru, Karnataka,
India
Background: There is growing interest in utilising various brain
stimulation techniques such as non-invasive brain stimulation (NIBS): repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation TMS and transcranial direct current
stimulation (tDCS), transcranial alternating brain stimulation (tACS) and
transcutaneous auricular vagal nerve stimulation (taVNS). TMS is shown to be
non-invasive, safe and effective mode of investigation to explore the physiology
of cortical circuits in health and disease. Generally, single or paired pulses
of TMS could be used to investigate cortical excitability functions, which are
altered in various neuropsychiatric disorders. rTMS and various patterns of
stimuli delivered over length of time alters the excitability of stimulated
region for extended period of time (so called plasticity effects) thus providing
therapeutic potentials in mood and movement disorders.
Materials and Methods: In ongoing studies, we are investigating
factors REM sleep behaviour disorders with Parkinsonian disorders, the efficacy
of dual stimulation of tDCS and high frequency rTMS in patients with Major
depression (commonest mental health disability) and investigate the medical
refractoriness in depression by using a comprehensive battery of clinical and
investigative modalities of TMS. In these projects we are exploring various
neurochemical factors to understand the interaction between excitatory and
inhibitory neurotransmitter systems using paired pulse TMS protocols and
neurochemical investigations discussing these neurophysiologic perspectives of
brain stimulation, possible combination of various modes of brain stimulation
and mechanistic basis of these stimulation protocols.
Results, Discussion and Conclusions: Although rTMS treatment has
been successfully considered as add-on in management of clinical depression and
various other neuropsychiatric disorders, we are still lacking the clear
understanding of their mechanisms of action in neurodegenerative conditions.
Based on scientific studies, we know brain stimulation alter the excitability
and plasticity of stimulated region and its connected regions based on polarity,
frequency and patterns of stimulation. Further, newer protocols of stimulation,
tailor made protocols depending on the genetic and clinical profiles of
patients, newer brain stimulation techniques and possible combination of various
modes of brain stimulation, which are emerging in research and clinical practice
of these neuropsychiatric conditions. These newer protocols or combination of
brain stimulation techniques may potentially augment both understanding the
pathophysiology as well as treatment strategies for mood and movement
disorders.

## S16.3. Probing Functional Brain Networks Using Transcranial Brain
Stimulation

Nivethida Thirugnanasambandam1

1
Department of Biosciences & Bioengineering, Indian
Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India
Our brain is functionally organised into specialised networks comprised of
multiple interconnected regions. Emerging evidence indicates that synchronised
interaction of brain regions within and across these functional networks plays a
crucial role in shaping behaviour. Functional brain networks can be identified
using advanced non-invasive imaging methods such as functional MRI and
magneto-/electro encephalography at different spatial and temporal resolutions.
Several such networks have been identified and implicated in specific cognitive
functions. Notably, disruptions in the activity of these networks have been
linked to neuropsychiatric disorders such as Parkinson’s disease,
Alzheimer’s disease, ADHD and schizophrenia. Thus, it is conceivable that
modulating these networks could potentially restore abnormal function associated
with these disorders. Transcranial brain stimulation has recently emerged as an
effective and safe tool for non-invasive neuromodulation. In this talk, I will
review the different non-invasive brain stimulation techniques with specific
focus on their effects on functional brain networks and their implications on
behavioural/clinical outcomes. I will also highlight the importance of a
multimodal approach in investigating the causal role of brain networks in health
and disease.

## S16.4. Brain State-specific Regulation of Neural Activity in Dementia

Anuraag Chetty1, Justin Joseph1, Harsha
Bhardwaj1, Aswin Sekhar C.S.1 and Chinnakkaruppan
Adaikkan1

1Centre for Brain Research (CBR), Indian Institute of Science (IISc),
Bangalore, Karnataka, India
There has been a growing interest in identifying early biomarkers of
Alzheimer’s disease (AD). They include biofluid-based (e.g., amyloid
levels in blood plasma) and also brain signal-based (e.g., EEG) biomarkers. In
the EEG-based approach, various features of EEG are examined to correlate with
cognitive function, including mini-mental state examination score (MMSE).
Although the latter approach provided promising results, progress in this area
is hampered by the lack of resources and tools for neurologists to examine these
EEG-based features as they require specialised training and experts. Therefore,
we investigate the relationship between brain rhythm features and
memory/dementia using a neural EEG collected non-invasively from the scalp of
human subjects. We developed a software package to examine the EEG signal
complexity and randomness. Forty meticulously crafted temporal, spectral and
spectro-temporal complexity features in EEG are extracted and regressed these
EEG features with MMSE. We find feature-specific and region-specific EEG
features correlating with MMSE scores, suggesting that EEG-based biomarkers
could be explored for AD diagnosis.

## S16.5. Modulation of Motor Neuron Excitability and Muscle Contractile
Properties in Complete Spinal Cord-injured Rats by Electromagnetic Field
Stimulation

Arpita Chakraborty1,3, Mehar Chand Sharma2 and Suman
Jain3

1Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurosciences Kolkata, West
Bengal, India
2Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India
3Physiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi,
India
Background: Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a catastrophic condition
associated with significant neurological deficit with loss of muscle mass,
strength and activity. Aim of our study was to investigate the motor neuron
excitability and muscle contractile properties after electromagnetic field
stimulation.
Materials and Methods: Adult male rats were subjected to spinal cord
transection at T13 level and 24h thereafter exposed to EMF for 7 and 14 days
(2h/day,17.96µT). On terminal days, electrophysiological recording of Hoffman
reflex and contractility (twitch force, tetanic force) of soleus muscle was
performed in Sham, SCI and EMF groups (n = 6). 10µm thick
sections of snap-frozen soleus muscle were taken to perform
immunohistochemistry.
Results: Hyper-reflexia, muscle atrophy, reduction in twitch and
tetanic force with earlier onset of fatigue was evident in the SCI group. EMF
stimulation showed significant improvement in H/M ratio, muscle twitch, tetanic
force, fusion frequency and fatigability as compared to SCI group. EMF
stimulation significantly increased peak force generation in progressive manner
at both time points at each stimulus frequency (5-50Hz). A significant increase
in regenerating myofibers (eMHC positive) and decreased type IIA following EMF
was evident.
Discussion and Conclusions: The results suggest significant
neuroprotective effects of early and chronic administration of EMF stimulation
on reflex, muscle spasticity, contractile properties, fibre type transformation
and muscle regeneration. Our study shows the potential of electromagnetic field
stimulation to modulate the excitability of motor neurons and muscle by
activity-dependent mechanisms that facilitate neuronal and muscle plasticity for
better functional recovery.

## Acknowledgement
This original research work was funded by Institution (AIIMS, New Delhi) and
ICMR.

Symposium 17: Glia in Health and Disease

## S17.1. The Glee’a: Do Glia Make Us Happy?

Swananda Marathe1

1Indian Institute of Technology, Dharwad, Karnataka, India
Mood and anxiety disorders, including depression, are the most common
psychiatric disorders across cultures, geographies and genetic backgrounds.
These disorders lead to profound adverse effects on patients’
wellbeing, and they can be life threatening, mainly because of the
heightened risk of suicides. Despite several decades of research, we do not
understand the pathophysiology underlying depression. As a result, currently
prescribed medications are highly inadequate, owing to their low efficacy,
delayed onset of action, side effects and high frequency of relapse.
One of the most common features seen in suicide victims of depression is
massive degeneration of glia, across various brain regions. Interestingly,
selective ablation of glial cells from the medial prefrontal cortex induces
the behavioural symptoms of depression in rats, suggesting a possible causal
link between glial degeneration and the behavioural symptoms of
depression.
Despite the mounting evidence showing glial involvement in the
pathophysiology of depression, we don’t understand the underlying
mechanisms. Furthermore, we don’t know if glia might be involved in
the behavioural effects of antidepressant therapies, and whether their
functions can be harnessed for novel therapeutic approaches.
Our lab has discovered a novel form of structural plasticity in astrocytes
induced by antidepressant therapies. I will also discuss how we may be able
to exploit this plasticity to produce antidepressant-like behavioural
effects.

## S17.2. Reactive Astrocytes in Aging, Neuronal Injury and
Neurodegenerative Diseases

Narendra Kumar Ramanan1

1Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
Astrocytes, the major cell type in CNS, play several critical functions
including ion homeostasis, synapse formation and synaptic plasticity.
Astrocytic dysfunction is central in several CNS disorders including
epilepsy, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson’s and
Alzheimer’s disease. In response to CNS injuries and pathologies,
astrocytes undergo a spectrum of molecular, physiological and structural
changes, in a process termed reactive astrogliosis. Reactive astrogliosis
can be beneficial or detrimental to normal brain functions and there is
increasing interest in unravelling the molecular mechanisms that regulate
astrogliosis as these might provide valuable therapeutic targets to improve
neuronal survival and promote CNS repair and recovery. We have identified
the transcription factor, serum response factor (SRF) as important for the
maintenance of astrocytes in a non-reactive state. We have found that
deletion of SRF in astrocytes in the mouse brain results in widespread and
persistent reactive-like astrocytes. These SRF-deficient astrocytes do not
affect neuron survival, synapse numbers, synaptic plasticity or learning and
memory. However, the brains of Srf knockout mice exhibited neuroprotection
against kainic-acid induced excitotoxic cell death. Relevant to human
neurodegenerative diseases, SRF-deficient reactive astrocytes abrogate
nigral dopaminergic neuron death and reduce β-amyloid plaques in
mouse models of Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease,
respectively. Interestingly, the brains of aged SRF knockout mice showed
attenuated cell loss and myelination in several brain regions along with
better motor coordination compared to the age-matched control mice.
Collectively, these findings establish SRF as a key molecular switch for the
generation of neuroprotective astrocytes in the mammalian brain.

## S17.3. ALA Augment Tau Phagocytosis and Endosomal Degradation in
Microglia

Subashchandrabose Chinnathambi1

1National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bengaluru,
Karnataka, India
Physiologically, microglia in resting state inspects the brain environment
with their long extensions for the extracellular targets. Omega-3 fatty
acids have neuroprotective properties and plays an important role in
development and differentiation of neuronal cells. Docosahexaenoic acid
(DHA-22:6n-3), Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA-20:5n-3) and α- Linolenic
acid (ALA 18 3n:3) are the most important long-chain fatty acids found in
the brain and constitute to majority of the cell membrane. These fatty acids
are incorporated in the cell membrane as long chains of phospholipids.
Omega-3 fatty acids are the vital factors to decide the polarity of
microglia cells as M1 or M2. DHA tends to increase the M2 phenotype of
microglia by changing the cell membrane composition and influencing the
production of lipid mediators. Omega-3 fatty acids also increase the
phagocytosis of myelin debris, clears extracellular Aβ peptide in the
AD brain environment, which is the major causes of neuroinflammation. In
this study, we aim to understand the effect of α-Linolenic acid, a
precursor of DHA and EPA, on actin remodelling related to phagocytosis and
migration. In Tauopathies, extracellular Tau seeds tend to activate
microglia to induce inflammatory activation. However, the study involves
understanding the effect of ALA on phagocytosis and related
actin-remodelling in microglia in the presence of extracellular Tau seeds.
Phosphatidylinositols are the product of different phosphatidylinositol
kinases and the state of phosphorylation at D3, D4 and D5 positions of
inositol ring. PI 3,4,5-P3 involves in phagocytic cup formation and cell
polarisation. PI4,5-P2-mediates phagosome formation and further fusion with
early endosome and relates actin remodelling.

## S17.4. To Grow or Not to Grow: Hyperglycaemia-induced Alterations in
Neurite Outgrowth

Vasudharani Devanathan1, Sapna Sharma1, Harshini
Chakravarthy1 and Gowthaman Suresh1

1Department of Biology, Indian Institute of Science Education and
Research, Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India
Background: Primary cultures utilise foetal rodent neurons, but
very rarely adult neurons from larger mammals. We established hyperglycaemia
model in retinal neurons from Goat. We explored role of cell adhesion
molecules in hyperglycaemia implicating to Diabetic Retinopathy. Further
study demonstrated that metabolic environment markedly affects neurite
outgrowth and transcriptional regulation of CAMs in adult retinal
neurons.
Materials and Methods: Retinal neurons were successfully
cultured and maintained in-vitro for 10 days. We confirmed
the cellular sub type by Immunofluorescence and neurite length in altered
metabolic conditions were measured. Furthermore, using biochemical methods,
we also showed transcriptional regulation of Cell adhesion molecules
involved in neurite outgrowth regulation.
Results: Immunofluorescence staining revealed that the cellular
population was heterogeneous composed of neurons and glial cells. These
cells were maintained in vitro for 10 days and were
supplemented with high glucose concentration to induce hyperglycaemia. The
neurite outgrowth was measured using ImageJ and the length of neurons
increased in hyperglycaemia condition. Using this model, we have identified
novel molecular markers that regulate neurite outgrowth in cultured Retinal
neurons.
Discussion and Conclusions: Retinal neurons have the advantage
of being the most accessible cells of the CNS, and serves as a reliable
mirror to the brain. Higher mammals such as pigs have similar retinal
structures as humans, while dogs develop morphological lesions most similar
to diabetic human retina. Our results obtained from Goat retinal cells show
role of hyperglycaemia in regulating cell adhesion molecules governing
neurite elongation. These cell adhesion molecules of the neuron may act as
early molecular markers or as therapeutic targets for Diabetic
retinopathy.

## Acknowledgements
We thank IISER Tirupati for constant support. The project was funded by
IISER Tirupati, VD is a recipient of Early Career Research Award from
SERB, Department of Science and Technology (Grant Number:
ECR/2016/001124/LS). HC is a recipient of Women Scientist Scheme-A
(WOS-A), Department of Science and Technology (Grant Number:
SR/WOS-A/LS-327/2018). VD would like to thank DST, Government of India
and IISER Tirupati for research support. GS and SS thank UGC, DAAD and
IISER Tirupati for their research fellowships.

## S17.5. Retro-engineering Brain Tumours: Uncovering Inflammation,
Immunity and Tumour Biology

Sushmita Jha1

1Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Indian Institute
of Technology, Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India
Malignant gliomas, the most common primary brain tumours that arise from
glial cells within the central nervous system (CNS), are among the most
fatal human cancers. With a median survival of only 14.6 months, even
after aggressive therapy with surgery, radiation and chemotherapy, most
patients succumb to their disease within two years of the initial
diagnosis. Taking into consideration the paradigm shifts from
traditional surgical resection to precision medicine, we use a
multi-pronged approach taking into account the cellular heterogeneity of
gliomas, their microenvironment and 3-dimensional cell-cell interactions
to identify the role of innate immunity and inflammasome signalling
pathways in gliomas. This could potentially provide a novel link between
innate immunity and glioma pathophysiology with widespread therapeutic
implications for delaying glioma progression and/or sensitising gliomas
to other treatment modalities.
We first established the importance of innate immune pathways in cell
lines and used the cancer genome atlas (TCGA) data, with funding from
SERB (Young Scientist Award grant). We next set up a tripartite MoU
between IIT Jodhpur, Tata Memorial Hospital and ACTREC & AIIMS
Jodhpur to understand the cellular and molecular landscape of gliomas
for the identification of novel therapeutic targets, especially in the
context of the Indian subcontinent, funded by the Department of
Biotechnology. These studies resulted in the identification of a novel
prognostic marker for glioblastomas (Sci Rep 9, 8480
(2019)). We have also developed a portable hypoxia chamber that will
provide a platform to study the role of hypoxia in several diseases
including gliomas. This chamber design is under patent (Patent
Application No. 201811017208). We are now in the process of translating
this technology with the help of industry partners. Additionally, we
recently discovered Dopamine-induced microglia extracellular traps.
Dopamine plays a central role in our brain’s pleasure and reward
systems, movement and cognition, but its role in regulating innate
immunity is unclear. Our research showed for the first time that
dopamine can induce DNA-based extracellular traps in microglia cell
lines and primary human microglia. These extracellular traps are formed
independently of reactive oxygen species, actin polymerisation and cell
death. The traps are functional and capture Escherichia
coli even when reactive oxygen species or actin
polymerisation is inhibited. Interestingly, we found microglia
extracellular traps within the Glioblastoma multiforme
microenvironment. This is crucial because these tumours are known to
secrete dopamine, but the mechanistic insights to this were largely
undiscovered. Our results demonstrate that dopamine plays a significant
role in neuro-inflammation by inducing microglia extracellular traps
paving the way for targeting dysregulated neuro-inflammation. It would
be interesting to explore how these extracellular traps play a role in
other neurodegenerative and cognitive diseases where dopamine is central
to pathophysiology.
With funding from the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology
(MEITY) for the development of an interdisciplinary research platform
for dissecting complex cellular interactions using patient-derived
normal and tumour organoids, computational biology and artificial
intelligence-based approaches. We have successfully created a protocol
for matrix-free patient-derived glioblastoma organoids (Indian Patent
application no: 202311002108). These organoids can serve as a
personalised medicine framework to allow for pre-clinical drug
development, biomarker analysis, drug-testing model and basic cancer
research.
Our research at IITJ has been published in leading international
journals, including Nature Reviews Immunology, The Journal of
Experimental Medicine (JEM), Scientific Reports, iScience, Journal
of Immunology(JI), Journal of Visualized Experiments (JoVE), STAR
Protocols, Cellular and Molecular Lifesciences and so on
(https://www.sushmitajhalab.com/publications). Importantly,
our research aims to create a deeper understanding of glioma
pathophysiology from the Indian subcontinent and develop technologies
for precision medicine.

## S17.6. Inflammation and Neuroprotection in Mouse Brain: Role of
HMGB1

K.P. Mishra1

1DRDO Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences,
Delhi, India
The damage associated molecular pattern HMGB1 is an endogenous alarmin
that causes inflammation, neurodegeneration and cognitive decline. In
the present study, we have delineated the potential inhibitory effect of
a novel receptor of HMGB1-CXCL12 complex known as atypical chemokine
receptor 3 (CXCR7) on HMGB1 induced glial phenotype switching,
neuroinflammation and subsequent memory loss. Upregulation of CXCR7
inhibits HMGB1-CXCL12 complex induced peripheral inflammatory cells
infiltration to the brain. Whereas ablation aggravates inflammatory
responses in hippocampus region and immune cell infiltration to the
brain tissues by breached blood brain barrier. This study also indicates
the important role of CXCR7 in maintaining CNS homeostasis, by balancing
M1/M2 microglia and A1/A2 astrocytes, which ameliorates HMGB1 induced
neurodegeneration and memory loss in mice. Overall, the study summarises
several significant protective functions of CXCR7 against HMGB1 induced
neuroinflammation, neurodegeneration and memory loss and thereby
provides a new paradigm for novel therapeutics development against
stress induced neurodegenerative diseases.

## Symposium 18: Neurochemical Basis of Neurotoxicity

## S18.1. Trolox Aids Coenzyme Q10 in Protection of Neural Retina in
NMDA-induced Glutamate Excitotoxic Damage via Upregulation of VEGF in
Rat Model

Shikha Upreti1 and Madhumita P.
Ghosh1

1Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University, Noida,
Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Glutamate receptors play an important role of
regulating extracellular glutamate concentrations to maintain signalling
processes in the eye. Elevated levels of glutamate in the vicinity of
retinal ganglion layer perturbs N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors
present on retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) leading to cell death. Here we
put forth the role of trolox in enhancing neuro-availability of COQ10
and recover the glutamate concentrations in a rat model of NMDA-induced
degeneration.
Materials and Method: Wistar rats were administered with
NMDA intravitreally and subsequently treated with coenzyme Q10 and
Trolox. After 7 days of incubation, animals sacrificed, eyes enucleated
and subjected to H& E staining, measuring ROS, mitochondrial
membrane potential, mRNA expression of VEGF and NMDA receptors and
protein expressions of VEGF and p VEGF.
Results: The release of ROS and oxidative stress, nitric
oxide is decreased on treatment with CoQ10 and Trolox. The mitochondrial
membrane potential challenged due to damage of NMDA receptors recover in
response to the combination of Trolox with COQ10.The mRNA expressions of
VEGFR2 increases on the treatment and that of NMDA receptors, Nrd 2A
increases and that of Nrd2B decreases in COQ10 and Trolox mediated
neuroprotection. The proteins VEGFR2 and ERK signalling are
enhanced.
Discussion: As there have been many reports about α-
tocopherol enhancing neuroprotection when used with CoQ10, this is the
first report in our knowledge to demonstrate the efficacy of trolox with
COQ10, which will help to devise ways to maintain VEGF levels that are
lowered in ocular diseases due to NMDA related toxicities.

## Acknowledgement
The work is funded by Indian Council of Medical Research.

## S18.2. Suppression of Bisphenol-A-induced Oxidative Stress and
Mitochondrial Dysfunction by Taurine Promotes Neuroprotection and
Restores Aggressive Behaviour in Adult Zebrafish (Danio
rerio)

Lilesh Kumar Pradhan1,2 and Saroj Kumar
Das1,3

1Neurobiology Laboratory, Centre for Biotechnology, Siksha
‘O’ Anusandhan (Deemed to be University), Bhubaneswar,
Odisha, India
2Centre of Excellence, Natural Products and Therapeutics
Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Sambalpur
University, Sambalpur, Odisha, India
3P.G. Department of Life Sciences Sri Krushna Chandra Gajapati
(Autonomous) College, Paralakhemundi, Odisha, India
Background: Bisphenol A (BPA), a prevalent industrial
chemical, raises concerns for its neurodegenerative potential, causing
neuronal damage, oxidative stress, inflammation and neurotransmitter
imbalances. Taurine, with its antioxidative, anti-inflammatory and
neuromodulatory properties, offers promise in combating oxidative
stress.
Material and Methods: The current experimental design
spanned 56 days to investigate taurine’s neuroprotective
effectiveness against BPA-triggered neurotoxicity in zebrafish through
waterborne exposure. Neurobehavioural assessments utilised the mirror
biting test. Furthermore, biochemical assays for oxidative stress
indices, gene and protein expression studies associated with
mitochondrial dysfunction were performed on adult zebrafish brain.
Results: BPA-induced neurotoxic effects result in a
reduction in the levels of BDNF. Additionally, exposure to BPA leads to
a decrease in the expression of tyrosine hydroxylase protein. The
heightened expression of JNK protein corresponds to modifications in the
mRNA expression of genes associated with apoptosis. Furthermore, taurine
effectively countered the neurobehavioural, biochemical and
neuro-morphological alterations within the zebrafish brain. Notably,
taurine supplementation reversed the distorted protein and mRNA
expressions induced by BPA.
Discussion and Conclusions: In a nutshell, the findings of
our study shows the neuroprotective efficacy of taurine against
BPA-induced oxidative damages, neurobehavioural alterations and
mitochondrial dysfunction.

## Acknowledgement
The authors acknowledge the Centre for Biotechnology, SOA (Deemed to
be University) for providing the infrastructure facility and
financial support.

## S18.3. Dietary Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG)
Attenuates the Toxic Effects of Benzo[a]pyrene and Ethanol on Zebrafish
(Danio rerio) via Gut Microbiota Modulation

Manorama Patri1

1Neurobiology Laboratory, Department of Zoology, School of
Life Sciences, Ravenshaw University, Cuttack, Odisha, India
Background: Endogenous gut microbiota can greatly sway down
all aspects of host’s physiology including gut–brain
communication, brain function and even behaviour. Recently, probiotics
have come into limelight as a novel for safely keeping a healthy
intestinal microbiota, and thus having impact on the gut–brain
function.
Materials and Methods: Our present study aimed of taking
zebrafish as a model organism to investigate the effect of
Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG) along with
Benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P) and Ethanol which causes neurochemical
alterations in the central nervous system leading to modulation of
behaviour. Wild-type zebrafish were designated as I; Vehicle Control
(DMSO); Probiotic, fed with feed supplemented with LGG; B[a]P (at a
conc. of 0.4µg/ml); B[a]P+ Probiotic group; Ethanol (0.1% v/v);
and co-treatment of Probiotic & Ethanol group.
Results: After chronic exposure of these pollutants the
novel tank test and light/dark test was used to evaluate fish behaviour,
which was analysed using ANY-Maze video-tracking system. LGG alone
didn’t alter any behavioural pattern rather kept the
histo-architectural structure intact. Histopathological changes of
following H&E staining of zebrafish intestine revealed that the
intestinal epithelial cells, lumen, villi and intestinal folding were
varied significantly (P<0.05) in B[a]P and ethanol exposed groups
in comparisoInaive and control groups.
Discussion: In B[a]P and ethanol treated groups it showed
reversal in scototaxis (anxiety-like) behaviour which was restored by
co-supplementation of LGG. Similarly, Cresyl violet staining of the
zebrafish brain’s section showed significant increase in pyknotic
cell counts following waterborne exposure to B[a]P and ethanol as coId
to naive and control. However, co-supplementation of LGG leads to
behavioural restoration and reduction of pyknotic cells in B[a]P+LGG
& Ethanol+ LGG groups as compared to B[a]P and Ethanol groups.
Conclusion: This study provides clues that probiotic strain
can modulate gut commensal bacteria influencing behaviour and histology
of brain in adult zebrafish.

## S18.4. Neuroprotective Properties of GC-MS-identified
Phytoconstituents in Persicaria hydropiper (L.)
Delarbre Methanolic Leaf Extract: An In-silico and In Vivo Study

Meenakshi Bawari1 and Linda B.
Hrangkhol1

1Department of Life Science and Bioinformatics, Assam
University, Silchar, Assam, India
Background: Neurological disorders pose significant
challenges to global healthcare systems, necessitating the exploration
of novel therapeutic strategies. This study focuses on
Persicaria hydropiper (L.) Delarbre, a medicinal
plant used in treating various ailments, and aims to investigate the
neuroprotective properties of phytoconstituents present in its
methanolic leaf extract.
Materials and Methods: GC-MS analysis identified
phytoconstituents in Persicaria hydropiper methanolic
leaf extract. Swiss ADME’s in silico approach was used to
determine phytoconstituents pharmacological properties. Molecular
docking simulations were performed to assess binding interactions with
key targets including serotonin, GABA, NMDA and potassium channel
receptor. An in vivo study was conducted to validate
neuroprotection.
Results: GC-MS analysis of Persicaria
hydropiper methanolic leaf extract revealed several
bioactive compounds with high binding affinities and favourable
pharmacological properties. An in silico study exhibited that these
compounds modulate target protein activity for rendering
neuroprotection. BIOVIA Discovery Studio software’s advanced
visualisation features revealed detailed binding interactions of the
ligands and target proteins. In the in vivo study, neuroprotective
effects were observed in mice treated with the low dose of this plant
extract.
Discussion and Conclusion: GC-MS analysis substantiates the
rich diversity of the phytoconstituents in Persicaria
hydropiper methanolic leaf extract, potentially responsible
for promoting neuroprotection. In silico pharmacological and molecular
docking results provided insights into the plausible mechanisms
underlying the neuroprotective effects. The in vivo study indicated that
the plant extract has neuroprotective benefits in a dose-dependent
pattern. In-silico predictions and in vivo results support further
exploration of this plant source as a therapeutic intervention for
neurological disease.

## Acknowledgement
Funding Source: NIL; GCMS analysis – AIRF, JNU, New Delhi.

## Symposium 19: Therapeutics and Neurodegeneration

## S19.1. Criticality of Gender in the Treatment of Neuropsychiatric
Disorders

Sumana Chakravarty1

1Applied Biology, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology
(IICT), Hyderabad, Telangana, India
Introduction: Neuropsychiatric disorders account for a major
burden among the global non-communicable diseases. Despite ongoing
research efforts, our understanding of the aetiopathology of depression
remains limited. Furthermore, most of the preclinical research uses only
male models though sex difference is evident in the incidence of many
neuropsychiatric disorders. We are trying to fill the void by uncovering
gender difference in the underlying molecular aetiopathology.
Materials and Methods: Chronic Variable Mild Stress (CVMS)
paradigm was used to induce depression and related mood disorder
phenotype in male and female C57Bl/J mice, assessed by a battery of
behavioural tests; The affected brain neurogenic area (Dentate Gyrus,
DG) from both sexes were subjected to transcriptomic study by RNA-Seq.
The validation of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) was done using
RT-qPCR.
Results: The CVMS resulted in mood disorder phenotype in
both the sexes; however, no remarkable cognitive disorder phenotype was
observed across the sexes except mild cognitive impairment in spatial
memory of stressed females. RNA-Seq results suggest sex difference in
the differential molecular regulation for apparently similar depressive
phenotype. The molecular analysis of the whole hippocampus revealed a
definite sex difference in the expression of transcriptionally
repressive epigenetic marks H3K9 and K27me2, following CVMS.
Additionally, the onset of depressive behaviours also showed
sex-specific difference.
Discussion and Conclusion: A total of 2230 DEGs was
identified in male DG subjected to CVMS and the preliminary analysis of
the top pathways affected is synaptogenesis signalling, axon guidance,
Siruins, etc. The RNA-Seq data from female DG had variations due to
difference in stages of the oestrous cycle the animals were at the CVMS
paradigm. Overall findings suggest that molecular mechanisms underlying
the depressive disorder differ across the sexes despite sharing similar
phenotype. Further research to validate and find novel, sex-specific
molecular targets for depression in underway.

## Acknowledgement
We wish to thank CSIR and SERB for the support to conduct this study.
This project was mainly supported by SERB-POWER
Fellowship to SC [SPF/2021/000045].

## S19.2 Taupathies and Neurodegeneration

T.C. Yasha1

1Department of Neuropathology, National Institute of Mental
Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
The microtubule associated protein, tau, forms insoluble cellular
aggregates in a heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative diseases,
termed tauopathies. They are characterised as primary/secondary,
depending on whether additional protein aggregates/inclusions are
involved; or 3R/4R/both based on the accumulated tau-isoform. The
clinical manifestations of tauopathies are chiefly determined by the
neuroanatomical sites involved, and the neurons, oligodendroglia and
less frequently astroglia show a spectrum of morphological inclusions
from pretangles, neurofibrillary tangles, coiled bodies, globular
bodies, Pick bodies, neurites and others. In Alzheimer’s disease,
the neurofibrillary tangles (tau) and neuritic plaques (tau and
beta-amyloid) contain both 3R and 4R tau. Pick’s disease has 3R
tau containing Pick bodies, while several of the other frontotemporal
lobar degeneration related tauopathies (FTLD-T), like corticobasal
degeneration (CBD), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), argyrophilic
grain disease (AGD) and globular glial tauopathy (GGT) contain 4R.
Additionally Multiple system tauopathy with Dementia (MSTD), caused by
several pathogenic variants of the Tau gene, result in
both 3R and 4R tau tauopathy. Diagnosis is by clinical features,
radiological findings and biomarker studies. Understanding the
neuropathology, the pathogenesis, the selective cellular vulnerability
and the stereotypical spread of tau pathology in a prion-like manner,
provides a scope for developing more accurate biomarkers for correlation
with neuropathology, early detection, diagnosis, monitoring and
assessing therapy outcomes in clinical trials and developing newer
molecules for therapeutic targeting.

## S19.3. Fyn Kinase-Tau Protein Interaction and Its Implication on
Alzheimer’s Disease Pathology and N-methyl Daspartate Receptor
Function

Sivaraman Padavattan1, Sneha Jos1, Roshni
Poulose1, Archanalakshmi Kambaru1, Hemanga
Gogoi1 and Bhupesh Mehta1

1Department of Biophysics, National Institute of Mental Health
and Neurosciences, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
Fyn kinase SH3 domain interaction with PXXP motif in the Tau protein is
implicated in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) pathology and is central
to N-methyl D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) function. Nevertheless, a
structural understanding of how the Fyn-SH3 domain interacts with the
Tau PXXP motifs at a molecular level is not available. Likewise,
hyperphosphorylation of Tau is considered a key pathological feature and
a primary driver behind fibrillar deposits in several tauopathies,
including AD. So far studies have shown how hyperphosphorylation at the
Tau microtubule-binding domain reduces binding affinity for its primary
ligand tubulin. However, the consequence of AD-specific phosphorylation
encompassing PXXP motifs’ interaction with the SH3 domain needs
to be studied. Here we combined structural and biophysical approaches to
determine Fyn-SH3 domain -Tau (207-221) peptide consisting of
5th and 6th tandem PXXP motifs and studied the
effect of AD-specific phosphorylation in the above interaction.
Subsequently, we investigated whether the above Tau peptide has any role
in remodelling NMDAR current using whole-cell patch clamp
electrophysiology.

## S19.4. TNT-mediated Protein Transmission: Implications for
Neurodegenerative Disease Spread in the Brain

Srinivasa Subramaniam1

1Department of Neuroscience, The Wertheim UF Scripps
Biomedical Research and Innovation, The Scripps Research Institute
Member, Norman Fixel Institute for Neurological Diseases, Florida,
Jupiter, USA
The CAG/CAA expansion encoding polyQ huntingtin (mutant huntingtin
[mHTT]) causes Huntington disease (HD), which is characterised by
atrophy and loss of striatal medium spiny neurons (MSNs), which are
preceded by neuropathological alterations in the cortex. Previous
studies have shown that mHTT can spread in the brain, but the mechanisms
involved in the stereotyped degeneration and dysfunction of the neurons
from the striatum to the cortex remain unclear. In this study, we found
that the mHTT expression initially restricted in the striatum later
spread to the cortical regions in mouse brains. Such transmission was
diminished in mice that lacked the striatal-enriched protein Ras-homolog
enriched in the striatum (Rhes). Rhes restricted to MSNs was also found
in the cortical layers of the brain, indicating a new transmission route
for the Rhes protein to the brain. Mechanistically, Rhes promotes such
transmission via a direct cell-to-cell contact mediated by tunnelling
nanotubes (TNTs), the membranous protrusions that enable the transfer of
mHTT, Rhes and other vesicular cargoes. These transmission patterns
suggest that Rhes and mHTT are likely co-transported in the brain using
TNT-like cell-to-cell contacts. On the basis of these new results, a
perspective is presented in this seminar: Rhes may ignite the mHTT
transmission from the striatum that may coincide with HD onset and
disease progression through an anatomically connected striato-cortical
retrograde route.

## S19.5. Mechanistic Insights and Therapeutic Implication of Astrocyte
Secreted Cytokines in Alzheimer’s Disease

Subhas Chandra Biswas1

1Neurodegenerative Disease Research Laboratory, Cell Biology
& Physiology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology,
Kolkata, West Bengal, India
The multi-factorial aetiology of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) strongly
suggests an integrated role of neurons and glia in pathobiology of the
disease. Astrocytes, the most abundant of the glial cells, undergo
morphological, biochemical, molecular and functional changes during the
pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases including AD termed as
reactive astrogliosis. Reactive astrocytes are rich reservoirs of
cytokines which may exert both beneficial and detrimental impacts on
neuronal health. Our studies identified intercellular adhesion
molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-1
(TIMP-1) as major neuroprotective candidates of glia origin that protect
neurons and ameliorate cognitive deficits in AD models. Interestingly,
we found strikingly diminished levels of TIMP-1 in the brain of
six-month-old 5xFAD mice (a transgenic model of AD) concomitant with
high levels of Amyloid-β (Aβ), versus wild-type mice.
Intracerebroventricular injection of TIMP-1 in 5xFAD mice ameliorated
their cognitive functions. TIMP-1 not only ensured neuronal viability
against apoptosis and aberrant autophagy in the AD model, but also
conferred synapse–specific effects. Synaptosomal analysis
revealed that TIMP-1 elevates dendritic spine size and protein levels.
Electrophysiology study revealed that it promotes post-synaptic
long-term potentiation in hippocampus, independent of pre-synaptic
activity. ICAM-1 protected neurons and improved cognitive behaviours in
5xFAD mice by NF-kB signalling. Therefore, we identify TIMP-1 and ICAM-1
as multifunctional cytokines with strong protective mechanisms-of-action
on neurons with long-term benefits and propose them as promising
therapeutic candidates in AD.

## Symposium 20: Parkinson’s Disease—Perspectives from Cells
to Clinic

## S20.1. Epigenetics: A Game Changer in Understanding the Disease
Biology of Neuropsychiatric Disorders

Arvind Kumar1,2

1CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB),
Hyderabad, Telangana, India
2Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR),
Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: The molecular aetiopathology most
neuropsychiatric disorders including Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is
still elusive, and so is efficacious therapeutics. Epigenetic
dysregulation of transcription appears to be involved in aetiology. Most
of the epigenetic studies involve histone lysine methylation, in
mediating chronic stress induced perturbations on the reward circuitry.
Here, we report the role of hiIne arginine (R) methylation, another
abundant epigenetic modification that is least studied.
Materials and Methods: Chronic Social Defeat Stress (CSDS)
model was used to induce depression-like phenotype in C57bl/6 Ncrl mice,
as assessed by a battery of behavioural assays. RT-qPCR was used to map
changes in transcription of Protein Arginine Methyltransferase (PRMT)
family members in hippocampus & its neurogenic region DG. This was
followed by uncovering the genomic targets of PRMT5 involved in altered
DG neurogenesis and remodelled hippocampal circuitry using ChIP-Seq and
ChIP-qPCR.
Results and Discussion: We uncovered dysregulation of some
PRMTs including PRMT5 in hippocampus and DG in aetiology of MDD-like
phenotype following CSDS, and also in Alcohol Use Disorder (AUD)
phenotype using mouse models. ChIP-Seq on the proliferating and
differentiated DG neural progenitor cells (NPCs) obtained from
post-natal day 2 (PND2) mouse pups using antibody against PRMT5, led us
to identify genomic targets of PRMT5 involved in hippocampal
neurogenesis. The overlap in ChIP-Seq data on PRMT5 enrichment, its
epigenetic target histone H4 arginine dimethylation (H4R3me2) enrichment
on target promoters and transcriptomics (RNA-Seq) data on the same
pups’ DG samples, revealed hundreds of target genes through which
PRMT5 might mediate its effects on neurogenesis and remodelled
hippocampal circuitry.

## Acknowledgements
We wish to thank DBT Glia projects in health and disease Phase I
& II, for the support to conduct this study.

## S20.2. Pax6-regulated Putative Biomarkers in Brain of MPTP-treated
Mouse Model of Parkinson’s Disease

Nidhi Ghosh1 and Rajnikant Mishra1

1Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Lab, Department of
Zoology, Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar
Pradesh, India
Introduction: Identification and evaluation of the
transcription factors to serve as diagnostic markers and therapeutic
targets are of current scientific concern. This report describes
evaluation of Pax6 regulated putative biomarkers because patients having
mutation of PAX6 show microcephaly, autism, mental retardation,
aniridia, glucose intolerance and aging associated disorders.
Methods: Brain of mouse model of Parkinson’s disease,
developed by injecting MPTP (1mg/kg) intraperitoneal for 21 days in
adult mice of AKR strain and equal volume of saline in vehicle control
group, was used. Integrated-omics study was performed using whole brain
transcriptomes, proteomes, ChIP and ChIP-sequencing. Anti-Pax6 was used
for immunoprecipitation.
Results: Whole brain transcriptomics and proteomics reveal
significant alterations of Cytokines, growth factors and neurotrophic
factors. Pax6 binds to promoter sequences, UTR, distal Intergenic and
Introns regions of several genes associated with synaptic functions,
cell junction assembly and inflammatory processes.
Conclusion: Pax6 may serve as a transcription factor-based
biomarker for differential diagnosis and better management of
Parkinson’s disease because integrated-omics evaluation provides
insights on Pax6 dependent regulation of cytokines, growth factors,
neurotrophic factors involved in motor and non-motor functions of
Parkinson’s disease.

## Acknowledgements
Financial support from the DBT, BT/PR28908/MED/122/174/2018 Dt
10/02/2020, India is gratefully acknowledged.

## S20.3. Neuronal Determinants of Autophagy Flux

Ravi Manjithaya1,2

1Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre
for Advanced Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore, Karnataka,
India
2Neuroscience Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced
Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
In many neurodegenerative diseases (NDs), including Alzheimer’s,
Huntington’s and prion diseases, the cellular manifestation of
disease pathology is seen earliest at the presynapse. Simultaneously,
compromised proteostasis, including autophagy, is a hallmark of these
NDs. Autophagy in neurons is highly compartmentalised and subtle
modulation of presynaptic autophagy may confer neuroprotective effects
against synaptopathies associated with such NDs. To investigate this
idea, we first characterised synaptic dysfunction in
vivo in a Drosophila model of Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 3
(SCA3) using locomotion-based behavioural assays as surrogate readouts
of presynaptic function. Further detailed characterisation of
glutamatergic synapses of motor neurons, the neuromuscular junctions
(NMJs), revealed defects in the morphology and function of these
synapses, with a concomitant defect in the autophagy pathway as a result
of mutant Ataxin-3 overexpression. Genetic manipulation of the autophagy
pathway in motor neurons by blocking the initiation complex also
revealed behavioural and synaptic defects, revealing the tight coupling
of synaptic function with presynaptic autophagy. Our work aims to
understand how modulation of the autophagy pathway can rescue defects
associated with synaptopathies in vivo.

## S20.4. Parkinson’s Disease in India: Unanswered Puzzle

Prashanth L.K.1,2

1
Parkinson’s Disease and Movement
Disorders Clinic, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
2Manipal Hospital Miller’s Road, Bangalore, Karnataka,
India
Parkinson’s Disease is a chronic neurodegenerative disorder that
affects a significant number of individuals in India. The exact
prevalence of Parkinson’s Disease in India varies across
different regions, but it is estimated to affect approximately 1%
of the population over the age of 60. As India’s population is
aging, the number of individuals living with Parkinson’s Disease
is expected to increase dramatically over the next decades. Diagnosis
and awareness of Parkinson’s Disease have improved in India over
the years, but there is still a lack of awareness, especially in rural
areas. Many cases go undiagnosed or are misdiagnosed as other conditions
due to the lack of specialised healthcare facilities and neurologists in
some regions. Access to quality healthcare and specialised treatment for
Parkinson’s Disease can be challenging, especially for
individuals in rural and underserved areas. In urban centres, there are
specialised clinics and neurologists who can provide better care,
including medications and therapies to manage the disease’s
symptoms. However, the cost of some of these treatments can be a barrier
for many patients. India has made progress in Parkinson’s Disease
research, with several institutions and hospitals conducting studies to
better understand the condition with collaborative efforts. The current
works of Parkinson Research Alliance of India (PRAI) working on the
Young Onset Parkinson’s Disease cohort genetics (GOPI-YOPD) and
the Michael J Fox Foundation funding through the global Parkinson
Genetic program (GP2) has made significant strides in collaborative
Indian works to answer the missing puzzle pieces of Parkinson’s
from India. The Indian government has taken steps to address
neurological disorders like Parkinson’s Disease. Public health
initiatives have been launched to create awareness about neurological
disorders, including Parkinson’s. However, more efforts are
needed to improve access to care and support for patients. Several
challenges persist in the management of Parkinson’s Disease in
India, including Limited Access to Specialised Care: Many patients do
not have access to neurologists and movement disorder specialists,
resulting in delayed diagnosis and suboptimal treatment. Stigma and
Awareness: There is a stigma associated with neurological disorders in
some parts of India, which can lead to social isolation for patients and
their families.
Cost of Medications: The cost of Parkinson’s medications can be
high, and insurance coverage may not always be adequate.

Future Prospects

To improve the status of Parkinson’s Disease in India, efforts
should focus on increasing awareness, improving access to specialised
care, and reducing the cost of medications. Collaborative research
initiatives and public-private partnerships can also contribute to
better understanding and management of the disease.

## S20.5. Organellar Hierarchy in Parkinson’s Disease:
Investigations Using Experimental Models

Bidisha Bhaduri1, Rashmi Santhosh Kumar2,
Dwarakanath Srinivas3, Pramod Kumar4 Pal, Ravi
Yadav4 and Phalguni Anand
Alladi1

1Department of Clinical Psychopharmacology and
Neurotoxicology, National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences,
Bangalore, Karnataka, India
2Department of Neuropathology, National Institute of Mental
Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
3Department of Neurosurgery, National Institute of Mental
Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
4Department of Neurology, National Institute of Mental Health
and Neurosciences, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
Background: Higher prevalence of PD in Caucasians compared
to Asian-Indians and 5-times lower prevalence in Anglo-Indians; the
admixed F1-generation of these two ethnicities, is well demonstrated.
Very similar to this; C57BL/6J, CD-1, and their F1X2 crossbred mice
exhibit variable response to the neurotoxin MPTP, where C57BL/6J mice
with fewer nigral DA neurons are more vulnerable. Although sub-cellular
organellar dysfunction is commonplace during neurodegeneration, rare
reports describe the chronology of degeneration of major organelles in
response to PD mimetics.
Materials and Methods: Here, we aimed to evaluate the
possible temporal hierarchy of sub-cellular organellar degeneration in
experimental models of Parkinson’s disease (PD), using
MPTP/MPP+. Our study traced organellar degeneration in
the striatal and nigral areas of control and MPTP-injected C57BL/6J,
CD-1 and F1X2 mice, subjected to semi-quantitative analysis of organelle
associated proteins and electron microscopy (EM). Separately, SH-SY5Y
cells were exposed to MPP+ and mitochondria-ER tracker dyes
followed by live imaging, mitochondrial respiration analysis and EM in a
temporal pattern. Human skin biopsies were evaluated by EM.
Results and Discussion: Altered expression of calnexin,
TGN-38 as well as ultrastructure hinted that most organelles were
severely impaired in the nigro-striatum of C57BL/6J. Live cell imaging
revealed a gradual loss of ER and mitochondria tags, though initial loss
was prominent in ER. In patient skin biopsies, decompacted myelin and an
increase in intermediate filaments were noted. Mild induction of
autophagy and mitochondrial biogenesis may be the coping strategies of
neurons. Similarities in C57BL/6J and patient skin suggest parallels in
pathogenesis and a reliable replication in the model. The chronology of
degeneration seen in SHSY5Y cells may be critical determinants of PD and
useful in designing therapeutics.

## Acknowledgements
NIMHANS Intramural funds to PAA and Fellowship to BB.

## Symposium 21: Pathology of Brain Disorders

## S21.1. Novel Insights into Molecular Events Following Virus-induced
Neurodegeneration

Guneet Kaur1, Himali Arora1,
Bindu1 and Pankaj Seth1

1National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, Haryana, India
Background: Neurotropic viruses adopt various strategies to
circumvent the innate and adaptive immunity and to breach blood brain
barrier (BBB) for infecting brain cells. Zika virus (ZIKV) infects human
neural stem cells (hNSCs) in developing foetal brain tissue by breaching
the blood placental barrier via infection of trophoblast cells. ZIKV and
its proteins affect the pool of hNSCs by altering their proliferation
and stemness, however the details of mechanisms are not well
understood.
Material and Methods: We studied effect of structural and
non-structural proteins of ZIKV on blood brain barrier cells as well as
hNSCs to gain novel insights into molecular mechanisms of ZIKV
neuropathogenesis in infants and adults. For this study, we used a two
cell model of BBB comprising primary cultures of human brain
microvasculature endothelial cells (hBMECs) and human astrocytes.
Results: We observed that ZIKV envelope (ZIKV-E) protein
altered BBB integrity by altering trans endothelial electrical
resistance, affected properties of both hBMECs and astrocytes and tight
junctional proteins. Furthermore, ZIKV E protein also altered hNSCs
proliferation (as seen with alterations in SOX-2, brdU, Ki67 levels) and
resulted in immature differentiation (alterations in DCX levels) as
indicated by mRNA and protein expression studies. We also identified
role of some long non coding RNAs in ZIKV-E protein induced
neuropathogenesis.
Discussion and Conclusions: Our study has helped to gain
insights into the underlying molecular mechanisms by which ZIKV-E
protein alters hNSCs proliferation. The findings have significant
clinical implications in understanding the ZIKV induced
microcephaly.

## Acknowledgements:
Authors acknowledge the financial support from NBRC Core funds.

## S21.2. Curcumin Protects Age-induced Neurodegeneration:
Desynchronisation of Interplay Between Clock, Immune and Microglia
Resting Genes

Anita Jagota1

1
Neurobiology and Molecular Chronobiology
Laboratory, Department of Animal Biology, School of Life Sciences,
University of Hyderabad, Telangana, India
Background: Aging is associated with changes in several
basic parameters of circadian timing system (CTS) in mammals leading to
circadian dysfunction. Circadian clock in Microglia have been known to
regulate the several age-associated pathologies like PD, AD etc. In
young brain microglia has several beneficial roles, however, with aging
the primed microglia are hypothesised to be detrimental in their
functions. As curcumin is a pleiotropic molecule which has various
properties such as anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-carcinogenic,
anti-microbial, anti-aging etc. was investigated for its therapeutic
influences on microglia.
Material and Methods: Male Wistar rats of three age groups:
3,12 and 24 months were used. They were maintained individually in
standard polypropylene cages with temperature at 23 ± 1
°C, relative humidity 55 ± 6 %; under light-dark
cycle (LD) 12:12 for 2 weeks prior to experiments. Microglia were
isolated at various time points Zeitgeber time (ZT) 0/24, 6,12 and 18
using density gradient method. Curcumin was administered orally 100
mg/ml in 0.5 % carboxymethyl cellulose. Various clock and immune
genes were studied using qRT-PCR. Data was analysed using R-program
Pearson correlation and one-way ANOVA.
Results: Our studies demonstrated that clock and immune
genes show temporal expression pattern in microglia in young age. With
aging, rPer2 and rCd172 in microglia
showed differential alterations in expression pattern. Interestingly,
curcumin showed restoration of daily rhythms of rNf-κb1,
rTnfα and rIl6 in microglia.
Curcumin also restored the altered mean levels of rCry2,
rCx3cr1 and rCd45 in microglia.
Correlations between the clock and immune genes were altered with
aging.
Discussion and Conclusions: Overall, this study helps in
paving a new path for the development of new therapeutic strategies
using the pleiotropic molecule curcumin to address several age related
chrono-immune attritions. In addition, our study gave an insight into
the cross-talk between clock and immune systems to underpin the
molecular mechanisms involved in chrono-immunological pathologies

## Acknowledgements
The financial support from ICMR is acknowledged.

## S21.3. Temporal Lobe Epilepsy: From Biochemistry to Biology

Anita Mahadevan1, Shwetha S.D.1, Srinivas
Bharat M.M.1, Arivazhagan A.2 and Sanjib
Sinha3

1Department of Neuropathology, Clinical Pharmacology &
Neurotoxicology, National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences
(NIMHANS), Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
2Department of Neurosurgery, National Institute of Mental
Health and Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
3Department of Neurology, National Institute of Mental Health
and Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
Background and Objective: Studies in animal models of
temporal lobe epilepsy suggest a pathogenetic role for mitochondrial
dysfunction, although validation studies in humans are scarce. We chose
to evaluate the mitochondrial status in the hippocampus resected from
patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE) through proteomic
approaches.
Materials and Method: Crude mitochondrial preparations from
human hippocampus samples, resected from patients with MTLE, who
underwent amygdalohippocampectomy (Early-onset <10 years of age,
n = 9 and late-onset >11years of age,
n = 9), compared with age matched normal controls
(n = 9) were subjected to quantitative proteomics
using high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS). MS data was validated by
mitochondrial respiratory chain complex assays (CI- CIV).
Results: The MS identified 7,961 proteins among which, 183
proteins and 61 mitochondrial proteins differentially expressed in early
and late onset respectively (p < 0.05). Proteins associated with
biological processes such as mitochondrial electron transport chain,
mitochondrial translation and branched-chain amino acid catabolic
process were differentially overexpressed in cases with early onset
MTLE, suggesting a pathogenetic role. Mitochondrial respiratory complex
I activity was higher in early onset compared to late onset MTLE and
controls, validating the proteomics data. The activities of
mitochondrial complexes II-IV remained unaltered. Proteomics of
astrocyte enriched fraction showed only few mitochondrial proteins, with
down regulation of Complexes I, IV, V and VDAC2 in both early-onset and
late-onset HS, differing from total proteomics data suggesting that
astrocytes do not contribute to the mitochondrial dysfunction in HS
Conclusions and Clinical Relevance: Mitochondrial
dysfunction in hippocampus appears to have a role in the pathogenesis of
early onset MTLE, in particular, mitochondrial complex I subunits.
Evidence for role of mitochondrial dysfunction may aid in development of
novel therapeutic strategies for treatment of MTLE.

## S21.4. Exploring Brain Energy Metabolism in Amyotrophic Lateral
Sclerosis

Anant Bahadur Patel1,2

1CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad,
Telangana, India
2Academy of Scientific & Innovative Research, Ghaziabad,
Uttar Pradesh, India
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is the most common adult-onset
progressive motor neurodegenerative disease that causes skeletal muscle
atrophy. Only 5-10% of ALS cases are inherited, out of which
20% of patients have a mutation in the Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase
(SOD1) gene. Moreover, ~0.4-4% of ALS cases
involve mutations in Optineurin (Optn), a
multifunctional adaptor protein that regulates autophagy, chronic
inflammation and necroptosis. We are using SOD1G37R and
Optn-/- mice to understand the pathophysiology of ALS.
The objective of the current study was to evaluate the impact of stress
on ALS phenotype and energy metabolism in Optn KO mice.
An approach of 1H-[13C]-NMR spectroscopy together
with an intravenous administration of [1,6-13C2]
glucose or [2-13C] acetate was to evaluate the neuronal and
astroglial metabolic activity. Our analysis in SOD1G37R mice
indicated a reduction in NAAG level while an elevation in myo-inositol
in the spinal cord of female and male mice. The male ALS mice exhibited
increased acetate oxidation in the spinal cord and cerebral cortex
suggesting astrocytic involvement in the pathogenesis of ALS. The rates
of glucose oxidation were increased in the cerebral cortex of male and
female ALS mice. Optn-/- mice did not exhibit motor
impairment, but progressive impairment in neuromuscular strength and
motor coordination was observed in Optn-/-
stressed mice after 30 days of chronic stress. Moreover, there was a
significant reduction in the rate of neuronal glucose oxidation in the
cerebral cortex and spinal cord Optn-/-
stressed mice. In contrast, astroglial metabolic activity was increased
in the cerebral cortex. Molecular studies using quantitative polymerase
chain reaction have revealed a decrease in expression of CTIP2 and OLIG2
with a concomitant increase in S100β and TMEM119 in the motor
cortex of Optn-/- stressed. In this
presentation, I will be discussing these findings in detail

## Acknowledgments
The study was supported by funding from the Department of Science and
Technology (DST/CSRI/2017/258) and CSIR-CCMB.

## S21.5. Can Cell Therapy Bring Mitochondrial Resilience Following
Ischemic Stroke?

Deepaneeta Sarmah1, Aishika Datta1, Nikita
Rana1, Bijoyani Ghosh1 and Pallab
Bhattacharya1

1Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, NIPER, Ahmedabad,
Gujarat, India
Background: Stroke is a medical condition that has a
profound impact on patient’s quality of life. Mitochondria are
highly vulnerable to damage following stroke; hence, the need of the
hour is to search for agents that can limit the stroke outcomes. Stem
cell therapy for stroke is promising as both preclinical and clinical
studies have shown beneficial outcomes.
Materials and Methods: We aim to investigate the involvement
of sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) in modulating the mitochondrial functions and
bringing resilience following endovascular delivery of stem cells in
animal model. Ovariectomised Sprague Dawley rats were intra-arterially
(IA) infused with 1*105 Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) at 6 h
post-MCAo. Following 24 h of MCAo, animals were evaluated for functional
and behavioural outcomes. Brains were harvested for molecular studies
and mitochondrial studies.
Results: Significant improvement in functional and
behavioural outcomes and a decrease in infarct size were observed
following infusion of stem cells post-stroke. An increase in average
neuronal length and viability were also observed. Increase in SIRT1,
mitochondrial fusion, biogenesis and tunnelling nanotube protein markers
were observed while reduction in mitochondrial fission protein markers
were seen in the brain regions following IA MSCs treatment. Improvement
in mitochondrial bioenergetics was also observed post-MSCs infusion.
Discussion and Conclusions: Results from the study
demonstrate the role of SIRT1 in modulating mitochondrial functionality
post-IA MSCs therapy in a rodent model of ischemic stroke. The IA
approach for administering MSCs is highly relevant in the present
clinical scenario.

## Acknowledgements
Department of Pharmaceuticals, GoI. Indian Council of Medical
Research (ICMR).

## S21.6. Somatostatin-releasing Inhibitory Interneurons of the
Olfactory Bulb Mediate Perceptual Learning Deficits in an Early Life
Stress Mouse Model

Nixon M. Abraham1

1Laboratory of Neural Circuits and Behaviour (LNCB),
Department of Biology, Indian Institute of Science Education and
Research (IISER), Pune, Maharashtra, India
Unravelling neural circuits responsible for sensory and cognitive
dysfunctions is one of the major challenges in Clinical Neuroscience.
The critical step towards this is undertaking a multi-pronged
experimental approach in order to confirm the causality between circuits
and behaviour. Despite many reports on somatostatin- releasing GABAergic
interneurons (SOM-Ins) in the olfactory bulb (OB), their involvement in
mediating perceptual learning deficits under early life stressed (ELS)
conditions, and their contribution to inhibitory interactions and
neuronal computations in the OB remain elusive. To address these
questions, it is essential to untangle the intricate interplay of
molecules, synaptic circuits and behavioural actions. Our results
demonstrate olfactory perceptual learning and memory deficits in ELS
mice using a well-established go/no-go odour discrimination paradigm.
Lowered c-Fos activity in the external plexiform layer and a reduction
in the number of dendritic processes of SOM-Ins in the ELS mice led us
to hypothesise the underlying neuronal circuit. We recorded reduced
synaptic inhibitory feedback on mitral/tufted (M/T) cells, in the OB
slices from ELS mice, explaining the learning deficiency caused by
compromised refinement of OB output. To study the role of SOM-Ins in
modulating olfactory perception, we performed in vivo opto-physiological
recordings using GcaMP6f expression in these neurons. Our results proved
learning-dependent refinement of Ca2+ dynamics in SOM-Ins during odour
discrimination. To investigate the causal role of SOM-Ins involving
circuitry, we carried out optogenetic bi-directional modulation of
SOM-Ins while animals were learning to discriminate different odour
pairs. Photo-activation of these neurons rescued the learning deficits
in ELS mice. Conversely, optical inhibition of SOM-Ins in control
animals mimicked the ELS- induced learning deficiency, while it
completely abolished the learning in ELS mice. These results confirm the
role of inhibitory circuits formed by SOM-Ins in mediating learning
deficits we observed in ELS mice.

## Invited Lectures

## IL1.1. Role of Dopamine on Iron Homeostasis in Astroglial Cells

Chinmay K. Mukhopadhyay1, Som Dev1, Reshmi
Mukherjee1, Pratibha Singh1 and Somya
Asthana1

1
Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal
Nehru University, New Delhi, India
Background: Astroglia plays crucial role in maintaining neuronal
iron homeostasis. Iron is an essential component for biosynthesis of
catecholamine neurotransmitters including dopamine (DA). Iron deposition in
substantia nigra and affected DA synthesis are commonly reported in
Parkinson’s disease (PD). However, role of DA on astroglial iron
homeostasis is little understood so far.
Materials and Methods: C6, U87MG and primary astrocytes were
used. Expressions of iron homeostasis components were detected by Western
blot and RT-qPCR analysis. Protein degradation was determined by chase assay
and methods involving autophagy. siRNAs were used for gene silencing.
Protein-protein interaction was determined by Co-IP and immunoblots.
Results: Here we report that DA promotes astroglilal ferritin
degradation by a lysosomal mechanism. NCOA4 acts as a specific cytosolic
cargo to carry ferritin to lysosome. DA promotes ferritin degradation by
chaperon mediated autophagy. We further reveal that DA induces cathepsin B
expression to degrade ferritin and suppress iron release components to
elevate iron content in mitochondria.
Discussion and Conclusions: Our results established a direct
role of DA on astroglial iron metabolism. DA could induce ferritin
degradation and affect iron release components resulting elevation of iron
in mitochondria. These results implicate a role of DA in astroglial
mitochondrial iron homeostasis that may be relevant in understanding
mitochondrial dysfunction reported in PD.

## Acknowledgement
CKM acknowledges financial support received from SERB. SD and PS were
supported by fellowships from CSIR and ICMR respectively.

## IL1.2. Sedation with Midazolam in the NICU: A Double-edged Sword

Nghi M. Nguyen1,2, Adrian Flores1,3, Jina
Yi1,2, Pranavi Athota1, Daniel
Meyer1, Sowmya Yelamanchili1,2,5 and Gurudutt
Pendyala1,2,4,5

1Department of Anesthesiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center (UNMC), Omaha, Nebraska, USA
2Department of Genetics, Cellular Biology, and Anatomy, UNMC,
Omaha, Nebraska, USA
3Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, UNMC, Omaha,
Nebraska, USA
4Child Health Research Institute, Omaha, Nebraska, USA
5National Strategic Research Institute, Omaha, Nebraska, USA
Background: Premature neonates frequently receive sedatives and
anaesthesia due to surgeries and ventilation. While these agents help manage
agitation, their repeated use early in life might cause cognitive issues.
Our research examines how the common neonatal sedative, midazolam (MDZ),
affects neurodevelopment from infancy to adulthood using a rodent model.
Methods: We established a dose-escalation regimen from postnatal
day (P) 3 pups until P21 to mimic long-term MDZ exposure at a very early age
to meticulously analyse how prolonged MDZ exposure during early development
influences neurodevelopment across phenotypic, molecular and behavioural
dimensions.
Results: Our findings demonstrated that long-term MDZ exposure
during the neonatal period negatively affects physical attributes in early
childhood. Surprisingly, while adult bodyweights between control and
MDZ-exposed rats remain comparable, the MDZ rats exhibited accelerated and
robust weight gain. Notably, during adulthood, the dopamine release in
MDZ-exposed rats was markedly reduced, suggesting a potential for developing
binge eating behaviour. We also observed elevated levels of pro-inflammatory
cytokines and growth factors during adulthood, hinting at a shift in
development due to early MDZ exposure. Furthermore, we observed trends of
heightened anxiety-like behaviour, nociception and reduced social
interaction during early adolescence compared to other stages.
Discussion: Our study presents for the first time a
comprehensive assessment of how long-term MDZ exposure during neonatal
stages impacts outcomes throughout life. These insights serve as a
foundation for unravelling mechanisms that could contribute to overcoming
neurodevelopmental complications associated with long-term MDZ use in
neonates.

## Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Institutes of Health R01DA042379,
(SVY), DA049577 (G.P.), Lieberman Endowment (G.P), Nebraska
Collaborative Research Initiative (S.V.Y & G.P.) and start-up funds
from the Department of Anesthesiology, UNMC (G.P. and S.V.Y).

## IL1.3. Tale of a Tailed Neuron: Insights from the TRPV1 Channel

Luna Samanta1

1Redox Biology and Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Zoology,
Ravenshaw University, Cuttack, Odisha, India
Multiple lines of evidence suggest significant similarities between the human
brain and testis, sparking interest within the scientific community. This
connection is underscored by observed associations between intelligence and
certain semen quality parameters, as well as apparent links between brain
dysfunctions and testicular issues. When examining these tissues, numerous
shared molecular features and a substantial number of common proteins become
evident. Functionally, human neurons and sperm exhibit similarities, such as
reliance on the exocytotic process and the presence of comparable receptors
and signalling pathways. The common proteins primarily participate in
exocytosis, tissue development and processes associated with neurons/
brain-associated biological processes. Neurons are excitable cells known for
their diverse ion channels, such as voltage-gated Ca2+ and
Na+ channels, and ligand-gated receptor channels. These
channels play a role in rapid membrane potential changes and electrical
signalling. Surprisingly, sperm cells also possess many of these channels.
This similarity has led to the idea that any cell with a combination of such
channels can be considered excitable. Thus, spermatozoa can be viewed as
excitable cells. Albeit, this area remains relatively unexplored, and
warrants further investigation to establish a clearer connection between
these cells, few recent studies have ventured into establishing the
association of these receptors with sperm function. The role of transient
receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) in this regard cannot be undermined,
particularly for sperms produced in testis with 2°C lower
scrotal temperature to their maturation and field of action at normal body
temperature. Our laboratory the first time demonstrated the
Ca2+-sensitive TRPV1 channel to be under-expressed in spermatozoa
of sub-fertile men, idiopathic infertile men and normozoospermic infertile
males with high ROS (idiopathic infertility and unilateral varicocele). To
investigate the role of TRPV1 in fertility, its expression in spermatozoa
from men achieving pregnancy through natural conception (NC+,
n = 10), IVF (IVF+, n = 23), or ICSI
(ICSI +, n = 9), and those with failed pregnancies NC
(n = 7), IVF (n = 23), or ICSI
(n = 10), were compared by both immunocytochemistry and
flow cytometry. Reduced TRPV1 expression in IVF+/– and ICSI+/–
groups in comparison to NC+ suggests its role in successful fertilisation.
Conversely, under-expression in NC-/IVF-/ICSI- sperm implies its importance
in conception and pregnancy maintenance. Since reactive oxygen species (ROS)
is regarded as one of the major contributors to both neurological disorders
and sperm dysfunction, we also explored TRPV1 as a redox sensor due to its
link with sperm dysfunction and ROS generation in neurons.
H2O2 treatment increased acrosomal reaction and
calcium influx, which were modulated by TRPV1 agonists resiniferatoxin (RTX)
and antagonists iodoresiniferatoxin (iRTX), indicating TRPV1’s role
in H2O2 response. In silico analysis
of the crosstalk between TRPV1 with fertility candidate proteins (reported
to influence IVF outcome) revealed cell death and survival, cellular
compromise and embryonic development to be the primary networks affected by
anomalous TRPV1 expression. Therefore, it is postulated that TRPV1 can act
as a redox sensor, and its expression in spermatozoa may serve as a
fertility marker. Such research could enhance our understanding of the
dysfunctions affecting both the brain and testis, ultimately leading to the
development of more effective therapeutic strategies.

## Acknowledgements
Financial support from Centre of Excellence in Environment and Public
Health by Higher Education Department, Government of Odisha (Grant No.:
26913/HED/HE-PTC-WB-02-17) is duly acknowledged.

## IL1.4. Altered Subcortical-Cortical Dynamic Network Reconfigurations in
Focal-to-Bilateral Tonic-Clonic Seizures

Shilpi Modi1,2, A. Ankeeta1, Walter
Hinds1, Michael Sperling1 and Joseph
Tracy1

1Department of Neurology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
2Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Sciences (INMAS), Delhi,
India
Background: Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is the most common
focal epilepsy syndrome in adults, with focal to bilateral tonic-clonic
seizures (FBTCS+) its most severe form. In this project, we pursued a
comprehensive characterisation of resting state (RS) dynamic functional
connectivity (dFC) in FBTCS+, examining four distinct set of
subcortico-cortico communication/propagation pathways.
Materials and Methods: Left TLE (n = 55)
patients (FBTCS-; FBTCS+current; FBTCS+remote) and age-matched controls
(n = 56) underwent an 8 min RS-fMRI scan. After
pre-processing (fMRIPrep), dFC measures- recruitment,
integration and flexibility were computed
(sliding-window approach) for Schaefer 7-cortical and 4 subcortical
(mesial-temporal/striatum/thalamus/cerebellum) network combinations. MANOVAs
on the deviation scores of the dFC measures were run.
Results: An increased recruitment was obtained in anterior
thalamus, DAN and limbic system in FBTCS+current group. Left-right VAN
showed an increased integration with both caudate and cereb-5 in
FBTCS+current (versus FBTCS-) group. As compared to FBTCS+remote,
FBTCS+current showed greater integration between caudate/ left control and
cereb-5/left DMN systems. Random Forest classification models with MANOVA
findings as predictor variables further suggest that the functional
connectivity within and between certain networks cohere differently based on
the FBTCS status.
Discussion and Conclusions: Anterior thalamus has been shown to
be recruited early before the clinical manifestation of seizures in TLE. The
heightened recruitment of the DAN and limbic systems appears to be an
adaptive feature of network dynamics in FBTCS. A complex set of increased
subcortio-cortico integration/synchronisation might serve as seizure
propagation pathways in FBTCS. Our analyses are the first to capture altered
RS dynamic network reconfigurations in subcortico-cortico intrinsic systems
in the setting of FBTCS.

## IL1.5. Morphological Changes in the Mice Central Nervous System in a
L-arginine-induced Model of Chronic Pancreatitis

Punit Kumar1, Manish Kumar Sharma2, Intizaar
Mehdi3, Kumari Priyam1, Tara Sankar
Roy4 and Tony George Jacob1

1Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
New Delhi, India
2Department of Anatomy, Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi,
India
3SOS in Neuroscience, Jiwaji University, Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh,
India
4Department of Anatomy, North DMC Medical College & Hindu Rao
Hospital, Delhi, India
Background: Studies on magnetic resonance imaging reveal that
there is structural reorganisation in the brain areas involved in visceral
pain processing. Here, we used repetitive injections of L-arginine to induce
chronic pancreatitis (CP) in mice and report behavioural, morphometric and
molecular changes related to chronic visceral pain of pancreatic origin.
Materials and Methods: CP was induced in adult male Swiss albino
mice by injecting L- Arginine intraperitoneally for six-weeks. We assessed
pain by von-Frey filaments. Stereological methods were used to estimate the
number of neurons in thalamus and sensory cortex. The expression of NeuN,
Vglut1 and GAD67 in brain was compared by immunoblotting.
Results: Mice with CP showed significantly decreased pain
threshold (0.008g) and increase in total percentage of responses in von-Frey
test indicating progressive mechanical allodynia. The number of neurons were
decreased in L-Arginine treated mice as compared to saline treated groups.
The expression of NeuN decreased but the expression of Vglut1 and GAD67 were
equivocal.
Discussion and Conclusion: The L-arginine model of CP induces
chronic visceral pain as shown by allodynia and hyperalgesia. Decrease in
the number of neurons reported by unbiased stereology and its validation by
decrease in the expression of NeuN by immunoblotting indicates that
viability of neurons in the brain were affected by CP.

## Acknowledgement
The authors are grateful to Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi
for funding this study (51/6/2019/ANA/BMS).

## IL1.6. Mitochondrial Dysfunctions-induced Reactive Oxygen Species in
Parkinson’s Disease Rodent Model

Jitendra Narain Singh1, Bhupesh Vaidya1, Mahesh
Polepalli1 and Shyam Sunder Sharma1

1Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, National Institute of
Pharmaceutical Education and Research, S.A.S. Nagar, Punjab, India
Parkinson’s disease is a neurodegenerative disease in which
considerable mitochondrial dysfunction and cell death localised to the
substantia nigra pars compacta is observed for which novel therapeutic
advancements are urgently required. An increasingly appealing and accepted
theory advanced the notion that such bio-energetical dysfunction may be the
cause, or perhaps the consequence of pathological ROS accumulation within
the mitochondria and the propensity for these messengers to stimulate the
amplification of their effects throughout the cell in a process termed
‘ROS-induced ROS release.
In this study, the effect of 2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate (2-APB), a TRP
channel blocker was investigated in the context of mitochondrial
dysfunctions in 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+)-treated SH-SY5Y cells and
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-administered Sprague
Dawley rats.
MPP+-treated SH-SY5Y cells exhibited reductions in cell viability, generation
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and loss of mitochondrial membrane
potential. Co-treatment with 2-APB led to an increase in cell viability,
reduction in intracellular and mitochondrial ROS and improvement in
mitochondrial membrane potential compared to MPP+-treated SH-SY5Y cells. In
addition, intra-nigral administration of MPTP led to a significant reduction
in motor function in the rats. Fourteen days of 2-APB (i.p.) treatment
improved behavioural parameters. MPTP-induced decrease in complex I activity
and mitochondrial potential were also blocked by 2-APB in the mitochondria
isolated from the brain regions, that is, midbrain and striatum.
MPTP-induced decrease in tyrosine hydroxylase levels were also restored by
2-APB.
Moreover, MPTP-induced reduction in proteins involved in mitochondrial
biogenesis, viz. peroxisome proliferator-activated-receptor-gamma
coactivator and mitochondrial transcription factor-A were increased after
2-APB treatment in vivo. In summary, 2-APB has a promising neuroprotective
role in the MPP+/MPTP models of PD via targeting mitochondrial dysfunctions
and biogenesis.

## IL1.7. Traumatic Brain Injury Alters the Limbic System of Both Rats and
Humans Leading to Impaired Memory Function

Richa Trivedi1, Palkin Arora1, Megha
Kumari1, Maria M. D’souza1, Kailash
Manda1 and Poonam Ra1

1Radiological, Nuclear and Imaging Sciences (RNAIS), Institute of
Nuclear Medicine and Allied Sciences (INMAS), DRDO, Delhi, India
Background: Traumatic or stressful event to the brain initiates
a sequalae of structural and functional alterations. Trauma can lead to
activation of the limbic system as an adaptive response of the body.
Alterations in the limbic system can be associated with TBI induced
neuropsychiatric disorders and PTSD. Therefore, the present study involved
assessment of microstructural changes in the limbic system along with
functional outcome in rats and human subjects.
Results: TBI showed altered microstructure in rats and humans.
The DTI scalars including apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), fractional
anisotropy (FA), radial diffusivity (RD) and axial diffusivity (AD) were
computed in both rats and human subjects. A decrease in ADC with decreasing
RD values were observed in the limbic regions. The rat brain also showed
astrocytic proliferation in the limbic structures with the presence of
neurite plaques distinctive of axonal injury. Behavioural tests in the rats
indicated decreased short-term memory with increased anxiety like behaviour.
On the other hand, human TBI subjects had a similar alteration in the limbic
microstructure with impaired memory function.
Discussion and Conclusions: The microstructural changes observed
using diffusion MRI in the limbic system of both rats and humans gives an
insight into the altered tissue composition with cellular changes after TBI.
These structural changes are accompanied by impaired memory and cognitive
functions in rats and humans. Therefore, this study highlights an important
role of limbic circuitry in the development of neuropsychiatric disorders
including, PTSD after TBI.

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the DRDO, Ministry of Defence, India
(INM-324).

## IL1.8. Development of Natural-inspired Novel Therapeutic and Diagnostic
Agents for Alzheimer’s Disease
Gyan Modi1, Saroj Kumar2, Saripella
Srikrishna3, Sarika Gupta4, Geeta
Rai5, Vegi G.M. Naidu6, Gauri
Shankar1, Himanshu Rai1 and
Gourav Singh1
1Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering & Technology, Indian
Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh,
India
2Department of Biophysics, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi, India
3Department of Biochemistry, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi,
Uttar Pradesh, India
4National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, India
5Department of Molecular and human genetics, Institute of
Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
6Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, National Institute
of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER), Guwahati, Assam, India
Background: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a multifactorial
progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterised by gradual memory
impairment. Natural products have gained enormous interest in preventing or
diagnosis of AD. To address the issues associated with natural products, we
developed ferulic acid (FA) and rivastigmine analogues.
Material and Methods: The novel molecules were designed,
synthesised and characterised following the art of medicinal chemistry. The
enzyme inhibition studies were carried out with modified Ellman method.
SHSY5Y cells were utilised to evaluate the neuroprotection ability of the
lead molecules. The in-vivo studies were carried out in various AD mice
models and in AD autopsy samples.
Results: The lead molecules were potent inhibitors of AchE/BchE
(IC50 = 2.09 ± 0.1, and 3.9 ± 0.8 nM for AchE
and BchE, respectively). The lead molecules exhibited promising antioxidant,
Aβ1-42 and tau aggregation modulation, NLRP3
inhibition and metal chelation property. Further, the lead molecules were
efficacious in the AD drosophila model, in-vivo and ex-vivo
in scopolamine-induced AD models. The lead probe molecules have shown
promising and selective Aβ aggregation detection ability in different
AD models.
Discussion and Conclusion: The promising anti-AD properties in
various in-vitro and in-vivo AD models of the developed molecules may be
attributed to their structural modification. The efficient brain
permeability and favourable brain kinetics in live murine models, along with
distinctive ocular imaging pattern in the AD Drosophila model, strongly
suggest that probes holds promise as a dependable indicator for rapid,
non-invasive assessment of new therapeutic modulators or inhibitors in
AD.

## Acknowledgments
GM is thankful to the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR/
EMR/2021-10363), the Science and Engineering Research Board under Core
Research Grant (SERB-CRG/2018/003490) and the Indian Institute of
Technology (BHU) (SM/2016–17/1198/L). GM also thanks Dr Anita
Mahadevan, Coordinator, Human Brain Bank (NIMHANS), for providing the
autopsy tissue samples from clinically diagnosed AD patients.

## IL2.1. Vulnerability of Müller Glial Cells in Aging Human Retina: Impact
on Photoreceptor Cell Survival

Tapas C. Nag1

1Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
New Delhi, India
Background: Müller cells (MC), a type of radial glia that span
the entire retina, maintain homeostasis via extrasynaptic removal of
neurotransmitters and providing trophic support to retinal neurons, like
astrocytes perform metabolic support for neurons in the CNS. As oxidative
stress is intensified with normal aging, it would be of significance to
investigate how MC alter with aging and respond to oxidative stress to
support the aging retinal neurons.
Materials and Methods: This study examined aging changes in MC
of donor human retina (age: 35–98 years; N = 18 donors), via approval
from Institute human ethics committee. Retinal samples were fixed and
processed for TEM analysis. Immunohistochemistry was performed to localise
the expression of MC markers (GFAP, vimentin, glutamine synthetase and
aquaporin 4) and oxidative stress (4-hydroxy 2-nonenal and nitrotyrosine)
with aging.
Results: MC undergo gliosis, lipid peroxidation and edematous
changes with advanced aging (>80 years). Photoreceptor cells also
undergo oxidative-nitrosative stress with aging, and their synapses also
show osmotic swelling. Oxidative stress response by MC is mediated by
proliferation of smooth endoplasmic reticulum and upregulation of
aquaporin-4 in endfeet and outer retina. In advanced aged retinas
(81–98 years), they show mitochondrial disorganisation, accumulation
of lipids and autophagosomes, lipofuscin granules and axonal debris in their
inner processes, suggesting a reduced phagocytotic potential in them with
aging. Glutamine synthetase immunoreactivity upregulates in endfeet and
Henle fibre layer only advanced aged retinas.
Discussion and Conclusion: It is evident that MC are vulnerable
with aging, and this could be a reason for photoreceptor cell abnormalities
and loss reported with aging of the human retina.

## Acknowledgements
This study was supported by funds from ICMR, New Delhi
(51/5/2019-BMS/ANA).

## IL2.2. Unlocking the Neural Symphony: A Study on Learning and Memory in
Vedic Sanskrit Scholars

Uttam Kumar1

1Center of Biomedical Research, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: The exceptional memorisation skills of Vedic
Sanskrit experts have sparked scientific intrigue. This study probed the
neuroanatomical substrates underpinning these abilities, focusing on white
matter tract differences related to learning and memory.
Materials and Methods: 25 Vedic Sanskrit experts and 25
non-experts were analysed using Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI). Fractional Anisotropy (FA)
values and Seed-Based Connectivity (SBC) analysis, targeting the caudate,
cingulate, hippocampus and thalamus, were employed.
Results: The analysis revealed a statistically significant
augmentation in Fractional Anisotropy (FA) values within the pre-post
central, mid, posterior cingulate caudate and orbitofrontal regions among
Vedic Sanskrit experts. These variations indicate enhanced white matter
integrity, likely associated with specialised learning and memory functions.
Furthermore, Seed-Based Connectivity (SBC) analysis unveiled distinctive and
complex connectivity patterns within selected seed regions, illustrating the
unique neural circuits engaged in the memorisation processes intrinsic to
Vedic Sanskrit expertise.
Discussion and Conclusions: The study elucidates a complex
interplay of neural substrates underlying the advanced learning and memory
capabilities of Vedic Sanskrit experts. With a marked increase in FA values
and distinctive connectivity patterns, these findings offer compelling
evidence of specialised neural adaptations. The results underscore a novel
insight into cognitive neuroscience and provide a foundation for further
investigation into cognitive augmentation strategies and the neurobiology of
expert-level language processing.

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported by intramural funding.

## IL2.3. Influence of Neuroactive Steroids and Mozart Effect on Neuronal
Oscillations and Cognition: An EEG Study

Afreen Begum H. Itagi1

1All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Mangalagiri, Andhra
Pradesh, India
Introduction and Objectives: Neuroactive steroids (NAS) interact
with neurotransmitter receptors and alter the excitability and synaptic
transmission to modulate learning and cognitive processes. Focusing on
subtle changes in Electroencephalogram (EEG) by spectral analysis, the
synchronous neocortical oscillations reflecting brain circuits can be
predicted. Listening to music serves to strengthen the neuronal pathways
subsequently leading to the execution of cognitive tasks. This research aims
to evaluate the effect of Neuroactive steroids on exposure to Mozart music
involved in directed attention during cognitive task performance along with
Correlation of EEG Changes reflecting highly specific Neuronal
oscillations.
Materials and Methodology: This cross-sectional Analytical study
was undertaken in 30 healthy individuals above 18 years at EEG Laboratory,
AIIMS Mangalagiri. The temporal and frequency properties of EEG: Power/ERSP
of EEG bands were recorded at rest, followed by exposure to soft music of
Mozart with eyes open and close for 3 minutes each. An event was marked in
the continuous EEG data to see the effect of music on EEG bands. Blood
sample was collected for measurement of Neuroactive steroids: cortisol and
DHEA-S before and after exposure to music. Participants also performed
cognitive tasks like Stroop Test, Trial Making Test and Mini Mental State
Examination, after which the event related potential (ERP) data was
processed using P300. Standard auditory ‘oddball paradigm‘ on
computerised evoked potential recorder (RMS EMG MK-2) using 10/20 system was
used to know the engagement of attention.
Results: Exposure to MOZART MUSIC lead to changes in Power/ERSP
of EEG bands and alteration of NAS: Cortisol and DHEA-S. The accuracies and
latencies showed improvement in cognitive task performance by increased
directed attention due to MOZART EFFECT. Participants with higher levels of
DHEA-S performed better in-terms of higher percentage accuracy and reaction
time. Lower P300 latencies reflects faster reaction time with better
response accuracies resulting better cognitive performances. Cortisol/DHEA-
S ratio was significantly increased in individuals with poorer attention and
performance.
Conclusion: Alteration of NAS: Cortisol and DHEA-S leads to
variation in synaptic transmission and neuronal excitability suggesting
possible role of Neuronal oscillations predicting cortical communications
reflected by Electroencephalogram record analysis and Neuroactive steroids
in Mozart Effect for cognition.

## IL2.4. Understanding the Pathophysiology and Virulence Determinants of
Burkholderia pseudomallei Strains Causing
Neuro-melioidosis

Somasish Ghosh Dastidar1

1Centre for Molecular Neurosciences, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal
Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India
Background: Neuromelioidosis is an emerging but neglected infectious
disease caused by a gram-negative, saprophytic bacteria Burkholderia
pseudomallei which is a Risk-GroupIII organism. This disease mimics
Guillain-Barre syndrome, aseptic meningitis, or brain-stem encephalitis with a
25% mortality rate. The pathogenesis, host-pathogen relationship,
virulence determinants and genetic variability of Neuromelioidosis-causing
strains are unknown.
Methods:
Burkholderia pseudomallei strains were isolated from patient
samples with and without CNS involvement. Phenotypic, microbiological and
genotypic characterisation were performed. We analysed the risk factors,
virulence factors, antimicrobial resistance, phylogenetic parameters, genotypic
diversity and population dynamics of these bacterial strains. We infected
neuronal cell lines to determine the factors behind the aetiology of
Neuromelioidosis.
Results: CNS manifestations aided by radiographic/MRI findings and
clinical presentations like fever, headache, seizure, cranial nerve palsies,
altered sensorium and limb weakness was observed in Neuromelioidosis cases.
Burkholderia pseudomallei strains were isolated from blood,
body fluid and CSF samples. Differences in phenotypic and genotypic
characterisation were observed in the Indian strains. Different mutations,
presence of genomic islands and virulent factors was noted in the Indian
strains. In-vitro infection led to neuronal cytotoxicity and
difference in lipid droplet formation.
Conclusion: Functionally novel virulent genes sugC,
LPS-rfb and cysC1 were identified in our strain.
We observe the presence of genomic islands, indicative of horizontal gene
transfer, harbouring two virulent genes, gmhA and
gmhB2, associated with pathogenesis. The current lack of
diagnostic kit for early detection and lack of commercial vaccine for B.
pseudomallei urgently demands an in-depth multidisciplinary
approach to decipher the molecular heterogeneity in B.
pseudomallei, phylogeny, virulome and the host-pathogen
interactions.

## Acknowledgement
We would like to thank KMC, MAHE for providing financial and instrumental
support to pursue this research work.

## IL2.5. Longitudinal MR Evaluation of Yoga-induced Changes in Brain in
Post-stroke Recovery

Dushyant Kumar1, Chahat1, M.V. Padma
Srivastava2,3 and Rama Jayasundar1

1Department of NMR, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India
2Departments of Neuroradiology, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi, India
3Departments of Neurology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
New Delhi, India
Background: Stroke is a leading cause of disability worldwide,
affecting countries both in terms of economy and work productivity. Although
physiotherapy is used conventionally in post-stroke recovery, there is growing
attention on the therapeutic use of yoga. In this study on ischemic stroke
patients, the effects of yoga on post-stroke rehabilitation have been evaluated
for the first time using Magnetic Resonance (MR) techniques.
Methods: Thirteen first-ever left hemisphere stroke patients
(18–60 years) were enrolled for the study after approval from the
Institute Ethical Committee. All had motor deficits with NIHSS score < 15
for left and < 10 for right hemispheres. The patients practiced yoga for
six months (one hour everyday) under the supervision of certified yoga trainers.
All assessments were carried out pre- and post-(3, 6 months) intervention.
NIHSS, mRS and Barthel Index scores, and pro-inflammatory (IL-1β, IL-6
and TNF-α) and anti-inflammatory (IL-10) cytokines were evaluated. The
fMRI studies were carried out in 3T MR scanner: with motor task (hand fist open
and close). For the latter, time series data from precentral gyrus region were
extracted and the results presented as frequency distribution for each
patient.
Results: Longitudinal changes in NIHSS showed significant
(p < .05) clinical improvement. The frequency
distribution of the BOLD activity from patients showed significant clinical
improvement. The peak corresponding to the zero-time point signifies that the
activity was nearly absent (most of the activity was very close to the mean).
The 2nd and 3rd time points indicated increase in bold
activity.
Conclusion: The current MR study has shown for the first-time
yoga-induced clinical and functional changes (improvement) in brain in
post-stroke recovery patients. Further in-depth analysis is under way.

## Il2.6. Contribution of Glial Gap Junctions Towards Neuropathic Pain in
Rats

Kaler Jhajhria S.1, Kumar A.1 and Ray
S.B.1

1All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India
Background: Gap junctions are made up of a pair of hemichannels. The
hemichannels and glial cells have a role in neuropathic pain, but their exact
mechanism is not fully understood in neuropathic pain. The study aimed to
understand the mechanistic role of gap junctions in neuropathic pain.
Materials and Methods: Male Sprague Dawley rats underwent partial
sciatic nerve ligation. Baseline behavioural studies were done and followed at
different intervals (7th, 14th, 21st and
28th days). On the 28th day, the spinal cord (L2-L4)
was procured after sacrificing rats. Expression was quantified by
immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence and western blot.
Results: Behavioural studies showed persistent neuropathic pain
between days 7th-28th and maximum pain was observed on day
14. Immunostaining revealed increased expression of Iba-1 and GFAP markers for
microglia and astrocytes, respectively, on the same side of the dorsal horn of
the spinal cord in the experimental rats as compared to the control.
Immunofluorescence also revealed microglial activation on the ipsilateral side
in neuropathic pain-induced rats. Western blot shows an active Cx-43 gap
junction.
Discussion and Conclusion: Microglias, the gatekeepers of CNS
immunology, are involved in various neurogenerative diseases. Gap junctions
connect glial cells. Connexin-43 is the most abundant gap junction, and it has a
role in glial cell activation. This study concludes the role of microglia and
astrocytes in neuropathic pain. Further studies are required on agents that can
suppress glial cell activation and can be used as potential analgesics for
neuropathic pain through these gap junctions.

## Acknowledgement
The work was supported by SERB, DST Grant. No conflict of interest.

## IL2.7. Advanced Neuroimaging and Artificial Intelligence in Understanding
Human Brain Health and Diseases: Sneaking into Gliomas and Aging Brain

Vivek Tiwari1

1Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science
Education and Research (IISER), Berhampur, Odisha, India
Understanding the clinically relevant molecular underpinning of brain disorders
is complicated, given the challenges associated with surgical interventions in
brain to obtain the tissue biopsies for genetic and epigenetic investigations.
Therefore, my group is employing advanced neuroimaging and artificial
intelligence to investigate clinically relevant hard-to-detect structural,
vascular and biochemical events signifying the brain health, especially in aging
associated disorders and gliomas to bypass the need of invasive procedures. We
are employing ‘Advanced neuroimaging, RadioGenomics and
RadioMetabolomics’ approaches to understand aging, dementia and glioma
associated ‘Quantitative signatures’ for improved clinical
management.
In 2016, WHO revised the glioma classification and introduced for the first time
molecular basis of glioma classification as IDH mutant and wild type.
Irrespective of the histologic grade, the gliomas harbouring somatic mutations
in isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) confers better prognosis and improved survival
compared to the IDH wildtype. The structural and geometric heterogeneities
across gliomas are potentially a phenotypic manifestation of tumour relevant
genetic and epigenetic events. Identification of mutational and epigenetic
status requires tissue biopsy/surgical interventions. Given the complexity of
surgical interventions in the brain, clinical management of gliomas and other
brain tumour patients is challenging. Establishing the genome-phenome
relationship by unravelling the tumour substructural geometry; viz enhancing,
non-enhancing, necrosis and oedema components across gliomas harbouring distinct
molecular background, is likely to establish a non-invasive method of structural
geometry as an indicator of molecular status and associated clinical outcomes
for prior treatment planning and improved clinical management. To investigate
the structural and molecular basis of genotypic status in gliomas, we have
performed glioma segmentation and fractal dimension measurements using MR
images. The fractal dimensions serve as a metric for quantifying the complexity
and irregularity exhibited by various shapes and structures. Fractal dimensions
vary for IDH mutant tumours compared to IDH wild-type tumours. A combined
approach of fractality and lacunarity of tumour subcomponents is predictive of
IDH mutational status and MGMT methylation. In addition to structural
remodelling, my recent findings elucidate the alterations in pool and kinetics
of ‘Glycine’ and ‘2-Hydroxyglutarate’ as indicator
of glioma aggressiveness and its role in patient survival. Biochemical
heterogeneity of gliomas is predictive of patient survival.
In a parallel study on aging and dementia, we observe that a subset of the aging
population maintains the cognitive abilities with minimal structural changes
with aging while another subset of population transforms to mild cognitive
impairment and dementia with manifold structural variations. Most importantly is
heterogeneity of white matter lesions arising because of small vessel infarcts.
With the application of advanced neuroimaging and AI methods in aging and
dementia patients, we establish that the ‘Brain Age’ pattern is
distinct from that of Chronological age. For the first time we shoe that Only
Three MRI features are that includes quantity of small vessel pathologies are
definitive of Brain age and Cognitive status.

## IL2.8. Glutamate Receptor Trafficking: Ins and Outs

Samarjit Bhattacharyya1

1Department of Biological Science, Indian Institute of Science
Education and Research (IISER), Mohali, Himachal Pradesh, India
In the brain, a variety of neurotransmitters and neuromodulators act on target
receptors to activate cellular signalling events which transfer information from
one cell to the next. Normal signalling depends on accurate localisation of such
receptors in specific regions of the cell, and the process of receptor
trafficking plays a critical role in controlling this localisation. In addition,
in case of most G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), receptor trafficking also
plays crucial roles in the regulation of the receptor. Despite the obvious
significance of this process, we still know very little about the molecular
mechanisms that mediate trafficking of neurotransmitter receptors in the brain.
Our labs specific interest lies in studying the cellular and molecular
mechanisms that regulate the trafficking of glutamate receptors in the central
nervous system. These trafficking events are thought to be critical for
virtually all forms of experience-dependent plasticity, including learning and
memory and are believed to play crucial role in various neuropsychiatric
disorders. The talk will be focused on the trafficking of glutamate receptors in
neurons and implications of these processes in the brain.

## Oral Sessions

## OR1.1. Complexity of a Mendelian Disease: Can Variants in
ATP7B and Modifier Loci Regulate Cognitive Decline and
Other Neurological Phenotypes in Wilson Disease?

Arpan Saha1, Shubhrajit Roy2, Rittika
Dutta1, Samragni De1, Bratati Dutta1,
Tithi Dutta1, Arnab Gupta3, Shaswata
Mukherjee4, Jharna Ray5, Arkaprava
Chakroborty6, S.K. Das6, Ashish
Bavdekar7, Prasanta K Gangopadhay8,
AtanuBiswas6, Kunal Ray9 and Mainak
Sengupta1

1Department of Genetics, University of Calcutta, West Bengal,
India
2Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
3Indian Institute of Science Education & Research Kolkata, West
Bengal, India
4Kalyani Mahavidyalaya, Kalyani, West Bengal, India
5S.N. Pradhan Centre for Neurosciences, Kolkata, West Bengal,
India
6Bangur Institute of Neurosciences, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
7KEM Hospital, Pune, Maharashtra, India
8KPC Medical College & Hospital, Kolkata, India
9Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda Educational and Research Institute,
Howrah, West Bengal, India
Background: Wilson Disease (WD), caused by mutations in
ATP7B, is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of copper
metabolism, characterised by a wide-range of neurological symptoms including
cognitive decline. This study aims screening variants in ATP7B
and other modifier loci in an attempt to correlate them with phenotypic
differences in WD patients.
Materials and Methods: The neurological symptoms of the patients
were evaluated by expert neurologists; cognitive decline assessed through
ACEIII, VLT and FAB; genotyping was done through PCR/RFLP/sequencing approach
followed by statistical analysis to correlate the genotype with the
phenotype.
Results: Analysis of the 85 ATP7B mutations and
genotype data of 12 potential modifier polymorphisms of APOE, PRNP,
BDNF, DRD2 and HFE revealed

ATP7B
 p. Ala1241Val to be associated with
risk of dysarthria; 
APOE
 rs429358 CC-CC/CT with
cognitive impairment and dystonia, 
BDNF
 rs6265
AA/AG with tremor, cognitive impairment and drooling and

BDNF
 rs56164415 CT/TT genotypes as
protective to dysarthria. 
DBH
 rs1108580 AG,

HFE
 rs2071303 CC and

DBH
 rs1611115 TT genotypes were associated
with severity in cognitive decline.
Discussion and Conclusions: Analysis of ATP7B
mutations alone have not been able to provide effective genotype to phenotype
correlation in WD. Clinical heterogeneity in neurological phenotypes including
cognitive decline among the patients may be attributed to the presence of
different modifier genes implicated in copper metabolism and various
neurological diseases having overlapping symptoms with WD. Concordant to our
finding, variations in 
DBH, BDNF
 and

APOE
 have been associated with cognitive
dysfunction in different neurological disorders.

## Acknowledgement
This study is supported by DST-CSRI, G.O.I and Presenting author is supported
by UGC-SRFship, From G.O.I.

## OR1.2. Unravelling Hippocampal Proteome Dynamics in Hepatic Encephalopathy
Rat Model Through Label-Free LC-MS/MS Profiling

Papia Acharjee1, Vishal Vikram Singh1, Shambhu Kumar
Prasad1 and Arup Acharjee2

1Department of Zoology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar
Pradesh, India
2Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Allahabad University,
Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Hepatic Encephalopathy, a metabolic brain disorder
results in cognitive and motor deficits. Hyperammonemia-led increased
glutamate-NMDAR overstimulation is the key pathogenic factor in HE pathogenesis.
However, targeting NMDAR for therapy is unfeasible due to its vital role in
brain function. To uncover alternative non-NMDAR therapeutic option, proteomic
profiling of MoHE rat’s hippocampal proteome were conducted using
high-resolution accurate mass spectrometry.
Materials and Methods: Adult male rats were divided into control and
MoHE group. MoHE was induced by thioacetamide (100mg/kg bw, i.p) treatment while
the control group received normal saline for 10 days once daily. Hippocampal
proteins were extracted from both groups and analysed using label-free based
LC-MS/MS. MetaboAnalyst was used to perform various statistical analysis.
Network and enrichment analysis performed by STRING and Metascape.
Results: We identified 2175 proteins, 47 of which exhibited
significant alterations at threshold of 1.25-fold change and p≤0.05 in
the HE hippocampus. Out of 47differentialy expressed, 42 were upregulated and 5
were downregulated.
Discussion: Several key proteins stood out among the top upregulated
proteins, including Homer-2, Y-box-binding protein 3, Autophagy-related protein
9A, Focal adhesion kinase 1, Tetraspanin 2 and CD9. Validation of these findings
was performed through various methods including qPCR, western blotting and
immunofluorescence. Focal adhesion kinase 1, Tetraspanin 2 and CD9 showed
increased expression in the hippocampus of MoHE compared to controls rats.
STRING analysis showed the interaction pattern among significantly altered
proteins. Pathway enrichment analysis using Metascape revealed enriched
biological processes in the central nervous system (CNS) that may be disrupted
during MoHE. These processes include gliogenesis, astrocyte differentiation,
myelination regulation and protein phosphorylation.

## Acknowledgments
Financial assistance: DST-SERB Grant (ECR/2017/001018), IOE BHU grant ((IoE
Dev. Scheme-6031) to PA, Project assistant fellowship and ICMR SRF to SKP,
UGC-SRF TO VVS.

## Facilities
Prof SK Trigun Lab (Department of Zoology, BHU), CDC BHU, DBT-ISLS, BHU and
Prof Sanjeeva Srivastava, BSBE, IIT Bombay for MASSFIITB facility
(BT/PR13114/INF/22/206/2015).

## OR1.3. Age-related Qualitative Morphological Changes in the Human Stria
Vascularis

Silka Agarwal1, Charanjeet Kaur2, Tara Sankar
Roy3, Daya Nand Bhardwaj4 and Tony George
Jacob1

1Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS), New Delhi, India
2Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Massachusetts Eye
and Ear, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
3Department of Anatomy, North DMC Medical College & Hindu Rao
Hospital, New Delhi, India
4Department of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology, AIIMS, New Delhi,
India
Background: Stria vascularis (SV) is a vascular epithelium in the
cochlea that secretes endolymph. Melanosomes are brown-coloured pigments that
maintain the ionic concentration of endolymph through ATP-pumps. They also help
in the formation of blood-strial barrier and reducing oxidative stress. Here, we
studied qualitative, age-related changes in human strial melanosomes.
Materials and Methods: Ten human cochleae, from deceased persons
aged 13–74 years were fixed, decalcified, dehydrated and embedded in
celloidin. Transverse sections were cut and stained with hematoxylin and eosin.
These sections were studied under a microscope.
Results: The SV was seen as stratified cuboidal epithelium with
three types of cells- basal, intermediate and marginal (from peripheral to
luminal). More melanosomes were seen in the intermediate layer. The number of
melanosomes appeared to increase with advancing age of the deceased. The blood
vessels, strial ligament, organ of Corti did not display any overt morphological
changes.
Discussion and Conclusion: The number of melanosomes increased with
increasing age, probably to compensate for the increasing oxidative damage
associated with ageing. This may be a useful morphological indicator of the
age-related loss of hair cells and spiral ganglion neurons due to oxidative and
excitotoxic damage that results in presbycusis, that is, age-related hearing
loss. We would like to further quantitate any relationship between the number of
melanosomes and the number of hair cells in the organ of Corti.

## Acknowledgments
This study was undertaken as part of the dissertation work for the MD degree
of Dr Silka Agarwal and was thus funded by the Department of Anatomy, AIIMS,
New Delhi.

## OR1.4. Network Pharmacology: Integrating System Biology with Computer-aided
Drug Design for Dealing with Neurological Disorders

Prachi Srivastava1

1Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University, Lucknow, Uttar
Pradesh, India
The human nervous system is a complex of several genes and proteins. Diseases of
the brain are multifactorial that get triggered by several proteins. Management
and treatment of such neurodevelopmental, neuropsychic, and neurodegenerative
diseases require a holistic approach. Thus, the traditional approach of
one-drug, one-target for the management of diseases has faced some serious
challenges in the past. Recent studies have now demonstrated network
pharmacology as the more promising approach for dealing with neurological
disorders. Network pharmacology is a new discipline that uses networks and
systems to identify key targets in a disease. This has revolutionised the
classic concept of computer aided drug designing by emphasising on targeting
multiple genes with a single drug. This is a more practical approach since
biological components are involved extensively in intricate and complex
relationships, thus it becomes more essential to use network biology concepts
when learning about biology. Network biology works on the principle that drugs
can effectively combat multifactorial diseases with the help of the novel
strategic approach. System biology methods help look at the disease as a whole
and target multiple proteins associated with the disease directly or indirectly.
The system biology-based drug targets aid in focusing on the vital biological
pathways that contribute to the development and progression of the disease.
Network pharmacology is now being extensively used for several disorders like
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, autism, intellectual disability and
epilepsy. Therefore, by using multiple system biology approaches more effective
and precise drugs can be formulated for dealing with several neurological
disorders.

## OR1.5. Non-permitted Food Colorants Induced Neurotoxicity in Rats: A
Behavioural, Neurochemical and Histological Study

Rajesh Singh Yadav1 and Pronit Biswas2

1School of Forensic Science, National Forensic Sciences University (An
Institution of National Importance), Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India
2Department of Forensic Science, School of Basic and Applied Sciences,
ADAMAS University, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
Background: Non-permitted Food Colorants (NPFCs) are prohibited due
to health concerns, but it is still claimed that they are injudiciously used,
particularly in the developing countries. Continuous use raises concerns about
adverse health effects in exposed individuals.
Material and Methods: The present study designed to investigate the
effects of 3 NPFCs (metanil yellow – MY, malachite green – MG and
sudan III – SIII) on neurobehavioural, neurochemicals, mitochondrial
dysfunction, oxidative stress and histological changes in brain regions of rats.
Results: Rats were treated with MY (430 mg/kg), MG (13.75
mg/kg), SIII (250 mg/kg) and mixture (YGR) (MY 143.33 + MG 4.52 + SIII 83.33
mg/kg) p.o. for 60 days showed a significant decrease in grip strength, motor
activity, learning and memory impairments as compared to controls. A significant
increase in the lipid peroxidation and decrease in the level of reduced
glutathione, activity of catalase and superoxide dismutase were observed in
corpus striatum, hippocampus and cerebellum in these rats. A significant
decrease in the activity of acetylcholinesterase (AchE), monoamine oxidase
– B (MAO-B), mitochondrial complex I and II were also observed in NPFCs
treated groups.
Discussion and Conclusions: Further, the histological damages to the
neurons in the brain regions evident for the toxic effects of NPFCs resulted
into the behavioural dysfunctions in rats linked with other biochemical and
neurochemical alterations. The findings of the present work suggested that
chronic exposure of NPFCs caused neurotoxicity involving behavioural
impairments, biochemical and neurochemical alterations, mitochondrial
dysfunction and neuronal cell damages in rat brain.

## OR1.6. Assessment of Short-term Memory Loss in Recovered COVID-19 Patients:
Indications from a Two-year Follow-up Study

R.K. Jha1, G. Kumar1, P. Dwivedy1, A.
Asghar1, R.K. Narayan2, S.K. Ghosh1, R.
Kirti
3
, D. Rai4, L. Tiwari5,
A. Banerjee6, A. Sarfaraz7 and A.
Kumar1

1Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences Patna,
Bihar, India
2Department of Anatomy, ESIC-MCH, Bihta, Bihar, India
3Department of Medicine, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
Patna, Bihar, India
4Department of Pulmonary Medicine, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences Patna, Bihar, India
5Department of Pediatrics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
Patna, Bihar, India
6Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
Patna, Bihar, India
7Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
Patna, Bihar, India
Background: Short-term memory loss as a persistent symptom reported
in recovered COVID-19 patients. We assessed post discharge persistence of this
symptom in hospitalised patients.
Methods: A total of 209 hospitalised patients of COVID-19 followed
up for two years post discharge. Patients were verbally interviewed through a
telephonic call and asked about the presence of the symptoms confirming the loss
of short- term memory, such as increased forgetfulness or a problem with
retaining a piece of recent information.
Results: The loss of short-term memory was present in
∼11% (24/207) of the patients. At the end of one year: the symptom
persisted in ∼87.5% (21/24) of patients. At the end of second
year: 25% (6/24) completely recovered, ∼21% (5/24) reported
improvement, and in 42% (10/24) symptom was persistent. One patient died
during study and two did not respond to the interview call.
Conclusion: There is significant improvement or remission in short
term memory loss in the long COVID patients after two years of hospital
discharge.

## Acknowledgements
Funding for this study received from All India Institute of Medical
Sciences-Patna.

## OR2.1. Expression of Pax3 in Human Neural Tube Defects

Swati Tiwari1 and Sabita Mishra1

1Department of Anatomy, Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi,
India
Background: The mechanisms encompassing neural tube formation have
not been completely understood. Studies in mice suggest role of Pax3 gene which
is expressed in early neurogenesis in dorsal half of neural rube. This gene
regulates neuroepihelial proliferation. There is limited literature on the role
of Pax3 in human neural tube defects.
Materials and Methods: Aborted foetuses with neural tube defects and
age matched controls were obtained from Department of obstetrics and gynaecology
at Lok Nayak Hospital, New Delhi, after obtaining consent and ethical approval
from institutional ethical committee. The spinal cord was processed for
immunohistochemistry and the expression of Pax 3 in the foetuses with neural
tube defects was compared with the expression in normal foetuses.
Results: The expression of Pax 3 was visibly more in normal foetuses
in comparison to the foetuses with neural tube defects. The difference in
expression was marked especially in the dorsal aspect of the proliferating
neural epithelium.
Discussion and Conclusions: Pax3 functions to maintain the
neuroepithelium in a proliferative, undifferentiated state, allowing neurulation
to proceed as suggested by several studies in mice. Reduced expression in the
foetuses with neural tube defects indicates that it has an important role in
neurulation in humans as well.

## Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the Government of NCT of Delhi for providing us with the
funds for our project under the scheme ‘Strengthening of research at
MAMC’.

## OR2.2. Association Between the Minutes Spent on Smart Mobile Phone Before
Falling Asleep and Sleep Quality

Pasang Tshering Dukpa1, Smita Sahu2 and Afreen Begum
H. Itagi3

1Department of Physiology, A.B.N. Seal College, Cooch Behar, West
Bengal, India
2District Hospital, Baloda Bazar, Chhattisgarh, India
3Department of Physiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Mangalagiri, Andhra Pradesh, India
Background: examine the association between mobile phone usage
before falling asleep and: (a) sleep duration, (b) subjective sleep quality and
(c) excessive daytime sleepiness in a sample from RIMS, Raipur.
Material and Method: Study was carried out in RIMS, Raipur, during
the months of July–August’ 2018. A total of 100 participants were
recruited in this study. Sleep quality was assessed with the help of the
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index questionnaire. Chi square test was used for
comparing demographic characters. Correlations between mobile phone usage before
falling asleep and sleep variables were computed using bivariate Pearson
correlation analyses.
Result: Of the 100 participants, 51 (51 %) had PSQI
≥5, reflecting poor sleep quality. A higher use of mobile phone before
falling asleep was significantly associated with a poor sleep quality as a
component of PSQI questionnaire (p = .01). The minutes spent on
smart mobile device before a falling asleep had a significant positive
correlation with the Latency period (p < .05) and
daytime dysfunction (p < .01) and sleep disturbance
(p < .05).
Discussion and Conclusions: This study revealed the evidence of the
impact or effects of smart mobile devices on sleep quality. Day time dysfunction
was significantly related to sleep disturbance. Since health trainees are
required to be alert & attentive during learning period so that they acquire
professional level knowledge and skills of patient care, day time dysfunction
and bad sleep quality may lead to significant stress and mental health
problem.

## Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ref no.
2018-01706).

## OR2.3. Mechanisms Underlying the Development of the Axonal Actin-spectrin
Membrane Periodic Skeleton (MPS)

Shivani Bodas1, Ashish Mishra2, Pramod
Pullarkat2 and Aurnab Ghose1

1Indian Institute of Science, Education and Research (IISER-Pune),
Biology, Pune, India
2Raman Research Institute, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
Background: The advent of super-resolution microscopy has revealed
the presence of a membrane- associated periodic actin-spectrin cytoskeleton
(MPS) precisely located beneath the axonal plasma membrane, repeating every ~190
nm. This periodic arrangement, bound to the plasma membrane, is observed to
respond to extracellular stimuli by recruiting and co-localising G
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and cell
adhesion molecules (CAMs) to the membrane.
Method, Results and Discussion: Our previous work highlighted the
importance of the Actin-spectrin Membrane Periodic Skeleton (MPS) to be crucial
for buffering axonal rest tension. However, the mechanisms underlying MPS
formation and remodelling during neuronal development remain unclear. To
investigate the mechanism of MPS development, we measured spectrin dynamics
using FRAP. Interestingly, very little recovery was observed for spectrin even
at DIV 1, when MPS was not prevalent. This suggests the recruitment of spectrin
to a stable structure before the establishment of the MPS. Lat-A-treated axons
revealed a faster initial recovery phase. The mobile fraction in early-stage
axons (DIV1-2) was higher than that in the controls, although this was not the
case for late-stage axons (DIV4). These experiments suggest the recruitment of
spectrin to a stable network via a combination of actin and membrane binding
which is later elaborated to form the MPS. This hypothesis is being tested using
specific deletion constructs in spectrin knockout cells and is expected to
reveal the sequence of interactions resulting in the development of the MPS. We
have shown that MPS prevalence in chick DRG axons increases with the
developmental stage (DIV 1-4; days in vitro). This increase in prevalence over
time correlates with an increase in axonal rest tension. Perturbation of actin
and microtubule dynamics affects MPS prevalence and stability and reveals the
role of microtubule stability in MPS formation and maintenance.

## Acknowledgements
Project fund -SERB, Fellowship-IISER-Pune; IISER-Pune microscopy facility,
RRI, Bangalore.

## OR2.4. Proteomic Profiling of the Aging Rat Hippocampus: Insights from
Machine Learning and High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry

Arup Acharjee1, Vishal Vikram Singh2, Shambhu Kumar
Prasad2 and Papia Acharjee2

1Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Allahabad University,
Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh, India
2Department of Zoology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar
Pradesh, India
Background: Biological aging is associated with an exponential risk
of cognitive decline and neurodegenerative disorders. Therefore, obtaining
deeper insights into the healthy aging process in the brain and exploring novel
strategies to achieve healthy brain aging and prevent neurodegenerative diseases
are urgently needed. Thus, we intend to understand the hippocampal proteome
dynamics in aging rats by High-Resolution Accurate Mass Spectrometry
(HRAMS).
Materials and Methods: Young and old male, Charles Foster rats were
taken for the experiment. Each group contained 6 rats. Hippocampal protein was
extracted and processed for LC-MS/MS study followed by protein identification.
The obtained protein dataset was analysed using a Machine learning approach and
statistical analysis by Metaboanalyst, and functional analysis by Metascape.
Results: A total of 1021 proteins were processed for machine
learning and statistical analysis. Some important features identified by random
forest are Neuronal cell adhesion molecule 1, 14-3-3 protein gamma, MICOS
complex subunit Mic60 and 14-3-3 protein zeta/delta. Statistical analysis
identified a total of 278 age-associated dysregulated proteins (log2 fold change
and the p-value threshold of 0.05), among which 123 were upregulated and 155
were downregulated proteins. Few examples: ERC protein 2, Protein piccolo,
Plectin-1 were upregulated and Septin-5, Mitogen-activated protein 1 and 14-3-3
protein were downregulated in aging rats.
Discussion: Our findings highlight critical proteins as essential
players in the age-associated hippocampal proteome dynamics. Through network
analysis tools, upregulated proteins are involved in modulation of chemical
synaptic transmission, synapse organisation, monoatomic ion transmembrane
transport, with neuron projection development being most significant. Pathways
that were uniquely identified in the 155 downregulated proteins are cellular
detoxification, response to reactive oxygen species, intracellular protein
transport and metabolism of nitric oxide. The comprehensive analysis of all 278
proteins dysregulated in the aging rats identified neutrophil dysregulation,
cellular response to stress, aerobic respiration and Signalling by Rho GTPase to
be highly significant.

## Acknowledgments
Financial assistance: DST-SERB Grant (ECR/2017/001018), IOE BHU grant ((IoE
Dev. Scheme-6031) to PA, ICMR SRF to SKP, UGC-SRF TO VVS.

## Facilities
Prof SK Trigun Lab (Department of Zoology, BHU), CDC BHU, DBT-ISLS, BHU and
Prof Sanjeeva Srivastava, BSBE, IIT Bombay for MASSFIITB facility
(BT/PR13114/INF/22/206/2015).

## OR2.5. Disease-modifying Effect of Quercetin in Iron-induced Experimental
Model of Post-traumatic Epilepsy

Chandra Prakash1, Shyam Sunder Rabidas1, Shweta
Saran1 and Deepak Sharma1

1School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,
India
Background: Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological
disorders afflicting people all over the world. The traditional antiepileptic
medications are known to cause drug toxicity and cognitive impairment. Thus, the
present study was intended explore the disease-modifying effect of quercetin, a
flavonoid in the rat model of post-traumatic epilepsy.
Materials and Methods: Male Wistar rats were given an intra-cortical
injection of FeCl3 (5 µl of 100 mM solution). After 15 days, quercetin
was administered orally for 15 consecutive days. Electrophysiology, Morris water
maze test, open field test, histopathology and immunofluorescence analysis were
employed to evaluate the disease-modifying potential of quercetin.
Results: The results showed that quercetin treatment distinctly
reduced occurrence seizures and cognitive impairment in epileptic rats.
Histopathological examinations depicted recovery of degenerating neurons and
cell death in the cortical and hippocampal regions of epileptic rats by
quercetin treatment. Furthermore, immunofluorescence analysis revealed
attenuation of neuronal loss and glial activation both in the cortex and
hippocampus regions.
Discussion: Overall, our observations suggest that quercetin
possesses substantial neuroprotective effect in the epileptic brain. Quercetin
may have decreased the number of neuro-degenerating neurons and cell death.
Furthermore, the flavonoid may have escorted an anti-seizure effect by
ameliorating neuronal loss and glial activation in experimental model of
post-traumatic epilepsy.

## Acknowledgement
The work was supported by the Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi
in the form of Research Associate (RA) Fellowship
(3/1/3/123/Neuro/2019-NCD-I) to C.P.

## OR2.6. Impact of Quercetin on Endothelial Cells of Retinal Capillaries in
Diabetic Rats

P. Kumar1, J. Kumari1, Ankita1, B.P.
Sinha1, B. Sharma2, L.K. Arya1, M.
Kumar3, T.C. Nag2, M. Nath4 and T.
Velpandian4

1Regional Institute of Ophthalmology, Indira Gandhi Institute of
Medical Sciences, Patna, Bihar, India
2Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India
3Central Animal House, Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences,
Patna, Bihar, India
4Department of Ocular pharmacology, Dr Rajendra Prasad Center for
Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi,
India
Background: Diabetic Retinopathy(DR)is one of the leading causes of
blindness caused due to hyperglycaemia. Uncontrolled hyperglycaemia causes
oxidative stress to retina leading to leaking of blood vessels. ROS
overproduction causes pro-inflammatory cytokines to elevate, endothelial cells
degeneration and pericyte death. Quercetin being an anti-oxidant, possess ROS
scavenging property, holds potentiality to take care of the oxidative damage
caused due to hyperglycaemia.
Materials and Methods: Diabetes was considered to exist in
streptozotocin(45mgKg-1BW)-induced rats with blood glucose levels of 300mgdL-1.
Once diabetes was maintained, quercetin was administered once a week for 16
weeks (50mgKg-1BW). To observe morphological changes in the retina, fundoscopy
was performed. Following the histopathological evaluations, TEM was performed to
look for ultrastructural alterations. To measure the levels of TNF- and IL-1,
ELISA was performed.
Results: ELISA findings of retinal homogenate showed significant
increase inIL-1β (p ≤ .001) and TNF-α
(p ≤ .01) levels in diabetic retina as compared to
control and quercetin treated. Histopathological findings revealed significant
cell degeneration in INL of diabetic retina in comparison to control and
qctn-treated (DR & Control p ≤ .01) (DR & DR+
Qctn p ≤ .001). TEM studies of retinal capillaries
showed significant degeneration of endothelial cell degeneration and pericyte
death in diabetic retina as compared to control and quercetin treated (p≤
0.001).
Discussion and Conclusions: Considering the above findings
Microaneurysms, Dot and Blot haemorrhages observed in diabetic retina are
results of endothelial cells degeneration and pericyte death in the retinal
capillaries. Increased levels of IL-1β and TNF-αadds on to the
cascading of oxidative stress damage further worsening the DR progression.
Quercetin treated retina showed significant reduction in DR symptoms and
appeared similar to control group, leading to improved vision. Hence quercetin
appear to improve DR. Other markers of endothelial cell degeneration yet to be
explored.

## Acknowledgements
Funding agency- SERB, New Delhi (project code: SRG/2021/000913), TEM work
done at SAIF, AIIMS, New Delhi.

## OR2.7. The Neuroprotective Effects of Withania somnifera on
Age-related Cognitive Decline-A Study of Oxidative Stress and Memory Function in
Mice Brain

Manju Lata1 and A. Jain1

1Department of Zoology, MSJ College, Bharatpur, Rajasthan, India
Background: Aging is a natural process that affects all living
organisms. In humans, it is associated with a decline in cognitive function,
including memory loss, learning difficulties and impaired attention. These
age-related cognitive impairments are caused by various factors, including
oxidative stress and decreased neurogenesis. Withania
somnifera, commonly known as ashwagandha, has been used for centuries
in traditional Ayurvedic medicine to treat various ailments, including cognitive
decline. In this study, we investigate the neuroprotective effects of Withania
somnifera on age-related cognitive decline in mice.
Material and Method: Male Swiss albino mice aged 8 months were used
in this study. The mice were divided into three groups: control, aging and
aging+Withania somnifera. The aging+Withania
somnifera group received Withania somnifera
extract (200 mg/kg body weight/day) for six weeks. Behavioural tests were
conducted, and oxidative stress markers were measured in the brain tissue of the
mice.
Result: The aging+Withania somnifera group showed a
significant decrease in escape latency and swimming distance compared to the
aging group. The aging+Withania somnifera group also showed a
significant increase in SOD and CAT levels and a significant decrease in MDA
levels compared to the aging group. The aging+Withania
somnifera group also showed a significant increase in Ach and ChAT
levels compared to the aging group.
Discussion and Conclusion: The results of this study suggest that
Withania somnifera extract has neuroprotective effects
against age-related cognitive decline. This suggests that W.
somnifera can ameliorate oxidative stress-related changes in
behaviour and that by doing so they might promote healthy aging in humans.

## Acknowledgement
Thanks to UGC, New Delhi, (UGC Project
IDRA-2016-18-GE-RAJ-7281).

## OR2.8. Olfml3 Could Act as a Central Molecule in the Regulation of
Microglia-mediated Brain Immunity

Himanshi Yadav1, Jaldhi1, Shweta1, Amrita
Bakshi2, Anamika2 and Shashank Kumar
Maurya1

1Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Zoology,
Faculty of Science, University of Delhi, India
2Department of Zoology, Ramjas College, University of Delhi, India
Background: Olfml3 belongs to a family of olfactomedin
domain-containing proteins. The expression of Olfml3 is confined to microglia in
the brain. However, the role and importance of Olfml3 in the brain are still
elusive. Therefore, the present study evaluates the possible involvement of
Olfml3 in the regulation of microglia-mediated brain immunity.
Materials and Methods: Neuroinflammation was induced by
intraperitoneal injection of LPS (500 µg/kg) for 7 days in adult male
BALB/c mice. An equal volume of saline was given to the control group. The qPCR
and western blotting were done to check expression, IHC for co- localisation and
in silico analysis for Olfml3 interacting protein.
Results: The expression of Olfml3 was found to be increased on
induction of neuroinflammation. Olfml3 was found to co-localise with Tmem119 and
Iba1. Tmem119, Sall1, Iba1, P2ry12, Siglec-h, Csfr1, Trem2, Cx3cr1, Gpr34, Bmp1,
Sparc identified as putative interactors of Olfml3. Based on its interacting
partners, Olfml3 has been analysed to be possibly involved in the regulation of
major biological functions in the brain including neuroinflammation,
neurogenesis and synaptogenesis in the brain of mice.
Discussion and Conclusion: The expression levels of Bdnf,
Tgf-β1 and Tnf-α were assessed to confirm inflammation in the
brain following LPS treatment in mice. Further, the levels of Olfml3 and Iba1
were found to increase while Tmem119 expression decreased in the brain by LPS
treatment. By interacting with proteins of microglia, neurotropic factors and
inflammatory response genes, Olfml3 could act as a central molecule in the
regulation of microglia-mediated brain immunity.

## Acknowledgements
Financial support from the Institution of Eminence (IoE), University of Delhi
is gratefully acknowledged.

## OR2.9. Gasdermin D Inhibition Confers Protection from Neuroinflammation and
Anxiogenic Behaviour in a Rodent Model of Anxiety Disorder

Soni Tiwari1,2, Santi Ranjan Atta3, Zaidan
Mohammed3, Shweta Kaushik1, Amla
Chopra2, Itender Singh1 and Simantini
Ghosh3

1Ambedkar Centre for Biomedical Research, Delhi University, Delhi,
India
2Department of Zoology, Dayalbagh Educational Institute, Agra, Uttar
Pradesh, India
3Department of Psychology, Ashoka University, Sonipat, Haryana,
India
Stress and anxiety disorders are complex and leading mental health problems.
Stress and anxiety disorders are associated with a chronic increase in
pro-inflammatory mediators such as interleukin- 1beta and NLRP3 inflammasome in
brain. The present study investigated the mechanism underlying induction of
interleukin-1beta and inflammasome pathway in a rodent model of anxiety
disorder.
Materials and Methods: The experimental rodents were subjected to
physical restraint and underwater trauma to induce anxiety disorder. Gasdermin D
was inhibited with necrosulfonamide and disulfiram, and thereafter animals were
assessed for anxious behaviour using open field test, light–dark test,
elevated plus maze test and fear conditioning and social interaction.
Results: We found the induction of caspase 11 and cleavage of
gasdermin D, the downstream mediators of inflammasome pathway, in the brains of
rodents with anxiety disorder. We found that inhibition of gasdermin D with
disulfiram as well as necrosulfonamide ameliorated the stress induced anxiogenic
behaviour. Further, disulfiram inhibited the release of interleukin-1beta in the
brain. A combinational treatment with Ibrutinib, a BTK-inhibitor and disulfiram
enhanced the protection from stress-induced anxiogenic behaviour.
Discussion and Conclusions: Cleaved gasdermin D forms membrane
pores, leading to cytokine release and enhancement of inflammatory cell
signalling in the brain. Our study has identified gasdermin D as an essential
element for enhanced and prolonged sustenance of IL1β signalling
following stress induced anxiety. Further studies are required to explore the
potential of inhibition of gasdermin D, especially disulfiram, an FDA approved
drug for addiction, as novel targets for the treatment of PTSD and anxiety
disorders.

## Acknowledgement
This study was supported by intramural research grant from Ashoka University
to S.G; Brain Aneurysm Foundation and Ramalingaswamy Fellowship to I.S., and
a graduate student fellowship from Ashoka University to Z.M.

## OR2.10. Outcome of EP2 Antagonist Treatment to a Two-hit Mouse Model of
Alzheimer’s Disease Depends on the Mouse Strain and the Sex

Avijit Banik1,2, Radhika Amaradhi1, Michael Sau1,
Raymond Dingledine1 and Thota Ganesh1

1Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, School of Medicine,
Emory University. Atlanta, Georgia, USA
2Department of Biotechnology, GITAM School of Science, GITAM deemed to
be University, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, India
Background: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the largest spectrum
of dementia, and is a chronic condition that severely impairs memory, thinking
and social abilities, negatively impacting the daily life of the
Prostaglandin-E2 (PGE2) receptor EP2, which is activated downstream of
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) signalling, emerged as a neuroinflammatory target in
several neurodegenerative diseases including AD.
Materials and Methods: Here we investigated the effect of a
selective EP2 antagonist on behavioural deficits in 5xFAD transgenic mice
subjected to mild, systemic inflammation by lipopolysaccharide (LPS). We have
exposed a cohort of 5xFAD mice in C57BL/6 and B6SJL backgrounds with once-a-week
intraperitoneal injection of LPS (0.5 mg/kg or 1 mg/kg) and treated with either
vehicle or EP2 antagonist TG11-77. HCl (100 mg/kg/day) for 12 weeks in drinking
water.
Results: Complete blood count (CBC) analysis was performed to
demonstrate that LPS induced an anaemia of inflammation, and induction of
inflammatory gene expression (mRNA) in these mice brains. TG11-77.HCl improves
memory retention both in single hit: environmental and two hit mice. Further,
TG11-77.HCl ameliorates mRNA expression of many proinflammatory chemokines and
cytokines in two-hit male cortex in B6SJL backgrounds while females showed
significant improvement in C57BL/6 strains. This was corroborated by attenuated
amyloid pathology in two-hit B6SJL male brain, but no alteration was found in
female brains in C57BL/6 mice.
Discussion and Conclusion: This study reveals that EP2 antagonism is
a prudent therapeutic strategy in reducing brain inflammation and behavioural
deficits in Alzheimer’s brain when it is subjected to an external
secondary hit of neuroinflammation. But these outcomes are strain and sex
specific.

## Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the NIH funds NIA Grant: U01AG052460 (T.G.) and
NINDS Grant: R21/R33 NS101167 (T.G.).

## Young Scientist Colloquium-1

## YS1.1. SIRT3 Activation by Honokiol Restores Mitochondrial Dysfunction and
Cognitive Impairment during MoHE Led Excitotoxicity

Anamika1,2 and Surendra K. Trigun1

1Biochemistry Section, Department of Zoology, Institute of Science,
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
2Department of Zoology, Ramjas College, University of Delhi, India
Background: Excessive glutamate receptor stimulation results in
calcium overload and mitochondrial dysfunction. Which in turn results in
neuronal aberration; key to several neurodegenerative disorders. Therefore, we
attempted to seek neuroprotection by re-establishing the mitochondrial stature
and function by targeting a conserved mitochondrial deacetylase, SIRT3.
Material and Method: The studies were undertaken in the hippocampus
of the neurobehavioural characterised model for ammonia neuroexcitotoxicity
induced moderate grade HE (MoHE; induced by 100 mg/Kg bw TAA for 10days) rats,
post treated with SIRT3 activator Honokiol (HKL) (10 mg/Kg b.w.) for 7 days.
Samples obtained were processed for biochemical and histological studies.
Results: The results suggested that honokiol treatment ensued
restoration of SIRT3 expression and activity which were consistent with recovery
of mitochondrial dysfunction by modulating Ca2+ influx and the factors involved
in maintenance of mitochondrial integrity and bioenergetics. Direct evidence of
SIRT3 activation led prevention of neurodegeneration is evident from the
normalisation of neuroarchitectural parameters of the CA1 pyramidal neurons and
neurobehavioural impairments in MoHE rats.
Discussion and Conclusion: Mitochondrial SIRT3 is a highly conserved
bonafide metabolic sensor which plays crucial roles in
maintaining mitochondrial structure and function. Our findings indicate that
SIRT3 activation could recover the deranged mitochondrial integrity mainly by
modulating critical transcription factors FoxO3a and PGC1α. This is
consistent with recovery in the deranged neuronal structures and
neurobehavioural impairments. In is evident that SIRT3 could be a potent
pharmacological target in protecting mitochondrial integrity during MoHE
pathogenesis.

## Acknowledgement
This work was financially supported by a DST project to SKT and award of
CSIR-SRF fellowship to Anamika. The instrumentation facilities provided by
CAS and DST FIST grants to Zoology and DBT-BHU ISLS unit and BHU CDC
facilities are also acknowledged.

## YS1.2. Social and Emotional Behavioural Alterations in Mouse Models Lacking
Presynaptic Bassoon in GABAergic Interneurons

Anil Annamneedi1

1Department of Biotechnology, School of Bioengineering, SRM Institute
of Science and Technology, Kattankulathur, Tamil Nadu, India
Background: A central organiser protein Bassoon at the presynaptic
active zone sites is involved in important functions including homeostatic
synaptic plasticity, proteasomal degradation, autophagy, CA3 mossy fibre synapse
development. Excitatory specific conditional knockout mice for Bassoon
(BsnEmx1cKO; Bsn2lx/lx X Emx1Cre/+)
display immature DG phenotype and enhanced learning.
Materials and Methods: Bassoon role in inhibitory synaptic terminals
has not been addressed so far. To answer this, we have generated conditional KO
of Bassoon in GABAergic interneurons (BsnDlx5/6cKO;
Bsn2lx/lx X Dlx5/6Cre/+) and in Parvalbumin (PV)
interneuronal subtype (BsnPVcKO; Bsn2lx/lx X
PVCre/+) and compared to littermate controls.
Results: Both the BsnDlx5/6cKO and
BsnPVcKO mice display strong social recognition deficits in
3-chambered test, increased stereotype behaviour such as rearing and grooming
behaviours and increased anxiety. Further, BsnDlx5/6cKO mice
display deficits in nest building behaviour in the home cage and a reduced
approach towards females in oestrus or their urine and a lack of ultrasonic
vocalisations. Both the BsnDlx5/6cKO and the
BsnPVcKO mice display altered numbers of PV positive (PV+)
interneurons in hippocampus.
Discussion and Conclusions: Human BSN gene
mutations have been associated with Landau- Kleffner syndrome (an early
childhood epilepsy), intellectual disability, schizophrenia. Together, these
results suggest a disturbed GABAergic function, resulting from selective loss of
Bassoon in GABAergic interneurons including PV sub-type in mice. The pronounced
emotional and social behavioural changes are reminiscent of autism spectrum
disorders, arguing that these models might be helpful to determine the critical
synaptic and network activity changes involved under such neuropathological
conditions.

## Acknowledgement
Sincere thanks to DFG-CRC779 (Neurobiology of Motivated Behaviour); Center
for Behavioural Brain Sciences (CBBS) funded by Saxony-Anhalt and European
Funds for Regional Development (EFRD) (ZS/2016/04/78113); CBBS Science
Campus funded by the Leibniz Association (SAS-2015-LIN-LWC) for the
financial support; Prof. Eckart D. Gundelfinger, Prof. Oliver Stork, Dr
Gürsel Caliskan and Dr Carolina Montenegro-Venegas (Germany) for their
constant scientific support and collaboration and Department of
Biotechnology, School of Bioengineering, SRM IST for providing new platform
to continue the work in India.

## YS1.3. Astaxanthin Protection Against Neuronal Excitotoxicity via Glutamate
Receptor Inhibition and Improvement of Mitochondrial Function

Swapna K.K.1, Madhura Milind Nimonkar1, Suravi
Sasmita Dash1, Bhupesh Mehta1 and Yogananda S.
Markandeya1

1Department of Biophysics, National Institute of Mental Health &
Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
Background: Excitotoxicity, a well-known cause of neurodegenerative
diseases is characterised by excessive release of glutamate, over activation of
glutamate receptors, calcium overload, mitochondrial dysfunction and excessive
reactive oxygen species (ROS) formation. Astaxanthin (AST), a carotenoid
antioxidant protects neurons from excitotoxic injuries. However, the mechanism
of AST in neuroprotection is not clear.
Objective: To understand the role of AST in neuroprotection from
excitotoxicity.
Materials and Methods: Cortical neuronal cultures were prepared from
postnatal day-1Wistar rat pups. Fluorescence imaging was performed to study the
intracellular calcium ([Ca2+]i), ROS, mitochondrial membrane
potential and cell viability by using Fura AM, Dihydro ethidium, Rhodamine-123
and Calcein-AM & Ethidium homodimer. NMDA, AMPA and KA receptor expressions
were evaluated by Western blot.
Results: The AST-pre-treated neurons showed increased cell viability
(53%) upon glutamate exposure compared to controls (34%), and a
significant reduction in [Ca2+]i, mitochondrial calcium, ROS and
mitochondrial depolarisation. AST-treated neurons upon NMDA stimulation showed a
51%reduction in [Ca2+]i, AMPA stimulation showed an inhibition
by 20%; KA showed a reduction by 43%. AST significantly reduced
the protein expression of NMDAR, and AMPAR by 63% and67%
respectively, with no significant change in Kainate receptor expression.
Summary and Conclusion:: AST alleviates glutamate-mediated excessive
elevation in [Ca2+]I and secondary sustained calcium response. AST
modulates Ca2+ influx through the ionotropic glutamate receptors as
well as the protein expression of NMDA and AMPA, however, no change in KA
receptors expression. Inhibition of abnormal ROS formation, mitochondrial
membrane potential and mitochondrial calcium accumulation by AST indicates its
neuroprotective role. In conclusion, AST protects neurons from excitotoxicity by
regulating cytosolic secondary calcium rise and mitochondrial calcium.

## Ethics
Approved by NIMHANS IAEC.

## Funding
SERB-DST Extramural for YSM, UGC fellowship for SKK.

## YS1.4. NOX2 Activation and Alteration in Mitochondrial Dynamics Involved in
Muscle Damage Following Japanese Encephalitis virus Infection

Alok Kumar1, Gajendra Singh1 and Kulwant
Singh2

1Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Department
of Molecular Medicine and Biotechnology, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
2Stem Cell Research Center, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of
Medical Sciences (SGPGIMS), Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Skeletal muscle wasting is a clinically proven pathology
associated with Japanese Encephalitis Virus (JEV) infection; however, underlying
factors for muscle damage are yet to be established. Here, we characterised the
skeletal muscle from JEV-infected mice through histological, biochemical and
molecular analysis.
Materials and Methods: 3-weeks-old suckling BALB/c mice were
intra-cranially infected with the JEV (GP78) strain with 3×106
plaque-forming units (PFU) by stereotaxic intracerebral injection. 7-days
post-infection, tibialis anterior (TA) and extensor digitorum longus (EDL)
muscles were isolated and processed for JE viral copy number, histological,
biochemical and molecular analysis.
Results: Histological analysis of TA and EDL muscles identified
collagen deposition, decreased total nuclei count and increased JE viral copy
number, suggesting JE virus infection causes muscle death and fibrosis. Further,
it is noted damage to skeletal muscle occurs through NOX2-mediated generation of
reactive oxygen species, activation of apoptosis and autophagy. The mitochondria
dynamics (fusion/fission) have been found altered, resulting in a decrease in
total mitochondria copy number.
Discussion and Conclusions: This is the first demonstration showing
JE virus directly infects skeletal muscle and induces muscle cell death by
activating the NOX2-mediated oxidative stress pathway. JE virus infection led to
alterations in mitochondrial dynamics; however, the crosstalk mechanism between
the NOX2 pathway and mitochondrial dynamics needs to be elucidated further.

## Acknowledgements
This study is supported by the Ramalingaswami re-entry fellowship (BT/RLF/Re-
entry/13/2014) from the Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and
Technology, Government of India and Grant-in-aid Scheme of the Department of
Health Research (DHR- GIA; R.11013/66/2021-GIA/HR) to Alok Kumar.

## YS1.5. Pearls in the Lake: Unique Histomorphic Features of Psammoma Bodies in
Human Choroid Plexus

Rajesh Kumar1, Ravi K Narayan2, Banshi
Nath1, Rakesh K. Jha2, Adil Asghar1,
Ashok Kumar Rastogi3 and Ashutosh Kumar1

1Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Patna, Bihar, India
2Department of Anatomy, ESIC Medical College, Bihta, Patna, Bihar,
India
3Department of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology, All India Institute
of Medical Sciences, Patna, Bihar, India
Background: The choroid plexus (ChP) is an indispensable component
for brain homeostasis by regulating the secretion of the cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) and forming blood-CSF barrier. Naturally occurring changes with ageing
within ChP have been noted but data regarding morphological characterisation of
Psammoma bodies (PBs) within ChP is lacking.
Materials and Methods: A preliminary observational study was done
for characterisation of histomorphic features of Psammoma bodies within ChP by
various stains namely haematoxylin and eosin, Masson’s trichrome (MT) and
periodic acid Schiff (PAS). Samples were obtained from bilateral inferior horn
of lateral ventricle of 7 post-mortem human brains after proper consent.
Result: Middle-aged and older individuals exhibited a significant
number of psammoma bodies within ChP. It is characterised by acellular, laminar
structures in the connective tissue. Central heterogeneous calcification area
surrounded by concentric acellular fibrous lamellae with an outermost cellular
layer containing fibroblasts. Fibrous lamellae in blue and fibroblasts nuclei in
black colour were clearly seen by MT staining. Epithelial basement membranes in
pink with blue nuclei of fibroblasts were clearly appreciated by PAS
staining.
Discussion and Conclusion: Because of the increase in the number of
the elderly in the world’s population, much attention is given to the
study of ageing and age-related diseases, including neurodegenerative disorders.
The nature and the mechanism of occurrence of PBs are not fully elucidated, but
it is generally accepted that they represent dystrophic calcifications.
Morphological appearance and characterisation by different staining techniques
would help to differentiate age-related changes from the abnormalities that
imply any pathological process.

## Acknowledgement
We acknowledge the tissue donor and their family for greatest gesture towards
scientific community. No funding was needed for this work.

## YS1.6. A Freshwater Zooplankton, Daphnia sinensis as a
Disease Model System in the Study of Motor Symptoms in Parkinson’s
Disease

Neethumol O.P.1, Prabha Mariam Jacob1, Khurana
S.1, Vignesh O.1, Mullasseril R1, Remya
V.R.1, Usha R.1, Pramod K.1, Chandra
G.1 and Mohanakumar K.P.1

1Inter University Centre for Biomedical Research & Super
Speciality Hospital, Mahatma Gandhi University, Kottayam, Kerala, India
Background: Animal models of neurological diseases are very crucial
for understanding the disease processes, the discovery of biological targets for
diagnosis, and the development of treatment strategies. Parkinson’s
disease (PD) pathophysiology can be characterised well the best animal model is
MPTP-treated non-human primates that replicate all the behavioural syndromes.
Lab-bred rodents, fishes and lower animals such as D. melanogaster, C.
elegans have been used in PD research. In view of the fact that
idiopathic PD forms more than 90% of the population, and all forms of
this disease have heterogenic aetiology and pathology, all types of animal
models are very relevant for understanding PD aetiology and pathogenesis. Lower
animals in research have several advantages such as low cost of maintenance,
very swift reproductive cycle, well-defined neuropathology and behaviours, ease
of genetic manipulation and globally absent animal ethical issues for research
use.
Materials and Methods: Here we have identified a zooplankton
crustacean Daphnia sinensis for characterising PD biology in
terms of behaviour and pathology. Initially we formed a colony of these animals
from a single parent, and these cloned animals were characterised for their
genetic uniqueness and identification by determining the mitochondrial genes,
Cox I and small subunit ribosomal RNA gene.
Results: We effectively used the phototactic behaviour of
Daphnia to characterise the movement-pathophysiology of PD
in them. The PD-neurotoxin MPP+ dose-dependently (1-100 nM) reduced
phototactic movement and speed, which correlated well with diminishing dopamine
levels and its metabolism.
Discussion: We propose here that D. sinensis could
be employed as a useful, valuable and effective model organism in PD research.
The advantages are such studies require inexpensive instruments, laboratory
space and facilities and ease of time.

## Acknowledgement
The presenter is financially supported by UGC JRF, Mahatma Gandhi University
and IUCBR & SSH.

## YS1.7. Study of Early-stage Parkinson’s Illness EEG Activity Using
Wavelet Techniques

Angana Saikia1 and Sudip Paul2

1Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India
2North-Eastern Hill University, Shillong, Meghalaya, India
Background: Electroencephalography (EEG) is an effective tool for
diagnosing neurodegenerative disorders like Parkinson’s. PD is an
age-related degenerative brain condition where the level of dopamine decreases.
EEG captured by sensors is affected by artifacts. Wavelet analysis is a valuable
tool for processing and analysis of EEG for disease detection.
Material and Methods: EEG was acquired using dual-channel Electrodes
(AD instruments) from the frontal and temporal brain lobes. PD patients
recruited were suffering from an early illness (Stage 1, 1.5). The mean age
group of all the recruited participants (PD and Non-PD) was 60±10 years.
The signal analysis was done in MATLAB.
Results: Using different wavelets: Daubechies, Haar, symlet, Coiflet
and EEG for various subjects were examined, and it was found that normal
subjects showed a higher value than PD using Daubechies wavelet.
Discussion and Conclusions: Daubechies wavelet was most efficient at
detecting various changes in Parkinson’s Disease as Daubechies sequence
has higher scalability and flexibility for weighting boundary problems.
Daubechies wavelet showed a higher value in the case of the typical subject
compared to Parkinson’s disease patients for all the extracted features.
This indicates an imbalance in the transmission of neuronal signals from the
brain to the muscle in the case of a Parkinson’s disease patient.

## Acknowledgements
We want to acknowledge the doctors and technical staff of North Eastern
Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health & Medical Science, Shillong
and North-Eastern Hill University, Shillong, for providing the required
participants and laboratory space for our study.

## YS1.8. Reviving Mobility: Investigating the Therapeutic Potential of
Intermittent Theta Burst Stimulation (iTBS) in Spinal Cord Injured Rats
Sharma G.1, Hariprasad G.2, Kochhar K.P.1, Kumar
N.3 and Jain S.1
1Department of Physiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Delhi, India
2Department of Biophysics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Delhi, India
3Department of Psychiatry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Delhi, India
Background: SCI leads to severe neurological deficits, including
paralysis and loss of sensory function. Intermittent theta burst stimulation
(iTBS), a form of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), has been
shown to induce long-term potentiation (LTP) and enhance synaptic plasticity in
CNS. This study examines whether iTBS can elicit functional recovery in complete
SCI rats.
Materials and Methods: Rats were randomly divided into five groups
control, sham SCI, SCI, SCI+iTBS & SCI+sham stimulation. SCI surgery was
performed at T13 spinal segment. iTBS was administered on primary motor cortex
(50Hz, 2 sessions/day X 5days). Motor threshold (MT), motor evoked potential
(MEP), BBB scoring and urinary bladder function were recorded before and after
the intervention. Rats were euthanised, and spinal cord tissues were collected
for histological analysis.
Results: Preliminary results demonstrated that rats subjected to
iTBS exhibited improved locomotor function compared to the SCI group.
Electrophysiological recordings indicated increased cortical excitability,
decreased MT in the iTBS treatment group, and increased MEPs amplitude in the
treated groups. There was no significant improvement in urinary bladder function
in SCI + iTBS treated group over SCI and sham stimulation groups. Histological
analysis showed enhanced axonal sprouting and reduced glial scar formation in
the iTBS group.
Discussion and Conclusion: The alterations in the MT and MEPs that
were recorded from forepaw suggest cortical reorganisation after the spinal cord
injury. iTBS exposure also lead to reduction of lesion area, glial scar
suggesting decrease in secondary damage. The results suggest that iTBS can
potentially revitalise neural circuits and promote functional recovery in rats
with complete spinal cord injury. The investigation has implications for
developing novel iTBS paradigms to improve functional outcomes in individuals
with SCI.

## Acknowledgement
This work was supported by Department of Science & Technology (DST),
Government of India and we would like to thank CSIR/UGC for providing
fellowship.

## YS1.9. The Neural Correlates of Deception

PrashansaTripathi¹, Meghna Shekar¹, Sumit Sharma¹,
Arun Sasidharan² and Vrinda Marigowda¹

¹Axxonet Brain Research Laboratory (ABRL), Axxonet System Technologies
Pvt. Ltd., Bengaluru, Hyderabad, India
²Center of Consciousness Studies (CCS), Department of Neurophysiology,
National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bengaluru, Hyderabad,
India
Background: Deceiving is a complex cognitive act that involves
interaction between different brain regions, especially in the prefrontal
cortex. These interactions can help us gain a comprehensive understanding of the
cognitive processes involved in deception. This study explores the change in EEG
connectivity during lying in the CQT (Control Question Test) paradigm.
Materials and Methods: The study was conducted on 10
healthy-participants. EEG data was acquired with a 32-channel system (BESS)
using saline-based cap at 1000Hz sampling rate. Using Brainstorm software,
filtered and eye-blink removed 2s epochs were analysed for Phase Transfer
Entropy based connectivity.
Results: After multiple-comparison correction, we found stronger
delta-band connection from TP8 to FP1inthe lying condition compared to the truth
condition. No other frequency bands showed statistically significant
connectivity differences.
Discussion and Conclusion: Our finding shows that the right
temporo-parietal (TP8) and frontal (FP1) brain regions were more synchronised
when participants were lying than when telling the truth. This is in line with
previous studies on the important role of frontoparietal networks in deception.
Delta band is highly associated with attention and memory updating processes.
So, the increased synchronisation in delta band could indicate stronger
attention to lie stimuli and more processing load of working memory during
lying.

## Acknowledgements
The authors would like to express their gratitude towards Munna RS, Varsha
Vijayan and other members of Axxonet for their contribution to this study.
The authors would also like to thank all the participants of this study.
This research The authors would like to express their gratitude towards.

## YS.1.10. Intermittent theta burst stimulation induces motor and sensory
functional recovery in complete spinal cord injury patients
Deeksha Patel1, Rohit Banerjee1, Kamran
Farooque2, Bhavuk Garg2, Nand Kumar3,
Deepak Gupta4, KP Kocchar1, Suman Jain1
1Department of Physiology, 2Department of Orthopaedics,
3Department of Psychiatry, 4Department of
Neurosurgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India
Background: Intermittent theta burst stimulation (iTBS) is discerned
to induce neuronal and synaptic plasticity in cortical regions. Spinal cord
injury (SCI) causes loss of tracts, neuronal apoptosis resulting in motor and
sensory dysfunction. This novel study aimed to assess the effect of iTBS on
sensory-motor function in complete SCI patients.
Material and Methods: A total of 10 patients were divided into
placebo and real stimulation groups. iTBS was administered over leg motor area
for 5 consecutive days followed by physiotherapy. Motor threshold, recruitment
curve, cortical silent period, ASIA score, SCIM, WISCI, pain, QOL, and
depression were assessed before and after intervention.
Result: A significant decrease in motor threshold was observed in
the real stimulation group compared to placebo after the completion of the
intervention. The amplitude of motor evoked potential and the slope of
recruitment curve increased in the real stimulation group. ASIA, VAS and Beck
depression inventory scores decreased and Quality of life scores improved in the
real stimulation group after the intervention as compared to the placebo.
Discussion and Conclusion: iTBS intervention generated sensory,
motor gains, reduction in pain and consequent functional recovery in patients
with SCI as evident by decreased ASIA and walking index scores. Altered
electrophysiological parameters reflect descending cortico-spinal pathway
excitability and synaptic transmission. Motor gains and reduced pain contributed
to improved quality of life and mood. The results of this study suggest that
iTBS could be a promising interventional tool in spinal cord injury
patients.

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Department of Biotechnology (DBT) Ministry of
Science and Technology, Government of India.

## Young Scientist Colloquium-2

## YS2.1 Closed Head Injury Leads to Bi-directional Crosstalk Between the Brain
and Systemic Physiology
Palkin Arora1,2, Megha Kumari1,3, Kavita
Singh1, Poonam Rana1, Maria MD Souza1,
Rajat Sandhir2 and Richa
Trivedi1
1Radiological, Nuclear and Imaging Sciences (RNAIS), Institute of
Nuclear Medicine and Allied Sciences (INMAS), DRDO, Delhi, India
2Department of Biochemistry, Panjab University, Chandigarh, India
3Department of Biotechnology, Delhi Technological University (DTU),
Delhi, India
Background: TBI is a stressful impact to the brain which can lead to
progression of structural and functional deficits. Physiologically, a stressful
event or trauma to the body leads to activation of the HPA axis as an adaptive
response leading to release of glucocorticoids which can regulate the
inflammation and metabolism in the system. Therefore, the study was aimed to
evaluate HPA axis along with assessment of neuronal and systemic changes after
closed head injury (CHI).
Materials and Methods: To study CHI induced HPA axis dysfunction,
brain microstructure was assessed using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). Cellular
and morphological alterations were observed in microglial and astrocytic
population using immunohistochemistry. Serum corticosterone and ACTH levels were
quantified using ELISA along with quantification of serum
metabolitelevelsusing1H-NMR. Systemic inflammatory
markers’ (TNF-α, IL-1β andIL-10) levels were quantified.
The gut microbiome composition was studied using 16S rRNA sequencing.
Results: TBI leads to structural changes in the brain as observed by
decreased diffusivity parameters (Apparent diffusion coefficient) in the
hypothalamus and hippocampus of the injured rats. The altered DTI scalars were
accompanied by glial pathology and amyloid plaque deposition. The structural
changes in the brain led to changes in the HPA axis with decreased serum ACTH
and increased serum CORT levels. In addition, the serum pro- inflammatory
cytokines were upregulated after injury. The serum metabolic profile showed
increased lactate–pyruvate ratio and decreased amino acids after injury.
Hyperactive HPA axis, inflammation and neurological alterations were accompanied
by changes in the gut microbiome composition.
Discussion and Conclusions: The neuronal structural changes are
accompanied by glial pathology and axonal injury leading to hyperactive HPA axis
with altered metabolism, inflammation and gut dysbiosis. CHI is a forceful
impact to the brain that can lead neurological alterations as well as systemic
perturbations. HPA axis, an important adaptive stress response system of the
body gets dysregulated post injury and acts as a major mediator of
bi-directional brain and systemic changes after injury.

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the DRDO, Ministry of Defence, India (INM-324).
Palkin Arora is supported by DRDO fellowship (EST/3009/JRF/2020). The
authors would like to acknowledge Nucleome Informatics Private Limited for
the faecal 16S rRNA sequencing.

## YS2.2. A Novel, Non-toxic Polymeric Nanoparticle for Neuronal mitochondria
Targeting

Nishad Keethedeth¹, Goutam Chandra1, K.P.
Mohanakumar1 and Rajesh A. Shenoi1

1Inter University Centre for Biomedical Research & Super Specialty
Hospital, Mahatma Gandhi University, Kottayam, Kerala, India
Background: Mitochondrial dysfunction is implicated in several
neurodegenerative diseases. Efficient and selective delivery of drugs to
mitochondria requires design of safe nanocarriers. Here, we report a safe,
neutral and versatile polymeric nanocarrier system based on multivalent
presentation of triphenylphosphonium (TPP) on dendritic polyglycerol (PG) for
targeting drugs to neuronal mitochondria.
Materials and Methods: PG nanoparticles were synthesised by anionic
ring-opening polymerisation and reacted with TPP to generate PG-TPP conjugates.
Mitochondrial localisation of FITC-labelled conjugates was achieved in SH-SY5Y
neurons by fluorescence imaging. Neurotoxicity of the conjugates was
investigated by assessment of cell viability, mitochondrial membrane integrity
and ROS generation.
Results: Neurotoxicity and mitochondrial localisation of the PG-TPP
conjugates were dependent on molecular weight and the density of TPP groups. All
the conjugates were non-toxic to neurons up to 100 µM. This displayed
efficient mitochondrial localisation, with PG-4 kDa-15TPP showing the highest
(98%) intra-mitochondrial localisation, without altering the
mitochondrial membrane potential at 100 µM. This conjugate exhibited excellent
mitochondrial localisation when incubated with MPP+- treated cells without
altering mitochondrial membrane potential and with reduced ROS generation.
Discussion and Conclusion: The present study revealed that molecular
weight and TPP density of the nanocarrier affect mitochondrial localisation and
neurotoxicity. Apparently, optimising these parameters is critical in designing
mitochondrial drug delivery systems. This is the first report of selective
mitochondrial localisation of a dendritic polymer nanoparticle in neurons. These
dendritic polymer nanoparticles exhibited improved safety profiles when compared
to dendrimers, designating them as a potential nanodrug delivery system for
mitochondrial targeting.

## Acknowledgment
This research was funded by Core Research Grant (CRG/2019/006028) from
Science and Engineering Research Board, Government of India. Financial
supports from Higher Education and Health & Family Welfare Departments,
Government of Kerala are acknowledged.

## YS2.3. CREB-binding Protein (CBP) Plays an Essential Role in the Regulation
of Cocaine- and Amphetamine-regulated Transcript Peptide (CARTp) During Operant
Conditioning For Intracranial Self-stimulation

Namrata Pawar1, Biru Dudhabhate2, Dipak
Sahare2, Dadasaheb Kokare2 and Amul
Sakharkar1

1Department of Biotechnology, Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune,
Maharashtra, India
2Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj
Nagpur University, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India
Intracranial self-stimulation (ICSS) in lateral hypothalamus-medial forebrain
bundle (LH- MFB) is widely employed to unravel the molecular underpinnings of
reward and reinforcement. Cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript peptide
(CARTp) in LH-MFB is induced by both, natural stimuli and addictive drugs.
However, the role of experience- dependent chromatin remodelling in the CARTp
regulation remains elusive. The current study probes the involvement of
CREB-binding protein (CBP), a transcription factor with intrinsic histone
acetyltransferase activity in the CART expression during ICSS. The male Wistar
rats (n = 6) were stereotaxically implanted with the bipolar
electrode targeted at the right LH-MFB. Animals were trained to press the lever
to seek electrical self-stimulation for reward stimuli. ICSS conditioning
increased the CART mRNA levels in LH. Immunohistochemistry showed the heightened
levels of CART and pCREB post conditioning. Further, ICSS also induced CBP
binding and histone acetylation (H3K9) levels on the CART promoter as measured
by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. CBP siRNA (2 µg/µl) infusion in LH not
only attenuated self-stimulatory activity but also reduced CART mRNA levels in
the LH. In addition, CBP binding and H3K9 acetylation levels on CART promoters
were lowered reflecting the crucial role of CBP-mediated histone acetylation in
CART gene regulation. Interestingly, CBP siRNA-mediated reduction in
self-stimulation was also rescued by co-infusion of CART peptide. Hence, these
results strongly implicate the CBP-induced CART expression within the framework
of LH in the reward and reinforcement.

## Acknowledgement
SERB-DBT, UGC (Govt. of India).

## YS2.4. Identifying Emotions Par Formats: EPN and LPP during Emotion
Recognition in Human Faces, Emoji Faces and Stick Figures

Munna R. Shainy1, Meghna Shekar1, Sumit
Sharma1, Arun Sasidharan2 and Vrinda
Marigowda1

1Axxonet Brain Research Laboratory (ABRL), Axxonet System Technologies
Pvt. Ltd., Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
2Centre for Consciousness Studies (CCS), Department of
Neurophysiology, National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences,
Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
Background: Evidence suggests humans recognise emotions, not just in
other human beings but also in inanimate objects. In today’s world of
digital-mediated communication, where emotions are depicted using 2D or 3D
counterpart formats, this study aims to demarcate if human faces, emoji faces
and stick figures are differently processed cortically.
Materials and Methods: Eight young healthy-adults attempted a visual search
paradigm-based experiment in which they recognised positive, negative and
neutral emotions shown in three formats. Simultaneously, 32-channel EEG
recordings were acquired to study the event-related potentials: early posterior
negativity (EPN) and late positive potential (LPP) in the posterior areas of the
brain.
Results: Irrespective of image format, the area under the curve (AUC) of EPN was
most negative during recognising neutral emotions, while that of positive
emotions was the least. On the other hand, LPP was higher during negative
emotion recognition and least during neutral emotion recognition. Considering
image format, posterior LPP was elicited more during emotion recognition in
human faces, followed by stick figures and emoji faces, while posterior EPN
showed the opposite trend.
Discussion and Conclusion: The current results of the inquiry are consistent with
existing literature indicating typical sustained deeper processing but weaker
rapid initial emotion processing of human facial features. Notably, this study
unveiled stick figures elicit relatively intermediate posterior EPN and LPP,
plausibly signifying a distinct pattern of neural processing mechanism while
perceiving embodied emotions in body postures. Overall, current findings suggest
neural responses to emotion recognition in stick figures are more similar to
humans than emoji faces.

## Acknowledgments
The authors would like to extend their sincere gratitude to Axxonet System
Technologies, Bengaluru, for funding this research project and to the
participants of the study, Prashansa Tripathi, Varsha Vijayan and other
staff members of Axxonet System Technologies, Bengaluru, for their
contributions towards this research. We also want to acknowledge Dr Nim
Tottenham (Development Affective Neuroscience Lab, Columbia University, USA)
for granting the NimStim Set of Facial Expressions material required for
this project.

## YS2.5. Medial-Septal GABAergic Neurons Are Essential for Social Memory in
Mice

Apoorva Bettagere Shivakumar1, Sonam Fathima Mehak1
and Gireesh Gangadharan1

1Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Manipal School of Life
Sciences, Manipal Academy of Higher Education (MAHE), Manipal, Karnataka,
India
Social memory, the ability to recognise and remember familiar conspecifics,
critically relies on the hippocampal region. Interestingly, it has been
described that the medial septum (MS), which constitutes a heterogeneous
population of neurons provides rhythmic drive to the hippocampus and control
diverse behaviours. In particular, the innervation of hippocampal inhibitory
interneurons by septal GABAergic neurons modulates hippocampal function and
information processing. However, the role of septal GABAergic neurons in social
memory remains elusive. We examined this issue using a novel immunotoxin,
anti-vGAT-SAP (vesicular GABA transporters-saporin), to selectively lesion
GABAergic neurons in the MS. Here, our findings show that lesions of MS
GABAergic neurons in mice resulted in impaired social memory, while sociability
and social novelty preference remained intact. Moreover, these lesions led to
disrupted theta rhythm in the dorsal CA2 (dCA2) region of the hippocampus, a
crucial area for social memory. Additionally, we observed altered expression of
arginine vasopressin (AVP) and oxytocin (OXT), key mediators of social
behaviours, in the dCA2 area of the hippocampus. Together, our results indicate
that septo-hippocampal GABAergic neuronal circuit is an important component of
social memory. Importantly, these results support the notion that
inhibition/excitation imbalance in the hippocampus contributes to social
deficits reminiscent of neuropsychiatric/neurodevelopmental disorders.

## Keywords
Social memory, Medial septum, GABA, Theta rhythm, Neuropeptides

## Acknowledgement
This work was supported by Ramalingaswami Re-entry Fellowship, Department of
Biotechnology, Government of India (No. BT/RLF/Re-entry/49/2018) and Science
and Engineering Research Board (SERB), Government of India (No.
CRG/2020/004205) to GG. ABS was supported by Innovation in Science Pursuit
for Inspired Research (INSPIRE) fellowship, Department of Science and
Technology, Government of India (IF190783). The authors thank the
DBT-Builder grant, Manipal School of Life Sciences, Manipal Academy of
Higher Education (MAHE), Manipal, Karnataka for the infrastructure and
support.

## YS2.6. ICAM-1 Reduces Amyloid β-mediated Neuroinflammation and
Cognitive Impairment by Potentiating Microglial Phagocytosis

Soumita Goswami1 and Subhas C Biswas1

1Cell Biology and Physiology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of
Chemical Biology, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
Background: Alzheimer’s Disease (AD), the most prevalent
neurodegenerative disorder currently affects almost 70% of total dementia
patients worldwide. Neuroinflammation plays major role in development of AD
pathologies like neuronal loss, synaptic degeneration and ultimately cognition
and memory impairment. However, identifying molecules to target inflammation
associated disease manifestation is yet to be discovered.
Results: Here we have found that, Aβ causes induction of
inflammation in microglia cells by activating ERK MAPK pathway. Microglia
secreted ICAM-1 is found to potentiate microglial phagocytosis of Aβ,
thus reducing Aβ induced ERK phosphorylation which leads to reduced
inflammation in microglia. Not only that, intra peritoneal administration of
ICAM-1 also reverts Aβ associated cognitive and memory deficits by
restoring synaptic protein expressions in 5xFAD TG mice. Lastly, we have seen
inhibition of interaction between ICAM-1and its receptor LFA-1 renders ICAM-1
mediated cognitive improvement.
Discussion: So far, these data suggest that ICAM-1 plays a pivotal
role in regulation of neuroinflammatory meshwork of AD by inducing phagocytosis
of Aβ and restores memory and cognition by improving synaptic health.
Thus, targeting this interaction could be a good therapeutic strategy to reduce
neuroinflammation and associated AD hallmarks.
Materials and Methods: To assess the effect of ICAM-1 in
vitro, we performed Western blot and immune cytochemistry and to
assess in vivo we did immunohistochemistry, western blot,
behavioural assays like novel object recognition, open field test and cue
dependent fear conditioning tests.

## Acknowledgement
The work was supported in part by one of the 12th Five Year Plan Projects,
miND (BSC0115) of CSIR, Govt. of India.

## YS2.7. Diet Restriction-induced Reward Sensitisation: A Role for Chromatin
Remodelling in Dopaminergic Neurocircuit

Vaishnavi Borade1, Smruti Sahoo1 and Amul
Sakharkar1

1Department of Biotechnology, Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune,
Maharashtra, India
The dopaminergic neurocircuit between ventral tegmental area (VTA)-nucleus
accumbens (NAc) serves as an epicenter of reward. It is highly sensitive to
dietary patterns, feeding habits and energy valence. Diet restriction increases
dopamine (DA) release and reinforcing properties of rewarding stimuli. However,
the precise mechanisms of diet-restriction-induced reward sensitisation are
largely elusive. Adult male Wistar rats were subjected to diet restriction for
48 hours followed by food ad libitum. After diet restriction
and feeding, behavioural sensitisation for reward was investigated by using
nose-poke operant conditioning. Interestingly, diet restriction dramatically
enhanced nose-poke activity to seek sweet pellets. This effect persisted for a
duration of three days, highlighting a state of heightened sensitivity to
rewards. On fifth day, the number of nose-pokes reduced to normal levels. Diet
restriction heightened the expression of dopamine receptor1 (DRD1) and
transporters (DAT) in the NAc. Moreover, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) levels in the
VTA were also improved after diet restriction. The increased neuronal activity
in NAc is further supported by elevated levels of cFos and
Bdnf. Diet restriction caused chromatin remodelling by
altering histone methylation (H3K4me2 and H3K9me2) at the promoter of
Drd1, which was likely modulated by two distinct histone
methyltransferases, MLL1andG9a.These results implicated MLL1 and G9a in the
formation of open chromatin to induce the Drd1 expression in
response to diet restriction. Insum, the present study underscores the causal
role for chromatin remodelling in diet restriction-induced reward sensitisation
by undertaking neuroadaptations in the dopaminergic neural circuit.

## Acknowledgment
SERB-DBT, UGC (Govt. of India)

## P1: G6PD-Nitric Oxide Axis: A Fundamental Regulator of Neuroinflammation and
Phago­cytotic Clearance of SARs-CoV2 Spike Protein

Abir Mondal1, Subrata Munan2, Isha Saxena1,
Soumyadeep Mukherjee1, Prince Upadhyay1, Waseem
Dar1, Nutan Gupta3, Animesh Samanta2,
Shailja Singh3 and Soumya Pati1

1Department of Life Sciences, School of Natural Sciences, Shiv Nadar
Institution of Eminence, Delhi, India
2Department of Chemistry, School of Natural Sciences, Shiv Nadar
Institution of Eminence, Delhi, India
3Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New
Delhi, India
Background: Glucose 6 Phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)-derived NADPH can
follow pro-oxidative and anti-oxidative pathways for the generation and removal of
ROS respectively in a tissue-specific manner. Therefore, the deficiency of G6PD
leads to the dysregulation of microglial defence mechanisms which can facilitate
SARs-CoV2 pathogenesis and may cause several neurological disorders.
Materials and Methods: Human microglia activation was confirmed by qPCR.
The production of Nitric oxide (NO) and phagocytosis were evaluated by confocal
microscopy. SARs-CoV2 responses were evaluated by using spike protein. Additionally,
the CRISPR-mediated G6PD deficient microglia model was used to identify the role of
the G6PD-Nitric oxide axis in neuroinflammation and phagocytic clearance.
Results: Our data indicated that G6PD-derived NADPH is essential for NO
production in human microglia. NO plays a crucial role in the phagocytic clearance
of foreign particles. The G6PD deficiency causes a 70% reduction in NADPH
level which further affects NO production and ROS regulation in human microglia. As
a result, G6PD deficiency and dysregulation of NO signalling aggravate SARs-CoV2
pathophysiology.
Discussion and Conclusion: G6PD is the most crucial enzyme for
restricting SARS-CoV-2-mediated neuroinflammation. A deficiency of G6PD leads to a
reduction in NO production and an alteration of redox equilibrium which further
aggravated Covid-19 responses. However, we are also generating clinically relevant
G6PD variants to study its responses in neuro-glia interaction for a detailed
understanding of neuroinflammation.

## P2: Relationship Between Levels of Vitamin D and Cognitive Functioning in an
Urban Indian Ageing Cohort: An Explorative Study

Aishwarya Ghosh1, Palash Kumar Malo1, TLSA Study Team and
Thomas Gregor Issac1

1Centre for Brain Research (CBR), IISC Bangalore, Karnataka, India
Background: Vitamin D regulates the calcium and phosphate balance in the
human body and has implications in brain health and cognitive functioning. Studies
suggest that low levels of Vitamin D are associated with impaired cognitive
functioning. This study aimed to investigate the relationship between Vitamin D and
cognition.
Materials and Methods: 999 healthy individuals were recruited from the
baseline data of the CBR-Tata Longitudinal Study for Aging (TLSA).
Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination-III (ACE-III) and Hindi Mental Status
Examination (HMSE) scores were considered to measure cognitive functioning and
Vitamin D levels were obtained. Data was analysed using IBM SPSS software.
Results: Participants were divided into age-groups of 45–54,
55–64 and >65 years. Global standards of Vitamin D levels of
<20 ng/ml (high risk), 20–40ng/ml (insufficient) and >40 ng/ml
(normal) were considered. Shapiro–Wilk test was used to check for normality.
Kruskal–Wallis’s H-test indicated no significant difference
(p > .05) in cognitive functioning between participants
with different levels of Vitamin D across the age groups.
Discussion and Conclusions: The results suggest that there was no
relationship between the levels of Vitamin D and cognitive functioning in the cohort
as opposed to the current body of literature. Hence, these results provide scope for
further investigation and subsequently a potential for developing new standards of
Vitamin D levels for the Indian population.

## Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledge all the members of the CBR-TLSA for helping us with
the collection of data. I would thank the participants for their participation
and kind cooperation. I also extend my gratitude to Tata Trusts and Centre for
Brain Research for their financial support.

## P3: Expression of Neurotrophins (BDNF and NT-3) and Their Receptors in Adult
Human Cochleae

Akanksha Mishra1, Abhishek Yadav2, T.C. Nag1,
T.S. Roy3 and Tony George Jacob1

1Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India
2Department of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India
3Department of Anatomy, North DMC Medical College & Hindu Rao
Hospital, New Delhi, India
Background: Sensorineural hearing loss’s definitive management is
cochlear implantation, contingent on presence of SGNs, hair-cells. Their age-related
degeneration is a limiting factor in cochlear implant efficacy. Neurotrophins are
keystones for development, differentiation of SGNs and synapses. They’re
expressed in mice, rat, chick cochleae: experimental absence leading to deafness;
delivery, SGN survival. Neurotrophin expression in human cochleae remains
unexplored.
Methods: Twelve human temporal bones containing cochlea were derived
within 24 hours of death. Bones fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, decalcified
with 10% EDTA for twelve weeks, cryoprotected, mounted, sectioned at 40µm on
a cryotome to obtain coronal sections of cochlea. Immunohistochemistry was used for
studying expression of BDNF, NT-3 and receptors.
Results: BDNF and NT-3 expressed in SGNs and neuropil, showing
membranous and cytoplasmic positivity. Apical layer of stria vascularis (SV)
expressed distinct positivity among three layers. SGNs expressed bipolar positivity
for TrkB and TrkC. Entire SV stained positive for receptor proteins.
Conclusion: It can be extrapolated that apical layer of SV produces
neurotrophins which act on cells expressing TrkB/TrkC. This information extrapolated
across ages can provide insight for future therapeutic intervention. Age-related
changes will be concluded with including more age-groups in this qualitative
observational study.

## Acknowledgements
ICMR Project No. 51/1/2018-ANA/BMS.

## P4: Iron Overload and Unfolded Protein Response (UPR): Induction of UPR After
Iron Accumulation in the Retina of Male Wistar Rat

Akanksha Singh1 and Tapas C. Nag1

1Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India
Background: Unfolded protein response (UPR) combats the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress caused by increase in unfolded proteins and maintains protein
homeostasis. It acts via upregulation of ER chaperones such as GRP78, attenuation of
protein translation mediated by the phosphorylation of eIF2α by PERK and
degradation of misfolded proteins via ER associated degradation. Mechanisms of iron
accumulation in the retina, leading to ER stress and modulating UPR are unclear.
This study was aimed to see if retinal cells develop ER stress after iron
accumulation and how ER stress influences UPR in iron-accumulated retina.
Material and Methods: Male Wistar rats (aged 2 months) were treated with
ferrous sulphate dissolved in water by oral gavage (500 mg/kg body weight/week). The
control animals received water as vehicle. Animals were euthanized, killed after 6
and 8 months of chronological age, their eyes enucleated and fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde. Histochemical staining with Perls Prussian blue (iron deposition),
and immunohistochemical localisation of the markers of iron homeostasis
(Transferrin, ferroportin), GRP78 and UPR markers (CHOP, p-PERK) were performed.
Results: Mild positive Perls staining was seen in the retina of
experimental rats. Increased expression of iron regulators was found in experimental
groups. Upregulation in the immunoreactivity of GRP78 was seen in cell layers of the
retina in six- and eight-month group. As compared to control group, increased immune
expression of CHOP and phosphorylated PERK was seen in retinal cell layers of
experimental groups.
Discussion and Conclusions: These data suggest iron accumulation-induced
ER stress causes activation of unfolded protein response in the retina.

## Acknowledgements
Supported by funds from ICMR, New Delhi (51/4/2000-ANA/BMS).

## P5: The Neuronal NOS Activates SC-VTA Circuitry During Reversal Learning
Behaviour Impaired in Schizophrenic-like Condition in Rats

Akash M. Waghade1, Ashwini A. Patil1, Dipak K.
Sahare1, Sanjay N. Awathale1, Nishikant K.
Subhedar2 and Dadasaheb M. Kokare1

1Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj
Nagpur University, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India
2Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Dr Homi Bhabha Road,
Pune, Maharashtra, India
Background: The change in environment causes superior colliculus (SC) to
regulate reversal performance, whereas the ventral tegmental area (VTA) conserves
reward processing. In schizophrenic illness reversal learning gets disrupted. The
neuronal NOS has abundantly present in SuG layer of SC. However, the role of
neuronal NOS in SC-VTA circuitry for reversal learning behaviour impaired in
schizophrenic illness is not established yet.
Materials and Methods: Reversal learning was assessed in adult male
Wistar rats in operant chamber. MK801 treatment (ip) was given to impair reversal
learning. Open field test was used to assess locomotion activity. The
7-nitroindazole (7-NI; nNOS inhibitor) and L-arginine (nitric oxide precursor)
treatment was given via intra-SuG. Additionally, combination treatments like
MK801+L- arginine and MK801+aCSF was employed. The neuronal NOS and TH
immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed. DiI retrograde tracer was given in VTA to
track projection from SC to VTA.
Results: MK801 treated rats decreased lever press activity and showed
hyper-locomotion during reversal learning than the saline treated group. In
combination group, MK801+L-arginine showed significantly elevated lever pressings
and switching behaviour, and decreased hyper-locomotion compared to MK801+aCSF.
While 7-NI significantly increased lever pressings and switching behaviour,
L-arginine had no effect on both the parameters. The IHC study revealed that NOS and
TH cells were increased in reversal trained group. The retrograde tracing has
revealed the NOS positive cells of the SC were projected to the VTA.
Discussion and Conclusion: The prior treatment of L-arginine has
improved reversal learning impaired by MK801 treatment. The 7-NI and/or L-arginine
treatment has enhanced reversal learning behaviour in rats. It suggests that
neuronal NOS of SC has prominent role in reversal learning impaired in MK801treated
rats. Additionally, we observed neuronal NOS positive cells in SC and TH cells in
VTA. Furthermore, we found that NOS cells were projected in VTA. Herein, the present
research work demonstrated that the neuronal NOS in SC might regulate reversal
learning behaviour via SC-VTA circuitry, and could be helpful for improving
schizophrenic illness.

## Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the grants from (DST-SERB) (CRG/2020/004971), Govt. of
India, New Delhi, India and Mahatma Jyotiba Phule Research & Training
Institute (MAHAJYOTI) fellowship, (An Autonomous Institute of the Other Backward
Class Bahujan Welfare Department, Govt. of Maharashtra).

## P6: Impact of Gender on the Progression of Alzheimer’s Disease in
AβPP-ps1 Mouse Model: A Behavioural and Metabolic Analysis

Akila Ramesh1, 2 and Anant Bahadur Patel1, 2

1NMR Microimaging and Spectroscopy, CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, Habsiguda, Hyderabad, India
2Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh,
India
Background: Alzheimer’s disease (AD), an age-related
neurodegenerative disorder with progressive loss of memory, is the most common form
of dementia that accounts for about 60-70% of the cases.1 Epidemiological
studies suggests that two-thirds of AD subjects are women.2 However; it is not clear
whether the higher prevalence of AD in women is due to longer life expectancy or
increased susceptibility.
Materials and Methods: Transgenic AβPP-PS1 male and female mice
(6 months) were used for the study. The learning and memory of the mice were
assessed using Y- maze3 and Morris Water Maze (MWM) test.4 Proton observed Carbon-13
edited NMR spectroscopy together with an administration of [1,6-13C2]
glucose was used to monitor the metabolic activity of neurons.5
Results: Male AβPP-PS1 and WT mice recorded an escape latency of
70.8±23.8 s and 61.6±29.8 s, respectively, in MWM test. Female
AβPP PS1 reached the platform at 59±26.2 s while WT mice reached at
59.1±27.6 s on an average. In Y maze, the spontaneous alternation of male
AβPP-PS1 was 54.5±11.7 % while that of WT was 58.5±1.0
%. Similarly, the female AβPP-PS1 showed 65.2±7.6 %
alternation while WT mice had 63.4±10.5 %. The evaluation of
neurometabolites homeostasis and the cerebral metabolic rates of glucose oxidation
are in progress.
Discussion and Conclusion: Memory assessment through Y-maze and MWM test
revealed that memory was intact in male and female AβPP-PS1 mice at 6 months
of age. Since molecular/metabolic changes precede phenotypic changes, we anticipate
perturbation in neurometabolic activity in transgenic AβPP-PS1 mice in a
region-specific manner. This will be identified in metabolic measures.

## Acknowledgements
This study was supported by Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
(CSIR-CCMB: NCP/MLP0139).

## P7: Sertad1 Depletion Using Lentivirus Ameliorates Behavioural Deficits by
Autophagy Modulation in Models of Alzheimer’s Disease

Naqiya Ambareen1,2 and Subhas C. Biswas1,2

1Cell Biology and Physiology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical
Biology, Jadavpur, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
2Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, Uttar
Pradesh, India
Background: Dysfunctional autophagy, marked by abnormal accumulation of
autophagosomes is a prominent characteristic of the Alzheimer’s brain.
Sertad1, a transcriptional coregulator is upregulated in response to Aβ
toxicity and aids in neurodegeneration. This study explores the role of Sertad1 in
autophagy modulation in cell and animal models of Alzheimer’s disease.
Materials and Methods: To study autophagy dysfunction in AD, lysates
from cortex and hippocampus of 5xFAD mice were prepared and subjected to Western
blotting. For mechanistic studies, Sertad1 was depleted using shRNA followed by
Western blotting and immunocytochemistry experiments to check for its effect on
autophagy modulation. Lentivirus containing shSertad1 was injected by bilateral
stereotactic surgery in 5xFAD mice brain and behavioural studies were carried out to
check for cognitive recovery. Golgi staining was done to determine number of
dendritic spines.
Results: Autophagy markers are robustly induced with disease progression
in 5xFAD mice at different ages. Sertad1 is also upregulated in 5xFAD mice brain.
shSertad1 confers neuroprotection in primary neurons by lowering autophagy markers,
LC3 and p62. Sertad1 depletion increased P-FoxO3a levels at Ser 253 responsible for
its cytosolic retention due to Akt activation. Further, 5xFAD mice infused with
shSertad1 containing lentivirus performed better in fear based cognitive learning
and spatial memory tasks. These animals also showed better synaptic health and lower
autophagy levels.
Discussion and Conclusions: Impaired autophagy results in a failure of
autophagosome clearance from the brain. Sertad1, a transcriptional coregulator is
upregulated in Alzheimer’s disease. Sertad1 depletion protects neurons
against Aβ induced toxicity by autophagy modulation. FoxO3a, translocates to
the nucleus to activate autophagy and apoptosis genes. Depletion of Sertad1 blocks
FoxO3a nuclear translocation and this is regulated by Akt activation. 5xFAD mice
that were infused with lentivirus expressing shSertad1 performed remarkable well in
locomotor activity, fear conditioning and spatial learning tasks and showed synaptic
recovery. Overall, this study shows that Sertad1 depletion can modulate autophagy
flux and provide behavioural benefits to 5xFAD mice and is an excellent target for
therapeutic intervention.

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by Council of Scientific and Innovative Research
(CSIR), Govt. of India and Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research
(AcSIR).

## P8: Investigation on Agmatinergic Pathway in Attention-deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder Using Exposure of 6-ohda in Mice

Amit Shiwal1, Apeksha Tambe1, Nitu Wankhede1,
Mayur Kale1, Brijesh Taksande1 and Milind

Umekar1

1Division of Neuroscience, Department of Pharmacology, Smt. Kishoritai
Bhoyar College of Pharmacy, Kamptee Nagpur, Maharashtra, India
Background: Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is a
neurodevelopmental disorder that affects both children and adults and is
characterised by persistent patterns of inattention and impulsivity that
significantly impact daily functioning and quality of life. During adolescence, the
prefrontal cortex develops connectivity with other brain regions to engage executive
functions and impulsive behaviour.
Materials and Methods: Swiss albino mice (SAM) exposed to 6-OHDA
hydrobromide on PND 5 underwent assessment: Hyperactivity (open field),
Attention/Impulsivity (Object-based task), Memory (Elevated plus maze), Anxiety
(Marble Burying Test), Depression (Sucrose preference) and Anti-social behaviour
(Social interaction task). Oxidative stress markers, Neurotransmitter levels were
also analysed.
Results: In the present study, 6-OHDA-induced ADHD-like behaviour was
significantly attenuated by agmatine (20, 40 and 80 mg/kg, i.p.), L-Arginine (60
mg/kg, i.p.), Aminoguanidine (50 mg/kg, i.p.), Arcaine (30 mg/kg, i.p.). Since ADHD
is associated with increased oxidative stress and inflammation as well as
alterations in neurotransmitter levels, we have also monitored the nitrite, lipid
peroxidation, reduced glutathione and superoxide dismutase, as well as Dopamine and
GABA levels in 6- OHDA-mice.
Discussion and Conclusions: Injection of 6-OHDA induced dopaminergic
neuron lesions, mimicking ADHD-like human pathophysiology. Agmatine and its
modulators mitigated ADHD-associated hyperactivity, anxiety, depression, anti-social
tendencies, inattention and memory deficits. Additionally, agmatine notably elevated
dopamine levels and, in combination with its modulators, effectively curtailed
oxidative stress linked to 6-OHDA-induced ADHD-like behaviour in mice. Overall,
these results propose agmatine as a potential therapeutic avenue for addressing
behavioural alterations linked to ADHD, warranting further investigation for
clinical application.

## P9: Identification of Common Biological Pathways Between Alzheimer’s
Disease (AD) and Metabolic Disorders (MD)

Ananya Shukla1, Neha Singla1 and Rajat
Sandhir1

1Department of Biochemistry, Panjab University, Chandigarh, India
Background: Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is an age-related
neurodegenerative disorder. People afflicted with metabolic disorders like Diabetes
and Obesity have a higher chance of developing AD. As number of individuals affected
by metabolic disorders increases, the patients impacted by AD will also
exponentially grow. However, the exact mechanism responsible for this association is
not fully understood.
Materials and Methods: Firstly, transcriptomic analysis was conducted
using Illumina Base Space Correlation Engine (BSCE) to discover Differentially
Expressed Genes (degs) followed by pathway enrichment. These results were validated
in female Wistar rats through biochemical tests, HPLC, ELISA and molecular biology
assays like Western blot and RT-PCR to determine the prominent changes induced by
the three diseases among the ascertained pathways.
Results: The in-silico study helped delineate 11 common
genes between the datasets: TNFAIP6, HIGD1A, RPS15A, GNG11, DPH3, CARD16, ATP5F1C,
NGDN, AIM2, TNFSF10, RPL9.The pathway enrichment of the degs focused on biological
processes primarily related to neurotransmission (like gabaergic pathway), Immune
system and Oxidative Phosphorylation. The pathways ascertained from computational
analysis were found to be significantly dysregulated in rat brain due to the three
disorders. Neuroinflammation and glutamate excitotoxicity were found to be increased
in rat brain. The levels of neurotransmitters were also observed to be disturbed in
Wistar rats.
Discussion and Conclusion: The results clearly suggest role of
metabolism in development of neurodegenerative phenotype in animal model. Apart from
the delineated pathways, neurodegenerative markers and inflammatory conditions were
also increased in rat brain. These are prominent indicators of neurodegeneration.
Further, the pathways determined from in-silico analysis help
understand the mechanisms through which a dysfunctional metabolism might lead to
neurodegeneration. This study has aided in identification of novel cellular and
molecular mechanisms that might link AD progression with metabolic disorders and
will further aid in formulating new treatment regimens.

## Acknowledgement
The fellowship provided by University Grants Commission (UGC), New Delhi
(reference number: 559\CSIR-UGC NET JUNE 2019) is acknowledged.

## P10: Stripe Factors for Targeted Epigenetic Remodelling for Nervous System
Regeneration

Anisha S Menon1, Dhruva Kesireddy1, Manoj Kumar
Kumaran1, Sneha Manjunath1, Shaik
Shafiulla1 and Ishwariya Venkatesh1

Laboratory of Axon Growth and Regeneration, CSIR-CCMB, Hyderabad, Telangana,
India
Background: The bundle of Axons which ferry the signal back and forth
between the Brain and Body is critical for normal nervous system function. When
injured, this disrupts the communication vital for the nervous system’s
function. Axonal injury necessitates precise transcriptional control to initiate a
regenerative response which is coordinated by master proteins called Transcription
factors (TFs). These factors then re-activate genes supportive of growth (pro-growth
genes). Although transcription factors are crucial for gene activation, a
prerequisite for their function is the availability of relaxed chromatin around
pro-growth genes. Therefore, epigenetic factors are higher up in the regulatory
cascade and gate accessibility to TFs to activate genes. DNA methylation patterns
and histone modifications are altered, influencing accessibility and the expression
of pro-growth without modifying the underlying DNA sequences. Understanding the
nature and pattern of self-imposed epigenetic constraints in injured neurons is a
vital component in achieving neural repair.
Materials and Methods: We are using an integrated approach starting with
in vitro assays of growth, in vivo models of
injury and functional epigenomics.
Results: Previously, we have shown that in adult neurons, the chromatin
is entirely restricted around pro-growth genes, preventing TF access. However, broad
remodelling genome-wide is ineffective in chromatin relaxation and thereby
increasing the expression of the gene. To override the lack of targeting with broad
remodellers, we are now focusing on achieving targeted remodelling. To this end, we
are exploring a novel set of proteins, called stripe factors to enable targeted
remodelling. Our preliminary data suggests that the extent of chromatin restriction
around pro-growth gene loci is more severe than previously demonstrated and that
stripe factors may be playing an essential role in chromatin remodelling during
development.
Discussion and Conclusion: Currently, we are testing the effects of
stripe factors such as Patz1, Sp2, Klf6, etc. for their ability to induce precise
chromatin relaxation around pro-growth genes and ensuing gene expression and
regeneration. This research will clarify novel fundamental molecular mechanisms that
control nervous system development and regeneration. In the future, our findings
could help in designing targeted therapeutic strategies to achieve neural
repair.

## Acknowledgment
Council for Industry and Scientific Research (CSIR).

## P11: Exploring the Links Between Serum Uric Acid Levels and Cognition: A Study
Conducted in an Urban Cohort, Southern India

Anjana J Menon1, Ashvin V.1, Shubham Jain1,
TLSA Study Teams, Thomas Gregor Issac1

1Centre for Brain Research, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore,
Karnataka, India
Background: There is an intricate relationship between uric acid and
cognition. The antioxidant property of uric acid confers neuroprotective effect.
Nevertheless, increased uric acid levels can have detrimental effects on cognition.
Therefore, this study tries to understand the relationship between uric acid levels
and cognition among urban-dwelling individuals in Southern India.
Methodology: 156 participants, aged ≥ 45 years, enrolled in CBR-
Tata Longitudinal Study of Aging (TLSA). HMSE (Hindi Mental State Examination) and
CDR (Clinical Dementia Rating) used to classify into healthy and cognitively
impaired. Logistic regression performed after adjusting covariates like age,
education, diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidaemia.
Results: Out of 156 participants, 139 (89.1%) were cognitively
healthy and 17 (10.9%) with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Prevalence of
hypouricaemia was more in MCI (17.65%) than in cognitively healthy
participants (3.60%) and hypouricemia was found to be significantly
associated with MCI (p = .05). Both years of education and
hypouricemia were statistically significant (p < .01)
independent variables. Logistic regression showed that the odds of developing
cognitive impairment in hypouricaemic participants was 5.98 times compared to
normouricaemic participants.
Discussions and Conclusion: Hypouricemia was found to be associated with
increased odds of developing MCI. The results of our study suggest that hypouricemia
can contribute to decreased cognition. Decreased uric acid levels are often linked
to poor nutrition. Given that hypouricemia is a modifiable risk factor, it may be
worthwhile to address this in the future. Therefore, dietary changes such as the
intake of food items rich in protein can be advocated to ensure normal uric acid
levels.

## Acknowledgments
I would like to acknowledge the staff of CBR-TLSA (Tata Longitudinal Study of
Aging) for carrying out the clinical and cognitive assessments. I also thank our
study participants for their participation and kind cooperation. The study is
funded by Tata Trusts through the Centre for Brain Research, Indian Institute of
Science, Bangalore.

## P12: Caffeic Acid: A Therapeutic Natural Medicine Against
Cyclophosphamide-induced Acute Neuronal Toxicity in Rats

Ankita Mukherjee1 and Monika Bhadauria1

1
Toxicology and Pharmacology, Department of Zoology Guru
Ghasidas University, Bilaspur, Chattisgarh, India
Background: Chemotherapy of cyclophosphamide (CP) is prescribed to treat
various types of cancer, including leukaemia, sarcoma, breast cancer and
neuroblastoma, that also possesses wide range of side effects. In present
investigation, caffeic acid was used to reduce CP induced toxic effect in brain.
Materials and Method: Thirty-six male albino rats of
Wistar strain (150±10g) were allocated to six equal
groups. Group 1 served as control. Group 3-6 received different doses of caffeic
acid (10, 20, 30 and 40mg/kg) for six days. Group 2-6 received CP (200mg/kg) on 7th
day. And group 2 considered as experimental control.
Results: Administration of CP increased level of lipid peroxidation and
cholesterol in neuronal tissues, and decreased level of GSH and activities of SOD,
catalase and GST. Therapy of CA reversed the toxic effect of CP in these biochemical
parameters significantly. CA reduced lipid peroxidation and cholesterol whereas,
increased the level of GSH and activities of SOD, catalase and GST in a
dose-dependent manner indicating its antioxidant nature.
Discussion and Conclusion: CP induced oxidative stress and diminished
antioxidant system is evident by increased LPO and decreased level of the GSH, SOD,
catalase and GST. Different doses of CA therapy-maintained homeostasis in the brain.
CA at 40mg/kg of dose was observed to be the most effective dose against CP induced
toxicological reactions observed in rats. These results indicate that caffeic acid
can be suggested as an ameliorative natural compound against CP induced toxicity in
rat brain.

## Acknowledgement
VRET non-NET fellowship awarded from Guru Ghasidas University is acknowledged.
Department of Zoology for providing laboratory facility.

## P13: Unravel the Impact of TUDCA on Iba-1 Immuno-positive Microglial Cells and DR
Progression

Ankita J. Kumari1, B.P. Sinha1, N. Mohan1, B.
Sharma2, L.K. Arya1, M. Kumar3, T.C.
Nag2, M. Nath4, A. Kumari1, A.K.
Jha5, T. Velpandian4, R.V. Azad4 and P.
Kumar1

1Regional Institute of Ophthalmology, Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical
Sciences, Patna, Bihar, India
2Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India
3Central Animal House, Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical sciences,
Patna
4Department of Ocular pharmacology, Dr Rajendra Prasad Center for
Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India
5The University of Tennesse Health Science Center, Memphis TN 38163,
USA
Background: Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) is one of the leading causes of
vision loss globally. One of the major complications of DR involves swelling.
Tracing the chemistry behind, literature suggests that there is activation of
microglia, oxidative stress and inflammation due to prolonged episode of
hyperglycaemia causing retinal neurodegeneration. TUDCA has shown to possess
neuro-protective behaviour, hence could be capable of tackling the above-mentioned
complications.
Materials and Methods: Streptozotocin (45mgKg–1BW)
induced rats showing blood glucose level of 300mgdL–1 were
contemplated as diabetic. Once diabetes was sustained TUDCA administration was done
weekly(500mgKg–1BW) for 16 weeks. Fundoscopy was done to see
morphological changes in retina. Rat retina was put to IHC study to observe Iba-1
levels in retina. ELISA was performed to quantify TNF-α and IL-1β
levels.
Results: IHC study of retinal section showed that microglia was
dispersed throughout retina layers and showing significant increase in number of
activated microglia in diabetic rats when compared to control and TUDCA treated
group (Control&DR p ≤ .01) and (DR&DR+TUDCA
p ≤ .001). INL showed mild swelling in diabetic group in
contrast with control and TUDCA treated which appeared alike to each other.
TNF-α (p ≤ .01) and IL-1β (p
≤ .001) levels were significantly increased in diabetic group in comparison
with control and TUDCA treated.
Discussion and Conclusions: The above finding suggests that the swelling
observed in DR could be attributed to activation of microglia. These activated
microglia in turn increases the level of inflammatory cytokines which further
worsens the DR progression, while as observed in TUDCA treated group where all the
parameters kept in consideration appeared similar to the control group. Considering
all the above findings TUDCA appears to reduce the number of activated microglia in
retina which further leads to reduced swelling.

## Acknowledgements
Funding agency- ICMR, New Delhi (project code: 5/4/6/6/OPH/2020-NCD-II), TEM work
done at SAIF, AIIMS, New Delhi.

## P14: Investigation of Hypothalamic 5HT2C Receptor Signalling in Obesity and
Metabolic Ageing

Annu Yadav1,2, Shajia Parveen2, Atul Goel2 and
Prem N. Yadav3

1Division of Neuroscience and Ageing Biology, CSIR-CDRI, Lucknow, Uttar
Pradesh, India
2Division of Medicinal and Process Chemistry, CSIR-CDRI, Lucknow, Uttar
Pradesh, India
3Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh,
India
Serotonin (5-HT, 5-Hydroxy Tryptamine), is essential for maintaining energy balance
in all vertebrate and invertebrate species. In animals, the central nervous system
(CNS)-produced 5-HT governs several essential physiological functions, such as
libido, mood and hunger. The adult central nervous system (CNS) contains resident
neural stem cells (NSCs) that are capable of self-renewal and proliferation to
produce new neurons, as well as oligodendrocytes. These NSCs are found in niches
such as the dentate gyrus and hypothalamus. Emerging evidence shows that
physiological aging and obesity contribute to a deterioration in NSC self-renewal
and regeneration abilities, which in turn results in several chronic CNS and
metabolic diseases. It is now commonly accepted that maintaining a healthy NCS pool
is essential for the best possible metabolic and mental performance. In this study,
we screened many chemical series that were focused and rationally designed, and
discovered a selective and specific 5-HT2C positive allosteric modulator (PAM),
CDRI-0327. This compound does not stimulate this receptor activity on its own but
significantly potentiates the effect of endogenous agonist serotonin this receptor.
We also examined the effects of CDRI-0327 and LRC (Lorcaserin, 5-HT2C agonist on the
proliferation of hypothalamic NSCs and discovered that activating the 5-HT2C
receptor via PAM induces the proliferation of neuronal stem cells. Further
in vivo studies with genetically obese Db/Db
mice, we observed that CDRI-0327 restores learning and memory deficits. Further
studies are in progress to elucidate the mechanisms of 5-HT2C PAM to induce NSC
homeostasis.

## P15: An Advanced Diffusion Magnetic Resonance Imaging Tractography Study in
Euthymic Paediatric Bipolar Disorder

Anshita Singh1,2 and Raj Shree2

1Centre of Bio-Medical Research, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of
Medical Sciences Campus, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
2Department of Information Technology, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar
University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Paediatric Bipolar disorder (PBD) is a complex mental
disorder associated with episodes of mood swings ranging from depressive lows to
manic highs. Multiple factors such as combination of genetics, environment and
altered brain structure may play a crucial role in this disorder. Some recent brain
imaging studies have strongly linked it with the white matter (WM) abnormalities. To
further explore the white matter association with this disorder we perform
non-invasive magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technique of diffusion tensor imaging
(DTI) to establish the association of white matter interaction. For this purpose, we
selected children with bipolar children under euthymic phase and compared with
typically developing children. In euthymic phase clinical symptoms are not entirely
absent, but are subdued enough, so that mood and normal activity are not
affected.
Methods: For this study we recruited 20 PBD patients from Department of
Psychiatry King George Medical University Lucknow and 20 typically developing
children from nearby locality for comparison. All participants were aged between 7
to 18 years. All the DTI data was collected at in housed 3T-MRI at Center of
Biomedical Research, Lucknow. The tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) analysis of
DTI data was performed to locate alteration in Fractional Anisotropy (FA), Mode of
anisotropy (MO) and Coordinates of linearity (CL), Coordinates of planarity
(CP).
Results: Compared to the Typically Developing children, euthymic
children with bipolar disorder shows alteration in FA, CL, CP and MO values at
multiple regions that include thalamus, precentral, corticospinal tract, superior
longitudinal fasciculus, corpus callosum, inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus and
middle cerebella peduncle.
Conclusions: The outcome of this study suggests a strong association of
white abnormalities in euthymic children with bipolar disorder involving multiple
neural regions. Our findings further suggest that bipolar disorders have underlying
WM pathology on DTI. Measuring WM pathology using DTI is emerging as a useful tool
for identifying individuals with various psychopathologies and may lead to early
diagnosis and treatment.

## P16: Molecular Docking and Simulation Studies Indicate Immunomodulatory Role of
Seaweed Metabolites by Interacting with Microglia-specific Proteins

Anurag Thapliyal1 and Shashank Kumar Maurya1

1Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Zoology,
Faculty of Science, University of Delhi, India
Background: Seaweed metabolites are novel compounds with great
therapeutic potential but with little known effects on microglia during
neuro-inflammation. Microglia have been shown to display marked upregulation of
certain proteins, which are directly involved in aggravation of neuro-inflammation.
Targeting these proteins might prove beneficial in alleviating gravity of
neurodegenerative disorders.
Methodology: 1072 seaweed metabolites were screened for their
physicochemical properties and pharmacodynamics. The ligand binding sites on IBA1,
CD40L, CSFR1 and P2Y12R protein 3D structure were detected. Molecular docking (MD)
and molecular dynamics simulation of drug-like compounds with each protein was
evaluated.
Results: 106 seaweed metabolites showed positive physicochemical
properties and pharmacodynamics to be considered as therapeutic/drug-like in nature.
Following MD, 32 compounds interacted successfully with the selected
microglia-specific proteins with significant binding affinities, inhibition
constants and hydrogen bonds. 5 compounds bind to IBA1, 15 compounds interact with
kinase domain of CSF1R, 4 compounds prevented CD40-CD40L interaction by blocking
binding site of CD40L and 8 compounds interacted antagonistically with P2Y12R. The
results were further validated with MDS.
Discussion and Conclusion: Targeting of microglial proteins can mitigate
neuro-inflammation. However, the effects of their inhibition or activation are
poorly understood. Secondary metabolites provide a novel set of compounds that can
interact with the microglia-specific proteins leading to identification of novel
compounds which can be translated to the level of therapeutic drugs in
neurodegenerative disorders. The results indicate a great potential of these
compounds to be involved in regulation of microglial activity during
neuro-inflammation.

## Acknowledgements
Financial support of Institution of Eminence, University of Delhi (IoE, DU) is
gratefully acknowledged.

## P17: Understanding the Role of PIWIL 1, 2 and 4 in Depressive Disorder Using
Chronic Social Defeat Stress Mouse Model

Arpan Mukhoti1,3, Nitin Khandelwal1, Ashutosh
Kumar1, Devika Mahimkar1,3, Bhanu Pranav
N.1,3, Annapoorna P.K.1,3, Pratishtha
Wanderkar1,3, Sumana Chakaravarty2,3 and Arvind
Kumar1,3

1CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB), Hyderabad,
Telangana, India
2Applied Biology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology
(IICT), Hyderabad, Telangana, India
3Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, Uttar
Pradesh, India
Background: Major depressive disorder is a debilitating psychiatric
disorder. Variable response to chronic stress suggests an important role of the
underlying epigenetic factors. Differential levels of expression of retro-elements
have been observed in psychiatric disorders in post mortem brain samples. This work
focuses on PIWIL proteins and piRNAs that are involved in the regulation of
retrotransposons.
Materials and Methods: Chronic Social Defeat Stress (CSDS) Paradigm of
10 days and PSDS (Progressive SDS) paradigm of 1-5 days were used to induce stress
by social aggression for depression-like phenotype. Behavioural tests were used for
evaluating the signs of depression-like conditions such as Anhedonia, helplessness,
etc. RT-qPCR and Immunoblotting was used for estimating the levels of change in
gene/protein expression.
Results: Behavioural data show an advent of symptoms of Depressive
disorder after 5-day defeat. PSDS induced depressive disorder was associated with
the progressive advent of the behavioural markers relative to the number of stress
instances. qPCR estimation shows dysregulation of PIWIL family genes in different
brain regions by CSDS. PSDS resulted in interesting pattern of dysregulation where
the levels of PIWIL 1 & 2 spikes at the 3rd stress instance.
Discussion and Conclusion: Social Defeat Stress results in a
depression-like phenotype in mice, and the intensity of the behaviour phenotype is
dependent on the number of stress events. Molecular studies show a change in PIWIL
genes in different brain regions in response to stress and a varying level of change
is found depending on the number of stress events. The results suggest that PIWIL
genes appear to be involved in the epigenetic mechanism underlying CSDS & PSDS
induced depressive disorder phenotype.

## Acknowledgements
We wish to thank CSIR-CCMB and AcSIR for the support. We would also like to
acknowledge CSIR fellowship to AM, and DBT grant to AK on Glia research in
health & disease.

## P18: Computational Elucidation of Selected Kinase Inhibitors as Potential PINK1
Activators Crucial for Parkinson’s Disease Through Molecular Docking,
Simulation and Scaffold Analysis

Arpita Soreng1, Achyutananada Samal1, Pabitra Mohan
Behera2 and Manorama Patri1

1Neurobiology Laboratory, Department of Zoology, Ravenshaw University,
Cuttack, Odisha, India
2Redox Biology and Proteomics Group, Center of Excellence in Environment
& Public Health, Department of Zoology, Ravenshaw University, Cuttack, Odisha,
India
Background: The human PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) protein is
characterised by its critical role in mitochondrial function and quality control.
Mutations in the PINK1 gene are the main cause of mitochondrial dysfunction and
leads to early onset of Parkinson’s disease. Here we report selected kinase
inhibitors as potential PINK1 activators crucial for Parkinson’s disease.
Materials and Methods: The UniProtKB database was searched for selection
of human PINK1 protein canonical and four natural variants characterised by point
mutations A168P (rs768091663), G309D (rs74315355), T313M (rs74315359) and L347P
(rs28940285). The PubChem database was searched for downloading of twenty-two kinase
inhibitors currently used for different disease conditions as reported in
literature.
Results: The homology models of PINK1 canonical and four natural
variants designed with the template structure (PDB ID: 7MP9) have more than
90% residues in the allowed regions of the Ramachandran plots. The molecular
dynamics simulation of the designed models suggested their stability and further
use. The docking studies of selected kinase inhibitors were associated with some
reasonable docking score (from –7 to –9 kcal/mol) and hydrogen bond
interactions with some important amino acid residues lining the selected binding
site.
Discussion and Conclusions: In the absence of human PINK1 protein
crystal structure we were able to model the canonical and four natural variants
crucial for the onset of Parkinson’s disease. The comparative molecular
dynamics studies of the models revealed their stability. The selected kinase
inhibitors accommodated themselves in the defined binding site and the fetching of
potential scaffolds from them may be crucial for the design of new chemical entities
as PINK1 activators crucial for PINK1 mutation onset Parkinson’s disease.

## Acknowledgements
National Fellowship for Scheduled Tribe Students (NFST), Arpita Soreng with award
number (202223-NFST-ODI-01547).

## P19: Early Detection of Parkinson’s Disease by Using Artificial
Intelligence and Analysis of Clinico-genetic Correlates

Arvind Kumar Das1, Gyaneshwar Chaubey2, Kaushal Kishor
Shukla3 and Vijaya Nath Mishra1

1Department of Neurology, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
2Department of Zoology, Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
3Department of Computer Science, Indian Institute of Technology, Banaras
Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Parkinson’s disease, a complicated neurodegenerative
disorder, affects millions of people worldwide. It influenced by hereditary
variables such single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), which has a negative impact
on quality of life. An artificial intelligence-driven methodologies aid in
identifying SNPs, discovering novel player biomarkers and creating prediction models
for disease risk assessment.
Material and Methods: Videos and blood sample of PD patients were
collected from S.S.L. Hospital, IMS, BHU, Varanasi. The AI technique was used to
screening and feature selection for PD using Machine and Deep Learning, such as KNN,
SVM, NB, DT and RF. Further genetic analysis is performed to find out the SNPs.
Result: AI tools has identified the pattern of disease (motor and
non-motor function) and check the accuracy rate and performance. Exome sequencing
retrieved the SNPs in certain gene such as: SNCA, PARKN, DJ1 and LRRK2 that could
potentially be used as biomarkers for the early diagnosis of PD. AI-driven genetic
dataset analysis uncovers genetic changes related to Parkinson’s subtypes and
symptoms severity.
Discussion and Conclusion: AI is still in its infancy, its integration
into PD research has great promise for accelerating the development of novel
therapies, improving patient outcomes and ultimately advancing our understanding of
the disease’s core causes. In conclusion, the AI could be helpful in
examining if any person having any of these symptoms is a Patient of
Parkinson’s by machine learning which can detect the changes in expression
and movement of the patient and their correlation with SNPs.

## Acknowledgement
The authors kindly acknowledge Department of Computer Sciences, IIT, BHU for
providing software and the computational facilities for AI analysis, and
Department of Zoology, Institute of Science, BHU for providing plate form for
genomic experiment. We are highly grateful to the Department of Neurology, IMS,
BHU for extending laboratory facilities.

## P20: Root of Argyreia speciosa Attenuate Post-stroke Biochemical
Defects and Histopathological Alterations in Rats

Bhagat Singh Jaiswal1 and Mukul Tailang1

1
School of Studies in Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jiwaji
University, Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh, India
Background: The plant Argyreia speciosa Linn. f. is
commonly known as Vridhadaraka (anti-aging) in Sanskrit. In Ayurvedic system of
medicine, its root part is used as the nervine tonic and prescribed for the various
neurological medication in Ayurvedic formulations such as Ajmodadi Churna
(hemiplegia), Maharasnadi Kashayam (cerebellar ataxia) and Ashtanga Ghrita (cerebral
palsy).
Materials and Methods: Global cerebral ischemic reperfusion injury
(GCIRI) induced by occlusion of bilateral common carotid arteries for 30 min
followed by 24 h of reperfusion period. Rats were pre-treated with Argyreia
speciosa (100, 200 and 400 mg/kg). Stroke was measured by area of
cerebral infraction and brain oxidative stress markers malondialdehyde (MDA),
superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT) and glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) were
assessed. Lastly, histopathological changes in the cortex, hippocampus and striatum
of brain were studied.
Results: GCIRI significantly increases cerebral infraction area,
increased the brain MDA content while decreased SOD, CAT and GSH-Px activity.
Additionally, GCIRI rats brain tissue exhibited disturbed histoarchitecture when
compared with Sham control rats. Pre-treatment with Argyreia
speciosa significantly reduced the cerebral infraction area and
improved the all above changes to normal level in a dose-dependent
(p < .05–p < .001) way
when compared to GCIRI rats.
Discussion and Conclusion: Pre-treatment with Argyreia
speciosa has shown the significant protective effect which may be due
to a reduction in oxidative stress. The neuroprotection offered by Argyreia
speciosa against GCIRI induced stroke was confirmed by the
histopathological investigations. In conclusion, the root of Argyreia
speciosa exhibited a beneficial effect on global cerebral
ischemia-reperfusion injury and validates its traditional Ayurvedic use in the
treatment of stroke or the related disorder.

## Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the Head, Department of SOS in Pharmaceutical
Sciences Jiwaji University, Gwalior for providing necessary facilities for the
research work and Dr DP Nagar, Scientist (Pharmacology & Toxicology
division), DRDE, Gwalior for extending a helping hand in histopathological
study.

## P21: Immunocompetent Cells and Their Possible Role in Age-related Choroidal
Capillary Changes in Rat Eye

Bhaskar Sharma1 and Tapas C. Nag1

1Neurobiology Laboratory, Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India
Background: Aging and age-related ocular diseases are associated with a
significant loss of choroidal capillaries. Owing to a lack of nutrients and oxygen
to the outer retina, this capillary loss results in geographic atrophy characterised
by loss of photoreceptors and retinal pigment epithelium. This study aimed to
examine the phenotypes of microglia and other immunocompetent cells in choroidal
capillary changes associated with ageing.
Material and Methods: Male Wistar rats were reared until they were 12
months of age. Their eyes were enucleated, the choroid removed, and ELISA and
Western blotting performed to measure the levels of different cytokines.
Histochemistry and immunohistochemistry were used to examine the distribution of
different immunocompetent cells in the choroid. Capillary changes in the choroid of
young and aged animals were evaluated using TEM.
Results: The control rats showed fenestrated capillaries with a mean
luminal diameter of 12±2.5 µm, whereas in experimental rats, they were larger
in size (mean diameter: 16.7-19.4 µm). In controls, the endothelium and pericyte in
most vessels were intact, whereas the endothelium was vacuolated and the pericyte
layer was electron-dense in aged rats. The level of proinflammatory cytokine markers
in the choroidal homogenates of aged rats was significantly higher than that of
young rats. Whole-mount choroid revealed mast cells were oriented along the
capillaries. The quantity of Iba-1 positive microglia increased in older rats
compared to younger rats. These findings suggest that both mast cells and microglia
contribute to capillary injury.
Discussion and Conclusion: These findings suggest that immunocompetent
cells play a role in choroidal capillary changes with ageing.

## Acknowledgements
Supported by funds from ICMR, New Delhi (51/4/2000-ANA/BMS, TCN).

## P22: In-house Natural Product Library Screening Identifies a Resveratrol Oligomer
as Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitor in Brain: Therapeutic Implications Against
Parkinson’s Disease

Chayan Banerjee1,2, Raju Barman3, Priya
Darshani3, Meghana Pillai1, Sanchi Ahuja1,
Rupsha Mondal1,2, V.S. Pragadheesh4, Joy
Chakraborty1,2 and Deepak Kumar2,3

1Cell Biology and Physiology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical
Biology, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
2Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, Uttar
Pradesh, India
3Organic and Medicinal Chemistry Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of
Chemical Biology, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
4CSIR-Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Research Centre,
Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
Background: Due to progressive loss of dopaminergic (DAergic) neurons at
substantia nigra, Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients experience DA shortage at
striatum. As Monoamine oxidase (MAO) metabolises DA, managing its activity is
instrumental to preserve DA levels. Though plant-derived compounds are well-utilised
in therapeutics, identification of promising MAO inhibitors is still
insufficient.
Material and Methods: Based on current literature, we choose 39
compounds of different classes and screened for their MAO inhibitory properties and
the appropriate molecule was evaluated for preliminary in-vitro and
in-vivo toxicity studies. Finally, therapeutic implication of
the molecule was evaluated in a toxin-induced sporadic mouse model of PD.
Results: CB1 (a resveratrol oligomer; Mol. formula C42H30O9) offers
highest level of MAO inhibition among all compounds and exhibits no effect on cell
viability, cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels and mitochondrial
morphology in-vitro. Preliminary in- vivo toxicity
study in Drosophila does not show any alteration as well. The
compound could not protect against toxin induced DAergic neuronal loss in sporadic
PD model, however, PD-associated akinesia and catalepsy are mitigated via elevated
levels of striatal DA.
Discussion and Conclusions: We propose to consider CB1 as an adjuvant
therapeutic agent for PD associated behavioural improvements or in conditions where
MAO inhibition may offer therapeutic amelioration.

## Acknowledgement
The authors are thankful to the director of CSIR-IICB for providing necessary
support and funding. RM, CB, PD and RB are recipient of research fellowships
from CSIR, UGC, NIPER-K and CSIR (MLP-138) respectively.

## P23: p38MAPK Inhibitor SB202190 Regulates Iron Storage Component Ferritin In
glioma Cells

Poonam Gupta1, Chayanika Banerjee1, Avijit
Paul1 and Chinmay K. Mukhopadhyay1

1
Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi, India
Background: High iron availability is required for enhanced growth and
proliferation for any cancer cell including glioma. We recently reported that
endogenous phosphoinositol-3-kinase activity could suppress translation of iron
storage component ferritin to avail higher iron pool for proliferation in glioma
cells. However, role of any other kinase remains unexplored.
Methods: Glioma cells were treated with p38MAPK inhibitor SB202190 and
ferritin subunits were detected at protein and mRNA levels. Ferritin regulation was
verified at transcriptional and translational level. Cell proliferation and
intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) were also measured.
Results: Significant increase in ferritin subunits was detected by
SB202190 at protein and mRNA levels but not by p42/44 MAPK inhibitor. Regulation was
at transcriptional level as detected by Ferritin-H promoter assay but no effect was
found on translation as detected by IRE-IRP interaction. SB202190 treatment also
blocked cell proliferation and decreased intracellular ROS generation.
Discussions and Conclusions: Our results show that p38MAPK inhibitor
SB202190 can promote transcription to elevate ferritin synthesis in glioma cells.
Simultaneous blocking of cell proliferation suggests that elevated level of ferritin
may store higher iron from labile pool to reduce the availability of iron required
for cell proliferation and ROS generation.

## Acknowledgement
AP acknowledges support of D.S. Kothari post-doctoral fellowship.

## P24: Understanding Cognition and Neuro-metabolism in 5xFAD Mouse Model of
Alzheimer’s Disease

Chaynita Dashora1,2, Akila Ramesh1,2 and Anant Bahadur
Patel1,2

1NMR Microimaging and Spectroscopy, CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, Habsiguda, Uppal Road, Hyderabad, India
2Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh,
India
Background: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative
disorder, characterised by memory loss and amyloid-beta plaques accumulation1.
Several studies have reported hypometabolism in the AD brain in mouse models as well
as human subjects2,3. The aim of this study was to understand the
alterations in cognition and neurometabolism with the progression of AD.
Materials and Methods: Six and twelve months old 5xFAD male mice were
used in the study4. Memory assessment was done using the Y-Maze and
Morris Water Maze tests. Neuronal metabolic activity was measured using 1H-[
13C]-NMR spectroscopy in brain tissue after intravenous injection of [1,6-13C2]
glucose in mice5.
Results: There was a significant reduction in spontaneous alternation
(%) in 6 months old 5xFAD mice (48.57 ± 5.19%,
p = .02), which further reduced at 12 months (47.32 ±
5.65%, p = .017).
Discussion: This study aimed to investigate how memory impairment is
manifested in neurometabolism with the progression of AD. The significant reduction
in working memory in the Y-Maze test suggests deterioration of memory with the
progress of age in 5xFAD mice. Moreover, a reduction in the rate of glucose
oxidation in glutamatergic neurons points towards reduced excitatory activity in the
5xFAD model of AD.

## Acknowledgement
This study was supported by the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
(CSIR-CCMB: NCP/MLP0139). CD would like to thank DBT for SRF.

## P25: Peripheral and Central Nervous System Immune Correlates of Early Life
Stress-induced Aggressive Behaviour

Chetan Mishra1,2, Beena Pillai1,2 and Arpita
Konar3

1CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, New Delhi, India
2Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, Uttar
Pradesh, India
3Institute of Health Sciences, Presidency University, Kolkata, West
Bengal, India
Brain, a relatively immune-privileged organ, undergoes an aberrant influx of immune
cells and cytokines during pathological conditions. Apart from astrocytes and
microglia, immune cells entering the brain from circulation also cause inflammation.
The cytokines produced by these immune cells not only cause neuro-inflammation but
are also observed to affect the behaviour of an individual. Traumatic experiences
during adolescence often lead to abnormal aggression, though molecular correlates
are still elusive. Earlier, we showed that male mice exposed to fear inducing
stressors during peripubertal age showed heightened aggression in adulthood. Here,
we have investigated the status of circulatory and CNS immune markers during
peri-pubertal stress (PPS) induced long-term aggressive behaviour. We observed that
cytokines were altered both in brain regions (prefrontal cortex; hypothalamus) and
serum of PPS exposed male mice. Interestingly, circulating and brain region specific
levels of cytokines were also modulated in post weaning social isolation (PWSI for 7
weeks) subjected escalated aggressive males, another early life stress induced
behavioural model system. CNS immune markers including GFAP (astrocyte marker) and
IBA1 (pan microglial marker) were also altered in both the experimental regimes.
Further studies will help us to understand how the circulatory and brain specific
immunity play roles in early life stress induced aggressive behaviour. These
findings will eventually help us find potential immune biomarkers related to trauma
induced aggression in humans, which might be useful for reducing the aggression
phenotype.

## Acknowledgements
We would like to thank AcSIR for registration, CSIR for infrastructure and DBT
for funding.

## P26: Neuropeptide S Suppresses Pain-related Aversion via Activation of GABAergic
Neurons Within Anterior Cingulate Cortex

Dadasaheb M. Kokare1, Harish M. Kawade1, Utkarsh P.
Patil1 and Nishikant K. Subhedar2

1Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj
Nagpur University, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India
2Biology Department, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research,
Dr Homi Bhabha Road, Pune, Maharashtra, India
Background: The role of neuropeptide S (NPS) in the sensory pain is
extensively studied, however the effect of NPS on affective dimension of pain and
underlying mechanisms have not been clarified. The GABAergic neurotransmission in
the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) has been emerged as a key player in the
pain-associated emotions.
Materials and Methods: Herein, we investigated the involvement of
GABAergic interneurons of the ACC in the action of NPS on pain-induced aversion. The
adult male Wistar rats were cannulated in the ACC for different drug treatments
using stereotaxic apparatus. The formalin injection (intra-plantar) was used to
induce conditioned place aversion (F-CPA) in animals.
Results: The intra-ACC NPS infusion (2 nM/rat, ACC) in the
formalin-treated rats showed attenuation of pain-related aversion compared to a
CSF-injected control. The pre-treatment of GABA-A receptor antagonist, bicuculline
(50 ng/rat, ACC) blocks the anti-aversive effect of NPS in formalin-treated rats.
NPS administered directly in the ACC showed increase in the cfos (marker of neuronal
activity) expression on GAD67-containing (marker of GABA interneurons) neurons
within ACC of formalin-treated rats.
Discussion and Conclusion: We used F-CPA model which is an operant
behaviour that involves a learning process, and allows the assessment of supraspinal
pathways underlying pain-induced aversion. While NPS (intra-ACC) injection
attenuated the pain-related aversion, this effect was blocked by bicuculline
treatment. The NPS treatment showed activation of GAD-67-containing neurons
(GAD67+cfos co-labelling) within ACC. The data suggest that NPS in the ACC attenuate
the pain-induced aversion via activation of GABAergic interneurons.

## Acknowledgment
We acknowledge the Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) (File No.
CRG/2020/004971), Government of India, New Delhi, India for financial
support.

## P27: Effect of Citrus Odour Exposure on the Performance in Stroop Task and
Salivary Testosterone Levels in Healthy Individuals

Deep Shikha1, Pooja Ojha2, Kamla Kant Shukla3,
Om Lata Bhagat2 and Abhinav Dixit2

1Department of Physiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India
2Department of Physiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India
3Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India
Background: Olfaction and cognitive functions share a related structural
nexus. Olfaction also affects Testosterone secretion and testosterone has been shown
to affect cognitive performance. This study investigated the effects of citrus smell
on Stroop task, a cognitive task and salivary testosterone levels.
Material and Method: Participants performed two sessions of the
computer-based Stroop task at an interval of one hour. Electrodermal activity and
photoplethysmography were recorded in both sessions following a baseline recording.
A pure citrus essential oil was used as an olfactory intervention in the
experimental session during the Stroop task.
Result: Paired t-test and Wilcoxon signed-rank test (n
= 30) revealed that citrus odour significantly improved the reaction time
(p = .000) in the Stroop task. An increasing trend of salivary
testosterone level with the cognitive tasks was observed. It was more in the
presence of the citrus odour inhalation in experiment session as compared to the
control session but the difference was not statistically significant.
Conclusion: Olfactory stimulation with citrus odour improves the
performance in stroop task and increases the salivary testosterone levels. Citrus
odour may be utilised for cognitive enhancement and increasing release of salivary
testosterone.

## Keywords
Citrus odour, stroop task, cognitive performance, salivary testosterone,
cognition

## P28: Neuropeptide S Alleviate Neuropathic Pain Symptoms via Activation of Lateral
Hypothalamic Orexinergic System

Deepali M. Pandhare1, Utkarsh P. Patil1, Harish M.
Kawade1, Nishikant K. Subhedar2 and Dadasaheb M.
Kokare1

1Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj
Nagpur University, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India
2Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Pune,
Maharashtra, India
Background: Neuropathic pain (NP) develops from the lesions of
peripheral and/or central nervous system. The efficacy of available treatment
strategies for NP is limited. The orexinergic and neuropeptide S (NPS) systems per
se in the brain showed potent antinociceptive effect. Herein, we investigated the
interactions of these two systems in regulating symptoms of neuropathic pain.
Materials and Methods: The chronic constriction injury (CCI) of sciatic
nerve was used to induce mechanical allodynia and thermal hyperalgesia in Wistar
rats. The cannula was stereotaxically implanted in lateral hypothalamus (LH) and
periaqueductal gray (PAG) for drug treatments. The symptoms of the NP were tested by
Hargreaves and von Frey filament tests.
Results: On third day after the surgery, neuropathic pain-like symptoms
were developed in CCI rats. NPS administration (0.2 nM/rat, LH) in CCI rats
increased paw withdrawal latency (PWL) and threshold (PWT) compared to aCSF-injected
control. The pre-treatment of orexin-1 receptor antagonist, SB-334867 (60 nM/rat,
PAG) blocks the antinociceptive effect of NPS. While intra-LH NPS injection showed
an increase in orexin immunoreactivity, the decrease was observed in the glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) expression in the PAG.
Discussion and Conclusion: The pathological conditions following CCI
surgery in animals are similar to human neuropathies, hence this model is widely
used. While NPS injection (intra-LH) alleviate the neuropathic pain symptoms, this
effect was blocked by SB-334867 treatment. In addition to activation of orexinergic
system of LH, NPS also reduced GFAP expression in the PAG, indicates
anti-inflammatory property of peptide in the brain. The data suggest that NPS
produced antinociceptive effect through activation of the LH-PAG orexinergic
pathway.

## Acknowledgment
We acknowledge the Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) (File No.
CRG/2020/004971), Government of India, New Delhi, India for financial
support.

## P29: Studying Olfactory Behaviour of park¹³
Mutant, A Parkinson’s Disease Model of D.
melanogaster

Deepanjali Ghadge1 and Mayur Gaikwad1

1Department of Life Sciences, Sophia College (Autonomous), Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India
Background: Parkinson’s disease is a neurodegenerative disease
showing motor symptoms along with non-motor symptoms. This occurs prior to motor
symptoms and can be used as potential biomarkers for early PD diagnosis. One such
symptom is olfactory dysfunction and this study is conducted using the
park13 model, a parkin null
mutant.
Materials and Methods: Larval Olfactory Assay tests olfactory
dysfunction in drosophila larvae using odorant iso-amyl acetate and
benzaldehyde.
The adult fly olfactory assay is performed using an olfactometer with different age
groups of flies to test olfactory dysfunction and its progression as they age using
odorant iso-amyl acetate.
Results: Results indicate a significant decrease in olfaction of
park13 larvae compared to wild types when assay
was performed using odorant iso-amyl acetate with 10-3 dilution.
The same assay was performed with odorant benzaldehyde to test odour non-specific
behaviour with 10-4 dilution. This also shows a significant decrease in
olfaction.
These results help to explore the potential of using olfaction as a means of
monitoring PD progression and developing new treatments.
Discussion and Conclusions: In recent studies using the PINK-1 and
alpha-synuclein model, olfactory deficit is seen earlier than motor symptoms.
Our study indicates that park13 shows a juvenile form of
PD and thus is an excellent model for investigating olfactory dysfunction. The cause
for olfactory deficit is not yet confirmed and is predicted to be associated with
impairment in the olfactory system. More studies need to be conducted to establish
the former and hence could be used as a predicting marker for PD.

## Acknowledgements
I extend my gratitude to the Principal, Dr Anagha Patil Tendulkar the Head of the
Department of Life Science, Dr Sree Nair, and my supervisor, Mr. Mayur Gaikwad
for giving me invaluable guidance, insights, moral support, and direction to the
project. Heartfelt thanks to my faculty of the Department of Life Sciences as
well as my lab partner Sonia Joshi for unnerving support.

## P30: Role of TGR5 in Neural Stem Cell Homeostasis

Devanshu Kaushik1,2 and Prem N. Yadav1,2

1Division of Neuroscience & Ageing Biology, CSIR-Central Drug Research
Institute, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
2Jawaharlal National University, New Delhi, India
G- protein coupled bile acid receptor 1, also known as Takeda G- protein coupled
receptor TGR5 is a Gαs Coupled GPCR discovered in 2002 by
Maruyama. TGR5 is an endogenous bile acid receptor, which upon activation is known
to initiate a number of signalling pathway modulating multiple physiological
responses. For example, energy metabolism, bile acid regulation and inflammatory
responses. TGR5 mRNA has been detected in many rodent and human brain tissues,
including macrophages/monocytes, gallbladder, placenta, intestine, liver and brain.
However, the precise role of TGR5 signalling in CNS is still not clear. Given that
neural stem cell (NSC) homeostasis is considered paramount in healthy ageing and
mood, we investigated the role and mechanism of TGR5 signalling in NSC homeostasis.
Furthermore, NSC proliferation and adult neurogenesis has been shown to be
significantly reduced during ageing and brain injury. We have found abundant
expression of TGR5 in primary cultured neural stem cell from hippocampus, and in
dentate gyrus region of mice. We have shown increased proliferation of NSC upon
stimulation with TGR5 selective agonist TCG-1005. Although TGR5 agonism has been
reported to cause itch upon activation by bile acids, however we found that
synthetic agonist TCG-1005 did not induce itch in mice. Furthermore, administration
of TGR5 agonist TCG-1005 significantly increased doublecortin (DCX) positive cells
(a marker or immature neurons), indicating TGR5 role in NSC homeostasis and adult
neurogenesis. More importantly, we also found that TGR5 activation led to increases
in the quiescent neural stem cells in cultured NSC. These observations suggest that
TGR5 might be a good target to ameliorate perturbed NSC homeostasis in various CNS
disorders.

## P31: Platelets-Neutrophils and Platelets-Monocyte Crosstalk in TBM: A Pilot
Study

Devesh Kumar1, Priya Dev1 and Abhishek
Pathak1

1Department of Neurology, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
Tuberculous meningitis (TBM) is the most serious and fatal type of extrapulmonary
tuberculosis (EPTB). Early disease detection and treatment are important for the
prevention of death or neurological damage. Mycobacterium tuberculosis cannot be
effectively detected in TBM patients using only a single diagnostic technique. A
combination of tests including clinical, bacteriological and neuroimaging may help
in early TBM diagnosis and hence, better treatment options. The current study
investigates the mechanistic basis of platelet responsiveness in TBM patients
compared with healthy controls (HCs). This was a pilot study that included 20 TBM
patients admitted in the Neurology ward, IMS, BHU after using consensus III
diagnostic criteria (probable and definite), and another 20 individuals who had no
disease were recruited as HCs. Demographic characteristics and clinical profiles of
diseased subjects were collected. 20 µL Fresh blood samples from all study
participants were collected and were added to a cocktail containing 10 µL
each of APC anti-CD41a (platelets specific) and FITC anti-CD14 (leukocyte specific)
antibodies within 20 minutes of blood withdrawn, mixed gently and analysed by a flow
cytometer (FACS Calibur, BD Biosciences). Unequal variance was used for statistical
analysis of results using GraphPad Prism, version 9.0. The significance of the test
was set at p <.05. Compared to healthy controls,
platelets-monocyte and platelets-neutrophil interactions were elevated in TBM
patients, but this elevation is significant only in the case of
platelets-neutrophils. Platelets were hyperactive in TBM patients as compared to HCs
but we need a large sample size for further confirmation and evaluation of
results.

## Acknowledgement
Department of Neurology, IMS, BHU.

## P32: Delineating the Sex-specific Role of Forkhead Family Proteins in
Anxiety-like Phenotype Using the Prenatal Stress Mouse Model

Devika Mahimkar1,3, Arpan Mukhoti1,3, Unis Ahamad
Bhat1, Aaheli Chakrabarty1, Sumana
Chakravarty2,3 and Arvind Kumar1,3

1CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB), Hyderabad,
Telangana, India
2Applied Biology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology
(IICT), Hyderabad, Telangana, India
3Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, Uttar
Pradesh, India
Background: Prenatal stress (PNS) appears to have a consequence on the
offspring’s health in later life and its molecular aetiology is still
elusive. Transcriptomic data using the PNS mouse model indicated dysregulation of
Forkhead family transcription factors (TFs) in the hippocampus. Here, we strive to
understand the role of a few Forkhead proteins in PNS-induced aetiopathology.
Materials and Methods: PNS by restraint was administered to the pregnant
dam. A battery of behaviour tests was performed on the offspring during adolescence
and adulthood. Environment Enrichment (EE) for 6 weeks was used for the rescue of
the phenotype. RT-qPCR for expression of Forkhead TFs was performed on the
hippocampus tissue and the derived dentate gyrus (DG) neural stem cell culture.
Results: The analysis of behaviour data suggests that both male and
female offspring developed an anxiety-like phenotype. The phenotype was rescued in
male offspring by the EE paradigm; however, the data on the recovery of females
appear inconclusive. Our molecular data show some dysregulated Forkhead family TFs
in the hippocampus in response to PNS. Additionally, PNS appears to affect the
proliferation and differentiation potential of neural stem cells from offspring
DG.
Discussion and Conclusions: Male and female offspring subjected to PNS
developed anxiety-like phenotypes in the adult stages. However, there seemed to be
no significant changes in their object recognition memory and social interaction.
Due to the increased activity of the EE group animals, better behaviour tests are
required to correctly assess the phenotype. Some Forkhead TFs seem to be involved in
the process of neural stem cell differentiation. The underlying mechanism involving
the Forkhead family TFs is being investigated in detail.

## Acknowledgements
We thank CSIR-CCMB and AcSIR for their support. We would also like to acknowledge
the DST-INSPIRE fellowship to DM, and the DBT grant to AK on Glia research in
health & disease.

## P33: Neurotoxicity of Neonicotinoid Pesticides in Early Life Exposure: A
Meta-Analysis

Dhanshree Sayangrushi Borkar1 and Rajesh Singh
Yadav1

1School of Forensic Science, National Forensic Sciences University (An
Institution of National Importance), Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India
Background: Developing foetus are at high risk of pesticides exposure
and resulting adverse consequences due to immature blood brain barrier and
detoxification mechanism. The toxicity of neonicotinoids was formerly thought to be
low, but many experimental studies suggested a number of adverse health impacts. In
view of the toxic effect of neonicotinoids, the present work aims to analyse the
studies reporting developmental neurotoxicity caused due to neonicotinoid pesticides
both in humans and animals.
Materials and Methods: An online literature search was conducted through
PubMed, Scopus, Science direct and web of science data bases using the keywords:
‘neonicotinoids’, ‘neurotoxicity’, ‘developing
brain’ as well as combinations of these terms.
Results: A total 255 articles were fetched from the data base in which
64 were found duplicate and therefore removed. Out of 191 articles, 152 were found
the studies on lower animals, adult age group and in vitro studies and not fit for
the inclusion criteria of the present study. Further, out of 39 selected research
articles, 8 were not found in the selected study criteria and therefore excluded
from the study. A total 31 relevant articles including 07 clinical and 24
experimental studies were included in the present work.
Discussion: The findings of the present work suggested that the
neonicotinoids caused neurobehavioural toxicity in developing children and animals
associated with enhanced oxidative stress, neurochemical and molecular alterations.
The study will open new vistas for regulatory agencies to draw suitable guide maps
for its use, risk assessments and reviews the threshold limit values.

## P34: Beyond Witnessing: Underlying Neurobiological Mechanisms of Vicarious
Trauma-Mediated Development of Learned Helplessness in Male and Female Mice

Shashikant Patel1,3, Dhaygude Sainath Sunil1, Roli
Kushwaha1,3, Kalyani Soren1,3 Arvind
Kumar2,3 and Sumana Chakravarty1,3

1Applied Biology, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Tarnaka,
Hyderabad, Telangana, India
2CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Habsiguda, Hyderabad,
Telangana, India
3Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, Uttar
Pradesh, India
Background: Depression is a multifaceted mental disorder manifesting a
state of profound despair and helplessness. At its core lies the concept of learned
helplessness, where individuals perceive an inability to control adverse
circumstances. To illuminate the neurobiological dimensions of depressive-like
behaviours, we explore the novel paradigm of vicarious trauma-induced learned
helplessness using male and female mice.
Materials and Methods: Our study employs meticulous animal procurement
and housing to establish controlled conditions for a transformative 7-day
investigation. Demonstrator mice are subjected to controlled footshocks in a
modified fear conditioning apparatus, while vicarious mice bear witness to these
events without direct exposure through an insulated compartment.
Results: Behavioural assessments—including the FST, EPM and
Empathy Test—reveal heightened stress and depressive-like behaviours in both
Demonstrator and Vicarious mice. Our results provide insights into the potential
transference of learned helplessness and its emotional manifestations in vicarious
mice. Subsequent to behavioural analyses, affected brain regions- AD, NAc, PFC,
Hippo, Dorsal Striatum and Hypothalamus were microdissected and assessed. Western
blot analyses shed light on intriguing trends, including elevated NGF levels within
the amygdala, along with attenuated PSD95 levels indicative of synaptic
adaptations.
Discussions and Conclusions: This study unveils the intricate dynamics
of vicarious trauma-induced learned helplessness, bridging the gap between
observational experiences and depressive-like behaviours. The findings provide a
deeper understanding of the underlying neurobiological mechanisms and their
relevance to stress-related disorders. By elucidating the neural basis of vicarious
learned helplessness, this research contributes to a comprehensive comprehension of
depression and offers potential avenues for therapeutic exploration.

## Acknowledgements
SP and RK acknowledge CSIR for fellowship. DSS acknowledges Ministry of Ayush for
fellowship.

## P35: Role of Central Amygdalar Dopaminergic System in the Generation of
Anger-like Responses in Rats

Dipak K. Sahare1, Biru B. Dudhabhate1, Nishikant K.
Subhedar2 and Dadasaheb M. Kokare1

1Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj
Nagpur University, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India
2Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Dr Homi Bhabha Road,
Pune, Maharashtra, India
Background: Anger is a negative emotion that have great impact on daily
life and abnormally expressed in various neuropsychiatric disorders like depression,
bipolar disorders, etc. Previous reports suggest that amygdala plays an important
role in the anger, fear, aggression and emotional responses. However, its
neurological underpinning has not been clearly studied.
Materials and Methods: Herein, we sought to investigate the role of
central amygdala (CeA) dopaminergic system in the regulation of anger-like behaviour
by using novel anger paradigm in rats. We checked cFos
immunoreactivity profile in different subregions of amygdala. Moreover, dopaminergic
D2 receptor modulators [agonist (Quinpirole) and antagonist (Sulpiride)] were
administered via intra-CeA.
Results: In present study, we observed that the 48-hours food restricted
(48-hFR) (food on display) rats significantly increased anger-like behaviour (number
of bites and duration of biting) as compared to fed rats. Moreover, the anger
induction also increases the cFos immunoreactivity profile,
specifically in the CeA region of 48-hFR (food on display) rats as compared to
48-hFR (no food on display). Interestingly, while quinpirole treatment significantly
elevated anger-like behaviour, sulpiride attenuated.
Discussion and Conclusion: The increased number of bites and duration of
biting indicates anger-like behaviour. We observed that the cFos
immunoreactivity profile revealed the activation of CeA during anger-like behaviour.
The finding showed DA D2 receptors agonist and antagonist altered anger-like
behaviour. Thus, we conclude that the central amygdalar dopaminergic system is
involved in the generation of anger-like behaviours of rats.

## Acknowledgement
This work is supported by a grant from the DST-SERB (CRG/2020/004971), Government
of India, New Delhi

## P36: Disparate Unfolded Protein Response of Astrocytes in Alzheimer’s
Disease

Diptesh Roy1 and Subhas C. Biswas1

1Cell Biology and Physiology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical
Biology, Kolkata, West Bengal, India

## Abstract
Astrocyte dysfunction contributes to pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases
including Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Misfolded and aggregated amyloid-beta
(Aβ) and hyperphosphorylated tau, the hallmark signatures of AD, are
accompanied with organelle dysfunction especially mitochondria, endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) and lysosomes. Being as a major controller of proteostasis, ER
plays a key role to modulate cellular milieu with initiating unfolded protein
response (UPR) in such neurodegenerative diseases. Previously it has been
reported that neuronal dysfunction has been implicated in AD with metabolic
changes due to a moderate dose of Aβ(1-42) treatment in primary neuron
culture. In this study, a primary astrocyte culture in serum free conditioned
medium has been developed to evaluate the effect of this moderate dose of
Aβ(1-42) on metabolic changes particularly on UPR response. This
astrocyte culture has been characterised morphologically as well as genetically
upon Aβ treatment in different time points. We found that
anti-inflammatory molecules were the major entities during early onset of
Aβ exposure. However, some pro-inflammatory molecules were also increased
upon prolonged Aβ exposure. The effect of this moderate dose of Aβ
on ER stress was obscure in primary astrocyte cultures unlike neuron cultures.
We found that UPR has been initiated in astrocytes. ER membrane bound stress
sensor proteins like PERK and IRE1α have been activated as well as
altered significantly in its protein level in a time dependent manner in
response to this moderate dose of Aβ administration. But, GRP78, ER
resident constitutively expressed hsp70, responded in different manner.
Downstream effector proteins of PERK & IREIα, that is, eIF2α
and JNK were also activated upon prolong treatment. We have also checked the
expression profile of components of UPR response pathway in transgenic AD mice
which corroborated the findings of culture system. Thus, astrocytes responded
differently compared to neurons upon moderate dose of Aβ treatment and ER
stress is limited to UPR.

## Acknowledgement
The work was supported by Institutional Projects P07(IP1-SCB/547) of CSIR-IICB,
Govt. of India.

## P37: Protective Efficacy of Caffeic Acid Against Acrylamide-induced Neurotoxicity
in Rats

Divya Gupta1, Sadhana Shrivastava1 and Sangeeta
Shukla1

1Reproductive Biology and Toxicology Lab, Jiwaji University, Gwalior,
Madhya Pradesh, India
Background: The presence of acrylamide (AA) has been reported
prominently in starchy food processed at high temperatures (>90 °C).
AA and its epoxide metabolite glycidamide form protein and DNA adducts leading to
neurodegeneration. Caffeic acid (CA) is an active phytochemical compound found in
relatively high levels in herbs and spices. CA acts as an antioxidant and prevents
oxidative stress.
Materials and Methods: 18 adult Wistar rats were randomly divided into
three groups. These groups were normal saline, AA (19.13 mg/kg) for 28 days and AA
(as in group 2) +CA (20 mg/kg) for 7 days. All animals were euthanized after 24
hours of last treatment. Serum and brain sample was collected for further
experiments.
Results: Our result showed all the sign and symptoms of acrylamide
toxicity which include reduction in body weight, hind limb splaying, hair loss and
skin irritation. AA intoxication significantly increases LPO and DNA damage and
reduces BuChE, AChE and GSH cycle enzyme activities when compared with normal. Our
biochemical findings were reinforced by our light and electron microscopic
observation. Treatment with caffeic acid restored tissue and serological indices
accompanying towards normal.
Discussion and Conclusion: Our experimental findings demonstrate that
histopathological changes in the brain and alteration in biochemical parameters and
DNA damage were recovered toward normal after administration of CA. This proves that
CA exerts a protective effect against AA-induced toxicity. These ameliorative
effects of CA were due to its strong antioxidant properties. This investigation
provides a piece of useful information for future deep research on the molecular
mechanism of the pharmaceutical potential of CA against AA-induced toxicity.

## P38: Understanding the Role of Phyto­chemicals and Notch 1 in C6 Glioma Cells and
N2A Neuroblastoma Cells: An In-silico and In vitro Validation

Duhita Jadhav1 and Geetanjali Ganguli1

1Department of Life Science, Sophia College (Autonomous), Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India
Background: Glioblastoma (GBM) is a malignant grade IV astrocytoma.
Neuroblastoma is an extracranial solid tumour occurring predominantly in infants.
The Notch1 signalling pathway participates in cell proliferation, metastasis. Notch1
acts as a tumour promoter in GBM. In Neuroblastoma Notch1 expression predicts poor
outcome. Notch1-antagonising strategies are important in therapeutics.
Materials and Methods: The In-Silico study is conducted using multiple
databases. For 3D structures prediction of phytochemicals and protein the Pubchem
and Pdb database software are used respectively. Toxicity is predicted using PROTOX
II servers. Molecular docking studies are done using Autodock software, Open Bable
and PyMoL.
Results: In-silico work both the drugs are following the drug likeliness
and toxicity criteria. Molecular docking results show that the lowest binding energy
of Azelaic acid with notch protein is -5.10 binding at amino acid residue VAL485,
GLU473, PHE474, CYS476 and Limonene with notch protein is -4.31 binding at amino
acid residue VAL485, GLN475, PHE474, CYS476. In which both the drugs have low
binding energy which shows they have high binding affinity.
Discussion/Conclusions: The results of molecular docking generate the
binding energy between the protein and ligand which is an essential parameter. The
lower the binding energy value, the higher is the binding affinity and docking. The
present work indicates the binding energies of the notch protein with phytochemicals
as −4.31 and −5.10. Our next aim is to study the role of these
phytochemicals and notch 1 on C6 and N2A cell lines in vitro.

## P39: The Role of Gut Microbiome and Associated Metabolome in the Regulation of
Symbiosis and Dysbiosis Through Behavioural Alteration Protecting Neural Damage in
Adult Zebrafish

Elora Barik1 and Manorama Patri1

1Neurobiology Laboratory, Department of Zoology, School of Life Sciences,
Ravenshaw University, Odisha, India
Dysbiosis in the gut are found to be associated with the inflammatory bowel diseases
(IBD), irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), diabetes, obesity, cancer, cardiovascular and
central nervous system disorders. Benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P), a polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon (PAH) is known for its neurotoxic potential causing behavioural
alterations in animal models. Thus, the present study was conducted on Zebrafish
model to address the potential role of microbes on B[a]P-induced dysbiosis leading
to neurodegenerative disease like phenotype. We investigated the role of probiotic,
Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG) in modulating host behavioural
responses using Light/Dark Preference Test (LDPT) and Novel Tank Diving Test (NTDT)
through the metabolic processes of toxicant and microbes interaction regulating the
symbiotic process. Waterborne B[a]P exposure was carried out for a stipulated period
of 21 days at a concentration of 20 µg/L. Learning and memory was assessed by T-maze
and explorative behaviour was assessed by novel tank diving test. The findings of
the present study advocated that chronic exposure to B[a]P significantly impaired
the reference learning memory in zebrafish. Chronic exposure to B[a]P significantly
reduced the distance travelled and velocity in novel tank. To address the possible
role of microbes in B[a]P-induced learning and memory impairment showing progressive
neurodegenerative phenotypes affecting the balance between symbiosis and dysbiosis.
The gram-positive cells, behavioural alteration and neurodegeneration were analysed
and results showed significant increase in gram negative cells and pyknotic cell
count in brain with locomotor impairment. The study showed remarkable behavioural
modulation in presence of LGG in toxicant-microbiota relationship providing a major
clue for improving animal and human health. Therefore, the findings of the present
study address the potential role of probiotic maintaining symbiosis in B[a]P-induced
neurodegenerative phenotypes of adult zebrafish.

## Keywords
Gut microbiota, probiotics, Lactobacillus, brain function,
behaviour, Zebrafish

## P40: Evaluation of Neuroprotective Effects of Salvia Officinalis on Brain Tissues
in Cerebral Ischemia

Harshita Ghanghoriya1, Arvind Singh Jadon1 and Manoj
Sharma1

1School of Studies in Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jiwaji University, Gwalior,
Madhya Pradesh, India
Background: The brain requires 25% of blood pumped by heart, and
any interruption in flow of blood can result in cerebral ischemia and neurological
deficits. Cerebral ischemia is one of the leading causes of neuronal damage
worldwide. The current study looks at neuroprotective properties of Salvia
Officinalis (SO) in cerebral ischemia rats.
Methods: The study involved four rat groups: control,
ischemia/reperfusion (I/R), and two groups treated with Salvia officinalis (100 and
200 mg/kg, p.o.) for 15 days prior to I/R. After the study period, all rats were
sacrificed, and their brains were analysed. Various parameters, including
malondialdehyde (MDA), nitric oxide (NO), superoxide dismutase (SOD) and glutathione
peroxidase (GPX) levels, were assessed to evaluate oxidative stress in brain tissue.
Additionally, measurements were taken for cytokines (IL-10 and TNF-α),
nuclear factor kappa B p65 (NF-κB), caspase-3, brain ATP levels and DNA
damage using the comet assay in the brains of cerebral ischemic rats.
Results: The study found that Salvia officinalis treatment reduced MDA
and NO levels (p<0.01) and increased SOD and GPX activity in cerebral
ischemic rat brains compared to I/R rats. Additionally, SO treatment raised IL-10
and brain ATP levels and lowered TNF-α, caspase-3 and NF-κB levels in
cerebral ischemic rat brains compared to I/R rats. The comet assay showed less DNA
damage in SO-treated rat brains compared to ischemic rat brains.
Discussion and Conclusion: The current study concludes that Salvia
Officinalis has a neuroprotective effect in cerebral ischemic rats due to its
antioxidant, anti-apoptotic and anti-inflammatory activity.

## P41: Decoding Sanskrit Effect: Impact of Chanting on the Working Memory of
Children

Harshini J. Anand1 and Deepti Navaratna2

1Jiwaji University, Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh, India
2National Institute of Advanced Studies, IISC, Bangalore, Hyderabad,
India
Practices such as Mantra chanting have long been used traditionally to enhance focus
and concentration. This study investigated the effectiveness of incorporating
mantra-based interventions into educational settings to improve working memory in
children. Thirty children (16 boys), aged between 5 and 7 years, with comparable
socio-economic backgrounds and basic intelligence were taught a high metric and
syllable-accent complexity chant for 30 minutes daily over a period of 5 weeks.
Their baseline phonological awareness, working memory and mantra acquisition
parameters (syllable recognition accuracy, pulse, accent and beat pattern
recognition, recall and performance) were recorded prior to the intervention. They
were tested for changes in their working memory using assessments like the digit
span and other phonological assessment methods. The results indicate an increase in
the digit span capacity and an increased accuracy in the digit span assessments. The
children also showed a marked increase in the rhythm and pulse perception scores
alluding to increased ability to retain and manipulate information in the
phonological loop. Enhancement of pulse perception was driven by the effect of the
intervention study on the children’s ability to perceive and predict a
metronome beat pattern and timing. The findings suggest that regular mantra practice
may have a positive impact on the development and of working memory in children.
They also highlight the potential of incorporating mantra chanting into the
educational curricula as a tool to support cognitive development and increase
academic performance in children.

## P42: Lateral Habenula-Deep Brain Stimulation Improves Spatial Recognition Memory
in Depressed Rats

Hemant S. Kanhere1, Biru B. Dudhabhate1, Nishikant K.
Subhedar2 and Dadasaheb M. Kokare1

1Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj
Nagpur University, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India
2Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Dr Homi Bhaba Road,
Pune, Maharashtra, India
Background: Lateral habenula (LHb) is an important brain structure plays
a critical role in spatial memory and depression. LHb hyperactivity results in
depressive phenotype. Evidences suggesting the pharmacological inhibition of LHb in
depressed rats alleviates depression-like behaviour, but in normal rats it results
in spatial working memory impairments.
Material and Methods: Rats were exposed to chronic unpredictable mild
stress (CUMS) for 6 weeks, unilaterally (intra-LHb) implanted with electrodes and
subjected to 14 days’ deep brain stimulation (DBS) treatment (1h/day).
Thereafter, spatial memory with novel object recognition (NOR), and depression by
forced swim test (FST) and sucrose preference test (SPT) were assessed.
Results: The chronic stress exposure for 42-days increased immobility
time in FST (behavioural despair) and decreased sucrose consumption in SPT
(anhedonia). Moreover, the novel object exploration and discrimination index in the
NOR test also decreased in CUMS rats, while LHb-DBS application reversed the
depressive phenotype.
Discussion and Conclusion: Our results suggest that application of
LHb-DBS to the CUMS rats ameliorates the behavioural despairs and anhedonia,
reflecting its robust antidepressant effect. Interestingly, the DBS treatment also
improved the recognition memory, which is affected due to chronic stress exposure.
It has been suggested that DBS may improve the LHb neuropathology and reversed the
memory deficit associated with depression. Further studies need to be performed to
explore the involvement of LHb in learning memory.

## Acknowledgement
We Acknowledge Department of Science and Technology- Science and Engineering
Research Board (DST-SERB) (CRG/2020/004971) and Chhatrapati Shahu Maharaj
Research, Training and Human Development Institute (SARTHI Provided Ph. D.
research fellowship).

## P43: Analysis of Olfml3 for Its Possible Involvement in Microglia-mediated Brain
Immunity

Himanshi Yadav1 and Shashank Kumar Maurya1

1Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Zoology,
Faculty of Science, University of Delhi, India
Background: Neuroinflammation is a hallmark of many neurological
disorders characterised by microglia activation and infiltration of blood-borne
macrophages. Olfml3, a microglia-specific protein has been reported to be a direct
target of TGFβ1/Smad2 and may have a role in the regulation of microglia
functions. However, information about the Olfml3 protein and its possible
involvement in neuroinflammation is still lacking.
Materials and Methods: Lipopolysaccharide-induced neuroinflammatory mice
model was used to study the expression pattern of Olfml3 by qPCR and western
blotting. Furthermore, the in-silico analysis was done to predict the
physicochemical properties, structure, specific interacting proteins and signalling
pathways.
Results: The expression of Olfml3 at both transcript and protein levels
was observed to increase in LPS-induced mice as compared to the control. Olfml3 is
predicted to be a stable protein with a high aliphatic index, a large proportion of
beta sheets and novel posttranslational modification sites. It was found to interact
with proteins essential for microglia proliferation, activation and migration,
extracellular matrix organisation, immunoregulatory interactions between a lymphoid
and a non-lymphoid cell, and integrin cell surface interaction.
Discussion and Conclusion: The results of the present study demonstrated
an increase in Olfml3 expression in LPS-treated mice. The Olfml3 instability index
was found to be low and the aliphatic index was recorded high indicating
thermostability. The coiled-coil domain and olfactomedin-like domain were found to
be conserved across mammals. By interacting with proteins of microglia, neurotrophic
factors and inflammatory response mediators, Olfml3 could play an important role in
the regulation of brain-specific immunity.

## Acknowledgements
Financial support of the Institution of Eminence, University of Delhi (IoE, DU)
is gratefully acknowledged.

## P44: Unravelling the Auditory Enigma: A Comprehensive Neuroimaging Investigation
of White Matter Tracts in Subjective Tinnitus

Himanshi Raj Pandey1,2, Neeraj Sinha1 and Uttam
Kumar1

1Centre of Biomedical Research, SGPGIMS Campus, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh,
India
2Academy of Scientific & Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, Uttar
Pradesh, India
Background: Tinnitus, delineated as the phantom perception of sound
devoid of corresponding external auditory stimuli, is classified into two
distinctive categories: subjective and objective tinnitus. The former, a perceptual
anomaly without observable neurological pathology, stands in contrast to the latter,
stemming from specific neurological aberrations.
Materials and Methods: In this study, 22 subjective tinnitus patients
and 22 controls were analysed using diffusion tensor imaging data acquired from 3T
MRI. The focus was on cerebral white matter tracts implicated in tinnitus, with
analysis conducted via DSI Studio software, highlighting specific alterations in
auditory processing pathways.
Results: Our investigation revealed marked alterations in fractal
anisotropy in the Inferior Fronto- Occipital Fasciculus (IFOF) and Uncinate
Fasciculus (UF) in subjective tinnitus patients. These white matter tracts are
crucial for connecting auditory and visual association cortices with the prefrontal
cortex and are implicated in auditory verbal and declarative memory functions.
Intriguingly, these disparities were primarily localised to the right cerebral
hemisphere, delineating a unique neuroanatomical pattern when juxtaposed with the
control group.
Discussion and Conclusions: Subjective tinnitus, a complex neurological
puzzle, involves intricate axonal connections. The Inferior Fronto-Occipital
Fasciculus (IFOF) forges connections between auditory domains and visual association
cortex, extending to the prefrontal cortex. The Uncinate Fasciculus (UF), comprising
motor and sensory fibres, links the orbital and inferior frontal gyri with the
anterior temporal lobe. These pathways hint at the multifaceted neuroanatomical
underpinnings behind phantom auditory sensations, but their exact roles remain
elusive.

## Acknowledgements
We acknowledge DST (IF200126) and ACSIR for providing funding and academic
support.

## P45: Diving into Anxiety

Irshikaa Sharma1, Navin Chawathe1 and Tressa
Jacob1

1Department of Life Sciences, Sophia College (Autonomous), Mumbai,
Maharshtra, India
Background: Anxiety is a common psychological condition characterised by
excessive fear in everyday situations. Schreckstoff (German word for fright
substance), which is released upon mechanical damage to the fish, induces anxiety in
zebrafish. The effects of anxiolytics such as ethanol have been tested to study the
reversal of anxiety caused by Schreckstoff.
Materials and Methods: Adult zebrafish (1.5-2 years) were used to
collect Schreckstoff and also tested for the behavioural analysis. The novel test
tank assay has been modified and used to test for anxiety induced in zebrafish.
Result: A novel method has been devised wherein the chemical can be
extracted from the skin of the zebrafish by simply scrapping the skin. On
introducing the fish to Schreckstoff, they show anxious behaviour such as darting
movements, freezing bouts and reduced exploration of the tank. We have recently
shown that after treatment with ethanol, the anxious behaviour is reduced. 1%
ethanol has proven to be the best suited concentration for anxiety reversal.
Discussion and Conclusion: Schreckstoff can be collected from the wounds
of the fish skin by injuring it multiple times. The novel method devised by our lab
works as an alternative to this method wherein the fish need not be sacrificed after
Schreckstoff collection. The effects of anxiolytics such as ethanol have been tested
to study the reversal of anxiety caused by Schreckstoff in zebrafish. Currently, we
are addressing the neurotransmitters related to this anxiety process in
zebrafish.

## Acknowledgements
I thank the Principal, Dr Anagha Patil Tendulkar and the Head of the Department
of Life Sciences, Dr Sree Nair for giving me the opportunity to present my work.
I thank the Department of Life Sciences at Sophia College, Mumbai for providing
me with the fish facility and the resources required to carry out my project. I
would like to Dr Mahendra Sonawane and his lab members at TIFR, Mumbai for
helping me learn the various techniques required for my project. I would also
like to thank Dr Kalidas Kohale and his team of the fish facility at TIFR,
Mumbai for providing me with the wild type strain used in the experiments. Thank
you to my supervisor, Dr Tressa Jacob and all the faculty members at the
Department of Life Sciences, Sophia College, Mumbai for giving me their
guidance. Thank you to my senior Navin Chawathe for initiating this project and
supporting me through

## P46: Deciphering the Role of 17β-estradiol in Pathogenesis of Temporal
Lobe Epilepsy

Jaldhi1, Sonali Kumar2, Ozasvi R. Shanker2,
Jyotirmoy Banerjee3, P. Sarat Chandra4, Manjari
Tripathi5, Shashank Kumar Maurya1, Aparna
Dixit2 and Amrita Bakshi2,6

1Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, India
2Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Centre for Biomedical Research, University of Delhi,
India
3Department of Biophysics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India
4Department of Neurosurgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India
5Department of Neurology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India
6Department of Zoology, Ramjas College, University of Delhi, India
Background: Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is one of the most common
drug-resistant epilepsy. Although 17β-estradiol affects neuronal
excitability, expression of its receptor (ERα, ERβ) is least explored
in epilepsy. Therefore, present study is designed to elucidate expression of
oestrogen receptors (ERα, ERβ) in hippocampus of epileptic rats and
correlate with neuroinflammation.
Materials and Methods: Adult male rats were administered with
pilocarpine to generate acute model of TLE. Western blotting and qPCR of oestrogen
receptors, neurotrophic factors and neuroinflammatory markers were performed to
analyse hippocampal protein and mRNA levels, respectively.
Results: The expression levels of oestrogen receptors, neurotrophic
factors and neuroinflammatory markers were found to be upregulated in hippocampus of
epileptic male rats as compared to the controls.
Discussion and Conclusions: Increased expression of ERα and
ERβ were seen to positively correlate with the levels of neurotrophic factors
and neuroinflammatory markers. A single report in ovariectomised mice demonstrates
reduced hippocampal expression of ERβ. Further, deletion of ERβ has
shown to elevate the seizure susceptibility which suggests its neuroprotective role
in chronic epilepsy. Additional studies are required to validate the role of ERs in
neuroinflammation and seizure susceptibility in epilepsy.

## Acknowledgement
Department of Health Research (DHR), Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, New
Delhi is acknowledged for the financial assistance.

## P47: Targeting Adult Neurogenesis for Hippocampal Regeneration Following
Neurodegeneration by Recruitment of Endogenous Neural Progenitors

Jhilik Dey1,2,3 and Prem Prakash Tripathi1,2,3

1Cell Biology and Physiology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical
Biology (CSIR-IICB), Jadavpur, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
2IICB-Translational Research Unit of Excellence (IICB-TRUE), Kolkata, West
Bengal, India
3Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, Uttar
Pradesh, India
Background: Seizure-induced neurodegeneration in the hippocampus
provides a powerful model for investigating adult neurogenesis as a response to
injury in an attempt for brain regeneration following neurodegeneration by
recruitment of endogenous neural progenitors. Our present study investigates the
response of endogenous neural progenitors following injury and their roles in
hippocampal regeneration.
Materials and Methods: Kainic Acid was administered once
intraperitoneally at a dose of 30mg/kg of animal body weight followed by BrdU
injection at various time points to mark the new-born neurons. Transcardial
perfusion was performed; brain samples were fixed and processed by cryosection.
Immunofluorescence was performed using a routine procedure.
Result: Seizure-induced selective lesions at the CA1 and CA3 regions of
the hippocampus were detected following KA treatment by Nissl staining. Also, TUNEL+
cells were observed at those injury sites (CA3 and CA1). Our result showed that
there is massive activation, proliferation and migration of the endogenous neuronal
progenitors at injury sites following KA-induced neurodegeneration. Around 45 days
of post-KA treatment, the reappearance of pyramidal neurons at injury sites was
observed.
Conclusion: In response to neurodegeneration following a seizure, a
robust proliferation of endogenous neuronal progenitors in the dentate gyrus of the
adult brain has taken place. These new-born neural progenitors may, in turn, have
subsequently migrated at the injury sites to generate new neurons there. Thus, the
presence of new neural progenitors at injury sites, followed by gradual regeneration
of hippocampus pyramidal neurons shows the endogenous repair potential of the brain
to restore brain functions.

## Acknowledgement
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial assistance from SERB, CSIR and
UGC-JRF Fellowship.

## P48: Identifying Transcriptional Factors Involved in Non-canonical Hes1
Activation

Jyothi P. Nair1,2, Rahul Jose1,3, Budhaditya
Basu1,3, Surya Suresh1,2, Archana R.1, Riya
Ann Paul1,2, Parvathy Surendran1,2, Meera V.1,2
and Jackson James1

1Neuro Stem Cell Biology Laboratory, Regenerative Biology, Rajiv Gandhi
Centre for Biotechnology, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India
2University of Kerala, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India
3Regional Centre for Biotechnology (DBT-RCB), Faridabad, Hariyana,
India
Background: Hes1 is a crucial transcription factor that plays a
fundamental role in stem cell maintenance and differentiation. Conventionally, Hes1
activation has been associated with the canonical Notch signalling pathway involving
CBF1. Along with other reports, we found the existence of CBF1 independent Hes1
activation in mouse neocortex.
Materials and Methods: The Reverse Chromatin Immunoprecipitation
(Reverse-ChIP) assay was employed with Hes1 promotor using mouse cortical nuclear
extract (E14). Utilising Molecular techniques, Mass spectrometry and Bioinformatics
we examined the regulatory elements and signalling pathways that contribute to Hes1
upregulation independent of the canonical Notch pathway.
Results: We identified the binding of transcriptional factors (β
catenin, Smad, Tead1, Foxg1) involved in other signalling pathways on Hes1 promoter
using mass spectrometry. We found an enrichment of signalling pathways such as Wnt,
Hippo, TGFB, FOXO and Hedgehog, among which, Wnt signalling is the most prominent.
Our analysis suggests a possible cross talk among the signalling pathways. The
findings offer significant implications on regulatory mechanisms controlling gene
expression and transcriptional regulation of the Hes1 promoter.
Discussion and Conclusion: The study contributes to our understanding
regarding gene regulation and its impact on cortical development. The signalling
pathways involved in activation of Hes1 non canonically would help us understand how
the neural stem cells are maintained in the neocortical niche. The implications of
our findings extend beyond the realm of developmental biology, as dysregulation of
Hes1 has been linked to various pathologies, including cancer and neurodegenerative
disorders.

## Acknowledgement
Supported by DST SERB (CRS/2021/005847) and Intramural grand from RGCB.
Fellowship to JPN (366288) from UGC RJ (12416) from CSIR.

## P49: Ex vivo Metabolic Alterations in a Rat Model of Repetitive Brain
Injury

Jyoti Chaurasia1, Samiya Zehra2, A.K.
Baranwal3, Kamlesh Singh Bhaisora4 and Ahmad Raza
Khan2

1Department of Biochemistry, University of Lucknow, Lucknow, Uttar
Pradesh, India
2Department of Advanced Spectroscopy and Imaging, Centre of Biomedical
Research (CBMR), SGPGI Campus, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
3Experimental Animal facility, SGPGIMS, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
4Department of Neurosurgery, SGPGIMS, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: In most instances, mild and repetitive mild head injuries
(RmTBI) are unreported, although is a strong risk factor for neurodegenerative
diseases. Due to the absence of any objective markers for such injuries, it’s
crucial to develop effective prevention strategies. Ex-vivo metabolic changes in
RmTBI rat models suggesting elevated oxidative stress.
Material and Methods: Rats were divided into three groups, viz. control,
mTBI and RmTBI. The latter two experiencing single and triple head injuries. Brain
tissue metabolites were extracted using perchloric acid extraction method. NMR data
were acquired on 800 MHz NMR-Spectrometer and analysed on Metaboanalyst
platform.
Results: The multivariate data analysis was performed on all the 1D
1H CPMG NMR spectra obtained for the injured and control group
revealing significant differences between control and mTBI and RmTBI groups through
PCA analysis. In post-mortem brain tissue, 1H NMR was utilised to aptly
detect total 18 metabolites. Through ANOVA (p<0.05), acetate and formate were
found significant out of all metabolites profiled in the hippocampus.
Discussion and Conclusion: A systemic change in the metabolites occurs
during brain injury. We observed a significant variation in acetate and formate only
in the hippocampus region. Acetate indicated energy perturbation in both groups and
suggest disturbed energy metabolism. While formate significantly altered only in the
mTBI group and suggest neurodegeneration. Metabolic profiling of the motor cortex
and cerebellum region did not show any significant metabolic alterations. Therefore,
we concluded that the hippocampus is the most sensitive region of the brain.

## Acknowledgements
The work is funded by the Department of Biotechnology, Govt of India under the
Ramalinga swami Re-entry Fellowship grant 2019. We would also like to thank our
host institute, the Centre of Biomedical Research (CBMR), under the Department
of Health and Family Welfare, UP Govt. We also thank our collaborators for their
support for animal experimentation at SGPGI, Lucknow.

## P50: BBPT Prevents Apoptosis Through Caspase-3/BCL-2 Expression and Suppresses
Neuro-inflammatory Pathway in 6-OHDA-induced Unilaterally Lesion Rat Model of
Parkinson’s Disease Through Non-dopaminergic Pathway

Jyoti Mishra1 and Pratibha Mehta Luthra1

1Neuro-pharmaceutical Chemistry Laboratory, Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Centre for
Biomedical Research, University of Delhi, India
Background: Parkinson’s disease (PD) is neurodegenerative
disorder characterised by dopaminergic neuron damage in SNPc which involved in
neuro-inflammation, dysregulation in calcium signalling, autophagy and apoptosis.
Therapeutic potential BBPT as A2A receptor antagonist investigating the
efficacy of BBPT in counteraction of free radical-scavenging and superoxide
scavenging activities by 6-OHDA induced PD.
Material and Methodology: Various antioxidant assays DPPH and ABTS assay
had done before evaluating the neuro-protecting effect of BBPT. Unilaterally lesion
6-OHDA model in rats was established and validated by behavioural test.
Neurochemical protein expression (TH and dopamine level), anti-oxidants MDA, GSH,
SOD, catalase, dopamine and glutamate levels were studied in 6-OHDA induced PD.
Results: BBPT showed better antioxidant activity in comparison to
ascorbic acid. BBPT reverse significant changes in motor and non-motor symptoms of
unilaterally lesioned 6-OHDA induced PD. Neurochemical alteration like TH enzyme,
Dopamine, genetic mutation (DJ-1 and parkin level), anti-oxidant enzymes,
neuro-inflammatory (TNF-α and IL-6) and apoptotic proteins (Caspase-3 and
BCL-2) were restored after BBPT treatment in unilaterally 6-OHDA induced PD in SD
rats.
Discussion and Conclusion: Our results demonstrated that the compound
BBPT is non-toxic and BBPT modulated Caspase-3/BCL-2 levels to inhibits apoptosis
and decreases the TNF-α and IL-6 levels leading to restore the neuronal
damage in unilaterally lesioned 6-OHDA induced SD rats. Thus, the research amply
supported BBPT’s eminence as a potent anti-parkinsonian drug with a
significant capacity to prevent neurodegeneration. This might have an impact on the
pathophysiology of PD and potential treatment targets in the future.

## Acknowledgements
Jyoti Mishra is thankful to the University Grant Commission (UGC), CSIR, New
Delhi, India for the award of Junior Research Fellowship. Pratibha Mehta Luthra
is thankful to the IoE, University of Delhi for sanctioning research funds to
carry out this study. We acknowledge the Central Instrumentation facility (CIF),
ACBR, University of Delhi, India for providing necessary support.

## P51: Exploring Gene Regulation and Electro-behavioural Alterations in
Pilocarpine-induced Epilepsy in Rats

Jyoti Tyagi1, Shweta Saran1, K.C. Upadhayay1
and Deepak Sharma1

1School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,
India
Background: Epilepsy is a neurological disorder characterised by
episodes of recurrent seizures. The prevalence and onset of epilepsy is
multifactorial and contributed by misregulation in the expression of multiple vital
genes. The role of multiple genes associated with epilepsy in patients still
remained to be studied in animal models, to explore the onset and progression of
epileptogenesis which can change the idea for therapy. Hence, in our study, we
evaluated the expression pattern of STX1B, KCNN2, FOXO, GABRA and GRIK1 genes, and
electro-behavioural alterations in pilocarpine-induced epilepsy.
Methods: Male Wistar rats (~250gms) to induce epilepsy pilocarpine
(127mg/kg) was injected in Wistar rats. which resulted in progressive evolution of
seizures. To reduce the mortality rate in rats Diazepam (8mg/kg) was administered
120 min after Status epilepticus (SE) induction Epileptiform seizures were confirmed
by Racine scale and electroencephalographic (EEG) from the cortex and hippocampus of
the brain, post 25 days of injection. Electro-behavioural assessment was carried out
by using Morris water maze (MWT) test to investigate spatial learning in epileptic
rats. The mRNA expression of STX1B, KCNN2, FOXO, GABRA and GRIK1 genes was analysed
using real time-PCR.
Results: Our results demonstrated the occurrence of discrete
epileptiform episodes in the cortex and hippocampus suggesting epilepsy in
pilocarpine-induced rats. It was further confirmed by the electro-behavioural
analysis. Decreased spatial learning was observed in epileptic rats. The expression
of STX1B, KCNN2, FOXO, GABRA and GRIK1 genes was seen to be down-regulated in both
cortex and hippocampus of pilocarpine-induced epileptic rats.
Conclusion: The product of these genes STX1B, KCNN2, FOXO, GABRA and
GRIK1 could be involved in the altered electro-behavioural expression affecting
spatial learning and collectively inducing epilepsy in pilocarpine-injected rats.
Hence, this model can be further explored to get an insight into the gene expression
patterns, observed in human epileptic conditions.

Acknowledgment

Financial assistance for the present study was provided from ICMR, New Delhi,
India.

## P52: Understanding Anxiety-like Behaviours Manifested in Rodent Model of
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD)

Jyotsna Pandey1, Amrutha S.2, Sakshi Sharma1,
Suman Jain3 and Varsha Singh4

1School of Interdisciplinary Research, Indian Institute of Technology
(IIT), Delhi, India
2Indian institute of Technology Delhi, India
3Department of Physiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India
4Humanities and Social Sciences, IIT Delhi, India
Background: AD is a neurodegenerative disorder that affects cognitive
functions, leading to memory loss, impaired thinking and difficulty in performing
daily activities. However, AD is not limited to cognitive symptoms; it can also
manifest with a range of neuropsychiatric symptoms, including psychological distress
and mood alterations such as anxiety and depression. We aimed to examine the
anxiety-like behaviours with AD to provide insights into the interplay between
cognitive decline and emotional states.
Materials and Method: Open filed test paradigm was performed in adult males
(n = 20) albino wistar rats weighing 220- 250g to examine the
anxiety-like behaviour. The variables taken for the assessment of OFT were total
time spent in the periphery, corner and centre of the chamber, frequency of climbing
and rearing which may provide insights into the animal’s level exploration
and anxiety,
Results: Analysis showed that AD rats spent less time in the centre
(inner zone) than the healthy control rats (p = .003,
t = 3.434, df = 18), and chose to spend more
time in the corners of the chamber (p = .01, t =
2.628, df = 18). Further, when the ethological parameters were
assessed, we observed increased climbing (p = .03,
t = 2.324, df = 18) and rearing
(p = .04, t = 2.213, df = 18)
in AD rats, suggesting increased emotional distress in AD rat model.
Discussion and Conclusion: Our analysis suggests that there is a
connection between AD-related neuropathology and anxiety-like behaviour. However,
the results from studies examining anxiety-like behaviour in AD have been
inconsistent. The findings highlight the complexity of the relationship between AD,
anxiety-like behaviour and the need for more comprehensive approaches to studying
emotional dysfunction in AD models. This could lead to a better understanding of the
underlying mechanisms and potential avenues for treatment strategies targeting both
cognitive and emotional symptoms in AD.

## Acknowledgements
VS and SJ supervised the study, JP collected the data and guided the interns to
perform the analysis, AS performed the data analysis. This work was under DST
SERB Vritika Research Training Grant of the author (VS) supporting the Trainee
(AS).

## P53: Navigating the Neural Labyrinth: A Technical Exploration of Age-related
Changes in Brain Complexity

Kalpana Dhanik1 and Uttam Kumar1

1
Center of Biomedical Research, SGPGIMS Campus, Lucknow,
Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Brain complexity, encompassing attributes like gyrification
and fractal dimension, is an indicator of brain health and neurological disorders.
Age-related declines in complexity are linked to cognitive impairment and
neurodegenerative diseases. This study probes these changes to enhance understanding
and potential early detection of related issues.
Material & Methods: Forty participants were analysed using a 3T
Siemens Magnetom Skyra scanner with a T1-weighted MPRAGE sequence. The study used
computational anatomy toolbox (CAT12/SPM12) for processing and included
surface-based morphometric analysis. Statistical analysis identified complexity
differences between aging and early adult groups, with corrections made using the
FDR method.
Results: The quantitative analysis demonstrated pronounced differences
in brain complexity between normal aging and early adult groups. These disparities
were particularly evident in the frontal, temporal, parietal and occipital regions
of the brain. These areas are integral to cognitive functions, including memory,
attention, languag and spatial reasoning. The observed variations may underline
substantial shifts in neural connectivity and processing, reflecting the age-related
changes that affect essential cognitive abilities, thereby contributing to the
broader understanding of aging’s impact on the brain.
Discussion and Conclusion: This study reveals significant age-related
changes in brain complexity, particularly in regions governing cognitive functions.
The differences may indicate alterations in neuronal connectivity and function,
leading to cognitive decline and increased risk of neurodegenerative disorders. The
findings contribute to understanding the aging brain, offering potential pathways
for early diagnosis or targeted therapies, thus emphasising the importance of
complexity measures in neuroscience and clinical practice.

## Acknowledgement
We acknowledge CBMR for providing intramural funding.

## P54: Stereological Analysis of Microglia in Rat Hippocampus Following Partial
Sciatic Nerve Ligation

S. Kamalesh1, Mamta Bishnoi1, Tony George
Jacob1 and Saroj Kaler Jhajhria1

1All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India
Background: Neuropathic pain, a complex and debilitating condition,
poses challenges in understanding its underlying mechanisms and impact on brain
regions such as the hippocampus. This project aimed to investigate the effects of
partial sciatic nerve ligation (PSNL), a model of neuropathic pain, on microglia in
the rat hippocampus through design-based stereology.
Materials and Methods: Male Sprague Dawley rats were divided into Sham
and PSNL groups, with a 28-day observation period. Optical fractionator was used to
quantify the total number of microglia. Nucleator probe was used to measure the
approximate volume of the microglial cell body. Cavaliery probe was used to measure
the approximate volume of the contralateral hippocampus.
Results: Design-based stereology provided quantitative insights into
microglial changes. The PSNL group demonstrated a significant increase in the total
count of IbA1-positive microglia in the contralateral hippocampus. Furthermore,
analysis using the nucleator probe revealed a noteworthy increase in the average
volume of microglia in the PSNL group. The cavaliery probe indicated no significant
differences in the volume of the contralateral hippocampus between the PSNL and Sham
groups.
Discussion: This study highlights the impact of neuropathic pain on the
hippocampus, shedding light on microglial activation and potential alterations in
behaviour. The project also demonstrates the utility of design-based stereology in
precisely quantifying microglial parameters and hippocampal volume, offering a
comprehensive view of neuropathic pain induced alterations. This work contributes to
the broader field of neuropathic pain research and encourages further investigation
into the complex relationships between pain, microglia and brain function.

## Acknowledgement
We would like to thank the Department of Anatomy, AIIMS, New Delhi for funding
this project.

## P55: Neurochemical Alterations in Primary Visual Cortex (V1) During Retinal
Degeneration

Kashish Parnami1 and Anwesha Bhattacharyya1

1Amity Institute of Neuropsychology and Neurosciences, Amity University,
Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Retinal degeneration (RD) involves gradual retina
deterioration, including light- sensitive photoreceptor loss. Electrophysiological
studies explored photoreceptor death’s impact on V1 neuron responses. Our
study examines GABAergic neuron subtypes to reveal neurochemical changes that shape
excitatory neuron output. This insight enhances understanding RD’s effects on
visual processing and neuronal communication.
Materials and Methods: Changes in parvalbumin and somatostain groups of
interneurons were studied in a mouse model of RD, C3H/HeJ (rd1) mice and compared
with C57BL/6 wild type mice. Animals were intracardially perfused, brains were
dissected, postfixed followed by sectioning in cryostat. Sections were
immunostained, visualised in confocal microscope and images were quantified.
Results: A trend of higher number of GABAergic neurons were observed in
the upper layers of the V1 as compared to the lower layers. Next, we evaluated the
changes in the GABA neurons in different age groups (early and late). No clear
changes in parvalbumin (PV) and somatostatin (SST) were observed in either stage of
wildtype animals. However, there was a decline in the population of PV neurons in
the early stages of RD.
Discussion: Here, we show that there is a decrease in the population of
subtypes of GABAergic neuron during RD, indicating a possible connection between
visual impairment and changes in inhibitory interneuron populations. This reduction
in specific GABAergic subtypes may contribute to disruptions in
inhibitory-excitatory balance within V1, possibly affecting the processing of visual
information and the overall functionality of the visual cortex.

## Acknowledgment
AB was supported by the Ramanujan Fellowship of Science and Engineering Research
Board (SERB), Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India
(Grant: RJF/2019/000040), and the Core Research Grant (CRG) of SERB, DST
(CRG/2021/003472.

## P56: Glycaemic Fluctuations and Their Effect Semaphorin 4D in Frontal Cortex of
Diabetic Rats

Kavya Shah1 and Amee Krishnakumar1

1Institute of Science, Nirma University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
Intricate arborisation of neuronal dendrites is crucial for signal processing. Sema4D
binding with plexinB1 is involved in process that modulates dendritic branching via
cytoskeletal dynamics including actin and microtubule organisation in CNS neurons,
including those in frontal cortex. Alterations in the Sema4D/plexinB1 signalling are
associated with neurological disorders characterised by abnormal dendritic
morphology, highlight its role in circuit maintenance. ATP powers actin
polymerisation and its hydrolysis within filaments, while microtubule motor proteins
use ATP hydrolysis for movement during growth cone formation. Altered glycaemic
levels could disrupt ATP-dependent cytoskeletal dynamics. Unexplored effects of
glycaemic variations on Sema4D/plexinB1 signalling could potentially interrupt
branching, revealing metabolic impacts on neurodevelopment. The primary function of
the frontal cortex involves integrating sensory stimuli, executing decisions and
generating motor responses through its dendritic architecture, which might get
altered during disrupted glycaemic regulation. Diabetes (D) was induced in adult
male Wistar rats (250-300g), by a single intravenous dose of streptozotocin (30
mg/kg body weight). Hypoglycaemia was induced by administering daily two doses of
insulin in control (C+IIH: 1.5 IU/kg body weight), and in diabetic (D+IIH: 10 IU/kg
body weight) rats via subcutaneous dosing for 4 weeks. Gene expression analyses of
Sema4D and PlexinB1 and Adhesion Removal behavioural assay were conducted in
experimental rats. Alterations in gene expression levels in experimental conditions
can be a causing factor of changes in frontal cortex dendritic structure. Thus, our
study highlights the underlying role of Sema4D in dendritic arborisation under
glycaemic alterations offers a promising avenue for further investigation.

## Acknowledgement
Dr Amee Krishnakumar thanks Institute of Science, Nirma University for
infrastructural facility. Ms. Kavya Shah acknowledges the fellowship grant
(202101569) from ScHeme of Developing High quality search (SHODH), Education
Department, Gujarat State and Institute of Science, Nirma University for
Research Budget for PhD Scholars (E1A07A).

## P57: Association of Pax6, Parkin and α-Synuclein in Parkinson’s
Disease

Khushboo Srivastava1 and Rajnikant Mishra1

1Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Zoology,
Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Pax6, evolutionary conserved transcription factor, is
required for the functional anatomy of the eyes, brain, pituitary, pineal and
pancreas. However, mechanisms of Pax6 functions and it association with Parkin and
α-synuclein in Parkinson are unavailable.
Material and Methods: Adult male mice (Mus musculus) of
AKR strain were used for developing the Parkinson’s model by using MPTP
(20mg/kg, SC, 21 days). Brains were removed, fixed and process for cryo-sectioning,
Nissl staining and Immunohistochemical analysis. SH-SY5K, NIH-3T3 cell lines were
also used to evaluate association of Pax6, Parkin, α-Synuclein.
Results: Cell types and numbers decrease in the striatum (SNc, DV) and
layers of cerebral cortex; molecular layer (MoLr), external granular layer (ExGl),
pyramidal layer or external plexiform layers (PyLr/ExPl), inner granular layer
(InGl), ganglionic layer (GaLr), multiform layer (MuLr) in brain of MPTP-treated
Parkinson’s mouse model. The Pax6, Parkin and α- Synuclein co-localise
but their expression and co-localisation change in the MPTP treated mice and SH-SY5Y
cell line.
Discussion and Conclusions: Reduction in Pax6 and Parkin-positive cells
and increase in α- Synuclein immuno-positive cells in brain of MPTP induced
mice, and co-localisation of Pax6 with Parkin and α-Synuclein in SH-SY5Y cell
line indicate their association in Parkinson disease.

## Acknowledgements
DBT, India, BT/PR28908/MED/122/174/2018 Dt 10/02/2020.

## P58: Unravelling the Therapeutic Potential of Atomoxetine in Animal Model of
Burn-Injury-induced Chronic Pain

Krushna Eknath Yadav1, Nipun Pundeer1 and Vinod
Tiwari1

1Neuroscience and Pain Research Laboratory, Department of Pharmaceutical
Engineering and Technology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh,
India
Background: Burn injuries is the most burdensome and common problem
which is the main cause of mortality along with severe and long-lasting pain. The
pathophysiology of burn pain is poorly understood due to various pathways associated
with it & the lack of clinical and pre-clinical shreds of evidence. It is
generally caused by physical contact with harmful elements such as flames,
electricity, scalding etc. Through behavioural assessments, biochemical, mRNA and
protein expression, the study aimed to uncover the mechanism by which atomoxetine
modulates pain perception and to assess its potential as a novel therapeutic option.
In this study we are investigating the antinociceptive effect of atomoxetine,
suggesting its potential to alleviate burn-injury induced chronic pain by targeting
different types of nociceptors.
Materials and Methods: Animals: Male Sprague Dawley rats
(200–220gm); Drugs: Atomoxetine (1,3,10 mg/kg i.p.), Morphine 5mg/kg i.p.);
Behavioural assessment: Mechanical Allodynia-Von Frey test, Thermal
Hyperalgesia-Hargraves test, Cold Allodynia- Acetone drop test, Cold
Hyperalgesia-Ice Floor test.
Biochemical Analysis: GSH, MDA and Nitrite.
Discussion and Conclusion: According to Behavioural studies, atomoxetine
exhibits effective anti-nociceptive activity in burn-injured rats. The effect is
also maintained for nearly 120minutes after drug administration in various pain
behaviour tests and for 240 minutes in the case of mechanical allodynia. These
results from Hargreaves test, von Frey hair test, acetone evaporation test and ice
floor test support that atomoxetine can modulate thermal hyperalgesia, mechanical
allodynia, cold allodynia and cold hyperalgesia in burn injury rats. Atomoxetine has
also shown a significant effect on the levels of Glutathione, Malondialdehyde and
nitrite stress indicating that it can attenuate the oxidative stress in the sciatic
nerve of burn-injured rats. This promising finding may pave the way for further
research that could lead to a novel treatment for burn pain.
Results: Results suggest that burn injury reduced the level of
antioxidant enzyme glutathione which was further elevated by the atomoxetine
treatment. The level of malonaldehyde was found to be increased by the burn injury
which was attenuated by the atomoxetine treatment and the nitrite level was found to
be significantly reduced by the atomoxetine treatment. Results indicate that
Atomoxetine (Strattera®), a selective norepinephrine (NE) reuptake inhibitor
and potential NMDA blocker, may be able to treat burn injury-induced chronic pain by
significantly reducing thermal hyperalgesia, mechanical allodynia and the effects of
potentially noxious or innocuous cold stimuli. Hence, may show antinociceptive
effects.

## Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering and Technology,
Indian Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar
Pradesh, India, for providing the necessary facilities and infrastructure.

## P59: Microglia Extracellular Traps: In Health and Disease

Lipika Sha1 and Sushmita Jha1

1Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of
Technology Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India
Background: Extracellular Traps (ETs) are extracellular web-like
structures composed of nuclear or mitochondrial DNA. ETs are released from various
immune cells in response to different stimuli. Circulating ETs can be markers of
cancer. Our group discovered dopamine-induced microglia ETs. Our work confirmed the
presence of ETs in glioblastoma tissue.
Materials and Methods: Microglia cells (BV2) were stimulated with
dopamine, cellular, molecular and transcriptomic techniques to assess the structure
and function, revealed key differences from Neutrophil Extracellular traps.
Results: Dopamine induces extracellular traps in microglia.
Additionally, Dopamine induces microglia glioblastoma cell proliferation. Cellular,
molecular and transcriptomic techniques reveal differences from neutrophil
extracellular traps.
Conclusion: In the GBM microenvironment, tumour cells secrete and
respond to dopamine in an autocrine mechanism. Different cells in the GBM
microenvironment, such as astrocytes and tumour cells, respond differently to
dopamine. The role of dopamine-induced microglia Extracellular Traps (miETs) in the
GBM microenvironment plays a vital role in GBM pathophysiology, this may be
investigated as a potential therapeutic intervention.

## Acknowledgement
We are thankful to IIT Jodhpur for infrastructure, administrative and financial
support. Lipika Sha is supported by MoE (Ministry of Education) fellowship from
IIT Jodhpur.

## P60: Understanding the Role of Biased and Unbiased KOR Agonist in Modulation of
Affective Behaviour

Manish K. Dash1,2, Poonam Kumari1, 3, Lalan Kumar2,
3, Sanjay Batra4, Prem N. Yadav1

1Neuroscience and Ageing Biology Division, Medicinal and Process Chemistry
Division, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
2Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (CSIR-HRDC), Ghaziabad,
Uttar Pradesh, India
3Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India
4Medicinal and Process Chemistry Division, CSIR-Central Drug Research
Institute, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
Biased Kappa Opioid Receptor (KOR) agonists have emerged as promising candidates for
the treatment of chronic pain conditions. Neuropathic pain is a highly unmet medical
need as the available analgesics are either very moderately effective or mired with
serious adverse effect profiles. Furthermore, neuropathic pain is highly associated
with severe debilitating mood impairments, such as depression, anxiety and loss of
motivation. Although KOR agonist has been shown to attenuate nociceptive pain, role
of biased KOR agonist on affective components of neuropathic pain is not known.
Therefore, we evaluated the effect of G-protein biased and unbiased KOR agonist on
neuropathic pain using Chronic Constriction Injury (CCI) and Chemotherapy-induced
peripheral neuropathic pain (CIPN) models in SD rats and C57BL/6J mice,
respectively. We observed that following biased KOR agonist CDRI4/105 (10mg/kg;
p.o., 7 days), significantly alleviated hyperalgesia and allodynia in CCI and CIPN
model of neuropathic pain. Conversely, unbiased KOR agonist U50488 (5mg/kg; i.p.)
didn’t elevate paw withdrawal threshold significantly. These results
highlight CDRI4/105’s potential therapeutic use in chronic pain conditions.
Furthermore, we observed that CDRI4/105 alleviated the neuropathic pain induced
increased in the anhedonia, anxiety like behaviours. Significantly, we also found
that CDRI4/105 did not induce aversion/dysphoria in contrast to unbiased KOR agonist
U50488. Further studies are in progress to delineate the molecular mechanisms of
biased KOR signalling in the modulation of affective neurocircuitry.

## P61: Noradrenaline Stimulates Na-K ATPase Expression by Increasing Its mRNA
Stability by Modulating HuR: Implications With Rapid Eye Movement Sleep and Its
Loss

Manjeet Kaur1, Rachna Mehta², Rohini
Muthuswami1 and Birendra Nath Mallick2

1School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,
India
2Amity Institute of Neuropsychology and Neurosciences, Amity University,
Noida, India
Background: Rapid Eye Movement Sleep (REMS) is an evolutionary conserved
instinct behaviour expressed in higher vertebrates. Although one spends the least
time in REMS, it is essential for the homeostatic maintenance of normal
physiological processes. Consistence research including contributions from our lab
has shown that REMS deprivation (REMSD) increases noradrenaline (NA) level in the
brain and that stimulates Na-K ATPase. Based on our findings it has been proposed
from this lab that ‘evolutionary significance of REMS is to maintain brain
level of noradrenaline (NA)’ (Singh et al., 2019) and one of the functions of
REMS is to maintain brain excitability by NA-mediated regulation of Na-K ATPase
activity (Mallick and Singh, 2011). Subsequently, while understanding the molecular
mechanism of sustained expression of Na-K ATPase molecules, we observed that
although REMSD-associated elevated NA increased Na-K ATPase protein expression, that
was not supported by corresponding increase in its mRNA abundance (Amar and Mallick,
2015). To resolve this apparent puzzle, we hypothesised that increased mRNA
stability and its recycling might be responsible for increased Na-K ATPase protein
translation We investigated the NA-induced HuR mediated Na-K ATPase mRNA
stability.
Material and Methods: Male Wistar rats (220-250g) were REMS deprived for
four days using classical Flowerpot method. The mRNA stability was assayed using
in vitro cytoplasmic degradation method. The HuR protein
expression was evaluated by western blotting in cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions
from the same brain sample.
Results: REMSD-induced elevated NA indeed increased Na-K ATPase mRNA
stability. mRNA stability was measured from control and REMSD rat brain with or
without in vivo (intraperitoneal) treatment with
α1-adrenoceptor (AR) antagonist, prazosin (PRZ). Upon REMSD,
Na-K ATPase α1- and α2-mRNA stability increased significantly, which
was prevented by PRZ. We also observed that the increased mRNA stabilisation was
induced by increased cytoplasmic abundance of HuR through PLC- mediated activation
of PKC pathway.
Summary and Conclusion: REMSD-associated elevated NA acting on ARs
modulates HuR and increases Na-K ATPase mRNA stability leading to increased
expression of Na-K ATPase. This explains REMSD-associated sustained effect on brain
excitability and chronic disease-associated symptoms.

## Acknowledgement
MK received fellowship from DBT. Research funding to BNM under JC Bose fellowship
and Institutional umbrella support under DST-PURSE& FIST and UGC-DRS.

## P62: Decoding the Molecular Mosaic of Age-related Shifts in CNS Neuron
Regeneration Through Bioinformatics

Manojkumar Kumaran1, Yogesh Sahu1, Anisha S.
Menon1 and Ishwariya Venkatesh1

1Department of Axon Growth and Regeneration, CSIR-CCMB, Hyderabad,
Telangana, India
Background: While numerous neurons display a sustained regenerative
capacity throughout their lifespan, central nervous system (CNS) neurons uniquely
exhibit heightened regenerative potential predominantly during their youthful phase.
The underlying mechanisms governing this age-related shift, particularly at the
molecular level, remain incompletely elucidated. Understanding the intricate
molecular alterations accompanying the decline in regenerative aptitude of CNS
neurons is pivotal for therapeutic advancements. The interplay between
transcriptional, epigenetic and 3D genomic landscapes could offer crucial insights
into this complex phenomenon.
Methods: Employing advanced bioinformatics algorithms and machine
learning techniques, we modelled the trajectory of age-dependent changes in CNS
neurons. Comprehensive analyses were conducted using combined single nuclei RNA-seq,
ATAC-seq and Hi-C to scrutinise modifications in transcriptional networks,
epigenetic arrangements and 3D genomic conformation.
Results: Preliminary data pinpoint nuclear receptors and stripe factors
as significant molecular entities influencing the decline in regenerative capability
of CNS neurons. Current endeavours are concentrated on assessing alterations in
pertinent enhancers to furnish a comprehensive molecular portrait.
Discussion: By meticulously tracing the molecular dynamics associated
with the waning regenerative potential of CNS neurons, this study aims to unveil
novel determinants governing this process. The insights gleaned will not only deepen
our understanding but also pave the way for innovative therapeutic strategies
targeting CNS neuron regeneration.

## Acknowledgment
Council of Industry and Scientific Research (CSIR).

## P63: NLRX1 A Novel Regular Regulator of Innate Immunity in the Glioblastoma
Tumour Microenvironment

Durgesh Meena1, Sushmita Rajkhowa1 and Sushmita
Jha1

1Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of
Technology Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India
Background: Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive glioma. Innate
Immune cells such as microglia and macrophages account for >50% of the
cellular population within the GBM microenvironment. Innate immune cells express
pattern recognition receptors (PRR). One PRR, NLRX1, regulates mitochondrial
signalling and cancer progression but the role of NLRX1 in GBM is
unexplored.
Material and Methods: To understand the subcellular expression pattern
of NLRX1, immunocytochemistry and immunohistochemistry were performed on glial and
GBM cell lines, GBM primary cells and brain tissue sections. Western Blot was
performed to quantify the NLRX1 differential expression and NLRX1 gene knockdown was
utilised for functional assessment across cell populations.
Results: Differential subcellular localisation of NLRX1 in various cell
lines shows the cell-specific role of NLRX1 in the GBM microenvironment.
Discussion and Conclusion: NLRX1 is an innate immune pattern recognition
receptor (PRR), expressed in the cytosol and mitochondria. NLRX1 plays a critical
role in inflammation, antiviral signalling, ROS production, apoptosis and autophagy.
Our data demonstrates that NLRX1 may act as a regulator of GBM progression. This
research will help improve the understanding of GBM pathophysiology leading to novel
diagnostic/prognostic markers and signalling/pathway discovery that, in turn, may
help create better GBM therapy approaches and improve overall survival.

## Acknowledgments
We acknowledge infrastructure and funding support from the Indian Institute of
Technology, Jodhpur, and funding support from the Ministry of Electronics and
Information Technology, Government of India (No.4 (16)/2019-ITEA). Durgesh Meena
is supported by a fellowship from the Council of Scientific & Industrial
Research (CSIR)-NET-JRF.

## P64: Investigation of Helico bacter pylori Secretome on the
Gut-brain Axis

Meenakshi Kandpal1, Budhadev Baral1, Nidhi
Varshney1 and Hem Chandra Jha1

1Infection Bioengineering Group, Department of Biosciences and Biomedical
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India
Background:
Helicobacter pylori is pathogenic bacterium causes gastritis and
gastric carcinoma. H. pylori’s influence extends beyond the
stomach, potentially causing neurological disorders by disrupting the gut-brain
axis. The current study investigated the plausible association between clinical
H. pylori isolates: HB10, HJ9 and HB1 and neuroinflammation
that might lead to neurological modalities like Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
Material and Methods: Assessment of Anti-microbial resistance in
H. pylori isolates done via broth dilution method. Inflammation
was studied by qRT-PCR and Western Blot of inflammatory, STATs and AD markers in
H. pylori derived conditioned media (HPCM) treated
neuroblastoma and neuro-astrocyte co cultured cells. ROS was estimated through,
DCFDA staining. Immunofluorescence were performed for the glial fibrillary acid
protein (GFAP) and pSTAT3.
Results: The HPCM-induced inflammation with differential expression of
inflammatory markers compared to control. Elevated expression of STAT-1, STAT-3 and
AD associated proteins- APP and APOE4 (p<0.05) was determined in HPCM-treated
neuronal cell and neuro-astrocyte co cultured cell. Excessive ROS generation has
been found in these cells. The HPCM treatment to LN229 cause astrogliosis evidenced
by increase in glial fibrillary acidic protein (p < .05).
Our results indicate the association of STAT3 as an important regulator in the
H. pylori-mediated pathogenesis in neuronal cells. Notably, the
inhibition of STAT3 by its specific inhibitor, BP-1-102 marked a reduction in the
expression of pSTAT-3 and AD markers (p<0.01).
Discussion and Conclusion: Our study demonstrate that H.
pylori infection exacerbates inflammation in AGS cells and modulates
the activity of STAT3 regulatory molecule. H. pylori secretome
could affect neurological compartments by promoting STAT3 activation and inducing
the expression of AD associated signature markers particularly with HJ9 strain. The
study suggest that pSTAT-3 inhibition may be a potential therapeutic strategy for
mitigating H. pylori-induced neurodegeneration.

## Acknowledgement
We gratefully acknowledge IIT Indore for providing facilities and support. We
acknowledge ICMR for the research grant (BMI/12(82)/2021) and
(ECD/CSTPU/Adhoc/COVID-19/28/2021-22. We are also grateful to Prime
Minister’s Research Fellowship, MHRD for fellowship.

## P65: Early and Delayed Neurobehavioural Consequences of Lateral Fluid
Percussion-induced Mild Traumatic Brain Injury

Mohd. Aleem1 and Kailash Manda1

1Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Sciences, INMAS, Delhi,
India
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) contributes to significant death and disability more
than any other trauma-related injury. The most common form of TBI among human
patients is mild TBI (mTBI) leading up to 80% of all TBI clinical cases. TBI
represents two complex damage spectra, primary/acute and secondary/delayed injury
cascades, each of which may affect neurobehavioural functions differently.
Therefore, the present study was carried out to compare the mTBI-induced early (at
7th day) and delayed (at 30th day) changes in neuronal architecture, neurogenesis,
neuroinflammation and associated behavioural functions. For this purpose, C57BL/6J
male mice were exposed to lateral FPI and assessed for potential changes in the
structural and functional outcomes of the brain. The functional observations on
acute time point revealed that mice with mild TBI showed significant locomotor
hyperactivity and risk-taking behaviour. Similarly, neuromuscular strength was
significantly impaired without affecting the motor coordination. On the contrary,
functional observations at later stage revealed no significant effect on locomotor
and exploratory functions, whereas higher anxiety, stress and depression-like
functions were found similar to acute functional changes. Moreover, cognitive
functional impairment was reported after mTBI at a later time point. Furthermore, at
both time points, structural observations revealed significant cortical tissue
damage, neuronal cell death and neuroinflammation in mTBI mice. The dendritic and
axonal morphometric and quantitative analysis revealed significant damages when
compared to the control. The study reports that the pattern of few functional
changes was common for anxiety, stress and depression, while locomotor and
exploratory activities were affected differently at both time points. The subsequent
neuronal cell death and dendritic damage at a later time point appeared to be an
exacerbation of the secondary and delayed damages.

## P66: Dental Pulp Stem Cells (DPSC)-derived Mitochondrial Transfer as a
Neuroprotective Biomolecule to Rescue Neurons Against Neurodegeneration in
Alzheimer’s Disease Like Cell Model

Mohil Mishra1, Shalini Raik1, Vidya Rattan2
and Shalmoli Bhattacharyya1

1Department of Biophysics, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education
and Research, Chandigarh, India
2Oral Health Sciences Centre, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education
and Research, Chandigarh, India
Background: Mitochondrial activity is essential to support neural
functions and can contribute to synaptic plasticity. Mitochondrial dysfunction is
considered one of the major factors for Alzheimer’s disease progression.
Thus, transferring DPSC-derived healthy mitochondria may serve as a means to rescue
neurons against the detrimental effect of AD.
Material and Method: In this study, pre-neuroblastoma cells were
differentiated into mature neurons, subsequently, treated with streptozotocin and
Aβ1-42 oligomer to develop AD-like in vitro models. Neuronal
morphology and cell viability assays were performed to validate the model. Further,
the therapeutic potential of DPSC-mitochondria was analysed by ROS and an
immunofluorescence assay.
Results: The results have shown a significant neurotoxic effect on
mature neurons after treatment with streptozotocin and Aβ1-42 oligomer that
act as in vitro AD models. Further, no decrease in cell survival
efficacy of mature neurons after the transfer of functional DPSC- derived
mitochondria that demonstrated a significant neuroprotective effect after
transplantation in vitro AD model.
Discussion: Our study has primary evidence that isolated autonomous
mitochondria from DPSCs can prevent neurotoxic effects, maintained neurite extension
and attenuated ROS production against Aβ and STZ. Thus, these findings might
provide a novel approach toward the use of mesenchymal cells-derived mitochondria
which may be considered as potential neuroprotective biomolecules for the treatment
of Alzheimer’s disease.

## Acknowledgment
Gratefully acknowledges the extramural funding provided by Indian Council of
Medical Research (ICMR), Govt. of India to conduct the study.

## P67: Exploring USP14 as a Potential Therapeutic Target for Neurodegeneration:
Insights from Rat Brain Studies

Moumita Roy1,2, Chayan Banerjee1,2, Rupsha
Mondal1,2 and Joy Chakraborty1,2

1Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, CSIR-Indian Institute of
Chemical Biology-TRUE, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
2Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, Uttar
Pradesh, India
Background: Deubiquitinases (DUBs) have emerged as potential regulators
of mitochondrial clearance. Among these, USP14 stands out for its dual impact on
proteasome activity and autophagy. USP14 inhibition enhances mitochondrial clearance
and protect against Parkinson’s disease progression in Drosophila. However,
its role in higher animal models of neurodegenerative disorders remains
unexplored.
Materials and Methods: Male Sprague Dawley rats (1 month, 6–7
months and 10–12 months old) were subjected to intraperitoneal injections of
3-nitropropionic acid (3-NP; 20 mg/kg) and Rotenone (1 mg/kg) for 2 consecutive
days. Brain homogenates from treated rats were immunoblotted and probed for Actin
and USP14.
Results: In the adult rat brain, USP14 levels showed an elevation in the
substantia nigra (SN) and cerebellum. However, there are no notable changes observed
in the cortex, striatum, ventral tegmental area and hippocampus. Post rotenone
exposure, marked upsurge of USP14 was manifested solely in SN, while other regions
remain unaltered.
Discussion and Conclusion: The reduced mitophagy during aging adds to
neurodegeneration related complexities. This study explores the potential of USP14
as a therapeutic target in the rat brain, focusing on age-related and
disorder-specific fluctuations in USP14 protein levels. Given the predominant rise
of USP14 within SN due to ETC complex I inhibition, there is a strong rationale to
consider it a promising target for therapeutic development, particularly regarding
the abnormal mitophagy seen in Parkinson’s disease.

## Acknowledgement
This research received partial support through the Early Career Research Grant
provided by the Department of Science and Technology-Science and Engineering
Research Board (DST SERB). Additionally, a segment of the study was financially
backed by the International Society of Neurochemistry (ISN) – Committee
for Aid and Education in Neurochemistry (CAEN), which facilitated research
supplies for utilisation within the researcher’s home laboratory.MR and
RM are currently pursuing their PhD studies and hold the position of Senior
Research Fellows under the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)
in India. CB is a recipient of a Senior Research Fellowship granted by the
University Grants Commission (UGC) of India.

## P68: Effects of Curcumin on Hyperglycaemia-induced Caenorhabditis Elegans

Mrunmayee Rade1, Sree Nair1 and Sukaina
Abbas1

1Department of Life Sciences, Sophia College (Autonomous), Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India
Background: Hyperglycaemia can occur in the body due to paucity of
insulin or non-responsiveness to insulin. Ensuing diabetic neuropathy harms neuronal
functions. Curcumin is known to have curing abilities. Therefore, more research into
the impact of curcumin on hyperglycaemia is desirable. In the present study we
attempt to learn the effect of curcumin using Caenorhabditis
elegans at hyperglycaemic conditions.
Materials and Methods: This study assess the effects of Curcumin using a
Hyperglycaemia induced Wild-type model of Caenorhabditis elegans.
Toxicity assays, specifically those of Glucose and Curcumin were analysed. Lifespan
assays were performed to examine the survival rate. Two behavioural assays,
including thrashing and pharyngeal pumping were used to evaluate motor and feeding
activities respectively.
Results: According to preliminary data, at certain concentrations,
curcumin shows rescue effect in C. elegans exposed to
hyperglycaemic conditions. The results showed that curcumin might considerably
increase C. elegans’ ability to survive without affecting
its growth. Antioxidant properties of Curcumin were evaluated with the help of DPPH
(2,2-Diphenyl-1- picrylhydrazyl) that also takes into account the utilisation of
free radicals in determining a substance’s capacity to act as a source of
hydrogen or a free-radical scavenger (FRS).
Discussion and Conclusion: Behaviour of the worms vary as the glucose
concentrations increases, showing motor and feeding defects. Survival rate hampers
because of high concentrations of glucose however curcumin exhibits its own
beneficial impacts in retrieving the normal lifespan of worms. Administration of the
antioxidant properties of curcumin is hypothesised to consider the use of free
radicals when assessing curcumin’s ability to serve as a free radical
scavenger (FRS) and needs to be further investigated.

## Acknowledgements
I want to express my heartfelt thanks to Sophia College, the Department of Life
Sciences, and the Suman Tulsiani Research Centre for giving me this chance. I
also expect to gain a lot of knowledge from this opportunity. RUSA (Rashtriya
Uchchatar Shikshan Abhiyan) 2.0 provided funds for this study in exchange for
supporting my initiative.

## P69: Deciphering the Anti-tumour Activity of Limonene and Azelaic Acid in
Neuroblastoma Cells

Muqadas Wani1 and Geetanjali Ganguli1

1Department of Life Sciences, Sophia College (Autonomous), Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India
Background: Neuroblastoma, an extracranial tumour originating from
neural crest progenitor cells offers low median rate of survival and recurrence in
patients. Hence, new treatments are required. Phytochemicals are potent therapeutic
alternatives due to their efficient anti-tumor activity and easy accessibility.
Authors are studying the effect of Limonene and Azelaic acid on N2a cells.
Materials and Methods: MTT assay is to detect cytotoxic effects of drugs
at concentrations; 2mM, 4mM, 6mM, 8mM and 10mM. Giemsa staining is to observe the
morphological changes in cells post treatment. Scratch assay is to examine cell
migration factors at concentrations as mentioned at time intervals; 0hrs, 24hrs and
48hrs. ROS estimation is conducted using Dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate and
dihydroethidium fluorescence staining in treated cells.
Results: Cell cytotoxicity increased with increase in concentration of
LMN and AZA as less formazan crystals were observed post addition of MTT assay. Cell
migration property was reduced with increasing concentration when scratch assay was
performed. Interestingly, changes in cell morphology were observed with increase in
phytochemicals concentration: the cells lost their neural projections. The ROS
levels were visibly higher as more green fluorescence was observed with increasing
concentrations of drugs.
Discussion and Conclusion: According to literature, phytochemicals and
their derivatives provide exciting possibilities for increasing the effectiveness of
cancer patients’ treatments and lowering negative side effects. Limonene and
Azelaic acid have shown cytotoxicity, effect on the cell morphology and migration
properties with increasing concentration in the assays conducted thereby indicating
therapeutic applications. To validate the likelihood that both the phytochemicals
are promising therapy against Neuroblastoma, more study must be done in this
area.

## Acknowledgements
I extend my gratitude to the Principal, Dr Anagha Patil Tendulkar and the Head of
Department of Life Science, Dr Sree Nair and my supervisor, Dr Geetanjali
Ganguli for giving me invaluable guidance, in sights, moral support and
direction. Heartfelt gratitude to the department of Life Sciences for allowing
me to use the Cell Culture Lab, Suman Tulsiani Research Centre at Sophia College
(Autonomous), Mumbai. I would also like to thank Dr Bhaskar Saha from Saint
Xavier’s College, Mumbai and National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS),
Pune for providing Neuroblastoma cells.

## P70: Uncovering Sex-specific Epigenetic Regulatory Mechanism Underlying
Neural and Recovery Mechanism in the Internal Carotid Artery Occlusion Mouse
Model

Mydhili Radhakrishnan1,3, Aditya Undru2,3, Arvind
Kumar2,3 and Sumana Chakravarty1,3

1Applied Biology, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (IICT),
Hyderabad, Telangana, India
2Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB), Hyderabad,
Telangana, India
3Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad,
Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Cerebral ischemic stroke is one of the foremost global
causes of death and disability. Apart from inadequate therapies, another lacuna
in the field is that stroke-related studies failed to consider sex as a critical
variable. In this study, we are elucidating the sex-specific epigenetic
mechanisms in cerebral ischemia induced neural damage and recovery.
Materials and Methods: ICAO (Internal carotid artery occlusion) were
surgically performed for 90 minutes in both males and females at different time
points. Behavioural tests were conducted to evaluate different motor
coordination and neurodeficits induced by ICAO.RT-PCR, Immunoblotting and
high-throughput RNA sequencing analysis was employed for molecular studies.
Results: Results showed early restoration of H3k9me2 marks on the
promoters of inflammatory genes in female striatum compared to that in males
post-ICAO; this resulted in attenuation of the expression levels of various
inflammatory cytokines leading to the accelerated recovery. Further, mild
occupancy of H3k27me2 mark on the promoters of different neurogenic genes at an
early time point triggered neurogenesis in female striatum. Thus, our findings
suggest that H3k9me2and H3k27me2 differentially regulates ICAO-induced neural
damage and recovery across the sexes.
Discussion and Conclusion: ICAO induced neurological deficits and
subsequent recovery mechanism differentially in male and female CD1 mice. Our
novel findings highlighted the role of the H3k9me2, H3K27me2,
kdm4b/jmjd2b and kdm6b epigenetic
modifications, which harness the substrate H3k9 and H3k27, in the inflammation
and regeneration processes post-ICAO. Based on the findings, we propose H3k9me2
and H3k27me2 as a novel target for the therapeutic development with sex or
gender as a crucial factor to be taken into consideration.

## Acknowledgements
This research was initiated by the Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research (CSIR), India network projects [(BSC0103-UNDO)] and ICMR grant
[5/4-5/3/17/Neuro/2022-NCD-1 to SC]. MR and AU acknowledges CSIR India, for
their doctoral fellowships. In addition, the authors would like to specially
acknowledge CSIR-IICT and CCMB for the support.

## P71: Long-term Neurobehavioural and Neurodegenerative Effects of Nerve Agent
(vx) Exposure in an Animal Model

Naveen Singh1, Ankush Rajput1 and Ramarao
Golime1

1Biomedical Verification Division, DRDE, Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh,
India
Introduction: Nerve agents belongs to organophosphorus compounds
(OPs) that pose a real threat to civilian and defence populations due to their
deadly toxic nature and ability to cause high mortality. Nerve agents are used
both in military and civilian conflicts and terrorist attacks in the recent
history. Nerve agents block the function of acetylcholinesterase irreversibly at
neuronal synapses causing an excess of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine
build-up. Excessive acetylcholine causes hyper activation of cholinergic
receptors leading to many toxic symptoms including death. However, the
mechanisms behind nerve agents induced long term neurological effects; cognitive
impairments are not well known.
Material and Methods: VX was obtained from PTD division, DRDE,
Gwalior. DTNB, Acetylthiocholine iodide and all other chemicals supplied by
Sigma Chemicals Co unless otherwise mentioned. Neuronal damage assessed by FJ-C
stain and acetylcholinesterase activity measured by Ellman method. Wistar rats
were used for this study.
Result and Discussion: Results showed that AChE activity
significantly inhibited after nerve agent exposure. Neurobehavioural studies
including elevated anxiety levels, decreased working memory and impaired muscle
strength were observed in animals after nerve agent exposure indicating the
nerve agent induced neurobehavioural effects. Neuronal damage in discrete rat
brain areas were observed in the 30day post exposure, indicating nerve agent
induced long term neurotoxicity caused by single VX exposure and no substantial
damage was observed in the 3 months when compared to the control animal groups.
Understanding the mechanisms underlying these long-term toxic effects of nerve
agents will help us to develop better antidotes.

## P72: Combined Exposure to Chlorpyrifos and Cypermethrin Induces
Neuroinflammation and Parkinsonian Indices in a Rat Model of Parkinson’s
Disease

Neeraj Rawat1,2 and Mahendra Pratap
Singh1,2,3

1Systems Toxicology Group, FEST Division. CSIR-Indian Institute of
Toxicology Research (CSIR-IITR), Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
2Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad,
Uttar Pradesh, India
3Capacity Building and Knowledge Services, ASSIST Division,
CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research (CSIR-IITR), Lucknow, Uttar
Pradesh, India
Background: Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a common
neurodegenerative disease characterised by the nigrostriatal dopaminergic
neurodegeneration, striatal dopamine depletion and motor deficits. While
cypermethrin (CYP) acts as a Parkinsonian neurotoxicant, chlorpyrifos (CPF) is
reported to produce neurotoxicity. Exposure to CYP induces behaviour
abnormalities, dopamine depletion, dopaminergic neurodegeneration and
neuroinflammation. However, the effect of chlorpyrifos on cypermethrin-induced
Parkinsonism is not yet known.
Objective: The study aimed to assess the effect of CPF exposure on
CYP-induced changes in Parkinsonian indices and expression of toll like
receptor-4 (TLR-4) and inflammatory cytokines in the rat nigrostriatal
tissue.
Methods: Rats were exposed to CPF for 4, 8 and 12 weeks in the
presence/absence of CYP along with respective controls. Rotarod and grip
strength tests were performed to check the behaviour abnormalities. Dopamine
content, number of TH-positive neurons and level of TLR-4, cyclooxygenase-2
(COX-2), tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), interleukin-1β
(IL-1β) were measured employing standard procedures.
Results: Both CYP and CPF individually altered the behaviour
indexes, dopamine content and number of TH-positive neurons. Besides, an
alteration in the expression of TLR-4, COX-2, TNF-α and IL-1β was
also observed after 12 weeks of CYP or CPF exposure. The alterations produced by
half of the combined exposure were more pronounced than that of individual
one.
Discussion and Conclusion: The result indicate that CPF increases
CYP-induced Parkinsonian indices. Besides, CYP and/or CPF could impart toxic
effect on the nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons probably by an alteration of
TLR-4, COX-2, TNF-α and IL-1β.

## Acknowledgement
The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi, India is
gratefully acknowledged for providing research fellowship to Neeraj
Rawat.

## P73: Zebrafish as an Alternative Model for Investigating Sporadic
Alzheimer’s Disease

Neha Dhiman1 and Rajat Sandhir1

1Department of Biochemistry, Basic Medical Sciences Block II, Panjab
University, Chandigarh, India
Background: Alzheimer’s Disease is a progressive
neurodegenerative disorder with a heavy global burden. Recently, zebrafish have
become a popular choice of model organism for neuroscience research. Their high
similarity to humans, conserved pathological genes, short duration of model
induction and cost effectiveness have promoted chemically induced and transgenic
models of zebrafish models for studying AD.
Materials and Methods: In this study, ICV-STZ injection was given to
adult zebrafish in different doses (1–30 mg/kg body weight STZ). The
selected doses (1, 5 and 10 mg/kg body weight STZ) where subsequently used to
evaluate behaviour using novel tank diving test. Gene expression analysis was
done using RT- PCR. Histological analysis was done by haematoxylin and eosin and
Congo red staining. The presence of amyloid beta plaques was further confirmed
using immunohistochemistry.
Results: STZ injection at higher doses proved fatal to the
zebrafish. STZ injected fish displayed symptoms of anxiety and stress with
cognitive impairment from day 5 onwards. The fish exhibited increased expression
of genes involved in AD pathology. Histological examination revealed marked
signs of neurodegeneration with fragmented nuclei and vacuolation.
Immunohistochemistry confirmed the presence of amyloid plaques. ICV-STZ
injection of 5 mg/kg body weight for 7 days proved to be the most effective dose
for inducing sAD pathology.
Discussion and Conclusion: Zebrafish have become the model of choice
for neurodegenerative diseases since they have a CNS which shares all major
nuclei, receptors and neurotransmitters with humans. sAD has been successfully
modelled in non-transgenic rodents as well as zebrafish. ICV-STZ induced sAD in
zebrafish has been described as a novel, robust and reliable model. The model
displayed all the hallmarks of AD pathology at behavioural, molecular and
histological level while preserving the cost effectiveness and efficiency this
model organism offers. The behavioural parameters analysed demonstrated clear
signs of anxiety, stress and cognitive impairment in the fish.

## Acknowledgements
The funding for this study from DST-INSPIRE is acknowledged.

## P74: Identification of Significant Differentially Expressed miRNA and Their
Targets Common in Idiopathic Parkinson’s Disease and Parkinson Plus
Syndrome

Neha Srivastava1, Gyaneshwer Chaubey2, Bhupendra
Kumar2, Abhishek Pathak1 and Vijaya Nath
Mishra1

1
Department of Neurology, Institute of Medical Sciences,
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India

2
Department of Zoology, Institute of Science, Banaras
Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Idiopathic Parkinson’s disease is the most common
type, causing oxidative stress, glutamate excitotoxicity, protein aggregation
and neurodegeneration. Parkinson’s plus syndrome presents progressing
symptoms and no effective dopaminergic therapy. This study aims to identify
differentially expressed miRNAs targeting neurodegeneration genes using microRNA
expression profiling and bioinformatics tools.
Methods: The present case study includes 10 patients from IPD and PD
plus with their respective 2 respective control. We have performed Microarray
profiling, GO, KEGG and miRNA-mRNA network analysis in order to find out the
candidate DE miRNAs in IPD and PD Plus by using bioinformatics tools and
algorithms.
Results: A total of 163 DE miRNAs identified, and 11 of them,
including hsa-miR-34/150/374/128/304/135/390/4473/6803 and 6809, was found to be
common in IPD and PD plus patients. Network analysis pragmatically demonstrated
that DE miRNAs such as: hsa-miR-34, hsa-miR-29, hsa-miR-128, hsa-miR-3175 and
hsa-miR-6809 were most prominent interactor miRs and its selected target genes
(SNCA, PAK1 and PRKN) show maximum interaction with selected miRNAs and also
play a potent role in Parkinson’s disease pathway and
neurodegeneration.
Discussion and Conclusion: Micro RNA expression profiling was used
to identify DE miRNAs in IPD and PD plus patients. The analysis revealed that
hsa-miR-34/29/128/3175/6809 was primarily involved in interactions with other
miRNA targets, such as SNCA, PAK1 and PRKN. The candidate miRNAs were then
chosen and assessed because they were interacting most strongly with other miRNA
targets that were linked to neurodegenerative diseases. This research highlights
potential therapeutic targets and a common pathway between IPD and PD plus.

## Acknowledgements
The authors kindly acknowledge Information Centre for Bioinformatics,
Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu University for providing software and
the computational facilities for bioinformatics analysis. We are highly
grateful to the Department of Neurology, Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi for extending laboratory facilities.

## Funding
This study was financially supported by IOE Scheme under
R/Dev/D/IoE/Incentive 2021-2022-32135. Scheme No. 6031/2021) and
ICMR-SRF, Research fellowship, Project (ICMR ID No: 2021-15613-F1).
Sanction letter No 3/1/2(2)/Env/2021-NCD-II-; dt-27.07.20.

## P75: Fractal Dimensions and Lacunarity of Glioma Subcomponents as a
Marker of Genotypic Status

Neha Yadav1, Ankit Mohanty1 and Vivek
Tiwari1

1Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Berhampur,
Odisha, India
Introduction: Gliomas of similar histologic type and grades
exhibit distinct geometries and variations in the fractions of tumour
subcomponents: enhancing, non-enhancing, necrotic and oedema fractions.
Gliomas are irregular structures that do not conform to traditional
Euclidean geometry. Instead, non-Euclidean geometric measurements, such as
fractal dimension and lacunarity, better characterise tumour subcomponents.
Gliomas with somatic mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) and
epigenetic methylations in O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT)
gene exhibit better prognosis and improved survival.
Methods: The study cohort consisted gliomas subjects with T1w,
T2w, T2-FLAIR and T1-Gd MRI images, alongside genomic data from TCGA-GBM and
TCGA-LGG. Fractal dimension and lacunarity were estimated for enhancing,
non-enhancing plus necrosis and oedema components using an in- house
developed novel pipeline. Using the fractal dimensions of different
subcomponents of tumour, a machine learning based Radiogenomic platform was
developed which is predictive of IDH status.
Results: Fractal dimension and lacunarity of different tumour
subcomponents varies between IDH mutant and wildtype tumours. wherein IDH
wildtype tumours had significantly higher FD of the enhancing component (EN)
and lower lacunarity compared to IDH mutant tumours. Furthermore, we
developed ML models to test whether Fractal dimensions of each tumour
subcomponent is predictive of IDH status and MGMT status. SVM based ML model
using fractal dimensions is predictive of IDH mutational status with an
average accuracy of ~92%. We have also extended the same process for
predicting MGMT status.
Discussion: Fractal dimension and Lacunarity of different tumour
subcomponents is distinctive of the IDH and MGMT status. Therefor FD and
Lacunarity are representative of differential prognosis and IDH status, thus
indicating that in vivo Fractal estimates have potential to serve a
non-invasive variable in characterising aggressive and non-aggressive
viz IDH mutant and wildtype gliomas. Quantifying the
geometry of different tumour components across diverse molecular backgrounds
could establish non-invasive method of structural geometry as a molecular
status indicator.

## P76: Pax6 Regulates Pattern Recognition Receptor Genes

Nidhi Ghosh1 and Rajnikant Mishra1

1Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Lab, Department of Zoology,
Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh,
India
Background: The Pax6 is evolutionary conserved transcription
factor required for the functional anatomy of central nervous system, eyes,
nose, pituitary, pineal and pancreatic alpha-cells. Since it is also
involved in immunological surveillance of brain, impacts of Pax6 has been
evaluated in innate immune responses and neuroinflammation.
Methods: LPS (1mg/kg) was injected intraperitoneally for 5 days
to develop neuroinflammatory AKR strain mice model. Equal volume of saline
was injected as a vehicle control. Multi-omics study was performed using
ChIP and ChIP-sequencing with anti-Pax6 and whole brain proteomics analysis
of Control and LPS mice.
Results: Pax6 recognises promoter sequences, UTR, distal
Intergenic and Intron regions of genes. Functional annotation of genes
enriched in LPS-administered mice brain shows that Pax6 binds to genes
participating in regulatory pathways ranging from Tlr4 activation,
chemokines secretion, regulation of NF-κB pathway. Proteomics
analysis sheds light into putative mechanism of Pax6 in Neuroinflammation
via Tgfβ cascade and putative biomarkers of Neuroinflammation.
Conclusion: Pax6 acts as a grid for cascades in regulating
innate to adaptive immunity switch and combating Neuroinflammation.Pax6
regulates initiation of neuroinflammation through Tlr4 (a part of innate
immunity) and works as mediator to innate and adaptive immune response by
regulating genes of Pattern recognition receptor, cytokines and Chemokines,
inflammasome activation through non canonical regulation of Tgfβ and
NF-κB pathways.

## Acknowledgements
Financial support from IoE-BHU is gratefully acknowledged.

## P77: Spatial Pattern of Cerebral Small Vessel Disease with Aging Is
Distinctive of Cognitive Status

Niraj Kumar Gupta1 and Vivek Tiwari1

1Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER),
Berhampur, Odisha, India
Background: Cerebral Small Vessel Disease is a prevalent aging
brain pathology, characterised by small arterial infarcts, causing chronic
ischemia and White Matter Hyperintensity (WMH) in white matter regions
visible on T2-FLAIR MR images. Yet, the uncharted clinical significance of
spatial-temporal cerebrovascular dynamics, their role in aging processes and
potential links to cognitive decline and Alzheimer’s pathology
warrant further investigation.
Methods: Post-MR image segmentation and WMH lesion extraction,
WMH spatial distribution was estimated. Probability maps, representing
voxel-wise WMH occurrence across age-groups within the normal cognition,
cognitive impairment, and cognitive impairment with AD aetiology cohorts,
elucidate brain-wide probabilistic insights into the prevalence and
localisation of WMH, enabling insights into evolving cerebrovascular
pathology with age and cognitive status.
Results: WMH burden increased exponentially with age across
cognitive groups, notably accelerated in CI and CI-AD vs. CN. Probability
mapping revealed peak WMH likelihood in the periventricular region, rising
with age and cognitive impairment. Frontal and parietal lobes showed
elevated WMH load. Periventricular WMH distinguished cognitive statuses at
all ages. Decline in executive functioning/reaction time due to
periventricular WMH load is mediated through atrophy of structures, which
are paracentral, precentral gyrus thickness/volume, accumbens, cuneus,
pericalcarine volume.
Discussion: White matter hyperintensity (WMH) load and
distribution influence structural decline and cognition via chronic vascular
insult. Certain brain regions exhibit higher susceptibility to CSVD-related
damage. Disparate WMH accumulation may dictate cognitive deficits. Spatial
WMH distribution differentiates normal cognition from impairment. CSVD
emerges as a contributor to cognitive decline, notably in attention and
executive function domains. Our study underscores CSVD’s cognitive
impact mediated through certain neuroanatomical atrophy and region-specific
vulnerability.

## P78: Pharmacological Investigations on Therapeutic Potential of Gabexate
Mesilate in Animal Model of Rheumatoid Arthritis

Nivedita Verma1, Abhipshit Kalita1 and Vinod
Tiwari1

1Neuroscience and Pain Research Laboratory, Department of
Pharmaceutical Engineering and Technology, Indian Institute of Technology
(Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune
disease characterised by persistent synovitis, pain and progressive joint
damage. The pathogenesis of RA mainly involves oxidative stress which is
responsible for inflammation and pain. Gabexate mesylate, a serine protease
inhibitor that has anti-inflammatory properties help in managing RA pain by
suppressing NF-κβ and nitric oxide pathway.
Materials and Methods: Animals-Male S Drats (wt-200-220 gm).
Drugs-Gabexate Mesilate (Dose:10mg/kg,20mg/kg,40mg/kg),
Indomethacin(5mg/kg).

Animal Model:

CFA-induced arthritis
Behaviour essays
Von-Frey test: Mechanical allodynia
Pin-prick test: Mechanical Hyperalgesia
Hargreaves test: Thermal Hyperalgesia
Acetone Drop test: Cold allodynia
Ice-floor test: Cold Hyperalgesia
CNS toxicity: Rotarod test, open field test
Biochemical tests-GSH, nitrite, LPO
Molecular tests-rt-PCR, Western Blotting

Results:

Gabexate mesylate attenuates mechanical allodynia in CFA-induced
arthritis rats.
Gabexate mesylate decreases heat hyperalgesia in CFA-induced
arthritis rats.
Gabexate mesylate decreases cold allodynia in CFA-induced arthritis
rats.
Gabexate mesylate restores paw thickness in CFA-induced arthritis
rats.
Gabexate mesylate restores body weight in CFA-induced arthritis
rats.
Gabexate mesylate did not affect locomotor or exploratory activity as
well as did not observe a significant change in motor incoordination
in the Rota-rod test.
Discussion and Conclusions: Gabexate mesylate prevents
proteolytic destruction of Iκβ resulting in suppression of the
NFκB signalling pathway and downregulates the activation of TRPV1
signalling in the spinal dorsal horn neuron. This leads to a decrease in the
production of inflammatory cytokines and also prevents spontaneous ongoing
pain. Findings from the current study revealed that gabexate mesylate could
be a better and safer therapeutics for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis
pain and inflammation.

## Acknowledgement
We would also like to acknowledge the Department of Pharmaceutical
Engineering and Technology, Indian Institute of Technology (B.H.U),
Varanasi for providing the necessary facilities and infrastructure.

## P79: Region-specific Alteration and Activation of Protein Tyrosine Kinase
2 in Temporal Lobe Epilepsy

Ozasvi R. Shanker1, Sonali Kumar1, P. Sarat
Chandra2, Manjari Tripathi3, Jyotirmoy
Banerjee4 and Aparna Banerjee
Dixit1

1Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Centre for Biomedical Research (ACBR),
University of Delhi, New Delhi, India
2Department of Neurosurgery, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, India
3Department of Neurology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS), New Delhi, India
4Department of Biophysics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS), New Delhi, India
Background: Research has demonstrated stress-related Pyk2
activation in the brain however its role in epilepsy remains unclear. Since,
TLE is a network-level disorder it is crucial to investigate PYK2 activity
in various temporal lobe areas. This study thus aimed to assess the
region-specific alteration and activation of PYK2 in TLE.
Materials and Methods: qRT-PCR and western blot were performed
to detect changes in mRNA and protein levels respectively in MTLE patients
versus control and in lithium pilocarpine model of epilepsy compared to
control. Cell-specific expression was assessed using immunofluorescence, and
flow cytometry was used to detect the calcium levels.
Results: The results revealed a significant increase in the
levels of phospo-Pyk2 in the hippocampus and ATL of MTLE patients and
lithium pilocarpine model of epilepsy as compared to control while no
significant changed was observed in the levels of unphosphorylated form of
Pyk2. Further, a positive correlation was observed between the levels of
activated Pyk2 and increased calcium levels.
Discussion and Conclusion: This was the first study to assess
the activation of Pyk2 in a region-specific manner in TLE suggesting its
possible contribution in the pathogenesis of epilepsy. The study also
suggested a possible involvement of Pyk2 in the generation of independent
epileptogenic networks in TLE and the role of calcium in activating Pyk2.
Specific inhibitor for Pyk2 will be used in the future studies to understand
its role as a potential therapeutic target in TLE.

## P80: Restorative Potential of the Mesenchymal Stem Cells Secretome in
Neural Progenitor Cells Receiving Toxic Insult of Monocrotophos

P. Vatsa1,2, R. Negi1,2, U.A.
Ansari1,2, V.K. Khanna1,2 and A.B.
Pant1,2

1Systems Toxicology & Health Risk Assessment Group, Food, Drug
& Chemical, Environment and Systems Toxicology (FEST) Division,
CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research (CSIR-IITR), Ghaziabad, Uttar
Pradesh, India
2Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad,
Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: The mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) secretome comprising
an array of neurotrophic factors, cytokines, nucleic acids, proteins, etc.,
imparts restorative potential by regulating the inflammatory responses,
reducing apoptosis and cytotoxicity. The study intends to investigate the
MSC secretome’s proteomic profile to understand its applicability in
the therapeutic intervention in neurodegeneration.
Materials and Methods: The proteome profiling of MSC secretome
following cellular pre-conditioning was done by High- Resolution Mass
Spectroscopy. The restorative potential of the MSC secretome was determined
in the iPSC-derived neural progenitor cells (NPCs) exposed to Monocrotophos
at 100 µM for 24 h.
Results: The MSC secretome reveals the predominant presence of
proteins involved in glycolysis, oxygen transport, anti-inflammation,
anti-fibrosis, neuroprotection and cell proliferation pathways. A total of
65 proteins were exclusive to the secretome of stimulated cells. In
comparison to the baseline secretome, 146 proteins were common between
pre-conditioned and normal MSCs while 65 were exclusive to former, of which
14 were upregulated and 10 downregulated. The secretome of MSC exhibits a
significant restoration in cell viability, oxidative stress and
mitochondrial membrane potential of NPCs receiving MCP exposure.
Discussion and Conclusions: Our findings show that MSCs can
alter their secretion profile in response to their microenvironment,
enabling them to play in different capacities according to the maladies. The
study findings also demonstrate that MSC secretome can restore homeostasis
in MCP-exposed NPCs. The components identified in the MSC secretome
highlight the importance of cellular pre-conditioning, hence rendering the
MSC secretome a potential therapeutic intervention against neurotoxicity/
neurodegeneration.

## Acknowledgement
The authors would like to acknowledge the Indian Council of Medical
Research, New Delhi for financial assistance (IRIS Cell No. 2020-9465)
and the Senior Research Fellowship to Ms. Pankhi Vatsa.

## P81: Telomere Shortening in Leukocytes and Placenta: Links Gestational
Diabetes Mellitus and Perinatal Depressive Symptoms

Thirumoorthy C.1, Pavithra Rekha R.1, Shalu
D.1, Nikhil P.J.1, Deepa M.2, Mohan
V.2 and

Gokulakrishnan K.1

1Department of Neurochemistry, National Institute of Mental Health
& Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore, Karnataka, India
2Madras Diabetes Research Foundation (MDRF), Chennai, Tamil Nadu,
India
Aim: Studies reported a bidirectional relationship between
depression and Gestational Diabetes Mellitus (GDM). While telomere length
(TL) has been extensively studied in the contexts of GDM and depression
individually, there has been a relatively limited exploration of TL in the
specific intersection of GDM with comorbid depression. The present study
aimed to examine the relationship of Leukocyte and Placental TL in antenatal
women with GDM with and without perinatal depressive symptoms (PNS)].
Methods: Blood leukocyte TL was measured in 300 pregnant women
between 24-28 weeks of pregnancy [Normal Glucose Tolerance [NGT] without PNS
(n = 80); NGT with PNS (n = 105); GDM
without PNS (n = 75); GDM with PNS (n =
40)] and in a subset of 112 placental samples from the ongoing STRiDE
(Stratification of Risk of Diabetes in Early pregnancy) study. The
depression score was derived using PHQ-9, and qRT-PCR was used to quantify
TL.
Results: Blood Leukocyte TL at 24-28 weeks of pregnancy was
lower in GDM (with and without PNS; p < .001), and
in individuals with NGT with PNS. This trend was similar in placental TL
(p < .001). Notably, GDM with PNS has the lowest
expression of both leukocyte and placental TL and was negatively correlated
with depression score (p<0.05) and 2-hour postprandial glucose levels
(p < .05).
Conclusion and Discussion: Our findings indicate that GDM and
PNS are linked to lower TL levels in blood leukocytes and placenta. This
suggests a dynamic link between TL, GDM and PNS throughout pregnancy. TL
could serve as a potential biomarker for GDM and PNS. Further studies are
needed to validate the observed change over time and whether similar marks
can be detected in postpartum, and children born to these mothers, remains
to be elucidated.

## Funding
This study was supported by India Alliance/ DBT Wellcome Trust.

## P82: In-silico Evaluation of Potential Natural Neuroprotective Molecules
for Treatment of Parkinson’s Disease

Poonam Bhadauriya1,2, Ahsas Goyal2 and Vibhav
Varshney2

1Institute of Professional Studies, College of Pharmacy, Gwalior,
Madhya Pradesh, India
2Institute of Pharmaceutical Research, GLA University, Mathura,
Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Mas Receptor is a G protein coupled receptor which
plays a pivotal role in the treatment of PD via the activation of
angiotensin II type receptor (AT-2R) and suppression of Angiotensin I type
receptor (AT-1R). The activation of AT-2R activate Ang(1-7)\MasR axis which
reduces an oxidative stress neuroinflammatory status that results is
protection of dopaminergic neurons by the Ang(1-7)/MasR axis.
Methods: Fifty flavonoids were evaluated for the binding
efficacy for Rat MasR by using molecular docking. On the basis of their
binding efficacy best two flavonoids were selected from docking results then
after molecular dynamic simulations for 100 ns for binding stability
analysis with the MasR were done of two selected flavonoids. Then after
in silico ADMET studies were performed to check the
drug ability of the selected flavonoids.
Results: Pterosupin (–7.9 kcal/mol) and Amentoflavone
(–7.6 kcal/mol) Pterosupin were the two selected flavonoids which has
best binding efficacy with the MasR. The molecular dynamics simulation
studies showed that both Pterosupin and amentoflavone were at stable state
during duration of simulation period, root mean square deviation (RMSD) and
root mean square fluctuation (RMSF), and protein flavonoids complex were
stable until 100 ns.
Discussion and Conclusion: Pterosupin and Amentoflavone are
potential lead molecules that could be used as effective agonists of MasR to
treat Parkinson’s disease. Thus, further in-vitro
and in-vivo analysis can be done for confirmation of
effectiveness of these flavonoids.

## P83: Association of Air Pollution with Placental Pathology in Pregnant
Women of Odisha, India: A Case Study

Poonpun Das1, Lucy Das1 and Manorama
Patri1

1Ravenshaw University, Cuttack, Odisha, India
Background: The exposure of pregnant women to atmospheric
pollutants is related to the period of early development of the foetus, low
birth weight, preterm delivery and low placental weight which occurs due to
oxidative stress, and it may cause placental abnormalities.
Objective: The present cross-sectional study was conducted to
know the effects of air pollution on placental pathology by taking 373 women
volunteer participants with normal pregnancy from thickly populated,
traffic-congested, industrial and remote rural areas of Odisha, India.
Methods: We collected the pollution level of air pollutants of
the three study areas of Odisha State Pollution Control Board (OSPCB)
Bhubaneswar. The placental tissue was collected immediately after delivery.
The effect of air pollutants on the placental pathology was analysed by
Histopathological studies done by using Hematoxylene and Eosin staining
methods and photographed by florescent microscope.
Results: The present study showed the level of pollution,
percentage of exposure of pregnant mothers to ambient air pollution, preterm
delivery, significant increase in preterm birth in heavy traffic congestion
areas (Cuttack zone) and industrial areas (Jajpur zone) in comparison to
rural non-industrial areas (Nilagiri zone). The histopathological study of
placenta showed presence of PM2.5, Neutrophil granules, damaged
tissues, desquamated epithelial tissues, thrombus and less number of villi
in heavy traffic and industrial areas as compared to non-industrial
areas.
Conclusion: Our findings advocate that the exposure of pregnant
women to air pollutants may adversely affect the growth and development of
placenta and foetus in highly polluted areas. More studies are required for
confirmation.

## P84: Generation of Drug-induced Model to Study Parkinson’s
Disease

Prajwal B.G.1, Priyajit Changdar1,2, Shrilaxmi
M.S.1, Varshith M.R.1 and Somasish Ghosh
Dastidar1,3

1Centre for Molecular Neurosciences, Department of Anatomy,
Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal,
Karnataka, India
2Department of Physiology, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal
Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India
3Centre for Emerging and Tropical Diseases, Kasturba Medical
College, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India
Background: Rotenone, a mitochondrial complex-1 inhibitor is a
naturally occurring insecticide and pesticide. High lipophilic nature of
rotenone enables it to cross biological membranes including the blood-brain
barrier to target the dopaminergic neurons and cause neuronal death. It can
be developed as the best drug-induced model for Parkinson’s
disease.
Material and Method: Male Swiss albino mice of age 4 and 8
months were considered for the study. The mice were housed in individually
ventilated cages, with 12hrs day-night cycle, ad libitum.
The mice were treated with rotenone for 21 days via intraperitoneal
injection and behavioural tests were conducted to examine the disease
progression.
Result: The rotenone-injected mice were subjected to a battery
of behavioural tests. The hind and fore limb grip strength test, hind limb
clasping, the vertical pole test, Ledge test, gait analysis and kyphosis was
performed to check the progression of the disease. The tests were performed
to assess the motor coordination, in which the rotenone treated mice showed
significant decrease.
Discussion: Rotenone, is one among the best chemicals to develop
drug-induced model of PD. It replicates most of the pathologies that are
observed in PD. Our studies reveal that injection of rotenone caused severe
decrease in the motor coordination, bradykinesia, gait abnormalities in the
mice compared to the normal mice.

## Acknowledgement
We would like to thank Department of Biotechnology (under the Ministry of
Science & Technology) and KMC, MAHE for providing financial and
instrumental supports to pursue this research work.

## P85: Chronic Rewarding Stimulation Alleviates Depression-induced
Motivation and Memory Deficit in Rats

Pratik D. Dange1, Biru B. Dudhabhate1, Vinod K.
More1, Nishikant K. Subhedar2 and Dadasaheb M.
Kokare1

1Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Rashtrasant Tukadoji
Maharaj Nagpur University, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India
2Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Dr Homi
Bhabha Road, Pune, Maharashtra, India
Background: Major depressive disorder is associated with
motivation and memory deficit that leads to severe disability in patients.
Recently, the deep brain stimulation (DBS) of LH-MFB evolved as an effective
therapeutic strategy to treat depression. However, DBS effect on motivations
and memory deficit, and its mechanism of action is yet elusive.
Material and Methods: Rats were exposed to unpredictable
stressors (42 days) to induce depression and implanted with electrodes in
LH-MFB. DBS (14 day) treatment was provided and behavioural screening
performed by sucrose preference, forced swim, operant and novel object
recognition tests. Expression of neuropeptide CART and BDNF were tested in
different brain subregions.
Results: Chronic stress exposure leads to behavioural despair,
reduction in sucrose intake, lever pressings under fixed and progressive
ratio schedules, and impairs recognition memory. CUMS rats showed decrease
in BDNF expression in the lateral hypothalamus, cornu ammonis 3, arcuate
nucleus and ventral tegmental area, and neuropeptide CART expression in
central amygdala, dentate gyrus, dorsal raphe nucleus, lateral hypothalamus
and ventral tegmental area compared to control rats. LH-MFB DBS reversed the
all-altered parameters in stressed rats.
Discussion and Conclusion: Previously, the unilateral
stimulation of LH-MFB produces an antidepressant effect in TRD patients. The
LH-MFB is a crucial location for DBS because it has connections with the
several brain areas that are affected by depression. Herein, the application
of 14 days DBS treatments reversed the depressive behaviour, affected reward
motivations and memory deficit in the CUMS rats. Moreover, increased
expressions of BDNF and CART, indicate its involvement in the antidepressant
effect of DBS of LH-MFB.

## Acknowledgment
We acknowledge Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB)
(CRG/2020/004971) and Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)
(SRF-2021- 15699/F1) for providing funding support for this work.

## P86: Transcriptome Analysis Reveals MTRNR2L1 as the Potent Biomarker in
Intellectual Disability Disorder

Prekshi Garg1, Farrukh Jamal2 and Prachi
Srivastava1

1Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University, Uttar
Pradesh, India
2Department of Biochemistry, Dr. Rammanohar Lohia Avadh
University, Ayodhya, Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) have been
widely used to understand not only gene function but also the molecular
mechanisms underlying different biological processes. In the present study,
key biomarker in intellectual disability (ID) was identified using
transcriptome data analysis and robust machine learning approaches.
Materials and Methods: Data for 29 control and 31 patients of ID
were retrieved from GEO and BioProject database of NCBI (GSE77742, GSE74263,
GSE108887, GSE90682, GSE98476, GSE145710 and PRJEB21964). The DESeq2 package
was used for identifying DEGs. The feature selection algorithms (InfoGain,
Correlation feature selection and Relief) of Weka 3 software was used to
identify important features among DEGs. The accuracy of these algorithms was
tested through logistic regression, logistic model trees (LMT) and Random
Forest. The key biomarker in intellectual disability was identified using
NeuralNet.
Results: The DESeq2 analysis identified 15 upregulated genes in
patient sample. Out of these 15 genes, feature selection algorithm discarded
2 genes as non-significant and identified 11 genes as the important
attributes for the analysis of intellectual disability. The machine learning
algorithms showed improved accuracy after removal of non-significant
attributes from the dataset. The artificial neural network formed using the
important attributes only revealed the MTRNR2L1 expression as an important
parameter when the level of all other genes was kept constant.
Discussion and Conclusion: This indicate that gene MTRNR2L1 is
expressed considerably in patients of intellectual disability even if the
levels of all other DEGs remain constant. The increased expression of
MTRNR2L1 gene can be easily identified in patients indicating their
increased risk of development of intellectual disability. Thus, MTRNR2L1 can
act as a potent biomarker for the early diagnosis of intellectual
disability.

## P87: BMAA Induces Myeloperoxidase-based HOCl Production and Aggravates
Lipid Peroxidation in Microglia

Abir Mondal1, Prince Upadhyay1, Chaheti
Goyal1 Subrata Munan2, Animesh
Samanta2, Shailja Singh3 and Soumya
Pati1

1Department of Life Sciences, School of Natural Sciences, Shiv
Nadar Institution of Eminence, Delhi, India
2Department of Chemistry, School of Natural Sciences, Shiv Nadar
Institution of Eminence, Delhi, India
3Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi, India
Background: Humans have been chronically exposed to bacterial
toxins through their biomagnification in the food chain. When consumed with
food, these microbial toxins cause several neurological diseases like-
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) and Parkinson’s Dementia Complex
(PDC). However, the molecular mechanism of toxins-induced neurodegeneration
is yet to be elucidated.
Materials and Methods: Myeloperoxidase activity in human
microglia was evaluated by microscopy using our in-house probe. Bacterial
toxin BMAA was used for our experiment to observe the production of HOCl,
loss of mitochondrial potential and accelerated lipid-peroxidation in
microglia by flow cytometer. Erastin was taken as a positive control.
Results: Treatment of bacterial-toxin BMAA increased in
percentage (56%) of reactive oxygen species (ROS) positive microglia.
Further, 50% of microglia showed reduced mitochondrial potential 24
hours after treatment with BMAA. We also found that BMAA induces
myeloperoxidase activity and increases the production of mitochondrial HOCl
similar to erastin-treated microglia. Additionally, BMAA increases lipid
peroxidation in microglia which is comparable to erastin treatment.
Potential small molecule flavonoid decreases the BMAA-induced HOCl
production and lipid peroxidation in microglia.
Discussion and Conclusion: BMAA is reported to enter the brain
via crossing the blood-brain barrier (BBB) or gut-brain axis. BMAA increases
ROS production and negatively regulates mitochondrial health. Additionally,
BMAA activates myeloperoxidase activity and lipid peroxidation in microglia.
Lipid peroxidation is the crucial step that promotes cell death called
ferroptosis. Thus, the bacterial toxin BMAA can alter microglial functions,
and increase the rate of ferroptosis which are also one of the causes of
sporadic form of neurodegeneration.

## Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the DST-CSRI, India (DST/CSRI/2018/247). We also
highly acknowledge the Shiv Nadar Foundation for supporting our research
work.

## P88: Development and Validation of High Throughput Screening Platform
Using Genetic Cell Line Model for Parkinson’s Disease and Gaucher
Disease

Priya Gagansingh Thakur1,2 and Sivaprakash
Ramalingam1

1CSIR-IGIB, New Delhi, India
2ACSIR, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: The glucocerebrosidase 1 (GBA1) gene is the most
common genetic risk factor for Parkinson’s disease (PD). The L444P
mutation is the most frequent occurrence and is known to cause early onset
and severe forms of PD. The accumulation of misfolded mutant GCase leads to
ER stress, which in turn causes GCase to move to the cytoplasm and interact
and stabilise soluble α-synuclein (αsyn) oligomers. This
accelerates the formation of pathological α-syn in PD pathology.
Approach: HTS using patient-derived iPSCs can provide more
accurate results, but it is a labour-intensive and costly process to screen
large libraries. To address these challenges, we have devised an economical
genetic model that employs low substrate concentration in SH-SY5Y cells
carrying the L444P mutation. This is supported by a platform that integrates
fluorescence-based assay and flow cytometry to assess GCase activity.
Results: An initial screening of small molecule compounds (1st:
approximately 1280 compounds, 2nd: approximately 10,000 compounds) to boost
GCase activity using the SH-SY5Y GBA1L444P/L444P and GBA1L444P/+ cell lines.
Additionally, our aim is to select the top 5 hit compounds through secondary
screening of the top 10.
Discussion: Assessment of the efficacy of these 5 compounds in
alleviating the disease symptoms in human DA neurons differentiated from
iPSCs of GBA1L444P/L444P-carrying. Evaluation of the potential of these
compounds to mitigate the defects in dopaminergic differentiation of
neuronal progenitor cells, improve mitochondria dysfunction and prevent the
accumulation of lipids, as well as to reduce susceptibility to α-syn
PFF-induced PD.

## Acknowledgments
DBT, Government of India, CSIR and DBT-JRF.

## P89: Graphene-based Nanomaterials to Support Neuronal Growth and Function
Post Injury

Priyadharishini Veeraraghavan1

1Department of Biotechnology, PSG Institute of Advanced Studies,
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India
Damage to neurons in the central nervous system (CNS) can have catastrophic
consequences due to the loss of function and limited ability to recover.
Injuries to the CNS occur in two stages: primary or acute injury, and
secondary injury. The primary injury is the initial impact to the CNS, which
leads to a prolonged secondary injury that further expands the loss of
function. Secondary injuries involve a range of cellular events and
molecular factors, including excitotoxicity, inflammation, oxidative stress
and axon degeneration, which can last from hours to days after the initial
injury. Additionally, many secondary injury factors are exacerbated by the
loss of physical support for neurons and their sub-cellular structures after
an injury. Therefore, it is essential to support and treat existing neurons
to improve their functional recovery quickly.
Graphene-based nanomaterials (GBNs) are emerging as promising tools for
tissue engineering due to their excellent biocompatibility with various
cells, including neurons. However, the potential functional effects of GBNs
on injured neurons in the CNS are still unclear. My lab aims to study the
membrane and functional properties of neurons during and after injury with
GBNs. This research will provide us with more insights into the use of GBNs
as a supportive material for treating CNS injuries and their potential for
clinical translation.

## P90: Neuroprotective Effect of Virgin Coconut Oil Against Chronic
Drug-induced Parkinson’s Disease

Priyajit Changdar1,2, Prajwal B.G.2, Shrilaxmi M.S.2, Varshith M.R.2,
Saradindu Banerjee2, Vasudev R. Pai4, Roberto Hirochi Herai5, Manjula
S.D.1 and Somasish Ghosh Dastidar2,3

1Department of Physiology, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal
Academy of Higher Education (MAHE), Manipal, Karnataka, India
2Center for Molecular Neurosciences, Kasturba Medical College,
Manipal Academy of Higher Education (MAHE), Manipal, Karnataka, India
3Center for Emerging Tropical Diseases, Kasturba Medical College,
Manipal Academy of Higher Education (MAHE), Manipal, Karnataka, India
4Department of Pharmacognosy, Manipal College of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Manipal Academy of Higher Education (MAHE), Manipal, Karnataka,
India
5School of Medicine and Life Sciences, Pontifícia Universidade
Católica do Paraná (PUCPR), Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil
Background: Virgin coconut oil (VCO) is a nutraceutical, with
anti-oxidative and anti-inflammatory properties. Parkinson’s disease
(PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder caused by dopaminergic
neuronal death due to oxidative stress and neuroinflammation. We propose VCO
can be neuroprotective against PD.
Materials and Methods: Swiss albino male mice were divided into
five different groups. To induce PD features three groups of mice were
injected with Rotenone. Post PD induction two groups of mice received VCO
treatment for 28 days while another one remained untreated. We assessed
motor behavioural parameters weekly during our treatment period.
Results: We observed a drastic reduction of motor and
coordination activities in mice after 21 days of rotenone injection in
comparison to control mice. When PD mice were treated with two different
doses of VCO, a symptomatic improvement was noticed. Weekly assessment of
fore limb and hind limb grip strength, gait, kyphosis, hind limb clasping
and vertical pole activity showed a sign of amelioration of PD progression
by VCO treatment in comparison to untreated PD mice.
Discussions: The possible reason for VCO’s ameliorative
effect in PD mice models could be due to its antioxidant and
anti-inflammatory properties. We have done RNA sequencing analysis of the
SNPc of the 5 groups of mice understudy. A thorough analysis of the
transcriptome data might reveal common pathway(s) shared in genetic or
environmental models of PD and mechanisms by which VCO offers protection
against PD.

## Acknowledgement
We would like to thank Department of Biotechnology (under the Ministry of
Science & Technology) and KMC, MAHE for providing financial and
instrumental supports to pursue this research work.

## P91: Neuroprotective Effect of Vitamin B12 Supplementation on Neuronal
Morphology and Spine Density After Traumatic Brain Injury

Priyanka Yadav1 and Thamil Mani
Sivanandam1

1Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of
Zoology, Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar
Pradesh, India
Introduction: Traumatic brain injury leads to the transmission
of external force to the head. Changes in neuronal morphology and spine
density are directly associated with the pathophysiology of TBI. The present
study aims to investigate the effect of Vitamin B12 supplementation on 3rd
day, 7th day and 14th day after TBI.
Methods: To check the effect of Vitamin B12 supplementation on
neuronal morphology and spine density, Swiss albino males (12±2 week)
were divided into three groups: Control, TBI and TBI+Vitamin B12
supplementation (1.5mg/kg body weight, intraperitoneally). The mice were
sacrificed on the 3rd, 7th and 14th day and
performed Golgi-cox staining.
Results: The results show that TBI+Vitamin B12 supplementation
significantly increases the number of intersections, and length as compared
to TBI on the 3rd, 7th and 14th day. The total number of nodes was only
found to be significantly increased in TBI+Vitamin B12 supplementation as
compared to TBI on 3rd day. The total spin density, filopodia and
mushroom-shaped spines were found to be increased in TBI+Vitamin B12
supplementation as compared to TBI on the 14th day.
Discussion and Conclusion: Neuronal morphology and spine density
are closely associated with structural plasticity. The study revealed that
TBI leads to changes in neuronal morphology such as the number of dendritic
intersections, dendritic length and nodes, and Vitamin B12 supplementation
markedly restored the same parameters. Similarly, spine density was also
increased by Vitamin B12 supplementation after TBI. Altogether these changes
indicated that TBI-mediated disruption in the neuronal architecture and
structural plasticity was improved by Vitamin B12 supplementation.

## Acknowledgments
ICMR, UGC-Start up grant for providing funds to STM lab. CSIR for senior
research fellowship to PY, interdisciplinary School of Life Science,
Banaras Hindu University for vibrotome and Light microscope
Facilities.

## P92: Identification of Natural Product Inhibitors of TRPA1 Channel
Against Neuropathic Pain

Priyanka Yadav1, Asif Ali2 and Aravind Sing
Kshatri

1Neuroscience and Ageing Biology Division1, Medicinal
and Process Chemistry Division, CSIR-Central drug Research Institute,
Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
2CSIR-Central drug Research Institute, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh,
India
Chronic pain control is frequently ineffective and associated with adverse
side effects, and thus prompted a frantic search for new natural therapeutic
molecules. TRPA1 channel has emerged as a critical target for pain relief
since its antagonists target the beginning of the pain transduction pathway.
To identify the TRPA1 antagonists we have developed and optimised a
fluorescent based screening assay using GCaMP6s as a Ca2+ indicator.
Molecular docking was performed to identify the binding sites of the hit
molecules. The in vivo efficacy was evaluated using Chemotherapy induced
peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) mice model. We identified that Phialomustin-B
(PHL-B) derived from endophytic fungus exhibited potent TRPA1 inhibitory
activity (IC50 = 0.4 µM). Its effects were selective to TRPA1 but not
to TRPV1 and TRPV4 channels. Molecular docking of PHL-B on TRPA1 channels
revealed a binding pocket in a hot spot region for gain of function
mutations which result in pain syndromes. Furthermore, our preliminary in
vivo data also shows that PHL-B effectively reversed neuropathic pain
behaviour in a translational-CIPN rodent model. Although PHL-B appears to be
a promising analgesic candidate displaying TRPA1 selectivity, its
optimisation with systematic SAR, structural & mechanism of action
studies, and detailed in vivo efficacy remains to be established. Based on
the obtained structural information, we envisage that PHL-B binding to this
region may hinder the movement of S4-S5 linker and prevents the TRPA1
channel opening. Together, PHL-B appears to be a promising analgesic
candidate targeting the nociceptive pain pathway.

## Acknowledgment
This work is supported by CSIR- CDRI & UGC-JRF fellowship to Priyanka
Yadav.

## P93: Unveiling the Neuroprotective Mechanisms of Agmatine in
Huntington’s Disease: Implications for Therapeutic
Interventions

Raj Katariya1, Nandkishor Kotagale1, Milind
Umekar1 and Brijesh Taksande1

1Department of Pharmacology, Smt. Kishoritai Bhoyar College of
Pharmacy, Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj Nagpur University, Nagpur,
Maharashtra, India
Background: Huntington’s disease (HD) is a rare incurable
progressive neurogenetic disorder caused by repeated expansion of CAG
trinucleotide in the huntingtin gene (Htt) with gradual loss of GABAergic
neurons in the striatal part of the basal ganglia. Agmatine is a novel
neurotransmitter in the brain reported to exhibit a diverse range of
biological properties.
Materials and Methods: 3-nitropropionic acid (3-NP), a
neurotoxin, was used to induce HD-like symptoms in rats like progressive
behavioural, biochemical, neurochemical and histopathological alterations.
Rats were pre-treated with 3-NP (10 mg/kg, i.p.) on alternate days and then
from the 10th day continued on agmatine treatment (5-20 mg/kg, i.p.) up to
the 32nd day of the treatment protocol.
Results: The findings of the current investigation revealed that
the manifestations of HD induced by 3-NP were restored by agmatine
treatment. Agmatine intervention not only improved the 3-NP induced motor
incoordination, beam walking, rota-rod performance, and learning and memory
impairment but also normalised the GABA/glutamate levels as well as the
oxidative stress markers in discrete brain areas. Moreover, agmatine (20
mg/kg) ameliorates the observed histopathological changes and modulates the
expression of GFAP, a recognised immunohistochemical marker indicative of
astrocytic activity.
Discussion and Conclusion: The outcomes of the present study
demonstrate that agmatine treatment effectively counteracted HD
manifestations induced by 3-NP. It ameliorated motor deficits, cognitive
impairments and neurotransmitter dysregulations while restoring oxidative
equilibrium. Notably, agmatine exerted positive influences on
histopathological alterations and GFAP modulation. These multifaceted
improvements underscore the neuroprotective potential of agmatine for
mitigating the diverse aspects of HD pathology. In conclusion, agmatine
holds enormous promise as a comprehensive therapeutic intervention for HD
management, warranting further exploration for clinical translation.

## Acknowledgements
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to my supervisor for their
invaluable support and guidance, which have been instrumental in shaping
my progress. We also acknowledged the DST-SERB (EEQ/2021/000955), New
Delhi for generously providing the funding that enabled us to conduct
our research work.

## P94: Early Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s Disease by Electrocorticogram
and Ameliorative Effects of Low Intensity Magnetic Field Stimulation in
Streptozotocin Rat Model

Reena Chittora1, K.P. Kochhar1 and Suman
Jain1

1Department of Physiology, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi, India
Background: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive
neurodegenerative disease and begins long before any symptoms become
apparent. It is an irreversible brain disorder slowly compromising learning
and memory skills. AD is an approaching public health crisis which presently
lacks an effective treatment. Non-invasive, magnetic field stimulation
therapy proposes a promising alternative approach to traditional
pharmacological interventions for AD.
Materials and Methods: Adult male Wistar rats were taken as
study model and divided into three groups: Sham, AD and AD+MF. For
development of AD, STZ was injected intracerebroventricularly, at a dose of
3mg/kg body weight using stereotaxic apparatus. AD+MF animals were exposed
to low intensity magnetic fields from 8th day of STZ treatment till 15th
day.
Results: A significant improvement in cognitive functions was
observed following MF exposure in AD rats. The improvement in behaviour was
supported by viable neuronal count which was higher after MF treatment than
in the AD rats. Electrocorticogram from frontal and occipital lobes showed
reduced delta power of EEG waves in AD rats, whereas MF exposure for short
duration of 8 days only, increased the wave power in comparison to AD.
Significant neurogenesis was also evident in MF exposed rats.
Discussion and Conclusion: These findings illustrate that the
alteration in delta activity can be a potential early diagnostic measure of
cognitive impairment in AD. It further confirms the correlation of
neurodegeneration with impaired memory deficits. Present findings also
suggest that non-invasive magnetic field stimulation has the potential to
ameliorate the functional, morphological and cognitive deficits in STZ rat
model of AD.

## Acknowledgement
Authors wish to thank ICMR for financial assistance. The overall
mentorship and supervision was provided by Prof. Suman Jain.

## P95: Elucidating the Mechanisms Underlying the Induction of Neurotoxicity
upon Low-dose Malathion and Radiation Exposure

Rekha Koravadi Narasimhamurthy1, Gireesh G.2,
Bola Sadashiva Satish Rao1,3 and Kamalesh Dattaram
Mumbrekar1

1Department of Radiation Biology & Toxicology, Manipal School
of Life Sciences, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka,
India
2Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Manipal School of Life
Sciences, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India
3Directorate of Research, Manipal Academy of Higher Education,
Manipal, Karnataka, India
Background: Neurodegenerative disorders are one of the most
prevalent problems that the ageing population globally suffers from. Among
the many etiological factors responsible for their onset, co-exposure to
pesticides and radiation has also been stated to play a role. However, a
holistic insight in to their regulative mechanism is scarcely explored.
Materials and Methods: One-month old C57BL mice were singularly
administered with malathion (50mg/kg) or subjected to irradiation (0.5Gy) or
co-exposed. Behavioural tests for memory, recognition and exploratory
behaviour were conducted. Following euthanising, neuronal morphology,
neuroinflammation, neuronal survival and antioxidant enzyme levels were
assessed. Further, hippocampal tissues were subjected to transcriptomic and
metabolomic analysis.
Results: Altered neuronal morphology, neuroinflammation,
neuronal death, increased oxidative stress and acetylcholinesterase enzyme
inhibition were observed in the single and co-exposure groups.
Transcriptomic analysis revealed activation of pathways involved in
neurodegenerative diseases like MAPK, PI3k-Akt, Notch, Fox-O, Hippo
signalling and so on. Several processes regulating neuronal cell survival,
synaptic transmission, plasticity, neurotransmitter synapses showed
synergistic enrichment in co-exposure group. Metabolomic signatures showed
alterations in metabolic pathways including tyrosine, glutathione, arginine,
glutamine, tryptophan metabolism.
Discussion and Conclusions: Malathion and radiation single and
co-exposure induced changes in antioxidant status, inflammation and gene
expression, leading to changes in metabolites and regulation of neuron
morphology, synaptic plasticity and survival. Several neuronal processes
along with genes and metabolites implicated in the onset of
neurodegenerative diseases were altered, demonstrating their role in
neurotoxicity. Co-exposure resulted in augmented effects compared to
individual exposure and alteration of several unique pathways important in
neuronal homeostasis, indicating importance of co-exposure toxicity
studies.

## Acknowledgements
The support and research facilities at the Manipal School of Life
Sciences and Manipal Academy of Higher Education is gratefully
acknowledged. The authors also thank the DBT-BUILDER for the support and
financial assistance under the grant (ECR/2017/001239) from SERB, Govt
of India. RKN would like to thank MAHE, Manipal, for the Dr. T.M.A Pai
fellowship and KSTePS, Govt of Karnataka, for the DST-PhD
scholarship.

## P96: Identification of Potential Protein Targets of Amyotrophic Lateral
Sclerosis in TDP-43-mutated hiPSCs-derived 3D Organoid Model

R. Negi1, P. Vatsa1, U.A. Ansari1,
V.K. Khanna1 and A.B. Pant1

1Systems Toxicology Group, Food, Drug & Chemical, Environment
and Systems Toxicology (FEST) Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology
Research (CSIR-IITR), Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
2Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad,
Uttar Pradesh, India
Background and Objectives: Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS)
is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder that causes motor neuron degeneration,
progressive motor impairment, paralysis and death. Human iPSC-derived 3D
organoid models have emerged as better predictive tools for understanding
the aetiology of neurodegenerative disorders. We investigate the proteomic
profile of the TDP-43-mutated hiPSCs-derived 3D organoid to understand its
applicability in the therapeutic intervention of ALS.
Materials and Methods: Human episomal iPSC cell lines were grown
in Essential 8 media to generate a significant number of iPSCs, which were
then characterised for pluripotency markers. The mutation in hiPSCs was
accomplished using CRISPR/Cas-9 technology and predesigned gRNA. Normal and
mutated organoids were produced and subjected to global proteomic profiling
by high-resolution mass spectrometry.
Results: The proteomic analysis of normal and mutated organoids
revealed the proteins associated with pathways of neurodegenerative
disorders, proteasomes, autophagy and hypoxia-inducible factor-1 signalling.
Differential proteomic analysis revealed that the mutation in TDP-43 gene
caused proteomic deregulation, which impaired protein quality mechanisms.
Furthermore, this impairment may generate stress conditions that may
ultimately lead to the development of ALS pathology.
Conclusion: The developed organoid model identifies potent
proteins and their associated biological mechanism altered in ALS pathology.
This study offers potential protein targets that may shed light upon the
precise disease pathological mechanism and could be used for future
diagnostic and therapeutic purposes for various neurodegenerative
disorders.

## P97: In-silco Study for the Identification of Biomarker for Tuberculous
Meningitis

Ritika1 and Varun Kumar Singh1

1Department of Neurology, IMS, BHU, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh,
India
Background: Tuberculous meningitis (TBM) is a common form of
meningitis caused by infection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and is the most
severe form of tuberculosis (TB). Although the proportion of TBM may only be
1–5% of all TB cases. Its mortality is unacceptably high
(range 10–36.5%), especially in developing countries. The
estimated mortality due to TBM in India is 1.5 per 100,000 population.
Despite being an endemic country for TB, data regarding clinical,
radiological and laboratory (biochemical and microbiological) parameters and
final outcome of adult TBM patients is sparse in India. Analysis of such
variables in various countries has shown association of various factors with
the prognosis of the disease like age, stage of disease, level of
consciousness, presence of extraneural TB, isolation of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis from CSF, biochemical studies and hydrocephalus. The
availability of such data in a high burdened developing country like India.
Thus, its required to develop diagnostic and prognostic biomarker for the
identification of TBM.
Aim: The present work is planned to identify diagnostic and
prognostic biomarkers for TBM.
Materials and Methods: In the present study we have used
DisGeNET (gene and protein repository) and STITCH tool.
Result: We have found from DisGeNET, that TBM has disease gene
id: C0041318 and have 68 genes reported from various databases. Further, we
identify their interaction among themselves using STITCH tool and found that
Cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide have higher interaction with rest of the
proteins as matrix metallopeptidase-2, matrix metallopeptidase-6,
Interleukin-6, Interleukin-4, Interleukin-1 beta, Oestrogen receptor-1 and
Vascular endothelial growth factor A.
Discussion and Conclusion: We found that these genes
(Cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide have higher interaction with rest of the
proteins as matrix metallopeptidase-2, matrix metallopeptidase-6,
Interleukin-6, Interleukin-4, Interleukin-1 beta, Oestrogen receptor-1 and
Vascular endothelial growth factor A) might be used for the diagnosis and
prognosis of TBM.

## Acknowledgement
IMS-BHU, Varanasi-221005, India.

## P98: Neuroprotective Effects of Nootropic Drug Bacopa
monnieri in Alzheimer’s Disease

Roshani Singh1, Deepesh Parashar1 and Manoj
Sharma1

1School of Studies in Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jiwaji University,
Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh, India
Background: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a disorder that
causes degeneration of the cells in the brain, and it is the main cause of
dementia, which is characterised by a decline in thinking and independence
in personal daily activities. AD is considered a multifactorial disease: two
main hypotheses were proposed as a cause for AD, cholinergic and amyloid
hypotheses. In the present study we have taken Bacopa monnieri for Cognitive
enhancement and neuroprotective effects. Based on its reputation for nerve
tonic and its antioxidant activity, we hypothesised that this plant extract
could mitigate the memory impairment and neurodegeneration in animal model
of Alzheimer’s disease.
Method: Bacopa monnieri (40mg/kg-ip) and Piracetam (200mg/kg-ip)
were administered 30 min before Scopolamine (0.4mg/kg-ip) on the first day
and followed up to 7th days. On day 8th animals were
sacrificed, brain tissue homogenate was prepared, and neuroprotective
effects were measured followed by lipid peroxidation (LPO) assay, and
antioxidant markers such as GSH, SOD and CATalase. Body weight changes,
estimation of haematological variables and behavioural changes were also
accessed.
Results: Based on previous findings that this plant extract
could directly inhibit the superoxide anion formation and could increase the
hippocampal superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT) and glutathione
peroxidase (GPX) activities, we suggested that the neuroprotective and
cholinoprotective effects of the plant extract might be partly due to its
antioxidant.
Discussion and Conclusion: In conclusion, the present data
supported the efficacy of Bacopa monnieri according to the traditional
system and provided supported document about the neuroprotective effect
against the cholinergic degeneration and cognitive enhancing effect of
Bacopa monnieri in Alzheimer’s disease model. Therefore, this plant
is a valuable candidate for cognitive enhancer and neuroprotective agent in
Alzheimer’s disease.

## P99: Electrophysiological Brain Mapping in Infantile Hemiplegic Cerebral
Palsy Patients

Rudraksh Banga1, Aliya Mufti1, Kanwal Preet
Kochhar1, Sheffali Gulati2 and Suman
Jain1

1Department of Physiology, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi, India
2Department of Pediatrics, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi, India
Introduction: Infantile cerebral palsy (CP) is a
neurodevelopmental disorder that affects children’s sensorimotor
functions, which may be associated with functional reorganisation of
somatotopic maps. The present study aims to standardise the procedure for
cortical brain mapping in children with cerebral palsy and study the effect
of rTMS on it.
Materials and Methods: Three different groups of participants
(active, sham and control) aged between 5 and 15 years with infantile
hemiplegic CP were subjected to brain mapping procedure before and after
administration of low frequency rTMS intervention over the contralateral
motor cortex for 4 weeks in 10 sessions along with Modified
Constraint-Induced Movement Therapy (mCIMT).
Result: A grid targeting predefined locations around the hotspot
of abductor pollicis brevisin cardinal directions was manually designed.
Single pulse TMS was used to record motor evoked-potential at 41 stimulation
sites on the grid for construction of brain maps. Heat maps of the hand area
generated in the MATLAB software showed modulation of cortical excitability
and somatotopic maps after rTMS intervention in CP patients. QUEST scores
confirmed the recovery of sensori-motor function in these children.
Conclusion: We were able to standardise the procedure for
mapping motor cortex in CP children using single-pulse TMS. This technique
was found to be effective in understanding the alterations in cortical
excitability and plasticity. Further rTMS intervention induced
reorganisation of cortical motor maps that lead to enhanced sensory and
motor functional recovery in hemiplegic CP children.

## Acknowledgment
We acknowledge the financial support provided by ICMR, Delhi.

## P100: Calcineurin Inhibition rescues Lopamine-induced Cytotoxicity and
Protects Against Behavioural Decline in MPTP-induced Parkinson’s
Disease Model

Rupsha Mondal1,2, Chayan Banerjee1,2, Sumangal
Nandy1, Moumita Roy1,2 and Joy
Chakraborty1,2

1Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, CSIR-Indian Institute
of Chemical Biology-TRUE, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
2Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-Human
Resource Development Centre, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Dopamine (DA) cytotoxicity plays a key role in the
development of Parkinson’s disease (PD) progression. Effect of L-DOPA
therapy on PD progression is still a matter of debate. We determined the
effect of Calcineurin (CaN) inhibition on DA cytotoxicity and PD progression
in a mice model.
Materials and Methods: Cytotoxicity assays, confocal microscopy
and immunoblotting were performed to determine the effect of DA (±
Calcineurin inhibition). MPTP, L-DOPA and CaN inhibitor FK506 treated
C57BL/6 mice (30, 10 and 1 mg/kg respectively, for 7 and 14 days) were used
to determine the behaviour, neurochemistry, neuronal death and neuronal
architecture.
Results: DA induces cytotoxicity and mitochondrial fragmentation
in vitro by enhancing CaN activity. This leads to mitochondrial
translocation of DRP1, which is protected by the application of FK506.
Further, evaluation of the impact of DA exposure on PD progression in a mice
model reveal that LD mediated behavioural recovery diminishes with time,
because of continued DAergic cell death and dendritic spine loss. CaN
inhibition, alone or in combination with LD, offer long term behavioural
protection.
Discussion and Conclusions: Application of FK506 alone or in
combination with L-DOPA in MPTP induced PD mice resulted in increased
neuronal spine density and behavioural recovery. However, inhibition of
other CaN substrates including proteins involved in neuro-inflammation
(e.g., NFAT) did not show improved neuronal spine density, thus behavioural
decline was not protected. Hence, our findings suggest that CaN inhibitors
might extend therapeutic effectiveness of LD therapy to treat PD
progression.

## Acknowledgements
The study is supported by grant from Indian Council of Medical Research
(ICMR) and Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB). MR and RM are
supported by Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)-Senior
Research Fellowship. CB is supported by The University Grants Commission
(UGC)-Senior Research Fellowship

## P101: RNA-binding Protein hnRNPA1 Regulates O6-Methylguanine
DNA-Methyltransferase Expression in T98G Glioma Cells

Sachin Bhardwaj1 and Ajay K. Yadav1

1Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Centre for Biomedical Research, New Delhi,
India
Background: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is most invasive brain
tumour with poor patient survival, recent studies showed O6-
Methylguanine DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT) as a poor
prognosis marker. Epigenetic silencing of MGMT by promoter
methylation compromises DNA repair and has been associated with the longer
survival of the patients with glioblastoma received alkylating drugs.
Material and Methods: We tested the relationship between
MGMT expression and RNA binding protein in T98G glioma
cells, along with expression of MGMT at mRNA level was
analysed in T98G and U87MG using PCR. RNA binding protein hnRNPA1 was
knocked down using specific siRNA and MGMT expression was
studied using RT-PCR and immunoblotting.
Results:
MGMT was predominantly expressed at mRNA level in T98G
glioma cells but not in U87MG cells. To study the further relation between
hnRNPA1 and MGMT we chosen T98G glioma cells and knocked
down hnRNPA1 variants showed downregulation of MGMT at mRNA
as well as protein level.
Discussion and Conclusion: Around 50-60% glioblastoma
patients have a methylated MGMT promoter; yet those
expressing MGMT due to an unmethylated promoter or
alternate mechanism will likely respond poorly to standard alkylating
therapy. It is very important to elucidate the molecular mechanism of
MGMT regulation at mRNA and protein level besides of
the MGMT promoter methylation. Combined evaluation of
MGMT methylation and expression may provide better
insight into better therapeutic approach.

## Acknowledgements
We thanks CSIR- Senior Research Fellowship support (File
no.-09/045(1769)/2019-EMR-I) to S.B for financial support and we also
acknowledge the support given to A.K.Y from Institute of Eminence Grant,
2021-22 by University of Delhi, and Internal Maintenance Grant,
University of Delhi, Delhi, India.

## P102: Unravelling the Timeline: Neuronal and Skin Regeneration Dynamics
After Injury in Zebrafish

Saida Sayyed1, Bushraa Nirban1 and Tressa
Jacob1

1Department of Life Sciences, Sophia College (Autonomous), Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India
Background: Skin injuries stimulate the growth of nerve fibres
in the injured area, where the actin cytoskeleton is crucial for maintaining
the structural integrity of cells and is involved in various cellular
processes, including neuronal development and function. The role of actin
polymerisation during skin and neuronal regeneration in zebrafish is being
studied.
Material and Method: Adult zebrafish (1.5-2 years) were used to
study neuronal regeneration by inducing a superficial wound. Different time
points after wounding were fixed using PFA, and immunostaining with mouse
anti-acetylated tubulin was used to detect regenerating neurons during
various post-injury time intervals.
Result: Presence of neurons was examined in the descaled region
24 h post descaling (24hpd) using immunostaining with mouse anti-acetylated
tubulin. Zebrafish at 0 hours post descaling (0hpd) displayed an absence of
neuronal growth in the descaled region, while regions with intact scales in
the same fish exhibited the presence of neurons.
Discussion and Conclusion: In this study, neuronal regeneration
was successfully observed at the 24-hour post-descaling time point in
zebrafish. To strengthen the validity of our findings, further
investigations involving a larger sample size are essential. Exploring
additional time points, both earlier and later, will provide a comprehensive
understanding of the regenerative process. Moreover, ongoing efforts to
unravel the role of actin polarisation in neuronal regeneration are being
carried out.

## P103: Understanding the Role of Dopamine Receptor D5 (DRD5) Modulator in
Working Memory and Cognitive Functions

Sakesh Kumar1,3, Kajal Sharma1,3, Prem P.
Yadav2 and Prem N. Yadav1

1Neuroscience and Ageing Biology Division, CSIR-Central Drug
Research Institute, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
2Medicinal and Process Chemistry Division, CSIR-Central Drug
Research Institute, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
3Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (CSIR-HRDC),
Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, India
Neurological diseases are on rising in all age groups, and the hardest hit
ones are elderly citizens all over the world. Cognitive impairment, motor
disability, are serious age associated debilitating conditions the occurs in
about 8% of Indian population. One of the major underlying mechanisms
considered for age associated dementia or motor disabilities is perturbed
dopaminergic neurotransmission. Dopamine, a major neurotransmitter action
through five (D1-D5) receptors belonging to the GPCRs superfamily. Also,
dopamine plays important role in several critical processes, such as reward,
motivation, attention and learning. In this study using HTS assay, we
discovered that thydroalcoholic extract of Tinospora
cordifolia plant (135/C002) exhibit selective DRD5
receptor agonist activity. Using GloSensor assay, a live cell assay to
measure cAMP formation, we determined that 135/COO2 extract
exhibitEC50<0.5µg/ml at DRD5, while <2.2µg/ml at the DRD1
receptor. We further evaluated the effect of 135/C002 on cognitive
behaviours in scopolamine-induced amnesia model. We observed that 135/C002
Significantly alleviated scopolamine-induced impairments in spatiotemporal
learning and memory (measured by Y-Maze Test), working memory (measured by T
maze test). Furthermore, to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of
135/C002procognitive effect in vivo, we measured the expression of BDNF,
phosphorylation of AMPA ion channel subunit-GluR1 and cFOS activation. We
observed that 135/C002 significantly blocked the effect of
scopolamine-induced decrease in BDNF and phsopho-GluR1. Furthermore, we
found that 135/C002 treatment induced the expression of cFOS (a marker of
increased neuronal activation and synaptic plasticity) in the prefrontal
cortex. These neurobehavioural and neurobiological studies for the first
time demonstrated that Tinospora cordifolia plant extract
135/C00 enhances spatiotemporal learning and working memory in C57BL/6J
mice. These results suggest that selective modulation of the D5 receptor as
a plausible therapeutic strategy for treating cognitive disorders and
highlights the therapeutic importance of Tinospora
cordifolia plants for CNS disorders.

## P104: Agmatine-NPY Interplay in Paraventricular Nuclei Regulates Pubertal
Endocrine Physiology

Sakshi Nalkande1, Manish Aglawe1, Brijesh G.
Taksande1 and Milind J. Umekar1

1Division of Neuroscience, Department of Pharmacology, Smt.
Kishoritai Bhoyar College of Pharmacy, Kamptee, Maharashtra, India
Background: Puberty onset is a complex, organised biological
process with multilevel regulation, and its physio-pathological mechanisms
are yet to be fully elucidated. NPY is known regulator, however, the role of
agmatine in neuroendocrine physiology of puberty is unknown.
Objective: To study the effect of agmatine on puberty and
evaluation of neuropeptide Y involvement in it and associated
conditions.
Method: On PND 29 to 35 & PND 45-52 daily administration of
agmatine (4, 8 µg i-pvn) & l-Arginine (5,10 µg i-pvn)) in pre- &
post-puberty male/female rats was done Onset of puberty was examined through
body weight, age of vaginal opening, oestrus cycle, testis development &
plasma hormone levels. Estimation of LH, FSH, ACTH, TSH, oestrogen,
progesterone, testosterone, T3 & T4 level in plasma by ELISA. The
involvement of NPY was done by implying NPY (peptide) agonist and antagonist
BIBP3226 (1 µg i-pvn).
Result: Testes development, vaginal cytology and oestrus
microscopy verified normal pubertal onset in all the experimental groups.
Intra-pvn administration of agmatine have significant influenced the
hormonal levels in HPG axis in pre- & post-puberty male/female rats. NPY
receptor antagonist BIBP2336 have shown significant reduction in the effect
of agmatine and l-arginine on release and inhibition of hormones in HPG
axis.
Conclusion: These data suggest the influence of agmatine within
paraventricular nucleus on release and regulation of hormones from HPG axis.
Furthermore, our study also highlights the implication of NPY within PVN in
the regulatory effect of agmatine in pre- and post- pubertal animal. Thus,
this interplay can be novel therapeutic target for management of pubertal
disorders.

## Acknowledgement
I am very thankful to AICTE for providing a GPAT stipend. Also, thankful
to all teaching and non-teaching staff for helping me throughout my
research.

## P105: Comparative Ethological Analysis of Behaviour in Healthy Male and
Female Wistar Rats on Elevated Plus Maze

Sakshi Sharma1, Martina Narzary2, Suman
Jain3 and Varsha Singh4

1School of Interdisciplinary Research, Indian Institute of
Technology, Delhi, India
2Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, India
3Department of Physiology, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi, India
4Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology,
Delhi, India
Background: The Elevated Plus Maze (EPM) is a standard task for
the assessment of anxiety in rodents. The ethogram derived from the EPM
provides precise measure of behaviour enabling objective interpretation of
anxiety. We report parameters assessing the behaviour on EPM critical for
quantitative and quantitative analysis of EPM with reference to
sex-differences.
Materials and Methods: Adult Male (n = 10) and
Female (n = 10) albino Wistar rats weighing
240g–280g were used for this study. EPM paradigm was used for the
investigation of basal levels of anxiety in healthy male and female Wistar
rats. Video-tracking of behaviour of the animal was done with CCD
camera.
Results: Results confirmed that males spent more time in the
open arms compared to the closed arms and showed more non-anxious
behaviours, reflecting low anxiety and increased risk-taking in males.
Females exhibited more anxious behaviour when parameters assessing the
quantitative measures of behaviour like time spent and number of entries to
each arm were investigated. Blind analysis of the ethological behaviours
like head dips, stretched posture and rearing also gave the similar results.
When the behaviour was analysed in the two separate halves of the task
duration, these observations persisted in the females when compared with the
males.
Discussion and Conclusion: Our study reports the differences in
the behaviour of the two sexes on EPM. We examined sex-specific quantitative
and qualitative measures in the elevated plus maze performance. Our
understanding of males and females’ approach-avoidance and anxiety
state explaining the behaviour on EPM might be improved by cumulatively
analysing the quantitative parameters along with the changes in ethology,
producing alternate insights.

## Acknowledgement
Authors, VS and SJ supervised the study. SS collected and analysed the
data. MN helped with the data analysis. This work was under DST SERB
Vritika Research Training Grant of the author VS supporting the Trainee
MN.

## P106: Subacute Metabolic Markers of Repetitive Mild Head Injury Rat
Model

Samiya Zehra1, A.K. Baranwal2, Kamlesh
Bhaisora3 and Ahmad Raza Khan1

1Department of Advanced Spectroscopy and Imaging, Centre of
Biomedical Research, SGPGIMS Campus, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
2Experimental Animal Facility, SGPGIMS, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh,
India

3
Department of Neurosurgery, SGPGIMS, Lucknow, Uttar
Pradesh, India
Background: Repetitive mild traumatic brain injury (RmTBI) is a
strong risk-factor for neurodegenerative diseases.1 So far, no
objective diagnostic test is available for RmTBI2, therefore we
hypothesise that NMR-based metabolomics can suggest potential biomarker for
RmTBI. NMR spectral analysis shows significant alterations in serum and
urine metabolites in mTBI and RmTBI.
Material and Method: Thirty male, Wistar rats were employed and
blood, urine samples were collected on day 21 from control, mTBI and, RmTBI
group. NMR spectra were acquired on 800 MHz NMR Spectrometer (Bruker,
Germany). Each metabolite was integrated with respect to the TSP and NMR
data were analysed as our previous work.3
Results: Serum metabolites N-acetyl Glycoproteins (NAG)
(p < .05), and Lipids L3/L4(p
< .05) were significantly altered. Among urine metabolites,
creatinine (p < .01), trans-aconitate
(p < .01), were significantly altered in both
groups, while acetoacetate (p < .01), and taurine
(p < .01) only in RmTBI group with respect to
control. AUC of serum metabolites are, NAG (0.843) and L3/L4(0.81). AUC
values of creatinine, acetoacetate, trans-aconitate and taurine from urine
are AUC = 1.0,0.98, 0.98, 0.95 respectively.
Discussion and Conclusion: Present study showed serum metabolic
markers such as N-acetyl glycoprotein (NAG) significantly increased in both
group in comparison to control. NAG is a marker of inflammation and has been
observed in many diseases such as cardiovascular, cancer and metabolic
diseases.4 A significant increase in creatinine and
significant decrease in Trans- aconitate, and acetoacetate observed in
urine, that suggest impaired energy metabolism after injury.5
While a significant decrease in taurine suggests impaired
osmoregulation.

## Acknowledgement
The work is funded by the Department of Biotechnology, Govt of India
under the Ramalinga swami Re-entry Fellowship grant 2019. We would also
like to thank our host institute, the Centre of Biomedical Research
(CBMR), under the Department of Health and Family Welfare, UP Govt. We
also thank our collaborators for their support for animal
experimentation at SGPGI.

## P107: Metabolic Rewiring During Neuronal Differentiation and Its
Interplay with Toxicant- induced Epigenetic Alterations
Sana Sarkar1,2, Anuj Pandey1, Mohammed Haris
Siddiqui2, Sanjay Yadav3 and A.B.
Pant1
1Systems Toxicology Group, Food, Drug & Chemical, Environment
and Systems Toxicology (FEST) Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology
Research (CSIR-IITR), Vishvigyan Bhawan, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India
2Department of Bioengineering, Faculty of Engineering, Integral
University, Dashauli, Uttar Pradesh, India
3All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Raebareli, Uttar
Pradesh, India
Background: The metabolic program in neuronal cells undergoes
critical alterations during neuronal differentiation and degeneration.
Further, epigenetic modulators like miRNAs deregulated by toxicant exposure
drive several processes triggering energy crises leading to neuronal death.
Thus, the present study was designed to explore alterations in mitochondrial
functions during differentiation, toxicant exposure and miRNA-mediated
regulation in neuronal cells.
Materials and Methods: Real-time bioenergetics was performed
using a Seahorse XFp analyser. OpenArray profiling was conducted to identify
miRNAs deregulated by arsenic exposure (10µM for 24h) in human-derived
RA+BDNF-induced differentiated SH-SY5Y cells. Target identification and
pathway analysis were done using in-silico tools. Gene
expression and transient transfection studies were carried out using mimics
and inhibitors of miRNAs via RT-PCR assay.
Results: Bioenergetics studies revealed that differentiated
SH-SY5Y cells exhibited an ‘anti-Warburg effect’, a metabolic
shift from glycolysis to oxidative phosphorylation indicated by higher OCR
and lower ECAR than proliferating cells. Further, differentiated cells
possessed enhanced bioenergetics functions and mitochondrial dynamics
relative to undifferentiated cells. However, arsenic significantly decreased
both OCR and ECAR in mature SH-SY5Y cells. Transfection studies confirmed
the involvement of miR-29b and miR-153 in regulating mitochondrial
bioenergetics and dynamics in neuronal cells.
Discussion and Conclusion: Induction of metabolic reprogramming
during neuronal differentiation marked the transition of cells from aerobic
glycolysis to oxidative phosphorylation. However, drastic alterations in
mitochondrial bioenergetics in response to arsenic or ectopic expression of
miR-29b and miR-153 have been associated with impaired mitochondrial
function and dynamic behaviour. The miRNAs (i.e., miR-153 and miR-29b) and
their associated targets identified in the present study have the potential
to develop as predictive biomarkers and mediators of multifactorial
neurodegenerative conditions.

## Acknowledgments
Financial support for the study was provided by CSIR-IITR, Lucknow,
India, and Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), New Delhi,
India. The Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi, India, gave
fellowship for carrying out the research.

## P108: Exploring the Relationship of Hyperhomocysteinemia with Executive
Functioning in Older Adults

Sandhya G.1, Palash Kumar Malo1, TLSA Study Team,
Thomas Gregor Issac1

1Centre for Brain Research, Indian Institute of Science,
Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
Background: Hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) is a known risk factor
for cardiovascular diseases. Since dementia more often involves
cerebrovascular pathology, it becomes important to study homocysteine as a
potential risk factor for cognitive impairment. The current study aims to
examine whether plasma homocysteine levels affect cognitive performance
especially executive functioning in older adults.
Materials and Methods: This study used baseline data from
CBR-Tata Longitudinal Study of Ageing (CBR-TLSA). Participants were assessed
for cognitive performance and executive functioning using
Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination-III (ACE-III) and Trail Making
Test-B (TMT-B) respectively. Homocysteine was quantified using
chemiluminescence immunoassays. Mann-Whitney U test was used to compare
means of scores between groups.
Results: A total of 1212 participants were stratified into three
groups based on age (45–54, 55–64, ≥65 years).
Homocysteine levels higher than median 17.22µmol/L were considered HHcy.
People ≥65 years with HHcy had significantly lower ACE-III than
people without HHcy of same age group (p = .005). Further
analysis showed that only women ≥65 years of age had significant
difference among HHcy groups (p = .014). The scores in
TMT-B did not show differences with HHcy across all age groups and genders
(p > .05).
Discussion and Conclusions: The present study showed that, in
women ≥ 65 years of age, people with HHcy scored significantly lesser
in ACE-III than those without HHcy. The observed result might be due to
uneven prevalence of HHcy among the genders and the post-menopause effects
in women. But such a difference among people with different HHcy status was
not observed in TMT-B.

## Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the CBR-TLSA study team who were involved in data
collection. I would also thank the participants of the study for their
active participation and cooperation. I also express my gratitude to
Tata Trusts and Centre for Brain Research for funding the research.

## P109: Development of Novel Therapeutics for Mitigation of Burn
Injury-induced Chronic Pain

Sangam Barnwal1 and Vinod Tiwari1

1Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering and Technology, India
Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh,
India
Burn injuries are among the underappreciated injuries associated with
substantial morbidity and mortality. Burn injuries, particularly severe
burns are accompanied by an immune ad inflammatory response, metabolic
changes and distributive shock that can be challenging to manage and can
lead to multiple organ failure. In India, over 100,000,0 people are
moderately or severely burnt every year. Burns not only lead to physical
trauma but also psychological trauma. Burn injury treatment follows a series
of events such as wound healing, suppression of chronic pain and stabilising
the proinflammatory cytokines. The major neuroinflammatory mediators are
starting from NGF, TRPVI to NR2B, and some voltage-gated ion channels. This
further activates PKA/PKC pathway, increases the influx of Na+ ions as well
as Ca+2; sensitises the AMPA channel, and simultaneously microglial
activation. Current therapeutics are morphine and its analogues, some
antipsychotic drugs, and antiepileptic drug but all of them have their own
limitations like CNS toxicity. Amiloride is a reversible blocker of the Acid
Sensitive Ion Channel (ASIC) and has been reported as a potent analgesic in
CCI-induced pain, bone cancer pain, neuropathic pain, and ulcerative colitis
pain. Moreover, ASIC is co-localised with TRPV1 in DRG so we hypothesise to
use ASIC as a target. So far, we have performed Evoked pain behaviour
studies and Biochemical; further, we are going to quantify mRNA expression
ASIC and its protein concentration in DRG.

## P110: Small Organism, Big Hope: Secondary Metabolites from
Dictyostelium discoideum as Innovative Interventions
for Alzheimer’s Disease

Nil Patil1,2, Rupal Dhariwal1,2 and Mukul
Jain1,2

1Cell and Developmental Biology Lab, Research and Development
Cell, Parul University, Vadodara, Gujarat, India
2Department of Life Sciences, Parul Institute of Applied Sciences,
Parul University, Vadodara, Gujarat, India
Background:
Dictyostelium discoideum, a eukaryotic microorganism,
produces diverse secondary metabolites (polyketides, terpenes, flavonoids)
across various developmental stages with antibacterial, anti-aggregative and
anti-amyloidic properties. This study focuses on isolation and
characterisation of screened secondary metabolites against AD.
Materials and Methods: Screening of metabolites (SWISS - ADME)
and receptors specific to AD were scrutinised through network pharmacology
(CytoHubba, GO and KEGG resources) and subsequent screening through AutoDock
and GROMACS. Among these, the selected compound was isolated from D.
discoideum, and subjected to characterisation using analytical
techniques - GC-MS and NMR.
Results: Following initial screening, six compounds were
selected and underwent hybrid approach involving database and
compound-centric target identification led to the selection of three
receptors (CYP19A1, COX2, mTOR), prioritised over GO enrichment and KEGG
analysis. The resulting metabolite-receptor complexes underwent validation
via molecular docking and molecular dynamics (MD) simulation. The ultimate
compound was isolated and subjected to characterisation using GC-MS, which
identified Discoidol (a Terpene) as a prominent constituent with a retention
time of 19.23 minutes and 100% abundance in the extract.
Discussion/Conclusion: This study explores the utilisation of
secondary metabolites from a eukaryotic model organism in a therapeutic
approach to develop a cost-effective, less harmful and relatively efficient
drug for AD treatment. The extract was highly comprised with Discoidol and
had affinity for COX2. The COX2 enhances amyloid-beta production and thus,
its targeted inhibition using Discoidol was focused on. Moreover, the
Discoidol’s PROTOX validation indicates its least toxic behaviour
towards human cells and organs in comparison with the referred drug
Indomethacin that have a hepatotoxic property causing upraised level of drug
degrading enzymes. Thus, Discoidol could be considered for pre- clinical and
drug discovery purpose against AD in near future.

## Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the Parul University, Vadodara for
providing funding support to this project.

## P111: Cell-free Therapy Against Neurodegeneration as a Double-edged Sword
of Extracellular Vesicles and Organelles

Shalini Raik1, Mohil Mishra1, Vidya
Rattan2 and Shalmoli Bhattacharyya1

1Department of Biophysics, Post Graduate Institute of Medical
Education and Research, Chandigarh, India
2Oral Health Sciences Centre, Post Graduate Institute of Medical
Education and Research, Chandigarh, India
Background: MSCs have been involved in promoting neural repair,
regeneration, axonal connection, decreasing amyloid deposition and tau-based
neuronal death by transferring various factors to the site of injury. This
study evaluates the neuroprotective efficacy of a stem cell-based cell-free
approach via transferring dental pulp stem cell-derived exosomes and healthy
mitochondrial.
Material and Method: In this study, SHSY-5Y cells were
differentiated into mature neurons, and later treated with streptozotocin to
develop Alzheimer’s disease-like in vitro model. An
immunofluorescence assay was performed to validate the model. Subsequently,
the therapeutic potential difference between DPSC-mitochondria and DPSC-EVs
was analysed by ROS and an immunofluorescence assay.
Results: Streptozotocin treatment to neuroblastoma cell line
showed neurite distortion and accumulation of Tau protein which was
confirmed by bright-field images and immunofluorescence assay; indicating
successful establishment of Streptozotocin mediated AD-like
in vitro model. Further, this neurotoxic effect was
reversed by the uptake of DPSC- derived mitochondria and exosomes in a
streptozotocin-treated neuroblastoma cell line which confirmed their
neuroprotective role.
Discussion: This study has evaluated the comparative effect of
exosomes and mitochondria derived from DPSC on mature neurons against
Streptozotocin in vitro AD model. The isolated mitochondria
and exosomes may have a role in preventing neurotoxicity and maintaining
neurite extension. Thus, we observed that these findings may be considered
potential dual- edged neuroprotective targets for the treatment of
Alzheimer’s disease.

## Acknowledgment
Special thanks to Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) for providing
funding for this study.

## P112: Exploring the Role of Imagery Rescripting and Imaginal Extinction
in Reducing Generalised Threat Expectancies

Sharmili Mitra1 and Manish Kumar
Asthana1,2

1Department of Humanities & Social Sciences, Indian Institute
of Technology Roorkee, Uttarakhand, India
2Department of Design, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee,
Uttarakhand, India
Background: Imagery rescripting (ImRS) is a UCS devaluation
intervention where participants mentally re-evaluate an aversive situation
in a desirable direction. While Imaginal extinction (IE) is an
exposure-based intervention where participants vividly imagine the
conditioned stimuli. The current study attempted to compare the
effectiveness of ImRS and IE in reducing generalised fear.
Materials and Methods: Forty-two healthy individuals
(M = 18.83, SD = 0.44) were randomly
assigned into three groups, ImRS, IE and standard-extinction (SE as control
group). On day 1, fear acquisition and generalisation were performed. On day
2, the intervention and generalisation tests were conducted. The outcome
measures were skin conductance responses, UCS expectancy and valence
ratings.
Results: There was no significant difference in the UCS
Expectancy ratings across the three intervention groups in the Acquisition,
Generalisation, Extinction and Generalisation Testing phases. Hence, the
results indicate that the three interventions had a comparable effect on the
expectancy ratings on extinction and generalisation testing. A significant
phase x group interaction effect [F (6,117) = 2.519,
p = .025, ηp2 = 0.823] of
CS+ valence was observed.
Discussion: The current study is the first to explore the effect
of ImRs and IE on generalised fear. After the intervention, the expectancy
ratings declined, although we did not find significant group differences.
However, the CS+ valence of the ImRS group in the generalisation testing
phase was higher than the other groups indicating a possible effect of UCS
devaluation. Therefore, ImRS may be more effective as it targets both
expectancy-learning and UCS devaluation.

## Keywords
fear generalisation; imagery rescripting, imaginal extinction,
expectancy; valence.

## P113: Scintillating Effects of Vitamin D3 in Combating the
Neuropsychiatric Symptoms of Schizophrenia

Sharon Mariam Abraham1, Omalur Eshwari1, Manjari
S.K.V., Kishore Golla1 and Pragya
Komal1

1Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology
and Sciences (BITS) Pilani, Hyderabad, Telangana, India
Background: Schizophrenia is a multifactorial, neuropsychiatric,
neurodegenerative, neurodevelopmental disorder in which the prefrontal
cortex (known to be important for working memory and cognition) is severely
impaired. Though glutamate receptor hypofunction has been previously
investigated, there is a critical lack of insights into whether a common
nutraceutical, Vitamin D3 (VD), combats neuropsychiatric symptoms observed
in SCZ.
Materials and Methods: In the present study, we explored the
effects of VD on SCZ phenotypes induced using MK-801 (dizocilpine) in a
rodent model. MK-801 is capable of recapitulating the adult positive,
negative and cognitive symptoms of SCZ. C57BL/6 male mice were divided into
four groups: (1) control (Group I), (2) SCZ (MK- 801, 0.5mg/kg;
Group II), (3) only Vitamin D3 (VD; 500IU/kg, Group
III) and (4) SCZ+ VD (Group IV). Mice were subjected
to various behavioural assays like the open field test (OFT), novel object
recognition test (NORT) and passive avoidance test (PAT) to assess
locomotion, attention, cognitive and memory function.
Results: Our preliminary data shows that VD pre-administration
remarkably restored movement deficit, anxiety and cognitive dysfunction
observed in SCZ mice. VD administration also rescued some major alterations
in the gene expression of NR2B, NR2A and NR1 subunits of the
N-Methyl-D-Aspartate (NMDA) receptors in the prefrontal cortex brain tissue
samples of SCZ mice.
Conclusion: Overall, we show that VD supplementation reflected a
beneficial role in restoring the neuropsychiatric symptoms of SCZ via the
rescue of the glutamatergic ionotropic receptor gene expression in the
PFC.

## Acknowledgements
Birla Institute of Technology & Science (BITS) Pilani- Hyderabad
Campus.
DBT-Boost to University Interdisciplinary Life Science Departments for
Education and Research programme (DBT-BUILDER) International Brain
Research Organisation (IBRO).

## P114: Withania Somnifera-mediated Microtubule Stabilisation: A Novel
Approach for Parkinson’s Disease Treatment

Shekhar Singh1 and Surya Pratap Singh1

1Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Microtubule instability, a key feature of
Parkinson’s disease, disrupts vital neuronal processes. Impaired
microtubule dynamics hinder intracellular transport, causing accumulation of
toxic alpha-synuclein aggregates. It also weakens neuronal structure, alters
axonal transport and declines mitochondrial function. These factors
contribute to the degeneration of dopaminergic neuron, manifesting as motor
symptoms. Understanding and addressing microtubule instability may offer
novel therapeutic strategies to combat PD progression.
Objective: In the present study, we investigated the microtubule
rescue effect of Withania Somnifera and explored its
neuroprotective mechanism in the rotenone-intoxicated PD model.
Material and Methods: Mice were divided into four experimental
groups: Vehicle control, rotenone (2 mg/kg body wt., subcutaneous),
Withania Somnifera extract (WSE, 100 mg/kg body wt.,
oral) + rotenone and WSE only]. Mice were pre-treated with WSE for a week
and then simultaneously injected with ROT for 35 days.
Results and Discussion:
Withania Somnifera mitigated the damage to dopaminergic
neurons and prevented the disruption of microtubules caused by rotenone.
Additionally, this was followed by increase in the post-transcriptional
modifications on tubulins, helping to restore the balance of polymerised
tubulins. In addition, Withania somnifera reduces
α-synuclein accumulation and increases the expression of tyrosine
hydroxylase that confirms the presence of viable dopaminergic neurons. These
results demonstrated that WSE prevents the dynamic instability of MT by
hyperacetylation of alpha tubulin rescuing the dopaminergic neurons from
degeneration.
Conclusion: Taken together, our findings indicate that Withania
somnifera has beneficial neuroprotective effects in PD and it might be a
potential microtubule stabilising agent for the treatment of PD and other
diseases. In light of its favourable neuroprotective properties, Withania
somnifera should be evaluated in the treatment of PD as well as related
neurological disorders.

## Keywords
Parkinson’s disease; Withania Somnifera;
rotenone; α-synuclein; microtubules; tubulins.

## P115: Analysis of Tmem119 for Its Possible Involvement in Microglia
Functions

Shweta1, Himanshi Yadav1 and Shashank Kumar
Maurya1

1Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of
Zoology, Faculty of Science, University of Delhi, India
Background: Microglia plays an important role in the regulation
of neuroinflammation-driven neurological disorders. Recently, Tmem119 has
been identified as a marker of adult microglia whose expression has been
shown to alter during neuroinflammation. However, analysis of the Tmem119
protein and its possible involvement in neuroinflammation need to be
deciphered.
Material and Methods: RT-PCR and western blotting were performed
in an LPS-induced mice model of neuroinflammation to study the expression
pattern of Tmem119. Physio- chemical properties, secondary and tertiary
structures were predicted using ExPASy ProtParam, PSIPRED and Swiss-Prot,
respectively. Protein-protein interaction and signalling pathways were
predicted using STRING.
Results: The expression of Tmem119 at both transcript and
protein levels was observed to increase in LPS-induced mice as compared to
the control. Regarding physiochemical properties, the number of negatively
charged residues was double the number of positively charges residues. The
instability index and aliphatic index were very high. The GRAVY index is
negative. The secondary structure showed a large portion of
α-helices. Tmem119 is predicted to interact with proteins of
microglia involved in various physiological functions.
Discussion: The results of the present study demonstrated an
increase in Tmem119 expression in LPS-treated mice. Tmem119 is a single-pass
transmembrane protein of 280 amino acids found in microglia. It is unstable
in ex-vivo conditions and shows high thermostability due to the presence of
a high number of aliphatic amino acids. Extracellular and intracellular
domains are hydrophilic and transmembrane is hydrophobic. Tmem119
interaction with microglial proteins using STRING predicts its role in
microglial cellular processes.

## Acknowledgements
Financial support of the Institution of Eminence, University of Delhi
(IoE, DU) is gratefully acknowledged.

## P116: Development of Small Molecules as Potential Mutant SOD-1
Aggregation Inhibitors for the Amelioration of Amyotrophic Lateral
Sclerosis

Siddharth Gusain1 and Manisha Tiwari1

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Center for Biomedical Research, University of Delhi,
India
Background: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a
neurodegenerative disease characterised by the loss of upper and lower motor
neurons. Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase is one of the genes associated with the
familial form of the disease (fALS). It is hypothesised that a toxic gain of
function in the protein leads to ALS.
Material and Methods: Novel synthesised molecules were tested
for their ability to prevent the aggregation of hSOD1 protein-associated
toxicity in Neuro-2a cells overexpressing G85R hSOD1 mutation. Cells
pre-treated with the small molecules were further treated by MG-132 and
effects were analysed by evaluating cell death, ROS generation, Apoptosis
and Mitochondrial membrane potential.
Results: Small molecules SG-9 and SG-10 displayed very low
toxicity to the transfected cells. Both the small molecules considerably
prevented cell death as compared to the MG-132 treated cells. These small
molecules were able to significantly reduce oxidative stress associated with
the aggregation of mutant SOD1 protein. The molecules were also able to
prevent apoptosis in the cells which was analysed by Annexin V-PI staining
and western blotting. These molecules were also able to restore
mitochondrial membrane potential upon treatment.
Discussion: Currently, there are only two FDA-approved drugs;
Riluzole and Edaravone, which are non-curative and marginally slow disease
progression by a few months. Our study provides small molecules that can be
further used for lead optimisation and can provide targeted benefits and
better therapeutic potential for SOD1-associated ALS. Our compounds were
able to ameliorate the effects associated with SOD1 aggregation in a
transfected N2a cell line model.

## Acknowledgement
S.G. would like to thank DU-Non-NET and ICMR-SRF for providing the
fellowship. M.T. would like to acknowledge the Institute of Eminence
Grant,2021-22 and Maintenance Grant, ACBR, DU for providing the
financial support to conduct the study.

## P117: Identification and Association of Genetic Factors: A Cohort Study
of Post-stroke Depression Among Eastern Indian Population

Smriti Mishra1, Dipanwita Sadhukhan1, Biman Kanti
Roy2, Subhra Prakash Hui3 and Arindam
Biswas1

1Molecular Biology & Clinical Neuroscience Division, National
Neurosciences Centre, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
2Bangur Institute of Neurosciences, IPGME&R, Kolkata, West
Bengal, India
3S.N. Pradhan Centre for Neurosciences, University of Calcutta,
Kolkata, West Bengal, India
Background: Post-stroke depression (PSD) is associated with
increased morbidity and mortality. In Kolkata, the prevalence of PSD was
36.98% and ~17% developed depression annually. PSD is linked
to worsen cognitive and physical outcomes. In this study, we aim to
determine the association of polymorphic variants with PSD among eastern
Indian population.
Materials and Methods: The patient cohort consisted of 91
Ischemic stroke and 68 ICH cases from eastern India. PCR- RFLP techniques
was used to genotype the polymorphisms, based on associated literature. We
used Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) for assessment of depression.
Statistical calculation was performed using Mann-Whitney U test calculator,
on line web tool.
Results: Among the studied polymorphic variants, rs6559833 of
TRKβ and rs6159 of CRH are
found to be statistically significant (p = .0455) and
(p = .01994) respectively; with PSD in ischemic stroke
patients. The mean GDS score for the ‘TT’ survivors of
rs6559833 was 14.45±6.36 and the score for the ‘AA’
survivors of rs6159 was 6.10 ± 2.02. Along with it, a trend has been
observed in the variant, rs6265 of BDNF (p
= .08124) among post-stroke depressed individuals of ischemic stroke.
Discussion and Conclusions: A significant association of
rs6559833 of TRKβ and rs6159 of CRH
is observed with PSD among ethnic Bengali population of eastern India and a
like-wise trend is observed for rs6265 of BDNF. To best of
our knowledge, this is first report from India, identifying the association
of genetic variants with PSD. In future, a large number of samples from
other ethnic population needs to be validated to understand the genetic
pathobiology of depression after stroke.

## Acknowledgements
The authors thank the patient and the family members who participated in
the study. Supported by grants from the Department of Science &
Technology, Govt. of India, under Cognitive Science Research Initiative
Programme to author Dipanwita Sadhukhan (DST/CSRI-PDF/2021/12) and the
corresponding author Arindam Biswas (DST/CSRI- P/2017/22).

## P118: Mouse Brain Development: Decoding Developmental Neurobiology
Through Integrated Multi-omics Analyses

Sneha Manjunath1, Vatsal Mehra1, Manoj
Kumar1, Murray Blackmore1 and Ishwariya
Venkatesh1

1CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad,
Telangana, India
Background: Understanding the regulatory landscape of the
developing mouse brain is crucial for unravelling the intricate processes
driving brain development and function. However, analysing all regulatory
layers simultaneously poses challenges for bioinformaticians, including the
management and analysis of large and complex datasets generated by
high-throughput sequencing techniques. This study introduces Mouse brain
dev, an innovative user-interactive website designed to retrieve regulatory
information in the field of neurobiology.
Methods: The Mouse brain dev database integrates diverse
datasets, including gene expression, chromatin accessibility, transcription
factor binding and transcription factor footprints, obtained from the ENCODE
consortia across multiple developmental time points. This comprehensive
resource enables neurobiologists to explore intricate regulatory networks
and uncover the molecular basis of complex brain functions.
Result: Mouse brain dev’s unique feature is its intuitive
graphical user interface (GUI), which overcomes the constraint of
effectively visualising data and analysis. The GUI provides interactive and
dynamic visualisations, facilitating the interpretation of complex
regulatory patterns and relationships. This empowers researchers to identify
trends, patterns and potential regulatory interactions that may not be
apparent in traditional formats. By addressing the challenges, Mouse brain
dev offers a holistic approach to studying the dynamic regulatory landscape
of the mouse brain during development.
Conclusion and Discussion: In conclusion, Mouse brain dev serves
as a pioneering bioinformatics resource tailored for neurobiologists
studying the mouse brain. Its integrated approach and user-friendly
interface enable comprehensive analyses of complex biological systems,
advancing our understanding of the regulatory mechanisms governing brain
development and function. The application of Mouse brain dev has the
potential to unlock the mysteries of the dynamic regulatory landscape of the
mouse brain, contributing to the broader field of neurobiology.

## Acknowledgements
Council of Industry and Scientific Research (CSIR)

## P119: Dopamine Controls Neuronal Iron Release by Regulating
Ferroportin

Sanju Kumari1, Somya Asthana1, Abhishek
Mukherjee1 and Chinmay K.
Mukhopadhyay1

1Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi, India
Background: Emerging evidences show degeneration of dopaminergic
neurons and iron deposition in the substantia nigra of Parkinson’s
disease (PD) patients and animal models. Synthesis of dopamine (DA) in
neurons is also dependent on iron. Despite the intimate relation between
them, any role of DA on neuronal iron homeostasis remains unexplored.
Methods: SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma and HT-22 hippocampal neuronal
cells were treated with DA. Western blot and RT-qPCR were performed for iron
homeostasis components. Regulation of iron exporter ferroportin (Fpn) was
determined by promoter assay, ChIP assay and protein stability assay.
Intracellular iron level was determined using calcein fluorescence.
Results: Ferroportin (Fpn) is the unique cellular iron exporter
in mammalian kingdom. It protects cells from iron-induced oxidative damage
by releasing iron. Here we show that DA promotes ferroportin level to
deplete of neuronal iron pool. DA regulates Fpn mRNA level by a
transcriptional mechanism and as well as by a protein stability mechanism.
Iron uptake component transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1) remains unaltered by DA
treatment.
Discussions and Conclusions: Our results reveal a novel role of
DA in releasing iron by inducing Fpn in neuronal cells, whereas it does not
influence iron uptake component TfR1. These results establish hitherto
unknown role of DA on neuronal iron homeostasis. Our findings may be
implicated in neuronal iron deposition in PD when DA synthesis is
affected.

## Acknowledgement
CKM acknowledges financial support received from DBT. SK was supported by
fellowship from DBT and AM by DSK post-doctoral fellowship from UGC.

## P120: Deregulated Expression of HDAC4 and an Insight into Its Interaction
with a Non-histone Substrate in Temporal Lobe Epilepsy

Sonali Kumar1, Ozasvi R. Shanker1, P. Sarat
Chandra2, Manjari Tripathi3, Jyotirmoy
Banerjee4 and Aparna Banerjee
Dixit1

1
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Centre for Biomedical Research
(ACBR), University of Delhi, New Delhi, India
2Department of Neurosurgery, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, India
3Department of Neurology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS), New Delhi, India
4Department of Biophysics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS), New Delhi, India
Background: Several neurological disorders have been linked to
the dysregulation of HDAC4, but the mechanisms underlying its role in
establishment of distinct epileptogenic networks and specific molecular
substrates in TLE remain unknown. The study thus, aimed to examine
region-specific differences in HDAC4 expression and its interaction with
Serum Response Factor (SRF).
Material and Methods: HDAC4 and SRF mRNA and protein levels and
their interaction were investigated via qRT-PCR, western blot and
co-immunoprecipitation, respectively in MTLE patients versus autopsy control
and in lithium pilocarpine model of epilepsy as compared to control. An
immunofluorescence assay was used to examine cell-specific HDAC4
expression.
Results: The results revealed a significant increase in the
levels of HDAC4 as well as its non-histone substrate-SRF in the hippocampus
of lithium pilocarpine model and MTLE patients as compared to control. HDAC4
was found to be elevated in the cytoplasm of epileptic hippocampus as
compared to control. Further, the interaction of HDAC4 and SRF was found to
be altered in TLE with a significant decrease in the hippocampus.
Discussion and Conclusion: The results for the first time reveal
a region-specific alteration in the levels of HDAC4 in TLE and support the
hypothesis that HDAC4 plays an important role in the pathogenesis of
epilepsy. The results also highlight a potential dysregulation in HDAC4/SRF
axis in TLE. Future studies will be focused on deciphering the contribution
of dysregulated HDAC4/SRF axis in TLE and employing inhibitor study.

## P121: Comparative Evaluation of LXR Modulators in STZ-induced sAD Rat
Model

Sonam Deshwal1 and Rajat Sandhir1

1Department of Biochemistry, Basic Medical Sciences Block-II,
Panjab University, Chandigarh, India.
Background: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common
cause of dementia. Majority of AD cases are of sporadic AD (sAD). Evidence
indicates that progression of AD is linked to aberrant cholesterol
metabolism and inflammation and can be modulated by liver X receptors
(LXRs). Therefore, present study was designed to evaluate the potential of
vitamin D (VD3) and podocarpic acid (PA) as LXR modulators in sAD model.
Material and Methods: Male Sprague Dawley rats weighing 300-350g
were used. Motor deficits and memory-related behaviour was done using
rotarod and MWM test. Body weight, serum insulin and glucose levels were
also done. Gene expression of LXRs and its target genes along with amyloid
pathway were done using qPCR. Histological analysis was done using H&E
and Congo red. IHC was done for inflammation.
Results: Neuro-behaviour tests showed significant improvement in
memory and cognition following both the treatments. Body weight of
STZ-treated animals was significantly(p < .001)
decreased initially and was recovered more significantly in STZ+VD3group
(p < .05) and (p < .01)
as compared to STZ+PA and STZ treated animals respectively. There was no
significant difference in peripheral fasting blood glucose levels among all
groups. Fasting serum insulin was significantly increased by 3.8-fold
(< .001) in the STZ treated animals. However, on VD3 and PA treatment
in STZ animals, insulin level significantly decreased by 1.5-fold
(p < .001) and 1.1-fold (p
< .01) respectively. Gene expression of LXRs and its target genes
(ABCA1, ABCG1) and amyloid pathway genes (APP, BACE) were significantly
altered in STZ-treated animals and found differentially restored on VD3 and
PA treatment. VD3 treatment restored the cell loss and decreased amyloid
deposition in the brain regions. Moreover, GFAP immunostaining suggested
protective role of both the treatments.
Discussion and Conclusions: VD3 treatment elicited improved
memory. VD3 evidenced efficacy in attenuating STZ-induced neuronal damage
and decreased amyloid load displaying neurotherapeutic effects. However, PA
failed to inhibit amyloid progression and behavioural dysfunctions.
Moreover, VD3 and PA attenuated the neuroinflammation observed in
STZ-treated animals as assessed by GFAP immunostaining which can be
correlated with reversal of neuronal injury. On treatment with VD3 and PA,
LXRs transcriptional activation seems to play a role in the above-mentioned
beneficial effects. In conclusion, our results revealed thatVD3 and PA
treatment attenuated ICV-STZ induced neurobehavioural, biochemical and
histological abnormalities. The neuroprotective effect of these treatments
could be attributed to the activation of LXRs in modulating inflammatory
brain damage, decreasing memory deficits and amyloid-load. Therefore,
strategies like modulating the activity of LXRs in brain of AD individuals
might offer prophylactic strategies to combat the disease.
Significance: Natural products have been an excellent and
abundant source of therapeutics for many decades. Using VD3 and PA like
compounds for sAD seems to be beneficial in terms of their non-toxicity and
reproducibility. Natural products have been the single most productive
source of leads for the development of drugs.

## Acknowledgement
The financial assistance provided by the University Grants Commission
(UGC), New Delhi, UGC-Ref. No.:584/ (CSIR-UGC NET DEC. 2018) is
acknowledged.

## P122: STAT3 Is a Critical Mediator of Diabetes-linked Exacerbation of
Neurovascular Dysfunction and Cognitive Impairment in Alzheimer’s
Disease

Soni Tiwari1,3, Ekta Yadav1, Shweta
Kaushik1, Zaidan Mohammed2, Anju
Katyal1, Simantini Ghosh2, Amla
Chopra3 and Itender Singh1

1Ambedkar Centre for Biomedical Research, Delhi University, Delhi,
India
2Department of Psychology, Ashoka University, Rai, Haryana,
India
3Department of Zoology, Dayal Bagh Educational Institute, Agra,
Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Type 2 diabetes is known to aggravate
neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). We hypothesised that
Aβ generated in AD and advanced glycation end product (AGE) produced
in type 2 diabetes or a diet with high fat, sugar and salt together amplify
STAT3 activation, leading to the exacerbation of AD pathology.
Materials and Methods: We conducted studies utilising
post-mortem human brains, human brain vascular endothelial cells, pericytes
and smooth muscles. To recapitulate human comorbidity condition of AD with
diet-induced diabetes, we developed a rat model by injecting amyloid beta
into the brain and feeding a diet with high levels of fat, sugar and
salt.
Results: The studies with blood micro vessels isolated from
post-mortem brains showed the enhanced activation of STAT3 in patients with
AD and diabetes comorbidity. The in vitro blood-brain
barrier studies utilising the primary endothelial cells and pericytes showed
that the inhibition of STAT3 attenuated the trans- endothelial barrier
impairment following exposure to amyloid beta and AGEs. Inhibition of STAT3
in the rat model of AD with diabetes ameliorated the neurovascular pathology
and improved cognitive function.
Discussion and Conclusions: Our in vitro and
in vivo studies provide strong evidence that STAT3 is
one of the primary mediators associated with neurovascular and cognitive
dysfunction in AD and diabetes comorbidity. High fat-high sugar diet is
known to increase AGE, which is one of the inducers of diabetic pathology.
Our studies demonstrated that the presence of AGE along with amyloid beta
amplify STAT3 activation and other downstream mediators leading to
exacerbation of AD pathology.

## Acknowledgement
This study was supported by Brain Aneurysm Foundation and Ramalinga Swamy
Fellowship to I.S., an intramural research grant from Ashoka University
to S.G., and a graduate student fellowship from Ashoka University to
Z.M.

## P123: Effects of Methyl Cinnamate on GMR-Aβ42 D.
melanogaster Larvae

Sonia Joshi1 and Mayur Gaikwad1

1Department of Life Sciences, Sophia College (Autonomous), Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India
Background:
GMR-Aβ42 D. melanogaster, a transgenic line of flies
to study Alzheimer’s Disease. Methyl Cinnamate having antioxidant
properties stands to be a potential therapeutic option. Previous work in our
lab has shown it slightly restores phototactic behaviour in adult flies. We
show the effect of Methyl Cinnamate on Drosophila larval
behaviour and levels of oxidative stress in larval stages.
Materials and Methods: Larval phototactic assay was performed in
the dark using third instar larvae on the Petri plate covered with light and
dark zones. Each set of larvae (Wild type and
GMR-Aβ42) were run under a white light bulb.
Preference towards dark or light was noted.
Oxidative Stress assay: Lipid peroxidation assay
Results: Wild type (CsBz files) showed an average negative
phototactic index, whereas GMR-Aβ42 flies show a
relatively positive phototactic index. Results indicated that owing to
possibly impaired light avoidance in GMR-Aβ42 larvae
they show positive phototactic behaviour.
Discussion and Conclusion: Therapeutic effects of Methyl
Cinnamate would be observed to see if the property of light avoidance is
rescued. Other parameters to be considered in this experiment are oxidative
stress and cell death in eye-antennal imaginal discs of larvae. Effects of
Methyl Cinnamate would be checked on the same.

## Acknowledgement
I extend my gratitude to the Principal, Dr Anagha Patil Tendulkar and the
Head of Department of Life Science, Dr Sree Nair and my supervisor, Mr.
Mayur Gaikwad for giving me invaluable guidance, in sights, moral
support and the direction to the project. Heartfelt thanks to my faculty
of Department of Life Sciences as well as my lab partner Deepanjali
Ghadge for unnerving support.

## P124: Role of Extra-telomeric TRF2 in Neural Stemness

Soujanya Vinayagamurthy1,2, Amit Kumar Bhatt1,
Sulochana Bagri1,2 and Shantanu
Chowdhury1,2,3

1Integrative and Functional Biology Unit, CSIR Institute of
Genomics and Integrative Biology, New Delhi, India
2Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad,
Uttar Pradesh, India
3GNR Knowledge Centre for Genome and Informatics, CSIR Institute
of Genomics and Integrative Biology, New Delhi, India
Background: TRF2 is part of shelterin, protecting telomeres.
G-quadruplex (G4) structures are common in telomeres and gene promoters.
Bioinformatic analysis showed high G4 motifs in neuronal gene promoters.
TRF2 binds to non-telomeric promoter G4s, and regulates transcription. It
interacts with REST/NRSF for repression. Together hypothesising,
‘TRF2 facilitates the repression of neuronal differentiation genes
via REST recruitment’.
Materials and Methods: Model system: SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells
and mNSCs from Terf2F/F/Nes:Cre
mice. TRF2 loss of function via silencing, and overexpressing dominant
negative TRF2. Tamoxifen treated mNSCs to deplete TRF2. Amino acid mutants
to investigate the function of post-translational modification.
Assays: Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP),
Immunoprecipitation, Gene expression by RT-PCR, Immunofluorescence and Flow
cytometry.
Results: TRF2 loss and acetylation mutant K176R overexpression
activated differentiation genes and exhibited differentiation phenotype. In
mNSCs, neurosphere formation was compromised. RNA Pol II (Ser 5-
transcription initiation) binding to differentiation genes promoters
increased upon loss of TRF2. REST interaction with TRF2 was confirmed with
IP. REST, H3K27me3 and EZH2 (the catalytically active component of PRC2)
lost binding at the promoters upon TRF2 loss and K176R overexpression. ChIP
indicated that the K176R mutant binds to promoters. Immunoprecipitation
revealed lost REST interaction.
Discussion and Conclusions: Results indicate that TRF2 binds to
the promoters of neuronal differentiation genes, and recruits REST and PRC2
complex. This leads to the deposition of H3K27me3 for gene repression. Loss
of TRF2 removes the repressor and increases RNA Pol ll on the promoter for
transcription initiation and gene activation. Also, acetylation of TRF2 at
K176 is crucial for its interaction with REST. Thus, TRF2 maintains neural
stemness by repressing the different genes.

## P125: Neurodevelopmental Defects in the Hippocampus Caused by Prenatal
Exposure to Valproic Acid

Sreyashi Chandra1,2 and Prem
Tripathi1,2

1Cell Biology and Physiology, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical
Biology (IICB), Kolkata, West Bengal, India
2Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad,
Uttar Pradesh, India
Valproic acid (VPA) is an antiepileptic drug whose prenatal exposure is
linked with a high risk of neurodevelopmental defects including autism
spectrum disorder (ASD). Here we investigated the effect of prenatal VPA on
hippocampal neurogenesis, NSC proliferation, neuroblast migration, neuronal
differentiation and the possible alterations in specific neuronal circuits.
Pregnant FVB/N mice were gavaged with VPA once daily from E12.5 to E14.5.
BrdU birthdating and immunofluorescence were used to pinpoint changes in the
specific neuronal populations at various time points during development. A
series of behavioural tests were performed in adolescence and adulthood to
assess developmental and social deficits. We found the proliferative
populations in hippocampal neuroepithelium (HNe) unaltered while their
distribution was diminished at E14.5. At E16.5, these populations and the
NSCs were increased in HNe, contrasted by their decrease in the dentate
migratory stream (DMS). At P0, we observed reduced NSC and proliferative
populations at DG. Behavioural data indicated delayed weight gain, delayed
eye opening and reduced swimming performance in neonatal mice, along with
lower sociability and higher repetitive behaviours in adults. At the
embryonic stages, the transient decrease in proliferative zones of the HNe,
followed by the increase in proliferative zones and a diminished DMS during
the tertiary dentate proliferative matrix formation window is explanatory
towards the lower presence of proliferative population at the postnatal DG.
The anomalies in hippocampal neurogenesis correlated with the behavioural
changes might eventually help us understand the key basis of certain
symptoms associated with ASD. We are thankful to Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research and CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology for
funding our project.

## P126: Effect of 12 Weeks of Combined Approach on Frequency Domain
Parameters of Heart Rate Variability Among Major Depressive Disorder
Population (Age 20-40 Years)

Sharma S.1, Kacker S.1 and
Saboo1

1Department of Physiology, RUHS College of Medical Sciences,
Jaipur, Rajasthan, India
Background: Depression has frequently been linked to
ANS-mediated heart rate control, as measured by heart rate variability
(HRV). This aim of this study was to observe the effect of 12 weeks of yoga
and diet intervention on frequency parameters of HRV in major depressive
disorder population.
Materials and Method: Study conducted on 40 subjects having
major depressive disorder. Study group participants were given the combined
approach which includes intervention of yoga and diet for 12 weeks.
Frequency domain Parameters of HRV were recorded at baseline and after 12
weeks for both groups. Data was analysed and p < .05
considered as significant.
Results: Yoga and diet group had significant increase in mean HF
(48.2 ± 10.55 to 60.92 ± 15.99) and LF (45.39 ± 10.80
to 68.08 ± 3.44) and LF/HF ratio after 12 weeks of intervention
whereas no changes were found in control group.
Discussion and Conclusion: Analyses revealed HRV parameter
differences between study and control group at baseline and after 12
weeks’ intervention may stimulate pressure receptors that lead to
increased parasympathetic activity which is similar to the study conducted
by K Gulati (2021). Change in HRV parameter values correlated with changes
in symptom severity of depression. Combined approach towards healthy
lifestyle was effective in increasing parasympathetic tone and reducing the
depressive symptoms in population suffering from major depressive
disorder.

## Acknowledgments
we would like to thank all the participants who have given consent to
participate in this study. We also want to acknowledge the faculty of
department of physiology, all hospital staff. There was no source of
funding.

## P127: Does Presenilin 1 Have a Role in Neural Stem Cell
Quiescence?

Surya Suresh1,2, Vankudoth Swathy1, Jyothi P.
Nair1,2, Meera V.1,2, Riya Ann
Paul1,2, Parvathy Surendran1,2, Budhaditya
Basu1,3 and Jackson James1

1Neuro Stem Cell Biology Laboratory, Regenerative Biology
Division, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala,
India
2University of Kerala, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India
3Regional Centre for Biotechnology, (DBT-RCB), Faridabad, Haryana,
India
Background: During developmental neurogenesis, some of the
proliferating neural stem cells (NSC) transit to a quiescent state and is
retained till adulthood, a process involving molecules like VCAM1 which in
turn is downregulated in Presenilin 1 (PS1) Knockout embryos. Hence, we
hypothesise that Presenilin 1 has a role in NSC quiescence.
Materials and Methods: Primary neural stem cells were derived
from embryonic mouse brain. Quiescence was induced in vitro by addition of
BMP4, and it was validated. Gene expression analysis as well as protein
expression analysis were done on BMP4 treated quiescent neural stem cells
and respective controls.
Results: We found that Presenilin 1 (Psen 1) is upregulated in
quiescent NSCs, unlike other γ- secretase components. Also,
γ-secretase activity (Cleaved Notch1 expression) is found to be
absent in quiescent NSCs. However, PS1 is found to be more stable and
localised to nucleus in quiescent NSCs. A significantly high proportion of
phosphorylated PS1 is found in active NSCs compared to quiescent NSCs and in
both cellular states, phsopho PS1 is localised to the nucleus.
Discussion and Conclusion: When active neural stem cells transit
to quiescent state, several attributes of Presenilin 1 seems to change, from
expression level to stability. PS1 overexpression is reported to induce cell
cycle arrest in glioblastoma. From our observations, we could arrive at the
conclusion that Presenilin 1 might be executing its function in quiescence,
independent of its γ-secretase activity. Identifying the interaction
partners of PS1 in quiescence will unravel the mechanisms involved.

## Acknowledgement
Supported by DST SERB (CRS/2021/005847) and Intramural grant from RGCB.
Fellowship to SS (Reg No. 316695) and JPN (Reg No.366288) from UGC.

## P128: Investigations on the Functional Status of Regulated Exocytosis in
Obesity-associated Metabolic Stress

Sushma Dagar1, Souren Sadhukhan1, Shivam
Malviya1, Krittika Biswas1, Nikhitha
Nair1, Chandramouli Mukherjee1 and Bhavani
Shankar Sahu1

1National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, Haryana, India
Metabolic homeostasis regulates many biological functions, and its
deregulation is responsible for severe pathophysiological conditions such as
obesity and diabetes. Regulated exocytosis is an important cell
physiological process during which dense-core vesicles (DCV) release cargo
in response to an external stimulus. However, the effect of obesity-induced
metabolic stress on regulated secretion is still being determined. We
modelled obesity-associated metabolic stress by feeding the mice with a
high-fat diet and glucose tolerance test (GTT) was used to validate the
obesity model.
We then used Neuropeptide-Y (NPY)-pHluorin imaging in primary chromaffin
cells to discover impaired stimulus-coupled regulated secretion in obese
animals. To further study which modes of exocytosis are affected by
metabolic stress, we used tetramethylrhodamine (TMR)-dextran staining and
interestingly, we found a significant reduction in 40kDa dextran (full
fusion) staining in obese chromaffin cells. We next used electron microscopy
(EM) and found a significant increase in the dense core diameter of DCVs in
obese chromaffin cells compared to control cells indicating a possible
maturation defect caused by metabolic stress. Similar findings were
documented in primary pancreatic islets. To understand the molecular
determinants, we have conducted the transcriptomic analysis in chromaffin
and pancreatic islets to discover specific pathways and genes associated
with trafficking getting differentially expressed. We are in the process of
validating some of those candidates using our cell culture systems.
In summary, we show that HFD-induced metabolic stress leads to a defect in
DCVs maturation and an impediment in stimulus-coupled regulated exocytosis
in chromaffin cells and primary islets.

## P129: Molecular Docking and Simulation Studies for Identifying Binding
Affinity of Flavonoids for α7nAChR for the Treatment of
Alzheimer’s Disease

Sushma Singh1,2, Ahsas Goyal2 and Neetu
Agrawal2

1Pharmacy College, Azamgarh, Uttar Pradesh, India
2Institute of Pharmaceutical Research, GLA University, Mathura,
Uttar Pradesh, India
Background: Alpha-7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
(α7nAChR) is one of the ligand-gated ion channels and one of the
essential parts of the cholinergic pathway in the brain and thus it plays
important role in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). It has been reported that
α7nAChR regulation by the phytoconstituent plays vital role in the
treatment of AD.
Method: Fifty flavonoids were evaluated for the binding efficacy
for human α7nAChR by using molecular docking. On the basis of their
binding efficacy best two flavonoids were selected from docking results then
after molecular dynamic simulations for 100 ns for binding stability
analysis with the α7nAChRwere done of two selected flavonoids. Then
after in silico ADMET studies were performed to check the
drug ability of the selected flavonoids.
Result: Amentoflavone (–9.1 kcal/mol) and gallocatechin
(–8.8 kcal/mol) were the two selected flavonoids which has best
binding efficacy with the α7nAChR. The molecular dynamics simulation
studies showed that both amentoflavone and gallocatechin were at stable
state during duration of simulation period, root mean square deviation
(RMSD) and root mean square fluctuation (RMSF), and protein flavonoids
complex were stable until 100 ns.
Conclusion: Amentoflavone and gallocatechin are potential lead
molecules that could be used as effective agonists of α7nAChR to
treat Alzheimer’s disease. Thus, to confirm their effectiveness in
future in vitro and in vivo analysis can be done.

## P130: NLRP3 and NLRP12 Play Distinct Cell-specific Roles in Innate Immune
Cross-talk in Glioblastoma Pathophysiology

Sushmita Rajkhowa1, Durgesh Meena1 and Sushmita
Jha1

1Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of
Technology Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India
Background: Glioblastoma (GBM), are malignant gliomas with poor
survival. Nucleotide-binding domain LRR-containing receptor (NLR) family
proteins NLRP3 and NLRP12 regulate inflammation and immunity and are known
to play reciprocal roles with cell-specific tumour-promoting or anti-tumour
functions. We aim to understand NLRP3 and NLRP12 differential expression and
function in GBM pathophysiology.
Methods: RNA and Protein isolation from cell lines, and primary
cells from patient-derived glioma tissue samples followed by endpoint and
real-time PCR, Western blotting and Immunocytochemistry. si-knockdown of
nlrp3 and nlrp12 in cell lines and
studying their effect on cell proliferation through colony formation assay
and growth of 3D organoids.
Results: Differential expression of NLRP3 and NLRP12 in
patient-derived cells as compared to GBM, astrocyte and microglia cell
lines.
Conclusion: Increased expression of NLRP12 correlates with poor
survival of patients. Differential expression of NLRP3 and NLRP12 is linked
to patient tumour heterogeneity and molecular pathophysiology. Hence,
correlating the molecular and cellular cross-talk of the cells in the tumour
microenvironment will improve our understanding of disease pathophysiology
and aid possible future therapeutic strategies.

## Acknowledgment
We are thankful to IIT Jodhpur and the Ministry of Electronics and
Information Technology (MeitY), for infrastructure, administrative and
financial support for this research (No.4(16)/2019-ITEA). Sushmita
Rajkhowa is supported by MoE fellowship from IIT Jodhpur.

## P131: Regulation of Drug Resistance and Epithelial-mesenchymal
Transition: Role of Extracellular Vesicles and Implications for Glioblastoma
Tumour Progression

Swagatama Mukherjee1 and Prakash
Pillai1

1Division of Neurobiology, Department of Zoology, Faculty of
Science, The M. S. University of Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat, India
Extracellular Vesicles (EV) play a crucial role in normophysiology as
conduits of intercellular communication. Recently, EVs are being viewed as a
cellular Cryptex unlocking new understandings of existing pathologies. Our
study aims to elucidate the role of EVs and their specific cargo in
mediating Temozolomide (TMZ) induced chemoresistance and epithelial-
mesenchymal transition (EMT) via in vitro and in
silico approaches. We also aim to identify the axis of
operation of EV enriched lncRNA HOTAIR, a documented molecular scaffold and
gene regulatory element, in epigenetically modifying the pathways of
Chemoresistance and EMT. In regard to TMZ-induced resistance and involvement
of EVs, U87 MG cells were treated with a TMZ pulse (200µM for 7 days
continuous) in the presence and absence of EV inhibitor GW4869 (10µM). We
found a decrease (30% decrease compared to control) in percent
survival in the group treated with TMZ only, however, U87 cells undergoing
continuous TMZ pulse and GW4869 treatment have a significantly lower percent
survival (80% decrease compared to control) which infers that the
absence of EV release by the cells prevents TMZ from either being effluxed
out or the absence of resistant cell-derived EVs prevents the sensitive
cells from gaining the resistant phenotype. Additionally, with the help of
TCGA database (with a cohort size of 595 GBM patients) and ExoCarta, we
studied the correlation and enrichment analysis of lncRNA HOTAIR with
various DNMTs and EMT regulatory elements ZEB isoforms (differentiation and
subtype specifiers), SLUG and SNAIL (transcriptional repressors) TWIST
(transcriptional activators), E-cadherin and N- cadherin (cell polarity
mediators) suggesting its role as a master regulator of pathways affecting
both EMT and chemoresistance. The correlation of enrichment of specific EV
cargo, lncRNA HOTAIR further indicates that EVs are vital carriers of
various epigenetic modifiers that may contribute to the GBM aggressiveness
and progression.

## Acknowledgements
The authors are thankful to UGC Savitribai Jyotirao Phule Single Girl
Child Fellowship (202223- UGCES-22-GE-GUJ-F-SJSGC-3102) and Junior
Research Fellowship, DBT Builder CAT-III awarded to Ms. Swagatama
Mukherjee. The authors also acknowledge the financial assistance
received from various funding sources (ICMR, New Delhi and GSBTM,
Gandhinagar) awarded to PP at Division of Neurobiology, Dept. of
Zoology, The M.S. University of Baroda, in partially supporting the
current research work.

## P132: Role of Dopaminergic Neurotransmission in the Expression of Key
Foraging Regulatory Molecules and Structural Plasticity in Apis
mellifera

Swasti Sukanya¹, Adarsh Kumar1, Mohammed
S. Mustak2 and Prakash P. Pillai1

1Division of Neurobiology, Department of Zoology, Faculty of
Science, The M. S. University of Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat, India
2Department of Applied Zoology, Mangalore University, Konaje,
Karnataka, India
Dopamine is crucial during foraging behaviour in honeybees. Understanding the
dopamine mediated regulatory mechanisms in honey bee foraging at both
cellular and molecular level are essential. Involvement of Immediate early
genes and its related downstream genes in learning and memory pathways are
highly expressed during foraging. Bees were collected at specified time
point for pre, during- and post-foraging; and we employed pharmacological
inhibitor (α-mT) in the study. Behavioural test was performed inside
an enclosure. Dopamine levels in all experimental groups and expression
levels of key genes were analysed through bionalyser, LC-MS and qPCR
respectively. Confocal imaging of honeybee brain sections performed for
tracing dopaminergic neurons using α-TH antibody. Expression of
target genes (CREB, EGR1, CaMKII, Ddc, Dopamine receptors, Kakusei) were
found to be upregulated in in the foraging Group. Pharmacological
manipulation of dopaminergic neurons led to significant down regulation of
IEGs, and other downstream genes involved in learning and memory pathways
during foraging activity. Tyrosine Hydroxylase immunostaining indicated
dopaminergic neurons features that may be involved in structural plasticity.
Dopamine levels were found to be significantly high in foraging group
suggesting it’s spatio-temporal expression pattern. Moreover,
expression profile of various regulatory molecules during pre- and
post-foraging were significantly lower compared to foraging group.
Pharmacological manipulation of dopamine synthesis significantly altered the
immediate early and target genes, suggesting expression of foraging genes
depends on the neuromodulatory effects of dopamine in foraging activity.
Overall, the study confirms the necessity of involvement of
aminergic control of modulation of regulatory molecules during foraging
activity in Apis mellifera.

## Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge DBT Junior Research Fellowship programme,
Regional Centre for Biotechnology (RCB), Faridabad, awarded to Ms.
Swasti Sukanya (Ref No: DBTHRDPMU/JRF/BET-20/I/2020/AL/391). The
financial assistance in the form of Minor grant awarded by Research and
Consultancy Cell, MSU Baroda to Dr Pillai is highly acknowledged. The
authors also are highly thankful for partial financial assistance
received from Animal house facility, Dept. of Zoology, Faculty of
Science, MSU Baroda. The authors would also like to thank all the
assistance received from the Team of Botanical Garden, Faculty of
Science, MSU Baroda.

## P133: Investigating the Impact of Medhya Rasayana on
Modifying Behavioural and Metabolomic Alterations in Mouse Model

Swathi Maruthiyodan1, Gagan M.1, Manjunath B.
Joshi1, Kamalesh D. Mumbrekar2 and Guruprasad
K.P.1

1Department of Ageing Research, Manipal School of Life Sciences,
Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India
2Department of Radiation Biology and Toxicology, Manipal School of
Life Sciences, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka,
India
Background: Human memory involves retaining and recalling
information from experiences and learning. Cognitive deficits may arise from
ageing, neuropsychiatric conditions, or developmental issues, prompting
interest in nootropics to improve cognitive abilities. Ayurveda focuses on
healthy aging and Medhya rasayana, a class of Ayurvedic
remedies, aims to enhance brain functions like memory, cognitive healing and
mental function. Hence, in this study, we aimed to explore the functional
and mechanistic role of the Medhya rasayana plant
Bacopa monnieri (Brahmi) in addressing cognitive
impairment and metabolic disruptions in the cognition deficit mice.
Methodology: In the present investigation, we have developed and
validated a mouse model with cognitive deficits. The efficacy of
Brahmi rasayana on cognitive improvement was assessed
by a battery of behavioural experiments on rasayana
pre-treated mice. In addition, the effects of rasayana
pre-treatment on metabolome profile was evaluated by LC/MS analysis.
Results: Analysis of behavioural data revealed that
rasayana pre-treatment improved cognitive ability. In
addition, the effects of rasayana pre-treatment elicited
metabolomic modulation in the mice serum. There was significant alteration
in the carbohydrate, lipid and amino acid metabolism. Further, analysis
reveals the upregulation of metabolites that have neuronal functions.
Discussion and Conclusion: To summarise, our data suggest that
Brahmi rasayana can reduce the risk of memory deficits may
be by altering the metabolites related to neuronal health. As
rasayanas are known as brain tonic and help in neuronal
regeneration, early consumption of Medhya rasayana may
improve brain health. The findings of the research could lead to the
development of new principles based on the notion of Ayurvedic medicine for
the translation of these medicines to enhance cognition.

## Acknowledgment
The authors thank TIFAC-CORE, Government of India, BUILDER DBT and Manipal
School of Life Sciences, Manipal Academy of Higher Education (MAHE),
Manipal, India for the infrastructure support and Centre for Ayurvedic
Biology for valuable inputs. The authors are thankful to Dr M S Valiathan,
National Research Professor for the mentorship and also to Prathiksha Trust,
Bengaluru for the financial support.

## P134: Glutamatergic Neuronal Innervation from Superior Colliculus to
Hippocampal Area Regulates Reward-related Memory in Rats

Vaibhav A. Sabale1, Akash M. Waghade1, Sanjay N.
Awathale1, Nishikant K. Subhedar2 and Dadasaheb M.
Kokare1

1Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj
Nagpur University, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India
2Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Pune,
Maharashtra, India
Background: Glutamatergic neurons of superior colliculus (SC)
receive visual inputs from external environment and terminate in hippocampal
area via cingulate cortex. However, the activation of glutamatergic neurons of
SC to hippocampal area for reward related memory has not been documented yet.
Therefore, we test the hypothesis that the formation of reward related memory
may be dependent on activation of glutamate system of the SC to hippocampus.
Materials and Methods: Adult male Wistar rats were trained with and
without light cue conditioning in the operant chamber for food
self-administration, and the number of lever pressings were counted. The MK-801
treatment (2 𝜇g/rat; intra-DG) was given in rats. The cFOS
immunohistochemistry and neurogenesis study was performed. Microdialysis and
HPLC-ECD system was used for the estimation of dopamine (DA) and 3,4
dihydroxyphenyl acetic acid (DOPAC) samples collected from nucleus accumbens
(NAc) of rats.
Results: The rats presented with light cue showed significant
increased lever pressings as compared to without light cue and control rats. The
cFOS immunoreactivity in SC was augmented in light cue conditioned group. The
BrdU and NeuN immunoreactivity was elevated in light cue conditioned group as
compared to without light cue and control. In MK- 801 treated rats, there was
reduced lever press activity and DA and DOPAC level in NAc. The overall results
suggest that the light cue helps to activate SC neurons to assist animals to
form reward related memory in the hippocampus.
Discussion and Conclusion: The visual light cue has improved
rewarding behaviour in rats. The animal conditioned with light cue has activated
more cFOS cells in SC region, it suggests that light cue assist to select and
obtain food reward. The BrdU and NeuN immunoreactivity has revealed neurogenesis
in the hippocampus, which shows the formation of reward memory in rats. We
observed that the MK-801 treated rats reduced lever pressing, and DA and DOPAC
level in the NAc, and reward memory. The present study reveals that the
glutamatergic system of SC communicates with hippocampal area to regulate reward
related memory in rats.

## Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the grants from (DST-SERB) (CRG/2020/004971),
Govt. of India, New Delhi, India.

## P135: Effect of Coloured Lights on Performance in Digit Span Tasks in Healthy
Individuals

Vakode Vani1, Pooja Ojha1, Mahesh Arjundan
Gadhvi1 and Abhinav Dixit1

1Department of Physiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India
Background: Coloured lights have been found to affect human
physiology and cognition. Working Memory is a crucial component of human
cognitive processes and plays a role in daily activities. The effects of
different coloured lights on performance in Forward and Backward Digit Span
tasks (DST) have been assessed in this study.
Materials and Methods: Thirty-five males, with an age mean of 29.31
years, performed Forward and Backward DST under red, green, blue and white
lighting conditions. The order of four lights was randomised. The illumination
was adjusted for all the lights using a lux meter and was maintained constant
for all of the lights. Percent (%) accuracy was assessed for both tasks
in all four lights.
Results: A statistically significant difference in % accuracy
was found with repeated measures ANOVA during red light exposure in Forward DST
as compared to white (p = .005), green (p
< .001) and blue (p = 0.029) lights. In addition, a
statistically significant difference was found in Backward DST during red light
exposure as compared to white (p = .009), green
(p < .001) and blue (p <
.001) lights.
Conclusion: Exposure to coloured lights affects performance in
working memory tasks. Among the above four lighting conditions, the performance
in forward and backward DST decreases, in that order, with red, white, blue and
green lights. Lighting colour should be considered while assessing performance
in working memory tasks and use of red light may be encouraged.

## Acknowledgments
No funding was received for this work. We are thankful to all the
participants who took part in the study.

## P136: Pelvic Irradiation-induced Brain Damage Through Gut Dysbiosis in a Rat
Model

Babu Santhi Venkidesh1, Rekha K. Narasimhamurthy1,
Krishna Sharan2, Thokur S. Murali3 and Kamalesh
Dattaram Mumbrekar1

1Department of Radiation Biology and Toxicology, Manipal School of
Life Sciences, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka,
India
2Department of Radiotherapy and Oncology, Kasturba Medical College,
Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India
3Department of Public Health Genomics, Manipal School of Life
Sciences, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India
Background: Pelvic radiotherapy is the primary choice for treating
pelvic cancers. Recent studies indicate a link between gut microbes and brain
function through the gut-brain axis. However, the consequences of pelvic
radiotherapy on the gut-brain axis and its neurological outcomes remain unclear.
Hence, this study aims to explore how pelvic irradiation affects the brain
through gut dysbiosis.
Materials and Methods: A single dose of 6 Gy of pelvic radiation was
given to 3–4-month-old Sprague Dawley rats. After treatment, faecal
samples were collected at different time points (0, 7, 12 days), to determine
the microbial diversity, using 16S rRNA sequencing. Further, behavioural,
histological and hippocampal gene expression analyses were performed to
determine pelvic irradiation-induced changes in the brain.
Results: Distinct alterations in gut microbiota assemblages were
noted at various time intervals following radiation exposure to the pelvic
region. These changes were accompanied by changes in the structure and integrity
of the intestine. Furthermore, a notable decline was seen in the number of
viable and developing neurons, while there was an increase in reactive
astrocytes. This shift led to a clear decrease in exploratory behaviour among
the irradiated group. Additionally, the gene expression study indicated reduced
neuronal plasticity.
Discussion and Conclusion: This study highlights the effects of
pelvic irradiation on the gut microbiota and its impact on brain damage. Altered
intestinal integrity points to negative gastrointestinal effects. Further,
reduction in surviving neurons and increase in reactive astrocytes in the
irradiated group associated with less exploratory behaviour, suggested pelvic
irradiation-induced neural damage. Reduced expression of Nmda2,
plasticity-related gene suggested that the brain’s adaptive responses
were hindered. These results highlight the need to understand and design
formulated bacterial supplementation to mitigate pelvic irradiation-induced
brain damage.

## Acknowledgment
This study was supported by an MAHE intramural grant (2019). VBS would like
to thank MAHE for the Dr TMA Pai PhD Fellowship.

## P137: Loss of NF1 Results in Cortical Malformations,
Hydrocephalus and Motor Deficits in Mouse Model

Vishal R.L.1 and Achira Roy
1

1Neuroscience Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific
Research (JNCASR), Bengaluru, Karnataka, India
Background: Neurofibromin 1 (NF1) is a critical regulator of
RAS-ERK-MAPK pathway, which is instrumental for brain development. Patients with
NF1 mutations often exhibit cortical malformations,
hydrocephalus and epilepsy, intractable to current medication. Hence,
understanding the origins and underlying mechanisms behind these disorders is
important for developing better therapeutic strategies.
Materials and Methods: We approached this question by generating a
clinically relevant brain-specific deletion of NF1 in mouse
using cre-lox system. We used GFAP-cre to conditionally delete
NF1 in the mouse brain. Subsequently, morphological,
molecular and behavioural alterations were examined at different developmental
time points to elucidate the underlying mechanism.
Results: To understand the brain malformations due to
NF1 mutations, we performed GFAP-cre
mediated deletion of NF1 in subset of neural progenitors in
mice. Biallelic loss of NF1 caused an increase in brain size.
Histological findings further revealed that NF1 mutants have
thicker corpus callosum, and a proportion of them developed severe
hydrocephalus. Interestingly, these mutants also show smaller cerebellum and
exhibit severe motor defects. These results suggest the importance of
NF1 in normal brain development.
Discussion: NF1 is a critical regulator of RAS-ERK-MAPK and its loss
results in cortical malformation, hydrocephalus and epilepsy in a proportion of
patients. To understand the underlying mechanism, we performed clinically
relevant deletion of NF1 in mouse brains. Phenotypes resulted
post NF1 loss include thicker corpus callosum, motor deficits
and hydrocephalus which recapitulate all the key human pathological features.
Our finding suggests a critical role of NF1 in the normal brain
development.

## Acknowledgements
We thank Kathleen J Millen, Jackson Laboratories, USA and BLiSC Animal Care
and Resource Center (ACRC), India, for gifting the mouse lines used in this
project. We thank the animal facility of JNCASR for the maintenance of mouse
lines. This work was funded by the Ramalingaswami Re-entry Fellowship from
the Department of Biotechnology (DBT), India (AR), a research donation from
M-CM Foundation, USA (AR), and the intramural funding from the Jawaharlal
Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, India.

## P138: LC-MS/MS-based Approach to Study the Altered Brain Proteome in Aging
Rat Due to Minimal Hepatic Encephalopathy

Vishal Vikram Singh1, Shambhu Kumar Prasad1, Arup
Acharjee2 and Papia Acharjee1

1Department of Zoology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar
Pradesh, India
2Department of Zoology, Allahabad University, Prayagraj, Uttar
Pradesh, India
Introduction: The work represents the impact of Minimal Hepatic
Encephalopathy (MHE) on cognitive impairment in aging rat population by
analysing hippocampal proteome dynamics. Mass spectrometry based proteomic
analyses was used to unravel common and specific features in the neural systems
associated with them and leveraging deep learning techniques to identify
critical proteins that may be targeted for therapeutic intervention in aging
population with MHE.
Material and Method: Old male rats were divided into two groups: Old
control (saline) and old MHE rats (Thioacetamide, 50 mg/kg B.W, i.p for 14
days). The hippocampus was dissected out followed by sample preparation for
LC-MS/MS. Statistical analysis and pathway enrichment analysis were performed
using MetaboAnalyst and Metascape respectively. Validation of certain proteins
using qPCR, Western blot and Immunofluorescence was conducted.
Result: 1535 proteins were obtained and after filtering and
50% missing value imputation, a total of 1082 proteins were proceeded for
further analysis. Statistical analysis of the protein sets identified a total of
40 dysregulated proteins among which 17 were upregulated proteins and 23 were
downregulated proteins. We validated some upregulated protein namely p23,
Interesectin 1 and fetuin-A.
Discussion and Conclusion: Our findings highlight critical proteins
as essential players impacting the age-associated hippocampal proteome dynamics
due to MHE. Through network analysis tools, upregulated proteins are involved in
the generation of precursor metabolites and energy, neurotransmitter release
cycle, positive regulation of dendritic spine development, chaperone-mediated
protein folding and protein stabilisation. The validated protein p23 is
upregulated in the presence of proinflammatory stimuli, fetuin-A is protective
against lethal systemic inflammation and Intersectin 1 is a multidomain
scaffolding and adaptor protein as a central regulator of synaptic vesicle
cycling.

## Acknowledgement
1: UGC-JRF for financial assistance to Vishal Singh, DST-SERB project, IOE
BHU grant to PA lab. Facilities: Prof SK Trigun Lab (Department of Zoology,
BHU), ISLS BHU, CDC BHU and IIT Bombay MASSFIITB Facility.

## P139: Transcriptional Control of Mammalian Axon Regeneration: Role of Nuclear
Receptors (NR) Family of Transcription Factors

Yogesh Sahu1, Manojkumar Kumaran1, Anisha
Menon1, Sneha Manjunath1, Meghana
Madhu1, Arupam Biswas1 and Ishwariya
Venkatesh1

1CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, Telangana,
India
Background: Neurons in the nervous system are connected through
axons, cylindrical projections enclosed within the spinal cord that facilitate
critical signal communication between the brain and other body parts. When
injured, embryonic neurons exhibit a robust regenerative response, activating
transcriptional networks that enable complete recovery. Yet, this regenerative
potential faces an abrupt decline a week post-birth.
Material and Methods: We employ CRISPR-based knockdown strategies to
neutralise the anti-growth activity of repressors, coupled with in
vivo overexpression of activators, to assess their impact on CNS
axon regeneration. We employ combinatorial approaches like in
vitro growth assays, in vivo mouse spinal
injuries, and single-cell gene expression assays and chromatin
accessibility.
Results: Our prior investigations highlight the synergistic action
of Klf6, with Nr5a2 and Rarb, which can salvage a portion of the lost
regenerative ability in adult neurons post-injury. Although regeneration is
observed, it didn’t translate into functional recovery, highlighting the
knowledge gap. Recently we found a group of factors called Nuclear Receptor
Transcription Factors (NRTFs) that modulate neuronal development but their role
in regeneration is still vastly unknown.
Discussion and Conclusion: Remarkably, around 18 out of 40 NRTFs
display heightened expression within the mammalian cortex, exclusive to phases
of axon growth across diverse cell types. Expression and binding analyses
indicate that NRTFs have a dual role in regulating axon growth- as both
activators and repressors depending on the developmental stage. Ultimately, the
outcome of our research holds promising implications for identifying innovative
therapeutic targets, potentially enhancing regenerative outcomes post-neural
injuries.

## Acknowledgement
Council for Industry and Scientific research (CSIR).

## P140: GluN2B NMDA Subtype Impairs Long-term Depression in an In-vitro
Epilepsy Model

Zubin Singh Rana1 and Pradeep Punnakkal
1

1Department of Biophysics, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education
and Research, Chandigarh, India
Background: Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is one of the most common
types of epilepsy in humans. It is commonly observed that patients with epilepsy
suffer from memory-related problems. Long term potentiation (LTP) and long-term
depression (LTD) are the two well characterised cellular models of memory. Here,
we studied the effect of epileptiform activity on LTD. We induced LTD in rat
hippocampal slices and studied how epileptiform activity affects LTD.
Material and Methods: Hippocampal slices were made from wistar rat
brain (p14-p28). Epileptiform activity was induced in the slices by perfusing
HK-ACSF (high potassium- artificial cerebrospinal fluid). LTD was induced in CA1
region by stimulating the Schaffer collateral pathway and the application of low
frequency protocol (1Hz, 900 pulses).
Results: Stable epileptiform activity was induced in the slices
after perfusion of HK-ACSF. Low frequency protocol induced 20% LTD in
control hippocampal slices. But in epileptiform induced slices 20% LTP
was observed instead of LTD. Next, we studied the role of NMDA receptors in LTD
and found that GluN2B subtype of NMDA receptor was responsible for the sign
change of LTD to LTP.
Discussion: The epileptiform induced metaplasticity impaired LTD in
hippocampal CA1 synapses. Moreover, this impairment was due to GluN2B subtype.
Impairment in synaptic plasticity has been observed in various neurological
disorder, the same was true in the present study. This provides new insight into
the molecular mechanism of memory formation during epilepsy. This study
identified GluN2B as a new target for memory impairment in epilepsy. Present
investigation will trigger more studies in the direction of metaplasticity to
understand the mechanism behind the memory impairment in patients with
epilepsy.

## Acknowledgement
The author ZSR was supported by CSIR (Fellowship No.
(09/0141(12456)/2021-EMR-I), New Delhi, India.

## P141: Neurocandidasis: Possible Role of Brain Macrophages in Eliminating
Candida albicans Infections

Siddhi S. Bangale1 and Gunderao H.
Kathwate1

1Department of Biotechnology, Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune,
Maharashtra, India
Background:
Candida species are the major cause of fungal infections in
humans. Systemic candidiasis may also result in conditions like neurocandidasis,
where the pathogen enters the CNS. This pathogen is responsible to invade the
entire neurons in the brain and lead the intracerebral haemorrhagic condition
and stroke. Therefore, it is important to investigate the role of brain
macrophages in the alleviation of neurological diseases.
Materials and Methods: SC5314 strain of Candida
albicans and THP1 monocytes were used for the
study. RNA extraction and imaging were done for co-culture of Candida
albicans and THP1 for 2 and 6 hrs for qPCR and
microscopy respectively.
Results: Microscopy done to monitor phagocytosis at 2 and 6 hrs
showed morphogenetic changes, when the monocyte gets activated and transforms
into a macrophage, start occurring by two hours. Live cell imaging showed that
these activated monocytes try to engulf the pathogen, and how the pathogen
escapes. Both, the THP1 and C. albicans cells
were alive at this point and by 6 hrs most cells lost their viability.
Discussion: There is an interplay between host and pathogen cells,
which decides their fate. Candida species are capable of
inducing apoptosis or pyroptosis in macrophages, whereas macrophages are
phagocytic cells. With the study undertaken, it was observed that phagocytosis
by THP1 cells starts occurring by 2 hr time point. By the end
of 6 hrs, most of the cells lost their viability, they died either by
phagocytosis or by apoptosis induced by Candida.

## Acknowledgements
I would like to thank DBT, Government of India and Savitribai Phule Pune
University, Prof. Smita Zinjarde, the Head of Department of the Department
of Biotechnology, my guide and mentor Dr G.H. Kathwate for providing me with
guidance, insights and extending their valuable support to undertake this
study.

## P142: A high-throughput Assay to Study Social Interactions in
Drosophila

Faizah Ansari1, Navinchandra Venkatarama Puppala1,
Monalisa Ghosh1, Paulami Dey1, Rachagolla Sai Prathap
Yadav1 and Pavan Agrawal1

1Centre for Molecular Neurosciences, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal
Academy of Higher Education, Udupi, Karnataka, India
Background: Prior social experience or the lack of it can affect the
interactions among social animals. Drosophila melanogaster is a
social insect that communicates with conspecifics using complex social
behaviours in a group setting. Stressors and drugs can disrupt these social
behaviours making it an attractive model to identify underlying mechanisms.
Material and Methods: Here we devised a simple assay to identify
changes by studying 79 behavioural parameters when flies interact in a group. We
used high-resolution machine vision cameras to record group dynamics in flies
which were group or single housed before introducing in the social arena. Using
our high-throughput machine vision and machine learning pipeline, it is possible
to analyse the effects of social isolation on group dynamics.
Results: The analysis of these recorded behaviours shows that prior
experience in the form of stress caused by isolation affects the group dynamics
and social parameters like walk, stop, chase, touch, body turns, etc. We also
show effects of neurogenetic manipulation on group behaviours using this
assay.
Discussion and Conclusion: Our recording and analysis setup can be
implemented to study effects of stressors such as social isolation on group
dynamics. It can also be extended to study effects of various drugs and identify
mechanisms underlying complex social interactions.

## Acknowledgement
DBT, extra mural research grant (PI- Pavan Agrawal); DBT, Ramalingaswami
Fellowship (PI- Pavan Agrawal, Project Associate: Faizah Ansari); CSIR- JRF
(Navinchandra Venkatarama Puppala); Manipal Academy of Higher Education-
intramural funding.

## P143: Nerve Agent-induced Brain Damage: Comparative Efficacy Analysis of
Midazolam and Diazepam Treatment in Mice

Poorna Shri1, Rohit Chand Kabidayal1, K.P.
Singh1, Neeti Jain1, D.P. Nagar1 and
A.S.B. Bhaskar1

1Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Defence Research and
Development Establishment, Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh, India
Background: Nerve agents are highly toxic compounds that interfere
with neurotransmission, leading to a range of symptoms including seizures,
biochemical changes and cognitive impairment. Standard treatment with Atropine
and 2-PAM do not control Status Epilepticus (SE). This study aims to compare the
efficacy of two commonly used benzodiazepine drugs for SE, Midazolam (MDZ) and
Diazepam (DZP) along with standard atropine and oxime treatment regimen for
nerve agent poisoning.
Materials and Methods: The study design involved animal model
exposed to a standardised dose of a representative nerve agent Vx. The animals
are divided into four groups: Control, Atropine+2-PAM-treated (Std),
MDZ+Std-treated and DZP+Std-treated. The effects of the treatments are measured
through a cholinesterase and neurotransmitter like monoamine oxidase activity
analysis and histopathological evidences.
Results: Brain tissue samples are collected to analyse the impact of
midazolam and diazepam as anticonvulsant on neurotransmitter levels and status
epilepticus. Midazolam shows the better efficacy over diazepam treatment in all
aspects in our results. Level of %AChE activity is high in MDZ treated
groups. Increased MAO activity shows the level of neurotransmitter degradation
in std group, equal to control in MDZ group. Preliminary observations indicate
comborative histopathological changes in brain tissue. MDZ+Std group show better
efficacy in protecting brain.
Discussion and Conclusion: This study contributes to a deeper
understanding of the pharmacological management of nerve agent (Vx) induced
brain poisoning. The results have implications for the development of novel
therapeutic interventions to counteract the deleterious effect of nerve agent
induced brain damage. AChE, MAO and histopathological analysis of brain tissue
shows that midazolam as a better anticonvulsant over diazepam along with
standard treatments.

## Acknowledgements
We are thankful to the Director, Defence Research and Development
Establishment, Gwalior for providing all facilities required for this study.
The study is funded by DRDO, Ministry of Defence.

## P144: Benzodiazepine Drugs: A Comparative Neurobehavioural Study for Better
Neuroprotective Drug Against Nerve Agent Toxicity

Rohit Chand Kabidayal, Poorna Shri1, K.P.
Singh1, D.P. Nagar1, A.S.B. Bhaskar1
and Neeti Jain1

1Pharmacology and Toxicology Division, Defence Research and
Development Establishment, Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh, India
Background: Nerve agents are organophosphorus chemical warfare
agents that disrupt the nervous system by inhibiting the function of enzyme
Acetylcholinesterase (AchE) by forming a covalent bond with its active site,
where acetylcholine would normally be broken down. Signs of acute intoxication
with nerve agents or OP are miosis, profuse secretions, bradycardia,
bronchoconstriction, hypotension and diarrhoea. Overstimulation of nicotinic
receptors triggers muscle fasciculation and short-term/long-term CNS-related
effects include anxiety, restlessness, confusion, tremors, seizures and central
cardiorespiratory paralysis. This study is designed to select the most suitable
drug amongst the various benzodiazepines recommended in case of nerve agent
induced tremors.
Materials and Method: To conduct this study; Nerve agent (VX),
Pralidoxime chloride(2-PAM), Atropine (ATP), Midazolam (MDZ) and Diazepam (DZP)
were used. Open field box test, forced swim test and object recognition tests
were performed on Swiss albino mice to access behavioural pattern. Four groups
(Negative control, VX only and VX with available treatments) were used.
Behavioural studies, and whole brain protein profiling were conducted at 1st
day,10th day & 30th day after primary exposure. Statistical analysis was
done using GraphPad Prism 5.
Results: Out of four groups VX exposed followed by MDZ treated group
showed most protective efficiency and neuroprotective symptoms compared to
traditional countermeasure treated group (i.e DZP with 2-PAM+ATP and 2-PAM+ATP
alone). SDS PAGE profile of whole brain homogenate indicate the intense band of
120Kda & 70KDa protein in MDZ treated mice and control mice, this could be
one possible reason for protective action of this anticonvulsant.
Conclusion: The behavioural data of MDZ treated groups certainly
showed better therapeutic efficacy towards neurotoxicity of VX compared to DZP.
This directs that administering 2-PAM with ATP is far less promising therapy for
acute as well as delayed organophosphorus / nerve agent exposed mice. Further
studies are in progress to validate the findings through biochemical, molecular
pathways and gene expression.

## Acknowledgements
The study was funded by DRDO, Ministry of Defence, Govt. Of India. The
authors are thankful to the Director, DRDE-DRDO, Gwalior, for providing
facilities to carry out the research.

## P145. Effect of HDACi Sodium Valproate on the Light-sensing Ability of
Hydra viridissima

Riddhesh Ahire1, Mayur Gaikwad1 and Nawalkar
Rhea1

1Department of Life Sciences, Sophia College (Autonomous), Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India
Introduction: Hydra is a freshwater cnidarian and widely used model
system for Regeneration studies. Sodium valproate (VPA), an aliphatic acid is a
known HDACi. Apart from its role in regeneration not much has been reported of
its role in behaviour. We show the effect of VPA on its behavioural parameter
(phototactic behaviour) and Anatomical parameter (Quantification of Battery cell
complex).
Material and Methods: LC50 assay was performed to determine the
least toxic concentration of VPA for Hydra viridissima. A range
of various concentrations of VPA were used to perform the following assays. A
phototactic performance assay was performed to assess the light-sensing ability
of hydra. Staining of BCC with methylene blue and its quantification was
performed to analyse the effect of VPA on BCC and sensory neurons using
ImageJ.
Results: 100% mortality of hydra was observed after 48 hours
of treatment with 2.5mM VPA. Hydra exhibited positive phototactic behaviour. The
average phototactic performance value increases after 24 hours of interval.
Staining and quantification of BCC was done using 0.1% methylene
blue.
Conclusion: Concentration up to 2.5 mM was lethal to hydra.
Therefore, a lower concentration would be considered for further analysis. At
lower magnification, clusters of BCCs were observed as bands, and single BCCs
were observed at higher magnification.

## Acknowledgement
I extend my gratitude to Dr Sree Nair and Sophia College for this exceptional
opportunity. Special thanks to Mr. Mayur Gaikwad, and Ms. Rhea Nawalkar, for
their mentorship. I also wish to acknowledge the dedicated faculty and staff
members whose contributions have been pivotal to my journey.

## P146. Orexin-expressing Cells in Cerebellum Are Involved in Goal-directed
Behaviour to Seek Reward

Sharavi Kulkarni1, Namrata Pawar1 and Amul
Sakharkar1

1Department of Biotechnology, Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune,
Maharashtra, India
The recent discovery that reward signals can be traced to the deep cerebellar
nuclei (DCN) has gained new traction. Orexin, a neuropeptide, serves in
wakefulness, motivation, arousal and feeding behaviour. We for the first time
report the orexin-expressing neuronal populations in the dentate nucleus (DN)
and dentate-interpositus (IN) region of the cerebellum. Further, we decipher the
role of this orexinergic system in goal-directed behaviour for seeking natural
food reward. Adult male Wistar rats were subjected to Y-maze conditioning and
nose-poke operant conditioning paradigms for seeking sweet pellets. Orexin siRNA
in DN and tracer in Ventral Tegmental Area (VTA) were administered by
stereotaxic cannulation. Conditioning for reward stimuli triggered
over-expression of orexin in different subnuclei of DCN in both paradigms. On
the contrary, the conditioning of rats to unbaited arm to avoid aversive stimuli
in Y-maze did not alter orexin levels in DN. Moreover, orexin expression was not
affected in rats exposed to sucrose water in home-cage. Interestingly, orexin
siRNA administration in DN dramatically reduced the number of nose-pokes as well
as time spent and entries in baited arm of Y-maze. These results highlight the
significance of orexin neurons in DN in goal directed behaviour for reward
seeking. Notably, these orexin neurons send projections to the VTA as shown by
retrograde tracing study. The current results provide strong evidence for an
essential role of orexin-expressing cells in DN in the processing of goal
directed behaviour for rewarding stimuli.

## Acknowledgements
SERB-DST and UGC, Government of India.

## P147. Dissecting the Role of miRNA in Cell Cycle-related Neuronal Apoptosis
(CRNA)

Komal1, Monika Chauhan1, Soumya
Kusumakshi1, Chen Chongtham1, Aneeshkumar
A.G.1 and Pushkar Sharma1

1National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, India
Background: Aberrant activation of the cell cycle of
terminally-differentiated neurons results in their apoptosis and is known to
contribute to neuronal loss in various neurodegenerative disorders like
Alzheimer’s Disease. However, the mechanisms that regulate Cell Cycle
Related Neuronal Apoptosis (CRNA) are poorly understood. It is important to know
how cell cycle related genes are up regulated in this situation. While microRNA
is implicated in the process of cell cycle regulation but their correlation with
the neuronal cell cycle regulation and neuronal loss has remained unknown.
Materials and Methods: We have used APP/PS1 transgenic mouse model
for AD (TgAD) and cultured cortical neurons to study CRNA, which was assessed by
assessing levels of cell cycle and apoptotic markers. Water Maze and Y-Maze test
were performed to study learning and memory in AD mouse model.
Results: RNAseq was performed to identify miRNA deregulated in AD
model, which was validated by qRT-PCR. Deregulation of miRNA that target cell
cycle related genes was observed in neurons of TgAD neurons. Investigations on
two of these miRNAs revealed that they suppress the cell cycle during neuronal
differentiation. In response to neurotoxic amyloid peptide Aβ42, their
expression was impaired, which contributed to Cell cycle Related Neuronal
Apoptosis (CRNA). Molecular mechanisms via which these miRNAs are deregulated,
which in turn may contribute to CRNA, were also deciphered. Morris water maze
and Y- maze revealed that overexpression of one of these miRNAs can improve
memory and learning in TgAD mice.
Conclusion: We have identified two miRNAs that keep the neuronal
cell cycle suppressed. Their repression in response to Aβ42 results in
CRNA, which can be prevented by their over expression and can revert defects in
learning and memory exhibited by TgAD mouse model.

## Acknowledgements
Funding support for this work was provided by NII core grant and a grant from
DBT, India.