2172molmetMolecular MetabolismMol MetabElsevierPMC1185012911850129118501293990918810.1016/j.molmet.2025.102107HINT1 suppression protects against age-related cardiac dysfunction by enhancing mitochondrial biogenesis
SatoMichio KadomatsuTsuyoshi MorinagaJun KinoshitaYuya TorigoeDaisuke HoriguchiHaruki OhtsukiSumio YamamuraShuji KusabaRyoko YamaguchiTakanori YoshiokaGoro ArakiKimi WakayamaTomohiko MiyataKeishi NodeKoichi OikeYuichi 1Department of Molecular Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan2Center for Metabolic Regulation of Healthy Aging (CMHA), Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan3Division of Kumamoto Mouse Clinic (KMC), Institute of Resource Developmental and Analysis (IRDA), Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan4Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, School of Medicine, Saga University, Saga, Japan5Division of Experimental Genetics, IRDA, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan6Department of Aging and Geriatric Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan7Department of Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Graduate School of Pharmacological Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan8Division of Developmental Genetics, IRDA, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan9Department of Histology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan⁎Corresponding author. Department of Molecular Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. oike@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp
∗∗Corresponding author. Department of Molecular Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan tkado@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp
#These authors contributed equally to this work.
322025931021071021072522025© 2025 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract

## Objective
Cardiac function declines with age, impairing exercise tolerance and negatively impacting healthy aging. However, mechanisms driving age-related declines in cardiac function are not fully understood.

## Methods
We examined mechanisms underlying age-related cardiac dysfunction using 3- and 24-month-old wild-type mice fed ad libitum or 24-month-old wild-type mice subjected to 70% calorie restriction (CR) starting at 2-month-old. In addition, cardiac aging phenotypes and mitochondrial biogenesis were also analyzed in 25-month-old cardiac-specific Hint1 knockout mice, 24-month-old CAG-Caren Tg mice, and 24-month-old wild-type mice injected with AAV6-Caren.

## Results
We observed inactivation of mitochondrial biogenesis in hearts of aged mice. We also showed that activity of the BAF chromatin remodeling complex is repressed by HINT1, whose expression in heart increases with age, leading to decreased transcription of Tfam, which promotes mitochondrial biogenesis. Interestingly, CR not only suppressed age-related declines in cardiac function and mitochondrial biogenesis but blocked concomitant increases in cardiac HINT1 protein levels and maintained Tfam transcription. Furthermore, expression of the lncRNA Caren, which inhibits Hint1 mRNA translation, decreased with age in heart, and CR suppressed this effect. Finally, decreased HINT1 expression due to Caren overexpression antagonized age-related declines in mitochondrial biogenesis, ameliorating age-related cardiac dysfunction, exercise intolerance, and exercise-induced cardiac damage and subsequent death of mice.

## Conclusion
Our findings suggest that mitochondrial biogenesis in cardiomyocytes decreases with age and could underlie cardiac dysfunction, and that the Caren-HINT1-mitochondrial biogenesis axis may constitute a mechanism linking CR to resistance to cardiac aging. We also show that ameliorating declines in mitochondrial biogenesis in cardiomyocytes could counteract age-related declines in cardiac function, and that this strategy may improve exercise tolerance and extend so-called "healthy life span".

Keywords: Cardiac aging, Heart failure, Mitochondrial biogenesis, Calorie restriction

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Increased HINT1 in aged hearts is linked to decreased Tfam expression.
•HINT1 decreases Tfam transcription by suppressing BAF chromatin remodeling complex.
•The expression of lncRNA Caren decreases with aging in heart.
•CR maintains Caren expression in heart, thereby preserving declines in mitochondria.
•Overexpression of Caren mitigates age-related declines in cardiac function.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Dec 3; Revised 2025 Jan 22; Accepted 2025 Jan 26; Collection date 2025 Mar.

1.

## Introduction
As life expectancy increases worldwide, many countries are rapidly transitioning to aging societies. However, there is an approximately 10-year gap between healthy life expectancy, defined as the period during which a person can live without physical disability, and marginal life expectancy. Closing this gap is a global concern [ , ] and requires identification of factors that both decrease and increase healthy life expectancy.
For bodily organs to function normally throughout life, it is essential that their cellular components be supplied with sufficient oxygen and nutrients. Because the circulatory system transports oxygen and nutrients to organs throughout the body, circulatory insufficiency due to cardiovascular abnormalities, including cardiac dysfunction, is a major cause of age-related functional decline in various organs [ , ]. Therefore, it is critical to maintain normal heart function throughout life. According, we recently showed that elderly people, including centenarians, show a decline in activity and die within a few years of an episode of cardiac dysfunction characterized by high circulating NT-proBNP levels [ ].
Even in non-elderly individuals with normal exercise capacity and healthy muscle and bone function, development of heart failure (HF) limits activity due to exercise intolerance [ , , ]. Accordingly, ameliorating these declines should improve exercise tolerance in the elderly and increase healthy life expectancy and maximum life expectancy [ , , ]. However, mechanisms driving such declines in cardiac function in the absence of organic heart disease, such as ischemic heart disease or heart valve disease, are not fully understood because cardiomyocytes, which are the parenchymal cells of the heart, do not proliferate or undergo cellular senescence, generally defined by cell cycle arrest [ , ]. Maintaining an adequate energy supply is especially important for cardiomyocytes to remain functional throughout an organism's lifespan. Mitochondria provide cells with ATP as an energy source, and mitochondrial dysfunction reportedly induces production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), increasing DNA damage and inflammation and leading to organ dysfunction [ , , , , ].
Here, we found that aging mice exhibit pathological remodeling of cardiac tissue, including cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and cardiac fibrosis, conditions associated with decreased cardiac pump function and exercise tolerance, even in the absence of ischemic heart disease or valve heart disease. We also found that cardiac dysfunction seen in aging mice is due to decreases in mitochondrial mass resulting from inactivated mitochondrial biogenesis. Calorie restriction (CR) reportedly activates mitochondrial biogenesis and promotes resistance to age-related dysfunction in various organs [ , , , ]. Here we confirm those phenotypes and show that CR suppresses age-related increases in levels of Histidine triad nucleotide binding protein1 (HINT1) and maintains expression of mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) in mouse heart. Relevant to mechanism, we observed that HINT1 suppressed chromatin remodeling activity of the BAF complex at the Tfam promoter, decreasing Tfam expression and impairing mitochondrial biogenesis. CR also suppressed age-related downregulation of the long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) Caren, which inhibits Hint1 mRNA translation [ ], in heart. Similar to CR, overexpressing Caren to block increases in HINT1 expression in mice activated mitochondrial biogenesis and antagonized age-related cardiac dysfunction and exercise intolerance. Overall, these findings suggest that mitochondrial biogenesis in cardiomyocytes decreases with age and could underlie cardiac dysfunction, and that the Caren-HINT1-mitochondrial biogenesis axis may constitute a mechanism linking CR to resistance to cardiac aging.

2.

## Results
2.1.

## Cardiac function declines with age in humans and mice
To assess age-associated changes in cardiac function in humans, we evaluated 28,260 male and female adults aged 18 years and older who underwent echocardiography as outpatients at the Department of Cardiovascular Medicine at Saga University Hospital between January 2014 and November 2022 ( ). Patients underwent echocardiography for several reasons, including preoperative cardiac function testing and diagnosis or follow-up of cardiovascular conditions such as ischemic heart disease, arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy and valvular heart disease. As shown in , left ventricular contractility, estimated from left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), decreased mildly with age. Moreover, left ventricular diastolic dysfunction, estimated based on the ratios of early diastolic transmitral flow velocity (E) to late diastolic transmitral flow velocity (A) (E/A) and of E to early diastolic mitral annular velocity (e′) (E/e'), decreased markedly with age in parallel with increased left ventricular wall thickness, trends that showed no gender differences ( ).
Next, to evaluate comparable effects in mice, we assessed cardiac function and performed histological analysis of 3-month-old (young) versus 24-month-old (aged) male mice. Echocardiography analysis revealed that, compared to young mice, aged mice developed cardiac hypertrophy with moderate left ventricular dilatation and showed impaired cardiac systolic function, as estimated by fractional shortening ( A,B). Cardiac diastolic function also became impaired with age ( C,D). Treadmill testing also revealed significantly reduced exercise tolerance in aged compared to young mice ( E). Heart weight/body weight (HW/BW) and lung weight/body weight (LW/BW) ratios increased in aged relative to young mice ( F,G). Moreover, cardiomyocyte enlargement, determined based on histological analysis of heart tissue, was significantly greater in aged relative to young mice ( H,I). RT-PCR analysis of heart tissue showed that expression of markers of HF (Nppa, Nppb, and Myh7) and cardiac fibrosis (Col1a1 and Ctgf) significantly increased in aged relative to young mice ( J). Overall, based on analysis of male mice, we conclude that cardiac systolic and diastolic function decline with age in parallel with development of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and fibrosis, similar to outcomes seen in human heart [ , ].
 
2.2.

## Mitochondrial biogenesis decreases in the aging mouse heart
To define mechanisms underlying age-related declines in cardiac function, we compared relevant activities in hearts of aged versus young mice. Immunostaining of heart tissue for 8-hydroxy-2′-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) ( A) and western blotting for 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE) ( B) revealed enhanced ROS accumulation in hearts of aged (24-month-old) versus young (3-month-old) mice. Moreover, levels of phosphorylated ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) protein, an important regulator of the DNA damage response (DDR), significantly increased in hearts of aged mice ( C), potentially in response to ROS-induced DNA damage. Consistent with reports that DDR activation initiates an inflammatory cascade [ , , ], we observed significantly increased levels of transcripts related to inflammation in hearts of aged mice ( D). Since mitochondria play a key role in ROS production [ ], we performed electron microscopy (EM) analysis of mitochondrial structure in heart and found that aged mice showed altered mitochondrial cristae structure relative to that seen in young mice ( E). Moreover, oxygen consumption rate (OCR) in mitochondria isolated from hearts of aged mice were decreased compared to rates seen in young mice ( F–H), indicating impaired mitochondrial respiratory function. Furthermore, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content was significantly lower in hearts of aged versus young mice ( I). TFAM binds mtDNA to regulate mitochondrial biogenesis [ ]. We observed significantly decreased Tfam expression in hearts of aged versus young mice ( J), suggesting that Tfam downregulation may underlie age-related decreases in mitochondrial biogenesis and mitochondrial mass.
 
2.3.

## Calorie restriction (CR) antagonizes phenotypes associated with cardiac aging and blocks age-related increases in HINT1 expression
CR, which is reportedly the most effective strategy to extend both lifespan and healthy lifespan across species [ ], activates mitochondrial biogenesis and ameliorates age-related dysfunction in multiple organs [ , , , ]. Indeed, echocardiographic analysis of 24-month-old male CR mice subjected to 70% CR starting at 2-months-old revealed that, relative to comparably-aged mice fed ad libitum (AL), both cardiac hypertrophy and left ventricular dilatation were attenuated, with preserved systolic and diastolic function ( A,B). Age-related increases in HW/BW ratio were significantly suppressed in CR relative to AL mice ( C,D) as was cardiomyocyte enlargement ( E,F). RT-PCR analysis of heart tissue showed significantly decreased levels of transcripts associated with HF, cardiac fibrosis, and inflammation in CR compared to AL mice ( G and ). Moreover, treadmill testing showed that CR significantly improved exercise tolerance in aged mice ( H). In addition, transcript levels in heart of several genes encoding factors functioning in mitochondrial biogenesis, including Tfam, significantly increased in CR versus AL mice ( I and ), as did mtDNA content ( J). Moreover, based on EM analysis hearts of CR mice exhibited a greater number of intermyofibrillar mitochondria relative to AL mice ( K). These analyses confirm that CR counteracts cardiac aging phenotypes and age-related declines in mitochondrial biogenesis in heart.
 
2.4.

## HINT1 negatively regulates Tfam transcription
We previously reported that expression of HINT1 increases in hearts of pressure overload-induced HF model mice and that HINT1 expression is upregulated in heart tissue from HF patients [ ]. HINT1 also regulates transcription of genes associated with mitochondrial biogenesis [ , ]. Interestingly, we found that cardiac HINT1 protein levels increase with age in mice ( L) and humans ( ). Moreover, CR suppressed age-related increases in HINT1 protein levels in mouse heart ( M), suggesting that these effects may underlie CR-dependent activation of mitochondrial biogenesis. To determine whether HINT1 negatively regulates Tfam expression, we knocked down (KD) HINT1 in mouse embryonal carcinoma P19.CL6 cells and observed upregulated Tfam expression ( A). HINT1 reportedly regulates activity of Microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF), which induces expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 alpha (Pgc1α), in turn activating Tfam transcription [ ]. HINT1 binds to MITF in the cytoplasm, inhibiting its nuclear translocation and function [ ]. Wnt-β-catenin signaling also regulates Pgc1α and Nrf1 transcription [ ], and HINT1 suppresses β-catenin-mediated transcription by interacting with the transcriptional repressors Pontin and Reptin [ ]. Thus, we asked whether HINT1 downregulates Tfam expression by interacting with either MITF, Pontin, or β-catenin proteins. However, immunoprecipitation (IP) analysis indicated that HINT1 did not interact with these proteins ( ), suggesting that HINT1 downregulates Tfam in heart via other mechanisms.
 
2.5.

## HINT1 suppresses BAF complex-mediated Tfam transcription in the aged heart
To identify mechanisms underlying Tfam suppression by HINT1 in heart, we used IP coupled to mass spectrometry (IP-MS) to identify HINT1-interacting proteins. Specifically, we IP'd HINT1 proteins from either whole lysates of P19.CL6 cells or heart tissue of aged mice, and identified co-IP'd proteins by quantitative proteomic analysis with nanoscale liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) ( B and ). Overall, we identified 1744 proteins from P19.CL6 cells and 1452 from heart tissue as candidate HINT1-interactors (anti-HINT1 antibody-IP versus control IgG-IP ratio >2). Among these, 508 overlapped between P19.CL6 cells and heart tissue. Moreover, gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of those proteins revealed that among the top 20 terms, five were associated with the BAF chromatin remodeling complex (also known as SWI/SNF) [ , ] ( C and ). Also, co-IP analysis of P19.CL6 cells showed HINT1 interaction with AT-rich interactive domain-containing protein 1 (ARID1A), SWI/SNF-related matrix associated actin-dependent regulator of chromatin E1 (SMARCE1), and BRM/SWI2-related gene-1 (BRG1), all BAF complex components [ , ] ( D). Finally, immunofluorescence analysis showed nuclear colocalization of HINT1 and ARID1A ( E). These results suggest overall that HINT1 interacts with the BAF complex.
Since cardiac HINT1 protein levels increase with age, we examined HINT1 interactions with various BAF complex proteins in hearts of young and aged mice by co-IP analysis ( F). We observed HINT1 interactions with complex components ARID1A, SMARCE1, and BRG1 in young and aged mice, but quantitative analysis indicated an increase in those interactions in aged mice ( F). BAF complex activity reportedly facilitates binding of transcriptional activators or repressors to gene regulatory regions [ , ]. Thus, we asked whether increased HINT1/BAF complex interaction alters BAF complex binding to the Tfam promoter region in hearts of young and aged mice using the CUT&RUN protocol. That analysis revealed that Tfam promoter occupancy by SMARCE1 decreases in aged relative to young mice ( G). Furthermore, acetylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27Ac), an active promoter/enhancer mark, decreased in aged relative to young mice ( G). Finally, levels of co-IP'd SMARCE1/ARID1A significantly decreased in hearts of aged compared to young mice ( H), suggesting that HINT1 binding impairs BAF complex integrity and that HINT1 may interact with SMARCE1. To test this possibility, we conducted co-IP analysis using Smarce1 KO P19.CL6 cells ( ). We observed that SMARCE1-deficiency did not alter HIINT1 interaction with ARID1A and BRG1, suggesting that HINT1 interacts with BAF complex components other than SMARCE1. These findings suggest overall that HINT1 interaction decreases binding of the BAF complex to the Tfam promoter, decreasing Tfam expression.
To further investigate BAF complex contributions to Tfam expression, we examined Tfam expression in the mouse myoblast line C2C12 treated with ACBI1, a proteolysis targeting chimera (PROTAC) degrader of BAF complex ATPases [ ] essential for chromatin remodeling, such as BRG1 ( ). Tfam expression showed a small but significant decrease in ACBI1-treated compared with untreated control (DMSO) cells ( ). However, ACBI1-treated and untreated cells showed comparable mtDNA content ( ). ACBI1-treated cells showed significantly decreased expression levels of genes encoding transcription factors functioning in mitochondrial biogenesis, such as Nrf1 and Nrf2, relative to untreated cells. However, expression levels of the coactivator Pgc1α, an essential activator of Tfam transcription [ ], were comparable in ACBI1-treated and untreated cells ( ). On the other hand, in addition to significant Tfam downregulation and reduced mtDNA content ( I,J), expression levels of Pgc1α, Nrf1, and Nrf2 significantly decreased in hearts of aged compared to young mice ( ). These results suggest that in the aging heart, inhibition of BAF complex-mediated chromatin remodeling, together with Pgc1α downregulation, significantly decreases Tfam transcript levels, decreasing mitochondrial biogenesis. Thus, BAF complex inhibition is necessary for Tfam downregulation but most likely insufficient by itself to decrease mitochondrial biogenesis.

2.6.

## Blocking increases in HINT1 expression activates mitochondrial biogenesis and antagonizes age-related cardiac phenotypes
Above we showed increased HINT1 protein in hearts of aging humans and mice ( L and ) and decreased HINT1 protein in hearts of CR mice ( M). Thus, we hypothesized that like CR, blocking increases in HINT1 expression in the aging heart may promote resistance to cardiac aging. To test this possibility, we generated cardiac-specific Hint1 knockout (Hint1Flox/Flox; αMHC-Cre, CKO) mice ( ) and examined age-related cardiac phenotypes in 25-month-old males CKO and littermate controls (Hint1Flox/Flox). HINT1 protein levels in hearts of aged CKO mice were significantly lower than those seen in aged control mice ( ). Echocardiographic analysis of aged CKO mice revealed attenuation of age-related declines in both cardiac contractility and diastolic function relative to aged control mice ( ). In addition, age-related increases in the HW/BW ratio were also blocked in aged CKO relative to control mice ( ). Moreover, cardiomyocyte enlargement, determined based on histological analysis of heart tissue, was significantly greater in aged relative to young mice ( ). RT-PCR analysis also revealed that age-related increases in expression of HF and cardiac fibrosis markers in heart tissue were suppressed in aged CKO mice ( ). Furthermore, expression of genes associated with mitochondrial biogenesis, including Tfam, significantly increased in hearts of aged CKO relative to control mice ( ), and aged CKO mice also showed significantly increased mtDNA content in heart tissue ( ). Taken together, these results suggest that blocking HINT1 expression in cardiomyocytes counteracts age-related decline in mitochondrial biogenesis and cardiac function.
We previously reported that Caren counteracts HF development by interacting with Hint1 mRNA and blocking its translation via various intermediate(s)—among them, an RNA binding protein [ ]. Interestingly, we observed significantly decreased levels of Caren transcripts in hearts of aged compared to young mice and that CR suppressed those decreases ( A). Thus, we asked whether decreasing HINT1 expression via overexpressing Caren in the aged heart would activate mitochondrial biogenesis and prevent age-related cardiac changes. To do so, first assessed 24-month-old transgenic (Tg) mice overexpressing Caren under control of the CAG promoter (CAG-Caren Tg mice) [ ] versus WT littermate controls, and observed significantly reduced HINT1 protein levels in heart tissues of Tg versus WT mice ( ). Transcript levels of several genes encoding factors involved in mitochondrial biogenesis, including Tfam, were significantly increased in hearts of CAG-Caren Tg versus WT mice ( ), as were TFAM protein levels ( ) and mtDNA content ( ). Moreover, echocardiographic analysis of 24-month-old Tg mice revealed that, relative to WT controls, both cardiac hypertrophy and left ventricular dilatation were attenuated, with preserved systolic and diastolic function ( ). Age-related increases in HW/BW ratio were significantly suppressed in CAG-Caren Tg relative to WT mice ( ), as was cardiomyocyte enlargement in heart, based on histological analysis ( ). RT-PCR analysis of heart tissue showed significantly decreased levels of transcripts associated with HF and cardiac fibrosis in Caren Tg versus WT controls ( ). ROS accumulation and upregulation of inflammatory genes were also significantly blocked in heart tissue of Tg relative to WT mice ( ). Furthermore, aged Caren Tg mice exhibited increased exercise tolerance ( ).
 We next asked whether increasing myocardial mitochondrial biogenesis in aging mice would ameliorate age-related cardiac dysfunction and underlying myocardial changes. To do so, we injected 24-month-old mice exhibiting age-related cardiac dysfunction intravenously with 1 × 1011 vg per mouse recombinant adeno-associated virus serotype 6 (AAV6)-Caren to restore Caren transcripts in cardiomyocytes, and injected controls with 1 × 1011 vg per mouse of recombinant AAV6-green fluorescent protein (GFP) ( B). Eight weeks later, immunoblotting analysis indicated significantly decreased HINT1 protein levels in hearts of AAV6-Caren relative to control mice ( C). AAV6-Caren treatment also significantly increased Tfam mRNA and protein levels and mtDNA content in heart tissue relative to control levels ( D–F). EM analysis revealed a greater number of intermyofibrillar mitochondria exhibiting fine cristae structure, which is typically seen in hearts of young mice ( E), in hearts of aged AAV6-Caren relative to control mice ( G). OCR of mitochondria isolated from hearts of aged AAV6-Caren mice also improved compared to controls ( H–J), although ROS accumulation and DDR activation in heart tissue decreased relative to that seen in controls ( K–M).
Blood pressure and heart rate were comparable in AAV6-Caren and control mice ( ). Interestingly, echocardiographic analysis showed that age-related progression of cardiac left ventricular dilatation, systolic dysfunction and diastolic dysfunction was ameliorated in AAV6-Caren-treated compared to control mice ( , A–D). In addition, cardiac hypertrophy, as assessed by HW/BW ratio and histological analysis, and cardiac function, as assessed by pulmonary congestion based on LW/BW ratio, were improved in AAV6-Caren relative to control mice ( E–H). RT-PCR analysis of heart tissue showed that upregulation of genes associated with HF and cardiac fibrosis was blocked in AAV6-Caren relative to control mice ( ). Moreover, treadmill testing showed that AAV6-Caren treatment significantly improved exercise tolerance in aged mice, which showed little or no post-exercise immobility due to breathlessness and decreased mortality after maximal exercise than controls ( I,J, ). Collectively, these results suggest that Caren-mediated inhibition of age-related increases in cardiac HINT1 expression activates mitochondrial biogenesis by enhancing Tfam expression and improves cardiac function, outcomes that may counteract exercise intolerance and exercise-related mortality, both of which increase with age.
 Supplementary video related to this article can be found at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmet.2025.102107
The following are the supplementary data related to this article:

## VideoS1
Endurance exercise testing of AAV6-Caren-treated aged mice.
Movie of aged WT mice injected with AAV6-Caren or AAV6-GFP taken during endurance exercise testing.4
VideoS1

## VideoS2
Behavior of AAV6-Caren-treated aged mice after endurance exercise testing.
Movie of aged WT mice injected with AAV6-Caren or AAV6-GFP taken immediately after endurance exercise testing.5
VideoS2

3.

## Discussion
In this study, we found that even in the absence of valvular or ischemic heart disease, aged mice show pathological remodeling of cardiac tissue, such as cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, cardiac fibrosis, and accompanying decreases in cardiac pump function and exercise tolerance. These age-related changes were associated with decreased mitochondrial biogenesis in mouse cardiomyocytes. We also show that decreases in mitochondrial biogenesis due to decreased Tfam transcription likely occur via inactivation of the BAF complex resulting from increased HINT1 levels in the aging heart. Expression of Caren, which blocks Hint1 mRNA translation, decreased in the aging heart. Interestingly, CR antagonized many of these age-related declines and preserved exercise tolerance. Moreover, CR suppressed increased HINT1 expression by maintaining Caren expression and maintained Tfam expression, thereby activating mitochondrial biogenesis. Finally, we confirmed that overexpressing Caren blocked increases in HINT1 expression and restored activation of mitochondrial biogenesis, counteracting age-related cardiac changes, improving exercise intolerance and reducing exercise-induced cardiac damage and subsequent death of mice. These findings support the idea that the Caren-HINT1-mitochondrial biogenesis axis is an important mechanism linking CR to resistance to cardiac aging.
It was previously reported that CR activates sirtuin and AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) pathways, increasing PGC1α expression and activation [ , , ]. PGC1α together with NRF1/2 induces expression of genes encoding mitochondrial proteins, such as TFAM, and enhances mitochondrial biogenesis [ ]. Indeed, CR mice showed increased cardiac Pgc1α, Nrf1, and Nrf2 expression relative to AL mice ( ). Interestingly, we also demonstrated that expression of these genes in hearts of aged CAG-Caren Tg mice was significantly higher than that in comparably-aged WT controls ( ). These findings support our conclusion that Caren-mediated pathways are closely related to CR-mediated activation of mitochondrial biogenesis.
The BAF complex regulates transcription via chromatin remodeling activity [ , ]. We observed both decreased SMARCE1 occupancy and decreased H3K27Ac levels at the Tfam promoter in hearts of aged versus young mice. Thus, in addition to increasing Pgc1α and Nrf1/2 expression in heart, Caren may promote BAF-mediated epigenetic changes at the Tfam regulatory region by suppressing HINT1 expression, thereby activating mitochondrial biogenesis. Caren-overexpressing mice also showed increased exercise tolerance and decreased incidence of exercise-induced acute heart failure and death, suggesting that activating mitochondrial biogenesis is could serve as an effective strategy to maintain myocardial mitochondrial mass in the aging heart.
We also observed a decline in cardiac function in hearts of aging mice due to decreases in mitochondrial mass, which we attribute to inactivated mitochondrial biogenesis. Similar age-related decreases in mitochondrial mass were evident in kidney, liver, and muscle ( ), suggesting that these activities underlie functional declines in various organs. Currently, mechanisms underlying these outcomes are not fully understood, although it was recently reported that mice show increased mitophagy activity with age in various organs [ ]. Mitochondrial mass is determined by the balance between mitochondrial biogenesis and mitophagy [ ]. Moreover, CR reportedly activates not only mitochondrial biogenesis but also mitophagy in various organs [ , , ]. Therefore, it is now important to assess multiple organs in aging animals to determine how CR alters this balance in a manner that promotes resistance to aging.
We found that Caren transcript levels in heart decreased with age, an activity suppressed by CR. Mechanisms underlying regulation of Caren transcripts in heart remain unclear. lncRNA transcript levels are regulated by both transcription and miRNA- and RNA binding protein-mediated stabilization or degradation of lncRNA [ ]. Future studies should address which of those mechanisms govern Caren transcript levels in the aging heart.
We demonstrated that HINT1 interacts with the BAF complex via interaction with complex components other than SMARCE1. However, the HINT1 binding motif required for BAF complex interaction remains unclear. HINT1 exhibits nucleotide phosphoramidase activity and zinc- and calmodulin-regulated small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) protease activity, and the HINT1 calmodulin binding motif and histidine triad are essential for these activities and for substrate binding [ , ]. Moreover, HINT1 reportedly interacts with Pontin and Reptin via its N-terminal region [ ]. These HINT1 motifs may contribute to HINT1 interaction with the BAF complex. Further studies are required to identify both the relevant HINT1 binding motif and the HINT1 binding partner among BAF complex components.
The decline in cardiac function seen in aged mice was very mild compared to the pathophysiology of HF but was associated with a decline in physical activity, as exemplified by exercise tolerance analysis. This finding suggests that since it is critical for the elderly to maintain physical activity in order to live a healthy lifestyle, it is important to prevent or ameliorate age-related declines in cardiac function.
In conclusion, this study demonstrates that perturbation of mitochondrial homeostasis with age is associated with age-related pathological remodeling of cardiac tissue and cardiac dysfunction. Specifically, in aging hearts, increased HINT1 expression decreases mitochondrial biogenesis by suppressing Tfam transcription, and CR likely antagonizes these phenotypes by blocking increases in HINT1 expression via maintenance of Caren expression. We also show that ameliorating declines in mitochondrial biogenesis in cardiomyocytes could counteract age-related declines in cardiac function, and that this strategy may improve exercise tolerance and extend so-called “healthy life span”.

4.

## Materials and methods
4.1.

## Animals
All experimental procedures were approved by the Ethics Review Committee for Animal Experimentation at Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan (approval No. A27-063, A29-072, A2019-063, A2021-071, and A2023-039). Procedures followed the guidelines and recommendations outlined by the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (8th Edition, 2011). Prior to tissue collection, mice were euthanized under isoflurane anesthesia, followed by cervical dislocation to ensure rapid euthanasia, a procedure also employed during sacrifice for tissue harvesting. Euthanasia was performed when animals met the established criteria for humane endpoints, specifically a body weight loss exceeding 20% over a 3-day period or 25% over a 1-week period, in accordance with the Kumamoto University Ethics Review Committee for Animal Experimentation above.
All animals were fed a normal diet (CE-2, CLEA, Tokyo, Japan), bred in a mouse house with automatically controlled lighting (12 h on, 12 h off), and maintained at a stable temperature of 22 ± 2 °C and a relative humidity of 40–80%.
C57BL/6NJcl (3- and 24-month-old) WT male mice were used in this study. Genetically engineered mice used in this study were: Tg mice overexpressing Caren driven by the CAG promoter (CAG-Caren) [ ] on a C57BL/6N background. To maintain an isogenic strain, CAG-Caren Tg mice were propagated as hemizygotes by breeding with C57BL/6N mice.

4.2.

## Calorie restriction
Two-month-old C57BL/6NJcl male mice were randomly assigned to ad libitum (AL) and calorie restriction (CR) groups. Both groups were fed normal chow (CE-2, CLEA). To determine baseline ad libitum levels per day, food intake in the AL group was measured once every week. In the CR group, mice were fed 70% of food consumed by the AL group three times a week during daytime periods.

4.3.

## Generation of Hint1 conditional KO mice
Mutagenized sperm from mice on a C57BL/6N background (EM:05220) was purchased from the European Mouse Mutant Archive (EMMA, http://www.infrafrontier.eu/) and used for in vitro fertilization with C57BL/6N eggs. To generate Hint1 conditional KO mice (Hint1Flox/Flox) through Flp/FRT-mediated recombination, pronuclear embryos were electroporated with Flp mRNA (800 ng μl−1) using the Super Electroporator NEPA 21 (NEPA GENE, Chiba, Japan). Genotyping was performed by PCR of tail DNA using the following primers: Hint1cKO-S (5′-GTCTATGAGTGGATTTGTTACTCTGG-3′) and Hint1cKO-AS (5′-TTATTAAAGACCACTTAAACTACC-3′). To maintain the strain, mice were propagated as heterozygotes by breeding with C57BL/6N mice. Tg mice overexpressing Cre driven by the murine αMHC promoter (αMHC-Cre) [ ] were kindly provided by Prof. Kinya Otsu (National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Japan).

4.4.

## Human research participants
The study was approved by the Ethics Committees of Kumamoto University (approval No. 2671) and Saga University (approval No. 2022-10-SCR-05). A total of 70,417 patients enrolled at the Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Saga University Hospital, between January 2014 and November 2022 and underwent echocardiography. Among those cases, only data from the first echocardiography was analyzed for patients who had undergone more than one echocardiography during this period. Thus, the final analysis included data from 28,260 patients ( ).
For immunohistochemical analysis of human heart tissue samples from atrium biopsy cases ( ), the study was approved by the Ethics Committees of Kumamoto University (approval No. 2640 and 2641) and Saga University (approval No. 2020-01-01 and 2020-09-01).

4.5.

## Echocardiography in mice
Mice were preconditioned by chest hair removal with a topical depilatory (FUJIFILM VisualSonics, Toronto, Canada), anaesthetized with 1.5–2.5% isoflurane administered via inhalation, and maintained in a supine position on a dedicated animal handling platform with limbs immobilized for electrocardiogram gating during imaging. Body temperature was kept constant by relaying signals from a rectal probe to a heating pad, while heart and respiratory rates were continuously monitored. Transthoracic echocardiography was performed using a high frequency ultrasound system dedicated to small animal imaging (VisualSonics Vevo 3100, FUJIFILM VisualSonics, Toronto, Canada) using a MS 400 linear array transducer (18–38 MHz). M-mode recording was performed at the midventricular level. All images were analyzed using dedicated software (Vevo Labo version 5.7.1). LV wall thickness and internal cavity diameters at diastole (LVID; d) and systole (LVID; s) were measured. Per cent LV fractional shortening (%FS) was calculated from M-mode measurements. For analysis of cardiac diastolic function, transmitral flow velocity patterns and early diastolic mitral annular velocity (e′) were measured to calculate early transmitral flow velocity (E) to atrial systolic velocity (A) (E/A) and ratio E to e′ (E/e′) in 4-chamber view. All procedures were performed under double-blind conditions with regard to genotype or treatment.

4.6.

## Mouse endurance exercise testing
Experimental mice were allowed to adapt to the treadmill chamber (Model MK-690S/4M, Muromachi, Japan) for 15 min with unlimited movement 3 times on separate days. After confirming that mice were sufficiently accustomed to running, we began treadmill testing at 5 m/min, and after 30 s, increased speed to 6 m/min. After the first minute, speed was increased first to 8 m/min and then to 10 m/min after another minute. Speed was then increased by 1 m/min every minute.
The experiment was terminated when a mouse touched the electrodes on ten or more occasions during rest intervals. Electrodes were positioned at the rear end of the treadmill belt.

4.7.

## RT-PCR analysis
Total RNA was extracted using a RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). DNase-treated RNA was reverse-transcribed using a Prime Script RT reagent Kit (Takara Bio Inc, Shiga, Japan). Heart tissue was homogenized using a multi-beads shocker (Yasui Kikai, Osaka, Japan). Real-time quantitative RT-PCR was performed using TB Green Premix Ex Taq II (Takara Bio Inc), and a Thermal Cycler Dice Real-Time system (Takara Bio Inc). Relative transcript abundance was normalized to that of 18S rRNA levels in mouse and human samples. Primer sets used for RT-PCR are listed in .

4.8.

## Quantification of mitochondrial DNA content
To assess mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content, we determined mtDNA/nuclear DNA (nDNA) ratios by extracting DNA from mouse tissues and subjecting it to real-time quantitative PCR analysis using specific primer sets for mtDNA (Cytb and Nd2) and nDNA (ActB and B2m) ( ). Real-time quantitative PCR was performed using TB Green Premix Ex Taq II (Takara Bio Inc) and a Thermal Cycler Dice Real-Time system (Takara Bio Inc).

4.9.

## Western blotting
Mouse heart tissue was homogenized in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl, 1% Triton X-100, 50 mM NaCl, 30 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 50 mM NaF, 5 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM Na3VO4, plus a protease inhibitor cocktail (Nacalai Tesque, Kyoto, Japan), pH 7.5) using a multi-beads shocker (Yasui Kikai). Proteins (20 μg) were separated by SDS–PAGE and transferred to PVDF membranes. Membranes were incubated with anti-4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (4-HNE) (clone HNEJ-2, MHN, Japan Institute for the Control of Aging (JaICA), NIKKEN SEIL, Shizuoka, Japan), anti-phosphorylated ATM (Ser1981) (10H11.E12, #4526, Cell Signaling Technology), anti-ATM (D2E2, #2873, Cell Signaling Technology), anti-TFAM (ab131607, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), anti-HINT1 (ab124912, Abcam), anti-ARID1A (D2A8U, #12354S, Cell Signaling Technology), anti-BRG1 (D1Q7F, #49360S, Cell Signaling Technology), or anti-SMARCE1 (E6H5J, #33360S, Cell Signaling Technology). Antibodies were diluted 1:1,000, and samples were incubated at 4 °C overnight. After TBST washing, membranes were incubated with 1:2,000 diluted horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit IgG or sheep anti-mouse IgG (GE Healthcare Life Science, Piscataway, NJ, USA) antibodies at room temperature for 60 min. Internal controls were incubated with 1:2,000 diluted anti-Hsc70 (sc-7298, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) antibody, and 1:2,000 diluted HRP-conjugated sheep anti-mouse IgG (GE Healthcare Life Science) antibody was used as a secondary antibody.
In some experiments, mouse anti-rabbit IgG (Conformation Specific) mAb (HRP-conjugated) (L27A9, #5127, Cell Signaling Technology) was used as a secondary antibody to avoid masking signals from proteins of interest by signals from antibodies used in the IP.
Immunodetection was carried out using ECL Western Blotting Detection Reagents or ECL Prime Western Blotting Detection Reagents (both from GE Healthcare Life Science).

4.10.

## Cell culture and transfection
The mouse embryonal carcinoma cell line P19.CL6 (RIKEN BRC, Tsukuba, Japan) was maintained in MEMα supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) under 5% CO2 and 95% air. The human embryonic kidney line HEK293 and the mouse myoblast line C2C12 (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS under 5% CO2 and 95% air.
P19.CL6 cells were transfected with Mission siRNA Universal Negative Control (SIC001, Sigma–Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) or mouse Hint1-targeting siRNA (siHint1-#1: SASI_Mm01_00048024: GCAUAUAUCCCAGAUUUCUTT, siHint1-#2: SASI_Mm01_00048025: GGUACCGGAUGGUGGUGAATT, Sigma–Aldrich) using Lipofectamine RNAi MAX reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) according to the manufacturer's instructions. After transfection, cells were subjected to RT-PCR analyses.
HEK293 cells were transfected with an expression plasmid encoding Flag-tagged Hint1 or HA-tagged Mitf alone or co-transfected with both vectors using Lipofectamine 3000 reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) according to the manufacturer's instructions. After transfection, cells were harvested and subjected to IP analysis.
C2C12 cells were incubated 72 h with 1 μM ACBI1(Selleck Biotech, Tokyo, Japan). Cells were then harvested and subjected to RT-PCR analysis, western blotting, or quantification of mtDNA content.

4.11.

## Establishment of Smarce1 knockout cell lines
Smarce1 knockout and control lines were established using a Guide-it CRISPR/Cas9 system (Takara Bio Inc) according to the manufacturer's instructions. In brief, sense (CCGGTTGATTCTCCTACCGTGACC) and antisense (AAACGGTCACGGTAGGAGAATCAA) oligos corresponding to mouse Smarce1-targeting sgRNA were annealed and cloned into the pGuide-it ZsGreen1 vector (Takara Bio Inc). To construct the control sgRNA plasmid, Guide-it control annealed oligos (Takara Bio Inc) were cloned into the vector. P19. CL6 cells were transfected with plasmids harboring either Smarce1-targeting or control sgRNA using the TransIT-X2 Dynamic Delivery System (Mirus Bio, Madison, WI, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions and cultured for 48 h. Cells were harvested and ZsGreen1-positive cells were isolated using a cell sorter SH800S (SONY, Tokyo, Japan). Established cell clones were subjected to immunoblotting analysis to confirm Smarce1 knockout.

4.12.

## Immunoprecipitation
Cultured cells were washed with PBS and homogenized in 1% Tx-100 lysis buffer (20 mM Tris–HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 10 mM NaF, 2 mM Na3VO4, 10 mM Na4P2O7, 10% glycerol, plus cOmplete, EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Mannheim, Germany), pH 7.5). Mouse heart tissue was homogenized in 1% Tx-100 lysis buffer using a multi-beads shocker (Yasui Kikai). Samples were incubated 10 min on ice and centrifuged. Supernatants served as protein extracts, which were subjected to IP.
For co-IP of HINT1 and ARID1A, 0.6–1.0 mg of protein was incubated with 4 μg of anti-HINT1 antibody (#10717-1-AP, Proteintech Japan Inc., Tokyo, Japan), anti-ARID1A antibody (#12354S, Cell Signaling Technology), or control normal rabbit IgG (#2729, Cell Signaling Technology) overnight at 4 °C. Samples were incubated 2 h with Dynabeads Protein G (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) at 4 °C. After washing with 1 % Tx-100 lysis buffer, IP'd proteins were eluted with 1 × SDS sample buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, 2% SDS, 0.1% 2-mercaptoehanol, 10% glycerol, and bromophenol blue, pH 6.8), and purified proteins were immunoblotted.
To calculate fold-change of a protein co-IP'd with HINT1 or ARID1A in hearts of aged and young mice, we employed the following formula (where x = HINT1 or ARID1A and y = BRG1 or SMARCE1):
Foldchange(vsYoung)=Aged[IP(y)/(Input(y)/Hsc70)IP(x)/(Input(x)/Hsc70)]Young[IP(y)/(Input(y)/Hsc70)IP(x)/(Input(x)/Hsc70)]For co-IP of Flag-tagged HINT1, 1.0 mg protein was incubated 2 h with 30 μl of Anti-DDDDK-tag mAb-Magnetic Beads (MBL) at 4 °C. After washing with 1% Tx-100 lysis buffer, IP'd proteins were eluted with 1 × SDS sample buffer, and purified proteins were immunoblotted.
To identify proteins interacting with HINT1 in P19.CL6 cells or mouse heart tissue, IP coupled to mass spectrometry (IP-MS) analysis was conducted using anti-HINT1 antibody (#10717-1-AP, Proteintech Japan Inc.) or control normal rabbit IgG (#2729, Cell Signaling Technology). After IP, precipitates were washed with 1% Tx-100 lysis buffer and then subjected to quantitative proteomic analysis.

4.13.

## Quantitative proteomic analysis
Peptide samples for quantitative proteomics were prepared by trypsin digestion using SP3 method [ ]. Analysis was conducted as described [ ]. Briefly, each sample was analyzed by data-independent acquisition (DIA/SWATH) on the TripleTOF 6600 (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) interfaced with the Eksigent nanoLC 400 (SCIEX). Protein identification and quantification were conducted using the library-free search function in DIA-NN 1.8 with the UniProt mouse reference proteome allowing one miss-cleavage [ ]. Concentration of each protein was calculated from specific peptides using the MaxLFQ algorithm [ ], which was integrated into DIA-NN. Peptides and proteins were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of <1% for identification and quantification.
To determine HINT1-interactors, proteins detected in IP-MS analysis using anti-HINT1 antibody or control IgG in P19.CL6 cells and aged mouse heart tissue were filtered at an anti-HINT1 antibody-IP versus control IgG-IP ratio of >2-fold. HINT1-interacting proteins found in both P19.CL6 cells and aged mouse heart tissue underwent gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis using the graphical gene-set enrichment tool ShinyGO v0.80 [ ]. Enriched GO terms were investigated and enriched terms (FDR <0.05) were sorted by the average of their ranks based on FDR and fold-enrichment. A bubble plot showing the top 20 enriched terms was generated using ShinyGO v0.80.

4.14.

## Immunofluorescence staining
Cells were fixed in 4% PFA at room temperature for 10 min. After washing with PBS, cells were incubated with PBS containing 0.2% Triton X-100 for 10 min and blocked with PBS containing 0.05% Tween 20, 0.1% BSA, and 5% normal goat serum. For double-staining with anti-HINT1 (#10717-1-AP, Proteintech Japan Inc.) and anti-ARID1A (#12354S, Cell Signaling Technology) antibodies, anti-ARIDA1 antibody was labeled with a fluorescent dye CoraLite Plus 488 using a FlexAble Antibody Labeling Kit (Proteintech Japan Inc.), according to the manufacturers' instructions. Cells were incubated overnight at 4 °C with anti-HINT1 antibody (1:200). After PBS/0.05% Tween 20 (PBST) washing, samples were incubated 1 h with Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (1:400, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) antibody at room temperature. After PBST washing, cells were incubated overnight at 4 °C with CoraLite Plus 488-labbeled anti-ARID1A antibody (1:100). After PBST washing, nuclei were counterstained with NucBlue Fixed Cell ReadyProbes Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Images were obtained using a BZ-X710 microscope (Keyence, Osaka, Japan).

4.15.

## CUT&RUN analysis
CUT&RUN analysis was carried out using a CUT&RUN Assay Kit (Cell Signaling Technology), according to the manufacturers' instructions. In brief, mouse heart tissues were fixed 10 min with 0.1% formaldehyde at room temperature and homogenized using a Dounce homogenizer. Tissue homogenates served as single-cell suspension, which was incubated with Concanavalin A magnetic beads. Cells immobilized on beads were then treated with digitonin to permeabilize them and then incubated 2 h with anti-SMARCE1 antibody (1:50, #33360S, Cell Signaling Technology), anti-H3K27Ac antibody (1:50, #8173S, Cell Signaling Technology), or control normal IgG (1:25, #66362, Cell Signaling Technology) at 4 °C. Samples were washed and incubated 1 h with pAG-MNase at 4 °C. After washing, MNase was activated by adding CaCl2 and samples were incubated 30 min at 4 °C. Samples were incubated 10 min at 37 °C to allow diffusion of digested chromatin fragments into the supernatant. DNA was purified from supernatants and subjected to real-time PCR analysis. Primer pairs used are shown in . For normalization, Sample Normalization Spike-In yeast DNA was added to each sample and signals were quantified using primers for the S. cerevisiae ACT1 gene.

4.16.

## Immunohistochemical analysis
Immunohistological analysis of 8-OHdG was performed as described [ ]. Briefly, mouse heart tissue samples were fixed 24 h in 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin. Blocks were sectioned into 4-μm-thick sections, air-dried, and deparaffinized. For immunohistochemistry, sections were pretreated with periodic acid (Nichirei Biosciences, Tokyo, Japan) to inhibit endogenous peroxidases. Specimens were then incubated overnight with anti-8-hydroxy-2′-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) (1:20, MOG, JaICA, NIKKEN SEIL). After PBS washing, sections were immunostained using a Histofine mouse stain kit (Nichirei Biosciences), according to the manufacturers' instructions, and specimens counterstained with hematoxylin. As negative controls isotype control IgG was used instead of primary antibodies. Peroxidase activity was visualized by incubation with a 3,3-diaminobenzidine solution. For wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) labeling, sections were incubated 1 h with 5 mg/ml Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated WGA (W11262, Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) at room temperature. After washing, sections were cover-slipped with a water-soluble antifading mounting medium containing 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Vibrance Antifade Mounting Medium with DAPI, H-1800, Vector Laboratories, Newark, CA, USA). Images were obtained using a BZ-X710 microscope (Keyence).

4.17.

## Transmission electron microscopy
Mouse heart tissue was fixed 4 h in phosphate buffer containing 2% paraformaldehyde and 2.5% glutaraldehyde (pH 7.4) at 4 °C. After washing in phosphate buffer at 4 °C, specimens were postfixed 2 h in 1% osmium tetroxide at 4 °C. Specimens were then washed repeatedly in distilled water, stained 30 min with 1% uranyl acetate, dehydrated through a graded ethanol series and propylene oxide, and embedded in Glicidether (Selva Feinbiochemica, Heidelberg, Germany). Ultrathin sections were cut and mounted onto nickel grids, stained 10 min with 1% uranyl acetate and 5 min with Reynolds lead citrate, and then observed using a HT7700 electron microscope (Hitachi High-Tech Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) [ ].

4.18.

## AAV production and mouse treatment
To construct AAV plasmids encoding Caren or GFP, respective cDNAs were cloned into the pAAV-CMV vector (Takara Bio Inc). Recombinant AAV6 vectors were produced with an AAVpro Helper Free System (Takara Bio Inc) and purified using an AAVpro Purification Kit (Takara Bio Inc), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Genome copy number was determined using an AAVpro Titration Kit (for Real-time PCR) Ver. 2 (Takara Bio Inc). 24-month-old male C57BL/6NJcl mice were intravenously injected with AAV6-Caren or AAV6-GFP vectors at 1 × 1011 vg. Cardiac function was assessed by echocardiography before injection and at 4 and 8 weeks afterwards. After echocardiography, mice were sacrificed and heart tissues subjected to histological, RT-PCR, immunoblot, and oxygen consumption analyses.

4.19.

## Isolation of mouse heart mitochondria
Mouse heart tissue was homogenized in mitochondrial isolation buffer (210 mM mannitol, 70 mM sucrose, 5 mM HEPES-KOH, 1 mM EGTA, 0.5% fatty acid-free bovine serum albumin (BSA), pH 7.2) using a glass-teflon homogenizer. Homogenates were centrifuged at 27,000×g for 10 min at 4 °C, and pellets suspended in mitochondrial isolation buffer. Samples were centrifuged at 500×g for 5 min at 4 °C, and supernatants were collected and centrifuged at 10,000×g, 4 °C for 5 min. The pellet was then resuspended in mitochondrial isolation buffer, and samples centrifuged 5 min at 10,000×g at 4 °C. Resulting pellets were suspended in BSA-free mitochondrial isolation buffer, and mitochondrial protein concentration determined using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay Dye Reagent (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). Samples were then incubated with an equal volume of mitochondrial isolation buffer and subjected to oxygen consumption analysis.

4.20.

## Oxygen consumption analysis of isolated mitochondria
Isolated mitochondria were diluted with mitochondrial assay solution (220 mM mannitol, 70 mM sucrose, 2 mM HEPES-KOH, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM KH2PO4, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.2% fatty acid-free BSA, 2 mM malate, 10 mM pyruvate, pH 7.2) to 80 μg/ml. Diluted mitochondria were loaded at 50 μl per well into 24-well Seahorse assay plates (Seahorse Bioscience) and centrifuged at 2,000×g for 20 min at 4 °C. After centrifugation, 450 μl mitochondrial assay solution was added to wells, and plates were incubated 8 min at 37 °C. To assess mitochondrial respiratory function, the following compounds (final concentrations) were sequentially-injected into each well: ADP (4 mM), oligomycin (2 μM), FCCP (4 μM), and Antimycin A (4 μM). OCR was measured under basal conditions and after each injection using an XFe24 extracellular flux analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience).

4.21.

## Human subjects
The investigation involving human subjects adhered to the principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki. Approval was obtained from Ethics Committees of Kumamoto University (approval No. 2671, No. 2640 and No. 2641) and Saga University (approval No. 2022-10-SCR-05, No. 2020-01-01, No. 2020-09-01), ensuring ethical oversight in all procedures involving human subjects. Informed written consent for participation was obtained through an opt-out procedure, allowing subjects the opportunity to decline inclusion in the study.

4.22.

## Echocardiographic analysis of human subjects
The study was approved by the Ethics Committees of Kumamoto University (approval No. 2671) and Saga University (approval No. 2022-10-SCR-05). A total of 28,260 patients enrolled at the Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Saga University Hospital between January 2014 and November 2022 were underwent echocardiography ( ). Two-dimensional echocardiography was performed using a ViVid 9 system (ViVid 9, GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI, USA) as described [ ]. Measurements included LV end-diastolic dimension (LVD; d), LV end-systolic dimension (LVD; s) and left arterial dimension (LAD), wall thickness, early transmitral flow velocity (E), atrial systolic velocity (A) and early diastolic mitral annular velocity and early diastolic mitral annular velocity (e′). Percent fractional shortening (%FS) and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) were calculated from left ventricular end-diastolic diameter (LVD; d) and end-systolic diameter (LVD; s), or from left ventricular end-diastolic/systolic volumes, which were calculated with LVD; d and LVD; s.

4.23.

## Immunohistochemical analysis
The study was approved by the Ethics Committees of Kumamoto University (approval No. No. 2640 and No. 2641) and Saga University (approval No. 2020-01-01, No. 2020-09-01). For this study, samples were fixed 24 h in 4% paraformaldehyde, paraffin-embedded, cut into 4-μm-thick sections, pretreated with periodic acid (Nichirei Biosciences), and then incubated overnight with anti-HINT1 antibody (1:400, ab124912, Abcam) at 4 °C. After PBS washing, specimens were incubated with goat anti-rabbit IgG conjugated with peroxidase (1:250, GE Healthcare Life Science) as a second antibody at room temperature for 60 min and counterstained with hematoxylin. Images were obtained using a BZ-X710 microscope (Keyence).

4.24.

## Statistics and reproducibility
Sample size and information relevant to statistical tests are reported in figure legends. No statistical methods were used to determine sample size, but sample sizes were determined based on previous reports. No exclusion/inclusion criteria were applied to mice used in this study. Group allocation and outcome assessment were performed in a blinded manner. In vitro experiments were repeated at least three times with similar results. All values were reported as the mean ± SD. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism software (version 7.03, GraphPad Software). Data were assessed with two-group comparisons of variables using two-sided unpaired Student's t-test. Comparisons between three or more groups were performed using one-way ANOVA followed by Sidak's or Tukey's post hoc test. Mouse survival was analyzed by the Kaplan–Meier log-rank test. For all statistical analyses, a value of p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## Fundings
This work was supported by the Scientific Research Fund of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) of Japan (Grant 21H04825 to Y.O., Grant 23K07511 to M.S., Grant 25461114 to K.M., and Grant 23310135 to K.A.), the Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST) Program of the Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (AMED) (Grant 24gm1710006h0002 to Y.O.), the Takeda Science Foundation (2023, 2024) (M.S., T.K.), the SENSHIN Medical Research Foundation (2020) (M.S.), and a Grant for Basic Research of the Japanese Circulation Society (2020) (M.S.), the NAITO FOUNDATION (2021) (M.S.), the Mochida Memorial Foundation for Medical and Pharmaceutical Research (2021) (M.S.), the MSD Life Science Foundation (2021) (M.S.), a Japan Heart Foundation Research Grant (2022) (M.S.), the NOVARTIS Foundation (Japan) for the Promotion of Science (2022) (M.S.), the Ichiro Kanehara Foundation for the Promotion of Medical Sciences and Medical Care (2022) (M.S.), and the JGS (Japan Geriatrics Society) Research Grant Award in Geriatrics and Gerontology 2024 (M.S.). This research was partially supported by the Platform Project for Supporting Drug Discovery and Life Science Research (Basis for Supporting Innovative Drug Discovery and Life Science Research (BINDS)) from AMED under Grant Number JP23am121018 (support number 5755).

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Michio Sato: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Tsuyoshi Kadomatsu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Jun Morinaga: Validation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Yuya Kinoshita: Validation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Daisuke Torigoe: Validation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Haruki Horiguchi: Visualization, Validation, Data curation. Sumio Ohtsuki: Validation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Shuji Yamamura: Validation, Data curation. Ryoko Kusaba: Validation, Data curation. Takanori Yamaguchi: Resources. Goro Yoshioka: Validation, Resources, Data curation. Kimi Araki: Validation, Resources. Tomohiko Wakayama: Validation, Supervision, Formal analysis, Data curation. Keishi Miyata: Validation, Supervision, Data curation. Koichi Node: Validation, Supervision, Resources, Data curation. Yuichi Oike: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgements
We thank our colleagues for valuable suggestions and discussion. We also thank Y. Ito, S. Iwaki, N. Shirai, and K. Tabu for technical assistance.

## Footnotes
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmet.2025.102107.

## Contributor Information
Tsuyoshi Kadomatsu, Email: tkado@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp.
Yuichi Oike, Email: oike@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary data
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Multimedia component 2
Multimedia component 2

## Multimedia component 3
Multimedia component 3

## Multimedia component 6
Supplementary F1. Echocardiography analysis of patients. (A) Overview of echocardiography analysis of a total of 28,260 patients enrolled at the Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Saga University hospital. Patients whose data represented outliers from the 1–99 percentiles in each echocardiographic parameter (echocardiographic index of one or more of IVST, LVPWT, LVEF, E/A, or SepE/e′ parameters) were excluded, and those numbers are shown in parentheses. (B) Overview of echocardiographic characteristics of patients. Values are shown as number and percentage of the categorical variable of gender and median and interquartile range (IQR) for continuous variables. IVST, interventricular septum thickness; LVPWT, left ventricular posterior wall thickness; LVD; s, left ventricular diameter at end systole; LVD; d, left ventricular diameter at end diastole; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; E/A, early diastolic filling velocity/ atrial filling velocity ratio; sepE/e′, ratio of septum early diastolic filling velocity to early diastolic wall motion velocity.
Supplementary F2. Age-related changes in cardiac function seen in human subjects. (A–F). Correlation of age with cardiac function in humans based on echocardiography. Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) (A), ratio of transmitral flow velocity patterns by echocardiography for early transmitral flow velocity (E) to atrial systolic velocity (A) (E/A) (B), ratio E to early diastolic mitral annular velocity (e′) (E/e′) (C), interventricular septum thickness (IVST) (D), and left ventricular posterior wall thickness (LVPWT) (E). Spearman's rho and P values for correlations between each parameter and age are also shown (F).
Supplementary F3. Effects of calorie restriction on expression of genes associated with inflammation and mitochondrial biogenesis in aging mouse heart. (A and B) Relative expression of genes associated with (A) inflammation and (B) mitochondrial biogenesis in hearts of 24-month-old mice fed ad libitum (AL) or subjected to 70% calorie restriction (CR) (n = 7, AL; n = 11, CR). AL values were set to 1. Statistical significance was determined by a two-sided unpaired Student's t-test.
Supplementary F4. Age-related changes in HINT1 protein levels seen in human subjects. (A) Patient characteristics and background. (B) Immunohistochemical staining for HINT1 in heart tissues from atrium biopsy in cases of a young (34-year-old) non-heart failure (HF) patient (left), an aged (68-year-old) non-HF patient (middle) and a 60-year-old HF patient (right). Scale bars: 100 μm. Lower panels show magnified images of boxed regions in upper panels. Scale bars: 200 μm.
Supplementary F5. HINT1 does not interact with MITF or the β-catenin transcriptional complex. (A) Immunoprecipitation (IP) using anti-Flag-tag antibody of HINT1 protein in HEK293 cells transfected singly or with both Flag-tagged HINT1 and HA-tagged MITF plasmids. Shown is representative immunoblotting of the Flag-tag (HINT1) and the HA-tag (MITF). Hsc70 served as loading control. (B) IP using anti-Flag-tag antibody of HINT1 protein in HEK293 cells transfected with Flag-tagged HINT1 or control plasmids. Shown is representative immunoblotting of Flag-tagged HINT1 and of Pontin and β-catenin. Hsc70 served as loading control.
Supplementary F6. Inhibition of the BAF complex decreases Tfam expression. (A) IP of HINT1 protein in control and Smarce1 KO P19.CL6 cell lines. Shown is representative immunoblotting for ARID1A, SMARCE1, BRG1, and HINT1. Hsc70 served as loading control. (B) Representative immunoblotting for ARID1A, BRG1, and SMARCE1 in C2C12 cells treated with or without 1 μM ACBI1. Hsc70 served as loading control. (C) Relative expression of Tfam, Pgc1α, Nrf1, and Nrf2 in C2C12 cells treated with or without 1 μM ACBI1. (n = 5 per group) Values in the untreated (DMSO) group were set to 1. (D) Analysis of mtDNA content (left, Cytb/B2m; right, Nd2/B2m) in C2C12 cells treated with or without 1 μM ACBI1. (n = 6 per group) Values in the untreated (DMSO) group were set to 1. (E) Relative expression of Pgc1α, Nrf1, and Nrf2 in hearts of indicated mice (n = 12, Young (3-month-old); n = 12, Aged (24-month-old)). Values in young mice were set at 1. Statistical significance was determined by a two-sided unpaired Student's t-test (C to E). n.s, not significant, between groups.
Supplementary F7. Generation of cardiac-specific Hint1 KO mice. (A) Schematic showing generation of Hint1Flox/Flox mutant mice. (B) Representative gel image of PCR products used to determine the genotype of Hint1+/+, Hint1Flox/+, and Hint1Flox/Flox mice. (C) Representative western blot (left) and quantification (right) of HINT1 protein levels in heart tissue of 25-month-old Hint1Flox/Flox; αMHC-Cre (CKO) and littermate Hint1Flox/Flox (Control) mice (n = 8 per group). Hsc70 served as loading control. Values in control mice were set at 1. Statistical significance was determined by a two-sided unpaired Student's t-test.
Supplementary F8. Cardiac-specific Hint1 KO mice show ameliorated age-related cardiac dysfunction and increased mitochondrial biogenesis in heart. (A) Shown are representative M-mode echocardiography recordings in 25-month-old Hint1Flox/Flox (Control) and Hint1Flox/Flox; αMHC-Cre (CKO) mice. (B) Left ventricular end-diastolic diameter (LVD; d) (mm) (left), left ventricular end-systolic diameter (LVD; s) (mm) (middle) and percent fractional shortening (%FS) (right) in indicated mice (n = 9, Control; n = 8, CKO). (C) Shown are representative transmitral flow velocity patterns determined from echocardiography for early transmitral flow velocity (E), atrial systolic velocity (A) (top row) and early diastolic mitral annular velocity (e′) (bottom row). (D) E/A (left) and E/e′ (right) ratios (n = 9, Control; n = 8, CKO). (E) Gross appearance of whole heart (top row; scale bar, 5 mm) and whole lung (bottom row; scale bar, 5 mm) in indicated groups. (F) Body weight (BW) (g) (left), and HW/BW (mg g−1) (middle) and lung weight per body weight (LW/BW) (mg g−1) (right) ratios in indicated mice (n = 8 per group). (G) Representative hematoxylin-eosin (HE)-staining in sections through the mid-portion of the heart (scale bar, 1 mm) in indicated mice. (H) Representative sections of left ventricle stained with wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) to indicate cardiomyocyte size in Control and CKO groups (left). Size distribution of myocardial cells (μm2) in indicated mice (right); number of cells = 279 (Control) and 281 (CKO). Scale bar, 100 μm. (I) Relative expression of genes associated with heart failure and fibrosis in heart tissues from indicated mice (n = 8 per group). Control group levels were set to 1. (J) Relative transcript levels of genes associated with mitochondrial biogenesis in heart tissue of indicated mice (n = 8 per group). Expression levels in the Control group were set to 1. (K) Relative mtDNA content (Cytb/ActB) in heart tissues of indicated groups (n = 8 per group). Values in the Control group were set to 1. Statistical significance was determined by a two-sided unpaired Student's t-test (B, D, F, and H to K).
Supplementary F9. Hearts of aged Caren Tg mice exhibit improved mitochondrial homeostasis and a decreased DNA damage response. Shown are analyses of hearts from 24-month-old aged Caren Tg versus WT mice. (A) Representative western blots (left) and quantitation (right) of HINT1 in indicated groups (n = 7). Hsc70 served as loading control. Values in WT were set to 1. (B) Relative expression of genes associated with mitochondrial biogenesis in indicated groups (n = 8, WT; n = 7, CAG-Caren Tg). WT values were set to 1. (C) Representative western blots (left) and quantitation (right) of TFAM in indicated groups. Hsc70 served as loading control. Values in WT were set to 1. (D) Relative mtDNA content (Cytb/ActB) in heart tissues of indicated groups (n = 8, WT; n = 7, CAG-Caren Tg). (E) Representative immunohistochemical staining with 8-OHdG. Scale bar, 1 mm. (F) Representative western blot (left) and quantitation (right) of 4-HNE-modified protein levels in indicated heart tissues (n = 7 per group). Hsc70 served as loading control. Values in WT were set to 1. (G) Relative expression of genes associated with inflammation in indicated tissues (n = 8, WT; n = 7, CAG-Caren Tg). WT values were set to 1. Statistical significance was determined by a two-sided unpaired Student's t-test (A to D, F and G).
Supplementary F10. Caren overexpression in cardiomyocytes blocks age-related declines in cardiac function and improves exercise tolerance in aged mice. (A) Shown are representative M-mode echocardiography recordings in 24-month-old WT and CAG-Caren transgenic (Tg) mice. (B) Left ventricular end-diastolic diameter (LVD; d) (mm) (left), left ventricular end-systolic diameter (LVD; s) (mm) (middle) and percent fractional shortening (%FS) (right) in indicated mice (n = 10, WT; n = 6, CAG-Caren Tg). (C) Shown are representative transmitral flow velocity patterns determined from echocardiography for early transmitral flow velocity (E), atrial systolic velocity (A) (top row) and early diastolic mitral annular velocity (e′) (bottom row). (D) E/A (left) and E/e′ (right) ratios (n = 8, WT; n = 6, CAG-Caren Tg). (E) Gross appearance of whole heart (top row; scale bar, 5 mm) and whole lung (bottom row; scale bar, 5 mm) in indicated groups. (F) Body weight (BW) (g) (left), and HW/BW (mg g−1) (middle) and lung weight per body weight (LW/BW) (mg g−1) (right) ratios in indicated mice (n = 8, WT; n = 6, CAG-Caren Tg). (G) Representative hematoxylin-eosin (HE)-staining in sections through the mid-portion of the heart (scale bar, 1 mm) in indicated genotypes. (H) Representative left ventricle sections from indicated genotypes stained with WGA to indicate cardiomyocyte size (left), and size distribution of myocardial cells (μm2) (n = 300 cells per group) (right). Scale bar, 100 μm. (I) Relative expression of genes associated with heart failure and fibrosis in heart tissues from indicated mice (n = 8, WT; n = 6, CAG-Caren Tg). Levels in WT were set to 1. (J) Treadmill analysis in indicated groups showing maximal speed (left), total exercise time (middle), and exercise distance (right) (n = 10, WT; n = 6, CAG-Caren Tg). Statistical significance was determined by a two-sided unpaired Student's t-test (B, D, F, and H to J). n.s, not significant, between groups.
Supplementary F11. Expression of genes associated with cardiac function, blood pressure, and heart rate in AAV6-Caren-treated aged mice. (A) Systolic blood pressure (left) and heart rate (BPM) (right) in 24-month-old WT mice 2 months after injection with AAV6-Caren or AAV6-GFP (n = 22 per group). (B) Relative expression of genes associated with heart failure and fibrosis in heart tissue of 24-month-old WT mice 2 months after injection with AAV6-Caren or AAV6-GFP (n = 10–11 per group). Levels seen in the AAV6-GFP group were set to 1. Statistical significance was determined by a two-sided unpaired Student's t-test (A and B). n.s, not significant, between groups.
Supplementary F12. Aged mice show decreased mtDNA content in various tissues. Relative mtDNA content (Cytb/ActB) in heart, kidney, liver, gastrocnemius and soleus muscle, and inguinal (iWAT) and epididymal (eWAT) white adipose tissues of 3- and 24-month-old WT mice (n = 10 per group). Levels seen in 3-month-old mice were set to 1. Statistical significance was determined by a two-sided unpaired Student's t-test.
Multimedia component 6

## Data availability
Data will be made available on request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## VideoS1
Endurance exercise testing of AAV6-Caren-treated aged mice.
Movie of aged WT mice injected with AAV6-Caren or AAV6-GFP taken during endurance exercise testing.4
VideoS1

## VideoS2
Behavior of AAV6-Caren-treated aged mice after endurance exercise testing.
Movie of aged WT mice injected with AAV6-Caren or AAV6-GFP taken immediately after endurance exercise testing.5
VideoS2

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Multimedia component 2
Multimedia component 2

## Multimedia component 3
Multimedia component 3

## Multimedia component 6
Supplementary F1. Echocardiography analysis of patients. (A) Overview of echocardiography analysis of a total of 28,260 patients enrolled at the Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Saga University hospital. Patients whose data represented outliers from the 1–99 percentiles in each echocardiographic parameter (echocardiographic index of one or more of IVST, LVPWT, LVEF, E/A, or SepE/e′ parameters) were excluded, and those numbers are shown in parentheses. (B) Overview of echocardiographic characteristics of patients. Values are shown as number and percentage of the categorical variable of gender and median and interquartile range (IQR) for continuous variables. IVST, interventricular septum thickness; LVPWT, left ventricular posterior wall thickness; LVD; s, left ventricular diameter at end systole; LVD; d, left ventricular diameter at end diastole; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; E/A, early diastolic filling velocity/ atrial filling velocity ratio; sepE/e′, ratio of septum early diastolic filling velocity to early diastolic wall motion velocity.
Supplementary F2. Age-related changes in cardiac function seen in human subjects. (A–F). Correlation of age with cardiac function in humans based on echocardiography. Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) (A), ratio of transmitral flow velocity patterns by echocardiography for early transmitral flow velocity (E) to atrial systolic velocity (A) (E/A) (B), ratio E to early diastolic mitral annular velocity (e′) (E/e′) (C), interventricular septum thickness (IVST) (D), and left ventricular posterior wall thickness (LVPWT) (E). Spearman's rho and P values for correlations between each parameter and age are also shown (F).
Supplementary F3. Effects of calorie restriction on expression of genes associated with inflammation and mitochondrial biogenesis in aging mouse heart. (A and B) Relative expression of genes associated with (A) inflammation and (B) mitochondrial biogenesis in hearts of 24-month-old mice fed ad libitum (AL) or subjected to 70% calorie restriction (CR) (n = 7, AL; n = 11, CR). AL values were set to 1. Statistical significance was determined by a two-sided unpaired Student's t-test.
Supplementary F4. Age-related changes in HINT1 protein levels seen in human subjects. (A) Patient characteristics and background. (B) Immunohistochemical staining for HINT1 in heart tissues from atrium biopsy in cases of a young (34-year-old) non-heart failure (HF) patient (left), an aged (68-year-old) non-HF patient (middle) and a 60-year-old HF patient (right). Scale bars: 100 μm. Lower panels show magnified images of boxed regions in upper panels. Scale bars: 200 μm.
Supplementary F5. HINT1 does not interact with MITF or the β-catenin transcriptional complex. (A) Immunoprecipitation (IP) using anti-Flag-tag antibody of HINT1 protein in HEK293 cells transfected singly or with both Flag-tagged HINT1 and HA-tagged MITF plasmids. Shown is representative immunoblotting of the Flag-tag (HINT1) and the HA-tag (MITF). Hsc70 served as loading control. (B) IP using anti-Flag-tag antibody of HINT1 protein in HEK293 cells transfected with Flag-tagged HINT1 or control plasmids. Shown is representative immunoblotting of Flag-tagged HINT1 and of Pontin and β-catenin. Hsc70 served as loading control.
Supplementary F6. Inhibition of the BAF complex decreases Tfam expression. (A) IP of HINT1 protein in control and Smarce1 KO P19.CL6 cell lines. Shown is representative immunoblotting for ARID1A, SMARCE1, BRG1, and HINT1. Hsc70 served as loading control. (B) Representative immunoblotting for ARID1A, BRG1, and SMARCE1 in C2C12 cells treated with or without 1 μM ACBI1. Hsc70 served as loading control. (C) Relative expression of Tfam, Pgc1α, Nrf1, and Nrf2 in C2C12 cells treated with or without 1 μM ACBI1. (n = 5 per group) Values in the untreated (DMSO) group were set to 1. (D) Analysis of mtDNA content (left, Cytb/B2m; right, Nd2/B2m) in C2C12 cells treated with or without 1 μM ACBI1. (n = 6 per group) Values in the untreated (DMSO) group were set to 1. (E) Relative expression of Pgc1α, Nrf1, and Nrf2 in hearts of indicated mice (n = 12, Young (3-month-old); n = 12, Aged (24-month-old)). Values in young mice were set at 1. Statistical significance was determined by a two-sided unpaired Student's t-test (C to E). n.s, not significant, between groups.
Supplementary F7. Generation of cardiac-specific Hint1 KO mice. (A) Schematic showing generation of Hint1Flox/Flox mutant mice. (B) Representative gel image of PCR products used to determine the genotype of Hint1+/+, Hint1Flox/+, and Hint1Flox/Flox mice. (C) Representative western blot (left) and quantification (right) of HINT1 protein levels in heart tissue of 25-month-old Hint1Flox/Flox; αMHC-Cre (CKO) and littermate Hint1Flox/Flox (Control) mice (n = 8 per group). Hsc70 served as loading control. Values in control mice were set at 1. Statistical significance was determined by a two-sided unpaired Student's t-test.
Supplementary F8. Cardiac-specific Hint1 KO mice show ameliorated age-related cardiac dysfunction and increased mitochondrial biogenesis in heart. (A) Shown are representative M-mode echocardiography recordings in 25-month-old Hint1Flox/Flox (Control) and Hint1Flox/Flox; αMHC-Cre (CKO) mice. (B) Left ventricular end-diastolic diameter (LVD; d) (mm) (left), left ventricular end-systolic diameter (LVD; s) (mm) (middle) and percent fractional shortening (%FS) (right) in indicated mice (n = 9, Control; n = 8, CKO). (C) Shown are representative transmitral flow velocity patterns determined from echocardiography for early transmitral flow velocity (E), atrial systolic velocity (A) (top row) and early diastolic mitral annular velocity (e′) (bottom row). (D) E/A (left) and E/e′ (right) ratios (n = 9, Control; n = 8, CKO). (E) Gross appearance of whole heart (top row; scale bar, 5 mm) and whole lung (bottom row; scale bar, 5 mm) in indicated groups. (F) Body weight (BW) (g) (left), and HW/BW (mg g−1) (middle) and lung weight per body weight (LW/BW) (mg g−1) (right) ratios in indicated mice (n = 8 per group). (G) Representative hematoxylin-eosin (HE)-staining in sections through the mid-portion of the heart (scale bar, 1 mm) in indicated mice. (H) Representative sections of left ventricle stained with wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) to indicate cardiomyocyte size in Control and CKO groups (left). Size distribution of myocardial cells (μm2) in indicated mice (right); number of cells = 279 (Control) and 281 (CKO). Scale bar, 100 μm. (I) Relative expression of genes associated with heart failure and fibrosis in heart tissues from indicated mice (n = 8 per group). Control group levels were set to 1. (J) Relative transcript levels of genes associated with mitochondrial biogenesis in heart tissue of indicated mice (n = 8 per group). Expression levels in the Control group were set to 1. (K) Relative mtDNA content (Cytb/ActB) in heart tissues of indicated groups (n = 8 per group). Values in the Control group were set to 1. Statistical significance was determined by a two-sided unpaired Student's t-test (B, D, F, and H to K).
Supplementary F9. Hearts of aged Caren Tg mice exhibit improved mitochondrial homeostasis and a decreased DNA damage response. Shown are analyses of hearts from 24-month-old aged Caren Tg versus WT mice. (A) Representative western blots (left) and quantitation (right) of HINT1 in indicated groups (n = 7). Hsc70 served as loading control. Values in WT were set to 1. (B) Relative expression of genes associated with mitochondrial biogenesis in indicated groups (n = 8, WT; n = 7, CAG-Caren Tg). WT values were set to 1. (C) Representative western blots (left) and quantitation (right) of TFAM in indicated groups. Hsc70 served as loading control. Values in WT were set to 1. (D) Relative mtDNA content (Cytb/ActB) in heart tissues of indicated groups (n = 8, WT; n = 7, CAG-Caren Tg). (E) Representative immunohistochemical staining with 8-OHdG. Scale bar, 1 mm. (F) Representative western blot (left) and quantitation (right) of 4-HNE-modified protein levels in indicated heart tissues (n = 7 per group). Hsc70 served as loading control. Values in WT were set to 1. (G) Relative expression of genes associated with inflammation in indicated tissues (n = 8, WT; n = 7, CAG-Caren Tg). WT values were set to 1. Statistical significance was determined by a two-sided unpaired Student's t-test (A to D, F and G).
Supplementary F10. Caren overexpression in cardiomyocytes blocks age-related declines in cardiac function and improves exercise tolerance in aged mice. (A) Shown are representative M-mode echocardiography recordings in 24-month-old WT and CAG-Caren transgenic (Tg) mice. (B) Left ventricular end-diastolic diameter (LVD; d) (mm) (left), left ventricular end-systolic diameter (LVD; s) (mm) (middle) and percent fractional shortening (%FS) (right) in indicated mice (n = 10, WT; n = 6, CAG-Caren Tg). (C) Shown are representative transmitral flow velocity patterns determined from echocardiography for early transmitral flow velocity (E), atrial systolic velocity (A) (top row) and early diastolic mitral annular velocity (e′) (bottom row). (D) E/A (left) and E/e′ (right) ratios (n = 8, WT; n = 6, CAG-Caren Tg). (E) Gross appearance of whole heart (top row; scale bar, 5 mm) and whole lung (bottom row; scale bar, 5 mm) in indicated groups. (F) Body weight (BW) (g) (left), and HW/BW (mg g−1) (middle) and lung weight per body weight (LW/BW) (mg g−1) (right) ratios in indicated mice (n = 8, WT; n = 6, CAG-Caren Tg). (G) Representative hematoxylin-eosin (HE)-staining in sections through the mid-portion of the heart (scale bar, 1 mm) in indicated genotypes. (H) Representative left ventricle sections from indicated genotypes stained with WGA to indicate cardiomyocyte size (left), and size distribution of myocardial cells (μm2) (n = 300 cells per group) (right). Scale bar, 100 μm. (I) Relative expression of genes associated with heart failure and fibrosis in heart tissues from indicated mice (n = 8, WT; n = 6, CAG-Caren Tg). Levels in WT were set to 1. (J) Treadmill analysis in indicated groups showing maximal speed (left), total exercise time (middle), and exercise distance (right) (n = 10, WT; n = 6, CAG-Caren Tg). Statistical significance was determined by a two-sided unpaired Student's t-test (B, D, F, and H to J). n.s, not significant, between groups.
Supplementary F11. Expression of genes associated with cardiac function, blood pressure, and heart rate in AAV6-Caren-treated aged mice. (A) Systolic blood pressure (left) and heart rate (BPM) (right) in 24-month-old WT mice 2 months after injection with AAV6-Caren or AAV6-GFP (n = 22 per group). (B) Relative expression of genes associated with heart failure and fibrosis in heart tissue of 24-month-old WT mice 2 months after injection with AAV6-Caren or AAV6-GFP (n = 10–11 per group). Levels seen in the AAV6-GFP group were set to 1. Statistical significance was determined by a two-sided unpaired Student's t-test (A and B). n.s, not significant, between groups.
Supplementary F12. Aged mice show decreased mtDNA content in various tissues. Relative mtDNA content (Cytb/ActB) in heart, kidney, liver, gastrocnemius and soleus muscle, and inguinal (iWAT) and epididymal (eWAT) white adipose tissues of 3- and 24-month-old WT mice (n = 10 per group). Levels seen in 3-month-old mice were set to 1. Statistical significance was determined by a two-sided unpaired Student's t-test.
Multimedia component 6

## Data Availability Statement
Data will be made available on request.