pmcHeliyonHeliyon2992heliyon101672560Heliyon2405-8440ElsevierPMC10006482PMC10006482.110006482100064823691550310.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e13986S2405-8440(23)01193-3e139861Review ArticleAdvanced visual sensing techniques for on-site detection of pesticide residue in water environments
IssakaEliasuqemmy17@gmail.com WaribokoMary Adumo JohnsonNana Adwoa Nkuma AniagyeiOfosuhemaa Nyame-do aSchool of Environmental Science and Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, PR ChinabSchool of Medicine, Faculty of Dermatology and Venereology, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, PR ChinacSchool of Food and Biological Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, PR ChinadSchool of Medicine, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi 00233, Ghana∗Corresponding author. qemmy17@gmail.com32023242202393429787e139861611202226120231722023240220231203202313092024© 2023 The Authors2023https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Pesticide usage has increased to fulfil agricultural demand. Pesticides such as organophosphorus pesticides (OPPs) are ubiquitous in world food production. Their widespread usage has unavoidable detrimental consequences for humans, wildlife, water, and soil environments. Hence, the development of more convenient and efficient pesticide residue (PR) detection methods is of paramount importance. Visual detecting approaches have acquired a lot of interest among different sensing systems due to inherent advantages in terms of simplicity, speed, sensitivity, and eco-friendliness. Furthermore, various detections have been proven to enable real-life PR surveillance in environment water. Fluorometric (FL), colourimetric (CL), and enzyme-inhibition (EI) techniques have emerged as viable options. These sensing technologies do not need complex operating processes or specialist equipment, and the simple colour change allows for visual monitoring of the sensing result. Visual sensing techniques for on-site detection of PR in water environments are discussed in this paper. This paper further reviews prior research on the integration of CL, FL, and EI-based techniques with nanoparticles (NPs), quantum dots (QDs), and metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). Smartphone detection technologies for PRs are also reviewed. Finally, conventional methods and nanoparticle (NPs) based strategies for the detection of PRs are compared.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Keywords
Pesticides residues (PRs)Visual sensingOn-site detectionElectrochemistryEnzyme-inhibition (EI)Smartphone detectionpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1

## Introduction
Pesticides have become increasingly important in increasing agricultural production [ , , ]. Nevertheless, the massive use leads to a variety of inescapable negative impacts of pesticide residues (PRs) on humans, animals, water, and soil habitats [ , , ]. Lengthy PRs ingestion damages the neurological and immune system to varying levels, ultimately resulting in several disorders and raising the chance of malignancy. It is especially dangerous for pregnant women since it can result in fetal deformity and gene mutation [ , ]. Several nations have established maximum residue limits (MRLs) to regulate PRs and reduce their adverse effects. As a result, it is critical to creating detection technologies for PRs in food safety and environmental monitoring that is time efficient, high throughput, sensitive, and accurate [ , , , ].
Extensive attempts are undertaken over the past decades to create reliable methods for determining PRs in waterbodies, and food crops [ ]. Currently, the most prevalent techniques for identifying pesticide residues are chromatography (C), spectroscopy (S), and enzyme inhibition (EI) [ ]. The most widely utilized in C are high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC/MS), and supercritical fluid chromatography (SFC) [ , ]. The greatest benefits of chromatographic procedures are their extremely high sensitivity and elevated accuracy, and they may perform numerous detections in a sample, making them suited for the examination of complicated materials [ ]. It is the standard assessment used all around the globe. Yet, C has the drawback of being a costly and difficult technique, which cannot be overlooked [ , ]. These drawbacks restrict the widespread use of chromatographic technologies in field screening. To account for the mobility issue of chromatographic technologies, an on-site sensor with easy operations and quick reaction is required, and fluorescence (FS) and colourimetric spectroscopy (CoS) may be an efficient means to accomplish this potential. Also, FS and CS techniques are frequently employed in the onsite chemical investigation because of their quick reaction, naked-eye detection, and easy use merits [ ].
Amid numerous sensing systems, visual detecting techniques have gained a lot of interest for inherent merits in terms of convenience, speed, sensitivity, and eco-friendliness. Notably, several detections are demonstrated to allow actual surveillance of PRs in environment water [ , ]. Colourimetric (CL) and fluorometric (FL) visual techniques have been extensively established and used for the sensing of PRs. The CL technique has the benefit of being able to be utilized for visual assessment based on colour shift, making it appealing for quick screening of PRs in field situations. Also, a semi-quantitative visual colourimetric-based visual sensing and a smartphone readout-based technique may be used for quantification investigation without the use of specialized apparatus. The CL approach is a quick supplementary analytic tactic for early surveillance of PRs and is suited for the fast sensing of a significant quantity of samples because of its simplicity [ ]. Fluorescent probes are gaining popularity because of their simplified design and easy production processes. Dynamic surveillance of the target may be accomplished using macromolecule fluorescent imaging technology (MMFIT), giving technological assistance for sample analysis [ ]. Micro-molecule fluorescent probes (MMFP) have excellent sensitivity and may respond quickly, making them ideal for on-site sensing [ ]. Nevertheless, there are issues with a low detection limit (DL) and inadequate anti-interference capability. Stated flaws severely reduce the real-life use of fluorescence probes and must be addressed by investigators [ , ].
Quick sensing approaches, such as immunoassay and EI-based techniques, were utilized in preliminary screening and on-site assessment to overcome the limitations of CL and FL detectors, such as limited detection limit (DL) and insufficient anti-interference capabilities [ ]. To detect a target, immunoassays like enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) are owed by precise binding of antigens and antibodies [ ]. Despite their excellent selectivity and sensitivity, these approaches are limited to the production of antibodies with high affinity and specificity [ , ]. The current fast advancement of nanoparticles (NPs), metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), and quantum dots (QDs) have opened up additional avenues for colourimetric, FL, and EI-based PR sensing approaches [ ]. The integration with NPs, QDs, and MOFs could be projected to overcome the approaches' operational issues [ , ].
MOFs' unusually thick and porous structure offers a large specific surface area and protects the coated active molecules, averting them from getting lysed in cells and/or other complicated environments and improving probe effectiveness [ , ]. QDs are semiconductor NPs with excellent optical and chemical characteristics, a substantial quantum yield, and excellent biocompatibility [ , ]. For great sensitivity and quick analysis, a few do not particularly need near-infrared excitation light [ ]. Gold NPs (AuNPs) are a kind of metal NP. AuNPs offer excellent optical and electrochemical characteristics, as well as wavelength-selective absorption with a high molar extinction coefficient [ , ]. They exhibit diverse colour shifts across various settings, which is simple, and visual superiority is frequently utilized for qualitative analysis [ , ]. This study provides an overview of colourimetric, fluorometric (FL), immunoassay, and EI-based pesticide residue (PR) detection methods (as shown in below). This study summarizes previously published results on the integration of colourimetric, FL, and EI-based approaches with NPs, QDs, and metal frameworks (MOFs). This article also reviews nanotechnological sensing approaches and their linkage with smartphone detection technologies for the on-site detection of pesticide residues in aquatic settings. Finally, conventional methods and nanoparticle (NPs) based strategies for the detection of pesticide residues (PRs) are compared. 

2

## Method-review of existing knowledge
As shown in below, using the Web of Science, (WoS) the reported publications in the area of “pesticide residue (PRs) detection” have been searched. 5371 manuscripts on the said topic have been published in the last decade. Of which. 2049 have been published in the last 3 years making up 38% of all publications since 2003. Also, “all databases” were used to perform the same search resulting in 17, 195 in the last decade. 7353 of which makes 43% in the last 3 years. Secondly, information on the area of “pesticide residue (PRs) detection in water environments” was also retrieved. Employing the WoS database, 340 publications on the said topic were found in the last decade. Out of which, 151 were published in the last 3 years making up 44% within the last decade. Furthermore, “all databases” showed 1909 publications in the last decade. 857 in the last 3 years making up. 45% in the last decade. illustrates the above data. Additionally, using the WoS, the reported publications in the area of “visual detection of pesticide residues” have been searched as shown in below. 208 manuscripts on the said topic have been published in the last 10 years. Of which. 57 have been published in the last 3 years making up 27% of all publications since 2003. In the “all databases”, 326 manuscripts have been published since 2022. Out of which 176 make up 54% have been published in the last 3 years. The historical survey represents holistically advances in the topic under review. It also emphasises the gap in knowledge as represented by which this manuscript seeks to close. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to look at the historical advances and discuss areas that current research lacks. 
2.1

## Pesticides categorizations, characteristics and effects
Pesticides are primarily used in all sectors of agricultural and pastoral agriculture to minimize or eliminate insect infestation damage. Pesticide use increases the quantity of yield and nutrients from crop cultivation. Pest invasion has destroyed millions of tons of agricultural products in past decades, causing global food shortages [ ]. Pesticides such as organophosphorus pesticides (OPPs), organosulfur pesticides (OSPs), carbamate pesticides (CmPs), organochlorine pesticides (OCPs), pyrethroids (PTs), neonicotinoid pesticides (NCPs) are widely used in agricultural production across the world [ ] below illustrates the categories of pesticides, examples of each category and the sensing methods that are employed for their detection. 
As a type of extensively utilized pesticide, OPPs offer advanced properties that make them perfect for pest elimination. Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) is a crucial enzyme in biological nerve conduction that catalyzes the hydrolysis of acetylcholine (ACh) to cease the excitatory impact of neurotransmitters and guarantee appropriate nerve signal transmission in vivo. OPPs, can bind to AChE receptors to create phosphorylated acetylcholinesterase, which is difficult to hydrolyze, blocking AChE action and harming the pest/human that consumes it through food or water [ , ]. OSPs have been recognized and used as a pesticide since ancient times, and it is now licensed for pesticidal usage worldwide. Short-term research indicates that OSPs have extremely low acute oral toxicity and do not irritate the skin. OSPs are also not skin sensitizers. However, OSPs can cause some eye irritation, skin toxicity and inhalation dangers. Chronic exposure to elemental sulfur at low levels is typically harmless. However, there are no documented hazards of carcinogenic, teratogenic, or reproductive consequences linked with OSP usage [ ].
Owing to their great selectivity, simplicity of breakdown, excellent efficacy, and minimal toxicity, CmPs are widely used in livestock farming to eradicate insects/pests, weeds, and illnesses [ , ]. Owing to the water-solubility, CmPs can be absorbed by plant parts. As a result, its residues are likely to be extensively disseminated into aquatic environments [ , ]. Because CmPs are acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and are probable carcinogens and mutagens, several of these are particularly hazardous to the central nervous system, causing damage to the environment and human health [ , ]. OCPs are a form of persistent organic pollutant that can harm non-target species such as aquatic food animals and people over time [ , ]. OCPs were among the most commonly used pesticides in agricultural activities, but their usage has been gradually prohibited or severely limited in most nations since the 1970s. Despite this, OCPs continue to be a significant component in aquatic environments. Sediments are not only the principal reservoir of OCPs but also a source of pollution that may influence aquatic creatures through trophic transfer. The sediment composition, which varies widely by area and with the raised species in inland freshwater aquaculture ponds, has a considerable impact on OCP accumulation in aquatic habitats (IFAPs) [ , , ]. OCPs have been widely employed in agriculture, industry, and especially to battle illnesses such as malaria over the last twenty years. Because of their physicochemical features, they are very resistant to biological breakdown and hence extremely durable [ ]. Because of their broad dispersion and limited biodegradability, these compounds constitute a major risk to public health and most forms of life, since OCPs can act as pseudo hormones, altering the endocrine system in wildlife, people, and aquatic biota [ , ].
Because of their excellent insecticidal efficiency and minimal mammalian toxicity, PTs are frequently utilized for crop-pest eradication and household garden usage. PTs have gradually expanded in use during the last two decades, accounting for one-quarter of the global pesticide industry [ ]. PT polluted surface waters/sediments are recently detected. PT is recognized as a significant source of poisonousness in water/sediments in urban streams and estuaries because of its significant aquatic toxicity. Owing to the inability of fish to hydrolyze PTs because of the absence of the appropriate enzyme, PTs toxicity in fish is enhanced. Furthermore, PTs have exceptional hydrophobicity and sorption properties. Consequently, TPs tend to concentrate on aquatic creatures [ , ]. NCPs are a kind of neuroactive insecticide that is chemically related to nicotine. Shell and Bayer began working on their development in the 1980s and 1990s, respectively. From 1999 through at least 2018, numerous NCPs were the most frequently used insecticide in the world [ ]. NCPs are less poisonous to birds and animals than OPPs and CmPs. The usage of NCPs has been linked to negative environmental impacts such as honey-bee colony collapse disorder (CCD) and falling numbers of insect-eating birds. Several nations including countries in the European Union used some NCPs in 2013 [ , ]. Neurological impairment, Parkinson’s disease, birth deformities, respiratory sickness, early sexual development, behavioural disorders, breast cancer, low sperm counts, and immune system failure have all been associated with these endocrine disrupters [ ]. below summarizes the examples of pesticides in use globally, categories, characteristics and effects of their residues on human health. 

2.2

## Advanced visual sensing strategies for PRs detection
2.2.1

## Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) based colorimetric (CL) sensing of PRs
Considering improved mobility, sensitivity, stability, and selectivity of sensors and analytical measuring technologies, nanotechnology offers a wide variety of effective ways. Fabrication of quick and modest CL methods for the sensing of PRs in water using nanotechnology has attracted a lot of interest in previous years [ ]. Based on the inhibition of AChE by PRs present in water, food, and other substances, researchers have performed CL analysis. AChE and other enzymes that are involved in the breakdown of ACh into choline (CHO) and acetic acid are inhibited in a novel paper-based CL tactic that is being extensively researched and used to detect PRs [ , ]. Ge and colleagues studied a unique extremely sensitive CL platform for malathion sensing based on the fabricated single-atom nanozyme (NE) (Fe– N/C SAzyme) under ideal circumstances (as shown in below). The signal response (SR) at 0.652 × 103 nm rose as the malathion residue grew. The linear response range (LRR) of the proposed colourimetric platform for malathion detection was 0.50–10.0 nM by the linear equation (A) = 0.04090C + 0.06180 with a limit of detection (LOD) of 4.20 × 10−1 nM. The relative standard deviations of peak absorbance values are 3.30%, 3.90%, and 4.10% in three repeated experiments of 0.2 × 10−1 nM, 0.6 × 10−1 nM, and 0.10 × 10−2 nM malathion, respectively, indicating that this suggested approach is reproducible [ ]. 
Ouyang and colleagues created graphitic carbon nitride/bismuth ferrite nanocomposites (g-C3N4/BiFeO3 NCs) (as shown in below) using a simple single-step sol-gel burning technique. The as-prepared probe shows a peroxidase-like activity [ ]. g-C3N4/BiFeO3 NCs were used as a CL and Chemiluminescent multi-readout immunochromatographic assay (ICA) for the multiple sensing of PRs using Chlorpyrifos (Chlp) and carbaryl (CBR) as model analytes based on their catalytic activity (CA) in the luminol-H2O2 reaction. Chlp and CBR antibodies were labelled on g-C3N4/BiFeO3 NCs in the suggested approach to creating the spatially-resolved multianalyte ICA. The detector antibodies were collected by the functionalized antigens on two test lines after two competitive immune reactions on the ICA test strip. The buildup of g-C3N4/BiFeO3 NCs produced brown colour, which was detected as a CL and semi-quantitative signal. Moreover, upon commencing the luminol- H2O2 reaction on the test lines, the g-C3N4/BiFeO3 NCs-driven production of the CL signal was captured as a sensitively quantitative signal. The LOD for Chlp and CBR were both 3.30 × 10−2 ng/mL under optimum circumstances. With appropriate recovery rates of 80–119% and 90–118%, the multiple-readout ICA was effectively employed to identify Chlp and CBR spiked in ambient water. The innovative ICA demonstrated tremendous promise in several domains such as medication safety, environmental monitoring, and clinical diagnostics because of many benefits such as cheapness, time competence, elevated sensitivity, and superior mobility [ ]. 
Li and colleagues reported on a label-free biosystem for sensitive sensing of OPPs via FL and CL channels based on AChE-controlled quenching of FL carbon dots (fCDs) [ ]. The combination of ACh with AChE produced thiocholine. (TCh), which particularly promoted the breakdown of 5,5-dithiobis (2-nitrobenzoic acid) to yield yellow-coloured 5-thio-2-nitrobenzoic acid (TNBA). Conversely, TNBA with a positive charge might act as a potent absorber to quench the fluorescence of fCDs via a dynamic quenching approach. AChE was inhibited in the presence of OPPs, resulting in the retrieval of the FL signal and a reduction in absorbance intensity with colour disparity. With a sensing level of 40 × 10−2 ng mL−1, the multi-output analyses demonstrated high sensitivity for fast sensing of paraoxon. As a result of the superior visual properties of CDs and the selectivity of the enzyme, the multi-readout system may be a suitable choice for OPPs sensing [ ]. Chen and colleagues present a competitive bio-barcode immune assay for the screening of parathion in wastewater [ ] (as shown in below). It is based on PtNPs amplification functioning as a NE. AuNPs were treated with parathion-specific monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), and thiolated single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) oligonucleotides. Ovalbumin-coupled parathion hapten was used to functionalize magnetic NPs (M NPs). On the surface of AuNPs, parathion and its hapten compete with mAbs. Following that, the platinum NPs (Pt NPs) probe, which had been functionalized with complementary thiolated ssDNA (C-ssDNA), was mixed in the reaction solution for parathion sensing. By combining the signal with platinum NE and employing tetramethylbenzidine and H2O2 as the chromogenic agents, the signal was catalytically enhanced. The immunoassay ranged linearly from 1 to 50 × 104 g/L, with a detection level of 2 × 10−1 g/L. The relative standard deviations (RSDs) and recoveries varied from 91.10 to 114.40% and 3.60–15.80%, respectively. The approach has a suitable correlation with results from gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (GC-MS/MS) [ ]. 
CBR is a commonly employed carbamate insecticide, and detecting its residues in environmental water is critical. As illustrated in below, Rohit and the group created a green photocatalytic biosensor (PCB) based on double-strand DNA-SYBR green I complex for sensitive CL CBR detection [ ]. This green PCB is capable of converting 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) into blue ox-TMB. Simultaneously, AChE catalyzes the production of TCh, which is used to directly convert blue ox-TMB to colourless TMB. However, CBR inhibits the action of AChE, resulting in less thiocholine and more ox-TMB for CL measurement. Following cautious tuning of detection parameters of concentration of DNA at 2.0 M, 50 M green-SYBR, and 10.0 min for illumination duration. The LOD for CBR was 8 × 10−3 ng/mL, with response ranging linearly from (0.01–0.25) × 10−2 ng/L to 25 × 10−2 ng/mL. Furthermore, this PBC has high selectivity for non-target compounds as well as PRs in real-world samples using a typical HPLC approach [ ]. Although NPs with enzyme-like actions are rising as intriguing options for the CL sensing of OPPs, most NEs' CA and analyte recognition capacities are intrinsically poor. Luo and colleagues used a one-pot hydrothermal reaction approach to incorporate manganese ions into a conventional iron-based MOF (Fe-MIL (53)), yielding a catalytically advantageous bimetallic Mn/Fe-MIL (53) MOF NE [ ]. Mn/Fe-MIL (53) outperforms pure Fe-MIL (53), and the reason for particle greater CA is disclosed by active species scavenging studies and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Furthermore, the addition of manganese gives the system the property of specific destruction by CHO. This encourages the development of a modest, selective, and subtle CL technique for OPPs sensing. The suggested CL approach measures methyl parathion and Chlp at concentrations ranging from 10.0 - 120.0 nM to 5.0–50.0 nM. The detection limit for methyl parathion was 2.80 nM and 0.950 nM for c Chlp. When used in real-time sample detection, good recoveries were obtained [ ]. 
The creation of solution-based NPs, transportable label-free inverse opal photonic hydrogel particles, and paper-based analytical tools such as chip-based CL assays, dipstick tests, paper strips, and smartphone-coupled colourimetric assays has expedited progress in this sector. Since ancient times, paper has been utilized for a wide range of purposes. This material has recently gained popularity for the fabrication of analytical and colourimetric-based devices, making it a desirable alternative for the production of straightforward, affordable, disposable, and portable colourimetric sensors and biosensors for the evaluation of the water environment. More crucially, point-of-care (POC) testing is made possible by paper-based analytical and colourimetric instruments. Paper-based analytical tools have also started to gain in popularity since they are simple to use, convenient, easy to store and carry, and can be quickly disposed of in an environmentally acceptable way. When using CL methods, it is easy to confirm the presence of target analytes or residues in the sample since colour changes may be seen with the unaided eye. In addition, NP-based colourimetric devices and paper-based analytical devices have a wide range of applications and bright futures, but there are still a lot of issues that need to be worked out before this technology can compete with analytical, electroanalytical, and electrochemical-coupled CL techniques.

2.2.2

## Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) based fluorescence (FL) sensing of PRs
Because many NPs have great quenching efficacy, a new molecular beacon based on NPs has gained increasing interest in FL techniques [ ]. Dou and colleagues developed an Au-based nano beacon (NB) probe to detect OPPs [ ]. The gold-based NB served as a signal indication displaying a decrease in intensity in correspondence with the targets that competitively bonded to single-strand DNA. Some factors, such as pH, temperature, and reaction time, were explored and tuned to obtain a highly sensitive probe. The Au-based NB probe assay demonstrated quick and LOD of 35 × 10−3 μM for isocarbophos, 134 × 10−3 μM for profenofos, 384 × 10−3 μM for phorate, and 235 × 10−2 μM for omethoate, respectively. The NB that was created efficiently decreased background and increased sensing specificity and efficiency. The system was reliable, simple to use and require uncomplicated apparatus. The as-prepared platform is endowed with characteristics for tracing OPPs in environmental entities [ , ]. As shown in below, Lu’s group created and published a deep learning-assisted smartphone-integrated tricolour ratiometric FL visual system for examining Cu2+ and thiram [ ]. Blue-emission carbon QDs (B-QDs), green-emission cadmium telluride QDs (G-QDs), and red-emission cadmium telluride QDs (R-QDs) make up the tricolour detecting probes. Built on electron transfer impact, complexing impact, and inner filter effect (IFE), the detection platform exhibited three emission responses to Cu2+ and thiram, respectively. Density functional theory was used to validate the reaction processes (DFT). Remarkably, the FL intensity of G-QDs and R-QDs was concurrently quenched by Cu2+, however, the FL intensity of B-QDs was unaffected and employed as the internal reference, causing a discrete colour shift from orange-red to blue with a detection level of 0.050 M. Following that, the addition of thiram reinstated the intensity of G-QDs and R-QDs while quenching the FL intensity of B-QDs, accompanied by a distinct colour change from blue to red with a LOD of 0.0730 M [ ]. 
In the work by Zhou and colleagues, it was discovered that OliGreen emitted substantially greater FL in the rigid T-Hg2+-T DNA structure than in the existence of poly T [ ]. By developing a T-Hg2+-T DNA structure, an OliGreen-responsive label-free FL detector for subtle sensing of OPPs was presented. OliGreen fluoresces strongly in T-Hg2+-T structures. Owing TCh’s strong affinity for Hg2+, the stiff DNA structure of T-Hg2+-T is prone to destruction by TCh, which is hydrolyzed by AChE. As a result, the T- Hg2+-T DNA structure was disrupted, and the FL intensity of OliGreen was considerably reduced. Because of the tight T-Hg2+-T DNA structure, the FL intensity of OliGreen remained high when AChE was inhibited by OPPs. Based on the FL intensity of OliGreen, a “turn-on” fluorescent sensor that eliminates NP production and complicated labelling methods is presented. Dichlorvos was identified through a broad linear response ranging from 5 × 10−3 to 0.25 × 102 ng/mL, with a sensing level of 0.29 × 10 pg/mL, which is more sensitive than recently reported approaches [ ]. OPPs pesticide residues have produced possible harm to the environment and human health, causing widespread concern. Li and colleagues developed a portable hydrogel kit based on AuNCs/MnO2 composites for precise measurement of paraoxon residues (as shown in below) [ ]. When gold NCs/MnO2 composites are immobilized in a hydrogel, a ratiometric FL signal is produced by accelerating the oxidation of o-phenylenediamine. The system has a built-in rectification with minimal background nosiness. The compact kit can sense residues of paraoxon at levels as low as 0.5 × 10 ng/mL by combining AChE catalytic processes and pesticide inhibitory effects. The FL colour changes of the portable equipment are translated into readable data with a linear range toward PR for on-site measurement. Particularly, the hydrogel compact kit was used effectively to accurately detect the PR and breakdown of paraoxon in Chinese cabbage, paving the door for real-world POC tests in environmental screening [ ]. 
Because of the poisonous nature and ubiquity in the environment and wastewater, ultrasensitive sensing of Hg2+ in water habitats is critical. As illustrated by below, Zhang and colleagues created a multi-colour nano-detector CD/InPQDs@ZIF-8 employing a single-step in-situ production process, blue fCDs, red FL InP/ZnS QDs (InPQDs), and MOFs (ZIF-8) [ ]. The InPQDs may function as a response unit for Hg2+ and Cysteine (Cys), with LOD of 8.68 nM and 37.96 nM, respectively. Notably, the nano-low detector’s sensing level coupled with its elevated selectivity and accuracy attains the required safety measure for Hg2+ in potable water. Besides, the colour detection and handling software loaded on a smartphone can sense Hg2+ and Cys in real time. A logic gate circuit was also created, which opens up the possibility of using the nano-detector in the area of smart devices. This was reported as one of the earliest examples of using InPQDs for incessant multicolour optical detection of Hg2+ and Cys, which served as a model for the development of ecologically friendly double-emission FL sensors for hazardous material examination [ ]. Wang and colleagues created a unique non-enzymatic fast testing method for detecting malathion in water [ ]. In theory, the target molecule can prevent FL resonance energy transfer (FRET) amid the biochemical FL probe and the cyclodextrin-coated silver NPs (@AgNP) (as shown in below). Malathion’s impacts on the dynamics of the FL probe and cyclodextrin@AgNP were studied. The characteristics of the as-prepared probe were hence outlined. This novel technology demonstrated an excellent sensitivity with a detection level of 1 × 10−2 g/mL, and responded linearly ranging from 10 to 25,000 × 10−2 g/mL. The recovery rate from water samples spiked at three distinct concentration levels (0.30, 0.40, and 0.60 g/mL) from 83.0% to 101.0% [ ]. 
Luo and colleagues established a straightforward technique for the manufacture of an extremely specific and accurate FL probe based on Rhodamine B (RB) enhanced silver (Ag) and gold (Au) bimetal NPs (RB-Ag/Au NPs) [ ]. The FL of RB-Ag/Au NPs is muted until they are exposed to OPPs. This is because the as-prepared probe’s coordination capacity with OPPs is beyond its coordination ability with RB. As a result, RB is readily displaced from the surface of the probe, accompanied by RB FL recovery. The transmission electron microscope (TEM) and FL spectra were used to characterize the RB-Ag/Au NPs. It may also be employed for the sensing of OPPs in actual environmental waters with detection levels as little as 1.8 × 10−3 ng/mL. The device incorporated organic/inorganic nanohybrid FL sensors, which can sense OPPs with high sensitivity. Furthermore, when subjected to a succession of competing ions, the sensing platform exhibits outstanding anti-interference capacity [ ]. Cheng and colleagues created an FL aptamer-based lateral flow bio detector (apta-LFB) coupled with fluorophore-quencher nano-pairs (FQNPs) and a smartphone spectrum reader to sense Chlp, diazinon, and malathion [ ]. Aptamers, rather than antibodies, act as alternative recognition components in LFB, providing greater specificity and stability. To conduct “signal-on” instead of “signal-off,” a unique FQNP (thus QD NB and AuNPs) was used. The detection level for Chlp, diazinon, and malathion was affirmed to be 73.0 × 10−2 ng/mL, 0.67 × 10 ng/mL, and 7.40 × 10 ng/mL, respectively, after optimization. The conjunction of better signal and zero noise may result in much higher sensitivity. This novel cascade technique allows for a lower sensing level of PR levels in food, which is generally regarded as adequate. Using twelve vegetable and fruit samples, the precision and usability of this system for efficient on-the-spot measurement of multi-pesticides were proven. The estimated recoveries in spiked samples ranged from 82.40% to 112.80%, indicating that the new approach is capable of identifying several PRs in crop samples. This sensitive portable technology has the potential to be a significant instrument for practical on-the-spot multi-pesticide quantification operations [ ].
FL sensors are an especially appealing method because of their high sensitivity, quick turnaround, and practical detection. Designing sensors with precise sensitivity, quick response, and consistency is the major problem in FL detection. It’s also necessary to identify PRs and other harmful compounds in the gas phase quickly and accurately. FL analysis techniques, which are wavelength-tunable and portable for on-site detection, are often more sensitive and accurate.

2.2.3

## Electrochemical sensing of pesticide residue (PR)
Based on the variation in sensing signal, EI-based operations can take several shapes. EI-based electrochemical biosensors have greater selectivity and sensitivity than FL and CL approaches, are readily made and miniaturized and are suitable for on-site monitoring [ , ]. To detect and assess PRs in environmental water and biological fluids, effective and portable sensors are necessary [ , ].
The viability of an electrochemical portable device for the detection of spiked pesticides Glyphosate (Glyp) and Chlp in low-fat and high-fat food matrices was investigated by Poudyal et al. (2023). The immunoassay-based two-plex sensing platform was built with Glyp antibody on one side and Chlp antibody on the other. The sensor response was tested using non-faradaic electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), which revealed a linear response in Glyp/Chlp concentrations ranging from 0.3 ng/mL to 243 ng/mL with a limit of detection of 1 ng/mL for low-fat matrix and 1 ng/mL to 243 ng/mL with a limit of detection of 1 ng/mL for high-fat matrix. The laboratory-based benchtop data was then compared to portable device data to determine applicability as a portable device. This electrochemical portable sensing approach has the potential to be a commercial field-testing tool in the future [ ]. Also, Kunpatee and colleagues created an electrochemical paper-based device (ePAD) for the simultaneous separation and determination of structurally identical carbofuran (CBF) and CBR [ ]. The technology integrated paper chromatography and an electrochemical sensor into a single system to improve the selectivity of the two pesticides detection. The separation of the two carbamate compounds during the simultaneous detection of CBF and CBR is determined by differences in the motions of the substances on the chromatographic paper in the moving phase flow. The separated pesticides were tested electrochemically using an amperometry technique. The proposed device provides a linear range for the simultaneous determination of CBF and CBR from 0.1 to 2.0 and 0.5–7.5 mg/L, with detection limits of 0.06 and 0.40 mg/L, respectively, under optimal conditions, which include the effect of the mobile phase, separation channel, and applied potential. Furthermore, we were able to successfully determine CBF and CBR in water, cucumber, and cabbage samples using the developed device. The obtained results are consistent with those obtained using a standard method. This developed ePAD is inexpensive and uses a small sample volume (2 L). Furthermore, it is disposable, portable, and a promising tool for on-site pesticide quantification in actual samples [ ].
Research of indigo carmine and dodecyl sulphate doped polypyrrole - Au NPs NC (SDS@PPy AuNPs NC) films by Loguercio and colleagues disclosed variations during polymerization that optimized the surface parameters for the functionalization of AChE, resulting in enhanced CA [ ]. The findings show that AChE from electric rays behave similarly to active sites oriented nearer to the electrode when the AChE is mounted on a positive-charged surface, allowing quicker direct electron transfer. Furthermore, this synergy permits the functionalization of a significant number of active enzymes. Due to the absence of impediment, CBR had strong binding synergy with the AChE adsorption sites. This electrochemical enzymatic bio detector showed linearity for CBR that ranges from 5 to 25 × 10−2 ng/mL, with a LOD of 3.3 × 10−2 ng/mL, a quantification limit of 11 × 10−2 ng/mL, and a sensitivity of −0.595 × 105 A/cm2/mL/g. The bio detector demonstrated strong intra-electrode repeatability and inter-electrode reproducibility, with relative standard deviations of 1.80% and 3.70%, respectively, for thiocholine oxidation and CBR PR sense. When kept at a lower temperature (−15.0 °C), the biosensor’s stability increased [ ]. In their study, Liu and colleagues presented a very sensitive biosensor for PR detection based on tin sulphide (SnS2) and chitosan (CHIT) NCs ornamented with a unique British housefly AChE (as shown in below) [ ]. Drop-casting of hydrothermally produced nano-SnS2 combined with chitosan solution (CHIT-SnS2) onto a glassy carbon electrode (GCE). The British housefly AChE was subsequently immobilized on the CHIT/SnS2-coated GCE, which was then used for PR sense. For the detection of Chlp as the model pesticide, the established bio detector demonstrated elevated sensitivity and extensive linearity of 2 × 10−2 nM to 200 × 102 nM with a LOD of 2 × 10−2 nM. Additionally, the AChE/CHIT-SnS2/GCE demonstrated satisfactory storage stability, repeatability, and selectivity [ ]. 
Yang and colleagues created a sensitive amperometry AChE bio detector based on NiO NPs, carboxylic graphene (CGR), and sulfonated tetrafluoroethylene-based fluoropolymer-copolymer to improve GCE [ ]. NiO NPs-CGR-NF NCs offered an extraordinarily hydrophilic surface for AChE attachment due to their superior conductivity, CA, and biocompatibility. The AChE bio detector had a high affinity for acetylthiocholine chloride (ATCl) and catalyzes ATCl hydrolysis with a Michaelis-Menten constant of 1.35 102 μM. Under ideal circumstances, the bio detector identified methyl parathion and Chlp ranging linearly from 0.1 × 10−14 to 1 × 10−10 M and 1 × 10−10 to 1 × 10−10 M, respectively, with detection limits of 0.5 × 10−15 M. The biosensor identified CBF in the linear ranges of 0.1 × 10−13 to 0.1 × 10−11 M and 0.1 × 10−11 to 0.1 × 10−9 M, with a detection level of 5 × 10−13 M. The constructed biosensor demonstrated high sensitivity, stability, and repeatability, making it a suitable tool for analyzing enzyme inhibitors [ ]. In below, Zhang and colleagues effectively created a very robust AChE sensor for sensing dichlorvos (DDVP) based on titanium oxide nanorods (TiO2-NRs) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) [ ]. The detector used a layer-by-layer assembly process to successively build NCs & rGO, Au-NPs, TiO2-NRs, and AChE on the surface of a GCE. Electrochemical characterization was used to examine the CA, impedance characteristics, material impacts, the connection between the sensor’s inhibition rate and the dichlorvos (DDVP) level, interfering tests, actual sample sensing, and sensor storage stability. The sensor’s DDVP response varied from 2.260 to 5650 nM, with a LOD of 2.230 nM, and it demonstrated high repeatability, selectivity, and storage stability [ ]. 
Nagabooshanam’s team has devised a simple method for fabricating nano-webbed structures of PANi-fMWCNTs (FL-multiwall carbon nanotube) onto ITO substrate for the sensing of OPPs [ ]. Electrochemical polymerization for PANi-fMWCNT NCs production allows for faster electrode formation while also improving surface characteristics. The developed detector was verified in the linearity level ranging from 0.10 × 102 to 120 × 10−10 ng/L with Chlp and methyl parathion (CPF and MP). The LOD for CPF and MP was 8.80 ng/L and 10.20 ng/L, respectively, with a sensitivity of 0.410 mA/ng/L/cm2 and 0.58 mA/ng/L/cm2, respectively. The sensor was also examined for interference with heavy metals, which was determined to be 10.0%. The sensor accurately analyzed the tainted vegetable samples as well. The designed sensor has a 30-day shelf life. The sensor may also be used for on-field detection of OPPs in fruit and vegetable samples [ ]. A new AChE-based biosensor was created in Zhai and the team’s work (as shown in below). With the help of Cu–Mg–Al calcined layered double hydroxide, AChE was immobilized onto a GCE (CLDH) [ ]. CLDH can increase the effective surface area for AChE loading, potentially improving the accuracy and stability of the AChE biosensor. However, the low electroconductivity of CLDHs may contribute to the limited sensitivity of the AChE biosensor. Graphene-gold NCs were employed to improve the electron transfer rate to effectively compensate for the drawbacks of CLDHs. As a result, the graphene-gold NCs (GN-AuNPs) were first modified onto the GCE, and the generated CLDH-AChE composite was subsequently coated onto the enhanced GCE to create a sensitive AChE bio detector for PRs sensing. Key factors, such as the pH of the ATCl solution, the quantity of AChE immobilized on the detector, and the inhibition period determining the biosensor’s analytical performance were thoroughly investigated and improved. Chlp was detected by the biosensor at values ranging from 5 × 10−2 to 1.50 × 102 g/L. Chlp had a LOD of 0.05 g/L [ ]. 
Song and colleagues created a modest electrochemical bio detector for quantitative measurement of CmPs based on a detecting interface of citrate-capped gold NPs (AuNPs)/(3-mercaptopropyl)-trimethoxysilane (MPS)/gold electrode (Au) [ ]. The bio detector was created by first building three-dimensional (3D) MPS networks on an Au electrode and then assembling citrate-capped AuNPs on the 3D MPS network using an Au single S bond. The interface of AuNPs/MPS/Au was negatively charged due to the citrate covered on AuNPs, which would repeal the negatively charged ferricyanide ([Fe (CN)6]), resulting in a negative reaction. When AChE and ATCl are present, the AChE catalyzes the hydrolysis of ATCl into positively charged TCh, which replaces the citrate on AuNPs via the robust Au single S bond and converts the negatively charged surface to a positively charged surface. The positively charged AuNPs/MPS/Au that was generated then attracted the [Fe (CN)6] to provide a positive reaction. The pesticide’s quantitative potential might be established based on the inhibition of CmPs on AChE activity. The linearity ranged between 3 × 10−3 and 200 × 102 μM. The detection technology was also shown to be capable of detecting CmPs in real-world samples [ ].
Chen and colleagues created a Chlp detection biosensor based on dicyclohexyl phthalate (DCHP) and MWCNTs altered a screen-printed electrode (SPE) [ ]. In comparison to a conventional electrode, an SPE demonstrated favourable material qualities that may be used for in situ detection. The manufactured biosensor was created by modifying a screen-printed electrode with NCs of DCHP and MWCNTs. This technique increased the electron transfer rate at lower voltage and efficiently promoted the electrochemical oxidation of ACh. To create an AChE biosensor for PRs sensing, AChE was adsorbed onto the NCs film. Furthermore, the biosensor had been effectively used to determine pesticide amounts in real vegetable samples with low concentrations. Grounded on pesticide suppression of AChE activity using Chlp as a model chemical, this biosensor demonstrated a wide range, low detection limit, strong repeatability, and high stability. Chlp inhibition was proportional to level, ranging from 5 × 10−2 to 0.1 × 106 g/L, with a LOD of 5 × 10−2 g/L. The designed biosensor demonstrated high repeatability as well as adequate stability [ ].
Zhao and colleagues present a class of hierarchical porous hollow N-doped Cu-based nanocages (HPH–N–Cu NCs) as a highly sensitive electrochemical sensing platform for OPPs detection [ ]. HPH-N-Cu NCs exhibit more exposed active sites, multiple reaction interfaces, and enhanced conductivity because of their distinct micro-/mesoporous structures, the changeable valence state of copper, and heteroatom doping, resulting in high electrocatalytic ability toward the oxidation of electroactive products. As a result, the AChE biosensor based on HPH-N-Cu NCs has a lower Michaelis-Menten constant of 126 μ M for acetylthiocholine chloride, a low detection limit of 0.258 × 10−10 g/L and a wide detection range of 0.1 × 10−8 to 0.1 × 10−2 g/L for methamidophos. Furthermore, the constructed biosensor is stable and accurate in real-world sample detection. The HPH-N-Cu NCs electrode materials might be useful for sensitive monitoring of a variety of contaminants [ ]. Furthermore, a dual-mode biosensor for ultrafast and ultra-trace detection of acetamiprid (ACE) was suggested [ ]. The electrochemical approach was used to create Polypyrrole nanowires (PPyNWs), which demonstrated a large electroactive surface area, outstanding conductivity, and great stability. The biosensor may be easily constructed after the immobilization of ACE aptamer onto CS/PPyNWs. The ACE concentration may be determined using both the signal reduction method of chronocoulometry and the chronoamperometry method. The dual-mode biosensor demonstrated ultrafast detection rates of 0.5 s and 2 s across linear ranges of 9 and 6 orders of magnitude using chronocoulometry and chronoamperometry, respectively. More crucially, the biosensor detected ACE residues in soil samples, demonstrating the viability of the dual-mode biosensor for ACE detection in complicated materials [ ].
A new electrochemical biosensor for OPPs residues was created by combining a laser-induced graphene (LIG) electrode on polyimide (PI) foil with MnO2 nanosheets loaded on paper [ ]. The biosensor’s premise was based on AChE-catalyzed hydrolytic product-triggered disintegration of MnO2 nanosheets, which released assistance DNA to commence nicking enzyme-aided recycling amplification. The activity of AChE was suppressed in the presence of OPPs, and it could not commence the cleavage of the electroactive molecules-labelled hairpin probe on the electrode, resulting in the maintenance of the electrochemical response to achieve an “on” determination of OPPs. The suggested biosensor provided good analytical performance for the OPPs test, with a linear range of 3–4000 ng/mL and a limit of detection of 1.2 ng/mL. Furthermore, the biosensor proved beneficial for determining the residual number of pesticides in the veggies. As a result, this novel biosensor offered significant potential for OPPs assay and provided a new path for the development of higher-performance POC testing devices for sensing applications in the environment and food safety domains [ ].
In food and environmental matrices, polydopamine has high adsorption capabilities for contaminants such as insecticides [ , ]. As a result, it has found use in sorbent-based micro-extraction techniques such as solid phase micro-extraction and magnetic solid phase extraction [ , ]. Polydopamine’s adhesive characteristics make it a good material for immobilizing the components of electrochemical sensors used to detect pesticides in environmental matrices [ ]. Researchers are interested in the use of polydopamine in electrochemical sensors such as acetylcholinesterase sensors, molecularly imprinted sensors, and aptasensors [ ]. The use of polydopamine-based adsorbents for pesticide extraction and electrochemical sensing in food and environmental matrices is not without difficulties. Futuristic research is required to improve and streamline the procedure [ , ].
The most popular approaches for on-site, quick detection of pesticide residues for extensive screening are enzyme inhibition-based techniques. The present issues with enzyme inhibition-based methodologies are mostly due to detecting enzymes, which constitute the primary bio-recognition component. The immobilization technique caused the native enzyme to lose a significant amount of activity and display poor temperature stability, pH stability, and organic solvent tolerance. Enzymes from different sources could react differently to pesticides, which would make their repeatability poor. Pesticide-induced inhibition restricts the use of biosensors based on enzyme inhibition. The newly extracted and purified plant esterase involved in the detection of OPPs are outlined superficially without being further identified.

3

## Nanotechnology for pesticides residues (PRs) sensing
In the realm of detecting, degrading, and removing PRs from various origins, many nanotechnologies utilizing a wide variety of nanomaterials (NMs) have been used. Nanoparticles (NPs), nanotubes, and nanocomposites (NCs) are the three main categories of NMs employed in this field [ ]. Various kinds of biosensors based on nanotechnology have also been created for detecting extremely low levels of PRs (as shown in below). For the detection and removal of PRs, many forms of NMs, including NPs, NCs, and nanotubes (NTs), have recently been used. Various NMs are employed to detect, degrade, and remove different PRs [ , ]. The top-down and bottom-up techniques are used to create NPs, which are nanoscale particles with sizes between 1 and 100 nm. While the bottom-up method includes piling up the atoms and molecules of the bulk material to create nanoparticles, the top-down method entails breaking down bulk materials up to the nanoscale [ ]. Comparing these particles to their bulk equivalents reveals that they have special chemical, physical, and biological characteristics. These characteristics of NPs may be explained by their tiny size, distinctive form, and elevated surface area. Numerous NPs may now be used for the detection, destruction, and removal of various PRs because of these special features. The three main types of NPs that have been employed by various studies to identify and break down PRs are metal, bimetallic, and metal oxide NPs [ ]. The area of pollution remediation has seen extensive use of noble metal NPs, particularly those of gold, silver, platinum, and palladium. In addition to these noble metal NPs, transition metal NPs including iron, copper, and zinc have also been used in some investigations. The cheap cost of chemicals required, simple production methods, and particular, prompt, and deft reactions are some of the benefits provided by NPs. AuNPs' unique optical characteristics have made it possible to employ them for the remediation of heavy metals and aromatic chemicals. The NPs' distinctive surface chemistry has made it possible to use them for both sensing and eliminating certain insecticides. Hazardous pesticides are converted into smaller, less harmful organic molecules by redox processes occurring at the surface of NPs [ , , ]. 
With a change in size, gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) are known to display a variety of colours [ ]. AuNPs are the perfect optical material for detecting different analytes because of the colour changes they undergo throughout various aggregation stages. To investigate how methotrexate and DNA interact with one another, they have been employed as a probe. They provide excellent assistance for the creation of diverse chemical and biological sensors thanks to their unique chemical and physical properties. In the area of pesticide detection in various sources, particularly fruits and vegetables, AuNPs have found a wide range of uses. By altering the surface of these NMs, it is possible to increase the sensitivity and specificity of these NPs towards certain pesticides. Sensors conjugated with AuNPs have been used to find several organophosphates (OPP) and organochlorine (OCL) PRs [ , ]. A competitive immunoassay for the detection of dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) has been created using AuNPs. After the DDT was treated with varying doses, the anti-DDT antibodies were coupled with AuNPs. The investigation used a colourimetric technique for pesticide detection. The anti-DDT antibodies were suppressed by the DDT present in the samples, which decreased the colour intensity. The amount of DDT in the sample had an inverse relationship with the colour intensity. Additionally, milk, grapes, cauliflower, and mango juice were tested using this assay [ , , ].
The development of a lac-functionalized copper-chitosan halloysite NT (Lac@Cu-CTS-HNT) nanocomposite for the breakdown of Chlp under various environmental conditions was the focus of Tharmavaram and colleagues' investigation [ ]. To achieve Cu and Lac’s synergistic effects on decomposing Chlp, the surface of HNT was changed with CTS to generate a receptive surface. It was examined how the surface chemistry of the NT may be further altered by the combination of HNT with a macromolecule such as CTS. TEM, SEM-EDX, XRD, FTIR, DSC, and TGA were used to evaluate the nano-composites. These methods revealed the structural and chemical characteristics of the NTs and verified the presence of Cu, CTS, and Lac on their surfaces. HPLC analysis of the Chlp degradation tests with both the free enzyme and the NC revealed high levels of degradation up to 97% at pH 7 at room temperature. The greatest dosage of Chlp (50 g/mL) in spiked tap water samples was reduced by around 93%. Even with varying temperatures and pH, the NC’s ability to degrade was maintained. Reusability tests revealed that even after 5 cycles, the NC still had degradation rates as high as 98%. The first-order reaction, with k = 0.0025 min−1 and t1/2 = 274.96 min, was followed by degradation. Lac@Cu-CTS-HNT has shown outstanding promise in this work to function as an environmentally benign catalyst for the breakdown of Chlp in aqueous environments [ ].
To reduce possible health risks, quick and accurate testing procedures for mixed pesticide residues are required. Using surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) technology, interfacial self-assembly gold nanorods (Au NRs) array substrates, and the self-modelling mixture analysis method, As illustrated in below, Hu and colleagues have developed a nondestructive and sensitive method to determine thiram and thiabendazole (TBZ) mixture on fruit surface [ ]. First, an organic-aqueous interfacial self-assembly method was used to create a wide area, high-density Au NRs array, which was then used as a sensitive SERS substrate for screening thiram and TBZ concurrently on the fruit surface. Using this technique, the Raman spectra of each pesticide were identified and separated from the Raman spectra of the pesticide combination on the infected fruit surface. The resolved pure spectrum of each pesticide was shown, and the results demonstrated that utilizing SERS methodology with the SMA method, qualitative and quantitative evaluations of a single component from the mixture’s spectra were concurrently accomplished. Pesticides on the surfaces of the apple, tomato, and pear had limits of detection (LOD) of 0.041, 0.029, and 0.047 ng/cm2 for thiram and 0.79, 0.76, and 0.80 ng/cm2 for TBZ, respectively. The suggested SERS detection strategy together with SMA techniques was expected to open the way for the detection of several analytes in real-world applications for agricultural and food safety inspection [ ]. 
The detection, degradation, and elimination of PRs from diverse matrices, such as water, fruits, and vegetables, have all been accomplished using different types of NMs covered in this chapter. The detection of extremely low levels of PRs has been accomplished using NPs including AuNPs, Ag NPs, and SiO2 NPs. These NMs were made more sensitive to PR sensing by various surface changes. Pesticide degradation by various nanomaterials is mediated by photocatalysis, dechlorination, and catalytic reduction. These PRs have been taken out of various matrices by adsorption or magnetic separation using metal oxide NPs and NCs. For several PRs, enzyme-based biosensors that have been altered with various NMs have likewise demonstrated quick response, high selectivity, and sensitivity with low detection limits. The principle underlying the detection of such PRs is the inhibition of cholinesterase and laccase in the presence of pesticides. Small size, excellent selectivity, sensitivity, and quick response are just a few advantages that nanotechnology-based materials and biosensors have over more conventional methods. Other benefits include a large surface area with customizable chemistry. They do, nevertheless, have certain shortcomings. NPs can’t be readily collected once they’ve been scattered in the water due to their incredibly tiny size. Another key worry is the toxicity of CNTs, metal, and metal oxide nanoparticles. When exposed, chemicals used to modify the surfaces of certain NMs also show harmful consequences (see , , ). 
3.1

## Smartphone technology for real-time sensing of PRs
Considering the growing popularity of POC sensing techniques, additional opportunities and advantages have been achieved by fusing smartphone-based technologies for on-the-spot, real-time detection of dangerous substances [ , ]. Smartphone-based POC devices come with a variety of sensory analyzers, including fingerprint sensors, microphones, and cameras with respectable pixel quality. The benefits of using smartphone-based POC sensing strategies include direct information transfer to consumers and market professionals, low-cost procedure, simple data transfer, efficient detection, quick access to results, on-site detection, and rapid investigations with simple-to-use devices that are lightweight and portable [ , ]. Due to their mobility, dependability, simplicity, and widespread availability, smartphones have been widely integrated with electrochemical sensing techniques for the chemical, biochemical, and analytical detection of diverse analytes/targets. Various sample-handling components, signal processors, recognition components, power sources, transmission units, and decision-making units are all included in the integrated devices [ , , ]. Novel POC testing platforms for on-site detection were defined as integrated devices that integrate the basic components of a design to convert the variables into the required product in a self-contained environment. Smartphones have primarily been used as data analyzers, image processors, detectors, data displayers, and controllers for the proper utilization of built-in modules of integrated electrochemical devices [ , ]. This has the potential to simplify the fabrication process and lower the cost of the detection systems. Each component’s level of complexity and how it is put together depends on the target analyte and the quantitative or qualitative testing method. These integrated devices were created to provide accurate monitoring of analytes with low detection limits, such as metal ions, proteins, biogenic amines, metabolites, bacteria, nucleic acids, and fungus, as well as measuring biomolecular electrochemical interactions [ , ].
By enabling individuals to do routine screening tests, smartphone-based electrochemical devices have the potential to change environmental safety, medical diagnostics, and food security control systems. Furthermore, the geolocation capabilities and internet connectivity of the smartphone may be utilized to locate the detection site and provide quick data transfer to inform the stakeholders about the system/quality products in real-time [ ]. Potentiometry, amperometry, DPV, chronoamperometry, SWV, CV, and EIS have all been made possible with smartphone-integrated electrochemical systems thanks to the use of (bio)sensors based on electrochemical methods. By combining optical analysis and electrochemical excitation with the built-in functional modules, electrochemiluminescence techniques have also been introduced into cell phones. Due to its many sensor modules, the amperometric system was initially connected with smartphone technology for the chemical and biological detection of diverse analytes. Additionally, using specialized detecting techniques can greatly improve the effectiveness of an analyte’s sensing capabilities for smartphone-based amperometric analyzers [ , , , ].
It is very desirable to be able to quickly and accurately detect Glyp using small, portable equipment. In the research of Zhang and colleagues, a new enzyme-free quick and visual ratiometric fluorescence sensor for specifically quantitatively detecting Glyp was developed by fusing gold nanoclusters (Au NCs) with blue carbon nanodots (CDs) [ ]. Within 2 s after the addition of Glyp, the aggregation of the CDs-Gly-CDs (as illustrated by ) complex resulted in a rapid quenching of CDs fluorescence via aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ). The ratiometric fluorescence fluctuation from blue to pink to orange was clear and instantaneous, whereas the Au NCs served as the reference signal without any change. The wide linear range was achieved from 0 to 180 nM, and the detection limit of 4.19 nM was adequate. Additionally, this method was successfully used to identify Glyp in actual samples, and a portable smartphone platform integrated paper sensor was created for on-site visual quantitative Glyp detection. These developments present a promising method for the development of an enzyme-free trace hazard detection system [ ]. 
As illustrated in below, Liu’s team used boric acid and ethanolamine hydrothermally to create boric carbon oxynitride quantum dots (BCNO QDs) [ ]. The best excitation/emission fluorescence peak for BCNO QDs was at 335 nm, while the best emission fluorescence peak was at 420 nm. Manganese dioxide (MnO2) nanosheets are an excellent fluorescence quencher, quenching the fluorescence of BCNO QDs by the inner filter effect (IFE). To create thiocholine, acetylcholinesterase (AChE) catalyzes the breakdown of acetylcholine (ATCh). MnO2 nanosheets may be reductively broken down by TCh to produce Mn2+, restoring the fluorescence of BCNO QDs. OPPs can impede the activity of AChE enzymes, limiting the synthesis of TCh and the breakdown of MnO2 nanosheets, leading to the “turn-off” of the fluorescence. As a result, the AChE-ATCh-MnO2-BCNO-QDs system’s fluorescence intensity change may be used to determine the concentration of OPs. The dynamic detection range of paraoxon is 0.1–250 ng/mL, and the detection limit is 0.03 ng/mL under ideal experimental conditions. The reaction system, meanwhile, displayed concentration-dependent variations in visual hue from colourless to brownish. Additionally, a portable BCNO QDs exam paper was created. We performed the digital picture chromaticity analysis using a smartphone to determine the RGB values of the reaction solution and the related test paper, which may decrease the detection time and cost and offer a practical method for the on-site detection of OPs quickly [ ]. 
A smartphone’s ability to interpret data and transmit the output signal supports the development of tailored diagnostic systems. The intelligent continuous monitoring of the qualitative and quantitative status of many biomarkers, nevertheless, offers useful options for both patients and medical professionals. Although many smart biosensors concentrate on measuring a single analyte, monitoring many biomarkers can aid in the diagnosis of some 873 illnesses. Multiple analytes may be measured simultaneously, which reduces waiting time and improves diagnostic efficiency. The majority of recent research has concentrated on the pathogenic and metabolic uses of multiplexed sensors based on smartphones. These earlier studies demonstrated the viability of multiplexed systems using both electrochemical and optical detection methods. Multiplexed sensors offer a strong potential for use in portable and wearable devices when it comes to biosensing technologies. They still need some work, though, and are not quite finished. The cross-reactivity issue still affects the analytical performance of multi-electrode systems, despite the convenience they provide in terms of hardware and data processing. In complicated biological media, mixed concentrations of some biomarkers may result in an undesirable readout signal. When the required improvements are made, multiplexed smart biosensing systems offer significant potential for quick and useful diagnoses. Smart multiplexed sensors will become easier to use and more widely available as the biosensor industry develops to fulfil the demands of clinical and individualized health care.

4

## Comparison between conventional methods and advanced sensing strategies for the detection of pesticides residues (PRs)
Conventional sensing methods, according to Huang and colleagues, are widely utilized across the globe, and their sensing effectiveness is unquestionable [ ]. Complex samples can be accurately analyzed and inspected. Because of the extremely high sensitivities, even tiny levels of PRs can produce a significant reaction, considerably ensuring food safety. HPLC, SFC, GC/MS, and GC detection limits for PRs can be as less as the nanogram level, but most currently described techniques only have microgram values [ ]. These techniques struggle to attain the same degree of sensing performance as HPLC, SFC, GC, and GC/MS. In general, present approaches are only suited for preliminary sample screening and semi-quantitation [ , , ]. The usage of probes determines the detection outcomes of CL and FL methods. These probes are vulnerable to influence from ambient variables such as pH and free ions, which can lead to misleading positive/negative readings [ , , ]. Nevertheless, with a sensing approach that prioritizes ease, the LOD of FL and CL platforms can fulfil the sensing criteria, and the methods are thus deemed acceptable. Besides, HPLC, GC/MS, SFC, and GC offer benefits that FL and CL techniques do not have, but FL and CL methods have advantages in the form of visual detection, portability, onsite detection, convenience, speed, sensitivity, and eco-friendliness [ , ]. Additionally, rapid sensing technologies, such as immunoassay and EI-based techniques, have been used in preliminary screening and on-site evaluation to overcome the limitations of CL and FL detectors, such as restricted detection limit (DL) and poor anti-interference capabilities [ , ]. The recent rapid progress of NPs, MOFs, and QDs has created new opportunities for colourimetric, FL, and EI-based PR sensing techniques. Integration with NPs, QDs, and MOFs might be expected to address operational concerns with the techniques [ , ].
HPLC, SFC, GC/MS, and GC procedures are obviously at a handicap since they need big and costly professional analytical equipment as well as a specific storage environment [ ]. Furthermore, precise equipment often needs frequent maintenance and expert diagnostics people, both of which incur personnel training expenses. HPLC, SFC, GC/MS, and GC procedures frequently necessitate the use of particular diagnostic chemicals that pollutes the environment. Also, elevated concentrations of chemicals are mandatory for elution, which raises expenditures [ , ]. However, using fluorescent materials in FL and colourimetry experiments risks contamination during production and treatment. Large amounts of eluents are used for purification in applications such as the synthesis of MOFs, NPs, and QDs, which raises the cost [ , , ]. When likened to HPLC, SFC, GC/MS, and GC methods, FL and CL methods save money on equipment by requiring only visual apparatus, while other sensing results are obtained via naked-eye surveillance. They are also currently optimized for smartphone detection, which is useful in remote and rural areas [ , ].
The sensing period of HPLC, GC, GC/MS, and SFC procedures is frequently affected by the analyte used. Gradient elution of samples over long periods is required to produce precise analytical findings. Furthermore, these procedures need sample preparation, such as centrifugal filtering or sample extraction for initial purification [ ]. Derivatization may be used in some cases to achieve the required separation. As a result, one of the major causes for the extended detection time is sample pretreatment with many procedures. Pretreatment is also required for the FL and colourimetry investigations before detection. Before detection, solid samples must be dissolved and processed into a solution. Nevertheless, as compared to HPLC, GC, GC/MS, and SFC procedures, it eliminates numerous processing stages and requires just simple processing for examination [ , , ]. Although certain paper-type FL and CL techniques may sense the analyte to be tested by dropping it. Similar to the operating manner of pH test paper and considerably reduces the preparation period and enhances sensing accuracy [ ]. FL and CL approach typically have sensing times of less than half an hour, and many may be photographed and watched in a matter of minutes, allowing for quick sensing in the field [ ].
Analytical procedures such as HPLC, GC/MS, SFC, and GC are widely utilized, and real analytes may be identified after suitable pretreatment. Other sensing technologies struggle to reach ultrahigh sensing sensitivities and reliability. Yet, tight sensing requirements and difficult procedures make it hard to fulfil people’s sensing criteria for environment water and crops, so more practical FL and CL approaches have emerged as viable solutions. The FL sensing technique does not need difficult operation procedures or specialist equipment, and, more crucially, the intuitive colour change allows visual monitoring of the sensing result. The cheap cost and portability successfully establish prerequisites for widespread use. It is known that efforts have been made to develop applicable kits or test strips, and that on-site and outside-the-laboratory testing is conceivable. This completely highlights the importance of FL and CL approaches in detecting chemical contaminants quickly. Whereas modern FL and CL procedures are not as accurate as HPLC, GC/MS, SFC, and GC methods, their performance cannot be questioned. As a result, simple, accurate, and sensitive approaches for preliminary PR assessment are of major significance.
Due to their thermal instability and polarity, new particular pesticides cannot be detected by GC-MS. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LCMS), which is extensively utilized to quantify pesticides and to validate their identification in water matrices at low concentrations, is a viable approach that overcomes this challenge. Time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometers are examples of full-scan mass spectrometers that may be used in conjunction with an LC. With their superior full MS scan sensitivity and comprehensive mass spectrum data, these forms of MS are increasingly employed for the assessment, classification, characterization, and structural elucidation of medicines, insecticides, veterinary medications, and unknown pollutants. The creation of sensor and biosensor technology is a novel approach, and these devices have several advantages over conventional techniques, such as simplicity, sensitivity, selectivity, and the ability to be used in the field, which is still highly desirable for the monitoring of pesticide contamination. Additionally, the use of NMs in the development of sensors and biosensors makes them become extremely effective analytical tools for the detection of pesticides and other analgesics. It contrasts with conventional methods, which have a variety of drawbacks such as sample decomposition, a finite number of samples in a finite amount of time, matrix interference, and a lengthier test period. Biosensors provide the door to a more effective analysis in the detection of pesticides, with higher precision, lower detection capacities, continuous monitoring, and a low cost. The numerous types of sensors for the detection of pesticides are compared in below, which also summarizes conventional and current trends in pesticide sensing technologies. Additional comparisons between the types of pesticides and limits of detection are shown. 
4.1

## Improving the efficiency and usefulness of various techniques
4.1.1

## Colorimetric (CL)/Fluorometric (FL) sensing
Even though some portable devices and on-site sensing strategies have been created using colourimetric approaches, there are still several technical and scientific issues that need to be resolved. Several improvements would make present sensing techniques more effective, making it easier to find pesticide residues in water environments [ ]. Non-toxic nanomaterials-based colourimetric detectors must be created, issues specific to the selectivity, sensitivity, and reproducibility of on-site colourimetric results must be overcome, and more effective designs are needed for the advancement and manufacturing of portable and highly efficient on-site colourimetric devices. Nanoparticle-based colourimetric probes with high capability and stability should be synthesized to target pesticide residues with high specificity [ , ].
The present drawbacks of sophisticated on-site colourimetric techniques must be overcome to allow the creation of reasonably priced and environmentally friendly devices that can concurrently detect several pesticides with reduced LODs. Therefore, methods for micro- and nanofabrication should be created to simplify and reduce the cost of the devices. To produce precise and repeatable findings, the colourimetric reaction parameters and methods should be further improved and verified [ , ]. To detect pesticide residue on-site, new nanosensors and biosensors must be developed. It is important to successfully integrate colourimetric detection methods with smartphone technology. To increase their dependability, portable gadgets should be updated with automation and calculation technologies. The findings of the pesticide detection may be transmitted to servers by using a smartphone to convert the detection data into a quantifiable digital signal and integrate portable devices and wireless networking. This opens the door for a new wave of mobile analytical tools for on-site real-time sensing [ ].
To facilitate quicker pesticide residue analysis, simple extraction and cleaning techniques must be created. It is advisable to utilize biological pesticides or nano pesticides as alternatives to chemical pesticides. LFA strips, portable hydrogel testing kits, and other testing equipment must be highly reliable over the long term. To more accurately estimate pesticide residues, colourimetric tests should be combined with image processing tools. Fabrication of micro- and nanochips with nanoparticles immobilized is necessary for analytical detection. This method will open the door for cutting-edge “lab on a chip” methods of pesticide detection [ , ].

4.1.2

## Nanotechnology for sensing
The issue of NPs being dispersed has been effectively solved by heterogeneous chemistry. Such NMs will be easier to retrieve from the sample matrix if they are immobilized on support materials. For this function, biopolymers including cellulose, chitosan, and starch can be employed as support materials. Halloysite nanotubes (HNTs), which are naturally occurring, non-toxic, and biocompatible, have become an excellent replacement for CNTs in upcoming research projects. The hazardous chemicals employed for surface functionalization can be replaced by environmentally friendly nanotechnology-based methods that emphasize the utilization of biological extracts. These methods will be beneficial in lessening the toxicity of certain NMs. These biologically supported green-produced NMs can also be employed to create PR detection biosensors [ ].

4.1.3

## Smartphone technology for real-time sensing
Future studies should concentrate on enhancing multiplexing performance by concurrent evaluation of several biomarkers and improvement of experimental conditions. Additionally, using machine learning techniques to advance these systems should make them more successful diagnostic tools. Smartphone-based multiplexed sensing devices will be crucial instruments for early illness detection, the monitoring of treatment success, continuous health tracking, and patient-specific medicines as additional data banks backed by clinical evidence-based algorithms are created [ ].

4.1.4

## Enzyme-inhibition (EI)-based electrochemical sensing
In light of the detrimental effects that pesticides have on human health, there should be an increase in monitoring activities for the detection of high levels of pesticides in water, as well as the development of easier extraction and cleanup techniques for a quicker analysis process of pesticides, thereby reducing the need for expensive instruments [ ]. For rapid monitoring of these residual pesticides in the real samples, spectrophotometric detection and aptasensors must be created. Future attempts should be made to build portable equipment when more dependable and effective microelectronics and immobilization matrices become available. This broad area of study has to be pointed in a productive path sooner rather than later with low-cost technology that appeals to the general people, especially the agricultural sector [ ].

5

## Concluding remarks
New colourimetric, fluorimetry and enzyme inhibition sensing techniques have been developed for the on-site sensing of pesticide residues in aquatic settings as a result of ongoing worries about the potentially harmful consequences of pesticide residues. Numerous scientific research and reviews over the last few years have discussed how to detect pesticide residues in water matrices using conventional approaches. To the best of our knowledge, however, this is the first study to thoroughly examine different colourimetric, fluorimetry, and enzyme inhibition sensing techniques in conjunction with nanoparticles (NPs), quantum dots (QDs), and metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), as well as their coupling with smartphone detection technologies for the development of novel sensors for the on-site detection of pesticide residues in water environments. These innovative metallic nanostructures and sophisticated techniques have significantly enhanced the efficacy of pesticide residue in aqueous matrices and complicated environments. They are particularly well suited for on-site detection applications due to their straightforward design and simplicity of presentation. In this review, the analytical efficacies of the created on-site procedures were also contrasted. Additionally, we end by touching on the prospects for these cutting-edge technologies' future, current developments, and difficulties.

## Author contribution statement
Eliasu Issaka: Conceptualization, Investigation, Data Curation, Resources, Validation, Formal analysis, Writing-Original Draft, Writing-Review and Editing, Supervision; Mary Adumo Wariboko: Writing-Original Draft, Validation, Formal analysis, Writing-Review and Editing; Nana Adwoa Nkuma Johnson: Resources, Methodology, Data Curation, Resources, Writing-Review and Editing, Writing-Review and Editing; Ofosuhemaa Nyame-do Aniagyei: Methodology; Data Curation, Resources, Writing-Review and Editing. All authors listed have significantly contributed to the development and the writing of this article.

## Funding statement
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

## Data availability statement
Data will be made available on request.

## Declaration of interest’s statement
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 

## Abbreviations

AchAcetylcholine
AChEAcetylcholinesterase
ATClAcetylthiocholine chloride
AuNPsGold nanoparticles
CChromatography
CACatalytic activity
CBFCarbofuran
CBRCarbaryl
CHOCholine
ChLChemiluminescent
ChlpChlorpyrifos (Chlp)
CmPsCarbamate pesticides
CMsCarbamates
C-ssDNAComplementary thiolated ssDNA
CoSColorimetric spectroscopy
CLColourimetric
DLDetection limit
EIEnzyme inhibition
ELISAEnzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
ePADElectrochemical paper-based device
FLFluorometric
FSFluorescence spectroscopy
GCEGlassy carbon electrode
GC/MS.Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
GlypGlyphosate (Glyp)
HPLCHigh-performance liquid chromatography
ICAImmunochromatographic assay
LRRLinear response range
MNPsMagnetic nanoparticles
MOFsMetal-organic frameworks
MRLsMaximum residue levels
MWCNTsMulti-walled carbon nanotubes
NCsNanocomposites
NCPsNeonicotinoid pesticides
NENanozyme
NMsNanomaterials
NPsNanoparticles
OCPsOrganochlorine pesticides
OPPsOrganophosphorus pesticides
OSPsOrganosulfur pesticides
PIPolyimide
PRsPesticide residues
Pt NPsPlatinum nanoparticles
PTsPyrethroids
QDsQuantum dots
SFC.Supercritical fluid chromatography
ssDNASingle-stranded DNA
TMB3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine

## Acknowledgement
The listed author(s) are thankful to their representative universities for providing the literature services.