pmcMol TherMol Ther902molther100890581Molecular Therapy1525-00161525-0024American Society of Gene & Cell TherapyPMC10491994PMC10491994.110491994104919943734063410.1016/j.ymthe.2023.06.011S1525-0016(23)00322-21Original ArticlePreventing occludin tight-junction disruption via inhibition of microRNA-193b-5p attenuates viral load and influenza-induced lung injury
VaswaniChirag M. VarkouhiAmir K. GuptaSahil EktesabiAmin M. TsoporisJames N. YousefSadiya PlantPamela J. da SilvaAdriana L. CenYuchen TsengYi-Chieh BatahSabrina S. FabroAlexandre T. AdvaniSuzanne L. AdvaniAndrew Leong-PoiHoward MarshallJohn C. GarciaCristiana C. RoccoPatricia R.M. AlbaicetaGuillermo M. Sebastian-BolzSteffen WattsTania H. MoraesTheo J. CapelozziVera L. dos SantosClaudia.C.claudia.dossantos@unityhealth.to 1Department of Physiology, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada2Keenan Research Centre for Biomedical Science, St. Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada3Department of Chemistry and Environmental Science, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ, USA4Institute of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada5Faculty of Medicine, School of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Herston, QLD 4006, Australia6Laboratory of Pulmonary Investigation, Carlos Chagas Filho Institute of Biophysics, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil7COVID-19 Virus Network from Ministry of Science, Technology, and Innovation, Brazilian Council for Scientific and Technological Development, and Foundation Carlos Chagas Filho Research Support of the State of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil8Program in Translational Medicine, SickKids Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada9Department of Pathology and Legal Medicine, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil10Laboratory of Respiratory, Exanthematic Viruses, Enterovirus and Viral Emergencies, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil11Integrated Research Group on Biomarkers. René Rachou Institute, FIOCRUZ Minas, Belo Horizonte, Brazil12Departamento de Biología Funcional, Instituto Universitario de Oncología del Principado de Asturias, Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain13Unidad de Cuidados Intensivos Cardiológicos, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain14CIBER-Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain15Department of Immunology, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada16Department of Pediatrics University of Toronto and Respirology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada17Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada18Department of Pathology, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil19Interdepartmental Division of Critical Care, St Michael’s Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada∗Corresponding author: Claudia. C. dos Santos, MSc, MD, Clinician-Scientist, Associate Professor of Medicine, Interdepartmental Division of Critical Care, St. Michael’s Hospital/University of Toronto, 30 Bond Street, Room 4-008, Toronto, ON M5B 1WB, Canada. claudia.dossantos@unityhealth.to0692023196202331944502026812701232023146202306092024060920241009202323082025© 2023 The Author(s)2023https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Virus-induced lung injury is associated with loss of pulmonary epithelial-endothelial tight junction integrity. While the alveolar-capillary membrane may be an indirect target of injury, viruses may interact directly and/or indirectly with miRs to augment their replication potential and evade the host antiviral defense system. Here, we expose how the influenza virus (H1N1) capitalizes on host-derived interferon-induced, microRNA (miR)-193b-5p to target occludin and compromise antiviral defenses. Lung biopsies from patients infected with H1N1 revealed increased miR-193b-5p levels, marked reduction in occludin protein, and disruption of the alveolar-capillary barrier. In C57BL/6 mice, the expression of miR-193b-5p increased, and occludin decreased, 5–6 days post-infection with influenza (PR8). Inhibition of miR-193b-5p in primary human bronchial, pulmonary microvascular, and nasal epithelial cells enhanced antiviral responses. miR-193b-deficient mice were resistant to PR8. Knockdown of occludin, both in vitro and in vivo, and overexpression of miR-193b-5p reconstituted susceptibility to viral infection. miR-193b-5p inhibitor mitigated loss of occludin, improved viral clearance, reduced lung edema, and augmented survival in infected mice. Our results elucidate how the innate immune system may be exploited by the influenza virus and how strategies that prevent loss of occludin and preserve tight junction function may limit susceptibility to virus-induced lung injury.

## Graphical abstract
 
The temporal-dependent inhibition of microRNA-193b-5p reduces tight junction protein occludin transcript degradation, lung edema, and viral load, and augments survival in influenza-infected mice. The results elucidate how strategies that prevent loss of occludin and preserve tight junction function may limit susceptibility to virus-induced lung injury.

## Keywords
acute respiratory distress syndromeacute lung injuryinfluenza virustight junctionsoccludinmicroRNAmiR-193binterferon betaalveolar-capillary membraneantiviral immune responsepmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Introduction
Inadequate immunity to the continually evolving influenza virus (IV) variants cause sporadic outbreaks that are often difficult to predict and continue to remain a public health concern. The 1918 pandemic claimed the lives of over 40 million people. The 2009 H1N1 pandemic strain resulted in an estimated 500,000 fatalities. IV can reach deep into the lung airspaces and cause alveolar-capillary injury, diffuse alveolar damage, exudative edema, and immune cell infiltration resulting in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) , ; the leading cause of multi-organ failure , and mortality in critically ill influenza-infected patients. 
Alveolar-capillary damage , in virus-induced ARDS is associated with injury to tight junctions (TJs). TJs are dynamic multiprotein complexes that function as paracellular gates that restrict diffusion between compartments on the basis of size and charge. , , Beyond barrier protection, TJs transmit signals to the cell interior that regulate the cytoskeleton, gene expression, cell proliferation and differentiation, affecting various cellular processes including microbial pathogenesis. , , Various pathogens have developed elegant strategies to disrupt TJs in order to reach their receptors and alter the host’s immune responses, while others utilize TJ proteins as receptors for entry into cells. Disruption of TJs, including occludin (Ocln), leads to increases in paracellular permeability and polarity defects which facilitate viral or bacterial cell entry and spread. , Evidence supports the role of Ocln, and associated structural proteins as targets for various classes of viruses. Ocln is a receptor for the hepatitis C virus (HCV), , coxsackievirus, porcine epidemic diarrhea virus, and Toxoplasma gondii. Ocln may also affect virus pathogenicity by regulating viral replication as Ocln-deficient cells are resistant to HCV infection and Ocln-targeting antibodies prevent HCV infection in vitro and in vivo. In contrast, IVs, West Nile virus, and rotaviruses disrupt TJs by causing a decrease in Ocln protein expression facilitating viral entry into cells. However, the molecular mechanisms of IV-induced Ocln decrease, its effects on lung injury, and the impact of preserving Ocln in acute virus-induced lung injury remain largely unknown.
MicroRNAs (miRs) are small (∼22 nucleotides) non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression at the post-transcriptional level. MicroRNAs can regulate TJ expression, modulate epithelial/endothelial barrier function and can be used directly or indirectly to augment viral replication potential. , We have recently identified miR-193b-5p, as a miR that binds to the 3′ untranslated region (UTR) of the Ocln mRNA, causing decreases in Ocln in sepsis-induced lung injury. miR-193b has been implicated in viral infection, , cell-cycle regulation, tumor suppression, fat metabolism, and vasculogenesis. Whether miR-193b-5p contributes to IV-induced lung injury remains to be determined. Here, we found that in lungs from patients who died with ARDS, expression levels of miR-193b-5p are increased, while Ocln is decreased at early, as well as late stages of IV-associated ARDS. In a murine model of H1N1 influenza (PR8), miR-193b-5p inhibition prevents loss of Ocln; enhances interferon beta (IFN-β) and interferon regulated genes (IRGs) expression, reduces viral replication, histological evidence of lung injury and mortality. Silencing of Ocln reconstituted the wild-type (WT) injurious phenotype in miR-193b-deficient mice. Taken together, our work suggests Ocln plays a fundamental role in the pathogenesis of IV infection and lung injury; and that inhibition of host-derived miR-193b-5p may enhance interferon antiviral responses, prevent Ocln TJ disruption attenuating viral load and influenza-induced lung injury.

## Results

## Decreased Ocln protein, TJ disruption, and miR-193b-5p expression in lung biopsies from patients with IV-induced ARDS
Analysis of differentially expressed genes from IV-infected vs. non-infected human lung tissue samples (GEO accession no. GSE163959) identified miR-193b as the most likely miRs regulating the gene expression pattern seen in lungs from IV-infected patients compared with non-infected controls (adjusted p value of 2.7 × 10−11, A). Human lung biopsies from IV-infected patients showed distinct pathological features of ARDS and reduced Ocln protein compared with non-infected controls in pulmonary bronchial epithelial, endothelial, and alveolar epithelial cells ( A, clinical data presented in ). In three representative patients, IV infection demonstrated transudative edema and granulomatous tissue ( B, top panel) and showed reduced Ocln staining in lung endothelial cells relative to non-infected control (by immunofluorescence for Ocln and colocalization with CD34, B, middle panel). In both ARDS patients, the transmission electron microscopy images demonstrated progressive disruption of TJs over the course of infection associated with viral inclusions ( B lower panel). RNA was extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) biopsy lung tissues ( C) to demonstrate a 2- to 7-fold increase in miR-193b-5p (copies/μL) contained in digital droplets relative to non-infected controls ( D). Since miRs in the same gene cluster or family may be co-regulated at the transcriptional level and/or may share functional relationships by coregulating the same biological process, we looked at the expression of miR-365a1, a member of the miR-193b/365a genomic cluster, and found that this was not differentially expressed in our biopsy lung tissues ( B). Using miRNAscope, we probed for miR-193b-5p in situ in human lung autopsy samples, and visually identified miR-193b-5p punctae within H1N1-infected lungs; in distal bronchi, in edema filled alveoli, and around pulmonary arterioles ( C). We further determined that the expression of miR-193b-5p increased in response to recombinant IFN-β by stimulating human primary distal bronchial airway epithelial cells (BEAS2b) with log-fold increasing doses of recombinant human IFN-β; the copy number of miR-193b-5p increased 3- to 5-fold over 4 h stimulation with 1,000 IU (international units) human recombinant IFN-β (1 pg = 1.2 × 102 IU, E). To determine if the promoter of miR-193b is IFN-β responsive, we made a construct with the 5′ UTR of miR-193b and demonstrated, using luciferase fluorescence, increased promoter activity in response to IFN-β as well as TNF-α, indicating their regulation on miR-193b ( F). Independent bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) samples obtained from IV-infected patients, compared with critically ill non-IV-infected patients (Toronto Public Health Laboratory and Regional Ethics Committee Comité de ética de la investigación Clinica del Principado de Asturias, Spain, ref. 22/17) and were sequenced for miR gene expression ( G) and showed increases in miR-193b-5p expression. IFN-γ and TNF-α proteins were increased using ELISA on the same BALf samples ( H, 1I, and 1J, respectively). 

## PR8 infection in mice recapitulates hallmark pathological features of human IV-induced ARDS
We established an intranasal murine model of influenza A infection with PR8 (Influenza, Strain A/Puerto Rico/8/34 [H1N1] at 107 TCID50 [50% tissue culture infectivity dose]) that recapitulated unique pathological features of human IV-induced ARDS. This model is uniformly lethal by 8 days post-infection. WT mice were infected intranasally with PR8, and lungs were analyzed at days 3, 4, 5, and 6 post-infections ( A). Macroscopically, murine lungs became progressively more congested, hemorrhagic, and hyperemic after day 3 post-infection ( B). As early as day 4 post-PR8 infection, mice exhibited prominent bronchiolar epithelial necrosis with basement membrane detachments, epithelial necrosis, and neutrophilic infiltrates consistent with severe interstitial pneumonitis. Alveolar collapse, homogeneous septal thickening with cell infiltration, and hyaline membrane resembled features of human ARDS-associated diffuse alveolar damage ( Cix, x, xi, xii). Hyperplasia of alveolar cells with viral cytopathic changes were present ( A), similar to pathological changes evident in human severe H1N1 infection ( Cv, vi, vii, viii). Histopathologic changes showed a similar degree and pattern of lung injury distribution in mice and humans ( C). Disruptions of the intercellular junctional complexes (TJ) and opening of cell-cell contacts of type II alveolar epithelial cells (yellow square) were observed in both the transmission electron micrographs of alveolar septa in mouse and human H1N1-infected lungs ( D and 2E, respectively). 

## Increase in miR-193b-5p decreases Ocln and MAVS in PR8-induced acute lung injury
To determine the role of miR-193b-5p in PR8-induced lung injury, C57BL/6J mice were randomized to receive PR8 or mock infection with an equal volume of saline ( A–2C). Lungs were collected daily from days 3 to 6 post-infection. Infection resulted in ≥15% weight loss and 50% mortality rate by day 6 ( A and S2B). The levels of miR-193b-5p expression increased by 2- to 8-fold by 5–6 days post-infection ( F).
We have previously shown that the sequences for human and mouse miR-193b-5p are homologous, and that miR-193b-5p binds to a conserved seed sequence in the 3′ UTR of Ocln resulting in its silencing. Here we noted that increased levels of miR-193b-5p and the loss of Ocln expression at days 6 and 6 post-infection ( E) were related with worsening lung injury. In independent experiments, increased levels of miR-193b-5p were confirmed using digital droplet PCR ( C). Both the miR-193b-3p sister strand and miR-365a1-3p were not differentially expressed in our PR8 model ( D and S3E).
In addition to Ocln, the gene encoding for mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS) protein is also a computationally predicted target of miR-193b-5p (MiRTarBase v.8.0). MAVS is an adaptor for the retinoic acid-inducible gene I-like receptors that mediate the transcriptional induction of type 1 interferons such as IFN-β and other IRGs that collectively establish the antiviral host response. We found significant decrease in the expression of MAVS by 5–6 days post-infection ( I), but this had no impact on type 1 IFN-β gene expression. IFN-β expression increased at day 3 post-infection and continued to rise and remain elevated until mice were humanely sacrificed at day 6 post-infection ( J). Type 2 IFN, IFN-β, peaked at 4 days post-infection and remained modestly increased until day 6 post-infection ( K).
To identify which cells expressed miR-193b-5p in vivo, we performed in situ hybridization with miR-193b-5p-specific probes and co-stained for macrophages (CD64; F), endothelial (CD34; G), and epithelial (transcription termination factor 1 [TTF1]) ( H) cells using specific markers to demonstrate miR-193b-5p punctae within all three cell types by day 4 post-PR8 infection.

## miR-193b-5p and Ocln inversely affect IV replication and IRG expression in human primary bronchial airway epithelial and pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells
Based on the in situ evidence of miR-193b-5p localization in both murine and human pulmonary epithelial and endothelial cells, miR-Ocln rescue and Ocln knockdown experiments were performed in human bronchoalveolar distal airway epithelial cells (BEAS2b) and human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells (HPMECs). Treating cells with increasing PR8 multiplicity of infection (MOI) resulted in increased miR-193b-5p expression levels in both BEAS2b ( I) and HPMECs ( J) at 24 h. BEAS2b cells were transfected with miR-193b-5p mimic (MIM), inhibitor (INH), or negative control (NC), followed by IV infection at an MOI of 1. Overexpression of miR-193b-5p in BEAS2b cells transfected with MIM resulted in increased detection of viral mRNA expression at 12 and 24 h post-infection ( ). Viral RNA polymerase subunit 1 (PB1) was significantly increased at 12 h post-infection, and viral hemagglutinin (HA) was increased at 12 and 24 h post infection ( A and 3B). 
In contrast, transfection with the miR-193b-5p INH resulted in decreased viral mRNA expression (HA and PB1) as early as 12–24 hpi ( C and 3D). However, we noticed an increase in HA and decreased PB1 transcripts by 48 hpi ( E). Viral plaque-forming units were significantly increased upon delivery of the miR-193b-5p MIM (shown in red) and decreased after treatment with the INH (shown in blue, F). The absence of complementarity between the miR-193b sequence and the virus mRNAs sequences negates the possibility of direct mimicry of host miR by the virus.

## Gene silencing of Ocln with an anti-Ocln siRNA enhances viral mRNA transcription and impairs IFN response in vitro
Since Ocln is a target of miR-193b-5p and other viruses use Ocln to mediate pathogen entry into cells, we assessed the direct effects of Ocln knockdown on IV viral mRNA expression. Decrease in Ocln protein expression was shown by western blot after transfection with Ocln siRNA compared with a scrambled siRNA in BEAS2b cells ( G) and quantitated through densitometry analysis ( K). H shows that decreased Ocln expression was associated with increased expression of viral polymerase (PB1), HA, and neuraminidase. Silencing Ocln resulted in impaired type 1 IFN responses, increased viral load, and impairment of host antiviral response factors, including IFN-β ( I), IFN-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1 (IFIT-1) ( J), and bone marrow stromal cell antigen 2 (BST-2) ( K) compared with the mock saline controls, recapitulating the effects of miR-193-5p MIM transfection in vitro and the effects of miR-193b-5p MIM transfection in vitro.

## miR-193b-5p inhibits type 1 IFN responses in vitro
HPMECs were treated with the miR-193b-5p INH or NC, followed by PR8 infection at an MOI of 1. Treatment with the INH resulted in increased expression of IFN-β ( L) and upregulation of other IFN-related genes—IFN regulatory factor 1 ( M), IFIT-1 ( N), and BST-2 ( O)—compared with NC. Taken together our data suggest miR-193b-5p downregulates type 1 interferon responses in vitro.

## The action of miR-193b-5p on antivirus responses is not restricted to IV
To determine whether miR-193b-5p also plays a role in other important respiratory virus infection we infected primary human nasal epithelial cells (HNECs) with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). Since HNECs are difficult to transfect, we generated a lentivirus vector overexpressing miR-193b-5p INH or empty vector (blank vector) that we used to determine the effect of miR-193b-5p inhibition in HNECs. HNECs were harvested from consenting healthy volunteers and cultured in an air-fluid interface. Cells were transduced with the empty vector or the LV-miR-193b-5p-INH and allowed to differentiate for 21 days, after which they were infected with RSV. Transduction with the LV-miR-193b-5p-IHN prevented RSV infection-induced loss of normal HNEC morphology over 72 h ( P, left hand panel) compared with empty vector ( Q, right hand panel) and reduced log-fold viral titers in vitro ( Q), suggesting the broad applicability of the miR-193b-5p target in viral injury.
Since the lentivirus could potentially impact the IFN response, we determined the effect of the LV on IRG expression by stimulating cells transduced with either the LV-miR-193b-5p INH or empty vector with human recombinant IFN-β (1,000 IU) for 24 h. Stimulation with recombinant IFN-β resulted in increased miR-193b-5p; this was unaffected by transduction with the empty vector, but was mitigated by transduction with the LV-miR-193b-5p-INH ( R).
Ocln expression levels increased significantly in cells transduced with the LV-miR-193b-5p-INH ( S). Transduction with the empty vector did not prevent recombinant IFN-β-induced decrease in MAVS expression, while LV delivery of the miR-193b-5p INH resulted in increased MAVS expression ( T). While the expression of IFIT-1 was unaffected by LV-miR-193b-5p-INH, the expression of STAT1 was markedly enhanced by miR-193b-5p inhibition ( U and 3V). These results indicate that the role of miR-193b-5p on antivirus responses is not restricted to IV and suggest a broader applicability for miR-193b-5p inhibition for preserving or augmenting antiviral responses and decreasing viral load.

## Mice deficient in miR-193b confer resistance to PR8 and have reduced lung injury and improved antiviral responses
Mice with a deletion of miR-193b (miR-193b-365a1 knockout [KO]) or their WT littermates were randomized to receive intranasally 30 μL of PR8 at 107 TCID50 or equal volume saline (mock infection) and were followed for 6 days. Absence of miR-193b conferred resistance to PR8-induced morbidity, as documented by reduced change in percent loss of body weight ( L) and body temperature ( M), and an overall reduced hyperemic lung ( A). In an independent experiment, in situ hybridization for miR-193b-5p shows increased visible punctae in the lung parenchyma from WT mice appearing at 6 days post-infection ( B). miR-193b KO mice were included as a NC. RNU6 stained intensely in the lung tissues as a positive control for the assay, and the scrambled control was used to demonstrate the specificity of the assay with minimal to no visible punctates. 
Progression of PR8-induced lung injury was markedly attenuated in miR-193b KO mice. Common histopathological features of severe human IV lower respiratory tract infection, including diffuse alveolar damage ( C) with hyaline membrane formation, patchy interstitial lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates, bronchiolitis with squamous metaplasia, and/or pulmonary congestion with various degrees of hemorrhage, , were significantly reduced in miR-193b KOs ( ).
Seven-day mortality was significantly decreased in miR-193b KO mice ( D) compared with WT PR8-infected mice. At day 6 post-infection, miR-193b KO mice had decreased markers of lung injury including lower BALf total cell infiltrates, protein exudation ( E and 4F), and percent polymorphonuclear (PMN) cells in alveolar spaces ( G). We did not detect any difference in the expression of inflammation-related cytokine IL-6 mRNA ( H). However, antiviral gene expression including miR-193b-5p targets Ocln ( I), MAVS ( J), as well as IRGs, including IFITM1 ( K), the IFN alpha and beta receptor subunit 1 (IFNAR1) ( L), and IFN-β ( L), were markedly increased in miR-193b KOs compared with WT PR8-infected mice.

## Decreased viral inclusions, preserved Ocln protein levels, and TJ integrity in PR8-infected miR-193b KO mice
Transmission electron micrography of lungs collected at day 6 post-PR8 infection from WT and miR-193b KO mice demonstrated that intercellular junctional complexes were markedly disrupted in WT mice ( A and 5B; K, red arrows) with marked opening of alveolar epithelial cell-cell contacts ( A and 5B; G, black arrows). Importantly, viral particles were seen totally free in cytoplasm adjacent to disrupted TJs ( A and 5B; C, red arrows) contrasting with well-enclosed viral particles adjacent to non-fragmented TJs in miR-193b KO lungs ( A and 5B; D, red arrows). Semiquantitative analysis of lung injury score performed by a lung pathologist (blinded to genotype and group assignment) supported preservation of alveolar epithelial cell ( C), adherens junction integrity ( D), TJs ( E), and was associated with significant reductions in viral inclusions ( F) in miR-193b KO mice compared with WT on days 4, 5, and 6 post-infection. 
Ocln protein expression was preserved in miR-193b KO compared with WT mice. Ocln expression was decreased in bronchial epithelial cells by immunohistochemistry in WT mice infected with PR8 ( G); immunoblotting for Ocln confirmed preservation of Ocln in PR8 infected miR-193b KO mice compared with WTs ( H). Interestingly, immunoblotting for MAVS revealed that absence of miR-193b did not protect from PR8-induced decrease in MAVS protein expression, suggesting that, while MAVS may be a computational target of miR-193b-5p, other mechanisms may be responsible for the reduction in MAVS protein expression in vivo (data not shown).
These results demonstrate that absence of miR-193b results in preserved Ocln mRNA and protein expression, reduced TJ morphological disruptions, reduced loss of compartmentalization of virus particles, improved antiviral responses, and decreased lung injury and mortality post-PR8 infection.

## Ocln gene silencing reconstitutes susceptibility to PR8 infection in miR-193b KO mice
To determine if Ocln is a critical target of miR-193b-5p playing a direct role in PR8-induced acute lung injury we randomized miR-193b KO mice and WT littermates to intubation and intratracheal delivery of 1.5 nmol of an anti-Ocln siRNA 24 h before intranasal inoculation with PR8 or saline (mock infection). We monitored behavioral and physiological parameters of mouse wellbeing daily and harvested lungs for analysis 5 days post-infection ( A). 
Gross lung morphology showed that miR-193b KO lungs treated with the siRNA against Ocln were markedly hyperemic, consistent with severe pulmonary hepatization similar to WT littermate positive controls. In contrast, miR-193b KOs randomized to receive the scrambled siRNA were protected from PR8-induced lung injury ( B). Silencing Ocln in miR-193b KO mice infected with PR8 resulted in increased loss of percent body weight (<5%) and temperature (<5%) relative to scrambled control ( C and 6D) associated with increased mortality. Lung Ocln transcripts were significantly reduced in both WT and miR-193b KO mice treated with the siRNA against Ocln relative to scrambled control ( E), demonstrating successful knockdown of Ocln. Lung IFN-β levels significantly decreased in mice where we knocked down Ocln in WT and KO mice treated with the siRNA ( F). Lung MAVS expression in KO mice treated with the siRNA against Ocln was significantly decreased, with a non-significant decrease in the WT mice ( G). Severe IV infection induced activation of innate immune cells neutrophils and macrophages, which increases the expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). Lung iNOS was elevated in both genotypes that received the siRNA against Ocln relative to scrambled controls ( H), suggesting increased inflammation following Ocln knockdown.
Histological assessments of lung injury were consistent with progression of lung injury following Ocln silencing in both genotypes ( I and 6J). Analysis of BALf demonstrated increased total cell infiltration ( K and 6L), PMN cells ( M), and total protein influx ( N). While Ocln silencing in WT mice non-significantly increased viral load in whole-lung tissue homogenates relative to scrambled control, the injurious effects were significantly reconstituted in miR-193b KOs ( O). Collectively, these results demonstrate that silencing Ocln in miR-193b KO mice abrogates the protective effects of miR-193b deletion and partially reverts the lung injury phenotype back to that seen in WT controls infected with PR8. Taken together, the data underscore the importance of both miR-193b and Ocln in PR8-induced acute lung injury.

## Intratracheal administration of miR-193b-5p INH mitigated loss of Ocln, reduced viral load, and improved survival in PR8-induced acute lung injury
C57/BL6 mice were randomized to receive the miR-193b-5p INH through intratracheal administration on days 4 or 5 post-PR8 infection (at 107 TCID50) or the same dose of a non-human miRNA NC. A schematic of the experiment is shown in A. Improved survival was noted when the INH was delivered on both days 4 and 5, but maximum improvement was following delivery at day 4 post-infection ( B and 7C). Lung tissues and BALf were collected on day 6 from mice treated at days 4 or 5 to determine levels of miR-193b-5p and assess lung injury-related outcomes. Treatment with miR-193b-5p INH resulted in decreased miR-193b-5p ( D), increased Ocln mRNA ( E), and protein expression ( F and 7G) in lung tissues. In addition, this treatment resulted in decreased viral titers measured using hemagglutination assay ( H), decreased expression of the viral nuclear capsid protein as measured by western blot ( I and 7J), increased IFN-β ( K), and decreased IL-6 ( L) gene expression. Infected mice treated with the miR-193b-5p INH also demonstrated decreased levels of systemic acidosis as measured by serum pH ( M) and circulating lactate ( N). 
Decreased Evans blue dye incorporation in lung tissue ( O) and BALf levels of total protein ( P) and IgM ( Q) were used to demonstrate decreased exudative edema formation in mice that received the miR-193b-5p-INH compared with NC. This was associated with decreased inflammatory cell infiltration ( R), myeloperoxidase activity ( S), and NADPH oxidase 2 expression ( T). The HI perfect reagent (HPF) alone did not seem to impart significant independent effect compared with the HPF carrying the NC inhibitor ( N, S3O, and S3P), therefore our results show the comparisons of just the NC and INH. Our results show how the timeline inhibition of miR-193b-5p in a PR8 murine model, can preserve Ocln transcript and protein expression, reduce lung injury, increase IFN-β, viral clearance and improve survival in vivo.

## Discussion
MicroRNAs play a pivotal role in modulating the expression of various protein coding genes simultaneously and therefore are uniquely positioned to orchestrate a coordinated antiviral response. , Not surprisingly, viruses have developed a variety of different ways to sabotage this response. , , Here, we demonstrate that, during IV infection, host-derived miR-193b-5p is induced by IFN-β and, in a feedback loop, acts to limit overexpression of IFN-β, which indirectly regulates the function of TJs by regulating Ocln expression levels in epithelial and endothelial pulmonary cells in a miR-193b-5p-dependent fashion. Various therapeutic strategies to silence Ocln are available for antiviral administration and are in phase 3 clinical trials to treat HCV infections. , However, strategies to preserve or modulate virus-induced disruptions of TJs and Ocln expression are not well elucidated and may be warranted for severe IV and other respiratory virus infections such as RSV. Our paper highlights the role of host-derived miR-193b-5p in the regulation of IFN-β and Ocln-dependent TJs in human cells and in mice infected with PR8. Inhibition or absence of miR-193b can mitigate H1N1- and PR8-induced cell injury and morbidity and mortality, respectively; by preserving Ocln expression and enhancing host antiviral responses.
At baseline, this miR-193b-5p is nearly undetectable; its expression in vitro can be induced by lipopolysaccharides (main component of Gram-negative bacteria), TNF-α, and IL-1β. It has been implicated in cancer metastasis, angiotensin-mediated inhibition of apoptosis, binding and regulation of histone deacetylase 7, and Polo-like kinase 1, a critical regulator of cell-cycle progression and apoptosis. Converging evidence suggests that both strands of miR-193b (-3p and -5p) play important roles in respiratory virus infections. We found that, during influenza infection, IFN-β induction of miR-193b-5p contributes to the pathogenesis of influenza through the loss of Ocln. In our models, mir-193b-5p expression levels are increased in response to recombinant IFN-β regulating the expression of other IRGs. Both IVs and other respiratory viruses such as coronaviruses (SARS/COVID) encode proteins capable of disrupting members of the membrane-associated guanylate kinases (MAGUK) family of proteins (MUPP 1, MUPP 2, MUPP 3, and Ocln). Moreover, members of at least nine different virus families use apical-junctional complex molecules as receptors or disrupt these proteins to gain access to their receptors in the paracellular space. Naturally, multiple viruses have devised specific strategies to prevent the host from defending the apical-junctional complex as a part of their pathological mechanisms. Ocln is one of these MAGUK targets, regulated by miR-193b-5p.
Here, we show that inhibition of miR-193b-5p or miR-193b deficiency resulted in preserved Ocln levels, TJ integrity, and enhanced type 1 IFN responses, resulting in reduced lung injury and mortality. In vitro delivery of an siRNA against Ocln resulted in increased viral mRNA transcripts and impairment of IRG expression, demonstrating that Ocln is required for type 1 IFN responses. Electron microscopy confirms the importance of miR-193b-5p in H1N1 pathology; viral inclusions, TJ disruption, and increased paracellular spaces were significantly more prominent in WT compared with miR-193b KO mice infected with PR8. While important in regulating Ocln and IFN-β-dependent responses, our data by no means exonerate other miR-193b-5p mechanisms of action (i.e., other target genes) in influenza-induced lung injury—this is an ongoing area of research in the lab.
Gain- and loss-of-function experiments demonstrate the importance of miR-193b-5p to the regulation of IFN responses via regulation of IRGs. Although MAVS is a putative target of miR-193b-5p, our data do not support this being an effector of miR-193b-5p-induced effects since the absence of miR-193b-5p does not preclude decreases in MAVS protein expression. In addition to MAVS, various antiviral transcripts were significantly increased in miR-193b KO mice including IFITM 1 and 3. IFIT-1 proteins mediate antiviral activity against a broad range of viruses, such as influenza, through the suppression of translation initiation and sequestering viral proteins or RNA in the cytoplasm. , Emerging evidence demonstrates that IFITM1 is localized predominantly at the plasma membrane, whereas IFITM2 and 3 localized within the endosomal and lysosomal compartments. IFITM3 exhibits its antiviral nature by trapping virions, including influenza, in endocytic compartments, resulting in their degradation. , , IFITM restriction is not a global property of the cell but rather localized to late or lysosomal compartments. IFITM 1, 2, and 3 have all been proven to exhibit antiviral properties including but not limited to SARS, Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome, and influenza-related viruses. , Tetherin is encoded by BST-2 and inhibits the release of influenza and other viruses from the surface of infected cells via induction of apoptosis. The absence of IFIT-1 is not critical in influenza restriction and, similarly, the anti-viral function of BST-2 can be partially antagonized. IFNAR1 has recently been shown to play a critical role in other forms of respiratory virus lung infections such as infections with SARS-coronavirus 2, as inherited IFNAR1 deficiency predisposes not only to severe COVID-19 pneumonia but also multisystem inflammatory syndrome. 
The contribution of Ocln to permeability has been demonstrated through numerous lines of investigation: (1) blocking the extracellular loops , and reducing the protein content alters paracellular permeability, (2) overexpression or prevention of Ocln degradation enhances transepithelial resistance (TER), and (3) synthetic peptides mimicking the extracellular loop compete with loop-loop interactions causing increased vascular leak. The debate on the role of Ocln in barrier protection centers on the fact that TJ ultrastructure appears unaltered in Ocln-deficient mice, and early studies suggested normal TER and permeability in isolated tissue preparations. These initial studies, however, may not have fully appreciated the role of Ocln (and TJs) in cell signaling and cell-cell and cell-matrix functions. Moreover, recent studies show that, although TJs are morphologically intact, Ocln-deficient mice have complex histological phenotypes characterized by chronic inflammation and poor TJ integrity in several epithelial/endothelial tissues, pointing to an important role for Ocln in TJ stability, signaling, and barrier function as opposed to TJ assembly. Here, we did not use Ocln KO mice, primarily because current data suggest that these mice have developed alternative strategies to compensate for the absence of Ocln and therefore are not ideal for our PR8-induced acute lung injury model. Hence, we delivered an siRNA to knock down Ocln acutely in vivo. When we knock down Ocln in miR-193b KO mice we partially abrogate the protective effects of miR-193b deletion in mice—we think in part because Ocln expression may not be entirely sufficient to explain the decrease in vascular leakage in our model. While we investigated the role of miR-193b-5p and Ocln in an influenza viral injury model, the putative targets list for miR-193b-5p is enriched for genes encoding for proteins associated with cell-cell adhesion and cell junction assembly including claudins (CLDN-2, -19), CLCN5 (chloride channel Cl−/H+ exchanger), and non-integrin membrane-ECM interaction proteins (thrombospondin 1 and 2), which may also account for the therapeutic effect of miR-193b-5p inhibition on vascular leakage. We are currently investigating the pulmonary differential expression profile in infected vs. non-infected miR-193b KO mice vs. WT littermates. This may provide novel insights into the role of miR-193b in host-immune regulation in virus-induced ARDS.
MicroRNAs are recognized as attractive targets for intervention as their aberrant expression in various pathological contexts can play critical roles in the development and progression of diseases. , In the context of virus-induced lung injury, miR command multiple gene targets, and thus delivering miR mimics or inhibitors may reduce various syndromic features of lung injury and enhance survival. Synthesized single-stranded oligonucleotides (antagomirs) as well as inhibitors are showing promise as interventions for various diseases. Studies have demonstrated their use in HCV, chronic inflammatory diseases, cardiac injury, and metabolic diseases. The administration of a lentivector overexpressing the miR-193b-5p INH in the presence of IFN-β rescues MAVS and Ocln, demonstrating the therapeutic potential of our inhibitor. Our findings were further supported by the overexpression of miR-193b-5p INH in a lentivector to reduce viral load and preserve TJ integrity in human primary nasal epithelial cells infected with a non-IV RSV, broadening the potential applicability of exploiting this miR in other respiratory virus disease models.
Because of their high transduction efficiency, 70% of all gene therapy clinical trials involve the use of lentiviruses (LVs). Concerns regarding high immunogenicity and the risks of insertional mutagenesis has limited the enthusiasm for translation to the clinic. Enhanced safety profiles and lower production costs have led to the emergence of nonviral vectors as an attractive alternative for the delivery of synthetic siRNAs , , and miRs. , , Lipid nanoparticles have gained much attention for the successful delivery of therapeutic RNAs in vaccines for SARS-COV2 , and treatment of hereditary amyloid transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis and tuberculosis. , 
In our pre-clinical in vivo study, cationic lipids containing the commercially available miR INH or the NC lipid micelles were generated upon mixture with the QIAGEN HPF. The miR INH was modified to reduce in vivo degradation (2′-O-methyl-group modified oligonucleotides). We have previously published successful delivery of our miR-193b-5p INH in an vivo model of sepsis using this methodology. In this article, we show that delivery of the miR-193b-5p INH on days 4 and 5 post-infection reduces the expression levels of miR-193b-5p, 24–48 h post-inhibitor delivery. Future work will build off our proof-of-concept experiments to develop therapeutically relevant carriers, such as lipid nanoparticles, for the delivery of exogenous therapeutic miRs.
In summary, we expose the pathogenic nature of miR-193b-5p and its role in working at the behest of the virus, where its timely increase assists in the reduction of the fortified barrier-Ocln enabling a viral attack to the host system. The timely delivery of the miR-193b-5p INH, mitigates the loss of TJ Ocln, reduces viral load, and enhances host antiviral responses, thus positioning this miR as a possible novel therapeutic target in influenza-induced ARDS.

## Materials and methods

## Cell culture
Human bronchoalveolar distal airway epithelial cells (BEAS2b) were generously gifted by Dr. Haibo Zhang (University of Toronto, Canada, Department of Anesthesia). Cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. HPMECs were purchased from PromoCELL (Heidelberg, Germany) and cultured in endothelial cell basal medium MV 2 (EBM-2) (CC-3202, Lonza) supplemented with endothelial cell growth medium (EGM-2MV) SingleQuot Kit supplements and growth factors (CC4176, Lonza). All in vitro experiments with HPMECs were performed with cells at passages 3 to 7.

## In vitro miR gain- and loss-of-function experiments
Cells were incubated at 70%–80% confluency for 24 h with 5 nM syn-hsa-miR-193b-5p miScript mimic (MIM; MSY0004767), 50 nM anti-hsa-miR-193b-5p miScript miRNA INH (MIN0004767), 50 nM hsa-miRNA inhibitor NC(1027271), 75 nM occludin siRNA (Ocln KD; SI05054385), or 5 or 75 nM AllStar siRNA NC (1027280) (all purchased from QIAGEN), using HPF (301705, QIAGEN) or Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (13778150, Thermo Fisher Scientific) as per the manufacturer’s instructions.

## In vivo knockdown of Ocln
C57Bl6 mice were intubated 1ne day before PR8 inoculation using Ambion In Vivo Pre-Designed silencing RNA (siRNA, cat. no. 4457308) targeting Ocln, and the Ambion In Vivo Negative Control no. 1 siRNA (cat. no. 4457287). SiRNA were re-suspended with the invivofectamine 3.0 Reagent (cat. no. IVF3001), with each mouse receiving 1.6 nmol of siRNA.

## Influenza infection in vitro
BEAS2b, Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK), and HPMECs cells were infected with 1.0 MOI of Influenza A/Puerto Rico/8/34 (H1N1; PR8; Charles River Laboratories) in DMEM, α-minimum essential medium (MEM), or EBM-2, respectively. Cells were supplemented with 2% FBS and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. Samples were collected at 12, 24, or 48 h post-infection.

## Animal care
All experimental procedures and protocols were approved by the Animal Care Committee of St. Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada (ACC906). Eight- to 12-week-old male C57Bl/6J WT mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories. miR-193-365-1 knockout mice (miR-193 KO) were a generous gift from Dr. Lothar Hennighausen (National Institutes of Health). miR-193-365-1 KO mice (miR-193 KO were bred in-house at the Keenan Research Center vivarium. Generation of KO mice has been previously characterized, and the microbiome from different genotypes was not different. miR-193 KO (C57Bl/6 × 129SvEv/Tac background) were bred with C57Bl/6J mice to produce heterozygotes (miR-193 Hets). DNA from ear notches was extracted using REDExtract-N-Amp (cat. no. XNAT, Sigma-Aldrich). PCR was performed per the manufacturer’s instructions. Primer sequences are given in . Primer pair 1 produces a 546 bp band in miR-193 KO animals while primer pair 2 produces a roughly 500 bp band in miR-193b WT animals. The presence of two bands, as resolved on a 3% agarose gel, indicates heterozygosity ( ). All mice were housed on a standard 12 h light/dark cycle and had free access to food (Teklan Glocbal 18% Protein Rodent Diet) and reverse osmosis water. Infection experiments were performed in a biosafety level 2 (BSL-2) room in the vivarium. Non-infected mice were housed in the same BSL-2 facility room as the infected mice to minimize potential confoundment. All animals were monitored closely and treated humanely in accordance to the guidelines outlined in the Canadian Council of Animal Care. Animals were sacrificed by anesthetic overdose (isoflurane) at the endpoint of each study. Assessment of physiological parameters were performed by an experimenter blinded to the assigned groups, and welfare assessment of the mice was performed in accordance with the St. Michael’s Hospital Vivarium Facility. All mice were randomized to experimental groups by providing a unique ID number per mouse in experiments, and were assigned to treatment groups using a random number generator (https://www.calculatorsoup.com) in accordance to the Animal Research: Reporting of In Vivo Experiments (ARRIVE) guidelines. ARRIVE 2.0 guideline checklist is provided in the .

## Influenza infection in vivo
Influenza A/PR/8/34 H1N1 was grown in eggs and tissue culture infectious dose determined by infection of MDCK cells and mice were anesthetized with 2%–5% isoflurane. Animals were held upright during administration. PR8 (10 TCID50) in a total volume of 30 μL was administered intranasally using a pipette. Animals were then placed on a bedding-free cage on top of a heating blanket until recovery. Intratracheal instillation of oligonucleotide mixtures were performed at days 4, 5, or 6 post-infections. Formal sample size calculation based on our preliminary experiments indicates that with eight mice per group we will have a power of 0.8 (type I error of 0.5) to detect statistically significant differences in survival and BALf differential cell count between mice treated with miR-193b-5p INH vs. NC.

## BALf and lung tissue harvesting
After anesthetizing the animal in 2%–5% isoflurane with continuous oxygenation, the trachea was intubated with a 20-gauge cannula, and the right main step bronchus tied off. BALf collection was performed by instilling 0.5 mL of saline into the left lung and re-aspirating the fluid three times. After cardiac puncture and exsanguination, blood was collected and immediately centrifuged for serum. The right lungs were collected, and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen for subsequent real-time qRT-PCR and protein quantification. After centrifugation, the BALf supernatant was used for protein determination using a Bradford assay. The pellet was re-suspended in PBS for total cell count using a hemocytometer and trypan blue dye. The re-suspended pellet was centrifuged onto cytospin slides, which were stained with hematoxylin and eosin with the Hemacolor Stain Set (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA) to distinguish monocytes, neutrophils, and macrophages for subsequent cell differential analysis. Lungs were also assessed for viral load determination (plaque assay), inflammation (neutrophil count), histology, western blots, immunohistochemistry, immunoblotting, or RNA analysis.

## Assessment of viral load
Standard agarose-based plaque assays were performed from the BALf. MDCK cells, an accepted tight-junction forming the epithelial cell model, were maintained at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO2 chamber under stationary conditions, cultured to 90% confluency. Each well of a 6-well plate is seeded at 1 × 106 cells and cultured in MEM (Gibco/Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) containing 10% FBS, 100 units/mL penicillin (Gibco), and 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Gibco). After two washes with serum-free DMEM (Gibco/Invitrogen), the cells are maintained in serum-free DMEM at 37°C for 1 h. Then, each well was overlaid with 200 μL of diluted BAL of serially diluted solutions of inoculum and incubated at 37°C for 1 h. After one wash in serum-free DMEM, the cells were overlaid with serum-free DMEM containing 0.6% agarose, 0.1% diethylamino ethyl-dextran (Sigma-Aldrich), and 7 μg/mL trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich). The cells were cultured at 37°C for 72 h, fixed in 10% formaldehyde, and then stained with 0.037% methylene blue and each experiment was performed in triplicate.

## Tissue culture infectivity dose
Samples were dispensed into a clear, round-bottomed, 96-well plate and serially diluted (1:10) in replicates of four down the plate from row A to H, along with a saline only NC and a PR8-positive control. MDCK cells were seeded at 105 cells per well. Plates were incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2. The following day, cells were washed twice with serum-free DMEM and incubated for 4 days with DMEM supplemented with 2% FBS, 1% penicillin-streptomycin, 1% L-glutamine, 1% NEAA, and 1× TPCK-treated trypsin. Post-incubation, 0.5% red blood cell solution was added to each well and degree of agglutination was measured after 2 h at 4°C. The TCID50 was calculated based on the ReedMunch method. 

## mRNA and miRNA analyses
Frozen right lungs were first homogenized using a mortar and pestle. Total RNA was then extracted from 1 mg of homogenized lung by the TRIzol Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized from 1 μg of RNA using the SuperScript First-Strand Synthesis System for reverse transcription (RT) PCR (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Real-time qPCR was performed using the ViiA 7 Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The relative change in gene expression or miRNA level was calculated by the ΔΔCT method. Gene expression was normalized to the housekeeping gene β-actin, and miR-193b-5p (QIAGEN, cat no. 339350) level was normalized to the housekeeping miRNA miR-191-5p (QIAGEN, cat no. 339350) and U6 (QIAGEN, cat no. 339350). Fold change was then normalized to appropriate controls. Primer list is provided in .

## Immunoblotting protein expression
Lung tissues were homogenized, and cells were lysed using RIPA lysis buffer in loading buffer (Bio-Rad, no. 161–0737). Proteins were resolved on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel, transferred on to nitrocellulose membranes (Amersham Biosciences), and blocked in 5% milk as previously described. Primary antibodies were probed overnight at 4°. Western blot bands were analyzed using Bio-Rad Gel Doc 2000. Densitometry was performed using GelQuantNet software. Antibodies used include occludin (71–1500, Invitrogen, used for tissue samples), occludin (sc-133255, Santa Cruz, used for cell samples), MAVS (no. 3993, Cell Signaling), GAPDH (no. 2118, Cell Signaling), and β-actin (sc-47778, Santa Cruz).

## IFN treatment
BEAS2b cells were treated with Recombinant Human IFN-β Protein (8499-IF, R&D). The specific activity of Recombinant Human IFN-β is approximately 2.8 × 108 IU/mg, which is calibrated against human IFN-β World Health Organization International Standard (NIBSC code: 00/572). Cells were treated at log-fold increase in IFN-β. Cells were lysed with TRIzol Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and RNA was extracted 4 h post-treatment.

## Lentiviral vectors overexpressing miR-193b-5p INH or NC
Third generation replication-defective and self-inactivating, VSVG-pseudotyped integrating lentivectors (LVs) were produced. Human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293T) cells were co-transfected with four plasmid vectors: (1) bicistronic LV transfer plasmid carrying the miR-193b INH or scrambled control (NC) sequence plus the gene for green fluorescent protein (GFP), high-efficiency LV packaging, and envelope plasmids (gifts from Professor Gerard Wagemaker, University of Rotterdam) including (2) LV packaging plasmid (pMDL-g/pRRE; encoding for gag and pol proteins), (3) LV packaging plasmid (pRSV-REV; encoding for rev protein), and (4) LV envelope plasmid pMD-VSVg (encoding for VSVg: vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein). Viral particles were harvested 48 h post-transfection by cell supernatant centrifugation, dispersed in PBS, and stored at −80°C. Functional viral titers were calculated based on transduction of 293T cells with serial dilutions of the virus and by flow cytometry to measure percentage of GFP-positive cells. GFP expression was confirmed by microscopy and cell death by lactate dehydrogenase levels in conditioned medium.

## Primary HNECs
Nasal brushings were performed from consenting healthy volunteers (REB no. 10000 61106 Hospital for Sick Children Research Ethics Board) and cells were cultured in basal epithelial growth medium. After two passages, cells were plated on collagen-coated 96-well trans wells for differentiation. After 21 days of growth under air-liquid interface conditions, cells were infected. Lentivirus (LV) vectors were used to transduce these cells and deliver the miR-193b-5p INH and NC sequences. At 21 days, cells were infected with PR8 (MOI = 1). Effect of miR-193b-5p inhibition was determined at 72 h post-infection. We exploited the existing system using RSV to demonstrate our approach and methodology. 

## Digital droplet PCR
RNA (from homogenized whole lung tissue, or cells) was reverse transcribed using RT-specific TaqMan primers (cat. nos. 4427975 and 4427975, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and the TaqMan MicroRNA Reverse Transcription Kit (cat. no. 4366596, Thermo Fischer Scientific). ddPCR Supermix for Probes (cat. no. 186-3010, Bio-Rad) was used as per the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, 20 μL reaction volumes, containing 1× master mix, primers and TaqMan probes (cat. no. 4427975, Thermo Fischer Scientific), and 2 μL of cDNA were loaded on disposable droplet generator cartridges (before 12.05.2014 cat. no. 186-3008, from 12.05.2014 cat. no. 186-4008, gaskets cat. no. 186-3009, Bio-Rad). Droplets were generated with 70 μL of droplet generation oil (cat. no. 186-3005, Bio-Rad) using the QX100 system (Bio-Rad). Droplets were then transferred to a 96-well PCR plate (cat. no. 0030128.613, TwinTec, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). The samples were partitioned into ∼20,000 nL sized oil droplets through a water-oil emulsion technique. Partitioned droplets were thermocycled to endpoint in a 96-well PCR plate. After PCR, the sealed plates were placed in the droplet reader from the QX100 system (Bio-Rad), and droplets were analyzed as per the manufacturer’s recommendations (Droplet Reader Oil, cat. no. 186-3004). Fluorescence amplitudes were read for all droplets in each sample well in a droplet flow cytometer.

## Histology
The left lung was fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. Sections (4 μm thick) were cut longitudinally from the central zone with a microtome and stained with hematoxylin-eosin for histologic analysis. Photomicrographs at magnifications of ×25, ×100, and ×400 were obtained from eight nonoverlapping fields of view per section under a light microscope (Olympus BX51, Olympus Latin America, Brazil).

## miRNAscopy in situ
In situ hybridization for miR-193b-5p was performed using miRNAscope HD Detection Reagent-RED (cat. no. 3324510, Advanced Cell Diagnostics). The manual RNU6 (positive) control probe (cat. no. 727871-S1) and scrambled (negative) control probe (cat. no. 727881-S1) in channel S1 were used for the miRNAscope HD RED assay. The RNA-Protein Co-Detection Ancillary Kit (cat. no. 323180) allowed simultaneous co-detection of the miR-193b-5p probe (cat. no. 892401- S1), and primary antibodies TTF1 (cat. no. BS-0826R), CD34 (cat. no. PA585917), and CD68 (cat. no. PA5109344) were stained with Alexa Fluor 633 (cat. no. A21070).

## Dual-Luciferase assay
The 2,800 bp of genomic sequence upstream of the human miR-193b-365a1 initiation codon (Ensembl ID ENSG00000207639) with flanking XhoI and BglII sites was synthesized by Epoch Gene into a pBluescript II SK (−) backbone. The promoter was digested using XhoI and BglII in NEB Buffer 3.1 and the fragment was cloned into the pNL1.2[NlucP] (cat. no. N1011) reporter vector. HEK293T cells were co-transfected with the promoter-reporter vector and a Firefly luciferase plasmid, pGL4.54[luc2/TK] vector (Promega) using Lipofectamine 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 24 h. The cell culture medium was replaced with fresh DMEM medium containing Hu-IFN-β (1,000 IU) and TNF-α (10 ng/mL) at 6 h post-transfection. Mock-transfected cells were not treated with Hu-IFN-β or TNF-α. Cells were lysed, and the luciferase signal was measured using a Nano-Glo Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega). The results are expressed as the normalized ratio of Nanoluc to Firefly luciferase intensity in miR promoter vs. backbone only control. All experiments were repeated three times.

## Ethics approval
REB no. 21-228C (St. Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, Canada), REB no. 02-0118-U/05-0016-C (Toronto Public Health Laboratory, Canada), REB no. 10000 61106 (Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada), REB no. 14.048–900 (University of Sao Paolo, Brazil), and REB no. 22/17 University of Asturias, Oviedo, Spain).

## FFPE human samples
Archival blocks of FFPE lung tissue from five patients who died with ARDS (two males and three females; mean age 48 years) and three control patients deceased from cancer (lung negative for malignancy: two males and one female; mean age 64 years) were obtained (CEP 14.048-900, University of Sao Paolo) and RNA was extracted from FFPE human sections using the RNeasy FFPE kit (QIAGEN, cat. no. 73504) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Statistics analysis
All studies were randomized and blinded. Observers assessing endpoints were blinded. Formal sample size calculations are based on mortality, levels of miR-193b, or degree of lung injury. All data were analyzed using Kruskal-Wallis one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) or two-way ANOVA as appropriate. We used false discovery rate to correct for multiple hypothesis testing.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S5 and Table S1

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Data availability
Data available upon request from corresponding author.

## Acknowledgments
We would like to thank St. Michael’s Hospital Research Core Facility Staff members (Drs. Xiaofeng Lu and Caterina Di Ciano-Oliveira) and the vivarium staff for their expertise and technical support for the experiments. We further extend gratitude to Dr. Yuexin Shan, Michael Kim, Shehla Itzari, Dr. Paul Turgeon, and Dr. Ana Paula Monteiro, for their expertise and advice in the experimental models. We also thank the patients and family who donated samples for research purposes. Graphical abstract images were created with BioRender.com. This work was supported by the 10.13039/501100000024Canadian Institutes of Health Research (grant no. MOP-130331 to CCDS). The research reported in this publication was supported in part by the São Paulo Research Foundation (10.13039/501100001807FAPESP) (2018/20403-6), Carlos Chagas Filho Foundation for Supporting Research in the State of Rio de Janeiro (10.13039/501100004586FAPERJ E-26/210.181/2020), and the 10.13039/501100003593National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq-483005/2012-6, 401700/2020-8) and 10.13039/501100002322CAPES/DFATD (88881.158922/2017-01).

## Author contributions
Concept and design, C.M.V., A.K.V., T.H.W., T.J.M., J.N.T., and C.C.d.S.; performed experiments and original data collection, C.M.V., A.K.V., V.L.C., S.G., A.M.E., S.Y., P.J.P., A.L.d.S., Y.C., Y.-C.T., C.C.G., S.S.-B., A.T.F., S.L.A., and A.A.; data analysis and interpretation, C.M.V., V.L.C., S.G., A.M.E., P.J.P., S.L.A., A.A., and C.C.d.S.; manuscript editing and discussion, C.M.V., A.K.V., S.G., A.M.E., J.N.T., A.L.d.S., T.H.W., C.C.G., P.R.M.R., G.M.A., T.J.M., S.S.-B., A.M., S.S.B., J.C.M., and C.C.d.S.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2023.06.011.