pmcNucleic Acids ResNucleic Acids Res4nar0411011narNucleic Acids Research0305-10481362-4962Oxford University PressPMC12585909PMC12585909.112585909125859094118905410.1093/nar/gkaf1141gkaf11411Nucleic Acid TherapeuticsAcademicSubjects/SCI00010Therapeutic antisense oligonucleotide mitigates retinal dysfunction in a pig model of CLN3 Batten disease
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4426-8442StrattonMatthew P
Center for Genetic Diseases, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, IL 60064, United States
School of Graduate and Postdoctoral Studies, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, IL 60064, United StatesCentaJessica L
Center for Genetic Diseases, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, IL 60064, United StatesDepartment of Pharmacology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United StatesSwierVicki J
Pediatrics and Rare Diseases Group, Sanford Research, Sioux Falls, SD 57104, United StatesPfeiferWanda LDepartment of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Institute for Vision Research, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, IA City, IA 52242, United StatesBoothClarissa D
Pediatrics and Rare Diseases Group, Sanford Research, Sioux Falls, SD 57104, United StatesAlbertKarlee
Pediatrics and Rare Diseases Group, Sanford Research, Sioux Falls, SD 57104, United StatesHunyaraJohn L
Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, CA 92010, United StatesRechtzigelMitchell J
Pediatrics and Rare Diseases Group, Sanford Research, Sioux Falls, SD 57104, United StatesDuelliFox JDepartment of Pharmacology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United StatesLeppertHannah G
Pediatrics and Rare Diseases Group, Sanford Research, Sioux Falls, SD 57104, United Stateshttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6467-3309RigoFrank
Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, CA 92010, United StatesSmitTrisha
Exemplar Genetics, Coralville, IA 52241, United StatesJafar-nejadPaymaan
Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, CA 92010, United StatesWeimerJill M
Pediatrics and Rare Diseases Group, Sanford Research, Sioux Falls, SD 57104, United StatesDepartment of Pediatrics, Sanford School of Medicine, University of South Dakota, Sioux Falls, SD 57104, United StatesDrackArlene VDepartment of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Institute for Vision Research, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, IA City, IA 52242, United StatesStead Family Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, IA City, IA 52242, United Stateshttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4253-9261HastingsMichelle L
Center for Genetic Diseases, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, IL 60064, United StatesDepartment of Pharmacology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States – ]. In classical presentations of the disease, children develop normally until symptom onset at 4–8 years of age, when vision loss begins, typically as the first clinical sign of the disease [ ]. Disease symptoms advance during adolescence to include seizures, difficulty speaking, loss of motor function, cognitive decline, psychiatric problems, and ultimately premature death in the second or third decade of life [ – ]. There are currently no effective treatments for CLN3 disease.
Vision loss causes a significant reduction in the quality of life for people with CLN3 disease, making it a therapeutic priority at early stages of the disease [ ]. In children with CLN3 disease, visual acuity is mildly affected initially, but vision loss due to retinal degeneration worsens rapidly, progressing from normal vision to functional blindness over 24–36 months, although light-dark perception may be retained for several years [ , ]. Electroretinograms (ERG) of patients with early CLN3 disease are electronegative [ – ], but as the disease progresses, the ERG is severely reduced [ ] with no rod response [ , , ], diminished and delayed cone responses [ , ], reduction in the a-wave response [ , ], even greater loss of b-wave amplitudes [ ], reduction in the b:a ratio [ ], and are ultimately completely undetectable [ , ].

CLN3 is a 15-exon gene encoding a transmembrane protein of unknown function that localizes to the membrane of lysosomes and endosomes via two lysosomal targeting sequences (LTS) [ – ]. The most common disease-causing variant in CLN3, accounting for ∼85% of disease alleles, is a 966 base pair deletion encompassing the entirety of exons 7 and 8 (CLN3∆78) [ , , ]. This deletion results in a shift in the translational open reading frame (ORF), which results in a premature termination codon (PTC) in exon 9, upstream of both LTSs. The consequences of this premature termination event include destabilization of the messenger RNA (mRNA) due to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) of the mutant CLN3 and translation of a truncated CLN3∆78 protein lacking 257 amino acids at its C-terminal end, as well as both LTSs, resulting in its retention in the endoplasmic reticulum [ , , ].

CLN3 pre-mRNA undergoes extensive alternative splicing, with over 60 identified spliced isoforms [ , ]. Given the lack of knowledge about the function of the protein, it is not known which isoforms carry out the essential functions of the protein. Thus, correcting the ORF of CLN3∆78 and recovering the expression of some of the potential CLN3 protein isoforms may have therapeutic value [ , , ]. One CLN3 spliced isoform of particular interest is CLN3∆578, which, in addition to lacking exons 7 and 8, also lacks exon 5, and occurs naturally in some regions of the brain [ , ]. The additional skipping of exon 5 results in an intact ORF when exons 7 and 8 are also skipped, resulting in a protein with a small, internal deletion that retains both LTS sequences and a C-terminus identical to full-length CLN3. Notably, this alternatively spliced transcript has been annotated in non-human primates (ENSNLET00000044463, ENSMMUT00000001013, ENSMFAT00000017263), dogs (ENSCAFT00845004450), and pigs (ENSSSCT00110037018.1), in addition to humans (ENST00000357806). Conservation of this spliced isoform across species suggests it may have a functional role in cells [ ]. Having identified a naturally occurring isoform of CLN3 lacking exons 5, 7, and 8, we have explored strategies to restore expression from CLN3∆78 by inducing a spliced isoform with an intact ORF.
Splice-switching ASOs are short, synthetic nucleic acids that modulate pre-mRNA splicing by base pairing to RNA sequences that are critical for directing appropriate splicing, thereby modulating splice-site selection [ ]. Splice-switching ASOs have been approved by regulatory agencies for the treatment of numerous genetic diseases, and many more are under development. A clinical trial utilizing an intravitreal splice-switching ASO to treat the ocular disorder CEP290-associated Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) demonstrated efficacy in some patients [ , ]. ASO clinical trials for vision loss in other diseases, including Usher syndrome type 2 [ ] and retinitis pigmentosa, are being developed [ ].
We have shown previously that intracerebroventricular (ICV) delivery of an ASO that induces Cln3 exon 5 skipping during pre-mRNA splicing is therapeutic in a mouse model of CLN3 Batten disease, decreasing abnormal histopathology throughout the brain and improving sensorimotor coordination [ ]. We have validated these findings in a mouse model that expresses only the Cln3∆578 isoform, mimicking our ASO approach, and found that ORF correction by exon 5 skipping in Cln3∆78 results in a protracted disease progression in mice [ ].
To explore whether ASO-mediated exon 5 skipping can also be used to treat retinal dysfunction in CLN3 disease, we tested the approach in a CLN3∆78 minipig model [ ]. Though mouse models have been used extensively to study this disease, rodent models of central vision loss are limited due to their lack of the highly specialized central retina forming the macula and fovea, which are found in the eyes of humans and other primates [ ]. Furthermore, Cln3∆78 mice have limited retinal dysfunction and normal ERGs [ , ]. Porcine models are more appropriate for the study of retinal dystrophies, given that the pig retina more closely resembles the human retina and eye size [ , – ]. Indeed, CLN3∆78 pigs have progressive vision loss, retinal pigment epithelium dysfunction, and photoreceptor cell loss [ ].
We administered ASOs targeting pig exon 5 via intravitreal injection (IVI) and found that a single treatment of exon 5-targeted ASO induced robust exon skipping for up to a year in pigs with the CLN3∆78 allele. Treatment also protected against retinal dysfunction at early stages of disease in the treated eye. To test human-targeted ASOs in the eye, we screened ASOs that were complementary to a region of CLN3 conserved between humans and pigs and identified a pan-human/pig ASO that induces exon skipping of endogenous CLN3 exon 5 in both patient-derived fibroblasts and in the pig eye. Taken together, our findings demonstrate the utility of ASO-based reading frame correction as an approach to treat CLN3 Batten disease retinal dysfunction and demonstrate the activity of an ASO specific for human CLN3∆78 in vivo.

## Materials and methods

## Study design
The overall objectives of this study were to identify splice-switching ASOs for correcting the ORF of the CLN3∆78 transcript in pigs and perform a preliminary assessment of the safety, feasibility, and efficacy of intravitreal delivery for the prevention of retinal dysfunction in a pig model of CLN3 Batten disease. Studies ranged from pig and human fibroblast cell cultures for initial ASO screening, through initial tolerability screening in rats, and lastly longevity, safety, efficacy, and ERG assessments in pigs. The sample sizes for in vivo studies are outlined in and were determined with the goal of using the smallest number of animals. All experiments were done in compliance with regulatory protocols as established in the sections below. Tolerability experiments were conducted in wild-type rats, and the sample size (n = 4 or 8) was selected on the basis of our previous experience with this method. The primary source of variability in these studies was the intravitreal dosing. Pig experiments were done in wild-type (+), CLN3+/∆78, and CLN3∆78 pigs, and the sample sizes were selected on the basis of previous experience with this model from our group and preliminary data. For splicing evaluation, endpoints for data collection were prospectively selected as 3, 6, and 12 months post-treatment. For functional ERG assessments, endpoints were prospectively selected, with an intermediary endpoint being the earliest point at which functional differences were observed based on treatment and a final endpoint of 12 months post-treatment if no differences were observed. Animal inclusion was decided by genotyping polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Both female and male animals were used for these experiments. ERG data were evaluated by a blinded researcher for inclusion based upon proper electrode placement and clean waveform measurement. The primary source of variability in these studies was the inherent variability in normal baseline ERG amplitudes between individuals. Animals were excluded from the study if their baseline ERGs were >2 SD from the group mean. Variability was further controlled for by pairing vehicle- and ASO-treated eyes within each animal and assessing changes in amplitude from each specific eye’s healthy baseline measurement. Animals were not excluded based on sex. Researchers were not blinded to experimental groups during the experiments or the analysis. Specific materials and methods are described in the sections below.

## Animals
All pigs were maintained at Exemplar Genetics (Sioux Center, IA, USA) under approved institutional animal care and use committee (IACUC) protocols (MRP 2021-014 and U Iowa 4072610). Animals were group housed, and all males included in this study were castrated. All rats were maintained at Ionis Pharmaceuticals (Carlsbad, CA, USA) under an approved IACUC protocol (2021-1164).

## DNA isolation and analysis
Genomic DNA (gDNA) was isolated from the optic nerve tissue of wild-type and CLN3Δ78 minipigs using the REDExtract-N-Amp Tissue PCR Kit (Sigma–Aldrich). gDNA was PCR amplified using primers specific for pig CLN3 (pCLN3) intron 6 forward and intron 8 reverse ( ). PCR products were separated on a 2% agarose gel, visualized with ethidium bromide, purified using the GFX Gel Band Purification Kit (Cytiva, Marlborough, MA), and sequenced to confirm identity (Azenta, Burlington, MA). Sequences were aligned using MultAlin multiple sequence alignment [ ].

## RNA isolation and analysis
Optic nerve and retina tissue from wild-type, CLN3+/Δ78, and CLN3Δ78 minipigs were homogenized in TRIzol reagent (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA), and RNA was isolated according to the manufacturer’s protocol and subsequently reverse transcribed using GoScript reverse transcriptase (Promega, Madison, WI) with oligo-dT primers. Radiolabeled PCR of the complementary DNA (cDNA) was performed using GoTaq Green (Promega, Madison, WI) with α-32P-deoxycytidine triphosphate and primers specific for pig CLN3 exon 3 forward and exon 6 reverse, or exon 4 forward and exon 10 reverse, as indicated ( ). PCR products were separated on a 6% nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel and quantified on a Typhoon phosphorimager (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL).

## Antisense oligonucleotides
Synthesis and purification of all ASOs was performed as previously described [ – ]. ASOs were uniformly modified with 2′-O-methoxyethyl sugars with a phosphorothioate backbone. Lyophilized ASOs were dissolved in sterile Dulbecco’s phosphate buffered saline (DPBS) without calcium chloride or magnesium chloride and sterilized through a 0.2 μm filter. The ASOs were diluted to the desired concentration required for dosing animals in sterile 1× DPBS. ASO sequences are provided in . BLAST and GGGenome searches with the ASO-16 target sequence against the pig genome and ASO-29a target sequence against the human genome revealed no other perfect sequence matches. Potential off-target sequences with greater than 15 contiguous bases of homology are provided in .

## Cell culture and transfection
Pig fibroblast cell lines were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) in a 37°C incubator with 5% carbon dioxide. Primary homozygous CLN3Δ78 pig cells were propagated in culture following isolation from a skin biopsy taken from homozygous CLN3Δ78 miniswine ears. Samples were cleaned by washing with Hank’s buffered salt solution in a 10-cm tissue culture dish. After washing, samples were cut into smaller pieces and placed in a T25 tissue culture flask containing digestion media (DMEM with high glucose, 4.0 mM l-glutamine, and sodium pyruvate supplemented with 20% FBS, 1.2% penicillin-streptomycin, 0.12% deoxyribonuclease I, 1.2% amphotericin B, and 1.2% collagenase). Samples were incubated overnight (37°C, 5% CO2). After incubation, the supernatant was centrifuged. The pellet containing cells was then plated in a T75 tissue culture flask with culture media (DMEM with high glucose, 4.0 mM l-glutamine, and sodium pyruvate supplemented with 20% FBS, 1% penicillin-streptomycin, and 1% amphotericin B). Once the cells started to grow, the culture media was changed to DMEM with high glucose, 4.0 mM l-glutamine, and sodium pyruvate supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin-streptomycin, and 1% amphotericin B. When cells were ready to be expanded, 0.25% trypsin was used to dissociate the cells from the dishes with a 5-min incubation at room temperature. Trypsin was inhibited by adding DMEM with high glucose, 4.0 mM l-glutamine, and sodium pyruvate supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. After centrifugation, the cells were expanded 1:2. Adherent cells were expanded for 10 passages prior to transfection.
Fibroblast cell cultures, derived from a person with CLN3 Batten disease who is homozygous for CLN3Δ78 (SP3.2.1), were provided by F. Porter and A. D. Do [National Institutes of Health (NIH)/National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD)]. Human fibroblasts were grown in DMEM/high glucose medium supplemented with 10% FBS.
ASOs targeting exon 5 of pig CLN3 or human CLN3 were individually transfected into a primary cell line from homozygous CLN3Δ78 miniswine ears or fibroblasts from a patient with CLN3 Batten disease, at a final concentration of 100 nM, or for the dose response from 0 nM to 100 nM for pig cells and 0 to 57 nM for human cells. ASOs were transfected into cells using Lipofectamine 3000 Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, with the P3000 reagent included only for the ASO walk in pig fibroblasts. Cells were collected in TRIzol (Life Technologies) after 48 h and analyzed for exon skipping. RNA was collected using TRIzol and analyzed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) as described earlier, using primers spanning exon 3 forward and exon 6 reverse, or exon 4 forward and exon 10 reverse for pig CLN3, and exon 4 forward and exon 10 reverse for human CLN3. Where indicated, cells were treated with puromycin at a final concentration of 200 µg/ml for 5 to 8 h prior to collection.

## Intravitreal injections
Pigs were placed on an operating room table and pre-anesthetized with an intramuscular injection of ketamine (14 mg/kg) and acepromazine (1 mg/kg). Pigs were then anesthetized using a cone inhalation delivery system of 1%–5% isoflurane. Proparacaine was administered as a topical anesthetic eye drop to mitigate discomfort on the ocular surface. Once properly sedated, the eyes were prepared using a 5% Betadine solution (povidone-iodine solution) applied around the eye and on the ocular surface. A sterile Alfonso lid speculum was placed in each eye. A sterile caliper was then used to measure 2.5 mm from the surgical limbus near 12 o’clock (modified depending on the age of the pig and the size of the eye, calculated as needed for each animal). A 31 G 5/16-inch needle on an insulin syringe was then used to inject DPBS or ASO at varying titers to have a maximum volume of 30 μl into the vitreous cavity. The needle was held in the eye for 10 s after injection, and a sterile cotton tip applicator, which had been dipped in the Betadine solution, was placed over the sclera as the needle was removed to prevent reflux. Manual intraocular pressure assessment and observation for clouding of the cornea were performed along with fundus photography using a condensing lens (20 or 28D) and an iPhone camera, Vista View, or indirect ophthalmoscope. After the procedure, antibiotic and steroid ointments were applied to the eyes.
Rats were anesthetized using a chamber inhalation delivery system of 1%–5% isoflurane. Once properly sedated, animals were placed in a stereotaxic instrument. A sterile Hamilton syringe with a 33-gauge needle was placed in the stereotaxic manipulator and used to inject PBS or 5 μg of ASO bilaterally at a volume of 2 μl into the vitreous cavity.

## Electroretinogram
Pigs were tested for retinal function using a flash ERG RETeval device (LKC Technologies) as previously described [ , ]. Baseline ERGs were recorded either immediately before injection or within the first week following injections to limit the time under anesthesia during injections and subsequently every 3 months until terminal tissue harvest.
Light-adapted testing was performed after a minimum 10-min exposure to artificial light, i.e. standard operating room illumination. The rabbit/minipig photopic two-step light-adapted protocol was used for each eye and produced an 8.0 cd·s/m2 flash at 2.0 Hz, followed by an 8.0 cd·s/m2 flicker at 28.3 Hz with a 30 cd/m2 background [ , ].
After light-adapted testing of both eyes, all lights in the room were extinguished, external light was eliminated, and a piece of blackout fabric was placed over the eyes of the pig. The RETeval device was calibrated for dark adaptation, and animals were allowed to adapt to the dark for 20 min. A dim red light was used as needed to set up the test.
Following dark adaptation, the rabbit/minipig scotopic two-step protocol was used for each eye. The first step produced an 8.0 cd·s/m2 flash at 0.1 Hz (dark-adapted mixed-rod and cone response), followed by a 25 cd·s/m2 flash at 0.05 Hz (dark-adapted mixed-rod and cone response to higher intensity flash).
Raw (unsmoothed) data values were used to calculate amplitudes. The a-wave amplitude was recorded as the pre-stimulus baseline to an a-wave trough, and the b-wave amplitude was measured from an a-wave trough to the highest waveform peak. ERG recordings were assessed by a blinded researcher, and some recordings were excluded from analysis on the basis of poor electrode placement or too much noise in the waveform baseline prior to stimulation. To limit inter-animal variability of retinal function, ERG measurements from the eyes of individual pigs, one treated with vehicle and one with ASO, were analyzed in pairwise comparisons, and the change over time in the ERG was calculated, with the first measurement, 1 week after treatment, serving as the baseline to account for any injection-related effects. To enable this analysis and control for pigs with vastly different ERG readings as baseline, we carried out an outlier analysis, and two animals were also excluded from some analyses because ERG recordings at the start of the study were >2 SD from the group mean.
Rats were tested for retinal function using a flash ERG Celeris device (Diagnosys LLC) 4 weeks post-injection. Dark-adapted testing was performed after housing the animals in a dark room for ∼24 h prior to testing. A three-step dark-adapted protocol was used for each eye and produced a 0.01 cd·s/m2 flash at 1.0 Hz, followed by a 3.0 cd·s/m2 flash at 1.0 Hz, followed by a 10.0 cd·s/m2 flash at 1.0 Hz. Three sweeps were recorded at each intensity level per eye, and the average response was used to determine the a- and b-wave amplitudes. The a-wave amplitude was recorded as the pre-stimulus baseline to an a-wave trough, and the b-wave amplitude was measured from an a-wave trough to the highest waveform peak.

## Tissue collection and processing
Following euthanasia via barbiturates (10 cc/45 kg IV pentobarbital), as approved by the AVMA in SOP 2037 Swine Euthanasia, pigs were enucleated. Using a scalpel, a small slit was cut in the posterior portion of the eye near the optic nerve to isolate a piece of retinal tissue for splicing analysis. Retinal tissue was flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Eyes were then injected with 2–3 ml of 10% formalin intravitreally through the slit and immersed in 10% formalin (20× volume of the eye) for 24 h at room temperature. After 24 h, the superior portion of the eye just above the lens was removed. The remaining portion of the eye was placed back into 10% formalin and fixed for another 24 h. Following the 48-h total formalin fixation time, a second cut was made to remove the inferior portion of the eye just below the optic nerve. Eyes were then placed in 50% ethanol for 1 h, then transferred to a pathology cassette used for paraffin embedding in 70% ethanol until embedding or up to 5 days.

## Paraffin embedding
Briefly, wax pots were heated to 66°C to melt paraffin. Once melted, tissues were placed top side down in a metal wax mold, and melted paraffin was poured over the tissue. Cassettes were then placed back on top of tissue, and the wax was cooled on a cold plate until hardened. Tissue blocks were carefully removed and stored at room temperature until sectioned.

## Tissue sectioning/immunohistochemistry
Tissue blocks were sectioned at 10 µm thickness on a rotary microtome. Paraffin-sectioned tissues were processed using the Leica BOND RX Fully Automated Research Stainer (Leica Biosystems, 21.2821). Deparaffinization was performed using the Leica BOND RX Bake and Dewax protocol using Bond Dewax (Leica Biosystems, AR9222, Deer Park, IL, USA). Antigen retrieval was performed using the HIER with BOND Epitope Retrieval 2 solution (Leica Biosystems, AR9640, Deer Park, IL, USA) for 20 min. Slides were immunolabeled using the BOND IHC IF protocol with 20-min primary and secondary antibody incubations using 2′-O-methoxyethyl ASOs (Ionis Pharmaceuticals, 13545; 1:500) and goat anti-rabbit IgG (H + L) Alexa Fluor 647 conjugate (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A-21245; 1:1000) and counterstained with Hoechst (Thermo Fisher Scientific, H3570; 1:1000). Slides were cover-slipped using anti-fade fluorescence mounting medium (Abcam, Ab104135). Sections were imaged using a Nikon 90i microscope with NIS-Elements Advanced Research software (version [v.]4.20+).

## Statistical analyses
Statistical analyses of data were performed using Prism 10.2.1 (Graphpad). Experimental sample sizes are provided in . Prior to analysis, ERG data were assessed by a researcher masked to treatment eye for electrode placement, eye direction on the in-unit camera system, and trace quality. Poor-quality acquisitions and those with baseline measurements more than two standard deviations from the group mean were not included in statistical analyses of change from baseline due to outlier status. In assessing ERG change from baseline, one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test was used to compare the ASO-treated and vehicle-treated CLN3∆78 eyes to vehicle-treated heterozygous controls. Contralateral ASO-treated and vehicle-treated CLN3∆78 eyes were compared using one-tailed, paired t-tests. Paired t-tests were used to compare eyes—one receiving ASO and one receiving vehicle—within each subject to reduce variability. One-tailed tests were used due to the directional nature of the hypothesis to determine whether ASO treatment specifically improves retinal function, as well as increase statistical power due to the small sample sizes necessary in this large animal study. *P < .05, **P < .01, ***P < .0001, ****P < .0001.

## Results

## 
CLN3∆78 expression in minipigs mirrors CLN3∆78 in humans
As a first step in utilizing the CLN3∆78 minipig as an in vivo model for ASO screening, we analyzed the sequence of the CLN3 locus surrounding the deletion and the expression of the gene. We isolated gDNA from CLN3∆78 minipig tissue and confirmed that the model has a 952 base pair deletion between intron 6 and intron 8 of CLN3 and a 122 base pair insertion into intron 8 ( and ). The deletion begins 278 bases upstream of intron 6, encompasses the entire 297 bases of exon 7, intron 7, and exon 8, and extends 377 bases into the 3′ end of intron 8 ( ). Immediately following this deletion, there is an insertion of 122 bases of the PGK-NeoR cassette, a vestige of the rAAV-mediated gene targeting used to generate this genetic model ( ). PCR analysis of gDNA from the gene-edited pig tissue revealed an amplicon of the expected size resulting from the 952 base pair deletion ( ). RT-PCR analysis of RNA isolated from the retina and sequencing of the resulting cDNA confirmed that the deletion/insertion results in the properly spliced CLN3∆78 mRNA transcript of the expected size ( and ). These results indicate that the CLN3∆78 minipig model accurately recapitulates the most common disease-causing variant in humans with CLN3 disease.

## Identification of ASOs that induce pig CLN3Δ78 exon 5 skipping in vitro
To identify ASOs that induce exon 5 skipping in pig CLN3∆78 (pCLN3), a series of 24 18-mer fully modified phosphorothioate steric blocking ASOs with 2′-methoxyethyl (MOE) modifications were designed to base pair with exon 5 and its flanking intronic region of pCLN3 RNA (Fig.  ). ASOs were transfected into a fibroblast cell line derived from the skin of a homozygous CLN3∆78 minipig. Prior to collection, cells were treated with puromycin to inhibit nonsense-mediated mRNA decay to stabilize the PTC-containing CLN3∆78 mRNA and thus more accurately assess the processing of RNA expressed from the gene. RNA was analyzed by RT-PCR using primers directed to exons 4 and 6 to quantify mRNA with exon 5 skipped. Many ASOs induced robust exon 5 skipping. However, treatment with some of the ASOs appeared to result in lower levels of total CLN3 mRNA. To determine whether this lower abundance was due to the additional skipping of exon 6, we performed the PCR analysis with primers in exons 4 and 10. Surprisingly, the pig fibroblasts have a high level of exon 6 skipping in untreated cells ( ). Skipping of exon 6 in the context of the deletion of exons 7 and 8 results in an intact ORF. The exon 5-targeted ASOs induced skipping of exon 5 in these transcripts as well ( ). ASO-16 induced one of the highest levels of exon 5 skipping in each of these assessments (81% and 91%, respectively) and was selected for further study (Figs.  and ). ASO-16 base pairs to a sequence in the middle of exon 5 and induces dose-dependent exon 5 skipping with an EC50 (half maximal effective concentration) in the low nanomolar range below the lowest concentration tested (∼5.39 nM) (Fig.  – ). These results identify ASOs that effectively induce pCLN3 exon 5 skipping in vitro.
 

## ASO-16 induces long-lasting exon 5 skipping throughout the retina of heterozygous pigs carrying the CLN3∆78 deletion
After identifying potent ASO-16 exon 5 skipping activity in vitro, we proceeded to evaluate its activity in vivo. One of three different doses (80, 200, or 300 μg) of ASO-16 or vehicle DPBS was delivered to the retina of heterozygous CLN3+/∆78 minipigs by IVI. The 300 μg dose was selected based on previous studies that injected ASOs in the eye [ – ]. Pigs aged 11–30 days (300 and 200 μg) or 125–154 days (80 μg dose) were treated, and eye tissue and RNA from the retina were collected 3, 6, and 12 months later. Because there are no reliable antibodies that specifically detect CLN3 protein, our evaluation of ASO activity was limited to splicing analysis of the mRNA. RT-PCR analysis of retinal RNA revealed that at 3 and 6 months after the high-dose treatment (300 μg), 98% and 91% of the total mRNA had undergone ASO-induced exon 5 skipping, respectively (Fig.  and  , lanes 1–4). RNA from the optic nerve was also analyzed and showed no evidence of ASO-induced exon 5 skipping ( ). Similar to the high dose, the intermediate dose (200 μg) induced 99% and 93% exon skipping at 3 and 6 months post-IVI, respectively, and exon 5 skipping was maintained at 74% at 12 months post-IVI (Fig.  and  , lanes 5–10). For the low dose (80 μg), 77% and 76% exon 5 skipping were observed at 3 and 6 months post-IVI, respectively, but dropped to 34% 12 months post-IVI (Fig.  and  , lanes 11–16). Immunofluorescent analysis of ASO in the retina of the treated pigs was performed using an ASO-specific antibody confirmed that the ASO was distributed throughout the retina, correlating with exon 5 skipping activity (Fig.  ). Taken together, these results reveal exon 5 skipping for up to 12 months, demonstrating the long-term efficacy of ASOs in the retina.
 The treatment was generally well-tolerated with few adverse events (AEs). One vehicle-treated eye developed a corneal ulcer, one vehicle-treated eye developed a cloudy vitreous, and one vehicle-treated eye developed a cataract ( ). Though these were heterozygous pigs and not expected to have any visual deficits associated with loss of one copy of CLN3, ERGs were performed on the pigs to evaluate any adverse effects of the treatment on retinal function. ERGs of eyes treated with the low dose of ASO (80 μg) had measurements similar to vehicle-treated eyes, whereas eyes treated with the higher doses had diminished ERG amplitudes following treatment, which recovered over time ( ). Diminished amplitudes could be caused by several factors, including the dose of the ASO itself, the younger age of the pigs treated with the higher doses at the time of treatment (11–33 days old versus 125–154 days old for the 80 μg dose), or the knockdown of the wild-type CLN3 allele in these heterozygous pigs caused by ASO-induced exon 5 skipping. To address these possibilities and limit the risk of AEs while still treating early enough to stabilize CLN3 transcript expression when it is highest ( ), we moved forward with a conservative treatment protocol to test ASO efficacy, administering the low dose of ASO (80 μg) no earlier than 3.4 months of age (the equivalent of a 64 µg dose in humans by vitreous volume) [ ].

## A single intravitreal injection of ASO protects against retinal dysfunction in homozygous CLN3∆78 pigs
To test the effect of ASO treatment in homozygous CLN3∆78 pigs, we performed a longitudinal study to determine whether ASO-16 can induce exon 5 skipping and prevent retinal dysfunction. ASO-16 (80 μg) was delivered to the retina of homozygous CLN3∆78 minipigs via a single IVI, with the contralateral eye serving as a vehicle-treated control. Heterozygous CLN3+/Δ78 pigs were treated in one eye with vehicle by IVI to control for injection-related effects and measure unaffected vision over time. All pigs were treated between 3.4 and 3.9 months of age. ASO-16 was well-tolerated in the retina ( ). None of the animals treated with ASO-16 had ocular AEs, though one control animal developed a partial cataract in its vehicle-treated eye ( ).
To evaluate whether ASO-16 could prevent retinal dysfunction in CLN3∆78 minipigs, we performed ERGs to measure the electrical response of the retina to light stimulation. ERGs were performed immediately before injection and every 3 months post-treatment for 9 months (Fig.  ). Testing was performed under light-adapted and dark-adapted conditions to assess the cone-predominant and combined cone and rod response, respectively. Photostimulation with 8.0 cd·s/m2 (bright flash) and 25 cd·s/m2 (super-bright flash) was used, and the resulting photoreceptor-predominant (a-wave) and bipolar cell-predominant (b-wave) responses were measured (Fig. – ). The implicit time of the a-wave and b-wave, which represents the speed of response of the cells following stimulation [ ], was not significantly different between ASO-treated versus vehicle-treated eyes at any time point or testing condition ( ).
 The a-wave hyperpolarization “negative peak” of an ERG waveform reflects the function of the photoreceptors in the outer retina [ ]. Under light-adapted conditions with an 8.0 cd·s/m2 flash, the only time point at which a difference was observed in the cone-predominant photoreceptor system between the groups was at 3 months post-treatment, when the vehicle-treated CLN3Δ78 eyes were significantly worse than heterozygous control eyes (Fig.  and ). Although the photoreceptors of the ASO-treated CLN3Δ78 eyes functioned similarly to the heterozygous control eyes at this same time point, the improvement compared to their contralateral, vehicle-treated CLN3Δ78 eyes was not statistically significant (P = .0570). Under dark-adapted conditions with an 8.0 cd·s/m2 bright flash, the combined cone and rod photoreceptor response was not significantly different among any of the groups over the duration of the study, except for a significant drop in a-wave amplitude in the ASO-treated eyes 6 months post-treatment (Fig.  and ). However, at 9 months post-treatment, the amplitudes from eyes treated with ASO were not different from heterozygote control eyes under these conditions (Fig.  and  and ). Under similar dark-adapted conditions, but with a brighter flash (25.0 cd·s/m2) to recruit more cone photoreceptors, the a-wave response of the ASO-treated eyes was improved significantly compared to the vehicle-treated eyes of the CLN3∆78 pigs at 9 months post-treatment (Fig.  and  and ). Taken together, these results indicate that a-wave amplitudes may not be profoundly reduced in CLN3∆78 pigs at this stage of disease progression, but ASO-16 treatment prevented progressive photoreceptor dysfunction, as evidenced by the significant difference in amplitudes compared to controls under super bright light stimulus at 9 months post-treatment.
The ERG b-wave depolarization “peak” reflects the function of the bipolar cells and Müller cells of the inner layers of the retina [ ]. Under light-adapted conditions with an 8.0 cd·s/m2 flash, cone-predominant bipolar cell function (b-wave) of vehicle-treated CLN3∆78 eyes was significantly diminished compared to healthy controls at 3 and 9 months post-treatment. Importantly, b-wave amplitudes were significantly higher in homozygote CLN3∆78 eyes treated with ASO-16 compared to vehicle-treated eyes at all timepoints (Fig.  and ). Under dark-adapted conditions with an 8.0 cd·s/m2 bright flash, the combined cone and rod photoreceptor responses were not significantly different between the ASO-treated and vehicle-treated CLN3∆78 eyes over the duration of the study (Fig.  and  and ). Both the ASO- and vehicle-treated eyes of the homozygous CLN3∆78 pigs were significantly lower than the heterozygote controls in b-wave amplitude at 6 months post-treatment. However, at 9 months post-treatment, the b-wave amplitudes of ASO-16-treated eyes from homozygote CLN3∆78 pigs were not significantly different than heterozygote control eyes, and the vehicle-treated CLN3∆78 eyes were significantly lower (Fig.  and ). Similar to the a-wave results, the b-wave response with the 25.0 cd·s/m2 super bright dark-adapted flash was significantly higher in the ASO-treated eyes of the CLN3∆78 homozygotes compared to their vehicle-treated eyes at 9 months post-treatment (Fig.  and  and ).
Using the light-adapted 28.3 Hz flicker ERG, the bipolar cells of the cone-only pathway functioned significantly better in the ASO-treated eye at 3 months post-treatment, though this difference was not significant at 9 months post-treatment (Fig.  and  and ). In contrast, the vehicle-treated eyes of the CLN3∆78 homozygote pigs were significantly decreased compared to healthy controls at both 3 and 9 months post-injection (Fig.  and ). Taken together, these results suggest that b-wave amplitudes may be more affected than a-wave amplitudes at this stage of disease in pigs, and that ASO-16 may stabilize function in both cone and combined photoreceptor responses, particularly under light-adapted and super bright flash conditions.

## Improved retinal function in a subset of high-responding animals treated intravitreally with ASO-16
Among the seven CLN3∆78 pigs that were treated with ASO-16 and were included in the final study, a subset of four animals was identified as high responders, a phenomenon seen in human studies with ASOs following IVI injection [ ]. Animals were classified as high-responders if they showed improvement in their ASO-treated eye in at least six of the seven ERG measurements recorded at 9 months post-treatment (Fig. , – , and and ). In these animals, under dark-adapted conditions, the combined rod and cone photoreceptor response was significantly improved using both an 8.0 cd·s/m2 bright flash and a 25.0 cd·s/m2 super bright flash (Fig. and  , and , and ). Bipolar cell function was also significantly improved in the cone-only (Fig.  , , and ), cone-predominant (Fig.  , , and ), and combined cone and rod pathway (Fig.  , , and ) of this subgroup, although improvement in the combined pathway was only seen with the 25.0 cd·s/m2 super bright flash (Fig.  and  ,  , and ). Taken together, these results indicate that some animals responded more favorably to CLN3 ORF correction than others.
 A subset of the cohort of pigs in the longitudinal study (homozygous CLN3Δ78 only) was maintained until 12 months post-injection, and ERGs were measured (   ). There was no significant difference between control and ASO-16-treated eyes, except in the high-responders identified in the longitudinal study (Fig.  ), whose ASO-treated eyes were significantly improved in the flicker response ( ). To confirm that ASO-16 induced exon 5 skipping in the homozygote CLN3∆78 pig eyes, we analyzed RNA from three of the pigs at 12 months post-injection. The remainder of the pigs were maintained for ongoing, long-term functional testing and re-dosing experiments. RT-PCR analysis of retinal RNA isolated from the pigs confirmed exon 5 skipping (54%), verifying the delivery and long-term durability of ASOs following IVI ( and ). Overall, we conclude from these results that the positive effect of ASO treatment on ERGs was largely limited to 9 months post-treatment, with minimal benefit relative to the vehicle-treated eye at 12 months post-treatment ( ). The decline at 12 months post-injection may be due to the waning effect of the ASO on splicing from 6 to 12 months post-treatment, a decrease that we extrapolate from the experiments with heterozygote pigs, wherein ASO activity was steady up until 6 months post-injection but dropped dramatically at 12 months post-injection (Fig. ).

## Splice-switching ASOs targeting a region of CLN3 conserved across pigs and humans induce exon 5 skipping in human CLN3Δ78 fibroblasts
Having demonstrated the ability of an ASO to induce CLN3Δ78 exon 5 skipping in the retina and mitigate retinal dysfunction in homozygous CLN3Δ78 pigs, we sought to extend these findings to a clinically relevant ASO that has the potential to target human RNA and can be tested in the pig model of the disease to demonstrate the efficacy of a possible drug candidate. In addition to recapitulating the loss of ERG amplitude phenotype seen in patients with CLN3 Batten disease, the CLN3Δ78 minipig model has the advantage of increased sequence homology with the human gene. Indeed, a region encompassing the 5′ splice site of exon 5 is highly homologous between humans and pigs.
To identify an active human CLN3-targeted ASO within the region homologous between humans and pigs, we tested four conserved 18-mer ASOs (Fig.  and  ). The ASOs were transfected into a homozygous CLN3Δ78 patient-derived fibroblast cell line, and splicing was analyzed by RT-PCR. All four ASOs induced nearly 100% exon 5 skipping (Fig.  ).
 To select an ASO for testing in vivo, we performed a limited tolerability test in rats by IVI of 5 µg of each ASO (the equivalent of 200 µg in the pig eye by vitreous volume) [ , ]. We selected ASO-29a for further study based on its favorable tolerability profile ( ). ASO-29a base pairs across the 5′ splice site of exon 5 and has an EC50  in vitro in the low nanomolar range below the lowest concentration tested (∼1.396 nM) (Fig.  and  ). These results demonstrate the ability of ASOs to target a human CLN3 (hCLN3) sequence and induce robust exon 5 skipping in the CLN3Δ78 minipig model.

## ASO-29a induces stable, long-lasting CLN3 exon 5 skipping throughout the retina
To assess the in vivo activity of ASO-29a, homozygous CLN3Δ78 minipigs were treated between 103 and 178 days of age with a single IVI of ASO-29a (80 or 160 μg) or a vehicle control. ERGs were taken 1 week, 3 months, and 6 months post-treatment to evaluate the safety and tolerability of the treatment ( ). Tissue and RNA were collected to assess ASO distribution and exon skipping. One eye treated with 160 μg of ASO-29a and one eye injected with vehicle developed cataracts ( ). Except for a decrease in the 30 Hz flicker ERG response 3 months post-treatment, ASO-29a was well-tolerated in the retina at 80 μg, but was associated with diminished ERGs at the 160 μg dose ( ). For the 80 μg dose, ASO-29a induced exon 5 skipping in 87%, 95%, and 95% of CLN3 RNA transcripts 1, 3, and 6 months after treatment, respectively (Fig. and  , lanes 6–10). Similarly, the 160 μg dose resulted in 99% exon 5 skipping at all three timepoints (Fig.  and  , lanes 16–20). ASO was distributed throughout the retina, and the apparent abundance of the ASO correlated with exon 5 skipping activity over time (Fig. ). Similar to ASO-16, ASO-29a induces robust, long-lasting exon 5 skipping for up to 6 months in the retina, demonstrating the activity of a potential clinically relevant ASO for treating CLN3 Batten disease vision loss in humans.
 

## Discussion
Here we demonstrate that ASO-induced skipping of CLN3Δ78 exon 5 protects the retina from early functional losses in a large animal model of the most common cause of CLN3 Batten disease. We demonstrate that this therapeutic approach is well-tolerated in the eye and that a single intravitreal injection of ASO induces robust exon skipping for up to a year. Furthermore, we identify an ASO that base pairs with 100% complementarity to both pig and human CLN3 and is highly potent at inducing exon 5 skipping in the retina. This result is an important demonstration of in vivo target engagement of an ASO that could be considered for treating CLN3 disease in humans.
For a therapy to be effective, the treatment must be active in the cells that are affected by the disease. In patients with CLN3 Batten disease, there is severe loss of the photoreceptor ONL layer in the macula and mid-periphery [ , , ], along with the reduced ERG a-wave responses [ – ], suggesting that photoreceptor cells are profoundly affected by CLN3 disease. The effect of CLN3 loss on photoreceptors could be direct or indirect through the dysfunction of retinal pigment epithelium cell phagocytosis of the photoreceptor outer segment [ ]. Additionally, bipolar cell rescue may play an important role in preventing retinal degeneration, given that patients exhibit even greater loss of b-wave amplitudes [ ], and AAV therapy targeting bipolar cells, but not photoreceptors, was found to be therapeutic in Cln3Δ78 mice [ ].
Our results indicate that ASO-16 reached both the inner and outer retina (Figs and  ), and while photoreceptor and bipolar cell function both showed improvement with treatment, this effect was more pronounced in bipolar cells (Fig.  ). Given the implication of both photoreceptors and bipolar cells in CLN3 disease vision loss, further investigation is warranted into how ASO treatment impacts the function and survival of both of these cell types. Furthermore, the greatest improvements, both in photoreceptors and bipolar cells, were seen with the cone-predominant light-adapted ERGs or brighter 25.0 cd·s/m2 dark-adapted flash, which recruits more cone photoreceptors. These improvements, which were largely absent from the rod-predominant 8.0 cd·s/m2 dark-adapted flash, could indicate that ASO-16 has a greater therapeutic benefit in bipolar cells and cone photoreceptors versus rod photoreceptors. However, given that these pigs were early in their disease progression, it is possible that it was too early to see degeneration in the rod pathway, whereas we observed early-stage degeneration in the cone pathway, which was prevented through ASO treatment. A longer-term study in these animals could reveal whether ASO treatment similarly stabilizes rod pathway function.
The eye is an attractive organ for translating therapeutics from the lab to the clinic for many reasons [ ]. The retina is a readily accessible portion of the CNS, meaning that tests of retinal function have potential value in assessing the efficacy of CNS-targeting therapies [ ]. Given the significant impact of preserving vision in just one eye on a patient’s quality of life, using one eye as an internal control for the other treated eye may be an effective strategy for clinical trials. This approach not only allows for direct comparison within each patient but also eliminates the need to ask parents to potentially enroll their child in a placebo group. The eye also offers increased safety for patients during early clinical trials, given that the small size of the eye means only small doses are needed, local delivery enhances drug bioavailability, and the eye is a closed compartment, separated from the rest of the body by the blood-retinal barrier, ensuring very little drug will circulate systemically [ – ].
IVIs are the most common intraocular procedure worldwide and are standardly performed by an ophthalmologist [ ]. In addition to being routine care for the treatment of neovascular disorders of the retina, IVI is a safe and effective route of delivery for ASOs to the retina [ , , – ]. The most commonly noted side effects for IVI are short-term increases in intraocular pressure and the development of cataracts [ , , ]. While the possibility of AEs is always of concern for patient well-being, it is worth noting that cataracts can be surgically corrected if they occur. Given the longevity that ASOs have shown intravitreally both here and by others, treatment windows of a single injection every 6–12 months should reduce the risk of AEs while providing adequate therapeutic coverage [ ].
Our results indicate that ASO-16 (80 µg) induced 76% and 34% exon skipping at 6 and 12 months post-IVI, respectively, in heterozygous CLN3∆78 pigs (Fig.  and  ). In homozygous pigs, the same dose protected against retinal dysfunction for up to 9 months post-IVI (Fig.  ), and exon 5 skipping remained high (54%) at 12 months post-IVI ( and ). Similarly, ASO-29a (80 µg) induced 95% exon skipping at 6 months post-IVI (Fig.  and  ). These findings are comparable and extend beyond other preclinical ASOs that are being investigated for ocular disorders. For example, an IVI-delivered gapmer ASO targeting Malat1 reduced gene expression in mouse retinas for up to 120 days [ ]. A splice-switching ASO targeting USH2A induced ∼40% exon skipping in mice for up to 6 months post-IVI [ ]. An ASO designed to treat autosomal dominant optic atrophy induced significant modulation of splicing in cynomolgus monkeys for up to 8 weeks [ ]. In rabbits, a 100 µg dose of a splice-switching ASO for LCA distributed broadly throughout the retina, with a 58-day half-life [ ]; a subsequent clinical trial reported improved visual acuity in patients for up to 15 months post-IVI [ ]. Together, these results highlight the strong therapeutic potential and long-lasting efficacy of our ASO approach compared to similar approaches for inherited retinal disorders.
The therapeutic effect of the ASO treatment 9 months after a single treatment was largely lost by 12 months post-treatment when exon 5 skipping had dropped to 54% ( and ). This result is consistent with our previous findings in a mouse model that endogenously expresses the Cln3∆578 isoform, where homozygous Cln3∆578 mice had a lower disease burden compared to heterozygous Cln3∆78/∆578 mice. Together, these studies suggest that the threshold for therapeutic efficacy may occur with ≥50% exon 5 skipping [ ].
Early therapeutic intervention is crucial for maximizing the outcomes of a progressive neurodegenerative disease with childhood onset. Nonetheless, though earlier treatment with ASOs showed superior benefit in conditions like spinal muscular atrophy, benefit is still observed after symptom onset [ , ]. The greatest therapeutic effect may occur early in development when CLN3 expression is highest in the brain [ ] and retina ( ). However, administering treatment too early in a developing system, such as the eye, could be harmful. Indeed, studies in neonatal rats have shown that IVI administration of ASOs can be detrimental if given too early, but beneficial if delayed by a few weeks [ ]. These findings highlight the importance of determining the optimal timing and dosage for treating children with CLN3 disease. Given similarities in retinal development between humans and pigs, minipigs are an ideal model for investigating this [ – ]. Future studies should focus on refining treatment timing and dosage to maximize therapeutic outcomes.
For families with children who have CLN3 disease, diagnosis often does not take place until after symptoms have begun, so it is typically not a matter of how early treatment can begin but rather, how late. The current study only assessed the ability of ASO-mediated ORF correction to prevent, but not reverse, retinal dysfunction. It remains to be determined whether later treatment, after retinal deficits appear, will be effective. Interestingly, a recent study utilizing an ASO to treat CEP290-associated LCA demonstrated improved visual acuity in a subset of patients who received the treatment after the onset of retinal dysfunction [ ]. Importantly, this same group also saw a subset of high responders within their patient population, similar to what we have reported here in pigs [ , ].
Our study demonstrates that ASO-induced exon 5 skipping of CLN3∆78 can protect against retinal dysfunction when delivered by intravitreal injection early in the disease course, prior to visual or retinal dysfunction. This result is a promising demonstration that isolated delivery to the eye can delay disease. However, we cannot rule out the possibility that a therapy targeting long-term CLN3 disease-associated vision loss may require dual delivery, both intravitreally and intrathecally, to correct CLN3 expression in both the retina and visual cortex. For patients whose symptoms are isolated to only the retina, intravitreal treatment could be sufficient to remediate symptoms, but in patients with broader neurological involvement, treatment of the thalamus and visual cortex may be necessary to target the entire visual pathway. Intravitreal delivery alone was sufficient to reach all layers of the retina, including retinal ganglion cells, whose axons make up the optic nerve (Figs and  ). Exon 5 skipping was not observed in optic nerve tissue following ASO treatment ( ), suggesting that ASO activity was limited to the soma of the retinal ganglion cells and did not reach the brain. Though a different form of Batten disease, recent work in an ovine model of CLN5 Batten disease found that gene therapy delivered intravitreally was able to protect against retinal dysfunction, but was not sufficient to prevent vision loss, likely due to cortical blindness [ ]. However, dual delivery to the CNS and the eye was able to prevent vision loss [ ].
Our study has several limitations. Most notably, due to the cost of a longitudinal study in a large animal model, the cohort sizes in some cases are small. Specifically, the splicing longevity of ASO-16 (Fig.  ) was assessed in a single animal for each dose and time point. Additionally, this study was concluded 12 months post-treatment, at a relatively early stage of retinal degeneration. A more long-term analysis will provide insight into both the optimal timing for reinjection intervals as well as therapeutic efficacy as vision continues to decline in older, untreated animals. Future investigations to explore the effects of treatment following the onset of retinal dysfunction will also be important.
Taken together, our results demonstrate the potential of ASOs as a therapeutic for treating the eye in CLN3 Batten disease. The ASOs tested are effective in modulating CLN3 splicing in the retina to protect against retinal dysfunction when administered pre-symptomatically and demonstrate the activity of an ASO specific for human CLN3∆78 in vivo. Our findings highlight the therapeutic value of reading-frame correction in the eye and support further exploration of this approach for treating CLN3 Batten disease vision loss.

## Supplementary Material
gkaf1141_Supplemental_File

## Acknowledgements
The authors thank the staff of Exemplar Genetics, including Brian Bishop, DVM, for miniswine management and care as well as their assistance with injections, ERG, and tissue collection; Steven A. Miller for consultation on statistical methodology; Katrina A. Stratton for her insight into vision loss, its clinical manifestations, and impact on patient well-being; Estela Viera for technical support; Erika Ruskie for comments on the manuscript; and the members of the Hastings lab for stimulating discussions. The graphical abstract was created in BioRender. Hastings, M. (2025) https://BioRender.com/8blbxrx. This work is dedicated to the memory of Kiba D. Stratton, without whose lifetime of friendship, support, and love this work would not have been possible.

Author contributions: Conceptualization: M.P.S., J.L.C., J.L.H., F.R., P.J., J.M.W., and M.L.H.; Data curation: M.P.S., V.J.S., C.D.B., K.A., M.J.R., F.J.D., H.G.L., and J.L.H.; Formal analysis: M.P.S.; Funding acquisition: J.M.W. and M.L.H.; Investigation: M.P.S., V.J.S., W.L.P., K.A., M.J.R., J.L.H., and A.V.D.; Methodology: M.P.S., J.L.C., V.J.S., W.L.P., P.J., F.R., and A.V.D.; Project administration: M.P.S., T.S., J.M.W., and M.L.H.; Resources: J.L.H., J.M.W., and M.L.H.; Software: M.P.S., F.J.D., and H.G.L.; Supervision: M.P.S., J.M.W., and M.L.H.; Validation: M.P.S., J.L.C., V.J.S., W.L.P., C.D.B., K.A., M.J.R., J.M.W., A.V.D., and M.L.H.; Visualization: M.P.S. and J.L.C.; Writing—original draft: M.P.S. and M.L.H.; Writing—review & editing: M.P.S., J.L.C., V.J.S., W.L.P., C.D.B., K.A., M.J.R., J.L.H., P.J., J.M.W., A.V.D., and M.L.H.

## Supplementary data

Supplementary data is available at NAR online.

## Conflict of interest
M.P.S., J.L.C., and M.L.H. are inventors on patent applications for ASOs and may be entitled to benefits from licensing of the associated intellectual property. M.L.H. and F.R. are inventors on patents on ASOs owned by RFUMS and Ionis Pharmaceuticals. J.L.H., F.R., and P.J. are paid employees of Ionis Pharmaceuticals Inc. J.M.W. is an employee of Amicus Therapeutics, Inc., and holds equity in the company in the form of stock-based compensation; Amicus had no input into this piece of work. The remaining authors declare no competing financial interests.

## Funding
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health [NS113233], the Batten Disease Support and Research Association, and the ForeBatten Foundation. Quantitation of radioactive PCR products was performed on an instrument in the shared Proteomics facility at RFUMS obtained with support from the National Institutes of Health [S10 OD010662]. A.V.D. receives support from the Ronald Keech Professorship and Chakraborty Family Foundation. Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this article was provided by MLH's discretionary funds.

## Data availability
The data underlying this article are available in the article and in its online supplementary data.