pmcHeliyonHeliyon2992heliyon101672560Heliyon2405-8440ElsevierPMC10864983PMC10864983.110864983108649833835658810.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e25521S2405-8440(24)01552-4e255211Review ArticleA critical review on metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) based nanomaterials for biomedical applications: Designing, recent trends, challenges, and prospects
SadiqSamreen KhanShoaib KhanIltafiltaf.khan@kfupm.edu.sa KhanAftab HumayunMuhammadmhumayun@psu.edu.sa WuPingwp4114@163.com UsmanMuhammad KhanAbbas AlanaziAmal Faleh BououdinaMohamed aSchool of Biotechnology, Jiangsu University of Science and Technology, Zhenjiang, 212100, ChinabCollege of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, 150030, ChinacInterdisciplinary Research Center for Hydrogen Technologies and Carbon Management (IRC-HTCM), King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran, 31261, Saudi ArabiadDepartment of Physics, School of Science, Jiangsu University of Science and Technology, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, 212100, ChinaeEnergy, Water and Environment Lab, College of Humanities and Sciences, Prince Sultan University, Riyadh, 11586, Saudi ArabiafDepartment of Chemistry, Abdul Wali Khan University Mardan, 23200, Pakistan∗Corresponding author. iltaf.khan@kfupm.edu.sa∗∗Corresponding author. mhumayun@psu.edu.sa∗∗∗Corresponding author. wp4114@163.com1These authors contribute equally.
15220240222024103455022e255211112202324120242912024020220241402202416122025© 2024 The Authors2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Retraction notice to "A critical review on metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) based nanomaterials for biomedical applications: Designing, recent trends, challenges, and prospects" [Heliyon 10 (2024) e25521]
111629102025e44079Heliyon10.1016/j.heliyon.2025.e44079PMC1267512241395428Nanomaterials (NMs) have garnered significant attention in recent decades due to their versatile applications in a wide range of fields. Thanks to their tiny size, enhanced surface modifications, impressive volume-to-surface area ratio, magnetic properties, and customized optical dispersion. NMs experienced an incredible upsurge in biomedical applications including diagnostics, therapeutics, and drug delivery. This minireview will focus on notable examples of NMs that tackle important issues, demonstrating various aspects such as their design, synthesis, morphology, classification, and use in cutting-edge applications. Furthermore, we have classified and outlined the distinctive characteristics of the advanced NMs as nanoscale particles and hybrid NMs. Meanwhile, we emphasize the incredible potential of metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), a highly versatile group of NMs. These MOFs have gained recognition as promising candidates for a wide range of bio-applications, including bioimaging, biosensing, antiviral therapy, anticancer therapy, nanomedicines, theranostics, immunotherapy, photodynamic therapy, photothermal therapy, gene therapy, and drug delivery. Although advanced NMs have shown great potential in the biomedical field, their use in clinical applications is still limited by issues such as stability, cytotoxicity, biocompatibility, and health concerns. This review article provides a thorough analysis offering valuable insights for researchers investigating to explore new design, development, and expansion opportunities. Remarkably, we ponder the prospects of NMs and nanocomposites in conjunction with current technology.

## Graphical abstract
Schematic representation showing the importance and harnessing of the potential of MOFs based nanomaterials for biomedical applications. 

## Keywords
Advanced nanomaterialsAntiviral therapyAnticancer therapyBiomedical applicationsMetal-organic frameworkspmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfnopmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1

## Introduction
Nanotechnology is an emerging branch of science that has great significance in synthesizing materials at the nanoscale level. NMs have unique properties like increased surface area, high porosity, large pore volume, biocompatibility, and biodegradability. These properties enable their use in various biomedical applications, such as disease detection, cell examination, and medication. NMs have exposure to most cells and tissues, making them valuable in antitumor, antibacterial, antiviral treatment, gene therapy, and biocatalyst applications [ ]. The broad classification of NMs synthesis is used top-down and bottom-up methods. The physical technique is used in the top-down approach that includes pyrolysis, lithography, physical vapor deposition (PVD), and, mechanical milling fabrication. However, chemical and biological procedures are involved in bottom-up strategies. The bottom-up chemical process utilizes various techniques including chemical vapor deposition (CVD), sol-gel, co-precipitation, micro-emulsions, hydrothermal, sonochemical, and microwave approaches In addition, NMs can be divided into different categories according to a variety of physical and chemical aspects such as morphology, dimensionality, chemical composition, and state [ ]. Depending on their shape and dimension, they are further classified into 0, 1, 2, and 3-dimensional NMs. Zero-dimensional (0-D) has a size below 100 nm which includes spherical, nanorod, cube, hollow sphere, polygon, metal NMs, and quantum dots (QDs). One-dimensional (1-D) contain ceramic, nanotube, polymeric, metallic, nanowires, nanofibers, and nanorod fiber. Two-dimensional (2-D) consist of single and multi-layered nanoplates, thin films, nano-coating, and amorphous/crystalline ones. Three-dimensional (3-D) has a variety of dimensions above 100 nm and they are combinations of diverse nanocrystals such as foams, fullerenes, and honeycombs [ ]. Furthermore, NMs are characterized by flatness, aspect ratio, and sphericity, and are highly valuable in biomedical applications due to their small size, high volume-to-surface area ratio, variable optical dispersion, improved surface features, and superparamagnetic properties [ ]. More importantly, nanoscale objects are easily manufactured and highly compatible with biological systems due to their compact size and shape. They can interact with extracellular and intracellular biomolecules, and structures less than 20 nm can evacuate blood arteries through the body. Adding more, NMs can be isomeric, dispersed, suspended, inhomogeneous, or clustered. Thus, depending on their chemical composition, NMs can be further categorized as composites e.g., inorganic, organic, hybrid, nano gels, quantum, and dots (QDs) [ ]. NMs are useful in a variety of various fields, including medicine [ ], computing technology [ ], farming [ ], nuclear power [ ], solar systems [ ], cosmetics [ ], acrylics [ ], and catalytic applications [ ]. In addition, they have the potential to be applied in a broad range of biomedical applications, such as targeted drug administration [ ], bioimaging [ ], biological sensors [ ], photocatalytic devices [ ], nanodevices [ ], tissue engineering [ ], photodynamic therapy [ ], gene therapy [ ], immunotherapy [ ], antiviral therapy [ ] as shown in . 

2

## Research significance of nanomaterials in the biomedical field
NMs have become popular in recent decades because of their unique three-dimensional structure and exceptional magnetic, chemical, and biological properties. These properties make them appropriate for various biomedical applications. Their surface-to-volume ratio and stability of NMs make them ideal for a wide range of applications [ ]. Most NMs are currently in the clinical trial phase. However, a few NMs, including Au, Ag, Fe3O4, Zn, Ti, Zr, Cu, Co, Si, carbon-based NMs, and a few hybrid NMs, have already been approved for various therapeutic applications. These applications include viral therapy, immuno-cancer treatment, gene therapy, medication delivery, as well as diagnostics purposes such as bioimaging and biosensing [ ] as shown in . 
Multiple studies demonstrated that size, shape, surface charge, and surface modification of drug carriers have a direct effect on their biodistribution, circulation time, and metabolism within the body. These factors determine the bioavailability of organs and tissues targeted for therapeutic purposes [ ]. For example, designing NPs with appropriate size is crucial for effective drug delivery. However, the size of drug carriers significantly impacts their circulation velocity, immunogenicity, plasma half-life, and intracellular distribution, thus influencing drug efficacy and intracellular distribution. In this regard, Fang et al. [ ] studied NPs sizes and their impact on blood circulation, finding larger NPs easier for macrophages to internalize, reducing circulation time. Accordingly, spherical chitosan nanocarrier drugs have boosted malignant cell uptake and antioxidant capacity. The glomerulus cell membrane efficiently filters NMs under 5 nm. However, NMs 10–20 nm may evade phagocytosis and impede liver and renal clearance [ ]. Hence, smaller NPs have a higher specific surface area, allowing faster release of drugs [ ]. Primarily, previous studies overlooked the different shapes of drug carriers, including spheres, rod, worms like, ellipsoids, elliptical disks, star and rectangular disks are thoroughly studied. For example, spherical NPs were internalized by cells within 2 min, while rod like NPs remained uninitialized for 32 min [ ]. Yet, micelles that are spherical in shape are ideal for drug delivery due to their small size and ability to bypass the reticuloendothelial system [ ]. Interestingly, Lim and colleagues [ ] found that spherical micelles, with a size of 10–30 nm, are more effective than worm-like NPs for systemic delivery of anticancer drugs against triple-negative breast and pancreatic cancer tumor models. Remarkably, Chen and colleagues [ ] reported that worm-like micelles have larger core volumes, which allows for the loading of hydrophobic drug molecules through double emulsification, that can load higher amounts of anticancer agents. In addition, the impact of surface charge of NPs is a crucial factor in the realm of drug delivery. It has been observed that the charge of NPs plays a pivotal role in modulating various aspects of drug delivery. Positively charged NPs have been found to exert significant influence on cellular uptake and drug release, thereby enhancing the efficacy of drug delivery systems. Conversely, negatively charged NPs have demonstrated their prowess in enhancing stability and promoting efficient bloodstream circulation [ ]. Fruitfully, Wang and associates [ ] reported that TiO2-NPs surface charge affects their colloidal stability in physiological environments, preventing aggregation and enhancing suspension stability, crucial for drug delivery. This suggests that their surface charge influences cellular uptake, with positively charged NPs more easily absorbed through electrostatic interactions, while negatively charged ones may experience lower uptake. Hence, surface charge influences the drug release kinetics in TiO2-based drug delivery systems. These findings underscore the significance of surface charge in NPs-mediated drug delivery and emphasize the need for further exploration in this domain. Furthermore, the performance, biocompatibility, and stability of NPs for biomedical applications can be improved through surface modification. Coating NPs with biocompatible materials like polymers enhances stability, reduces nonspecific interactions, and enhances binding affinity. This involves modifying the surface characteristics of the NPs to achieve desired functionalities and reduce any potential toxicity. Chemical bonds between coating molecules and surface of NPs alter the surface spin structure [ ]. In this regard, Vestal and et al. [ ] conducted a study on the magnetic properties of MnFe2O4-NPs. They found that the saturation magnetization increased when the NPs were coated with substituted benzenes and benzoic acid ligands. The study also found that the specific coordinating functional group on the NPs surface enhance the magnetic properties for biomedical applications.
By considering the above-mentioned factors, NMs have found extensive use in the field of biomedical, particularly in applications related to diagnostics, therapeutics, and drug delivery. Notably, NMs due to their large surface area act as theranostic agents, enclosing various biosubstrates like antibodies, aptamers, DNA, and RNA [ , , ]. In this regard, Bhatia and his research team [ ] have developed a synthetic blood-based biomarker for free circulating tumor DNA. This biomarker, which has a diameter of 11 nm, is designed to release nanoscale analytes for the purpose of tumor identification and therapy. Later, Yang and colleagues [ ] demonstrated that nanoscale structures like Au-NPs can enter biological systems, enhancing drug release and staying in the bloodstream for longer periods. These NPs are used in biomarkers, screening, detection, nanomedicine, and targeted drug delivery for tumors. Moreover, drug-resistant cells, resistant to platinum-based medications like oxaliplatin and cisplatin, pose a significant challenge to NPs due to DNA alteration. Smart NPs like micelles are used to effectively transport NPs to the nucleus that are widely used to reduce the drug resistance [ , ]. In order to enhance bioavailability, absorption, drug solubility, and minimize cytotoxicity, inorganic NMs are often combined with organic NMs. This is carried out because inorganic NMs have low biocompatibility. Meanwhile, organic and inorganic nanocomposites are utilized in the development of immunization techniques because of their customizable structure, long shelf lives, ability to modify their inherent adjuvant features, and immune-modulating properties. Ultimately, they can enhance the efficiency of delivering, processing and stabilizing antigens [ ]. Fruitfully, Huang and colleagues [ ] synthesized mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNPs) for melanoma vaccines, combining them with antigens ovalbumin, ammonium bicarbonate, and polydopamine. The composite MSNs-ABC@PDA-OVA demonstrated suitability due to customizable surface area, pore diameter, biodegradability, and stability. With a single injection, 75 % of melanoma malignancies were eradicated, generating potent immune memory and preventing cancer recurrence [ ]. Recently, Abdellatif et al. [ ] reported that FDA-approved lipid systems, including liposomes and micelles, are currently used as the first generation of NMs for antiviral therapy. Later, Yetisgin and research group reported, inorganic NMs can be incorporated in these liposomes and micelles primarily to improve the effectiveness of cancer treatments, imaging, and drug delivery purposes [ ]. Furthermore, NMs has been revolutionized for dual targeting delivery systems, such as drugs coupled with a multistage short-term magnetic guide with customized ligand-mediated targeting for effective tumor therapy [ ]. Accordingly, Chiang et al. [ ] developed a double emulsion technique using super magnetic nanoclusters to load trastuzumab onto doxorubicin. They used synthetic polyvinyl alcohol, methacrylic acid, and super-paramagnetic Fe3O4 NMs. The coated superparamagnetic NPS increased the average lifespan of nude mice carrying the HER 2 gene. Additionally, carbon and hydrophilic NMs can be customized with desired molecules for infectious and cancerous diseases using adsorption, electrostatic association, and covalent bonding [ ]. Fruitfully, Karnati and co-workers [ ] documented single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) loaded with chemotherapeutic agents like paclitaxel and DOX. They found that the co-loading and release process is impulsive and exothermic due to π–π stacking interactions and hydrogen bonding.
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in the development of nanocomposite frameworks that mimic the chemical and physical features of native tissues. This has led to the exploration of various NMs that can be incorporated into synthetic or natural polymers. One class of NMs that has shown promise in this regard is silicate-based NPs. These NPs can be chemically or physically bonded to polymers, resulting in nanocomposite frameworks with enhanced mechanical properties and improved biocompatibility. The incorporation of silicate-based NPs has been found to promote cell adhesion and proliferation, making them suitable for tissue engineering applications. Another group of NMs that have been investigated for their potential in nanocomposite frameworks is calcium phosphate (CaP) NPs. These NPs can be incorporated into polymers to create nanocomposites that closely resemble the mineral composition of bone tissue. The presence of CaP-NPs in these frameworks has been shown to enhance osteogenic differentiation and mineralization, making them promising candidates for bone tissue engineering. Carbon-based NPs, such as carbon nanotubes and graphene, have also been explored for their incorporation into nanocomposite frameworks. These NPs possess unique mechanical, electrical, and thermal properties, which can be harnessed to develop nanocomposites with tailored functionalities [ ]. Lastly, metal and metal oxide NPs have been investigated for their potential in nanocomposite frameworks. These NMs can be integrated into polymers to develop nanocomposites with enhanced antimicrobial properties. Recent studies show that certain techniques can improve cell-matrix interaction, impacting cellular processes like guided movement, cell growth, and cell division [ ]. These findings highlight the significance of optimizing cell-matrix interactions for the development of advanced tissue engineering and regenerative medicine strategies. Moreover, metal and metal oxide NMs have gained attention for their potential antibacterial properties. These NMs, due to their unique physicochemical properties, inhibit bacterial growth and proliferation through mechanisms like ROS generation, membrane disruption, and interference with essential cellular processes. Metal NMs have been a growing interest in the development of novel materials that have the potential to replace traditional bone grafts. Generally, this review emphasizes the potential of NMs as bone graft alternatives due to their low toxicity and compatibility with the biological system. NMs have a favorable toxicity profile. Traditional bone grafts carry risks of adverse reactions and complications, including immune responses and infections. Yet, NMs have lower toxicity, making them safer for biomedical applications. The reduced toxicity of NMs can be attributed to their unique physicochemical properties, including their small size and large surface area, which enhance biocompatibility. NMs are more hydrophobic than conventional bone grafts [ , ]. Primarily, NM's hydrophobic nature facilitates favorable interactions with their surroundings. Interestingly, Christy and her research associates [ ] designed a hybrid chitosan-based ZnO regarding tissue engineering. With the goal to improve tensile strength and density for direct bone bonding implantation, the research proposed a particular extracellular matrix for bone development. Additionally, it is worth noting that Au and Ag-NPs exhibit remarkable durability and possess robust resistance against microbial colonization. These exceptional characteristics render them highly suitable for various dental applications [ ]. Moreover, metallic NMs such as TiO2, Ag, ZnO, and Cu, have applications for surface cleaners and disinfecting agents against COVID-19 [ ]. Due to their superior mechanical, biological, and chemical properties, NMs are used in a variety of medical applications, including tissue engineering, artificial bone grafts, bandages, and electronic medical equipment, particularly dental instruments and vascular stents [ ] as shown in . 

3

## Challenges regarding the utilization of nanomaterials in the biomedical applications
The application of NMs in the medical field show the promising potential to significantly improve human health in terms of disease identification, prognosis, prevention, and treatment [ ]. Even though, there are still some problems regarding the utilization of NMs for biomedical purposes because they have adverse effects on living organisms [ , ]. For example, organic, inorganic, hybrid and carbon based NMs have several benefits in drug delivery systems, but their clinical applications are currently somehow limited due to several challenges such as time, target site, adsorption, instability, engineering of nanoprobes, recognition of biomolecules, thermo-sensitivity, electromagnetic fields, degradation, and pH nature polarity of solvent and optimization [ ] as shown in . 
Likewise, NMs constitute a possible risk to the environment and human health due to their uncontrolled consumption and waste disposal in cosmetics, electronics, textiles, pharmaceuticals, and other products that contaminate aquatic and terrestrial habitats as shown in . Additionally, crops are exposed to nano fertilizers and pesticides. These NMs emerge from plants and reach the human body exhibiting hazardous consequences [ ]. For example, environmentally sourced polystyrene NPs (PSNPs) can enter the human body, interact with immune cell populations in the bloodstream and lymphatic drainage system, and cause severe damage to secondary organs of the body through reactive oxygen species (ROS) production [ ]. In this regard, Raja and research associates demonstrated, at molecular level genotoxic effects regarding NMs are strongly influenced by their chemical composition, which influences their solubility, oxidation, and reduction mechanisms and has a strong affinity for biomolecules. In addition the cellular viability effected the cell growth, as a result ROS-associated mitochondrial impairment and DNA deterioration occurred [ ]. 
Size, shape, exposure time, and dosage are the main factors that lead to toxicity in biological systems when NMs are ingested, inhaled, or come into contact with the skin. For instance, NMs having ultra-small volume exhibit great adsorption through various exposure routes. Generally, size-dependent NMs from the enteric region can take entry into the bloodstream by enterocyte transcytosis whereas alveolar macrophages preferentially absorb particles larger than 70–100 nm in diameter and size less than 100 nm can make their passage through the air-blood barrier via intercellular transport [ ]. On this basis, Pan and colleagues [ ] reported size-based graphene and its derivatives that cause toxic effects in zebrafish that reduces cell viability by increasing damage to DNA and the generation of ROS. In addition, metallic NPs (Ag, Au, ZnO, TiO2) with a size of 4 nm or less can get entry into the skin, whereas 21–45 nm can only penetrate through scarred skin and those with a size more than 45 nm are unable to cross the skin barrier [ ]. For another instance, a study conducted by Al-Doaiss, A et al. [ ] demonstrated that small-sized NMs e.g., TiO2 may accumulate in the lungs, digestive tract, liver, heart, spleen, kidneys, and cardiac tissues after inhalation or oral exposure. Additionally, TiO2 is frequently used as a food additive due to its whitish color, but when it comes into contact with biological membranes, it may cause inflammation due to reactive oxygen species (ROS). Moreover, the inhaled NMs may trigger oxidative stress in cells that may cause lung inflammation. Later, Li and research team [ ] reported, sub-organ biological distribution, delivery, and elimination patterns of Au NPs coated with polyethylene glycol (PEG), chitosan (CS), and polyethylenimine (PEI) in mice liver and kidney following intravenous injection are assessed. This study demonstrated that altering the surface composition of NMs can enable them to reach different cell types and enhancing the therapeutic potential of non-biodegradable NMs.
The impact of shape on toxicity levels has been widely investigated in various studies. It has been observed that the shape of a substance can significantly influences its toxicity. Researchers have found that substances with different shapes can exhibit varying degrees of toxicity, even if they have the same chemical composition. One key aspect of shape that impact of NM's shape and its cytotoxicity is a crucial aspect to consider in the field of nanotoxicology. Numerous studies have demonstrated that the shape of NMs plays a significant role in determining their cytotoxic effects. This review aims to provide an overview of the current understanding regarding the influence of NMs shape on cytotoxicity. For instance, several types of NMs, including nanoparticles, nanotubes, and nanowires, exhibit diverse shapes such as spheres, rods, tubes, and wires. Accordingly, amorphous TiO2 produces more reactive oxygen species (ROS) than anatase or rutile due to its surface irregularities, which produce more active sites for ROS production [ ]. Interestingly, Lee and associates [ ] reported, in a murine macrophage cell line rod-shaped Fe2O3 NMs produced more cytotoxicity than sphere-shaped Fe2O3. This reported higher levels of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) leakage, cell death, inflammation, and the generation of ROS. Additionally, through the production of ROS, NMs with a wire-like structure disrupt DNA structure. Studies demonstrated that Au on human skin keratinocyte cells is not significantly affected by shape. On the other hand, a study conducted by McLaren and research team [ ] found that hexagonal ZnO crystals are more hazardous than rod-shaped ones, exhibiting five times higher activity and increased TNF and LDH secretion. In another study, metallic NMs, such as Ni was evaluated which is dendritic in structure. In zebrafish embryos, dendritic NMs were found to be more harmful than spherical ones, suggesting that NM structure may have a greater impact on toxicity compared to size [ ].
In addition, it is important to consider the duration of exposure to NMs as a significant factor in inducing cytotoxicity within biological systems. For instance, metal, metal oxide, and carbon-based NMs are the most important NMs linked to human contact due to exposure over prolonged periods of time and have low excretion levels [ ]. In this regard, Huang and his research team [ ] reported that metal oxide NMs have harmful effects on human health. For instance, prolonged exposure rate of NMs induce apoptosis, oxidative stress, suppress cell development, disrupt homeostasis, metabolic and molecular catastrophic pathways. In another study, conducted by Lin and colleagues [ ] used cultured human bronchoalveolar A549 carcinoma-derived cells to evaluate the cytotoxicity of 13 nm and 22 nm sized aluminum (Al) NPs. They concluded that prolonged exposure of NMs altered the chemical composition of surface and cell membrane potential.
The toxicity of NMs in cells and living organisms is significantly influenced by the dose concentration, which is a critical parameter in determining the extent of toxicity observed in biological systems. Therefore, assessing NM toxicity requires careful consideration of dose concentration. In this regard, Huang and colleagues [ ] conducted dose-response evaluations for metal oxide NMs such as SiO2 on the human fetal lung fibroblast MRC-5 cell line. This confirmed that the metabolic profiles of the cells changed in a dose-dependent manner. As the dosage increased, the levels of amino acids and enzymatic antioxidants such as glutathione peroxidases (GSH) declined while urea and phospholipid concentrations elevated resulting inflammation in respiratory system and disruption of the energy metabolism. Fruitfully, Reus and coworkers [ ] reported the fabrication of SiO2 using Stober method. SiO2 potential for cytotoxicity was examined in BALB/c3T3 cell lines. At a high dose of SiO2 i.e., 300 mg/kg, it promotes cell necrosis. Additionally, Cheng and et al. [ ] evaluated ZnO-NPs toxicology during in vitro investigations in MRC5 human lung fibroblasts by using the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster as a model. This study showed that ZnO NPs at a concentration of 50 g/mL induced ROS, and DNA damage, resulting in complete cell death.
Studies have shown that fluorescence can also cause phototoxicity in biological systems. Primarily, fluorescence is an optical phenomenon involving short-wavelength light emission, while phototoxicity is a chemical reaction involving light exposure, causing chemical reactions and the generation of ROS. Certain substances can cause phototoxicity in living organisms, causing adverse effects when light is absorbed by human tissues and organs [ ]. For example, Ag-NPs were the first to destruct DNA molecules, and when they come into contact with skin, they harm living cells by forming metallic nano-silver particles under UV or visible light, leading to renal proximal tubule necrosis [ ]. Adding more, polymeric NPs have emerged as promising candidates for efficient drug delivery due to their unique properties such as biodegradability, water-solubility, biocompatibility, biomimetic nature, and stability during storage. However, they face limitations such as limited drug-loading capacity, potential for premature drug release, and the need for controlled release. One concern is their potential toxicity, as some polymers may induce cytotoxic effects. In the realm of nanomedicine, the use of polymeric materials has shown great promise, but the number of approved NPs in clinical settings remains limited [ ].
Although graphene-based NMs (GBNs) have a wide range of uses in, bioimaging, cancer theranostic, gene and drug delivery due to large surface area but their interactions with biological systems are poorly understood. Researchers and regulatory bodies are investigating the safety profile of GBNs due to concerns about their toxicity. However, most of the available information is from in vitro studies, leaving a gap in understanding the true toxicity of these materials in living organisms. In vitro studies, which involve experiments outside of living organisms, provide valuable insights into potential adverse effects, such as oxidative stress, inflammation, and genotoxicity. However, these studies have limitations, such as not fully replicating complex physiological conditions in living organisms, such as metabolism, immune responses, and organ interactions [ ].
Therefore, despite the remarkable properties, some NMs have intrinsic drawbacks that pose significant challenges in fully harnessing their potential. Therefore, the research for alternative and novel materials is crucial to unlock new avenues for maximizing the utility of NMs and driving advancements in various fields.

4

## MOFs applications in the biomedical field
4.1

## Structure of MOFs
Yaghi et al. proposed MOFs as crystalline materials with a vast surface area, size-dependent characteristics, diverse chemical functionalities, tunable porosity, and large surface area. Generally speaking, MOFs consist of metal nodes connected through organic ligands to form secondary-building units. Metal nodes can be lanthanides, metal ions, or transition metals like chromium, copper, nickel, or zinc. On the other hand, organic linkers are typically carboxylates derived from organic acids, play a crucial role in metal node linkage, affecting the surface area, chemical properties, and pore size of MOFs. Primarily, MOFs are characterized by various shapes like cubic, spherical, prismatic, octahedral, polyhedral, amorphous, or irregular, significantly influence their properties and performance in various applications. Likewise, MOFs have typical morphologies like nanosheets, nanoparticles, bilk crystals, and nanorods, which depend on solvents, metal ions, organic linkers, and synthesis parameters. Additionally, MOFs have various types, including zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF), isoreticular, materials institute Lavoisier (MIL), University of Oslo (UiO), and porous coordination polymers (PCPs). Moreover, synthesis methods for MOFs include solvent-based, hydrothermal, mechanochemical, solvothermal, microwave-assisted, and ultrasonic methods. Each method has its advantages and disadvantages, including purity, environmental impact, and crystalline structure. Techniques like mechanochemical, solvothermal, microwave-assisted, and ultrasonic improve reactant mixing and mass transfer [ , ]. Furthermore, MOFs, highly ordered crystalline structures, are utilized in various applications like hydrogen generation, gas sensing, CO2 conversion, pollutant degradation, and batteries due to their structural flexibility and large surface area. The other possible applications of MOFs are listed below and shown in . 

4.2

## Diagnosis
4.2.1

## Bioimaging
Bioimaging promises to become cost-effective, rapid, three dimensional, and a core component of medical research that enables the visualization of biological processes in vivo for screening, progression, and response to disease therapies in real time. The least amount of interference with living processes is envisioned by bioimaging [ ]. For instance, in the last few decades, MOFs have drawn significant attention in the diagnostic field as a luminescence agent due to their porous nature and adaptability between organic and inorganic components. In addition, due to the persistent luminous features, multiple investigations have demonstrated that QDs@MOFs have outstanding bioimaging capabilities. On this basis, Jain and research team [ ] reported combining MOFs with various QD types can produce a hybrid with superior qualities compared to the separate components, exhibit stability including their excellent proportion of signal-to-noise, excellent sensitivity, profound penetration, and lack of tissue self-fluorescence interference and be employed for bioimaging and drug administration. Adding more, due to their functionalization, compositions, customized structure, and porosity, MOF-based nanocomposites have gained widespread recognition in positron emission tomography (PET), optical imaging (OI), computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for intracellular imaging [ ].(i)Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

In September 1971, Lauterbur invented the first technique for encoding spatial knowledge into an NMR signal using electromagnetic gradients [ ]. According to this theory, MRI is a non-invasive imaging technique that offers ultra-high resolution and deep tissue penetration without endangering the biological system. For instance, MOFs as potential MRI agents have a significant metal payload, minimal toxic effects, improved stability, and higher relaxivity values, which offer stronger contrast at low dosages and hence improve diagnostic sensitivity [ ]. The most promising material for MRI imaging is thought to be GdIII based MOFs. The crystal size, particle size, and shape modified the material relaxivities of GdIII-MOFs containing either benzene-1,4-dicarboxylate or benzene-1,2,4-tricarboxylate ligands. This reports a favorable association between the Gd-MOFs surface areas and the longitudinal relaxivity in MRI technology [ ]. Zhang and the research workers [ ] developed MOF-based nanoplatforms for imaging-guided and precision chemotherapy. Gd3+ is utilized as an MR imaging ligand. This composite facilitates tailored chemotherapy for the targeted tumor. Other than, Gd-Based MOFs, MOFs often employed in MRI technologies include Mn-MOFs [ ] and Fe-MOFs [ ].(ii)Computed tomography (CT)

In 1971, a device invented by Sir Godfrey Hounsfieldg was used to perform the first diagnostic CT scan that works on the principle of X-ray. Computed tomography (CT) is a cost-effective tool, having ultra-high-resolution imaging capability, 3D tomography anatomical information so widely used in clinical applications for diagnostic purposes. Additionally, it is highly capable to differentiate between biological tissues and cells. Internal tissues like the liver, stomach, lungs, cartilage, and heat can be examined with X-ray computed tomography (CT) [ ]. On this basis, MOFs performs a specific function in regards to CT approach. For example, Mn2+, Hf4+ ion, high Z elements such as iodine, Au, Bi, and Gd, and the ligand IR825 are employed as photothermal agents, MRI contrast agents that improve CT signal and radiation sensitivity [ ]. Moreover, MOFs can increase penetration and retention (EPR) action to selectively deposit in malignancies. For producing CT imaging, significant number of Z components are integrated into MOFs with high payloads. For instance, Lin and co-workers [ ] developed two MOFs as CT contrasting agents, namely Zr-UiO and Hf-UiO, in Zr (metal loading capacity 37 wt %) and Hf (57 wt %) was evaluated. This reported Hf-MOFs of various sizes were conjugated with silica and polyethylene glycol (PEG) during in-vivo investigations to enhance the photothermal efficiency and biological compatibility. When used in a mouse model, it also increases sensitivity, spatial precision, and dimensions, which drastically slows down the malignancy in hepatocytes and spleen cells. In addition, Robison and his research team [ ] reported bismuth-based MOFs (Bi-NU-901) synthesized by solvothermal method and applied this in CT tomography technique as a contrasting agent. It demonstrated in vitro study, showed that this novel bismuth MOF exhibits 7 times better contrast intensity relative to a zirconium MOF with the same architecture and 14 times better contrast than a commercially available CT contrast agent. Other examples of CT imaging based on MOFs are ZIF-8 [ ], iodine-boron dipyrromethene (BODIPY) [ ].(iii)Positron emission tomography (PET)

The PET imaging strategy provides quick imaging speed compared to other bioimaging methods, strong sensitivity, broad invasion, and exceptional quantification procedure. It also provides additional information regarding the emergence and metabolism of cancer [ ]. Likewise, PET is used for the development of pharmaceuticals, heart and brain mapping, and theranostic purposes. In this context, MOFs combined with positron imaging radioisotopes are considered to be advantageous. On this basis, Duan and fellows [ ] reported size dependent drug loaded MOFs (DOX@AZIF-8) by one pot technique in which they used a chelator-free 64Cu-labeled method in aqueous medium (64Cu-DOX@AZIF-8). In vivo investigations, cancerous cellular uptake of size dependent drug-loaded MOFs was evaluated by PET. This reported improved blood circulation, multimodal imaging and DDSs for cancer theranostics. For another instance, MOFs 89Zr-UiO-66/Py-PGA-PEG-F3 have been demonstrated to be capable of image-guided drug delivery and relatively long-term imaging. For this purpose, the radioisotope 89Zr was added to UiO-66, and its surface was then coated with the tumor-targeting F3 peptide-Cye-SH and PEG generated from pyrene. Results showed 3–4 times increase in drug accumulation. The PET imaging data showed that the drug was more effective in modified MOFs that have lifespan of 89Zr was 76 h longer than a typical agent i.e., 2 h [ ] .(iv)Optical imaging (OI)

After exposure to visible or near-infrared light, optical imaging uses photonic molecules with high sensitivity, great resolution, and simple execution, used to illustrate facts about the biological organization from cellular to molecular level. For optical imaging NIR dyes are used for deep light penetration [ ]. In this regard, for the very first time Collet and co-workers [ ] documented novel MOFs with a high density of Yb3+ lanthanide cations and sensitizers generated from phenylene emitting NIR was introduced in living cells. In HeLa and NIH 3T3 cells, this suggested nano-Yb-PVDC-3 generates a large number of photons per unit volume. Additionally, single-photon excitation of NIR lanthanide emission was also evaluated for biological applications. Two subcategories of optical imaging techniques that are currently in use are fluorescence imaging and bioluminescence imaging. On this basis, Deng and fellows [ ] documented fluorescence-based MOFs (RhB/ZIF-90) investigate the dynamics of mitochondrial ATP in vivo. When fluorescent Rhodamine B (RhB) is encapsulated in ZIF-90 it inhibits RhB emission. However, when ATP and ZIF-90 metal node confront for coordination then ZIFs disintegrate and RhB is released for ATP sensing. For another instance, Yang and associates [ ] reported the two-photon MOFs (TP-MOFs) for bioimaging. For this reason, modified PCN-58 was selected, in which biological cells and tissue employ Zn2+ and hydrogen sulfide (H2S), respectively. The composite TP-MOF probes exhibit deep penetration, exceptional biocompatibility, photostability, low toxicity, and selectivity.

4.2.2

## Biosensing
Biosensing is a technique that relies on the principles of targeting molecule recognition employed by biological systems, like the immune system, to determine the degree of sensitivity and specificity of multifaceted biochemical variables [ ]. Rapid, sensitive, and targeted evaluation for clinical applications can be achieved using biosensors, that has been proven a promising technology. Biosensors enable for non-invasive detection of human conditions without requiring the extraction of blood, serum, or body fluids [ ]. In this context, Hu et al. [ ] documented a strong coordination bond immobilized Ru-(bpy)2(mcpbpy)2 on the Zr6 cluster of PCN-777, leading to fabrication of a mesoporous luminescence-functionalized MOF (Ru–PCN-777). The mesoporosity of Ru–PCN-777 facilitated the Ru (bpy)2(mcpbpy)2 on its surface and inside the material to be mobilized by the electrons, improving the application ratio and improving the high ECL response by 14 times. In addition, the formulation and development of functional materials have raised the demands for sensitive biosensing. Recently, for the fabrication of biosensors, MOFs have been used as scaffolds [ ]. Biosensors are mainly classified into three groups (a) DNA/RNA-based sensing (b) Enzyme-based biosensors (c) Small-biomolecule sensing [ ].(i)Aptamers (DNA/RNA) based sensing

Multiple studies have shown that MOFs have good fluorescence-quenching abilities for adsorbing single-strand DNA than double-strand DNA [ ]. In 2013, Chen and coworkers [ ] demonstrated for the first time that the MOFs Cu(H2dtoa) is safe and efficient for the detection of thrombin and HIV-1 DNA sequences. In another study, Jia et al. [ ] reported the pyrolysis method was employed for manufacturing the bimetallic NiCo-based MOFs (NiCo-MOFs), which demonstrated exceptional electrochemical activity, outstanding biological compatibility, and great affinity towards HIV-1 DNA over the linear range of 0.1 pM–20 nM. In addition, Yang and the research team [ ] documented that Japanese viral molecularly imprinted polymers (JVIPs) were manufactured in a one-step process providing a new approach to MIL-101 for higher specificity and sensitivity. Investigations were carried out on saturated surfaces that are PEG-passivated. This states that the metal chelating agent in matrix material (MIL-101) reduces evaluation time, and increases the likelihood of detection. However, this approach was successfully used to evaluate the presence of Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) in clinical serum samples. Adding more, by using an electrochemiluminescence (ECL) RNA sensor framework, Zhang and others [ ] recently published the metal-organic gel (MOG) and MOFs Fe-MIL-88 for the detection of the Zika virus. Findings showed a broad detection range of 0.3 nM–3 nM with a threshold for detection of 0.1 nM exhibiting high specificity and stability. In addition, Qiu et al. [ ] examined Cu based MOFs, as [Cu(Cmdcp)(phen)(H2O)]29H2O, which were employed as fluorescent sensors that identified conserved RNA sequences from the Ebola virus. When P-DNAs are loaded on MOFs, this study shows strong stacking, hydrogen bonds, and electrostatic interactions for a superior sensing platform. This indicated great stability, diagnostic, and detection value of the Ebola virus.(ii)Enzyme-based sensing

The first potentiometric enzyme electrode-based sensor for urea detection was first time reported by Guilbault and Montalvo in 1969 [ ]. Enzymes have been developed to identify malignant cells due to their susceptibility to high temperatures and diverse chemical nature. With regard to the regular network arrangements, MOFs are considered an ideal agent for encasing the guest molecules for chemical sensing. The active site of an enzyme and the MOFs load medicines. The release and delivery mechanism that separates the medicinal product from the complex is mainly due to MOFs disintegration and large pore size [ ]. In this regard, Mohammad et al. [ ] documented that glucose oxidase (GOx) and horseradish peroxidase (HRP) enzymes were loaded to ZIF-8 by co-precipitation method that was coupled to a polymeric substrate (PDA/PEI) to determine the presence of glucose. This states that ZIF-8/GOx&HRP in-situ hybrid materials on PDA/PEI patterns have greater acid and temperature resistance compared to pristine ZIF-8. This investigation sheds light on the spatial distribution of MOF-based biosensors incorporating various biological components e.g., antibodies, aptamers, vital metabolites, synthesis of proteins, and overexpression of genes monitoring the progression of various cancer types.(iii)Small-biomolecule sensing

A glucose and lactate enzyme sensor based on hydrogen peroxide detection at a platinum electrode was initially proposed by Guilbault and Lubrano in 1973 [ ]. Due to their distinctive characteristics, MOFs have emerged as promising candidates for the selective detection of small biomolecules, including glucose, H2O2, dopamine (DA), amino acids, and cysteine (CySH), formaldehyde (FA) [ ]. For instance, Li and colleagues [ ] prepared PCN-224 in combination with Fe (Fe@PCN-224) to monitor blood glucose levels in diabetic patients. The engineered composite was pH and temperature dependent and efficiently developed a colorimetric approach for rapid and precise glucose and H2O2 monitoring in conjunction with glucose oxidase. This technique has been used effectively to determine the peroxidase activity. In addition, Zhang et al. [ ] designed a promising and robust electrocatalyst of Ni-MOF-74 as a precursor for nonenzymic glucose sensors. For this purpose, a composite of proactive Ni2P and persistent graphene film (Ni2P/G) with MOF-74 was fabricated. During in situ investigations, it has been determined due to prolonged exposure of metal ions and proactive sites, improved conductivity, and immobilization of glucose electrooxidation due to an alkaline environment. Hence, this composite has been successfully used to regulate the serum glucose level for clinical assessments.

4.3

## Therapeutics
4.3.1

## Antiviral therapy
Antiviral therapy is used to treat viral infections that can inhibit the spread of viruses by antiviral drugs such as oseltamivir and zanamivir used against flu. Around two million people die from viral infections each year. Vaccination is a typical approach to preventing viral infections, however, there are currently ineffective vaccinations for many viral infections [ ]. To overcome this problem, MOFs have been introduced that have the potential to improve the antiviral therapeutic system. Organic and inorganic nanocomposites are used to fabricate nanofibers, which have an extensive surface area that hinders viral integration and adhesion. MOFs can also provide vaccine therapy due to the numerous medical intervention opportunities [ ]. Additionally, considering the vast potential of MOFs as a therapeutic agent, there was an urgent need to address the immunological fingerprint of MOFs, which includes a comprehensive study of factors such as cellular oxidation balance, inflammatory processes, immune cell recruitment, and induction of cytokine profile. On this basis, Hidalgo and colleagues [ ] recently investigated the inherent immunogenicity of MOFs composed of aluminum (Al-MIL-100), iron (Fe-MIL-100), and zinc (ZIF-8). Their findings showed that these MOFs have excellent biocompatibility characteristics. In addition, MOFs exhibited both anti-inflammatory and proinflammatory response and facilitates the stimulation of innate and Th1 cells leading to intriguing adjuvant alternatives for targeted immunotherapy. Furthermore, developing non-toxic systems that enable improved drug delivery efficacy and reduced cytotoxicity is one of the main objectives of the formulation of nanocarriers. To address this issue, Horcajada and research team [ ] designed biocompatible, nontoxic porous iron (III) carboxylate MOFs such as (MIL-88A, MIL-88Bt, MIL-89, MIL100, and MIL-101-NH2) worked as a nanocarrier for the successful regulated distribution of complex retroviral drugs such as azidothymidine triphosphate and cidofovir against AIDS treatment. In addition, iron-based cores have remarkable relaxivity, so they are linked through new complementary therapy and screening purposes. Later, Dahri [ ] and the research group used MOFs such as IRMOF, ZIF, HKUST, and UiO to hinder the S surface protein from interacting with the receptor and angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE 2) against SARS-CoV-2. The viral secondary structure undergoes modifications for replication through fundamental core links in the MOFs through van der Waals, electrostatics, and H bonds. This study establishes the way for innovative COVID-19 screening, therapies, and preventative measures, such as MOF-based air filters, bioconjugates, biomarkers, and therapeutic payloads. Additionally, A. Ejsmont and research fellows [ ] demonstrated the Cu-based MOFs (Cu-MOFs) prepared by a one-pot solvothermal method that evaluates the synergistic antiviral action which suppresses SARS-CoV-2 infectivity, including their magnitude, morphology, the approach of medicine adsorption, and subsequent release kinetics. Following that, HKUST-1 and Cu-BDC NMs were synthesized using the integration modification technique. Strong hydrogen bonds, open-metal sites with Cu2+ linker functional groups like COOH, hydroxyl groups from linked sites, and tiny pore volumes are the factors that help to adhere drugs to NMs surfaces. Consequently, Cu-BDC and HKUST-1 both exhibited significant sorption capacities, with 84 mg g1 and 122 mg g1, respectively. Thus, they are highlighted for better sustainability and minimal toxicity for SARS-CoV-2. Accordingly, Jaros et al. [ ] reported the fabrication of BioMOFs Ag4(-PTA)2(3-PTA)2(4-pma)(H2O)2]n6 nH2O based on a wet solvent approach. This states a new strategy to develop an effective vaccine for the treatment of human adenovirus 36 (HAdV-36). Furthermore, for the antiviral therapy of SARS-Co-2, Jodowski, and associates [ ] presented an alternative approach. For this purpose, they integrated acriflavine (ACF) and zirconium-based MOFs. The findings indicate that acriflavine sorption and release from ACF@MOF composites were significantly influenced by electrostatic interactions, with minimal ACF drug payloads for MOF-808 and UiO-66 and substantial payloads for UiO-67 and NU-1000. Moreover, Azidothymidine triphosphate (AZT-TP) and lamivudine triphosphate (3 TC-Tp) are two active triphosphorylated NRTIs that have been encased in the biocompatible MIL-100(Fe) for anti-HIV therapy, were described by Marcos and coworkers [ ]. This suggests that can help to minimize NRTI drugs, usage focusing on HIV reservoirs, or acting as a protective microbicide therapy for HIV patients.

4.3.2

## Anticancer therapy
Cancer is the second most prevalent cause of global mortality, posing a significant challenge for medical professionals and researchers. The article highlights the alarming prevalence of cancer as a leading cause of death worldwide, and the effective treatment remains a significant challenge due to the intricate nature of tumor microenvironments [ ]. To address this issue, Chen and research associates [ ] highlighted a promising solution for targeted drug delivery in medicine by combining platinum with MOFs. This combination offers potential applications in bioimaging and biosensing, particularly in combating cancer. Platinum, a well-known anticancer agent, has been used in chemotherapy treatments but has been limited by its lack of selectivity. MOFs, porous materials with large surface areas, are ideal for drug delivery systems. By combining these two, Pt-MOFs have enhanced drug delivery capabilities, allowing targeted delivery to cancer cells and minimizing damage to healthy tissues. This approach can improve the efficiency and effectiveness of medicine distribution by minimizing harm to living organisms during the distribution process.
4.3.2.1

## Nanomedicine
Nanomedicine is a promising method for improving medical interventions in diagnosing and treating diseases. It involves designing, developing, and applying nanoscale materials and devices. The ability to design biomedical nanodevices with multiple features is crucial in cancer nanomedicine, addressing complex challenges and revolutionizing cancer diagnosis and treatment [ ]. In this regard, MOFs have emerged as a promising candidate for the development of nanomedicines. MOFs have garnered significant attention in the field of nanomedicine research owing to large surface area, high porosity, big pore size, biocompatibility, size, and biodegradability that have potential benefits in biomedical applications like biosensing, bioimaging, and biocatalysis. Drug delivery systems (DDSs) are manufactured by modifying the pharmacokinetics and biodistribution of the coupling medicinal products. The ideal characteristics of MOFs are they are good tool for high loading capacity and their potential to protect a drug from decomposition by encapsulation [ ]. The ability of nanomedicines to preferentially emphasize cancer tissue through tumor leaky blood vessels by reducing their off-target negative effects and passively tumor-targeted delivery improves the therapeutic efficacy of administrated medicines [ ]. In this context, Wang and colleagues [ ] synthesized F127–MnO2-ZIF@DOX/C3N4 NMs with the integration of chemotherapy and aerobic PDT to improve cancer prevention which had a therapeutic outcome on hypoxic malignancies.

4.3.2.2

## Theranostics
In the late 1960s, Speiser and his team revolutionized the use of nanocarriers for therapy and diagnostics. These tiny vehicles, typically in the nanometer size range, transport therapeutic or diagnostic agents to specific targets within the body. They navigate biological barriers and interact with cells and tissues at a molecular level [ ]. Hence, the development of novel molecular probes such as imaging technologies when combined with nanomedicine enhanced the reliability of earlier disease detection leading to a theranostic approach [ ]. In this regard, MOFs have great potential as a theranostic agent due to novel bioimaging (CT, MR, and optical) characteristics and capacity to target specific diseases [ ]. In this section, we will illustrate MOFs can be used as theranostic nanoplatforms for merging medication therapy and phototherapy. Many research investigations have been conducted to inquire about MOFs as DDSs for tumor therapy. In this context, ZIF-8 coupled with interference-free persistent luminous MOFs (PLMOFs) was prepared by using a single-pot approach. DOX (cancer-fighting drug) embedded on a composite of PLNPs@ZIF-8 for controlled drug administration [ ]. Hence, PLMOFs exhibited both regenerative and sustained NIR luminescence. Additionally, ZIF-8 is considered to be a significant drug-carrying potential because of its extensive broad surface and the synergistic interactions between DOX and Zn2+ resulting up to nine folds by PLNPs@ZIF-8 [ ]. Following that, Nejadshafiee and colleagues [ ] demonstrated that the hydrothermal technique is used for manufacturing BioMOFs, which is then decorated with Fe3O4 (Fe3O4@Bio-MOFs) and coated with folic acid-chitosan conjugate (FC) for the treatment of tumors. Additionally, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and curcumin (CUR) are heavily loaded onto Fe3O4@BioMOF, which showed better selectivity and toxicity against malignant cells. This reports the specific antitumor delivery, absorption by cells, appropriate blood compatibility, and suitable MRI contrast effectiveness regarding breast cancer. Adding more, Xu and his research associates [ ] documented a non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cancer treatment by designing a nanomedicine based on hyaluronic acid (HA)-modified UA/(AS-IV)-loaded polydopamine (PDA) denoted by (UA/(AS-IV)@PDA-HA). These findings indicated a novel multifunctional NSCLC nanomedicine when combined with CT, PTT, and immunotherapy, which increased targeted delivery by improving the solubility of UA and AS-IV in vivo and in vitro studies while inhibiting NSCLC metastasis. Notably, tumor destruction can be provoked by PDA-DOX/ZIF-8 CDT, PTT, and NIR light. This reports that the coupling of CDT with PTT improved the therapeutic impact and enhanced the activity against tumors [ ]. For another instance, Shang and et al. [ ] reported RAMOFs-DOX was fabricated by using different synthesis techniques, and after labeling with the targeted peptide iRGD, Au NPs were functionalized with poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-SH polymer for drug therapy and phototherapy. Researchers have explored the use of micropore Fe-MOF as nanocarriers for chemotherapy and MRI agents for breast and bladder carcinoma detection. This innovative approach enhances treatment efficacy and tumor identification through non-invasive imaging techniques. Additionally, researchers have demonstrated the potential of 808 nm laser irradiation in enhancing photothermal therapy and drug heat transfer in cancer treatment.

4.3.2.3

## Starvation therapy
To date, cancer starvation therapy is a promising approach in cancer treatment, involving techniques like vascular disrupting and trans arterial chemoembolization angiogenesis. It aims to reduce the supply of nutrients and oxygen to tumors, leading to their necrosis and the death of cells. This method has shown promise in targeting tumors directly [ ]. Recently, it was demonstrated that glucose oxidase (GOx) is a “green” cancer treatment because it effectively blocks the required nutrition supply to tumors and stimulate immunostimulatory response [ ]. In this regard, Dai and his research team [ ] prepared a MOFs-based nanoreactor which was employed to deliver the glucose oxidase (GOx) and indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase (IDO) inhibitor 1-methyltryptophan (PCP–Mn-DTA@GOx@1-MT). This reported stimulation of immune response as a result of the intracellular ROS and overcomes the biological barriers related to tumor invasion and promotes the drugs absorption. GOx consumes glucose and generates ROS, resulting in the disintegration of MOFs for drug release and the stimulation of effector T cells and immune memory with immunological tolerance to mitigate tumor metastasis in vivo. These findings provide an intriguing approach for earlier immune response and minimizing immunological resistance by IDO-blockade immunotherapy. For another instance, Zhang and colleagues [ ] developed a synthetic MOF-based nanocomposite (TGZ@eM) loaded with the prodrug tirapazamine (TPZ) and employed GOx for starvation-activated colon cancer treatment. ZIF-8 interacts with co-load GOx and TPZ by one pot technique to produce GOx and TPZ-loaded ZIF-8 (TGZ). This suggested that TGZ@eM has significant immunity-escaping properties as well as prolonged blood flow. In the tumor microenvironment, TGZ@eM induced starvation and exacerbated hypoxia, which efficiently initiated the conversion of prodrug TPZ into highly lethal free radicals, inducing cell death in both in vitro and in vivo experiments.

4.3.2.4

## Immunotherapy
Recently, nanomedicine technology is increasingly being used for drug delivery, providing protection from degradation and prolonging their half-lives. This approach is particularly beneficial in cancer treatment, where immunotherapy harnesses the immune system's ability to distinguish between healthy and abnormal cells. Recent breakthroughs in immunotherapy include immune checkpoint blockade (ICB), chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells, and a programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) produced in T cells, and vaccines are some of the most important discoveries. Nano chemotherapeutics, such as ipilimumab, have shown promise in targeting cancer cells while sparing healthy tissues. These advancements have shown promise in enhancing the efficacy and reducing side effects of traditional chemotherapy [ ]. For instance, Alsaiari and fellows documented that Nivolumab (NV), a monoclonal antibody checkpoint inhibitor, was delivered using biomimetic ZIFs coated with cancer cell membranes that stimulate the T cells in hematological malignancies, which proved the prolonged release characteristic of NV-ZIF has proven to be more effective than the naked NV [ ]. In addition, Zhang and colleagues [ ] designed a MOF-based vaccine for cancer immunotherapy by generating robust humoral and cellular immune responses. Ovalbumin (OVA) was covalently linked to ZIF-8 (OVA@ZIF-8). The vaccine adjuvant, unmethylated cytosine-phosphate-guanine oligodeoxynucleotides (CpG ODNs), was electrostatically loaded onto the OVA@ZIF-8 surface (OVA@ZIF-8-CpG), which demonstrated outstanding biocompatibility and pH-responsive disintegration potential. Significantly, both in vitro and in vivo experiments confirmed that this dual-loading method induced a powerful immune response and effective immunological memory activation upon subsequent exposure to the same antigen. Moreover, cancer therapies can only destroy a certain percentage of cancer cells when applied unilaterally. Combining two or more treatments lessens side effects and increases anticancer efficacy through a synergistic effect. In this regard, Xu and colleagues [ ] outlined MOFs are frequently employed as specialized theranostic scaffolds for the detection and therapy of cancer including monomodal treatments such as photodynamic therapy (PDT) photothermal therapy (PTT), chemo dynamic therapy (CDT), and radiotherapy (RT).(i)Photodynamic therapy

Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a non-invasive treatment method that uses a photosensitizer (PS), light exposure, and tissue oxygenation to treat various medical conditions. The photosensitizer is selectively taken up by target cells or tissues, and is activated by specific light wavelengths. This triggers photochemical reactions, generating reactive oxygen species (ROS) within the target. PDT uses the power of cytotoxic singlet oxygen (1O2) generated by photosensitizers (PSs), transferring energy to oxygen and other molecules [ ]. Currently, the synergistic effect of PDT and MOFs for improved cancer diagnostic and therapy has been reported. On this basis, Liu and co-workers [ ] demonstrated ZIF-67 that was developed using a bottom-up strategy and formed a hybrid PCN core, with GSH responsive MOF/siRNA. Thus, the release of PCN core photosensitizing effects reduces antioxidant defense and makes GSH receptive to 1O2 by the PSZ activity. The activation of intracellular GSH causes the dissociation of PSZs ZIF-67 shell to increase siRNA activity for gene silencing, and this subsequently results in 2 times greater apoptotic outcomes. In another instance, stimuli-responsive MOFs such as Au nanoclusters fabricated and then loaded on DOX (AuNCs-@MOFs-DOX) enable regulated release and successfully cure breast cancers through the synergistic interaction of PDT and chemotherapy [ ]. The development of novel nanoagents that combine microwave thermal therapy (MTT) and microwave dynamic therapy (MDT) makes it easier to advance the therapeutic effects against cancer. Fruitfully, Meng and colleagues [ ] have synthesized Mn2+ doped Zr-MOFs nanocubes (Mn-ZrMOF NCs) for tumor therapy using hydrothermal technique. The study demonstrates the biocompatibility and biodegradability of Mn-ZrMOF NCs, which promote the production of cytotoxic hydroxyl radicals (•OH) in response to microwave stimulation, providing a framework for minimal side effects. This study provides a solid foundation for further exploration and utilization of Mn-ZrMOF NCs in biomedical applications.(ii)Chemodynamic therapy

Chemo dynamic therapy (CDT) is a promising approach for treating tumor malignancies, using a Fenton-type catalytic reaction to generate toxic hydroxyl radicals (OH) that are crucial for cancer cell eradication. CDT selectively activates a metal complex in the tumor microenvironment, triggering a Fenton-type reaction that produces OH radicals with exceptional cytotoxicity. These radicals damage DNA, proteins, and lipids. CDT's unique characteristics, such as acidic pH and elevated reactive oxygen species, allow for targeted treatment, sparing healthy cells. This localized production minimizes damage to surrounding healthy tissues, making it a highly effective and targeted treatment for cancer [ ]. Accordingly, Yang et al. [ ] developed a novel material called DHA@MIL-101 using solvothermal technique. The composite was found to increase intracellular iron levels, leading to the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and promoting ferroptosis and lipid peroxide (LPO) proliferation. This increased iron levels initiated ferroptosis, a form of regulated cell death. The accumulation of ROS initiated ferroptosis, while the proliferation of lipid peroxides induced oxidative stress. This led to mitochondrial damage and cell death. The study highlights the potential of the DHA@MIL-101 composite in modulating intracellular iron levels and its effects on cellular processes.(iii)Radiotherapy

Radiation therapy is a widely used treatment method that uses ionizing radiation to manage and eliminate cancerous cells. It is crucial in the fight against cancer, targeting tumors precisely while minimizing damage to healthy tissues. The technique is often administered using a linear accelerator, which generates high-energy X-rays or electron beams, ensuring accurate and effective radiation delivery. Interestingly, Ni K et al. [ ] explored the potential of Hf-porphyrin MOFs (Hf-DBB-Ru) in cancer treatment, demonstrating their efficacy in eliminating malignancies through radiotherapy and radio dynamic therapy, while using low doses of X-rays. The researchers aimed to improve the outcomes of radiotherapy while minimizing side effects. The study found that Hf-DBB-Ru MOFs generated singlet oxygen (1O2) and produced hydroxyl radicals using Hf secondary building units (SBUs). This compound, known as [Hf6(3-O)4(3-OH)4(DBB-Ru)6]12+holds great potential for various applications. This reports that targeting specific mitochondria could trigger cell death in tumor cells while minimizing damage to surrounding healthy tissue. The study also explored the effects of low-dose X-rays on a mouse model of colon cancer, highlighting minimal negative effects and improved therapeutic outcomes. The study emphasizes the significance of exploring alternative therapeutic approaches in the treatment of cancer.(iv)Photothermal therapy

Photothermal therapy (PTT) is a promising approach in cancer treatment that uses near-infrared (NIR) laser technology to trigger a localized inflammatory response, leading to the destruction of malignant cells. PTT uses the unique properties of NIR laser light to penetrate deep into tissues without causing significant damage to healthy cells. When applied to cancerous tissue, nanoparticles or other agents absorb the light energy and convert it into heat, resulting in the destruction of cancer cells. PTT offers a more precise and localized approach, reducing the risk of adverse effects and overcoming some of the limitations of conventional therapies [ ]. The novel agent for treating malignancies is the combination of photothermal agent and MOF materials; the photothermal reagents generate heat when stimulated by external lasers for thermal excision of tumors [ ]. Recently, Wang and research team [ ] successfully fabricated a UiO-66@PAN nanocomposite, which has the potential for use in photothermal therapy (PTT) for colon tumor treatment. The material has strong near-infrared absorbance, excellent photothermal conversion efficiency, and favorable water dispersibility, making it suitable for in vitro applications. The study highlights the substance's advantages for effective PTT, efficient light energy conversion into heat for tumor ablation, and its favorable water dispersibility, which supports further investigation for clinical translation.
Additionally, based on their compositions and structural characteristics, MOFs-conjugate materials as photothermal agents have been classified into three groups: i) metal-doped MOFs, ii) organic-doped MOFs, and iii) polymer-coated MOFs [ ].(i)Metal-doped MOF

Due to low toxicity and high photothermal convertibility, Au-NPs are frequently utilized as PTAs in photothermal therapy. However, because of their structure, in vivo gold nanorods (Au-NRs) readily cluster and due to poor biodegradability and inadequate surface modification [ ]. The use of gold nanorods (Au-NRs) in hybrid materials has gained attention for their potential to overcome limitations in conventional materials. Researchers aim to harness the unique properties of Au-NRs while utilizing other components, resulting in enhanced performance and functionality. In this regard, Yang and team [ ] found that a composite of AuNRs@ZIF-8, a core-shell nanostructure, can be used for enhanced combinatorial tumor therapy. The composite showed a significant reduction in systemic toxicity under near-infrared (NIR) radiation. The composite's core-shell nanostructures showed promising results, with decreased toxicity observed within 14 days. This suggests the potential of AuNRs@ZIF-8 for safe and effective tumor therapy, especially when combined with NIR radiation. The study also demonstrated the potential of combining photothermal therapy (PTT) and chemo dynamic therapy (CDT) in the mouse body, with the core-shell structure of AuNR@ZIF-8 nanoparticles exhibiting a clear and effective synergistic effect.(ii)Organic doped MOF for PTT

By modifying the types of metal ions and ligands, MOFs perform a variety of functions. For example, some copper-based nanostructures have been documented to have NIR light absorption capabilities that can efficiently produce heat when exposed to 808 nm laser light [ ]. Very recently, Li and fellows [ ] developed copper nanosheet based metal-organic frameworks (Cu-MOFs) for tumor treatment using laser irradiation. The nanosheets, with their high surface area and tunable porosity, are ideal for targeted drug delivery and localized therapy. By converting light energy into heat, the nanosheets effectively destroy tumor cells while minimizing damage to healthy tissues. The study highlights the unique properties of Cu-MOF nanosheets, including their broad spectrum, high light absorption intensity, and abundance of copper vacancies.(iii)Polymer coated for PTT

By modifying the types of metal ions and ligands, MOFs perform a variety of functions. Polydopamine (PDA), a coating material, was manufactured by combining it with MOFs for PTT. Polydopamine (PDA), a coating material, was produced by combining MOFs for photothermal treatment [ ]. According to multiple studies, the unique coupling properties of PDA enable the modified MOFs to be coupled with functional molecules. Once functionalized with PDA, MOFs like ZIF-8, MIL-101, and UiO-66 are used to generate stimuli-responsive multifunctional hybrid materials for in vitro and in vivo studies. These MOFs could pair with targeting molecules like aptamers and folic acid (FA) for cancer therapeutics [ ]. In this regard, Wu and his fellows [ ] demonstrated that PDA@ZIF-8, a novel material, has the potential to inhibit tumor growth in mice when exposed to near-infrared (NIR) radiation. The researchers used mice divided into two groups, one receiving PDA@ZIF-8 treatment and the other a control group. The mice treated with PDA@ZIF-8 showed a significantly higher inhibitory effect on tumor growth compared to the control group. This suggests that PDA@ZIF-8 has potential in cancer therapy. This study reports that by combining Chemo-Dynamic Therapy (CDT) with Photothermal Therapy (PTT) significantly improved the therapeutic impact, leading to enhanced activity against tumors. This synergistic effect could potentially revolutionize cancer therapy.

4.4

## Cargo delivery
Very recently, the field of nanotechnology has made significant strides in the realm of drug administration and gene therapy. This revolutionary technology has paved the way for targeted medication delivery and DNA/RNA delivery systems, ushering in a new era of possibilities in the field of biomedical applications, with a particular focus on targeted medication delivery [ ]. In last few decades, NMs have emerged as a promising tool in the field of photoactivated therapies. These NMs are activated by light and have shown great potential in various applications, especially in the development of drug delivery systems (DDSs) and gene therapy methods. One of the key advantages of using NMs in these therapies is their ability to undergo photoisomerization and photoreduction, allowing for real-time monitoring of the treatment progress [ ]. In the realm of gene and drug delivery, several remarkable examples of MOFs have emerged. Notably, the University of Oslo MOFs, cyclodextrin MOFs, and Fe-MOFs have garnered attention for their potential in this field. The University of Oslo MOFs have demonstrated promising capabilities in gene and drug delivery applications. These MOFs possess a unique structure that allows for efficient encapsulation and controlled release of therapeutic agents. Through careful design and engineering, the University of Oslo researchers have successfully harnessed the potential of MOFs for targeted delivery, enhancing the efficacy and minimizing side effects of gene and drug therapies. On the other hand, cyclodextrin and Fe-MOFs have also emerged as a noteworthy candidate for gene and drug delivery. These MOFs, composed of cyclodextrin molecules and iron ions respectively, offer a versatile platform for encapsulating various therapeutic agents. These MOFs exhibit excellent stability and biocompatibility, making them suitable for biomedical applications [ ].
4.4.1

## Gene delivery (CRISPR)
Gene delivery is the process by which foreign genetic material, such as DNA or RNA introduced into host cells for desired gene expression. Hence, gene therapy utilizes gene delivery system to transfer genetic material for treating a specific condition or disease. On the other hand, gene delivery using CRISPR technology has revolutionized the field of genetic engineering. This innovative approach allows for precise and efficient editing of the genome, opening up new possibilities for treating genetic diseases. However, RNA interference (RNAi) and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR/Cas9) nucleic acids (NAs) are two significant approaches for manipulating the expression of genes for gene therapy. For this purpose, foreign DNA is required to be synthesized as part of a vector. The inadequate delivery carriers impede the advancement of gene therapy [ ]. Multiple investigations have been carried out to identify novel strategies to improve the efficacy of nucleic acid delivery. To overcome this problem recombinant viruses and synthetic vectors i.e. (viral and nonviral delivery vectors) have been introduced [ ]. Very recently, promising nonviral vectors MOFs have attracted a lot of attention due to high surface areas and tailored structure. For nucleic acids delivery, the MOFs pore size needs to be between 100 and 500 nm. MOFs protect nucleic acids during endocytosis pathways due to their fragile nature. Typically, MOFs have a positive charge whereas nucleic acids are negatively charged that generates electrostatic associations and improve the DNA/RNA delivery [ ]. Thereby, the clinical efficacy of UiO-66, MIL-88B, and ZIF-8 as frequently employed gene therapy vectors are evaluated [ ]. On this basis, silica coupled with ZIF (SMOFs) was fabricated to transfer nucleic acids, as reported by Wang and colleagues [ ]. The SMOFs encapsulated nucleic acids exhibit high loading efficiency due to modified surface, excellent stability, and robust intracellular and pH-responsiveness. This versatile and stable SMOFs is a prospective gene therapy carrier. For another instance, Poddar and research team [ ] demonstrated ZIF-C for gene therapy against prostate cancer. ZIF-C has the capability to target cytoplasm and nucleus to knockdown the expression of host genes in PC cells using RNAi and CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing.

4.4.2

## Drug delivery
In the realm of pharmaceutical advancements, one notable invention that has garnered significant attention is the field of drug delivery. Drug delivery systems have revolutionized pharmaceuticals by allowing precise administration of medications to targeted areas of the body. Traditionally, oral ingestion or injections led to systemic distribution, resulting in potential side effects and suboptimal therapeutic outcomes. These systems address these limitations by delivering drugs directly to the desired site of action, minimizing systemic exposure and maximizing therapeutic efficacy. They enhance drug bioavailability by encapsulating drugs within specialized carriers like NPs, simplifying the administration process and improving accuracy and precision [ ]. In this regard, MOFs received attention as an intriguing medication delivery mechanism. The MOFs based nanocarriers used in drug delivery applications have a proper design that influence the hydrophilicity of the medications for uptake and release characteristics thereby preventing the drugs from adhering to extraneous substances [ ]. Among various MOFs, Zinc-based MOFs are considered one of the best candidates for developing nano-encapsulates because they are versatile, lower toxicity, and easily biodegradable. The zeolitic imidazolate frameworks ZIF-67, ZIF-90, and ZIF-8 are used as carriers for drugs [ ]. Hence during synthesis, their substantial surface area, high porosity, and tailored, attributes help them to target specific sites and the size of less than 200 nm allows them to travel promptly into capillaries. The substrate must be stable under manufactured conditions to encase drugs inside the MOFs for intracellular administration and subsequent release. For instance, camptothecin (CPT) encapsulated ZIF-8 nanospheres with a 70 nm particle size demonstrated better cell incorporation and reduced toxicity for MCF-7 breast cancer cells [ ]. Additionally, Lei and his team of researchers [ ] used Zr, Fe, and Al as ligands to fabricate redox-responsive MOFs like M(DTBA) (M = Fe, Al, or Zr) for cancer-preventive drugs. Eventually, curcumin was incorporated into MOFs to formulate CCM@MOF-Zr (DTBA) composite. During in vitro investigations, post-synthetic surface modifications, cell eradication, and a faster drug dispersal pattern were observed in the composite as compared to free CCM. With this regard, Cai and the research team [ ] outlined the Zn-based MOFs (CUR@IRMOF-16) that were designed using the precipitation approach in which curcumin functions as an anticancer medication and IRMOF-16 serves as a carrier. These findings demonstrate substantial intracellular absorption, a decline in mitochondrial membrane potential, biodegradability, biosafety, and minimal cytotoxicity during in vitro investigations. Furthermore, Leng and coworkers [ ] prepared Ori@MIL-53(Fe) by the solvent thermal method for anticancer drug administration in which oridonin was loaded to the MIL-53 (Fe). This indicates that the orthogonal structure facilitates excellent drug loading capacity while pH responsiveness suggests efficiently targeted drug release behavior that reduces HepaG2 cell growth with no toxic effects during in vitro testing. Notably, MOFs have been divided into two main groups based on drug solubility: (i) water-soluble MOFs and (ii) water-stable MOFs. The water solubility phenomenon has gained much attention in medical and drug release techniques. MOFs with low crystallinity are frequently reported to be soluble in water [ ]. To examine the crystalline integrity and pharmaceutical adsorption, Liu and his research team [ ] proposed that micron-sized γ-CD-MOFs were manufactured by an improved vapor diffusion technique. Due to the hydrophilic nature of KOH and carboxyl groups exhibited relatively significant drug adsorption. Hence, this reports that CD-based MOFs exhibit rapid drug solubility in water. Likewise, multiple antibiotics and antiviral drugs have been incorporated into MOFs for DDSs that are based on Fe, Zr, K, and Zn NPs [ ]. Fruitfully, Agostoni and research fellows [ ] investigated the interaction of these three water-soluble medicines, azidothymidine (AZT), azidothymidine monophosphate (AZT-MP), and azidothymidine triphosphate (AZT-TP), with mesoporous iron trimester MIL-100 MOFs. The anti-HIV activity of MIL-100 was tested using human PHA-P-activated PBMC in MOFs, which revealed that free AZT-TP did not affect viral replication. Interestingly, AZT and AZT-TP loaded with MIL-100-based MOFs showed anti-HIV activity by 4 folds, which may minimize viral replication by up to 90 %. Additionally, Alinne Elida and co-workers [ ] assessed, in vitro release of efavirenz from a system innovation due to the intrinsic characteristic of the ZIF-8, which has a pH-sensitive release modulation for the treatment of AIDS. This reports that the ZIF-8 structure degrades at pH 1.2. The EFZ release from the EFZ: ZIF-8 system obtained in ethanol was extended in the pH 4.5 and 6.8 medium, releasing 95 % of the drug in 24 h at pH 4.5 and 75 % medium at pH 6.8. Moreover, Jodłowski and companions [ ] choose four models such as MOF-808, UiO-66, UiO-67, and NU-1000, to investigate the DDSs properties to combat the SARS-CoV-2 virus. For this purpose, Acriflavine (ACF) was loaded onto different MOFs in various concentrations. The drug absorption and release activity from ACF@MOFs composites was measured by the pore volume, π-π stacking, and electrostatic interactions. It was found that the cytotoxicity was minimal that made it an excellent candidate for COVID-19 therapy. In addition, the pain reliever and anti-inflammatory drug such as indomethacin (IDM) were loaded on ZIF-8. The investigations revealed that the composite has 45 folds greater water solubility than the IDM [ ]. Other examples of water-soluble drugs and their loading capacity included iron-based MOFs (MIL-53) [ ] chromium-based MOFs, Matériaux de l′Institute Lavoisier (MIL-100, 101) [ ], Ti-based MOFs, ibuprofen (IBU) [ ] and copper-based MOFs (HKUST-1) [ ].

5

## Exploring the mechanism of MOFs for the biomedical applications
MOFs are porous materials with organic linkers that manipulate chemical and physical characteristics, including pore diameters, surface area, active sites, and chemical stability. They have diverse applications in biomedical fields, including diagnostics, drug delivery, and therapeutics. MOFs have been used in diagnostics, drug delivery, and therapeutics for over two decades. The Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) reports around 99,075 MOFs and MOF-type compounds [ ]. MOFs are ideal for diagnostic techniques like bioimaging and biosensing due to their metallic nature, improved ROS activity, biofilm penetrability, and enhanced charge transfer and fluorescence resonance energy transfer. Their properties, including metallic, crystalline, porous, inorganic, and organic, make them suitable for various applications [ ]. With this regard, Li and colleagues [ ] demonstrated that MOFs can couple with inorganic and organic NMs at the same time to improve their chemical nature, substantial loading capacity, and biodegradability for detection approaches. For another instance, Cai and colleagues [ ] synthesized indocyanine green (ICG) and MIL-100(Fe) to improve loading efficiency by 40 %. When combined with hyaluronic acid, MOF@HA@ICG improves ICG accumulation in tumors and imaging intensity, while decreasing decomposition and eradication in vivo. Additionally, MOFs organic nature enables binding to biomolecules through covalent conjugation, van der Waals interactions, coordination bonds, and electrostatic interactions, enabling electrochemical biosensing and signal amplification [ ]. For instance, Najafabadi and colleagues [ ] developed a dye-labeled probe (FAM-Probe) with folate to detect microRNA-21 in prostate cancer cells using fluorescence sensing, demonstrating a promising approach for miRNA sensing. Aforementioned discussion has demonstrated that MOFs are excellent drug-delivery nanocarriers due to their nature, porosity, active sites, pH, temperature, and dose concentration, and biocompatible nature. These nanocarriers reduce drug leakage, load and release drugs, and have low cytotoxic effects on biological systems [ ]. In this context, Mosavi and coworkers [ ] prepared MOF-5 using microwave technique. A chitosan polymer film on MOF-5 showed high drug loading capacity at pH 5, releasing 96.78 % of the medication. It also demonstrated pH-responsiveness in treating breast cancer. Adding more, MOFs are excellent nanocarriers for therapeutic purposes, such as combining with chemotherapeutic medications to achieve anticancer targets. These drugs improve drug release efficiency, overcome unregulated drug release, systemic adverse effects, and resistance [ ]. To elaborate this, Liu et al. [ ] manufactured a multifunctional UiO-66/Bi2S3@DOX composite, which exhibited a photothermal effect and pH-triggered DOX release. Combining transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) and PTT reduces the risk of malignancies, making UiO-66/Bi2S3@DOX a promising therapeutic agent for hepatocellular carcinoma treatment.
5.1

## Future of MOFs
Extensive research has been conducted on MOFs in biomedical field. Their prospects are promising with ongoing research dedicated to expanding applications, improving synthesis techniques, and optimizing performance. The improvement of MOFs can be achieved through the expansion of pore volume, pore size distribution, and surface area, alongside improving thermal, physical, and chemical stability. MOFs with customized porosity are highly effective as molecular sieves for biomedical applications. Efficient synthesis techniques are essential for widespread adoption, considering the limitations of traditional methods both in terms of affordability and time. Therefore, researchers are currently focused on developing new MOFs that are compatible with biological system. Further research is required to explore inexpensive raw materials that can investigate the stability, cytotoxicity, and biocompatibility of MOFs. MOFs are expected to play a significant role in solving global healthcare problems due to their cost-effectiveness and sustainability.

6

## Conclusion
Nanotechnology is based on the introduction of novel NMs, which can lead to the development of advanced structures and devices. These NMs exhibit novel chemical and biological characteristics and are used in various biomedical applications, including cancer treatment, viral infections, and diagnostics. MOFs, inorganic-organic hybrid materials, have gained attention in various fields due to their large surface area, porosity, high stability, low density, and simple synthesis method. In addition, MOFs are also being investigated for their ability to interact with biological entities in response to various stimuli, such as pH, temperature, light, magnetic field, pressure, glucose level, and multiple shock-responsive techniques for efficient drug release. MOFs are primarily used in biomedical research due to their enhanced biocompatibility. However, further investigation is needed to address stability and toxicity before clinical implementation.

## Availability of data and materials
Data available on request from the authors.

## Ethical approval
There are no human subjects in this article and informed consent is not applicable.

## Consent to publish
The results/data/figures in this manuscript have not been published elsewhere, nor are they under consideration by another publisher.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Samreen Sadiq: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Formal analysis, Data curation. Shoaib Khan: Visualization, Validation, Software. Iltaf Khan: Writing – original draft, Supervision, Conceptualization. Aftab Khan: Validation, Supervision, Resources, Data curation. Muhammad Humayun: Validation, Resources, Investigation, Conceptualization. Ping Wu: Validation, Resources, Methodology, Investigation. Muhammad Usman: Validation, Investigation, Conceptualization. Abbas Khan: Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Amal Faleh Alanazi: Validation, Software, Data curation. Mohamed Bououdina: Validation, Methodology, Data curation.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 

## Abbreviations

ATPAdenosine triphosphate
BmBDVBombyx mori bidensovirus
BmCPVBombyx mori cytoplasmic polyhedrosis virus
BmNPVBombyx mori nucleopolyhedrovirus
BmEBovine mammary epithelial
CdSCadmium sulfide
CdTeCadmium telluride
CoCobalt
CUSsCoordinatively unsaturated sites
DNADeoxyribonucleic acid
DDSDrug delivery system
ERKExtracellular-signal-regulated kinase
FDAFood and drug administration
AuGold
GNMsGraphene-based nanomaterials
ImdImmunological deficit
InAsIndium arsenic
InPIndium phosphide
FeIron
Fe3O4Iron oxide
JAK/STATJanus kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcript
LDLethal dose
MIL-53Matériaux de l′Institut Lavoisier-53
MOFsMetal-organic frameworks
MAPKSMitogen-activated protein kinases
MC3T3Murine calvarial pre-osteoblast cell line
NMsNanomaterials
nmNanometer
NPsNanoparticles
NPsNanoparticles
NiNickle
NF-kBNuclear factor kappa
1-DOne-dimensional
P13K AktPhosphatidylinositol 3-kinase protein kinase B
PVAPolyvinyl alcohol
PEGPolymeric ligand
PTDPhotodynamic therapy
PTTPhotothermal therapy
PVPPolyvinylpyrrolid
pHPower of hydrogen
PPOProphenol oxidase
QDsQuantum Dots
ROSReactive oxygen species
SiO2Silicone oxide
STINGStimulator of interferon gene
3-DThree-dimensional
TiTitanium
TiO2Titanium oxide
T-DOX-MNCsTrastuzumab-doxorubicin-loaded magnetic nanoparticle clusters
2-DTwo-dimensional
UVUltraviolet
ZIF-8Zeolitic imidazolate framework-8
0DZero-dimensional
ZnOZinc oxide
ZnSeZinc selenide

## Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful and would like to thank the 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 22150410332) and 10.13039/501100012216Jiangsu University of Science and Technology (Grant No. 1112932205) for financial support. The author would like to acknowledge the support provided by the Saudi Aramco Chair Program (ORCP2390), Authors are grateful and would like to thank Prince Sultan University Riyadh for paying the Article processing Charges (APC).