pmcCell Mol Gastroenterol HepatolCell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol3079cmgh101648302Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology2352-345XElsevierPMC12804005PMC12804005.112804005128040054126057110.1016/j.jcmgh.2025.101681S2352-345X(25)00222-X1016811Original ResearchLoss of NKCC1 Activates the NLRP3 Inflammasome in Intestinal Epithelia
KoumangoyeRainelli B.FerdausMohammed Z.DavisXeniaBohannonJulia K.DelpireEriceric.delpire@vanderbilt.edu Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee∗Correspondence Address correspondence to: Eric Delpire, PhD, Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, T-4202 Medical Center North, 1161 21st Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37232-2520. tel: (615) 343-7409. eric.delpire@vanderbilt.edu20261711202520350287510168113620258112025171120251601202624032026© 2025 The Authors2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).K+ Flux Capacitor: NKCC1-mediated Potassium Flow Prevents an Inflammatory Overload
2041122025101696Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology10.1016/j.jcmgh.2025.101696PMC1300752541338411

## Background & Aims
Potassium and chloride efflux have been reported to regulate nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain, leucine-rich repeat, and pyrin domain-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome activation. Aberrant activation of NLRP3 inflammasome causes autoimmune and chronic inflammatory diseases. The Na+-K+-2Cl- cotransporter (NKCC1) maintains the intracellular concentrations of sodium, potassium, and chloride. Here we ask whether NKCC1 modulates NLRP3 inflammasome activation.

## Methods
Mice with intestinal epithelial-specific deletion of NKCC1, CRISPR-Cas9 NKCC1-deleted Caco-2 and HT-29 cells, and human fibroblasts expressing mutant NKCC1 were used to evaluate NLRP3 inflammasome activation.

## Results
We found that deletion of NKCC1 in established intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) in culture causes increased pyroptosis and interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-18 secretion upon NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Similarly, organoids derived from mice with conditional NKCC1 knockout in IECs also exhibit increased IL-1β secretion when stimulated with adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Moreover, fibroblasts from a patient with NKCC1 mutant also showed increased pyroptosis and IL-1β and IL-18 secretion. Loss of NKCC1 sensitizes IECs to changes in intracellular concentration of K+ and decreases the threshold required for NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Finally, we showed that NKCC1ΔIEC mice have increased infiltration of innate immune cells in the colon mucosa and peritoneal cavity.

## Conclusions
NKCC1 functions as a negative regulator of NLRP3 inflammasome activation and this may explain why patients of loss-of-function mutations in NKCC1 are susceptible to inflammatory diseases.

## Keywords
InflammationInflammatory CytokinesIntestinal EpitheliumNKCC1pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Abbreviations used in this paper
ANOVAanalysis of variance
ASCapoptosis-associated Speck-like protein containing a CARD
ATPadenosine triphosphate
BSAbovine serum albumin
bumbumetanide
CAPScryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome
DAMPdanger-associated molecular pattern
DAPI4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
DHSBDevelopmental Studies Hybridoma Bank
D-MEMDulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
ELISAenzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
ERendoplasmic reticulum
FBSfetal bovine serum
FITCfluorescein isothiocyanate
GSDMDgasdermin D
H&Ehematoxylin and eosin
HBSSHanks’ Balanced Salt Solution
HRPhorseradish peroxidase
ICP-MSinductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
IECintestinal epithelial cell
ILinterleukin
KOknockout
LDHlactate dehydrogenase
LPSlipopolysaccharide
mtDNAmitochondrial DNA
NF-kBnuclear factor kappa B
NKCC1Na+-K+-2Cl− cotransporter
NLRNOD-like receptor
NLRPnucleotide-binding oligomerization domain, leucine-rich repeat, and pyrin domain-containing protein
NLRP3nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain, leucine-rich repeat, and pyrin domain-containing protein 3
OSR1oxidative stress response 1
PAMPpathogen-associated molecular pattern
PBSphosphate buffered saline
PVDFpolyvinylidene fluoride
ROSreactive oxygen species
SEMstandard error of the mean
SLC12solute carrier transporter 12
SPAKSte20-related proline-alanine-rich kinase
Tthymine
TLRtoll-like receptor
TNFtumor necrosis factor
TUNELterminal transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling
WNKwith-no-lysine kinase
WTwild-type

## Summary
This study shows that Na+-K+-2Cl- cotransporter (NKCC1) affects NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome activation. Loss of NKCC1 function sensitizes intestinal epithelial cells and human fibroblasts to NLRP3 inflammasome activation, induces pyroptosis, and increases secretion of the inflammatory cytokine interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-18. Loss of epithelial NKCC1 causes an increase in infiltration of innate immune cells in the gut mucosa.

This article has an accompanying editorial.

The innate immune system is rapidly activated in response to invading microorganisms or cellular injury, initiating a nonspecific defense mechanism that represents the first line of defense against pathogenes and danger signals. Inflammation is part of the innate immunity and is a natural response to tissue injury, bacteria, virus, or any other pathogens. The innate immune system uses a variety of sensor proteins to detect damaged and infected cells. NLR (NOD-like receptor) protein detect pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) from infectious agent and danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) released from damaged host cells. , The nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain, leucine-rich repeat, and pyrin domains-containing proteins (NLRPs) are a family of cytosolic sensors that initiate the innate immune response. Once activated, NLRPs form the inflammasome, a multi-protein complex that sense danger signals, damaged and infected cells. , , Assembly of the inflammasome mediates caspase-1 activation and the production of the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-18. , , Activated caspase-1 also cleaves and activates gasdermin D (GSDMD), where its N-terminal domain translocates to the plasma membrane to form pores. These pores facilitate the release of IL-1β and IL-18 and cause a fiery inflammatory cell death known as pyroptosis. , , , , NLR and other immune sensors are expressed in variety of cells. Recent studies suggest that NLRP1, NLRP3, NAIP/NLRC4, and NLRP9b in epithelial cells play a critical role in the pathogenesis of inflammation. , , , , Activating germline mutations in NLRP3 gene have been linked to autoinflammatory disease called cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome (CAPS). , , Intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) represent a first line of defense against pathogens and play critical roles in sensing PAMPs and DAMPs, which initiate and facilatate the inflammatory response by professional immune cells such as dendritic cells, monocytes, macrophages, and neutrophils. Multiple studies have shown that activating mutations in NLRP3 (NALP3) and pyrin (MEFV) inflammasomes are associated with autoimmune diseases and inflammatory bowel diseases. , , , , , , In addition, genetic variants in CARD8 (CARD8); a negative regulator of NLRP3, have been linked to Crohn’s disease. , , These studies imply that factors that increase NLRP3 inflammasome activation associate with incresased risk of developing inflammatory bowel disease. Although most NLRP inflammasomes sense or bind to PAMPs, NLRP3 does not bind to a PAMP but instead senses cellular stress or change in cellular metabolic state. The activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome is a 2-step process. In the first step or priming, microbial ligands and endogenous cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α or IL-1β activate the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kB) pathway via activation of toll-like receptor (TLR), TNF, or IL-1 receptors. NF-kB mediates the transcription of NLRP3, caspase-1, IL-1β, IL-18, and other proinflammatory genes. In the second step, or activation step, NLRP3 is activated by a variety of ligands including uric acid and cholesterol crystals, amyloids deposits, reactive oxygen species (ROS), mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), lysosomes destabilization, adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and bacterial pore-forming toxins. , , , , Although the precise mechanisms by which these diverse agonists activate the NLRP3 inflammasome is not well-understood, the NLRP3 inflammasome activation is always preceeded by intracellular potassium (K+) eflux. , , Moreover, recent studies also indicate that Cl- efflux and cell volume regulation play a role in NLRP3 inflammasome activation. , , 
SLC12A2, the gene encoding Na+-K+-2Cl− cotransporter (NKCC1), belongs to the mammalian solute carrier transporter 12 (SLC12) gene family. NKCC1 uses the electrochemical gradient established by the Na+/K+-ATPase pump to mediate the electroneutral transport of Na+, K+, and Cl- inside the cell. NKCC1 is expressed in most cell types, including epithelial cells, and it plays a critical role in maintaining the intracellular concentration of ions. NKCC1 is regulated by the Cl- and K+ sensing “with-no-lysine” (WNK) serine/threonine kinases. During an hyperosmotic stress or low intracellualr Cl- concentration, WNK autophosphorylates and activates downstream kinases Ste20-related proline-alanine-rich kinase (SPAK) (STK39) and oxidative stress response 1 (OSR1) (OXSR1), which directly phosphorylate and activate NKCC1. , , Activation of NKCC1 mediates the influx of Na+, K+, and Cl- inside the cell, which we argue here is required to stop inflammasome activation. Indeed, this process could explain how defective K+ and Cl- influx due to the loss of NKCC1 function inhibits the resolution of the inflammatory response and causes excessive inflammatory cytokine secretion, possibly leading to GI inflammation and multisystem failure in human patients. Few studies have investigated the role of NKCC1 in the activation of the innate immune response. However, systemic inhibition of NKCC1 with bumetanide or microglia-specific NKCC1 knockout (KO) induces inflammatory cytokines secretion in the cerebral cortex in response to an inflammatory stimuli. Similarly pharmacologic inhibition of NKCC1 induces inflammatory cytokines secretion in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced lung inflammation. 
In this study, we report that NKCC1 regulates NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Using CRISPR-Cas9 we eliminated NKCC1 in Caco-2 cells and demonstrated that loss of NKCC1 function causes a rapid and robust IL-1β and IL-18 secretion with a corresponding increase in caspase-1 activity followed by pyroptotic cell death. Although K+ efflux is sufficient to induce NLRP3 inflammasome activation and IL-1β secretion in IECs, we found that when combined, K+ and Cl- effluxes trigger a substantially greater NLRP3 inflammasome activation and IL-1β release. Cl- efflux alone had no significant effect. In fibroblasts isolated from a patient carrying a deleterious NKCC1 mutation (NIH UDP-2780 or NKCC1-DFX patient), we found that extracellular ATP induces a rapid release of increased IL-1β and IL-18. Using a mouse with intestinal-specific deletion of NKCC1, we found that NKCC1-deficient IECs secrete more cytokines in response to NLRP3 inflammasome activation, and this change alters the mouse peripheral innate immune response. Overall, we show that epithelial NKCC1 works at restoring intracellular K+ and at minimizing inflammasome activation, because in the absence of the cotransporter, inflammasome activation is greatly enhanced. This novel function of NKCC1 explains why patients with deleterious mutations in NKCC1 are prone to develop inflammatory diseases, including gastrointestinal inflammation and sterile or noninfectious inflammatory diseases. 

## Results

## Deletion of NKCC1 in IECs Increases IL-1β and IL-18 Release Upon NLRP3 Inflammasome Activation
Although inflammasomes are primarily studied in immune cells such as macrophages and neutrophils, recent studies suggest that NLRP1, NLRP3, NAIP/NLRC4, and NLRP9b are also expressed in epithelial cells and play a key role in innate and adaptive immune response. , , , , NKCC1 is expressed in most cell types and is regulated by the WNK-SPAK kinase signaling cascade. In response to a drop in intracellular chloride (Cl-), potassium (K+) or cell shrinkage, WNK kinases (WNK1 and WNK4) auto-phosphorylate and activate SPAK (STK39) and OSR1 (OXSR1) kinases, which phosphorylate and activate NKCC1. NKCC1 then mediates the influx of Na+, K+, and 2Cl- into the cell. , Previous studies have shown that Cl- and K+ efflux play a key role in activating the NLRP3 inflammasome. , , , , In addition, it was shown that systemic and intracortical inhibition of NKCC1 with bumetanide or microglia-specific deletion of NKCC1 increases IL-1β secretion. The Na-K-2Cl cotransporter modulates microglial phenotype and inflammatory response to brain injury in a cell-autonomous manner. Because NKCC1 is a major regulator of intracellular concentration K+ and Cl-, we sought to determine whether loss of NKCC1 function leads to NLRP3 inflammasome activation and inflammatory cytokines secretion in IECs. We used CRISPR-Cas9 to delete NKCC1 in Caco2 cells, as we have previously described. We selected a guide that targets exon 1 of the SLC12A2 gene ( A). Multiple clones were obtained, and 3 were retained for further characterization. The sequence of the SLC12A2 alleles revealed addition or deletion of bases around the break site, leading to frameshift events within exon 1 ( B–C). Both alleles of clone A2 showed an added thymine (T) at the break site, leading to a homozygous p. Val144Argfs SLC12A2 variant. Distinct deletions in both alleles of clones A5 and B4 were observed, resulting in multiple frameshift events. To assess the functionality of the cotransporter, we performed K+ influx measurements under hypertonic conditions, in the presence or absence of 20 μM bumetanide (bum). NKCC1-wild-type (WT) cells showed a significant bumetanide-sensitive K+ influx that was abolished in the 3 NKCC1-KO clones ( D), confirming that these cells no longer express the cotransporter. Western blot analysis confirms absence of NKCC1 protein in all 3 clones ( E). To assess the effect of NKCC1 deletion on NLRP3 inflammasome activation, we primed wild-type Caco2 and NKCC1-KO (Caco2-ΔNKCC1) with LPS for 4 hours followed by ATP stimulation for 20 minutes. Conditioned media and cell lysates were prepared and analyzed by immunoblotting ( A–E) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) ( F). Priming with LPS alone was not sufficient to activate the NLRP3 inflammasome and induce IL-1β. However, priming with LPS followed by activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome led to a significant increase in IL-1β secretion; especially in Caco2 cells lacking the cotransporter ( A). ATP stimulation increased IL-1β processing and maturation, as evidenced by a decrease in p30 IL-1β ( B), as well as increases in cleaved p17 IL-1β ( C) and p10 IL-1β ( D). In accordance with the increase in IL-1β processing observed by Western blot, we found by ELISA that Caco2-ΔNKCC1 cells release more IL-1β at baseline and upon ATP stimulation compared with WT and nontreated controls ( E). Similar data were obtained with IL-18 ( F–I). To further evaluate whether the loss of NKCC1 function activates the NLRP3 inflammasome and induces the inflammatory cytokine secretion, we stimulated WT and NKCC1-deficient HT29 cells with ATP and ouabain and assessed mature IL-1β in the supernatant. As with Caco-2 cells, we observed a significant increase in NLRP3 inflammasome activation as evidence by the release of IL-1β in the supernatant of NKCC1-deficient HT29 cells treated with ATP and ouabain compared with nontreated WT HT29 cells ( J). Collectively, these data suggest that loss of NKCC1 increases the release of precursors and mature IL-1β and IL-18 in NLRP3 inflammasome activated immortalized IECs in culture. 

## NKCC1 Regulates Caspase-1 Activation in IECs
Activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome in immune cells leads to the recruitment and activation of caspase-1, which then mediates the cleavage of pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18 into their biologically active forms: IL-1β and IL-18. Note that some studies have also shown that IL-1β maturation could be mediated via caspase-independent mechanisms. , To assess whether the loss of NKCC1 increases caspase-1 activation, primed WT and Caco2-ΔNKCC1 cells were incubated in absence or presence of ATP, and pro-caspase-1 cleavage and release in the conditioned media and whole cell lysate was assessed by Western blotting. We observed a significant decrease in the caspase-1 pro form (p55) ( A–B) and an increase in cleaved caspase-1 p50 and p38 fragments ( A, C, D). Although the p20 fragment of caspase-1 did not resolve well in Caco2 cells, it was clearly visible in NKCC1-deficient HT29 cells treated with ouabain and ATP ( F). A mechanism of NKCC1-mediated inflammasome activation is that the loss of NKCC1 function lowers the activation threshold of the inflammasome complex, as bioactive IL-1β and caspase-1 fragments are rapidly released by NKCC1-deficient cells, compared with control cells ( and ). In addition, we found that caspase-1 activity was significantly increased in stimulated Caco2-ΔNKCC1 cells, with caspase-1 specificity demonstrated using the caspase-1 specific inhibitor YVAD-CHO ( E, green bar). 

## Effect of NKCC1 KO on ASC Assembly and Pyroptosis
Apoptosis-associated Speck-like protein containing a CARD (ASC) oligomerization drives the formation of multiprotein complexes or specks, which is a critical step in inflammasome activation. It mediates the recruitment of procaspase-1 into the inflammasome via its PYD and CARD domains. The CARD domain of caspase-1 interacts with the CARD domain of ASC or other CARD domain-containing Nod-like receptors such as NLRC4, which bring caspase-1 into proximity and activates procaspase-1 by autocatalytic cleavage. ASC speck or pyroptosome formation precedes inflammasome activation and caspase-1-mediated inflammatory cell death. To assess ASC oligomerization or speck formation, we treated primed Caco2 and Caco2-ΔNKCC1 cells with ATP and performed Western blotting. We observed a significant decrease in ASC monomer (p20) abundance in Caco2-ΔNKCC1 compared with parental Caco2 ( A–B). Concomitantly, we observed increased ASC dimer (p40) abundance in ATP-treated Caco2-ΔNKCC1 cells ( A, C). We obtained similar data by immunofluorescence staining of ASC in Caco2 cells ( D–G). However, unlike macrophages, monocytes, and neutrophils, where activation of the inflammasome leads to the formation of one ASC speck or pyroptosome per cell, in Caco2 cells, ASC exists in pre-assembled small specks which merge into a larger speck ( G). Importantly, there was no significant difference in the number of ASC specks between Caco2 and Caco2-ΔNKCC1 cells ( H). However, ATP stimulation resulted in a significant increase in ASC speck size in Caco2-ΔNKCC1 cells ( I). Upon cell shrinkage, the NKCC1-linked kinases: WNK1, SPAK, and OSR1 move from a diffuse cytoplasmic localization to phase transition condensates or puncta. To assess whether ASC colocalizes with WNK1 or SPAK puncta, we examined endogenous SPAK by immunofluorescence in Caco2 and Caco2-ΔNKCC1 cells ( J–M). Like ASC speck formation, SPAK exists in small, pre-assembled puncta at baseline. Upon ATP stimulation, the number of SPAK puncta per cell decreases, whereas the size of the puncta increases ( N–O). Although both ASC speck and SPAK puncta increase in size upon ATP stimulation, SPAK seems to localize preferentially around the nucleus, whereas ASC seems to translocate inside the nucleus. Taken together, these data indicate that both ASC and SPAK are activated during NLRP3 inflammasome activation, but they are in physically distinct subcellular domains. 
In addition to IL-1β and IL-18, caspase-1 also cleaves GSDMD, which then translocates to the plasma membrane where it triggers a proinflammatory programmed cell death called pyroptosis. , This, in turn, causes the release of inflammatory cytokines and cellular content in the extracellular space and initiates the immune response. , , To investigate whether the loss of NKCC1 affects pyroptosis, we measured the release of cleaved GSDMD by immunoblotting. As shown in A, cleaved GSDMD fragments increase in the supernatant of Caco2-ΔNKCC1 cells and LPS-primed and ATP-stimulated Caco2-ΔNKCC1 compared with WT Caco2 cells ( A–C). In addition, we observed the release of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) ( D). 

## Potassium (K+) and Chloride (Cl-) Efflux are Required for NLRP3 Inflammasome Activation
K+ and Cl- efflux drive the assembly and activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome. , , NKCC1 is regulated by chloride and potassium sensitive WNK-SPAK/OSR1 kinases, , which phosphorylate and activate NKCC1 leading to an influx of Na+, K+, and 2Cl- into the cell. , , , Thus, we hypothesized that loss of NKCC1 may decrease the threshold of intracellular chloride and potassium required to activate the NLRP3 inflammasome. Indeed, upon a drop in intracellular K+ and/or Cl-, NKCC1 is stimulated and works at replenishing the ions. Absence of the cotransporter sustains inflammasome activation. To evaluate this, we designed experiments to decrease the intracellular concentration of K+ and Cl- separately, or together, prior to ATP-mediated NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Incubating WT Caco2 or Caco2-ΔNKCC1 cells in Cl- free media (methanesulfonate substitution) prior to NLRP3 stimulation slightly decreased IL-1β release ( A–B, left panel). Similarly, incubation WT Caco2 and Caco2-ΔNKCC1 cells in K+ free alone media prior to NLRP3 stimulation slightly increases IL-1β release ( A–B, middle panels). In contrast, dropping both ions in the extracellular solution caused a significant increase in IL-1β release in both WT and mutant Caco2 cells ( A–B, right panel). Consistent with the Western blot data, we found by ELISA that at baseline, Caco2-ΔNKCC1 cells release more IL-1β than their WT counterparts. Cl- efflux alone caused a slight decrease in IL-1β secretion, whereas K+ efflux alone and Cl- and K+ efflux combined induces a significant increase in IL-1β secretion in both WT Caco2 and Caco2-ΔNKCC1 cells ( C). To assess the role of Cl- and K+ efflux in activating pyroptotic cell death, we treated the cells as described above and measured LDH release. As shown in D, K+-free media and Cl-- and K+-free media combined induces a significant release of LDH in both WT and Caco2-ΔNKCC1 cells. We also measured the intracellular K+ levels in NKCC1-mediated NLRP3 inflammasome activation by using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) on WT Caco2 and Caco2-ΔNKCC1 cell samples. At resting state, Caco2-ΔNKCC1 cells displayed lower intracellular K+ concentration compared with parental Caco2 cells. When the cells were treated with the NLRP3 activator ATP, both WT and KO cells showed a significant decrease in intracellular K+ ( A). In addition, we observed a small decrease in intracellular Na+ concentration in the NKCC1-deficient cells, indicating that the transporter is an important mechanism for Na+ influx in epithelial cells. Note, however, that activation of the NLRP3 inflammation with ATP did not cause any noticeable change in the intracellular Na+ concentration ( B). 

## The NKCC1-DFX Mutation Is Associated With an Increase in IL-1β and IL-18 Secretion and Enhanced NLRP3 Inflammasome Activation in Human Fibroblasts
In recent studies, we and others have shown loss of function mutations in NKCC1 are linked to multiple inflammatory conditions. , , , , To determine whether the NKCC1-DFX mutation influenced the NLRP3 inflammasome activation, we treated control human fibroblasts and fibroblasts derived from the UDP-2780 patient carrying the NKCC1-DFX mutation with ATP and measured IL-1β, IL-18, Caspase-1, and GSDMD release by Western blotting ( A–K). Even in fibroblasts, the IL-1β ( A–C) and IL-18 ( D–E) release were increased in the NKCC1-deficient cells. Although the typical active Caspase-1 (p20) fragment was not detected in the supernatant of NKCC1-DFX and control fibroblasts, we observed a significant increase in caspase-1 (p55) and caspase-1 (p38) releases from UDP-2780 patient fibroblasts treated with ATP, compared with WT fibroblasts ( F–H). Similarly, assessment of GSDMD cleavage and secretion showed that UDP-2780 patient fibroblasts released more inactive (p53) and activate (p35) GSDMD compared with WT fibroblasts ( I–K). 

## Ex Vivo Organoids Derived From Mice With IEC-specific Deletion of NKCC1 Secrete More Inflammatory Cytokines Upon NLRP3 Inflammasome Activation
Targeted deletion of WNK1 in mouse macrophages induces NLRP3 inflammasome activation. In addition, pharmacologic inhibition of NKCC1 with bumetanide or WNK kinases with WNK463 in an acute LPS-induced lung inflammation mouse model, induces a proinflammatory immune response with elevated release of proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-6, TNFα, and IL-10. To confirm an IEC-specific role of NKCC1 in NLRP3 inflammasome activation, we generated conditional KO mice with specific deletion of NKCC1 in intestinal epithelial cells ( , 10A–D). At baseline, there were no significant changes in mouse body weight (not shown) nor colon length ( E). Histopathologic analysis did not reveal any significant changes by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining ( F–G), although we observed an expansion of the mucosal compartment, which we confirmed by measuring increased proliferation ( A–C). Sporadic accumulation of macrophages in lamina propria and mucosa of NKCC1fl/fl and NKCC1ΔIEC mice was observed ( D–E), and the number of infiltrating macrophage in the mucosa increased in NKCC1ΔIEC mice compared with NKCC1fl/fl mice ( F). There was no notable change in apoptosis ( G–I), analyzed by terminal transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL). To determine the effect of IEC-specific deletion on NLRP3 inflammasome components, we isolated IECs from the colon of NKCC1fl/fl and NKCC1ΔIEC mice and analyzed IL-1β and caspase-1 expression by Western blot. Deletion of NKCC1 in IECs did not on its own increase the expression of IL-1β or caspase-1 (data not shown). However, when we isolated IECs and prepared organoids ( J–K), we found by ELISA that stimulation of IEC organoids with ATP caused a significant increase in IL-1β secretion in NKCC1ΔIEC mice organoids compared with organoids derived from NKCC1fl/fl mice ( L). To assess whether the loss of NKCC1 in IECs affects the peripheral immune response, we isolated leukocytes from the peritoneal cavity of NKCC1fl/fl and NKCC1ΔIEC mice. We then stained these cells with immune cell surface markers and analyzed them by flow cytometry. As shown in , targeted deletion of NKCC1 in IECs led to an increase in total number of cells in the peritoneal cavity of NKCC1ΔIEC mice compared with NKCC1fl/fl mice ( A). Similarly, the number neutrophils ( B), macrophages ( C), and monocytes ( D) increased in the peritoneal cavity of NKCC1ΔIEC compared with their NKCC1fl/fl littermates. However, IL-1β secretion in the peritoneal fluid of these mice was low and not detectable by Western blot. 

## Discussion
Although most studies on inflammasome activation and inflammatory cytokine secretion are conducted in innate immune cells such as macrophages, monocytes, neutrophils, and dendritic cells, recent studies indicate that IECs play a pivotal role in sensing pathogen and danger signals and activating diverse inflammasomes such as NLRP1, NLRC4, NLRP9b, and NLRP3 to process and secrete activation and IL-1 β and IL-18. , , , , IECs constitute the first line of defense within the epithelial innate immune system, acting as sentinels that detect microbial pathogens and DAMPs. Upon activation, IECs secrete inflammatory cytokines that recruit immune cells from the underlying lamina propria, thereby initiating a localized inflammatory response. This crosstalk between IECs and resident immune cells is critical not only for host defense but also for maintaining intestinal homeostasis. In NKCC1-deficient IECs, aberrant overproduction of proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β and IL-18 may lead to excessive immune cell infiltration into the gut mucosa, perpetuating chronic inflammation. This dysregulated epithelial-immune signaling may contribute to the persistent inflammatory phenotypes observed in the gastrointestinal tract and other organs of individuals harboring NKCC1 mutations. NLRP3 is the best characterized inflammasome, and its dysregulation has been linked to a multitude of autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, including Alzheimer, Parkinson, gout, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, CAPS, atherosclerosis, and type 2 diabetes. , As Cl- and K+ efflux have been recently described as sufficient drivers of NLRP3 inflammasome activation and inflammatory cytokine secretion. , , , , mechanisms regulating the intracellular content of these ions likely play a role in these processes. Patients with loss-of-function mutations in NKCC1 suffer from numerous pathological conditions, including chronic inflammatory diseases. , , , , , , Since NKCC1 mediates the influx of K+ and Cl- and maintains intracellular K+ and Cl- concentrations, which are required to inhibit NLRP3 inflammasome activation, we postulated that NKCC1 may function as a negative regulator of NLRP3 inflammasome. We further hypothesized that the genetic association between NKCC1 and chronic inflammation may be driven by overproduction of inflammatory cytokines in the intestine and other organs.
Loss-of-function studies of NKCC1 in vivo have been limited because deletion of NKCC1 affects multiple organs and causes debilitating phenotypes in mice, including peri-weaning lethality. , , , , , In this study, we used CRISPR-Cas9 edited Caco-2 cells and HT-29 cells and a conditional KO mouse with IEC-specific deletion of NKCC1 to study activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome. Our results show that NKCC1-deficient IECs secrete more IL-1β and IL-18 upon NLRP3 inflammasome priming with LPS followed by activation with ATP. This response is not specific to IECs since NLRP3 agonist also caused increased secretion biologically active IL-1β from the fibroblasts isolated from the patient harboring a 11-bp deletion in exon 22 (p.Val1026Phefs∗2) of SLC12A2, which results in frameshift and truncation of the carboxy-terminal tail of the cotransporter.
IECs and human fibroblasts undergo rapid pyroptosis upon NLRP3 inflammasome activation as the precursors and active forms of caspase-1 and IL-1β are rapidly released in the condition medium after ATP stimulation. Additionally, NKCC1-deficient cells release more LDH than their WT counterparts. Our study shows that intact NKCC1 is necessary to inhibit NLRP3 inflammasome activation as expression of mutant NKCC1-DFX in fibroblasts or deletion of NKCC1 in IECs resulted in significant release of precursor and active caspase-1 and IL-1β. Our data suggests that NKCC1 acts as a negative regulator of the NLRP3 inflammasome. This observation is in line with previous reports showing that loss of function mutations in CARD8, a negative regulator of the NLRP3 inflammasome, causes inflammatory bowel diseases in human patients. , , , We also found that IECs harbor preassembled ASC specks/puncta that coalesce into larger specks upon NLRP3 agonist treatment.
In this study, we also assessed the molecular mechanisms by which NKCC1 deletion in IECs led to inflammatory cytokine secretion. Despite the plethora of studies, the precise mechanisms of NLRP3 inflammasome activation has remained controversial. This is in part due to the fact NLRP3 inflammasome activation is activated by diverse and unrelated stimuli such as pore forming toxins, uric acid, cholesterol crystals, β-amyloids protein, ROS, mtDNA, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. , , , , , We reported that the NKCC1 DFX patient has elevated mitochondria DNA, and expression of the mutant cotransporter in mice lead to increased production of ROS, damaged mitochondria, and metabolic dysfunction. , , Moreover, K+ efflux and Cl- efflux to a lesser extend are increasingly recognized as necessary and required downstream of all NLRP3 activators. , , , , , , Given the role of NKCC1 in maintaing intracellular concentrations of Cl- and K+, we proposed that NKCC1-dependent influx of of Cl- and K+ is necessary to inhbit NLRP3 inflammasome activation and terminate inflammatory cytokines release. Surprisingly, we found that Cl- efflux alone was not sufficient to activate NLRP3 inflammasome, whereas K+ efflux alone is a strong activator of NLRP3 inflammasome in IECs. But IL-1β is strongly induced when IECs are incubated in Cl- and K+ depleted media. Although we cannot exclude the fact that ROS production in NKCC1-KO cells may accelerate NLRP3 inflammasome activation, the fact that depletion of Cl- and K+ induces IL-1β secretion in WT cells suggest that that the primary driver of NLRP3 inflammasome activation in IECs is a drop in intracellular concentration of Cl- and K+. Our study also found that NKCC1-deficient Caco2 cells had slightly lower level of intracellular potassium compared with their WT counterparts. This could explain why the secretion of mature IL-1β and caspase-1 in higher in in Caco2-ΔNKCC1 upon NLRP3 agonist or ouabain treatment, suggesting that loss of NKCC1 sensitize IECs to NLRP3 inflammasome activation. These data support previous studies showing that patients on thiazide or loop directics that target NCC and NKCC2 have a higher risk of developing gout, , which is caused by accumulation of uric acid; a known activator of NLRP3 inflammasome. In essence, loop diuretics may cause electrolyte loss and hypokalemia, which, in turn, sensitizes cells of NLRP3 inflammasome activation. We also observed increased peritoneal macrophages, neutrophils, and monocytes in NKCC1ΔIEC mice compared with WT. Although the precise mechanism of action of how loss of NKCC1 in IECs causes a mild peritonitis is unknown, multiple factors may be contributing to this observation. For instance, multiple studies have shown that activation of NLRP inflammasomes in IECs protects against mucosal pathogens and restricts systemic dissemination of pathogens. , , In addition, we have previously demonstrated that loss of NKCC1 function causes gut inflammation and increased permeability of IEC tight junctions. , Furthermore, increased NLRP3 inflammasome activation and IL-1β secretion has been linked to barrier defect in patients with active ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease. , Gut inflammation combined with tight junction dysfunction may facilitate the translocation of immune cells from the gut to the peritoneal cavity.
Collectively, our data shed light on a previously unknown role of epithelial NKCC1 in modulating the NLRP3 inflammasome and pyroptosis ( ). Our study demonstrates that loss of NKCC1 function sensitizes IECs and human fibroblasts to NLRP3 inflammasome activation and subsequent IL-1β and IL-18 secretion. Our studies suggest that the broad spectrum of inflammatory diseases in patients with loss of function mutations in NKCC1 may derive from imbalanced intracellular Cl- and K+ ions that trigger the NLRP3 inflammasome. Finally, targeting the NLRP3 inflammasome or IL-1β/IL-18 signaling pathway may be viable options for patients with loss of function mutation in NKCC1. 

## Material and Methods

## Reagents
The following antibodies were used as primary antibodies: NKCC1 from the University of Iowa Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank (DHSB: T4 monoclonal, 1:1000); caspase-1 (Abcam: ab179515, 1:2000); IL-18 (Abcam: Cat.# ab207324, 1:2000); GSDMD (Invitrogen: Cat.# MA5-44666, 1:2000); β-actin (Sigma, AC-74 monoclonal, Cat.# A2228; 1:5,000); IL-1β (Abcam: Cat.# ab9722; 1:2000); Phospho-SPAK (Ser373)/Phospho-OSR1 (Ser325) (Millipore: Cat.# 51-6100; 1:2000); Anti-phospho-NKCC1 (Thr212/ Thr217) (Millipore: Cat.# ABS1004 ; 1:2000); Anti-ASC pAb-AL177 (AdipoGen Life Sciences: Cat#: AG-25B-0006-C100); Anti-NLRP3/clone Ab-Cryo2 (AdipoGen Life Sciences: Cat#: AG-25B-0014-C100). Human IL1β/IL-1F2 ELISA Kit (R&D: Cat# : DLB50); Human IL18/IL-1F4 ELISA Kit (R&D: Cat# : DL180). Cytotoxicity detection Kit (Sigma/Millipore: Cat# 11644793001). Caspase-Glo 1 Inflammasome Assay (Promega: Cat#: G9951). Alexa Fluor Plus 405 Phalloidin (Invitrogen: Cat#: A30104).

## Generation of NKCC1/Villin-Cre Mice
The NKCC1-flox mouse was created using homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells. The DNA construct was built from a 10-kb genomic fragment used previously to create a global NKCC1 KO mouse. The targeting DNA construct includes a 2339 bp 5′ arm, followed by a first loxP site, a 646-bp fragment that includes exons 8 and 9, a second loxP site, a 6.9-kb SA/IRES/βgeo/pA cassette for selection, a third loxP site, and a 5150-bp 3′ recombination arm. The DNA construct was linearized with NotI and electroporated into TL-1 ES cells. Transfected cells were grown on fibroblast feeder cells in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (D-MEM) supplemented with 15% fetal bovine serum (FBS), gentamicin (50 μg/mL), LIF (1000 U/mL), β-mercaptoethanol (90 μM), and G418 (0.2 mg/mL). We picked 340 independent neomycin-resistant colonies, grew them in 96-well plates on feeder layer, then expanded and analyzed them for the presence of the mutant gene using Southern-blot analysis of genomic DNA digested with PstI. Eight clones (3 negatives and 5 positives) were picked and expanded for further analysis with genomic DNA digested with NheI + SphI. The mutant gene b-galactosidase-neomycin cassette introduces a SphI site that reduces the size of a 11.4-kb genomic fragment to 7.5 kb. Clone 2D6 was then injected into C57BL/6J blastocysts, and multiple chimeric mice were born. A chimeric male with the highest brown fur coloration (2D6-H) was mated to C57BL6/J females to obtain germline transmission (ie, produce the first NKCC1-3loxP mice). To eliminate the βgeo cassette, a 3-loxP male was mated to B6.FVB-Tg(EIIa-cre)C5379Lmgd/J females (Strain #003724, Jackson Laboratories). Mice carrying a 2 loxP allele (ie, NKCC1+/f) were identified and bred one additional generation to C57BL/6J females to eliminate the Ella-CRE allele prior to breeding to obtain our first homozygous animals. Mice were genotyped using primers that generate a 296-bp fragment from the mutant allele and a 256-bp fragment from the control allele. Note that in parallel, the line was bred 2 additional generations to F6 prior to generating homozygotes and crossing the line with B6.Cg-Tg(Vil1-cre/ERT2)23Syr/J mice (Strain #020282, Jackson Laboratories).

## Husbandry and Tamoxifen Induction
Mice were maintained in a specific pathogen-free facility where they were provided with food and water ad libitum and maintained in a 12-hour light-dark cycle at 23°C ambient temperature and 60% humidity. Mice were anesthetized by isoflurane inhalation and euthanized by cervical dislocation. All procedures with mice were approved by the Vanderbilt University Medical Center Animal Care and Use Committee. Both male and female mice were used at ages of 8 to 10 weeks old. To induce deletion of NKCC1, the mice were injected intraperitoneally once a day for 5 consecutive days with 1 mg tamoxifen (Sigma, Cat#: T-5648) in 100 mL corn oil. The mice were then allowed to rest for 7 days (tamoxifen washout period) prior to euthanasia. Control mice, which were NKCC1-flox mice without the villin-CRE allele, were also injected with tamoxifen.

## Intraperitoneal Lavage and Flow Cytometry
Mice were anesthetized by isoflurane inhalation and euthanized by cervical dislocation. Intraperitoneal cavities were washed with 50 mL of ice-cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS). The peritoneal lavage fluid was then assessed by flow cytometry (BD) with markers: Ly6G for neutrophils, Ly6C for monocytes, and F4/80 for macrophages.

## CRISPR/Cas9-mediated Deletion of NKCC1 in Caco2 and HT29 Cells
Two complementary oligonucleotides creating open BbsI sites upon annealing were ligated into the pX458 plasmid. The sequence introduced (CCGCTTCCGCGTGAACTTCG) represented the guide RNA, designed to target cas9 to exon 1 of SLC12A2. The pX458 plasmid also contains the open reading frame of a cas9/GFP fusion protein under a mammalian hybrid CBh promoter. After sequencing was performed to confirm proper insertion of the guide fragment, bacteria containing the modified plasmid were grown overnight in 60 mL culture, and bacterial DNA was purified using a Qiagen Medi prep column. DNA (2 μg/35-mm dish) was then transfected into Caco-2 cells. Forty-eight hours post-transfection, the cells were sorted for GFP using a FACSAria III flow cytometer and plated single cell per well in 96-well plates. All surviving clones were expanded to 24-well and 6-well plates and screened for presence or absence of NKCC1 expression via Western blot analysis and genomic DNA sequencing.

## 83Rb Uptake Experiments
K+ influx was measured through unidirectional 83Rb uptakes in parental Caco-2 cells and NKCC1-KO clones in 35-mm dishes. Cells were preincubated for 15 minutes with 1 mL hypertonic saline (140 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 0.8 mM MgCl2, 2 mM glucose, 80 mM sucrose, 5 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 380 mOsM). The solution was then aspirated and replaced with 1 mL identical saline containing 0.25 μCi 83Rb, 200 μM ouabain, with or without 20 μM bum. As a tracer for K+ movement, we utilized 83Rb (Brookhaven radioisotope production facility). The isotope has a half-life of 86.2 days and emission energies that can be detected by either gamma detector (at 520 keV) or liquid scintillation counting (window set to energies of 0–100 keV). Two 5-μL samples of flux solution were taken at the beginning of each uptake period, placed in scintillation vials, and used as standards. After 15 minutes uptake, the radioactive solution was aspirated, and the cells were washed 3 times with 3 mL ice-cold hyperosmotic solution. Cells were then lysed with 500 μL 0.25N NaOH for 1 hour and neutralized with 250 μL glacial acetic acid. Aliquots of 300 μL and 30 μL were used for β-scintillation counting and protein assays, respectively. K+ influx was expressed in pmoles K+ per mg of protein per minute.

## Caspase-Glo 1 Inflammasome Assay
WT and NKCC1-KO Caco2 cells were plated in 96-well plates. The cells were then primed with LPS for 4 hours, then incubated for 1 hour with vehicle or ATP. Caspase-1 activity was measured with the caspase-Glo 1 inflammasome assay (see reagents) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 100 μL of caspase-1 glo reagent was added to each well and mixed by up and down pipetting. The mixture was then incubated at room temperature in the dark for 1 hour before measuring the luminescence using a Promega GloMax plate reader. Ac-VAD-CHO was used as a specific caspase-1 inhibitor.

## Cytokines Assay
IL-1β and IL-18 release into cell culture supernatants after the various treatment was determined by ELISA using the Human IL-1β/IL-1F2 and IL-18/IL-1F4 Quantikine ELISA kits (R&D Systems), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## LDH Release Assay
Pyroptosis was quantitated by measuring the activity of LDH in cell supernatants using the Cytotoxicity Detection Kit (Roche) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, Caco-2 cells and NKCC1 KO clones were plated in 96-well, flat, clear-bottomed black plates. The cells were primed with LPS overnight. Caco-2 cells were then stimulated with vehicle (Hanks’ Balanced Salt Solution [HBSS]) or ATP for 20 minutes before cell-free culture supernatants were collected and incubated with LDH assay solution at 25°C for 30 minutes. In some experiments, the inhibitor (ouabain) or stimulator such as potassium and chloride-free solutions were added for 1 hour prior to ATP stimulation. The optical density values were analyzed at 490 nm. These experiments were repeated at least 3 times, and the results are expressed as a percentage of the maximum LDH released when cells are lysed in RIPA buffer.

## Potassium Chloride Replacement Experiment
WT and NKCC1-deleted Caco-2 cells were primed overnight with LPS (500 ng/mL) supplemented in complete DMEM/F12 containing 10% FBS. The next day, the cells were incubated in control solution (120 mM NaCl or 120 mM Na-methane sulfonate, 4.2 mM K-gluconate or 4.2 mM N-methyl-D-glucamine-methane sulfonate, 35 mM NaHCO3, 1.2 mM Ca(NO3)2, 0.7 mM MgSO4, 0.45 mM NaH2PO4, 0.5 mM Na2HPO4, 0.5 mM Na-pyruvate, 17 mM glucose, amino acids (50× from Sigma, Cat. No. M5550), Glutamax (100× from Gibco, Cat. No. 35050-061), vitamins (100× from Gibco, Cat. No. 11120052) and 5% FBS (from R&D Systems).

## Western Blot Analysis
Proteins were extracted from colon tissues and Caco-2 cells growing on 6-well plates were using RIPA buffer (Sigma) supplemented with complete protease inhibitors and Phospho-Stop phosphatase inhibitors (Roche Applied Science). Cell lysates were sonicated for 20 seconds and incubated on ice for 20 minutes and vortexed every 5 minutes. At the end of the incubation period, the cells were centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 8 minutes. Supernatants containing the soluble protein were transferred to new tubes. Protein concentration was determined with the Bio-Rad Bradford Assay. An equal amount of protein (40 μg) of each sample was separated on pre-cast Bio-Rad 4% to 12% gradient gels. The gels were then transferred to Bio-Rad polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes. The membranes were probed with indicated antibodies, followed by horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary anti-mouse and rabbit antibody and revealed using Bio-Rad’s Clarity Western ECL reagent.

## Immunofluorescence
Parental Caco-2 and NKCC1-KO clones were cultured on glass-bottom dishes. Cells were fixed with cold (−20oC) methanol:acetone (1:1) solution, washed and incubated in blocking buffer (5% BSA, 1% goat serum, 0.1% Triton X-100, and 0.1% Tween-20 in HBSS2+) for 2 hours, then incubated in primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. Slides were washed 3 times for 20 minutes with HBSS2+ and incubated with fluorophore conjugated (Cy3 or fluorescein isothiocyanate [FITC]) secondary antibodies for 2 hours. Prolong Gold Antifade with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Invitrogen) was added to each dish and covered with a 12-mm round cover glass. Images were captured on a Zeiss LSM 880 laser scanning confocal microscope. Samples were scanned using a 63× oil objective. Z-stacks slices were set at 0.5 μm intervals. The images were exported as TIFF files using the Zeiss ZEN Lite 2012 software.

## Intracellular K+ and Na+ Measurement by ICP-MS
Caco-2 (WT and ΔNKCC1) were cultured in 6-well black plates. Cells were washed 3 times using HBSS2+ and then treated with 20 μM ATP or left untreated (vehicles) for 20 minutes. After removing the conditioned media, the cells were scraped off the plate and transferred to 15-mL tubes. The samples were then digested with 100 uL of nitric acid over night before adding 1.4 mL of water to get a sufficient volume and to lower the concentration of nitric acid. Trace elements were quantitated on an ICP-MS.

## Mouse IEC Extraction and Organoids Culture
Mice of both sexes were sacrificed according to institutional guidelines. Small intestine and colon tissues were dissected and washed 3 times in cold PBS. Intestines were cut into 1-cM segments into a 50 mL tube containing 30 mL of the cell dissociation buffer (HBSS without calcium and magnesium supplemented with 30 mM EDTA). Pieces of intestine were then incubated on a shaker at 60 rpm for 30 minutes at 4°C before shaking and filtration through a 70-μm cell strainer to isolate crypts. The crypts were pelleted at 900 g for 4 minutes at 4°C and resuspended in cold 1 mL PBS containing 0.1% bovine serum albumin (BSA). Twenty μL of the crypt pellet was embedded in 100 μL of reduced growth factor Matrigel and plated on 24-well plate as a dome. Matrigel domes containing intestinal crypts were allowed to polymerize at 37°C in temperature for 15 minutes. Next, 500 μL of IntestiCult Organoid Growth Medium (StemCell Technologies, cat# 06000) supplemented with penicillin and streptomycin was added, and organoids were cultured at 37°C and 5% CO2. The organoid culture media was replaced after 4 days. For ATP stimulation experiments, NKCC1fl/fl and NKCC1ΔIEC mice-derived organoids were primed overnight with LPS (500 ng/mL) supplemented in Intesticult Growth Medium. The next day, the cells were incubated in control solution (120 mM NaCl, 4.2 mM K-gluconate or 4.2 mM N-methyl-D-glucamine-methane sulfonate, 35 mM NaHCO3, 1.2 mM Ca (NO3)2, 0.7 mM MgSO4, 0.45 mM NaH2PO4, 0.5 mM Na2HPO4, 0.5 mM Na-pyruvate, 17 mM glucose, amino acids [50× from Sigma, Cat. No. M5550], Glutamax [100× from Gibco, Cat. No. 35050-061], vitamins [100× from Gibco, Cat. No. 11120052], and 5% serum [from R&D Systems]) or control solution supplemented with 20 μM ATP for 1 hour at 37°C and 5% CO2. 500 μL of the culture supernatants were collected and concentrated through 10K centrifugal filters and analyzed by ELISA.

## Organoids Immunofluorescence Staining
Matrigel dome containing NKCC1fl/fl and NKCC1ΔIEC organoids were incubated at 4oC for 20 minutes to dissolve the Matrigel. Organoids were then washed twice with ice-cold PBS and fixed with cold (−20oC) methanol:acetone (1:1) solution. Organoids were washed 3 times for 10 minutes with ice-cold PBS and incubated in blocking buffer (5% BSA, 1% goat serum, 0.1% Triton X-100, and 0.1% Twenn-20 in HBSS2+) for 2 hours before incubation with anti-NKCC1 antibody (1:200) overnight at 4°C. The next day, organoids were washed 3 × 20 minutes with HBSS and incubated at room temperature for 2 hours in blocking buffer containing FITC-conjugated rabbit secondary antibody and Alexa Fluor Plus 405 Phalloidin to stain the actin filaments. Organoids were then washed 3 × 20 minutes in HBSS. Organoids were finally mounted on glass slides using a mounting medium from Invitrogen (Prolong Gold Antifad containing DAPI). The slides were covered with 24 × 50 mm microscope cover glasses and imaged on a Zeiss LSM 880 confocal microscope.

## Statistical Analysis
Data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Statistical significance was determined by 1-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test. Statistical significance for some datasets was determined by parametric and nonparametric tests (indicated in the Figure legends). A significant difference was assigned when P < .05. The number of asterisks indicates the following degrees of significance: ∗P < .05, ∗∗P < .01, and ∗∗∗P < .001.

 

## Acknowledgments
We generated the NKCC1-flox mouse in collaboration with the Vanderbilt Genome Editing Resource (VGER, Research Resource ID#: SCR_01882). Confocal imaging was performed in part using the VUMC Cell Imaging Shared Resource (supported by National Institutes of Health grants CA68485, DK20593, DK58404, DK59637, and EY08126). Flow Cytometry experiments were performed in the Vanderbilt Flow Cytometry Shared Resource. The Vanderbilt Flow Cytometry Shared Resource is supported by the Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center (P30 CA068485) and the Vanderbilt Digestive Disease Research Center (DK058404). The authors also wish to acknowledge Ghali Abdelmessih and Kerri Rios for their assistance in managing Villin-CreERT2 colony.

## CRediT Authorship Contributions
Rainelli B. Koumangoye, PhD (Conceptualization: Equal; Data curation: Equal; Formal analysis: Lead; Investigation: Lead; Methodology: Lead; Writing – original draft: Lead; Writing – review & editing: Lead)
Mohammed Z. Ferdaus, PhD (Investigation: Supporting; Methodology: Supporting; Writing – review & editing: Supporting)
Xenia Davis, PhD (Investigation: Supporting; Methodology: Supporting)
Julia K. Bohannon, PhD (Investigation: Supporting; Methodology: Supporting)
Eric Delpire, PhD (Conceptualization: Equal; Funding acquisition: Lead; Investigation: Supporting; Methodology: Supporting; Project administration: Lead; Resources: Lead; Supervision: Lead; Validation: Supporting; Writing – original draft: Supporting; Writing – review & editing: Supporting)

Conflicts of interest The authors disclose no conflicts.
Funding This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants, GM118944 and DK093501, and a Leducq Foundation Transatlantic Network of Excellence grant, 17CVD05, to Eric Delpire.
Data Availability All primary data are included in the manuscript.