pmcAdv Sci (Weinh)Adv Sci (Weinh)2933advsciADVSAdvanced Science2198-3844WileyPMC11809427PMC11809427.111809427118094273975432810.1002/advs.202406324ADVS99561ReviewReviewPeriodic Table of Immunomodulatory Elements and Derived Two‐Dimensional Biomaterials
RafieeradAlireza SalethLeena Regi KhanahmadiSoofia AmiriAhmad AlagarsamyKeshav Narayan DhingraSanjivhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-2664-7633 sdhingra@sbrc.ca

1

Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences
St. Boniface Hospital Albrechtsen Research Centre
Biomedical Engineering Program
Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology
Rady Faculty of Health Sciences
University of Manitoba
Winnipeg
Manitoba
R2H2A6
Canada

2

Institute for Molecular Biosciences
Johann Wolfgang Goethe Universität
60438
Frankfurt am Main
Germany

3

Russell School of Chemical Engineering
The University of Tulsa
Tulsa
OK
74104
USA

*E‐mail: sdhingra@sbrc.ca

03120252202512648178410.1002/advs.v12.62406324
09102024
0762024
030120251102202515062026© 2024 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley‐VCH GmbHhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract
Periodic table of chemical elements serves as the foundation of material chemistry, impacting human health in many different ways. It contributes to the creation, growth, and manipulation of functional metallic, ceramic, metalloid, polymeric, and carbon‐based materials on and near an atomic scale. Recent nanotechnology advancements have revolutionized the field of biomedical engineering to tackle longstanding clinical challenges. The use of nano‐biomaterials has gained traction in medicine, specifically in the areas of nano‐immunoengineering to treat inflammatory and infectious diseases. Two‐dimensional (2D) nanomaterials have been found to possess high bioactive surface area and compatibility with human and mammalian cells at controlled doses. Furthermore, these biomaterials have intrinsic immunomodulatory properties, which is crucial for their application in immuno‐nanomedicine. While significant progress has been made in understanding their bioactivity and biocompatibility, the exact immunomodulatory responses and mechanisms of these materials are still being explored. Current work outlines an innovative “immunomodulatory periodic table of elements” beyond the periodic table of life, medicine, and microbial genomics and comprehensively reviews the role of each element in designing immunoengineered 2D biomaterials in a group‐wise manner. It recapitulates the most recent advances in immunomodulatory nanomaterials, paving the way for the development of new mono, hybrid, composite, and hetero‐structured biomaterials.

Two‐dimensional (2D) nanomaterials, possessing unique physiochemical properties, revolutionize the field of biomedical engineering to address critical diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. This review unveils the periodic table of 2D immunomodulatory elements, assessing synthesis, properties, immunomodulatory mechanisms and biocompatibility. A comprehensive group‐wise, element‐by‐element roadmap of nano‐enabled immunomodulatory 2D materials is provided, discussing well‐explored and emerging 2D elements, while noting those without current application in immunoengineering, drug delivery, cancer therapy and regenerative medicine.
 

2D biomaterialscancer therapyimmunoengineeringimmunomodulatory periodic elementsnanomedicinetheranosticCanadian Institutes of Health Research
10.13039/501100000024CIHR #PJT178254Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
10.13039/501100000038NSERC RGPIN‐2021‐03951 Therefore, in the current review, we classify and design innovative “immunomodulatory periodic elements” and derive 2D biomaterials as a comprehensive reference for researchers in the field. We have compiled a group‐by‐group and element‐by‐element journey through the periodic table of chemical elements in a systematic manner. We have discussed the current advances in the synthesis, properties, and biomedical applications of these materials. We have discussed different methods of preparation, such as self‐assembly, exfoliation, epitaxy, thin‐film coating, colloidal accumulation, and matrix reinforcement. First, groups 1 to 2 (hydrogen and alkali metals and alkaline earth metals) are discussed, followed by groups 3 to 12 (transition metals, lanthanides and actinides). Typically, Group 1 and Group 2 elements exist in conventional 2D forms such as nanoparticles and nanosheets. The elements in groups 3 to 12 are the widely used 2D forms of nanomaterials. The inclusion of transition metals in these nanocomposites imparts unique properties, making them suitable for a diverse array of applications. They are specialized immunoengineered nanostructures such as Xenes, MXenes, transition‐metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), transition metal oxides (TMOs), metal‒organic frameworks (MOFs), metal‒organic layers, and layered double hydroxides (LDHs). As illustrated in Figure  , these transition metal‐based 2D nanostructures exhibit a wide range of immunomodulatory properties, aiding in cancer therapy, diagnostics and the management of inflammatory diseases. Next, groups 13 to 17, comprising p‐block elements, mostly metalloids, posttransition metals, and reactive nonmetals, are discussed. Some of the elements in these groups have very well‐known and extensively researched 2D forms such as graphene and black phosphorus, as well as monoelemental nanomaterials. Finally, we conclude this unique roadmap of immunomodulatory elements by describing the role of group‐18 noble gases in the synthesis and functionalization of 2D biomaterials.
Because of the potential of immunomodulatory biomaterials in the field of biomedical applications, efforts toward clinical translation and regulatory approvals will soon be underway. Therefore, to expand the scope of this review article, we have included a separate section to summarize the in vitro and in vivo biocompatibilities of 2D nanomaterials.[
 , , , , , , 
] An overview of the content covered in this report is described in Figure
 . We believe that this review will help experts in the field gain the comprehensive knowledge required to optimize and fabricate new mono‐, hybrid‐, and composite‐based immunomodulatory biomaterials for nanomedicine applications. (Table
 )
 
2

## Periodic Immunomodulatory Table Element‐Derived 2D Biomaterials
2.1

## Biocompatibility Assessment and Safety Patterns of 2D Biomaterials
Low‐dimensional biomaterials, especially layered 2D nanomaterials, are critical in developing future technologies for the biomedical and medical fields because of their greater biocompatibility than conventional bulk materials. Studies have investigated the biocompatibility, efficacy and safety of these nanomaterials, providing insights into their molecular and cellular interactions with biological moieties to assess their biocompatibility and nanotoxicological profiles both in vitro and in vivo. The bioactivity of these atomically thin‐structured biomaterials is enhanced by the presence of abundant functional groups on their surface, leading to improved biological interactions. Numerous studies have investigated the biocompatibility and dose optimization of modern nanomaterials, as different forms of nanomaterials interact with biological systems through complex and distinct mechanisms. The subsequent sections delve into these investigations, as they are crucial in ensuring the safe and effective use of immunodoluatory nanomaterials in biomedicine and healthcare. Nevertheless, advancements in the bioengineering of 2D nanomaterials have focused on manipulation of their microstructure, biodegradation, and dose optimization. In particular, bioactive nanomaterials exhibit negligible toxicity at controlled doses at both the cellular and tissue/organ levels.[
 
] Despite advancements in the bioengineering of 2D nanomaterial immunomodulatory nanomaterials, assessing their safety efficacy is critical. of these materials. Current findings are in their infancy and require further investigations into long‐term immunological effects. Therefore, in later sections, we discuss strategies such as combining 2D nanomaterial composites with biodegradable polymers, functionalizing them with surface modifications, engineering them as smart delivery platforms, maximizing their therapeutic benefits while minimizing potential adverse effects, and translating the unique properties of 2D materials into clinically relevant applications. Table
 provides a concise summary of the biocompatibility of commonly used 2D layered biomaterials.
 
2.2

## Group‐1 to Group‐2 Elements and Reported Immunoengineering Applications
The group‐1 elements consisted of hydrogen (H) and alkali metals, including lithium (Li), sodium (Na), potassium (K), rubidium (Rb), cesium (Cs), and francium (Fr). Among these alkali elements, sodium and potassium are among the most abundant elements, ranking 6th and 8th, respectively, in the Earth's crust. While hydrogen is abundant in the universe, it is less prevalent in the Earth's crust, ranking 10th. In contrast, lithium, rubidium and cesium are relatively rarer in nature. Francium is quite unstable and only exists in trace amounts with high levels of radioactivity. Despite this contrast, the elements of group 1 are extensively involved in the composition of several important materials and compounds in our environment and life. Potassium‐based nanomaterials are mostly considered for targeted delivery, antimicrobial properties, antioxidant activities and fertilizers in phytobiology and agricultural fields. However, to the best of our knowledge, no significant studies have reported the immunomodulatory properties of 2D potassium nanosheets for immunoengineering, immunotherapy, anticancer, and other regenerative medicine applications. Therefore, the current section is intended to review the immunomodulatory profiles of the periodic elements of the other group 1‐derived 2D materials.
2.2.1

## 2D Lithium‐Based Nanocomposites
Lithium, the lightest solid element in the periodic table, exhibits unique physical and optoelectronic properties in its 2D forms, which is responsible for its biomedical applications.[
 
] The biomedical applications of lithium are mostly reported for its chemical salt components, such as lithium carbonate, citrate, and sulfate, as mood‐stabilizing drugs for the treatment of bipolar disorders and depression diseases.[
 
] In addition, energy storage bioelectronics consisting of conventional and nanolithium‐ion batteries are utilized for implantable devices such as drug pumps, neurostimulators, and cardiac pacemakers.[
 
]

Owing to the high reactivity of alkali metals, conventional wet chemical methods are usually unsuitable for lithium‐based nanomaterials that require specific synthesis equipment. Recently, the first evidence of the electrochemical growth of free‐standing lithium nanosheets was reported,[
 
] where ultrathin lithium nanosheets (Li‐NSs) with an average thickness of approximately 10 nm were used. Compared with plasmonic heavy metals, the obtained layered materials had improved biocompatibility and biological properties with low dielectric losses, suitable plasmon absorption, and surface plasmon resonance in the visible wavelength range. Therefore, Li‐NSs have the ability to be used as biosensors and in bioimaging applications for the diagnosis and treatment of different inflammatory degenerative diseases.[
 
]

Furthermore, the potential of lithium‐hydroxyapatite (Li‐HAP) as a scaffold material was recently investigated for bone tissue engineering applications.[
 
] Wang et al reported the synthesis of a lithium‐silicate‐chitosan‐sodium alginate nanocomposite via a typical vacuum freeze‒drying methodology with solid porosity, morphological plasticity, controlled swelling ability and biodegradability. Similarly, the development of porous Li‐HAP nanocomposites has been reported for the treatment of glucocorticoid‐induced osteonecrosis of the femoral head (GIONFH).[
 
] The designed composite scaffold aided in upregulating the wingless‐related integration site (Wnt)/beta‐catenin (β‐catenin) and hypoxia‐inducible factor 1‐alpha (HIF‐1α)/vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathways, which are vital for repairing GIONFH. This work emphasized the use of this nanolithium material to effectively increase the bone density, promoting the osteogenic differentiation process of bone morrow‐derived mesenchymal stem cells (BM‐MSCs) and simultaneously improving osteogenic angiogenesis and the regeneration process. The Wnt and GSK‐3β pathways modulate the production of inflammatory cytokines during inflammation and are identified as targets for inflammation‐mediated diseases. The regulatory effects of lithium‐based scaffolds on the Wnt/GSK‐3β signaling pathway reported in this study suggest the use of lithium‐based nanomaterials in future inflammatory disease therapeutics.
In addition, nanolium‐based materials hold promise for the treatment of specific neurodegenerative diseases. Lithium‐based drugs can be widely distributed in the central nervous system and effectively interact with neurotransmitters and receptors to decrease the release of norepinephrine and increase serotonin production in the body.[
 , 
] Serotonin recruits innate immune cells and plays an important role in regulating inflammation within the central nervous system and periphery. It is a key regulator of mood, anxiety and immune responses related to major disruptive disorders. Owing to the interrelationship between serotonin and immune cell signaling, these factors can be effective treatments for neuroinflammation‐related disorders. Lithium‐based drugs show potential in the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases by increasing serotonin production, suggesting their immunomodulatory role in neuroinflammation. These desirable properties impact the immunomodulatory properties of these compounds by decreasing their immunosuppressive and bacterial growth‐promoting effects.[
 
] To date, immunoengineering applications of 2D lithium nanosheets face challenges associated with large‐scale production, stability and clearance after delivery. Thus, considering the therapeutic effects of nontoxic nanolium compounds from the above‐discussed reports, these compounds can be considered potential candidates for future immunoengineering applications.

2.2.2

## 2D Sodium‐Based Nanocomposites
Sodium‐based compounds are required in specific amounts for the body to maintain the balance of the physical fluid system and to assist in muscle and nerve functions. Sodium‐based nanoforms have been widely studied for their antibacterial properties, and injectable sodium‐containing composites formed through a typical gelation process have been reported for antibacterial applications.[
 
] The designed scaffolds exhibited favorable physicochemical properties and were designed to combat bacterial infections, suggesting that the nanoenabled innate functionality attracts immune cells and postactivation of immunomodulatory responses. Elsewhere, a sustainable application of nanosodium‐containing filters was reported for the extraction of bacterial organisms from polluted water in different soil samples.[
 
] This study paved the way for the use of nanosodium to overcome the current challenges of low availability of drinking water resources, human health problems and inflammatory diseases that can be caused by polluted water.[
 , , 
]

Bioelectronic medicine is an emerging field of modern medicine used to develop treatment strategies for various neurophysiological and immunological challenges. Furthermore, sodium nanocompounds have been reported for next‐generation biomedical, wearable electronics and lithium‐based hybrid batteries,[
 
] and ultrasonic crystallized cathodes have been used for metal‐ion batteries.[
 
] The electrochemical properties of this material resulted in favorable energy storage capacity, with enhanced sodiation/desodiation properties for next‐generation sodium‐ion‐based bioelectronics for modern medicine to treat infections and inflammatory disorders.

2.2.3

## 2D Rubidium‐Based Nanocomposites
Rubidium, the sixteenth most abundant element in the Earth's crust, is the first alkali metal in Group 1 and has a density higher than that of water. Progress in the recent development of rubidium‐based nanocompounds is rare, and their composite applications are mostly reported in optoelectronics because of their enhanced thermal stability.[
 
] With photoluminescence (PL) emission peaks at approximately 490 nm, nanorubidium significantly enhanced the PL quantum yield (approximately 100%), suggesting a new design of quantum‐confined crystalline materials for future applications in air purification and water sterilization.
The development of nanorod‐like rubidium‐hydroxyapatite as a biocompatible and antibacterial implant material was reported for bone tissue engineering applications.[
 
] The incorporation of rubidium into the as‐designed matrix effectively enhanced the proliferation and differentiation capability of human bone cells and showed suitable inhibition properties against both gram‐negative Escherichia coli and gram‐positive Staphylococcus aureus bacteria (see Figure
 ). The applied treatment significantly promoted the proliferation, ALP activity, and early differentiation of the cultured MG‐63 cells into the targeted bone cells, suggesting the multiple functionalities of the rubidium‐based material for antimicrobial therapy applications.
 
2.2.4

## 2D Cesium‐Based Nanocomposites
Cesium is a silvery‐white to silvery‐gold alkali metallic element and is the most electropositive element of the group‐1 family. While the synthesis and application of nanosized crystals for perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has recently been reported, their biological and biomedical applications are largely limited due to their material processability.[
 
] However, in a recent study by Daza et al., the anticancer application of nanocesium particles through the regulation of cesium‐induced metabolic interference was reported. The results suggested that the internalization of cesium cations from this nanocesium compound could limit the glucose internalization process, effectively increasing the intracellular pH to support anticancer properties and subsequent induction of apoptosis in the cells (see Figure
 ). The applied treatment consequently resulted in remarkable mitochondrial generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), resulting in autophagy activation and significant programmed cell death.[
 
] Autophagy and apoptosis are homeostatic mechanisms that regulate inflammation, and their modulation could lead to the development of new therapeutics to treat inflammatory diseases. These findings pave the way for the use of nanocesium‐based biomaterials for future immunoengineering and regenerative nanomedicine, but further research is needed to assess their long‐term safety and therapeutic efficacy.
 
2.2.5

## 2D Francium‐Based Nanocomposites
Francium, which is the least electronegative of all the periodic table elements, is estimated to contain less than 30 grams of francium in the Earth's crust at any time. Owing to the rarity and poorly understood physicochemical properties of francium, its biomedical and therapeutic applications as bulk solid crystals or colloids are highly limited. Safety concerns, owing to liability to autoignition in air and severely limited availability, further restrict its use.[
 
] However, a recent study reported the use of francium nanomaterials for the treatment of gum cancer under synchrotron radiation.[
 
] The authors investigated the thermoplasmonic characteristics of simulations of various francium‐based nanostructures that aided in the interaction of nanofrancium with synchrotron radiation emission as a function of beam energy via the finite element method (FEM). Francium nanorods have demonstrated suitable thermoplasmonic characteristics for application in optothermal human cancer treatment by selectively ablating tumor tissues without damaging adjacent healthy tissues. Studies have shown that the high temperature caused at the tumor site by photothermal therapies can cause inflammation at that site, limiting the efficacy of heat‐assisted cancer treatment. For francium nanomaterials to be used in immunoengineering applications, further research is needed to address the limitations posed by inflammation in optothermal treatments and develop inhibition strategies.
Thus, group 1 elements such as lithium, sodium, rubidium, cesium and francium show promise in biomedical applications as 2D nanomaterials from the above‐discussed studies. The adaptation of specialized synthesis techniques to overcome their high reactivity enables the creation of nanomaterials with unique optoelectronic and plasmonic properties for potential immunomodulatory applications.
The group 2 alkaline earth metal elements include beryllium (Be), magnesium (Mg), calcium (Ca), strontium (Sr), barium (Ba), and radium (Ra), which easily lose electrons to become cations, resulting in most of their derived compounds being colorless ionic salts. In addition to radium, elements of this group tend to react with hydrogen, oxygen, and halogens to create metallic hydrides, oxides, and halides, respectively. Although Be‐based nanoforms have suitable physical properties for laser and optoelectronic applications, no obvious studies have been reported on the immunomodulatory effects of these element‐derived layered materials. Beryllium oxide nanofluids and nanostructures synthesized through a facile polymer‒gel method for use in gamma radiation dosimetry[
 
] and as surface‐modified beryllium‐based nanoparticles with polymers possess enhanced stability and dispersibility properties for heat and energy transfer applications.[
 
] Among the group 2 elements, 2D nanoforms of Mg and Ca have been well explored for their antibacterial, immunomodulatory and tissue regeneration potential, especially in hard tissue engineering applications. The ability of the Mg and Ca nanoforms to mimic biological environmental constituents enhances their ability to be used as hard tissue implants without triggering immunogenic responses upon implantation. The following discussions highlight immunoengineered syntheses and applications of these nanoforms, emphasizing their unique biomedical properties.

2.2.6

## 2D Magnesium‐Based Nanocomposites
Nano magnesium (Mg) materials have gained prominence over beryllium‐based nanocompounds because of the increased availability of Mg resources for a wide range of catalysis, energy storage, and plasmonic and biomedical applications. In particular, the incorporation of low‐dimensional Mg materials into functional composite devices has significantly enhanced their physical and optical properties.[
 
] From a biological perspective, various synthesis methods produce magnesium and magnesium oxide (MgO) nanomaterials with large surface areas, expanding their applications in antimicrobial therapy, biosensors, bioimaging, implant coating, immunomodulation and tissue engineering.[
 , , , , , 
]

An exploration of the immunomodulatory effects of magnesium‐based composites in vitro and in vivo[
 
] revealed that magnesium hydroxide (MgOH) nanosheets synthesized as highly bioactive films can be used to coat titanium (Ti)‐based implants. The nanotopography and sustainable Mg ion release from the MgOH biofilm surface are crucial for modulating the immunomodulatory functions of implants by regulating the polarization of macrophages to the macrophage‐2 (M2) phenotype and promoting tissue healing. Macrophage‐conditioned culture media collected from the nano‐MgOH‐coated Ti samples treated with BMSCs from human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) showed superior osteogenic and angiogenic activities. As shown in Figure
 , the reinforcement of the bare Ti implant with nano‐MgOH films effectively reduced local inflammation by reducing inflammatory cell infiltration and creating thinner fibrous layers in the tested animals than in the control groups did (Figure  panels A, B), with an increase in closely adhered bone formation on the modified implants and surrounding regions (Figure  panel C), suggesting the promotion of osteointegration. This study revealed that nano‐MgOH coated on Ti implants is a promising candidate for immunomodulatory orthopedic applications.
 Nanomagnesium has gained attention for its ability to sustain localized surface plasmon resonances across different ultraviolet, visible, and near‐infrared wavelengths. These plasmonic properties can be tuned by manipulating their size and shape, which is beneficial for their application in fluorescence‐based biomonitoring and/or light‐activated cancer therapy.[
 
] Truskewycz et al. developed fluorescent MgOH‐based nanosheets (NSs) with tailored bioactivity properties for antimicrobial wound dressings and pH‐tracking therapeutic applications.[
 
] The authors tested these nanosheets against different bacterial species on solid surfaces via the typical alkaline precipitation method. The autofluorescence property of the MgOH‐NSs was attributed to their hydroxide constituents, which led to pH‐responsive behavior that allowed them to heal. In addition, strong fluorescence signals are emitted to track the degradation rate and antimicrobial functionality of the material. In addition to their antimicrobial and plasmonic properties, MgOH‐NSs possess excellent anti‐inflammatory properties by reducing the production of inflammatory macrophages and enhancing chronic wound healing. The destruction of microorganisms increases inflammation and the anti‐inflammatory property of Mg, reducing inflammation at the wounded site and creating an acidic environment. This change in pH causes the mineralization of MgOH to Mg2+, which contributes to the proliferation of keratinocytes and the migration of fibroblasts to improve their health. Furthermore, its pH‐sensitive profile could be used effectively as a pH‐responsive probe for detecting wound acidification and accelerating the wound healing process upon skin injury. Thus, when MgOH‐NSs are integrated into electrospun wound dressings, they promote keratinocyte proliferation and fibroblast migration for healing and visually indicate health by indicating an acidic environment. In addition, the planar 2D morphology of MgOH‐NSs provides a high specific surface area and alkaline environment to enhance interactions with microorganisms to improve antimicrobial properties.
Mg‐based nanomaterials are gaining importance in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine applications. A study by Laurenti et al. described the synthesis of a new crystalline complex nanomaterial containing magnesium phosphate nanosheets (Mg3(PO4)2‐NS) for bone regeneration.[
 
] Bone comprises 50% of the body's magnesium and plays a role in mineralization, leading to enhanced calcification, osteoblast proliferation and differentiation, which was exploited in this study to develop a 2D nanomaterial‐incorporated hydrogel, which offers an innovative approach to bone tissue engineering, replacing conventional bioceramics. The incorporation of sodium (Na) in Mg3(PO4)2‐NS improved the crystallization and 2D planar morphology of the matrix. The resulting biomaterial possesses good processability for incorporation into polymeric hydrogels, good biocompatibility, injectability for biomedical tissue engineering applications, and desirable biological properties to accelerate osteogenesis and osseointegration processes in vitro and in vivo. The Mg3(PO4)2‐NS hydrogels showed enhanced biocompatibility with human fibroblasts and enhanced bioactivity through upregulated expression of bone formation‐associated genes, including collagen type I alpha 1 (COL1A1), runt‐related transcription factor 2 (RunX2), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), osteocalcin (OCN), and osteopontin (OPN), in mouse bone marrow cells (see Figure
 ). Elsewhere, Turan et al. reported the study of different nanostructured ceramics such as MgO and niobium oxide (Nb2O5) and how tailoring their physical, mechanical and bioactivity properties aids in hard tissue repair. Hydroxyapatite is the traditional ceramic used for hard tissue engineering, and incorporating nanostructures into these materials has been reported to increase surface properties. Hence, this study discusses the importance of developing nanostructured hydroxyapatite (HAP) containing metallic oxide nanoparticles, MgO and Nb2O5 to enhance the surface properties of HAP. Thus, the improved bone implant substrates showed greater mechanical durability while retaining their bioactivity and without inducing any immunologic response.[
 
]

 Furthermore, a new design of 2D magnesium‐based nanosheets was reported by Fan et al. as a hydrogen‐releasing and acid‐responsive prodrug for synergistic gastric cancer chemotherapy.[
 
] Briefly, the synthesized biocomposites were used for hydrogeno‐chemotherapy via the encapsulation of magnesium‐boron (MgB) nanosheets (NSs) in polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) pills and were administered intravenously with doxorubicin. The bioengineered pills demonstrated high compatibility, stability in biological environments, sustained gastric acid responsiveness and suitable bioactivity properties. MgB‐NS‐PVP acts as a hydrogen prodrug and combines with doxorubicin, and the chemotherapeutic drug creates a synergistic hydrogeno‐chemotherapeutic agent. This specific hydrogeno‐chemotherapy treatment markedly reduced the side effects on normal cells; prolonged the viability of gastric cells; selectively inhibited the aerobic respiration of gastric cancer cells; and activated aerobic respiration in normal cells, such as mesenchymal stem cells and hepatic, splenic, and cardiac cells with high proliferation, to ensure the protective role of the nanomaterial in gastric cancer.
Together, these findings support the future of layered magnesium‐based nanomaterials in potential biomedical, immunomodulatory, tissue engineering and chemotherapeutic applications.

2.2.7

## 2D Calcium‐Based Nanocomposites
The structures of calcium (Ca) have been largely investigated for use in biomedical applications such as dental implants, bone tissue engineering and immunomodulation‐based applications. Calcium ions (Ca2+) and phosphorous ions (PO4
3−) are present in the body, are important constituents of the bone matrix and present themselves as calcium phosphate (Ca3(PO4)2. Ca2+ induces bone formation, stimulates osteoblasts toward bone maturation and regulates osteoclast resorption. PO4
3− regulates osteoblast differentiation and bone tissue formation. Thus, synthetic Ca3(PO4)2 is employed in research because of its prolonged bone regenerative characteristics, mimicking the natural role of Ca2+ and PO4
3− in bone metabolism for bone repair. Owing to its enhanced bioactivity and antimicrobial properties, nanoCa3(PO4)2 has been studied for bone‐like implant applications.[
 
] Saglam et al. reported that antibiotics containing nanomaterials offer suitable antimicrobial and biodegradation properties to enhance the osseointegration process and prevent implant failure. The authors proposed that calcium‐based nanomaterials form bioactive films on implant surfaces, preventing bacterial colonization and regulating anti‐inflammatory responses locally and systemically. In fact, multifunctional HAP‐ in the form of nano Ca3(PO4)2 coatings enables desirable osteoconductive and drug delivery properties, promoting bone healing and implant durability. Furthermore, these bioactive nanomaterials intrinsically dissociate into ions and enhance their cellular internalization, delivery of therapeutic molecules and regulation of immunomodulatory gene expression to significantly reduce the risk of inflammation and implant rejection. In addition, the surface texture of these nanomaterials critically influences the crosstalk between host inflammatory cells and regenerative cells, stimulating osteoinduction. Thus, nanocalcium‐based substrates modulate the inflammatory response and improve the potential for bone regeneration.
Mitwalli et al recently developed nanocalcium‐fluoride (CaF2) as a bioactive dental composite with improved remineralization and antibacterial properties.[
 
] At the onset of tooth caries, the success rate of tooth caries restoration is limited because acidic biofilms cause inflammation and increased susceptibility to recurrent bacterial infections, limiting restoration success. Repeated treatments to address this issue lead to the loss of tooth structure. Understanding this crucial situation, formulating nanobased dental composites with improved antibacterial properties to target biofilm formation to inhibit enamel demineralization and offer long‐term protection against recurrent caries is vital. The long‐term release of F and Ca from the CaF2 nanocomposite enhanced remineralization and prevented demineralization by suppressing bacterial growth. Together, these findings highlight the potential of calcium‐based nanocompounds as antimicrobial, antibacterial, immunomodulatory, and hard tissue engineering candidates for regenerative medicine.

2.3

## Group 3 to Group 12 Elements and Reported Immunoengineering Applications
Most of the elements in groups 3 to 12 are transition metal elements that are widely used as ultrasmall biomaterials in different nanoforms, ranging from nanoparticles to nanosheets to nanocomposites to quantum dots. These elements are formulated as 2D transition metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes), transition‐metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), transition‐metal oxides (TMOs), metal‒organic frameworks (MOFs), metal‒organic layers (MOLs) and layered double hydroxides (LDHs). The different forms of these two‐dimensional nanomaterials are comprehensively discussed below.
Briefly, layered MXene nanosheets are composed of transition metal carbides/nitrides that are exfoliated from their parent “MAX” phase. The “M” represents the transition metal elements from the periodic table, and most reported MXenes are from the metallic elements of group‐4 to gr. The “A” layer represents the elements from Groups 13, 14, and 15, and “X” represents its carbide or nitride. The general structural formula of MXenes is “M(n+1)XnTx”, where the Tx represents the surface terminations on the MXenes that are obtained due to the exfoliation process.[
 , , 
] Since its discovery in 2011, MXenes have been used in a wide variety of applications, and owing to their hydrophilicity and biocompatibility, MXenes have been applied in the biomedical and clinical fields. MXenes are used in tissue engineering, cancer therapy, such as chemotherapy, anticancer drug delivery, photodynamic/thermal therapy, radiation therapy, and diagnosis, as in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), photoacoustic imaging (PAI), computed tomography (CT) imaging, biosensing, immunomodulators, and drug delivery applications.[
 , , , , , 
]

TMDs are 2D nanomaterials that can be used as alternatives to graphene. The TMD structural formula is X‐M‐X, where M is the transition metal from groups 4–7 from the periodic table (Mn, Mo, Ta, W, Re) and X is the chalcogenide (S, Se, Te). The structural formula indicates that M is sandwiched between two chalcogenides X. The most widely explored TMD because of its immunomodulatory effects is molybdenum disulfide (MoS2). Other forms of TMDs, such as molybdenum diselenide (MoSe2), tungsten disulphide (WS2), tungsten diselenide (WSe2), and molybdenum ditelluride (MoTe2), are synthesized by similar exfoliation techniques. WSe2 and MoSe2 have been applied as photosensors, phototransistors, nanobiosensors and nanocarriers, whereas WS2 is used in light‒matter interaction applications because of its optoelectronic properties.[
 , 
]

TMOs are among the most extensively studied 2D nanomaterials because of their remarkable chemical and physical properties. The unique nature of d‐electrons in transition metals results in multiple oxidation states for the cations, which strongly influences their electrical properties. As a result, TMOs possess enhanced electron mobility, ductility, stability and biodegradability, making them biocompatible for biomedical applications. TMOs have been shown to increase the level of ROS in the tumor microenvironment, facilitating their application in synergistic photodynamic, photothermal, magnetic, thermal, sonodynamic and cancer therapies.[
 
] The oxidative properties of TMOs, such as titanium oxides, manganese dioxides, and zinc oxides, induce oxidative stress in tumor cells. This leads to the release of tumor‐associated antigens, which in turn activate dendritic cells and enhance antigen presentation, ultimately facilitating tumor cell elimination. TMOs such as iron oxides and tungsten oxides extend their immunomodulatory properties by recruiting macrophages and inducing macrophage polarization, thus leading to the inhibition of tumor growth in cancer immunotherapy applications.[
 
]

Another class of widely studied 2D nanomaterials is MOFs, which are known for their highly tunable structural and functional chemistry. MOFs are composed of metal‐containing nodes and organic linkers and are widely used in energy transfer, photocatalysis and biomedical applications.[
 
] The photocatalytic properties of MOFs have been harnessed to develop nanoplatforms for photoimmunotherapy in cancer treatment.[
 , 
] Additionally, MOFs have also been utilized as substrates for the immobilization of cytokines to provide sustained cytokine presentation.[
 
] Notably, MOFs exhibit dose‐dependent radiosensitization properties that can be utilized to modulate the ROS levels and DNA damage caused by radiation therapy in cancer treatment.[
 
] MOLs are 2D counterparts of MOFs with thicknesses in the nanometer range. Compared with that of MOFs, the increased number of accessible active sites in MOLs has been found to be advantageous in facilitating easier chemical and surface modifications.[
 
] This ability of MOLs enables enhanced tailoring of their molecular and material chemistry, making them suitable candidates for electro and photocatalysis‐based applications. Interestingly, in some instances of ration‐based cancer therapies, nanosized MOLs have shown superior performance compared with MOFs.[
 
]

Another promising class of versatile 2D nanomaterials with significant biomedical applications is LDH. The unique lamellar structure of these materials, consisting of positively charged metal hydroxide layers and intercalated anions, contributes to their highly tunable structural and functional properties, leading to desirable biomedical outcomes.[
 
] Research shows that LDHs are immunoengineered, leveraging their unique properties to enhance their therapeutic efficacy in cancer therapy.[
 
] For example, altering the crystalline structure of LDHs has significantly improved their sonodynamic cancer therapeutic potential by increasing the generation of reactive oxygen species to effectively destroy tumor cells.[
 
] Furthermore, photosensitizer‐functionalized LDHs offer a targeted approach to treat cancer through a light‐activated mechanism involving singlet oxygen generation.[
 
] By incorporating photoactive components, LDHs can be tailored to release therapeutic agents to activate immune responses upon light stimulation.[
 , 
]

The following section discusses the reported immunomodulatory roles and mechanisms of these layered transition metal‐based biomaterials in a group‐by‐group and element‐by‐element order.
2.3.1

## Group 3 Elements and Reported Immunoengineering Applications
The group‐3 elements constitute the first group of transition elements and include scandium (Sc), yttrium (Y), and lanthanium (La), which are classified with lanthanide elements, and actinium (Ac), which is classified with actinoids. Elements of Group 3 have no biological role, and to the best of our knowledge, no obvious studies have reported the immunomodulatory effects of these aforementioned elements in the literature, except for cerium.
2.3.1.1

## Cerium‐Based Nanocomposites
Among the 14 known lanthanoids, cerium (Ce)‐based 2D materials have been found to possess immunomodulatory properties. Cerium derivatives are widely used in wound healing remedies because of their antimicrobial properties, making them valuable in biological and clinical applications.[
 
] For example, cerium nitrate is used as an antiseptic to treat deep burns and in combination with silver sulfadiazine as a clinically accepted wound treatment.[
 , 
] In addition to its antimicrobial effects, it also elicits immunomodulatory effects, preventing sepsis in patients suffering severe burn injuries. Preservation of T‐cell functions and regulation of interleukin 2 (IL‐2) production.[
 
] The antimicrobial properties of cerium oxide are mediated through oxidative stress, especially in its low‐dimensional form, such as nanoceria/cerium oxide nanoparticles (CeO2‐NPs), and aid in wound healing applications.[
 , 
] As cerium has properties similar to those of calcium and in combination with its antimicrobial and antioxidant properties, it is used in bone tissue engineering. A recent study by Li et al reported the antibacterial and anti‐inflammatory applications of CeO2‐NPs for surface modification of titanium implants.[
 , 
] These results indicate that CeO2‐NP‐modified surfaces have greater anti‐inflammatory and ROS‐scavenging activities than control surfaces do in vitro. Their in vivo data revealed significant decreases in the mean mRNA expression of IL‐6, IL‐1b, and TNF‐a after treatment with different rods, cubes, and octa‐shaped CeO2 coatings. As illustrated in Figures
 and  , histomorphometric analysis revealed a significant reduction in inflammation around CeO2‐NP‐modified implants compared with the control, and this reduction, estimated by measuring the number of inflammatory cells present, demonstrated the effectiveness of CeO2‐NPs in mitigating the inflammatory response.
 Furthermore, cerium‐hydroxyapatite (Ce‐HAP)‐based nanomaterials are used as antimicrobial bone implants for directing bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells toward the osteogenic lineage and relieving inflammatory responses via ROS scavenging.[
 
] When doped into different glass, collagen, and chitosan scaffolds, these CeO2 materials show good biocompatibility with BM‐MSCs, supporting their viability and proliferation for enhanced osteointegration in bone tissue engineering applications.
Owing to the ability of CeO2‐NPs to mimic redox enzymes, they can be used in immunomodulatory cancer therapy applications by extending their enzyme‐like activity in redox regulation.[
 , , 
] Their ability to cycle between the Ce3+ and Ce4+ oxidation states and the presence of oxygen vacancies on the CeO2 surface with a Ce core, which leads to enzymatic ROS scavenging, is the foundation for the use of CeO2‐NPs in cancer therapy.[
 
] The antioxidant properties, good biocompatibility, ability to reduce drug resistance, and high chemical stability are other alluring properties of CeO2‐NPs for use in biomedical applications. Another attractive feature is their ability to exhibit differential cytotoxicity, as they act as cytotoxic agents in acidic cancer environments while being protective agents (antioxidants) for normal cells at neutral pH.[
 
] Under hypoxic conditions, CeO2‐NPs trigger angiogenesis and catalytically regulate intracellular oxygen, leading to the stabilization of hypoxia.[
 
] The high surface area combined with the ratio of the two oxidation states of cerium (Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio) also regulates the level of intracellular oxygen, leading to robust induction of angiogenesis.[
 
] CeO2‐NPs have been reported to be valuable nanozymes in cancer diagnosis as immune[
 , , , 
]/DNA[
 , 
] electrochemical biosensors for tumor marker detection. CeO2‐NPs have been designed for magnetic resonance contrast imaging technologies for cancer detection.[
 
] The ability of CeO2‐NPs to regulate ROS helps establish their role in photodynamic therapy (PDT) and photothermal therapy (PTT).[
 
] PTT utilizes the ability of photosensitizers (PSs) to be stimulated by light to produce heat, leading to the generation of ROS, followed by the induction of oxidative stress at the tumor site to kill tumor cells. In the tumor environment, the large surface area, selective targeting mechanisms and increased circulation time of light‐stimulated CeO2‐NPs help increase the accumulation of PS and effective ROS generation to disrupt tumor cells.[
 , 
] Owing to its cytotoxic and protective antioxidant properties, CeO2‐NPs are used in radiotherapy[
 , , , 
] and chemotherapy[
 , 
] to synergistically protect the normal cells and selectively target the tumor cells. The use of CeO2‐NPs in PDT, PTT, radiotherapy and chemotherapy has potential for combination therapy approaches. Their ability to sensitize cancer cells enhances radiation/chemotherapy‐induced cell death in combination therapy, such as PDT/PTT,[
 , 
] and in chemotherapy/PTT,[
 , 
] demonstrating their versatile, multimodal, immunomodulatory, antioxidant application in cancer theranostics.[
 
]

Overproduction of stress‐induced ROS causes oxidative stress in distressed tissue, leading to dysregulation of the immune system. CeO2‐NPs effectively scavenge overproduced ROS, modulate the immune response and protect tissue from oxidative damage.[
 
] A comparative study conducted on two catalytic nanoparticles, TiO2 and CeO2, revealed that both promote immunomodulation via dendritic cells (DCs) and T‐helper (TH) cells. This study revealed that CeO2‐NPs targeted antigen‐presenting cells (APCs) and stimulated DCs to secrete the anti‐inflammatory cytokine IL‐10. When cocultured with allogenic CD4+ T cells, CeO2‐NPs triggered the expression of TH2 regulatory cytokines (IL‐4, IL‐5 and IL‐10) and provided a basis for modulating immunity via the use of metallic nanoparticles.[
 
] Cubic and sphere‐shaped CeO2‐NPs have the potential to modulate reactive nitrogen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) and cause immune cell induction in respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) disease by modulating RSV‐infected alveolar macrophage polarization and increasing CD80, CD86, TNF‐α, and IL‐12p70 expression. The CeO2‐NPs decreased M2 CD206 expression and modulated the innate cellular response to address infection.[
 
] Oxidative stress leads to the release of proinflammatory cytokines, and CeO2‐NPs have shown promise in treating chronic pain syndrome (UCPPS) via ROS scavenging, reducing oxidative stress and, in turn, downregulating the proinflammatory cytokines IL‐6 and TNF‐α.[
 
] Polyethylene glycol (PEGylated) CeO2‐NPs have been developed to treat COVID‐19, leveraging their antimicrobial, antiviral, antioxidant and immunomodulatory properties. COVID‐19 suppresses cytokine expression, triggers ROS, and leads to multiple organ failure. During these events, CeO2‐NPs increase superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) levels, reducing the degree of oxidative damage caused by ROS generation. Additionally, they exhibit immunostimulatory properties by activating the T‐cell‐mediated immune response, suppressing inflammation and preventing multiple organ damage, suggesting their potential as therapeutic agents for COVID‐19.[
 
]

CeO2‐NPs act as immunomodulators by increasing their antiapoptotic effect via the scavenging of free radicals in neurological disorders such as Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease. These compounds exert their anti‐inflammatory effects by reducing hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) levels under ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke conditions. The reduction in free radicals is elicited by the ability of the NPs to mimic SOD, revealing the neuroprotective role of CeO2‐NPs through the conversion of superoxide anions to hydrogen peroxide and oxygen.[
 
] Parkinson's disease is caused by the accumulation of alpha‐synuclein (α‐synuclein) and by a mutation in the α‐synuclein gene SNCA, leading to ROS generation and neuroinflammation and causing microglial cell neurotoxicity.[
 
] CeO2‐NPs scavenge excess ROS, interact with α‐synuclein to inhibit its accumulation,[
 
] protect dopaminergic neurons and preserve dopamine levels in an induced Parkinson's disease mouse model.[
 , 
] Hegazy MA et al. emphasized the need for dose optimization of CeO2‐NPs for effective neuroprotection from Parkinson's disease.[
 
] Europium‐doped CeO2‐NPs (CeO2‐NPs‐Eu) exhibit an immunomodulatory effect in treating the neurodegenerative disorder Alzheimer's disease (AD) by maintaining immune cell homeostasis, targeting amyloid beta (Aβ) plaques that accumulate in diseased conditions, oxidative stress, and inflammation and inducing protective intracellular signaling. Microglia are special macrophage‐like cells that orchestrate the inflammatory response in the central nervous system. Eu‐CeO2‐NPs target microglia, increase microglial phagocytosis, upregulate the expression of CD36 scavenger receptors to facilitate Aβ clearance, attenuate the expression of proinflammatory cytokines (IL‐6, IL‐1β, and TNF‐α) and restore homeostasis in the diseased environment.[
 
] PEGylated CeO2‐NPs (CeNPs‐PEG) decreased the expression of the proinflammatory M1 biomarker CD16/32 and increased the expression of the anti‐inflammatory M2 biomarker CD206 via intracellular ROS scavenging in microglia in vivo. CeNPs‐PEG eliminate ROS and lead to a reduction in the translocation of P65 NFκB induced by the inhibition of ROS‐triggered inflammation. CeNPs‐PEG shifted the microglial phenotype from the M1 phenotype to the M2 phenotype, which led to the control of the NFκB pathway via elimination of ROS.[
 
]

CeO2‐NPs play a catalase‐mimicking role in ischemic/hemorrhagic stroke conditions via the reduction of H2O2 into oxygen and water, leading to ROS scavenging. During ischemic stroke, disruption of the cerebral blood supply and central nervous system (CNS) infarction and the restriction of oxygen lead to acidosis in neurons. This condition induces oxidative stress via the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and additional stress induced by H2O2 radicals and superoxide anions.[
 
] CeO2‐NPs target H2O2 radicals and superoxide anions and scavenge ROS, which efficiently reduces ischemic cell death in the brain.[
 
] The cytoprotective role of CeO2‐NPs in efficiently removing ROS and acting against RNS[
 
] shows their therapeutic potential for treating ischemia‒reperfusion injury. Recent studies using CeNPs‐PEG[
 
] and RGD‐CeNPs[
 
] have shown that the repair of ischemia‐induced cerebral damage by ROS scavenging provides potentially new treatments for ischemic stroke. Hemorrhagic stroke is caused by rupture of the cerebral vasculature, accounting for its subtypes of intracerebral hemorrhage characterized by nontraumatic parenchyma bleeding[
 
] and subarachnoid hemorrhage characterized by bleeding by aneurysmal bleeding.[
 
] To reinstate homeostasis, thrombin is secreted, which induces an inflammatory response with additional microglial activation accelerating ROS generation in the hemorrhagic region.[
 
] The phospholipid CeNPs‐PEG were found to aid in relieving oxidative stress by scavenging ROS in intracerebral hemorrhage via the reduction of CD68+ microglia/macrophages.[
 
] Additionally, in subarachnoid hemorrhage, oxyhemoglobin is overexpressed and leads to ROS production‐induced oxidative stress.[
 
] Water‐soluble aminocaproic acid‐coated CeO2‐NPs were synthesized to address the oxidative stress that occurs during subarachnoid hemorrhage, as they have the ability to remove superoxide anions and hydroxyl radicals, leading to ROS generation.[
 
] The remarkable antioxidant properties of CeO2‐NPs promote free radical scavenging in various acute and chronic disease conditions, indicating their potential in the treatment of chronic inflammation. They modulate immunosuppression and immunostimulation due to their anti‐inflammatory properties. CeO2‐NPs, as immunomodulators, serve as vaccine adjuvants and antiallergy therapeutics,[
 , , 
] highlighting the need to explore NP‐mediated nanoimmunointeractions for clinical applications.
Furthermore, CeO2‐NPs were found to demonstrate complex immunomodulatory effects, including both protective and potentially harmful outcomes. These cells play a protective role by activating mast cells that promote pulmonary inflammation, impair vascular relaxation and aggravate myocardial ischemia‒reperfusion injury. The pulmonary instillation of CeO2‐NPs led to increased production of prostaglandin D2 (PGD2), TNF‐α, IL‐6 and osteopontin as a cardiovascular inflammatory response.[
 
] While CeO2‐NPs provide cardioprotection by increasing osteopontin, which is involved in cardiovascular remodeling and the pathogenesis of inflammatory/immune diseases, CeO2‐NPs can cause lung toxicity and inflammation when exposed to diesel engine exhaust, which uses cerium as a catalyst. CeO2‐NPs induce lung inflammation by increasing IL‐12 and osteopontin levels and reducing NO levels, which can lead to fibrosis in the lungs.[
 
] In a dose‐ and time‐dependent manner, CeO2‐NPs increased the levels of IL‐1β and MIP‐2, which are mediators of acute neutrophilic inflammation.[
 
] Prolonged exposure to CeO2‐NPs in rodent models increased the concentrations of the proinflammatory cytokines IL‐1β, TNF‐α, and IL‐6, leading to oxidative stress‐induced lung toxicity and impaired clearance and chronic inflammatory response.[
 
] They can also trigger delayed‐type hypersensitivity via the induction of the inflammatory cytokines IFN‐γ and IL‐10, leading to lung fibrosis in mice[
 
] and being immunotoxic to human monocytic THP‐1 cells.[
 
] In addition, CeO2‐NPs exhibit immunogenic properties and potential toxicity in aquatic environments. CeO2‐NP exposure in mussels led to increased expression of immune and antioxidant genes at the molecular level; increased ROS and lysosome release at the cellular level; reduced embryonic development at the tissue level; and the induction of the oxidative stress genes catalase (CAT) and glutathione‐s‐transferase (GST) in the hemocytes and digestive glands of mussels.[
 , 
] This shows the selective immunomodulatory properties demonstrated by cerium nanoparticles at different levels of biological organization (see Figure
 ).
 These reports highlight the need to carefully study the nanoimmune responses evoked by the synthesized CeO2‐NPs for biological use and as hazardous materials from industrial sources into the environment, as each exhibits varying toxicity and inflammatory effects.

2.3.2

## Group‐4 Elements and Reported Immunoengineering Applications
Group 4 is the second group of transition metals in the periodic table of chemical elements. It contains four elements: titanium (Ti), zirconium (Zr), hafnium (Hf), and rutherfordium (Rf). With the exception of rutherfordium, all the other elements have biological applications.
2.3.2.1

## Titanium‐Based Nanocomposites
Titanium (Ti) is a light and white‐silvery transition‐metallic element with strong mechanical and corrosion‐resistant properties. Ti and its compounds have long been tracked in clinical applications, primarily as bone implants, and subsequently, their antimicrobial, immunomodulatory, and anticancer properties have been studied. In addition, titanium carbide MXene (Ti3C2Tx), the first synthesized composition of MXene in 2017,[
 
] led to the advent of the generation of a new class of 2D nano/biomaterials in the form of MXene nanosheets and quantum dots in bioimaging and biosensing.[
 , , 
] Since their advent in biomedical applications, MXenes have been fabricated using various etchants, intercalants and functionalized postsyntheses for enhanced bioactivity and improved physiochemical properties.[
 , , 
] Surface terminations create avenues for surface modifications and aid in the conjugation of drugs on the MXene surface. Ti3C2 MXene nanodots are used in bioimaging.[
 , , 
] A Ti3C2 MXene surface modified with soybean phospholipid (SP) was the first demonstration of the use of MXenes for photothermal therapy (PTT).[
 
] Furthermore, Ti3C2‐doxorubicin (Ti3C2‐DOX) MXenes, which are surface modified with hyaluronic acid (HA), SP and Ti3C2‐MnOx MXenes modified with SP, are used in PTT/photodynamic (PDT)/chemotherapy by acting as efficient photothermal agents (PAs) in cancer theranostics.[
 , , 
]

The surface‐modified MXenes exhibited enhanced photothermal conversion efficiency, as the heat conversion efficiency determines their ability to kill tumor cells. PEG‐modified Ti2C MXenes efficiently cause minimal damage to healthy nonmalignant cells during PTT.[
 
] Additionally, Ti3C2 loaded with titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles was found to be an efficient sonodynamic therapy (SDT) agent. Ti3C2 has PTT effects, and TiO2 aids in SDT; combining both as Ti3C2‐TiO2‐x shows highly advantageous therapeutic effects against cancer as a multifunctional nanohybrid.[
 
] SP‐modified Ti3C2 loaded with DOX and cellulose‐integrated Ti3C2 with DOX are used for the delivery of chemotherapeutic agents, thus playing a synergistic role in chemotherapy and PTT.[
 , , 
]

Interestingly, Ti3C2‐based MXenes are among the first transition metal‐based biomaterials reported for their alluring immunomodulatory properties to manage graft rejection. This study was carried out in our laboratory (Figure
 ), and we demonstrated that MXenes are highly biocompatible with human peripheral blood mononuclear cells at concentrations of up to 1000 ng mL−1 after 24 hours of culture, with no significant cytotoxicity for up to seven days. In addition, the immunomodulatory assessments revealed a significant decrease in lymphocyte proliferation in the MXene groups compared with the control samples, indicating a decrease in lymphocyte activation in response to the observed proinflammatory stimuli. They further reduced the percentage of CD4+, IFN‐γ+, and Th‐1 inflammatory cells and increased the percentage of CD4+ CD25+ forkhead box P3 (FOXP3+) regulatory T cells. This concept was first established in our lab by the synthesis of Ti3C2 MXene‐quantum dots as next‐generation smart nanomaterials and administering them in vivo through a chitosan‐based MXene composite hydrogel for immunomodulation.[
 
]

 Our laboratory recently reported the first immunomodulatory application of Ti3C2Tx MXenes to treat allograft vasculopathy.[
 
] The highly biocompatible and bioactive nature of Ti3C2Tx MXenes allows them to interact with human endothelial cells (ECs), regulating alloantigen presentation and cellular adhesion. Molecular evaluation revealed reduced endothelial expression of key antigen presentation mediators (HLA‐1, IRF1, TAP1, and B2M), significant downregulation of PECAM1 and VE‐CDH5, and upregulation of leukocyte adhesion molecules. These findings revealed the effects of MXenes on cell adhesion and maintenance of the normal endothelial phenotype. RNA sequencing analysis (see Figure
 ) and quantitative PCR revealed that Ti3C2Tx MXenes mitigate immune cell infiltration through the top upregulated pathways related to cell cycle regulation. A reduction in the endothelial immune activation of T lymphocytes (decreased CD4 and CD28 expression both in vitro and in vivo) and amelioration of the pathogenesis of allograft vasculopathy by the significant downregulation of gene sets related to interferon alpha beta signaling and interferon gamma signaling were the other findings of our research to support the immunoengineered MXene nanosystem‐mediated treatment of transplant allograft vasculopathy.
 
2.3.2.2

## Zirconium‐based Nanocomposites
The physical and chemical properties of zirconium (Zr), a heat‐ and corrosion‐resistant transition metal, are similar to those of titanium. 2D zirconium has a role in photocatalysis, sensing, conductivity, lubricant and optoelectronics‐based applications.[
 
] Ultrathin zirconium‐based 2D metal‒organic frameworks (Zr‒MOFs) are more advantageous than 3D bulk MOFs because of their enhanced catalytic activity, large surface area, and thermal properties, indicating great potential in photocatalysis.[
 
] Owing to their high structural tunability and biodegradability, MOFs are multifunctional and useful in biological applications. Zr‐MOFs have greater accuracy in early cancer cell detection and biosensing, particularly in the detection of the early marker protein mucin 1 (MUC1), where the overexpression of MUC1 is characteristic of different malignancies.[
 
] MUC1 plays an intrinsic role in regulating and modulating infection‐induced and pathogen‐induced inflammatory responses, respectively, suggesting that Zr‐MOF detection of MUC1 is a clinical marker for chronic respiratory‐related inflammatory diseases. Thus, zirconium‐based nanosheet materials are promising for potential immune‐biosensor applications.

2.3.2.3

## Hafnium‐based Nanocomposites
Hafnium, a tetravalent transition metal that chemically resembles zirconium, has diverse applications in industrial settings, such as semiconductors, nuclear reactors and alloys, in combination with niobium, titanium, and tungsten. Hafnium oxide (HfO2) is the first biosensor used to assess cortisol levels in heart failure patients via electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). HfO2 acted as the substrate bearing the functionalized magnetic nanoparticles and antibodies as self‐assembled monolayers (SAMs) and aided in the detection of cortisol via its interaction with the polyclonal antibody via EIS analysis in cardiac disease management.[
 
]

Hafnium‐based two‐dimensional metal organic layers (2D‐MOLs) and three‐dimensional metal‐organic frameworks (3D‐MOFs) connected by hafnium clusters are utilized in fluorescence sensing,[
 
] biomimetic sensing, catalysis and biorelated analytical separation applications.[
 
] Due to their multifunctional use in biological systems, transition metal‐based nanoparticles, including hafnium‐based nanoparticles (Hf‐NPs), have gained importance in cancer therapies. Understanding the mechanism of Hf‐NPs in the biophysiological microenvironment is critical for their effective application beyond traditional industrial uses.[
 
] As the particle size decreases, the reactive surface area increases, ultimately increasing the toxicity of the nanoparticles to cancer cells. Thus, careful evaluation of the potential toxicity of Hf‐NPs in normal and cancerous human cells is needed. Additionally, the reduction in the size of the NPs allows easy cellular uptake, systemic distribution throughout the body and potential deflection of macrophage defenses. Testing the cytotoxic nature of HfO2 and HfO2‐NPs in different human cell lines and other microbial systems revealed that these particles do not cause acute or severe toxicity to cells.[
 
]

Hf‐NPs especially show promise in radiation‐based anticancer approaches because of their ability to enhance radiation dose effectiveness. The high number of HfO2‐NPs is considered favorable for radiation‐based cancer therapy because it enables adequate local and systemic tolerance, good interaction with high ionizing radiation and the deposition of high energy in the tumor region. The systemic tolerance of HfO2‐NPs is attributed to their nontoxic nature when taken up by phagocytic cells, making them nonimmunogenic, chemically inert, and have minimal health hazards, making them viable for enlarging the therapeutic window of radiation‐based cancer therapies.[
 
] Hafnium ions are high‐Z metal ions with high molar extinction and photoelectric effects, making them effective as metal‒polyphenolic nanosystems for photothermal therapy (PTT) and radiation therapy (RT). The polyphenolic system led to photothermal conversion (PTC) in the NIR‐II biowindows, and chelated hafnium radiosensitization led to the neutralization of tumor reoccurrence, which is prevalent in PTT.[
 
] Thus, this synergistic hafnium‐sensitized RT and PTT can be effectively used in cancer theranostics. Under X‐ray irradiation, hafnium sensitizes abnormal ROS generation caused by radio‐dynamic therapy (RDT) as a nanoprocessor composed of hemoglobin (Hb), hafnium, and chlorin e6 (Ce6). The combined effects of Hb‐Hf‐Ce6 led to the modulation of the oxygen balance in the tumor microenvironment and the induction of an antitumor immune response.[
 
] Subsequently, the radioenhancer NBTXR3 with functionalized HfO2‐NPs is used for radiotherapy (RT) to treat liver cancer, which is currently in clinical trials.[
 , 
] Radiotherapy activates the NBTXR3 HfO2‐NPs that target tumor cells, and the NPs are chemically inert in cellular and subcellular systems, resulting in favorable systemic tolerance. These findings support its use in clinical trials to treat cancer with radiation therapy via on/off modes of action.[
 
] HfO2‐NPs serve as nanoenhancers, combining radiosensitization and tumor cell death by radiation in various cancer theranostic approaches at the cellular and molecular levels.[
 
] To overcome the immunogenicity caused by radiotherapy and address the antitumor immune response stimulated by RT, RT‐activated NBTXR3 (functionalized HfO2‐NPs) were tailored to act as effective immunomodulators by affecting the lymphocyte population and altering tumor cell immunogenicity through immunopeptidome modulation (Figure
 ).[
 
] RT‐activated NBTXR3 results in a specific adaptive immune response by significantly increasing CD3+ and CD8+ T‐cell populations with enriched cytokine, adaptive immunity and T‐cell receptor signaling pathway genes in patients with soft tissue sarcoma (STS).[
 
] These compounds are used to treat locally advanced STS in phase 2–3 controlled clinical trials, where the effect of RT‐activated NBTXR3 has been studied in comparison with that of conventional RT.[
 
] These findings emphasize the role of the RT‐activated high‐Z hafnium radioenhancer as an effective modulator of cancer immunogenicity in anticancer radiation‐mediated immune therapies. Recently, it has been reported that nanoscale metal‒organic frameworks (nMOFs) offer better radiosensitizing ability than solid NPs do. A comparison of the efficacy of NBTXR3 with that of Hf‐oxo nMOF revealed that the dose‐enhanced radiosensitizing effect of the nMOFs was efficient in controlling the ROS and DNA damage caused by radiation therapy in cancer treatment.[
 
]

 Hf‐NPs are employed beyond tumor‐related applications because of their role as anti‐inflammatory nanoagents to treat inflammatory diseases. Tannic acid‐coated hafnium disulfide nanosheets (HfS2‐TA‐NSs) were developed for targeted therapy of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). HfS2‐TA‐NSs were found to eliminate excessive ROS and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) in an IBD model due to their high specific area and number of reactive sites. The excellent targeting ability of HfS2‐TA‐NSs (Figure
 ) and their ability to accumulate in the intestinal mucosa via electrostatic interactions led to the inhibition of inflammation and aided in repairing the intestinal mucosa by downregulating proinflammatory cytokines, which were subsequently excreted by the kidney and hepato‐intestinal systems. This finding highlights the potential of HfS2‐TA‐NSs to have immunomodulatory properties as anti‐inflammatory two‐dimensional nanoagents combined with hafnium in CT imaging for IBD‐targeted diagnosis and therapy in the future.[
 
]

 Carbon dots (CDs) are promising nanoprobes for bioimaging techniques such as noninvasive tumor imaging and diagnosis. Hafnium‐based carbon dots (Hf‐CDs) are biocompatible, enhancing tumor site accumulation and providing excellent renal clearance, overcoming the limitations of conventional carbon dots, with significant computed tomography (CT) performance in an orthotropic liver cancer model.[
 
] Thus, hafnium‐doped CD materials have potential for use as multimodal nanoprobes in bioimaging and in clinical diagnosis. HfO2 layers also aid in bone tissue engineering applications by exerting anti‐inflammatory effects, enhancing osteogenesis, and reducing osteoclastogenesis in an osteoporotic bone fracture model without eliciting an immune response. These findings indicate that the HfO2 biomaterial can be used to restore homeostasis by modulating the imbalance between bone formation and bone resorption and, consequently, enhancing the healing process in patients with bone‐related disorders.[
 
]

The above studies show the dynamic and versatile applications of nanohafnium‐based materials in biosensing, radiation therapy, photothermal therapy, radiation‐mediated immunotherapy, immunomodulation and tissue engineering.

2.3.3

## Group‐5 Elements and Reported Immunoengineering Applications
Group 5 of the period table of chemical elements consists of vanadium (V), niobium (Nb), tantalum (Ta), and dubnium (Db) transition metals. Dubnium is a radioactive transuranium element described as a crucial component of nanoparticles that can be intravenously injected into the body and can be irradiated by a laser.[
 
] Subsequently, dubnium nanoparticles have been developed and studied for their ability to absorb energy from bean radiation and convert it into heat in a short span of time to target cancer cells and extend their application in anticancer therapy.[
 
] The following sections discuss the well‐researched immunomodulatory applications of 2D Va, Nb and Ta.
2.3.3.1

## Vanadium‐based Nanocomposites
Vanadium is a rare, ductile, gray‒white metallic element found in different animals, and natural resources are widely used in industry because of its optical and magnetic properties, which are attributed to its low neutron absorbing properties. It can be used to treat type 2 diabetes by lowering blood sugar levels.[
 
] Vanadium is easily cleared by the body, which limits its bioavailability, and high‐dose administration of vanadium causes toxicity issues. Therefore, vanadium‐based nanomaterials have been developed to overcome the drawbacks of vanadium in its native state. These nanomaterials have been used in various cancer therapies and in tumor diagnosis.[
 
] Vanadodrugs are vanadium‐based therapeutics for cancer with highly modifiable chemical and structural properties that target malignant tissues, inhibit tumor growth and cancer cell proliferation, and limit the invasion and metastasis of neoplastic cells. They influence miRNA expression, stem cell differentiation and autophagy, making them effective anticancer agents with specificity, selectivity and effectiveness for future metallodrug applications.[
 
]

Vanadium oxide nanoparticles (V2O3‐NPs), as transition metal oxides (TMOs), create strong oxidative stress, which impairs cellular functions in a biological system because of their high surface reactivity. Owing to this, V2O3‐NPs are potentially toxic to human endo‐ and epithelial lung cells and can be exploited to target malignant lung tissues.[
 
] Vanadium pentoxide (V2O5) is the most stable thermodynamic form of vanadium‐oxygen compounds,[
 
] and its antitumor effects have been validated both in vitro and in vivo. Vanadium pentoxide nanoparticles (V2O5‐NPs) present pro‐ and antioxidative properties, altering the mRNA levels of antioxidant genes and influencing autophagy and apoptosis. Hyperaccumulation of V2O5‐NPs induces autophagy‐ and mitophagy‐mediated mitochondrial damage, leading to lysosomal dysfunction and influencing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. V2O5‐NPs are selective for the treatment of breast cancer cells, making them promising candidates for the treatment of chemoresistant cancer.[
 
]

As a group of transition metal elements, vanadium carbide MXenes are of interest for a wide range of energy storage applications. Vanadium carbide MXene (V2CTx) nanosheets synthesized from V2AlC,[
 , 
] are of interest for a wide range of energy storage applications and biomedical applications, particularly in photothermal therapy (PTT) such as its counterpart Ti3C2Tx. The biocompatibility of V2CTx is questionable in biological systems because of its rapid oxidation[
 
] and decomposition into vanadium oxide mixtures,[
 
] which cause cytotoxicity, cell cycle disruption and cell membrane damage.[
 
] Conventional methods of V2CTx synthesis result in low photothermal conversion efficiency (PTCE); hence, a green delamination method in which algae intercalate and delaminate the V2AlC MAX phase results in V2CTx MXene nanosheets with a PTCE as high as 48%.[
 
] Another interesting feature of V2CTx is that it exhibits the enzyme‐mimetic properties of superoxide dismutase (SOD), peroxidase (POD), catalase (CAT) and glutathione peroxidase (GPx) and acts as a theranostic nanozyme to suppress ROS elevation after ischemic stroke. V2CTx scavenges ROS and blocks ROS‐induced inflammation, extending its antioxidative property against oxidative injury and leading to neuronal apoptosis. Thus, V2CTx can act as a regulator of inflammation and be used to treat ROS‐related brain diseases.[
 
] Inspired by their cytotoxic nature and PTT effect, vanadium carbide MXene‐derived quantum dots (V2CTx‐QDs) were synthesized as sonodynamic therapeutic agents to hinder antioxidant cellular mechanisms to aid in ROS generation when triggered by ultrasound irradiation to be potent in ROS‐mediated sonodynamic anticancer therapy.[
 
]

The combination of antioxidant, photothermal‐based cancer therapy and the immunoregulatory properties of vanadium‐based nanoforms makes engineering cytotoxic 2D vanadium crucial in the development of future immune‐cancer therapeutics.

2.3.3.2

## Niobium‐based Nanocomposites
Niobium is a ductile transition metal commonly used to coat metals, alloys, and implants that are implanted in the human body at the site of injury, as it is highly resistant to physiological corrosion and is biocompatible. Niobium carbide MXenes (Nb2CTx) were the first reported photothermal agents (PTA) for PTT in 2017 but had a low PTCE of 28.6% in the NIR‐II region.[
 
] To enhance its PTCE, surface‐engineered Nb2CTx materials have been developed. Surface‐modified Nb2CTx with polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) increased the PTCE to 36.4% and 45.65% in the NIR‐I and NIR‐II biowindows, respectively, suggesting that this material is an efficient antitumor therapeutic agent.[
 
] Polydopamine (PDA)‐modified Nb2CTx combined with an immunoadjuvant was developed to confront the tumor‐associated antigens (TAAs) that are released during photothermal ablation of tumor cells. These TAAs induce immunogenic cell death, and the addition of an immunoadjuvant to Nb2CTx enhances their immunotherapeutic activity. In addition to the photothermal therapeutic activity elicited by Nb2CTx, PDA modification helps increase the loading of the immunoadjuvant, making this MXene system synergistic in PTT and immunotherapy.[
 
]

Moreover, multifunctional Nb2CTx was developed by coating nanosheets with silica (Si) and an immune adjuvant and then 3D printed on biodegradable bioglass (BG) scaffolds as immune‐engineered nanomaterials for tissue regeneration. This composite has both PTT effects on target cancer cells and tissue regeneration potential due to the presence of Nb and Si, which aid in bone regeneration. The immune adjuvant helped the composite activate the immune response for anticancer therapies. This composite MXene nanosystem acts as a combined therapy to target tumor cells and the immune response, thereby promoting tissue regeneration in bone metastasis caused by breast cancer.[
 
] With the history of the use of niobium as an alloy to coat metal implants, Nb2CTx‐coated titanium plate implants with anti‐infection properties have been developed for clinical use. By utilizing the photothermal performance of Nb2CTx as a thermoablation agent to increase bacterial infection resistance when it is implanted, these clinical implants were found to impact the immune response by increasing proinflammatory responses and ROS scavenging, aiding in angiogenesis and tissue remodeling.[
 
] As shown in Figure
 , their data suggest effective alleviation of oxidative stress in material‐treated immune cells and macrophages compared with or without lipopolysaccharide stimulation. In addition, ultrathin Nb2C nanosheets were developed to target inflammatory bowel disease by targeting ROS, reducing intracellular ROS levels and promoting cell survival.[
 
] This evidence demonstrates the potential of 2D niobium as an effective PTA and antioxidant‐based immunoregulator for treating ROS‐related diseases, cancer therapy, tissue regeneration and immune modulation in medical applications.
 
2.3.3.3

## Tantalum‐based Nanocomposites
Tantalum is a soft, silvery, lustrous transition metal with desirable physiochemical properties for a wide range of applications. Owing to its high corrosion resistance, it is utilized in the synthesis of electronic components, as a thin layer coating of metals to achieve high capacitance, and in the coating of metal implants because of its high corrosion resistance, which is contributed by its oxide form in aqueous media. Tantalum is less toxic than titanium and can be effectively used in biological applications such as tantalum carbide MXenes (Ta4C3Tx), such as Ti3C2Tx. Surface‐modified Ta4C3Tx has been applied in tumor ablation, especially Ta4C3Tx functionalized with superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (Ta4C3Tx‐IONPs), and furthermore, surfaces modified with soybean phospholipids (SPs) are efficient photothermal agents (PTAs) in breast cancer theranostics. The PTCE of these Ta4C3Tx‐IONP‐SP nanosheets was 32.5%, which effectively eradicated tumors without reoccurrence. The IONP‐SP conjugation aided in magnetic resonance imaging, thus making the Ta4C3Tx‐IONP‐SP composite an efficient bioimaging tool for diagnosis and PTT.[
 
] Similarly, manganese oxide nanoparticle‐functionalized Ta4C3Tx (Ta4C3Tx‐MnOx) is a promising candidate for cancer theranostics, with an enhanced PTCE of 34.9% and enhanced photoacoustic imaging (PAI) potential due to the MnOx component.[
 
] Ta4C3Tx is gaining attention in bioelectronics because of its exceptional electronic, optical, and magnetic properties. Accordingly, we developed a highly biocompatible Ta4C3Tx‐tantalum oxide (TTO) nanohybrid by adapting an oxidized fluorine‐free method of synthesis. The oxygen‐containing functional groups contributed to the electrochemical performance of the material, which is crucial for bioelectronic applications.[
 
] Owing to the enhanced biocompatibility of Ta4C3Tx, we further investigated these nanomaterials in the form of quantum dots (Ta4C3T
x
 MQDs) for immunomodulatory applications for the first time. The immunoengineered Ta4C3T
x
 MQDs efficiently modulate the immune response during allograft vasculopathy by reducing immune cell infiltration during organ transplantation. Our study revealed the promising application of these MQDs in immunomodulation‐related applications,[
 
] as they caused a remarkable shift in the expression pattern of surface coinhibitory and costimulatory molecules in HUVECs and significantly increased the expression of programmed death ligand‐1 in activated HUVECs compared with that in control cells (∼3.3‐fold). In addition, (Figure
 ), there was a marked difference in the expression levels of PD‐L1 and CD86 in activated HUVECs treated with MQDs (1.3‐fold, p = 0.182), suggesting their role in T‐cell‐activation pathways as coinhibitors and coactivators, respectively, via cultured antigen‐presenting cells. We also observed that there was no significant change in the percentage of Th2 cells, confirming that immunomodulation was achieved by the modulation of Th1 cells. In vivo experiments revealed that the immunoengineered MQDs exhibited effective immunomodulatory properties without significant cytotoxic effects on cells, tissues, or organs in the tested aortic transplantation rodent models (see Figure
 ).
 These findings highlight the potential of Ta4C3T
x
 in combining cancer therapy and tissue regeneration, similar to its predecessors V and Nb, with promising immunomodulatory applications in preventing organ transplant failure.

2.3.4

## Group‐6 Elements and Reported Immunoengineering Applications
The Group 6 elements of the periodic table include the following transition metals: chromium (Cr), molybdenum (Mo), tungsten (W), and seaborgium (Sg). Cr, Mo and W are refractory metals with reported biomedical and immunomodulatory applications, which are discussed below. The radioactivity and rarity of Sg limits its biological use due to potential toxicity; hence, there are no reports related to the immunomodulatory properties of 2D seaborgium nanosheets.
2.3.4.1

## Chromium‐Based Nanocomposites
Chromium is widely used in metallurgy and enhances insulin activity in individuals with type 2 diabetes, preventing the risk of cardiovascular diseases.[
 
] Nanoforms of chromium conjugated with supplements, such as nanochromium‐containing metal‒organic frameworks (MOFs), are being explored to improve insulin resistance and repair impaired glucose metabolism by extending their antioxidant and anti‐inflammatory effects to ameliorate it.[
 
] Another study showed that nano chromium picolinate (nCrPic) affected insulin‐related signaling pathways in skeletal muscle and adipose tissue in an in vivo pig model. nCrPic increased the expression of genes related to insulin resistance (PI3K, AKT, and adiponectin) and regulated genes related to glucose metabolism (SOCS3, UCP3, and IL‐15).[
 
] Additionally, Cr‐based nanoparticles and microparticles of chromium, when alloyed with cobalt, have been tested for their cytotoxicity to fibroblasts to study particle size effects. Particle size is crucial in orthopedic implants, as it influences bioactivity and potential inflammation upon implantation.[
 
] More recently, chromium nanoparticles (CrNPs) were found to address challenges associated with immune checkpoint blockade, a promising cancer immunotherapy.[
 
] CrNPs enhance the infiltration of immune cells, particularly M1 macrophages and CD8+ T cells, via the MIP‐1α and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways. CrNPs also exhibit strong photothermal properties, and when combined with PD‐1/PD‐L1 inhibitors, they improve antitumor efficacy by alleviating the immunosuppressive TME and increasing immune cell infiltration.
Biocompatible ferromagnetic 2D materials can selectively target tumor cells without affecting healthy tissue by combining PTT via hyperthermia with magnetically directed drug delivery systems. Commonly explored manganese‐containing monolayers for ferromagnetic chemotherapy are neurotoxic; thus, chromium‐based monolayers have been developed and studied. Biocompatible CrX3 (X = chloride, bromide, iodide) monolayers exhibit ferromagnetic properties at room temperature and show great potential in cancer theranostics for magnetic biolabeling, drug delivery and hyperthermia treatment of cancer.[
 
] Chromium‐based MXenes (Cr2CTx) are also ferromagnetic and are employed in spintronic applications[
 
] and cancer theranostics. The functionalization of Cr2CTx with multiple functional groups (Cr2CF(OH)) affects its optical properties and promotes its use as a photocatalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).[
 
] HER catalysts play a vital role in cancer therapy, and ongoing research on these Cr‐based catalysts has focused on optimizing their toxicity to tumor cells while minimizing side effects on healthy tissues.
These findings highlight the potential immunomodulatory effects of nano‐Cr, where its antioxidant, ferromagnetic, optical, photothermal and photocatalytic properties enable the selective targeting of tumor cells. This releases tumor antigens and increases immune cell infiltration by stimulating the immune system via immunogenic tumor cell death.

2.3.4.2

## Molybdenum‐Based Nanocomposites
Molybdenum is a trace element found in various dietary sources with diverse applications, including alloys, catalysts, lubricants, pigments, fertilizers and medicinal supplements. Molybdenum from dietary sources such as legumes, grains, dairy and meat helps in the body's metabolism by preventing molybdenum cofactor deficiency, a rare genetic neurological disorder. Molybdenum from mines and other industrial sources is harmful. Molybdenum‐based 2D materials can be synthesized via both top‐down and bottom‐up methods. Conventionally, Mo2C crystals were synthesized via a bottom‐up approach, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), but plasma‐enhanced pulsed laser deposition (PELPD) and template methods afforded nontoxic, biocompatible Mo2C and MoN nanosheets.[
 
]

Molybdenum carbide MXenes (Mo2CTx) derived from their metal carbide MAX phase Mo2Ga2C follow a top‐down approach, and like other MXenes, they are extensively used in energy storage applications. Unlike other MXenes, where the “A” of MAX has a single layer of “A”, the molybdenum MAX phase has two layers separating the Mo2C layers.[
 
] Compared with other MXenes, Mo2CTx is stable and has enhanced HER activity,[
 
] making it a promising candidate for cancer theranostics. Mo2CTx has been studied for its anticancer effects and ability to circulate in the reticuloendothelial system, showing a satisfactory biocompatible and biodegradable nature in vivo. Mo2CTx surfaces modified with polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) serve as efficient PTAs, enabling effective photonic tumor ablation by inducing the release of lysosomotropic compounds into the cytoplasm during early cancer cell apoptosis. Mo2CTx‐PVA has a high PTCE of 24.5% in the NIR‐I and 43.3% in the NIR‐II biowindows, allowing deep tissue penetration and large permissible exposure of hyperthermia in tumors, making these MXenes excellent biodegradable PTAs for PTT.[
 
]

Furthermore, 2D molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) TMDs have versatile biological applications, including photothermal therapy, cancer theranostics, gene/drug delivery, bioimaging, biosensing and, recently, tissue engineering, as they aid in the differentiation of different stem cell lineages.[
 , , 
] These MoS2 nanosheets (MoS2‐NSs) are highly biocompatible at concentrations of up to ∼100 ppm and, compared with pristine nanosheets, are 10% less toxic to cells.[
 
] Unlike other TMDs, PEGylated MoS2‐NSs are highly biodegradable and do not accumulate in organs for extended periods.[
 , 
] PEG‐MoS2‐NSs have been found to be useful as drug carriers for cancer therapy. The delivery of lipoic acid (LA‐PEG‐MoS2) and doxorubicin (DOX‐PEG‐MoS2) for combination therapy involving anticancer drug delivery and PTT has synergistic anticancer effects.[
 
] Nanocomposites of MoS2 conjugated with Fe3O4,[
 , , 
] Bi2S3,[
 , 
] MoS2 nanodots,[
 
] and MoS2 quantum dots[
 
] were found to be useful for photothermal, photodynamic and chemical applications. MoS2 functionalized with chitosan (CS‐MoS2) was reported to possess photothermal‐triggered drug delivery potential to deliver DOX for combined bioimaging (CT), chemotherapy and photothermal therapy applications. The PTCE of the CS‐MoS2 ∼ 24.37% in the NIR region allowed heat‐induced controlled drug release of DOX in response to the NIR laser.[
 
]

MoS2‐NSs show promise as “nanozymes” in cancer theranostics, where a hybrid structure of gold nanobipyramid (AuNBP) coated with MoS2 was developed. This smart nanozyme was readily internalized into cancer cells when studied via two‐photon bioimaging, and it exhibited plasmon‐mediated photothermal effects via the generation of ROS at the targeted site.[
 
] MoS2‐NSs are rapidly internalized by macrophages, leading to an inflammatory response,[
 
] and compared with pristine MoS2‐NSs, PEG‐MoS2‐NSs induce a better inflammatory response.[
 
] Owing to their rapid internalization by macrophages and ability to extend the anti‐inflammatory response, PEG‐MoS2 nanoflowers possess high drug loading ability, facilitating controlled and sustained drug delivery, with long circulation times in the blood, which can aid in targeted drug delivery for immunomodulatory applications.[
 
] and facilitated targeted photothermal tumor ablation without inducing any systemic toxicity or side effects.[
 
] MoS2‐NSs modulate dendritic cell (DC) maturation and migration upon interaction in a size‐ and dose‐dependent fashion. MoS2‐treated DCs also play a vital role in T‐cell activation and the regulation of the adaptive immune response, suggesting their application in nanoimmunotherapy as nanoadjuvants and “nanovaccines”.[
 
] A specific size range of 100–500 nm of MoS2‐NSs effectively improved the T‐cell priming capability of DCs regardless of their size and improved downstream immune responses in CD8+ cytotoxic T‐ and B‐lymphocytes.
Considering the interaction of MoS2‐NSs with macrophages and DCs, PEG‐MoS2‐NSs are employed as nanocarriers for drug delivery‐mediated photothermally enhanced cancer immunotherapy.[
 
] Nanosheets easily penetrate through biological membranes and aid in the release of drugs and proinflammatory cytokines,[
 
] and MoS2‐CuO composites have been applied in immune‐adjuvant cancer therapy.[
 
]

Thus, the above‐discussed research shows evidence that 2D molybdenum‐based nanomaterials have multiple biomedical applications because of their unique interactions with immune cells, photothermal, drug delivery and immunomodulatory effects.

2.3.4.3

## Tungsten‐Based Nanosheets
Tungsten is a shiny and silvery‐white metal that has a wide range of applications, from light bulb filaments to electrodes/conventional electronics, the metal/superalloy industry and biomedical applications. Tungsten‐based 2D nanomaterials show promise in biosensing, cancer theranostics and immunomodulation. TMOs of tungsten oxide (WOx) possess unique physiochemical properties, and as nanosheets (WOxNS), they are highly conductive and exhibit efficiency in the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) when oxygen vacancies (OVs) are introduced into WO3NS.[
 
] OV‐WO3NS, with an enhanced photothermal conversion efficiency (PTCE) ƞ ≈ 41.6% and an up to 96.8% tumor inhibition rate, has a multifunctional role in energy‐based and cancer‐based applications.[
 
] Ultrathin hydrogenated, OV‐WO perovskite NSs are excellent drug delivery platforms for cancer theranostics. These oxygen‐deficient WOx‐NSs exhibit pH‐ and photoresponsive drug release behavior with deep tumor penetration in the NIR‐II region, which may aid in the targeted treatment of cancer without instigating any immune response to these nanomaterials.[
 
] Macrophages aid in inhibiting tumor growth, but their long‐term survival in biological systems is a challenge. Thus, combining the photothermal property of WO with the phagocytotic function of macrophages leads to minimal collateral damage to healthy tissue and helps treat cancer. However, WO nanoparticles lack fluorescent properties, which limits their imaging‐guided performance. Hence, in this study, a visually guided therapeutic method was employed in combination with WOx and macrophages as excellent candidates for immunotherapy and PTT both in vitro and in vivo.[
 
]

Single‐layer WO‐NSs are used as an efficient method for permanent male sterilization in experimental animals and livestock. This nonsurgical male sterilization method adapts to the photoresponsive‐induced hyperthermia of WO‐NSs. These WO‐NSs are termed “smart photoresponsive sterilants” because of their i) ability to sensitize singlet oxygen, ii) PT/PD effects with benign, negligible toxicity and iii) increased biocompatibility without causing long‐term immune suppression, overcoming adverse effects.[
 
] Defective WOx nanomaterials have been employed as promising solutions to address the challenge of repairing bone defects in patients with diabetes, a condition characterized by disrupted bone immune homeostasis. These WOx nanoribbons, which are immunoengineered as ultrathin nanoribbons with abundant OVs, demonstrate combined functionality: they can moderately scavenge reactive oxygen species (ROS) and exhibit robust photothermal antibacterial properties. Owing to this, WOx nanoribbons prevent the disruption of ROS homeostasis and combat bacterial infections in the repair of diabetic bone defects.[
 
] Doping with metals enhances the physiochemical properties of WO nanoparticles, such as increasing the PTCE, which is characteristic of any given transition metal, and increasing the electrical conductivity. Hence, hybrid WOx nanomaterials, in the form of nanosheets and nanoparticles, find their place in biosensing applications. The increased NIR photothermal conversion of these metal‐doped nanocomposites aids in the treatment of cancer through PTT and PDT and serves as a promising contrast agent for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), photoacoustic tomography (PAT) and computed tomography (CT) scans.[
 
]

PEGylated iron tungsten oxide‐based nanosheets (FeWO‐PEG‐NSs) have been found to be nanoadjuvants for immune therapy and chemodynamic therapies (CDTs), as these nanosheets augment tumor‐infiltrating T cells, provoking a systemic immune response that combines PTT and CDT and causes immunogenic cell death triggered by increased production of ROS. Thus, FeWO‐PEG‐NSs are excellent CDT/PDT/PTT agents for targeting primary tumors and immunotherapeutic agents via the effects of ROS/PTT to inhibit distant tumor growth in NIR‐II biowindows.[
 
] Tungsten oxide‐decorated gold nanoparticle (AuNP‐WOx) hybrids aid in anchoring primary antibodies to form chemical bonds between the AuNPs and the –NH2 of the antibodies to be used as photoelectrochemical immunosensors for prostate‐specific antigen detection.[
 
] WOx nanoplates exhibit ROS‐mediated anticancer effects, inducing IL‐2, IL‐8 and TNF‐α secretion and altering proapoptotic and antiapoptotic gene expression.[
 
] Functionalized tungsten trioxide (WO3) nanosheets were developed as electrochemical immunosensors for cardiac biomarker detection because of their high biomarker loading and selective detection capabilities.[
 
] Most recently, metal single‐atom (SA)‐deposited oxygen vacancy (OV)‐rich WO3‐x nanocomposites with superior sonodynamic therapeutic potential were developed. Sonodynamic therapy employs sonosensitizer‐induced ROS upon ultrasound irradiation to induce tumor cell apoptosis and necrosis to treat cancer. Among various metal SA‐based OV‐ WO3‐x, Zhan et al. (2024) reported that copper‐decorated WO3‐x outperformed in terms of ultrasound‐induced ROS production, leading to effective tumor eradication in vitro and in vivo via the modulation of the apoptosis and TNF signaling pathways.[
 
]

2D tungsten disulfide (WS2) nanosheets are 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) with promising electrochemical sensing abilities and are used as photodetectors because of their improved light absorption over a wide UV‒Vis‐NIR (ultraviolet‒visible‐near‐infrared) spectral range.[
 
] An assembly of AuNPs on WS2 nanosheets enables highly selective detection of the cardiac marker myoglobin, such as WO3 nanosheets, via aptamer‐based SERS detection methods.[
 
] Tungsten disulfide nanosheets (WS2‐NSs) aid in monitoring and quantifying the coupling of immunosuppressive drugs with laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry (LDI‐MS), leveraging their strong UV absorbance and ability to generate electron‒hole pairs under laser irradiation to facilitate ionization and desorption.[
 
] Nanocomposites of WS2‐graphene and gold nanoparticles are employed in the electrochemical detection of proteins for biosensing applications for the detection of IgE in serum samples as part of an electrochemical immunoassay.[
 
] Because of their high biocompatibility and protein immobilization capability, poly(vinylpyrrolidone)‐tungsten disulfide nanosheets (PVP/WS2‐NSs) are used as novel electrochemical immunosensors for the detection of fibroblast growth factor‐21 (FGF‐21). Owing to their protein immobilization capability and high biocompatibility. PVP/WS2‐NSs functionalized with gold nanoparticles and metal organic framework (AuNP/MOF) nanozymes are highly electroconductive, assisting in the direct immobilization of antibodies on the electrode surface and emphasizing their role in clinical diagnostics. PVP improved the dispersion and stability of WS2‐NSs, and MOF nanozymes helped produce strong electrochemical signals. AuNPs provided a functional surface for bioreceptor immobilization, making this composite highly sensitive, cost effective, rapid and enzyme‐free for the detection of proteins in serum.[
 
] WS2‐NSs are exploited for their ability to quench time‐resolved fluorescence efficiently in enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assays, leveraging the ability of bioprobe to absorb WS2 through the van der Waals forces created between WS2 and nucleobases, leading to quenched fluorescence for analysis. Doping multicolor‐emissive nanoparticles with the bioprobe and WS2 led to this time‐resolved fluorometric aptasensor.[
 
] WS2‐NSs have also demonstrated excellent antibacterial properties, as they adhere to the surface of bacteria and robustly inhibit cell proliferation, damaging cell membrane integrity and oxidative stress via ROS generation.[
 
]

WS2 quantum dots (WS2QDs) are employed in multimodal (CT/PA) imaging coupled with PTT/RT for the precise detection of tumors and tumor eradication due to their photothermal ability, high NIR absorption and strong X‐ray attenuation. Their ultrasmall size prevents any side effects that can occur due to the injection of the biomaterial.[
 
] Multiwall inorganic WS2 nanotubes and fullerene‐like nanoparticles can impair salivary gland function without affecting cell morphology or cell viability when they are taken up by cells and accumulate in cytoplasmic vesicles. This study suggests the potential of these biocompatible nanomaterials for treating oral diseases.[
 
] Another 2D TMD of tungsten is tungsten selenide (WSe2) nanosheets, which are employed as ultrasensitive electrochemical biosensors in miRNA detection via an RNA‒RNA hybridization configuration to discriminate and detect any base mismatches in the miRNA sequence.[
 
] Owing to the high PTCE of 35.2% erbium‐doped tungsten selenide (Er‐WSe2) in the NIR‐II biowindow, Er contributes to luminescence, and the emission of WSe2 in the NIR‐II region shows promising bifunctional bioimaging and PTT effects in cancer theranostics.[
 
]

These studies show that tungsten, in its diverse 2D forms, is employed in various fields of immunoengineering, combined with light‐ and heat‐mediated cancer therapy, promising bioimaging and biosensing candidates for clinical therapies.

2.3.5

## Group 7 Elements and Reported Immunoengineering Applications
Group‐7 elements include manganese (Mn), technetium (Tc), rhenium (Re), and bohrium (Bh). These elements are abundant in nature and have a hard metallic nature. However, technetium and bohrium have no obvious immunomodulatory effects on their nanosheets in the literature.
2.3.5.1

## Manganese‐Based Nanocomposites
Manganese is a brittle, pinkish‐gray metallic element with relatively high chemical reactivity and oxidation capacity. Bivalent manganese ions (Mn2+) play a vital role in the innate immune‐cell sensing of tumor antigens and serve as tumor immune activators in promoting the adaptive immune response against tumors.[
 , 
] Photodynamic‐based therapy has been widely studied as a promising noninvasive therapeutic strategy for the treatment of cancer, and 2D manganese dioxide nanosheets have been reported for their application in photodynamic therapy and bioimaging.[
 
] Hao et al reported a pH‐responsive drug delivery application of layered manganese dioxide on the basis of its redox mechanisms for theranostic cancer applications.[
 
] Recently, Mn‐based MOFs have been developed for cancer metalloimmunotherapeutic approaches. The immunostimulatory Mn‐MOFs aid in the infiltration of immune cells into tumors to suppress tumor growth and metastasis.[
 
] Mn was doped with cobalt molybdenum double layered hydroxide (Mn‐CoMo‐LDH) nanosheets to improve the sonodynamic therapeutic potential of the nanosheets.[
 
] This modification effectively modulates ROS production and ROS clearance after alleviating the hypoxic tumor microenvironment to induce tumor cell apoptosis. Furthermore, the doping of Mn served to enhance the MRI contrast ability, further highlighting the multifunctionality of Mn in this nanocomposite. Thus, manganese‐based 2D nanomaterials are employed in biosensing and immunostimulatory‐based clinical cancer theranostics, owing to the above‐discussed research.

2.3.5.2

## Rhenium‐Based Nanosheets
Rhenium is a silvery metallic element with relatively good corrosion resistance. Rhenium disulfide (ReS2)‐based materials obtained via liquid exfoliation were reported as theranostic nanoagents for photoacoustic/computerized tomography imaging and PTT applications.[
 
] The obtained 2D ReS2 nanosheets (ReS2‐NSs) have an average lateral size between 20–100 nm and a layer thickness of 1.5–5 nm. As a light‐mediated therapeutic agent, the synthesized PVP‐capped ReS2‐NSs exhibited enhanced tissue penetration and minimal invasion properties due to the relatively high Z content of rhenium (Z = 75) and photoacoustic activity. With high near‐infrared absorption and a PTCE of approximately 79% (other TMDs in the literature possess a PTCE of approximately 30%),[
 , , 
] a tumor elimination rate of up to 100% was achieved. Briefly, 5 concentrations of the as‐designed biocomposite were tested at 10, 20, 40, 80, and 120 µg mL−1; the results revealed rapid and dose‐dependent temperatures (from 6.7 to 46.1 °C) after 10 minutes of irradiation, indicating effective photothermal activity. In addition, no significant cytotoxic effects, organ damage or inflammation were observed.
The application of a rhenium‐based immunoengineered system for tumor targeting and stimuli‐responsive drug delivery combined with chemo‐photothermal therapy has been reported.[
 
] In this study, bovine serum albumin‐assisted exfoliation of thin 2D layered rhenium‐disulfide resulted in efficient photothermal properties under laser irradiation at 808 nm. This treatment resulted in photothermal activity at a pH of ≈6.5 and facilitated the release of the anticancer drug, with 55% resveratrol after six cycles of 5 min of NIR irradiation. Rhenium‐based compounds are promising for targeted anticancer therapies because of their relatively high oxidation states and heterometallic complex assemblies.[
 
] Owing to the cytotoxic and phototoxic effects of these rhenium‐based materials on cancer cells reported in preclinical studies, these materials act through DNA binding, mitochondrial effects, enzyme inhibition, and oxidative stress regulation through 1O2 and CO release mechanisms. Rhenium radioisotopes have potential in the treatment of inflammatory joint damage and bone tissue damage. Taken together, these findings suggest that rhenium‐based immunoengineered nanosystems offer selective anticancer and immunomodulatory effects, meriting further investigation.

2.3.6

## Group 8 to Group 10 Elements and Reported Immunoengineering Applications
The elements of group 8 of the periodic table are iron (Fe), ruthenium (Ru), osmium (Os), and hassium (Hs). Only iron has notable applications as an iron‐based nanomaterial and oxide composite for diagnosis, antibacterial activity, and treatment of bacterial infectious diseases.[
 
] Metal ions modulate immune cell function within the complex tumor microenvironment via the transmission of intracellular and extracellular signals. The application of nanometals for tumor immunotherapy has proven effective in synergistically enhancing the T‐cell‐mediated immune response against cancer.[
 
] In this context, iron‐based LDHs have been developed to enhance ferroptosis‐induced cancer immunotherapy. Fe/Al‐LDHs are immunoengineered to selectively degrade in acidic tumor environments and release iron ions to induce programmed cell death in tumor cells while simultaneously promoting the polarization of macrophages toward the M1 phenotype. These findings underscore the potential of nanoiron to significantly improve the efficacy of tumor immunotherapy.[
 
]

The Group 9 elements of the periodic table contain all the transition metals in the d‐block. These compounds include cobalt (Co), rhodium (Rh), iridium (Ir) and meitnerium (Mt). Rh is an extremely rare, carcinogenic, precious metal, and Ir is the second‐densest silvery white metal in nature. Both rhodium and iridium are platinum group metals (PGMs). Except for cobalt (Co), to date, no significant reports are available on the immunomodulatory applications of 2D Rh, Ir, and Mt‐based nanosheets. In Groups 9–12, there are some elements with unknown properties, termed chemically uncharacterized elements, as they are rare, and radioactive synthetic elements are not found in nature. The elements that fall into this category are meitnerium (Group 9), darmstadt (Group 10), roentgenium (Group 11), and copernicium (Group 12), with few reports on their 2D synthesis and unexplored biological properties.
2.3.6.1

## Cobalt‐based Nanosheets
Cobalt is used industrially and medically for irradiation and is an essential component of vitamin B12, assisting in mature red blood cell formation and extending a protective role to the nervous system. 2D cobalt‐based nanomaterials are employed in cancer therapy. For example, layered cobalt hydroxide nanosheets (Co(OH)2‐NSs) were developed for treating ovarian cancer, where Co(OH)2 offered more effective anticancer and antioxidant activity than did cobalt acetate (as the precursor).[
 
] As self‐therapeutic nanomaterials, Co(OH)2‐NSs exert selective anticancer effects, offering an alternative to existing chemotherapies. Compared with FDA‐approved cisplatin drugs, Co(OH)2‐NSs are less toxic to normal cells and increase the degree of cellular apoptosis. Localization and cellular internalization assays indicated effective uptake and escape from lysosomal degradation. Iron sulfide/cobalt sulfide nanosheets have been employed for hypoxic tumor therapies because of their light‐assisted intracellular photocatalytic oxygen generation bioactivity.[
 
] Furthermore, a composite nanosheet comprising iron, cobalt, and polyethylene glycol (FeS2/CoS2@PEG) was formulated owing to the redox cycles between iron and cobalt (Fe3+/Co3+ and Fe2+/Co2). The nanocomposite exhibited high absorption in the NIR‐II biowindow with a PTCE of 50.5%, with high redox potential because it readily oxidizes water, forming O2 and reducing the dissolved O2 to produce ROS at the tumor site. The nanocomposite relieved tumor hypoxia by mimicking peroxidase and catalase activities to decompose endogenous hydrogen peroxide and served as a glutathione oxidase to disrupt ROS homeostasis and facilitate intracellular oxidative stress in the tumor area.
Additionally, cobalt‐based LDHs have been employed in treating cancer through sonodynamic therapy. These LDHs act as sonosensitizers, which, when activated by ultrasound, produce promising amounts of ROS for treating deeply located tumors via the induction of cancer cell apoptosis. Upon undergoing phase transformation, CoW‐LDH nanosheets were found to act as highly efficient sonosensitizers for sonodynamic therapy.[
 
] Furthermore, the doping of Mn with CoMo‐LDH nanosheets alleviated the hypoxic conditions in the tumor microenvironment and synergistically promoted the sonodynamic therapeutic potential of the Cobased LDH nanosheets.[
 
] Thus, the antioxidant and anticancer effects of cobalt‐based nanomaterials support their efficient use in synergistic antitumor immune, photothermal, photodynamic, sonodynamic and chemotherapeutic applications.
Group 10 of the period table consists of d‐blocks, silvery white transition metals, namely, nickel (Ni), palladium (Pd), platinum (Pt), and the chemically uncharacterized darmstadtium (Ds). Nickel is a hard, ductile element with good conductivity and hydrogen absorption properties. Crystalline ultrathin nickel‐based nanosheets have been fabricated for various chemical, electrical, and optoelectronic applications; however, their biological use has not been well reported. However, layered nickel‐graphene composites have demonstrated desirable electrocatalytic properties and are used as biosensors.[
 
] Platinum is a lustrous, ductile element with corrosion‐resistant properties. Platinum‐based nanosheets are synthesized in different forms, including bulk crystals, colloids, and thin films, for diverse electrochemical and detection‐based approaches. Platinum compounds such as cisplatin and carboplatin are used for the treatment of cancer. Despite the biologically inert nature of platinum, soluble, halogenated platinum salts potentiate platinum‐salt hypersensitivity upon direct contact and exposure to the body, limiting their use in immunoengineered biological systems.

2.3.6.2

## Palladium‐Based Nanocomposites
Palladium is a shiny metallic element that is naturally available in some geological reigns but is often extracted as a byproduct of nickel refinement. In medicine, palladium‐based nanostructures have been studied for use in photothermal therapy as antimicrobial and antitumor agents. Ultrasmall palladium nanosheets (Pd‐NSs) have been shown to possess suitable light‐sensitizing properties,[
 
] converting light into heat upon laser irradiation, with a PTCE of 52%. Pd‐NSs functionalized with reduced glutathione possessed enhanced biodistribution in the blood and accumulation at a relatively high rate in tumors, with ultrasmall sizes (<10 nm) allowing a unique renal clearance route. Thus, they are effective photothermal agents with favorable biodistribution and clearance. Jiang et al reported the effect of 2D palladium‐containing injectable scaffolds for synergistic chemo‐photothermal therapy.[
 
] These hydrogels showed high photothermal efficiency, stability over the conventional matrix of similar compositions, high drug loading capacity and sustained release of doxorubicin under NIR irradiation to inhibit tumor metastasis. These findings demonstrate the use of palladium‐based nanomaterials to develop novel anticancer therapies with enhanced biodistribution and clearance without causing a nanomaterial‐induced immune response.

2.3.7

## Group 11 Elements and Reported Immunoengineering Applications
Group 11 of the periodic table. is composed of copper (Cu), silver (Ag), gold (Au) and roentgenium (Rg). Silver and gold are considered noble metals, and roentgenium is a radioactive synthetic element with no known biological role. All the metallic elements in this group mostly occur in oxidation stages +1 and +2. The immunomodulatory applications of Cu, Ag and Au are discussed below.
2.3.7.1

## copper‐based nanocomposites
Copper‐based nanosheets have demonstrated good electronic and optoelectronic properties. However, despite these well‐established favorable properties, their biological applications have remained largely unexplored. This research gap can be attributed to concerns regarding the high electrical and thermal conductivity of copper‐based materials, as well as the potential release of free copper ions or ligand‐assisted copper ions in biological environments over time.[
 , 
] Nonetheless, recent investigations have begun overcoming these challenges, paving the way for renewed interest in testing copper‐based nanomaterials in biomedical applications, particularly in the field of cancer immunotherapy. Guoqing et al. (2024) developed copper ion‐doped LDH (Cu‐LDH) nanoparticles for cancer immunotherapy via their dual ability to trigger cuproptosis through abnormal lysosomal aggregation within tumor cells and induce lysosomal rupture. Cuproptosis is a regulated form of cell death triggered by excess copper, and pyroptosis is a form of cell death triggered by inflammation‐associated proinflammatory signals. Researchers have leveraged this copper‐induced cell death and immune cascade for cancer therapy. Cu2+ ions facilitate therapeutic efficacy by promoting cuproptosis and pyroptosis, leading to the blockade of autophagy to effectively suppress tumor cell growth and increase the efficiency of tumor therapy.[
 
] In addition, dual gadolinium and copper LDH (GdCu‐LDH) nanoparticles have been developed owing to their high magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast properties for use in accurate cancer diagnostics.[
 
] Owing to the efficiency of synergistic sonodynamic therapy (SDT) and cuproptosis in cancer therapy, Cooper‐based LDH nanosheets have been used. The introduction of Cu2+ ions into the tumor microenvironment (TME) amplified oxidative stress and enhanced the sonodynamic therapeutic potential by triggering immunogenic cell death and enhancing dendritic cell maturation. Overall, this strategy of Cu2+ ion‐mediated SDT/cuproptosis was found to be effective in promoting antitumor immune outcomes in the treatment of cancer.[
 
] Copper‐based LDH composed of cobalt, copper and molybdenum loaded on Lactobacillus acidophilus has been reported to elicit sufficient photodynamic (PDT) activity in the TME, leading to ROS‐induced cell apoptosis and tumor eradication.[
 
] These studies show that copper‐based nanomaterials, particularly LDHs, are promising candidates for cancer immunotherapy because of their unique ability to induce pyroptosis, enhance SDT/PDT and provide improved diagnostic capabilities.

2.3.7.2

## Silver‐Based Nanocomposites
Silver nanomaterials have a long history of antimicrobial applications in combating different types of invasive and noninvasive microorganisms for the treatment of pathogenic diseases. Despite concerns about their long‐term toxicity, extensive research has focused on optimizing their therapeutic efficacy. For example, Li et al. reported the synthesis of hybrid silver nanosheets (Ag‐NSs) as efficient antibacterial membranes.[
 
] Compared with silver ions, silver nanoparticles (Ag‐NPs) offer superior controllability, long‐term antibacterial effects and antibiofouling activity. They elicit antibacterial effects by interacting with bacterial amino acids to inhibit their intracellular proteases and subsequently prevent DNA replication. In this context, Ag‐NPs have been studied for antibacterial, antiviral, anticancer, and anti‐inflammatory applications, including immunomodulation and gene regulation.[
 , , , 
] Ag‐NPs exhibit broad‐spectrum antiviral activity against respiratory pathogens by targeting viral glycoproteins, preventing pathogen entry, reducing pathogen replication, decreasing the production of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines and increasing neutrophil recruitment and activation.[
 
] Studying Ag‐NP‐induced cytokine release is essential for its use in clinical studies, as Ag‐NPs interact with cells, and their toxicity profile induces cytokine release, predicting an immune response. An in‐depth study by Bae, Jiwon, et al. via mass spectrometry revealed the size‐dependent Ag‐NP‐mediated inflammatory response in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (hPBMCs), providing guidance for the design of appropriate nanomaterials for future therapeutics.[
 
] These results expand the scope of the study and evaluation of the immune toxicity, long‐term safety and environmental compatibility of silver nanostructures.

2.3.7.3

## Gold‐Based Nanocomposites
Gold is one of the most ductile and malleable metallic elements, and gold‐based nanomaterials are widely utilized in biomedical and clinical applications, including biosensors, implants, drug delivery, antimicrobial therapy, anticancer, and regenerative medicine.[
 , 
] Since its early development, engineering of gold nanoparticles (Au‐NPs) has advanced, leading to the development of different nanoforms, such as nanorods, nanoparticles, nanotubes, and thin nanofilms. Inflammatory diseases cause an imbalance between M1 and M2 macrophages. Gold nanostructures possess suitable biocompatibility at controlled doses to aid in the treatment of inflammatory diseases.[
 
] These compounds effectively interact with macrophages because of their ability to track contrast and highly active surface for targeted delivery and elicit macrophage‐mediated inflammation.[
 
] These compounds possess excellent therapeutic features for immune modulation, such as inhibiting macrophage responses, preventing macrophage recruitment, and modulating M1/M2 polarization.[
 , 
] Owing to the interaction of gold nanoparticles with macrophages, they can be used in inflammation‐related disease imaging combined with their photothermal ability, serving as effective macrophage modulators in the immunotherapy of inflammatory diseases and photothermal therapy in cancer.
Elsewhere, gold nanomaterials have emerged as potential treatments for rheumatoid arthritis, a common autoimmune inflammatory disease characterized by destruction of joint cartilage. This is driven by complex interactions between inflammatory mediators such as TNF‐a, IL‐1b, cyclooxygenase‐2 and nitric oxide.[
 
] In this context, the immunomodulatory mechanism of Au‐NPs in a collagen‐induced arthritis rat model was studied. After the induction of arthritis, the animals received 20 µg kg−1/body weight of the Au‐NPs for approximately 3 weeks. Nanogold treatment significantly reduced the levels of TNF‐a, IL‐1b, COX‐2 and NF‐κB. Au‐NPs decreased oxidative stress and inflammatory mediator levels and attenuated the imbalance between oxidant and antioxidant status close to normal. Au‐NPs inhibited the activation of NF‐kB, reducing proinflammatory cytokines and ultimately preventing cartilage destruction. Compared with those of the control animals, the histological findings revealed a remarkable decrease in bone erosion and inflammation in the Au‐NP‐treated animals. The application of nanogold‐based composites to fabricate biosensor electrodes for the detection of SARS‐CoV‐2 has been recently reported.[
 
] This biosensor is composed of gold, graphene, a polymeric matrix, and immunoglobulins, and specific SARS‐CoV‐2 antibodies are attached to designed electrodes. Changes in electrochemical signals indicate virus detection, serving as a bioelectronic tool for monitoring health/infection status.
Thus, owing to the inherent photothermal, antioxidant and immunomodulatory properties of gold nanoforms in ablating tumors, reducing oxidative stress and modulating macrophages, respectively, 2D gold is considered the finest candidate for immunoengineering‐based cancer and regenerative medicine.

2.3.8

## Group 12 Elements and Reported Immunoengineering Applications
Group 12, also called the zinc group, contains zinc (Zn), cadmium (Cd), mercury (Hg), and copernicium (Cn). Mercury is widely used in medical devices such as thermometers, sphygmomanometers and mercury‐containing derivatives and is employed in antiparasitic, anti‐inflammatory, antisyphilis, antipruritic, antiseptic drugs and dental amalgams. However, the toxicity of mercury to humans is still debatable, which limits its use as a 2D nanomaterial for various biomedical applications. Copernicium, a synthetic element formed by fusing lead and zinc atoms, has no biological role because of its limited availability and radioactivity. The biological role of zinc and cadmium in biomedical applications is discussed below.
2.3.8.1

## Zinc‐Based Nanocomposites
Zinc, a lustrous, bluish‐white metallic element, plays antioxidant and anti‐inflammatory roles in the human body by reducing oxidative stress, which leads to chronic inflammation. Like nanogold, nanozinc also adapts to phagocytic uptake by macrophages to target inflammation and has potential as an anti‐inflammatory agent. Recently, 2D metal‒organic frameworks (MOFs) were designed on the basis of zinc cations and tetrakis(4‐carboxyphenyl) porphyrin as the organic linker. These Zn‐MOFs were surface modified with polyethylene glycol as potential drug delivery carriers for combined chemo‐photodynamic therapy.[
 
] The developed anticancer system possesses significantly greater light‐triggered singlet oxygen generation properties with efficient doxorubicin drug‐loading capacity due to the photodynamic properties and large surface areas of these zinc‐containing nanosheets for targeted delivery. They also exhibited increased biocompatibility and antitumor efficacy for effective tumor retention upon intravenous injection. Zn‐LDHs have been used as highly efficient photosensitizers for photodynamic therapy to treat cancer by penetrating deep into the tissue and inducing cancer cell damage.[
 
] Hence, nanozinc is employed in immunomodulatory and anticancer therapeutics.

2.3.8.2

## Cadmium‐based Nanocomposites
Cadmium, a lustrous, malleable, ductile element, has properties similar to those of zinc, as it is present in small traces in zinc ores and is a byproduct of zinc production. Cadmium‐based materials in thin film and solid powder forms are used to fabricate different biomedical sensors and electrodes.[
 , , 
] Although nano‐ and quantum‐sized materials of cadmium have gained attention, concerns regarding their long‐term safety persist due to their ability to release toxic cadmium ions and accumulate in different organs (spleen, liver, and kidney) through the bloodstream through reversible cellular uptake, promoting systemic inflammation and toxicity to the intestine and gut microbiota.[
 , 
] Studies on the biosafety, biodistribution and pharmacokinetics of these quantum dots are important for the future development of biologically safe cadmium‐based nanomaterials. For example, Golovine et al reported that cadmium could effectively downregulate the expression of X‐linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) in prostate cancer cells.[
 
] Prostate has the highest amount of cadmium accumulation, and in prostate cancer patients, cadmium levels are high both in circulation and in resident tissues, leading to increased risk of inflammation. Cadmium downregulates the expression of IAPs, inhibiting apoptosis at the posttranscriptional level via an NF‐κB‐independent proteasome‐mediated mechanism, which coincides with TNF‐α‐mediated apoptosis. Further investigations are needed to establish the pro‐/anti‐inflammatory effects of cadmium for its use as a two‐dimensional nanomaterial.
In conclusion, the above‐discussed sections highlight the significant potential of Group 3 to Group 12 transition metal‐based 2D nanomaterials in immunoengineering applications in diverse forms, such as nanoparticles, nanosheets, nanofilms and quantum dots. The physiochemical properties of these elements dictate their synthesis, which is tailored for specific applications, including drug delivery; photothermal, photodynamic and sonodynamic cancer therapies; and immunomodulation. Owing to their outstanding bioelectronic and thermal properties, these materials selectively target tumor tissues via preferential heating, enabling oxidative stress‐induced tumor ablation. Additionally, immune cell modulation can be facilitated by demonstrating selective toxicity to tumor cells while maintaining biocompatibility with normal cells for anticancer, tissue regeneration and inflammatory disease treatment. As research advances, the potential of transition metal‐based 2D nanomaterials has increased, offering promising avenues for cancer theranostics and regenerative medicine.

2.4

## Group‐13 to Group‐17 Elements and Reported Immunoengineering Applications
Groups 13–17 include posttransition elements categorized into boron, carbon, nitrogen, chalcogen, halogen and noble gas groups, respectively, which contain metals, nonmetals and at least one metalloid. Like the chemically uncharacterized radioactive metals discussed in the previous groups, the following elements are synthetic radioactive elements with no biological role: nihonium (Group‐13), flerovium (Group‐14), moscovium (Group‐15), livermorium (Group‐16), tennessine (Group‐17), and organesson (Group‐18). Below are groupwise discussions on 2D materials derived from posttransition elements and their immune‐based applications.
2.4.1

## Group 13 Elements and Reported Immunoengineering Applications
Group 13, known as the boron group, includes boron (Br), aluminum (Al), gallium (Ga), indium (In), thallium (Tl), and the chemically uncharacterized nihonium (Nh). Indium is the softest, malleable, silvery metal with remarkable semiconductor and optoelectronic properties. 2D indium nanosheets maintain metallic properties under strain, and their buckled forms can transition from an indirect semiconductor to a metal. Hence, adding indium to alloys enhances their mechanical properties, such as microhardness, wear resistance and compressive strength, yielding highly corrosion‐resistant alloys for orthopedic applications.[
 
] Studies have revealed that single layers of a new 2D indium (indiene) possess metal‐like properties that enhance their electronic conductance and optical absorption for potential nanomedicine and anticancer applications.[
 
] However, given the high toxicity of indium and the lack of knowledge on its direct effects on human health, no obvious studies have reported its intrinsic biomedical applications. 2D thallenenes possess optoelectronic properties comparable with those of other noncommon Xene bulk nanosheets[
 
] but lack biomedical studies. The reported 2D immunomodulatory applications of 2D nanoforms of B, Al and Ga are discussed below.
2.4.1.1

## Boron‐Based Nanocomposites
Boron, the only nonmetal in group 13, is found in minerals such as borate, kernite, borax, colemanite, and ulexite. The two‐dimensional form of boron, borophene, is a type of Xene. Xenes are novel 2D monoelemental materials with unique physicochemical, electronic, and optical properties. Borophene surpasses its preceding translational nanomaterials because of its high‐performance diagnostic, sensing, optical, magnetic and electrical properties, and it is widely used in energy storage, biosensors, bioimaging and theranostic applications. Borophene's alluring application in artificial intelligence (AI), internet of medical things (IoMT)‐assisted biomedical devices, shows its futuristic prospects in next‐generation healthcare management.[
 
] PEGylated borophene nanosheets (PEG‐B‐NSs) serve as a photonic drug delivery platform with high drug‐loading capacity and a high PTCE of 42.5%. Photothermal irradiation triggers drug release, with multimodal imaging and thorough tumor ablation, and these nanosheets show good tracking and biocompatibility without significant cytokine response or tissue injury.[
 
] 2D borophene flakes integrated with plasma proteins to synthesize functional nanosheet‒corona complexes promoted a macrophage‐mediated immune response; the plasma corona promoted the uptake of the nanomaterial by phagolysosomes.[
 
] Proteomic analysis revealed that plasma proteins could effectively change the surface identities of B‐NSs, with a binding efficiency of 46.5%. and consequently regulate macrophages by reducing the production of cytokines, such as TNF‐α, and increasing the level of ROS. Owing to their excellent drug loading properties, the anticancer drug fluorouracil‐loaded B‐NSs have been developed to increase drug bioavailability and overcome adverse effects, such as neurotoxicity, cardiotoxicity, and myelotoxicity.[
 
] Thus, B‐NSs possess exceptional drug loading capability, macrophage regulation ability and photothermal properties for future nanoenabled immune‐cancer theranostics.

2.4.1.2

## Aluminum‐Based Nanocomposites
The abundance, inertness, and physicochemical properties of aluminum, a lightweight, soft posttransition metal, and its derivatives make them valuable in various engineering applications. Owing to its malleability, aluminum is used in diagnostic, surgical and other medical devices. Aluminum hydroxide‐based substances are considered “generally regarded as safe” (GRAS) in various foods, cosmetics, human vaccines, and preclinical applications.[
 , , 
] In particular, aluminum‐containing adjuvants increase vaccine efficacy by increasing antigen biodistribution for prolonged periods, leading to efficient stimulation of the host immune system.[
 
]

In cancer therapy, aluminum nanosheets affect the tumor microenvironment and potentiate the antitumor effects of cancer drugs. Nanoaluminum oxide hydroxide‐based materials (boehmite) are promising nanocontainers for anticancer applications.[
 
] Recently, 2D layered aluminum sheets in the fields of nanomedicine and cancer therapy were reported.[
 
] Cancer cells are sensitive to changes in the extracellular ion concentration; metallic nanomaterials such as aluminum hydroxide nanosheets (aloohenes), which have high bioactivity and high positive charge, disturb the tumor microenvironment (TME). The desirable microstructural stability, optical adsorption, and surface charge properties of aloohene potentiate its antitumor effect and can be used in combination with other anticancer drugs. The large surface area and positive charge of aloohene lead to the selective adsorption of anionic species in the extracellular environment, leading to ionic imbalance in the perimembranous space in the cells of the TME. This resulted in a 30–37% decrease in the proliferation of the 3 tested cancer cell lines. Aloohene nanosheets interact with tumor cells and the TME stromal compartment by decreasing tumor cell viability and proliferation. This inhibits the progression of murine melanoma when loaded with a low dose of doxorubicin. These reports demonstrate the synergistic therapeutic role of nanoaluminum in cancer immune therapy.

2.4.1.3

## Gallium‐Based Nanocomposites
Gallium possesses remarkable chemical stability, loading capacity, optical low‐power‐consumption, and phase‐change memory properties; thus, it has applications in electronics, robotics, product design, medical devices such as thermometers, barometers and biomedicine. A recent study by Kochat et al. developed a gallium‐based Xene with a honeycomb‐lattice structure of monolayered gallium sheets (gallenene),[
 
] opening avenues for diagnostic, imaging, and optical‐therapeutic strategies and other biomedical applications.[
 
]

Antibacterial nanomaterials have limited effectiveness due to their cytotoxicity; gallium‐based nanocomposites overcome this limitation and elicit enhanced antibacterial effects by preventing implantation‐induced infections, such as those caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a common rod‐shaped bacteria that triggers a cascade of inflammatory responses. In this context, a nanocomposite consisting of graphene oxide (GO) and gallium nanoparticles (GaNPs) was developed to treat implant‐associated bacterial infection in the treatment of bone fractures.[
 
] GO‐GaNPs demonstrated enhanced therapeutic efficacy and biosafety when tested in in vitro and in vivo infectious microenvironments. The increased osteogenic ability of the GO‐GaNPs is attributed to the GO enhancing osteoblastogenesis and the GaNPs inhibiting osteoclastogenesis. Together, these synergistic nanosystems aid in improving bone regeneration, eliminating biofilm formation and overcoming the complications imposed by implant‐related osteomyelitis. The relatively low toxicity of gallium makes it suitable for replacing liquid metals such as mercury in biomedical applications.[
 
] Additionally, gallium‐based liquid metals have been developed and studied for their antimicrobial properties.[
 
]

By utilizing the antibacterial properties of gallium, the wound healing properties of gelatin and the anti‐inflammatory properties of quercetin, gallium‐based gelatin nanoparticles loaded with quercetin (QCT@GNPs‐Ga) were synthesized for wound healing applications.[
 
] Gallium ions, which mimic iron, enter bacterial cells to disrupt iron metabolism, enhancing their antibacterial effects. QCT@GNPs‐Ga modulates inflammation by regulating macrophage polarization from the M1 phenotype to the M2 phenotype through the TGF‐β/Smad pathway, reducing scar formation and enhancing healing. Gallium‐based metal‒organic frameworks (Ga‒MOFs) were developed to overcome the clinical challenges associated with biofilm formation. Ga‐MOFs disrupt bacterial iron metabolism and function as antibiotic carriers that penetrate bacterial biofilms, inhibiting bacterial pyroptosis and alleviating inflammation.[
 , 
] Gallium is also known to disrupt iron homeostasis in immune cells, resulting in its anti‐inflammatory effect. However, Chengchen et al. reported that gallium nanodroplets (Ga‐NDs) have immunomodulatory effects without hindering iron homeostasis.[
 
] This is achieved by the molecular interaction between Ga‐NDs and macrophages, which selectively inhibits nitric oxide production without affecting proinflammatory mediators (verified by the nondisrupted accumulation of ROS, IL‐6, TNF‐α, and NO). These findings highlight the extraordinary application of nanogallium: a) in resolving clinical dilemmas related to bacterial infection, b) in tissue engineering due to its regeneration potential and c) in immunoengineering owing to its anti‐inflammatory properties.
In conclusion, the group of 13‐2D nanocomposites of boron, aluminum and gallium extend their biomedical application, particularly in cancer therapy and immunomodulation, by influencing the TME and immune responses, respectively. They show similarities in drug loading abilities with inherent anticancer properties and regulate macrophage‐mediated inflammatory responses, leveraging their application in wound healing and antibacterial treatments.

2.4.2

## Group‐14 Elements and Reported Immunoengineering Applications
The group‐14 elements consisted of carbon (C), silicon (Si), germanium (Ge), tin (Sn), lead (Pb), and the extremely radioactive synthetic element flerovium (Fl). Lead is widely used in industrial applications and in the nuclear industry as a protective shield to effectively absorb electromagnetic radiation. Despite its industrial applications, lead has no biological use because it is highly toxic, accumulates in the body, depletes antioxidants and increases systemic inflammation, especially in the liver, causing chronic inflammation and fibrosis.[
 
] Animal studies have shown lead‐induced hepatoxicity, characterized by reduced levels of antioxidants such as glutathione and increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF‐α), interferon (INF‐γ), and interleukins such as IL‐1β, IL‐6, and IL‐8.[
 
] Lead in urine serves as a breast cancer biomarker, as lead disrupts the endocrine system, affecting estrogen and inducing tumors by inhibiting apoptosis and abnormal signal transduction,[
 
] and promotes inflammation via the regulation of interleukin 1 receptor‐associated kinase 1, which is a regulator of the NF‐κB pathways involved in mammary gland malignancy.[
 
] The development of thin 2D lead‐based nanosheets is still in its infancy[
 
] and is mostly employed in optoelectronic applications. Owing to the toxicity and proinflammatory properties of lead, lead‐based 2D nanomaterials are not preferred for biomedical applications. The immunomodulatory applications of C, Si, Ge and Sn are discussed below.
2.4.2.1

## Carbon‐Based Nanocomposites
Carbon is one of the most abundant elements with unique physicochemical properties and can form new biologically salient compounds with superior characteristics. Owing to this, 2D carbon nanomaterials have gained significant popularity because of their enhanced bioactivity and tunable physicochemical and biological properties. Interestingly, the physical interaction of 2D biomaterials with the cellular membrane leads to selective cellular uptake, and tissue penetration is considered the primary basis for their biological and immunological properties.[
 
] The surface charge of 2D carbon‐based nanosheets significantly affects their biocompatibility, cellular uptake activity, and accumulation of phospholipids on their large surface area.[
 
]

Graphene, a 2D single layer of carbon arranged tightly in a hexagonal honeycomb lattice, has revolutionized the field of nanomedicine because of its tunable immunomodulatory properties. Graphene and its derivatives elicit their immunomodulatory effects by stimulating macrophages and activating monocytes, releasing growth factors, regulating inflammation, promoting the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells to osteoblasts to maintain bone homeostasis and enhancing regeneration.[
 
] Specifically, GO‐NSs induce bone regeneration by stimulating macrophages toward the M1 phenotype to release proinflammatory cytokines, creating a favorable osteoimmune microenvironment for osteogenesis with increased levels of osteogenic factors for the osteogenic differentiation of stem cells. Xue et al investigated the effects of graphene oxide nanosheets (GO‐NSs) on the inflammatory properties of mouse macrophages (RAW‐264.7 cell lines) toward enhanced osteogenesis,[
 
] where GO‐NSs increased the levels of the proinflammatory cytokines IL‐1β, IL‐6, INFγ, and TNF‐α and the osteogenic factors myeloid differentiation factor 88, BMP‐2, oncostatin M, and VEGF via the oncostatin M and NF‐κB‐VEGF signaling pathways.[
 
]

Graphene‐based nanomaterials have been shown to possess immunomodulatory properties because their intrinsic ability to suppress immune cells[
 , , 
] after being internalized through passive diffusion does not affect cell viability or induce an inflammatory response, leading to cell death.[
 
] In addition, carbon quantum dots at nontoxic doses aided in the production of anti‐inflammatory T helper 2 cytokines, inhibited the production of proinflammatory T helper 1 cytokines, affected dendritic cell functions, suppressed T regulatory cells, downregulated reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, influenced NF‐κB translocation and mTOR activity and increased autophagy.[
 , , 
]

The increasing importance of graphene in nanotechnology has created the need to understand the underlying immunomodulation[
 
] and molecular mechanism of interaction via molecular stimulation.[
 
] To reduce its toxic effects and increase its biological effects, the functionalization of graphene nanomaterials with polymers such as polyethylene glycol (PEG) and polyethyleneimine (PEI) has been reported. By being readily internalized by macrophages, functionalization enhances biocompatibility and immunomodulatory properties, with the PEI composite accumulating in both endosomes and the cytoplasm and the PEG composite in endosomes.[
 
] The immunomodulatory activities of graphene and carbon‐based nanomaterials have received considerable attention for cardiac tissue regeneration. Han et al reported the dual immunomodulatory role of GO‐NSs in macrophage‐targeting/polarizing effects. The dual roles of GO‐NSs are a) to act as antioxidants in reducing inflammation via macrophage polarization from the M1 to M2 phenotype and attenuating intracellular ROS generation and b) to function as nanocarriers of IL‐4 plasmid DNA for the propagation of M2 macrophages and enhanced release of cytokines favorable for cardiac repair. This immunoengineering approach remarkably improved ROS scavenging, fibrosis mitigation, and cardiac functions with desirable bioactivity to increase the survival and proliferation of transplanted stem cells under hypoxic conditions. Park et al reported the antioxidant responses of MSC‐encapsulated graphene oxide/alginate hydrogels, where MSCs improved cardiac maturation via paracrine signaling and alginate microgels decreased the infract size; together, they served as an effective platform for stem cell delivery and a protective antioxidant system.[
 
]

Functionalized carbon nanotubes (CNTs) modulate immune responses by interacting with macrophages, lymphocytes, dendritic cells, phagocytic cells and the complement system.[
 
] The surface charge and molecular patterns of CNTs can influence complement activation, which in turn modulates phagocytosis and cytokine responses, potentially dampening proinflammatory responses.[
 
] In addition, CNTs serve as intracellular transport carriers of immunostimulatory sequences such as CpG DNA, with enhanced cellular uptake efficiency and prolonged immunocompetence in cancer immunotherapy.[
 
] Fullerene, a 2D allotrope of carbon, has shown significant potential in immunomodulation because of its unique chemical structure. In colorectal cancer therapy, oral fullerene tablets (OFTs) target the inflammatory microenvironment, scavenge ROS, inhibit NF‐κB and STAT3, and reduce the infiltration of proinflammatory M1 macrophages and neutrophils to restore immune homeostasis and inhibit tumor progression without significant toxic side effects.[
 
] Curdlan‐decorated fullerene nanoparticles (Cur‐F‐NPs) alleviate immune‐mediated hepatic injury by reducing macrophage infiltration, eliminating excessive ROS, and suppressing the NF‐κB signaling pathway, which results in decreased production of proinflammatory cytokines and balanced immune homeostasis.[
 
] Collectively, these studies underscore the versatile role of carbon‐based nanomaterials in modulating immune responses, offering new therapeutic avenues for cancer, autoimmune disorders, and inflammatory conditions.

2.4.2.2

## Silicon‐based Nanocomposites
Silicon is the second most abundant element in the Earth's crust and is used for a wide range of biomedical applications, as it is environmentally friendly and biocompatible.[
 
] Silicon plays a crucial role in the synthesis of collagen and elastin, which are essential components of the aorta and other organs, such as bone and skin.[
 
] Silica nanoparticles (SiO2‐NPs) possess high biocompatibility, physiochemical and surface properties with controllable particle sizes, creating avenues for surface functionalization and structural modification with enhanced biological properties.[
 
] Despite this, their therapeutic applications are largely limited to drug delivery systems and medical diagnosis, as the poor intrinsic biodegradation of silicon biomaterials contributes to their poor efficacy in vivo and in clinical translation. To improve their efficacy, SiO2‐NPs are functionalized to reduce their acute toxicity. SiO2‐NPs containing redox nanocarriers loaded with anti‐inflammatory drugs were employed to induce anti‐inflammatory effects through ROS scavenging for the treatment of inflammatory bowel diseases.[
 
] Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)‐functionalized SiO2‐NPs were developed to promote angiogenesis in cardiomyocytes,[
 
] light imaging, MRI contrast,[
 
] radiolabeled imaging,[
 
] ultrasound imaging,[
 
] fluorescent magnetic imaging and photoacoustic imaging‐based applications.
Recent advancements have led to the use of silicon as 2D nanomaterials called silicene nanosheets (nSi‐NSs) with enhanced degradation properties via the wet chemical exfoliation method,[
 
] and tailoring the desirable degradability of silicene under specific simulated physiological conditions was assessed for diagnostic imaging and phototriggered therapies.[
 
]

Compared with conventional silicon‐based biomaterials, nSi‐NSs, owing to their sp2/sp3 lattice structure, possess enhanced thermal conductivity and photothermal properties. In this context, extensive research to optimize the synthesis routes and efficacy of thin 2D silicene for photothermal therapeutic applications[
 , , 
] has been conducted. The photothermal effect of biodegradable mono‐/oligo layer silicene, with a PTCE of ∼36.09%, is elicited by inducing tumor hyperthermia followed by specific tumor ablation without significant toxicity to healthy cells, surpassing that of gold‐based nanorod nanomaterials (PTCE = ∼21%). Furthermore, silicene nanocomposites are employed as synergistic photothermal‐assisted chemotherapies, where doxorubicin‐loaded nSi‐NSs exhibit pH‐dependent drug delivery and NIR‐triggered anticancer activity.[
 
] Additionally, compared with mesoporous SiO2‐NPs and porous silicon substances, nSi‐NSs have remarkable drug delivery efficacy[
 
] and have been used as photodynamic nanosystems with tunable bandgaps and selective degradability.[
 
] Despite the promising role of 2D silicene in oncological applications, its clinical translation is still limited by hyperthermia, indicating the need to assess the molecular mechanisms of the photonic hyperthermia of nSi‐NSs in in vitro and in vivo models.[
 
] nSi‐NSs induce photothermia via the activation of caspase 3 and caspase 7, enhancing apoptosis in cancer cells and epigenetically suppressing the anticancer functions of proapoptotic proteins and p53. These results serve as valuable tools for future optimization and clinical translation of photothermal agents.
Ultrathin nSi‐NS surfaces modified with hydrogen atoms exhibit good stability in the TME with selective degradability in the neutral physiological environment of normal tissues. The nSi‐NSs showed good biocompatibility and hemocompatibility without inducing any inflammatory reactions, hepatotoxicity or nephrotoxicity.[
 
] Hydrogen‐terminated nSi‐NSs, referred to as H‐silicene, are efficient at treating acute inflammation. The hydrogen atoms released from the nanosheets scavenge ROS and have anti‐inflammatory effects on inflammatory diseases.[
 
] Recently, H‐nSi‐NSs functionalized into tricalcium phosphate scaffolds were developed for osteoimmunomodulation, where the scaffold remodeled immune cells and promoted bone repair at the site of injury. H‐nSi‐NSs were subsequently released from the scaffold, scavenged the ROS, and enabled endocytosis by macrophages, facilitating macrophage polarization to the M2 phenotype. Consequently, the immune microenvironment is converted from a proinflammatory type to an anti‐inflammatory type, leading to the degradation of the scaffold to promote osteogenesis. This study highlights the immune‐bone remodeling ability of these nanosheets, expanding their application in immunomodulation‐based regenerative medicine.[
 
] Taking these accounts together, 2D silicon‐based nanomaterials have prospects in immunoengineered biomedical and cancer therapies.

2.4.2.3

## Germanium‐Based Nanosheets
Pure germanium is a lustrous gray‒white, nontoxic metalloid with chemical and physical properties similar to those of silicone and is known for its free radical scavenging, antioxidant,[
 
] anticancer,[
 
] immunoregulatory[
 , 
] and regenerative[
 
] properties, making it a significant constituent of nutritional health‐protective supplements.[
 
] Germanium can be administered as a drug or dietary supplement through the blood; after its biological functions, it is absorbed by acids and enzymes.[
 
] A study on the underlying mechanism by which germanium plays an immunomodulatory role was reported in 130 human subjects, and it was shown that biogermanium increased natural killer cell cytotoxicity; activated immunoglobulins, B lymphocytes and TNF‐α; and regulated the NF‐κB and MAPK pathways.[
 
] Administration of germanium in a dose‐dependent manner decreased the production of proinflammatory factors (IL‐6, IL‐1β and TNF‐α) and increased IL‐10 in microorganism‐induced mastitis, indicating its potential for treating inflammatory diseases.[
 
] Knee sleeves embedded with germanium were developed to treat knee osteoarthritis, as germanium‐free electrons undergo transdermal effects, creating a microelectromagnetic field in the embedded fabric, which consequently increases blood circulation and tames the inflammatory process.[
 
]

The recent development of a 2D germanium allotrope similar to graphene called germanene has been reported,[
 
] and these monoelemental germanenes with unique structural and optoelectronic properties have received significant attention for biomedical applications.[
 
] Rapidly biodegradable and photothermal free‐standing 2D germanene nanosheets (nGe‐NSs) have provided high photoacoustic contrast, with a PTCE of ∼38% in NIR‐II biowindow in vivo cancer models.[
 
] Briefly, the obtained nGe‐NSs Doxorubicin‐functionalized nGe‐NSs increased drug accumulation in drug‐resistant cancer cells and exhibited a maximal drug effect of 62.8%, with no significant cytotoxicity or hemolysis.[
 
] Conjugation of the chemotherapeutic drug doxorubicin to nGe‐NSs Elsewhere, owing to the sensitivity of germanene to ultrasound and hyperthermia, these nanosheets aided in photothermal conversion and photoacoustic imaging with enhanced biocompatibility and oxidative biodegradability. Here, the ability of germanene as a multifunctional cancer therapeutic was explored because it is easily degraded after it scavenges tumor cells.[
 
] Germanium's antioxidant properties aid in the ability of hydrogen‐terminated germanene nanosheets to scavenge ROS in acute kidney injury. These nanosheets accumulate in injured kidneys and exert robust antioxidant protective effects by regulating inflammation through free radical and redox reaction absorption.[
 
] In summary, germanium and 2D germanium are powerful agents for immunomodulation, cancer therapeutics and the treatment of anti‐inflammatory diseases.

2.4.2.4

## Tin‐Based Nanocomposites
Tin, a pliable, soft metallic element, is highly corrosion resistant and is used as a protective coating for other metals for electrical circuits. However, recent research by Ahmad et al. revealed that tin nanoparticles (Sn‐NPs) have antioxidant, hematoprotective and cytotoxic potential[
 
] in hemolytic anemia. Sn‐NPs play an immunomodulatory role by decreasing the levels of proinflammatory cytokines and increasing the levels of anti‐inflammatory cytokines; play a hematoprotective role by increasing the blood cell counts of total platelets, white blood cells, and granulocytes; and have antioxidant potential by increasing the levels of GPX, CAT and SOD. Furthermore, Sn‐NPs decreased the serum erythropoietin, ferritin and ferrous iron levels, which is characteristic of their potential for treating hemolytic anemia. Functionalized Sn‐NPs are employed in biosensing applications. Cerium oxide/tin oxide nanocatalysts (CeO2/SnO2‐NPs) can be used to sense anti‐inflammatory drugs electrochemically, and the combination of two metal nanoparticles improved their physiochemical and electrocatalytic properties, facilitating efficient sensing of the drug mesalamine.[
 
] The anti‐inflammatory properties of SnO2‐NPs loaded on a chitosan‒polyethylene glycol complex can be improved by modulating the levels of cytokines and their antioxidant properties by increasing their antioxidant enzyme activities, preventing lipid peroxidation and oxidative stress, and increasing their antiarthritic potential by reducing bone depletion in the immunomodulatory treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.[
 
]

Despite the promising biomedical applications of Sn‐NPs, their potential toxicity should be considered, as indium‐tin oxide (ITO) is employed as a transparent conductive coating in the electronics industry, and the production of ITO releases toxic pollutants and indium‐related compounds, causing indium‐induced interstitial lung disease called alveolar proteinosis. In this context, ITO nanoparticles were synthesized and administered intraperitoneally to mice to determine the occupational exposure effects of indium. ITO activated NOD‐like receptor pyrin domain‐containing 3 (NLRP3) in macrophages, followed by neutrophil recruitment and IL‐1β production. Macrophage endocytosis of ITO induced the production of TNF‐α, cell death and the activation of T helper cells, which are characteristic of pyroptosis. This study also cocultured macrophages impaired by ITO with mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), suggesting that MSCs are effective therapeutics for indium‐induced pulmonary alveolar proteinosis.[
 
] Liu et al. also investigated the toxicity induced by ITO and observed oxidative stress, chronic pulmonary inflammation, and lung fibrosis through the release of Il‐1β, IL‐6 and TNF‐α; the number of alveolar macrophages; and the NF‐κB pathway, which affects both the morphology and function of pulmonary organs.[
 , 
]

Stanene is a recently synthesized 2D tin‐based monoelemental material akin to graphene, with unique physicochemical properties, enhanced thermoelectric performance, optoelectronic properties and topological superconductivity.[
 
] Biomedical applications of stanene nanosystems have been investigated because of their good stability and photonic and sonodynamic properties. The potential effect of stanene‐based nanosheets for the delivery of anticancer β‐Elemene drugs and ultrasound‐assisted combination cancer therapy was reported, where the nanosheets presented an enhanced PTCE of ∼40% and acted as a nanocarrier due to their inherent 2D‐planar structure.[
 
] This nanosystem acts as a promising sonosensitizer to achieve ultrasound‐triggered ROS generation for application in sonodynamic therapy. Owing to the excellent ability of stanene to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) under ultrasonic stimulation to damage bacterial structures, a stanene‐loaded hydrogel system was developed to test its sonodynamic antibacterial effect. This antibacterial effect is harnessed to promote wound healing in the treatment of drug‐resistant infections, and the hydrogel reduces inflammation at the wound site.[
 
] PEGylated stanene nanosheets with increased stability and biocompatibility were prepared to test their multifunctional role in cancer therapy. The release of free electrons from the upper and lower stanene layers and their ability to convert light to heat at the tumor site assist in photothermal cancer elimination and potential use as multimodal imaging‐guided therapy.[
 
] Drug‐loaded stanene nanosheets tend to repolarize macrophages associated with tumors and hence are effective in chemoimmunotherapy. Immunosuppression in the TME by tumor‐associated macrophages (TAMs) reduces the efficiency of immunotherapy, and drug‐loaded drugs overcome TAM‐induced immunosuppression by polarizing M2‐tumor support, such as TAMs, to the M1‐tumor suppressive phenotype. They also enhance CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes, mature dendritic cells and deliver chemotherapeutic drugs, amplifying antitumor effects. This novel study highlights the immunomodulatory potential of stanine in improving cancer therapy to develop nanoimmunotherapeutics.[
 
]

Thus, group 14 elements, with graphene as their forerunner, Si, Ge and Sn, have demonstrated extraordinary potential as 2D monoelemental nanoforms such as silicene, germanene and stanene. These “ene”‐ending 2D nanomaterials exhibit unique optoelectronic and photothermal properties, modulate immune responses, scavenge ROS and promote tissue regeneration, making them versatile candidates for next‐generation therapeutics and regenerative medicine.

2.4.3

## Group‐15 Elements and Reported Immunoengineering Application
Group 15 consist of nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), arsenic (As), antimony (Sb), bismuth (Bi), and highly radioactive moscovium (Mc). As one of the most abundant elements, nitrogen plays a significant role in various biological mechanisms and exhibits indirect effects on immunomodulatory functions. Nitrogen readily reacts with different elements to form different 2D hybrid, hetero, and composite nanostructures with enhanced physicochemical and biological properties. The immunomodulatory applications of 2D P, As, Sb and Bi are discussed below.
2.4.3.1

## Phosphorus Based Nanocomposites
Phosphorous, an abundant multivalent non‐metal plays a vital role in sustaining life on earth by maintaining the biosphere, hydrosphere and geosphere. It plays a dominant role in energy metabolism of carbohydrates and fats, regulates the cell growth and repair of tissues. Phosphorous‐based nanomaterials range from biodegradable black phosphorus nanosheets to phosphorous containing dendrimers and metal phosphates, are employed in biomedical applications due to their unique physiochemical, optical, and biological properties. They are employed as biosensors, drug carriers, cancer theranostics as tumor imaging agents, photothermal/dynamic agents and tissue regenerators, especially in bone regeneration.[
 
] Black phosphorous nanosheets (BP‐NSs) biodegrade to phosphate ions that affects ATP hydrolysis[
 
] leading to tumor cell death,[
 
] by selectively inducing high intracellular oxidative stress in cancer cells while remaining biocompatible with normal cells. BP targets the aggregation of β‐amyloid peptides (characteristic feature of neurodegenerative Alzheimer's disease), inhibits ROS generation, targets neuroinflammation and stabilizes the calcium homeostasis.[
 
] Due to the low toxicity, high stability, and metal free high PTCE of native BP and its derived planar form, they are highly desirable photo‐thermal agents when compared to conventional carbon nanostructures. Biocompatible BP nanosheets integrated with cellulose elicits its anti‐cancer effects due to its high PTCE, exhibiting strong absorbance in the NIR regions, demonstrating high tumor elimination efficiency.[
 
] Ultrathin BP‐NSs with high PTCE act as photothermal agent and immunological stimulator relieving immunosuppression in TME. by recruiting monocytes in initiating a tumor specific immune response.[
 
] BP‐NSs’ PTCE can reach up to 31%; when combined with immunotherapy; they inhibit the tumor growth and prevent tumor recurrence. This is achieved by stimulating host immune system to develop antitumor immunity to protect normal cells during cancer treatments.[
 
] Carbon dot‐passivated BP nanosheets (CD‐BP‐NSs) possess significantly higher PTCE of 77.3% in NIR‐I biowindow and 61.4% in NIR‐II biowindow, exceeding that of pristine BP's PTCE of 50% at NIR‐I and 28% at NIR‐II biowindows.[
 
] BP_NSs excel as drug delivery agents with high drug loading efficiency, which is helpful in administering tumor‐suppressing drugs through these photothermal agents.
Monoelemental 2D layered form of phosphorus named “phosphorene” possess outstanding optoelectronic properties.[
 
] Phosphorene (nP) is a 2D Xene nanomaterial akin to graphene with unique anisotropic orthorhombic structure, physical, optical, and biological properties. nP shows promise in caner treatment and serves as template for anti‐cancer drug loading and release mechanisms, without causing any significant change in chemical structure of the drug.[
 
] Owing to the biocompatible, high adsorption photoredox capability, intrinsic fluorescence and photoacoustic (FLPA) properties, prevention of PTT‐triggered hyperthermia induced inflammatory diseases and selective ROS generation in TME, maximizes therapeutic efficacy and minimizes systemic toxicity of nP. Thus, phosphorene‐based technology is viable for multifunctional biomedical applications including cancer therapy, treatment of degenerative disorders, stem‐cell therapy, blood‐brain barrier, and targeted delivery applications.[
 
]

Phosphorus containing dendrimers play therapeutic role by breaking down into non‐toxic substances in the treatment of autoimmune inflammatory disease, rheumatoid arthritis (RA).[
 
] The multivalent nature of these dendrimers interact with multiple cellular targets; specifically targeting monocytes to decrease pro‐inflammatory cytokines and increase anti‐inflammatory cytokines’ characteristic to T helper 2 response. These dendrimers extend its therapeutic role by inhibiting the signalling pathway responsible for monocyte differentiation into osteoclasts, in RA.[
 
] Water‐soluble, biodegradable phosphorous containing dendrimers hold high potential as nanocarriers to delivery chemotherapeutic drugs like paclitaxel[
 
] and doxorubicin. The, nanomaterials are endosomally taken up in TME to sustainably release high concentrations of the chemotherapeutic drug.[
 
]

Metal‐based phosphate nanomaterials, like calcium phosphates and hydroxyapatite, mimic natural inorganic bone constituents and hence used in bone tissue engineering.[
 
] Calcium phosphate‐based nanocomposites with increased functionalization are employed as effective diagnostic, cellular (nucleic acid drugs) delivery agents and nanocarriers, replacing conventional synthetic polycationic nanocarriers.[
 
] Calcium phosphate nanoparticles (CaP‐NPs) improve heart function and can treat heart failure, when loaded with drugs and injected. Inhaled peptide loaded CaP‐NPs reached the heart faster, were taken up by the cardiomyocytes and improved cardiac function in diabetic cardiomyopathy animal models. showing their potential use as invasive targeted cardiac drug delivery method in humans. The nanoparticles protect the loaded peptides from immediate enzymatic degradation, providing cellular permeability into the cardiomyocytes and release bioactive microRNA, improving cardiac function without inducing any oxidative stress, toxicity or interfering heart function TME is characterised by low pH, high ROS, high GSH and overproduced hydrogen peroxide. To effectively target the tumor, the physiological behaviour of nanoparticles at low pH conditions needs validation. Hollow Manganese phosphate nanoparticles were employed as multifunctional probes for synergistic cancer therapy[
 
] and covalently functionalized with poly (ethylene glycol) with chemotherapeutic drug. The nanoparticles possessed low MRI at pH 7.4, but exhibited high MRI contract at pH 5.4; leading to the release ofMn2+ upon erosion, facilitating targeted delivery of chemotherapeutic drug DOX. This pH‐controlled MRI and pH‐triggered drug delivery are ideal for diagnosis and treatment of cancer. Copper phosphide nanowires serves as electrocatalytic cancer cell detection probe to facilitate selective and sensitive detection of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), crucial indicator of physiological cellular homeostasis.[
 
] Tumor cells release H2O2, when detected under ROS conditions abnormal H2O2 levels indicate cell aberrance, imbalance ROS and apoptosis, all of which are relate to disorders like Parkinson's disease, myocardial infraction, and cancer. Hence, H2O2 sensing is important and metal‐based phosphide nanomaterials act as non‐enzymatic sensors in this application.
These aforementioned properties of phosphorus nanomaterial, help in its application in cancer detection/treatment/imaging, antioxidant potential, H2O2 sensing, ROS reduction, photoredox potential and immunomodulatory regenerative medicine.

2.4.3.2

## Arsenic Based Nanocomposites
Chronic environmental arsenic exposure leads to inflammatory infiltration, renal edema resulting in renal failure and liver inflammation, by activating pro‐inflammatory signalling pathways, ROS induction and consequent, DNA damage, impairs both innate and adaptive immune system.[
 
] Arsenic alters proliferation, differentiation, and function of T lymphocytes[
 
] making it a promising therapeutic for lymphoproliferative autoimmune syndromes that damage lungs, skin and kidneys.[
 
] Arsenic extends a pro‐oxidant effect and increases the ROS levels in macrophages, lymphocytes, and several cell types. Arsenic aids in the management of chronic graft vs host disease, by the depletion of glutathione and ROS production,[
 
] prolonged allograft survival by repressing CD4+[
 , 
] and CD8+ memory T cells and redox‐sensitive signalling pathways modulation by DNA damage, immune cell gene expression impairment,[
 
] cell stress‐induced NRF2 regulation of antioxidant genes and IL‐12 inhibition in dendritic cells.[
 
] Studies show that arsenic targets nucleotide‐binding oligomerization domain‐like receptor proteins (NLRP) inflammasome complexes, blocks its activity, and affects IL‐1β showing its application in treating chronic inflammatory responses in inflammasome ‐mediated diseases.[
 
]

Owing to the pro‐oxidant and ROS generating ability of arsenic, layered 2D structure of arsenic called arsenene (nAs), are widely employed in cancer therapies including its application as enzymatic phenol biosensor and as therapeutic agents for acute promyelocytic leukemia cells (APL).[
 
] Planar nAs and arsenic nanomaterials (As‐NMs) obtained by wet chemical exfoliation method have shown promising therapeutic anticancer effect against APL cells through reducing super‐oxide dismutase activity and generating ROS mechanism.[
 , , 
] Furthermore, the cytotoxicity of 2D arsenene nanosheets (nAs‐NSs) with different types of cancer cell lines, including A549, A2780, HeLa, and MCF‐7 was assessed and compared to normal human cell lines (HL‐7702 liver and HEK293 embryonic kidney). nAs‐NSs demonstrated effective therapeutic anticancer properties with 50–80% inhibition affecting nuclear deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and subsequent nuclear protein TXNL1 in treated‐NB4 cancer cells to effectively suppress their proliferation and induce pyrimidine metabolism pathways. Development of a therapeutic nanomotor consisting of nAs‐NSs for anticancer drug delivery, with intrinsic cytotoxicity, motion capabilities, and drug carrier competency of the immunoengineered arsenene‐based system was investigated.[
 
] nAs‐NSs are highly biocompatible and enhanced cellular uptake, and targeted delivery for future self‐carrier therapeutic approaches using arsenic nanocompounds.

2.4.3.3

## Antimony Based Nanosheets
Antimony is a durable, semi‐metallic element that naturally occurs in environment and its commonly used to develop frame‐ retardant materials, pottery, alloys for machine bearings and bullets. Chronic exposure to antimony and its compounds leads to respiratory, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal and lung inflammation, and elicits human carcinogenicity. However, since the 16th century, antimony‐based compounds have been used in medicine as tartar emetics for treatment of inflammatory conditions and diseases like Leishmania.[
 
] Anti‐inflammatory antimony compounds have also been used as antiprotozoal drugs to treat psoriasis, a chronic inflammatory disease with characteristic hyperproliferation of skin keratinocytes. In psoriasis conditions, cytokines are activated by the activation of the NF‐κB, STAT3 pathways, type 1 interferon (IFN) signaling pathways and antimony compounds influenced the production of pro‐inflammatory cytokines IL‐6 and IL‐8, and reduced the dendritic cell activation and IL‐23 expression respectively.[
 
] Studying the toxicity profile of antimony oxide nanoparticles (Sb2O3‐NPs) in comparison to 7 other metal oxide nanoparticles on different hematopoietic human cell lines, showed that Sb2O3‐NPs extended specific toxicity to erythroid precursor proliferation and inhibited the differentiation of T helper 1 monocytes to macrophages.[
 
] Sb2O3‐NPs showed low degree of aggregation when in contact with cells, as the nanoparticles interacted with the erythroid precursors at the plasma membrane level. Sb2O3‐NPs possess photocatalytic activity due to its optoelectronic and photoelectric properties and when incorporated into poly (o‐phenylenediamine), this nanocomposite aided in the photocatalytic degradation of Ibuprofen, a non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory drug and organic pharmaceutical pollutants from the environment.[
 
] Antimony selenide nanosheets conjugated with polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) and irradiated by infrared laser efficiently act as antibacterial agents to combat multi‐drug resistant bacteria via ROS induction.[
 
] PVP modification enhanced nanosheets’ bioinertness and the nanosheets’ photothermal‐induced antibacterial property aided in complete eradication of bacterial infections.
2D elemental layered nanostructures of antimony called antimonene are gaining attentions for biomedical and therapeutic applications.[
 
] Zhang et al reported the fabrication of poly(lactic‐co‐glycolic acid)‐coated antimonene nanosheets as an X‐ray radiosensitizer.[
 
] Upon X‐ray irradiation, the nanosheets induced strong oxidative stress by the increased generation of ROS to effectively accelerate electron transfer by radiocatalysis and inactivate vascular endothelial growth factor‐regulated hypoxia. Notably, without radiosensitization, the antimonene‐based nanosystem exhibited significant cytotoxicity with the co‐cultured cancer cell lines and upon radiosensitization induced cancer cell apoptosis. This shows the importance of tunable antimonene to be used in future radiosensitization based clinical therapeutics. Dual‐responsive 2D antimonene nanosheets (nSb‐NSs)‐based drug‐loading system for cancer theranostics was reported.[
 
] nSb‐NSs are constructed by wet chemical exfoliation of bulky antimony and surface modified with PEGylation and doxorubicin loading due to hydrophobic interactions and this nanoplatform can be activated by both internal stimuli of acidic pH stimuli and external stimuli of NIR light at 808 nm. With drug‐loading capacity of 150% and PTCE of 42%, this nanoplatform was readily taken up through endocytosis and enhanced tumor growth inhibition by NIR irradiation. Likewise, application of a 2D antimonene‐based heterostructure with enhanced capability of ROS generation was reported for photonic cancer theranostics.[
 
] Ultrathin 2D antinomy‐based sheets were functionalized with a photosensitizer and modifier, with an average thickness and particle size of 4 nm and 110 nm, respectively, are fabricated. Their structural arrangement facilitated a loading capacity as high as 83% for 5,10,15,20‐Tetrakis(4‐hydroxy‐phenyl)‐21H,12H‐porphine as photosensitizer, PTCE of ∼ 44.6% and improved electron‐hole pairs to hold redox potential for ROS generation at tumor site. Further, multimodal imaging properties of this nanosystem were owed to its photothermal and photoacoustic imaging ability, paving the way toward future image guided therapeutics of 2D antimony‐based nanomaterials.

2.4.3.4

## Bismuth Based Nanosheets
Bismuth, brittle and crystalline pinkish‐white metallic element is the heaviest and “green” metal due to its low toxicity (much lower than sodium chloride) and benign nature.[
 
] Bismuth finds its application in manufacturing industry and cosmetics. Though bismuth has no known biological function, the low‐toxicity and tunable nature of bismuth compounds contributes to its use in biological applications. Compared to arsenic and antimony, large concentration of bismuth can be tolerated by the human body. Bismuth‐based drugs are commercially used for the treatment medical disorders and used for their antimicrobial and anticancer properties. Bismuth complexes strongly bind to proteins, glycoproteins, and enzymes of the connective tissue, and inhibits microbial adherence, eliciting a synergistic effect by modulation of metal‐associated toxicity and enhancement of biological interactions.[
 , 
] Bismuth nanoparticles (Bi‐NPs) are used for treating multidrug resistant bacteria in combination with x‐ray‐based therapies, where upon X‐ray irradiation, tBi‐NPs exhibit photothermal effect. They directly interact with bacterial cell wall, leading to ROS generation, limiting biofilm formation and stimulating immune reaction. This same phenomemon is observed in bismuth bisulphide nanoparticles.[
 
] Bismuth nanoparticles (Bi‐NPs) also help in curing infections resulting from inflammatory diseases, by attacking the pathogen causing inflammation[
 
] and can be amalgamated with antibiotics for increase sensitivity to microbes.[
 
] Bi‐NPs synergistically aid in antibiotics delivery[
 
] and photothermally aids in breaking the bacterial wall making antibiotics accessible.
2D bismuthene nanosheets (nBi‐NSs) with desirable microstructure and biological properties are explored in cancer theranostics.[
 , 
] Biocompatible nBi‐NSs engineered as biomimetic radiosensitizer enhanced the radiation‐killing of cancer cells without disturbing the normal cells around the tumor site and modulate radiotherapy‐resistant hypoxic tumor by inducing excess ROS. Functionalised nBi‐NSs with quantum dots and chemotherapeutic drugs elicited pH ‐sensitive and photothermal induced drug release in the TME. This shows the photodynamic properties of bismuth to induce oxygen radicals, PTCE of ∼54% and the chemotherapeutic drug loading ability of ∼250%, can be used as extraordinary cancer therapeutics. Gou et al, utilized the pH sensitive and photothermal property of bismuthene in combination with cancer immunotherapy in sequentially triggering programmed death‐ligand 1 siRNA release. nBi‐NSs simultaneously induce the pathological permeability, retention and rapid clearance leading to inhibition of both local and distant metastasis, by enhancing DC maturation and immunosuppressive tumor reversion.[
 
] Further, photothermal nBi‐NSs are employed as potential drug carriers and can reduce carbon dioxide into carbon monoxide (CO) by adapting a photocatalytic route. to reduce the chemotherapeutic drug resistance and photothermal‐induced inflammation.[
 
] These immunoengineered bismuthene‐doxorubicin nanosystems improved tumor inhibition up to 50% and upon simultaneous irradiation with IR and NIR, the tumor inhibition rate increased to 90%. in the tested tumor‐bearing mouse models. These findings further support the multifunctional immunomodulatory anticancer properties of bismuthene‐based system in future clinical therapies.
The extensive research discussed above on 2D forms of group 15 elements, including P, As, Sb and Bi, exhibits their remarkable pH‐sensitive properties aligning with increasing metallic character and decreasing electronegativity down the group. These characteristics enhance their potential in biomedical applications alongside their pH/photothermal‐triggered chemotherapeutic drug release, antimicrobial, immunomodulatory and biosensing properties for future thernaostics.

2.4.4

## Group‐16 Elements and Reported Immunoengineering Application
Group 16, the oxygen‐group elements, also called chalcogens consist of oxygen (O), sulfur (S), selenium (Se), tellurium (Te), polonium (Po), and livermorium (Lv). Owing to a biradical electron configuration, oxygen is highly reactive, forming compounds with other elements rather than its own stable 2D structures, and its poor intrinsic properties limits the synthesis of stable 2D nanomaterials. Polonium is rare, highly toxic and radioactive with no biological role. Recently, studies have explored the synthesis of stable layered 2D polonium nanosheets (poloniumene)[
 
] Similar to molybdenum disulfide, these nanostructures tend to form three‐atomic‐layers with desirable large band gap and stable monolayers.[
 
] However, no significant biomedical applications have been reported; instead, research focuses on assessing risks of radioactive polonium exposure from various sources. Livermorium, discovered in 2000 by bombarding curium with calcium, is extremely radioactive, has no biological role and is used in research to study the behaviour of superheavy atoms. The biomedical applications of the other elements of this group are discussed below.
2.4.4.1

## Sulfur Based Nanocomposites
Sulfur plays a vital role in various biological pathways and has been used in dermatology for centuries due to its biologically active nature. Nipin et al, validated sulfur's anti‐inflammatory effects in modulating LPS‐induced skin inflammation, where sulfur suppressed the ROS and DNA damage in skin fibroblasts.[
 
] This study shows potential of sulfur in developing safe cosmetics. Sulfur‐based nanoparticles (S‐NPs) exhibit anti‐bacterial properties and are employed in treating dermatological diseases, effectively disrupting the bacterial cell wall of Staphylococcus bacteria that causes acne vulgaris.[
 
] Synthesis of anti‐fungal and anti‐microbial S‐NPs from citrus limon leaves was validated as synergistic, safe nanohydrogel formulation for clinical use.[
 
] These studies validate the anti‐bacterial, anti‐fungal and anti‐microbial role of S‐NPs in synergistically treating skin inflammation and developing safe dermal applications.
Elsewhere, selenium‐sulfur nanocomposite showed accelerated tissue regeneration by enhancing angiogenesis and regulating inflammation.[
 
] Transcriptomic analysis showed that nSeS promoted biosynthesis and reduced inflammation by targeting ROS in zebrafish and mice models. During the early stage of tissue regeneration, nSeS improved the accumulation of inflammatory cells, increased CD206+ macrophages and decreased myelopeoxidase‐positive neutrophils. This study proved that the incorporation of sulfur was the driving force to accelerate tissue regeneration and reduce inflammation. S‐NPs extend their synergistic anti‐microbial and immunomodulatory activities in potential wound healing applications.[
 
] In addition to this, synthetic 2D planar sulfur‐based materials possess TME responsive, anticancer properties. Li et al, studied this by incorporating tirapazamine and indocyanine green into sulfur nanosheets with the loading efficiency of around 6% and 95%, respectively.[
 
] Compared to carbon nanomaterials, sulfur nanomaterials have unmatched antibacterial, antifungal activity and possess large specific area, enhanced dispersibility and optical transparency, making them excellent candidatures for multifunctional photothermal/dynamic/chemotherapy. On the onset of high H2O2 in TME these sulfur nanomaterials decompose, to elicit its photothermal‐assisted chemotherapeutic effect., These nanocomposites demonstrate suitable biocompatibility alongside NIR fluorescence, ROS generation, and PTCE for enhanced TME responsiveness in vitro and inhibitory effect on tumor growth in vivo. Also, design and application of hydrothermally synthesized layered sulfurene nanosheets by assembling sulfur quantum dots was tested for visible‐light‐active photocatalysis and optical sensing applications.[
 
] This beneficial nanomaterial‐based strategy for offered diagnostic and therapeutic approaches, owing to its optical absorption and multi‐wavelength photoluminescence and photoelectric properties.
Overall, sulfur and its 2D nanocomposites elicit extraordinary anti‐microbial, anti‐inflammatory, tissue regenerative, photothermal assisted anti‐cancer and immunomodulatory effects.

2.4.4.2

## Selenium Based Nanocomposites
Selenium's physicochemical properties are similar to sulfur and tellurium, and is typically found un metal sulfide ores. The World health organization (WHO) recommends a daily dietary consumption of 40µg of selenium due to its nutritional benefits[
 
] in regulating various homeostatic mechanisms and normalizing cell proliferation.[
 
] Selenium nanoparticles (Se‐NPs) are widely used for their antioxidant, anticancer, antimicrobial, and immunomodulatory roles in various biomedical applications. Se‐NPs extends its antioxidant property by scavenging ROS and modulating oxidative stress, major factor in disease progression. They increase biodegradability of nutritional supplements aiding their clearance from the body.[
 
] In cancer therapy, Se‐NPs are encapsulated by immune cells, causing mitochondrial ROS induction, ATP depletion and mitochondrial damage, ultimately resulting in tumor ablation.[
 
] Thus, Se‐NPs are excellent candidates for cancer therapy due to its prophylactic ability to selectively target tumor cells without inducing host toxicity and can be to exhibit enhanced anti‐cancer effects.[
 , , , 
]

Selenium deficiency leads to several diseases like atherosclerosis, spinal cord injury, rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes, epilepsy, renal diseases by promoting inflammation and reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation. Selenoprotiens boost the immune system by exhibiting antioxidant functions. They influence effector functions of immune cells by maintaining redox, oxidative stress burst, protein folding and regulating immunity.[
 
] These selenoproteins exhibit antioxidants and anti‐inflammatory effects in wound healing,[
 
] reducing ROS, lowering fatty acid and lipid peroxides levels,[
 
] translocating NF‐κB,[
 
] affecting lymphocyte proliferation[
 
] and regulates the monocyte adherence.[
 
] Se‐NPs’ immunostimulatory effects were first reported in breast cancer model.[
 
] Se‐NPs’ induced delayed type hypersensitivity by increasing natural killer (NK cells, INF‐γ and IL‐17. Further, Se‐NPs exerts immunomodulatory role by increasing IL‐8, IL‐6 and TNF‐α in colon cancer treatment;[
 , 
] TNF‐α, interferon regulatory factor (IRF1) and receptor interacting protein (RIP1) in prostate cancer treatment[
 
] and, increasing IL‐33, IL‐1β, IL‐6, superoxide dismutase (SOD) and decreasing glutathione (GSH), glutathione peroxidase (GPx) in treatment of hepatocellular cancer.[
 , 
] Further, Se‐NPs extend anti‐inflammatory ability to reduce the inflammation by reducing leukocyte count, TNF‐α, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), nitric oxide (NOx) and lipid peroxidation.[
 
] Se‐NPs are employed in treating inflammatory diseases such as chronic inflammatory rheumatoid arthritis[
 , 
] and nephropathy.[
 
] In immunomodulated treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, Se‐NPs increased GSH, CAT, SOD, GPX proteins and, decreased COX‐2, IL‐1β, IL‐6 and MCP‐1. In atherosclerosis, Se‐NPs decreased lipid peroxidation and increased NO, GPX, SOD and catalase (CAT) levels.[
 
] Se‐NPs increased the M2 macrophage, SOD, GSH, GPX and decreased TNF‐α, Il‐6, ROS to treat spinal cord injury.[
 
] In epilepsy, Se‐NPs increased GSH, GPX, SOD, CAT, nuclear factor‐erythroid factor 2‐related factor 2 (Nrf2), heme oxygenase (HO‐1) and decreased IL‐1β, TNF‐α, COX‐2, NF‐κB levels.[
 , 
] Se‐NPs functionalized with mannose‐rich oligosaccharides (MRO) were developed to treat inflammatory bowel disease, like ulcerative colitis, by improving M2 phenotype polarization, reducing IL‐1β, IL‐6, IL‐12, monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP‐1) and TNF‐α cytokines. showing the resolution of inflammation in this disease model. Amit et al, showed that selenium deficiency was observed in COVID‐19 patient and supplementing the diet with Se‐NPs can overcome this deficiency that leads to increased mortality. Se‐NPs boost selenoprotien activity and reduce secondary bacterial infections associated with the COVID‐19.
In addition to the therapeutic applications of Se‐NPs, development of 2D layered nanostructures of selenium (selenene) has been theoretically reported.[
 
] Owing to the chair‐like buckled structural similarity with germanene and siliciene, 2D selenene and similar to group IV Xenes, it the Se atoms are held by covalent bonds in its layered structure.[
 
] 2D selenene are potential anti‐metastatic/anti‐angiogenic/ nanoagent[
 
] and effective radiosensitizer for cancer radiotherapy applications. Their favorable physical, electronic and optoelectronic properties of 2D selenene and ultrathin can be used in combinational cancer therapy.[
 
] 2D ultrathin selenium‐based nanosheets with tunable optical and optoelectronic properties were synthesized using a typical wet exfoliation method[
 
] exhibited photoluminescence and ultrafast photonics. Overall, 2D selenium offer a wide range of favorable diagnostic and therapeutic effects in various inflammatory disease models, suggesting in‐depth preclinical investigations for its safe use and commercialization in future therapeutics.

2.4.4.3

## Tellurium Based Nanocomposites
Tellurium is a rare, toxic, teratogenic metalloid with limited biological mechanisms. However, advancements in nanotechnology led to the experimental construction of stable 2D tellurium‐based nanosheets, reported in 2018. 2D forms of tellurium include, tullurene (nTe), the 2D monoelemental material Xene, transition metal tellurides (TMTs), optoelectronic tellurium nanosheets, antioxidant tellurium nanorods, tellurium nanoparticles and photoconductive nanowires. Zhongjian et al, prepared 2D structure of crystalline tellurium layers with covalent Te‒Te bonds in their intrachain and Van der Waals forces in their interchains[
 
] offering desirable photoresponse and photoelectrochemical properties under simulated lights at different wavelengths (350 to 475 nm). Thereby, biomedical applications of 2D nTe have received attention due its potential electronic and optoelectronic properties. Ultrathin tellurene nanosheets modified with polyethylene glycol (nTeNS‐PEG) were fabricated for combined cancer thermo‐chemotherapy.[
 
] nTeNS‐PEG's large‐surface‐area efficiently generated local hyperthermia with a high drug loading capacity (around 160%) and significant PTCE of ∼55% under laser irradiation at 808 nm. These nanosheets induce TME‐triggered drug release, showing the combined effect of the chemotherapeutic drug and photothermal nanosheets in chemo/photothermal cancer nanomedicine. Furthermore, the use of biocompatible 2D tellurium‐based sheets was suggested for PAI‐guided photodynamic therapy[
 
] by generating ROS under light irradiation of around 670 nm for multispectral optoacoustic tomography. nTe nanosheets are efficient plasmonic biosensors and reported to significantly detect SARS‐CoV‐2 virus.[
 , 
]

Tellurium nanoparticles (Te‐NPs) exhibit antioxidant, antimicrobial, cytotoxic and photothermal properties.[
 
] Furthermore, numerous selenium and tellurium nano‐derivatives are used in research for their anti‐proliferative and antioxidant roles to serve as chemotherapeutic agents.[
 , , 
] Te‐NPs enhance the photothermal properties of selenium and together, they, generate ROS, mimic pro‐oxidant roles, boost antioxidant mechanisms, induce apoptosis and stimulate the immune response in inflammation. In detail, activated by photothermally, radiation or chemical stimulation in the tumor site, these nanocomposites inhibit metastatic tumor cell proliferation in local and distant sites by the stimulation of immune response and exhibiting selective toxicity to cancer cells, and prevents the formation of malignant tissues.[
 
] Immunomodulatory selenium‐tellurium derivatives are used in tropical formulations to treat dermatitis, by effectively inhibiting cysteine proteases,[
 
] modulating the corticosterone levels in the treatment of anxiety‐related disorders and extend their neuroprotective role by inhibiting integrin avβ3 to modulate anxiety regulating pathways.[
 
] Te‐NPs regulate the redox metabolism in oxidative stress conditions by scavenging H2O2, OH. radicals and inducing apoptosis in the treatment of colon cancer.[
 
] Embedding antioxidant Te‐NPs into electrospun fibers of polycaprolactone/gelatin, enhanced its wound healing properties, by targeting inflammation at the wounded site, leading to dose‐dependent collagen formation and modulation of redox enzymes (GSH, CAT, malondialdehyde (MDA)). This study shows the combinational immunomodulatory and tissue regenerative role of antioxidant Te‐based nanofibers.[
 
]

Tellurium nanowires (Te‐NWs) act as inorganic prodrug to mediate precise tumor ablation, by generating TeO6
6− molecules upon interacting with intracellular H2O2, which decreases intracellular GSH and consequently increasing ROS. Te‐NWs selectively target tumor cells by apoptosis and caspase‐independent autophagy without inducing host toxicity. After eliciting its immunomodulatory antitumor effects, Te‐NWs are easily cleared from the body by dissociating into smaller molecules.[
 
] Further, hydrophilic ultra‐thin Te‐NWs with well‐defined mesostructures possessed extraordinary reversible photoelectric properties enhancing its potential in photothermal cancer therapy.[
 
] Functionalized tellurium nanorods with polysaccharide‐protein complex were developed using the facile one‐pot hydrothermal synthetic system, exhibited remarkable hemocompatibility, low toxicity to normal cells and induced a dose‐dependent mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis by targeting intracellular ROS. The functionalized nanorods scavenged the free radicals: 2,2‐diphenyl‐1‐picrylhydrazylhydrate (DPPH) and 2,2′‐azinobis‐(3‐ethylbenzothiazoline‐6‐sulfonic acid radical cation (ABTS.+) exhibiting its immunomodulatory antioxidant properties.[
 
] In summary,, tellurium in different nanoforms of holds promise in various therapeutics.
Together with sulfur and selenium, these 2D chalcogens exhibit significant immunomodulatory effects owing to its role in redox modulation, photothermal, antimicrobial and anti‐inflammatory properties.

2.5

## Role of Group‐17 & 18 Elements in Fabricating Immunomodulatory 2D Biomaterials
The halogen group consist of fluorine (F), chlorine (Cl), bromine (Br), iodine (I), and astatine (At) and is known for its high reactivity, due to 7 valence electrons in its structure that needs only 1 more to complete its octet. Except for astatine, all the elements are non‐metallic and non‐radioactive. The halogen elements are mostly employed for synthesis processing, surface modification, and chemistry manipulation of various nanomaterials. For instance, fluoride‐based acids and salts are used in the etching of “A” from the MAX phase in the synthesis of 2D MXenes, affecting the surface termination and physiochemical properties of resultant MXenes. The group‐18, “noble gas” elements include helium (He), neon (Ne), argon (Ar), krypton (Kr), xenon (Xe), radon (Rn), and oganesson (Og), and are inert/non‐reactive due to full valence electron structure. These noble‐gas elements are mostly colourless, odourless, tasteless and non‐flammable making them useful applications requiring stable environment, such as fabrication, manipulation, and functionalization processes of synthesis of other 2D biomaterials. While halogens and noble gases contribute to the fabrication and functionalization of 2D nanomaterials, their direct applications as immunoengineered nanomaterials are rarely reported and primarily explored in theoretical and computational studies.

3

## Conclusions and Future Prospects
This review comprehensively reports the group‐wise element by element exploration of the periodic table in the field of immunoengineering and its allied applications. The chemical diversity of the elements of the periodic table opens new avenues to utilize the existing research for the development of new innovative strategies. Hence, this review helps in the identification of the elements that extend its immunomodulatory role by its interaction with immune cells, induction of ROS/RNS and modulation of oxidative stress. This review also covers the elements that may have a potential role in the future to be used as viable immunomodulatory agents owing to their theranostic applications. So far, the transition metals in groups 3 to 12 have been extensively explored as 2D nanomaterials and studied for their immunomodulatory roles. As discussed, the 2D layered nanomaterials composed of the periodic chemical elements significantly outperform their thicker counterparts in the interms of physicochemical and biological properties for biomedical applications. Besides, the family of 2D nanomaterials beyond graphene have been significantly expanded over the past decade with the development of a large set of transition‐metal carbonatites MXenes, transition‐metal dichalcogenides, ultrathin organic crystals, metal‐organic frameworks, metal oxides, post‐transition metal chalcogenides, and mono‐elemental Xenes. These materials have garnered consistent attention to be used as newer nano‐agents for antimicrobial, anticancer, immunomodulatory, targeted delivery, and tissue engineering applications. More recently, smart immunoengineered nanosystems based on these biomaterials have been considered promising strategies towards the treatment of various inflammatory and infectious diseases including COVID‐19 infection.
Thus, in this review we have comprehensively discussed the advances in the preparation, physicochemical properties, and bio‐applications of 2D immunomodulatory materials to understand their mechanisms to interact with the immune cells. We have thoroughly evaluated and studied the immunomodulatory role of each element of the periodic table and categorized them based on their position in the periodic table and reported applications in a group‐wise fashion. To expand the scope of our work, we also discussed other biomedical applications of 2D materials for light‐activated cancer therapy and combined chemotherapy and summarized their representative biocompatibility in vitro and in vivo. It presents a new design of the periodic table by focusing on immunomodulatory elements and derived 2D biomaterials with a focus on immunoengineering mechanisms. This work will also pave the way towards the construction of new mono, hybrid, and composite nanosystems with tunable immunomodulatory properties for nanomedicine applications.

## Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Author Contributions
The study was conceptualized and designed by Alireza Rafieerad, Ahmad Amiri, Leena Regi Saleth and Sanjiv Dhingra. Alireza Rafieerad, Leena Regi Saleth, Soofia Khanahmadi, Keshav N Alagarsamy and Sanjiv Dhingra drafted the manuscript and designed Figures  and  . All authors have read and approved the final version of this comprehensive review manuscript.

## Acknowledgements
A. R. and L. R. S. These authors are co‐first authors. This work was supported by funding from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR, #PJT178254) and Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC, RGPIN‐2021‐03951).

Alireza Rafieerad is a visiting research scientist at Goethe University Frankfurt. Before that, he held a senior postdoctoral fellow position for over five years at the Canada‐Italy tissue engineering laboratory at St. Boniface Research Centre, University Manitoba, Canada. He is an awardee of the Marie‐Skłodowska‐Curie Seal‐Of‐Excellence certificate associated with the EU‐Horizon program. His research focuses on designing and developing advanced low‐dimensional biomaterials for biomedical and biotechnological applications. His postdoctoral studies have actively contributed to advancing the field of nano‐immunoengineering by delving into the MXenes’ impact as novel‐promising approaches for treating specific inflammatory diseases caused by the host immune responses post‐transplantation.
 
Leena Regi Saleth is pursuing her PhD at the University of Manitoba under the supervision of Dr. Sanjiv Dhingra. She earned her bachelor's and master's degrees in biotechnology in India, where she developed a strong foundation in biomaterials for tissue engineering. Building on this knowledge, she is now committed to developing innovative solutions in cardiac tissue engineering at the St. Boniface Hospital Research Center, Winnipeg, Canada. Her current research is centered on modifying the surface properties of MXenes for immunomodulatory applications, exploring innovative nanomaterial‐mediated immunomodulatory strategies to advance the field of cardiac regenerative medicine.
 
Sanjiv Dhingra is a faculty member and Director of the Canada Italy Tissue Engineering Program at the St. Boniface Hospital, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada. He is also affiliated with the Regenerative Medicine Program and the Centre for Biomedical Engineering of the University of Manitoba. His research interests are focused on stem cell and MXene‐based regenerative therapies and cardiac tissue engineering. Further, his laboratory is currently funded by multiple agencies including Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Natural Science and Engineering Council of Canada (NSERC), and CFI, allowing him to bring over 5M dollars to his lab in 5 years.