pmcACS NanoACS Nano822acssdnnACS Nano1936-08511936-086Xpmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC11803921PMC11803921.111803921118039213982319910.1021/acsnano.4c095661ReviewTransforming Medicine:
Cutting-Edge Applications of
Nanoscale Materials in Drug Delivery
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4698-6832TenchovRumiana HughesKevin J. GanesanMagesh https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8476-0036IyerKavita A. RalhanKrittika https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5955-9595Lotti DiazLeilani M. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6965-975XBirdRobert E. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3519-359XIvanovJulian M. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6711-369XZhouQiongqiong Angela †CAS,
a division of the American Chemical Society, Columbus, Ohio 43210, United States‡ACS
International India Pvt. Ltd., Pune 411044, India*Email: qzhou@cas.org.170120250402202519448162240114038160720242712202423122024070220250802202511022025© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2025The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
Since their inception in the early 1960s, the development
and use
of nanoscale materials have progressed tremendously, and their roles
in diverse fields ranging from human health to energy and electronics
are undeniable. The application of nanotechnology inventions has revolutionized
many aspects of everyday life including various medical applications
and specifically drug delivery systems, maximizing the therapeutic
efficacy of the contained drugs by means of bioavailability enhancement
or minimization of adverse effects. In this review, we utilize the
CAS Content Collection, a vast repository of scientific information
extracted from journal and patent publications, to analyze trends
in nanoscience research relevant to drug delivery in an effort to
provide a comprehensive and detailed picture of the use of nanotechnology
in this field. We examine the publication landscape in the area to
provide insights into current knowledge advances and developments.
We review the major classes of nanosized drug delivery systems, their
delivery routes, and targeted diseases. We outline the most discussed
concepts and assess the advantages of various nanocarriers. The objective
of this review is to provide a broad overview of the evolving landscape
of current knowledge regarding nanosized drug delivery systems, to
outline challenges, and to evaluate growth opportunities. The merit
of the review stems from the extensive, wide-ranging coverage of the
most up-to-date scientific information, allowing unmatched breadth
of landscape analysis and in-depth insights.

nanocarrierdrug deliverynanoparticlenanocrystalnanoemulsionnanotubemicelleexosomepmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9nn4c09566document-id-new-14nn4c09566ccc-price

## Introduction
The development and use of nanotechnology
have grown substantially
in the past decades, gaining impressive momentum. The application
of nanotechnology inventions or products has revolutionized many aspects
of everyday life including various medical applications and specifically
drug delivery systems (DDSs), maximizing the therapeutic efficacy
of the contained drugs by means of bioavailability enhancement or
minimization of adverse effects.
Overall, drug delivery has
been a complex challenge, often impeded
by the limited solubility, stability, and bioavailability of many
therapeutic agents. These constraints have motivated a widespread
quest to find more efficient ways to deliver drugs to their intended
targets. Among the transformative advancements in drug delivery technologies,
nanosized DDSs (nano-DDSs) have emerged as a formidable force in the
world of pharmaceutical science and practice offering a dynamic range
of solutions that transcend traditional pharmaceutical boundaries.
Typically, nanosized objects contain a small number of atoms or
molecules, a significant part of which are located on their surface.
Therefore, while the characteristics of macrosystems are determined
by their bulk properties, for nanosystems, the surface effects are
dominant. Unlike macrosystems, the properties of which generally do
not depend on their size, the properties of the nanosized systems
are essentially dependent on their size. As a result, nanoscale particles
exhibit specific structural, chemical, mechanical, magnetic, electrical,
and biological properties, which are often of significant value in
their applications as DDSs. Prominent characteristics of the nanosized
DDSs are their high surface area/volume ratio, their chemical and
geometric tunability, and their ability to interact with biomolecules
in order to facilitate uptake across the cell membrane. The large
surface area promotes high affinity for drugs and small molecules,
such as ligands or antibodies, to bind and adsorb, facilitating targeting
and controlled release.
Due to the advantage of their size,
nanoscale systems have been
demonstrated to be efficient DDSs and may be useful for encapsulating
drugs, enabling more precise targeting with a controlled release.
Their use may address some of the most pressing challenges in drug
delivery, such as solubilizing poorly water-soluble drugs, protecting
labile drugs from degradation, and delivering drugs selectively to
disease sites. Nanosized structures stay in blood circulation for
a prolonged time, allowing the sustained release of incorporated drugs.
Thus, they cause fewer plasma fluctuations with reduced adverse effects. Being nanosized, these structures penetrate tissue,
facilitate easy uptake of the drug by cells, enable efficient drug
delivery, and ensure activity at the targeted location. The uptake
of nanostructures by cells is much higher than that of large particles. , Hence, they directly interact to treat diseased cells with improved
efficiency and reduced side effects. Modifying or functionalizing
nanoparticles to deliver drugs through the blood–brain barrier
for targeting brain tumors has been one superb outcome of medical
nanotechnology. Furthermore, due to their
size, shape, and functionality, nanoparticle systems are crucial components
of DNA delivery vectors. , They can penetrate deep
into tissues and are absorbed by the cells efficiently. Moreover, nanoparticles have widened the scope
of pharmacokinetics for insoluble drugs.
In this review, we
utilize the CAS Content Collection, a vast repository
of scientific information extracted from journal and patent publications,
to analyze trends in nanoscience research relevant to DDSs in an
effort to provide a comprehensive and detailed picture of the use
of nanotechnology in this field. We examine the publication landscape
in the area in an effort to provide insights into advances and developments
in current knowledge. We review the major classes of nanosized DDSs,
their delivery routes and targeted diseases. We outline the most discussed
concepts and assess the advantages of the various nanocarriers. The
objective of this review is to provide a broad overview of the evolving
landscape of current knowledge regarding nanosized DDSs, to outline
challenges, and to evaluate growth opportunities, in order to further
efforts in solving the problems that remain. The merit of the review
stems from the extensive, wide-ranging coverage of the most up-to-date
scientific information, allowing unmatched breadth of landscape analysis
and in-depth insights.
This review is part of a series of articles
based on the CAS Content
Collection aimed to identify emerging topics in the field of nanotechnology.
This involves understanding trends, such as the growth of certain
topics over time, as well as establishing relationships between emerging
topics. We achieved this by using a host of strategies including a
quantitative natural language processing (NLP) approach to identify
multiple emerging topics and subtopics across three major categories,
materials, applications, and properties, by surveying over 3 million
publications in the nanoscience landscape. This wealth of information
has been condensed into several conceptual mind maps and other graphs,
which will be published separately, providing metrics related to the
growth of identified emerging concepts, grouping them into hierarchical
classes, and exploring the connections between them. Our extensive
analysis taking advantage of a NLP-based approach along with robust
CAS indexing provides valuable insights in the field that we hope
can help to inform and drive future research efforts.

## Advantages of Nanosized Drug Delivery Systems
The rationale
behind employing nano-DDSs lies in the numerous advantages
they offer compared to traditional drug delivery methods, which contribute
to improved therapeutic outcomes, reduced side effects, and enhanced
patient compliance. The advantages as well as certain disadvantages
of the nano-DDSs are summarized in .
 

## Key Nano-DDS Forms, Materials, and Applications
Since
its dawn, nanotechnology has become a focus and a vital part
of pharmaceutical science and has found numerous remarkable applications
in drug delivery. For example, the potential of liposomes as DDSs
was recognized almost immediately after their discovery in the 1960s. − The use of the term “nanoparticle” in the context
of drug delivery dates as far back as 1978. Continued interest resulting in extensive research and development
has led to a wide variety of nano-DDS forms. Analysis of >600,000
publications allowed identification of the nano-DDS forms, a few representative
examples of which are shown in A, and their trends, in terms of both growth in publications
( B) and distribution
of certain nano-DDS across subcategories ( C).
 

## Nanoparticles
Nanoparticles (NPs) are sub-micrometer-sized
colloidal particles with distinctively tunable properties, selectively
designed for specific applications. Pharmaceutical NPs constitute
currently the best explored, mature area of nano-DDSs, with the highest
number of published documents ( A). Nanoparticulate DDSs are intended to maximize drug
efficacy and minimize cytotoxicity. A particularly important design
feature of NPs for drug delivery is their surface functionalization
accomplished by bioconjugation or passive adsorption of molecules
onto the NP surface. Responsive biomaterials are powerful tools for
controlling treatments such as cancer immunotherapies by providing
precise control over the delivery and kinetics of therapeutic cargoes. Better efficacy and lower toxicity are often
achieved by functionalizing NP surfaces with ligands that improve
drug binding, suppress immune response, and afford targeted/controlled
release.
The composition of the NP is chosen with respect to
the target environment or anticipated effect. For example, biodegradable
NPs can be designed to degrade upon delivery, reducing their bioaccumulation
and toxicity. Metal NPs have optical
properties that allow for less invasive imaging techniques. , Plasmonic metal NPs are used as superior optically stable bioimaging
agents for the early diagnosis of diseases. The photothermal response
of NPs to optical stimulation can be exploited in tumor therapy. 
Polymeric NPs are currently
the most popular class
of NPs in drug delivery accounting for 32% of documents in the nano-DDS
data set in the CAS Content Collection ( C). They are beneficial for drug delivery
because they can be modulated with adequate physical properties, encapsulants,
and surface ligands; they can also be tailored to co-deliver multiple
therapeutic agents. Various stimuli-responsive
(e.g., enzyme-, pH-, and redox-responsive) polymers, including natural
and synthetic polymers, have been utilized as smart nanocarriers for
drug delivery. Redox-responsive polymeric nanohydrogels exhibiting
tissue-like mechanical properties and high porosity have been extensively
studied and shown to be effective in protecting payloads, including
protein drugs, gene therapeutics, and small-molecule drugs, in blood
circulation as part of a strategy for controlled release. The most commonly used natural polymers, polysaccharides,
include cellulose and its esters, chitosan, alginic acid/sodium alginate,
hyaluronic acid, dextran, and xanthan gum, while poly(ethylene glycol)
(PEG) and its copolymers such as poloxamines, poloxamers and also
polystyrene, poly(ethylene terephthalate), poly(methyl methacrylate),
poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP), polyacrylamide, poly(vinyl alcohol),
and polysorbates, as well as the biodegradable poly(lactic acid),
polycaprolactone, and poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid),
are preferred synthetic polymers. 
Lipid NPs( ) are widely
explored and used nanocarriers ( C), contributing to 24% of publications in the NP DDS
subset. Lipid-based NPs have been applied in drug delivery since the
discovery of liposomes, which are spherical vesicles with lipid bilayers
surrounding an aqueous core, in the 1960s. Subsequently they exhibited
several significant advancements: (i) with the introduction of PEGylation, which increased their circulation half-lives
further improving their efficiency; (ii)
with the discovery of the cationic/ionizable liposomes able to deliver
anionic nucleic acids; , (iii) with the development of
the solid lipid NPs (SLNs), consisting of solid lipids, and nanostructured
lipid carriers (NLCs), combining solid and liquid lipids, offering
enhanced drug-loading capacity and flexibility, higher stability,
and largely improved scalability. , A strong advantage
of lipid NP drug carriers is the fact that most of their components
are physiological lipids and excipients which are generally recognized
as safe (GRAS). They are superior to
other nano-DDSs in minimizing systemic toxicity while maintaining
adequate solubility and constitute a
common type of nanomedicines with regulatory approval. Lipid-based NPs can successfully deliver small
molecules as well as protein and nucleic acid therapies in
vivo to achieve remarkable activity. Their elegance lies
in their ability to overcome some of the most pressing challenges
in drug delivery: improving the solubility of poorly water-soluble
drugs, protecting labile compounds from degradation, and precisely
targeting disease sites within the body. , , , − Lipid NPs have a wide range of applications, including cancer therapy
(reducing systemic toxicity and enabling targeted delivery), infectious
disease treatment (improving drug stability and selective delivery
to infected tissues), vaccine delivery (enhancing immune responses),
targeting pulmonary endothelium for vascular repair after viral injury, precision treatment of viral pneumonia through
macrophage targeting, mRNA delivery to
the lungs carrying Cas9-based genetic editors, mRNA delivery to the bone microenvironment, and gene therapy (safe and efficient gene transfection). , They are employed also in the treatment of neurological disorders
(overcoming blood–brain barrier challenges), ophthalmic conditions
(enhancing drug retention in the eye), cardiovascular therapies (improving
drug solubility and controlled release), and more.
Inorganic
NPs provide an appropriate framework in
which multiple modules can be combined to give multifunctional capabilities.
Inorganic materials such as metals (gold, silver, iron, and others),
silica, calcium phosphate, and others ( A) have been used to prepare NPs for various
drug delivery and imaging applications. Metallic NP formulations are
particularly advantageous because of their potential for dense surface
functionalization and for optical or thermal based therapeutic and
diagnostic methods. Inorganic NPs have
distinctive physical, electrical, magnetic, and optical properties.
Particularly, plasmonic metal NPs (i.e., gold, silver, etc.) distinguish
themselves from other inorganic NPs based on their distinctive optical
property known as localized surface plasmon resonance , originating from photon confinement to a nanosize particle, which
property has been widely utilized for biological and medical applications. − Gold NPs, for example, have been fabricated into various forms including
nanospheres, nanorods, nanostars, nanoshells, and nanocages. , Gold NPs have oscillating free electrons at their surface endowing
them with photothermal properties. , They are also
easily functionalized, providing them with additional beneficial delivery
capacities. Iron oxide NPs are another
kind of metal NPs which make up the majority of US FDA-approved inorganic
nanomedicines. Magnetic NPs comprising
magnetite (Fe3O4) or maghemite (γ-Fe2O3) exhibit superparamagnetic properties at certain
nanosizes and have been successfully used in imaging, drug delivery,
and thermosensitive medications. , Other commonly
used inorganic NPs include mesoporous silica NPs, which have been
successfully applied for gene and drug delivery. , Magnetic iron oxide NPs. Iron oxide NPs
can generate heat when exposed to an alternating magnetic field, a
property that has been utilized to induce cell death and stimulate
an immune response in hyperthermia-based cancer treatment. Iron oxide NPs can also be used as contrast
agents for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), allowing for noninvasive
tracking of immune cell migration and infiltration into tumor sites.
In order to enhance their cellular uptake and effectiveness, these
NPs can be modified with a specific coating, can be conjugated to
drugs, proteins, enzymes, antibodies, or nucleotides, and can be directed
to an organ, tissue, or tumor site using an external magnetic field.
They can be also used in the development of dual-purpose probes for
the in vivo transfection of siRNA. 
Silver NPs known
for their antibacterial
activity, are also known to enhance the antitumor effects of anticancer
drugs in combination therapies, allowing use of lower doses to reduce
cytotoxic effects and increase efficacy. They can thus operate as direct anticancer agents, as well as delivery
platforms of various cytotoxic drugs or enhance the anticancer performance
of combinational partners upon chemo- or radiotherapy. Silver NPs can exhibit a plasmon resonance effect
and generate heat when exposed to specific wavelengths of incident
light. This property can be harnessed
for photothermal therapy, where the localized heat generated by the
NPs can selectively damage cancer cells and stimulate immune response.
The plasmonic properties can be varied by changing the composition,
size, and shape of the metallic NPs which can affect the collective
oscillation of free electrons at their localized surface plasmon resonance
wavelengths when irradiated with resonant light over most visible
and NIR regions. , Endowed with a tunable optical
response, the NPs can be utilized as highly bright reporter molecules,
effective thermal absorbers, and nanoscale antenna, via modulating
the local electromagnetic field to detect changes in the environment. 
Gold NPs. Possessing multifunctional therapeutic
modalities, gold NPs can be used as targeted delivery systems for
vaccines, nucleic acids, and immune antibodies, as theranostic agents,
and in cancer therapy. They have also been successfully applied in
medical imaging, such as radiotherapy, magnetic resonance angiography,
and photoacoustic imaging. Gold nanostructures including NPs, nanorods,
nanocages, etc., are easily synthesizable in diverse shapes and sizes
through various chemical, physical, or biological methods, which empowers
their manageability, since even minor modifications of their size
and shape can produce significant alterations in their functional
properties including biodistribution, metabolism, cytotoxicity, and
immunogenicity. , Similar to silver NPs, gold
NPs can be utilized in photothermal therapy via localized surface
plasmon resonance and are considered an excellent biomedical diagnostic
tool. − Recent progress in nanotechnology has afforded plasmonic gold NPs
with tunable optical properties by manipulating parameters such as
size, shape, and composition, which has attracted much interest for
biomedical applications, especially for diagnostic imaging and drug
delivery. − A noteworthy application of gold and other inorganic NPs is in the
so-called “spherical nucleic acids”: densely packed and highly oriented arrangements of linear
nucleic acids forming a shell on an inorganic NP core (gold in the
initial version ) in a three-dimensional,
spherical geometry. Silver, iron oxide,
silica, and semiconductor materials have also been used as inorganic
cores in later versions of the spherical nucleic acids. − Intracellular gene regulation, immunotherapy agents, and intracellular
probes are among the suggested applications of these exotic nanostructures. − 
Silica NPs. Mesoporous
silica exhibits
high porosity, appropriate biocompatibility, and facile surface functionalization.
Silica NPs can be engineered to various shapes, sizes, and surface
properties, making them versatile tools for targeted drug delivery,
imaging, and immunomodulation. After
the introduction of a sub-micrometer mesoporous silica termed MCM-41 and its successful application as a nanocarrier, it has been regarded as a promising DDS. Moreover, mesoporous silica exhibits a self-adjuvant
property, significantly enhancing anticancer immunity without additional
immunomodulators. Mesoporous silica
has emerged as a prospective nanocarrier for cancer vaccines as well, imparting antitumor effect through dual loading
of antigen and adjuvant on a single platform. 

## Nanocrystals
Certain drugs are highly insoluble, not
only in aqueous solvents but also in lipids or oils due to their strong
crystalline lattice energy. They are frequently formulated as nanocrystals,
since the reduction in particle size through nanonization can overcome
or improve solubility issues. Such nanocrystalline drug technology
involves the reduction in the bulk size of the drug particles down
to the nanosize range, thus altering their physicochemical properties,
including enhancing drug bioavailability. Nanocrystals are carrier-free drug NPs surrounded by stabilizers
such as polymers or surfactants and suspended in aqueous medium. Among the polymeric stabilizers, the most widely
used are poloxamers (e.g., Pluronic F68, Pluronic F127), poly(vinyl
alcohol), PVP, and cellulose derivatives (hydroxypropyl methylcellulose,
hydroxypropyl cellulose). Among surfactants, Tween 80, sodium lauryl
sulfate, and others, have been widely used. , Due to high drug loading, nanocrystals exhibit effective therapeutic
concentration to produce desirable pharmacological action. In addition
to therapy, nanocrystal technology can be applied also in diagnostics. − Examples of nanocrystalline drugs on the market include Rapamune
(Wyeth), an mTOR inhibitor immunosuppressant especially useful in
preventing transplant rejection; Emend (Merck), preventing nausea
and vomiting caused by certain anticancer chemotherapy medicines;
Tricor (Abbott) and Triglide (Sciele Pharma), both lowering cholesterol
and triglyceride levels in blood; and Megace ES (Par Pharmaceutical),
used to increase appetite and prevent weight loss in patients with
AIDS. 

## Nanoemulsions
Emulsions are liquid–liquid dispersions
with one liquid phase dispersed in the other liquid phase as small
droplets with the droplets being nanosized in the case of nanoemulsions.
Surfactants play a critical role in producing and stabilizing nanoemulsions
by residing at the interface between the two immiscible phases. Nanoemulsions can be easily produced at a large
scale using industrial methods including high-pressure homogenization
and ultrasonication. Because of their small size and easily dispersible
components with different hydrophobicity (e.g., hydrophobic drugs
in the dispersed oil phase and hydrophilic proteins in the continuous
aqueous phase), they are considered promising drug delivery vehicles
to deliver hydrophobic drugs, and have been used as adjuvants for
vaccines, demonstrating their clinical significance. − 

## Nanotubes
Carbon nanotubes are successful drug and
gene delivery platforms that can be functionalized with a variety
of biomolecules, including antibodies, proteins, or nucleic acids,
allowing for specific payload targeting particular tissues, organs,
or cells. Carbon nanotubes are easily internalized by cells through
passive and endocytosis-independent mechanisms, delivering drugs to
the cytoplasm or nucleus. Nanotubes maintain a perpendicular position
with respect to the cell membrane during uptake, perforating and diffusing
through the lipid bilayer to move into the cytoplasm. Carbon nanotubes are large molecules, consisting
of a repeating pattern of hexagonally arranged hybridized carbon atoms
wrapped into a cylinder approximately 2.5–100 nm in diameter.
Carbon nanotubes can be single-walled or multiwalled depending on
the number of layered carbon sheets in their structure. 
Carbon nanotubes have been used as carriers
of anticancer drugs, such as docetaxel, doxorubicin, methotrexate,
paclitaxel, gemcitabine, anti-inflammatory drugs, osteogenic dexamethasone,
steroids, and others. The distinctive optical properties of carbon
nanotubes are the reason for their use in phototherapy. The effortless surface functionalization of
carbon nanotubes has motivated their use in gene delivery as delivery
vectors for plasmid DNA (pDNA), micro-RNA (miRNA), and small interfering
RNA (siRNA). Despite great promise, carbon nanotubes possess a few
disadvantages such as poor aqueous solubility and high cost as well
as sustained and substantial concerns regarding their biodegradability
with efforts being made to minimize these drawbacks. , 

## Micelles
Micelles are colloidal systems formed by the
self-assembly of amphiphilic molecules in aqueous media at concentrations
above their critical micelle concentration. They comprise a hydrophobic
core and a hydrophilic shell. The most widely used amphiphiles are
lipids or polymers; thus the resultant micelles are either lipid micelles,
polymeric micelles, or lipid–polymeric hybrid micelles. Polymeric micelles are made of amphiphilic block copolymers
that self-assemble to form a core–shell structure in aqueous
solution. The hydrophobic core can be loaded with hydrophobic drugs
such as camptothecin, docetaxel, and paclitaxel, while the hydrophilic
shell makes the whole system soluble in water and stabilizes the core. The most commonly used polymers for micelle formation
are amphiphilic diblock copolymers such as polystyrene–PEG
and triblock copolymers such as poloxamers, with graft and ionic copolymers
(e.g., PEG–poly(ε-caprolactone)-g-polyethylenimine)
used in some circumstances. − The hydrophilic part is most often composed of PEG, but other polymers
such as PVP, poly(acryloylmorpholine), or poly(trimethylene carbonate)
have been also exploited; the hydrophobic segment can be made up of
poly(propylene oxide), polyesters such as poly(ε-caprolactone),
or homopolymers and copolymers of glycolic and lactic acids.
While liposomes have a lipid bilayer structure encapsulating an aqueous
moiety, lipid micelles consist of a monolayer with the
lipophilic chains forming the inner core and the hydrophilic heads
exposed to the aqueous environment. The nanoscale dimensions and the
hydrophilic shell protect them from elimination by the reticuloendothelial
system, thereby increasing their circulation time and ability to deliver
drugs to the targets. Hybrid micelles prepared from lipid–polymer conjugates comprising water-soluble
polymers, such as PEG or PVP, conjugated with phospholipids or long-chain
fatty acids have been used to deliver various poorly soluble anticancer
agents. For example, micelles formed
by conjugates of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) with PEG of various
molecular weights, e.g., PEG750–PE, PEG2000–PE, and
PEG5000–PE, have been reported to accumulate efficiently in
tumors. 

## Natural Product-Based Nano-DDSs
The class of natural
product-based nano-DDSs is the fastest growing nano-DDS in the CAS
Content Collection ( B).
Chitosan exhibits mucoadhesive properties and has
been used to operate at tight epithelial junctions. Chitosan-based
nanomaterials are widely used for sustained drug release systems for
various types of epithelia, including intestinal, nasal, buccal, ocular,
and pulmonary. − Alginate is another biopolymer (polysaccharide) frequently used
in drug delivery. Alginate is terminally substituted with carboxylate
groups, rendering it anionic and imparting stronger mucoadhesion than
that of neutral or cationic mucoadhesive polymers. , Xanthan gum is a high MW polyanionic heteropolysaccharide with good
bioadhesive properties, produced by Xanthomonas campestris. It is widely used as a pharmaceutical excipient since it is considered
nontoxic and nonirritating. Cellulose
and its derivatives are extensively used in DDSs mainly for modification
of the solubility and gelation of drugs, resulting in control of their
release profile. − , , 
The combined use of nanotechnology along with the extreme
variety
of bioactive natural compounds is attractive, and has been growing
very rapidly in recent decades. Natural
products have been used as medicines since ancient times. Nowadays,
about 35% of the pharmaceutical compounds are either from natural
products or their derivatives and analogs, mainly including plant
(25%), microbial (13%), and animal (3%) sources. Natural compounds have been widely studied in curing diseases
owing to their various activities, such as inducing tumor-suppressing
autophagy and antimicrobial properties. For example, autophagy has
been exhibited by curcumin and caffeine, and antimicrobial effects have been shown by cinnamaldehyde, carvacrol,
curcumin, and eugenol. , Application of nanotechnologies
gave rise to substantial enhancement of their properties, such as
bioavailability, targeting, and controlled release. Thus, thymoquinone,
a bioactive compound in Nigella sativa, exhibited
a 6-fold increase in bioavailability after encapsulation in a lipid
nanocarrier in comparison to free thymoquinone. It also improved its pharmacokinetic characteristics, thus
accomplishing better therapeutic effects.

## Quantum Dots
Quantum dots are nanometer-sized crystalline
semiconductor particles with distinctive fluorescence properties,
commonly made of materials such as lead sulfide, lead selenide, cadmium
selenide, cadmium sulfide, cadmium telluride, indium arsenide, and
indium phosphide. − They can also take the form of core–shell structures incorporating
two semiconductor materials. They are used primarily in imaging applications
and in vivo diagnostics. , Due to their magnetic, radioactive, or plasmonic properties, these
inorganic NPs are particularly suited for applications such as diagnostics,
imaging, and photothermal therapies. Most have good biocompatibility
and stability and fill niche applications that require properties
unattainable by organic materials. For their discovery and development
of quantum dots, Bawendi, Brus, and Ekimov were awarded the Nobel
prize in Chemistry in 2023. , However, quantum dots
are limited in their clinical application by low solubility and toxicity
concerns, especially in formulations using heavy metals. , 

## Core–Shell NPs
Core–shell NPs are nanostructures
in which the core acts as a reservoir for drugs, including small molecules,
proteins, nucleic acid therapeutics (DNA, siRNA, or oligonucleotides),
or molecular imaging probes, while the shell protects the cargo from
the environment. − This distinct architecture offers advantages
such as tunable physicochemical properties, improved biocompatibility
and permeability, target-specific drug delivery, and multidrug delivery.
For example, polymer/liposome composite systems with a core/shell
structure have been designed, with a lipid vesicle core utilized as
a delivery system for small molecules and proteins; NPs with reverse
geometry, having polymeric cores, have been also engineered. , , Another intriguing example of
core–shell NPs are the spherical nucleic acids comprising an oligonucleotide shell arranged
on an inorganic NP core, mentioned above.

## Biomimetics
Development of NPs with intrinsic characteristics
similar to circulatory cells such as leukocytes and platelets for
use as biomimetic DDSs has been intended to solve the issues of conventional
DDSs. Specifically, synthetic biomimetic NPs coated with cellular
membranes have been engineered and shown able to cross the endothelial
layer of the inflamed vessels and permeate into tumor tissue mimicking
the properties of leukocytes, making it possible to securely deliver
drugs to diseased sites. Thus, biomimetic
DDSs, developed by directly utilizing or mimicking biological structures
and processes, provide promising approaches for overcoming biological
barriers and specifically the blood–brain barrier for brain
drug delivery. , 

## Exosomes
Superior innate stability, low immunogenicity,
biocompatibility, and excellent capacity for membrane penetration
allow exosomes to be valuable natural nanocarriers for efficient drug
delivery. As important mediators of
intercellular communications, exosomes are increasingly gaining interest
in the context of cancer immunotherapy. , Exosomes, either tumor-derived, comprising tumor-associated antigens,
or derived from dendritic cells presenting antigens, can trigger immune
activation and therefore can be used in developing anticancer vaccines. Moreover, tumor-derived exosomes hold information
from primary cells; thus they can activate CD8 T-cells, which offer
distinct therapeutic approaches for developing cancer vaccines. − Exosomes participate in the formation of the cancer immunosuppressive
microenvironment; thus, tumor exosome production control might be
an effective treatment strategy. Exosomes also play a key role in
PD-1/PD-L1 immune checkpoint inhibitor treatment.

## Major Material Classes, Top Substances, and Annual Trends
Proteins/peptides are the largest class of substances related to
nano-DDSs, both as drugs and as drug carriers ( A). Natural biomolecules, such as proteins,
are commonly used in pharmaceutical nanoformulations because of their
safety. Protein nanocarriers offer significant advantages, such as
biocompatibility, biodegradability, environmental sustainability,
cost efficiency, and availability at larger scales. Furthermore, the
preparation procedures and the encapsulation process can be carried
out under milder conditions not involving toxic chemicals or organic
solvents. Protein nanocarriers can be prepared using various proteins,
such as albumin, gelatins, collagens, keratins, silk fibroin, elastin,
lipoproteins, and ferritin proteins. , Plant proteins
such as maize zeins, soy protein, and wheat gliadin are also frequently
explored for various drug-delivery applications. 
 The number of protein/peptide drugs has significantly
increased
since the introduction of the first recombinant protein therapeutic,
which was human insulin. , Protein therapeutics
have several advantages over small-molecule drugs, such as higher
specificity, lower immunogenicity, and faster clinical development
and approval. The anticoagulant heparin, the antibiotics vancomycin
and bleomycin, along with the antibodies trastuzumab, bevacizumab,
cetuximab, pembrolizumab, rituximab, adalimumab, tocilizumab, alemtuzumab,
and ranibizumab are the most widely represented protein/peptide drugs
in the CAS Content Collection ( B).
Nucleic acid medicines, including DNA and
RNA (miRNA, siRNA, mRNA),
have recently shown themselves to be useful in treating a variety
of diseases. However, while nucleic
acid therapeutics can expand the range of treatable diseases, their
wide-ranging use is limited by multiple delivery challenges. First of all, nucleic acids need to cross multiple
biological membranes, cellular and intracellular, escape from endosomes,
and in some cases enter the nucleus. Second, nucleic acids encounter
various enzymes upon their delivery to the target cells, which may
degrade them or trigger immune response. , Third, nonspecific biodistribution to nontarget cells and tissues
can lead to low efficacy. In addition,
nucleic acids exhibit a strong negative charge, preventing their permeation
across cellular membranes. Thus, delivery vectors for transporting
these therapeutics to the desired location are needed. Beyond the physical barrier of the cellular
membrane, there are multiple systemic and intracellular challenges
that motivate the need for effective delivery vehicles. Nucleic acids are subject to endo- and exonucleases
that degrade them. Numerous strategies for the encapsulation or stabilization
of nucleic acids have been developed in order to achieve intracellular
delivery. Common carriers for nucleic acid remedies include cationic
polymers, cationic lipids, and cationic peptides. 
Polymeric nanocarriers are one of the most widely
used nano-DDSs
( C). PEG and its copolymers with poly(propylene
glycol) (poloxamers), PVP, and polystyrene are among the most common
nanocarrier constituents ( B). Natural polymers such as chitosan, dextrin, polysaccharides,
hyaluronic acid, poly(glycolic acid), poly(lactic acid), and their
copolymers, have also been widely used for polymeric DDSs. Synthetic
polymers such as poly(ethylenimine)s, dendritic polymers, and biodegradable
and bioabsorbable polymers have been also discussed for polymeric
drug delivery. Cationic polymers form complexes with nucleic acids
by means of electrostatic interaction and create a net positive charge
of the nanocarriers, which facilitates cell attachment, internalization,
and endosomal escape. The structures
of cationic polymers are diverse, including linear polymers such as
chitosan and linear poly(ethylenimine), branched polymers such as
branched poly(ethylenimine), circle-like polymers such as cyclodextrin,
cross-linked poly(amino acids), and dendrimers. 
Lipid NPs, one of the widely applied drug nanocarriers,
include
various lipid constituents, with their compositions determined by
the intended morphology and application. Along with the most common
constituents, the phospholipids and cholesterol, frequent components
of lipid NPs include cationic ionizable lipids and PEG–lipid
conjugates (PEG-lipids), as well as various other components. Cholesterol is the lipid component used in the
largest number of nano-DDS-related documents in the CAS Content Collection
( C). Phospholipids
such as phosphatidylcholines, phosphatidylethanolamines, phosphatidylglycerols,
and phosphatidylserines, are the most widely used lipid classes. Preferred
phospholipid species with respect to their hydrocarbon chains include
saturated dimyristoyl, dipalmitoyl, and distearoyl chains, as well
as unsaturated dioleoyl chains. Phospholipids
from natural sources, such as soya phospholipids and egg phosphatidylcholines,
have also been used often in lipid NP formulations. Since the discovery
that PEG–lipid conjugates can significantly increase circulatory
half-lives in sterically stabilized “stealth” liposomes,
PEG-lipids have also been widely used in pharmaceutical lipid NP
formulations.
Cationic lipid NPs, comprising stable complexes
between synthetic
cationic lipids and anionic nucleic acids, represent the most widely
used nonviral delivery system for nucleic acid drugs. Cationic lipids
are the most commonly used carriers for nucleic acid delivery. A large
number of cationic (ionizable) lipid amphiphiles have been designed,
synthesized and tested as nucleic acid carriers since the introduction
of N-[1-(2,3-dioleoyloxy)propyl]-N,N,N-trimethylammonium (DOTMA). Commonly used cationic lipids for nucleic acid
delivery include various amine derivatives such as DOGS and DC-Chol,
quaternary ammonium compounds such as DOTMA, DOTAP, DORIE, and DMRIE,
cationic phosphatidylcholines such as EDOPC and EDMPC, combinations
of amines such as DOSPA and GAP-DLRIE, and amidinium salts such as
Vectamidine. − Of particular note are the branched-chain cationic lipids used in
the recent mRNA COVID-19 vaccines, ALC-0315 and SM-102. − 
A selection of approved and globally marketed nanotechnology-based
drug formulations is summarized in .
 

## Targeted Diseases and Their Correlation to DDSs
Development of nanotechnology
in nanomedicine is taking place at
a rapid pace. The application of nanomaterials ranges from nanosilver
for antibacterial use to early diagnosis and treatments of numerous
severe diseases such as cancer, immune-related diseases, genetic disorders,
infections, inflammation, and many others ( A). During the last decades, a tremendous
amount of research has evaluated diagnostic and therapeutic applications
of nanotechnology, some of which have already been approved or have
reached advanced clinical trials.
 Cancer is a major global health threat,
causing millions
of fatalities yearly. Nano-DDSs can
be engineered to selectively accumulate in tumor tissues, allowing
for more precise cancer treatment. Specific targeting of cancer cells
is an essential characteristic of nanocarriers for drug delivery,
as it offers a way to attack tumors with large doses of drugs, thus
augmenting therapeutic efficacy, while protecting normal cells from
cytotoxicity and avoiding the harmful side effects that often accompany
chemotherapy to the detriment of patients. Passive targeting of nano-DDSs
is mainly accomplished by the enhanced permeability and retention
(EPR) phenomenon, which exploits the enhanced vascular permeability
and weakened lymphatic drainage of cancer cells and enables nanocarriers
to target cancer cells passively. Active targeting is attained by
interaction between ligands and cellular receptors. Specific receptors
on cancer cells include transferrin receptors, folate receptors, glycoproteins
(e.g., lectin), and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). The earliest nanoformulation, approved by the
US FDA in 1995, is the anticancer liposomal formulation Doxil, designed
to improve the pharmacokinetics and biodistribution of the anthracycline
drug doxorubicin. Multiple other nanomaterial-based
pharmaceuticals have received approval and have been successfully
used since then for cancer treatment. , , 
Cancer vaccines, a new cutting-edge approach
in immunotherapy,
are designed to enhance the immune response against cancer. − Nano-DDSs play a crucial role in optimizing these vaccines by improving
delivery precision, stability, and the ability to activate immune
cells more efficiently. Gardasil and Cervarix are both vaccines that
protect against human papillomavirus (HPV) types 16 and 18, common
sexually transmitted infectious agents, which are responsible for
most HPV-caused cancers such as cervical, anal, throat, and other
cancers. , Hepatitis B vaccine prevents
liver cancer, which can be caused by hepatitis B virus (HBV). This
preventive vaccine protects against HBV infection, thereby lowering
the risk of chronic liver disease and hepatocellular carcinoma. Provenge (Sipuleucel-T) is a therapeutic cancer
vaccine that uses the patient’s own dendritic cells and was
approved in 2010 for castration-resistant prostate cancer. mRNA cancer vaccines are personalized to each
individual based on their tumor’s molecular features. , They work by training the immune system to recognize and fight cancer
cells. Clinical trials are testing mRNA vaccines for various types
of cancers including pancreatic cancer, colorectal cancer, melanoma,
and advanced head and neck cancer. ECI-006 is a combination mRNA cancer
vaccine that combines mRNA encoding dendritic cell activation molecules
with mRNA encoding tumor-associated antigens. Other promising cancer vaccines include adoptive T-cell
transfer and allogeneic whole cell vaccines. , 
Another complementary nanotechnology-based approach for the
treatment
of cancer is therapeutic hyperthermia, a technique in which the body
temperature is locally raised above the normal level. , The response of cancer cells to radiation and chemotherapy can be
augmented by increasing the temperature within tumors. NPs are applied to induce localized heating
within tumors. Hyperthermia can be induced by either laser radiation
or an applied magnetic field. Magnetic NPs can be used as heating
mediators. The specific optical properties
of noble metal NPs have been used for inventive light-based treatment
approaches for cancer treatment. Thus, the combination of noble metal
(Au, Ag) and magnetic iron oxide NPs is reported to augment the effectiveness
of hyperthermia. , , The response of cancer cells to radiation and chemotherapy can be
augmented by increasing the tumor temperature. 
Numerous diseases have their sources at the genetic level. The human genome project and the advances in molecular genetics
and high throughput technologies have revealed the genetic basis of
many pathologies and identified new therapeutic approaches. Gene-based
therapies must cross multiple biological barriers in order to reach
their sites of action. Because of their negative charge, nucleic acids
cannot cross the cellular membrane, which is also negatively charged.
Therefore, delivery vehicles that allow gene medicines to reach their
site of action avoiding degradation, crossing cellular membranes,
and escaping the endosomes, are needed. Nanomaterials are presently being developed for the delivery of
genetic material, as nonviral vectors for gene therapy use. A number
of nanostructures including lipids, polymers, and various inorganic
nanocarriers can incorporate certain genetic materials, such as plasmid
DNA, mRNA, and siRNA. One of the most significant applications for
nanomaterial-based gene delivery is the use of NPs in genetic-based
vaccines. , 
Infectious diseases are a dominant driver of global
disease burden. High mortality rates are associated with lower respiratory
infections, diarrhea, tuberculosis, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection, and malaria. Nanotechnology-based
approaches have been the focus of intensive research efforts to improve
the therapeutic index of anti-infective drugs and simplify their use.
The introduction and advancement of medical nanotechnology can develop
a more straightforward treatment regimen with a lower dose frequency.
Long-acting injectable NPs comprising antiretroviral drugs are an
emerging treatment method for reducing the frequency of doses for
HIV patients and represent the most clinically advanced nanotechnology
treatment for this virus. Nanotechnology like this also has the potential
to be used as a preventative measure, which could benefit a large
population who are at a higher risk for HIV. The targeting potential
of nanotechnology is a significant advantage, helpful in overcoming
challenges associated with the treatment of these diseases, including
low on-target bioavailability and low patient adherence due to drug-related
toxicities and extended therapeutic regimens. It would be significantly beneficial for treatment of malaria,
usually treated with chemotherapy drugs that have adverse side effects
and suffering from toxicity, missed doses, and the development of
resistance. Furthermore, nanocarriers can be applied for formulating
vaccines, which represent a major defense in combating infectious
diseases , 
Antibiotic drug
resistance has been identified as
a global concern by the World Health Organization since 2014 , and is still regarded as a primary health concern. A major contributing factor to the rise of multidrug resistance
(MDR) is the rampant misuse of antibiotics in both humans and animals
(as part of the food industry). , This, along
with the slow pace of development of additional antibiotics, has further
intensified the MDR crisis. In this context, the exploration of other
avenues, such as use of nano-DDSs to combat MDR, has become a vital
need. Furthermore, repurposing known classes of antibiotics into nanomaterial-based
DDSs has been found to overcome resistance mechanisms and can potentially
help reduce the burden of MDR. , 
The present
treatments for autoimmune diseases involve
administration of broad-spectrum, nonspecific, anti-inflammatory,
or immunosuppressive drugs, which reduce the proliferation of inflammatory
cells and inhibit immune reactions. Such treatment can alleviate
clinical symptoms but is unable to address the underlying cause and
therefore incapable of curing the disease. Moreover, extensive use
of immunosuppressants reduces the body’s normal immune response,
increasing susceptibility to other diseases. , The application of nanocarrier-based DDSs in the treatment of autoimmune
diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, and lupus
can increase the efficiency of inducing antigen-specific tolerance in vivo. Nanocarriers have
significant potential as tolerance delivery vehicles with certain
benefits to autoimmune diseases, allergies, and transplantation rejection
immunotherapy. Nanocarrier-mediated delivery-induced tolerance in vivo is a promising approach in autoimmune diseases or
transplantation. The capability of NPs to deliver antigens and immunomodulators,
primarily targeting antigen-presenting cells and lymphocytes, can
increase the potential to induce a specific tolerance.
Inflammation, a common feature of numerous diseases,
is a basic immune response that facilitates survival and sustains
tissue homeostasis. In some conditions, the inflammatory process becomes
harmful, contributing to the pathogenesis of a disease. Targeting
inflammation by using nanomedicines, either through the detection
of molecules overexpressed on the surface of activated macrophages
or endothelial cells or via enhanced blood vessel permeability, provides
a promising solution for the treatment of inflammatory diseases. Various types of nanocarriers have been developed
or are still in development for the management of inflammation, including
liposomes, polymer NPs, micelles, dendrimers, or hydrogel-based formulations,
which can target passively, through the leaky vasculature, or actively
the main triggers of inflammation, including macrophages, endothelial
cells, membrane receptors on inflammatory cells, anti-inflammatory
genes, and cytokines. 
The various
types of nano-DDSs and the diseases with which they
co-occur in the CAS Content Collection are depicted in B as a heat map. In most diseases,
NPs are the most frequently used nano-DDS.
For genetic
disorders, liposomes are the preferred
delivery systems. Indeed, after the invention of cationic lipids in
1987, cationic liposomes have been widely
applied for gene delivery. , Complexation with
positively charged lipids stabilizes nucleic acids and enhances their
resistance to nuclease degradation, allowing them to be delivered
to their desired target cells.
Liposomes are the preferred nano-DDS
for treating hematopoietic
disorders, as well ( B). Introduced in the 1990s, PEGylated liposomal doxorubicin
has been approved as an antitumor agent in the US and other countries
and is widely used in patients with multiple myeloma. Another liposome-encapsulated formulation delivers
a synergistic 5:1 drug ratio of cytarabine and daunorubicin for treating
acute myelogenous leukemia. It was recently
reported that surface-modified liposomes can present a promising approach
to deliver liposomal drugs into bone marrow via specific bone marrow
phagocytosis. This bone marrow delivery
formulation can be a successful nanocarrier for the therapy of hematopoietic
malignancies such as myelocytic leukemia and multiple myeloma.
One of the larger uses of liposomal DDSs is for treating urogenital
diseases ( B).
It was recently reported that intravesical instillation of liposome-encapsulated
botulinum toxin A can be a successful treatment for functional bladder
disorders such as overactive bladder, interstitial cystitis/bladder
pain syndrome, and bladder oversensitivity. Liposomal tacrolimus instillations have been reported to be promising
for the treatment of hemorrhagic cystitis. , Liposomal amphotericin B has been found effective in the treatment
of urinary tract infections caused by Candida albicans. 
Nano-DDSs have shown great
promise in the field of wound
healing, as they can enhance the effectiveness of treatments,
promote tissue regeneration, and reduce infection risks. − By using NPs to deliver drugs, growth factors, or other therapeutic
agents directly to the wound site, these systems aim to improve the
healing process. Antimicrobial NPs prevent infection by delivering
antimicrobial agents directly to the wound. For example, silver NPs
can be used to combat a wide range of bacteria, fungi, and viruses.
They can be incorporated into wound dressings, gels, or sprays to
prevent infection in chronic wounds, burns, and diabetic ulcers. Zinc
oxide NPs also exhibit strong antibacterial activity and can be used
in wound dressings. Growth factor delivery promotes tissue regeneration
and speeds up the healing process by delivering growth factors that
stimulate cell proliferation and tissue repair. Polymeric NPs encapsulating
growth factors, such as VEGF or PDGF can be used to enhance angiogenesis.
Chitosan NPs can be used to deliver growth factors to wounds and stimulate
faster healing. Anti-inflammatory NPs reduce inflammation in chronic
or nonhealing wounds. Curcumin-loaded NPs help to reduce inflammation
and promote faster wound healing. Dexamethasone-loaded NPs can be
delivered to control excessive inflammation in chronic wounds or burns.
Collagen-based NPs support tissue regeneration by delivering collagen,
which is a key structural protein in the skin. Nanofibers and nanogels
serve as wound dressings that not only protect the wound but also
release therapeutic agents over time. NPs can enhance blood flow to
the wound by promoting angiogenesis, which is critical for supplying
nutrients and oxygen to the regenerating tissue. − 
Topical delivery of active pharmacological ingredients is
a challenge,
because of the mechanical barrier created by the skin. Nanoemulsions
have emerged as a promising nano-DDS in the field of dermatology for
the encapsulation of active substances and for their controlled release.
Indeed, decreasing particle size in nanoemulsions increased the contact
surface area, resulting in increased drug efficacy and generally exhibiting
superior performance in safety, permeability, and bioavailability. Polymeric micelles are another successful topical
nanocarrier. They have been reported to enhance the deposition of
drugs in targeted sites of the skin in dermatological diseases such
as psoriasis and acne. 
Exosomes
secreted by cells involved in inflammation exhibit high
inflammatory affinity and targeting; hence they can successfully deliver
cargo to inflammatory cells and can achieve superior anti-inflammatory
effect. Exosomes derived from mesenchymal
stem cells, astrocytes, and dendritic cells with immunomodulatory
functions are widely applied as delivery vehicles to transport cargo
to inflammatory sites for enhanced anti-inflammatory efficiency. − Successful application of exosomes has been also reported in a variety
of conditions, including neurodegenerative diseases, cardiovascular diseases, and
cerebrovascular diseases, and others. , 

## Delivery Routes and Their Correlation with DDS Types
Nanomedicines can be administered through various routes depending
on the specific characteristics of the nanomaterials and the targeted
disease ( ).
The choice of administration route is influenced by factors such as
the desired therapeutic effect, the site of action, and the physical
and chemical properties of the nanomedicine.
 NPs can be incorporated into oral formulations
such
as tablets, capsules, and liquid suspensions. The oral route is a
preferred method of drug administration owing largely to its facility,
convenience, and highest degree of patient compliance; however effective
drug delivery with minimum off-target side effects is often challenging. NPs can protect drugs from degradation in the
digestive system and enhance their absorption. Formulation into NPs
can enhance drug stability in the harsh gastrointestinal tract environment,
improving the likelihood for successful targeting, increasing drug
solubility and bioavailability, and affording sustained release within
the gastrointestinal tract.
NPs can be delivered directly into
the bloodstream through intravenous injection. This route
is commonly used for the
systemic delivery of nanomedicines to target specific organs or tissues
throughout the body. Injection of nanomedicines into muscle tissue
(intramuscular) or just beneath the skin (subcutaneous) allows for sustained release and gradual absorption. This route
is often used for the sustained delivery of drugs or vaccines. Injection
of nanomedicines directly into the peritoneal cavity (intraperitoneal) or the tumor site (intratumoral) can be used for localized
treatments. This route is often employed in cancer therapy to deliver
drugs directly to the tumor. Injection of nanomedicines into cerebrospinal
fluid (intrathecal) or directly into brain tissue (intracerebral) can be used for treating neurological disorders.
This route allows for bypassing the blood–brain barrier to
deliver therapeutic agents to the central nervous system. Injection
of nanomedicines into the skin (intradermal) or delivery
through the skin (transdermal) is employed for localized
treatments or sustained drug release. Transdermal patches containing
NPs can facilitate controlled drug delivery over an extended period.
NPs can be administered directly into the vitreous humor of the
eye (intravitreal) for the treatment of ocular diseases.
This route is used to target specific tissues within the eye while
minimizing systemic exposure. NPs can be engineered for inhalation, allowing for targeted delivery to the respiratory system. This
route is useful for treating lung diseases and achieving the rapid
absorption of drugs into the bloodstream through the lungs. NPs can
be formulated for nasal delivery, providing a noninvasive
route for systemic or local drug delivery. This route is particularly
advantageous for drugs that may be degraded in the digestive system.
The selection of a specific delivery route depends on the therapeutic
goals, nature of the drug, and characteristics of the targeted disease
or condition. Each route comes with its own set of considerations,
advantages and disadvantages ( ), and ongoing research aims to optimize drug delivery
for improved efficacy and patient outcomes.
 

## Applications: Therapy, Diagnostics, Imaging, Cosmetics, Nutraceuticals,
and Agriculture
DDSs have found diverse applications beyond
the traditional medical
field, including drug/vaccine/gene delivery and diagnostic/imaging,
extending into areas such as food and dietary supplements, cosmetics,
agriculture, and others.
In the field of food and dietary
supplements, NPs
and microencapsulation technologies are applied to protect sensitive
nutrients, such as vitamins and omega-3 fatty acids, from degradation,
ensuring their stability and bioavailability. Encapsulation can also
be used to mask undesirable tastes or aromas, protecting sensitive
flavors, or adding controlled-release properties to enhance the sensory
experience of food and dietary supplements. Microencapsulation helps
protect probiotics from harsh stomach conditions, ensuring their survival
and efficacy in the digestive system. Nanodelivery systems enhance
the solubility and absorption of poorly soluble nutrients such as
vitamins (e.g., vitamin D and vitamin E), minerals, omega-3 fatty
acids, and antioxidants. For example, lipid NPs (e.g., nanoemulsions
or nanoliposomes) are used to encapsulate fat-soluble vitamins and
enhance their absorption in the gastrointestinal tract. NPs protect
sensitive nutrients from degradation due to exposure to light, oxygen,
or heat during processing or storage. Thus, nanoencapsulation of probiotics
in dairy or nondairy products protect them from stomach acid and ensure
that they reach the intestine intact. Nanodelivery systems can also
provide controlled or sustained release of nutrients to ensure that
they are absorbed gradually, maximizing their health benefits. − 
DDSs in cosmetics involve the encapsulation of
active
ingredients in nanocarriers such as liposomes or NPs. This ensures
controlled release and targeted delivery into the skin for improved
efficacy. NPs improve the penetration of active ingredients into deeper
layers of the skin, making cosmetics and skin care products more effective.
For example, lipid-based NPs like nanoliposomes or SLNs are used in
antiaging creams to deliver ingredients such as retinol, peptides,
or coenzyme Q10 deep into the skin. NPs can be used to deliver sun-blocking
agents, improving the stability and distribution of sunscreens on
the skin. Nanodelivery systems can release skin care or cosmetic ingredients
in a controlled manner, providing long-lasting effects. Thus, nanospheres
loaded with moisturizers or sunscreens release ingredients slowly
throughout the day, providing prolonged hydration or UV protection. − 
In agriculture, NPs and microencapsulation are
utilized
for the controlled release of fertilizers, pesticides, and growth
regulators. This promotes precision farming, reduces environmental
impact, and enhances the crop yield. Controlled-release systems in
agriculture involve encapsulating fertilizers in polymer coatings,
allowing for gradual and sustained release of nutrients to crops.
Nanocarriers can be used for the targeted delivery of biopesticides,
minimizing the environmental impact of pest control. Nanocapsules
encapsulating pesticides or herbicides allow for controlled release
at specific times or in response to environmental triggers such as
humidity or pH changes in the soil. Nanofertilizers made from polymeric
NPs deliver micronutrients such as nitrogen, phosphorus, or potassium
directly to plant roots, increasing efficiency. NPs can be used to
deliver growth stimulants, plant hormones, or genetic materials to
enhance crop growth and resilience. For example, NPs delivering plant
growth regulators such as gibberellic acid can improve seed germination,
flowering, and fruit development. − 
Figure S6 shows the percentage of documents
(journal articles and patents) related to the various application
fields, as well as their relative annual growth. As anticipated, the
medical applications including drug/vaccine/gene delivery and diagnostic/imaging
dominate, comprising in combination 91% of journal articles and 82%
of patents.

## Notable Patents
In recent years, sizable methodological
progress and a wealth of
knowledge have promoted the advancement of research on nano-DDSs,
enhancing our understanding of their structure and efficiency. This
is reflected in the consistent growth in the number of related scientific
publications (journal articles and patents) in the last two decades.
The landscape of the nano-DDSs research as reflected in the CAS Content
Collection is presented briefly in the Supporting Information, Figures S1–S6.
 summarizes
exemplary notable patents related to nano-DDSs. These examples were
selected to represent the range of discussed materials and applications
and also based on innovative uses of nanomaterials in DDSs.
 

## Outlook, Challenges, and Perspectives
The application
of nanotechnology in biomedical sciences, in healthcare
as a whole, and specifically in drug delivery is considered an emerging
area of nanotechnology, playing a significant role in the field of
medicine and pharmaceutics, mainly due to its potential to overcome
the major limitations and problems related to conventional DDSs. The
outlook for nano-DDSs is promising, with ongoing research addressing
challenges and paving the way for innovative and impactful therapeutic
solutions. The major perspectives and expectations for nano-DDS can
be summarized as follows:Personalized treatment paradigm: Nano-DDSs contribute
to the growth of precision medicine by enabling targeted and personalized
therapies. They offer the potential to shift toward more patient-centric
treatment approaches. For example, lipid NPs are used to encapsulate
mRNA that encodes tumor antigens, ensuring that the mRNA is delivered
to cells where it can produce the antigen and stimulate an immune
response. This technology is being explored in personalized cancer
vaccines. The synergy between nano-DDSs and cancer vaccines holds
great promise for creating more effective and personalized cancer
therapies.
Therapeutic innovation: Due
to their customizable structure
and surface modifications, they facilitate the delivery of a wide
range of therapeutic agents, including small molecules, biologics
(like proteins and antibodies), and nucleic acids (like DNA and RNA),
allowing for targeted delivery to specific sites within the body while
potentially improving treatment efficacy and reducing side effects.
Multifunctional platforms: NPs can carry
multiple therapeutic
agents (e.g., a drug and an imaging agent), allowing for combination
therapy and real-time monitoring of treatment. For example, theranostic
NPs combine therapeutic and diagnostic capabilities, enabling simultaneous
treatment and imaging of tumors.
Disease-specific
approaches: Nanocarriers can be tailored
for specific diseases by utilizing distinct surface properties that
allow them to selectively deliver drugs to diseased cells, thereby
enhancing treatment efficacy while minimizing side effects compared
to traditional drug delivery methods. NPs can be engineered with specific
ligands or antibodies that bind to receptors overexpressed on diseased
cells, ensuring that the drug reaches the intended target tissue.
By delivering drugs directly to the target site, healthy tissues are
exposed to less medication, minimizing systemic side effects.
Combination therapies: They provide opportunities
for
combining multiple drugs in a single nanocarrier allowing for the
controlled delivery of different therapeutic agents simultaneously,
potentially leading to enhanced synergistic effects between the drugs,
meaning their combined effect is greater than the sum of their individual
effects when administered separately. However, designing stable nanocarriers
that can effectively encapsulate and deliver multiple drugs with different
physicochemical properties can be challenging.
Overcoming biological barriers: Ongoing research focuses
on designing NPs to overcome biological barriers, such as the blood–brain
barrier, which are typically difficult for conventional drugs to penetrate.
For example, lipid-based NPs or dendrimers can be used to deliver
drugs directly to the brain, offering new therapeutic options for
neurodegenerative diseases and brain tumors.
Remote-controlled delivery: Advancements are made in
remote-controlled or stimuli-responsive nanosystems for on-demand
drug release. Nanoassemblies responsive to exogenous stimuli are employed
for remotely controlled drug delivery. The properties of the nanoassembly
based DDSs are dependent on stimuli-triggered structural transition.
Such nanoassemblies hold great potential for clinical translation.
Drug repurposing opportunities: Nanocarriers
provide
opportunities for repurposing existing drugs by improving their delivery
and efficacy. Using NPs as drug carriers introduces fresh opportunities
for drugs that exhibit potent therapeutic properties, but are hampered
by delivery-related complications. The extensive range of attributes
and adaptability associated with NPs renders them particularly interesting
for drug repurposing.
Global health impact:
Nanomedicine has rapidly grown
to treat certain diseases like brain cancer, lung cancer, breast cancer,
cardiovascular diseases, and many others. These nanomedicines can
improve drug bioavailability and drug absorption time, reduce release
time, eliminate drug aggregation, and enhance drug solubility in the
blood. Addressing these challenges can lead to breakthroughs that
impact global health, especially in the treatment of complex diseases.
Advancing cancer treatment: Nano-delivery
systems continue
to play a crucial role in advancing cancer treatment options, providing
targeted and less toxic alternatives: NPs can selectively target tumor
tissues, sparing healthy cells; they are more stable and biocompatible
than conventional drugs; they can accumulate in tumors due to defects
in the tumor microenvironment; the timing and site of drug release
can be controlled using external or internal triggers; they can target
mechanisms that cause cancer drug resistance.
Emerging applications: Nano-DDSs can be utilized in
new applications, such as in the delivery of gene-editing tools and
RNA-based therapies. Implant technology can deliver targeted medication
for longer-lasting, localized therapy.
Regulatory adaptations: There are ongoing efforts to
adapt regulatory frameworks to accommodate the specific characteristics
of nano-DDSs. Regulatory agencies worldwide are actively adapting
their frameworks to address the distinct characteristics of nano-DDSs,
focusing on establishing specific guidelines for evaluating the safety
and efficacy of nanomaterials used in drug delivery, including detailed
characterization requirements, toxicity testing protocols, and considerations
for targeted delivery mechanisms, to ensure the safe and effective
translation of nanomedicines from research to clinical applications.

Along with the benefits, nano-DDSs need to address certain
challenges
and roadblocks that impact their development, translation to clinical
use, and widespread application. These include the following:Biocompatibility and toxicity: the potential toxicity
of nanomaterials, especially inorganic NPs like gold or silver, raises
concerns. While these materials are effective for drug delivery, they
can accumulate in organs such as the liver, spleen, or kidneys, leading
to long-term toxic effects. Determining safe dosages and long-term
biocompatibility is critical. Currently, there are limited studies
on the long-term impacts of nanomaterials on human health, particularly
in terms of chronic toxicity and biodegradability.
Clinical translation: complex manufacturing processes,
concerns about toxicity and biocompatibility, difficulty in achieving
targeted delivery, lack of standardized regulatory pathways, high
production costs, and the need to demonstrate significant clinical
benefits compared to existing treatments all can significantly hinder
the progress from preclinical studies to clinical trials and market
approval.
Scale-up challenges: Manufacturing
NPs on a large scale
with consistent quality and safety is a major hurdle. Scaling up nanoformulations
from laboratory to industrial production requires strict quality control
to ensure uniformity in particle size, drug encapsulation efficiency,
and release properties. The production process of nanocarriers is
highly sensitive to variations in conditions, such as temperature,
solvent use, and particle synthesis methods. Small changes can affect
the properties of NPs, making reproducibility difficult. The cost
of producing NPs at an industrial scale also remains high, posing
a barrier to widespread adoption.
Biodistribution
variability: even under normal physiological
conditions, effective biodistribution and drug delivery are difficult
to achieve as NPs face both physical and biological barriers, including
shear forces, protein adsorption and rapid clearance, that limit the
fraction of administered NPs that reach the target therapeutic site.
Immunogenicity: nano-DDSs must navigate
the body’s
immune system, which can recognize NPs as foreign objects and attempt
to eliminate them. This immunogenicity can lead to premature clearance
of the nanocarrier, reducing its efficacy before it reaches the target
site. Overcoming this challenge often requires coating NPs with stealth
materials (e.g., PEG), but the immune system can eventually recognize
even these modified particles. Additionally, repeated exposure to
certain NPs may induce an immune response, complicating long-term
treatment.
Long-term safety concerns:
primarily due to their specific
characteristics, NPs can have unexpected interactions with the body,
including potential toxicity, immune responses, and accumulation in
specific organs, even when designed for targeted delivery; this necessitates
extensive research to fully understand the long-term effects of NPs
in the body and to mitigate potential risks.
Regulatory hurdles: The regulatory landscape for nano-DDSs
is still evolving. Regulatory bodies like the US FDA and EMA require
extensive safety, efficacy, and toxicity data to approve new DDSs,
particularly when innovative nanomaterials are used. Nanoformulations
must meet stringent criteria for clinical trials, often requiring
additional studies on toxicity, biodistribution, and potential environmental
impacts. Current regulatory frameworks may not be fully equipped to
handle the complexities of nanomedicines, leading to delays in approval
and market entry. The lack of standardized testing protocols for nanomaterials
adds another layer of difficulty.
Standardization
issues: Lack of standardized methods
for characterizing and manufacturing NPs lead to difficulties in comparing
research findings, ensuring consistent quality across batches, and
navigating regulatory approval processes due to variations in particle
size, surface chemistry, and morphology across different production
techniques.
Complex manufacturing processes:
Manufacturing challenges
associated with nano-DDSs include difficulties in achieving consistent
particle size and size distribution, controlling surface chemistry
and morphology, ensuring sterility and purity, scaling up production
to meet clinical needs, and developing reliable analytical methods
to characterize the NPs, all while maintaining cost-effectiveness
and minimizing potential toxicity concerns.
Nano-DDSs require interdisciplinary collaboration because
of the many different areas of expertise involved in their development:
nanotechnology, materials science, pharmacology, engineering, biology,
and chemistry.
Cost considerations: Developing
nano-DDSs can be expensive
due to the specialized equipment, materials, and expertise required.
Moreover, the clinical development process (including preclinical
studies, clinical trials, and manufacturing) is costly and time-consuming.
For widespread use, the cost of nano-DDSs needs to be justified by
significant improvements in patient outcomes. High costs may limit
accessibility, particularly in low-resource healthcare settings, and
could deter investment from pharmaceutical companies if the market
potential is uncertain.
Inadequate understanding
of pharmacokinetics: poor understanding
of NP biodistribution, rapid clearance from the bloodstream, difficulty
in achieving targeted delivery to specific tissues, inconsistent drug
release profiles, potential for off-target accumulation, and variability
in patient response due to differences in physiological conditions
all can significantly impact the efficacy and safety of nanomedicines.
Ethical concerns surrounding nano-DDSs primarily
center
around potential risks to human health, including potential toxicity
from NPs, unequal access to these therapies, privacy concerns related
to nanomaterial tracking, and the need for informed patient consent
regarding the use of nanotechnology in their treatment, all while
ensuring responsible research and development practices to mitigate
these risks.
Key market challenges and
roadblocks related to nano-DDSs:
high development costs, complex manufacturing processes, stringent
regulatory hurdles, potential toxicity concerns, lack of standardized
testing methods, difficulties in achieving targeted delivery, and
the need for robust clinical trials to demonstrate efficacy and safety
all can significantly impede the market adoption of nanomaterial-based
drugs despite their potential therapeutic advantages.

Efforts are ongoing to overcome these challenges through
continuous
research, technological innovation, collaboration, and regulatory
adaptation. As the field evolves, addressing these challenges will
be crucial for realizing the full potential of nano-DDSs in improving
drug efficacy and patient outcomes.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.4c09566.Landscape of the nano-DDSs research; Figure S1, early
growth of the number of documents (journal articles and patents) related
to nanosized DDS in the CAS Content Collection and Nano-DDS vs overall
DDS-related documents yearly growth; Figure S2, Leading countries/regions
with respect to the numbers of nano-DDS-related journal articles and
patents; Figure S3, leading scientific journals with respect to the
number of published nano-DDS-related articles and the average number
of citations per article and classification of the top scientific
journals with respect to the number of published nano-DDS-related
articles and number of citations; Figure S4, leading academic research
organizations with respect to the number of published nano-DDS-related
articles and the number of citations per article; Figure S5, top academic
and commercial organizations with respect to the number of nano-DDS-related
patents; Figure S6, applications of the nano-DDS as reflected in the
CAS Content Collection (PDF)

## Supplementary Material
nn4c09566_si_001.pdf

## Related Paper
Kevin
J. Hughes,
Magesh Ganesan, Rumiana Tenchov, Kavita A. Iyer, Krittika Ralhan,
Leilani Lotti Diaz, Robert E. Bird, Julian Ivanov, Qiongqiong Zhou.
Nanoscale materials at work: Mapping emerging applications in energy,
medicine, and beyond. 2024. ChemRxiv. DOI: 10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-s75wv; https://chemrxiv.org/engage/chemrxiv/article-details/6622bd8891aefa6ce1ebc7f5 (accessed Dec 19, 2024).

## Author Contributions
§ R.T., K.J.H., M.G., K.A.I., K.R., L.M.L.D., and
R.E.B. contributed
equally to this review.
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
The authors sincerely appreciate the CAS Data, Analytics &
Insights team for their assistance in data extraction and Dharmini
Patel for project coordination. The authors are grateful to Manuel
Guzman, Michael Dennis, Dawn Riedel, Dawn George, and Hong Xie for
executive sponsorship. The authors also appreciate the rest of the
Science Connect team at CAS for their support and insightful discussions.

## Vocabulary:
NanoparticleParticle with
dimensions measured in nanometers (nm), typically ranging from 1 to
100 nm in size. Due to their small size, NPs exhibit distinctive physical
and chemical properties that differ significantly from larger particles
of the same material. These properties make them useful in various
fields, including medicine, engineering, and environmental science.
NanocrystalA nanoscale
crystal, with dimensions measured in nanometers (typically a few nanometers
in size). Nanocrystals have a crystalline structure throughout their
volume, with atoms arranged in a repeating, orderly pattern. This
structure gives them specific optical, electrical, and magnetic properties,
due to quantum confinement effects.
NanotubeA nanoscale cylindrical
structure with a hollow core. These structures can have diameters
ranging from about 1 to tens of nanometers and lengths up to several
millimeters. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are the most well-known type,
consisting of rolled-up sheets of graphene. They exhibit remarkable
properties, including high tensile strength, excellent thermal and
electrical conductivity, and unique quantum effects.
Quantum dotA nanoscale
semiconductor particle, typically a few nanometers in size, that exhibits
distinctive optical and electronic properties due to quantum mechanical
effects. When illuminated by UV light, quantum dots can emit light
of various colors depending on their size, a result of quantum confinement.
These properties make quantum dots useful in applications such as
medical imaging, display technologies, and quantum computing.
ExosomeA nanosized
subset
of extracellular vesicles (diameter ∼30–150 nm) comprising
bioactive cargos, including proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, and metabolites.