3686acsomegaACS OmegaACS OmegaAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC1041384210413842104138423757663910.1021/acsomega.3c02030Nanoadjuvants:
Promising Bioinspired and Biomimetic
Approaches in Vaccine Innovation
DesaiDhruv N MahalAhmed VarshneyRajat ObaidullahAhmad J GuptaBhawna MohantyPratikhya PattnaikPriyabrata MohapatraNrusingha Charan MishraSnehasish KandiVenkataramana RabaanAli A MohapatraRanjan K †Department
of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, United States‡Department
of Medical Biochemical Analysis, College of Health Technology, Cihan University−Erbil, Erbil, Kurdistan Region, Iraq§Department
of Veterinary Microbiology, FVAS, Banaras
Hindu University, Mirzapur 231001, India∥Department
of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, King Saud University, P.O. Box 2457, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia⊥School
of Biotechnology, KIIT Deemed-to-be University, Bhubaneswar 751024, Odisha, India#Bioenergy
Lab, BDTC, School of Biotechnology, KIIT
Deemed-to-be University, Bhubaneswar 751024, Odisha, India▲Indian
Immunological Ltd., Gachibowli, Hyderabad 500032, India¶Process
Analytical Division, Vaxxinity Inc, Merrit Island, Florida 32953, United States□Department
of Microbiology, Prathima Institute of Medical
Sciences, Karimnagar 505 417, Telangana, India■Molecular
Diagnostic Laboratory, Johns Hopkins Aramco
Healthcare, Dhahran 31311, Saudi Arabia○College
of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh 11533, Saudi Arabia●Department
of Public Health and Nutrition, The University
of Haripur, Haripur 22610, Pakistan△Department
of Chemistry, Government College of Engineering, Keonjhar 758002, Odisha, India*Email: ranjank_mohapatra@yahoo.com (R.K.M.).
*Email: snehasish.mishra@gmail.com (S.M.).
*Email: dhruvdesai24@gmail.com (D.N.S.).
24720238312795327953–279681182023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Adjuvants are the
important part of vaccine manufacturing
as they
elicit the vaccination effect and enhance the durability of the immune
response through controlled release. In light of this, nanoadjuvants
have shown unique broad spectrum advantages. As nanoparticles (NPs)
based vaccines are fast-acting and better in terms of safety and usability
parameters as compared to traditional vaccines, they have attracted
the attention of researchers. A vaccine nanocarrier is another interesting
and promising area for the development of next-generation vaccines
for prophylaxis. This review looks at the various nanoadjuvants and
their structure–function relationships. It compiles the state-of-art
literature on numerous nanoadjuvants to help domain researchers orient
their understanding and extend their endeavors in vaccines research
and development.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Apr 29; Accepted 2023 Jul 13; Collection date 2023 Aug 8.

## Introduction
Vaccine technology and manufacturing are
humanity’s momentous
achievements in the modern world. − Vaccines have not only
significantly reduced deaths or possible induced lifetime disabilities
by neutralizing the effect early but also have helped eradicate numerous
crippling diseases including the smallpox. Vaccination strategies formulated to prevent child mortality are
a giant step forward for a healthy world. Other than the antigens,
epitope, or immunogens, vaccine development strategies involve adjuvants
as additional components in specific cases. An adjuvant (adopted for
the Latin word “adjuvare” which means to help) is an
eliciting substance that enhances the immunogenicity of the antigen/immunogen
when injected mixed with an antigen or immunogen. They are often used to boost the immune response when an
antigen has low immunogenicity or when only a small titer of an antigen
is available. The adjuvant concept was
proposed at the beginning of the 20th century when the traditional
purified diphtheria and tetanus toxoids failed in eliciting an immune
response effectively. The understanding
of adjuvants and their broad applications have undergone transformation
from natural ingredients to artificial synthetic compounds since then.
The effect of aluminum salts as an adjuvant in 1926 was a milestone
discovery in this regard. 
With a
deeper understanding of immunology and various advancements
in molecular biology, developing novel and more effective vaccines
is possible. However, the immunostimulatory properties of live/attenuated
new generation vaccines seem to be lacking. Nanotech-inspired formulations offer numerous vaccine development
advantages. Nanoaluminum salts, nanopolymeric particles, liposomes,
lipid nanoparticles, virosomes, etc. are promising carriers that help
in vaccine-antigen uptake by the immune cells thereby enhancing the
efficiency of a vaccine. While focusing
on targeting the antigen to antigen-presenting cells (APCs) for enhanced
targeted performance, such nanocarriers also improve vaccine stability
by protecting the vaccines from degrading. Nanotechnology involves
the structure, device, and/or system manipulated at the nanoscale
level to design, characterize, produce, and apply those that expectedly
possess at least one superior trait or property. A major area of application of nanotechnology is drug
and vaccine delivery. Nanomaterials are particles, emulsions, liposomes,
micelles, dendrimers, etc. that typically have high therapeutic indices
compared to traditional adjuvants. − Carrier systems effectively
enter the APCs and deliver antigens in the right quantity. Adjuvants could be built and improved for increased
immune responses against specific diseases in the systems. Two alternate
ways to achieve this are, first, by coentrapping an immunomodulator
and the antigen and, second, by surface engineering the antigen or
the carrier particle to activate innate and adaptive immunity. An
NP-based delivery system can deliver a need-based site-directed antigen
to promote effective antigen presentation and processing. Such systems
seek to address the poor immunogenicity and stability issues of recombinant
protein vaccine candidates. A major attraction of NP-based delivery
systems is modulating the immune response and generating a cytotoxic
T-cell response. Nanotechnology system based vaccine delivery for
both humoral and cellular immunity is necessary to combat intracellular
infections in diseases like malaria and tuberculosis. Fine-tuned NP-based
vaccine delivery systems offer tremendous opportunities as viable
solutions for enhanced immune responses.
Nanosize particulates
entrap vaccine candidates and nanoadjuvant
(nanoimmunomodulator) with a dendritic cell activator, supporting
vaccine development opportunity. They are particularly useful in treating
intracellular infections where T- and B-cell mediated antibody responses
for protective immunity are needed, wherein immunization with a suitable
nanosystem helps. Nanoparticle delivery systems could be useful in
genetic immunization and for delivery of antigens along with immunomodulators
and toll-like receptors (TLRs). With increasing vaccination success
against several infectious diseases, the focus on modern strategies
for chronic noninfectious diseases like allergies, cancer, inflammatory
diseases, and contraception problems has grown. Nanotechnology-based
vaccine delivery systems could be a game-changer in new and efficient
vaccine development strategies through deeper research.
 provides
a compiled timeline of adjuvants used in the development of human
vaccines. Viral vector based carrier molecules like viral genome,
virus-like protein and virosomes, and nonviral vector based adjuvants
like lipid nanoparticles and nanoemulsions have gained prominence
in vaccine development. Nanobased formulations
have been promising in developing vaccines against cancers for better
targeting, identification, and destruction. A nanoparticles-based approach to counter public health emergencies
like the current COVID-19 pandemic has been recommended. − Notably, a biocompatible nanobased approach is cost-effective with
reduced toxicity. Nanomolecules demonstrably
have unique characteristics like a higher surface-to-volume ratio,
surface charge, size, shape, and optical, biological, and functional
properties.
 

## Results and Discussion

## Cellular Effects of Nanoadjuvants
Sustained research
and development on adjuvants has been greatly facilitated through
our understanding of the innate immune responses triggered by the
highly conserved molecular patterns on microbes and recognition receptors
on the immune cells. Activation of adaptive immunity to induce protective
antibody responses thus ensues. Numerous adjuvants for live and viral
vaccines have been frequently used to elicit innate responses through
the TLRs. , The development of new generation adjuvants
aims at better and effective antigen-specific immune responses with
a sustained effect on cellular differentiation and metabolic activity
while ensuring high safety levels. Despite their widespread use, the
molecular mechanisms in human cells of most of the adjuvants are not
yet well-understood. Specific instances of these are elaborated later
in the article under specific dedicated heads.
Certain adjuvants
as ligands could activate TLRs synergistically and engage multiple
DC subsets, even direct B-cell activation. This fact paved the way
to produce adjuvants as ligands to multiple TLRs, inducing a persistently
healthy specific antibody response, reactions at the germinal center,
response of the follicular T helper cells, and enduring plasma cells. 

## Aluminum Hydroxide NPs as Nanoadjuvants
Alum adjuvants
have been in use for decades in vaccine manufacturing. Some routinely
used alum adjuvants include aluminum hydroxide, aluminum phosphate,
and amorphous aluminum hydroxyphosphate (AAHS). These have been effective
in stimulating the humoral immune system as compared to the cell-mediated
immune response. Aluminum hydroxide is a common vaccine adjuvant and
has been used in numerous human and animal vaccines. Although the
safety profile of aluminum hydroxide is relatively quite high, it
reportedly could induce only weak to moderate antigen-specific antibody
responses. Alum allegedly stimulated
the Th2 immune cells that resulted in increased antigen-specific antibody
production but was incapable in stimulating robust Th1 or against
cytotoxic responses. The actual size
of the primary aluminum hydroxide fibers is in nanometers. However,
when dispersed in an aqueous solution, it forms aggregated particulates
of 1–20 μm size. , Aluminum phosphate
is another well-known aluminum salt adjuvant, the size of which is
about 20 nm, and it also shows similar aggregation properties in aqueous
solution like aluminum hydroxide. , Growing evidence
suggests that nanoparticles of about 200 nm have more potency as adjuvants
and as vaccine or antigen carriers than larger particles. 
Numerous studies determining the efficacy
and utility of aluminum nanoadjuvants have been reported. In one such
study, ovalbumin (OVA) and Bacillus anthracis were
used as protective antigens to induce inflammatory responses by adsorbing
them on aluminum hydroxide NPs, which showed a stronger OVA-specific
antibody immune response as compared to bigger-sized OVA-adsorbed
larger aluminum hydroxide microparticles. It was observed that aluminum hydroxide NPs induced milder local
inflammatory reactions than the microparticles. Thus, the potent adjuvant activity of aluminum hydroxide
NPs was closely associated with their ability to more efficiently
facilitate the uptake of the adsorbed antigen by the antigen-presenting
cells. The overall efficiency of the
conventional aluminum hydroxide adjuvant was particle size dependent,
and its nanometer size has a greater potential to generate a better
immunity response. The same concept was
also used later for administering Mycobacterium tuberculosis antigen EsxV in mice subcutaneously. The efficacy of aluminum hydroxide
NPs in inducing the release of IFN-γ and activating Th-1 response
from the immune system was significantly high as compared to the antigen
alone. The efficacy of alum adjuvants
appears to be low, especially with subunit and low molecular weight
vaccines. Also, nanoalum has a larger surface area and could accommodate
more antigens. Aluminum oxide microparticles
were constructed into alum NPs of around 30 nm size and used in pulmonary
vaccine as an adjuvant-based antigen delivery system. It elicited
a stronger immunogenic response as noticed through the presence of
IgG and IgA in salivary, nasal, respiratory, and vaginal fluids. Thus,
it showed prospects of use in vaccines as an efficient tool for simplified
delivery systems. Initial research findings
on alum-based nanoadjuvant are positive and may guide the development
of a better and more effective adjuvant for antigens or subunit vaccine
delivery.

## Aluminum-Based Adjuvants
Along with increasing the
efficacy in eliciting the differentiation of CD4+ T helper
cell (Th2) and antibody responses in humans, alum is a prevalent adjuvant
primarily due to its availability and its low-cost manufacturing. , The adjuvant effect of alum is TLR-independent, although adjuvant
activated TLR-mediated innate immunity enhances the immunogenicity
of a vaccine. Alum reportedly stimulated
adaptive immunity by causing cell death at the site of injection,
thereby activating the inflammatory DCs to release cytokines and chemokines.
Studies report the use of alum nanoparticles (Al-NPs) as adjuvants
in robust and durable immune responses especially in lymph nodes and
tumors (anticancer vaccines). , The available larger
surface area also increases the carrying capacity of Al-NPs, allowing
use of multiple adjuvant/antigen in a single vaccine; e.g., CpG is
coated onto Al-NPs for better delivery of anticancer vaccines as in
Sipuleucel-T, Provenge. 
As the
use of alum as an adjuvant becomes prevalent, there is an urgent need
to assess the relevance of stress signals from tissue damage, its
role in activating cells of different origins, the metabolic and nutrient
sensing pathways involved, the innate receptors other than TLRs, and
the signaling mechanisms leading to antibody production and T helper
cell differentiation for optimum efficacy. Upon administration into the host, alum particles form aggregates
that are engulfed by phagosomes, and the antigen entrapped or adsorbed
is presented to the phagosomes. However,
formation of an aluminum depot is seen upon phagocytosis, and, contrary
to the popular assumption, this depot was not cleared completely by
the hydrolyzing enzymes in the phagolysosomes. As these macrophages divide, the aggregated aluminum particle
is carried to lymph nodes and is dispensed for years. Phagosomal degradation
of the engulfed particles is mostly driven by the activity of the
v-ATPases and hydrolytic enzymes. As
the initial pH of an undifferentiated phagosome is neutral, the aluminum
particles get accumulated (alum particles solubilize only at lower
pH). Even when the phagosomes mature and the pH goes below 5.0, the
alum particles do not clear off, leading to increased concentration
of alum inside the vesicle modulating the innate properties of phagosome, a glaring bioaccumulation and biomagnification
instance. Aluminum ions interact with biomolecules like carboxylates,
phosphates, and nucleotides. They reportedly also interact with proteins
and alter their 3-D structure, rendering them ineffective or reducing
their bioactivity. Also, alum ions compete with biologically useful
ions involved in important metabolic pathways (like Fe2+, Fe3+, Zn2+, and Ca2+) and modulate
their function. 
Alum ions affect
the membrane polarity and potential of mitochondria.
Production of cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) is majorly mitochondria
and cellular respiration regulated. Cellular
ROS results in a dysfunctional mitochondrion. ROS release is associated
with phagosome maturation due to enhanced activity of the NOX2 complex. Human macrophages are classified into M1 type
of inflammatory phenotype and M2 macrophages of a regulatory/anti-inflammatory
phenotype. , Excess ROS production drives
the differentiation and polarization of an immature macrophage toward
the M1 fate, leading to increased inflammatory burden and further
inflammatory complications. Aluminum ions rendered stability to the
produced ROS in mammalian cell lines, highlighting that alum-based
adjuvants might be significant in persisting inflammatory conditions. After the membrane ruptures and alum ions are
released to cytosol, they extensively affects organelles, biological
pathways, and biomolecules. Interacting with proteins, these increase
misfolding in them, leading to an increased demand for chaperone-mediated
protein refolding. Increased activation of chaperone proteins and
subsequently the DAMPs induces an immune response, which leads to
increased accumulation of inflammatory cytokine.
Alum ions also
reportedly activate the inflammasome pathways. This
activation is facilitated by cytosolic pattern recognition receptors
that trigger signaling pathways downstream thereby producing and secreting
inflammatory cytokine IL-1β. , After the
aggregated alum is phagocytosed, IL-1β activation induces the
NLRP3 inflammasome pathway. NLRP3, a cytoplasmic pattern recognition
receptor (PRR), belongs to the family of the nucleotide-binding oligomerization
domain (NOD) like receptor and is characterized by central nucleotide
binding and leucine-rich repeat pyrin 3 domains. Activated NLRP3 inflammasome
pathway activates caspases that express proinflammatory cytokines,
such as IL-1β and IL-18. Continued activation of the pathway
ultimately leads to cell clearance through apoptosis. ROS reportedly
regulates NLRP3 inflammasome activation and is a key byproduct of
the administration of alum-based adjuvants. It could drive the activation
of the NLRP3 inflammasome pathway. , , Alum ions could also disturb the tricarboxylic acid
(TCA) cycle, increase succinate accumulation, and activate hypoxia
inducible transcription factor 1α (HIF-1α). HIF-1α
leads to metabolic reprogramming of macrophages by controlling the
expression of glycolytic enzymes and proinflammatory signaling. Phagosomal rupture may activate maturation of
the macrophages toward a M1-biased phenotype and increased inflammation
upon receiving the vaccine. 
Alum
reportedly affects iron metabolism in mammals. Alum ions enter
the blood as the vaccine is administered, bind to readily available
transferrin, and go systemic in the bloodstream. Transferin, Fe3+, and Al3+ enter the cell and kickstart the transferin
cycle through receptor mediated endocytosis. By activating proton
pumps like divalent metal transporter 1 (DMT1), endocytosed Fe3+ is transported to cytoplasm along with alum ions, taken up by mitochondria and subsequently neutralized,
and the cycle goes on ( ). The neutralization cycle burdens mitochondria through ROS
production, DNA damage, and sentinel cell proliferation, and also
leads to the loss of viability of the affected cell. 
 

## Oil-in-Water Emulsion
An emulsion is a mixture of two
immiscible liquids whose stability is maintained through mechanical
shear and surfactant. Oil-in-water emulsions
as vaccine adjuvants have shown better results than water-in-oil emulsions.
The most commonly used oil-in-water adjuvants are MF59 (Novartis)
and AS03 (GlaxoSmithKline). Both droplets are squalene-based emulsions
of around 160 nm size. MF59 is approved and AS03 has already been
licensed for H5N1 and H1N1 influenza vaccines. , MF59 has Tween 80 and Span 85 (two surfactants), and AS03 has polysorbate
80 and α-tocopherol (vitamin E), with a squalene base in common. MF59 could recruit local monocytes, macrophages,
and dendritic cells for antigen uptake and can activate CD4 T cells. , Contrarily, AS03 could nonspecifically activate the immune system
in mice. MF59 and AS03 could be good
nanoadjuvant candidates due to the <200 nm size and biocompatibility
trait. However, only small variants of oil-in-water emulsions have
also been tested so far. Theoretically small-size adjuvants (of about
20 nm) would be more efficacious, although the opposite finding is
also reported. It is found that commercial adjuvants of about 160
nm size were more effective for in influenza vaccine administered
in mice as compared to 20 nm oil-in-water emulsion adjuvant. EAS, another novel squalene-based oil-in-water
emulsion adjuvant of approximately 105 nm particle size, was compared
with commercially available MF59 adjuvant for subcutaneous administration
of swine influenza vaccine, and it was
found that the novel EAS adjuvant had comparable properties to the
established MF59 adjuvant. EAS elicited strong IG1 and IG2a antibodies
response with a high Th1 response involving IFN-γ and IL-2 cytokines
compared to vaccine/antigen alone. Various
oil-in-water emulsion based adjuvant studies show the potential to
develop an effective subunit vaccine. However, deeper insights into
the properties and side-effects need to be considered before its wider
application.
Differentiating between oil-in-water emulsion and
water-in-oil emulsion approaches is vital. The oil is the dispersed
phase in the oil-in-water emulsion distributed in water as the continuous
phase, while the roles switch in the other. A better way to comprehend
is that milk is an example of an oil-in-water emulsion, while butter
is a water-in-oil emulsion. Nevertheless, due to the highly mobile
water droplets that enhance coalescence, flocculation, and/or sedimentation,
the water-in-oil emulsion often is less stable.

## Oil Emulsion
Adjuvants
These include an array of oil-in-water
or water-in-oil emulsions. Due to their high ranking on the reactivity
scale, water-in-oil adjuvants are deemed unfit for use in humans. Owing to their relatively low reactivity, oil-in-water
emulsions are often used, although they exhibit side-effects. They
are known to induce a strong inflammatory response at the site of
injection and to induce inflammasome activation. Oil based adjuvants
like compound 81 increase cytokines production by reducing mitochondrial
membrane potential and inducing mitochondrial stress, which lead to
decreased basal and ATP-linked respiration. This adjuvant induced mitochondrial stress further led to mitophagy
to clear the damaged mitochondria and activation of the cytokine release
cascade. Oil emulsion adjuvants reportedly also regulate mitochondrial
ROS production in a dose-dependent manner ultimately driving the activation
of NF-κB driven inflammatory pathways and activation of IFN
regulatory factors ( ). 
 

## TLR Agonist Adjuvants
TLR adjuvants include a wide
range of pathogen-derived substances like proteins, lipopeptides,
glycolipids, and their synthetic equivalents. The TLR agonists activate
the inflammatory transcription factor nuclear factor NF-κB through
TLR adaptor proteins TRIF and MYD88. Studies
revealed that R848, a TLR7 agonist, increased the level of mitochondrial
ROS leading to mitophagy and inflammation when loaded on to a zirconium-based
metal organic framework and injected into mice. 

## Surfactin
Surfactin is natural lipopeptide
used as
a vaccine adjuvant. Its usage pattern
varies, and the mechanism of the immune response is yet to be thoroughly
explored. As an adjuvant it activates the inflammasome NLRP1 and NLRP3
mediated by endogenous danger signals. Surfactins reportedly increase ROS production inside mitochondria
of macrophages, thereby initiating ROS-mediated activation of the
NF-κB pathway and triggering inflammation. The presence of ROS
simultaneously triggers apoptotic genes as a result of mitochondrial
stress that leads to the loss of cell viability.

## Nanoliposome
Liposomes are made of a double-layer phospholipid
shaping as a sphere within water through self-assembly under the driving
force of hydrophobicity. Liposomes are
made of various amphiphilic phospholipids that could combine with
lipids, such as cholesterol, to provide membrane stability. PEGylation
also increases the stability of liposomes. PEGylation prevents liposome
adhesion, thereby preventing fusion or coagulation. PEGylation also
prevents liposomes from binding with plasma proteins but allows binding
with other specific plasma proteins, thereby increasing the in vivo circulation time of the nanoparticle. 
Freeze-drying of liposomes with a liposome
cryoprotectant like sugar is an alternate strategy to increase its
structural stability. Among various nanocarriers,
liposomes are frequently used in the delivery of drug or as vaccine
adjuvant. According to liposome size, immune reactions may vary when
used as a delivery system or adjuvant. Subcutaneous injection or oral
inoculation of small-sized liposomes (<150 nm) influences the development
of the Th-2 type response, and larger particles (>200 nm) promote
IFN-γ and Th-1 type responses more. The phospholipids in liposomes are known important mediators of
innate and adaptive immunity. Liposome
has the built in capacity to activate innate immunity but could also
effectively present the carried antigen to APCs. According to their
physiochemical properties, these could stimulate both naïve
T-lymphocytes into CD4+ and CD8+ cells, and
β-lymphocytes to initiate the humoral immune response. 
Very small particles of <20 nm
may distribute and disperse
into the tissues and become systemic by entering the circulating blood
with little scope of lymphatic uptake. However, bigger (>100 nm) particles have a better chance
to be trapped in tissue, thus creating a depot effect at the site
of injection. Through this it is easily identified and picked by APCs
which would then mature, present the required epitopes, and migrate
to the draining lymph nodes for adaptive immune response further. Monophosphoryl lipid A, a detoxified part of
endotoxin lipid A, along with a TLR4 ligand is identified as a safe
and effective lipid-based adjuvant to use in developing emerging vaccines
against infectious diseases like malaria, AIDS, leishmaniasis, and
others, as also to treat several cancers. , The approved adjuvant for “Mosquirix” (malaria) and “Shingrix” (herpes zoster) vaccines, AS01 is liposome-based system containing
3-O-desacyl-4′-monophosphoryl lipid A (MPL)
and saponin QS-21 as immunostimulants. 

## Immune-Stimulating Complexes (ISCOM)
ISCOM is an important
lipid-based adjuvant or vaccine delivery system. Like liposomes, the
lipid particles here are also made of cholesterol and phospholipids;
however it also contains some protein antigens devised by using saponin
Quil A found in soapbark tree Quillaja saponaria. They are 40–50 nm sized cages, and several
APCs uptake them because of their lipid-based structure. The antigens
carried by the ISCOM are presented to both MHC I and MHC II (major
histocompatibility complexes). ICOSAMATRIX is an ISCOM without an
antigen. High affinity between saponin
and cholesterol that are part of ISCOM and ICOSAMATRIX provide high
stability. They could elicit a balanced
Th1 and Th2 response maintaining durable antibody titer and effective
cell-mediated immunity. The presence of saponin that could be toxic
is a disadvantage of these carrier molecules, and both ISCOM and ICOSAMATRIX
are approved only for veterinary purposes as of now. However, the
development of influenza and human papilloma virus vaccines using
ISCOM is under research. 

## Toll-like
Receptors (TLRs)
TLRs, pattern recognition
receptors, are crucial for microbial detection ( ). Many adjuvants are built on PAMPs that
bind to TLRs. TLRs on cell surfaces like TLR1, TLR2, TLR4, TLR5, TLR6,
and TLR11 are capable of detecting extracellular antigens, whereas
TLRs like TLR3, TLR7, TLR8, TLR9, and TLR10 found inside of cells
are capable of detecting internal intruders like viruses. TLR13 is
also reported, although not in humans. Activating transcription factors
like AP-1, NF-B, and interferon regulatory factors begins by stimulating
TLRs by the related PAMPs (IRFs). Creating interferons (IFNs), pro-inflammatory
cytokines, and effector cytokines that control adaptive immune response
are only a few cellular responses triggered by TLR signaling. NF-B,
MAP kinase, and IRF3 are three important transcription factors activated
by all TLRs except TLR3. In addition to the activation enzyme caspase-1,
NF-B and MAPK activate the genes for three important proteins IL-1,
IL-6, and TNF-α. Another transcription factor, IRF3, which is
activated by the TRIF complex, turns on the antiviral cytokine Interferon
beta gene. TLR ligands include synthetic substances causing professional
APC to mature and be activated and to release inflammatory cytokines
and chemokines. TLR-7 and TLR-7/8 are ligands, respectively, for small-molecule
nucleoside analogues imiquimod and resiquimod. Imiquimod is approved
to treat HPV and basal cell carcinoma in addition to leishmaniasis
(BCC). , Although the precise mechanism of action
of imiquimod is unknown, it is believed that its activity as a TLR-7
agonist mimics that of a microbial antigen and induces the expression
of cytokines. These include IL-1, IL-6, IL-12, IFN-α, and TNF-α
which stimulate or enhance both the innate and the cell-mediated immune
responses while enhancing the migration of Langerhans’ cells
from the dermis to local lymph nodes. details the TLRs as ligands and their sources. , 
 

## Virosomes
Virosomes, made up of membrane lipids that
are actually part of the viral envelope and viral glycoproteins (but
completely devoid of genetic information), are quite similar to liposomes. They are US FDA-approved lipid nanomolecules
for use as vaccine delivery systems. Their surface could be modified
and used for the fusion of proteins/antigens during vaccine designing.
Virosome-based vaccines have demonstrated a better response in terms
of both humoral and cell-mediated immunity. Virosomes are ever more beneficial in designing subunit vaccines,
wherein microbial proteins of low molecular weight need an efficient
carrier or adjuvant molecule for an enhanced vaccine effect. 
Virosomes could carry antigen determinant
sites of pathogens by allowing attachment to the viral coat in the
virosome. As adjuvants, virosomes present
antigens to both MHC I and MHC II, and thus produce both humoral and
cell-mediated immunity. Many novel vaccines
of recent times use virosome nanoadjuvants. Some such approved ones
are influenza virus vaccine Inflexal V in Europe and hepatitis A virus
vaccine Epaxal in Asia. Virosomes in
these vaccines were derived from an influenza viral coat containing
influenza hemeagglutinin protein. The
Inflexal V vaccine is reportedly safe for all age groups. A nanocurcumin-based hybrid influenza virosome
was designed to treat cancer. These were more efficient in terms of
drug release and targeted delivery, thus enabling their use in the
delivery of herbal medicine and treating diseases including cancer. Virosome technology which has proved to produce
higher titers of neutralizing antibodies could be applied to design
vaccines like the currently available SARS-CoV-2 vaccines of AstraZeneca
AZD1222 given its low immunogenicity. Virosomes have high fusogenic properties, enabling them to attach
to host cells and transport the drug/protein into cells through endocytosis.
They are efficient drug delivery systems and could be used in the
development of an array of vaccines. 

## Virus-like Particles (VLP)
VLPs are suggested as a
safe alternative as a live (or even attenuated) virus could be reactivated,
thereby triggering infections. VLPs are viral proteins including capsid,
envelope, and others. VLPs are produced, purified, formulated, and
administered using microbial and nonmicrobial vehicles like bacteria,
yeasts, plants, insect cells, mammalian cells, etc. Effectively, they
have antigenicity (or immunogenicity) without pathogenicity. VLP technology
could be applied to counter emerging infections and cancers. 
VLP is a noninfectious self-assembled
structure of viral envelope proteins without genetic material. As
it is a viral derivative, it possesses several properties very similar
to those of the host virus. This makes it an efficient elicitor of
the immune response when administered as an adjuvant. Like virosomes,
VLPs are also seen to elicit cell-mediated as well as humoral immunity. Plasmids containing the genes for viral structural
proteins infect the cell lines, and the generated proteins are filtered
and separated from the culture to be used as VLPs. Two vaccine cases
where VLPs are successfully used are recombinant hepatitis B and the
human papilloma virus vaccines. VLPs
of, say, foot and mouth disease (FMD) virus were used alongside silica
nanoparticles to produce an effective vaccine that induced long duration
(three months) high antibody titer in pigs. VLPs allegedly induced a better immune response than vector- and
virosome-based vaccines. VLPs, thus, could make approved vaccines
such as Inflexal V against influenza more efficient.

## Dendrimers
Derived from Greek “dendron”,
dendrimer literally means tree. These are versatile, derivable, well-defined,
compartmentalized chemical polymers resembling protein biomolecules
in size and physicochemical properties, synthesized either through divergent or convergent routes following
a series of well-directed polymerization. Dendrimers generate from small monomeric units from a central core
by polymerizing. Thoroughly branched
globular macromolecules similar to globular proteins are generated.
Nanosize dendrimers (10–100 nm) look similar to a ball with
a capacity to trap molecules in the interstitial space of the branched
structure and the multiple functional groups expressed on the surface. 
After their discovery in the last century,
the importance of dendrimers has increased and has been put to several
applications. One such significant application in biological sciences
is as a vaccine adjuvant and for drug delivery. The potential of dendrimers
as adjuvants for antigen delivery in cancer is quite evident. These
could be used in making anticancer drugs, in efficient drug delivery,
as dendritic sensors, in phototherapy for precise anticancer targeting,
gene therapy, etc. 
A branched dendrimeric
chain could be altered or modified, which
is helpful in adaptations for specific use. Antigens could be loaded onto dendrimers through complexation or
chemical bonding at end-branch points. Polyamidoamine (PAMAM) is recognized
as a significant dendrimer formed by repetitively adding branched
units to ammonia or ethylene diamine. Research
has identified specific dendrimers like glycodendrimers, phosphorus
dendrimers, and several others including PAMAM with potential use
in cancer nanotheranostics with the ability to activate the immune
system. Mesoporous silica nanoparticle
dendrimers as adjuvants are highly stable and safe for use as subunits
in VLP-based FMD vaccines for ruminants. 

## Silk Fibroin (SF)
Silk fibroin is a polymeric protein
whose potential as a drug delivery system that has been under study
for a long time. Due to certain encouraging
traits like low toxicity, better biocompatibility, and few structural
properties, silk fibroin nanoparticles (SFNPs) seem efficacious. , Silk fibroin forms hydrogel matrices. It is made of disulfide-bound heavy (370 kDa) and light (25 kDa)
chains. The core structure is of 12 hydrophobic
protein domains with a high propensity to form an antiparallel sheet
(physically cross-connected structure). These domains are alanine
and glycine residues rich. There are 11 tiny hydrophilic amorphous
domains dividing the blocks, which demonstrated valuable immunological
traits, a factor to consider while implanting protein-based materials. pH, temperature, shear, vortexing, electricity,
and sonication based techniques are used to make silk hydrogel. , − Silk-based biomaterials could stabilize and release
proteins. , It suggests integrating proteins, either
trapped or free, into silk films. Reversible interactions between
free protein and silk allow its quick escape from the matrix, and
irreversible connections in the trapped protein may need destroying
the silk matrix to allow the release.
Loading sensitive therapeutic
molecules like peptides and proteins into SF needs gentle aqueous
processing conditions, which is an encouraging feature of SF for drug
delivery. Additionally, SF protein has
amino acids with amine and carboxyl groups that could facilitate attachment
to numerous materials. In preventing
urinary tract infections (UTI), the use of SFNPs adjuvant for vaccine
delivery validated that their biocompatibility, biodegradability traits,
and capability in controlled release of antigen is useful to formulate
an efficient vaccine. SFNPs have garnered
increased interest in recent times due to their unique properties
of tunable size, high surface area to volume ratio, and high drug
loading capacity. 
A suitable adjuvant
should be risk-free and should be devoid of
negative effects. Also, adjuvants should be chemically neutral, biodegradable,
and quickly eliminated from the body. As a natural biopolymer, SF
undergoes proteolytic breakdown to nontoxic byproducts. The biodegraded products of SF have a negligible
or nonexistent effect on the human body. They must also be accessible and affordable for commercially viability. The techniques for SF extraction and purification
are simple and cost-effective. Due to these, SF is a highly biocompatible
polymer with distinctive physical and functional traits. By enhancing
the particle size and structure of SFNPs, these could be good nanoadjuvant
candidates.

## Polycationic CpG Nanoparticles
Antigen-adjuvant
complex
loading on nanoparticles is precisely affected by cationic polymer
polyethylenimine (PEI), an electrostatically forming biological macromolecules
complex. As compared to most other nanoparticle
formulations, fabricating an assembled PEI–protein nanoparticle
is simple, fast, and biomolecule-friendly. PEI increases the immunogenicity
of the vaccines involving DNA and protein. Like damage-associated molecular pattern (DAMP) adjuvants such as
Al(OH)3 or alum (K2(SO4)·Al2(SO4)3·24H2O), Th2 dominates
PEI-induced immunity. Due to the lack
of IFN-γ cytokine induction, PEI could not induce cellular immune
responses such as cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTLs). Yet, PEI-adjuvanted
subunit H1N1 HA protein protected mice challenged by the homologous
influenza virus. The negatively charged viral glycoproteins formed
nanoscale complexes, induced by PEI. 
Higher mucosal antibody and cellular immune responses could
be induced by polyanhydride NPs-induced coencapsulation of inactivated
or killed soluble swine influenza (KAg + CpG-nanovaccine) antigen
and the toll-like receptor (TLR)-9 agonist (CpG-ODN). A cross-reactive
IgA antibody response, higher lymphoproliferative response in mononuclear
blood cells, and elevated secretion of IFN-γ were noticed in
an antigen-induced recall response in intranasally delivered prime-boost
KAg + CpG-nanovaccine. Oligodeoxynucleotides
(ODNs) with unmethylated cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) motifs (CpG
ODNs), which are TLR9 agonists, are promising adjuvants and are already
used in humans. Th1-type immune responses and antigen-specific IgG2
production could appropriately be induced by oligodeoxynucleotides
with unmethylated cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) motifs as adjuvants.
CpG ODN is a synthetic small fragment ssDNA with an immunostimulatory
CpG motif that binds to TLR9 at the endosomes of the dendritic cells
after uptake. TLR9 primarily binds to the unmethylated CpG DNA motifs
that are commonly encountered in bacterial and viral DNA, thus being
central to viral immunity and autoimmune disorders. 

## Lipid Nanoparticles (LNPs)
A lipid
molecule is amphiphilic
and has a polar head, a hydrophobic tail, and a linker between them.
Cationic and ionizable lipids have been successfully tried in mRNA
delivery. mRNA is a novel agent in therapeutics and prophylaxis. To
protect from degradation and allow its in vivo release
after a cell takes it up, mRNA needs an effective, safe, and stable
delivery system. LNPs seem to be promising vehicles across pharmaceutical
industries to deliver mRNA and other therapeutics. As a milestone
in mRNA-based intervention, LNPs-mRNA vaccines were successfully tried
for the first time against COVID-19. LNPs were the key in developing the COVID-19 mRNA vaccine for effective
protection and transportation. Liposome, an early LNPs version, is
a versatile nanomedicine delivery platform ( ). Lipid nanoparticles are successfully used
as an mRNA delivery system. Many liposomal drugs are approved and
are in use in medical practice.
 An enhanced physical stability with a more complex
architecture
was exhibited in subsequent lipid-nanocarrier innovations in the form
of a nanostructured lipid carrier, cationic lipid-nucleic acid complex,
and solid-lipid NP. LNPs hold great promise in treating an array of
diseases due to their encapsulation and site-specific delivery ability
and sustained release of contents. The
delivery of polymeric particles encapsulated nucleic acids and the
delivery of exogenous mRNA into a host cell with liposome were successfully
demonstrated long ago, in 1976 and 1978 respectively.
Cationic lipids are commonly
used in formulating mRNA-based vaccines.
The headgroup in cationic lipids has a permanent positive charge. Usually, quaternary NH4+ lipids, i.e., 1,2-di-O-octadecenyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane
(DOTMA), 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine
(DOPE), and 1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane (DOTAP), are
used in lipid NPs-based vaccines. − Spleen-targeted DOTMA–mRNA
lipoplexes are developed as systemic cancer vaccines. Antigen-specific CD4 regulatory T cells proliferate
by such vaccines that lead to superior immunosuppression with reduced
clinical signs. DOTAP-based cationic
nanoemulsions could deliver antigen mRNA against viral, bacterial,
and parasitic infections. − Dimethyldioctadecylammonium bromide (DDAB),
a quaternary NH4+ lipid as an mRNA vaccine adjuvant,
forms mRNA complexes that stimulate innate immunity. Biodegradable lipids are more and more being accepted in
the vaccine world. It helps the rapid elimination of lipid NPs from
tissue and plasma through which their safety and tolerability are
improved. COVID-19 mRNA (mRNA-1273 and BNT162b2) vaccines involving
biodegradable lipids have widespread acceptance. Lipids themselves
could have adjuvant properties boosting the vaccine efficacy alongside
being a delivery vehicle. − 
Other than being used
for vaccines against infectious diseases,
mRNA vaccines have a promising future, including their use in cancer.
LNP-based mRNA vaccines have had significant progress in cancer therapy. , They are a safe and tolerable treatment option in cancer therapy
with high-specificity. New-age personalized cancer vaccines could
treat solid tumors like colorectal and lung cancers, preclinical studies
demonstrate. By activating TLR subtypes, a combination of diverse
adjuvant types could synergize an immunostimulating effect. Combined
adjuvants in LNPs could further improve mRNA-mediated immune responses.
Costimulation of several TLR subtypes by combined adjuvants may expedite
the evolution of mRNA-based LNP formulations for cancer immunotherapy. 

## Nanoadjuvants in Treating Respiratory Diseases
The
world has an enormous respiratory disease related health burden, and
quite a large population suffers from asthma, obstructive pulmonary
disease, TB, pulmonary fibrosis, pneumonia, lung cancer, occupational
lung disease, and pulmonary hypertension that are chronic in nature.
Billions are exposed to such risks owing to exposure to biomass burning
toxicity, outdoor air pollution, and smoking of tobacco. Chronic respiratory
diseases prematurely kill millions of people annually. Lack of suitable
treatments for many of these has demanded an urgent need to develop
desired vaccines against them. New generation vaccines to induce immunity
against these through attenuated or killed entire organisms, subunits,
and peptides or RNA or DNA vaccines have recently developed. Efficient
delivery of the vaccine molecules to the target site and the need
for a prime-boost vaccination regime with other immunogenic agents
present challenges like their low infection risk, ability to elicit
immune response against specific pathogen, and cost effectiveness.
Efficient vaccine delivery to the target site requires a competent
delivery cargo system and an adjuvant to potentiate immunogenicity,
avoiding rapid degradation under a hostile environment. An effective
vaccine delivery mechanism is required to get through the challenges
mostly as it gets the vaccine molecule to the target site where it
could trigger long-term immunity but also has few side-effects. Further,
there is a growing need to create next-generation composite vaccines
that function both as an adjuvant and immunogen. Nanotech-based formulations
have several advantages in developing a new generation vaccines. Using
nanocarrier-based delivery methods, vaccine antigens could be encapsulated
in the nanoparticles or decorated on the surface for antigen presentation
with more precision, improving stability, protecting vaccines from
early degradation and having superior adjuvant qualities ( ).
 Nanoparticles-based
vaccines against various animal
and human respiratory
tract infections against bovine parainfluenza virus, swine influenza
virus, influenza virus and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) etc.
are being manufactured. Nanotech-based vaccines are injectable or
inhaled formulations that may or may not need a cold chain, are fast
acting with better safety and usability characteristics compared to
traditional vaccines like the live attenuated vaccines, inactivated
vaccines, nucleic acid based vaccines, subunit vaccines, recombinant
viral vaccines, carbohydrate vaccines, conjugated vaccines, and toxoid
vaccines. Viral infections having pandemic
potential still pose a huge threat to human health globally despite
the path-breaking advances in science and technology. Nanobased technologies
could further facilitate to resolve the key antiviral treatment related
issues.
Diversified nanoparticles are poised to revolutionize
especially
the medical sciences, while the safety assessment remains challenging.
Nanoparticle absorption is a vital assessment of the safety of nanobased
products. Studies show that nanoparticles influence immunity and the
respiratory tract, could create oxidative stress, and could even be
genotoxic. , Nanoparticle uptake is dependent
on its physicochemical characteristics intrinsically and on the organism’s
health status extrinsically.
Success of nanobased formulations
developed specifically against
COVID-19 and MERS-CoV as delivery carriers, vaccine transfer platforms,
and as nanodrugs has encouraged research in antigen and adjuvant delivery,
antigen agglomeration prevention, and improved immune responses in
booster immunization. Ag-NPs with stabilizers
were effective with anti-TGEV action, and the Ag2S nanoclusters
prevented RNA synthesis and budding as for instance in porcine epidemic
diarrhea vaccine (PEDV). Ag-NPs as inhalable nanotherapeutics against
SARS-CoV-2 have also been suggested. Their stability, surface functional
chemistry, and biocompatibility make Au-NPs good antigen conjugation
candidates. Nonmetallic NPs like the organic curcumin carbon dots
(CCM-CDs) and polylactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA)
are demonstrably effective against PEDV.

## SWOT Analysis
Keeping the growing demand particularly
in medical applications and their universal value in view, nanoadjuvants
offer tremendous prospects in biobusiness in international trade and
commerce. − In light of this, it is essential to discuss
and analyze the strengths and opportunities (as the positive factors),
and weaknesses and threats (as the negative factors) of the commercial
implications of nanoadjuvant-based vaccine development with the former
as either a vaccine carrier or as a performance elicitor. Thus, a
schematic presentation of the SWOT analysis is provided in for better and comprehensive
understanding for readers. Needless to mention, the strengths are
internal positive factors, the opportunities are external positive
factors, the weaknesses are internal negative factors, and the threats
are external negative factors.
 It is also pertinent here to elaborate on and dissect
the two terms
mentioned in the title of the article, which are “bioinspired”
and “biomimetic” approaches. The biomimetic approach
often falls under radical innovation, and its consequences could be
revolutionary. On a broader sense, biomimicry focuses on inspiration,
ideation, and education to reconnect with nature primarily with a
sustainability (global sustainable development) goal in focus. While
biomimicry is about precise imitation of a biological system, bioinspiration
seems more encompassing on the other hand, considering the artificial
synthesis of a material inspired by a natural system. Essentially,
it synthetically mimics a natural system. In order to ensure the
needed sophistication and function level are on par with those of
a biological system, bioinspiration obviously needs extensive research
and validation.

## Conclusion and Future Directions
Adjuvants other than
those based on alum include oil emulsions,
TLR agonists, and surfactin. Such nontraditional adjuvants could affect
the metabolic state of the host though they are successful in eliciting
an immune response. Increased ROS production is a common side-effect
in them that leads to activating inflammatory pathways mediated by
the NF-κB transcription factor. An increase in ROS is also a
cellular signal to activate the pathways associated with autophagy
and mitophagy in which the cell or dysfunctional mitochondria are
cleared off, leading to reduced cell viability. Endogenous danger
signals also are potent activators of inflammasome pathways like NLRP1
and NLRP3 which further increase the metabolic dysfunction and inflammatory
load.
Despite increasingly favorable evidence of the potential
of nanoparticles
as a drug delivery vehicle, there are only a few such carrier molecules
and vaccines designed so far. Nanobased vaccine strategies majorly
work on stimulating the APCs and DCs in antigen uptake and processing,
thereby stimulating both humoral and cell-mediated immunity. Owing
to the lack of adequate data, nanomolecule-based vaccines and delivery
systems have failed to gain acceptance in pharmaceutical market although
they appear extremely beneficial. Thus,
it is increasingly vital to augment studies that attempt to understand
the characteristics of nanobased vaccines such as their administration
route, interaction with host biomolecules, general and immunological
toxicity, bioavailability, inter- and intracellular signaling, and
cellular uptake mechanisms, among others.
The immense potential
of biologics and biosimilars in biopharmaceutical
products in general and vaccines development in particular has been
recognized in recent times and highlighted. Similar, or even better, has been the scenario for the applications
of bioinspired and biomimetic nanomaterials especially in vaccine
research and development. As lessons learned during the recent COVID-19
pandemic, keeping in mind the potential increase in the number and
the intensity of the evolving strains of the infectious viral entities,
dedicated research and development in vaccines is emergent and urgent.
This review shall surely provide researchers a bird’s-eye-view
of recent trends in a compiled manner, and also as essential leads
for furthering their research endeavors.

## Materials and Methods
The study began with a systematic
search of electronic/digital
databases like PubMed, Scopus, and the Web of Science for the recent
relevant literature. It included searching the databases for all original
scientific publications in English without date limit, with strings
as nanoadjuvant, nanoadjuvant in vaccine discovery, nanotechnology
in vaccine development, aluminum-assorted adjuvant, nanoparticle as
adjuvant, oil emulsion adjuvant, TLR agonist adjuvant, nanoliposome,
lipid nanoparticle, virus-like particle, adjuvant in human vaccine
development, cellular effect of nanoadjuvant and nanoadjuvant in treating
respiratory disease.
Two of the designated coauthors independently
read the titles and
abstracts and collated the literature to include in the work. Other
authors joined to exclude the seemingly irrelevant or less meaningful
articles that could potentially defocus the writeup. While facts and
figures from each selected article were meticulously extracted, one
author independently reviewed those to ensure the veracity, accuracy,
and relevance. 181 articles were shortlisted from a total of more
than 994 searched, references validated, and listed manually.
It followed critical dissection of the articles, corroboration
of facts and figures, secondary data analyses and synthesis, building-up
a free-flowing focused article, and giving a contextually meaningful
title. Thus, the workflow followed was Identify the relevant database
→ search for literature online systematically → collate
literature → exclude less meaningful (seemingly less veracity,
accuracy, and irrelevant) articles → critically dissect selected
articles → corroborate the facts and figures → analyze
and synthesize the presented data → construct a free-flowing
focused article → give a contextually meaningful title to the
final writeup → validate references → list the references
manually.

## Acknowledgments
All authors acknowledge and
thank their respective affiliations.
The authors extend their appreciation to the Researchers Supporting
Project (No. RSPD2023R620), King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

## Author Contributions
DND, RV: Conceptualized and provided the draft framework; BG, PM: Did the initial literature search and
compilation; BG, AM, PM, PP, NCM, AJO, VK, AAR: Drafted the major portion of the paper and provided necessary
technical inputs in the tables and figures; SM, RKM: Spearheaded the work from front, corrected the technical
inputs and the language in the draft, and added valuable and necessary
inputs for the completeness of the final draft. All authors have seen
the manuscript, participated in the revision, and approved it for
publication.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References