pmcJ Adv ResJ Adv Res2546jare101546952Journal of Advanced Research2090-12322090-1224ElsevierPMC12684937PMC12684937.112684937126849373995232010.1016/j.jare.2025.02.012S2090-1232(25)00110-91Original ManuscriptBlocking S1P4 signaling attenuates brain injury in mice with ischemic stroke
BasnetNikita ChoHyunkyung SapkotaArjun ParkSeungbae LimChaemin GaireBhakta Prasad KimDonghee LeeJoo-Youn BeenJae Hui LeeSeunghee LeeBong Yong ChoiJi Woongpharmchoi@gachon.ac.kr KimSangheepennkim@snu.ac.kr aCollege of Pharmacy and Gachon Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Gachon University, 191 Hambakmoero, Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 21936, KoreabCollege of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 08826, KoreacNextgen Bioscience, 228-17 Pangyo-ro, Bundang-gu, Seongnam, Gyeonggi-do 13487, Korea⁎Corresponding authors. pharmchoi@gachon.ac.krpennkim@snu.ac.kr1These authors contributed equally to this work.
12202512220257850208068170229920241712025922025120220250912202509122025© 2025 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Cairo University.2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•The FTY720 analog NXC736 is an S1P4-selective functional antagonist.
•S1P4 is a novel pathogenic factor of ischemic stroke.
•The pathogenic function of S1P4 is associated with neuroinflammation like microglial activation.
•NLRP3 inflammasome activation underlies the S1P4-mediated pathogenesis of ischemic stroke.

## Introduction
The functions of S1P receptors have been revealed using genetic and pharmacological tools, including the potent non-selective modulator FTY720. However, studies on subtype-specific agonists and antagonists are limited; hence, the role of S1P4 remains unclear.

## Objectives
To identify a novel function of S1P4 as a pathogenic factor in stroke using a newly developed S1P4-selective modulator and S1P4 knockdown.

## Methods
Heteroaromatic analogs of FTY720 were synthesized, a β-arrestin assay was conducted against S1P receptors, and the developed compound (NXC736) was characterized as a functional S1P4 antagonist. To clarify the function of S1P4, the therapeutic potential of NXC736 in ischemic stroke was determined using a transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) mouse model, which was validated using S1P4 knockdown. The S1P4-dependent pathogenic mechanisms were determined using immunohistochemical and biochemical analyses.

## Results
Molecular modeling studies provide valuable clues for understanding S1P4 selectivity of NXC736. NXC736 contains a triazole ring instead of a phenyl ring and exhibits S1P4-selective activity as a functional antagonist. Its action on S1P4 does not require phosphorylation by sphingosine kinase 2. Notably, NXC736 exhibited substantial therapeutic activity against ischemic stroke by attenuating tMCAO-induced acute brain injuries, including brain infarction, neurological deficits, and neuronal apoptosis. This suggested that S1P4 is a pathogenic factor in ischemic stroke. This function was confirmed using AAV-based S1P4 knockdown. NXC736 or S1P4 knockdown attenuated blood–brain barrier disruption, neutrophil infiltration, microglial activation and proliferation, and the upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, thereby demonstrating that S1P4 influences neuroinflammatory responses in ischemic stroke. The underlying mechanisms were activation of NLRP3 inflammasome, NF-κB, and MAPKs. S1P4 also contributed to chronic brain injuries caused by ischemic stroke because NXC736 exerted long-term neuroprotective effects against tMCAO challenge.

## Conclusion
Using a functional S1P4 antagonist (NXC736) and a genetic tool for S1P4 knockdown, we identified S1P4 as a novel pathogenic factor in ischemic stroke.

## Keywords
S1P4NXC736S1P4 knockdownIschemic strokeMicrogliaNLRP3 inflammasome activationpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Introduction
Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P, A) mediates important cellular processes, including cell survival, proliferation, differentiation, and trafficking, as well as immune responses. The molecule serves as an extracellular signal transducer that activates five G protein-coupled receptors (S1P1–5) and their downstream effector pathways , . Moreover, S1P has been implicated in the pathogenesis of various diseases, including cancer, infectious diseases, and central nervous system diseases . S1P also has dual effects in cardiovascular diseases, where it exerts protective effects in myocardial infarction and detrimental effects in aortic valve disease . Owing to the multiple aspects and importance of S1P and S1P receptors, numerous studies over the last decade have aimed to develop S1P receptor-specific agonists and antagonists , , , , , , , . These efforts have resulted in new multiple sclerosis therapeutics, such as FTY720 (1, Gilenya™, fingolimod, A), ozanimod, and siponimod. FTY720 is phosphorylated by sphingosine kinase 2 (SPHK2) in vivo
 and this phosphorylated form (FTY720-P) activates four out of the five S1P receptor subtypes (S1P1, 3, 4, 5). S1P1 is the only one of these receptors that has been investigated as a therapeutically relevant target of FTY720 for multiple sclerosis , . However, given that ozanimod and siponimod target both S1P1 and S1P5, S1P5 has recently been considered as a promising FTY720 target , . These continued successes in drug discovery and accumulating evidence from in vivo animal studies have given S1P receptors value as attractive targets for the treatment of many diseases. Despite these successes, most studies have focused on S1P1, leaving the biological functions of other S1P receptor subtypes, such as S1P4, unexplored. 
S1P4 is primarily expressed in lymphoid and hematopoietic tissues . Only a few immune cell functions of S1P4, including neutrophil trafficking, dendritic cell differentiation, cytokine production from dendritic cells, and macrophage recruitment in psoriasis, have been revealed using null mutants , , , , . Moreover, few studies have explored the functions of S1P4, with limited available S1P4-selective modulators to elucidate its biological significance , , , , , . Despite these efforts, the biological function of S1P4 remains unclear and requires further investigation using novel functional chemical probes. In this context, NXC736, which exhibits S1P4-selective functional antagonistic activity, was recently developed . Furthermore, a phase II clinical trial of oral NXC736 for alopecia areata is currently being planned (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT06104839). With this novel pharmacological agent, we sought to identify a novel function of S1P4 in the pathogenesis of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) [our previous study, ; in the previous study, this compound was initially named SLB736, and after technology transfer to NEXTGEN Bioscience, Co., Ltd., it was renamed NXC736] and ischemic stroke [the current study].
Ischemic stroke is induced by insufficient blood flow to the brain, causing severe brain injury through many pathogeneses, such as excitotoxicity, oxidative stress, and neuroinflammatory events . S1P and its receptor-mediated signaling are important pathogenic events in ischemic stroke, as evidenced by the efficacy of FTY720 in both human patients and animal models of ischemic stroke . Moreover, studies using animal models have revealed that S1P receptors S1P1
 , S1P2
 , , and S1P3
 function as key pathogenic players in ischemic stroke. The function of S1P4 in this disease type is unknown. However, this study hypothesized that S1P4 contributes to brain damage in ischemic stroke because the transcript levels of S1P4 are higher in injured mouse brains following an ischemic stroke challenge . In addition, S1P4 influences the functions of immune cells, such as neutrophils, dendritic cells, and macrophages , , , , , , , . Neutrophil infiltration into the brain occurs upon ischemic stroke, and its attenuation is a viable therapeutic strategy to reduce stroke damage . Interestingly, the neuroprotective effects of FTY720 were associated with a reduction in neutrophil recruitment in the brain , , a phenomenon also reported in ischemic stroke , . Therefore, S1P4 may be an additional S1P receptor that plays a critical function in ischemic stroke-induced brain injury.
Therefore, this study aimed to confirm that S1P4 functions as a novel pathogenic player in ischemic stroke. This was achieved by providing evidence for the promising therapeutic potential of the S1P4-selective functional antagonist NXC736 in ischemic stroke during the acute and chronic phases. In addition to this pharmacological agent, the pathogenic functions of S1P4 in ischemic stroke were reaffirmed by S1P4 knockdown using an adeno-associated virus (AAV)-based S1P4 shRNA. Furthermore, the mechanisms by which S1P4 contributes to brain injury following ischemic stroke were demonstrated. In addition to identifying the novel function of S1P4, isolation of NXC736 and its direct action on S1P4 without phosphorylation were revealed. Moreover, valuable clues for understanding the S1P4 selectivity of NXC736 were provided through molecular modeling studies.

## Materials and Methods

## Chemistry

## Synthesis of compounds
All compounds (3a–10f) were synthesized based on the scheme shown in . The details regarding compound synthesis and nuclear magnetic resonance spectra of the synthesized compounds are provided in the .

## Predicting the structure of S1P4 using AlphaFold2
The amino acid sequence of the S1P4 receptor was obtained from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (https://expasy.org/) with accession number O95977. Structural prediction of human S1P4 was performed using AlphaFold2 ( ) . Computation was performed using the ColabFold platform (https://colab.research.google.com/github/sokrypton/ColabFold/blob/main/AlphaFold2.ipynb) with the following parameters: template mode set to pdb100, MSA options configured as MSA_mode: mmseqs2-uniref_env; and pair_mode set to unpaired. This configuration enabled the generation of the predicted S1P4 structure.

## Molecular docking simulations
To understand the binding mode of NXC736, flexible docking studies were performed using Discovery Studio 2024 (BioVia, San Diego, CA, http://www.accelrys.com). A flexible docking protocol was employed to account for receptor flexibility at key binding-site residues. The X-ray crystal structure of S1P1 (PDB code: 3V2Y) was retrieved from the Protein Data Bank (http://www.rcsb.org), whereas the S1P4 structure was constructed using AlphaFold2.
For S1P4, the following residues were designated as flexible: 122, 125, 126, 196, 212, 264, 267, 271, 293, 294, and 297. Similarly, for S1P1, residues 29, 34, 101, 105, 106, 109, 117, 120, 121, 124, 125, 128, 195, 206, 209, 210, 269, 272, 276, and 297 were designated flexible. These residues were selected based on their proximity to the binding pocket and potential for dynamic interactions with the ligand during the docking process.
The generated docking poses ( A, and S5B) provided the initial configurations for subsequent molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, thereby enabling a detailed evaluation of the ligand-receptor interactions and the stability of the complexes under dynamic conditions.

## MD simulations
MD simulations were performed using Discovery Studio 2024 software to observe conformational changes in the ligand–protein complex within the solvent system. The CHARM36 force field was employed for the MD simulations. NXC736-S1P complexes resulting from the flexible docking protocol, were subjected to MD simulations. The membrane was then added to a generalized Born implicit membrane module. The membrane thickness was set to 30  Å. The ligand-S1P complex was embedded in a 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine lipid bilayer, counterions (Na+ and Cl−) and water molecules, filled with TIP3P water were then added. The solvated system was minimized using the Smart Minimizer algorithm for 2000 steps, followed by heating from 50 to 300 K for 100 ps. A subsequent 100-ps equilibration step was carried out at 300 K under 1.0 bar pressure with a time step of 2 fs. The last trajectory frame from the equilibration step was used as the input for the Nanoscale Molecular Dynamics. An NPT ensemble with a temperature of 300 K and pressure of 1 bar was applied during the 50 ns simulation.
The evaluation was performed using The Analyze Trajectory protocol in Discovery Studio, which involved the root mean square deviation (RMSD) and root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) ( ). A binding pose was obtained with the last 1 % of the 50-ns trajectory.

## Biology

## The β-arrestin assay
The synthesized compounds were tested in agonist mode for S1P receptors using the custom PathHunter β-arrestin assay service of DiscoveRx (Fremont, USA). The β-arrestin assay data are provided in along with that of the control FTY720-P. 

## In vitro SPHK2 knockdown and treatment
The small interfering RNAs (siRNA) for transient transfection were obtained from Dharmacon (Lafayette, CO, USA). C6 glioma cells stably expressing S1P4-enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) were transiently transfected with control siRNA or SPHK2 siRNA using Lipofectamine® RNAiMAX reagent (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the guidelines of the manufacturer. After recovery, transfected cells were starved overnight in fetal bovine serum-free Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium containing 0.1 % fatty acid-free bovine serum albumin (FAF-BSA) and exposed to S1P, FTY720-P, NXC736, or vehicle (0.1 % FAF-BSA) for 15 min.

## Ethics statement
All experiments involving animals were conducted according to the ethical policies and procedures approved by the Gachon Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (GIACUC) of Gachon University (Incheon, Korea) (approval numbers: GIACUC-R2019006 and GIACUC-R2021011).

## Induction of ischemic stroke using transient middle cerebral artery occlusion/reperfusion
Male ICR mice (seven-weeks old; Orient, Kyungi-do, Korea) were anesthetized using isoflurane inhalation (4 % isoflurane in oxygen for induction and 3 % isoflurane for maintenance) to induce transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO). This procedure involved 90 min of middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO), followed by reperfusion, as previously described , . The mice were positioned supine under a stereo-dissecting microscope, and a 1-cm ventral neck incision was made after sterilizing the surgical site. A 9-mm-long silicon-coated monofilament (5–0 nylon) was inserted through the bifurcation to occlude the right middle cerebral artery. The monofilament was removed after 90 min to restore blood flow. In the sham group, the same surgical procedure was performed without occlusion. To minimize post-surgical pain, lidocaine gel (Firson, Cheonan-si, Chungcheongnam-do, Korea) was applied to the incision site after surgery. The body temperature of the mice was maintained at 37 °C throughout the procedure using a heating lamp. At the end of the study, the mice were humanely euthanized using CO2 gas, following ethical guidelines and approved protocols.
In total, 255 mice were used in this study ( ). Of these, 162 mice were allocated to the tMCAO and NXC treatment experiments, and 93 mice were used in the S1P4-knockdown experiments. Different sets of surviving mice were used for tissue loss and histological, protein, and transcriptomic (mRNA) analyses to ensure robust and independent assessments. During the experiments, 13 mice were excluded from further analysis. The exclusion criteria included death during the experiment, hemorrhage, or unsuccessful surgeries. Unsuccessful surgeries were defined as those in which the animals failed to exhibit the expected neurological responses, such as the absence of contralateral body rotation when suspended by the tail immediately after MCAO and reperfusion .

## NXC736 administration and AAV-based S1P4 knockdown in mice
After the tMCAO challenge, the mice were randomly assigned to a vehicle (10 % Tween80, p.o.)- or NXC736 (1, 3, or 10 mg/kg, p.o.)-treated group. To determine the efficacy of NXC736 against acute brain injury following tMCAO, NXC736 was given to mice immediately after reperfusion. In the time-window experiment, NXC736 was administered to mice 3 h after reperfusion. To determine the efficacy of NXC736 against chronic brain injury following tMCAO challenge, NXC736 was administered once-daily for five days (the first administration was performed immediately after reperfusion).
To achieve in vivo S1P4 knockdown, AAV particles with either control shRNA with a scrambled sequence or S1P4 shRNA in pAAV-EGFP-U6 vectors (VectorBuilder, Santa Clara, CA, USA) were injected intravenously into the lateral tail vein of the mice (2 × 1011 genome copies of shNC or shS1P4). One week later, the infected mice were subjected to tMCAO.

## Assessment of brain injuries after tMCAO challenge during acute and chronic phases
Acute brain injuries were assessed 22 h after the tMCAO challenge by determining functional neurological deficits and brain infarction. Chronic brain injuries were assessed by determining functional neurological deficits and survival daily for 21 days, and by assessing brain atrophy at the end of the experiment. To ensure proper nutrition and recovery after tMCAO, freshly prepared soft food was provided daily to the mice. Although changes in body weight were not directly monitored during the study period, mice consumed the provided food without any signs of reduced food intake.
Neurological functional deficits in balance, motor function, reflex function, and sensory function were determined using a modified neurological severity score as previously described , . Detailed information of the mNSS components is provided in .
To analyze brain infarction, coronal slices of the brain (2-mm-thick) were stained with 2 % 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) and photographed as previously described , . The infarction volume was calculated using ImageJ software (NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA).
For the survival analysis, the mortality rate of the mice was calculated over the course of the experiment. To assess brain atrophy, brains were harvested 21 days after the tMCAO challenge and photographed. The degree of brain atrophy in the ipsilateral hemisphere compared with that in the contralateral hemisphere was calculated using ImageJ software, as previously described .

## Antibodies
Detailed information on all primary and secondary antibodies used for histological and western blot analyses is provided in .

## Histology

## Preparation of brain sections
At the end of each experiment, the mice were anesthetized with isoflurane, perfused with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline, and fixed with ice-cold 4 % paraformaldehyde (PFA). Brains were then removed from mice, fixed further with 4 % PFA, cryoprotected with 30 % sucrose solution, frozen in embedding solution, and sectioned into 20-μm-thick coronal sections using a cryostat (RD-2230, Roundfin, Shenyang, Liaoning, China).

## Immunofluorescence
Sections were labeled with S1P4 overnight at 4 °C. The sections were labeled with Alexa-Fluor®488-conjugated secondary antibody for 2 h at room temperature (R/T) and covered with a cover slip using VECTASHIELD® mounting medium (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA). Fluorescence imaging was performed using a fluorescence microscope equipped with a DP72 camera (BX53T; Olympus Co., Tokyo, Japan).

## TUNEL assay
Brain sections were labeled with NeuN antibody overnight at 4 °C. Sections were incubated with AF488-conjugated secondary antibody for 2 h at R/T, labeled with a mixture of enzyme and label solutions (In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit, Roche, Mannheim, Germany) for 1 h at R/T, and covered with cover slips using VECTASHIELD® mounting medium. Fluorescence imaging was performed with a BX53T fluorescence microscope.

## Gr-1 or Iba1 immunohistochemistry
Sections were labeled with Ly-6G and Ly-6C (Gr-1) or Iba1 overnight at 4 °C. The sections were labeled with biotin-conjugated secondary antibodies for 2 h at R/T, incubated with ABC reagent (1:200, Vector Laboratories), and processed for signal development using a 3,3′-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride hydrate kit (Dako, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The sections were rinsed, dehydrated, and covered with a cover slip using Entellan mounting medium (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). Colored images were obtained using a bright-field microscope equipped with a DP72 camera (BX53T).

## Double immunofluorescence
Sections were incubated with the following primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C: claudin-5/CD31, NLRP3/Iba1, NLRP3/ASC, and NF-κB/Iba1. The sections were labeled with Alexa-Fluor®488- or Cy3-conjugated secondary antibodies, and cover with a cover slip using VECTASHIELD® mounting medium. Fluorescence imaging for claudin-5/CD31 or NF-κB/Iba1 double immunofluorescence was performed with a BX53T fluorescence microscope. Double immunofluorescence imaging of NLRP3/Iba1 or NLRP3/ASC was performed using a laser scanning confocal microscope (Eclipse A1 Plus; Nikon, Tokyo, Japan).

## Bromodeoxyuridine incorporation and double immunofluorescence
Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU; 50 mg/kg, i.p.; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) was injected into mice twice per day at 12-h intervals for two days, starting 12 h after tMCAO or sham operation. The brains were harvested three days after the tMCAO challenge. Brain cryostat sections were incubated with Iba1 and BrdU antibodies, labeled with Alexa-Fluor®488- or Cy3-conjugated secondary antibodies, and covered with cover slips using VECTASHIELD® mounting medium. Fluorescence imaging was performed using a BX53T fluorescence microscope.

## Image quantification
Captured images using were used for quantification. For each experiment, brain sections from five mice per group were examined. Three different images (20 × magnification) were captured from each mouse brain section, and the number of immunopositive cells was counted using ImageJ software. The average number of immunopositive cells in each region was calculated and expressed as the number of cells per unit area (mm2). In some experiments, the proportion of double-positive cells relative to cell marker-positive cells was determined by quantifying both cell populations and calculating their ratios.
In terms of the microglial phenotype, the soma area of each Iba1-immunopositive cell was measured using ImageJ software, as described previously . The average soma size in each mouse was calculated based on these measurements. Microglia were further classified into ramified and amoeboid phenotypes based on their morphology, as described previously , . Specifically, microglia with small somas and highly branched processes were classified as ramified microglia, whereas those with larger, rounded somas, and retracted, thickened processes were identified as amoeboid microglia.

## Western blot analysis
Proteins isolated from the cells and brains were subjected to SDS-PAGE and transferred to PVDF membranes. After blocking with 5 % skim milk, membranes were labeled with primary antibodies against total ERK1/2 (ERK1/2), phosphorylated ERK1/2 (p-ERK1/2), total p38 (p38), phosphorylated p38 (p-p38), total JNK (JNK), phosphorylated JNK (p-JNK), pro-caspase 1, cleaved caspase-1, pro-IL-1β, mature IL-1β, and β-actin overnight at 4 °C. They were further labeled with the respective horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies for 2 h at R/T and processed to visualize target protein bands using an Enhanced Chemiluminescence Detection Kit (Donginbiotech Co., Seoul, South Korea). ImageJ software was used to quantify the signal intensities of the target protein bands.

## The qRT-PCR analysis
Total RNA was extracted from the ischemic brain hemisphere using RNAiso Plus (Takara, Kusatsu, Japan). cDNA was obtained from 1 μg of total RNA from brain samples using All-in-One First-Strand cDNA Synthesis SuperMix (TransGen Biotech, Haidian, China). The qRT-PCR analysis was performed using StepOnePlusTM qRT-PCR system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) with Power SYBR® Green master mix (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and primer sets ( ). Expression level of each target gene was calculated using the 2-ΔΔCT method with normalization based on β-actin expression levels.

## Statistical analyses
Data are presented as the mean ± SD. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism software (version 8.2.1). Normality of data distribution was assessed using the Shapiro-Wilk test. For data with a normal distribution, a one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test for multiple comparisons or Student’s t-test for pairwise comparisons was used. For non-normal data, the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s post-hoc test was used for group comparisons, and the Mann-Whitney test was applied for pairwise comparisons. Survival rate was analyzed using the Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05.

## Results and discussion

## Design and synthesis of heteroaromatic FTY720 analogs and additonal biological evaluation of NXC736
NXC736 was recently identified as a new selective functional antagonist of S1P4
 . The β-arrestin recruitment assay in agonist format (DiscoveRx PathHunter profiling service) to determine EC50 values at individual S1P receptors revealed that NXC736 exhibited good potency against S1P4 solely with an EC50 value around 2 μM. However, its activity against S1P1, S1P2, and S1P3 was negligible . In addition, NXC736 acted as a functional antagonist of S1P4 by chasing S1P4 fate upon treatment in a cell-based system. This was because S1P4 was internalized into the cytosol but not recycled to the cell surface by NXC736 . Despite the pharmacological properties of NXC736 as a functional antagonist of S1P4, the information on how to get NXC736 was not fully provided in our previous study , which was demonstrated in this study.
Considering that phytosphingosine-1-phosphate (PhS1P, A) binds to S1P4 with a higher affinity than S1P , introducing additional heteroatoms into the structure of FTY720, a typical nonselective S1P ligand, may change the subtype selectivity to S1P4. Therefore, several such analogs, including heteroaromatic analogs of FTY720, were designed and synthesized. Although several FTY720 analogs with heteroaromatic rings have been reported , , , their heteroaromatic moieties only function as linking units connecting the polar head group and the hydrophobic tail. The designed analogs are shown in Scheme 1 ( ). They contained thiazole, thiophene, or triazole rings instead of the phenyl ring of FTY720, and the attached alkyl chain was 10 carbon atoms long.

## Evaluation of analogs using β-arrestin recruitment assay and further biological evaluation of NXC736
For a preliminary evaluation of heteroaromatic analogs 10a–f, a β-arrestin translocation assay was conducted in agonist format against S1P receptor subtypes 1–4 using the DiscoveRx PathHunter profiling service. Given that FTY720-P binds to S1P receptors, it was used as a control instead of FTY720. Furthermore, FTY720-P was not subtype selective ( ). Unexpectedly, FTY720-P also showed S1P2 agonistic activity ( ), which is contrasting to previous studies demonstrating it as an agonist for all S1P receptors except S1P2
 , . In the current study, all compounds including FTY720-P was tested at a fixed concentration of 10 μM. Therefore, this high concentration may have contributed to the observed activity of FTY720-P on S1P2. In fact, in our previous study, the β-arrestin assay in agonist format to determine EC50 values at individual S1P receptors revealed that FTY720-P exerted concentration-dependent effects on S1P1, S1P3, and S1P4, but not on S1P2, thereby confirming the selective activation of these receptors .
Thiazole and thiophene-based analogs 10a–e showed moderate S1P1, S1P3, and S1P4 agonistic activity at a concentration of 10 µM. The 2,4-substituted thiazole-containing analogs 10a and 10c exhibited a greater preference for S1P4 over S1P1 than the 2,5-substituted analog 10b (entries 1 and 3 vs. 2). Moreover, S1P4/S1P3 selectivity was slightly higher in the 2,4-substituted thiophene analog 10e than in the corresponding 2,5-substituted analog 10d (entry 4 vs. 5). However, the receptor selectivity of these analogs was insufficient to justify further biological evaluation. When the thiophene ring was replaced with a triazole ring, the S1P4 selectivity was considerably enhanced (entry 6). As a result, the triazole-based compound 10f (NXC736) showed high potency against S1P4, but very low activity against other subtypes at 10 µM ( ). After obtaining these preliminary results, further biological studies were performed, as demonstrated previously ; NXC736 selectively acts on S1P4 as a functional antagonist.
FTY720 is a modulator of S1P receptors and requires phosphorylation by SPHK2 to exert its effects on S1P receptors , , . When developing a new modulator of S1P4, one of the main goals is to develop an agent that can bypass the phosphorylation requirement. NXC736 was identified as an S1P4 modulator with the properties of a functional antagonist , and it could act on S1P4 without phosphorylation. To address this, ERK1/2 activation, a downstream effector pathway of S1P4, was analyzed in C6 glioma cells overexpressing S1P4-EGFP under SPHK2-knockdown conditions ( B). As expected, S1P (1 μM) induced ERK1/2 phosphorylation regardless of SPHK2 knockdown, whereas FTY720 (1 μM) markedly reduced ERK1/2 phosphorylation upon SPHK2 knockdown ( C and D). In sharp contrast to FTY720, NXC736 (1 μM) induced ERK1/2 phosphorylation independent of SPHK2 knockdown ( C and D), thereby demonstrating that non-phosphorylated NXC736 solely acts on S1P4. However, the possibility that sphingosine kinase 1 also phosphorylates NXC736 cannot be excluded because it also phosphorylates FTY720, but with different Vmax
 .

## MD simulations
MD simulations were performed to investigate the molecular basis of the receptor selectivity for NXC736. The protein structure of S1P4 was generated using AlphaFold2 with high confidence ( ) . Analysis of the S1P4 structure and the X-ray crystal structure of S1P1 (PDB code: 3V2Y) revealed that the binding pockets of both S1P receptors are highly amphipathic, thereby accommodating the hydrophilic head and hydrophobic tail of the ligand. The hydrophobic region is lined with aliphatic amino acid residues and aromatic amino acid residues that form a narrow, tunnel-shaped cavity. The hydrophilic region contains numerous polar residues, including Asn101 (S1P1)/Asn102 (S1P4), Arg120 (S1P1)/Arg121 (S1P4), and Glu121 (S1P1)/Glu122 (S1P4), which are involved in strong interactions with the polar parts of the ligands.
The non-phosphorylated form of NXC736 acted as a functional antagonist of S1P4, similar to FTY720-P; thus, NXC736 itself was used in the simulation study. The flexible molecular docking of NXC736 was followed by 50-ns MD simulations using Discovery Studio 2024 . The predicted binding positions of NXC736 in S1P1 and S1P4 are shown in . When S1P4 bound to NXC736, its hydrophobic pocket was completely filled with the hydrophobic tail of NXC736 via several hydrophobic interactions ( A and C). In contrast, the hydrophobic tail of NXC736 partially filled the hydrophobic region of S1P1 and remained far from the hydrophobic cluster comprising Met124, Phe125, Leu195, and Phe210 ( B and D). 
Another notable difference was that the interactions and position of the triazole ring in NXC736 differed considerably between the two receptors. Although the triazole ring of NXC736 interacted with Leu270 and Leu271 in the S1P4 model, a corresponding interaction was not observed in S1P1. The triazole ring NXC736 in S1P1 interacted with Glu121, Leu297, and two water molecules and was thus located in the upper part of the pocket. This appears to cause the hydrophobic tail to occupy a smaller volume within the hydrophobic region than in S1P4, or vice versa. As expected, the polar moiety of NXC736 interacted with the polar residues of both receptors but with different interaction patterns. Moreover, a hydrogen bond exists between the hydroxyl groups of NXC736 and Tyr29 in S1P1, whereas the corresponding interaction is not present in S1P4. Instead, the hydroxyl groups of NXC736 in S1P4 engaged in hydrogen bonding with other polar residues, such as Arg34 and Asp290. Thus, these differences in binding, especially the position of the triazole, provide a plausible explanation for the difference in binding affinity between S1P1 and S1P4.
To confirm the role of triazole in subtype selectivity, 2,5-substituted thiazole-containing analog 10b was subjected to the same MD simulations for S1P1 ( C and F). As previously indicated, the analog 10b exhibited no preference for S1P4 over S1P1 ( ). This simulation predicted that the hydrophobic tail of 10b forms many hydrophobic interactions and the heteroaromatic thiazole ring is involved in π-alkyl interactions with Met124 and π-π stacking with Tyr98, thereby efficiently filling the hydrophobic region in S1P1. This binding mode of 10b in S1P1 was considerably different from that of the S1P4 selective triazole-containing NXC736, especially the position of the heteroaromatics and the degree of filling of the hydrophobic pocket. Thus, it was hypothesized that different non-bonding interactions of heteroaromatics with amino acid residues cause subtype selectivity.
Computational mutagenesis of S1P4 supported the proposed subtype selectivity of NXC736. Sequence alignment of S1P1 and S1P4 suggested that Met124 in S1P1 and Leu125 in S1P4 were notably different amino acid residues in the hydrophobic pockets ( ). Therefore, Leu125 in S1P4 was mutated to methionine. The mutant S1P4 structure was subjected to MD simulations under the same conditions as the wild-type S1P4 MD simulation. The MD simulation results for the mutant receptor showed that unlike the MD simulation results for wild-type S1P4, the hydrophobic tail of NXC736 did not reach the deeper parts of the hydrophobic pocket, and its triazole ring was positioned near the hydrophilic region ( D and E).
To elucidate the differences in binding poses between the wild-type and mutant S1P4 receptors, snapshots of the binding poses were captured during the MD simulations. For the wild-type S1P4 (Leu125), a snapshot was taken at 7.84 ns, representing the moment when NXC736 moved deeper into the hydrophobic pocket. In contrast, for the mutant S1P4 (Met125), a snapshot was taken at 2.13 ns, when NXC736 reached its deepest position within the hydrophobic pocket. These conformations were superimposed to compare interactions between the ligand and Leu125 or Met125 ( E). In both snapshots, the triazole ring of NXC736 occupied a similar position. However, the subsequent conformational progression diverged pronouncedly. In the wild-type receptor, Leu125 engaged in a π-alkyl interaction with the triazole ring, with a distance of 5.08 Å, which provided sufficient space for NXC736 to move deeper into the hydrophobic pocket. In contrast, in the mutant receptor, Met125 formed a strong π-sulfur interaction with the triazole ring , with a closer distance of 3.68 Å. This limited the available space for NXC736 to advance into the hydrophobic pocket. Thus, the selectivity of the S1P subtypes was caused by the different interactions of the triazole ring with the amino acid residues around the entrance of the hydrophobic pocket.

## Identification of S1P4 as a novel pathogenic factor for ischemic stroke

## S1P4 is a pathogenic factor in ischemic stroke during the acute phase
A time-dependent upregulation of S1P4 mRNA levels was observed in injured brains after tMCAO challenge with a 45 min occlusion . Similarly, in this study, S1P4 mRNA ( A) and S1P4 protein ( B) was upregulated in injured brains one day after tMCAO challenge with 90 min occlusion. Immunofluorescence staining also showed that S1P4 protein was upregulated ( C and D), and the number of S1P4+ cells in the tMCAO group was considerably higher than that in the sham group ( C and D). To further delineate the cell-specific S1P4 upregulation, double immunofluorescence was performed using antibodies against S1P4 and different cell-specific markers for neurons (NeuN), neutrophils (Gr-1), microglia (Iba1), and endothelial cells (CD31), all of which contribute to brain injury in stroke , . Neurons, neutrophils, and microglia were responsible for S1P4 upregulation, as evidenced by the markedly higher number of S1P4-expressing neurons ( A and B), neutrophils ( C and D), and microglia ( E and F) in the brains of the tMCAO group compared with that in the sham controls. In contrast, the number of S1P4-expressing endothelial cells was lower in the tMCAO-challenged brain ( G and H), indicating S1P4 downregulation in this cell type, which was consistent with the findings of a previous study that demonstrated S1P4 downregulation in endothelial cells isolated from ischemic brains. Despite this discrepancy depending on the cell type, S1P4 is clearly upregulated in injured brains after stroke challenge, thereby strongly indicating the possible function of S1P4 in stroke as a pathogenic factor. 
To address this possibility, a selective functional antagonist of S1P4 (NXC736) was used. To determine the function of S1P4 in ischemic stroke, the ability of NXC736 to alleviate brain damage after ischemia/reperfusion in tMCAO-challenged mice was evaluated. The protective effects of NXC736 when administered immediately after reperfusion were first determined in the context of acute brain injury one day after the tMCAO challenge by assessing the effects on brain infarct volume, functional neurological deficits, and neuronal apoptosis. Moreover, whether these effects were preserved even by NXC736 administration 3 h after reperfusion was investigated.
When NXC736 (1, 3, and 10 mg/kg) was administered to mice immediately after reperfusion, acute brain injuries one day after the tMCAO challenge were considerably lower, as evidenced by the attenuated infarct volume ( E and F) and functional neurological deficits ( G). The neuroprotective effects of NXC736 were evident at 3 and 10 mg/kg, without any considerable dose effect ( E–G). Thus, a lower dose (3 mg/kg) was chosen for further determination. Next, whether delayed NXC736 administration could also attenuate tMCAO-induced brain damage was determined in the context of the therapeutic time window. When NXC736 was administered 3 h after reperfusion, the infarct volume of the brain one day after tMCAO challenge was considerably lower ( H and I), and functional neurological deficits were also attenuated compared with that of the vehicle-administered group ( J).
Ischemic stroke-induced brain injury is characterized by cortical neuronal loss resulting from pathological processes, such as excitotoxicity, oxidative stress, and inflammation triggered by reduced blood flow during ischemia , . The cerebral cortex, a region critical for sensory perception, motor control, cognition, and memory, is particularly vulnerable to ischemic damage . Cortical neuronal death is a major contributor to functional impairment in stroke, thereby highlighting the importance of strategies for mitigating neuronal loss during stroke therapy. In particular, neurons in the lesions of a stroke-challenged brain undergo acute-phase apoptosis . Therefore, the ability of NXC736 to attenuate neuronal apoptosis in the cortical area of the ischemic core region after tMCAO challenge was explored using the TUNEL assay. The number of apoptotic neurons (TUNEL+NeuN+ cells) in injured brains after the tMCAO challenge was considerably higher than that in the sham group ( K and L), whereas NXC736 treatment resulted in a lower number of apoptotic neurons ( K and L). Additionally, the ratio of apoptotic neurons to total neurons (TUNEL+NeuN+/NeuN+) in the NXC736-treated group was considerably lower than that in the vehicle group ( M).
Taken together, these results illustrate that NXC736 exerts protective effects against acute brain injury in a tMCAO mouse model, suggesting a pathogenic function of S1P4 in acute brain injury caused by ischemic stroke. This pathogenic function, established using NXC736, was further confirmed by S1P4 knockdown using its specific shRNA AAV. Successful S1P4 knockdown in the brain was validated ( A). S1P4 knockdown mice exhibited a lower infarct volume than that in the control shRNA AAV-infected mice ( B and C) and showed improved neurological scores ( D) during the acute phase of tMCAO-induced brain injury. Moreover, the number and ratio of apoptotic neurons (TUNEL+NeuN+ cells) were markedly lower in S1P4 knockdown mice than in controls after tMCAO challenge ( E–G). These results strongly support the pathogenic function of S1P4 in ischemic stroke during the acute phase. 

## S1P4 contributes to neutrophil infiltration and blood–brain barrier disruption in ischemic stroke during the acute phase
Considering that infiltration of immune cells, including neutrophils, can occur upon blood–brain barrier (BBB) disruption, the effects of NXC736 on neutrophil infiltration and BBB damage were assessed , . The known functions of S1P4 in neutrophils, including increasing neutrophil trafficking , was recapitulated using an in vivo ischemic stroke model. Neutrophil infiltration after tMCAO challenge was observed in the cortical areas of the ischemic core regions ( A and B). The number of Gr-1+ cells was pronouncedly higher in the cortical areas of the ischemic core regions after the tMCAO challenge, which was lowered by NXC736 ( A and B). Additionally, NXC736 administration attenuated BBB dysfunction in tMCAO-challenged brains ( C and D), as indicated by the expression of the junctional protein claudin-5 in endothelial cells. To elucidate the function of S1P4 in tMCAO-induced neutrophil infiltration and BBB disruption, S1P4 knockdown experiments were conducted. S1P4 knockdown resulted in fewer Gr-1+ cells in the cortical areas of the ischemic core regions following the tMCAO challenge ( E and F). Moreover, S1P4 knockdown ameliorated BBB dysfunction, as evidenced by higher claudin-5 expression in endothelial cells ( G and H). These results demonstrate that NXC736 administration and S1P4 knockdown lower neutrophil infiltration levels and BBB disruption in mice after tMCAO challenge, indicating that these phenomena are S1P4-dependent pathogenic events in ischemic stroke. 
S1P signaling regulates BBB function in patients with stroke by blocking either S1P producing enzyme (SPHK1) or a downstream effector of S1P signaling (STAT3) . Furthermore S1P receptors are involved in BBB disruption during stroke. In vivo tMCAO-induced stroke models have further revealed that S1P1
 , S1P2
 , and S1P3
 are disruptive factors of BBB function; blocking these receptor activities attenuates tMCAO-induced BBB disruption. In this study, blocking S1P4 signaling, either with NXC736 treatment or S1P4 knockdown, attenuated tMCAO-induced BBB disruption ( ); thereby confirming S1P4 as a disruptive factor of the BBB in stroke. However, the disruptive effects of S1P4 may be a result of the overall progression of brain injury. Thus, the attenuation of brain injuries by blocking S1P4 signaling in tMCAO-challenged mice may result in attenuated BBB disruption. Interestingly, endothelial S1P4 exerts its BBB-protective function in endothelial cells and S1P4 expression is downregulated in endothelial cells isolated from a tMCAO-challenged mouse brain . Consistent with the latter, in this study, the number of endothelial cells, particularly S1P4 expressing endothelial cells, was lower in the tMCAO-challenged brain than in the sham control, whereas the number of S1P4 expressing neurons, neutrophils, and microglia, all of which are involved in the pathogenesis of ischemic stroke, were higher ( ). Taken together, S1P4 mediates protective effects on endothelial cells; however, its effect on other cell types may outweigh this benefit, thereby contributing to overall injury progression.

## S1P4 contributes to microglial activation and proliferation in ischemic stroke during the acute phase
The activation of microglia is one of the major pathogenic events in the post-ischemic brain, where it occurs in both the ischemic core and peri-ischemic regions . In addition, the morphology of microglia in the ischemic core regions can change into highly deleterious amoeboid cells . To address whether microglial activation is a pathogenic event for S1P4-mediated brain damage in ischemic stroke, microglial activation in the ischemic core and peri-ischemic regions one and three days after tMCAO challenge was assessed using immunohistochemical analysis for Iba1, which is a widely known marker for activated microglia . The morphological changes in Iba1+ cells in the ischemic core region were also determined three days after tMCAO challenge. After tMCAO, the number of Iba1+ cells was markedly higher in both the ischemic core and peri-ischemic regions at both time points (one and three days) ( A, B, D, and E). Additionally, soma size, which reflects microglial activation, was markedly larger in these regions at both time points ( A, C, D, and F). However, NXC736 administration considerably lowered the number and soma size of Iba1+ cells in these areas ( A–F). Notably, the morphology of Iba1+ cells in the ischemic core region three days after tMCAO challenge was mostly amoeboid ( D and G), whereas NXC736 administration was associated with a higher proportion of ramified Iba1+ cells and a lower proportion of amoeboid Iba1+ cells ( D and G). These results indicated that S1P4 plays a critical role in microglial activation during ischemic stroke. In addition to microglial activation, activated microglia proliferate in the injured brain after ischemic stroke, which is observed in the penumbra region, a marginal zone between the ischemic core and the peri-ischemic regions , , . To determine whether S1P4 also affects microglial proliferation in ischemic stroke, BrdU/Iba1 double immunofluorescence staining was performed to determine BrdU signals in Iba1+ cells in the penumbra three days after tMCAO challenge. The number of BrdU+Iba1+ cells was higher in the injured brains of the vehicle-treated group after tMCAO than in the sham group ( H and I). This suggests that extensive microglial proliferation occurs in post-ischemic brains. NXC736 administration resulted in fewer BrdU+Iba1+ cells ( H and I). Additionally, the ratio of proliferating microglia to total microglia (BrdU+Iba1+/Iba1+) was notably lower in the NXC736-treated group than in the vehicle group ( H and J). These results suggested that S1P4 is involved in microglial proliferation during ischemic stroke. 
To further elucidate the function of S1P4 in tMCAO-induced microglial activation and proliferation, experiments were conducted under S1P4 knockdown conditions. Similar to NXC736 treatment, S1P4 knockdown resulted in a lower number and smaller soma size of Iba1+ cells in both the ischemic core and peri-ischemic regions at both time points (1 and 3 d) ( A–F). Additionally, S1P4 knockdown resulted in a lower proportion of amoeboid Iba1+ cells, which was elevated by tMCAO ( D and G). Moreover, the number and ratio of proliferating microglia (BrdU+Iba1+) induced by tMCAO were considerably lower in S1P4 knockdown mice than in the controls ( H–J). 
Collectively, by using NXC736 in conjunction with S1P4 knockdown, microglial activation and proliferation may be pathogenic events for S1P4-mediated brain damage in ischemic stroke.

## S1P4 contributes to upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines in ischemic stroke during the acute phase
When ischemic stroke occurs, profound brain damage can be associated with enhanced production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and relatively suppressed production of anti-inflammatory cytokines , . Activated microglia produce pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines in the injured brain following ischemic stroke . Therefore, they contribute to brain injury and recovery from the damage by producing pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-12, and IL-23, and by producing anti-inflammatory cytokines, such TGF-β1, IL-10, and IL-4, respectively , . To investigate whether S1P4 influences the production of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines in ischemic stroke, we examined the mRNA expression levels of these cytokines in injured brains one day after tMCAO challenge ( ). As expected, tMCAO challenge resulted in higher mRNA expression levels of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 ( A–C). However, NXC736 administration markedly attenuated this upregulation ( A–C), thereby demonstrating that S1P4 is involved in the production of proinflammatory cytokines in ischemic stroke. In contrast, S1P4 was not involved in the production of anti-inflammatory cytokines in ischemic stroke, as evidenced by the fact that NXC736 administration did not alter the mRNA expression levels of TGF-β1, IL-10, and IL-4 in tMCAO-challenged brains ( D–F). The expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines under S1P4 knockdown conditions were also evaluated. Consistent with the NXC736 treatment, S1P4 knockdown markedly lowered TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 mRNA expression levels, which were elevated by tMCAO ( G–I). These results indicate that S1P4 influences pro-inflammatory responses in brains injured as a result of ischemic stroke. 

## S1P4 contributes to NLRP3 inflammasome activation in ischemic stroke during the acute phase
Activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome may contribute to neuroinflammatory processes and tissue damage in injured brains of ischemic stroke. In general, NLRP3 inflammasome activation requires two signals: a priming signal (signal 1) and an activation signal (signal 2), which are responsible for NLRP3 upregulation and formation of the NLRP3 inflammasome complex, respectively . The latter results in caspase-1 activation and IL-1β maturation . NLRP3 inflammasome activation through this sequential process has the potential for pathogenesis in various inflammatory diseases, including ischemic stroke , . NLRP3 inflammasome activation may contribute to the pathogenesis of ischemic stroke. This is supported by evidence of NLRP3 upregulation and NLRP3 inflammasome activation in injured brains after stroke , , , and attenuation of stroke-induced brain injury by either genetic deletion of NLRP3 or its inhibitor . Moreover, S1P4 regulates NLRP3 inflammasome activation in macrophages which share common features with microglia . Therefore, S1P4 may play a pathogenic function in ischemic stroke, possibly through NLRP3 inflammasome activation. To address this possibility, the ability of S1P4 to upregulate NLRP3 in injured brains one day after tMCAO was investigated ( A–C). NLRP3 was upregulated at both the mRNA ( A) and protein ( B and C) levels in injured brains. Additionally, NLRP3 upregulation was prominent in Iba1+ cells, with a higher number of NLRP3+Iba1+ cells than in the controls ( B and C), indicating that activated microglia are responsible for NLRP3 upregulation. Interestingly, the NLRP3 upregulation was pronouncedly attenuated by NXC736 administration ( A–C). Next, the ability of S1P4 to activate NLRP3 inflammasome in damaged brains of ischemic stroke was determined by assessing the ASC speck formation one d after tMCAO challenge using NLRP3/ASC double immunofluorescence ( D and E). The number of NLRP3+ASC+ cells was markedly higher after the tMCAO challenge, whereas NXC736 administration significantly lowered this number ( D and E). The regulatory function of S1P4 in NLRP3 inflammasome activation in injured brains of ischemic stroke was further determined by evaluating caspase-1 activation and IL-1β maturation one day after tMCAO challenge using western blot analysis ( F–H). Protein expression levels of both cleaved-caspase-1 and mature IL-1β were notably upregulated after tMCAO challenge, whereas NXC736 administration remarkably attenuated this upregulation ( F–H). 
To specifically assess caspase-1 activation and IL-1β maturation in microglia, double immunofluorescence staining was performed using antibodies against Iba1 and cleaved caspase-1 or mature IL-1β in ischemic brain tissues ( ). The expression of cleaved caspase-1 and mature IL-1β, which was increased by tMCAO, was predominantly observed in Iba1+ cells ( A and C). The number of cleaved-caspase-1+Iba1+ and mature IL-1β +Iba1+ cells in the tMCAO group was markedly higher than that in the vehicle group ( ). However, NXC736 administration resulted in a considerably lower number of double-positive cells ( ). These findings suggested that NXC736 effectively lowered NLPR3 inflammasome activation, specifically in microglia, following tMCAO.
To further validate the regulatory function of S1P4 in NLRP3 inflammasome activation, NLRP3 upregulation in activated microglia, ASC speck formation, and resultant activation of components (caspase-1 and IL-1β) were assessed under S1P4 knockdown conditions following tMCAO. Knockdown of S1P4 resulted in lower levels of NLRP3 mRNA ( A) and protein expression ( B and C) in injured brains than in controls. Similar to the effects observed with NXC736 treatment, the number of NLRP3+Iba1+ cells was markedly lower in the S1P4 knockdown group ( B and C). Consistently, the number of NLRP3+ASC+ cells, which was elevated by tMCAO, was notably lower in the S1P4 knockdown group ( D and E). Finally, the protein levels of cleaved caspase-1 and mature IL-1β, which were increased by tMCAO, in the S1P4 knockdown group were considerably lower than that in the control group ( F–H). 
Collectively, these results indicated that S1P4 influences NLRP3 inflammasome activation in ischemic stroke-challenged brains, specifically in activated microglia, by regulating both signal 1 (for NLRP3 upregulation) and signal 2 (for NLRP3 inflammasome assembly). This ultimately results in caspase-1 activation and IL-1β maturation.

## The pathogenic function of S1P4 in ischemic stroke during the acute phase is associated with activation of NF-κB and MAPKs
NF-κB and MAPK are well-known signaling molecules that influence NLRP3 inflammasome activation by regulating signal 1 to induce NLRP3 upregulation . They also influence neuroinflammatory responses and brain injury in ischemic stroke , , . Moreover, these signaling molecules are effector molecules that are activated upon S1P4 activation . Therefore, the role of NF-κB and MAPKs in S1P4-dependent pathogenesis of ischemic stroke was investigated. First, the ability of S1P4 to modulate NF-κB signaling in damaged ischemic stroke brains was investigated. For this purpose, NF-κB expression levels in Iba1+ cells were determined at one day after tMCAO challenge using NF-κB/Iba1 double immunofluorescence ( A and B) because NF-κB contributes to inflammatory responses in activated microglia . The number of NF-κB+Iba1+ cells was higher in the vehicle-treated tMCAO group, whereas NXC736 administration markedly lowered this number ( A and B). Consistent with NXC736 treatment, S1P4 knockdown resulted in a lower number of NF-κB+Iba1+ cells after tMCAO challenge ( C and D). These findings suggest that NF-κB is involved in the pathogenic function of S1P4 in ischemic stroke, particularly in activated microglia. 
In addition, the ability of S1P4 to modulate MAPKs signaling in the injured brains of ischemic stroke was investigated using western blot analysis. All three MAPKs (ERK1/2, p38, and JNK) were activated in injured brains one day after tMCAO ( E–H), and this activation was considerably suppressed by NXC736 administration ( E–H). Similarly, S1P4 knockdown suppressed the activation of these three MAPKs ( I–L). To specifically evaluate MAPKs activation in microglia, double immunofluorescence staining was performed using antibodies against Iba1, p-ERK1/2, p-JNK, and p-p38 in ischemic brain tissue ( A–F). The number of p-ERK1/2+Iba1+, p-JNK+Iba1+, and p-p38+Iba1+ cells were notably higher in the tMCAO group than in the vehicle group ( A–F). However, NXC736 administration resulted in a markedly lower number of double-positive cells ( A–F). These findings suggest that S1P4 influences MAPK activation in injured brains following ischemic stroke, particularly in activated microglia.
As mentioned earlier, these signaling molecules, NF-κB and MAPKs, have been independently identified as mediators of NLRP3 inflammasome activation and brain injuries of ischemic stroke through regulation of neuroinflammatory responses , , . Moreover, they act as effector pathways of S1P4
 . In this context, the study findings suggest that the pathogenic function of S1P4 in ischemic stroke processes, such as brain injury, neuroinflammatory responses, and NLRP3 inflammasome activation, may be associated with activation of NF-κB and MAPK pathways.

## S1P4 also contributes to brain damage following ischemic stroke during the chronic phase
Considering that long-term neurological dysfunction is a serious problem in clinical cases of ischemic stroke, addressing the long-term neuroprotective effects of NXC736 against stroke is of great importance . Thus, this study determined whether NXC736 protects against chronic brain injury by assessing functional neurological deficits, survival, and brain atrophy up to 21 days after the tMCAO challenge ( ). When NXC736 was administered daily for the first five days after tMCAO challenge, functional neurological deficits were considerably attenuated compared with those in the vehicle-administered tMCAO group ( A). NXC736 also improved survival ( B). In the vehicle-administered tMCAO group, 40 % of the mice (8 of 20 mice) survived, and in the NXC736-administered tMCAO group, 80 % of the mice (8 of 10 mice) survived. Additionally, NXC736 treatment considerably attenuated brain tissue loss ( C and D). Brain tissue loss was measured using a widely accepted method . However, this approach has the limitation of only providing estimates and does not allow for quantitative comparison of brain mass values. Nevertheless, the combined results suggest that NXC736 exerts long-term neuroprotective effects in the tMCAO mouse model. 
The aggregated in vivo results of the current study support a new function of S1P4 as a pathogenic factor in ischemic stroke. When S1P4 signaling was blocked by either NXC736 treatment or S1P4 knockdown, tMCAO-induced brain injury was attenuated. As key pathogenic events, this study demonstrates that S1P4 regulates neuronal apoptosis, BBB disruption, and neuroinflammation, such as neutrophil infiltration, microglial activation, and pro-inflammatory responses. These events constitute the well-known pathogenesis of ischemic stroke . In particular, S1P4 in ischemic stroke appears to specifically influence microglia-driven inflammatory responses, supported by findings that blocking S1P4 signaling attenuated NLRP3 inflammasome activation in activated microglia, along with attenuation of underlying signaling pathways including NF-κB and MAPK. In addition to demonstrating the new function of S1P4, the in vivo results of the study indicate the potential of NXC736, a functional antagonist of S1P4, as a promising therapeutic agent to treat ischemic stroke. NXC736 administration, which was performed either immediately after tMCAO challenge or 3 h after tMCAO challenge, markedly attenuated brain injuries during the acute phase and also exerted long-term neuroprotection against tMCAO challenge. These results highlighted the potential of NXC736 as a novel therapeutic agent against ischemic stroke. This potential is further supported by its safety and tolerability, as confirmed in a Phase 1 clinical trial (NCT05079425). Additionally, a Phase 2 clinical trial for NXC736 in the treatment of alopecia areata is planned (NCT06104839). Further investigations are warranted to explore its broader applicability in ischemic stroke.

## Conclusion
The development of small-molecule modulators that selectively target S1P4 has been recognized as a major issue in the translational research field of S1P receptors. This is mainly because the biological roles and associated mechanistic pathways of S1P4 remain unclear despite the great potential of S1P4 as a pharmaceutical target protein. Herein, heteroaromatic ring–containing analogs of FTY720 were designed to achieve high S1P4 activity and subtype selectivity to alter the interactions between ligands and residues in the receptor cavity. Among the synthesized analogs, the representative triazole NXC736 exhibited excellent subtype selectivity toward S1P4. From our previous study, this compound was revealed as an S1P4-selective functional antagonist . The distinguishable molecular docking patterns of NXC736 with S1P1 and S1P4 explain the selectivity of this subtype. Importantly, the in vivo efficacy of NXC736 in ischemic stroke demonstrates its promising potential as a treatment for tMCAO-induced brain damage. These results also revealed that S1P4 is a novel pathogenic target in ischemic stroke, which was further supported by the finding that S1P4 knockdown lowered tMCAO-induced brain injury. Using NXC736, S1P4 has also been shown to play critical roles in NASH . Therefore, these independent studies may serve as reference points for the development of S1P4 therapies for ischemic stroke, NASH, and possibly other disease types.

## Compliance with Ethics Requirements
All experiments involving animals were conducted according to the ethical policies and procedures approved by Gachon Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (GIACUC) of Gachon University (Approval no. GIACUC-R2019006 and GIACUC-R2021011).

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Nikita Basnet: Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Visualization. Hyunkyung Cho: Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Visualization. Arjun Sapkota: Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization. Seungbae Park: Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization. Chaemin Lim: Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization. Bhakta Prasad Gaire: Formal analysis, Investigation. Donghee Kim: Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization. Joo-Youn Lee: Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation. Jae Hui Been: Methodology, Validation, Investigation. Seunghee Lee: Methodology, Validation, Investigation. Bong Yong Lee: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. Ji Woong Choi: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition. Sanghee Kim: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 Appendix A

## Supplementary material
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

## Supplementary Data 1

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea (NRF-2021R1A2C1005520 to JWC and NRF-2018R1A5A2024425 to SK) and the Gachon University Research Fund of 2020 (GCU-202008420013 to JWC).
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2025.02.012.