3413bioactmatBioactive MaterialsBioact MaterKeAi PublishingPMC1193809011938090119380904014479410.1016/j.bioactmat.2025.02.043Advances in locally administered nucleic acid therapeutics
ShenJie DuanXusheng XieTing ZhangXinrui CaiYue PanJunhao ZhangXin SunXuanrong aCollaborative Innovation Center of Yangtze River Delta Region Green Pharmaceuticals & College of Pharmaceutical Science, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, 310014, ChinabState Key Laboratory of Biopharmaceutical Preparation and Delivery, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, ChinacUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China⁎Corresponding author. State Key Laboratory of Biopharmaceutical Preparation and Delivery, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China. xzhang@ipe.ac.cn
⁎⁎Corresponding author. sunxr@zjut.edu.cn
103202549218218–2542632025© 2025 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Nucleic acid drugs represent the latest generation of precision therapeutics, holding significant promise for the treatment of a wide range of intractable diseases. Delivery technology is crucial for the clinical application of nucleic acid drugs. However, extrahepatic delivery of nucleic acid drugs remains a significant challenge. Systemic administration often fails to achieve sufficient drug enrichment in target tissues. Localized administration has emerged as the predominant approach to facilitate extrahepatic delivery. While localized administration can significantly enhance drug accumulation at the injection sites, nucleic acid drugs still face biological barriers in reaching the target lesions. This review focuses on non-viral nucleic acid drug delivery techniques utilized in local administration for the treatment of extrahepatic diseases. First, the classification of nucleic acid drugs is described. Second, the current major non-viral delivery technologies for nucleic acid drugs are discussed. Third, the bio-barriers, administration approaches, and recent research advances in the local delivery of nucleic acid drugs for treating lung, brain, eye, skin, joint, and heart-related diseases are highlighted. Finally, the challenges associated with the localized therapeutic application of nucleic acid drugs are addressed.
Keywords: Nucleic acid drugs, Local administration, Extrahepatic diseases

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Nucleic acid drugs face severe biological barriers for local delivery in the lung,brain, eye, skin, joint, and heart-related organs.
•The bio-barriers, administration approaches, and recent research advances in the local delivery of nucleic acid drugs for treating extrahepatic diseases are highlighted.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Dec 16; Revised 2025 Feb 13; Accepted 2025 Feb 27; Collection date 2025 Jul.

1.

## Introduction
Nucleic acid drugs are driving a revolution in healthcare and changing the paradigm of disease treatment with their potential to target almost any gene, highly efficient and specific gene silencing capabilities, single-dose efficacy lasting up to several months, short discovery cycles, and high success rates in research and experimental development [ , ]. They also serve as valuable tools for developing therapeutic targets. Even when the pathogenesis of many diseases remains unclear, once a specific target is identified, nucleic acid drugs can be used to silence, upregulate, or replace the associated genes. This process is faster than the development of small molecule chemical drugs or antibody drugs [ , ]. Additionally, nucleic acid drugs exhibit higher success rates in clinical development compared to chemical and antibody drugs. However, the in vivo application of nucleic acid drugs faces significant challenges, including susceptibility to nuclease degradation, poor compatibility with cell membranes, hydrophilicity, and difficulty escaping endosomes or lysosomes. Thus, the effectiveness of nucleic acid drugs largely depends on efficient delivery technologies [ , ].
Currently, nucleic acid drugs on the market primarily utilize delivery technologies such as chemical modifications, conjugates, lipid-based nanoparticles (LNPs), and viral vectors [ , , ]. These technologies have demonstrated irreplaceable advantages in providing efficient and long-lasting therapeutic effects for rare diseases and metabolic disorders. However, for extrahepatic diseases, only a few nucleic acid drugs have been commercialized due to the lack of effective delivery methods [ , ]. Consequently, there is a substantial clinical demand for nucleic acid drugs targeting extrahepatic diseases. Furthermore, extrahepatic organs such as the lungs, brain, eyes, skin, joints, and heart are particularly suitable for topical administration due to considerations of bioavailability, ease of handling, and patient compliance. In particular, localized drug delivery can significantly enhance the targeting ability of nucleic acid drugs in specific organs. Compared to systemic drug delivery, localized delivery reduces the risk of systemic toxicity, requires lower doses, and necessitates less frequent administrations. This has made it a critical strategy for delivering nucleic acid drugs to non-hepatic targets [ ]. Nevertheless, each organ has unique biological barriers and delivery challenges, necessitating the development of tailored delivery technologies based on the characteristics of the target diseases.
This review primarily summarizes and discusses the current advances in localized nucleic acid drug therapeutics for extrahepatic disease ( ). Firstly, the classification, characterization, and mechanisms of nucleic acid drugs, including antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs), microRNAs (miRNAs), small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), aptamers (Apts), plasmid DNAs (pDNAs), messager RNAs (mRNAs), and clustered regularly interspaced short polymorphic repeats (CRISPR), are concisely described. Secondly, the main nucleic acid drug delivery technologies, including conjugates, lipid-based nanoparticles (LNPs), polymer nanoparticles (PNPs), biomimetic nanoparticles (BNPs), inorganic nanoparticles (INPs), and DNA origami-based nanomaterials, are outlined. Thirdly, the bio-barriers of the lungs, brain, eyes, skin, joints, and heart are analyzed, alongside the approaches for local administration to these organs. Furthermore, strategies and advancements in delivery technologies designed to overcome these biological barriers are highlighted. Finally, the review outlines the potential of local nucleic acid drug delivery, discusses its current limitations, and provides an outlook on future advancements in the field.
 
2.

## Classification and mechanism of nucleic acid drugs
Nucleic acid drugs are a class of DNA- or RNA-based therapeutics that regulate gene expression through Watson-Crick base pairing. The main types of nucleic acid drugs include ASOs, miRNAs, siRNAs, Apts, pDNAs, mRNAs, and CRISPR. In this section, the characteristics and mechanisms of these nucleic acid drugs are described and compared. Other types of nucleic acid drugs, such as transfer RNAs (tRNAs) [ ], and small activating RNAs (saRNAs) [ , ], are not discussed in this manuscript. However, they also play important roles in gene expression regulation, protein synthesis, and disease treatment.
2.1.

## ASO
ASOs are the earliest-discovered and most widely approved class of small nucleic acid drugs. ASOs are single-stranded DNA or RNA molecules ranging from 8 to 50 nucleotides in length and were the first RNA interference (RNAi) drugs to be developed. To date, a total of 14 ASO drugs have been approved for clinical use. Among them, three ASO drugs are administered via local injection. ASOs were first proposed in 1978, when Zamecnik and Stephenson discovered their ability to inhibit the translation of Rous sarcoma virus RNA [ ]. In 1998, the first ASO drug (Fomivirsen) approved for marketing was utilized for antiviral gene therapy for cytomegalovirus retinitis (CMV) via vitreous injection [ ]. In 2016, Spinraza from Sarepta was approved to treat spinal muscular atrophy via intrathecal administration [ ]. More recently, in 2023, Qalsody (Tofersen) from Ionis Pharmaceuticals was approved to treat amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also via intrathecal administration [ ]. The mechanism of ASO is shown in a. ASOs primarily exert their effects through three mechanisms: 1) RNase H-mediated mRNA degradation: by forming a heterodimeric double strand with the target mRNA, ASOs recruit ribonuclease H (RNase H) enzyme, which degrades the mRNA; 2) Steric blocking of translation: by acting as a spatial blocker of ribosomes, ASOs prevent the translation of target mRNA; 3) Modulation of splicing: by binding to pre-mRNA, ASOs alter its splicing, thereby regulating the production of mature mRNA [ , ].
 
2.2.

## siRNA
siRNAs, double-stranded ribonucleotides typically 21–23 nucleotides in length, are currently the most widely used RNAi drugs. In 2003, siRNAs were first applied in therapeutic studies on mammals. The first clinical trial involving siRNA was conducted in 2004. It was not until 2018 that the first siRNA drug, Onpattro, was approved for the treatment of neurological injury disorders [ ]. To date, six siRNA drugs have been approved for clinical use [ , ]. The other five are GalNAc-based siRNA conjugates. GalNAc binds to glycoprotein receptors, which are highly expressed on hepatocytes, resulting in the efficient uptake of siRNA by the cells [ ]. The mechanism of siRNA is shown in b. Argonaute (AGO) enzymes are essential for siRNA-mediated gene silencing. AGO selectively recruits the antisense strand of siRNA to form the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC). Afterwards, the siRNA duplex is unwound, and the antisense strand is incorporated into RISC to recruit mRNA via base complementary pairing. Finally, the AGO enzymes catalyze RISC to induce the degradation of target mRNA [ ].

2.3.

## miRNA
miRNAs are short-stranded RNAs, 19–22 nucleotides in length, encoded by the genomes of eukaryotic cells. The mechanism of miRNAs is illustrated in c, miRNAs are initially transcribed in the nucleus in the form of DNA. Then, the primary miRNA is formed by transcription in the presence of enzymes. The pri-miRNAs are then processed by Drosha and DGCR8 enzymes to form precursor miRNAs. After being transported to the cytoplasm, the miRNA duplexes recruit AGO enzymes to form RISC complexes. Through RISCs, miRNAs regulate gene expression by either promoting the degradation of target mRNA or inhibiting its translation. This regulation ultimately influences cellular processes such as development, proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis [ ]. Notably, in contrast to ASOs or siRNAs, miRNAs do not require perfect sequence complementarity with their target mRNAs. Instead, they attenuate and modulate mRNA expression rather than completely suppressing it. Additionally, miRNAs can regulate multiple genes simultaneously, lacking the specificity of siRNAs or ASOs for individual target genes [ ]. Beyond their application as gene therapy agents, miRNAs are widely used as biomarkers for disease diagnosis and as indicators of therapeutic efficacy.

2.4.

## Apt
Apts are single-stranded DNA or RNA sequences screened by Systematic Evolution of Ligands by Exponential Enrichment (SELEX), possessing specific secondary structures, such as hairpins, stem-loops, pseudoknots, and G-quadruplexes [ , ]. The secondary structures of aptamers do not exist in isolation; rather, they often interact and transform dynamically to facilitate binding to various target molecules and perform specific biological functions. These secondary structures can be assembled to form unique tertiary structures for specific recognition of target molecules. Apts were first discovered by Tuerk and Gold in 1990 [ ]. Apts are often referred to as chemical antibodies. They are smaller in size, easier to be modified, more stable, and less costly than traditional antibodies [ ]. In 2004, the first aptamer-based drug, Pegaptanib (Macugen), was approved for marketing by the FDA [ ]. Pegaptanib was developed by Pfizer and Eyetech for the treatment of age-related macular degeneration (AMD). In 2023, Izervay (avacincaptad pegol) was approved for clinical use, also for intraocular injection to treat AMD [ ]. In addition to their direct therapeutic effects directly as a nucleic acid drug, Apt can also be used as a targeting ligand. By conjugating with drugs, aptamers form aptamer-drug conjugates (ApDCs), which enable precise drug delivery to target cells and hold significant potential for clinical applications [ ].

2.5.

## pDNA
pDNAs, loop-shaped DNA molecules, are primarily extracted from bacteria. pDNA exerts gene-augmenting function in the nuclei. This typically involves introducing genes or gene fragments directly into cells to replace or repair defective genes. As illustrated in d, pDNA is transcribed into mRNA in the nucleus. The mRNA then guides ribosomes to produce proteins, supplementing downregulated genes or replacing the mutated ones. The essential components of a pDNA include an origin of replication (ORI), resistance genes, multiple cloning sites (MCS), promoters, selective markers, reporter genes, enhancers, ribosome binding sites (RBS), and signal peptide sequences (SPS) et al. [ ]. Many generalized plasmid frameworks are already available. The advantage of DNA drugs mainly lies in their stable structure. Researchers can modify these plasmids according to their requirements, enabling pDNAs to perform specific functions. In 2012, the first plasmid drug (Neovasculgen) was approved for marketing in Russia [ ]. Neovasculgen mainly promotes the expression of the vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) gene to treat atherosclerosis.

2.6.

## mRNA
mRNA was first discovered in 1961 and introduced into mammals in 1992 [ , ]. In 2001, mRNA clinical trials were conducted through the transfection of isolated dendritic cells for tumor therapy [ ]. In 2020, Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna launched two mRNA vaccines against COVID-19, further advancing the research and application of mRNA-based therapies in large-scale public health applications [ , ]. Several mRNA therapies are currently in clinical trials. The three primary therapeutic areas currently under exploration for mRNA drugs include immunotherapy, protein replacement therapy, and regenerative medicine [ ]. In contrast to DNA drugs, mRNA drugs do not need to enter the nucleus. Instead, mRNA directly guides ribosomes in the cytoplasm to produce proteins ( e). This characteristic eliminates the risk of genomic insertion and associated mutations. Compared to antibody drugs, mRNA drugs are more affordable to produce, have shorter treatment cycles, and require less frequent administration.
Nowadays, mRNA drugs can exert their effects in three forms: non-replicating linear mRNAs, self-amplifying mRNAs, and looped mRNAs. Among these, non-replicating linear mRNAs are the most widely used, with a well-established extraction process. However, a major challenge lies in their structural instability. Significant research has been devoted to modifying mRNA structures, including the 5′-cap, 3′-untranslated regions (3′-UTRs), coding regions, and poly(A) tails [ ]. For instance, Wang et al. synthesized topologically and chemically modified mRNAs with multiple poly(A) tails, significantly extending their activity in vivo from less than 7 days–14 days [ ]. Self-amplifying mRNAs, containing a replicase structure, can self-replicate in vivo, enabling prolonged expression and lower dosing requirements [ , ]. Meanwhile, their larger vector fragments present challenges in purification and loading. Looped mRNAs do not require capping or polyadenylation and exhibit long-lasting and stable expression [ ]. Despite these advantages, circular mRNAs face issues such as low cyclization efficiency and difficulties in amplification and purification [ ].
In addition, in order to enhance the precision and functionality of mRNAs, some researchers have optimized mRNA sequences by combining them with specific miRNAs. Moderna dopes mRNA sequences with regulatory sequences of miRNAs to initiate the expression of target mRNAs in specific cells [ ]. CureVac dopes miRNA binding sites into mRNA sequences, enabling precise intervention of mRNA expression in specific tissues [ ].

2.7.

## CRISPR
CRISPR is currently the most powerful and widely used gene editing tool. CRISPR, standing for clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats, was discovered by Doudna and Charpentier in 2012. It works by targeting specific genomic sites with the assistance of single-stranded guide RNA (sgRNA), which enables the CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9) nuclease to cleave the DNA at these designated sites [ ]. In 2013, Feng Zhang designated CRISPR in mammalian therapeutic research [ ]. In 2023, the FDA approved the first CRISPR gene editing therapy, CASGEVY, developed by CRISPR Therapeutics and Vertex. This innovative therapy focuses on editing the B-cell CLL/lymphoma 11A (BCL11A) gene in CD34+ human hematopoietic stem cells and progenitor cells via CRISPR/Cas9. The edited cells are subsequently infused back into patients to alleviate vaso-occlusive crises in individuals with sickle cell disease [ ].
The mechanism of CRISPR/Cas9 is shown in f [ ].There are three primary methods for delivering CRISPR/Cas components: 1) universal pDNAs that encoding both the Cas nuclease and sgRNA; 2) the combination of Cas nuclease mRNA and sgRNA; and 3) the ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex, which consists of Cas nuclease and sgRNA [ , ]. These three approaches ultimately play a major role in both Cas9 nuclease and sgRNA. Using the Cas protein and sgRNA, double-stranded DNA can be knocked out, knocked in, or replaced. In addition to the Cas9 protein, other commonly used CRISPR-associated nucleases include Cas12, Cas13, and Cas14 [ ]. The relevant information regarding these Cas nucleases is summarized in . And the characteristics of the nucleic acid drugs mentioned in this review are summarized in .
 

3.

## Delivery technologies of nucleic acid drugs
Nucleic acid drugs individually fail to become drugs due to their instability, short half-life, easy to be rapidly cleared by kidney, and lack of focal targeting. Therefore, the delivery of nucleic acid drugs is critical for their successful application. Based on their characteristics, nucleic acid drug delivery systems can be classified into conjugates, LNPs, PNPs, BNPs, INPs, and DNA origami-based nanomaterials. In this section, the structures and characteristics of nucleic acid drug delivery technologies are illustrated.
3.1.

## Conjugates
RNA-based nucleic acid drugs modified with chemical molecules are commonly used for delivery. Initially, deoxythymidine dinucleotide (dTdT) overhangs were simply employed to enhance the stability of siRNAs. Nowadays, siRNA modifications have become highly diverse, encompassing three main types: phosphate skeleton modifications, ribose modifications, and base modifications. Commonly used chemical modifications include cholesterol [ ], lipids [ ], alkyl chains [ ], sugar chains [ ], and peptides [ ]. Hydrophobic modifications, in particular, can enhance the half-life of siRNAs in vivo by facilitating their binding to lipoproteins [ ]. Among the six siRNA drugs approved for clinical use, five are siRNA conjugates (four delivery technologies from Alnylam Pharmaceuticals and one delivery technology from Novo Nordisk/Dicerna Pharmaceuticals). However, these approved siRNA drugs are exclusively used for treating liver-related diseases and have limited applicability for extrahepatic diseases. A promising innovation in this field is multivalent nucleic acid drugs. Multivalent siRNAs, which consist of two or more siRNAs linked by covalent bonds, have been shown to prolong systemic circulation and reduce susceptibility to renal clearance [ ]. As shown in , Anastasia Khvorova et al. investigated the enrichment and gene silencing effects of monovalent, multivalent (divalent, trivalent, and tetravalent) modified siRNAs, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA)-modified siRNAs, and docosanoic acid (DCA)-modified siRNAs via topical lung administration [ ]. The results showed that multivalent siRNA were more effectively enriched in the lungs compared to hydrophobically modified siRNAs. Moreover, trivalent and tetravalent siRNAs exhibited superior enrichment compared to bivalent siRNAs, highlighting the potential of multivalent siRNAs for siRNA conjugate local delivery development.
 
3.2.

## LNPs
LNPs are variants of liposomes. Liposomes are spherical, bilayered phospholipid vesicles with a hydrophobic core and a hydrophilic outer layer. The structure of LNPs is diverse. LNPs can be formed by self-assembly of a monolayer of lipid molecules with multiple cores ( a). They can also be multilayered vesicles and homogeneous core-shell vesicles [ ].
 By pairing with lipid molecules of various properties, LNPs can be tailored to exhibit specialized functions. Typically, ionizable LNPs for nucleic acid drug delivery consist of cationic or ionizable lipids, helper lipids, PEG-containing lipids, and cholesterol [ ]. The types and proportions of these lipids can be adjusted to produce LNPs with distinct characteristics. Cationic lipid molecules, such as DOTAP, DOTMA, and DPTAP, interact electrostatically with negatively charged nucleic acid drugs, facilitating their encapsulation. Furthermore, due to their ability to interact with negatively charged cell membranes and organelle membranes, cationic lipid molecules can further facilitate the cellular uptake of nucleic acid drugs and realize endosomal/lysosomal escape. Ionizable lipids, including DLin-MC3-DMA, DODAP, and DODMA, play a critical role in nucleic acid drug delivery. They have a pH-dependent ionization property. Ionizable lipids are electrically neutral in physiological conditions (pH 7.4). But in acidic environments (pH 5–6), they are rapidly protonated and become positively charged, aiding in efficient in vivo delivery and endosomal/lysosomal escape [ ]. Neutral helper lipid molecules, such as DOPC, DOPE, and DSPC, can assist in nucleic acid drug encapsulation. Neutral lipid molecules exhibit high biocompatibility and remain stable under physiological conditions. PEG-containing lipid molecules improve the structural stability of LNPs and extend the circulation time of nucleic acid drugs in vivo. Notably, some PEG-substituted lipids, such as zwitterionic DSPE-PCB, do not elicit IgG antibody production, thereby avoiding rapid clearance upon repeated administration [ ]. Cholesterol stabilizes the structure of LNPs and regulates membrane fluidity.
The first siRNA drug, Patisiran (Onpattro), developed by Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, utilizes LNPs as its delivery system. Its main components include cholesterol (38.5 %), DSPC (10 %), DLin-MC3-DMA (50 %), and PEG2000-C-DMG (1.5 %) [ ]. Among these, DLin-MC3-DMA, with its pH-dependent charge-variable properties, significantly contributes to the therapeutic efficacy of siRNA. The first mRNA vaccine against COVID-19, COMIRNATY, delivered by LNP consisting of DSPC (9.4 %), cholesterol (42.7 %), ALC-0315 (46.3 %), and ALC-0159 (1.6 %) [ ]. Similarly, the launched mRNA vaccine, Spikevax, also employs LNPs for delivery. The main components are SM-102 (50 %), DSPC (10 %), cholesterol (38.5 %), and PEG-2000 DMG (1.5 %). Hyeryun Choe's group analyzed and compared the effects of the ionizable lipid molecule ALC-0315 in COMIRNATY and SM-102 in Spikevax [ ]. They found that SM-102 was more effective than ALC-0315 in mRNA delivery, antibody expression, and long-term stability at 4 °C.
Some studies have also combined LNPs with inorganic tracers to further investigate the mechanism of LNPs in vitro and in vivo. Marino Zerial et al. encapsulated gold nanoparticles within LNPs to visualize and analyze the intracellular endosomes/lysosomes escape of LNPs by light and electron microscopy [ ]. They found that about 1–2% siRNA can be released from endosomes/lysosomes and this release occurs only at a defined stage of endosomal progression. To non-invasively trace the circulating pathways of LNPs in vivo, Huang et al. doped LNPs with the MRI contrast agent Gd-DTPA-BSA component [ ]. After tail vein injection, real-time MRI imaging of the tumor mice showed that the tumor-targeted modified LNPs displayed significant MRI signals at the tumor sites.
Interestingly, emerging studies suggest that some intrinsic components in systemically injected LNPs, such as cholesterol and phospholipids, may not be essential for nucleic acid drug delivery [ , ]. However, it remains unclear whether similar findings apply to locally injected LNPs. The representative lipid molecules that mentioned in this review were shown in b.

3.3.

## PNPs
PNPs are mainly categorized into polymer complexes, dendrimers, and micelles ( a). Polymers can be designed based on the properties of the target disease and the loaded drugs. Common cationic polymers include polyamino acids, polyethyleneimine (PEI), polyesters, and dendrimers [ , , ]. These polymers form complexes with nucleic acid drugs through electrostatic interactions. Dendrimers are highly and precisely branched tree-like structures with a core, branching units, and terminal groups. The advantage of dendrimers is that the physicochemical properties can be adjusted to meet delivery requirements by adjusting the number of branching generations and terminal groups. Polymer micelles, on the other hand, are typically formed by amphiphilic block copolymers via hydrophilic and hydrophobic self-assembly interactions, with nucleic acid drugs subsequently loaded through electrostatic interactions.
 The electrical properties of PNPs are critical to their performance. Excessive positive charge can lead to cytotoxicity, whereas insufficient positivity may compromise nucleic acid drug loading and cellular internalization. PEI is one of the most commonly used cationic polymers, known for its efficient adsorption of nucleic acid drugs. However, its strong positive charge is associated with significant toxicity, which severely limits its applications. To address this limitation, Cho et al. developed an siRNA delivery vector (PS-PEI) by combining low molecular weight PEI with sorbitol diacrylate [ ]. PS-PEI adsorbed siRNA targeting connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) to construct complexes (PS-PEI/siCTGF). The sorbitol diacrylate modification reduced the cytotoxicity of PEI and enhanced endosomal/lysosomal escape. PS-PEI/siCTGF complexes were administered transdermally to treat skin scarring in mice. The results demonstrated that PS-PEI/siCTGF significantly promoted skin repair in mice, outperforming the PEI/siCTGF group. The representative lipid molecules that mentioned in this review were shown in b.

3.4.

## BNPs
BNPs offer advantages such as long circulation time, good biocompatibility, and homologous-targeting ability, making them promising for nucleic acid drug delivery [ ]. Among BNPs, membrane-based nanoparticles and extracellular vesicle (EV)-based nanoparticles are the most widely used for drug delivery.
Membrane-based nanoparticles generally act as “nano-traps” by encapsulating drugs, PNPs, or INPs within bio-membranes ( a–b). The origin of the cell membranes significantly influences the function of BNPs. Common sources include red blood cells, immune cells, macrophages, and tumor cells [ , ]. Currently, EV-based nanoparticles are more commonly used in local nucleic acid drug delivery. Extracellular vesicles, which are secreted by cells to mediate intercellular communication, include apoptotic vesicles, microvesicles, and exosomes. Among these, exosomes are the most extensively studied for drug delivery. Exosomes are vesicles ranging from 30 to 150 nm in size, with a lipid bilayer structure that contains various biologically active substances. Self-derived exosomes can reduce immune rejection in patients, making them highly promising for clinical applications. The primary advantage of exosomes is their ability to be modified exogenously (e.g. via electroporation, acoustic treatment, or freeze-thaw cycles) or endogenously (e.g. via plasmid transfection). These modifications enable exosomes to express specific proteins or miRNAs, achieving targeted delivery, trophoblast effects, or immunomodulation. The source of exosomes strongly influences their properties and functions [ , , ]. For example, exosomes secreted by stem cells and immune cells exhibit neurotrophic and immunomodulatory functions [ ]. Exosomes are typically extracted using ultracentrifugation, precipitation, ultrafiltration, and affinity chromatography. These methods are often combined to ensure the purity of the exosomes [ ]. Initial purification is commonly performed via centrifugation, followed by further purification using chromatography and/or precipitation. Exosomes are identified through transmission electron microscopy, size analysis, nanoparticle tracking analysis, and protein marker analysis.
 Compared to LNPs, exosomes may synergize with nucleic acid drugs to enhance immunomodulation and therapeutic effects. For lung cancer inhaled gene therapy, Cheng et al. used human embryonic kidney cell-derived exosomes to load mRNA encoding interleukin-12 (IL-12) via electroporation [ ]. When compared with LNPs of similar functionality, exosomes demonstrated superior lung enrichment, despite both being administered through inhalation. In addition, exosomes further enhanced protective immune responses, relying on CD8+ T cells. Fusing LNPs with biomembranes or combining biomembranes from different sources to create hybrid nucleic acid drug delivery systems is a popular research direction ( c) [ , ]. However, challenges such as the difficulty and instability of large-scale extraction of cell membranes or exosomes for clinical applications must be addressed. Furthermore, the lack of standardized international protocols for biomimetic membrane extraction limits their broader application.

3.5.

## INPs
INPs can be categorized into metallic and non-metallic nanoparticles. INPs possess a high specific surface area, facilitating surface functionalization and modification. Metallic nanoparticles exhibit unique optical, thermal, and magnetic properties, enabling their use for combined diagnosis and therapy [ ]. Common metallic nanoparticles include gold nanoparticles, iron oxide nanoparticles, and zinc oxide nanoparticles [ , ]. Non-metallic nanoparticles mainly comprise carbon nanotubes, quantum dots, and silicon dioxide nanoparticles [ , ]. Based on current research, INPs load nucleic acid drugs mainly through three mechanisms: 1) Cationic molecules modified on the surface of INPs. This makes the whole nanoparticles being positively charged, allowing for electrostatic adsorption of nucleic acid drugs [ ]. 2) Nucleic acid drugs are modified on the surface of INPs via linkers responsive to specific biological environments [ ]. 3) INPs are coated with amphiphilic cationic polymers through self-assembly. Nucleic acid drugs are electrostatically adsorbed by the overall positive electrical properties of the complexes [ ].
One significant advantage of INPs is their ability to synergize directly or indirectly with nucleic acid drugs to enhance therapeutic effects. For instance, Liechty et al. utilized cerium dioxide nanoparticles coupled with miR-146a to treat acute lung injury via intratracheal injection [ ]. Cerium dioxide nanoparticles scavenged reactive oxygen species (ROS), while miR-146a reduced leukocyte recruitment and the inflammatory response. This combination was more effective than either cerium dioxide nanoparticles or miR-146a alone.
INPs can also stimulate photothermal effects to enhance drug therapy. Cui et al. constructed a gold nanocage siRNA-DOX synergistic therapeutic delivery system [ ]. siRNA and thiolated DNA were modified on the surface of Au NPs to form the inner cores, which were then wrapped in single-stranded DNA to create DNA nanocages. The chemotherapeutic drug DOX was inserted into the DNA double strands. Administered via local injection to the lungs, the nanocages significantly improved survival in lung cancer models through gene-chem-photothermal triple therapy.
In addition to therapeutic applications, INPs can act as contrast agents for medical diagnostics. Their use in medical imaging can guide drug delivery, helping to select optimal delivery systems and informing subsequent therapeutic regimens. Zhang et al. stabilized gold nanoparticles with ichthyosin sulfate to deliver pDNA encoding hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) for the treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) ( a) [ ]. The nanoparticles were initially taken up by MSCs, which were then injected into the lungs of IPF mice via the airway. Enhanced CT imaging allowed real-time monitoring of lung conditions for up to 48 days. Accurate imaging of neural stem cell (NSC) differentiation in the brain remains a challenge. To address this, Zhang's group constructed a zwitterion-based amphiphilic polymer, poly(carboxybetaine) based poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate)-retinoic acid-poly(carboxybetaine) cell-penetrating peptide (PHEMA-RA-PCB-CPP), to encapsulate SPIONs and adsorb siRNA targeting sex determining region Y box protein 9 (SOX9), named PHEMA-RA-PCB-CPP/SPIONs/siSOX9 NPs ( b) [ ]. These nanoparticles were endocytosed by the NSCs, which were then locally injected into the brains of Alzheimer's disease mouse models. The migration of NSCs in the mouse brain was successfully tracked in real-time using MRI.
 However, the slow metabolism and biosafety of INPs must be carefully considered for inhalation drug delivery. For example, inhalation of large quantities of micron-sized SiO2 particles in the lungs can trigger fibrosis. Yao et al. reported that SiO2 dust inhalation in mice elevated levels of macrophage exosome miR-107, leading to cell cycle arrest and differentiation of lung fibroblasts [ ].

3.6.

## DNA origami-based nanomaterials
DNA origami is commonly composed of a long single strand DNA scaffold (phage M13 bacteriophage DNA) and numerous short DNA pieces (named staple strands) that are assembled through nucleic acid sequence hybridization based on the Watson-Crick base pairing principle. It was first proposed by Paul W. K. Rothemund in 2006 [ ]. He used many short single-stranded DNA pieces to assemble different 2D shapes by “one-pot” method. In 2009, 3D and curved space DNA origami were developed to expand its scope of utilization [ , ]. Due to its precise control over morphology, flexible shape design, and ease of functional modification, DNA origami can be versatilely prepared to encapsulate chemical drugs, proteins, nucleic acid drugs, and metal nanoparticles [ , ]. The application of DNA origami technology is not limited to this, as it also holds great potential in the fields of nano-chips, nucleic acid detection, and virus detection.
Nanomaterials based on DNA origami technology have been reported to have favorable biosafety and nucleic acid delivery capabilities. Daniel G. Anderson et al. used six single-stranded DNA fragments and six siRNAs to form tetrahedral nanoparticles loaded with siRNAs by self-assembly [ ]. They also precisely modified folate ligands on these tetrahedral nanoparticles to achieve efficient delivery of siRNA at the tumor site without causing any immune response. DNA origami-based nanomaterials can also be designed as microenvironment-responsive nucleic acid delivery systems. Ding et al. constructed a 3D tube-shaped glutathione-responsive nanodevice [ ]. As shown in a, they prepared a DNA nanostructure to load doxorubicin (through DNA intercalation) and siRNAs targeting Bcl-2 and P-gp. The outer layer was modified by tumor-targeting peptides. Importantly, the single stranded-DNA containing S-S bonds acts as a locking chain to close this tubular structure. Once in the tumor's glutathione environment, the S-S bonds would be cleaved to release siRNAs and DOX. For local lung delivery, Ding's group utilized a negatively charged, hydrophilic DNA origami nano-delivery system modified with the cell-penetrating peptide R9 (RRRRRRRRR) to enhance the bio-barrier permeation in the lungs ( b) [ ]. In a lipopolysaccharides-induced acute lung injury model, the delivery system successfully reached deep lung lesions and demonstrated significant anti-inflammatory effects.
 

4.

## Local delivery of nucleic acid drugs for disease therapy
Nucleic acid drugs have emerged as promising therapeutic agents for treating various diseases. However, their application in extrahepatic disease therapy is limited due to challenges such as poor targeting ability, susceptibility to nuclease degradation, and negative electronegativity. In addition to the appropriate delivery techniques, the approach of administration is critical for achieving effective extrahepatic delivery of nucleic acid drugs. Local delivery of nucleic acid drugs is currently one of the most important modalities for extrahepatic disease therapy. Organs suitable for localized delivery are typically those where drug administration can be achieved through non-invasive or acceptably invasive methods, such as the lungs, brains, eyes, skin, joints, and heart. Nevertheless, each organ presents unique biological barriers and delivery challenges [ ], requiring the development of tailored delivery strategies based on the specific characteristics of the target disease. In this section, we described the bio-barriers, administration approaches, and research advances in the delivery of nucleic acid drugs to the lungs, brain, eyes, skin, joints, and heart.
4.1.

## Local delivery of nucleic acid drugs for lung-related disease therapy
4.1.1.

## Bio-barriers in lung
The abundance of capillaries, the large surface area of the alveoli, and the short transit distance between epithelial cells and blood vessels make the local delivery of nucleic acid drugs particularly suitable for lung disease therapy [ ]. The phase I clinical trial of the inhaled Ad5-nCoV vaccine (NCT04552366) reported that inhaling one-fifth of the intramuscular dose produced comparable antibody titers while significantly reducing the incidence of adverse effects [ ], proving the superiority of local drug delivery.
However, even with direct administration into the lungs, drugs still face barriers in the lower airways and alveoli ( a). The first barrier is the mucus layer, which has a dense reticular structure. Drugs delivered locally to the lungs are initially trapped in the mucus layer and subsequently cleared by the periciliary layer. Epithelial and endothelial cells constitute cellular barriers that drugs must penetrate to reach target cells-one of the major challenges in nucleic acid drug delivery. Furthermore, the alveolar barrier, including the collagen matrix, significantly affects drug utilization [ ]. Therefore, the nucleic acid drug delivery system must be capable of overcoming these biological barriers to effectively reach and enter target cells.
 Apart from physiological barriers, the mechanical shear generated by the nebulizer may also compromise the integrity of the nanoparticles [ ]. During the nebulization process, shear stress exerts pressure on the nanoparticles, causing them to rupture. This results in premature exposure of the nucleic acid drug to the nuclease environment, leading to degradation. For example, Lu's team used a vibrating mesh sprayer (Aerogen Solo) to nebulize SM102-LNP. They revealed that the structure of the SM102-LNP was severely disrupted after nebulization, with only ∼17 % of intact LNP remaining [ ]. Therefore, nucleic acid drug delivery systems for intravenous delivery and nebulized inhalation are not identical in design principles. Gaurav Sahay et al. developed a microfluidic nebulization platform that effectively maintained the integrity of LNPs and mRNA stability after nebulization [ ]. In addition, the atomizer and mesh pore size also influence the integrity of the nanoparticles. Vibrating mesh nebulizers are gentler on nanoparticles than ultrasonic nebulizers and air-jet nebulizers [ , ]. Larger mesh apertures can minimize the damage to nanoparticles.

4.1.2.

## Approaches of local administration to lung
The main methods of local administration to the lungs include inhalation, nasal administration, and intratracheal injection. Among these, inhalation is a favored and straightforward method for delivering drugs locally to the lungs. This approach requires devices such as nebulized inhalers or dry powder inhalers for precise and effective delivery. Particles smaller than 10 μm (referred to as “respirable particles”) can be inhaled into the lungs [ ]. Particles larger than 5 μm tend to accumulate in the upper respiratory tract, while particles ranging from 1 to 5 μm primarily deposit in the lower respiratory tract. Particles smaller than 1 μm are more likely to reach the alveoli but are also prone to exhalation [ ]. Nasal administration differs from airway inhalation in terms of particle size and delivery mechanism. Particles ranging from 10 to 150 μm are generally more likely to be deposited in the nasal cavity. Besides, nasal drug delivery requires minimal dispersion of particles. For instance, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals employed 2′-O-hexadecyl (C16) conjugate with siRNAs to realize a long-lasting reduction of superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) mRNA in the lungs by intranasal administration. Intratracheal injection involves the direct insertion of drugs into the airways, followed by pressurized breathing to facilitate drug diffusion and absorption in the lungs. Compared to inhalation and nasal administration, intratracheal injection requires specialized physicians and equipment, leading to lower patient compliance.

4.1.3.

## Local nucleic acid therapeutics for lung
For clinical trials of local nucleic acid therapeutics for lung, Moderna Therapeutics and Vertex Pharmaceuticals have co-developed an LNP-based delivery system (VX-522) for cystic fibrosis therapy via inhalation [ ]. VX-522 delivers mRNA targeting the cystic fibrosis (CF) transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) and is currently in Phase I clinical trials (NCT05668741). Arcturus Therapeutics also developed mRNA-LNP (ARCT-032) targeting CFTR to treat CF (NCT06747858/NCT05712538) [ , ]. Phase I/II clinical data showed that ARCT-032 did not cause any adverse effects in the participants and showed a trend toward improved lung function after two doses. Additionally, ReCode Therapeutics launched mRNA-encapsulated LNPs-based on selective organ targeting (SORT) platform for the treatment of primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) via aerosol inhalation (named RCT1100, NCT05737485/NCT06600425/NCT06633757) [ , ]. The results showed that in Phase Ia trial RCT1100 had a safety profile in 40 healthy adult volunteers. It is being conducted in Phase Ib trial to evaluate safety and tolerability for PCP patients. Subsequently, they developed the second aerosol inhaled mRNA-LNP (named RCT2100) based on the SORT platform to treat CF [ ]. It is currently recruiting volunteers to conduct safety evaluations (NCT06237335).
The mucus barrier is a major obstacle for inhaled nucleic acid therapeutics. PEG modification provides a promising strategy [ ]. James E. Dahlman's group investigated the mechanism of PEG lipids for the mRNA delivery of nebulized LNPs to the lungs [ ]. In LNPs containing cationic lipids (DOTAP, DOTMA, DDAB), increasing the content of PEG lipids enhanced mRNA transfection efficiency in vivo. In contrast, in LNPs containing neutral lipids (DOPE, DSPC), increasing the PEG content decreased the transfection efficiency of mRNA, but lengthening the PEG lipid tails could increase the transfection efficiency. Similarly, Zhang's team developed a cationic lipid delivery system loaded with siIL-11 and modified with PLGA-PEG on the outer layer, which significantly enhanced the mucus barrier penetration of the particles [ ]. After inhalation, this system efficiently inhibited fibroblast differentiation and reduced collagen deposition in mice, leading to substantial improvement in pulmonary fibrosis. Using lung tissue surface components as drug vector coatings has also been reported to enhance mucus permeability [ , ]. Jiang et al. incorporated dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC), a key phospholipid in pulmonary surfactants, with ionizable lipid molecules to construct an mRNA delivery system [ ]. The inclusion of DPPC improved mRNA permeability through biological barriers and facilitated pulmonary fibrosis treatment.
Regulating the charge and hydrophilicity of the delivery systems may also enhance bio-barrier permeability of nucleic acid drugs. Hydrophilic delivery systems with neutral or negative charges are generally more effective at penetrating bio-barriers. Lu's group developed a charge-assisted stabilization (CAS) strategy-based mRNA LNP (short as CAS-LNP, b) [ ]. They designed a peptide (DSSC, aspartic acid provided negative charges, serine enhanced hydrophilicity) to link with DOPE. When the LNP composition was 50 % SM-102, 7.5 % DSPC, 38.5 % cholesterol, 1.5 % DMG-PEG, and 2.5 % DSSC-DOPE, the zeta potential of CAS-LNP was ∼-12 mV, showing more than 35 % of intact LNP after nebulization, while the SM-102-LNP (zeta potential: 2.39 mV) showed only ∼17 %. Moreover, 2.5 % CAS-LNP also showed higher mRNA transfection efficiency than SM-102-LNP after nebulized inhalation.
Targeted delivery to specific cells in lung is also critical. Small molecules or peptides with targeting functions are often incorporated into nucleic acid drug delivery systems to enhance specificity. Many cell surfaces in the target area overexpress glucose-associated receptors, allowing specific glucose modifications to facilitate target cell uptake of nucleic acid drugs. Engelhardt et al. identified overexpression of mannose receptor 1 (Mrc1) on the surface of alveolar macrophages in SARS-CoV-2 patients [ ]. They used computer simulations to identify trimannose suitable for Mrc1 binding and conjugated it with locked nucleic acid to inhibit miR-21, which is highly expressed at inflammation sites. In a lung injury mouse model, the conjugates effectively targeted alveolar macrophages and reduced miR-21 expression through airway administration. For lung cancer therapy, Cui et al. constructed a gold nanocage siRNA delivery system [ ]. The outer layers were wrapped by an aptamer AS1411, which binds to the nucleolin receptor overexpressed on tumor cells. The modification of AS1411 significantly enhanced nanoparticle retention after inhalation into the lungs.
BNPs, with homologous targeting ability, demonstrate potential for penetrating biological barriers and targeting lung tissues. Anastasiya et al. used exosomes derived from MSCs for inhalation administration in a lung fibrosis model mice [ ]. The endogenous miR-29c and miR-129 in the exosomes significantly reduced actin expression in myofibroblasts. Bacterial outer membranes have been reported to possess the property of fusing with homologous bacteria [ ]. As shown in c, Jin's group constructed bionic vesicles loaded with CRISPR/Cas9 pDNA utilizing a mixture of bacterial membrane derivatives and cationic lipids [ ]. The results showed that inhalation of hybrid bionic vesicles alleviated lung infections, reduced lung inflammation, and promoted recovery of respiratory and locomotor functions in multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii (MRAB) mice. The representative local nucleic acid therapeutics for lungs in this review are summarized in .
 

4.2.

## Local delivery of nucleic acid drugs for brain-related disease therapy
4.2.1.

## Bio-barriers in brain
The physiological structure and biological barriers of brain tissues were shown in a. Blood brain barrier (BBB) is the main brain barrier that prevents the delivery of nucleic acid drugs, which consists of the endothelial cells, basal lamina, astrocytes, pericytes, and microvascular smooth muscle cells [ ]. In particular, the core component of the BBB is the endothelial cells of brain capillaries. The blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier includes choroid plexus, tight junctions, and endothelial cells, which impede the passage of substances from the blood into the cerebrospinal fluid. Additionally, the arachnoid barrier involves the dura mater, arachnoid mater, and pia matter. For transnasal delivery into the brain, drugs may leak into the brain and cerebrospinal fluid through nasal epithelial cells or be transported through transneuronal pathways via olfactory and trigeminal axons. However, the nose-brain barrier remains a challenge, requiring nucleic acid drug delivery vectors to penetrate the intranasal mucus and the layers of olfactory epithelial cells to reach brain lesions. These barriers help maintain the homeostatic environment of the ventricles while severely preventing the enrichment of nucleic acid drugs in brain lesions through systemic administration.
 
4.2.2.

## Approaches of local administration to brain
Some researchers have attempted to enable nucleic acid drugs to penetrate the BBB through intra-cerebroventricular and intrathecal injection. Although local injection into the brain is invasive, a single injection can maintain a high concentration of the drug, thereby avoiding delays in achieving optimal treatment due to the difficulty of delivering the drug to the brain. Intra-cerebroventricular injection involves injecting nucleic acid drugs directly into the ventricles of the brain through the skull, allowing the drugs to be delivered directly to the brain and bypass the BBB limitations [ ]. However, this approach is invasive and may result in increased intracranial pressure, which in turn creates potential risks such as cerebrospinal fluid leakage, intracranial infections, and neurological deficits. Intrathecal injection is performed by lumbar puncture or by implanting a drug delivery device in the intrathecal space or subarachnoid space. Drugs can diffuse into the brain parenchyma through the cerebrospinal fluid flow. Compared to intra-cerebroventricular injection, intrathecal injection is less invasive. But it still poses a risk of medullary damage. Intranasal administration is also recognized as a potential method for delivering drugs to the brain. Unlike the above injections, intranasal administration is non-invasive. Given the presence of the nose-brain barrier, when designing a nucleic acid drug delivery system for transnasal administration, the penetration of the delivery system into mucus and endothelial cells must be carefully considered.

4.2.3.

## Local nucleic acid therapeutics for brain
Intrathecal administration is the most widely used approach in both clinical and preclinical nucleic acid therapeutics for brain diseases. For instance, Nusinersen (Spinraza), an FDA-approved ASO drug for the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy (NCT04591678), is primarily administered intrathecally to enable ASO to bind to survivor motor neuron (SMN) pre-mRNA, thereby promoting exon 7 inclusion in SMN2 and enhancing SMN protein expression [ ]. Qalsody (Tofersen) was approved for treating amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with mutations in the superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene by intrathecal administration (NCT04972487) [ ]. Tominersen, an ASO drug used to treat Huntington's (HTT) disease by intrathecal injection, has shown good patient tolerance and significant reduction of HTT proteins in cerebrospinal fluid in current clinical trials (NCT05686551/NCT04000594/NCT03842969) [ ]. To screen for siRNA delivery technologies suitable for the brain, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals employed C16 conjugated with siRNAs to achieve sustained localized RNA interference activity for more than 3 months through intrathecal and lateral ventricular local administration [ ]. This study is currently in a phase I clinical trial (NCT05231785).
For intra-cerebroventricular administration, Hanseul Park et al. developed a cationic micelle by self-assembly of an amphiphilic peptide R7L10 (NH2-RRRRRRRRLLLLLLLLLL-COOH). The cationic micelle electrostatically adsorbed CRISPR/Cas9 RNP targeting Beta-Secretase 1 (BACE1) to form a nanocomplex [ ]. They delivered the nanocomplex to the CA3 region of the hippocampus in the mouse brain to knock down BACE1 gene. The results showed that the nanocomplex successfully edited the BACE1 gene without causing off-target mutations in brain neurons. Then, it significantly attenuated the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and Aβ42 plaques, ultimately facilitated the cognitive enhancement in AD mice. This represents the first use of non-viral CRISPR RNP vectors for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases.
Poly(β-amino ester) (PBAE) nanoparticles, which have a favorable biosafety profile and good buffer capacity, have been extensively studied in localized nucleic acid drug delivery in the brain [ ]. Jordan J. Green and colleagues synthesized a series of PBAE molecules to load miRNAs [ ]. By evaluating binding ability to miRNAs, proton buffering capacity, cellular uptake, and gene expression capacity, they screened a PBAE molecule (named BR6-S4-E6) prepared by monomer 2,2′-disulfanediylbis(ethane-2,1-diyl)diacrylate (BR6) co-polymerized with 4-amino-1-butanol (S4) via a Michael addition reaction, and end-capped with 2-(3-aminopropylamino)ethanol (E6) ( b). BR6-S4-E6 could form a complex with miR-148a and miR-296-5p via electrostatic adsorption, significantly prolonging the survival time of glioma mice after intra-cerebroventricular administration. Subsequently, this group developed a carboxylated branched PBAE for CRISPR/Cas9 RNP delivery [ ]. Efficient gene editing in glioma mice was achieved by a single intracranial injection of this PBAE/CRISPR RNP nanocomplex. Jung Soo Suk et al. conjugated PBAE with 5 kD PEG to minimize adhesive trapping in the brain [ ]. In comparison with conventional PBAE/pDNA nanocomplexes, PBAE-PEG promoted the diffuse distribution of pDNA in the brain. Alfredo Quinones-Hinojosa et al. also developed PBAE molecule to load pDNA targeting bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) for brain tumor therapy through intranasal administration [ ].
BNPs have also demonstrated potential in local nucleic acid therapeutics for brain diseases. Tao and co-workers used RNA-seq to analyze and screen a miRNA, miR-26a-5p, which is highly conserved in human placental mesenchymal stem cells. They found that miR-26a-5p persistently reversed neuroinflammation and mechanical abnormal pain in mice through a single injection by regulating the Wnt5a pathway [ ]. In order to enhance the nose-brain barrier penetration ability of transnasally administered nucleic acid drugs, peptides with penetration ability can be modified. Zhang et al. treated Parkinson's disease (PD) by modifying exosomes derived from mesenchymal stem cells with an osmotic peptide (RQIKIWFQNRRMKWKK, P) ( c) [ ]. Through intranasal administration, the exosomes released encapsulated curcumin to brain lesions and synergize with exosomal endogenous miR-133b. To efficiently load siRNA targeting Huntingtin (HTT) into exosomes, Anastasia Khvorova's group used hydrophobic cholesterol conjugated with the 3′ end of the siRNA passenger strand [ ]. Cholesterol, as one of the main components of exosome membranes, can be fused into exosomes to realize siRNA loading without changing the structure of exosomes. The results showed that insertion of siHTT into glioma cell-derived exosomes significantly down-regulated HTT protein through brain-localized administration. Similarly, Lee et al. engineered the binding receptor for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE, over-expressed in hypoxic cells of the ischemic brain) peptide (RBP) to be carried in exosomes [ ]. In addition, ASOs targeting miR-181a were modified by cholesterol and inserted on RBP engineered modified exosomes through hydrophobic interactions. Through intranasal delivery, the modified exosomes achieved neuroprotection in an ischemic stroke rat model. The representative local nucleic acid therapeutics for brain in this review are summarized in .
 

4.3.

## Local delivery of nucleic acid drugs for eye-related disease therapy
4.3.1.

## Bio-barriers in eye
The structure of the eyes can be divided into anterior (including: cornea, iris, ciliary body, and lens) and posterior (including: retina, vitreous, fovea, choroid, sclera) segments ( a). The eyes are one of the most suitable organs for local drug delivery, as they are independent of the systemic immune system. However, the complex and tightly interconnected tissue structure of the eye significantly limits the application of nucleic acid drug delivery. First of all, tear dilution causes more than 85 % of the drugs to be lost [ ]. The remaining drugs must also overcome barriers such as the corneal barrier, vitreous barrier, and the blood-retinal barrier [ ]. The corneal barrier consists of epithelium, bowman's layer, stroma, and endothelium. The tight connectivity between corneal epithelial cells and lipid-enriched cell membranes prevents the penetration of hydrophilic drugs. The vitreous humor is a clear, gel-like substance that has a low blood flow, so the diffusion of drugs through the vitreous humor is very slow. The blood-retinal barrier is formed by tight junctions between retinal ganglion cells, bipolar cells, horizontal cells, and photoreceptors. Intraocular drug delivery sites mainly include the anterior chamber, vitreous, retina, sclera, choroid, and cornea [ ]. Among these, the cornea and retina are the main target sites for nucleic acid drug delivery [ ]. The tight junctions and hydrophobic structures of corneal and retinal epithelial cells hinder the diffusion of hydrophilic drugs.
 
4.3.2.

## Approaches of local administration to eye
The major methods for ocular topical delivery of nucleic acid drugs include ocular surface drops and injections. Ocular surface drops, which are suitable for treating ocular surface diseases, are available in the form of eye drops, adhesive ointments, and gels. Among these, eye drops are highly comfortable for patients but are easily diluted by tears, resulting in low effective concentrations. Ointments and gels can extend the retention time of the drug in the eye but are associated with lower patient compliance [ ]. Ocular injections and intraocular implants may be more effective for treatments requiring higher drug concentrations or for deeper eye diseases. Drugs can be administered retinally, intraocularly, subconjunctivally, periocularly, and intravitreally. Nucleic acid drugs delivered intraocularly diffuse rapidly into areas such as the retina and choroid plexus. Direct injections bypass the corneal barriers and significantly increase the local concentrations of the drugs. However, they are invasive and may cause complications and other risks.

4.3.3.

## Local nucleic acid therapeutics for eyes
In clinical trials of local nucleic acid therapeutics for eyes, Vitravene (Fomivirsen), developed by Ionis and Novartis, utilized phosphoskeletal thio-modified ASOs. By vitreous administration, Fomivirsen downregulated the Immediate-early 2 (IE-2) gene and was used to treat retinitis caused by CMV infection in HIV patients [ ]. Unfortunately, it was withdrawn from the market due to low demand. Aptamers are also widely used in ocular topical delivery. Pegaptanib is a PEG-linked nucleic acid aptamer drug that inhibits endothelial cell proliferation by inhibiting VEGF for AMD therapy via intravitreal injection [ ]. However, it was withdrawn from the market in 2006 due to the limited economic benefits it generated. Avacincaptad pegol, an RNA aptamer that covalently binds to branched PEG molecules, specifically inhibits complement protein C5, reducing inflammation-associated retinal pigment epithelial damage [ ]. Approved by the U.S. FDA in August 2023, it is administered via intravitreal injection for the treatment of AMD.
In preclinical trials, Tivanisiran is an eye drop for the treatment of Sjögren's Syndrome [ ]. It inhibits the synthesis of transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) via siRNA, thereby alleviating pain and inflammation. Tivanisiran is currently in a Phase III clinical trial (NCT04819269) and has shown good tolerability. OLX10212, an asymmetric siRNA developed by OliX Pharmaceuticals, Inc., targets the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) gene and is administered via intravitreal injection for the treatment of age-related macular degeneration [ ]. OLX10212 is currently being evaluated for safety and tolerability (NCT05643118). Hong and colleagues used sugar-engineered nanoparticles to load ASO targeting the mRNA of Ec108acpP (named GP-SiNPs-asPNA) as eye drops to treat bacterial keratitis. GP-SiNPs-asPNA could be internalized into bacterial cells through the bacteria-specific ABC sugar transporter pathway [ ]. This delivery system eradicated nearly 100 % of antibiotic-resistant bacteria and is currently in a clinical phase I trial (NCT06451172).
Lipophilic drugs are more effective in penetrating the corneal barrier. Yossi Mandel's group constructed aptamer-modified C-dots nanocompsosites for the treatment of ocular vascular diseases [ ]. Due to the hydrophobic property of the C-dots, the nanocompsosite could penetrate into the corneal epithelium rapidly after topical administration. After penetrating the corneal epithelium, hydrophilic Apts traverse the deeper hydrophilic corneal stroma, then into the lens, and ultimately into the retina and posterior sclera.
Exosomes have also been reported to possess the advantage of penetrating the blood-eye barrier. Chi et al. found the level miR-29s in the aqueous humor of the glaucoma patients’ eyes was significantly higher than that of the normal group [ ]. They prepared engineered exosomes derived from induced pluripotent stem cells, which efficiently expressing miR-29b-3p to interfere miR-29s. These engineered exosomes were injected intraocularly into the retinal tissue of mice, thereby promoting optic nerve repair. To enhance retention of nucleic acid drugs in ocular lesions, Bajpayee et al. inserted arginine-rich cationic lipid molecules on the surface of milk-derived exosomes to deliver mRNA [ ]. These modifications allowed the exosomes to interact with anionic glycosaminoglycan and the water content of the tissue via electrostatic interactions. Arginine-modified exosomes demonstrated superior penetration through the full thickness of porcine retinal explants and enhanced mRNA transfection efficiency.
Surface modification of delivery systems by targeted peptides, aptamers, and functional groups can facilitate the targeting and retention of nucleic acid drugs in target cells. As shown in b, Gaurav Sahay's group screened the peptide SPALHFLGGGGSC (MH42) for its high affinity for retinal photoreceptor cells using a combined M13 phage-based heptameric peptide phage display library [ ]. Through intravitreal and subretinal injection, they found that the MH42 peptide (0.15 %) modified on the surface of LNPs could efficiently deliver mRNAs into retinal cells of mice and rhesus monkeys, providing an efficient ocular mRNA delivery LNPs. After that, this group explored the retinal transfection effects of different functional groups on the LNPs. They prepared LNPs containing DSPE-PEG-Amine (providing positive charges), DSPE-PEG-Carboxy NHS, and DSPE-PEG-Carboxylic Acid (providing negative charges), respectively ( c) [ ]. After subretinal injection, the results showed that LNPs containing DSPE-PEG-Carboxylic Acid and DSPE-PEG-Carboxy NHS were effective in facilitating mRNA photoreceptor transfection. They hypothesized that LNPs with carboxylated surface modifications have modified protein crowns that contribute to the ability of mRNA to enter the photoreceptors. Mucin 1, a glycoprotein highly expressed in the cornea, was also targeted for drug retention. To prolong the retention time of the drug in the cornea, Liu's group ligated the Mucin 1 aptamer to cholesterol and inserted it into liposomes to prepare eye drops for the treatment of dry eye [ ].
For corneal administration, Solinis et al. used lipid-based nanoparticles (LNPs) to encapsulate mRNA encoding Interleukin-10 (IL-10) [ ]. They formulated the LNPs into eye drops containing 1 % polyvinyl alcohol (PVA). Following eye drop administration, IL-10 mRNA was successfully expressed in the corneal epithelium of mice, demonstrating that the IL-10 production promoted by the drops could alleviate corneal inflammation in mice.
For deeper ocular delivery, Campochiaro's team utilized cationic poly(-amino ester)s (PBAEs) to deliver pDNA encoding VEGF-neutralizing protein [ ]. VEGF protein expression was sustained for more than eight months with choroidal and subretinal injections. This approach significantly inhibited vascular leakage and neovascularization in a macular degeneration rat model. Additionally, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals employed C16-conjugated siRNA to achieve sustained down-regulation of transthyretin protein for six months through topical ocular vitreous administration [ ]. The representative local nucleic acid therapeutics for eyes in this review are summarized in .
 

4.4.

## Local delivery of nucleic acid drugs for skin-related disease therapy
4.4.1.

## Bio-barriers in skin
The skin is the largest organ in the body. Transdermal administration is not only convenient but also facilitates the observation of the skin's response to the treatment. However, transdermal drug delivery faces the physiological barriers, including the stratum corneum, stratum granulosum, stratum spinosum, and stratum basale, which hinder the absorption of nucleic acid drugs ( a) [ ]. Among these, the stratum corneum represents the largest barrier to transdermal drug delivery. It consists of tightly packed cells with a thickness of 10–20 μm. From the superficial layers to deeper ones, drug delivery must overcome the barriers of the granulosum layer, the stratum spinosum, and the stratum basale before reaching the dermis [ ]. The dermis itself comprises the papillary and reticular layers, which contain connective tissue and microvessels. Beneath the dermis lies the hypodermis, primarily composed of fat and connective tissue, which serves as an energy store and provides cushioning protection.
 
4.4.2.

## Approaches of local administration to skin
Transdermal administration is the simplest and most convenient method for delivering drugs to the surface of the skin. Nucleic acid drugs can be applied to the skin through various dosage forms such as liquids, ointments, and patches. Many innovative transdermal patches and wearable devices have been developed to facilitate drug release and real-time monitoring [ , ]. However, pure transdermal delivery often penetrates the skin barrier with limited efficiency.
Intradermal and subcutaneous injections are direct methods for bypassing the stratum corneum barrier. Microneedles are an effective solution for delivering drugs uniformly across a fixed area of skin. Typically, microneedles have lengths ranging from 150 to 1500 μm. Their sharp tips can directly penetrate the stratum corneum, allowing nucleic acid drugs to reach the dermis [ ]. Besides, microneedles are less invasive, and the wounds can heal quickly. However, compared to traditional subcutaneous injections, the dosage of drugs administered using microneedles is difficult to control, and the procedure is more costly.
It can also be used to enhance the transdermal delivery efficiency of nucleic acid drugs by incorporating physical modalities such as electroporation, topical ultrasound, iontophoresis, lasers, and so on. However, It is important to consider whether the nucleic acid drug delivery system and the nucleic acid drug maintain their integrity after being stimulated by these physical methods [ ].

4.4.3.

## Local nucleic acid therapeutics for skin
For preclinical research, TD101 is the first siRNA trial in human skin for pachyonychia congenita therapy (NCT00716014) [ ]. The results of phase I clinical trial showed non-adverse effects in patients receiving TD101. And the callus regression was observed in the foot. Vaccines are usually administered intramuscularly, but since the dermis also contains a rich blood and lymphatic system, dermal injections can achieve effective immunization. Moreover, microneedle patches can produce an immune response at low doses due to their ability to cover a larger surface of the skin. For this reason, the Leiden University Medical Center initiated the intradermal delivery of mRNA vaccines encoding Spike proteins in microneedle patches to treat SARS-CoV-2 [ ]. Phase I clinical trials are currently being conducted to evaluate immunogenicity and safety (NCT05315362).
Certain peptides and molecules have been reported to enhance skin barrier penetration. Peng et al. designed a tumor-targeting molecule by modifying polyamide ester (PEA) with hyaluronic acid (HA) and a skin-permeable peptide (SCP, ACTGSTQHQCG) [ ]. SCP-HA-PAE formed micelles by self-assembly to adsorb siRNAs targeting survivin, enabling transdermal delivery for melanoma treatment. Similarly, Yasuo Seta et al. enhanced the transdermal penetration of free siRNA by pretreating the skin with a functional stearylated cytoplasm-responsive peptide (stearic acid CHHRRRRHHC) and a tight junction-opening peptide (FCIGRLCG) [ ]. For transdermal administration, Song et al. constructed hyaluronic acid nanoparticles conjugated with ASO targeting the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) gene, loaded with DOX for transdermal treatment of proliferative scarring in mice [ ]. The nanoparticles enhanced skin penetration through the intercellular pathway, achieving a penetration intensity 1.7 times higher than that of free drugs. This approach significantly inhibited the growth of proliferative scarring in mice through synergistic gene-chemotherapy effects. For intradermal administration, Harris et al. utilized docosanoic acid conjugated with siRNAs for gene therapy targeting autoimmune skin diseases. They screened siRNA targeting JAK1 and verified the immunomodulatory function of the docosanoic acid conjugated siJAK1 [ ]. The results showed that local administration of docosanoic acid conjugated siJAK1 significantly reduced skin infiltration of autoreactive CD8+ T cells and prevented epidermal depigmentation. In addition, a single injection maintained the effect in mouse skin for up to five weeks. Yasuo Seta combined siRNA with a peptide AT1002 (capable of opening skin tight junctions), and a peptide STR-CH2R4H2C (cytoplasmic-responsive arginine-rich peptide) to achieve an ameliorative effect of siRNA on atopic dermatitis through transdermal delivery [ ].
The permeability barrier of the stratum corneum comprises lipids such as ceramides and cholesterol. Lipid-based nucleic acid drug delivery systems, therefore, have the potential to penetrate this physiological barrier. As shown in b, Zhang et al. synthesized a lipid molecule by linking 3, 4-dihydroxyphenylpropionic acid to dioleostearin-3-amino-1,2-propanediol, named DA [ ]. Liquid crystals prepared from DA (DALC) were fused with extracellular vesicles derived from adipose mesenchymal stem cells (AMSC) to create EVs@DALC. This system was applied to the treatment of skin trauma. The lipophilicity of EVs@DALC facilitated transport through the epidermal layer and significantly enhanced cellular uptake of miR-31 and miR-126, reducing ROS and cellular inflammation.
Topical ultrasound can also facilitate deep penetration of the nucleic acid drug delivery system at the administration sites. Yoon et al. designed microbubble (MB)-nanoliposome (NL) nanoparticles loaded with Cas9/sgRNA RNP, named MB-NL(Cas9/sgRNA) ( c) [ ]. Under local ultrasound, the CRISPR RNP was efficiently taken up by dermal papilla cells in androgenetic alopecia model mice, successfully suppressing the expression of the key SRD5A2 gene responsible for alopecia. This treatment restored hair growth in the mice.
Iontophoresis is another effective method to enhance drug penetration through biological barrier. It mainly delivers drugs transdermally via electro-osmosis and electro-repulsion. Kogure et al. utilized the functional peptide AT1002 (RRRGGFCIGRL) combined with iontophoresis to open the thickened skin barriers caused by psoriasis [ ]. ASOs were then delivered to the dermis, where inflammation occurred, inhibiting the expression of relevant inflammatory factors and improving epidermal proliferation in psoriasis model rats.
In order to deliver pDNA to the dermis utilizing microneedles, Khademhosseini et al. constructed a gelatin methacryloyl (GelMA)-based microneedle platform for pDNA delivery [ ]. The pDNA was encapsulated in poly (β-amino ester) (PBAE) and subsequently loaded into the microneedle. This method enabled the efficient release and expression of pDNA in the dermis through microneedle administration.
Ionic liquids are a class of liquid salts composed of organic cations and anions, which can deliver nucleic acid drugs through non-covalent complexation. The ionic interactions help nucleic acid drugs penetrate deeper into the epidermis and dermis, and ionic liquids maintain the structural integrity of nucleic acid drugs after transdermal delivery. Samir Mitragotri's group developed choline-geranic acid (CAGE) ionic liquids to enhance siRNA dermal penetration [ ]. They successfully delivered siRNA to the mouse dermis by complexing this ionic liquid with siRNA. They then designed a library of ionic liquids to evaluate their efficiency for transdermal delivery of siRNA [ ]. Ultimately, an ionic liquid mixture of CAGE and choline and phenylpropanoic acid (CAPA) was used to deliver siRNA targeting the Nuclear factor κB protein IκBζ (NFKBIZ) gene, which significantly reduced erythema and desquamation symptoms in psoriasis model mice.
BNPs have the advantage of low immunogenicity for transdermal delivery. Andrew S. Lee used fibroblast-derived exosomes loaded with mRNA targeting VEGF-A via electroporation [ ]. In contrast to adeno-associated viruses and LNPs, the modified exosomes delivered via transdermal delivery were low-immunogenic in vivo, did not cause an increase in neutrophils and macrophages, and had positive effects on repairing damaged wounds and promoting neoangiogenesis. The representative local nucleic acid therapeutics for skin in this review are summarized in .
 

4.5.

## Local delivery of nucleic acid drugs for joint-related disease therapy
4.5.1.

## Bio-barriers in joint
Joints are structures that connect bones to one another. The physiological structure and biological barriers of joints are shown in a. The basic structure of a joint includes the joint capsule, synovial membrane, synovial fluid, joint cavity, articular cartilage, and periosteum. In articular cartilage, chondrocytes are distributed at varying densities and depths, dividing the cartilage into four zones: the superficial zone, intermediate zone, deep zone, and calcified cartilage [ ]. When inflammation occurs, structural homeostasis of the articular cartilage is disrupted, accompanied by extracellular matrix degradation and chondrocyte apoptosis. After intra-articular administration, drugs can enter systemic circulation through the synovium, leading to their removal from the joint cavity. Additionally, cartilage tissue comprises dense collagen fibers and negatively charged glycosaminoglycans, which limit drug penetration and distribution. Consequently, effective drug delivery to chondrocytes remains a significant challenge.
 
4.5.2.

## Approaches of local administration to joint
Intra-articular administration is the primary localized injection approach for treating joint-related diseases. The joint cavity is a confined space enclosed by the synovial layer of the joint capsule and the articular cartilage, containing a small amount of synovial fluid that helps maintain joint flexibility and stability. Intra-articular administration enhances the bioavailability of nucleic acid drugs within the joints and minimizes potential side effects associated with systemic circulation [ ]. Nevertheless, some drugs are also rapidly cleared from the joint after injection, limiting their efficacy. To address this issue, some studies have combined drugs with hydrogels, thereby prolonging their retention time in the joint and enabling slow, controlled drug release [ ]. Other studies have incorporated contrast agents such as Gd(II) and iohexol into the hydrogel system, allowing MRI and CT imaging to monitor the degradation behavior of the hydrogel in vivo [ , ].

4.5.3.

## Local nucleic acid therapeutics for joint
In preclinical studies, XT-150 is a free pDNA encoding interleukin 10 (IL-10) for treating moderate to severe knee osteoarthritis. The results of Phase I/II clinical trials showed that XT-150 is well tolerated and has demonstrated analgesic effects (NCT03477487/NCT04124042) [ ].
Polymer structure affects the effectiveness of nucleic acid drug transfection after intra-articular injection. Shinsuke Ohba et al. synthesized polyethylene glycol-polyamino acid (Poly{N-[N’-(2-aminoethyl)-2-aminoethyl]aspartamide}) block copolymer (PEG-PAsp(DET)) and PEG-poly(N-{N’-[N’’-(2-aminoethyl)-2-aminoethyl]-2-aminoethyl}aspartamide) (PEG-PAsp(TET)) to encapsulate mRNA targeting runt-related transcription factor 1 (Runx1), respectively [ ]. Through intra-articular administration, the results showed that mRNA delivered by PEG-PAsp(TET) exhibited higher and more persistent expression in the joint cavity compared to PEG-PAsp(DET).
Peptides with targeting functions have been reported to enhance the joint-specific delivery of nucleic acid drugs [ ]. Xu and colleagues engineered a chondrocyte-binding peptide (DWRVIIPPRPSA) onto the surface of exosomes derived from subcutaneous fat stromal cells [ ]. Deep cartilage delivery of miR-199a-3p was achieved by intra-articular injection for reversing osteoarthritic injury. Wang et al. modified the same chondrocyte-binding peptide on the surface of exosomes derived from Expi293F cells by hydrophobic insertion. They encapsulated siRNA targeting matrix metallopeptidase 13 (MMP13) into these exosomes using electroporation [ ]. The hybrid exosomes effectively silenced MMP13 in chondrocytes and attenuated cartilage degeneration after intra-articular administration.
Collagen is a major component of the cartilage matrix. Type 2 collagen constitutes more than 90 % of the total collagen [ ]. Targeting collagen, therefore, is an effective way to facilitate drugs penetration into the cartilage. Craig L. Duvall's team designed Collagen type 2 antibody-modified molecules with positive electrical properties, forming nanoparticles (mAbCII-siNPs) with negatively charged palmitic acid-siRNAs in an acidic environment [ ]. A single intra-articular injection of mAbCII-siNPs significantly reduced arthritis progression more than weekly injections of the steroid methylprednisolone. Xie et al. developed exosomes-derived from MSCs to load siRNA for arthritis therapy [ ]. To enhance the exosomes' joint retention capacity, they inserted a cationic peptide (WYRGRL) targeting type 2 collagen into the exosomes via DSPE-PEG-WYRGRL. The results showed that the peptide modification significantly prolonged the retention effect of exosomes in the joint (more than four times longer than that of unmodified exosomes) and enhanced cartilage penetration.
Integration of nucleic acid drugs into hydrogels enables prolonged retention, slow release, and controlled release at the joint site. Fang and coworkers integrated agomir-29b-5p with functionalized stem cell-homing peptide (SKPPGTSS) to form an injectable hydrogel (SKP@miR) [ ]. By intra-articular injection, SKP@miR could be retained in the joint cavity for more than 14 days. Moreover, treatment restored the arthritic knee joints of model rats to a state comparable to normal joints and reduced cartilage degeneration. Qin's group prepared an injectable nanogel to sustained delivery of siRNA targeting Integrin β3 (Cd61) to joints of osteoarthritis mice ( b) [ ]. The core/shell nanogel ((poly (N-isopropylmethacrylamide), PNIPMAM) was synthesized by N-isopropylmethacrylamide (NIPMAM), N,N′-methylenebis(acrylamide) (BIS), and N-(3-aminopropyl methacrylate hydrochloride) (APMA) through a free-radical precipitation polymerization. Then, RGD peptide was conjugated with nanogel through condensation reaction to enhance cell adhesion. After loading siRNA, the RGD-Nanogel/siRNA Cd61 were prepared to block osteopontin-integrin β3 signaling to treat osteoarthritis.
Cartilage tissue contains a large number of negatively charged proteoglycans. Therefore, cationic delivery systems can be used to enhance the retention of nucleic acid drugs in chondrocytes. For instance, Christine T. N. Pham et al. constructed cationic amphipathic peptide “p5RHH” (VLTTGLPALISWIRRRHRRHC) to form a complex with siRNA targeting nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB), stabilizing the outer layer with albumin to produce p5RHH-siRNA nanoparticles [ ]. The p5RHH-siRNA nanoparticles deeply penetrated osteoarthritis cartilage after articular injection and persisted in the chondrocyte lumen for at least 2 weeks.
DNA-based nanomaterials also show potential in local nucleic acid therapeutics for joint. Endogenous MSCs enhancement is considered one of the effective ways to treat osteoarthritis. As shown in c, Zhu et al. constructed an aptamer (HM69, for recruiting MSCs)-modified tetrahedral framework nucleic acid [ ]. And, transforming growth factor-beta 3 (TGF-β3), which can induce cartilage formation, was attached to this HM69-modified tetrahedral framework nucleic acid via an S-S bond. After intra-articular administration, endogenous MSCs were recruited to the joints of model mice and articular cartilage scores were enhanced. Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory disease characterized by synovial inflammation. In order to regulate the synovial inflammation, Lin and coworkers developed tetrahedral framework nucleic acids to deliver miR-23b (T-23b) [ ]. Local intra-articular injection of T-23b significantly inhibited inflammatory cell infiltration and synovial proliferation, thereby alleviating synovial injury. The representative local nucleic acid therapeutics for joints in this review are summarized in .
 

4.6.

## Local delivery of nucleic acid drugs for heart-related disease therapy
4.6.1.

## Bio-barriers in heart
The heart is the central organ of the circulatory system, primarily composed of cardiomyocytes, cardiac fibroblasts, smooth muscle cells, and endothelial cells. It is responsible for pumping blood throughout the body to meet metabolic and physiological needs. The physiological structure of the heart is shown in a, It has four chambers: the left atrium, left ventricle, right atrium, and right ventricle. The heart also has coronary arteries (including the left and right coronary arteries) that supply blood and oxygen to the myocardium, as well as veins. The heart has a dense membranous structure, which includes the fibrous pericardium, parietal pericardium, pericardial space, epicardium, myocardium, and endocardium [ ]. Among these, the fibrous pericardium consists of tightly packed connective tissue that prevents the heart from overexpanding. The endocardium is composed of a single layer of endothelial cells, forming a dense “blood-heart barrier” that prevents macromolecules and particles from entering cardiomyocytes [ ]. Additionally, coronary endothelial cells block the entry of drugs into the myocardium through tight cellular junctions. Together with the heart's high blood flow and metabolism, delivering nucleic acid drugs to the heart remains a significant challenge.
 
4.6.2.

## Approaches of local administration to heart
The main methods of local administration to the heart include intra-myocardial and intra-coronary injections [ ]. Intra-myocardial administration involves injecting drugs directly into the myocardium through epicardial, endocardial, or trans-coronary routes [ ]. This approach allows for efficient enrichment of nucleic acid drugs in cardiomyocytes [ ]. Epicardial intra-myocardial administration requires invasive open-heart surgery and a long postoperative recovery time. Endocardial intra-myocardial administration involves using a catheter to enter the ventricular cavity from the peripheral blood, either retrogradely through the arterial system or through the venous system via septal vein puncture. This approach is less invasive but requires expensive equipment. Trans-coronary intra-myocardial injection uses a catheter inserted through the femoral vein into the coronary sinus to deliver drugs. This method is also relatively less invasive. Intra-coronary administration involves injecting the drug directly into the coronary arteries through a catheter [ ]. It is further classified into antegrade and retrograde coronary injections. Retrograde intra-coronary injection involves delivering drugs through the coronary sinus and requires blocking coronary blood flow to eliminate the effects of collateral flow on pressure. Intra-coronary administration distributes the drug more evenly throughout the heart and results in less myocardial damage than intra-myocardial injections [ ]. However, due to the high blood flow and metabolism of the heart, the drug is quickly absorbed into the body's circulation, leading to reduced retention in the heart.
Researchers have also explored achieving extended and sustained release of drugs in the heart by implanting patches or hydrogels loaded with nucleic acid drugs, as well as enabling real-time monitoring of cardiac electrophysiological activity, which has shown promising applications [ ]. In addition, inhaled drug delivery approaches have also been used to target the heart. Shu et al. developed inhalable cardiac-targeting peptide (CTP)-modified calcium phosphate (CaP) nanoparticles to target cardiomyocytes and fibroblasts for the treatment of heart failure [ ].

4.6.3.

## Local nucleic acid therapeutics for heart
VEGF, one of the key targets for the treatment of coronary artery disease, can promote angiogenesis and cardiac repair. In clinical trials, pDNA encoding VEGF (phVEGF165) was administered intra-myocardially to treat coronary artery disease. Phase I/II clinical trials have shown that phVEGF165 has a good safety profile and can improve myocardial infarction outcomes (NCT00135850) [ ]. AZD8601, an mRNA drug encoding VEGF-A, was developed by AstraZeneca and Moderna for heart failure therapy via epicardial injection (NCT02935712/NCT03370887). Results from the Phase I/II clinical trials indicated that AZD8601 did not pose a safety burden and alleviated heart failure symptoms in patients [ ]. INXN-4001 contains three pDNAs encoding VEGF (affecting calcium handling), stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1α, affecting angiogenesis), and S100 calcium binding protein A1 (S100A1, affecting progenitor cell recruitment), respectively [ ]. These plasmids were used to treat heart failure via retrograde intracoronary injection. In the 6-month trial, no adverse effects were observed with INXN-4001, and there was evidence of improvement in heart failure symptoms (NCT03409627) [ ].
To validate VEGF as a therapeutic target in a larger animal model, Regina Fritsche-Danielson's group administered purified VEGF-A mRNA through intra-myocardial injection in a porcine model of myocardial infarction [ ]. Their findings demonstrated efficient VEGF-A protein expression in porcine hearts, which promoted neovascularization and improved cardiac function recovery post-infarction.
In optimized mRNA myocardial local delivery research, Kenneth R Chien et al. synthesized various nucleotide-modified RNAs (modRNAs) for intra-myocardial administration in myocardial infarction treatment [ ]. By comparison with mRNA and pDNA encoding same VEGF target, modRNA induced less immune responses than mRNA and prolonged the survival of myocardial infarction mice more than pDNA. P. Vader and colleagues explored the impact of different LNP ratios on the transfection efficiency of modRNAs through intra-myocardial administration [ ]. The LNP formulations comprised C12-200 ionized lipids, cholesterol, helper lipids (DOPC or DOPE), and PEG-conjugated lipids (DMG-PEG). Through systematic screening, they identified the optimal formulation with a ratio of C12-200:Chol:DOPE at 40 %:43.5 %:15 %, which demonstrated the highest transfection efficiency in both fibroblasts and epicardial cells.
MicroRNAs play important roles in both promoting angiogenesis and treating cardiovascular diseases. MicroRNA-21 can target multiple anti-angiogenesis genes, thereby promoting the vascularization process. To deliver miRNAs efficiently into cardiomyocytes, Yang et al. constructed inflammatory environment-responsive mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) to deliver microRNA-21-5p [ ]. These were encapsulated in a hydrogel for the treatment of myocardial infarction via intra-myocardial administration. On one hand, MSNs suppressed the inflammatory response by inhibiting the polarization of M1 macrophages in the infarcted myocardium. On the other hand, microRNA-21-5p promoted local neointimal formation, demonstrating a good therapeutic effect in the pig infarction model. Cai and co-workers developed exosomes derived from cardiac telocytes (CT) to treat myocardial infarction through intra-myocardial administration [ ]. They found that miRNA-21-5p in CT exosomes promoted myocardial revascularization by interfering with the p53 target 1 (Cdip1) gene. Han et al. investigated the therapeutic effects and mechanisms of exosomes overexpressing miR-214-3p derived from MSCs in acute myocardial infarction [ ]. After intra-myocardial administration, miR-214-3p overexpressed MSCs-exosomes significantly reduced cardiomyocyte apoptosis and improved cardiac function in acute myocardial infarction rats. The phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted on chromosome ten (PTEN)/protein kinase B (AKT) signaling pathway is one of the potential mechanisms. Bei and co-workers developed conductive microneedle patches to deliver ZIF-8 (miR-30d@ZIF-8) and Au NPs loaded with miR-30d to treat myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury [ ]. As shown in b, after miR-30d@ZIF-8 within the patch was released, miR-30d was released to achieve anti-apoptosis and anti-fibrosis through ZIF-8's escape from the endosomes/lysosomes. Au NPs promoted electrical impulse conduction and restored myocardial electrophysiological function. The representative local nucleic acid therapeutics for heart in this review are summarized in .
 

5.

## Conclusions
This review discusses the research progresses of various non-viral nucleic acid drugs therapeutics for local administration in extrahepatic diseases. Compared to systemic administration, the main advantages of local administration are: 1) high local drug concentration in target organs: local administration delivers the drug directly to the lesion, significantly increasing the local drug concentration; 2) low systemic side effects: local administration avoids systemic circulation and first-pass effects, reducing adverse effects on non-target tissues; 3) good patient compliance: the locally administered drug has a high local concentration and a long duration of action, requiring less frequent administration. However, biological barriers associated with different diseases pose challenges for the design of nucleic acid drug delivery vectors. Nucleic acid drug delivery techniques adapted for systemic administration are not necessarily suitable for local injection. It is anticipated that rationally designed delivery systems will overcome these physiological barriers by modulating interactions among the vectors, nucleic acid drugs, and the physiological environments of the diseases.
For local lung delivery, the upper airway barrier (mucus, cilia, etc.) and the alveolar barrier (collagen, etc.) are the main biological barriers limiting nucleic acid drug availability. The main approaches for drug delivery are inhalation, nasal administration, and intratracheal injection. Among them, nebulized inhalation must also consider the effect of mechanical shear generated by the nebulizer on the integrity of nanoparticles. Nucleic acid drug delivery systems for local injection in the lungs should be designed by considering factors such as electrical properties, hydrophilicity, particle sizes, and surface PEG coating. In addition, peptides, small molecules, and Apts with cellular targeting capabilities can be considered for modification in the delivery systems to enhance the targeting of nucleic acid drugs.
For the brain, the BBB, blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier, arachnoid barrier, and nose-brain barrier are the major physiological barriers. Lateral ventricular administration, intrathecal administration, and transnasal administration are commonly used for localized brain injections. PNPs and LNPs that can efficiently load nucleic acid drugs and enable endosome escape are commonly used as vectors. In addition, BNPs can also be functionally modified to achieve efficient delivery of cleic acid drugs and synergistic therapies. INPs are also commonly used to trace the in vivo behavior of nucleic acid drugs in the brain through MRI, CT, and so on.
For eye delivery, tears, the corneal barrier, the vitreous barrier, and the blood-retinal barrier are the major biological barriers. Ocular surface drops, retinal, intraocular, conjunctival, and vitreous administration are the primary local delivery approaches for nucleic acid drugs. Hydrophobic and electronegative nucleic acid drug delivery systems are better suited for topical ocular injections. Apts hold great promise for clinical applications in the treatment of ocular diseases. Several targeting molecules, apts, and negatively charged functional groups that modify the delivery systems can facilitate the barrier penetration of nucleic acid drugs.
For local skin delivery, the stratum corneum, stratum granulosum, stratum spinosum, and stratum basale are the main physiological barriers. Transdermal, intradermal, and subcutaneous administration are the main methods for nucleic acid drug delivery. Liquids and ointments are the primary forms used for transdermal administration. To enhance transdermal efficiency, physical approaches such as electroporation, localized ultrasound, iontophoresis, and lasers are frequently combined. Several ionic liquids and peptides that can open tight junctions of the barriers have also been developed to facilitate the penetration of nucleic acid drugs through the stratum corneum.
For local joint delivery, clearance by synovial fluid and the low permeability of cartilage are the main biological barriers. Intra-articular administration is the most important mode of local drug delivery. Vectors modified with peptides that bind to chondrocytes and collagen can enhance joint-specific delivery of nucleic acid drugs. Positively charged vectors enhance drug retention in the joints through electrostatic interactions with proteoglycans. The integration of nucleic acid drugs into hydrogels can prolong drug retention, enable slow release, and provide controlled release at the joint sites.
For local heart delivery, the tight junctions of the fibrous pericardium, parietal pericardium, pericardial cavity, epicardium, myocardium, endocardium, and coronary endothelial cells prevent nucleic acid drugs from entering the heart lesion. Moreover, the high blood flow, metabolism, and extracellular matrix also represent major physiological barriers. Intra-myocardial and intra-coronary injections are the main local delivery approaches. The integration of nucleic acid drug delivery systems into cardiac patches or hydrogels may extend the release time of the drug in the heart, potentially reducing the frequency of administration and allowing for more efficient treatment of heart-related diseases.
With current advances in clinical marketing and preclinical studies, modifications or conjugates to nucleic acid drugs remain the predominant delivery technique. However, conjugation delivery technology is only applicable to relatively small fragments of nucleic acid drugs such as ASO and siRNA. LNPs have also been applied clinically in siRNA and mRNA systemic delivery. However, the design principles of local delivery LNPs are not the same as those of systemic delivery LNPs. In local applications, LNPs should also be adjusted according to the characteristics of the disease. PNPs can achieve multifunctional delivery of nucleic acid drugs through clever design of polymers. However, it is very difficult to precisely control the preparation of polymers and PNPs. INPs have good stability and are easy to be functionalized modification. They can also be used as contrast agents or auxiliary therapy formulations to guide or enhance therapeutic effects. Meanwhile, the potential metabolic burden in vivo is a concerning point in clinical applications. BNPs possess therapeutic miRNAs, proteins, and have homologous targeting, and good biocompatibility. However, the unclear composition, low nucleic acid drug loading capacity, and difficulty in large-scale extraction limit their further application. DNA origami based nanomaterials can be prepared with high precision and controllability, with great potentials in local nucleic acid drug delivery. Nevertheless, their design and preparation process are relatively complex, and the cost is also high. In specific applications, appropriate nucleic acid drugs and related delivery technologies should be selected based on disease characteristics and delivery needs.
The application of nucleic acid drugs for the treatment of extrahepatic diseases is still limited. In addition to the bio-barriers, the following limitations persist for localized injections compared to systemic injections: 1) limited scope of application: local administration may allow for the enrichment of nucleic acid drugs in specific organs, but it is primarily confined to diseases affecting the lungs, brain, eyes, skin, joints, and heart. For systemic diseases and deep tissue lesions, local administration remains challenging. 2) Complexity of operation. For the brain, heart, and joints, localized administration is much more difficult to manipulate. 3) Potential risks. Brain delivery, for example, faces unacceptable risks caused by craniotomy. For skin delivery, it may causes local irritation and allergic reactions.
Based on the deficiencies in local administration, nucleic acid drugs for extrahepatic disease therapy may also require approaches beyond local injection. For instance, specific expression of mRNA in the liver, spleen, and lungs can also be achieved by modulating the charge properties of liposomes [ , ]. Additionally, modifying the hydrophilic head groups and hydrophobic structures of lipid molecules can enable efficient mRNA expression in bone marrow [ ]. Selective delivery of nucleic acid drugs to specific organs can also be achieved by using microbubbles. Vectors combined with microbubbles can be co-delivered in vivo and irradiated with focused ultrasound, creating a cavitation effect that enables the selective delivery of nucleic acid drugs to specific organs [ ].
On the other hand, due to patient heterogeneity, the same nucleic acid drug delivery system may not be suitable for all patients. Thus, medical imaging is essential for guiding nucleic acid drug delivery. Artificial intelligence (AI) offers significant potential to manage the complex interactions between multivariate nano-delivery systems and nucleic acid drugs. AI can assist researchers in predicting the properties of delivery systems and accelerate high-throughput screening of vectors. Moreover, integrating AI with gene target screening holds great promise for expediting the clinical application of nucleic acid drugs. Advances in microfluidics have facilitated the synthesis of more homogeneous and controllable nanodelivery systems to optimise nucleic acid drug delivery. The development of organoid microarrays has accelerated the process of screening and optimising nucleic acid therapeutics. In conclusion, the future development of local nucleic acid therapeutics relies on the deep integration of technologies such as chemical synthesis, biological evaluation, medical diagnostics and evaluation, nanotechnology, AI, and microfluidics.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Jie Shen: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Conceptualization. Xusheng Duan: Writing – review & editing. Ting Xie: Writing – review & editing. Xinrui Zhang: Writing – original draft. Yue Cai: Writing – original draft. Junhao Pan: Writing – original draft. Xin Zhang: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Conceptualization. Xuanrong Sun: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition.

## Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.

## Ethics approval and consent to participate
There are no human and animal subjects in this review and informed consent is not applicable.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: Xin Zhang reports financial support was provided by National Natural Science Foundation of China. Xuanrong Sun reports financial support was provided by National Natural Science Foundation of China. Xuanrong Sun reports financial support was provided by National Key Research and Development Program of China. Xuanrong Sun reports financial support was provided by Foundation of Zhejiang University of Technology. Jie Shen reports financial support was provided by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation. Jie Shen reports financial support was provided by ostdoctoral Fellowship Program of China Postdoctoral Science Foundation. If there are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 32225029, 22075247), National Key Research and Development Program of China (No.2022YFC2804204), Foundation of Zhejiang University of Technology (No.KYY-HX-20221141), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No.2023M743104), and the Postdoctoral Fellowship Program of China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. GZC20232365). The authors are pleased to acknowledge the support by Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of TCM for Innovative R & D and Digital Intelligent Manufacturing of TCM Great Health Products.

## Footnotes
Peer review under the responsibility of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd.
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2025.02.043.

## Contributor Information
Xin Zhang, Email: xzhang@ipe.ac.cn.
Xuanrong Sun, Email: sunxr@zjut.edu.cn.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary data
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Multimedia component 2
Multimedia component 2

## Multimedia component 3
Multimedia component 3

## Multimedia component 4
Multimedia component 4

## Multimedia component 5
Multimedia component 5

## Multimedia component 6
Multimedia component 6

## Multimedia component 7
Multimedia component 7 

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Multimedia component 2
Multimedia component 2

## Multimedia component 3
Multimedia component 3

## Multimedia component 4
Multimedia component 4

## Multimedia component 5
Multimedia component 5

## Multimedia component 6
Multimedia component 6

## Multimedia component 7
Multimedia component 7

## Data Availability Statement
No data was used for the research described in the article.