pmcJ Adv ResJ Adv Res2546jareJournal of Advanced Research2090-12322090-1224ElsevierPMC13131433PMC13131433.113131433131314334085068210.1016/j.jare.2025.08.032S2090-1232(25)00647-21Original ManuscriptLong noncoding RNA Nron and its functional motif modulate macrophage-mediated inflammatory response
YangLiuye WangPengchao LiuKaiyuan LiuBing ZhuJingbo LiFengcen AiMingfa LiXiaoguang LiangMinglu HuangKaihuangkai1@hust.edu.cnunionhuang@163.com DuMengD201378184@alumni.hust.edu.cn aDepartment of Cardiology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, ChinabDepartment of Radiology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, ChinacXiamen Cardiovascular Hospital of Xiamen University, School of Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, ChinadThe First Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, ChinaeHubei Key Laboratory of Metabolic Abnormalities and Vascular Aging, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, ChinafHubei Clinical Research Center of Metabolic and Cardiovascular Disease, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, ChinagDepartment of Endocrinology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China⁎Corresponding authors at: Department of Endocrinology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1277 Jiefang Ave., Wuhan 430000, China. huangkai1@hust.edu.cnunionhuang@163.comD201378184@alumni.hust.edu.cn1These authors contributed equally to this work.
52026228202583512772897912228202419820251982025220820250105202609052026© 2025 The Author(s)2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Myeloid-specific Nron deficiency exacerbates LPS and CLP-induced sepsis in mice.
•Nron binds to miR-146a-3p/miR-16-1-3p and thus enhances SIRT1 activity, leading to restriction of HIF-1/NF-κB signaling.
•The functional motif of Nron (NCM2) relieves inflammatory response with advantage.
•The macrophage-targeted delivery of NCM2 exert a significant therapeutic effect in vivo.

## Introduction
Non-resolving macrophage-mediated inflammation is closely linked to the pathogenesis of systemic inflammatory response syndrome. Despite years of clinical trials attempting to mitigate the harmful effects of excessive inflammation, these efforts have largely been unsuccessful. Therefore, it is essential to develop novel therapeutic strategies.

## Objective
To explore the role of Nron in inflammatory diseases and evaluate the therapeutic effect.

## Methods
Conditional knockout/knockin mice were used for a systematic evaluation of Nron function in lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or cecal ligation and puncture (CLP)-induced sepsis. Quantitative real-time PCR, western blot, luciferase reporter assay, and RNA-RNA interaction assay were performed to investigate mechanisms and identify functional motifs. An enhanced lipid nanoparticle (LNP) formulation was constructed for targeted macrophage delivery and therapy. Moreover, monocytes were obtained from blood of patients with sepsis for in vitro culture, and the serum for enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) detection. Data analysis was conducted using GraphPad Prism 8.

## Results
Conditional knockout of Nron in myeloid cells exacerbates LPS or CLP-induced sepsis, while the conditional transgenic mice exhibited a survival advantage with alleviated tissue inflammation and damage. Nron enhances sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) deacetylase activity via sponging miR-146a-3p/miR-16-1-3p in macrophages, thus regulating on nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) signaling by inhibiting p65 acetylation/phosphorylation directly or via HIF-1 signaling. The conserved functional motif of Nron (NCM2) has a longer half-life and LNP-NCM2 targeted to macrophages effectively alleviated sepsis in mice.

## Conclusion
Nron serves as a crucial negative regulator of excessive inflammatory responses, and its functional motifs can be used as a potential therapeutic agent for inflammatory diseases such as sepsis.

## Keywords
InflammationSepsisLncRNANucleic acid therapypmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Abbreviations
LPSLipopolysaccharide
LncRNALong noncoding RNA
BMDMsBone marrow-derived macrophages
AMsAlveolar macrophages
PMsPeritoneal macrophages
PBMCsPeripheral blood mononuclear cells
CLPCecal ligation and puncture
NCMNron conserved motif
hNCMHuman NRON conserved motif
qPCRQuantitative polymerase chain reaction
FISHFluorescence in situ hybridization
RNA-seqRNA-sequencing
ChIPChromatin immunoprecipitation assay
RIPRNA immunoprecipitation
rAAVRecombinant adeno-associated virus 6
GOGene Ontology
KEGGKyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
LNPLipid nanoparticle
SIRT1Silent Information Regulator 2 homolog 1
NFATPhosphorylated Nuclear Factor of Activated T-cells
AGO2Argonaut RISC catalytic component 2

## Introduction
Sepsis is defined as a life-threatening syndrome resulting from organ dysfunction due to a dysregulated immune response to infection, with a high global mortality rate. The host immune response during sepsis initiates excessive host inflammatory response to infection, which is linked with tissue damage and leads to organ failure [ , , , ]. Ideally, the initial encounter between the pathogen and the inflammatory system should eradicate the microbe and swiftly restore the host to homeostasis [ , ]. Despite years of clinical trials attempting to mitigate the harmful effects of excessive inflammation through anti-inflammatory treatments, these efforts have largely been unsuccessful [ ].
The research on long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) and sepsis has gained significant momentum in recent years [ ]. LncRNAs, a class of noncoding RNA molecules longer than 200 nucleotides, have been implicated in various disease mechanisms, including inflammation and immune disorders [ ]. In the context of sepsis, studies have begun to unravel the potential roles of specific lncRNAs in modulating the inflammatory response and contributing to disease progression [ ]. By understanding the mechanisms through which these lncRNAs function, we hope to identify novel diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets for sepsis, ultimately improving patient outcomes and reducing mortality rates.
Long non-coding RNA, Nron (non-coding repressor of nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT)) is an “antisense lncRNA” situated within the intronic region of the multivesicular body subunit 12B (MVB12B) gene, and it is well-conserved across multiple species, including both mice and human [ ]. It is approximately 2.7 kb in length, and expressed primarily in immune organs. Nron was initially identified as facilitating the assembly of a large RNA/protein complex and functioning as a cytoplasmic trap for phosphorylated NFAT proteins [ , ]. Although initially believed to be limited to the immune system and primarily involved in T cell differentiation, Nron has been found to modulate a variety of pathophysiological processes and is associated with several diseases, including neoplastic disorders, as well as dysfunctions in cardiovascular and bone homeostasis [ , , ]; however, the character of Nron in inflammatory diseases, and its diagnostic and therapeutic potential, remains to be established. Here we found that Nron is abundant in macrophage and involved in various inflammatory diseases including endotoxemia and sepsis.
In the present study, we aim to explore the role and mechanism of Nron in inflammatory diseases, and reveals that Nron serves as a crucial negative regulator of excessive inflammatory responses, and confirms that the functional motifs of Nron can be used as a potential therapeutic agent for sepsis.

## Material and methods

## Animal studies
C57BL/6J mice were purchased from Beijing Weitong Lihua Laboratory AnimalTechnology Co., Ltd. Nron conditional knockout mouse (Nronflox/flox, Cyagen Biosciences Inc.), Nron conditional knockin mouse (NronKI/KI, Cyagen Biosciences Inc.) and Sirt1 conditional knockout mouse (Sirt1flox/flox, The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA) were generated using a genome editing approach mediated by CRISPR/Cas9. Nron floxed mice were bred with LysM-Cre mice (#004781; The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA) to generate myeloid-cell-specific knockout or knockin mice. The on-target/off-target effect of gene editing was evaluated by Cyagen Biosciences, and genotyping was conducted using mouse tail before all animal experiments. Eight- to ten-week-old male mice were utilized for the research, and littermates that are homozygous for the conditional allele but do not contain the Cre transgene were used as controls. The mice were housed in a facility with suitable temperature and lighting conditions, with unrestricted access to water and food. All experiments involving animals were conducted according to the ethical policies and procedures approved by the ethics committee of Union Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China (Approval no. 3594).

## Patients and samples
Patients admitted to Union Hospital who met the clinical criteria for sepsis were screened for eligibility. Blood samples were collected once within the first day of hospitalization. Exclusion criteria encompassed pregnancy or breastfeeding, the presence of malignancies, organ transplantation, human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS), autoimmune disorders, and the use of immunosuppressive medications within the past month. Volunteers without sepsis, who were age- and gender-matched, and scheduled for elective surgery, served as the control group. Demographic details and clinical variables of the patients were gathered from existing medical records (Supplementary Table 3). All information collected from patients has undergone data anonymization. Blood samples (10 mL) were collected, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated using LSM-Lymphocyte Separation Medium (50494X, MP Biomedicals). Monocytes were subsequently obtained using the plastic adherence method [ ]. The isolated cells were identified and quantified using flow cytometry. Informed consent forms were obtained from each patient (Approval no. 0339-01).

## Septicaemia models
We established a mouse model of septicemia using CLP surgery or intraperitoneal injection of LPS (10 mg/kg). As previously detailed [ ], CLP surgery was performed on 8-week-old cohorts of male mice weighing between 22 and 28 g. Ligation was conducted at approximately 50 % of the cecum followed by two punctures with a 20-gauge needle to induce severe sepsis. Resuscitation was performed immediately after abdominal closure via subcutaneous injection of 1 mL of normal saline. The control group underwent the same procedure with cecal ligation but without the puncture, to serve as sham-operated controls. The LPS-induced endotoxemia model was conducted as previously described [ ]. Survival was tracked and documented for up to 72  h. All mice were anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (60 mg/kg, Sigma, USA) and euthanized by cervical dislocation at indicated time points (24 h after LPS modeling and 48 h after CLP modeling). Plasma samples were collected for ELISA testing, and lung tissues were colleted for signaling pathway detection and histological evaluation.

## Generation of recombinant adenovirus and adeno-associated virus
Adenovirus carrying Nron or control GFP was applied to infect bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) or RAW246.7 in vitro. Recombinant adeno-associated virus 6 (rAAV, type 6) carrying NCM2 fragment under control of the F4/80 promoter was utilized to manipulate the expression of NCM2 in macrophages in vivo [ ]. Mice were administered with AAV-F4/80-NCM2 or AAV-Ctrl in 20 μL of PBS (Wuhan Lanheng Era Biotechnology Co., Ltd.) via endotracheal intubation and in 100 μL of PBS via tail intravenous injection per mouse at a dose of 1 × 1011 viral particlesss. NCM2 expression in alveolar macrophages was detected by RT-PCR on day 28 after AAV injection. All adenovirus and AAVs were supplied by GeneChem Technologies.

## Lipid nanoparticle (LNP) formulations
The LNP formulation used for our study was prepared using a microfluidic mixing device [ ]. Antibody conjugated LNP (MacLNP) was prepared based on a previous study [ ]. Briefly, Azide LNP was formulated by microfluidics mixing of an ethanol phase containing 4-O10b1 lipidoid (35 %, molar ratio), DOPE (16 %, molar ratio), cholesterol (46.5 %, molar ratio), C14PEG2K (2 %, molar ratio), and azide-PEG (0.5 %, molar ratio) with an aqueous phase containing 50 nM NCM2. Subsequently, DBCO-activated F4/80 antibody was incubated with the above LNP solution for clickable conjugation. They are engineered with a diameter of less than 100 nm to facilitate more efficient entry into cells. Right after CLP surgery, MacLNPs were delivered to mice via intranasal inhalation (1.25 mg/kg), and the delivery efficiency was assessed in alveolar macrophages.

## ELISA
The serum was collected from animals after blood clotting and centrifugation. The concentrations of inflammation factors were quantified using ELISA kits according to the manufacturer’s instructions. ELISA kits were: tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) (RK00027, ABclonal), interleukin 6 (IL-6) (RK00008, ABclonal), IL-1β (RK00001, ABclonal), and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) (RK00381, ABclonal).

## RNA extraction and quantitative real-time PCR
Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent and subsequently used to synthesize cDNA from mRNA or microRNA using reverse-transcription kits [ ]. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) amplification was conducted and detected. Relative gene expression was normalized to 18S rRNA or U6 snRNA using the 2 − ΔΔCt method. The primer sequences are provided in Supplementary Table 1.

## Western blot
Cells or tissues were collected at the indicated times. Equivalent amounts of protein were separated by SDS-PAGE, followed by immunoblotting with specific primary antibodies and secondary antibodies, and the final immunoblot signals were detected using a chemiluminescence detection system and analyzed with ImageJ software. The primary antibody catalogs are listed in Supplementary Table 2.

## Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
FISH assay was performed according to the previous study [ ]. Briefly, cells were fixed in 4 % formaldehyde and then permeabilized in PBS containing 0.5 % Triton X-100. Hybridization was carried out using a FISH kit (RiboBio, Gaungzhou, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Hybridization buffer containing 50 nM of a commercially available Nron-specific probe was added to the cells and incubated at 37C overnight. The next day, cells were rinsed thrice with 4 × SSC solution (20 × SSC solution: 175.3 g NaCl and 88.2 g sodium citrate diluted in ultra-pure water, with the volume adjusted to 1 L and pH adjusted to 7.0) with 0.1 % Tween-20 for 5 min at 42 ℃, followed by washing once with 2 × SSC solution and once with 1 × SSC solution for 5 min each at 42 ℃. After being stained with 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), images were obtained using a confocal microscope (Olympus X73, Fukasawa, Japan).

## RNA pulldown assay
Biotin-labeled RNAs were synthesized in vitro using the Biotin RNA Labeling Mix and T7 RNA polymerase (Ambion). Post-transcription, the RNAs were purified utilizing the RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN), which involved on-column DNA digestion. The biotinylated Nron or antisense Nron was subsequently incubated with cell lysates (containing RNasin) overnight at 4 ℃. The resulting complexes were isolated using streptavidin beads and analyzed by immunoblotting.

## RNA–RNA in vitro interaction assays
The assay was performed as described previously [ ], with some modifications. Briefly, after 50ul of Streptavidin Magnetic Beads (MedChemExpress, NJ, USA) was washed twice with RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP) wash buffer, equal amounts (5 pmol) of biotin-labeled RNAs (Nron sense, control RNA) were incubated with beads in Incubation Buffer for 30 min at RT with rotation. Following incubation, 2.5 pmol of the RNA fragment (Nron antisense, 5′ untranslated regions (UTR), 3′UTR, coding area (CDS) of house mouse sirt1 mRNA) was added into individual tubes and incubated 2 h at 4 °C with rotation. After incubation, beads were washed six times with RIP Wash Buffer. To recover RNA, beads were digested with proteinase K buffer containing RIP Wash Buffer, 1 % SDS and 1.2 μg/μl proteinase K (Servicebio, Wuhan, China) at 55 °C for 30 min. After digestion, RNA was extracted from supernatant using the RNAiso Plus (Takara, Kusatsu, Japan), and reverse transcription was performed using the Superscript III system (Takara, Kusatsu, Japan). The amount of the RNA fragment as above recovered in each interaction assay was quantified by qPCR analysis. Data were normalized to the Nron-AS control, using the ΔCt method.

## RNA immunoprecipitation
Cells were crosslinked with 0.3 % formaldehyde at 37 °C for 10 min, followed by quenching with 0.125 M glycine in PBS at RT for 5 min. The cells were then pelleted and resuspended in RIPA buffer and gently mixed on ice for 30 min. AGO2 antibody or control IgG was added, and samples were incubated overnight at 4 °C. The RNA/protein complexes were captured using protein G Dynabeads, washed with RIPA buffer, and the RNA was extracted with TRIzol for RT-PCR analysis [ ].

## RNA sequencing analysis
The library construction and sequencing was performed at SeqHealth Technology Co., LTD (Wuhan, China). TRIzol reagent (Life Technologies) was used to extract the total RNA, which was then purified. RNA was quantified and screened for quality using Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies). Illumina HiSeq X Ten was used to construct stranded RNA-seq libraries for high-throughput sequencing following the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA-seq reads were mapped to the reference genome of the Illumina Ensembl genome. Mapped reads were summarized for each gene using htseq-count version 0.11.2. DEGSeq version 1.36.1. was used to analyze differentially expressed genes.

## Plasmid constructs and luciferase reporter assay
The fragments of Nron containing the miRNA binding site or the 3′UTR of Sirt1 mRNA sequence were ligated into the psiCHECK dual-luciferase vector (Promega). The luciferase reporter constructs were transfected into RAW246.7 cells together with miRNA mimics or a negative control mimic. Luciferase activity was then measured using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay Kit (Beyotime, RG027).

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay (ChIP)
ChIP assay was performed according to the instructions (CHIP assay kit, Millipore) using monoclonal antibody against p65. IgG was used as the negative control. The primers are as follows for ChIP assays: F5′-TTTAAGGTGGGAGCTGCTGG-3′, R5′-GGGCAGAGGAAGGAACTCAC-3′ [ ].

## Cell preparation
BMDMs were isolated from WT and Nron knockout (NKO) mice. In a laminar flow hood, the skin and muscle were carefully separated to expose the tibia and femur. The bone was cut at the femoral head junction, and the bone marrow cavity was flushed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) to collect the cells. After filtering through a 70 μm strainer and lysing red blood cells, the cells were pelleted and cultured in complete RPMI-1640 medium with 20 ng/mL macrophage-colony stimulating factor (M-CSF). The medium was refreshed on days 1, 3, and 5, and experiments began on day 7. Peritoneal and alveolar macrophages were collected by lavage, and cultured for 2 h, then nonadherent cells were removed, leaving adherent cells for experiments. Kupffer cells were extracted from liver tissue. The liver was perfused to remove blood, followed by collagenase digestion to release hepatic cells. Cells were further separated using density gradient centrifugation and resuspended in RPMI-1640 containing 1 % penicillin/streptomycin, and 10 % fetal bovine serum (FBS), and cultured for 2 h. Cells were washed with RPMI-1640 to remove nonadherent cells; only adherent monolayer cells were used. The isolated cells were identified using flow cytometry.

## Immunofluorescence
Cell samples were initially treated with 4 % paraformaldehyde for fixation. Following fixation, the cells were subjected to a 1-hour blocking procedure at ambient temperature (25 °C) using a solution containing 5 % bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBST. Primary antibody incubation was performed with p65-specific antibodies at a 1:100 dilution, maintained at 4 °C for approximately 16 h. After primary antibody incubation, cells were exposed to Alexa Fluor 555-labeled secondary antibodies at a 1:1000 dilution for 60 min under room temperature conditions. Nuclear counterstaining was achieved through a 15-minute incubation with DAPI (Servicebio, G1012). Fluorescence visualization and image acquisition were conducted using a Nikon confocal microscopy system, as previously described [ ].

## Flow cytometry
The phosphorylation kinetics of NF-κB were quantitatively assessed through flow cytometric analysis using the BD FACS system (BD Biosciences). This investigation employed a modified protocol based on previously established methodologies [ ]. Cellular samples were collected and distributed into Eppendorf tubes containing complete growth medium, maintaining a standardized density of 5 × 10^4 cells per tube. After a 2 h stabilization period, experimental groups were exposed to predetermined LPS concentrations. Cellular fixation was performed at specified time points using 4 % paraformaldehyde solution (30 min), followed by membrane permeabilization with ice-cold absolute ethanol (−20 °C, 30 min). Following extensive PBS washing cycles, immunocytochemical staining was conducted through sequential incubations: initial treatment with specific primary antibodies (2 h) and subsequent labeling with Alexa Fluor 555-conjugated secondary antibodies (1 hr).

## Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 8 (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA). Western blot band intensities were analyzed using ImageJ. Data are presented as mean ± SEM from at least three independent experiments. Statistical significance between two groups was determined using the Student’s t-test, with Benjamini–Hochberg corrections applied for multiple comparisons in transcriptional studies. For multiple groups, one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni (for homogeneous variance) or Tamhane’s T2 test (for heterogeneous variance) was used. A P-value < 0.05 was considered significant. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. Specific P-values for the most critical findings were provided in the figures. Randomization and blinding were applied where possible, and animal cohort sizes were based on previous studies.

## Results

## Role of lncRNA Nron in macrophage inflammatory responses
We first examined the potential regulation of Nron during an inflammatory process. The levels of Nron in tissue macrophages (including peritoneal macrophage, alveolar macrophage, and Kupffer cell in the liver) were all downregulated in mice with LPS-induced endotoxemia, although there was a slight rebound at 24 h after induction ( A–C). FISH showed that Nron was primarily located in the cytoplasm ( D and E). We next analyzed Nron expression in different types of primary cultured cells. The toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 agonist LPS, induced a strong decrease in Nron expression in peritoneal macrophages in a concentration-dependent manner within 48 h ( F and G). In contrast, IL4, an anti-inflammatory cytokine, had no effect on Nron expression ( H). Notably, LPS had no effects in other parenchymal cells (including cardiomyocyte, cardiac fibroblast, hepatocyte, smooth muscle cell, and adipocyte) except for endothelial cell, but induced a decrease of Nron expression in bone marrow and liver-derived macrophages ( I–P). 
We further explored the direct role of Nron in modulating the inflammatory response through testing the levels of inflammatory cytokines in BMDMs. Compared to control groups, BMDMs from NKO mice expressed much higher levels of proinflammatory genes (Il-1β, Il-6, Mcp-1, Inducible Nitric Oxide Synthase (iNOS) and Il-12a) after LPS stimulation (Supplementary Fig. 1A), whereas Nron-overexpressed (NOE) macrophages (infected with Nron-expressing adenovirus) had significantly decreased proinflammatory gene expression (Supplementary Fig. 2A). Additionally, Nron deficiency resulted in an enhancement of NF-κB p65 phosphorylation and IκBα degradation after LPS stimulation, and Nron overexpression inhibited the NF-κB signaling. In contrast, Nron had no effects on the phosphorylation levels of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 (Supplementary Fig. 2A and D). Collectively, these results indicate that Nron plays a negative regulatory role in LPS-induced NF-κB signaling activation and the subsequent inflammatory responses in macrophages.

## Nron deficiency in myeloid cells exacerbates systemic inflammatory responses in vivo
To specialize in the functions of Nron in macrophages in vivo, we deleted Nron in the myeloid lineage by crossing Nronfl/fl (used as the control) with LysM-Cre mice (hereafter referred to as NronLysM-Cre). As expected, Nron was efficiently ablated in BMDMs and peritoneal macrophages ( A). Then the mice were exposed to LPS challenge or CLP to induce sepsis. In comparison to the Nronfl/fl counterparts, NronLysM-Cre mice of both models showed lower survival rates, and all died at 96 h post LPS challenge ( B and C). Nron deletion in myeloid cells increased the serum levels of inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6 and MCP-1) ( D) and exacerbated the lung injury and inflammatory infiltration induced by LPS ( E–H). Besides, NF-κB signaling (both the phosphorylation and acetylation of p65) was more intensively activated in lung tissues ( I and J). Consistently, NronLysM-Cre mice subjected to CLP also showed a more severe phenotype compared with the control mice ( K–Q). 
To test whether overexpression of Nron in myeloid cells works in the opposite way in the context of acute inflammatory response, Nron conditional knockin (cKI) mice were constructed (Supplementary Fig. 2A and B) and were subjected to LPS challenge. Compared to the control group, Nron cKI mice showed higher survival rates (Supplementary Fig. 2C), decreased serum levels of inflammatory factors, including IL-1β, IL-6 and MCP-1 (Supplementary Fig. 2D), and attenuated inflammatory infiltration and injury in the lung (Supplementary Fig. 2E–H). Consistently, the activation of NF-κB pathway in lung tissues was significantly inhibited in cKI mice (Supplementary Fig. 2I and J). These data indicate that Nron in myeloid cells contributes to regulating the sensitivity of animals to acute inflammation injury.

## SIRT1 functions as a target protein of Nron for mediating the NF-κB pathway inhibition in macrophages
Having established a critical function of Nron in the control of inflammatory responses, we next investigated the underlying molecular mechanisms. Although the phosphorylation of NF-κB p65 was increased more obviously in NKO macrophages challenged with LPS, its upstream signaling proteins, such as transforming growth factor-β-activated kinase 1 (TAK1) and inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa-B kinase subunit (IKK)α/β, were almost unchanged ( A). However, the acetylation of p65, which traps itself in the nucleus and enhances the DNA-binding activity, was more activated in NKO macrophages, and was inhibited in NOE cells ( A). We then studied the kinetics of LPS-induced NF-κB activation using both confocal imaging (nuclear translocation of p65) ( B and C) and flow cytometry (p65 phosphorylation) ( D). The phosphorylation signal, as well as nuclear p65, increased and reached its’ maximum at 15 min after LPS treatment, then rapidly decreased to the initial values over the next 2 h. As expected, compared to WT group, NKO macrophages exhibited more pronounced p65 phosphorylation and lower rate of p65 nuclear export. 
We next screened the proteins involved in p65 acetylation regulation, including SIRT and histone deacetylase domain protein (HDAC) families [ , ], and found that the protein level of SIRT1 was decreased in NKO macrophages, and increased in NOE cells ( E–G). However, the mRNA expression of Sirt1 was remained unchanged ( H and I). SIRT1 is an NAD+-dependent deacetylase that plays a vital role in regulating NF-κB-driven inflammatory responses by deacetylating p65/RelA at lysine 310 [ ]. We further explored whether SIRT1 functions as a potential Nron target for mediating the NF-κB pathway. Overexpression of SIRT1 reversed the augmented inflammatory signaling in NKO macrophages, as shown by decreased p65 phosphorylation and acetylation ( J), while knockdown of SIRT1 completely abolished the inhibitory effect of Nron on NF-κB signaling activation ( K). We then investigated the mechanism of the regulation on SIRT1 at the protein level, and found that Nron had no effect on the protein half-life when cells were treated with cycloheximide (CHX), an inhibiter of protein synthesis ( L and M), indicating no involvement of SIRT1 degradation. Non-coding RNAs have been demonstrated to regulate proteins through the formation of RNA-protein complexes or modulate mRNAs via direct or indirect RNA-RNA interactions [ ]. Moreover, Nron could not directly bind to SIRT1 protein and mRNA, as shown by RNA pulldown assay ( N) and RNA–RNA in vitro interaction assays ( O).

## MiR-146a-3p/miR-16-1-3p mediates the suppressive effect of Nron on SIRT1/ NF-κB pathway
Nron locates in the cytoplasm and we speculate that Nron regulates SIRT1/NF-κB pathway by function as a competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNA) [ ]. We identified 6 candidate miRNAs that may combine with Nron by bioinformatics analysis (LncBase, lncRNASNP and TargetScan) ( A). Using dual-luciferase reporter gene assays, we validated that miR-146a-3p, miR-16-1-3p and miR-744-3p can directly interact with the predicted binding sites of Nron, as compared with the sequences containing mutant binding sites ( B). We next investigated the contribution of these potential miRNAs to inflammatory process in macrophages challenged with LPS, and found that miR-146a-3p ( C and D) and miR-16-1-3p ( E and F) mimics could individually enhance the phosphorylation and acetylation of NF-κB p65, as well as increase the expression of inflammatory cytokines Il-6 and Mcp-1. However, miR-744-3p had no effect on NF-κB signaling and inflammatory response ( G). Moreover, miR-146a-3p and miR-16-1-3p also decreased SIRT1 protein level in macrophages ( H). Furthermore, bioinformatics analysis revealed evolutionarily conserved miR-146a-3p and miR-16-1-3p seed regions within the 3′-UTR of SIRT1. Transfection with miR-146a-3p or miR-16-1-3p mimics reduced SIRT1 3′-UTR reporter activity; however, this effect was absent when the seed region was mutated ( I and J). As is well known, microRNAs are unable to regulate target mRNAs when ceRNAs bind to microRNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) as microRNA sponges. Argonaut RISC catalytic component 2 (AGO2) serves as the core component of the RISC complex [ ]. RIP experiments revealed that Nron, along with miR-146a-3p and miR-16-1-3p, were significantly enriched in AGO2 pellet ( K). Notably, we provide evidence for a mutual regulation of Nron and miRNAs in macrophages, that is, Nron inhibited both miR-146a-3p and miR-16-1-3p expression, while miR-146a-3p, not miR-16-1-3p, could inversely reduce the level of Nron ( L). This may be due to their combination promotes degradation of each other. 
To further validate the relevant role of miR-146a-3p and miR-16-1-3p in Nron-mediated SIRT1/NF-κB signaling modulation, we administered miR-146a-3p and miR-16-1-3p antagomirs to macrophages. The increased phosphorylation and acetylation levels of p65 in NKO cells were reversed when miR-146a-3p or miR-16-1-3p were interfered ( M), and the reduced SIRT1 protein was restored ( N). Collectively, these results identified miR-146a-3p and miR-16-1-3p as targets of Nron. As a competing endogenous RNA, Nron decoyed miR-146a-3p and miR-16-1-3p, and antagonized their effects on SIRT1/NF-κB pathway, thus alleviating inflammatory response in macrophages.

## Full activation of NF-κB pathway by Nron deficiency requires SIRT1/HIF-1 signaling
We performed RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis on Nronf/f versus Nronf/f; LysM-Cre peritoneal macrophages from LPS-challenged mice. The Gene Ontology (GO) analyses showed a significant enrichment of gene sets (up-regulated) associated with inflammatory response, protein refolding and cellular response to hypoxia (Supplementary Fig. 3A and B). The corresponding Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways included IL-17 signaling pathway, HIF-1 signaling pathway, TLR signaling pathway, TNF signaling pathway, and NF-κB signaling pathway (Supplementary Fig. 3C). Heat maps of related genes were demonstrated in Supplementary Fig. 3D. Since the data also emphasized a potential regulation on IL-17 and HIF-1 signaling pathways, we further validated it with cultured BMDMs. The expression of Il-17ra, Hif-1α, vascular endothelial growth factor a (Vegfa) and lactate dehydrogenase a (Ldha) were all more obviously activated in NKO macrophage treated with LPS (Supplementary Fig. 3E). However, only the HIF-1α pathway was actually activated since the protein levels of HIF-1α and downstream VEGFA were consistently increased, while IL-17/IL-17RA proteins remained unchanged (Supplementary Fig. 3F and G). Previous studies have demonstrated that SIRT1 represses HIF-1α-target genes through binding and deacetylating HIF-1α [ ]. This study revealed that both the protein expression level (Supplementary Fig. 3H and I) and the acetylation level (Supplementary Fig. 3J) of HIF-1α were reduced in NOE macrophages, while these effects were completely abrogated when SIRT1 was silenced. The results indicate that the regulation of Nron on HIF-1α pathway was also mediated by SIRT1.
Previous studies have shown indirect links between HIF-1 and NF-κB pathways, by which both conspire to induce an augmented, enhanced responsiveness to an inflammatory stimulus [ , ]. Our further investigation reveals that the HIF-1 inhibitor 2-MeOE2 completely reversed the excessive NFKB inhibitor alpha (IκBα)/p65 phosphorylation caused by Nron deficiency, while had no effect on the acetylation of p65 (Supplementary Fig. 3K and L). These results indicate that HIF-1 is required for SIRT1-dependent p65 phosphorylation and fully activated NF-κB pathway.

## The functional motif of Nron regulates macrophage inflammatory responses
Nron transcript is 3653-nt in length; bioinformatics analysis identified that there were two Nron conserved motifs (NCMs) within the third exon. Sequence similarity analysis showed that both NCM1 and NCM2 are conserved in mammals (Supplementary Fig. 4). We hypothesized that NCMs were evolutional selected functional motifs of Nron and further investigated their functions. We found that overexpression of NCM2, not NCM1, could significantly block the acetylation and phosphorylation of p65, as well as the expression of inflammatory cytokines, in macrophages challenged with LPS ( A–C). Interestingly, we found that NCM2 executed their functions more efficiently than that observed using full-length Nron ( D). Furthermore, we demonstrated that the corresponding human NRON (hNCM2) conserved motif had the same inhibitory effect as that of mouse NCM2 on NF-κB pathway in THP-1 cells ( E and F). Next, we determine if NCM2 also acts via miR-146a-3p/miR-16-1-3p as full-length Nron. Although NCM2 only contains the binding site of miR-16-1-3p, it decreased both miR-146a-3p and miR-16-1-3p levels ( G). Meanwhile, the protein level of SIRT1 was increased in NCM2-treated macrophages, whereas the effect was abrogated when miR-16-1-3p expression was restored ( H). Thus, NCM2 works as a functional motif of Nron that regulates inflammatory pathways in macrophages. 

## Myeloid cell-targeting delivery of functional motif of Nron alleviates systemic inflammatory responses in vivo
Then, the in vivo therapeutic potential of the functional motif NCM2 was determined.
Recombinant adeno-associated virus 6 (rAAV, type 6) carrying NCM2 under control of the F4/80 promoter, or the control virus AAV6-Cherry, was administrated intravenously combined with by endotracheal intubation to LPS-induced septic mice. NCM2 was successfully expressed in alveolar macrophages by AAV gene transfer ( I). Exogenous NCM2 improved the survival rate of septic mice ( J), decreased the serum levels of inflammatory cytokines ( K), and alleviated the lung injury and the infiltration of macrophages and neutrophils ( L–O). All these effects were abolished in the myeloid-specific SIRT1 deficient mice (LysM-Cre-SIRT1f/f mice), indicating that the protective role of NCM2 in sepsis is SIRT1 dependent. Consistently, NCM2 delivery significantly inhibited the phosphorylation and acetylation of p65 in alveolar macrophages from septic mice, but not in SIRT1 knockout mice ( P and Q).
Lipid nanoparticle (LNP) delivery strategies for nucleic acid therapy have been used successfully in various murine disease models [ , , ]. To improve delivery efficiency to macrophages, we conjugated the F4/80 antibody to the LNPs, leading to an advanced LNP we term “MacLNP” [ ] ( A). MacLNP-NCM2 delivery by intranasal administration enhances NCM2 levels in targeting macrophages more effectively than AAV gene transfer ( B). We next employed MacLNP or AAV to deliver NCM2 to CLP-induced septic mice. MacLNP-mediated NCM2 therapy reduced mortality ( C), decreased serum inflammatory cytokines ( D), attenuated lung injury and inhibited inflammatory pathways in alveolar macrophages of septic mice ( E–I), and all these effects were more remarkable than AAV-mediated gene therapy. Besides, we also compared the efficacy between MacLNP-NCM2 and -Nron in vivo and found that NCM2 is more effective, which is consistent with our in vitro observations. These results provide valuable insights of MacLNP-NCM2 therapy for the treatment of inflammatory diseases (Supplementary Fig. 5). 

## The regulation of LPS/NF-κB/miR-146a-3p/Nron axis
Our present results have demonstrated that Nron binds to miR-146a-3p, and more intriguingly both RNAs mutually regulate and promote degradation each other. In addition, we observed the expression of miR-146a-3p was robustly induced by LPS but Nron was repressed (Supplementary Fig. 6A). Antagonization of miR-146a-3p restored the level of Nron in LPS-treated macrophages (Supplementary Fig. 6B). To clarify the possible mechanisms for the regulation of miR-146a-3p by LPS, canonical TLR4 signaling pathways were inhibited and miR-146a-3p expression was determined. We found only pretreatment with NF-κB inhibitor Bay-11-7082 could effectively diminished miR-146a-3p production by LPS (Supplementary Fig. 6C).
Since miRNA nuclear transcripts are longer than the known pre-miRNA hairpin precursors and most of their transcription start sites have so far remained undefined [ ], we choose a longer length of 20 kb region upstream of miR-146a-3p for identifying putative p65 binding sites (Supplementary Fig. 6D). To test the putative promoter activity of the upstream sequences of miR-146a-3p gene, the luciferase reporter vector containing the region with two predicted p65 binding sites was constructed and transfected into RAW264.7 cells in the presence of exogenous p65. Ectopic expression of p65 significantly increased the luciferase activities of the construct, and mutation of the binding site-1 (Mut-1), but not the binding site-2 (Mut-2), completely reversed the effect of p65 (Supplementary Fig. 6E). Further, ChIP assays in BMDMs demonstrated that p65 physically binds to the binding site-1, and the interaction was enhanced by LPS challenge (Supplementary Fig. 6F). The results indicate a positive feedback mechanism by which miR-146a-3p amplifies NF-κB signaling and sustains proinflammatory response. Since Nron sponges miR-146a-3p is accompanied by co-degradation, exogenous Nron supplement could be a reasonable approach to disturb miR-146a-3p/NF-κB loop. Interestingly, we found that NCM2 executed the functions more efficiently than that observed using full-length Nron. LPS or miR-146a-3p mimic accelerates the degradation of exogenous Nron but not NCM2 in macrophages (Supplementary Fig. 6G), possibly because of the lack of miR-146a-3p binding site within NCM2 sequence. The fact that NCM2 also repressed miR-146a-3p expression may be due to the indirect effect of miR-16-1-3p/SIRT1 on NF-κB signaling inhibition.

## Involvement of NRON in human sepsis and chronic inflammatory diseases
Next, we assessed NRON expression levels in monocytes from both healthy individuals and patients with bacterial sepsis. However, there was no significant difference between two groups ( A). Notably, we found that the serum levels of NRON from septic patients were much lower than those from control subjects ( B), and negatively correlated with serum IL-1β ( C), but not procalcitonin (PCT) ( D). These findings suggest that NRON reduction in the serum might be a biomarker for the diagnosis and evaluation of sepsis. Notably, although the expression did not change, supplement of exogenous hNCM2 also exerted therapeutic effect (decreased expression of IL-1β and IL-6) in monocytes from human suffering from sepsis ( E and F). 
Given Nron’s crucial role in regulating the acute inflammatory response in septic mice, we became interested in exploring whether Nron also plays a part in chronic inflammatory diseases. Surprisingly, the levels of Nron in macrophages were all significantly decreased in diet-induced obese mice (peritoneal macrophage and adipose tissue macrophage) (Supplementary Fig. 7A and B), in mice with ulcerative colitis (peritoneal macrophage and colonic macrophage) (Supplementary Fig. 7C and D), and in aged mice (peritoneal macrophage and adipose tissue macrophage) (Supplementary Fig. 7E and F).

## Discussion
The present study demonstrates that a highly conserved long non-coding RNA, Nron, is abundantly expressed in macrophages and decreases in multiple inflammatory diseases from both humans and mice. Nron deficiency in myeloid cells promoted, whereas Nron overexpression prevented, the process of acute inflammation in vivo. Mechanistically, Nron prevents the downregulation of SIRT1 mediated by miR-146a-3p and miR-16-1-3p, thereby inhibiting inflammation through the SIRT1/NF-κB signaling pathway. Meanwhile, lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced upregulation of miR-146a-3p promotes the degradation of Nron.
In this study, we identified miR-146a-3p and miR-16-1-3p as inflammation-associated miRNAs and showed their critical role in continued activation of NF-κB during the inflammatory process. Induction of miR-146a-3p expression has been associated with the development of various inflammatory diseases such as cardiovascular diseases, inflammatory bowel disease, and autoimmune disorders [ , , ]. We verified that the transcription of miR-146a-3p was directly regulated by TLR4/NF-κB signaling, and ectopic overexpression of Nron potentially countered the effect of miR-146a-3p and broke this vicious cycle, thereby terminating NF-κB signaling. While the role of miR-16-1-3p in macrophages has not been investigated, here, we found that targeting miR-16-1-3p simply also has unexpected anti-inflammatory effects, since the conserved motif NCM2 exerted surprising therapeutic efficacy in vivo although it only contains miR-16-1-3p binding site.
SIRT1 was considered a link between inflammation, nutrient, and metabolic dysfunction, which reciprocally interacts with inflammatory signals at various levels [ , , ]. The beneficial effect of SIRT1 on cellular inflammatory response is due in part to its ability to suppress the activity of NF-κB through an alternative mechanism that does not directly involve the IKK complex. SIRT1 interacts with the p65 (RelA) subunit of NF-κB, leading to deacetylation at lysine 310, thus trapping it in the cytoplasm and repressing NF-κB target genes [ , ]. Additionally, we showed that inflammation induced acetylation and stabilization of HIF-1α is abolished in NOE macrophages, and was reversed when SIRT1 was silenced. Besides, the robust induction of IκBα/p65 phosphorylation in NKO cells was reversed when HIF-1α was inhibited. It means that the inhibitory effect of Nron on NF-κB signaling is dependent on SIRT1, which directly regulates p65 acetylation and indirectly regulates IκBα/p65 phosphorylation via HIF-1α pathway without affecting TAK1/IKK.
We identified that the Nron 3′ end conserved motif 2 (NCM2) is the functional unit of Nron that inhibits inflammation, and further evaluated the in vivo therapeutic effects of NCM2 on sepsis induced by LPS or CLP. The results indicate that the macrophage-targeted delivery of NCM2 by AAV (under control of the F4/80 promoter) or lipid nanoparticle (conjugated by antibody F4/80; MacLNP) relieves tissue damages and improved the survival rate of mice, and the therapy by MacLNP exerts more outstanding efficiency and effects. Interestingly, we found that the protective effect of NCM2 was more remarkable than the full-length Nron. It may be due to the combination of Nron and miR-146a-3p promotes degradation of each other, eliminating the pro-inflammatory role of miR-146a-3p but consuming itself undesirably. Our study provides evidence that miR-146a-3p was induced by LPS via NF-κB signaling, and then augmented inflammatory signals through the positive feedback loop of SIRT1/HIF-1/NF-κB pathway. Exogenous supplementation of Nron broke the cycle but was simultaneously degraded. However, NCM2, which only contains the binding site of miR-16-1-3p, has a longer half-life and represses miR-146a-3p indirectly. This leads to a more significant inhibitory effect on NF-κB pathway. Besides, the corresponding human conserved motif has the similar effect in human macrophages, indicating the potential translational implication of functional motif of Nron in inflammatory disease therapy.
Notably, we found that NRON in the serum was dramatically decreased of patients with sepsis; however, we observed no significant difference in NRON expression in monocytes between healthy individuals and patients. These may be attributed to the high heterogeneity of blood cell (contain a population of newly generated monocytes from bone marrow) during the acute phase, or to the different NRON regulatory patterns between monocyte and macrophage. We believe that changes in NRON in the serum are derived from differentiated, mature macrophage in the tissues. Considering a very significant decline, and the negative correlation with IL-1β in the serum, NRON also hold promise for a novel molecular diagnostic biomarker of sepsis.
Besides, we also examined the expression of Nron in chronic inflammatory states including obesity and aging, and found that it also decreased in tissue macrophages. However, we are not sure whether it plays a similar role as in acute inflammation and how it works. We are also considering whether Nron can be a target to reduce metabolic inflammation or delay aging. To further advance this research, future studies should employ cell-specific knockout models to investigate Nron's functions in other immune cells such as neutrophils and T cells. The therapeutic potential of MacLNP-NCM2 warrants further investigation, particularly its long-term safety, biodistribution, and off-target effects in chronic conditions like obesity and aging. Additionally, clinical validation of serum NRON as a diagnostic or prognostic biomarker in sepsis, along with its correlation with PCT/CRP, would strengthen its translational relevance.
In conclusion, we identify lncRNA Nron as a regulator of inflammatory response to prevent excessive damage to the host, and confirms that the functional motifs of Nron can be used as a potential therapeutic agent for inflammatory diseases such as systemic inflammatory response syndrome.

## Limitations
Our study focuses mainly on macrophages but does not address how Nron might affect other immune or non-immune cells in inflammatory contexts. In addition, athought we demonstrated the therapeutic effect of Nron or NCM2 in inflammatory diseases and shown certain potential for clinical translation, we have not yet examined the long-term effects and potential side effects, leaving gaps in understanding the sustainability and the safety profile as a therapeutic intervention.

## Contributors
Du M. and Huang K. designed the experiments and wrote the manuscript. Yang L.Y., Wang P.C., Liu K.Y., Liu B., Zhu J.B., Li F.C. and Ai M.F. performed the experiments. Du M. and Yang L.Y. analyzed the data and generated data figures. Li X.G. and Liang M.L. contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools. All authors contributed to the refinement of the study and reviewed and approved the final version of manuscript.

## Compliance with ethics requirements
All Institutional and National Guidelines for the care and use of animals (fisheries) were followed.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 Appendix A

## Supplementary data
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

## Supplementary Data 1

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China [82071794 to Meng Du, 82495174 to Kai Huang], Non-Communicable Chronic Diseases-10.13039/501100018537National Science and Technology Major Project [2024ZD0530400 to Meng Du] and 10.13039/501100003819Hubei Natural Science Foundation [2025AFA094 to Meng Du].
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2025.08.032.