pmcChem RevChem Rev822acssd2985134RcrChemical Reviews0009-26651520-6890pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC10979413PMC10979413.110979413109794133847806410.1021/acs.chemrev.3c005811ReviewCarbon Nanomaterial
Fluorescent Probes and Their Biological
Applications
KrasleyAndrew
T. LiEugene https://orcid.org/0009-0006-1974-6664GaleanaJesus M. BulumullaChandima https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3896-2144BeyeneAbraham G. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3007-1489DemirerGozde S. †Janelia
Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 19700 Helix Drive, Ashburn, Virginia 20147, United States‡Division
of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California
Institute of Technology, 1200 E. California Boulevard, Pasadena, California 91125, United States*gdemirer@caltech.edu.*beyenea@janelia.hhmi.org.1303202427032024124645886130853185160820230902202401022024290320243003202423022026© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2024The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
Fluorescent carbon nanomaterials have broadly useful
chemical and
photophysical attributes that are conducive to applications in biology.
In this review, we focus on materials whose photophysics allow for
the use of these materials in biomedical and environmental applications,
with emphasis on imaging, biosensing, and cargo delivery. The review
focuses primarily on graphitic carbon nanomaterials including graphene
and its derivatives, carbon nanotubes, as well as carbon dots and
carbon nanohoops. Recent advances in and future prospects of these
fields are discussed at depth, and where appropriate, references to
reviews pertaining to older literature are provided.

National Science Foundation10.13039/100000001NAShurl and Kay Curci Foundation10.13039/100010319NAResnick Sustainability Institute for Science, Energy and Sustainability, California Institute of Technology10.13039/100007287NACalifornia Institute of Technology10.13039/100006961NAHenry Luce Foundation10.13039/100005848NANational Aeronautics and Space Administration10.13039/100000104NAHoward Hughes Medical Institute10.13039/100000011NApmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9cr3c00581document-id-new-14cr3c00581ccc-price

## Special Issue
Published
as part of Chemical Reviewsvirtual special issue “Fluorescent Probes in Biology”.
1

## Introduction
Fluorescent carbon nanomaterials
(CNMs) probes have garnered significant
attention in the fields of biomedicine and environmental science due
to a desirable array of optical, electrical, chemical, and material
properties. These CNMs encompass several classes of nanoparticles
whose primary constituent is elemental carbon. The first in the family
of these materials is graphene, with a characteristic planar structure
made from sp2 hybridized carbon atoms arranged in an extended
honeycomb network, and its derivatives such as graphene oxide (GO)
and graphene nanoribbons (GNR). While
graphene is an allotrope of elemental carbon and has dimensions on
the scale of ∼10 μm, GO and related family of graphene
derivatives constitute a mix of sp2 and sp3 hybridized
carbon atoms, typically contain epoxide, carbonyl, or carboxylic acid
functional groups, and have dimensions that are on the order of ∼10
nm. Graphene is a zero-bandgap nanomaterial with metallic character
and, despite a wealth of fascinating material properties, is nonfluorescent
and hence not a focus of this review. However, it forms the basis
for understanding GO and GNR family of nanomaterials, which can be
synthesized from graphene, and can be fluorescent with demonstrated
use for biological and environmental applications. We will therefore
introduce graphene and discuss its properties as it enables us to
explain the synthesis and material properties of GO and related derivatives.
Later sections of this review, which focus on applications and use
cases of CNMs, will primarily focus on GO and other fluorescent CNMs,
and not graphene.
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) constitute another
important class of fluorescent
CNMs included in this review. Carbon nanotubes are cylindrical nanocrystals
of sp2 hybridized carbon atoms that can be conceptualized
as rolled sheets of graphene. While the diameter of CNTs is typically
on the order of single nanometers, their length could extend for up
to ∼1 μm. Within CNTs, one can distinguish between single-walled
CNTs (SWCNTs), and double and multiwalled CNTs (DWCNTs and MWCNTs,
respectively). SWCNTs are single rolled sheets of graphene, whereas
DWCNTs and MWCNTs can have two or multiple coaxial rolled sheets of
graphene that are nested within each other. Quantum confinement effects
give rise to a set of unique photophysical properties in semiconducting
SWCNTs, including a nonphotobleaching fluorescence in the near-infrared
and shortwave infrared (NIR/SWIR) regions of the electromagnetic spectrum
(850–1400 nm). Despite the reported low quantum yield (QY)
of SWCNTs (typically ∼1%), their stable photoemission spectra,
sharp optical transitions (full width at half-maximum ∼180–200
cm–1, or ∼20 nm), and large absorption cross
section (10–15–10–17 cm2/C atom) can be advantageous for biological imaging applications. , Moreover, the fact that SWCNT photoemission emanates from surface
bound (and hence environmentally sensitive) excitons make SWCNTs excellent
scaffolds for biosensing with single molecule sensitivity. , Other members of the CNT family, including DWCNTs and MWCNTs, are
nonfluorescent because the coaxial geometry of nested nanotubes facilitates
efficient nonradiative relaxation from otherwise fluorescent single
tubes. , Therefore, DWCNTs and MWCNTs are not a focus
of this review. Carbon nanocones (CNCs, also known as carbon nanohorns)
encompass another class of sp2 hybridized rolled graphene
sheets with conical, as opposed to cylindrical, geometry. Although
they are easier to synthesize than CNTs, and have been used as nanohybrids
in conjunction with other fluorescent nanomaterials and dyes, CNCs
do not have intrinsic fluorescence of their own and are therefore
not a focus of the later sections of this review. 
Carbon dots (CDs) refer to a major class of CNMs
that also includes
carbon quantum dots (CQDs) and carbonized polymer dots (CPDs) and
are an important focus of this review. CDs are quasi zero-dimensional, spherical CNMs, with diameters that
are in the range of ∼1–10 nm. They can be synthesized
from a wide range of precursor materials, are intrinsically fluorescent,
and exhibit diverse photophysical and material properties that are
functions of the carbon source and the synthetic strategy used to
produce them. Indeed, the latest synthetic strategies can now furnish
bright CDs with quantum yields up to 80%, and highly tunable and stable
photoemission ranging from blue to NIR, from a wide range of abundant
low-cost source materials. Relative to other fluorescent CNMs, CDs
permit a better degree of control and ease over their synthesis and
purification, which has enabled the generation of CDs exhibiting a
wide range of photophysical and chemical properties. This diversity
has also led to the use of CDs in a wide range of applications, including
bioimaging, which we extensively explore in this review. 
Carbon nanohoops (CNHs) constitute the
smallest and newest class
of fluorescent CNMs discussed in this review. CNHs are composed of
aromatic rings that are fused to generate a macrocyclic structure
that resembles the smallest slice of a SWCNT. CNHs are unique among
fluorescent CNMs in that they are synthesized bottom up from small
molecule precursors using strategies that benefit from advances in
modern synthetic organic chemistry, including precise control over
molecular structure, excellent characterization, and purification
to produce monodisperse products with well-behaved photophysical and
chemical properties. As the newest member of fluorescent CNMs, applications
of CNHs for bioimaging are still in their infancy, but early results
have been highly encouraging, and weexplore these advances in the
review.
Small molecule organic fluorophores and fluorescent
proteins (FPs)
still constitute the primary reagents of choice in scientific research
where imaging or sensing is employed. There are several reasons for
this. These reagents are better characterized, are monodisperse (pure),
and therefore generally well behaved compared to fluorescent CNMs.
They are also optically compatible with most commercially available
microscopes. FPs are typically expressed through common genetic strategies
widely available to experimental biologists, which facilitates their
ease of use. Similarly, some organic fluorescent dye reagents are
straightforward in their application. However, as we highlight in
this review, there are some unique advantages that fluorescent CNMs
provide that make them a rational or only choice for certain biological
applications.
First, the optical properties of fluorescent CNMs
can be quite
advantageous for applications in biology. A commonly encountered theme
in the emissive properties of all CNMs is a remarkable photostability,
with some fluorescent CNMs exhibiting nonphotobleaching fluorescence.
Additionally, emission is highly tunable, broadly encompassing the
visible, NIR, and SWIR regions of the spectrum. A dearth of fluorophores
that emit in the NIR/SWIR means that CNMs could be compelling reagents
of choice for imaging and biosensing in that region of the spectrum.
Second, thanks to a unique combination of their small size, and surface
and mechanical properties, some CNMs are able to reach and enter cell
and tissue types that otherwise are inaccessible to traditional probes,
enabling applications in neural tissues and plant organelles for instance.
Third, preparation of most fluorescent CNMs does not require sophisticated
synthesis and purification skills, and these materials can be produced
at scale and low cost compared to other laboratory reagents. Lastly
and importantly, fluorescent CNMs facilitate multiplexed use cases,
in which the nanomaterials can be functionalized with contrast agents
that allow orthogonal imaging modalities, or can be loaded with therapeutics,
drugs, or biomolecules, such as genes and proteins, for delivery into
cells. Compared to fluorescent nanomaterials synthesized from heavy
metals, CNMs are biocompatible, and their abundant functional handles
can be ligated to fine-tune their biointerfacial properties. Although
not in the scope of this review, CNMs have also found applications
in a diverse range of the scientific enterprise, including electrochemical
sensing, optoelectronics, catalysis, and energy storage.
In
this paper, we provide a review of the synthesis, functionalization,
characterization, and material properties of the CNMs that we introduced
in the preceding paragraphs. Subsequently, we explore the applications
of fluorescent CNMs in biological imaging, molecular sensing, and
cargo delivery both in biomedical and environmental science and engineering.
We conclude the review by discussing the important topics of CNM cytotoxicity,
environmental accumulation, and fate, and their scale-up, economical,
and regulatory considerations, all of which are critical factors for
the successful translation of CNMs from the lab to clinical and field
applications. This review mostly covers advancements made in the last
five years, with relevant comprehensive reviews suggested for earlier
studies for interested readers. However, older literature are discussed
in cases where new literature is unavailable, or the earlier literature
still represent the most significant advancements for the topic at
hand.

2

## Carbon Nanomaterial Synthesis and Characterization
In this section, we discuss synthesis and characterization methods
for CNMs briefly introduced in the previous section. We discuss material
properties in , chemical modifications in , and biological and environmental applications in and .
2.1

## Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs)
Carbon nanotubes
(CNTs) are nanocrystalline materials that are composed of a hexagonal
sp2 hybridized network of carbon atoms that are rolled
into a cylindrical form ( A). They can contain single, double, or multiple coaxial
layers resulting in either single-walled (SWCNTs), double-walled (DWCNTs),
or multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs). CNTs can be synthesized
through various methods, with the three primary modes of synthesis
being chemical vapor deposition (CVD), − arc discharge, and laser ablation. In contrast to DWCNTs and MWCNTs, SWCNTs possess intrinsic and unique
photophysical properties, and have been extensively employed for biosensing
and imaging applications and will therefore be one of the primary
CNMs discussed in this review.
 Since their first discovery in the late 20th century,
SWCNTs have
drawn interest from a wide range of scientific fields due to their
mechanical, chemical, electrical, and optical properties. − While SWCNTs typically have a diameter of 1–3 nm, DWCNTS
and MWCNTs can have a broader diameter distribution ranging from 2
to 100 nm. Depending on the structure
of the graphitic lattice, SWCNTs can be categorized into three groups:
armchair, zigzag, or chiral. SWCNT electronic
band gap structure is critical for setting their electronic and optical
properties. For instance, certain SWCNTs can serve as field effect
transistors, and tracking change in electrical
or optical properties across the nanotube in the presence of adsorbed
molecules can provide a means for molecular sensing. Also a consequence
of their electronic bandgap structure, certain SWCNT chiralities exhibit
photoluminescence by absorbing light in the NIR-I and emitting in
the NIR-II region. This makes them excellent reagents for biological
imaging , and scaffolds for biosensing applications. , SWCNTs have also been employed as photoinduced drug delivery vessels, , gene and protein delivery vehicles, , nanopores, , adjuvant vaccines, and are used in
tissue engineering applications. − 

2.2

## Carbon Dots (CDs)
Carbon dots (CD),
quasi-spherical in nature, are typically smaller than 10 nm in diameter
and encompass a collection of nanoparticles, such as graphene quantum
dots (GQDs), carbon quantum dots (CQDs), and carbonized polymer dots
( B). CDs have been extensively used in various fields
due to their tunable photoluminescent (PL) properties, − chemical diversity, , and biocompatibility. , 
Synthesis routes consist of top-down and bottom-up approaches.
For bottom-up synthesis, polymers, , glucose, , glycerol, , biowaste, , amino acids, , among others have been used to
create surface-functionalized CDs via hydrothermal methods or microwave
pyrolysis. Top-down methods for CD synthesis require cleavage of larger
carbon allotropes like graphite, − GO, carbon fibers, and other carbon materials. , Recently, there has also been a growing literature on the “green
synthesis” of CDs from biological organisms. , 
The popularity of CDs for bioimaging have been attributed
to their
unique photoluminescence properties and high quantum yields. , Their π-conjugated system absorbs UV light and provides emission
of visible light facilitated by both n → π* and π
→ π* transitions of C=N and C=O, and C=C bonds, respectively. , Many studies suggest that N doping (adding nitrogen) of CDs leads
to higher quantum yields. These inherent
photoluminescence properties and biocompatibility of CDs make them
ideal fluorescent probes, where they have been utilized to image cells, , biomolecules, and various other biological
systems. − 

2.3

## Carbon Nanocones (CNCs) and Carbon Nanohoops
(CNHs)
Beyond the aforementioned CNMs, carbon nanocones and
nanohoops have gained increasing attention for their distinctive physicochemical
properties ( C,D). Although their applications in biological research are less
developed, these materials hold a promising potential for biosensing,
bioimaging, and therapeutics.
Carbon nanocones (CNCs), also
known as nanohorns, are comprised of carbon atoms arranged within
a highly conjugated C–C π-system akin to CNTs and graphene
sheets. CNCs have a diameter of 2–5 nm and length of 40–50
nm. Diverging from CNTs and graphene,
CNCs have one end enclosed and the other end open, embodying the shape
of an ice cream cone ( C). They can be synthesized by various processes depending
on the desired size, including cascade annulation, and laser and solar radiation ablation. , The potential applications of CNCs include biosensing, bioimaging,
therapeutics, and cargo delivery.
Carbon nanohoops (CNHs) belong
to a new class of CNMs and can be
thought of as singular cross sections of CNTs ( D). CNHs are composed of several aromatic
rings fused together to form a closed conjugated π-system that
resembles a macro-ring structure. Although nanohoops emerged theoretically
in 1954, their synthesis was not feasible until 2008, when Jasti,
Bertozzi, and colleagues synthesized [9], [12], and [18]-cycloparaphenylenes
([n]-CPPs). This groundbreaking
CNHs synthesis has been followed up by various innovative approaches
leveraging transition metals to execute reductive eliminations for
formation of highly strained CPP macrocycles. − Unlike many other π-conjugated CNMs, nanohoops have radially
oriented π-systems yielding unique optical, electronic, and
charge transport properties, making them
attractive for select bioimaging applications. , In terms of optical properties, smaller CNHs demonstrate red-shifted
fluorescence due to the narrowing of the HOMO–LUMO (highest
occupied molecular orbital–lowest unoccupied molecular orbital)
gap. In addition to size, electron donating
and accepting rings also change fluorescent emission properties via
solvent-molecule interactions and improve quantum yields. 

2.4

## Graphene, Graphene Oxide (GO), Reduced Graphene
Oxide (RGO), and Graphene Nanoribbons (GNRs)
Graphene made
its debut in 2004 and the pioneering
work of Geim and Novoselov in graphene physics was recognized with
the 2010 Nobel Prize. Graphene has unique electronic, magnetic, optical,
and thermal properties that make it suitable for a wide range of applications. − Composed of a single layer of hexagonal sp2 hybridized
carbon atoms arranged in a 2-dimensional (2D) sheet, graphene’s
highly conjugated π-system is responsible for its electronic
properties ( E). Its zero-bandgap enables effective electron conduction at relativistic
speeds, , making graphene excellent for electrochemical
processes. − Graphene is the thinnest and strongest nanomaterial
to date with atomic thickness and mechanical stiffness of 1060 GPa. , 
Graphene is synthesized via two main synthetic routes. Top-down
approaches include mechanical and chemical exfoliation, , unzipping of carbon nanotubes, − and chemical synthesis, , which are typically used to synthesize smaller graphene lattices
(nm up to cm length). For bottom-up approaches, CVD − and epitaxial growth − are preferred to synthesize
larger graphene lattices (up to several cm in length).
GO is
comprised of a graphene parent structure, and additionally
contains hydroxyl (−OH) and epoxide functional groups (C–O–C)
on the longitudinal plane, and carbonyl oxygens (=O), ethers (−O−),
and carboxylic acids (O=C–OH) at the edges , ( F). These
chemical modifications contribute to GO’s solubility in polar
protic and polar aprotic solvents, and
give rise to photoluminescence properties that broaden its applications.
GO’s decoration with oxygen-rich moieties also results in a
p-doping effect and lowers its Fermi level, which facilitates development
of artificial optoelectronic systems that mimic naturally occurring
biological phenomena. , Other common applications of
GO include drug delivery, , antimicrobials, , fluorescent probes for biological sensing, and cancer biomarker detection. 
Until recently, synthesis and homogeneous functionalization of
highly crystalline GO was not feasible, where synthesis mostly relied
on the direct oxidation of graphite to produce graphite oxide followed
by an exfoliation process. High degrees
of crystallinity translate to decreased amounts of defect sites and
thus improved electrical conductivity and resistance to oxidation.
Toward this goal, a route for highly crystalline GO synthesis has
recently been developed, achieving a >99% monolayer ratio with
uniform
epoxy modification and minimal lattice defects, advancing the robust use of GO in many applications. Even
though this approach currently only works for epoxy modification,
its translation to other surface modifications with high crystallinity
will be highly enabling.
Another recent CNM of interest is graphene
nanoribbons (GNRs).
These small strips of graphene typically have width to length ratios
of 1:10, and with recent advancements in GNR synthesis, widths less
than 10 nm have been achieved. The GNR
band gap is governed by its size, making narrow GNRs desirable. Similar
to other CNMs, top-down synthesis methods involve the fragmentation
of larger carbon allotropes, such as CNTs and graphene. Specifically,
CNTs can undergo plasma etching, where a localized and controlled
exposure to plasma induces their unzipping and facilitates the formation
of smaller GNRs. Other synthesis approaches
include lithographic and sonochemical , methods for the formation of GNRs from graphene, which also requires
etching for the controlled removal of atoms from higher ordered graphene.
Bottom-up synthesis of GNRs has been reported. Halogenated aromatic
substrates are some of the first chemical precursors to be used for
bottom up GNR synthesis. These chemical
moieties provide avenues for the selective polymerization of smaller
aromatic building blocks via radical addition reactions at high temperatures.
More recently, novel methods for the synthesis of GNRs exploited the
use of transition metals for the selective polymerization of smaller
building blocks, , offering tighter control for
the formation of thinner GNRs.

2.5

## CNM Characterization Methods
In this
section, we describe the most prevalent CNM characterization techniques
including methods used for chemical identification, morphological,
structural, optical, size, and surface charge characterization. provides a comparative
overview of these techniques and their limitations to guide readers
to choose the most suitable characterization method for a given CNM
and property type.
 2.5.1

## Chemical Identification
Methods
for characterizing CNM chemical identity include spectroscopic approaches
such as Fourier-Transform Infrared (FTIR) and Raman. FTIR measures
the vibrations of atoms and bonds when they absorb infrared light
(IR) at various wavelengths providing information about the chemical
functional groups present within a material ( A). Even though it is more common for the
characterization of CDs, CNTs, and GO, it can
also be used with other CNMs as a standard characterization tool. , Another technique that relies on IR and vibrational frequencies
to provide a molecular fingerprint is Raman spectroscopy. Raman utilizes
scattering of light (instead of absorbance in FTIR) to measure intrinsic
chemical properties of CNMs, and can provide information on the mass
density, optical energy gap, elastic constants, doping levels, presence
of defects, and other forms of crystal disorder. It also offers insights
into the edge structure, strain, number of graphene layers, nanotube
diameter, chirality, and curvature of CNMs ( B). FTIR and
Raman distinguish different bond types, each with unique limitations
and strengths. Therefore, they provide a comprehensive chemical identification
of CNMs when used in combination.
 Other common methods for chemical identity characterization
of
CNMs include X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR). XPS enables quantitative analysis of elemental composition
of most CNMs. It uses high energy X-ray photons to ionize electrons
within an atom to provide data on electron binding energies associated
with specific atoms within the specimen. For this reason, XPS is one
of the standard methods of characterization of most CNMs and their
surface modifications ( A). , , In addition to XPS, NMR spectroscopy allows for the characterization
of the molecular structure, specifically of carbon and hydrogen atoms
via 13C NMR and 1H NMR, and can offer information
on certain surface-modified CNMs (CDs, CNTs) − and their relative purity ( B). However, one major
limitation is the difficulty of interpreting properties of the whole
CNM being analyzed given their large and complex carbonaceous structures.
Therefore, relatively small CNMs, such as nanohoops, are more frequently
characterized via NMR. , 
 
2.5.2

## Morphological and Structural Characterization
Small-angle neutron scattering (SANS) and small-angle X-ray scattering
(SAXS) are powerful techniques that utilize the diffraction of high
energy particles to investigate the atomic and magnetic structures
of CNMs. Both techniques leverage the wave characteristics inherent
to particles to analyze the diffraction patterns according to Bragg’s
law, thereby obtaining information about the arrangement and organization
of atoms in the material’s inner and outer layers. SAXS is
particularly well-suited for studying the external surfaces of CNMs,
making it ideal for analyzing single-layered materials, such as graphene
and SWCNTs ( A). , On the other hand, SANS, by using neutrons,
possesses greater penetration capabilities and is less destructive,
allowing the investigation of bulk materials and determination of
internal structures without causing significant decomposition ( B). Consequently,
SANS is especially useful for exploring the chemical structures deeply
embedded within nanomaterials like MWCNTs. While SAXS and SANS provide distinct benefits, they also complement
each other by offering insights on chemical structures in different
regions of CNMs. Therefore, researchers often employ both techniques
in tandem to gain a comprehensive structural understanding of CNMs.
However, it must be noted that SANS does have an advantage over SAXS
as it provides higher contrast between the sample and its solvent
through contrast matching. In SAXS, contrast matching is also possible
but requires the chemical modification of the nanoparticles making
it more challenging to perform. 
 Other techniques utilized for morphological characterization
of
CNMs are atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning electron microscopy
(SEM), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), and transmission electron
microscopy (TEM). AFM measures the intermolecular forces between a
sharp probe and a sample to afford an image of the surface of CNMs.
AFM is routinely used for CNTs, CDs, graphene, and
GO to provide high resolution images
of CNM surface at the nanometer and even atomic scale and is commonly
used to verify the loading of macromolecules ( A). SEM focuses a high energy electron beam
to a sample to measure the secondary electron emissions. It is commonly
employed for the characterization of CNTs, CDs, graphene, and GO and provides a detailed
analysis of surface features, such as roughness, texture, and the
presence of defects ( B). STM also visualizes surface characteristics of CNMs by
using a sharp conductive probe positioned closely to a sample, which
tunnels electrons via quantum tunneling when a bias voltage is applied.
Consequently, small aberrations in the tunneling currents can be translated
into height differences in sample surface, revealing atomic and molecular
features of CNTs, CDs, graphene, and GO ( C). TEM, on the other hand, is routinely used for the imaging
of internal and morphological structures of CNMs. It transmits high
energy electrons through a thin sample to visualize internal and peripheral
structural characteristics of CDs, , CNTs, graphene, , and GO , ( A).
 
2.5.3

## Optical Characterization
CNMs possess
extraordinary optical properties that position them as highly useful
fluorescent probes. Ultraviolet–visible-near infrared (UV–vis-NIR)
spectroscopy is a powerful tool elucidating the diverse light absorption
and fluorescent emission profiles of CDs, , CNTs, , nanohoops, , , nanoribbons, , fullerenes, and GO. UV–vis-NIR
characterization facilitates the acquisition of comprehensive chemical
absorption profiles, an invaluable technique to determine quantum
yields ( A).
Moreover, when paired with emission profiles, it provides insights
for the fine-tuning of the fluorescent properties of CNMs, particularly
important for those that have undergone selective chemical modifications
( B). Specifically,
UV–vis is routinely used for the quantification of quantum
yields for highly fluorescent CDs. 
 
2.5.4

## Surface Charge and Size Characterization
Zeta potential, which is a measure of the magnitude of the electrostatic
repulsion or attraction between particles, is routinely used to determine
the surface charge and colloidal stability of CNMs. It is based on
applying a voltage to the CNM solution and measuring the particle
velocity as a function of voltage as particles move toward the electrode
of opposite charge ( C). Zeta potential can be specifically useful to validate
the attachment of moieties and biological cargoes if they have a charge
different from the nanoparticle core. Zeta potential also indicates
the stability of colloidal nanoparticles, where it is commonly accepted
that particles with zeta potential <30 and >30 mV are colloidally
stable. 
Dynamic light scattering
(DLS) measures the hydrodynamic size distribution of nanoparticles.
By exploiting the inherent Brownian motion of particles, DLS analyzes
fluctuations in scattered light intensity, enabling accurate particle
size and polydispersity estimation − ( D). The measurements and algorithms of a
typical DLS are optimized for spherical particles but they could be
modified for rod-shaped CNMs. The synergic use with electron microscopy
and AFM enhances the characterization by providing insights into the
particle geometry, aggregation, and morphology. DLS finds broad applicability
in the investigation of many CNMs, such as CDs, fullerenes, graphene, and GO. 

3

## Material Properties of CNMs
In this
section, we discuss important photophysical ( ), mechanical ( ), and electronic properties
( ) of above-mentioned
CNMs, specifically focusing on how these properties affect their biological
applications.
 3.1

## Photophysical Properties
3.1.1

## Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes (SWCNTs)
Among all CNMs, SWCNTs possess certain unique photophysical properties.
Semiconducting SWCNTs are intrinsically fluorescent in the near-infrared/shortwave
infrared (NIR/SWIR) regions of the spectrum due to strongly allowed
Van Hove transitions that are the main features of their electronic
density of states. The excited state
of a SWCNT is characterized by diffusive excitons on the graphitic
lattice. Excitation typically proceeds
by absorption of photons in the second conduction band, which rapidly
decays to the first, allowing radiative recombination and fluorescence
in the NIR region (800–1600 nm) , ( C and ). This emission is typically sharp and consists of multiple
peaks, each corresponding to a specific chirality of a nanotube. The emission range, coupled with large Stokes
shifts and the absence of photobleaching, have facilitated the use SWCNTs for fluorescence microscopy. , − SWCNTs can enable imaging of depths up to 3 mm , because of the reduced absorption and scattering of their fluorescence
emission by tissue, bone, water, and blood − ( ).
 In order to deploy SWCNTs as fluorescence contrast
agents, they
often need to be functionalized. This is required to make SWCNTs soluble
in aqueous mediums of interest and/or to impart biological compatibility.
Perturbations to either the SWCNT directly or to the extended supramolecular
corona encompassing the SWCNT can impart changes to the photophysics
of the material. Covalent attachments are often introduced at the
expense of lower or fully eliminated photoluminescence due to the
degradation of the sp2 network, which can promote non-radiative
decay of mobile excitons. − 
One particular type of covalent modification, organic color
centers
(OCC), allows for tuning the inherent
NIR/SWIR emission of SWCNTs. These centers are synthetic defects that
are added to the sp2 lattice, causing sp3 centers
that facilitate emission of bright photoluminescence that is chemically tunable , and single
photon in nature. These centers often
trap and localize excitons and increase the probability of radiative
recombination. The introduction of an
OCC creates a quantum two-level system, which inherently emits single
photons, with an E11 and a red-shifted new E11– fluorescence peak ( ). Density
functional theory (DFT) calculations support that this dipole-allowed
transition results from an asymmetric splitting of the frontier orbitals
at the defect site. Introduction of
defects has minimal effect on absorption, but can dramatically change
the emission spectrum, in which E11– can become more dominant than E11. , 
 The bright photoemission from OCC-modified SWCNTs
arises from the
fact that the E11– optical
transition lies below the E11 dark excitons. , The newly formed state allows for these E11 dark excitons, which normally decay through non-radiative pathways,
to be harvested at OCC-sites and allow SWCNT brightness to be increased
as much as 28-fold through the E11– emission pathway. , , As the density of OCCs on the SWCNT are increased,
the lifetimes of both bright and dark E11 excitons become shorter; suggesting both can become trapped at the
defect sites. The energy difference
between the E11 and E11– corresponds to the D-phonon mode
(1301 cm–1, 161 meV) caused by the defect, suggesting
an exciton–phonon coupling mechanism that can brighten dark
excitons. Position and intensity of
the emission can be tuned through installation of aryl OCC with electron-withdrawing
or donating substituents. These groups effectively adjust the HOMO
and LUMO levels at the defect sites and have been demonstrated to
have a linear correlation between E11– shift and the Hammett constant of the OCC group. , 
Similar to OCCs, oxygen dopants have also been demonstrated
to
produce red-shifted emission. − This emission is temperature dependent,
suggesting low-lying dark state exists below the optically allowed
states, which was supported with DFT
calculations. These and other SWCNT
covalent modifications are more extensively discussed in .

3.1.2

## Carbon Dots (CDs)
CDs are fluorescent
nanoparticles that can absorb and emit photons that cover the entire
UV–vis spectrum, but typically
show strong absorption in the UV region (230–300 nm). Fluorescence excitation in CDs can be achieved
over a broad range of excitation wavelengths , and is tunable with a shifting emission that is a function of the
excitation wavelength. Quantum yield
of CDs can vary widely with reported values ranging from approximately
1% , to 94.5%. 
The photoluminescence mechanism of CDs is still not well-understood
and is highly debated. It is complicated by the fact that a wide range
of carbon containing materials are used as precursors for CD synthesis.
Multiple disciplines investigate CDs with non-harmonized techniques
and measurement parameters that are often focused on discipline-specific
applications. Additionally, the inherent complexity of the photoemission
that likely involves multiple pathways further complicates the study
of CDs. − These have led to several contrary findings
during the characterization of CDs. While
several different mechanisms have been proposed for CD photoluminescence, , , many studies attribute the emission
to surface electronic states, , − which can be strongly influenced by surface group functionality.
CDs are inherently surface-functionalized with polar groups formed
during their synthesis. Some studies claim that fluorescence originates
from oxygen groups on the surface, others
attribute it to the nitrogen groups, core electronics, CD crystallinity, or to the presence of fluorescent molecules
on the surface , , or in solution , that are inadvertently formed
during synthesis. , − 
Some studies have attributed the origin of CD emission to
quantum
confinement effects, involving band-to-band transitions or intrinsic
emission. − In such a system, the emissive component is thought to be a nanometer
sized, sp2-conjugated domain that is only emissive at very
small sizes, possibly the core or a portion of the core. Several groups have noted emission is correlated
with size, with the small CDs being blue-shifted and larger being
red-shifted; as expected with the quantum confinement model. , , However, other groups have observed
the opposite trend, with decreasing size producing red-shifting. , On the other hand, many groups have posited that photoemission may
arise from extrinsic contributions, particularly on the surface in
the form of defects, charge traps, , or molecular-like
states. This position is supported by
the need to appropriately passivate the surface to achieve bright
CDs, and fluorescence being strongly
influenced by pH, , solvents, , and degree of surface oxidation. , 
Despite
the uncertainty in mechanism of emission, CDs typically
have very strong fluorescence, , − which is tunable , , − and sensitive to its local environment (e.g., solvents, , , ions, , pH, , and other particles − ). Emission bands are very broad with their full width half-maximum
approximately 50–100 nm. Fluorescence
often occurs only when the nanoparticles are well dispersed , and emission efficiencies decrease at longer wavelengths. Single dots usually have narrower emission
spectra. , Gosh and co-workers demonstrated
the loss of tunability at the single dot level along with loss of
emission multiexponential decay that are suggestive of presence of
multiple emitters. This suggests that
individual dots may be individual emitters of a particular wavelength
and the typical broad spectrum observed is due to an overlay of many
dots emitting at once. , This has been contradicted
by other groups claiming tunability at single dot level, but it is difficult to discriminate whether
or not true single dots are present or emissions arose from small
number of CD nanoparticles that may be aggregating. Related to this, Kang and co-workers showed that different
fractions collected from size exclusion chromatography purification
of CDs display non-tunable emission of a specific color that is a
function of size. Wen and co-workers
used this same size exclusion protocol to isolate different sizes
with the same emission, suggesting that the tunability of emission
is associated with the heterogeneity of CDs produced during synthesis
(i.e., differences in core and shell densities, size, surface functional
groups). Similar separations with high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC), based on surface functionality rather
than size, also produced individual fractions with specific non-tunable
emissions. 
Early reports of CDs
claimed little to no photobleaching after
several hours of continuous irradiation. , , , However, recent data reported considerable photobleaching of CDs. − For instance, Wang and co-workers noted an approximately 8% drop
in fluorescence intensity after 17 h (365 nm, 950 μW cm–2) and that the quantum yield remained constant and
did not decrease below a certain threshold even when irradiating longer.
When purged with nitrogen before and during measurements, or treated
with a reducing agent (e.g., ascorbic acid) or poly(methyl methacrylate)
during drop-casting, photobleaching slowed. Interestingly, Wang et
al. noted an approximately 50% fluorescence reduction when drop-cast
on SiO2 substrates and irradiated (532 nm, 1.68 mW, 0.7–0.8
μm spot). Moreover, Zhi and co-workers
synthesized CDs with different quantum yields and observed that when
irradiated with UV light, CDs with the highest quantum yield showed
the largest reduction in absorbance. Longo and co-workers also conducted a photobleaching study, where
CDs were irradiated with a laser, with known pulse duration, repetition
rate, and energy per pulse. Using 5 ns pulses, they observed an emission
intensity decrease of 10% after 500 pulses. As they performed the
experiment at different energies per pulse, they observed that the
bleaching rate varied linearly with power. When varying wavelength,
they noted the photobleaching was maximized at wavelengths close to
the absorption peak. Javed and O’Carroll
have provided an extensive summary of CD emission studies in their
review. 
A unique photophysical
property of some CDs is blinking, which
makes them attractive for applications like super-resolution microscopy.
Das and co-workers observed multiple fluorescent intensities attributed
to a multichromophoric system when observing immobilized CDs in poly(vinyl
alcohol) (PVA) on glass (561 nm, 78 W cm–2 and 0.3
kW cm–2). Khan and
co-workers observed blinking in CDs immobilized on coverslips in the
presence of ascorbic acid or methyl viologen. In the presence of ascorbic
acid, an electron donor, CDs underwent a single-step photobleaching.
While in the presence of methyl viologen, an electron acceptor, CDs
underwent blinking with long-lived dark states. Chizhik et al. also studied blinking using an epi-fluorescence
microscope (473 nm, 500 W cm–2) and measured temporal
fluctuations in fluorescence and off-state duration for individual
particles. They observed on and off states to vary widely for individual
particles. Their experimental data fit well with a power law function,
something common in semiconductor nanocrystals, where blinking is
caused by trapped charge on the surface or within particles. , , 
Besides blinking, some
CDs are able to act as photoswitches; that
is, they are able to be turned off then recover completely or partially after
exposure to a wavelength of light usually shorter than the light used
to turn them off. In a study by Kahn and co-workers, CDs with red
emission immobilized in PVA on glass decayed after a few seconds of
exposure to a 639 nm laser. The emission was then regained via excitation
with a 401 nm laser. The authors explained this behavior as CDs being
able to be excited by a short wavelength laser and return to ground
state emitting a photon. Once in the ground state, CDs can also be
excited with a longer wavelength laser, which can cause them to undergo
an intersystem crossing and end up in an off state. Then, to return
to ground state, they must be excited with energy that is greater
than their band gap. , , 

3.1.3

## Carbon Nanocones (CNCs)
CNCs do
not have an inherent photoemission of their own. They gain photophysical
properties of interest for imaging upon conjugation to other systems
(e.g., metals, dyes, aptamers, etc.). , A common
use of CNCs involves coupling to other photoactive molecules such
as porphyrins , − or β-cyclodextran. In some of
these applications, the CNC can act as an electron acceptor. Pristine CNCs have a Raman spectrum with two
peaks of almost equal scattering strengths. The G-band, assigned to
E2g-like vibrations, occurs at 1593 cm–1 and the D-band, assigned to A1g-symmetry modes, at 1341
cm–1. 

3.1.4

## Carbon Nanohoops (CNHs)
Cycloparaphenylene
(CPP) carbon nanohoops can be conceptualized as a cross-section of
a carbon nanotube that is one aryl ring thick, connected to other
aryl rings in the para positions (i.e., 1,4 linkage),
and maintain sp2 hybridization. CPPs are typically denoted
as [n]CPPs where n is the number
of phenylene units linked together. All para-linked CPPs share a common absorbance maximum at approximately
340 nm attributed to a symmetry-forbidden HOMO to LUMO electronic
transition. Emissions range from approximately 450–600 nm with
smaller ring sizes producing more red-shifted emission. , Smaller ring sizes of para-linked CPPs (e.g., n = 5,6) are non-emissive due to their inability to break
molecular orbital symmetry in their excited state (see . for more on
electronic properties). By changing the linkage of a single aryl ring
to a meta-linkage (i.e., 1,3 rather than 1,4) emission
from smaller rings (e.g., n = 5,6) can be achieved. Incorporating the meta-linkage
into a CPP ring of any size produces a brightness comparable to or
brighter than its para-linked analog, and blue-shifts
the common absorbance to approximately 328 nm. , , − 
Having a common absorbance and a large Stokes shifts of 100–200
nm make CPPs attractive for multiplexing because a single excitation
source can be used to excite multiple species. , − Strikingly, unlike most organic small-molecule
fluorophores, CPPs retain the same bright emission in both solution
and solid state, − allowing them to be used in various flexible
devices. , Additionally, variations of
CPPs, such as the water-soluble sulfonate-modified [8]CPPs, have shown
constant emission intensities over a wide pH range (pH = 3–11). Another interesting photophysical property
observed in solid [10]CPP, when loaded with I2 guest molecules,
is a broadened white-light emission profile that contrasts the green-blue
emission profile prior to the application of an electrical stimulus
that can induce a phase transition. Moreover,
modifications to CPPs can lead to emission shifts. Upon oxidation,
CPP peak fluorescence is red-shifted. Some CPPs, such as [6–9]CPP2+, are capable of weak NIR emission (900–1300 nm). 

3.1.5

## Graphene, Graphene Oxide (GO), and Reduced
Graphene Oxide (RGO)
Graphene is a 2D CNM that finds useful
applications in many fields. Graphene is mostly transparent in the
visible light spectrum, but does have
intraband transitions , and optical phonon–electron
coupling, and is considered a zero-bandgap
semiconductor or metal due to its 2D symmetry. This means electrons that are promoted to an excited state
will relax down non-radiatively. ( ) To utilize graphene
in optical applications, a decrease in dimensionality is needed to
form a bandgap via quantum confinement. To achieve this, while maintaining the graphitic structure, graphene
nanoribbons (GNRs) and oxidized versions of graphene, GO and RGO,
have been produced. The RGO is a less oxidized version of GO, in which
some of the sp2 bonds present in the pristine graphene
have been restored through reduction.
 Functionalization via oxidation to form GO results
in a bandgap
between the valence and conduction bands. This allows GO to absorb
in UV with a π → π* transition occurring at approximately
230 nm and a shoulder n → π* transition occurring at
approximately 300 nm. − Photoluminescence ranging from blue (350–450 nm), to green, to infrared (500–800 nm) − can occur from electron–hole recombination in microscopic
sp2 graphitic regions within the heavily oxidized GO surface. Fluorescence lifetimes can vary from picoseconds
to nanoseconds , , , with Chen and co-workers reporting
red and blue emission in the picosecond and nanosecond range, respectively. 
In heavily oxidized GO with large sp3 regions, and thus
large bandgaps, two-photon absorption is possible at high excitation
energies, whereas sp2 domains
with smaller bandgaps can only absorb one photon. Using controlled
oxidation and reduction, the ratio of sp2 to sp3 regions can be adjusted, which in turn can fine-tune the absorption
of the material. , In relaxation kinetics studies,
RGO has approximately 90% fast lifetime components attributed to electron–phonon
interactions; a mechanism similar to graphene, giving RGO a similar
carrier dynamics. Alternatively, GO
has a large share of slow lifetime components and lower carrier density
than RGO, suggesting defect states and oxygen-related traps control
the relaxation dynamics. , 
The mechanism
of emission within GO remains elusive and has several
competing hypotheses, as summarized by Naumov and colleagues. These mechanisms are complicated by differing
approaches to generating the graphene, methods of oxidation, and then,
in some cases, further reduction. Some suggest location of the emission
peak is determined by the relative abundance of sp2 graphitic
regions of a particular size and their efficiency to transfer energy
to regions of larger size. , − Differing sizes can emit directly, or additively transfer and combine
to cause a larger region to emit. Others
propose that emission occurs at localized states at the oxygen containing
functional groups. , , , , In this model, photoluminescence is governed by HOMO/LUMO transitions
at carbon atoms adjacent to carbon–oxygen functional groups. Both of these models could be occurring independently
in their respective systems, in combination in others, or through
artifact debris formed during the oxidation
or reduction steps.

3.2

## Mechanical Properties
3.2.1

## Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes (SWCNTs)
CNTs are among the strongest materials due to the uniform sp2 bonds of their graphitic lattice. , Some structural defects, including dangling bonds at the end of
a nanotube, carbon vacancy spot, sp3 point defects, and
rotated bonds may be present, which can alter material properties. , , However, the density of these
defects can be as low as one site per four μm in pristine nanotubes. SWCNTs have an unparalleled length-to-diameter
ratios exceeding 1000:1, large surface
areas, and exhibit a high degree of
flexibility. , In addition, SWCNTs have an
average Young’s modulus of 0.32–1.47 TPa with bending and sheer moduli of approximately
1 TPa and 1 GPa, respectively. This
allows nanotubes to bend, twist, kink, and buckle, and then return
to their original shape with their properties preserved. Moreover,
SWCNTs have very high thermal conductivity of up to 3500 W m·K–1. Strong van der Waals
interactions often cause SWCNTs to cluster together into aggregate
bundles and require use of surface treatments
or surfactants to solubilize them for biological applications. 

3.2.2

## Carbon Dots (CDs)
CDs are small,
semi-spherical nanoparticles with diameters less than 10 nm and are
typically composed of carbon (approximately 50–80%), oxygen,
nitrogen, and hydrogen with large surface areas. CDs consist of a core that can be crystalline or amorphous
and an outer shell, which can be up to a few nanometers thick that is usually functionalized in a disordered
manner with polar carboxyl, hydroxyl, or amine groups. , Most CDs are hydrophilic due to polar surface functionality, though
hydrophobic versions are possible. , Both core
and shell composition are heavily synthesis-dependent. 
The core can be graphitic, amorphous, , C3N4 crystalline (β-C3N4), , C3N4 graphitic (g-C3N4), , or aggregated. − Graphitic cores consist of sp2 carbons, while the amorphous
CDs have a mixture of sp2 and sp3 carbon atoms.
The C3N4 cores can be accessed through high
levels of nitrogen doping during synthesis. − The g-C3N4 is layered similarly to graphite,
with hexagonal alternating sp2 carbons and nitrogen, while
β-C3N4 core consists of sp3 carbon and sp2 nitrogen atoms. Aggregated cores can be formed during synthesis, particularly with
citric acid as a starting material, , and are held
together in a sphere-like shape through π-stacking, hydrogen
bonding, or van der Waals interactions. Interestingly, regardless of the core structure or connectivity,
most CDs exhibit similar characteristics. This has led to the hypothesis
that the core is merely a surface on which to construct an active
surface layer. However, some studies have noted that the core can
be as important as the surface shell , and acts
as an antenna for photon absorption and electron transfer. 

3.2.3

## Carbon Nanocones (CNCs)
CNCs can
be thought of as short CNTs that are gradually reduced in size at
one end until they are completely enclosed. They have an average diameter
of 3 nm, a length of 40 nm, and cone angel of 20°. They aggregate together into bundles with a
diameter of approximately 80 nm that can be dahlia-like if made using
argon or bud-like if produced with helium. As the connected rings approach the tip of the horn, pentagons (five-membered
rings) may be incorporated into the hexagonal network to form a horn. As grown, CNCs are approximately 70% tubular,
15% defective at the tip, 12% graphitic, and 2.5% amorphous carbon. When held at the base and pressed at the apex,
a CNC imparts a fixed amount of elastic energy per carbon. The mechanical response can invert the cone
from tip to base if the number of five-membered rings in the tip is
low; however, if higher, the system is rigid, and no inversion occurs. , 
CNCs have characteristically large surface areas and microporosity.
The pores come in two types; open (or interstitial) pores accessible
from the surface and closed (or internal) pores that are inaccessible. The size of the open pores depends on temperature,
while closed pores remain intact with heat treatment. Micropores have
a volume of 0.11 mL g–1 and a large surface area
of 308 m2 g–1. , Internal pores can be accessed through oxidizing the surface of
the CNC and creating large windows. , − These windows can sometimes be thermally reversible, with sidewall
holes being harder to close than the tip hole, and holes smaller than
0.9 nm closing more easily. Microporosity
can be increased with compression at high pressures. Pores opened via oxidation that create windows can increase
the surface area to 1010 m2 g–1 and increase
pore volume to 0.47 mL g–1. 

3.2.4

## Carbon Nanohoops (CNHs)
CNHs are
strained systems, and the strain of the rings arises from forcing
the CPP backbone to become planar. As the size of the CPP ring is
constrained with decreasing n, computational studies
have shown that the strain increases. , , For a [20]CPP, strain can be as low as 29 kcal mol–1, while [5]CPP is significantly more strained at 119
kcal mol–1. , , Interlocked macrostructures are achievable and have interesting
properties but are outside the scope of this review and are discussed
elsewhere. , 

3.2.5

## Graphene, Graphene Oxide (GO), and Reduced
Graphene Oxide (RGO)
Graphene is one of the strongest materials;
it is stiffer than diamond but has approximately 20% more elasticity.
It can sustain up to 25% in-plane tensile and elastic strains, has
higher thermal conductivity than diamond, and is impermeable even
to gases as small as helium. Mechanically,
graphene is more flexible and stronger than its oxidized derivatives with monolayer graphene having a Young’s
modulus of approximately 1.0 TPa and
GO having a modulus of 0.25 ± 0.14 TPa. Oxidation decreases the in-plane Young’s modulus and fracture
strength. 
Like most other materials
discussed in this review, graphene can have a bandgap; however, it
must be induced through strain or size reduction to produce GO or
GNR. Theoretical calculations predict uniaxial strains >23% are
needed
to open a band gap and that even with
moderate deformation, properties such as resistance do not change. Gauge factors of approximately 2 are typical, though higher gauge factors, up to 150, are
achievable. , With increasing strain comes
the chance of deforming the nanomaterial, which have enabled the use
of rippled graphene or overlapping networks
of graphene to achieve larger gauge factors on the order of 200 to
300. − 
Graphene and its oxidized derivatives
have exceptionally high surface
areas of 2630 m2 g–1 and 2418/2391 ±
1292 m2 g–1 (theoretical/experimental),
respectively , . Graphite oxide can have interlayer
spacing of 0.6–1.2 nm and thickness
of individual GO sheets range from 1 to 1.4 nm. 

3.3

## Electronic Properties
3.3.1

## Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes (SWCNTs)
Geometric differences (e.g., chirality, diameter) and density of
defects or the degree of crystallinity in CNTs can all impact their
electronic properties. , CNTs can be metallic,
semimetallic, or semiconducting based on their roll-up vector. They
are considered chiral since different roll-up vectors produce tubes
of different twists that are not superimposable images of each other
( A,B). Pristine
SWCNTs are semiconducting and become p-type under most application
conditions with conduction band electrons
delocalized over the extended π-network. Semiconducting SWCNTs have exceptional carrier mobilities
(>100,000 cm2 V–1 s–1), current densities (4 × 109 A cm–1), , room temperature
ballistic electron conductivity, , high capacitance, and exciton diffusion lengths usually in the
range of 100 nm. SWCNTs can hold a voltage
of up to 20 V nm–1 before they begin to unravel. SWCNTs can also become superconductive when
cooled below 20 K. Pristine SWCNTs have
an electric resistivity of 10–6 Ω cm. Impurities
and surface defects can increase the resistivity to 1–7 ×
10–4 Ω cm; , with aggregation
and interfacial contact resistance producing a variation in measurements. CNTs form a Schottky barrier connection with
their matrix, enhancing recovery time and reducing turn-on voltage. , 
Due to their small diameter of approximately 1–2 nm,
SWCNTs are subject to quantum confinement effects, where electrons
exist in discrete energy levels and
density of states that exhibit bandgaps of approximately 1 eV. Different chiralities have different bandgaps
and thus distinct excitation and emission wavelengths with decreasing bandgaps as diameter increases. , Quantum theory predicts that SWCNT excitons are composed of 4 singlet
and 12 triplet states due to the spin degeneracy and intervalley Coulombic interactions between the electron
and the hole. Only one singlet transition,
which happens to be higher in energy than all the other singlet and
triplet dark states, is optically allowed. , , A bright exciton can readily
decay into the lower lying dark states, where the energy is typically
lost as heat, and this contributes to the intrinsic low quantum yield
of SWCNTs. 

3.3.2

## Carbon Dots (CDs)
CDs have excellent
charge transferability, enhanced electroconductivity, and large surface
areas. , The conductivity is enhanced in functionalized
surfaces. , When doped with heteroatoms
(e.g., N, P, S, B, etc.), the electronic attributes of surface functionality
can be enhanced from intramolecular charge transferability, − where charge can be readily displaced to adjacent carbons. , Doping also provides a means of distorting electronic configurations,
tuning of local densities, and for an accelerated adsorption and desorption
of substrates that interact with CDs. − 
Dispersing metal cations
(Hg2+, Cu2+, Fe3+) in solution with
CDs leads to quenching of fluorescence. Photoexcited CDs can transfer
electrons to metal ions, which prevents radiative recombination in
excitons. , CDs can also become photoexcited
electron acceptors depending on their surface structure, and have
been observed to interact with organic molecules, metal complexes, and semiconductor
surfaces on which they are adsorbed. The dynamics of these transfers are extremely fast (on the scale
of picosecond or faster) and require ultrafast time-resolved techniques
to elucidate them. 
Much like their
photoluminescence mechanism, the electronic properties
of CDs are not well-understood. A combination of several mechanisms
is likely to interact in CDs. Generally, it is accepted that the aromatic
chemical structure of their cores allows for easy energy transfer
throughout the conjugated system. CD absorption of short UV light
(230–300 nm) has been attributed
to π→π* of C=C and C=N, and longer wavelength absorption
(300–400 nm) to the n→π* transition of C=O. , Inclusion of heteroatoms can alter the electronic properties of
CDs by changing the bandgaps between energy levels and red-shifting
the emission. One general model used
to describe these properties is the core-to-surface migration of excitations.
The core acts as an antenna absorbing a photon, causing spontaneous
charge separation with electrons. Holes remain trapped on the surface,
where radiative recombination and fluorescence emission can occur.
This model has been proposed since the inception of CDs and has been recognized by many, , , , , yet fu rther experimental findings
have been elusive. 
A contrasting
model is one based on the optical charge transfer
transitions. In a system where this occurs, an exciton, localized
on the surface, is directly formed when a photon is absorbed. Electron transfer from the core to these surface
traps occurs simultaneously, and fluorescence occurs as a consequence
of inverse recombination. This model
is supported by solvatochromic and time-resolved single-molecule studies,
and predicts well-defined charge transfer bands in the absorption
spectra with single-exponential fluorescence decay. However, most CDs have unstructured absorption spectra
and multiexponential decays , , and likely do not adhere to this model, unless the spectra observed
in those experiments are caused by a mixture of CDs each with its
own properties, leading to a convoluted spectra from a polydisperse
sample.

3.3.3

## Carbon Nanocones (CNCs)
The overall
shape of CNC facilitates flow of electrons to the pentagonal sites
at the tip of the horns. − In aggregated form, electron spin resonance has shown two decoupled
electronic systems attributed to the graphene-like outer sheets and
interior aggregates. NMR has supported
this, showing the two distinct components as being the surface of
the nanohorns, which has fast spin–lattice relation and the
graphitic core exhibiting a slow relaxation. As thin films, they have low turn-on field and good long-term stability,
which make them ideal for field emission applications. Pristine CNCs can exhibit semiconducting properties, and their semiconductivity can be modulated
by adsorption of oxygen and carbon dioxide gases. , 

3.3.4

## Carbon Nanohoops (CNHs)
As n in [n]CCPs increases, the energy gap
between the HOMO and LUMO increases as well; hence, CPP emission red-shifts
as n decreases. , All CPPs
share a common absorbance maximum at approximately 340 nm attributed
to a symmetry-forbidden HOMO to LUMO electronic transition. This common
absorbance occurs through energetically similar transitions as ring
size increases (e.g., HOMO to LUMO+1/LUMO+2, and HOMO–1/HOMO–2
to LUMO). , Tretiak and co-workers have
theorized that emission is dependent on the breaking of orbital symmetry
in the excited state when the CNH backbone is partially planar due
to the strain of the ring system. The
strain present in [5]CPP and [6]CPP, unlike larger ring systems, inhibits
the planarization and thus prevents breaking the symmetry. 
Smaller CPPs [n = 5–9]
have low to moderate charge mobilities, while larger CPPs [n = 10–12] have mobilities of more than 1. Theoretical charge transport calculations of
smaller and larger CPPs indicate values comparable to C60 fullerene with energetic disorder
and reorganization energies affecting mobilities the most. , In addition, CPPs are easily oxidized , − and can produce multicharged species. These species cause drastic
alteration to their electronic structure as seen in [6–9]CPP2+ that exhibit weak NIR emission. This phenomenon has been attributed to the in-plane aromaticity
formed in the oxidized CPPs. , 

3.3.5

## Graphene, Graphene Oxide (GO), and Reduced
Graphene Oxide (RGO)
Graphene has more than 100 times higher
current carrier capabilities than copper, and similarly higher intrinsic
carrier mobilities than silicon. When
stacked, graphene is an excellent conductor in directions parallel
to the graphene sheets, but it is a poor conductor perpendicularly
due to the van der Waals force between layers. Charge carriers have zero rest mass and a mean free path
in the millimeter range at room temperature. These properties are imparted to the material from the conjugated
sp2 network intrinsic to the graphitic lattice. Because
graphene’s properties are highly dependent on the conjugated
π-network, functionalizing graphene to produce GO or RGO often
diminishes these qualities. This means that, in terms of electronic
properties, graphene is better than RGO, which in turn is better than
GO, as RGO has some of the sp2 network reconstituted when
it is generated from GO.
Graphene has a low electrical noise
due to its crystal lattice structure. Extremely small quantities of
adsorbed material can change local carrier concentrations and thus
resistance. − Schedin and co-workers demonstrated this extreme sensitivity with
a gas sensor that could detect a single molecule of NO2. As noted in the mechanical properties
section (see ), the bandgap can be opened on graphene via mechanical strain or it can be induced through the addition of
oxygen-containing adducts that could produce quantum confinement effects.
The degree and type of functionalization can turn graphene into a
semiconductor or even an insulator. − 

4

## Surface Functionalization Chemistry
In order for most CNMs to be used in biological applications, they
often need to be modified to induce a desired application functionality.
These include tuning fluorescence properties, controlling solubility
in a particular matrix (e.g., wrapping with an amphiphilic polymer
for aqueous dispersion), or to generate a handle on which to build,
connect, and expand for further elaboration (e.g., installing a carboxylic
acid for conjugation to amines via amidation). While the focus of
this review is CNM fluorescent probes, many different disciplines
work with the base carbon materials in a number of research areas
ranging from physical material studies of hybrid composites for energy
storage to in vivo deployment of biosensors. This
section describes the chemistries that have been performed on CNMs
from various disciplines with the goal of providing the reader with
a survey of what is possible. Not every functionalization will be
compatible with every application.
We have organized this section
of the review under two broadly
defined umbrella terms: non-covalent ( ) and covalent ( ) functionalizations. Covalent approaches
collectively refer to methods that break and form new bonds, whereas
non-covalent approaches refer to those that do not. Generally, covalent
attachments are more stable, but often come at the cost of destroying
the conjugated networks and associated photochemical features. Non-covalent
approaches leave the sp2 network that imparts most of the
interesting properties of the materials intact; however, they can
attenuate various properties through subtle electronic changes to
the local environment. Across all CNMs reviewed, 1,3 dipolar cycloadditions
and oxidations are the most common covalent modifications, and π-stacking
with the aryl groups is among the most common non-covalent modifications.
 4.1

## Non-covalent Functionalization Chemistries
4.1.1

## Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes (SWCNTs)
Non-covalent surface modifications involving π-stacking are
primarily employed to solubilize CNTs without disrupting their sp2 lattice. These include traditional surfactants (e.g., sodium
dodecyl sulfate (SDS), sodium cholate (SC), Triton X-100), , surfactant-like amphiphilic biopolymers (e.g., DNA and RNA oligonucleotides), peptides, − and polycyclic aryl complexes
with hydrophilic appendages (e.g., proteins , and polymers , ). These approaches can impart
solubility alone (e.g., SC) or solubility with sensitization to various
analytes of interest (e.g., single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) used to sense
catecholamines). Non-covalent approaches
have also been used to conjugate nanotubes to a variety of molecular
recognition motifs such as antibodies, , peptides, , and aptamers for specific biosensing
of analytes of interest. Moreover, halogen-doping of SWCNTs via halogenated
solvents has been investigated recently by Taborowska and co-workers.
SWCNTs treated with these solvents were noted to exhibit an increase
in electrical conductivity, with bromoforms producing the most dramatic
effects. 

4.1.2

## Carbon Dots (CDs)
CDs have been
non-covalently modified in manners similar to CNTs. Aryl rings can
π-stack with the extended π-systems of CDs and have been
used to anchor a number of quenching motifs, including ssDNA. , The ssDNA can desorb in the presence of its complementary strand,
revealing the fluorescent dot. Similar unquenching phenomena are noted
when certain ssDNA base pairs bind to metal ions such as Hg2+ or Ag+. , Most CDs have polar groups 
on their surface that are installed during synthesis, and these groups
can participate in non-covalent interactions. Carboxyl groups can
be deprotonated and used to sequester metal ions such as Na+, bind polar molecules like Rhodamine
B, or attract larger positively charged
polymers such as polyethyleneimines (PEIs). 

4.1.3

## Carbon Nanocones (CNCs)
Non-covalent
modification of nanocones occurs in manners similar to CNTs and CDs.
Sidewalls of the CNC can have π-stacking interactions with other
aromatic systems. These non-covalent
interactions have been used to maintain most of the electronic properties
of the CNC, while imparting handles for attachment. , , Non-covalent interactions have
also been used to attach porphyrins , and can solubilize
CNCs in aqueous solvents. 

4.1.4

## Carbon Nanohoops (CNHs)
Carbon
nanohoops are excellent candidates for host–guest type applications
with other macro- or small molecules that can non-covalently interact
with them. These interactions can occur both externally on the hoop
or internally within the pore at the center of the structure. Most
CPPs undergo quenching upon internal guest uptake. , , , This quenching can be leveraged to generate a turn-on sensor when
the guest molecule is stripped from the CPP. This allows for a modular
approach where the sensing mechanism is reliant on a guest modification
rather than modifications to host CPP, which may already be optimized
to particular wavelengths and brightness levels.
[n]CPPs can π-stack with other π-systems, but they are
unable to do so internally with themselves. One common π-interaction
involves end-capping a [10]CPP with a fullerene C60. In a similar manner, [n +
5]CPP can be used to selectively encapsulate an [n]CPP forming a shortened version of a DWCNTs. , Typically, in solid-state structures, [n]CCPs stack
in a herringbone pattern except for [6]CPP, which adopts a columnar
packing. − Columnar packing is also favored when [n]CCPs are fluorinated, − carboxylated, , heteroatom-doped, , or reduced to anionic forms. Columnar configuration was leveraged by Ozaki
and co-workers to fill CPPs with I2 molecules and produce
electrically induced white light emission. 

4.1.5

## Graphene, Graphene Oxide (GO), and Reduced
Graphene Oxide (RGO)
Like many other carbon-based systems
with sp2 networks, non-covalent functionalization of graphene,
GO, and RGO relies on π-stacking interactions or other π-system
interactions. Because GO and RGO both
contain isles of graphene within their structures, these interactions
can be generalized to all forms of graphene with differences in binding
stability being dependent on the base material being functionalized.
Non-covalent attachment of aryl complexes such as pyrene, , naphthalene, and perylene , can be achieved through π-stacking. Using this same approach,
ssDNA, − porphyrins, − polyaniline, , and polystyrene have been attached.
Zwitterionic and hydrogen bonding interactions can also be utilized
as demonstrated by Fang and co-workers, in which RGO was functionalized
with the polymer chitosan. Nanoparticle
deposition has also been extensively explored as a method of non-covalent
functionalization. Various groups have deposited gold, − palladium, − platinum, − cobalt, − silicon, tin, − and various metal oxides , , , on graphene and its derivatives. These nanohybrid assemblies are
understood to be stabilized by van der Waals interactions between
ligand-capped metal nanoparticles and graphene, or through direct
electrostatic interactions between ligand-free metals and graphene. Similar interactions have been used to immobilize
carbon quantum dots (CQDs) on graphitic surfaces. − 

4.2

## Covalent Functionalization Chemistries
4.2.1

## Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes (SWCNTs)
Most classic organic transformations to aryl and extended aryl
systems are possible, though they often occur in an uncontrolled manner
over the entire nanotube. These approaches have been used to impart
functional handles for further chemical modification or to introduce
bright defect sites that can shift the emission spectrum and modulate
quantum yield.
Halogenations of the side walls have been used
to introduce fluorine − and cause conversion of the sp2 metallic or semiconducting
tubes into sp3 insulating tubes. DFT calculations suggest 1,2-addition is more favorable than 1,4-addition though both are likely to occur under the aggressive
reaction conditions. Fluorine can be substituted via Grignard or organolithium
reagents and can undergo substitutions
from diamines and diols. Heating at high temps of 500 °C can dealkylate
the nanotube, recovering its pristine properties, yet others have contested that this rarely occurs. Chlorination and bromination are also possible,
with chlorine adding more readily than bromine. 
Cycloadditions are another family of reactions that
are commonly
utilized to functionalize SWCNTs. These include [2 + 1] cyclopropanations
of carbenes − and nitrenes, − 1,3-dipolar cycloadditions of azomethine ylides to form fused pyrrolidine
rings, nitrile imines under microwave
conditions to form pyrazoline derived tubes, zwitterionic cycloadditions, and Diels–Alder
cycloadditions with and without microwave conditions. − 
Besides halogenations and cycloadditions, radical additions
are
another common reaction class. Functionalization of side walls can
be achieved with radicals from diazonium salts , in a reductive manner or in an oxidative manner with aromatic amines. − , Reductive Birch reduction–alkylation has been achieved using
classic conditions of alkali metals in liquid ammonia with alkyl halides
or sulfides as coupling partners. , Reduced or
hydrogenated versions have been produced in a similar manner using
methanol as a hydrogen source in lieu of an alkyl halide. Alkyl and aryl peroxides have been thermally
decomposed and added to SWCNTs in a radical manner. , Photoinduced radical attachments of perfluoroalkyl groups have been
achieved , as have photoinduced silations
using UV irradiation. 
Electrophilic
additions are also achievable in CNTs. Tagmatarchis
and co-workers added chloroform in the presence of a Lewis acid in
order to hydrolyze the groups to produce hydroxyl functionality. Balaban and co-workers explored electrophilic
additions using Friedel–Crafts conditions to generate polyacrylate
nanotubes. Complementary to electrophilic
additions, nucleophilic additions of functionalities like carbenes, octadecylamine in an amination reaction, or carbon dioxide after treatment with sec-BuLi have also been achieved.
Ozonolysis has been reported at low , and room
temperatures. Subsequent treatments
with peroxide, dimethyl sulfide, or sodium borohydride afford carboxylic
acids and esters, ketones and aldehydes, and hydroxyls on the surface.
Banerjee and co-workers noted that sidewall ozonation occurs more
readily in narrow diameter tubes due to increased strain from the
curvature and a higher rehybridization energy. 
Oxidations using concentrated nitric or sulfuric
acids, peroxides,
and oxygen have all been successfully employed for covalent modification
of nanotubes. , These reactions tend to form
carboxyl groups at the ends of the nanotubes and at defect sites on
the side walls. While these nanotubes
have better aqueous solubility, they tend to lose most of their pristine
optoelectronic properties because addition often proceeds in an uncontrolled
manner. While many reports of covalent
CNM modifications exist, a recent study by Sanders and O’Bryan
surveying select covalent modifications noted issues with the reproducibility
of some of the reported reactions. 

4.2.2

## Carbon Dots (CDs)
Most covalent
modifications to CDs utilize oxidation handles installed on the surface
during synthesis, including carbonyl, hydroxyl, or amine functionalities.
Most popular are amide coupling reactions including EDC/NHS, which
couple carboxylic acids with amines and have been reviewed extensively
elsewhere. This has been used to directly
attach end-product functionality (e.g., coupling with an amine aptamer) or for attaching a new pendant functionality
(e.g., ethylenediamine) that can be
further elaborated upon. Besides amide couplings, a variety of other
reactions have been demonstrated including nucleophilic acyl substitutions, − silylations, , esterification, , sulfonation, , − and copolymerization via SN2 of alcohols that open epoxides. Most classic organic transformations of these
pendant oxidized groups formed during the synthesis are achievable.
Surface passivation or derivatization of CDs can tune fluorescence
properties and quantum yield. This can be done both through post-synthesis
modifications or by introducing passivating agents during synthesis
that are incorporated into the CDs. While
these groups do impart new functionality that could in turn change
the optoelectronics of the materials, they also impart colloidal stability
to CDs allowing them to be dispersed in solutions rather than clumping
as aggregates.
Different types of doping, particularly with
heteroatoms, can lead
to enhancement of adjacent functional sites through charge transference. − Heteroatom doping can also distort electronic states by effectively
tuning local charge densities, and can increase the adsorption and
desorption of molecules. , , These dopants are usually added during the synthesis or as a covalent
appendage post synthesis.

4.2.3

## Carbon Nanocones (CNCs)
Various
methods of oxidation are commonly used to functionalize CNCs. These
methods rupture the sp2 network and open up holes on the
surface through insertion of hydroxyl or carbonyl functionalities.
Some common approaches include high temperature treatment in the presence
of O2 or CO2, or through treatment with strong acids such
as H2SO4, H2SO4/H2O2, or HNO3 under heat, or through microwave irradiation. The acid treatment increases porosity by opening
holes on the surface and increases internal porosity. Introduction of these groups, particularity
carboxylic acids, serves as a powerful functional handle that can
be easily transformed into many chemical moieties for couplings, conjugations,
or direct linkages. A modified oxidative procedure using O2 at high temperatures and lower pressures has also been developed
to selectively install carboxylic acid units at the conical-tips of
the CNCs. If less oxygen functional
groups are desired, a second heat treatment with H2 can
be performed. Direct amination of CNCs
using NaNH2 and liquid ammonia is also possible. This has
produced amino-nanocones that are water-soluble without the introduction
of any additional holes to the structure. Amino-nanocones are also
able to be separated according to their size. 
Besides direct oxidation of the CNCs, 1,3-dipolar
cycloadditions have proved to be very useful as well. Azomethine ylides
can be generated in situ from a decarboxylative condensation
of α-amino acids with aldehydes to yield the installation of
almost any functionality desired. One
of the most popular options involves N-modified α-amino acids
to produce N-substituted pyrrolidines on the CNH scaffold. , Malonate moieties can also be introduced to the surface using a
Bingel cyclopropanation reaction. These include simple ones such as
diethyl malonate and larger custom synthesized ones containing large
anthracene, pyrene, or light-harvesting groups. Utilizing microwave-assisted irradiation allowed for solventless
introduction of the malonates, as well
as [2 + 1] nitrene and benzyne cycloadditions. 

4.2.4

## Carbon Nanohoops (CNHs)
Various
functionalizations can be covalently introduced at different positions
during the synthesis of CPPs. − One common approach to enhance
brightness is to connect a ring within an [n]CCP
in a meta or 1,3 manner rather than a para or 1,4 connection. Installing electron
withdrawing groups, such as nitrogen or benzothiadiazole, causes emission
to red-shift due to a narrowing of the HOMO–LUMO gap. , , Incorporation of fluorine into
the nanohoop, in place of a C–H bond, can impact the way nanohoops
align with one another in the solid state, causing formation of tubular
nanotube-like channels. Other nanohoop
versions have also been achieved through incorporation of a naphthalene
ring asymmetrically to form a chiral nanohoop, , symmetrically to create extended π-networks, or through the incorporation of other fused aryl and π-systems
to create extended π-networks. , Furthermore,
addition of sulfonates on an extended ether side at one of the C–H
positions on an aryl ring has afforded a more water-soluble version
of nanohoops. This attachment was made
through a benzylic alcohol and has proved very useful as demonstrated
by White and co-workers, in which the transformation was exploited
for an azide click chemistry reaction for connecting the azide-CPP
with alkyne-folic acid for in vitro studies. 

4.2.5

## Graphene, Graphene Oxide (GO), and Reduced
Graphene Oxide (RGO)
Covalent functionalization of graphene
shares many commonalities with GO and RGO since both contain graphene
isles. These reactions focus on the sp2 C=C bonds present
in graphene, GO, and RGO, but also include the more reactive oxygen
functionalities in GO and RGO.
Additions of free radicals through
diazonium salts − and benzoyl peroxides have been achieved,
as have 1,3-dipolar cycloadditions of azomethine ylides, − nitrenes, − and arynes. , Halogenation is also possible
through fluorination, chlorination, , or bromination. , In addition, covalent functionalization
of graphene to GO can be achieved through strong oxidation by acids, − ozone, , and chemical or thermal exfoliation
from graphite oxide. − In all these methods, the sp2 network is oxidized and
new functionalities, including hydroxyl, carbonyl, carboxylate, and
epoxide, are formed on the surface. RGO can be generated from GO through
an additional reduction step after the oxidation. This is done to
restore some sp2 functionality and associated properties,
such as electrical conductivity and absorption properties, and to
create a lightly oxidized version as compared to GO. Common chemical
approaches reduce GO with hydrazine, , , but the scalability of this approach is limited.
To overcome this, methods using ascorbic acid, , sodium borohydride, − ethanol, − H2, , SO2, and hydroquinone , have been developed. Besides chemical approaches, thermal reduction
in the presence of inert gas is also possible, − as is ultraviolet light reduction. − Microwave-assisted versions
of chemical and thermal reductions can also be employed. Moreover, Salas and co-workers have developed
a procedure to produce RGO from GO using bacteria. Doping graphene with nitrogen is also possible through
incorporation of nitrogen precursors during the reduction or annealing
steps in various processes − using ammonia or hydrazine. These dopants, and boron, can also be incorporated directly upon synthesis. 
GO and RGO can be modified with 1,3-dipolar
cycloadditions, , , diazonium radical additions, , − carbene and nitrene additions, [3,3] sigmatropic rearrangements, alkylations, and
halogenations, − among other chemical inclusions. , , Additional covalent modifications can occur on the
newly installed oxygen-containing groups. Utilizing the carboxylic
acids, many groups have performed amide couplings with amines on small
molecules, − biomolecules, polymers − and other compounds of interest. , − This approach has also been used to help further solubilize and
passivate through attachment of polyethylene glycol (PEG)-amines , , or poly-l-lysine. , In a similar manner, esters, , − ethers, and silanes − have been attached as well.
Nucleophilic additions using epoxides
can occur as demonstrated
by Yu and Hsiao et al. Generation of carbamates can also occur via isocyanates
reacting with both the carboxyl and hydroxyl groups on the oxidized
graphene. − Radical polymerization, grown directly from
the GO surface, is also achievable as demonstrated by several groups, − where they used a living radical polymerization after covalently
attaching an initiator followed by addition of various monomers.

5

## CNM Fluorescent Probe Applications
In this section, we describe the use of CNMs in cells, tissues,
microorganisms, plants, animals, and the environment for various applications
in imaging, sensing, delivery, and therapeutics in detail ( ).
 5.1

## Fluorescence Imaging in Biomedical Applications
In this section, we will discuss the use of fluorescent CNMs for
imaging in biological applications, including in vivo imaging of the vascular system and organs in small animals, and in vitro imaging in cells and tissues.
5.1.1

## In Vivo Vasculature Imaging
One prominent application of fluorescent CNMs is the vasculature
imaging. All biological entities rely heavily on a steady supply of
nutrients. Animals utilize the blood circulatory system to transport
oxygen, carbon dioxide, nutrients, heat, and hormones into and out
of organs. Blood vessels are dynamic in nature and capable of undergoing
changes to facilitate structural remodeling. To accommodate temporary
physiological adaptations, such as during pregnancy or endurance training, transient
vasculature restructuring processes can occur. Moreover, at slower
temporal scales, permanent changes can occur in association with several
pathological conditions. From a pathological perspective, early diagnosis
of alterations in vasculature is crucial for medical interventions,
especially in the cases of hypertension, atherosclerosis, diabetes,
and retinopathy. Hence, vascular imaging plays an important role during
diagnosis, and for monitoring treatment efficacy and disease progression.
The heart, brain, and eyes are among some of the organs that are heavily
monitored for changes in vasculature.
5.1.1.1

## Heart Vasculature
Mapping blood
vessels in the heart dates back to 1950s with the introduction of
angiography using iodine injected into the bloodstream and visualization
with X-ray. Decades later with the inventions of multiple technologies
such as ultrasound, computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), positron emission tomography (PET)/scintigraphy, ultrasonography,
and optical coherence tomography (OCT), the distribution and anomalies
in blood vessels can be mapped noninvasively, and most importantly
often without the need of exposure to ionizing X-ray radiation. While
these techniques can report on global changes in vasculature, small
changes inside blood vessels cannot be mapped due to insufficient
temporal and spatial resolutions. In cases where medical interventions
are required, invasive intravascular imaging is performed. In contrast,
fluorescence-based techniques can provide high temporal and spatial
resolutions compared to the conventional vasculature imaging techniques
employed in the clinic. Fluorescence
imaging can be performed over a wide range of excitation and emission
wavelengths, and the NIR window has been particularly identified as
the bioimaging window that optimizes photon absorption, reduces scattering
of photons, and contributes negligible autofluorescence background.
All these features allow deeper tissue penetration and imaging.
Among the many NIR-emissive probes that include small molecule fluorescent
dyes, polymer nanoparticles, aggregation-induced emission dots, rare-earth
doped nanoparticles, and semiconducting
quantum dots, we will highlight carbon
allotropes used for heart vasculature imaging. SWCNTs are one of the
few materials whose intrinsic optical properties lie in the optimal
bioimaging window (850–1350 nm). SWCNTs can be formulated to
become water-soluble, and Hong et al. have studied heart vasculature
using their intrinsic NIR fluorescence. A direct comparison of NIR fluorescence and commonly used microcomputed
tomography (Micro-CT) revealed that the two techniques are comparable
at measuring blood vessel of widths greater than 100 μm ( A). For SWCNTs,
the smallest measurable vessel diameter was ∼35 μm, while
Micro-CT could not discern any structure less than 100 μm ( A). Apart from
measuring blood vessels diameter, gaining insights into hemodynamics
(e.g., arteries vs veins) is important to assess function. Typically,
Doppler measurements aided by microultrasonography provide hemodynamic
information, but spatial resolution significantly attenuates at increased
penetration depths. When SWCNTs were employed, based on the time difference
between the inflow and outflow from veins and arteries respectively,
the two types of blood vessels were successfully distinguished. To
show the utility of this technology, SWCNTs were tested in mice that
underwent surgically induced ischemia. As expected, a significant
delay in the appearance of NIR fluorescence in ischemic limbs was
noted compared to the control, suggesting that CNM fluorescence-based
vasculature imaging can discern acute changes in blood flow following
a pathologic condition ( B).
 
5.1.1.2

## Brain Vasculature
The brain is
among the most complex organs due to its anatomical composition and
function, and the demand for blood flow within cerebrovasculature
is very high. By monitoring blood flow, neuroscientists can study
brain regions that may be responsible for orchestrating specific actions.
From a clinical perspective, fine changes in cerebrovasculature, such
as vessel blockages, inflammation (vasculitis), narrowing (stenosis),
vessel spasm (vasospasm), and malformations are linked to several
pathological conditions. Therefore, cerebrovascular imaging-guided
diagnosis could be the key for the prevention and early intervention
of brain diseases. Rapid advancements in instrumentation and tools
have enabled a wide variety of imaging techniques to peer into brain
vasculature. Selection of an appropriate technique depends on the
clinical situation and the resolution (both spatial and temporal)
required for optimal diagnosis.
The gold standard for cerebrovascular
imaging is angiography, where a contrast dye is introduced via a catheter
placed near the arteries of the neck and the head. The contrast agent
helps visualize the blood vessels in X-ray images but with limited
spatial (submillimeter) and temporal (minutes long scanning times)
resolutions. Fluorescence-based brain imaging offers an alternative
with improved resolutions (both spatial and temporal) without the
need of exposure to ionizing radiation. One of the biggest drawbacks
of fluorescence imaging performed in the visible (400–700 nm)
and NIR (700–900 nm) regions is reliance on craniotomy, cranial
windows, and skull thinning agents. Even with invasive surgical installation
of cranial windows, penetration depths of imaging are usually limited
to 1–2 mm. Multiple reports from different laboratories have
shown biological imaging in the NIR-II window (1000–1700 nm)
can potentially enable deep brain fluorescence imaging due to greater
penetration depths and reduced scattering of photons. However, there
are very few materials that fluoresce in the NIR-II window and the
challenge is further compounded by strict constraints including water
solubility and high biocompatibility. For example, NIR-II emissive
inorganic semiconducting QDs are attractive candidates due to narrow
emissions and high quantum yields. However,
the toxicity of heavy metal QDs is a major concern and hinders their
deployment in biological applications.
Highly extended π-conjugated
systems, such as SWCNTs, have
intrinsic emissions in the NIR-II range (900–1400 nm) when
excited with NIR-I (700–900 nm) lasers. Despite low quantum
efficiencies, the ability for tunable water solubility and biocompatibility
sparked an interest in utilizing SWCNTs for cerebrovascular imaging.
Over the years, the Dai Lab has pioneered tissue imaging in the NIR-II
window using CNMs. In a report published
in 2014, the group demonstrated that SWCNTs can be useful for studying
brain vasculature with high spatial resolutions and great tissue depths
(>2 mm in the mouse brain). Notably,
this feat was achieved without the need of a surgically installed
optical window in the cranium ( ). Additionally, to directly compare the
differences between imaging in NIR-I vs NIR-II regions of the spectrum,
the authors synthesized SWCNT-IRDye800 conjugates, where IRDye800
emits in the 800–900 nm window (NIR-I) and SWCNTs emit in the
900–1400 nm window (NIR-II). After injecting a solution of
SWCNT-IRDye800 through the tail of a mouse, the cerebrovasculature
was imaged under 808 nm laser illumination. In comparison to NIR-I
spectral window imaged by IRDye800, higher resolution images of brain
blood vessels were obtained with NIR-IIa (1300–1400 nm) window
using SWCNTs ( A). At the NIR-IIa window, dynamic changes in blood perfusions were
recorded at sub-10 μm spatial resolutions and imaging rates
of ∼5 frames/sec. Furthermore, the authors demonstrated the
utility of SWCNTs to record dynamics of blood perfusions for studying
the effect of strokes. Compared to WT controls, blood flow of a surgically
induced middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) mouse was noted to
be markedly slower, thus demonstrating that CNM-based vasculature
imaging can report on acute changes in hemodynamics induced by physiological
perturbations ( B).
 
5.1.1.3

## Ocular Vasculature
Eye vasculature
is a complex network and can be divided into three main subdivisions:
hyaloid, choroid, and retinal vasculature. Generally, hyaloid vasculature
system is dominant during the early development stages and disappears
as retinal vessels develop and mature. The choroid is the central network of blood vessels found in the
eye, which transports oxygen and nutrients into the retina via retinal
pigment epithelium. The retinal vasculature is among the most studied
bed of blood vessels in the body due to ease of accessibility from
the front of the eye. With ever advancing non-invasive imaging modalities,
patients routinely undergo retinal scans in the clinic for early detection
and monitoring of disease progression, and evaluation of therapeutic
efficacies for various ophthalmic diseases. For most clinical examinations, ocular vasculature is imaged by
angiography, which involves an intravenous injection of a fluorescent
dye, followed by imaging of retinal blood vessels via dilated eyes.
Typically, fluorescein is used as the dye of choice to image retinal
blood vessels with blue light excitation. As a proof-of-concept nitrogen
and selenium-doped CDs have been successfully used to image retinal
vasculature in mice. The spatial resolutions
achieved by these CDs lag those of small molecule organic fluorophores;
however, CDs can be simultaneously employed for imaging and as delivery
vehicles for therapeutic agents, and are, therefore, worthy of continuous
exploration in this space. , Application of CNMs
for imaging of the choroid vasculature is even less common, and to
our knowledge has not yet been reported.

5.1.2

## In Vivo Whole Organ Imaging
In vivo fluorescence imaging presents a unique
set of challenges compared to imaging in reduced preparations such
as cells and tissue slices. One of the biggest challenges is the poor
penetration depth, which is more pronounced when visible light is
used for optical imaging. Furthermore, tissue autofluorescence is
prominent in visible range of the spectrum but is considerably diminished
in NIR. All of these reasons have motivated the development of fluorophores
that are excitable in the NIR-I window (700–900 nm) and emit
in NIR-II window (900–1400 nm). CNMs are relatively easy to
synthesize and purify compared to multistep organic synthesis required
for synthesizing small molecule dyes. CDs, GOs, and SWCNTs are the
most widely used fluorescent CNMs for in vivo biological
imaging, and most of the discussions in this section will focus on
these materials.
In order to access SWCNT fluorescence, bundled
SWCNTs need to be singly exfoliated into colloidal dispersions by
the use of surfactants or a wide variety of amphiphilic chemical motifs.
Despite affording colloidally stable bright suspensions, surfactants
used for exfoliating nanotubes are often cytotoxic to biological tissues.
On the other hand, biocompatible SWCNTs dispersions, such as those
obtained from the commonly used phospholipid-polyethylene glycol (PS-PEG),
exhibit low brightness. To circumvent
this issue, Welsher et al. devised a method to generate both bright
and biocompatible SWCNTs using a two-step ligand exchange method.
Bright SWCNT suspensions were first suspended with sodium cholate
(SC), and the SC is subsequently replaced with PS-PEG via ligand exchange.
It is thought that the ligand exchange process preserves the bright
fluorescence properties afforded by SC, whereas direct passivation
with PS-PEG leads to breaks in the sp2 lattice and generation
of oxygen-induced adducts that quench the fluorescence ( A). When PS-PEG-SWCNT suspension was introduced
into wild-type (WT) mice via tail vein injections, dispersions produced
by the ligand exchange method showed high image contrast at very low
concentrations. To generate comparable contrast in captured images,
direct-sonication PS-PEG-SWCNT suspensions required more than 15-fold
loading compared to exchanged PS-PEG-SWCNTs ( B).
 Further demonstration of SWCNTs as contrast reagents
involves dynamic
imaging of SWCNTs through the path of the blood circulatory system
after a mouse tail vein injection. Following
the injection, oxygen-deficient venous blood travels to the heart
and lungs. Video rate imaging then revealed an initial spike of NIR
fluorescence in the lungs, followed by a decrease in the fluorescence
signal from lungs and an increase in the signal in the kidneys and
the liver ( A). The temporal dynamics of SWCNT fluorescence affords imaging at
anatomical resolutions through principal component analysis (PCA)
of the time-variant data, which can be challenging to discern from
real-time raw fluorescence images alone ( B).
 The use of functionalized SWCNTs for in
vivo imaging
extends beyond their use as whole organism-scale contrast agents to
organ-specific or tumor-targeted imaging reagents. − Tumor-homing SWCNTs, typically designed through side-wall functionalization
with tumor specific antibodies or peptides, have been employed for
imaging tumors in animal models. One approach employs the RGD peptide,
a potent ligand for αvβ3 receptor
that is important for tumor angiogenesis. SWCNTs bearing the RGD ligand
localize to the tumor, thus enabling imaging of the tumor and associated
vasculature. A similar approach employed
bifunctional SWCNTs that are decorated with tumor-specific antibodies
and radioligands. The small diameters
of SWCNTs (typically in the range of 1–3 nm) are thought to
assist in the trafficking into tumors sites. , Moreover, in contrast to the tight endothelial junctions found in
healthy tissue, tumor sites have leaky endothelial junctions. Porous
openings in vasculature associated with tumor sites facilitate nanoparticle
circulating in blood to passively accumulate in tumor tissues. Once
nanoparticles are accumulated, most of them are retained due to poor
lymphatic drainage. This phenomenon
is referred to as the enhanced permeation and retention (EPR) effect. Taking advantage of the EPR effect, the Dai
lab first tested the efficacy of SWCNT accumulation in tumor-bearing
mice in a proof-of-concept study. The
results of the study were further confirmed by employing other imaging
modalities, such as PET and Raman spectroscopy, to demonstrate the
tumor targeting tendency of SWCNTs . , Following
an intravenous injection, SWCNTs accumulated predominantly in the
liver, spleen, and tumor-bearing tissues. Other organs such as heart,
kidney, pancreas, and lungs contained negligible amounts of SWCNTs.
Although the results of this study are encouraging, a high degree
of tumor targeting is generally required for early detection of tumors.
Interestingly, the same group observed that functionalizing the nanotube
surface with octadecene units appended to PEG chains increased blood
circulation times (half-life of 30 h). The improved bioavailability in the bloodstream over an extended
period, combined with continuous accumulation of SWCNTs, allowed NIR
fluorescence to steadily increase in the tumor region ( ).
 The tumor-homing ability of SWCNTs can be leveraged
not only for
imaging, but also for delivery of therapeutic interventions. An interesting
study used SWCNTs to image intact tissues at lower excitation powers
and map the tumor region. Once the tumor
map is registered, laser irradiations at high power cause SWCNTs to
heat until the impacted tissue reaches the temperature necessary for
thermal ablation. Such efforts can be further optimized by sorting
as-synthesized SWCNT suspensions to isolate highly fluorescent chiral
species. More brightly fluorescent SWCNTs afford clear tumor imaging
and quickly reach tumor ablation temperatures at much lower injection
doses. , Moreover, SWCNTs can also be used to image
biological tissues that are not amenable to conventional techniques.
One such example is the detection of brown fat using a SWCNT reporter
that is decorated with a synthetic amphiphilic polymer. Brown fat is an increasingly attractive therapeutic
target and imaging it relies on expensive modalities, including PET-computed
tomography.
Functionalized graphene-oxide (GO)-based nanomaterials
have also
been used for imaging tumor in mice in vivo. In one
study, graphene quantum dots (GQDs) were decorated with catechol-functionalized
hyaluronic acid (HA), an important biopolymer that is a component
of the extracellular matrix. The catechol
is understood to anchor HA through its affinity for the surface of
the graphitic nanomaterials. In in vitro cellular
assays, the authors showed that GQDs that were not decorated with
HA exhibited low levels of internalization into cancerous and noncancerous
cell lines. In contrast, HA-GQDs showed significant levels of uptake
by A549 cancer cell lines. Remarkably, when A549-cancer cell bearing
mice were injected with the nanomaterials, the HA-functionalized GQDs
were more intensely localized to the tumor regions, largely recapitulating
the observations made in the in vitro cellular assay.
This study additionally demonstrated that the tumor-homing ability
of HA-GQDs can be leveraged for delivering chemotherapeutic agents
into tumor locations. The authors suggest endocytosis and EPR as mechanisms
for cellular uptake and tumor-homing ability, with the HA motif clearly
playing a facilitative role in targeting and internalization into
cancerous cells. , Other studies have used antibodies
to target GO nanoparticles into cancer cells. Sun et al. showed that
GOs functionalized with a lymphoma targeting antibody, Rituxan, facilitated
trafficking of the nanomaterials into tumor cells in vitro, with the nanomaterials serving a dual purpose as imaging reagents
and drug delivery vehicles. 
Indeed,
the use of the GO-family of CNMs as dual imaging and therapeutic
reagents appears to be an attribute that has been repeatedly exploited
in the literature. Besides being used for drug cargo delivery, GO-based
nanomaterials have also been used as agents for photothermal therapy.
Yang et al. showed that the strong optical absorption of PEG-functionalized
GO in the NIR can be used for efficient tumor destruction in mice
models. In addition to their tumor-homing
abilities, GO-based CNMs have been used for fluorescence imaging using
multiphoton excitation. PEG-GO nanoparticles exhibited enhanced solubility
and biocompatibility, and their two- and three-photon photoluminescence
properties were exploited for imaging in cortical layers at depths
of up to 300 μm and at even deeper
depths in tissue phantoms. 
The
utility of CNMs as dual imaging and therapeutic reagents extends
from the GO family of nanoparticles to CDs. In one study, Ge et al.
used polythiophene phenylpropionic acid as the starting precursor
for CD synthesis. The resulting CD nanoparticles
exhibited a broad emission with a maximum at 640 nm. When intravenously
injected into tumor-bearing mice, majority of the red-emitting CDs
were localized to tumor sites and the liver. The authors further demonstrated
the efficacy of CDs as a treatment option for cancerous tissue via
photothermal therapy.
The studies highlighted in the previous
sections were conducted
using mice as the model organism, consistent with the practice in
many disciplines of biomedical research. Beyond mice, the use of CNMs
for in vivo imaging has been demonstrated in drosophila
(fruit flies), an important organism that is used as a model for scientific
research in several disciplines of biology. In one study, SWCNTs were
dispersed in buffered bovine serum albumin, concentrated, and then
mixed with Baker’s yeast, which is a standard laboratory food
for drosophila. Drosophila larvae fed
on SWCNT–yeast paste during their normal growth phase, and
then imaged in the pupal or adult phase, did not exhibit abnormal
development, and had levels of survival that were comparable with
those that were fed standard food. Importantly, post hoc imaging of
the NIR/SWIR SWCNT photoluminescence showed that SWCNTs localized
to the gut and the dorsal vessel of fruit flies. Furthermore, fluorescence
signals were detected in brain tissue albeit at lower levels of intensity.
While food-based nanotube delivery into model organisms could present
a less invasive method of in vivo loading of tissue,
it is not clear what new biological insights were gained from this
study beyond a proof-of-concept level demonstration. 
Other types of CNMs have also been used for in vivo imaging. One of the early in vivo explorations
of CDs involved engineering doped CDs with ZnS (CZnS-Dots). Both CDs and CZnS-Dots had comparable
excitation and emission spectra, while the latter fluoresced brighter.
These two materials were administered subcutaneously in mice and compared
side-by-side to evaluate optical properties in vivo. As expected CZnS-Dots appeared brighter in the injection
area compared to undoped CDs ( A). After intravenous injection into mice, CDs were
primarily excreted via urine. CD emissions were only detectable in
kidneys and liver after 4 h post injection, which was consistent with
the urine excretion pathway.
 Several subsequent studies demonstrated the utility
of CDs as contrast
agents in living animals including mice and zebrafish ( B). − In zebrafish, the biodistribution of CDs rapidly increased within
the first 48 h in multiple organs including the yolk sac, intestine,
stomach, and liver. The accumulation of CDs had no adverse effects
on key biological processes, such as hatching rates, teratology, or
mortality. To improve probe targetability, Wang et al. decorated nitrogen-doped
CDs with N-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (pN-CNDs) and demonstrated
such two-component systems can hone in on specific cancerous tissue,
such as glioma in vivo. 
The multimodal imaging and therapeutic applications observed
in
GOs and SWCNTs is prevalent in CDs as well. Ge et al. synthesized
far-red and NIR-emissive CDs, which exhibited a broad emission profile
with a maximum at 640 nm. When injected
into tumor-bearing mice via intravenous injection, the majority of
the red-emitting CDs were localized inside tumor site and the liver,
presumably through the EPR effect. Furthermore, authors tested the
efficacy of these CDs as photothermal therapeutic agents. The relative
tumor volume in CD-treated mice diminished compared to control mice
after phototherapeutic intervention, demonstrating the multifunctional
potential of CNMs for biomedical imaging and therapy. Notably, CD-treated
mice did not show signs of inflammation, necrosis, or apoptosis. In
a subsequent study, Liu and co-workers synthesized red-emissive CDs
from taxus leaves. After purification,
the CDs displayed an excitation-independent emission maximum at 673
nm and a narrow full width at half maximum (fwhm) around 20 nm. Post-injection
into mice, CD photoluminescence was detected in the liver, lungs,
and kidneys. Although this method produced CDs with highly desirable
narrow NIR emissions, limited water solubility and solvent-induced
aggregations (which leads to fluorescence quenching) may hinder further
biological applications.

5.1.3

## In Vitro Imaging in Reduced
Preparations
The study of complex biological systems is often
facilitated by employing reduced preparations, such as cultured cells
and tissue slices. Cells in culture can retain some of the complexity
of biological phenomena seen in tissues while offering a simplicity
that makes them accessible for study. The advent of fluorescence microscopy
has facilitated studies of cell biology in vitro.
Fluorescence microscopy is quite advantageous because organelles,
proteins, oligonucleotides can be labeled to reveal novel dynamical
information that otherwise would have remained inaccessible. CNMs
have advantageous properties including ease of synthesis, minimal
photobleaching, and tunable emission properties. Similar to organic
small molecule fluorescent probes, fluorescent CNMs can be used as
either cellular or subcellular stains, or to detect biologically relevant
analytes using their fluorescence modulations. In this section, we
discuss examples of CNMs used as contrast agents for in vitro cellular imaging.
Early studies of SWCNTs in biological milieu
primarily employed SWCNTs as a scaffold for gene and drug delivery. , Explorations of SWCNTs as contrast agents for fluorescence microscopy
began shortly after the discovery of their intrinsic NIR fluorescence.
An early report of studying SWCNT cellular uptake via imaging of their
intrinsic NIR fluorescence was achieved by Pluronic F108-coated SWCNTs
in mouse peritoneal macrophage cells. Such surfactant-suspended SWCNT uptake was limited to phagocytic
cells. In a related study, Heller et al. decorated SWCNTs with an
alternating guanine and thymine containing ssDNA (GT)30, which remained in live cells for up to three months. Interestingly, in cultured murine 3T3 cells,
(GT)30-wrapped SWCNTs were internalized, and electron microscopy
images revealed aggregates of nanotubes in the endosomes. This led to a series of studies related to
mechanisms of ssDNA-functionalized SWCNT uptake in cells, which revealed
that internalization occurs via endocytosis, which is followed by
an endosomal escape, and leads to SWCNT accumulation in the cytosol
( ). − 
 It should be noted that SWCNT uptake and final
intracellular destination
is influenced by many factors, including nanotube type (multi- or
single-walled), purity, size/length, aggregation, and functionalization.
To elucidate these parameters, Kang et al. carried out a study on
intracellular uptake of SWCNTs and MWCNTs of different lengths. The study showed that MWCNTs were excluded
from the cytoplasm, longer SWCNTs were internalized and resided exclusively
in the cytosol, and shorter SWCNTs partitioned between both the cytoplasm
and nuclei ( A). Apart from size, the properties of materials that coat SWCNTs
also influence cellular uptake. For example, SWCNTs coated with bovine
serum albumin (BSA), a protein often used to generate biocompatible
and singly exfoliated dispersions of nanotubes, exhibit cellular loading
that is primarily cytoplasmic in localization. Other studies have shown that the endocytosed nanotube’s
cytosolic location can be programmed to drive preferential partitioning
into various subcellular locations. , A good example
is the work of Heller and colleagues, where synthetic polymer–SWCNT
hybrids were used to guide nanotube reporters to different subcellular
compartments ( C). In this study, SWCNTs were functionalized
with ammonium- and guanidinium-based polycarbodiimide polymers. SWCNTs
with guanidium functionalization preferentially partitioned into the
nucleus, while ammonium-based ones were excluded from the nucleus
( C). Initial
entry into the cells was facilitated by endocytosis, and nuclear translocation
for the guanidinium complex was mediated by the less common import
receptor importin-β through an apparent non-canonical pathway.
Another study pursued a different strategy to direct the subcellular
localization of internalized SWCNTs using canonical nuclear import
pathways. Here, coating SWCNTs with the tail end of the nuclear protein
lamin B1 (LB1) appeared to derive the partitioning of internalized
SWCNTs from the cytoplasm into the nucleus. LB1 contains an exposed nuclear localization signal and as a result,
LB1-functionalized SWCNTs were translocated into the nucleus, as evidenced
by multimodal Raman and fluorescence imaging. While these studies
show that controlling the SWCNT cellular distribution is possible
through interfacial engineering, they also highlight the absence of
generalized design principles for controlling SWCNTs' biodistribution
in cells, and most results remain application- and discipline-specific.
One advantage of the photophysics of SWCNTs is the ability to stably
emit photons under prolonged excitations, enabling minutes to hours
of continuous imaging, without the need to correct for photobleaching
or blinking. This photostability can be exploited for single particle
tracking experiments, as demonstrated by the use of SWCNTs for high
resolution mapping the movement of kinesin along microtubules in live
cells ( A–C). This strategy used Halo-tagged kinesin and
SWCNTs functionalized with the HaloTag ligand. SWCNTs were delivered
into cells via electroporation for kinesin labeling. Fakhri et al.
utilized the stable photoluminescence of SWCNTs to track the motion
of kinesins in live cells from milliseconds to hours. Based on the
quantitative data collected from live cell imaging, authors show that
thermal motion dominates cytoskeletal dynamics on short time scales,
whereas motor protein-based transport is dominant at longer temporal
scales. In another study, a green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged
kinesin was labeled with SWCNTs bearing an anti-GFP nanobody. This
afforded tracking motor protein movement in embryos of drosophila. In a related theme, single particle tracking
experiments using PEG-functionalized SWCNTs have enabled super resolution
mapping of the brain’s extracellular space (ECS) in brain slices. In this study, SWCNTs are non-covalently functionalized
with pegylated phospholipids, which generate colloidally stable and
biocompatible SWCNT dispersions. The functionalized nanotubes are
delivered into mice brain by microinjection, where they localize to
the ECS and allow single particle tracking experiments to be carried
out ( D–F).
The dynamic movement of isolated SWCNT emitters is tracked through
a custom-made fluorescence microscope, enabling a high-resolution
mapping of the morphology and rheology of the brain’s ECS ( D–F). In a follow up study, work from the same group
demonstrated that single particle tracking of SWCNTs can reveal nanoscale
differences in the morpho-rheological properties of the ECS in close
proximity to synapses. 
 Directing fluorescent probes to biologically important
targets
may be necessary to study the function of the target. Several strategies
have been employed to direct SWCNTs to receptors, biomolecules, or
organelles. Some of these include the engineering the biointerfacial
properties of SWCNTs to localize them exclusively to the lumen of
endolysosomal organelles, surface receptors
via conjugation to antibodies and nanobodies, transmembrane receptors, such as integrin,
by using peptides with integrin recognition sequences. SWCNTs have also been directed to proteins
using antibodies, − biotin–avidin interactions, or aptamers. 
The GO-family of CNMs have been used in vitro in
cultured cells. Indeed, work by Al-Nahain et al. and Yang et al. utilized in vitro cellular assays in cancer cell lines as part of
their studies that demonstrated the tumor-homing ability of GO’s in vivo ( ). − The in vivo dual use attributes
of GO-based CNMs for imaging and therapeutics are applicable in cellular
assays as well, as demonstrated by Li et al. Li and co-workers used two-photon excitation for imaging of GO-labeled
cancer cells, which incidentally generated microbubbles upon laser
excitation. The microbubbling caused
cell death at an order of magnitude lower laser power than in non-labeled
cells, making GOs an effective photothermal therapy reagent. Non-labeled
cells tolerated 35 mW of power and required 40 mW to induce damage/death,
while GO-labeled cells exhibited significant cell death when raster-scanned
at 4 mW. Similarly, Pramanik and co-workers used two-photon imaging
of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
labeled with GO. They reported excitation
wavelength-dependent tunable emissions from the same GO material,
which enabled multicolor imaging of bacterial cells with aptamer-functionalized
GOs.
For in vitro live cell imaging, it is
advantageous
to have brightly fluorescent CDs. Prior to elemental doping and post-synthesis
surface modifications, early synthetic methodologies produced weakly
fluorescent CDs. However, recent studies,
such as those by Bhunia et al. show that it is possible to synthesize
highly fluorescent CDs with tunable emission profiles. As synthesized, these CDs are less than 10
nm in diameter and their optical properties exhibited dependence on
the method of carbonization. For example, blue- and green-emitting
nanoparticles were produced by carbonization of carbohydrates using
sulfuric acid, whereas yellow- and red-emitting CDs required phosphoric
acid. The quantum yield for these CDs ranged from 6 to 30% against
fluoresceine standard. Synthesized CDs were hydrophobic, and surface
functionalization with amphiphilic polymers afforded water solubility.
Interestingly, further functionalization with affinity ligands enabled
biolabeling. TAT-functionalized CDs exhibited increased cellular penetration
and folate-functionalized CDs showed selective labeling of cells that
express folate receptors ( ).
 A common strategy to improve CD fluorescence is
through introduction
of elemental precursors at the synthesis phase, a practice that is
quite prevalent in the field of semiconductor nanoparticles to furnish
brightly fluorescent emitters. Liu et
al. generated smaller diameter (∼3.5 nm) multicolor fluorescent
nanoparticles via nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) doping. These biocompatible NP-CDs were able to penetrate
cell membranes effectively when tested in human cervical carcinoma
SiHa cells. Indeed, heteroatom inclusion, most commonly encompassing
phosphorus (P), boron (B), nitrogen (N), and sulfur (S), has been
extensively employed to tune the photoluminescence properties of CDs. − The brightness and emission spectra of CDs are sensitive to the
doping agents and the method of synthesis. For example, nitrogen-doped
CDs synthesized from citric acid and ethylenediamine by a hydrothermal
method reported a QY of 80%, while N-
and P-doped CDs synthesized using a microwave-assisted method had
QY of only 17%. Cysteine is a common
source of sulfur to synthesize S-doped CDs (s-CDs), and when combined
with the hydrothermal method, s-CDs with QYs of 73% are reported. From these, nitrogen appears to be the most
common dopant for CD photoluminescence tuning.
The highest reported
QY for CDs is 94.5% and Liu et al. accomplished
it by using folic acid as the nitrogen source. These blue-emitting CDs were bright and photostable when
exposed to a continuous excitation light source for up to 150 min.
When incubated with cancer cells presenting overexpressed folate receptors,
preferential uptake of CDs was evident compared to control A549 cells.
Remarkably, the source of N-precursors appears to influence the cellular
permeability of CDs. For example, N-CDs synthesized by Li et al. using gelatin as a nitrogen source were able
to penetrate and label the cytosol of A549 cells. In contrast, N-CDs
synthesized by Liu et al. from folic acid were impermeable to A549
cells. In addition to these four common heteroatom dopants, CDs can
also be doped with rare earth elements such as gadolinium and ytterbium. Incorporation of gadolinium permits MRI imaging,
and ytterbium allows CT imaging due to its strong X-ray absorption
coefficient. In combination with the fluorescence from the CDs, Gd/Yb@CDs
afforded multimodal imaging both in vitro and in vivo. − 
Similar to other CNMs, it is thought that CDs enter cells
via endocytosis
and escape the early endosome through energy and cell-dependent mechanisms. , To integrate subcellular targetability into CDs, reactive ligands
incorporating recognition moieties can be installed. As a proof of
concept, Cheng et al. included meta-phenylenediamine
and triethylenetetramine in the CD synthesis phase, in which the resulting
CDs showed a strong affinity for cellular RNA. The affinity toward RNA was thought to be mediated by possible
π-interactions of isoquinoline moieties in CDs with the major
groove of RNA. However, the implementation of this sensing strategy
was limited to RNA and did not extend to other analytes.
Cell
biological studies often involve the study of subcellular
compartments and their real-time dynamics. With the aid of high affinity
chemical moieties, CDs have been directed to different subcellular
targets, including nuclei, lysosomes, mitochondria, and components of the extracellular matrix such as hyaluronan. However, these approaches appear to employ
one-off strategies and occasionally rely on insufficiently understood
intrinsic properties of CDs to mediate subcellular targeting. If rationally
designed targeting motifs, such as HaloTag and SNAP tag ligands, can
be incorporated into CDs, these can be coupled with genetic perturbations
for a more modular targeting of subcellular structures, as described
for small molecule organic fluorophores. This approach could be compelling to biologists for experiments
that leverage CDs' photostability and compatibility of their
photoluminescence
with commercially available microscopes. In addition to CDs, other
CNMs, including GO and RGO, have been employed for in vitro imaging and delivery of cargo into cells. , 
Despite the expanding application of CDs in biology, organic
dyes
and fluorescent proteins (FPs) remain preferred reagents for imaging.
Tunability of emission could be a competitive advantage for CDs, particularly
in the NIR region of the spectrum where high performing organic dyes
and FPs are still hard to find. Previous attempts at red shifting
the CD emission required complicated synthesis and extensive purification
steps. − To address this issue, Sun et al. prepared
red-emissive CDs via microwave-assisted synthesis from citric acid
and formamide precursor materials. The
synthesized CDs were ∼4 nm in diameter and displayed emission
at 640 nm when excited using a 540 nm laser. Cell staining experiments
revealed red CDs can effectively permeate past the cell membranes
of MCF-7 and HeLa cells. Interestingly, the CDs passed through the
nuclear pore complex and translocated to the nucleolus. Furthermore,
the authors used these CDs as a vehicle to deliver cell impermeable
therapeutic agents, demonstrating yet again the general suitability
of CNMs to function as multimodal experimental reagents.
The
newest and smallest class of fluorescent CNMs, carbon nanohoops,
have also been leveraged for cell imaging studies. Although numerous
studies and reviews have noted the promise of carbon nanohoops as
biological imaging agents, applications
of these materials have been slow to emerge owing to low solubility
in aqueous mediums, but encouraging advances have been made to ameliorate
this. A seminal study by White and
co-workers has achieved water solubility through the synthesis of
sulfonate-functionalized carbon nanohoops. Their disulfonate-[8]CPP (excitation: 328 nm, emission: 510 nm)
showed no cytotoxicity at concentrations of up to 10 μM and
good cell permeability when used for live cell staining and imaging
in HeLa cells ( ). The study showed that HeLa cells internalized the nanohoops with
good colocalization towards the cytosol over mitochondria ( B). The authors
further modified the reagent to include a clickable handle in place
of the sulfonate group ( C). Here, the attachment of a folate group afforded
successful targeting of folic acid receptors, which are known to be
overexpressed in cancer cells ( D). 
 In a subsequent study, Lovell and co-workers used
a meta[6]CPP (excitation: 328 nm, emission: 519 nm),
and demonstrated a
simpler, higher yield synthesis of nanohoops, and further explored
their cytotoxicity, cellular uptake, and subcellular targeting in
HeLa cells. Their approach employed
the use of clickable constructs and attachment of water-solubilizing
PEG groups that are terminated with a carboxylic acid or morpholine
groups ( C).
When incubated with HeLa cells, the carboxylic acid-terminated CPPs
were found throughout the cytosol, to a lesser extent in the nucleus,
and had no colocalization with LysoTracker in the lysosomes ( D). In contrast,
the morpholine-terminated CPPs were observed to be sequestered as
puncta outside the nucleus and had strong colocalization with LysoTracker
in lysosomes and minimal colocalization with MitoTracker in mitochondria,
demonstrating a successful subcellular targeting. This study provided
evidence of CNH uptake via endocytosis. Moreover, it demonstrated
that these nanomaterials can be used for two-photon imaging in U2OS
cells, reporting a peak two-photon response at 720 nm with a 65 GM
absorption cross section. The authors demonstrate photostability at
100 mW for continuous imaging of up to three minutes. Other studies have similarly sought to improve
solubility of CPPs. Park and co-workers developed a water-soluble
oxidized-[5]CPP (Oxi-[5]CPP) by exposing [5]CPP to air at room temperature
for 24 h. These Oxi-[5]CPPs were then
packaged into liposomal nanoparticles via thin-film hydration and
subsequently applied to HeLa cells (excitation: 335 nm, emission:
446 nm). Internalized Oxi-[5]CPP-liposomes efficiently labeled the
cytosol, and no reduction in cell viability was observed at concentrations
of up to 40 μM. 

5.2

## Environmental and Food Sample Imaging with
CNMs
5.2.1

## Bacteria Imaging
Bacterial infections
have become a growing concern in recent years, largely due to the
emergence of antibiotic-resistant strains. Shockingly, more than 1.2 million people died in 2019 due to antibiotic-resistant
bacterial infections. Given the circumstances,
the urgency to develop innovative and real-time techniques for monitoring
and mitigating bacterial pathogens in both food and environmental
contexts has never been more critical. To date, there has been a noticeable
gap in the availability of real-time bacterial detection methods.
Existing techniques include polymerase chain reaction (PCR), matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization
time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), , and traditional microbiological counting methods. These methods have excelled in quantifying and detecting
bacterial pathogens due to their high specificity and sensitivity. Nevertheless, they harbor inherent drawbacks,
such as the requirement for sophisticated preparation procedures and
inability to deliver prompt, spatially, and temporally precise detection
of bacteria. , This has highlighted the necessity
for more advanced bacterial imaging and sensing techniques. In response,
CNMs have shown potential as fluorescent imaging probes for pathogenic
bacteria.
In this section, we provide a comprehensive summary
of the recent developments in the use of CNMs as fluorescent probes
for imaging bacteria. Our focus is on literature published after 2017
with special attention to studies that have utilized these probes
in analyzing real-world environmental and food samples. To gain a
broader understanding of CNMs and other nanomaterials used for environmental
or food sample imaging, readers are encouraged to refer to these other
reviews. − 
Among all CNMs, CDs stand out as the most utilized fluorescent
probes for environmental bacterial monitoring. This preference can
primarily be attributed to the facile, scalable, and affordable synthesis
methods for CDs in contrast to the more intricate procedures required
for other CNMs, such as chemical vapor deposition, arc discharge,
or laser ablation. Additionally, CDs exhibit a distinct advantage
with their intrinsic bright fluorescence in the visible light spectrum.
While SWCNTs can display NIR fluorescence, their fluorescence signals
are generally weaker compared to CDs and require specialized instrumentation
for detection that limits feasibility in environmental settings. Lastly,
other CNMs, such as MWCNTs, graphene, and fullerenes, do not possess
intrinsic fluorescent properties. − 
Compared to traditional
fluorescent probes based on metallic quantum
dots or organic dyes, such as vancomycin and hexidium iodide, , , CDs overcome issues of easy
oxidation and photobleaching, high toxicity, and low quantum yield.
For instance, CDs@MR-1 developed by Shen et al. using a one-step hydrothermal
process from Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 bacterium
has demonstrated exceptional abilities in selectively interacting
with Gram-positive bacteria, effectively distinguishing them from
Gram-negative bacteria. They incubated
these CDs with either Gram-positive (S. aureus and B. subtilis) or Gram-negative bacteria (P. aeruginosa and E. coli). After a two-hour treatment, CDs incubated
with the two Gram-positive bacteria, but not the Gram-negative bacteria,
exhibited blue, green, and red fluorescence emissions under different
excitation wavelengths (405, 488, and 552 nm), respectively ( ). The utility
of CDs@MR-1 extends beyond bacterial imaging, as researchers also
demonstrated its high sensitivity and selectivity in detecting environmental
pollutants in real water samples, including Hg2+ ions and
the antibiotic tetracycline. This broadens the scope of bacteria-sourced
CDs, making them valuable tools not only in bacterial imaging studies,
but also in environmental monitoring. While this work on CDs@MR-1
represents a significant advancement in the field, it falls short
in elucidating the underlying reasons for the selective interaction
of these CDs with Gram-positive bacteria.
 In another study, Yan et al. developed L-tryptophan modified
carbon quantum dots (T-SCQDs) that also exhibited a specific staining
pattern for Gram-positive bacteria. Their experiments revealed that T-SCQDs bound more effectively to
the peptidoglycan and lipoteichoic acid cell wall layers in Gram-positive
bacteria compared to the lipopolysaccharides in Gram-negative bacteria
( ), providing
valuable insights into the specific detection mechanisms that were
missing in previous studies. This specificity arises from the distinctive
chemical compositions of bacterial cell walls. Specifically, lipoteichoic
acids (−7.70 mV) and peptidoglycans (−12.37 mV) exhibit
more negative zeta potentials compared to lipopolysaccharides (−3.84
mV). This difference grants Gram-positive bacteria an increased number
of anionic sites, ultimately enhancing their electrostatic interaction
with the cationic amino groups of T-SCQDs. Furthermore, peptidoglycan’s
structure, comprising of N-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylmuramic acid
linked by short peptides, provides ample hydrophobic regions for the
benzopyrrole structure of T-SCQDs to interact. Additionally, the abundant
hydrophilic groups on the peptidoglycan surface allow hydrogen bond
formation with the hydroxyl groups on T-SCQDs. These interaction mechanisms
together might potentially explain why, even though T-SCQDs have negative
zeta potentials, they are still able to target the peptidoglycans
of Gram-positive bacteria rapidly and selectively.
 Although electrostatic and weak intermolecular
interactions may
play a crucial role in distinguishing between Gram-positive and Gram-negative
bacteria, their applicability in real environmental samples can be
limited by various confounding factors. In complex matrices, such
as natural waters or food samples, the presence of other ions, molecules,
and particulate matter can interfere with these interactions, potentially
leading to false results. Moreover, although the aforementioned studies
offer a general distinction between Gram-positive and Gram-negative
bacteria, they do not enable the precise identification of bacterial
species or strains. Considering these challenges, there is a pressing
demand for more specific and robust detection methods that can target
specific types and strains of bacteria with high accuracy.
The
exploration of molecular recognition elements for bacterial
targeting has revealed a diverse toolkit. Antibodies have been the
preferred option due to their unparalleled specificity and ease of
use, but they can be expensive and
impacted by environmental factors such as pH and temperature. In comparison,
antibiotics and lectins, which achieve their antimicrobial action
by attaching to the bacteria’s cell wall or outer membrane,
are more affordable but often lack the desired selectivity. Aptamers
stand out in this landscape as their binding specificity rivals that
of antibodies, yet they are more versatile—easy to synthesize,
resilient under various conditions, and adaptable. All of this makes them suitable for bacterial detection
in environmental samples, offering a balance of specificity, stability,
and practicality.
One application of this technology is the
aptasensor developed
by Cui et al., which employs a combination of CDs and Fe3O4 nanoparticles, both modified with DNA sequences. The Fe3O4 nanoparticles
are coated with DNA aptamers specific to Staphylococcus aureus, while the CDs are modified with complementary DNA (cDNA). In the
absence of S. aureus, these components interact,
leading to the quenching of CD fluorescence via fluorescence resonance
energy transfer (FRET). However, when S. aureus is
present, the aptamer binds to the bacteria instead of the cDNA, causing
the disassembly of the Fe3O4/CD complex. This
leads to a recovery in CD fluorescence, clearly signaling the presence
of S. aureus. The sensor’s outstanding sensitivity
and specificity are evident in its impressively low detection limit
of 8 colony forming units per milliliter (CFU/mL), along with a noticeable
surge in fluorescence intensity when compared to six other bacterial
types, as depicted in . Its feasibility is further established through the accurate
detection of S. aureus in food samples, such as milk
and juice, achieving recovery rates (defined as the bacteria amount
measured by the sensor divided by the actual amount spiked in the
samples) of 95% to 106%. These results, comparable to traditional
plate counting methods, underscore the sensor’s potential for
rapid, reliable, and specific bacteria detection across various samples.
 Despite these advances, the aptasensor faces challenges
due to
the susceptibility of base sequence-assembled aptamers to degradation
in microbial environments. This susceptibility can lead to premature
breakdown, risking unreliable outcomes and false positives in pathogen
detection. To address this limitation, researchers developed a novel
dual-recognition ratiometric fluorescent nanoprobe, named Apt-Van-QDs@CNPs, to achieve rapid and sensitive detection for S. aureus at the single-cell level. This innovative probe
combines NIR-fluorescent Apt-Van-QDs and blue-fluorescent π-rich
electronic carbon nanoparticles (CNPs) to create a mechanism that
relies on both an S. aureus-specific aptamer and
vancomycin, a broad-spectrum antibiotic, for precise and rapid bacterial
targeting. The proximity of CNPs (energy donors) and Apt-Van-QDs (energy
acceptors) facilitates FRET, leading to an observable change in fluorescence.
In the absence of S. aureus, the FRET process occurs
smoothly, resulting in blue fluorescence quenching of CNPs and enhanced
NIR fluorescence from the Apt-Van-QDs. However, when S. aureus is present, it binds to the Apt-Van-QDs, disrupting the FRET process
and causing a significant fluorescence shift, characterized by increased
blue fluorescence from CNPs and reduced NIR fluorescence from Apt-Van-QDs
( ). Due to
its dual fluorescence property, the sensor can operate ratiometrically,
offering self-calibration and heightened sensitivity with a detection
limit of 1 CFU/mL. Moreover, further studies have confirmed the feasibility
of this nanoprobe in real-world conditions. Apt-Van-QDs@CNPs were
successfully tested in complex media such as commercial milk, orange
juice, and riverine water without any pretreatment, resulting in highly
accurate detection of S. aureus, with recovery rates
ranging from 97.00% to 103.00%. These findings underscore the effectiveness
of the probe in actual samples and bolster its potential in food safety
and environmental monitoring applications.
 Furthermore, alongside advancements in the utilization
of CDs,
notable strides have been made in the application of SWCNTs for bacterial
imaging purposes. In a recent publication, Boghossian and colleagues
explored the uptake of SWCNTs in Gram-negative cyanobacteria. In this study, the authors first decorated
SWCNTs with different amphiphilic polymers carrying varying degrees
of electrostatic charges, leading to SWCNT dispersions of varying
zeta potentials. When tested in intact unicellular cyanobacteria (Synechocystis), (AT)15 coated-SWCNTs were unable
to penetrate the outer peptidoglycan coat. On the other hand, lysozyme
(LSZ)-coated SWCNTs (LSZ-SWCNT) showed colocalization in the same
bacterial cell lines ( A). To verify internalization, a strong SWCNT fluorescence
quencher (K3[Fe(CN)6]) was introduced into cells
that were pre-incubated with LSZ-SWCNT conjugates. NIR fluorescence
near periphery of cells were strongly quenched by K3[Fe(CN)6]. However, inside the cytosol, SWCNT NIR-emissions were retained.
This showed LSZ-decorated SWCNTs can efficiently enter bacterial cells,
whereas (AT)15-decorated SWCNTs cannot. Furthermore, similar
to observations found in eukaryotic cells, short LSZ-SWCNTs were found
to be better at penetrating cells compared to long LSZ-SWCNTs ( B). Since LSZ can
hydrolyze the peptidoglycan network, the authors used thermally inactivated
LSZ to explore if the enzymatic activity of LSZ is responsible for
facilitating nanoparticle cellular entry. Notably, they found that
the inherent physicochemical characteristics of LSZ are responsible
for internalization rather than their enzymatic activity. Indeed,
the study revealed that internalization was higher for SWCNT suspensions
with positive zeta potentials, while negatively-charged dispersions
of SWCNTs were unable to cross the cyanobacteria cell membrane. Remarkably,
the internalized CNMs did not inhibit the photosynthetic activity
of the cyanobacteria, but rather appeared to facilitate exoelectrogenicity
(i.e., transfer of electrons from the bacteria into the extracellular
space), opening a nascent and tantalizing role for CNM-bacterial hybrids
as living photovoltaic devices.
 In the field of CNM-mediated bacterial imaging
for environmental
and food samples, research is still relatively scarce compared to
medical applications. Beyond our current discussions, there remain
numerous unexplored avenues that researchers can potentially delve
into. An important example includes the development of probes for
biofilm detection. In natural settings, microbial communities frequently
form biofilms, characterized by robust and adhesive extracellular
polymeric substances. These biofilms present notable challenges for
fluorescent imaging by restricting dye penetration into the biofilm
structure, and the dyes can cause damage to biofilms. − Although we have not seen any studies conducted in actual environmental
or food samples, one study did investigate a type of carbon dots (CD-605)
capable of directly and specifically labeling microorganisms within
biofilms, bypassing the need for incubation,
protection, or washing steps. CD-605 features negatively-charged carboxyl
groups that facilitate strong electrostatic repulsion against similarly
charged microorganisms. This repulsion is further enhanced by its
hydrophilic nature, which is marked by the presence of −COOH
and −OH groups, inhibiting hydrophobic interactions with microorganisms.
Due to its highly negative and hydrophilic surface, CD-605 is prevented
from penetrating live, planktonic microorganisms. However, its remarkably
small size enables it to infiltrate dead microorganisms that have
permeable cell walls and membranes. This unique characteristic allows
for the selective staining of dead cells within a biofilm. Importantly,
these CDs do not disrupt the biofilm structure and show greater photostability
compared to the commercial dye SYTO 9, ensuring reliable imaging of
biofilm-associated microorganisms.
Besides biofilm imaging,
live/dead staining techniques are valuable
in environmental and food sample analysis, particularly for quality
control and assessing environmental impacts. In the food industry,
these techniques can help determine shelf life by monitoring bacterial
load, setting expiration dates, and maintaining product quality. In
environmental research, they can be used to evaluate the impact of
pollutants and ecological changes on microbial life, which is crucial
for ecosystem conservation and management. Recent advancements include
the use of CNMs as probes for live/dead staining. For instance, nitrogen
and phosphorus co-doped carbon dots (NPCDs), synthesized through
a one-step hydrothermal reaction of ethylenediamine and yeast extract, , possess an enhanced negative charge distribution on their surface,
enabling them to selectively stain dead bacteria due to electrostatic
repulsion from the negative charges on intact bacterial cell walls.
NPCDs can stain dead bacteria within two hours, providing detection
accuracy on par with traditional plate counting methods but more rapidly.
Similarly, Hua et al. developed CDs with low cytotoxicity and multicolor
fluorescence emission properties, suitable for live–dead bacterial
staining. In their comparative studies
with the conventional viability dye propidium iodide, they found that
CDs showed a higher efficacy in differentiating dead from live cells.
Similar to previous studies, this paper suggests that the selective
staining by CDs is due to their negatively charged surface, which
leads to electrostatic repulsion and selective permeability. This
feature prevents the CDs from penetrating live cells with intact membranes,
thus enhancing their specificity for dead cells. Furthermore, CDs
offer several advantages over propidium iodide, including multicolor
imaging, superior photostability, and notably, significantly lower
cytotoxicity. These findings collectively highlight the potential
of CNMs to be used as live/dead fluorescence probes in real samples.

5.2.2

## Plant Imaging
In plant biology
research, imaging is essential for studying plant internal structures,
from organelles to entire organisms. This process is crucial for understanding plant development and
the relationships between structure and function. However, imaging
plant cells is challenging due to their distinct structural characteristics.
The cell walls, composed mainly of cellulose, hemicellulose, and pectin,
create a dense and rigid barrier that hinders the penetration of imaging
probes. Furthermore, chlorophyll in plant leaves and lignin in cell
walls lead to high levels of autofluorescence, complicating the imaging
process and leaving much to the researcher’s interpretation. , 
To address these challenges, scientists have been exploring
alternative approaches. Microinjection, for instance, involves directly
inserting imaging reagents into the cells, bypassing the cell wall.
However, this technique must contend with the limited space in the
cytoplasm and avoid disrupting the structure and function of organelles
and cytoskeletal structures. Engineered
CNMs, especially CDs and SWCNTs, have emerged as promising alternatives
to traditional bioimaging agents for use in plants. − This is primarily due to their small size, ability to enter plant
cells efficiently, bright intrinsic fluorescence, resistance to photobleaching,
and the ability to fine-tune their emission range. This section delves
into the recent applications of these CNMs in plant cell imaging,
highlighting their role in overcoming traditional barriers in plant
biology research. Here, we explore how the unique characteristics
of CDs and SWCNTs enable more effective and detailed visualization
of plant structures, from cell walls to organelles such as chloroplasts
and mitochondria.
In a pioneering study, Giraldo et al. successfully
utilized SWCNTs
for bioimaging in plants focusing on exploring various plant components,
including the lamina, veins, and chloroplasts, allowing for the detailed
visualization of these structures deep within plant tissues. A key aspect of their approach was leveraging
the unique fluorescence emission properties of SWCNTs in the NIR spectrum,
specifically beyond 1100 nm. This wavelength is particularly effective
because it minimizes interference from chlorophyll autofluorescence,
thereby facilitating clear imaging of plant chloroplasts. Previously,
plant researchers had no means of visualizing these structures via
fluorescence microscopy, as typical probes cannot reach chloroplasts
and the chlorophyll autofluorescence often overlaps with that of probes.
Furthermore, photobleaching resistance of SWCNTs marked a remarkable
advancement in plant imaging, introducing a novel tool for conducting
in-depth biological studies over long-time frames to study plant development
and effects of environmental changes on plants.
Since then,
numerous research teams have made substantial strides
in developing novel CNM fluorescent probes designed to target different
organelles and subunits in plants, which are detectable through various
fluorescent imaging modalities. An intriguing imaging target is the
plant cell wall. This crucial biosurface, pivotal in interactions
with nanomaterials in both terrestrial plants and aquatic algae, remains
a significant barrier to the delivery of genetic materials, nutrients,
and pesticides. , A deeper understanding of nanoparticle–cell
wall interactions could revolutionize agricultural nanotechnology,
enhancing crop productivity and sustainability with minimal environmental
impact.
In a recent article, Jeon et al. explored this interaction
by creating
CDs with varying surface charges, specifically designed to target
the cell walls of plants and algae. These included CDs coated with polyethyleneimine (PEI-CD), carboxylated
polyethyleneimine (CP-CD), and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP-CD). Using
the intrinsic fluorescence properties of CDs as fluorescent probes,
this study delved into how these different CDs interact with both
model and native cell walls of plants and algae. Interestingly, only
the positively charged PEI-CDs had a strong affinity for the native
cell walls of plants and algae, in stark contrast to the negligible
interaction observed with CDs that were either neutral or negatively
charged ( ). This finding was further elaborated through chemical interaction
studies, where PEI-CDs demonstrated a significantly stronger binding
affinity to pectin compared to cellulose in model cell walls, given
the ionic interactions between the charged groups of the CDs and the
pectin’s carboxylic acid groups. Further analysis showed that
increasing the surface charge density of the positively charged CDs
enhanced their interactions with plant cell walls. This research not
only underscores the potential of using specifically designed CNM
fluorescent probes for imaging cell walls, but also sheds light on
the importance of charge and electrostatics in nanoparticle–plant
interactions.
 Besides cell walls, chloroplast stands out as a
key focus in plant
imaging due to its vital role in numerous plant metabolic pathways,
including the conversion of light energy into sugars that power plant
growth and the regulation of plant yields. , Additionally, chloroplasts are becoming increasingly recognized
as promising targets for gene editing. Given the high polyploidy of
the plastid genome, which is the condition of having multiple sets
of chromosomes, chloroplast transformation can lead to exceptionally
high levels of protein production by introducing thousands of foreign
gene copies per cell. This potential,
coupled with a reduced risk of mammalian viral contamination and the
chloroplasts’ ability to correctly fold human proteins, positions
chloroplasts as ideal candidates for synthesizing human therapeutics. The convergence of these unique attributes
makes plant chloroplasts a particularly intriguing subject for detailed
study and imaging.
To investigate the interactions of nanomaterials
with chloroplasts,
Kim et al. utilized CDs as fluorescent probes, focusing on positively
charged PEI-CDs and negatively charged CP-CDs and PVP-CDs. This study revealed the essential role of
sulfolipid (SQDG), a negatively charged lipid in chloroplast membranes,
in influencing these interactions. The presence of higher SQDG levels
in chloroplast membranes significantly increased the electrostatic
attraction with positively charged PEI-CDs ( A). This novel imaging tool also demonstrated
that the ionic strength of the environment plays a crucial role in
modulating this attraction, with increased ionic conditions leading
to reduced CD adsorption on SQDG model membranes ( B). Furthermore, strong CD–chloroplast
membrane interactions could inhibit further adsorption due to particle–particle
repulsion, a phenomenon known as the surface exclusion effect. These
findings elucidate the complex interplay of forces in nanomaterial–biological
membrane interactions, and underscore the utility of CDs as versatile
fluorescent probes to image these interactions.
 In another study, instead of using isolated chloroplasts
as a model
system, Kwak et al. utilized mature E. sativa, N. officinale, N. tabacum, and S. oleracea plants, as well as A. thaliana mesophyll protoplasts (plant cells in solution with their cell walls
digested), and employed SWCNTs both as carriers for plasmid DNA and
as fluorescent probes for chloroplast imaging. These SWCNTs, designed using the lipid exchange envelope
penetration (LEEP) mechanism, effectively penetrated plant cell walls
and membranes, including the double lipid bilayers of chloroplasts, enabling the direct delivery of genetic material
to these organelles in various plant species. The fluorescent properties
of SWCNTs facilitated real-time tracking and visualization of this
gene delivery process, providing critical evidence of their localization
within chloroplasts and the subsequent gene expression. The dual functionality
of SWCNTs marks a substantial advancement in plant biotechnology,
offering a more precise and efficient method for studying chloroplast
functions and enhancing capabilities in genetic engineering for crop
improvement.
While the probes discussed above have been promising
plant bioimaging
agents, their interaction with plant structures largely depends on
size, electrostatic forces, and intermolecular interactions. This
dependence, though beneficial in certain scenarios, can also be a
source of variability and limitation. Factors such as pH fluctuations
and variations in salt concentration within the plant’s internal
environment can largely alter the efficacy of these probes. As the
ultimate goal of bioimaging is to achieve precise, reliable, and consistent
visualization of cellular processes, overcoming these limitations
is important. To enhance the specificity and robustness of these probes
under varying environmental conditions, a promising approach lies
in the functionalization of CNMs with molecular recognition elements. , This strategy involves the incorporation of specific biomolecules
or chemical groups onto the surface of the nanomaterials, transforming
them into smart probes capable of selectively targeting and binding
the specific imaging targets within plant cells.
For this, Santana
et al. developed targeted CNM probes for chloroplasts. Their design includes β-cyclodextrin-CDs
and DNA-coated SWCNTs functionalized with a chloroplast targeting
peptide (TP). This peptide, derived from the Rubisco small subunit
1A, selectively binds to protein translocation outer channels (TOC)
on the chloroplast membrane, enhancing the efficiency of targeted
delivery into chloroplasts. Using these probes, the quality and specificity
of fluorescent probes for imaging chloroplasts have been substantially
improved. This enhancement is evidenced by the notable increase in
colocalization rates. For TP-β-CDs with chloroplasts ( ), the colocalization
rates have significantly risen to 70.0 ± 9.46%, compared to 47.4
± 9.57% for β-CDs that are not targeted. In a similar vein,
the colocalization rates for TP-SWCNTs have escalated to 56.9 ±
4.58%, a marked improvement from the 38.7 ± 6.69% observed for
untargeted SWCNTs.
 Besides targeted probes for chloroplasts, targeted
fluorescent
probes for plant mitochondria are also impactful, since mitochondria
are involved in key cellular processes, such as energy production
and regulation of metabolic pathways. Developing specific fluorescent probes for plant mitochondria can
provide deeper insights into their unique functions and dynamics within
plant cells.
An example here is the innovative use of SWCNT-polymer
hybrids
for imaging plant mitochondria. These
hybrids, specifically designed for mitochondrial targeting, consist
of a polymethacrylate maleimide (PM) layer noncovalently adsorbed
on the SWCNT surface. This layer offers high adaptability for functionalization
and can undergo covalent conjugation with thiol-rich compounds, including
the Cytcox peptide (Cyt) that targets mitochondria, and the KH9 cationic
peptide that enhances electrostatic interactions for binding. Law
et al. evaluated the effectiveness of these SWCNT nanocarriers in
delivering to plant mitochondria. They
created a fluorescently labeled variant by conjugating SWCNT-PM-CytKH9
with the DyLight488 dye. This complex was then applied to the root
cells of Arabidopsis thaliana through a vacuum/pressure
infiltration process. Their observations showed a distinct colocalization
of the DyLight488-labeled SWCNT-PM-CytKH9 with MitoTracker-stained
mitochondria in the infiltrated cells. This contrasted with the control
groups: samples without vacuum infiltration displayed the SWCNT-PM-CytKH9
primarily on the root surface, while those treated with only DyLight488-labeled
KH9 exhibited minimal fluorescence, highlighting the targeted delivery
and localization of the SWCNT-PM-CytKH9 probes within the mitochondria,
enabled by the imaging capabilities of SWCNTs in plant tissues.

5.3

## Biosensing Applications of Fluorescent CNMs
5.3.1

## Biomedically Relevant Sensing
Sensing
in biology can facilitate breakthrough insights into the inner workings
of numerous biological processes, spanning broad fields including
cancer research, metabolomics, and neurobiology. Classically, biosensing
relies on genetically encoded proteins that operate by modulating
the intensities or fluorescence lifetimes of engineered fluorescent
transgenes, expressed in cells, tissues, or organisms via genetic
approaches. While genetically encoded sensors remain the predominant
technology in biology, synthetic, nonprotein-based probes have made
important contributions. In this regard, CNMs have made contributions
for sensing of biomolecules, including those that target small signaling
molecules, such as neurotransmitters and metabolites, , − as well as large macromolecular complexes, , including proteins, oligonucleotides, and organelles and whole cellular complexes, such as viruses
and bacteria. , In this section, we review
utilization of CNMs for biosensing within the context of applications
in biological research which include, among others, their utility
in advancing basic biomedical research, as well as translational uses
in analytics and diagnostics.
Optical biosensors are an amalgam
of two primary components: the fluorophore and the molecular recognition
motif. Biosensor development is concerned with identifying or rationally
synthesizing molecular recognition motifs, and successfully conjugating
these motifs to the fluorescent molecule. In most designs, conformational
changes, or perturbations of local chemical environment elicited by
the recognition motif modulate the fluorescence of the reporter, which
can serve as a readout for molecular recognition. CNM photoluminescence
can be sensitized to its local chemical environment through strategies
that employ covalent or noncovalent conjugation of the nanomaterials
to molecular recognition motifs. In principle, a molecular recognition
event in proximity to the nanomaterial can induce local perturbations
in the electrical, chemical, or photophysical properties of the nanomaterial
that can be read out for sensing. Here, we emphasize modulation of
photophysical properties that facilitate sensing within the context
of fluorescence imaging (i.e., optical biosensing) and do not discuss
literature related to sensing through other modalities (e.g., electrochemical).
From among the family of CNMs included in this review, SWCNTs are
the predominant materials employed for optical biosensing because
their photoluminescence emanates from superficial excitons that can
be easily perturbed by proximally located molecular recognition motifs.
Fortuitously, SWCNTs fluoresce in the NIR region of the spectrum has
properties that facilitate imaging in biological specimens. Some applications
of GO-related CNMs as sensors involve the use of these materials in
conjunction with other optical probes through which the sensing occurs
and are beyond the scope of this review. In such cases, the graphene
nanomaterials are used as a platform to bind and quench fluorescently
labeled oligonucleotides − or probes, which are then turned on upon binding their target analytes.
Similarly, GO-type CNMs have also been used to enhance other forms
of fluorescent nanomaterials, such as up-conversion nanoparticles;
however, the fluorescent output here is from the up-conversion nanoparticle
and not the GO nanomaterial itself. 
In subsequent sections, we review applications of SWCNTs,
and when
appropriate other CNMs, for sensing in biological research. For additional
material on SWCNT-based sensors, readers are invited to refer to a
recent review by Ackermann et al. 
5.3.1.1

## Neurotransmitters and Neuromodulators
One of the most productive uses of CNMs for sensing has been in
the field of neuroscience, where SWCNT biosensors have made significant
contributions to our understanding of the molecular and cellular neurobiology
of a class of neurons that release catecholamines. ssDNA-functionalized
SWCNTs (ssDNA@SWNCT) have been particularly fruitful in this field.
To understand their utility, it is important to appreciate the basics
of the biology toward which they are applied and how several features
of the biological systems to which they are targeted have contributed
to their success.
Nerve cells (neurons) are the building blocks
of the nervous system. One of the hallmark properties of neurons that
underpins their function is their ability to communicate with each
other. This communication is, in most instances, mediated by chemical
signaling molecules that are released from one neuron and diffuse
through extracellular space (ECS) to travel to and activate receptors
on neighboring neurons ( ). Neurons use several dozen types of chemicals to
derive this communication, with each neuron typically releasing just
one type of neurochemical. Regardless of the diversity in chemical
matter, most of the signaling between neurons is highly stereotypical.
Each neuron synthesizes and packages one or just a few of these chemical
signaling molecules into small packets (quanta) of vesicles, which
are aggregated into cellular locations called synapses ( ). A sophisticated
protein machinery then orchestrates the release of these chemicals
from synapses in response to neuronal electrical activity, where the
molecules diffuse in the ECS to activate receptors on postsynaptic
partners. An array of complex molecular processes ensure that the
release of these chemical cues is highly confined both spatially and
temporally. The spatial and temporal precision of these chemical cues
makes them amenable for detection with a fluorescent turn-on sensor
because neurochemical signals go from low-to-high in a short period
of time, within a relatively small spatial domain. In other words,
they are both spatially and temporally specific. As a consequence,
a biosensor that is strategically localized to the ECS inside synaptic
clefts or in close proximity to them is likely to detect this signal
if it has the appropriate kinetics and sensitivity.
 One class of chemicals that neurons employ for
communication are
referred to as catecholamines. Catecholamines fall within the family
of monoamine neuromodulatory neurotransmitters and include molecules
such as dopamine and norepinephrine that play important roles in learning,
motivation, and motor control. SWCNT-based catecholamine sensors have
so far been some of the most successful and well-studied. , These sensors employ a conjugation between ssDNA and SWCNT, which
create ssDNA@SWCNT bionanomaterials that exhibit strong fluorescence
turn-on response to catecholamines. Short (GT)n (n = 6–15) sequences are typically
used for sensor assembly. Conjugation of the ssDNA to the SWCNT is
achieved through noncovalent self-assembly, in which π-stacking
of ssDNA nucleobases on the graphitic lattice of SWCNTs electrostatically
pins the DNA to the nanotube surface. The negative charge of the phosphodiester
backbone imparts solubility in aqueous media and is the main source
of colloidal stability for ssDNA-solubilized SWCNTs. In addition to offering a stable colloid,
the DNA tiles the surface of SWNCT, quenching the baseline fluorescence
of the SWCNT and creating a rich surface topology with unique binding
pockets for the molecular recognition of catecholamines ( ). The binding
of catecholamines to recognition sites on ssDNA@SWCNT surfaces results
in a strong turn-on of the quenched baseline fluorescence of the nanotube.
The mechanism behind the fluorescence turn-on is still being investigated.
One proposed mechanism posits that molecular interaction between catechol’s
diol motif and phosphate groups on ssDNA lead to ssDNA conformational
change. Another study proposes that
catechols perturb the electrochemical surface potential imprinted
on the SWCNTs by the adsorbed ssDNA. (GT)n-rich ssDNA sequences appear to
provide the best signal-to-noise for catecholamine detection and molecular
dynamic simulations have offered insights into the role that hydrogen
bonding and π-stacking play in analyte binding and molecular
recognition. , Catecholamine binding is thought
to be followed by facilitation of radiative recombination of excitons
on nanotube surfaces.
 One of the first successful demonstrations of the
use of ssDNA@SWCNT
for sensing and imaging catecholamine release from cells involved
the detection of dopamine release from pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells. Although non-neuronal, PC12 cells package
and release catecholamines (primarily dopamine) from dense core vesicles.
In this study, pheochromocytoma cells were cultured on a nanofilm
layer made from (GT)15 ssDNA functionalized SWCNTs ((GT)15@SWCNT) deposited on a glass coverslip and then passivated
with polylysine. (GT)15@SWCNT exhibited good turn-on sensitivity
to dopamine in solution phase, and this sensitivity is retained when
the sensors are deposited onto a solid substrate on which cells can
be cultured. Cultured PC12 cells were stimulated with a high concentration
potassium chloride (KCl) solution to evoke dopamine release. This
allowed detection of dopamine released from cells, in which the turn-on
signal was localized to the cellular periphery of the cells being
imaged. This study presented an important conceptual advance, particularly
in employing fluorescent CNMs as solid-state substrates on which cells
can be cultured, and with which biochemical activity from the same
cells can be detected. However, reliance on KCl for cellular stimulation
suggested that the study lacked the appropriate signal-to-noise ratio
to report catecholamine release with better temporal and spatial specificity.
The first application of SWCNT-based catecholamine sensors in neurons
involved imaging dopamine release in striatum in acute brain slice
preparations obtained from mice. The
striatum is an important anatomical brain region that receives strong
innervation by dopamine neuron axons. In this study, (GT)6 functionalized SWCNTs ((GT)6@SWCNT) were applied to 300
μm slices of brain tissue by incubating the tissue in a dilute
concentration of the nanosensors ( A). The nanosensors diffused into the tissue,
forming a layer of uniform coat on the slice at penetration depths
of up to 20 μm. Dopamine release from brain tissue was elicited
via electrical stimulation, which enabled sub-second scale temporal
precision for signal detection. In addition, optogenetic stimulation
was also employed, which involves the use of light sensitive proteins
to stimulate dopamine release, offering both temporal and cellular
specificity for evoking dopamine release. In both stimulation paradigms,
the SWCNT sensors were able to record the release and diffusion of
dopamine from axonal terminals at video frame rates ( B,C). This study demonstrated
that dopamine release is organized as hotspots in the striatum, the
brain region where imaging was being performed. The authors demonstrate
that application of pharmacology that delays clearance of dopamine
from tissue also delays the temporal profile of the signal decay from
the nanosensors, demonstrating that ssDNA@SWCNT conjugates possess
favorable kinetic properties for fast imaging of neurochemical release
and can recapitulate pharmacologic perturbations. Although this study
enabled temporally precise imaging of dopamine from brain tissue,
it lacked the spatial resolution to assign the visualized dopamine
release hotspots to specific chemical synapses.
 Two additional recent studies have demonstrated
the utility of
SWCNT-based sensors for imaging dopamine release with the spatial
specificity of a single chemical synapse. These studies involve the
use of composite nanofilm substrates made from fluorescent and dopamine
sensitive ssDNA@SWCNT conjugates, and employ primary dopaminergic
neurons that are grown on such composite nanofilms ( ). Using this method, Elizarova
et al. demonstrate an important role for a protein called MUNC13 in
organizing dopamine release by using KCl and electrical field stimulation
of neurons to evoke dopamine release. Using optogenetic stimulation, Bulumulla et al. show spatiotemporal
dopamine release and diffusion from single chemical synapses with
the sensitivity of single release events, a feat that had not been
achieved with any type of biosensor before ( ). With this
tool, the authors explore various facets of dopamine neurobiology
that elude conventional methods of inquiry, including exploring molecular
determinants of release, and elucidating less well understood phenomena
such as release of dopamine from dendritic process. SWCNT-based catecholamine
sensors for dopamine can also be used for investigating norepinephrine,
another important molecule, although demonstration of this in real
biological contexts is still lacking. SWCNT-based optical sensors
for catecholamines remain some of the most well studied and extensively
used sensors from the CNM family. Importantly, catecholamines play
critical roles in various facets of brain function, and their aberrations
are implicated in several neurological and psychiatric diseases. Therefore,
ssDNA@SWCNT catecholamine optical nanosensors are poised to be an
important tool within the neuroscientist’s toolkit for continued
explorative research in these fields.
 Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) is an important
modulatory
neurotransmitter in the brain and the enteric nervous system. Cell
bodies of serotonergic neurons are located in the raphe nuclei, a
region in the brain stem, and project to innervate all the major regions
of the brain, including the cortex. Consequently, serotonin regulates
a wide range of brain functions that affect broad facets of behavior,
including mood, learning, and cognition. SWCNT-based nanosensors for
5-HT have been developed and their utility have been demonstrated
in brain tissue and in cells in two studies. In the first study, Jeong
et al. developed a sensor for 5-HT from conjugation of ssDNA on SWCNTs
in a manner similar to catecholamine sensors. These sensors were developed by high-throughput screening
coupled to a selective enrichment strategy, in which a large random
library of initial oligonucleotide sequences was conjugated to SWCNTs,
and selectively enriched for their ability to bind to 5-HT. The technique,
named SELEC by the authors, made an important advancement in its approach
to identify ssDNA sequences that can serve as recognition motifs for
a specific analyte in a semirational manner and with an improved throughput,
which contrasts sharply against the low throughput screening approaches
that have generally been the norm in the field. Using this method,
the authors identify a sequence with improved selectivity for 5-HT
over catecholamines. To demonstrate the utility of the sensors, the
authors use them for detecting exogenously applied 5-HT in acute brain
slices prepared from mice. In the second study, Dinarvand et al. noncovalently
conjugated a previously reported DNA aptamer to SWCNTs as a molecular
recognition motif. These 5-HT aptamers,
when conjugated to SWCNTs, serve both as the recognition element and
keep the nanotubes in stable colloidal dispersions. The study demonstrates
the use of these sensors for detecting endogenous 5-HT release from
platelets.
We highlight these two studies here because both
seek to address
a general challenge in the development of biosensors for molecules
of interest using CNM scaffolds. Development of such biosensors has
historically relied on serendipitous discoveries or low throughout
screens, and a rational design strategy has been sorely lacking. Jeong
et al. and Dinarvand et al. sought to ameliorate this drawback by
using two different strategies: high-throughput screening or relying
on a pre-existing molecular recognition motif (an aptamer in this
case). Although important as conceptual advances, the broader applicability
of both approaches remains to be seen. For example, it is still not
clear if the SELEC strategy reported by Jeong et al. can reliably
generate selective sensors for a broader class of analytes. On the
other hand, while aptamers have often been touted as molecular recognition
motifs that can be modularly coupled to CNMs for biosensor development,
the study by Dinarvand et al. fails to fully explore alternative aptamer-CNM
conjugation strategies beyond a simple sonication step. It is therefore
not clear to what extent the aptamer’s solution-phase secondary
structure is retained once it is coupled to SWCNTs via probe tip sonication,
making it difficult to assess if the reported molecular recognition
indeed arises from the aptamer’s secondary structure. Critically,
the selectivity of the sensors for 5-HT over catecholamines from both
of the studies we highlighted here needs improvement. However, with
carefully designed experiments and appropriate controls, both sensors
have the potential to become useful tools for the study of serotonin
neurobiology. Importantly, imaging of endogenous 5-HT release from
neurons with these probes has not been demonstrated, and this remains
an important next use case for these technologies.
A recent
report has expanded the use of SWCNT-based neurochemical
sensing from small molecules to neuropeptides by employing a rational
approach for sensor synthesis. This
approach eschews the low throughput and tedious screening strategies
that are used to identify molecular recognition motifs for target
analytes, and instead uses a rational design strategy for developing
a sensor for a neuromodulator called oxytocin. Oxytocin is an important
neuropeptidergic hormone that is released from a small cluster of
neurons. In the mammalian brain, oxytocin plays an evolutionarily
conserved role in regulating important aspects of social behavior,
particularly in establishing and maintaining social bonds, and regulating
maternal care. In the study, an oxytocin receptor peptide fragment
is used as the molecular recognition motif, where it is covalently
linked to the surface of SWCNT. The
covalently functionalized SWCNT scaffold is further passivated and
solubilized noncovalently with ssDNA. The hybrid covalent and noncovalent
approach offers a unique strategy that scaffolds the nanotube surface
with the molecular recognition and solubilizing motifs serially. This
sensor was demonstrated to be selective for oxytocin over vasopressin,
a close molecular analogue of oxytocin that is often difficult to
distinguish from oxytocin using commonly available assays. The probe
was further validated in in vitro assays and demonstrated
to have affinities for oxytocin (reported as Kd) of ∼6 μM. When employed in mice acute brain
slice experiments, the probe enabled visualization of oxytocin dynamics
evoked by the electrical stimulation of the paraventricular nucleus
of the hypothalamus, a brain region that is enriched in oxytocin releasing
neurons.

5.3.1.2

## Proteins, Oligonucleotides, and Other
Biomolecules
SWCNTs can be conceptualized as cylindrical
rolled sheets of graphene, and exhibit photoemission that is highly
sensitive to the direction and length of the rollup vector that maps
the nanocrystalline lattice of the SWCNT onto an imaginary 2D graphitic
sheet ( ). SWCNT
photoemission therefore displays complex spectra that are a convolution
of fluorescent spectra from several unique emitting species, a reflection
of the geometric diversity with which flat a graphitic lattice can
be rolled into cylindrical tubes. While this convoluted photoemission
spectra can often be a disadvantage when pure, single emitter species
of nanotubes are sought, the diversity and spectral complexity can
also be leveraged for biosensor development. In particular, the location
of fluorescence peaks (peak position) for each SWCNT emitter is sensitive
to the dielectric environment of the surface of the nanotube. Therefore,
solvatochromic shifts driven by modulations in surface dielectric
properties can be leveraged for the development of sensors for biomolecules,
including oligonucleotides and proteins. − 
One such biosensor that has been developed for protein targets
is for albumin, one of the most abundant proteins in the human body.
A high concentration of albumin in urine is indicative of a pathologic
state. In one study, polycarbodiimide (PCD) polymers with carboxylic
acid functional groups, which have an affinity for albumin, were used
in conjugation with SWCNTs. SWCNTs
were noncovalently functionalized with PCD polymers. The collapse
of PCD on the surface of nanotubes offered colloidal stability and
served as a molecular recognition motif. When exposed to albumin,
PCD functionalized-SWCNTs undergo a hypsochromic (blue) shift in their
emission spectra, which served as a readout for albumin biosensing.
It is thought that the PCD headgroup mimics albumin binding fatty
acids and serves as the basis for molecular recognition. In contrast,
nonspecific protein binding by transferrin and γ-globulins drives
a bathochromic shift in nanotube fluorescence or no shift at all.
This is offered as evidence of specificity of the response to albumin.
The choice of transferrin and γ-globulins as the only potentially
interfering proteins limits the validation of this sensor and constrains
the scope of its use to urine samples. Therefore, the applicability
of this sensor would require a more rigorous test of specificity that
is tailored toward the biological samples under investigation. Moreover,
the sensor exhibits a maximal response of ∼1.5 nm over time
scales of ∼20 min, suggesting that detection of smaller signals
that occur over faster time scales under dynamic conditions could
be challenging. The authors use a hydrogel encapsulation strategy
to demonstrate the ease and utility for biosensing albumin, and propose
the method for diagnosing microalbuminuria in low resource settings.
SWCNT emission wavelength-shift is not the only sensing modality
of proteins, and intensiometric sensing of proteins has also been
demonstrated. , In two studies, Bisker and
colleagues used PEG-phospholipid functionalized SWCNTs for sensing
the blood protein fibrinogen. In vitro, the sensor
exhibited a dose-dependent fluorescence quenching in response to fibrinogen.
Fragment based assays revealed the binding emanates from an interaction
between the D-domain of the fibrinogen protein and the PEG-phospholipid
corona, and not the E-domain nor fibrinopeptide sequences. In a subsequent
study, the authors used the sensor for monitoring the dynamics of
the coagulation cascade to visualize fibrin and thrombin-mediated
blood clot formation demonstrating the ability of the probe for monitoring
active biochemical processes. 
Early diagnosis of cancer is a critical factor in the longer-term
survival of patients, and several SWCNT-based biosensors have been
developed that target cancer biomarkers. In particular, several studies
from Heller and colleagues have made important contributions to detecting
cancer biomarkers from patient derived biofluids. In one such study,
Williams et al. conjugate an antibody for HE4 (an ovarian cancer biomarker)
to SWCNTs. Exposure of the SWCNT-HE4
antibody conjugate to patient derived HE4 biofluids leads to a solvatochromic
shift in SWCNT photoluminescence, which is used as a readout for molecular
recognition. Similar strategies were employed for the detection of
amyloid-beta, the main component of
amyloid plaques found in the brains of people with Alzheimer’s
disease, and urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA), a prostate cancer
biomarker. 
During the development
of optical biosensors, each analyte of interest
for which an optical sensor is sought requires a unique molecular
recognition motif. Consequently, developing new biosensors is a low
throughput and arduous effort that relies on an iterative process
of identification and synthesis of unique molecule recognition elements
and their conjugation to the fluorescent material for each target
of interest. Two recent reports leverage SWCNT photoemission diversity
and develop an optical sensing strategy that does not rely on a one-to-one
correspondence between the analyte and the recognition motif, hence
seeking to improve the throughput of biosensor development.
In the first study, a library of short ssDNA oligonucleotides of
varying length and sequence chemistry are conjugated to polydisperse
SWCNT starting materials to generate stable colloidal dispersions. The optical response of each ssDNA@SWCNT conjugate
pair to a panel of disease biomarkers for gynecologic cancer (HE-4,
CA-125 and YKL-40) is then measured. Although the optical response
of any one of the ssDNA@SWCNT conjugates to HE-4, CA-125, and YKL-40
did not exhibit reliable specificity, a machine learning-based parsing
of the ensemble optical modulation of the library of ssDNA@SWCNTs
to patient derived samples was determined to be highly predictive
for cancer relative to laboratory-generated control samples. The authors
refer to this technology as a “molecular perceptron”
and compare it to the ability of the olfactory system to “perceive”
odors with high specificity based on a combinatorial input from many
relatively nonspecific receptors. A subsequent study from the same
group extends the use of “perception” strategy of sensing
to SWCNTs with covalently installed color centers. The utility of both strategies is demonstrated in solution-phase
spectroscopic assays, in which both the intensities and peak positions
of individual SWCNT species can be tracked. However, applications
of such a “molecular perceptron” strategy in an imaging
setup for the detection of spatiotemporally resolved dynamics of molecules
would require combined spectroscopy and microscopy, and is yet to
be demonstrated for biosensing purposes. Additionally, it is not clear
the extent to which the number of starting oligonucleotide sequence
in the library correlates with specificity of the sensor or the signal-to-noise
ratio of detection, making direct comparisons with single oligonucleotide
sensors difficult. Finally, the specificity of the strategy against
a protein biomarker ensemble for a different but closely related disease
is not demonstrated. Coupled with the fact that a sophisticated data
analysis and parsing is a required component of the molecular perceptron
pipeline, how broadly this strategy will be adopted by the broader
scientific community remains to be seen.
In addition to fluorescence
intensity and wavelength modulations,
SWCNTs can have a stereoselective interaction with their immediate
chemical environment, which can be leveraged for biomolecular sensing.
Chiral species of SWCNTs exhibit handedness that is often denoted
by (+) or (−) and reflects their interaction with circularly
polarized light. In a recent study, enantiopure SWCNTs functionalized
with resolving ssDNA sequences were demonstrated to exhibit a stereoselective
modulation of their fluorescence toward amino acid enantiomers. This difference in modulation was noted to
be a consequence of the chiral nanotube species interacting in a specific
way with chiral amino acid compounds. This study opens up a less explored
modality of molecular recognition using SWCNT optical properties as
transduction elements.

5.3.1.3

## Sugars, Lipids, and Other Metabolites
Besides disease markers, CNMs have been used to sense a broad range
of analytes in vivo or in biological fluids ex vivo.( , ) CNM-based optical recognition
strategies for various important classes of metabolites, such as sugars, − lipids, − ascorbic acid, − uric acid and urea, − and mycotoxins have been developed and improved over the
past decade. Below, we discuss some of the pioneering and recent advances
that have been achieved on this topic.

5.3.1.3.1

## Sugars
Sugars are important
metabolic targets that can be detected by CNMs. There have been many
enzymatic and non-enzymatic efforts since the early 2000s in optical
sugar sensing as described in several reviews. − Earlier non-enzymatic efforts focused on the non-covalent and covalent
attachment of boronic acid varieties to SWCNTs for glucose-specific
fluorescence intensity and wavelength modulation with a detection
limit of around 5 mM. , Here, boronic acid
is used to quench the fluorescence of nanotubes, which sets a low
baseline brightness. Complexation affinity of saccharides with boronic
acids is then used for molecular recognition of sugars. For instance,
glucose partially rescued the quenched SWCNT fluorescence functionalized
with 4-chlorophenylboronic acid, whereas glucose also caused a wavelength
red-shift in SWCNT emission when it was functionalized with 4-cyanophenylboronic
acid ( ). The fluorescence modulation mechanism in both
cases was claimed to be a photoinduced excited-state electron transfer
that is disrupted by boronate formation when glucose binds boronic
acid. A subsequent study from the same group extended the use of boronic
acids for recognition of pentoses such as arabinose, ribose, and xylose. 
 These studies represent important conceptual advances
for molecular
sensing of glucose, but their applications remain at a proof-of-concept
level with most demonstrations being carried out in in vitro experiments using buffered solutions. Their efficacy for sensing
glucose in biological fluids, or in cells and tissues, remains to
be demonstrated. Therefore, whether these SWCNT sugar sensors could
retain their solution-phase properties in realistic biological specimens,
and importantly, the extent to which the kinetics of sensor turn-on
and reversibility are compatible with the biochemical processes that
dictate the spatiotemporal profiles of endogenous biological events
remain unexplored.
In addition to SWCNTs, phenyl boronic acid
was also used as a glucose
recognition moiety on other CNMs. For instance, graphene quantum dots
(GQDs) functionalized with phenyl boronic acid were employed as a
non-enzymatic glucose sensor with a sensitivity of 3 mM. These ∼10 nm GQDs in PBS solution were
excited at 350 nm and had an emission peak at 426 nm. Glucose addition
both reduced the photoluminescence intensity and also caused a 9 nm
red-shift. The authors hypothesized that the sensing is based on the
surface quenching states (SQS) induced mechanism, where glucose molecules
bound to PBS groups form negatively charged boronate complexes, stretching
the interfaces of the PBS-GQDs to form surface states for efficient
fluorescent quenching. This mechanism was specific to glucose as the
sensor did not respond to other sugars, such as fructose, galactose,
sucrose, or lactose. The authors have also demonstrated the utility
of this GQD sensor in real blood serum samples, achieving 93.6–98%
recovery rates. 
In another non-enzymatic
detection study, aniline-functionalized
GQDs modified with phenyl boronic acid responded to glucose as a fluorescence
turn-on sensor with a remarkable 2 μM sensitivity ( A). Aniline-functionalized GQDs (a-GQDs) have
an absorption peak at around 328 nm corresponding to n→π*
electronic transitions related to the conversion of −COOH groups
to O=C–N–H bond after aniline functionalization, and
emission peak around 460 nm. Presence of the phenyl boric acid (PBA)
quenches this GQD fluorescence as the amine groups of a-GQDs attract
the boronic acid groups by electrostatic interaction, resulting in
a close spatial orientation between PBA and a-GQDs. PBA forms π–π
stacking interactions with the aniline molecules, allowing for electron
transfer from a-GQDs to PBA and quenching the fluorescence. Addition
of the analyte glucose then recovers the fluorescence ( B) by disassembling the PBA
linker from a-GQDs as the boronic acid groups form negatively charged
boronic ester complexes with the cis-diols of glucose. This sensor
was also employed as a portable paper-based printed sensor and a wearable
composite thin-film sensor, and was able to detect glucose in human
blood serum and tear samples demonstrating its promise in real life
biomedical applications ( C).
 Enzymatic SWCNT-based saccharide sensors have also
been developed.
In one study, Barone et al. non-covalently functionalized SWCNTs with
glucose oxidase (GOx). Before GOx functionalization,
the nanotube is oxidized with the application of ferricyanide anion
(Fe(CN)63)–, which adsorbs on SWCNT surfaces and abstracts electrons from the
nanotube’s valence band and bleaches optical transitions, lowering
the nanotube’s Fermi level in the process. In this manner,
the oxidized nanotubes experience a quenched baseline fluorescence.
In the presence of glucose, GOx produces H2O2 as a catalytic byproduct, which is observed to increase the fluorescence
of the quenched nanotube. The liberated H2O2 is hypothesized to partially reduce the Fe3+ core of
ferricyanide to Fe2+ (ferrocyanide), lowering its oxidative
effect and ameliorating transition bleaching in nanotubes. This is
detected as a partial rescue of the quenched nanotube’s fluorescence.
The authors demonstrate the efficacy of the sensor in in vitro solution-phase experiments.
Following up on this work, two
recent reports demonstrate that
GOx-functionalized SWCNTs can directly sense glucose without the need
for an electroactive intermediary to facilitate charge transfer reactions
between the nanotube and GOx. , In one study, SWCNTs
were directly functionalized with GOx through a two-step ligand exchange
process as described in . Addition
of 30 mM glucose generated a maximal sensor response of ∼35%
ΔF/F. The positive sensor response suggested that the catalytic
product of GOx-glucose reaction, H2O2, is unlikely
to be the cause of the fluorescence modulation. The authors suggested
direct reversible doping of nanotube surface defects, mediated by
molecularly adsorbed oxygen, as a mechanism for the observed optical
modulation. A subsequent study from the same group used bioconjugation
reactions to outfit GOx with pyrene moieties that can anchor the enzyme
to the nanotube surface through π-stacking interactions. Several recombinant GOx variants were anchored
on nanotube surfaces and screened for their optical responses to glucose,
which led to the identification of a variant that produced optical
modulations with single milli-molar sensitivity, a feat the authors
attribute to the oriented enzyme loading facilitated by pyrene binding.

5.3.1.3.2

## Lipids
Beyond sugars, CNM-based
optical biosensors for lipids have been reported. Two studies have
demonstrated the utility of SWCNT-based lipid biosensors in live cell
experiments and in vivo.( , ) In the first study, Jena et al. leveraged
classical works of Zheng and colleagues that show that oligonucleotides
of specific length and sequence chemistry can be used as molecular
tweezers to purify specific nanotube chiralities. One oligonucleotide sequence that enriches the (8,6) nanotube
chirality was also shown to exhibit a hypsochromic shift in the emission
peak of the nanotube in response to soluble lipids and lipid analogues
( ). The authors
demonstrate that when incubated with macrophages, these lipid nanosensors
localize to lysosomal compartments, which afforded sensing of lipid
accumulation in these organelles. Using these sensors, the authors
demonstrate that biochemical perturbations that lead to accumulation
of lipids in lysosomes recapitulate the hypsochromic shift observed
in solution phase experiments, suggesting the probes retain their
sensing efficacy inside cells.
 In a subsequent study, Galassi et
al. employ a similar approach of using ssDNA-purified single-color
emitters of SWCNTs for sensing lysosomal lipid accumulation in vivo in liver macrophage cells. Tail vain injection of
the probes into mice led to sequestration of the sensors in the liver.
Perturbations that induce accumulation of lipids in the liver, such
as a high fat diet, generated sensor response profiles similar to
those seen in vitro, suggesting that the probes can
be used to study a variety of lipid storage disorders in animal models
of disease. While the successful application of these sensor responses
in cells and in vivo is important, the selectivity
of the probes for specific types of lipids over a broader range of
lipid and nonlipid biomolecules has not been sufficiently demonstrated.
Moreover, sensor kinetics and the feasibility of using these sensors
to track fast changing dynamical biological processes has not been
fully explored.
Lipid droplets (LD) are cellular organelles
consisting of a phospholipid
layer and a hydrophobic lipid core and serve as important lipid storage
locations inside cells. Small molecule fluorescent probes are often
used for visualizing and studying dynamic biochemical processes involving
LDs, but a recent report shows that CNM-derived probes could be employed
for studying LDs. Boron and nitrogen co-doped CDs (BNCDs) were employed
for selective and intrinsic staining of LDs in cells. Using a BODIPY-based LD probe as a positive
control, the authors showed that BNCDs exhibited a high degree of
overlap with LDs, and low levels of overlap with lysosomes and endoplasmic
reticulum, demonstrating a specificity that is on par with fluorescent
organic probes. The authors further demonstrated the robustness of
the probe by testing LD-labeling in five different cell lines. Importantly,
whereas most organic fluorescent probes require targeting ligands
for LD labeling, a process that entails complex organic synthesis
and purification, the CDs reported in this study appear to be straightforward
in their synthesis and do not require introduction of LD targeting
ligands for their function. The authors also demonstrated that BNCDs
can be used for studying biochemical processes that control the dynamics
of LDs inside cells, including lipophagy. 

5.3.1.3.3

## Other Metabolites
Ascorbic
acid is another important metabolite of interest for sensing oxidative
stress and related diseases. Wei et al. used CD fluorescence quenching
for reversible detection of ascorbic acid in the concentration range
of 1–30 μM in a selective manner, though authors did
not provide a discussion of what endowed this selectivity. Similarly, N-doped CDs were recently used
as in-solution fluorescence turn-off sensors for ascorbic acid with
a detection limit of 2.6 μM. Besides
CDs, single-chirality SWCNTs wrapped with oligonucleotides were also
developed as ascorbic acid sensors; however, these were not specific
to the analyte and also responded to dopamine and riboflavin. 
CDs have also been used for sensing
uric acid and urea with demonstrated potential for human health diagnostic
applications. For instance, N and P co-doped CDs were used to detect
uric acid in human fluids. Zhang et
al. furthered this study by improving uric acid detection limit to
0.14 μM in human fluid samples using iron and nitrogen co-doped
CDs. For urea sensing, which is important
for health monitoring, an integrated fluorescent CD nanosensors with
pH-responsive plasmonic silver nanoparticles have been reported. The urea increases the pH and generates plasmonic
Ag NPs in situ, which quenches the CD fluorescence
with a linear range of detection between 100 nM and 1 mM.
Mycotoxins
are synthesized by a variety of fungi, and they exhibit
many toxic effects in humans, therefore, their detection is an important
pursuit. Numerous CNM-based biosensors have been developed for sensing
mycotoxins using recognition moieties of antibodies, aptamers, and
molecularly imprinted polymers on metal-doped GO sheets, SWCNTs, GQDs,
CDs, among others. For a comprehensive discussion of mycotoxin detection
via CNMs, readers are referred to a recent review by Ma et al. 

5.3.1.4

## Reactive Oxygen and Nitrogen Species (ROS/RNS)
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS)
are highly reactive species primarily composed of oxygen and nitrogen,
respectively, and can be produced under normal physiological processes
in humans and many other organisms. Common ROS species include hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2), hypochlorite (ClO–), hydroxyl radicals (OH–), superoxide anion radicals
(O2–), and singlet oxygen (1O2), and common biological RNS molecules are nitric oxide
(NO), nitroxyl (HNO), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and peroxynitrite
(ONOO–). These molecules play a role in oxidative
stress linked to various pathologies, including Parkinson’s
and Alzheimer’s diseases, inflammation, diabetes, and cancer.
As such, ROS and RNS are important targets of biosensing by CNMs.
Developments in the area are discussed in a comprehensive review by
Kwon et al. ROS/RNS sensing in the
context of plant biology is additionally discussed in of this
review.

5.3.1.4.1

## ROS
H2O2 is one classical ROS that has been successfully studied using fluorescent
biosensors developed from SWCNTs. The sensitivity of SWCNT fluorescence
emission to H2O2 is well-characterized, and
has been attributed to reversible charge transfer from the valence
band of the nanotube to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of
H2O2. This makes
it possible to study biochemical processes in which the release of
H2O2 plays an important role, or can be employed
for the study of enzymatic reactions that produce H2O2 as a byproduct (see discussions on glucose sensing in preceding
sections of this review). These reactions between nanotubes and H2O2 generally lead to reduction in the intensity
of nanotube’s fluorescence emission and have been leveraged
to sense the release of H2O2 generated by biochemical
processes. In one such study, the dynamics of H2O2 release from A431 human epidermal carcinoma cells is investigated. Activation of a receptor expressed in these
cells is thought to induce the release of H2O2, but the spatiotemporal profile of the H2O2 release had remained mostly unknown. A431 cells grown on a surface
immobilized array of collagen passivated-SWCNTs and subsequently stimulated
to evoke biochemical release of H2O2 induced
localized quenching of SWCNT emission with putative single molecule
sensitivity. The study relies on the statistical signal aggregation
from extended imaging frames, likey due to small signal-to-noise ratio
of detection, which makes it difficult to assess the extent to which
the signal faithfully recapitulates the purported underlying biological
phenomena. Nonetheless, the study made an important demonstration
of the utility of the approach for detection of endogenously produced
ROS. A related study from the same group used the spectral diversity
of SWCNTs for multimodal detection of singlet oxygen and hydroxyl
radicals in addition to H2O2. Interestingly, the study demonstrates that not all ROS
affect SWCNT photoluminescence similarly: for example, H2O2 was noted to induce fluorescence reduction of lower
bandgap SWCNTs (e.g., (7,5) nanotubes) more vigorously than higher
bandgap nanotubes (e.g., (6,5) nanotubes). On the other hand, singlet
oxygen and hydroxyl radicals produced a unique combination of spectral
shifts and intensity attenuations that the authors use for multimodal
ROS signal detection. The utility of this approach was demonstrated
in cultured 3T3 cells that are exposed to perfusions of exogenously
prepared ROS. However, the efficacy of this approach for multimodal
sensing of biochemically generated ROS, where the potential impact
of successful demonstration would have been the highest, remains unknown.
More recently, other CNM platforms have been reported for indirect
and direct optical detection of ROS/RNS. Indirectly, iron and nitrogen
co-doped CDs (Fe/N-CDs) have been used together with o-phenylenediamine
(OPD) to detect H2O2 generation in human serum
and urine samples. Fe/N-CDs emit strong
fluorescence at 449 nm under UV excitation. The presence/generation
of H2O2 oxidizes OPD, which then causes CD fluorescence
quenching via FRET as the oxidation product, 2,3-diaminophenazine
(oxOPD), absorbs at 420 nm and emits at 555 nm. Since the amount of
product generated is linearly correlated with the amount of H2O2 consumed, the detection of H2O2 can be achieved by monitoring both ratiometric fluorescence
at 555 nm/449 nm and colorimetric absorption at 420 nm. This dual
detection platform exhibits notable selectivity and sensitivity toward
H2O2 with a detection limit of 70 nM.
On the other hand, direct sensing of H2O2 was
achieved through the use of core–polycaprolactone (PCL)
shell microfibrous textiles incorporating SWCNTs for the real-time
optical monitoring of H2O2 in in vitro wounds within a physiologically relevant range (1–250 μM). This study used (GT)15-wrapped
SWCNTs that are responsive to H2O2 and employed
an electrospinning process to encapsulate them in poly(ethylene oxide)
(PEO) and PCL polymers is a fiber format ( A). Hyperspectral fluorescence imaging revealed
that all (9,4), (8,6), and (8,7)-SWCNT chiralities quench upon exposure
to H2O2; however, the extent of quenching varies
among the chiralities, creating a ratiometric sensor ( B). For real-life applications,
attaching the fibrous sensors onto a commercial wound bandage enabled
real-time wireless wound screening over 7 days ( C).
 Besides H2O2, CDs for the
detection of hypochlorous
acid (HClO) at fresh wounds of zebrafish larvae have been reported. These CDs have a continuous absorption ranging
from UV to more than 500 nm, displaying light yellow color under room
light. Their excitation and emission peaks locate at 496 and 537 nm,
respectively. Because these CDs are very bright and possess abundant
phenolic hydroxyl groups on their surface, authors tested their use
for ROS sensing, and demonstrated that HClO causes a distinct blue
emission after a 10 min reaction with a detection limit of 8.60 nM.
These experiments were also successfully replicated in A549 cells
and 7-day old zebrafish larvae, noting the potential for real life
applications, even though the mechanisms behind sensing and its specificity
are not explored or discussed in this study.

5.3.1.4.2

## RNS
NO is a gaseous messenger
molecule that is ubiquitously employed in living systems, including
the cardiovascular system, nervous system, and immune system. The
small and labile nature, and high reactivity of NO make development
of optical probes for NO a challenge. The importance of NO signaling
has led to the development of several classes of genetically encoded
probes. Similarly, CNMs have been successfully
employed for the development of sensing technologies for NO. , SWCNTs in particular have been successfully exploited for biosensing
of NO in vitro and in vivo.
The first such report relied on 3,4-daminophenyl-functionalized dextran
(DAP-dex) as a non-covalent functional motif for SWCNTs. DAP-dex enables colloidally stable dispersions
to be prepared from SWCNTs and covers the surface of SWCNTs to enable
NO-specific analyte binding and optical perturbation. In this report,
NO induces a fast and reversible photobleaching of the SWCNT photoluminescence,
which is attributed to the electron transfer from SWCNT to NO. In
addition to the in vitro spectroscopy of the sensor,
the study demonstrates that the sensor retains its NO sensitivity
in exogenous NO wash experiments, as well as endogenous NO release
from stimulated cultured cells. In a follow up study, Zhang et al.
demonstrated a ssDNA@SWCNT-based sensor for in vitro NO detection. In subsequent studies,
Iverson et al. demonstrated that PEG-functionalized versions of ssDNA@SWCNT-based
NO sensors can be injected into mice, in which the sensors localized
in the liver and responded to endogenous NO levels in a mouse model
of inflammation. Additionally, hydrogel-embedded
NO nanosensors in that study were investigated for their long-term
use in vivo.
Besides SWCNTs, other CNMs such
as CDs, have been used for RNS
detection. For instance, benzylamine-passivated CDs (B-CDs) were developed
to detect NO and NO2– under different
pH conditions in aqueous media with a limit of detection of as low
as 43 nM and 0.65 μM, respectively. Here, 2.5 nm B-CDs absorb at 264 and 333 nm, which are attributed
to the π→π* transition of aromatic sp2 domains from the carbon core and the n→π* transition
of C=O, respectively. When excited at 375 nm, B-CDs have an emission
peak at 460 nm. The presence of NO was shown to decrease the B-CD
fluorescence linearly within the concertation range of 0–180
μM. Interestingly, this sensor showed no response toward 1O2, ·OH, ONOO–, NO2–, NO3–, HNO, H2O2, ClO–, ascorbic acid, cysteine,
dehydroascorbic acid, or methylglyoxal. Authors verified that the
fluorescence quenching mechanism of NO is static quenching, which
occurs when a non-fluorescent ground-state complex or a weakly fluorescent
complex is formed by the interaction between CDs and quenchers. 
Moreover, folic acid-functionalized
CDs (CdotsFA) were able to
selectively sense NO levels down to the 10 nM range via fluorescence
quenching. Authors selected folic acid
(FA) functionalization as FA has a redox regulator role, and showed
that the presence of 10–10 M NO· effectively
quenched the fluorescence intensity of the CdotsFA and caused an 8.3
nm red-shift in CD emission. The sensing mechanism was not revealed
in this study, but a strong binding constant between CdotsFA and NO
was shown.

5.3.1.5

## Bacteria and Viruses
Detection
of viral or bacterial pathogens is important for early diagnosis and
treatment of many human diseases. For a comprehensive review of viral
pathogen detection using CNMs, readers are encouraged to refer to
Bardhan et al. for pre-2021 literature.
Similarly, for comprehensive reviews of bacterial pathogen detection,
readers are invited to refer to Alafeef et al. and Cui et al. for pre-2020
literature. More recently, there have been several exciting advancements
in the field of virus and bacteria detection. Pinals et al. constructed
a SWCNT nanosensor that is functionalized with ACE2, a protein that
binds SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. SARS-CoV-2
spike protein causes a 2-fold fluorescence increase of this nanosensor
90 min after exposure in solution. However, the surface-immobilized
version was able to detect 35 mg/L SARS-CoV-2 virus-like particles
within 5 sec in human saliva.
For pathogenic bacteria sensing,
Nißler et al. developed a set of SWCNT nanosensors functionalized
with molecules that can specifically detect the metabolites released
by bacteria and specific virulence factors such as lipopolysaccharides,
DNases, and proteases. Using this approach,
they were able to sense and differentiate clinical isolates of six
important bacteria. More recently, a unique approach was taken for
optical sensing of odors specific to certain bacterial infections.
In this study, Shumeiko et al. functionalized SWCNTs with artificial
olfactory sensors consisting of peptides for specific detection of Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae.( ) Lastly, a label-free fluorescent
carbon nanosensor embedded in agarose was developed for detection
based on pH changes that can rapidly discriminate pathogens in real
time. The detection relies on the pH-triggered
aggregation-induced emission quenching of nanosensors in a physiologically
relevant pH range and demonstrated single cell resolution with rapid
response time.

5.3.1.6

## Metal Ions
Concentration of metal
ions in organisms or in the environment can affect health and wellness.
CNMs have been used for electrochemical sensing of transition metal
ions. In addition, optical detection
of metal ions has also been demonstrated, as reported in a recent
study. SWCNTs coated with a melanin-like
supramolecular complex were observed to exhibit dose-dependent modulation
of their fluorescence in response to divalent transition metal ions,
including Cu2+, Hg2+, Mn2+, and Fe2+. Interestingly, in addition to detecting these ions, nanotube–polymer
complexes exhibited a remarkable ability to chelate these metal ion
species and remove them from solution, suggesting a potential role
as scavengers of free metal ions from solution. A more extensive review
of metal ion sensing with relevance to environmental applications
is summarized in .
 

5.3.2

## Environmentally Relevant Sensing
CNMs have gained significant attention in recent years as fluorescent
sensors for environmentally relevant molecules. This section presents
a review of the research surrounding the application of CNMs in environmental
optical sensing, focusing on post-2019 literature ( ). Key focal areas encompass
sensing of pathogens, , − explosives and contaminants, − metal ions, − volatile organic compounds (VOCs), − plant hormones, − and ROS/RNS. − For a more detailed overview of the broad use of CNMs as fluorescence
sensors, readers may refer to the other reviews. − 
5.3.2.1

## Pathogen Sensing
Pathogen detection
is vital in environmental monitoring and food safety, playing a key
role in protecting ecosystems, preventing disease spread through environmental
means, and ensuring the safety of our food. This important practice
helps prevent foodborne illnesses, strengthens public health, and
supports the sustainable future of the food industry. However, traditional
methods like PCR, ELISA, and various culture-based techniques, while
effective, can be slow and complex, often taking days to produce results.
Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop and adopt faster, more
efficient, and reliable technologies for pathogen detection to improve
our ability to quickly and accurately detect pathogens.
In a
recent study, Roh et al. introduced PVP@Ag:FCD, a novel material that
merges photoluminescence-tunable fluorescent carbon dots (FCDs) with
silver nanoparticles (AgNPs). This
combination yields a dual-function tool adept at both detecting and
eliminating bacteria. The material operates through a two-pronged
mechanism. The first aspect involves bacterial detection, where the
FCDs are pivotal. Upon encountering bacteria, these FCDs experience
a quenching of their fluorescence, triggered by aggregation-induced
quenching stemming from the material’s cationic nature that
allows it to electrostatically adhere to the negatively charged bacterial
cell surfaces. Simultaneously, the AgNPs within the material unleash
their antibacterial properties, disrupting
bacterial cell walls and ultimately causing bacterial death. This
innovative probe has demonstrated significant sensitivity in detecting
bacteria, with the ability to identify concentrations as low as 10
CFU/mL for both E. coli and S. aureus. Furthermore, researchers also demonstrated the material’s
efficacy in real-life situations, such as in contaminated river water,
where it successfully detects and eradicates bacteria. Even though
this versatile tool demonstrates the ability to detect and kill bacteria
effectively, the method’s reliance on electrostatic and weak
intermolecular interactions poses challenges for real-world sensing
applications. Factors such as pH changes, and the presence of other
ions, molecules, and particulate matter could interfere with these
interactions, potentially resulting in false outcomes. Hence, technologies
that utilize molecular recognition elements, such as aptamers and
antibodies, are preferred.
Addressing this issue, Zhao et al.
present an innovative approach
through the development of a cell-based fluorescent microsphere immunosensor
for the detection of E. coli O157:H7 in milk. This sensor integrates CDs within nonviable,
inactive S. aureus cells ( ), utilizing the cells not only as carriers
of CDs but also exploiting the inherent binding affinity of Staphylococcal
Protein A (SPA) on their surface to antibodies specific to E. coli O157:H7. The fluorescence signal generated by the
CDs is the key to detection, which occurs when the E. coli
O157:H7 is captured between immunomagnetic beads and the
antibody-coated CD-microspheres, forming a sandwich-like structure.
This design yields a sensor with exceptional sensitivity, capable
of selectively detecting E. coli over five other
bacteria types, and features a moderate detection limit of 2.4 ×
102 CFU/mL. It can detect in roughly 30 min, outperforming
PCR (2 h) and ELISA (2.5 h) in speed, and surpassing the lateral-flow assay
in detection limit (4 × 103 CFU/mL). Notably, the
sensor’s effectiveness extends to practical scenarios, as evidenced
by its successful identification of E. coli O157:H7 in contaminated milk samples. With its rapid, sensitive, and cost-effective
detection capabilities, this sensor represents a notable leap forward
in pathogen detection within the realm of food safety.
 Regarding pathogen detection, another method, besides
directly
sensing the pathogens themselves, involves monitoring their metabolites.
This approach offers a valuable alternative for evaluating pathogen
activity, as these metabolites can be indicative of the presence and
intensity of an infection. By analyzing the specific compounds produced
by pathogens, it is possible to gain insights into their metabolic
processes and potentially identify their presence even when direct
detection of the pathogen is challenging. For example, N-acyl homoserine
lactones (AHLs) are key molecules in the communication system, known
as quorum sensing, of Gram-negative bacteria. This system enables
bacteria to gauge their population size and adjust their behavior
accordingly, including the production of factors that contribute to
virulence, spoilage of food, and formation of biofilms. Common foodborne
pathogens, such as Aeromonas hydrophila, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Hafnia alvei, are known to produce AHLs during their growth phases, playing a
crucial role in the spoilage of food and the onset of foodborne illnesses.
Consequently, the detection of AHLs in food items could serve as a
reliable indicator of contamination by Gram-negative bacteria.
In a recent study, Cui et al. introduced a novel magnetic fluorescence
probe, combining Fe3O4 particles with CQDs-doped
molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs) for the precise detection of
AHLs in food samples. This probe operates
on a unique mechanism: the Fe3O4 particles provide
a magnetic base, facilitating easy separation and manipulation in
complex matrices like fish juice and milk. The MIPs, tailored with
specific molecular cavities, selectively bind to AHL molecules. CDs
embedded within these MIPs emit a fluorescence signal, which is quenched
upon the binding of AHLs, indicating their presence through a decrease
in fluorescence intensity. This mechanism allows for a sensitive detection
range for AHLs, from 3.65 × 10–3 to 0.96 ×
10–1μmol/L, and boasts a detection limit of
2.99 × 10–5 μmol/L. The selectivity of
the probe is demonstrated by its ability to distinguish AHLs from
six similar compounds (e.g., C4-HSL, C6-HSL,
C8-HSL, etc.), showing significant fluorescence quenching
with AHLs while exhibiting minimal response to others. The probe’s
capability to accurately detect AHLs in real food samples, with recovery
rates from 83.10% to 90.74%, further demonstrates its practical applicability.
This innovative tool, with its specificity, sensitivity, and magnetic
separation features, represents a significant advancement in food
safety monitoring, offering a new avenue for rapid and reliable detection
of bacterial signals in food products.
The field of pathogen
biosensing has also expanded its applications
to agriculture, offering valuable opportunities to enhance our understanding
of plant–pathogen interactions. , By closely monitoring dynamic physiological processes, such as plant’s
defense response against pathogenic attacks, we could advance the
cultivation of plants with enhanced tolerance to biotic stress. Nißler
et al. have made significant progress in this domain through extensive
modifications of SWCNT sensors for the detection of plant polyphenols,
which are released when the plant is under pathogen attack. These modifications entail the incorporation
of nucleotides, PEG, and phospholipid (PS) macromolecules onto the
surface of SWCNTs, leading to favorable interactions with hydroxy-rich
compounds. Consequently, these interactions induce fluorescence quenching
or solvatochromic shifting. Expanding
upon these interactions, the PEG-PL-SWCNT sensors show excellent capability
in detecting soybean defensive polyphenols, notably genistein, and
trihydroxypterocarpan ( ). These compounds, crucial in the plant’s defense
mechanism against pathogens, can be accurately detected and quantified
using the developed sensors. The study showcases the effectiveness
of these sensors in different plant-based experiments, including their
application in real-time monitoring and analysis in agricultural and
botanical research. Overall, the study provides a significant advancement
in the field of agricultural monitoring by enabling the sensitive
and specific detection of plant polyphenols.
 
5.3.2.2

## Plant Hormone Sensing
Detecting
plant hormones is a critical aspect of agricultural science and plant
biology, offering profound insights into plant growth, development,
and responses to environmental stimuli. By accurately identifying
and quantifying these hormones, researchers and farmers can better
understand how plants adapt to stress, optimize nutrient uptake, and
regulate their life cycles. Traditional methods for detecting and
analyzing plant hormones include HPLC, gas or liquid chromatography/mass
spectrometry (GC or LC/MS), capillary electrophoresis (CE), and ELISA.
These techniques, although effective, are not optimal because they
require complex sample preparation, expensive equipment, and skilled
operators. Additionally, they are destructive methods and fail to
offer prompt spatiotemporal results. CNMs have emerged as promising
alternatives to traditional technologies, owing to their capacity
to enter plant cells and their tunable surface functionalities. These
characteristics enable them to target a diverse range of molecules
with high specificity.
Shi et al. developed a ratiometric fluorescence
aptasensor, specifically designed to detect abscisic acid (ABA), a crucial phytohormone that is instrumental
in regulating plant growth, seed germination, and environmental stress
response. This sensor integrates CQDs within a 2-Methylimidazole zinc
salt framework (CQDs@ZIF-8) and couples them with aptamer-functionalized
gold nanoparticles (Apt-AuNPs). This unique configuration grants the
CQDs@ZIF-8 dual-emission properties, with the ZIF-8 component serving
as both a stabilizing anchor and a modulation agent. The sensor’s
operation is based on the specific interaction between the ABA and
aptamers on the Apt-AuNPs. When ABA binds to these aptamers, it alters
the configuration of the Apt-AuNPs, thereby disrupting the FRET between
CQDs@ZIF-8 and Apt-AuNPs. This disruption manifests as a change in
fluorescence intensity at two distinct wavelengths (increase in 490
nm and decrease in 657 nm). Remarkably, the sensor is capable of detecting
a wide range of ABA concentrations, with the relationship between
the fluorescence signal and the ABA concentration estimated by two
linear regression equations for the respective ranges of 0.100–10.0
ng/mL and 10.0–150 ng/mL. The detection limit of the assay
is calculated to be 0.03 ng/mL, based on the principle of triple signal-to-noise
ratio (S/N = 3). Its practicality was further validated through successful
applications in measuring ABA levels in rice seeds, delivering results
that are comparable to those obtained using the standard LC/MS method.
In addition to its sensitivity and broad detection range, the sensor
is selective, reliably distinguishing ABA even amidst various potential
interfering substances, including but not limited to Na+, Ca2+, and K+. This high specificity is complemented
by the sensor’s long-term stability, maintaining its signal
integrity with minimal decay over a 30-day storage period at 4 °C.
Despite these significant advantages, the article did not test the
probe’s reversibility or its long-term monitoring capabilities
in plant tissues. These aspects represent limitations that would need
further investigation.
In addition to their work on the ABA
sensor, Shi and colleagues
expanded their research to develop a sensor for jasmonic acid (JA), a plant hormone essential for growth, reproduction,
and defense mechanisms. They engineered a ratiometric fluorescent
probe by synergizing three components: nitrogen-doped carbon quantum
dots (NCQDs), cobalt-based metal–organic frameworks (Co-MOFs),
and molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs). The detection mechanism
begins with the NCQDs, which are fine-tuned by nitrogen doping to
emit fluorescence at two distinct wavelengths. These NCQDs are initially
insensitive to JA due to their surface charge and resulting repulsion
between NCQDs and JA. However, the incorporation of Co-MOFs alters
this charge and reduces the electrostatic repulsion, hence priming
the NCQDs for interaction with JA. MIPs are then strategically attached
to the Co-MOFs. These polymers are engineered with specific cavities
that mimic the shape of the JA molecule, ensuring that the probe selectively
binds to JA with high fidelity, akin to a lock and key mechanism.
Upon encountering JA, the NCQD undergoes a photoinduced electron transfer
(PET) process. This interaction prompts a dual-wavelength fluorescent
response: the fluorescence at 367 nm diminishes, while that at 442
nm intensifies. The JA detection range of the probe is between 1
and 800 ng/mL. This sensitivity was evidenced in tests conducted on
various rice strains, demonstrating the probe’s ability to
accurately quantify endogenous JA levels. Specifically, higher levels
of JA were observed in the disease-resistant variety (Nanjing 46)
compared to the infected varieties (Yongyou 9 and Jiaheyou 218), highlighting
the role of JA in plant defense. Furthermore, the probe’s
measurements correlated strongly with those obtained from LC/MS, affirming
its accuracy. The sensors developed by Shi and colleagues are significant
advancements in agricultural research, offering a more effective means
for detecting critical hormones like ABA and JA.
Besides ABA
and JA, Ang et al. developed a SWCNT-based sensors
used in detecting synthetic auxins 1-naphthalene acetic acid (NAA)
and 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D), where NAA is commonly
used as a rooting hormone powder and as a plant spray to prevent premature
flowering and 2,4-D is used as a herbicide that selectively kills
broadleaf dicotyledonous weeds while being generally tolerated by
monocotyledonous crops. The SWCNT-based
sensors used for their detection employ the corona phase molecular
recognition (CoPhMoRe) approach, , where amphiphilic
polymers wrap SWCNTs to form distinct molecular recognition sites
for various types of small molecules. Specifically, to selectively
detect 2,4-D, the researchers utilized a range of cationic fluorene
copolymers, which were copolymerized with Py (pyridine), Pz (pyrazine),
Pm (pyrimidine), or 13-P (1,3-phenyl). On the other hand, for the
specific detection of NAA, they employed specialized polymers featuring
poly(N-vinylimidazole) (PVI) and poly(4-vinylpyridine) (PVP) as their
backbones. This method allows the nanosensors to detect fluctuations
in fluorescence intensity, characterized by a quenching response to
NAA and an activation response to 2,4-D. A pivotal aspect of this
research is the detailed examination of the spatiotemporal distribution
of NAA and 2,4-D in spinach leaves ( ). It demonstrates how varying concentrations
of NAA, from 1 mM to 100 μM, result in corresponding changes
in fluorescence quenching. This indicates the nanosensors’
sensitivity and ability to monitor the uptake and metabolism of NAA
within plant tissues. Contrasting this, 2,4-D infiltration showcases
a more gradual fluorescence turn-on response over 90 min, highlighting
a different uptake and metabolic pattern compared to NAA ( ). These measurements
were not limited to laboratory conditions but extended to in planta testing across a variety of plant species, including
spinach, A. thaliana, bok choy, and rice, in diverse
environments of soil, hydroponics, and plant tissue culture media.
A key finding from these tests was the sensors’ ability to
detect the accumulation of 2,4-D in bok choy leaves—a dicotyledonous
plant susceptible to 2,4-D—while showing no such uptake in
the tolerant monocotyledonous rice leaves. This ability to differentiate
between susceptible and tolerant plants is crucial for understanding
the transport mechanisms and herbicide resistance in crops. Moreover,
these sensors have proved to be effective tools for rapid herbicide
susceptibility testing, marking a significant advancement in agricultural
technology.
 Another plant hormone of interest for detection
has been gibberellins
(GAs), particularly GA3 and GA4. These hormones
are vital for plant growth and development. Boonyaves et al. employed
the CoPhMoRe platform to wrap SWCNTs with polymers composed of styrene-based
monomers, namely sodium-styrenesulfonate (S) and vinyl benzyl trimethylammonium
chloride (N). These monomers were specifically
chosen for their interaction with GAs, particularly targeting the
carboxyl groups of the GAs as key interaction sites. Using CoPhMoRe
SWCNT sensors, researchers were able to detect changes in GA levels. The sensors responded to GA3 and
GA4 concentrations ranging from 0 to 150 μM, with
detection limits estimated at 542 nM for GA3 and 2.96 μM
for GA4, respectively. In Arabidopsis seedlings,
these sensors exhibited a pronounced increase in fluorescence intensity
following GA3 application. Additionally, the study revealed
that Arabidopsis mutants overexpressing GA20ox1,
a key enzyme in GA biosynthesis, displayed higher GA levels than wild-type
plants, as detected by the sensors ( ). This differentiation demonstrated the
sensors’ capabilities in gauging varying endogenous GA levels
in genetically diverse plant lines. This study further explored the
impact of environmental stress, specifically salinity, on GA dynamics
in Arabidopsis. The sensors indicated a decrease
in GA levels under high salinity conditions, a change that correlated
with reduced lateral root growth ( ). This finding linked GA dynamics directly
to the plant’s response to environmental stress. Moreover,
the spatial analysis of GA distribution in Arabidopsis roots revealed higher concentrations at critical growth points,
such as the lateral root bud, emphasizing GA’s role in root
development. The study also ventured beyond model plants, with experiments
in lettuce showing similar trends in GA reduction under salinity stress,
correlating with stunted growth. These findings highlight the substantial
potential of CNM sensors in real-time, nondestructive monitoring of
GA distribution and dynamics in plants. The ability to provide detailed
insights under both normal and stress conditions open up new avenues
for agricultural research and crop management.
 The continuous advancement of sensor technologies
in plant biology
research holds the potential to revolutionize agricultural practices,
leading to more precise crop management, and fostering a deeper understanding
of plant biology. The exploration of a broader range of plant hormones,
including cytokines, ethylene, and brassinosteroids, which are pivotal
in cell division, stress response, and overall plant development,
could unveil a more comprehensive understanding of plant hormone networks
and their complex interactions. Such investigations have the potential
to pave the way for innovative agricultural strategies and enhance
crop resilience. However, despite these promising advancements in
this field, there remain critical aspects that warrant further investigation.
For instance, the sensors for ABA and JA, while demonstrating excellent
sensitivity, are reliant on tissue homogenization, an inherently destructive
process. This methodological constraint limits our ability to obtain
immediate, spatially resolved insights within the plant tissues, which
are essential for understanding dynamic physiological processes and
hormone distribution patterns in situ. The reliance on destructive
sampling techniques, therefore, poses a significant barrier to fully
elucidating the intricate spatial and temporal dynamics of hormone
activity within plant structures. Furthermore, other important factors
such as the reversibility of the sensors, their long-term stability
in plant tissues, their ability to provide spatiotemporal information,
and their specificity amidst various environmental factors and other
biological molecules also merit further. Addressing these challenges
is crucial for advancing our understanding and application of these
sensor technologies.

5.3.2.3

## ROS/RNS Sensing
There is also
an emerging field of study centered around the detection of reactive
oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS/RNS) in plants, − with a particular focus on H2O2 and NO. ROS
play a critical role in plant physiology and their response to stress.
For instance, H2O2 production and accumulation
have been observed in plants experiencing various stresses, such as
light, heat, salinity, wounding, and pathogen infection. − 
In response to the growing demand, Wu et al. have devised
a highly sensitive H2O2 sensor utilizing SWCNTs
functionalized with a DNA aptamer that specifically binds to hemin
(HeAptDNA-SWCNT). This sensor operates
through a Fenton-like reaction, wherein
H2O2 reacts with hemin, generating hydroxyl
radicals that subsequently quench the SWCNT fluorescence. To ensure
the sensor’s specificity for H2O2, tests
were conducted to assess its response to stress-associated plant ions,
sugars, and hormones, including Ca2+, sucrose, glucose,
methyl salicylate, abscisic acid, and jasmonate. The results showed
that the NIR fluorescence responses of the sensor were largely unaffected
by these off-target molecules. Furthermore, the H2O2 sensing performance of the HeAptDNA-SWCNTs remained robust
in the presence of these stress-related molecules, underscoring their
selectivity and potential for in vivo applications.
Using the HeAptDNA-SWCNTs, they were able to selectively monitor
physiological H2O2 levels (10–100 μM)
in A. thaliana leaves ( A) in
response to several stressors, such as UV-B light (reduction of 11%),
high light (reduction of 6%), and a pathogen-related peptide (reduction
of 10%), although it does not detect leaf wounding. 
 In a complementary study, Lew et al. developed
highly sensitive
and selective sensors using functionalized SWCNTs for real-time monitoring
of H2O2 caused by wounding. This study employed two types of DNA-wrapped SWCNTs: G-SWNTs,
which are wrapped in ss(GT) oligonucleotides and show quenched fluorescence
in the presence of H2O2, and A-SWCNTs, wrapped
in ss(AT) oligonucleotides, whose fluorescence remains invariant toward
H2O2. This dual system forms a ratiometric platform
for in vivo H2O2 detection.
Using these sensors, researchers investigated the mechanism and characteristics
of the H2O2 signaling pathway in various plant
cultivars and genetic variants. Their findings suggest a significant
interaction between H2O2, electrical, and calcium
signaling pathways, which plays a crucial role in regulating plant
defense responses following wounding.
The focus on RNS, including
NO, has grown alongside the study of
ROS. The remarkable capacity of RNS to modulate plant growth, enhance
nutrient absorption, and activate disease and stress tolerance mechanisms
has attracted significant attention across a wide range of plant species. , Giraldo et al. developed ratiometric reversible sensors using NIR-SWCNTs
coated with corona phases consisting of specific oligonucleotides
that selectively recognize NO, H2O2, or no analyte
in A. thaliana leaves. ( B). The
integration of these nanosensors with plants, facilitated by the unique
optical properties of single chirality SWCNTs, holds immense potential
for establishing a robust platform for biochemical monitoring, particularly
in dynamic field conditions. For example, leveraging the multiplexing
capability of the NIR signal emitted by nanosensor-equipped plants
could enable the detection of SWCNT fluorescence from remote locations
using standoff devices such as NIR cameras, even amidst challenging
environmental, chemical, and optical complexities.
The advances
in plant nanobionics represent a significant leap
in our understanding of plant responses. Researchers’ innovative
use of SWCNTs to monitor vital indicators offers new prospects for
real-time, remote plant health assessment. However, it is not just
H2O2 and NO that are crucial; other ROS and
RNS, such as superoxide radicals, peroxynitrite, and hydroxyl radicals
also play an important role in plant processes, as they are respectively
produced during photosynthesis and respiration in plant cells. For
a more comprehensive study of plant stress, it is essential to develop
probes that can detect these additional types of reactive species.
Given that these ROS have shorter half-lives and are less able to
travel through cellular membranes, sensors designed for this purpose
will need to be highly efficient in penetrating plant cells and possess
rapid response times. While these technologies using CNMs are still
evolving, their development underscores the transformative potential
of nanobionics in shaping a more resilient future for agricultural
systems.

5.3.2.4

## Other Sensing Applications
CNMs
are also employed for detecting heavy metals and contaminants, covering
a broad spectrum of chemicals. These include, but are not limited
to, As3+, Ag+, Cr4+, Hg2+, Fe3+, Pb2+, Cu2+, Co2+, trinitrotoluene (TNT), trinitrophenol (TNP), malathion, and glyphosate. presents the CNMs
utilized for environmental monitoring in various settings such as
rivers, lakes, and land. However, due to the extensive research in
this field and the scope of this review, our discussion focuses solely
on CNMs used in biological samples, such as plants and animals.
In the case of detecting contaminants, Ma et al. developed a ratiometric
fluorescent nanosensor aimed at detecting glyphosate, a widely used herbicide known for its nonselective,
broad-spectrum weed control properties. This sensor integrates nitrogen-doped
CDs enveloped in mesoporous silica spheres (N-CDs@SiO2)
with bovine serum albumin-stabilized gold nanoclusters (BSA-AuNCs).
The core–satellite configuration of this sensor facilitates
dual-emission fluorescence at 436 and 651 nm using a single excitation
wavelength of 360 nm. This mechanism operates on a “signal
on–off–on” principle, where the fluorescence
of BSA-AuNCs is initially quenched by addition of Cu2+ and
then restored when glyphosate forms complexes with Cu2+, altering the fluorescence intensity ratio at these wavelengths.
Notably, the sensor is highly selective in distinguishing glyphosate
in the presence of other pesticides, including carbofuran and alachlor
( ). The probe
can detect glyphosate across a wide concentration range of 5–100
ng/mL ( ),
with the lowest detection limit of 3.4 ng/mL. Its selectivity and
sensitivity make it particularly effective in complex environmental
samples. Using malt as the tested system, the researchers achieved
glyphosate recoveries ranging from 94.81% to 101.61%. The sensor’s
innovative design, combined with its validated efficacy in real-world
samples, positions it as a tool for environmental monitoring and food
safety.
 Another example of CNM application in contaminant
detection involves
carbendazim, a widely used fungicide from the benzimidazole chemical
class. This substance effectively controls a wide range of fungal
diseases in crops and serves as a preservative in paints, textiles,
and paper products. Ruiyi et al. developed a sensitive fluorescence
probe, with a detection limit of 6.1 × 1017 M. This system utilizes serine and histidine-functionalized
graphene quantum dots (Ser-GQD-His), which display blue and yellow
fluorescence under varying excitation wavelengths. The mechanism is
based on the interaction between carbendazim and a specially designed
aptamer. When the aptamer binds with carbendazim, it prompts the release
of an assistant strand (AS), initiating a DNA recycling amplification
process. This process leads to the formation of numerous G-quadruplex/hemin
(G4/hemin) DNAzyme composites. These composites catalyze the transformation
of externally introduced o-phenylenediamine (OPD) into the fluorescent
molecule 2,3-diaminophenazine (DAP). The presence of DAP then quenches
the fluorescence of Ser-GQD-His and simultaneously enhances its own
fluorescence, thus generating a strong and measurable fluorescence
signal. The practical application of this probe has been successfully
demonstrated in the detection of carbendazim in tomato plants, achieving
a recovery rate between 95 to 105%.
Recently, a different type
of quantum dots has been used for detecting
malathion, which is an organophosphate insecticide that is commonly
applied to control mosquitoes and a variety of insects. Liang et al.
developed a dual-mode sensor consisting of CQDs and gold nanoparticles
(GNPs) for the efficient detection of malathion in cabbage. This sensor’s construction leverages
the fluorescence properties of CQDs and the colorimetric response
of GNPs, enabling it to visually detect malathion through changes
in both fluorescence intensity and color. The mechanism by which the
presence of malathion enhances the fluorescence of the CQDs-GNPs and
causes a color shift from red to blue is due to a specific interaction
between malathion and the nanocomposite sensor. When malathion is
present, it induces the aggregation of the GNPs within the sensor.
This aggregation disrupts the fluorescence quenching normally caused
by the close proximity of the GNPs to the CQDs. As the GNPs aggregate,
they move away from the CQDs, which restores the fluorescence of the
CQDs. The aggregation of the GNPs also leads to a visible colorimetric
change; the solution’s color changes from red to blue, which
can be observed with the naked eye. Importantly, the probe exhibits
high specificity: when tested against various other compounds typically
found in cabbage, such as isocarbophos, dimethoate, and dichlorvos,
the sensor’s response to malathion was distinctly stronger,
indicating selective detection capability even when the interfering
substances were present at higher concentrations than malathion. Furthermore,
the sensor demonstrates high accuracy in real-world applications,
where its effectiveness was validated in cabbage samples by detecting
varying concentrations of malathion. The sensor’s recovery
rates range from 89.9% to 103.4% in fluorescence detection and 88.7%
to 107.6% in colorimetric detection.
Besides detecting pesticides,
sensing toxic heavy-metal pollutants
is also crucial because these pollutants can cause severe environmental
damage and pose significant health risks to humans and wildlife. Timely
and accurate detection helps in implementing effective remediation
strategies and preventing long-term ecological and health impacts.
For example, in a recent study, Lew et al. utilized plant nanobionic
sensors for the real-time detection of arsenite, which is an arsenic
form predominantly found in anaerobic conditions such as paddy soils
of crops. Their approach involved embedding
NIR fluorescent nanosensors, specifically SWCNTs, into plant tissues.
These nanosensors, wrapped in single-stranded DNA rich in guanine
and thymine nucleotides, selectively respond to arsenite, leveraging
the unique binding properties of these nucleotides that form strong
hydrogen bonds with arsenite’s hydroxy groups. Their study
underscores the efficacy of these sensors in the Cretan brake fern
(Pteris cretica), a species known for its arsenic
hyperaccumulating abilities. The ratiometric sensor response for P. cretica was consistently higher than that observed in
other plant species like spinach or rice. This heightened response
in the fern, shown in a significant increase of 74% relative to the
initial level, is indicative of its superior arsenite accumulation
capability ( ). Experiments demonstrated that upon exposure to arsenite, the ferns
exhibited a steady increase in the fluorescence intensity of the embedded
SWCNTs over a seven-day period. This increase was relative to the
initial values, providing a dynamic quantitative measure of arsenite
uptake. Further, the study explored a kinetic model to describe the
nanosensor response to arsenite uptake in P. cretica. This model helped translating the changes in sensor fluorescence
intensity into actual concentrations of arsenite within the plant
tissues. Using the natural ability of P. cretica ferns
to hyperaccumulate and tolerate exceptionally high levels of arsenic,
the sensors can integrate arsenite signals over extended periods,
which in turn help detect arsenic levels as low as 0.6 parts per billion
(ppb) after 7 days, and 0.2 ppb after 14 days ( ). The research affirmed the potential of
integrating optical nanosensors with living plants, enabling them
to function as sensitive and selective detectors for environmental
monitoring.
 Beyond detecting heavy metals in plants, CNM research
extends to
the important area of environmental monitoring, focusing on the sensing
of divalent metal cations in aquaculture. In one study, Gong et al.
uses SWCNTs functionalized with DNA corona phases (CPs). These optical sensors are designed to identify
harmful metal ions such as mercury, lead, chromium, and manganese,
which are notable contaminants in aquaculture environments. The sensor
operates on the principle of photoluminescence changes, triggered
by the interaction of DNA-SWCNTs with specific metal ions. The DNA
CPs serve as molecular recognition elements, allowing the SWCNTs to
selectively bind to different divalent metal cations and induce changes
in photoluminescence intensity and wavelength. The researchers conducted
a series of experiments to understand the interactions between a range
of divalent metal cations and various DNA CPs. Critical experimental
conditions, including the ionic strength, buffer dilution kinetics,
laser excitation power, and analyte response kinetics were optimized
to maximize the sensor’s accuracy and reliability. A notable
finding was the sensor’s ability to operate in two distinct
sensing states, achieved by adjusting the pH levels of the solution.
This pH-dependent response is crucial for differentiating among various
metal ions, enhancing the sensor’s versatility. Furthermore,
the researchers developed a portable version of the sensor for aquaculture
applications, where it detected mercury levels in fish tissue extracts,
a crucial test given the prevalence of mercury contamination in aquaculture
products. The sensitivity of this DNA- SWCNT sensor was 33 nM. Given
that the typical mercury concentration in cod, post-extraction, is
around 1.1 μM, this suggests the method could be highly effective
for monitoring and ensuring safety of seafood products at a commercial
scale.
He et al. also introduced a ratiometric fluorescence
sensor for
detecting mercury in seafood, based
on nitrogen-doped carbon dots (N-CDs) sensitized with Terbium(III)
and 2,6-pyridinedicarboxylic acid (DPA). The sensor operates on a
mechanism where N-CDs are coordinated with DPA-modified Terbium ions
(Tb-DPA). This coordination results in a sensor that exhibits dual-emission
fluorescence: one at 436 nm from the N-CDs and another at 543 nm from
the Tb-DPA complex. The detection mechanism is centered on the interaction
between mercury ions and the N-CDs. When mercury ions are present,
they interact with the oxygen-containing functional groups on the
N-CDs, facilitating an electron transfer process. This interaction
leads to the quenching of the N-CDs’ fluorescence at 436 nm
without affecting the fluorescence emission of the Tb-DPA complex
at 543 nm. The ratiometric measurement is based on the relative change
in the intensity of these two emissions, providing a reliable indication
of the presence and concentration of mercury ions. One of the most
remarkable features of this sensor is its selectivity. The sensor
shows the ability to selectively detect Hg2+ ions in the
presence of a wide range of other metal ions, including Ag+, Cu2+, Mn2+, among others. The selectivity
is crucial for applications in complex matrices like seafood, where
various metal ions can be present. In addition to its specificity,
the sensor has a low detection limit of approximately 37 nM. In practical
applications, it has successfully quantified mercury levels in different
seafood samples (e.g.,prawn, seaweed, octopus, and large yellow croaker).

5.4

## Tracking of Delivery with CNM Fluorescent
Probes
Delivery of biologics using CNMs has been a popular
application in nanomedicine and bioengineering. Advances in this area
are summarized in numerous comprehensive reviews. − Even though majority of the delivery applications of CNMs use non-fluorescent
nanomaterials, unique properties of CNMs enable novel ways of cell
entry and cargo delivery that are not achievable by other approaches.
Given the focus of this review is on the CNM fluorescent probes, this
section is kept brief.
5.4.1

## Delivery of Drugs in Nanomedicine
Recently, novel fluorescent CNMs were established for dual intracellular
imaging and drug delivery. For instance, gluten was used as a carbon
source to synthesize highly fluorescent carbon nanorings with a quantum
yield of 47.0% that when loaded with the model drug doxorubicin showed
high level of apoptosis in many cancer cells lines. Similarly, nitrogen and sulfur co-doped photoluminescent
CDs synthesized from κ-carrageenan and folic acid were targeted
to cancer cells using folic acid receptors to effectively deliver
an anticancer drug capecitabine. 
Besides imaging and drug delivery, more modalities have recently
been added to CNMs, such as leveraging photothermal effects of certain
CNMs by heating them with a NIR light resulting in an on-demand drug
release. Another combination therapy
example is the usage of CNMs that inherently have antimicrobial properties
for the delivery of antibiotics to address the increasing antibiotic
resistance issue. For this, carboxylic acid-functionalized MWCNTs
were developed for the delivery of kanamycin and streptomycin to treat Mycobacterium fortuitum infection. Similarly, isoniazid and fluoxetine-conjugated MWCNTs showed
effective delivery of the drug fluoxetine for combined therapy against Tuberculosis.( )
Recent
years have also seen a surge of studies investigating the
drug–CNM interactions at the theoretical and modeling levels
using the quantum theory of atoms in a molecule (QTAIM) method, electron
localization function (ELF) calculations, DFT, and molecular dynamics. , These studies provide fundamental understanding of drug-CNM adsorption/desorption
dynamics and complex stability, which are crucial for the future successful
design of CNM medicines.

5.4.2

## Gene and Protein Delivery
The delivery
of genes and proteins is the first step for gene therapy and genetic
engineering of multicellular organisms, such as animals and plants. − For an overview of CNM applications in biomolecule delivery to plants,
refer to the Landry et al. and to mammalian
systems, refer to Hossein et al. Below,
we discuss the advancements developed after the publication of these
reviews. It is important to note that some CNM delivery vectors that
are covered in this section are not fluorescent due to their chemical
modifications for cargo loading.
In case of plant gene delivery,
Law et al. decorated SWCNTs with cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV (cytcox)
and cationic lysine and histidine repeat cell penetrating peptides
for the targeted delivery of DNA into the mitochondria of A. thaliana seedlings. These
modified SWCNTs did not have fluorescence, so their uptake to mitochondria
was verified via Raman microscopy. Introduction of genetic material
using SWCNTs resulted in a 30-fold increase in the expression of delivered
DNA when compared with prior work using cell penetrating peptides
only, as well as efficient homologous recombination into mitochondrial
genome with no cytotoxicity. Controlled expression of GFP from the
delivered plasmid was observed in A. thaliana by
utilizing either a constitutive promoter (35S) or a mitochondria specific
promoter (cox2), shown via both confocal imaging ( A) and Western Blot ( B,C).
 Other methods using biorecognition peptides on
CDs and CNTs have
been shown to allow access to cellular organelles, such as chloroplasts.
For example, Santana et al. developed PEI-coated SWNCTs and cyclodextrin-coated
CDs, both of which had chloroplast targeting peptides for the selective
targeting of A. thaliana chloroplasts. When compared to CNMs without chloroplast
targeting peptides, the efficiencies of modified CNMs improved from
47% to 70% and 39% to 57% for CD and SWCNTs, respectively.
In
the case of mammalian delivery, CDs have been recently used
to deliver genes into in vitro mammalian cells, where
Hashemzadeh et al. developed cationic PEI and arginine-functionalized
CDs for the delivery of CRISPR plasmids into the HEK 293T-GFP cells
to effectively knock out the GFP gene as a proof-of-concept study. CDs offer significant benefits due to their
inherent photoluminescent properties and their ability to function
both as nanocarriers and as a fluorescent probe. Zhai et al. used
CDs for the delivery and tracking of a CRISPR plasmid into HeLa cells, where the plasmid targeted the EFHD1 gene that is associated with various diseases. CDs that were synthesized
from PEI, PEG, and citric acid (CQDs-PP) demonstrated an efficient
nuclear uptake ( A) and editing efficiency of 34.2% ( D,G) as compared to a common transfection
agent Lipo2000 with editing efficiency 18.4% ( B,E,H). Authors have also compared the CQDs-PPs
with other CDs made from the PEI and citric acid without PEG, which
were unsuccessful in causing editing given their inability to enter
cell nucleus ( C,F,I).
 Compared to the DNA delivery, there are only a
few reports of protein
delivery using CNMs. Du et al. assessed the efficacy of catechol,
carboxyl, amino, and hydroxyl-modified MWCNTs and GO for the delivery
of morphogenic protein-2 (BMP-2) and osteogenic growth peptides (OGP)
into both mouse and rabbit models to track induced osteogenesis. BMP-2 and OGP-modified MWCNTs induced osteogenesis
more effectively in the ectopic osteogenesis rat models when compared
to GO derivates ( ). Similarly, osteogenesis in the calvarial defect rabbit
models was greater with MWCNTs compared to GO. Moreover, Silvestre
et al. used MWCNTs for the delivery of rMSP1a proteins to Holstein
cattle and measured their immune response against Anaplasma
marginale.( ) Results demonstrated
that vaccinated cows with MWCNT-rMSP1a presented an increase in Natural
Killer (NK), CD4+, and CD8+ cells. In addition
to the elevated immune cells, an increase in IgG, IgG1, and IgG2 anti-rMSP1a
were present after two rounds of vaccinations. This study utilized
CNMs for the delivery of rMSP1a in place of conventional vaccines
and was able to elicit a strong immunogenic response in vivo in cattle.
 

6

## Biomedical and Environmental Translation of
CNMs
With the rising prominence of CNMs both in the biomedical
and environmental
fields, it is crucial to gain a comprehensive understanding of their in vitro and in vivo cytotoxicity effects
( ), along
with their environmental accumulation and fate ( ). The translation of CNMs
from the lab to the clinic and fields will also depend on scale-up,
economical, and regulatory considerations ( ).
6.1

## Cytotoxicity of CNMs
6.1.1

## In Vitro Cytotoxicity
Common methods of studying the in vitro cytotoxic
effects of CNMs include tracking of mitochondrial function, mitochondrial
membrane permeability, cellular membrane breakdown, uptake of neutral
red dye by lysosomes, and the generation of ROS in cultured animal
cells. Below, we describe these methods,
discuss how they provide valuable information to help evaluate the
cytotoxicity of CNMs, and summarize recent in vitro cytotoxicity study results of CNMs. For a more extensive review
on in vitro CNM cytotoxicity, readers are encouraged
to refer to Yuan et al. and for a CNT-specific
review on toxicity and regulation, readers should refer to Heller
et al. 
6.1.1.1

## Methods Used for Determining Cytotoxicity
Tracking mitochondrial function is often used to measure both the
metabolic activity and viability of cells. Since live cells depend
on mitochondrial ATP synthesis for many cellular functions, mitochondrial
function is commonly tracked via [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide] (MTT) assays to determine cellular viability. This assay
depends on the reduction of water-soluble MTT to water insoluble formazan
via viable mitochondrial dehydrogenases. Consequently, by measuring
the production of formazan through UV–vis spectroscopy, mitochondrial
metabolic activity and viability of cells can be determined. Tracking
mitochondrial permeability via monitoring the mitochondrial membrane
potential can be used to determine cellular viability, since changes
in mitochondria membrane potential are indicative of the start of
apoptosis. This is commonly monitored via a fluorescent reporter,
5,5,6,6′-tetrachloro-1,1′,3,3′ tetraethylbenzimi-dazoylcarbocyanine
iodide (JC-1). When cationic JC-1 molecules
are present in high concentrations in the inner negatively charged
mitochondria, they fluoresce red due to the aggregation of JC-1. However,
when the concentration of JC-1 aggregates is low in mitochondria,
the monomeric JC-1 accumulates in the cytosol and fluoresces green.
Inhibition of JC-1 transport into mitochondria is a sign of compromised
mitochondria.
Neutral red dye absorption in live cell lysosomes
provides an estimate of live cells present. This assay utilizes the
selective trapping of neutral red dye in viable cell lysosomes. After
extraction of dye from lysosomes, UV–vis spectroscopy can be
utilized to determine neutral red amount which is proportional to
live cells. On the other hand, Trypan Blue is utilized for the staining
of dead cells. Plasma membrane impermeable Trypan Blue is only internalized
by cells when their membranes are compromised, and thus dead cells
can be quantified to understand cytotoxicity in vitro. Similarly, tracking cellular membrane permeability is conducted
via lactate dehydrogenases (LDH) assays. This assay utilizes the LDHs
typically found in the cytoplasm as a reporter for lysed cell membranes.
By conversion of lactase to pyruvates and the reduction of NAD+ to
NADH, NADH is then able to activate the inactive luciferin to a luminescent
luciferin probe. Luciferin can then be measured to quantify the luminescence
caused by compromised cellular membranes. Lastly, the Cell Counting
Kit (CKK-8) similarly utilizes the conversion of 2-(2-methoxy-4-nitrophenyl)-3-(4-nitrophenyl)-5-(2,4-disulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium
salts to a water-soluble formazan dye that can be quantified to determine
cellular viability.
The detection of excess ROS is observed
by 2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein
diacetate (DCFH-DA) assay. This assay utilizes the conversion of DCFH-DA
to 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescein (DCF) via oxidation caused
by excess ROS. DCF can then be measured via UV–vis to determine
the relative concentration of ROS present in the treated cell. Measuring
ROS is important because excess ROS cause oxidative stress in cells
and can ultimately lead to the damage of nucleic acids (DNA), lipids
(cell membrane), and proteins (enzymes), all of which are crucial
for cellular viability. 
The following
sections summarize some of the recent in
vitro cytotoxicity results of several CNM types that either
performed a systematic and comprehensive study, or revealed an interesting
finding. However, there exists a large breadth of old and newer literature
in this area, which will not be possible for us to discuss all here.
Nevertheless, in summary, some of these findings are contradictory
because most studies do not control or report all the needed information
on CNMs, biological systems, and treatment conditions. Therefore,
going forward in the field, it is crucial to develop better, more
comprehensive, and standardized CNM characterization and treatment
strategies for accurate understanding of CNM cytotoxicity.

6.1.1.2

## Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs), Carbon Nanocones
(CNCs), and Carbon Nanohoops (CNHs)
He et al. performed a
systematic study to compare the cytotoxicity of five nanocarbons:
two SWCNTs, two MWCNTs, and one single-walled carbon nanohorn (SNH). They conducted a careful characterization
of many CNM properties and their effects on macrophages. SNHs had
monomer diameter of 2–5 nm and length of 10–20 nm. SWCNTs
had a diameter of 1–2 nm and lengths of 0.5–2 μm
for one batch and 2–5 μm for the second batch. MWCNTs
had a diameter of 20–30 nm and lengths of 0.5–2 μm
for one batch and 2–5 μm for the second batch. The pristine
dry CNMs were characterized with Raman, FTIR, thermogravimetric analysis
(TGA), XPS, and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS).
Then, they were all dispersed in 0.5% (w/v) BSA containing PBS, and
further characterized with DLS, TEM, and SEM. The results showed that
SNH exhibited unique a cone-like structure and an extremely small
aspect ratio, which are significantly different from the rod shapes
of high-aspect-ratio nanotubes. Macrophages internalized 2-fold lower
amounts of SNH by phagocytosis compared to CNTs ( A). Third, MTT and LDH assays
revealed that SNH caused lower cytotoxicity than four types of CNTs
( B). It was
further observed that necrosis was the main mode of dead cells, tested
by propidium iodide (PI) staining resulting in a ∼23% death
in SNH-treated samples, compared to the >40% cell death observed
in
CNT-treated samples. He et al. further elucidated the molecular mechanism
behind the CNM cytotoxicity, revealing that CNTs cause cleavage of
PARP and CASP-3, which are two hallmarks of apoptosis. This study
also investigated many other cytotoxicity metrics that are not discussed
here, but in summary, it represents
an important advancement in the field of studying CNM cytotoxicity
as it performs a thorough characterization of many material properties
and associated biological responses aiming to eliminate nuanced and
skewed toxicity conclusions of insufficiently characterized nanomaterials.
 Beyond pristine CNMs in the above study, other
research has compared
the cytotoxicity of carboxylic acid-functionalized CNTs. − One example of this is done by Aminzadeh et al., where they studied the reproductive toxicity of COOH-SWCNTs
and COOH-MWCNTs in an in vitro setup on human spermatozoa.
The results showed that neither CNTs had caused increased cell death
at a concentration range of 0.1–100 μg/mL when incubated
with sperms at 37 °C for 5 h as shown by the MTT test. However,
sperm motility was significantly attenuated in a dose-dependent manner.
Also, measuring the ROS/RNS amounts revealed increased levels of ROS
production in human spermatozoa with both CNT types. This study reveals
the importance of how surface functionalization can affect cytotoxicity
behavior of CNMs, and that measuring only cell death is not a sufficient
metric for comprehensive understanding of CNM effects on biological
systems. Studies are highly limited on the cytotoxicity of the newer
CNM type carbon nanohoops (CNHs). White et al. demonstrated that water-soluble disulfonated [8]CPP at
the working concentration of ≤10 μM was not toxic to
the HeLa cells. Future studies are needed to determine cytotoxicity
of different size CPPs, heteroatomic CPPs, and their other chemical
modifications on diverse biological systems, especially including
noncancerous cell lines.

6.1.1.3

## Carbon Dots
The investigations
of cytotoxic concentrations of CDs can be misleading. This comes as
a surprise since advantageous properties of CDs include their biocompatibility
and low cellular toxicity. However, in a recent study conducted by
Lui et al., it was demonstrated that the photodegradation of several
CDs samples synthesized from different compounds can result in the
generation of smaller CDs fragments upon exposure to light, which
can notably increase their cytotoxicity in vitro.( ) This degradation process was found
to be driven by the production of alkyl and hydroxyl radicals when
CDs were exposed to light. Specifically, CD samples were subjected
to light irradiation in an aqueous solution at a rate of 60 μmol
photons/m2/sec for varying durations (0.5, 1, 4, 8 days)
and concentrations (0, 10, 30, 100, and 300 mg carbon/L) of CDs. The
impact on the treatment of three cell lines (HeLa, Hep-G2, and HEK-293)
from glucose pyrolysis-derived CDs were evaluated illustrated in . Notably, prolonged
light exposure of CDs led to a significant decrease in cell viability,
and similar cytotoxic effects were observed when the cells were treated
with photodegradation products of <3 kDa filtrate solution from
CD treated with light and CDs that had been irradiated for 8 days.
Moreover, to determine the composition of CD degradation byproducts,
mass spectrometry was utilized, and it was elucidated that chemical
structures observed in degradation products were glucose-PEG linkage,
aldehydes, poly aromatic rings, pentose, and tetrose conjugated PEG.
Similar degradation patterns were observed from nitrogen containing
CDs, commercially available CDs, and silicon-containing CDs, suggesting
any type of CDs has the propensity to undergo similar decomposition
under light, and have potential to be cytotoxic. Given this recent
and novel insight, light exposure should be taken into consideration
when utilizing CDs for biological applications. This is especially
true since the previously reported cytotoxicities of CDs were often
contradictory ranging from very biocompatible to mildly biocompatible. − It may be possible that sample handling may have been influencing
these ranges of biocompatibilities in prior studies.
 
6.1.1.4

## Graphene Oxide (GO)
Studies have
recently shown that GO size has a major implication on its cytotoxicity.
Specifically, in a study conducted by Gurunathan et al., they found
that GO smaller than 100 nm made the TM3 and TM4 cell lines susceptible
to higher levels of leakage of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and caused
generation of more ROS compared to GO samples with 100 nm diameter. This suggests that the formation of ROS is
more prevalent for smaller CNMs. However, it must be noted that size
is likely not the only contributing factor to GO’s cytotoxicity.
In fact, other key factors such as surface structure, functionalization,
charge, aggregation, and impurities all play substantial roles in
determining cytotoxicity. For more information on graphene family
nanomaterial cytotoxicity, readers can refer to a review published
by Ou et al. 

6.1.2

## In Vivo Cytotoxicity
The in vivo assessment of cytotoxicity of CNMs
involves a comprehensive investigation into their potential adverse
effects on living organisms. Through carefully designed experiments,
researchers administer various doses of CNMs to animal models, allowing
for the observation of their impact over specific time periods. Tissues
and organs are sampled and subjected to histopathological examination,
revealing any morphological changes indicative of cellular damage,
inflammation, or necrosis. For a comprehensive analysis of the in vivo CNM cytotoxicity, readers are encouraged to refer
to recent reviews, as this is a heavily examined topic in previous
reviews. , 
There is a recent study
performed to determine the cytotoxicity of CDs in vivo, where researchers found that CDs synthesized from sugar cane molasses
at concentrations lower than 150 μg/mL had no impact on embryonic
toxicity nor showed impediment on embryo development in zebrafish. Conversely, concentrations higher than 200
μg/mL greatly increased cytotoxicity, and demonstrated an impact
on the dopamine levels, and a decrease in TH+ neuronal
cells. Additionally, upon oral administration of 5000 μg/mL
CDs, they were localized to the brain, gills, heart, liver, and intestines
with a gradual decrease over a course of 5 h. Model organisms, such
as zebrafish and mice, have been instrumental in testing the cytotoxicity
of CNMs, embryonic development, and localization of CNMs in
vivo.

6.1.3

## In Planta Cytotoxicity
In the realm of plant research, assessing cytotoxicity takes on
a unique perspective distinct from that applied to mammalian cells.
The evaluation of the quantum yields of photosystem II, gene expression,
and, in certain instances, cell viability assays stand as pivotal
approaches to gauge the effects of CNMs on plants.
Monitoring
the quantum yield of photosystem II is commonly used to determine
physiological stress on plants induced by CNMs. , , By selectively quantifying
the maximal fluorescence (FM) and variable
fluorescence (Fv), both of which are quantum
yields, a ratio of the two (Fv/Fm) can be used to compare quantum yields of
plants that are infiltrated with CNMs to untreated plants. A decrease
in quantum yield can be indicative of lower levels of photosynthesis,
stress, and thus overall cytotoxicity.
Expression of reporter
stress genes activated under stress conditions
can also serve as an indicator of cytotoxicity in plant cells. Plant
NADPH oxidases, also known as respiratory burst oxidase homologues
(rboh), are enzymes that catalyze the formation of a superoxide anion
and are often upregulated to combat biotic and abiotic stressors. The quantification of the expression of these
genes, as a stress and cytotoxicity proxy, can be performed via reverse
transcriptase quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) or
at the protein level via Western blot. Moreover, plant response to CNMs can also be characterized at the
whole plant transcriptome level using RNA-seq. 
Similar to determining cellular viability in mammalian
cells, plants
can be subjected to dyes that provide information on cellular viability.
A common dye used to determine cytotoxicity in plants is propidium
iodide (PI). This impermeable florescent
probe, which is only internalized when cell membranes are compromised,
can be visualized by confocal microscopy and can offer modes of detection
for compromised cells. Additionally, other dyes like Evans blue have
been utilized to determine cellular viability in plants. Like PI, Evans blue can be used to determine
compromised cells by binding to proteins and nucleic acids.
A recent study led by González-Grandío et al. delved
into the investigation of the toxic effects of SWCNTs in plants using
RNA-seq. The SWCNTs that were modified
with PEI, when used at high concentrations (50 mg/L), triggered upregulation
of genes associated with programmed cell death in leaves of A. thaliana. However, at lower concentrations (1 mg/L),
stress gene expression levels returned to baseline values 6 h after
infiltration. Interestingly, carboxylated SWCNTs did not cause cytotoxicity
even at the higher concentration of 50 mg/L. In Nicotiana
benthamiana, higher molecular weight polymer–SWCNT
conjugates were more toxic than the low molecular weight and linear
polymer–SWCNTs. An altered version
of PEI with a low degree of hydrophobic modification was then used
to functionalize SWCNTs, which showed significantly reduced stress
response and less nonspecific protein adsorption in plant cells.
In planta cytotoxicities of other CNMs have also
been evaluated. CDs synthesized from citric acid and urea and modified
with β-cyclodextrin molecular baskets showed best biocompatibility
at 20 mg/mL in Arabidopsis model systems. In another study, CDs that are electrochemically
synthesized from graphene rods showed little to no toxicity at 0.8
mg/mL and interestingly increased the growth rate of plants, specifically
eudicots. The authors hypothesized that several factors might have
caused this, including the decomposition of CDs to CO2 and
plant like hormone analogs. Although
certain CD and SWCNT formulations appear to be noncytotoxic in plants,
additional investigations into the long-term and prolonged exposure
effects are needed.

6.2

## Environmental Accumulation and Fate of CNMs
The expanding production and utilization of CNMs necessitates careful
consideration and evaluation of their environmental impacts. Projections
estimate that by 2030, 20–40 tons of CNTs will annually be
released to soil, resulting in a concentration range of 0.01–3
μg per kg soil. − Moreover, it is expected that
within the next half-century, the concentration of CNTs in surface
waters and sediments will reach 5 μg per L and 970 mg per kg,
respectively. , As such, this section discusses
the accumulation and fate of CNMs in the environment.
CNMs have
the potential to be released into the environment through a variety
of pathways, including industrial processes, waste disposal, accidents,
and consumer products. The specific
mechanisms responsible for their release involve biodegradation, mechanical
means (e.g., abrasion, scratching, or sanding), washing, diffusion,
matrix degradation (which can include photo-, thermo-, or hydrolytic
degradation), and incineration. The
exact pathway and mechanism of release may vary depending on the context
and properties of the materials. − For instance, when
CNMs are present in landfill settings, they are likely to enter the
environment through hydrolytic degradation or photodegradation processes. , Conversely, in aquatic settings, CNMs are typically released into
the environment through rainwater and runoff from contaminated air
and soil, deposition from aerial and tire sources, or emissions from
wastewater treatment plants. , 
Once introduced
into the environment, the fate of CNMs varies depending
on many factors, including but not limited to the particle exposure
concentration, size, surface properties, and solubility/degradability.
Consequently, the behavior and impacts of CNMs have been the focus
of numerous investigations, with particular attention paid to their
effects on either aquatic or soil environments. presents a comprehensive summary of all
studies since 2017 that investigated the distribution and ultimate
destiny of diverse CNMs in the natural environment.
 In aquatic environments, CNMs undergo a range of processes
( ). In environments
with high ionic strength or natural organic matter (NOM), the extensive
surface area of certain CNMs allows for the adsorption of components
such as metals, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), NOM, and
other compounds onto their surfaces. These adsorbed CNMs may subsequently
undergo homoaggregation with other CNMs or heteroaggregation with
other particles, leading to their sedimentation. − To better understand these interactions, Xu et al. conducted a study
on the fate of MWCNTs considering coexisting metal Cd and NOM. Their results indicated that upon discharge
into the environment, MWCNTs promoted Cd sedimentation and immobilization.
However, it is worth noting that in natural settings, sedimentation
is not an instantaneous process; it can span over long time periods.
Owing to their size, charge, the stabilizing agents used to deter
aggregation, or due to environmental transformation and sediment resuspension,
CNMs might linger in water sources. Corroborating this, Avant et al. found that more than 99% of CNM
mass traverses through natural water systems without undergoing heteroaggregation
or being deposited into the sediments. This implies that concentrations may accumulate downstream in river
systems, all the way to reservoir or ocean end points, and can persist
in the water column’s free phase for protracted periods. Eventually,
CNMs will accumulate in sediments, and with prolonged exposure, the
sediment concentrations may see a substantial increase. Predictive
models estimate recovery periods to reduce sediment CNM concentrations
by half to be over 37 years for lakes and 1 to 4 years for rivers. 
 In addition to their accumulation in the environment,
certain CNMs
can potentially elicit harmful effects on neighboring organisms through
several mechanisms, including the induction of oxidative stress, inflammatory
responses, DNA damage, and mutations. Moreover, CNMs can interfere
with electron-mediated transfer processes between themselves and biological
membranes. − Notably, studies by Zhao et al. and Cano et al. have reported the
toxicity and accumulation of MWCNTs in Xenopus tropicalis, D. magna, and Fathead Minnow.( ) These studies
have revealed that MWCNTs can accumulate within aquatic organisms
and induce adverse effects. For instance, MWCNTs accumulated in the
lungs of X. tropicalis, resulting in lesions and
inhibited growth and development. Moreover, it has been established
that both fullerene and GO can induce toxicity in aquatic organisms.
Specifically, unfunctionalized GO has demonstrated a notable mean
effective concentration of 1.25 mg per L when C. dubia is acutely exposed to it. This exposure
leads to the ingestion and subsequent accumulation of GO within the
gut tract of these organisms. Consequently, the accumulation of GO
prompts C. dubia to allocate energy toward maintaining
defense mechanisms, such as antioxidant processes. As a result, this
diversion of energy may potentially reduce the availability of energy
for crucial physiological processes, including reproduction and foraging
activities. Another study examined
the impacts of both acute (12 and 24 h) and chronic exposures (10,
15, 28 days) to sediment-bound fullerenes (at concentrations of 0.025,
0.18, and 0.48 mg/cm2) on the benthic invertebrate Chironomus riparius.( ) The
presence of C60 within the upper sediment layer leads to
the swift assimilation of C60 aggregates in their gut,
consequently inducing oxidative stress in tissues adjoining the microvilli
and exoskeleton.
Similar to the aquatic environments, the destiny
of CNMs in terrestrial
environment is subject to various factors ( ). To explore the impact of environmentally
relevant conditions on fullerenes, Carboni and colleagues conducted
an incubation experiment with C60 under ultraviolet A (UVA)
irradiation for 28 days. Their findings
indicate that UVA irradiation alone can induce considerable degradation
of C60. However, when C60 was introduced into
quartz sand or sandy soil samples, degradation occurred at a significantly
faster rate. This suggests that once CNMs are deposited in soil, their
fate is likely determined by a complex interplay of interactions with
soil materials and microbiota. These interactions involve the physical
disturbance and mixing of soil through bioturbation, which encompasses
the activities of living organisms that alter soil structure and nutrient
distribution. Additionally, the fate of CNMs is influenced by biotransformation,
which encompasses the chemical transformations occurring within organisms,
leading to the conversion of CNMs and other substances into different
forms. The scientific literature contains numerous investigations
of the biodegradation of CNMs by soil bacteria. − For example, Chouhan and colleagues identified a bacterium named T. guamensis that is capable of oxidizing and partially
catalyzing the degradation of MWCNTs. Furthermore, Berry and colleagues discovered that in organic-rich
clay, the presence of agricultural soil bacteria significantly enhances
the mineralization degradation rate of C60, with over 50%
of C60 being mineralized in 65 days. 
Certain CNMs could demonstrate beneficial effects
by boosting various
functions in plants, such as water uptake, water transport, seed germination,
nitrogenase, photosystem, and antioxidant activities. Additionally,
they stimulate water channel proteins and enhance nutrition absorption. , , However, an excess of these
CNMs may not be favorable. At higher concentrations, CNMs could accumulate
within plants, thereby inhibiting growth. For instance, when Arabidopsis is exposed to elevated
levels of MWCNTs, root elongation is impaired in a dose-dependent
manner. This overaccumulation can even extend to leaves, affecting
their growth. The adverse effects of
CNMs on plants are generally attributed to their ability to trigger
oxidative stress. Further research has identified an increase in the
activity of antioxidant enzymes, including catalase, peroxidase, and
superoxide dismutase, when GO is introduced. This heightened enzymatic
activity points to the oxidative stress that arises from GO treatment. , 
In summary, the escalating production and use of CNMs in multiple
domains pose a growing risk to the environment and ecological balance.
Upon release, these nanomaterials undergo complex interactions within
aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems, leading to potential accumulation
and consequent adverse impacts on local flora and fauna. Understanding
the fate and influence of these materials is paramount to establishing
effective risk assessment and mitigation strategies. It is crucial
to continue extensive research in this area with a particular emphasis
on developing environmentally benign alternatives, containment strategies,
and waste management approaches. The findings reviewed herein underscore
the pressing need for stringent guidelines to manage the environmental
impact of CNMs and safeguard ecosystems (see ).

6.3

## Scale-Up, Economical, and Regulatory Considerations
of CNMs
Given the considerable potential exhibited by CNMs
discussed in prior sections, it becomes imperative to explore the
feasibility and ramifications of their mass production. To expand
their applications and fully realize their capabilities, three pivotal
factors necessitate thorough examination: scaling up production, assessing
economic feasibility, and considering regulatory constraints.
6.3.1

## Scalability of CNM Synthesis
The
scalability of CNMs revolves around two essential aspects: production
consistency and process efficiency. Ensuring uniformity in synthesized
probes is crucial for obtaining reliable and reproducible outcomes.
However, achieving this consistency across large batches poses a challenge due to structural inhomogeneity and imprecise
fabrication arising from the synthesis process. 
Presently, the three most commonly employed methods
for CNM production include arc-discharge, laser ablation, and CVD.
While the arc-discharge method excels in generating high-quality CNMs,
it is resource-intensive and requires expensive equipment, rendering
it less suitable for large-scale production. − In contrast, laser ablation operates at relatively lower temperatures
compared to arc-discharge and employs solid carbon sources. − However, it still requires high energy consumption and has the potential
for product entanglement, as well as inadequate product purification,
thereby presenting obstacles to scalable production of high-quality
materials. Therefore, CVD has emerged
as a prominent choice for mass production. , CVD involves the vaporization of carbon-containing precursors onto
a substrate, where CNMs decompose and form. This method has garnered
substantial attention due to its capacity to achieve relatively low-cost
production, high yield, and less stringent reaction conditions. , However, an inherent challenge with all these methods is the batch-to-batch
variation, both in terms of nanoparticle properties (size, charge
etc.) and impurity levels. These variations can impact the utility
of the synthesized CNMs for specific applications and can create difficulties
in achieving standardization. 
Despite this, extensive research dedicated to employing CVD in
the large-scale synthesis of diverse CNMs has seen significant advances. These advancements encompass the successful
large-scale production of notable materials such as SWCNTs, , MWCNTs, fullerene, graphene, along with other
noteworthy CNMs. Moreover, the harnessing
of CVD for the mass manufacture of CNMs has stimulated the creation
of various innovative techniques. Key developments in this realm include
techniques like hot-filament CVD, ultra-high
vacuum plasma-enhanced CVD, and floating
catalyst CVD. These techniques have
proven pivotal in enhancing both the efficiency and quality of mass
production. floating catalyst CVD, for instance, employs gaseous or
liquid precursors to facilitate high productivity, superior quality,
and controlled growth. It also ensures excellent uniformity while
easing the controlled doping of CNMs with heteroatoms. , This represents just one example of how these advancements in CVD
technology are transforming the production of CNMs.

6.3.2

## Economic Feasibility of CNM Technologies
In addition to direct production costs, broader economic considerations
encompass market potential, competition, and cost-effectiveness. As
the potential applications for CNMs continue to expand, so does their
market potential. However, to effectively compete with established
fluorescence technologies like organic dyes, it is crucial to lower
production costs and demonstrate superior long-term cost-effectiveness.
The selection of precursors plays a vital role in managing production
costs.
Traditional precursors such as coal, mesophase carbon,
benzene, n-hexane, methane, ethylene, and acetylene
are predominantly derived from petroleum sources. This reliance on
petroleum presents a range of challenges, including environmental
concerns, depletion of fossil fuel resources, and uncertainty in crude
oil prices. − To address these issues, the exploration
of alternative precursors, such as biomass-derived materials, emerges
as a more sustainable and cost-effective option. Biomass-derived materials
offer a diverse range of alternatives, including algae, crop stalks,
husks, cellulose, starch, chitosan, and lignin, among others. − These renewable sources present the potential for sustainable CNM
production. Notably, some of these materials have already been demonstrated
to be suitable for manufacturing CNMs with high quality and sensitivity,
as showcased in previous sections. Although
biomass-derived materials show promise as alternative precursors for
CNM production, they present specific challenges related to their
high oxygen content and the need to maintain consistency. In CNM synthesis,
low oxygen content in the starting material is generally preferred, which is commonly found in fossil-based hydrocarbon
precursors like methane and benzene. The relatively high oxygen content
of biomass, particularly in carbohydrates, may complicate its suitability
as a precursor. , 

6.3.3

## Regulation of CNM Usage
In the
context of CNMs’ regulatory considerations, it is essential
to understand that regulatory agencies worldwide are paying close
attention to CNMs. In an era where nanotechnology is making strides,
ensuring safety and compliance with environmental, health, and safety
(EHS) regulations is fundamental. Nanomaterials,
presently governed by conventional chemical regulations, fall under
the jurisdiction of various international entities. For instance,
the United States’ Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) enforces
the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) to supervise nanomaterials. This regulation necessitates a premanufacturing
notification for any new chemical substances, including nanomaterials,
before they can be produced or imported. Meanwhile, in Europe, the
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) regulates nanomaterials through the
REACH (Registration, Evaluation, Authorization, and Restriction of
Chemicals) and CLP (Classification, Labeling and Packaging) regulations. 
Despite these regulations, concerns
persist that conventional chemical laws may not adequately consider
the distinctive properties and behaviors of nanomaterials. For example,
the International Chemical Secretariat (ChemSec) has classified CNTs
on the SIN (Substitute It Now) list, which is a comprehensive catalog
of chemicals that, according to ChemSec, should be restricted or prohibited
within the EU. However, categorizing
all CNTs under a single material type is simplistic, given their diverse
structures, physical dimensions, modifications, and wide-ranging applications. This diversity can lead to significantly varying
levels of toxicity and environmental impact.
Under existing
procedures, safety data sheets offer details about
potential hazards, as well as guidelines for safe handling, storage,
and emergency response for specific substances or products. Nonetheless, safety data sheets for nanomaterials
present a key issue: they often outline different toxicity profiles
than those of their bulk material equivalents. It is reported that approximately 35% of these nanomaterial-focused
safety data sheets could be unreliable. , Addressing this gap requires a focused effort in streamlining research
in the field of CNMs and their environmental effects. To start, establishing
standardized practices and protocols is crucial. Central to this is
the creation of a universal set of guidelines for characterizing CNM
properties, such as size, shape, surface area, stiffness, and functional
groups, as these factors are critical in determining their fate and
toxicity in environmental and health contexts. For instance, studies
show that longer CNTs, exceeding 15–20 μm, may induce
“frustrated” phagocytosis, where immune cells cannot
effectively absorb and break down these CNTs, leading to potential
harm. Conversely, shorter CNTs seem
to be less hazardous. Moreover, the stiffness of CNMs significantly
influences their interactions with biological systems. Rigid CNMs
can damage lysosomes, vital cell organelles, and such stiffness is
linked to both acute and chronic inflammatory responses. Therefore, having a uniform characterization
protocol is essential for achieving global consistency in CNM research.
This uniformity facilitates easier comparison and analysis of results
from different studies, enhancing the overall understanding of CNMs
and their effects on the environment and health.
In parallel,
standardizing experimental conditions and protocols
is equally important. This involves accounting for variables such
as organism, tissue, or cell type, and their respective ages and health
statuses. Given that CNMs’ impacts can vary across biological
systems and conditions, standardizing these factors is essential.
This includes documenting and standardizing application conditions
like concentration, exposure method, and duration. Establishing common
guidelines for these variables will help reduce variability and conflicting
findings in current research. Finally, emphasizing comprehensive reporting
and transparency in research findings is critical. Encouraging or
mandating researchers to report all relevant information, including
both positive and negative results, under specific conditions, can
enhance the reliability of data. Peer-reviewed journals can enforce
these standards by requiring detailed methodological information for
publication. Promoting open data and science practices can further
accelerate discovery and understanding. In summary, while CNMs and
their fluorescent probe derivatives exhibit enormous potential, their
journey from the lab to the market is subject to a host of regulatory
considerations. As the regulatory landscape for nanomaterials continues
to evolve, it is essential to maintain active engagement with regulatory
agencies to ensure the responsible and sustainable development and
commercialization of CNMs. Future research should aim not only to
improve the production efficiency and cost-effectiveness of these
materials but also to better understand and mitigate their potential
environmental and health impacts.

7

## Perspectives and Outlook
As we highlight
in this review, CNMs have enabled important advancements
in the fields of physiological imaging, biosensing, cargo delivery,
and therapeutics. Although their uses were initially demonstrated in vitro and in vivo in animals and animal
derived cells and tissues, CNM usage has been successfully translated
to microbes, plants, and various other organisms for a plethora of
applications, which we explored extensively in this review.
In the biomedical imaging field, fluorescent CNMs have found fruitful
niche applications that are enabled by several unique attributes.
First, their photoluminescence properties exhibit a high degree of
tunability, and between the family of CNMs reviewed in this paper,
it is possible to find probes that emit stably across a wide swath
of the electromagnetic spectrum, including UV, visible, NIR, and SWIR.
Use cases in NIR and SWIR are particularly tantalizing given the advantages
associated with imaging in the so-called “tissue-transparency”
window, which we discussed broadly in this review. The synthetic nature
of CNMs affords flexible deployment to enable applications where genetically
encoded probes may be unavailable or are not feasible, as we highlight
in several examples where these materials are used as implantable
probes, composite films and as bionanohybrids in conjunction with
other biological matter. Another common theme in the application of
CNMs relates to the dual role that most CNMs can play, in which imaging
and environmental applications are often seamlessly coupled to, and
sometimes facilitate, their use as therapeutics agents or as cargo
delivery vehicles. This feature appears to be common among most CNMs
reviewed in this paper and could be an important competitive edge
for these materials. Compared to small molecule organic probes, synthesis
of CNM probes is cheaper and less reliant on sophisticated synthesis
and purification techniques. In this sense, the relative accessibility
of these materials could contribute to their appeal to a broad segment
of the scientific enterprise.
However, despite these advantageous
attributes, there are several
areas where the field needs to focus for improvement. First, the relative
ease in the synthesis of CNMs can make keeping track of advancements
in this field challenging, and the literature in this field is considerably
vast and growing. Adding to the challenge, most studies appear to
rely on discipline specific, and sometimes even lab-specific practices
for purification and characterization of these materials, which makes
comparative analysis across studies difficult. The lack of a consistent
approach also makes replicating specific claims challenging and contributes
to inconsistencies. For example, the literature on cytotoxic effects
of CNMs has led to findings that appear contradictory, with claims
ranging from complete biocompatibility to acute cytotoxicity, as we
highlight in our review. This can make interpretation of results in
biological settings difficult, and in some cases can lead to ill-advised
policy decisions on regulatory frameworks that govern the eventual
deployment of CNM-based reagents in biomedical settings. Even some
fundamental properties, such as the precise mechanism of fluorescence
in CDs, or the set of biointerfacial properties that govern CNM cellular
entry, remains surprisingly enigmatic. Therefore, the field needs
to focus on harmonizing, and if necessary, inventing techniques for
synthesis, characterization, functionalization, and deployment of
these materials.
Ultimately, these gaps in our knowledge contribute
to some critical
challenges for CNM based technology. In the area of biosensors, for
example, a facile and modular approach for developing a sensor for
a given analyte of interest does not exist. The optoelectronic properties
of SWCNTs offer a good example. The mechanism of SWCNT photoluminescence
is well understood and emanates from quantum confined surface excitons
that are sensitive to the immediate chemical environment that the
nanoparticle is exposed to. The material is relatively better characterized,
has a large surface area, and has well described chemistries to functionalize
the surface. Despite these attributes, no unified principle exists
that govern the conjugation of SWCNTs to molecular recognition motifs
for biosensor synthesis. Some of the better characterized sensors,
such as those for catecholamines, still lack mechanistic descriptions
of how analyte binding leads to massive modulations in fluorescence
intensity. Working out the molecular mechanisms that underpin these
ssDNA@SWCNT bionano conjugates could open a beachhead in turning these
CNMs into a platform technology that can be modularly tuned as a sensor
for a broader class of analytes. Currently, there are CNM sensors
for many classes of metabolites, hormones, proteins, lipids, metals,
ROS/NOS, pathogens, among many other molecules, both for biomedical
and environmental applications, which we reviewed extensively in this
paper. However, the process of biosensor development for most of these
targets relies on serendipitous discoveries or low-throughput screens,
and typically does not involve rational use of molecular recognition
motifs, necessitating time- and resource-intensive screens. Some recent
progress has been made in this field with higher-throughput enrichment-based
screens and AI/ML-based selection strategies. These types of explorations
should be highly encouraged. Future studies focusing on this issue
will greatly benefit the CNM biosensing field.
Improvements
in CNM imaging modalities and hardware constitute
another opportunity for the field. In the plant imaging field for
example, CNMs have been used to track intracellular cargo delivery
and enabled a rapid way of testing nanoparticle-cargo formulations
that are effective in such systems. However, the strong autofluorescence
of plant tissues, especially in leaves due to the chlorophyll, can
make imaging of CNM fluorescence difficult. In addition to chlorophyll
fluorescence, plant tissues demonstrate a high level of background
fluorescence when damaged, which makes it challenging to detect CNM
uptake. New imaging modalities, such as those based on FRET or fluorescence
complementation, have not been sufficiently explored for CNM imaging
and are therefore an area of opportunity. Moreover, imaging CNMs that
fluoresce in the NIR and SWIR regions of the spectrum have often relied
on custom-made microscopy solutions that have wildly varying performance.
This is largely a consequence of the fact that most fluorescent reagents
used in experimental biology fluoresce in the visible region of the
spectrum. The dearth of reagents that fluoresce in NIR and SWIR, including
proteins and synthetic small molecule dyes, has led to a concurrent
lag in the performance of hardware in NIR/SWIR. Microscopes, cameras,
PMTs and related instrumentation for NIR/SWIR do poorly relative to
equivalent technologies in the visible range of the spectrum. Therefore,
the field should make a concerted effort to incentivize manufactures
to make improvements in hardware, and work to standardize practices
through open-source collaboratives, as has been done in various fields
of the scientific enterprise that have faced similar challenges.
The eventual translation of these CNM technologies to the clinic
or environment will depend on many factors, including but not limited
to the CNM cytotoxicity, environmental accumulation and fate, and
their scale-up, economical, and regulatory considerations. There have
been many studies of CNM cytotoxicity. However, these studies tend
to take a generalist approach and attempt to extend result from one
nanoparticle formulation to another, which is likely to be inaccurate
as different size and surface properties of CNMs will affect their
final cytotoxicity levels. The technical and economic feasibility
of scale-up is yet another critical factor in translation. Future
studies should focus on developing sustainable and affordable synthesis
approaches that will result in highly uniform, robust, and replicable
batches of CNMs. Last but not least, the regulation of CNMs both in
medicine and environment needs to focus on each exact CNM formulation
for safety and efficacy, and carefully weigh the benefit-risk ratio
for a given application. Standardized approaches are needed not only
for CNM testing, but also for enabling regulations that are universally
agreed between different stakeholders and countries.

## Author Contributions
+ Andrew T. Krasley
and Eugene Li contributed equally to this work
as co-first authors, and Jesus M. Galeana and Chandima Bulumulla contributed
equally to this work as co-second authors. Abraham G. Beyene and Gozde
S. Demirer are co-corresponding authors. All authors contributed to
writing and editing of the paper, and approved the final version.
CRediT: Andrew T. Krasley data curation, formal analysis,
investigation, methodology, resources, software, validation, visualization,
writing-original draft, writing-review & editing; Eugene
Li data curation, formal analysis, investigation, methodology,
resources, software, validation, visualization, writing-original draft,
writing-review & editing; Jesus M. Galeana data curation,
formal analysis, investigation, methodology, resources, software,
validation, visualization, writing-original draft, writing-review
& editing; Chandima Bulumulla data curation, formal
analysis, investigation, methodology, resources, software, validation,
visualization, writing-original draft, writing-review & editing; Abraham G. Beyene conceptualization, data curation, formal
analysis, funding acquisition, investigation, methodology, project
administration, resources, software, supervision, validation, visualization,
writing-original draft, writing-review & editing; Gözde
S. Demirer conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis,
funding acquisition, investigation, methodology, project administration,
resources, software, supervision, validation, visualization, writing-original
draft, writing-review & editing.
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.
Andrew T. Krasley received his B.S. in Chemistry
from Gettysburg
College and his M.A. and Ph.D. in Organic Chemistry from Bryn Mawr
College under the guidance of Professor William P. Malachowski. He
has worked as a medicinal chemist and later as an analytical chemist.
Currently, he is a postdoctoral researcher in the Beyene Lab developing
and studying carbon nanotube fluorescent biosensors and their mechanisms
for applications in neurobiology.
Eugene
Li is currently a Ph.D. student in the Chemical Engineering
department at Caltech, and a member of Professor Gozde S. Demirer’s
group. Eugene’s research focuses on establishing genetically
encoded sensors for measuring the bioavailable nutrient amount in
plant cells. Prior to Caltech, Eugene earned his Bachelor’s
degree in Chemical Engineering at the University of California, Santa
Barbara in 2022.
Jesus M. Galeana is currently
a Ph.D. student in the Chemistry
department at Caltech, and a member of Professor Gozde S. Demirer’s
group. Jesus’s research focuses on developing carbon dot platforms
for delivery of nucleic acids and proteins to plant cells. Prior to
Caltech, Jesus received his B.S. degrees from the University of California,
Irvine in Chemistry and another in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
in 2021.
Chandima Bulumulla received his
B.S. degree in Chemistry from University
of Peradeniya, Sri Lanka and conducted his doctoral studies in the
field of organic semiconductors under the supervision of Dr. Mihaela
C. Stefan at UT Dallas. Currently, he is a postdoctoral researcher
in the Beyene Lab studying dopamine neuromodulation using synthetic
semiconducting carbon nanotube-based fluorescent biosensors.
Abraham G. Beyene is a group leader at the Janelia
Research Campus
of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute in Ashburn, VA. He received
a B.S. in Chemical Engineering from University of Maryland, Baltimore
County in 2008 and a Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering from UC Berkeley
in 2019 under the guidance of Professor Markita Landry. The Beyene
Lab works at the intersection of materials chemistry and neuroscience,
with emphasis on materials-based tool and technology development that
facilitate the study of neurobiology.
Gozde S. Demirer is a Clare B. Luce Assistant Professor of Chemical
Engineering in California Institute of Technology. She received her
B.S. in Chemical and Biological Engineering from Koc University in
2015. Prof. Demirer completed her Chemical Engineering Ph.D. at UC
Berkeley with Prof. Markita Landry in 2020, and her postdoc in Plant
Biology and Genomics at UC Davis with Prof. Siobhan Brady in 2022.
The Demirer Lab works on bioengineering of plants and rhizosphere
for food security, sustainability, and climate-change resiliency using
novel nanotechnology and synthetic biology approaches.

## Acknowledgments
G.S.D. acknowledges funding from Caltech, Resnick
Sustainability Institute, Henry Luce Foundation, Shurl and Curci Foundation,
NSF, and NASA. A.G.B. acknowledges funding from the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute.