pmcPLoS GenetPLoS Genet331plosgenplosPLOS Genetics1553-73901553-7404PLOSPMC11449308PMC11449308.111449308114493083931257410.1371/journal.pgen.1011411PGENETICS-D-24-002421Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCell ProcessesNuclear ImportBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyNervous SystemNeuroanatomySpinal CordMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyNervous SystemNeuroanatomySpinal CordBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceNeuroanatomySpinal CordBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsNeuronsMotor NeuronsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCellular NeuroscienceNeuronsMotor NeuronsResearch and Analysis MethodsAnimal StudiesExperimental Organism SystemsModel OrganismsMouse ModelsResearch and Analysis MethodsModel OrganismsMouse ModelsResearch and Analysis MethodsAnimal StudiesExperimental Organism SystemsAnimal ModelsMouse ModelsBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesCytoplasmBiology and life sciencesGeneticsGene expressionGene regulationSmall interfering RNABiology and life sciencesBiochemistryNucleic acidsRNANon-coding RNASmall interfering RNABiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCytoplasmic InclusionsMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsNeurodegenerative DiseasesMedicine and Health SciencesNeurologyNeurodegenerative DiseasesNEMF mutations in mice illustrate how Importin-β specific nuclear transport defects recapitulate neurodegenerative disease hallmarks
NEMF mutations in mice recapitulate neurodegenerative disease hallmarkshttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-3997-0421Plessis-BelairJonathanConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0009-0006-5471-8458RavanoKathrynInvestigationMethodology HanEllenInvestigationMethodology JannielloAubreyInvestigationMethodology https://orcid.org/0009-0009-9233-4035MolinaCatalinaInvestigationMethodology https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3327-537XSherRoger B.ConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York, United States of America2
Center for Nervous System Disorders, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York, United States of AmericaCoxGregory A.Editor .zip file.

## Data Availability
All Data are included in supplemental .zip file.

## Introduction
Nucleocytoplasmic transport (NCT) defects underlie several neurodegenerative disorders, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), frontal temporal dementia and frontal temporal lobar degeneration (FTD\FTLD), and Alzheimer’s and Alzheimer’s Related Dementias (AD/ADRD) [ – ]. Here we show that mutations in Nuclear Export Mediator Factor (NEMF) in mice result in Importin-β-specific nuclear import defects, cytoplasmic protein mis-localization, and recapitulate phenotypic and transcriptional alterations found in neurodegenerative disorders. We further show that transient pharmaceutical inhibition of Importin-β induces key proteinopathies and transcriptional alterations seen in neurodegenerative diseases.
NCT involves the regulated trafficking of proteins and RNA between the nucleus and the cytoplasm through the nuclear pore complex (NPC) [ ]. Smaller molecules (<40kDa) can freely migrate through the nuclear pore, whereas larger molecules require active transport mediated by nuclear transport receptors (NTRs, also known as karyopherins) such as importins and exportins [ ]. During nuclear import, nuclear import receptors (NIRs), such as Importin-β, directly bind their cargo in the cytoplasm or utilize importin-α as an adaptor to bind cargo proteins bearing a classical nuclear localization signal (cNLS) [ , ]. Other NIRs, such as Transportin-1, recognize different nuclear localization signals, such as a Proline-Tyrosine NLS (PY-NLS), for transport into the nucleus [ ].
Pathological disruption of NCT, such as the mis-localization of Nuclear Pore Complex proteins (Nups), NTRs, and Ran-GTPase, are seen in both animal models and in familial and sporadic forms of ALS, FTD, and AD/ADRD [ – ]. In addition, pathological cytoplasmic protein aggregates mark the progression of most neurodegenerative diseases [ , ]. One of the most frequently found protein aggregates comprises TAR-DNA binding protein-43 (TDP-43), normally a nuclear protein that, in disease, mis-localizes and aggregates in the cytoplasm [ ]. Cytoplasmic aggregation and loss of nuclear TDP-43 are observed in post-mortem neurons and glia in 97% of cases in ALS, 40% of cases in FTD, and in many cases of AD/ADRD [ ].
Amino acid substitutions in NEMF have been identified in multiple human patients exhibiting severe neurodevelopmental disorders [ – ]. However, the mechanisms through which these NEMF variants result in disease are unknown. While NEMF was initially associated with nuclear transport in Drosophila (Caliban) [ ], its canonical role has more recently been elucidated in the context of ribosome quality control (RQC). The RQC is recruited to stalled translation events [ – ], where NEMF plays a crucial role in targeting partially translated nascent chain polypeptides (NCPs) on the 60S ribosome for proteasomal degradation [ , , – ]. NEMF’s interaction with the 60S ribosome facilitates the recruitment and stabilization of the E3 ubiquitin Ligase Listerin (LTN1), promoting the ubiquitination of NCPs [ , , , , , ]. Additionally, NEMF can generate c-terminal alanine (and threonine) tails on NCPs (CATylation) to expose amino acids in the ribosomal exit tunnel for subsequent ubiquitination by LTN1 [ , , ]. These stalled translational events are most commonly a result of premature polyadenylation, where a poly (A) tail is inserted into the open reading frame resulting in the translation of lysine-AAA codons [ , , , – ]. Notably, these so-called “nonstop” lysine-rich polypeptides that escape degradation by the RQC, as well as other defective ribosomal products (DRiPs), will be transported into the nucleus and will accumulate into the nucleolus before degradation [ , ]. Furthermore, Importin-β has been demonstrated to bind to translating NCPs targeted to the nucleus, suggesting that protein quality control and nuclear import mechanisms are more directly interconnected [ ].
Mutations in both Listerin and Nemf in mice have been associated with neurodegenerative diseases [ , ]. Previously, Martin et al. [ ] described two mouse models with different N-ethyl N-nitrosourea (ENU)-induced missense mutations in Nemf which develop progressive motor neuron degeneration. These two mouse lines carrying homozygous mutations in NemfR86S/R86S and NemfR487G/R487G, henceforth NemfR86S and NemfR487G, show progressive neuromuscular degeneration correlated with progressive loss of neuromuscular junction (NMJ) occupancy and axonal degeneration, with the NemfR86S mice showing a more early-onset and severe phenotype. However, the exact nature of how these singe nucleotide polymorphisms result in a motor neuron disease and neurodegeneration remains unclear. In this study, we have demonstrated that the mutant mouse model, NemfR86S, exhibits impaired nuclear import of proteins containing canonical nuclear localization signals (cNLS), consequently leading to defects in nucleocytoplasmic transport both in vitro and in vivo. We have identified a specific defect in Importin-β mediated transport that manifests as both nuclear loss and cytoplasmic gain of NEMF, Importin-β, and TDP-43, along with a collapse of the Ran gradient. This dysregulation is further associated with the altered expression of transcripts associated with neurodegeneration, specifically Stmn2. Remarkably, the downregulation of Stmn2 observed in our Nemf mutant-mouse model can be reproduced through the transient induction of a nuclear import block in both murine and human cells using a small molecular antagonist of Importin-β, importazole. Our study reveals that there is a causative role for an Importin-β nuclear import deficiency upstream of the multiple proteinopathies and transcriptional pathologies found in neurodegenerative disease.

## Results

## Motor Neuron Degeneration is associated with Progressive Nuclear loss of mutant NEMF in Lumbar Spinal Cord
To investigate the mechanism by which the missense Nemf mutation in mice led to an age-dependent neurodegenerative phenotype associated with motor deficits [ ], we immunostained transverse lumbar spinal cords of wild type and NemfR86S homozygous mutant mice at 21 days (NemfR86S median lifespan: 20 days) [ ]. Lumbar spinal motor neurons were identified by ChAT-positive cells located in the ventral horn. In wild type (WT) mice, NEMF was found to be predominantly nuclear with diffuse cytoplasmic staining ( ). NemfR86S mice exhibited nuclear loss of NEMF with a significant cytoplasmic accumulation in the somata of ChAT positive motor neurons ( ). However, this phenotypic pathology is not exclusive to spinal motor neuron as staining in the primary motor cortex also displays a similar pattern of mis-localization ( ). Additionally, cytoplasmic mis-localization was also observed for Importin-β and TDP-43 ( , ). Interestingly, the loss of nuclear localization of NEMF and TDP-43 was exclusive to neurons in the ventral horn, consistent with lamina IX [ ] ( ).
 To investigate an expanded temporal scale of the disease progression, we turned to the late onset NemfR487G mouse that also displays a later-onset progressive neuromuscular disease with a milder disease phenotype [ ]. The gain of NEMF and TDP-43 cytoplasmic inclusions occurred later in these NemfR487G mice with their appearance beginning at approximately 6 months ( ). However, the significant nuclear loss of both NEMF and TDP-43 was observed later at 12 months, correlating more closely with disease onset ( ). Thus, nuclear loss and cytoplasmic gain of mutant NEMF and TDP-43 occur during disease progression in mice with either of these NEMF mutant alleles.

## NemfR86S exhibits specific Importin-β nuclear import defects
We generated WT and NemfR86S mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) to investigate the mechanisms underlying the NEMF mutant phenotypes. To measure impacts on nuclear import, we used a turboGFP in-frame with a canonical SV-40 Importin-β nuclear localization signal (GFP-3X-NLS), which we exogenously expressed in NemfR86S MEFs ( ). We found that GFP-3X-NLS appropriately translocated to the nucleus in WT MEFs, but predominantly remained in the cytoplasm in NemfR86S MEFs ( ). A control plasmid with cytoplasmic turboGFP without an NLS showed no difference in localization and was found diffuse in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm, highlighting that the GFP-3X-NLS is being retained in the cytoplasm in NemfR86S MEFs ( ). Importin-β and GFP-3X-NLS co-stains do not reveal any large sequestration of GFP-3X-NLS into cytoplasmic puncta in the NemfR86S MEFs, but do reveal diffuse cytoplasmic colocalization ( ). To determine whether this Importin-ß defect observed is an indirect effect of RQC dysfunction, we knocked down the RQC E3 ubiquitin ligase Ltn1 ( ). Knockdown of Ltn1 reduces RQC capacity and prevents the RQC from targeting NCPs for degradation, resulting in the aggregation of its substrates[ , , ]. We observed no significant difference in the ability to localize GFP-3X-NLS in with Ltn1 knockdown in WT MEFs ( ), highlighting that the GFP-3X-NLS is not an RQC substrate. Next, we knocked down NEMF ( ) to determine if this defective nuclear import is either a loss of function or a toxic gain of function phenotype from the mutant form. NEMF knockdown in the WT cells did not result in an overt quantitative nuclear import block, but did present with cytoplasmic inclusions ( ). NEMF knockdown in the NemfR86S only resulted in a 20% knockdown of transcript, but concurrently resulted in a large decrease in cell survival ( ), suggesting that NEMF knockdown has a significant toxic effect on these mutant cells.
 We then expressed a Proline-Tyrosine (PY) Transportin-1 targeted nuclear localization signal in-frame with mCherry and observed no significant difference in nuclear import ( ), indicating that only active Importin-β import, but not active Transportin-1 import, is affected. Proper nuclear import of the PY-NLS reporter in both WT and NemfR86S allowed us to create a chimeric protein expressing both a PY-NLS and a pKI nuclear export signal (pKINES) in-frame with an mCherry. Thus, following the initial import into the nucleus, this pKINES-PY-NLS nuclear export reporter would be shuttled out into the cytoplasm and indeed, both the WT and mutant NemfR86S are able to properly export this reporter ( ). To confirm that this nuclear import reporter GFP-3X-NLS is Importin-β specific, we transiently treated these MEFs with an Importin-β small molecular inhibitor Importazole (IPZ) [ ]. Indeed, inhibition of Importin-β with IPZ in WT cells resulted in the accumulation of the GFP-3X-NLS reporter in the cytoplasm but had no effect on the localization of GFP or the PY-NLS reporter ( ). Thus, mutant NEMF results in a nuclear transport defect that is specific to the Importin-β pathway, leaving transportin-1 mediated import and exportin-1 mediated export intact.
To further confirm that this defect is not a result of a passive nuclear import block, we digitonin-permeabilized these MEFs and measured the ability for 60-70kDa and 500kDa dextrans conjugated to FITC to passively diffuse into the nucleus. We observed no significant difference with 500kDa dextrans but observed a significantly greater nuclear localization of the 60-70kd dextrans in the NemfR86S MEFs, highlighting a potentially ‘leaky’ nuclear pore in the mutant cells ( ).

## RQC nonstop and poly (A) stalling reporters fail to localize to the nucleus in NemfR86S MEFs
RQC substrates that escape degradation have been previously described to be transported into the nucleus where they will then accumulate into the nucleolus [ ]. This accumulation into the nucleus was dependent on the lysine-enriched 3’ UTR, where poly-lysines tails were sufficient to cause nucleolar accumulation [ ]. The homology of these poly-lysine tails and lysine enriched canonical SV-40 NLS sequences suggests that the transport into the nucleus may be Importin-β dependent. Here we show that nonstop stalling reporters that escape degradation fail to be transported into the nucleus and accumulate in the cytoplasm of NemfR86S MEFs ( ). The hydrophobic nature of the 3’UTR in the nonstop reporter (GFP-Nonstop) increased its propensity to aggregate in the NemfR86S MEFs, presenting as cytoplasmic puncta ( ). In comparison, the addition of a Poly-Lysine track (Poly-K (AAA)) in the C terminal also failed to properly localize into the nucleus in the NemfR86S MEFs but lacked the high presence of cytoplasmic puncta ( ). Both of these substrates were found to be sequestered in the cytoplasm with Importin-β in our mutant cells, whereas this cytoplasmic sequestration was absent when expressing the GFP-Stop reporters ( ). Immunoblotting for these GFP reporters revealed a partial reduction in the CATylation ability as indicated by the reduction of modified nonstop substrates versus unmodified ( ), as previously described in yeast [ ]. We then tested whether this cytoplasmic accumulation was RQC dependent or if it was an Importin-β specific defect. We utilized puromycin which induces translational inhibition by incorporation into the nascent chain polypeptide and subsequent release from the ribosome ( ). This incorporation and release prevents the dissociation of the 60S and 40S ribosome, preventing NEMF and other RQC components from binding to the ribosome and targeting these defective ribosomal products for degradation [ ]. These puromycylated nascent chain polypeptides bypass RQC-mediated degradation and will also accumulate in the nucleolus [ ]. Indeed, when the NemfR86S MEFs were pulsed with puromycin (OP-Puro), we observed a reduction for these substrates to be properly transported into the nucleus compared to WT MEFs, resulting in their accumulation in the cytoplasm ( ). This cytoplasmic accumulation was also observed when WT MEFs were treated with an Importin-β antagonist IPZ [ ], highlighting the role of Importin-β as both a nuclear import mediator and a cytoplasmic chaperone ( ).
 

## In Situ Proximity Ligation Assay (PLA) reveals cytoplasmic NEMF R86S interactions with Importin-β
Importin-β has been shown to form cytoplasmic granules under basal conditions as well as under stress [ ]. It has been demonstrated that under conditions of stress such as neurodegenerative disease, both the abundance and size of these granules increases [ ]. To identify a mechanism for this mutant NemfR86S nuclear import defect, we co-stained for Importin-β and NEMF and observed an increase in the size, but not abundance of Importin-β granules ( ). This increase in size was also correlated with an increase in the number of granules colocalizing with NEMF in the R86S cells ( ). This prompted us to investigate whether the mutant NEMF protein directly interacts with Importin-β in the cytoplasm. We utilized an in-situ proximity ligation assay using probes for NEMF and Importin-β and saw both an increase in the mean PLA frequency as well as the mean PLA intensity in the mutant NemfR86S MEFs (Figs and ). Thus, there is an increase in the frequency of interaction between Importin-β and NEMF R86S relative to that with Importin-β and WT NEMF protein. Whether these interactions are a result of direct binding of mutant NEMF protein to Importin-β, or a byproduct of sequestration in a larger complex is yet to be determined [ ]. Interestingly, even in WT cells, there is some association of NEMF and Importin-β, indicating that NEMF may have some normal function in Importin-β biology.
 

## NemfR86S MEFs display cytoplasmic aggregates
The identification of NCT defects in this mutant NemfR86S model prompted us to investigate whether pathology was presented in the form of cytoplasmic aggregates. NemfR86S MEFs displayed a smaller cell area and a significantly decreased growth rate (Doubling time-WT:17.32h, NEMF R86S: 26.20h) ( ). Furthermore, a puromycin incorporation assay showed no significant differences in the incorporation of puromycin, highlighting no greater differences in protein synthesis ( ). Immunostaining for NEMF, TDP-43, Ran, and RanGAP1 protein revealed cytoplasmic puncta ( ). This phenotype was not uniformly observed, as only a fraction of the cells (20–40%) exhibited this aggregated phenotype ( ). In addition to the canonical nuclear import function of Importin-β, it has been described to act as a cytoplasmic chaperone to prevent aggregation-prone proteins from misfolding and accumulating into insoluble aggregates [ ]. The mis-localization into cytoplasmic puncta of NEMF, TDP-43, Ran, and RanGAP1 co-localized with Importin-β suggests that the primary defect of NEMF mutations is a direct dysfunction of Importin-β (Figs and ). AmyloGlo (Biosensis) labeling also revealed a significant increase in the amyloid-like signal in the cytoplasm in the mutant MEFs compared to the WT MEFs ( ). Treatment of these cells with Importin-β antagonist IPZ resulted in the lower cell survival in the NemfR86S MEFs with ~48% cell survival at 40μM as compared to ~85% cell survival in WT MEFs ( ). Despite the mis-localization of these nuclear transport factors, factors such as Exportin-1 and Transportin-1 were not observed to be mis-localized or aggregated ( ). Furthermore, other factors such as NPM1, a nucleosome marker that co-localizes with NEMF in nucleolar puncta, were also not observed mis-localized in the cytoplasm ( ). Moreover, ribosomal subunits 40S (RPS6) and 60S (RPL3) were also not observed overtly mis-localized ( ). Various nucleoporins (Nup153, Nup98, and mAb414 NPC) were also observed to be sequestered within Importin-β cytoplasmic puncta and showed a reduction in nuclear signal ( ). As TDP-43 was found to be mis-localized, pathological TDP-43 was identified through phospho-TDP-43 immunostaining and was found to be greatly increased in mutant cells (~21% of cells) ( ). We then biochemically isolated TDP-43 in WT and NemfR86S MEFs using sarkosyl insoluble fractionation [ ] and found an increase in levels of insoluble TDP-43 in mutant cells ( ). Immunostaining of spinal motor neurons in WT and mutant NemfR86S mice revealed cytoplasmic phospho-TDP-43 aggregation exclusive to these ChAT-positive motor neurons, with ~36% of these motor neurons displaying pTDP-43 cytoplasmic inclusions ( ). Subsequent staining of the late onset mutant NemfR487G spinal motor neurons revealed some phospho-TDP-43 positive motor neurons at 6 months (~4%), with more motor neurons positive at 12 months (~18%) ( ).
 Taken together, these findings demonstrate that NEMF mutations result in nuclear import defects and cause cytoplasmic protein aggregates, leading to the sequestration of nuclear transport factors and TDP-43 pathology.

## NemfR86S mice display altered expression of neurodegenerative disease related genes
The nuclear loss of TDP-43 prompted us to examine transcriptional profiles in this mutant model to determine whether there were similar transcriptional changes as those seen in neurodegeneration with TDP-43 dysfunction. Indeed, a subset of ALS- and AD-linked genes displayed altered expression in the mutant MEFs, with Stmn2 and Apoe being highly down- and upregulated, respectively ( ). qPCR validation in MEFs shows that both transcripts are significantly dysregulated in the mutant, with significant dysregulation also found in lumbar spinal cord tissue, but not in brain tissue ( ). Other notable genes found to be dysregulated in neurodegeneration and were differentially expressed in the mutants include , Bax, and Sort1 [ – ], which were significantly dysregulated in vitro but not in vivo (Figs and ). Another gene commonly dysregulated in neurodegeneration, Chmp2b [ – ], was downregulated in all tissue types, but was not significant ( ). Investigations into bonafide TDP-43 missplicing events revealed an increase in exon inclusion of Sort1 and Dnajc5 ( ), consistent with nuclear loss of TDP-43 [ , ]. Additionally, an mutant MEFs display upregulation of long noncoding RNA, Meg3, which has been implicated in necroptosis in Alzheimer’s disease ( ) [ ]. To determine neuronal-specific relevance of these changes, we isolated primary cortical neurons from WT and NemfR86S mice and cultured them for 14 days prior to RNA extraction ( ). We observed a significant downregulation of Stmn2 transcripts, but not Apoe ( ). To validate RNAseq data to qPCR data, simple linear regressions were used to model fold change in RNA-seq data and qPCR data, showing significant correlations in MEFs and spinal cord tissue, but not brain tissue ( ). Gene ontology and pathway analysis of the RNA-seq dataset of WT and mutant NemfR86S MEFs revealed biological processes involved in cell adhesion, skeletal system development, and negative regulation of cell proliferation ( ). An investigation into STMN2 protein levels revealed STMN2 protein loss in vitro and in vivo, and specifically in the spinal cord, but not the brain, consistent with RNA downregulation ( ). A possible confound for the differences in the degree of dysregulation from in vitro to in vivo and between spinal cord and brain in vivo, could result from both the initial onset of pathology (i.e. spinal motor neurons vs brain) and the nature of the non-specificity of bulk tissue RNA extraction. Collectively, these observations, both in vitro and in vivo, indicate that a primary pathology triggered by canonical nuclear import defects results in TDP-43 pathology and downstream transcriptional dysregulation in sporadic forms of ALS-FTD and neurodegenerative disease.
 

## A transient nuclear import block recapitulates transcriptional downregulation of Stmn2
To investigate if impairing the Importin-β pathway itself recapitulates the phenotypes seen in the NEMF mutant, we targeted the nuclear import pathway through the small molecular inhibitor of Importin-β, IPZ [ ]. A cell viability assay was used to determine sub-toxic levels of importazole (20uM) following a 48h treatment ( ). We found that transiently blocking Importin-β nuclear import results in the mis-localization of TDP-43 with the presence of cytoplasmic phospho-TDP-43 in ~15% of cells (Figs , and ) and in the downregulation of Stmn2 transcript, with no alteration of Apoe transcripts ( ). To confirm that Stmn2 downregulation was in fact downstream of blocking nuclear import, and not simply a side effect of importazole treatment, we also treated MEFs with sub-toxic levels of ivermectin (IVM, 10uM, ), a known Importin-β antagonist [ ]. Using this transient nuclear import block, we observed a similar downregulation of Stmn2 transcript, with no Apoe dysregulation ( ). The lack of Apoe dysregulation downstream of a nuclear import block suggests that Apoe upregulation may be an Importin-β-independent event or may have lower sensitivity to short-term transient Importin-β blockage than that seen in vivo. To further ensure that the downregulation observed was not a result of a decrease in RNA quality, as has previously been described to be a confounding factor [ ], RNA quality was checked and confirmed to be of the highest quality, with RINe values ranging from 9.4–9.7 across all samples ( ). Following these observations, Importazole-treated RNA samples were sent for bulk RNA sequencing to determine which transcripts were similarly dysregulated to our NemfR86S MEFs ( ). We found 20 commonly dysregulated genes in both conditions, with 15 of those genes similarly downregulated, and Stmn2 being the only ALS-linked gene commonly downregulated ( ). A gene ontology analysis also described cell adhesion as being the most significant dysregulated pathway (similar to the NemfR86S MEFs) with collagen fibril organization, extracellular matrix organization, and many cholesterol and lipid processes also observed as dysregulated pathways ( and Figs). We then isolated primary cortical neurons from WT mice and cultured them for 14 days prior to RNA extraction ( ). These primary neurons were treated with IPZ for 48 hours prior to RNA extraction. Similar to NemfR86S primary neurons ( ), we observed a significant downregulation of Stmn2, but not Apoe transcripts ( ).
 Using Apoe and Stmn2 dysregulation as a marker for transcriptional dysregulation, we targeted Nemf and Ltn1 by siRNA knockdown in WT and NemfR86S ( ) and saw that Nemf knockdown causes a small, but significant reduction in Stmn2 transcript and an almost 3-fold increase in Apoe transcript, comparable to the mutant mouse model ( ). In comparison, Ltn1 knockdown samples did not perturb Stmn2 and Apoe transcriptional regulation ( ). The results indicate that Apoe dysregulation may be more related to NEMF impairment than to Importin-β impairment, while Stmn2 seems to be more directly impaired by Importin-β.
To confirm that this transcriptional dysregulation can be recapitulated in human models, we treated SK-N-MC neuroblastoma cells with importazole for 48h and observed an increase in the cytoplasmic mis-localization of TDP-43 with the presence of cytoplasmic phospho-TDP-43 ( ). This TDP-43 mis-localization was accompanied by a ~50% reduction in STMN2 transcripts ( ). We then proceeded to knock down NEMF (SDCCAG1) and LTN1 (RNF160) in HEK293 and SK-N-MC cells ( ) and observed a similar downregulation of full-length STMN2 transcripts in siNEMF treated SK-N-MC cells, but not siLTN1 treated samples ( ) siNEMF treated HEK293 cells did show a trend towards lower STMN2 transcripts, but was not significant ( ). We also observed an increase in APOE transcripts in siNEMF treated HEK293 cells ( ), but not in siLTN1 treated HEK293 cells or in both treatments in SK-N-MC cells ( ). To further elucidate how nuclear import mechanisms can dysregulate STMN2 transcriptional regulation, we targeted nuclear import pathways through siRNA knockdown (Importin-β (KPNB), Importin-α (KPNA), and Transportin-1 (TPNO1)) in HEK293 cells ( ) and Importin-β in SK-N-MC cells ( ). Interestingly, we see a downregulation of STMN2 transcripts when Importin-β nuclear import is inhibited either by Importin-β siRNA-treated or IPZ-treated samples in both HEK293 and SK-N-MC cells ( ). Furthermore, only knockdown of Importin-α in HEK293 resulted in a significant upregulation of APOE ( ).
Lastly, Importin-β upregulation has been demonstrated to rescue hallmarks of TDP-43 proteinopathies and has demonstrated strong therapeutic potential in neurodegenerative proteinopathies [ , ]. Using these strategies, we upregulated Importin-β expression through transient transfection to determine if the upregulation of this protein can result both the dissolution and disaggregation of TDP-43 in these NemfR86S MEFs. Indeed, overexpression of Importin-β-GFP resulted in a decrease in the presence of cytoplasmic TDP-43 inclusions in these Importin-β-GFP-positive cells ( ). Furthermore, overexpression of Importin-β-GFP was able to partially restore depleted levels of Stmn2 in these NemfR86S MEFs, and almost completely restored levels of Apoe ( ).
Altogether, our results show that targeting nuclear import pathways can recapitulate Stmn2 downregulation in both mice and human cell lines, whereas Apoe dysregulation is non-neuronal specific and may be more specific to NEMF impairment than Importin-β.

## Discussion
A common pathological hallmark of neurodegeneration is the accumulation of cytoplasmic amyloid-like aggregated proteins [ , , ]. Our data, utilizing two independent single nucleotide polymorphisms in Nemf (R86S and R487G), demonstrate that disrupted Importin-β nuclear import results in the mis-localization of nuclear proteins to the cytoplasm. Importantly, this disruption of NCT is specific to Importin-β nuclear import and not to Transportin-1 or RQC function.
Recent evidence indicates that cells actively promote the sequestration of misfolded proteins into aggregates, which are further compartmentalized within distinct cellular compartments [ , , ]. NIRs have been shown to operate in the cytoplasm and disaggregate NLS-bearing cargoes to prevent deleterious phase transitions [ ]. This ability to inhibit and reverse both physiological and deleterious phase transitions has been implicated in multiple forms of neurodegenerative diseases, wherein RNA-binding proteins or Prion-like domains are lost from the nucleus and accumulate in the cytoplasm [ – ]. This is demonstrated in the role of Importin-β cooperating with Importin-α to prevent and reverse TDP-43 condensation and fibrillization [ , ]. Furthermore, Importin-β upregulation has been shown to rescue hallmarks of TDP-43 proteinopathy [ , ]. The potential of these NIRs to serve as cytoplasmic chaperones and restore the nuclear function of RNA-binding proteins highlights their therapeutic potential [ ].
It is difficult to establish whether the mutant NEMF R86S is pathologically interacting with Importin-β directly or is indirectly associating with Importin-β through aggregate-induced sequestration. However, the absence of nuclear import defects in an Ltn1 knockdown model highlights an RQC-independent specificity for NEMF in these observed import defects. This fact, along with the greater association of the NEMF R86S protein with Importin-β through PLA, highlights a role for NEMF interactions with Importin-β. Furthermore, the inability for RQC substrates such as GFP-Nonstop and GFP-PolyK-(AAA)10 to properly localize to the nucleus in the NemfR86S suggests that nuclear import mechanisms may work closely with protein degradation pathways. It has been well described that PolyK tracts are known to act as nuclear and nucleolar localization sequences [ , , ], whereas the 3’UTR sequences found in the GFP-Nonstop are unable to properly localize these proteins to the nucleus and will sequester in the cytoplasm [ ]. Therefore, we can infer that the inability for NemfR86S MEFs to localize the GFP-Nonstop to the nucleus through their PolyK tracks results in their sequestration into cytoplasmic inclusions through these 3’UTR domains, whereas the GFP-PolyK and GFP-3X-NLS remain relatively diffuse. These observations prompted us to determine if NEMF’s engagement in the RQC dictated the fate of these aberrant proteins. Using puromycylated nascent chains which disrupt the interaction of NEMF with the 60S ribosome [ , ], we were able to observe a similar lack of nucleolar targeting which was dependent on the ability for Importin-β to interact with its substrates. Altogether, this suggests that Importin-β’s function as both a nuclear import receptor and cytoplasmic chaperone is disturbed in this NemfR86S model, wherein the protein is sequestered away from its typical function, and that we can recapitulate many of these in vivo alterations through transient Importin-β pharmacological impairment.
The early onset of disease in the NemfR86S mutant mice indicates that the cytoplasmic accumulation of NEMF and TDP-43 may be a result of a greater propensity to mis-localize in the R86S variant when compared to the R487G, whether through direct or indirect mechanisms. Importantly, the mis-localization of NEMF, Importin-β, Ran, RanGAP1, and TDP-43 in the mutant NemfR86S MEFs is observed broadly throughout the cell population whereas the presence of cytoplasmic puncta is only observed in a subset of the cell population. This indicates that the nuclear import defects may precede the accumulation and sequestration of NTRs in the cytoplasm. Furthermore, the presence of insoluble TDP-43 and phospho-TDP-43 in the NemfR86S MEFs and spinal cord motor neurons is consistent with TDP-43 pathology in neurodegeneration [ , ].
Reduced Stmn2 expression has been implicated in human TDP-43 pathologies in ALS and AD, as well as in Parkinson’s disease patients and FTLD-tau patients [ , – ]. Furthermore, the genetic loss of Stmn2 alone in mice results in motor neuropathy [ , ]. The loss of Stmn2 transcript in our NemfR86S mouse model suggests either that Stmn2 is downregulated directly because of defects in nuclear import, that its down regulation is a result of the mis-localization of TDP-43 itself, or some combination of the two. The lack of a role for TDP-43 regulation of Stmn2 in mice [ ] suggests a parallel pathway in which nuclear import dysregulation can result in these differentially expressed genes. Nevertheless, our observations of pathological TDP-43 insoluble aggregates, TDP-43 missplicing events, and a downregulation of Stmn2 mRNA and protein after a nuclear import block indicates a direct causal role of defective nuclear import upstream of these pathologies. Additional dysregulation of transcripts, such as the upregulation of Meg3 and Apoe, as well as the downregulation of , are seen in our model and mirror changes seen in neurodegenerative disease [ , ]. Our investigations show that by disrupting NEMF and Importin-β pathways through knockdown in human cell lines, we can induce a significant decrease in Stmn2 transcript. Interestingly, knockdown of NEMF and Importin-α, but not Importin-β causes an upregulation of APOE transcripts, again mimicking similar phenotypes observed in mice. The divergence for the dysregulation of Apoe and Stmn2 suggests that these transcripts are more likely dysregulated through separate downstream pathways, with Stmn2 being dysregulated by defects in nuclear import and Apoe by other unknown mechanisms, non-specific to neuronal cells. However, the ability for Importin-β upregulation to rescue both Stmn2 and Apoe in our NemfR86S, even if partially suggests a divergence of pathology that can be mediated by both driving nuclear import as well as the disaggregating chaperone activity of Importin-β.
We have demonstrated that there is a direct impact of Importin-β nuclear import dysregulation on multiple phenotypes seen in neurodegeneration through the following: (1) NEMF-specific dysregulation of Importin-β nuclear import (but not of Transportin-1 import), (2) mis-localization and aggregation of NEMF, TDP43, Ran, RanGAP1 and Importin-β, (3) amyloid-like aggregation, (4) PLA cytoplasmic association between NEMF R86S and Importin-β, (5) cytoplasmic accumulation of NEMF, Importin-β, and TDP43 in Nemf mutant mouse spinal cord, (6) transient Importin-β-specific nuclear import blockage knockdown recapitulates these transcriptional alterations (7) and upregulation of Importin-β can partially rescue these transcriptional alterations. These dysfunctions are not, however, recapitulated upon knockdown of NEMF’s RQC partner LTN1, indicating a specific, non-RQC role for NEMF in impairing Importin-β nuclear import. Collectively, our data suggests that Importin-β nuclear import dysfunction serves as a primary upstream pathomechanism for TDP-43-mislocalization and phosphorylation, as well as transcriptional dysfunction seen in neurodegenerative proteinopathies.

## Methods

## Ethics statement
All mouse husbandry and procedures were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Stony Brook University (1556599) and were carried out according to the National institutes of Health Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.

## WT-NEMF and R86S-NEMF Mouse Embryonic Fibroblasts (MEFs) Derivation and Culture
Dams were euthanized by cervical dislocation. A small incision was made on the abdomen to expose the embryos. Embryos were quickly transferred to a 10cm petri dish with PBS 1X and dissected out of its respective muscular sac. The embryos were further transferred to another 10cm petri dish with PBS 1X and everything was moved to a laminar flow hood. Embryos were transferred to a fresh petri dish with Trypsin-EDTA (0.05%) and finely chopped into fine pieces with a fresh blade and placed at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 5–10 minutes. Chopped embryos were passed through a 20 ½ gauge syringe. Fresh Media (Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (10% FBS, Glutamine 1X (Glutamax), PenStrep)) was used to neutralize the trypsin and cells were transferred into a 50mL tube where the cells were triturated 5–10 times before being divided and placed into a dish and placed back into a 37°C, 5% CO2 incubator for 3 days. Media was changed once on day 3 and cells were passaged for 14 days until they were frozen back in liquid nitrogen. WT NEMF and R86S-NEMF MEFs were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (10% FBS, Glutamine 1X (Glutamax), PenStrep) at 37°C, 5% CO2 and passaged every two days with Trypsin-EDTA (0.05%). Reagents used indicated in .

## HEK293 Culture
HEK293 cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (10% FBS, 1mM Glutamax, PenStrep, Non-essential amino acids) at 37°C, 5% CO2 and passaged every two-four days with Trypsin-EDTA (0.05%). Reagents used indicated in .

## SK-N-MC Culture
SK-N-MC cells (ATCC) were cultured according to the vendor’s protocol. In brief, cells were maintained in ATCC-formulated Eagle’s Minimum Essential Medium (10% FBS, PenStrep) at 37°C in 5% CO2. Reagents used indicated in .

## Microplate MEF Plating
Coverslips (Carolina Biological Supply) were washed with 70% ethanol in a sterile petri dish to sterilize and then allowed to air dry for 30mins. Using a 24 well microplate, the sterilized coverslips were then placed inside each well, and then 1mL of the 0.1%(w/v) gelatin (Sigma) was added and incubated at 37°C for 1hr. The excess gelatin was aspirated with a vacuum and the coverslips were again incubated at 37°C for 1hr.

## Plasmid and SiRNA Transfections
Transfection of plasmids and siRNAs ( ) was performed using Lipofectamine 3000 and Lipofectamine 2000 (Life Technologies) following manufacturer’s instructions. Experiments were performed 48 hours after transfections of plasmids and siRNAs. Control transfections were performed using a scrambled control.

## Nuclear Import Block
Cells were treated with 20uM and 10uM of importazole (Sigma) and ivermectin (Sigma) respectively for 48 hours at 37°C 5% CO2.

## Immunofluorescent Staining
Cells were chemically fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS(1X). Each well was then rinsed with PBS(1X). The cells were then permeabilized with 0.1% TritonX-100/PBS for 10mins at room temperature. The cells were then blocked at room temperature with 5% NGS/PBS/0.1% Tween-20. The cells were then incubated with the respective primary antibody in 5% NGS/0.1% Tween-20/PBS overnight at 4°C. The primary antibodies used are listed in . The next day, the cells were rinsed 3 times for 5mins with 0.1% Tween-20/PBS(1X). The cells are then incubated with the respective secondary antibodies in 5% NGS/0.1% Tween-20/PBS for 2hrs in the dark at room temperature. The secondary antibodies used are listed in . The cells were then rinsed 3 times for 5mins with 0.1% Tween-20/PBS and stored temporarily with 200μL of PBS(1X) in the dark at 4°C. Using sterile slides, 20–25μL of Prolong glass with NucBlue (Thermo Fisher) was added to the slide. The liquid was then aspirated from the well and using an SE 5 tissue curved forceps, the coverslips were gently picked up and then placed with the cell layer (top) down on the slide. The slide is then cured in the dark at 4°C for 24hrs. Confocal images were taken by an Olympus FV1000 Laser Scanning Confocal. Laser settings (laser strength, gain, and offset) and magnification were maintained across treatment groups. Post-processing of images was performed by ImageJ and Cell Profiler as described below.

## Proximity Ligation Assay (PLA)
PLA was performed as described in the DuoLink In Situ PLA protocol (Millipore Sigma). In brief, cells were seeded onto gelatin coated coverslips and grown overnight. Cells were chemically fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS (1X). Each well was then rinsed with PBS (1X). The cells were then permeabilized with 0.1% TritonX-100/PBS for 10mins at room temperature. Cells were blocked for 60 minutes in DuoLink Blocking Solution at 37°C for 60mins. Cells were then incubated overnight at 4°C with the respective primary antibody combination in Duolink Antibody Diluent. Cells were washed twice in Duolink Wash Buffer A and then incubated in PLA probe solution for 60mins at 37°C. Cells were then washed twice in Duolink Wash Buffer A and then incubated in ligation solution for 30mins at 37°C. Cells were then washed twice in Duolink Wash Buffer A and then incubated in amplification solution for 100mins at 37°C. Cells were then washed twice in Duolink Wash Buffer B and washed once in 0.01X Wash Buffer B for 1 minute. Cells were then Mounted with Duolink PLA mounting media with DAPI. Confocal images were taken by an Olympus FV1000 Laser Scanning Confocal. Laser settings (laser strength, gain, and offset) and magnification were maintained across treatment groups. Post-processing of images was performed by ImageJ and Cell Profiler as described below.

## Dextran nuclear exclusion analysis
Analysis of the Nuclear Pore Complex using the plasma membrane permeabilization was performed as previously described [ ]. In brief, cells were seeded onto gelatin coated coverslips and grown overnight. Optimization of permeabilization was performed first on 3 test coverslips. Cells were washed once in PBS (1X) at 37°C. Microplates were placed on ice and cells were washed once in ice cold PBS (1X). Permeabilization buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 110 mM KOAc, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.25 M sucrose, and protease inhibitors) was then added to the cells and incubated for 5mins. The buffer was then replaced with permeabilization buffer containing 20ug/mL of digitonin and incubated for 4, 7, and 10mins for each coverslip to optimize permeabilization time. Cells were then washed 4 times with diffusion buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 110 mM KOAc, 5 mM sodium chloride, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.25 M sucrose, and protease inhibitors). 2μl of diffusion assay solution (diffusion buffer with 0.6mg/mL 500kDa FITC-dextrans) was placed onto a glass slide and coverslips were lifted and mounted onto the slide. The coverslips were sealed with clear nail polished, incubated for 15mins and imaged on the Olympus FV1000 Laser Scanning Confocal. These steps were repeated with 60-70kDa and 500kDa FITC-dextrans at the optimal permeabilization time where the 500kDa FITC-dextrans were found in cytoplasm but excluded from the nucleus. Laser settings (laser strength, gain, and offset) and magnification were maintained across treatment groups. Post-processing of images was performed by ImageJ and Cell Profiler as described below.

## Puromycylation of Nascent Chain Polypeptides
Cells were grown on gelatin-coated glass coverslips as described above. Labeling of newly synthesized proteins was performed by incubating the cells in 25uM O-propargyl-puromycin (OP-Puro) (BioVision) for 2hrs with or without Importazole (40μM) (Sigma). Samples were incubated for 2hrs with each treatment. Following the incubation period, cells were rinsed once with PBS(1X) and then chemically fixed in 4% PFA in PBS(1X) for 10mins at room temperature and permeabilized for 15mins with 0.1% TritonX-100 in PBS(1X). Labeling of the OP-Puro-labeled peptides for immunolabeling was performed following EZ Click Global Protein Synthesis Assay Kit Protocol. In brief, cells were incubated for 30mins at room temperature in EZClick Reaction cocktail and then washed for once in PBS. Immunostaining occurred after ‘Click’ Chemistry reaction. Confocal images were taken by an Olympus FV1000 Laser Scanning Confocal. Laser settings (laser strength, gain, and offset) and magnification were maintained across treatment groups. Post-processing of images was performed by ImageJ and Cell Profiler as described below.

## Growth assay
Cells were seeded on a 24 well plate at a cell density of 10,000 cells per well. Using Agilent Lionheart Imager, three regions of interests in the well were imaged for 48 hours every 15mins. Cell growth was standardized by starting cell number.

## RIPA Lysis Protein Extractions
Cells were washed twice with 5mL of pre-chilled PBS(1X). 500μL of RIPA lysis buffer (Sigma) supplemented with protease inhibitor was added to the flask and then incubated on ice for 5mins. The cells were scraped and then transferred to a 1.5mL microtube. The lysate was then agitated for 30mins at 4°C and then centrifuged for 20mins at 12,000rpms at 4°C. The supernatant was then transferred to a pre-chilled microtube and stored at -80°C.

## Sarkosyl Insoluble Fractionation
Pathological TDP-43 aggregates were biochemically isolated as previously described in Manuela et al 2019 [ ]. In brief, cells grown in a 6 well plate were washed twice in 1ml of PBS (1X). 100ul of 1X HS Buffer (10mM Tris, pH 7.4, 15mM NaCl, 0.5mM EDTA, 1mM DTT, protease and phosphatase inhibitors) supplemented with 0.5% Sarkosyl (Sigma) and Benzonase Endonuclease (12mM MgCl2 with 250U/Sample Benzonase) (Sigma) was added to the wells and the cells were scraped into a 1.5ml microtube. The wells were washed 1X with 1X HS Buffer, 0.5% Sarkosyl and added to the microtube. 200ul of 2X HS Buffer, 4% Sarkossyl was added to the lysate and incubated on ice for 45mins with vortexing in 10min intervals. Following cell lysis, 200ul of ice cold 1X HS Buffer, 0.5% Sarkosyl was added the sample and then centrifuged at max speed for 20mins at RT. The supernatant was collected as the soluble fraction, and the pellet was washed twice with PBS 1X. Pellets were frozen at -80°C until SDS PAGE.

## Pierce BCA protein assay
The standards were prepared according to the Test Tube protocol provided by the Pierce BCA (Thermo Fisher). 10μL of each standard was pipetted into appropriately labeled 500μL microtubes and repeated for each label. 200μL of working reagent was added to each tube and incubated in a water bath at 37°C for 30mins. The standards were analyzed on the NanoDrop at 562nm to establish a standard curve and the samples were then analyzed on the curve.

## SDS-PAGE
10μg of lysate was prepared with 50mM dTT (Biorad) and 4X laemli buffer (Biorad). The solution was vortexed quickly and boiled for 5mins at 95degC. The lysates were then chilled briefly on ice and then loaded onto a Stain-Free mini-protean 10 well pre-cast gel (BioRad) and mini-protean tank (BioRad) with a Chameleon 800 MW ladder (Licor). The gels were run at 200V for approximately 45mins in Tris/Glycine/SDS Running Buffer (BioRad). Gels were then equilibrated in transfer buffer (20% methanol) (BioRad) and total protein was imaged using a ChemiDoc Imaging System (BioRad).

## Semi-dry Transfer (PVDF .2um)
The PVDF membrane was pre-wet in methanol, then rinsed with ultra-pure water. The membrane and 6 filter papers are equilibrated for 20mins in transfer buffer. A gel sandwich is then prepared with 3 filter papers, gel, membrane, 3 filter papers, respectively. The transfer is then run for 90mins, with the current monitored to maintain 80mA-240mA. After the transfer, the membrane is removed and allowed to dry completely. The membrane is then re-activated with methanol, and rinsed once with TBS (1X), then stored in TBS(1X) in the fridge until immunoblotting.

## Immunoblotting
The membrane is rinsed with TBS(1X) and then incubated with TBS-Based Odyssey blocking buffer for 1hr at room temperature with gentle rocking. The blocking buffer is then discarded, and the membrane is incubated in blocking buffer supplemented with 0.1% Tween-20 and primary antibody overnight with gentle rocking. The primary antibodies used are listed in the . The membrane is then washed with TBS-T (0.1% Tween-20) 3 times for 5mins with gentle shaking. The membrane is then incubated with blocking buffer (0.1% Tween-20) and the respective secondary antibody at room temperature for 2hrs with gentle rocking. The secondary antibodies used are listed in the . The membrane is then washed with TBS-T 3 times for 5mins. The membrane is then rinsed with TBS(1X) and imaged with the Odyssey Scanner (Licor).

## Mouse strains, husbandry, and genotyping
Tail tissue was lysed in proteinase K at 55deg C overnight and extracted DNA was used for genotyping. Genotyping for B6J-NemfR86S was performed via PCR using the following primers: forward primer specific to wild-type allele: 5′-AACATTTGAAGAGTCGGGGA-3′; forward primer specific to mutant allele: 5′-AACATTTGAAGAGTCGGGGT-3′; reverse primer common for both alleles: 5′-GCAGGTGGATGGTAGCAACG-3′. Similarly, for the genotyping of the B6J-Nemf
R487G mice the following primers were used: forward primer specific to wild-type allele: 5′-TGCTGCTAAAAAAACCCGGA-3′; forward primer specific to mutant allele: 5′-TGCTGCTAAAAAAACCCGGG-3′; reverse primer common for both alleles: 5′-AAAGCCCTTGCTGCAAAGCC-3′.

## Primary neuron isolation and culture
P0/P1 pups were euthanized by cervical dislocation. Cortices were quickly dissected from the brain in 2mL of Hibernate-A/B27(0.5mM GlutaMAX, PenStrep, 1% B27) at 4°C in a 35mm dish. Cortices were minced with as scalpel and transferred into a tube containing Papain Digestion Medium (100units Papain in 2mL Hibernate-A) and incubated for 30mins at 30°C and agitated on a platform shaker at 170rpm. Slices are transferred to a 15mL conical containing 2mL of Hibernate-A/B27 and allowed to settle for 5mins. Slices are titurated 10 times with a siliconized 9 inch Pasteur pipette with a tip fire polished to an opening of 0.7 to 0.9μm diameter. Slices are allowed to settle for the supernatant to be transferred to a new tube, and the tituration is repeated in another 2mL of Hibernate-A/B27. The cells in the supernatant were pelleted by centrifugation at 80 x g for 5mins. The remaining supernatant was discarded, the cells were gently resuspended in 1-3mL of Hibernate-A/B27. Cells were then counted by hemocytometer. The cells were further pelleted by centrifugation at 80 x g for 5mins. The supernatant was discarded, and the cell pellet was resuspended in an appropriate volume of Neurobasal-A/B27(B27 1X, PenStrep, 1X GlutaMax) and the cells were plated at 80% of plating volume. The medium was removed 30-45mins post plating and replaced with fresh medium to prevent debris from settling along with the cells. Cells were maintained at 37°C in 5% CO2 and cultured for 2 weeks with media changes every 2 days.

## Spinal Cord Isolation
Mice were euthanized by carbon dioxide inhalation and immediately exsanguinated by cardiac puncture using a 1mL syringe with a 25 gauge needle. Using small surgical scissors and forceps, the dorsal skin was removed. Next, the location of the atlanto-occipital joint was visualized by repeated flexion and extension of the spinal column and palpation. Using large scissors, animals were decapitated at the atlanto-occipital joint, exposing the cervical spinal cord. Following decapitation, a clean transverse cut was made through the lumbar portion of the spine, cranial to the iliac crest. Moving from caudal to cranial, the vertebral column was dissected from the ventral portion. The entire vertebral column was rinsed with PBS 1X and placed in a 15mL conical tube with 4% PFA for 20mins at 4°C. During this stage, skull cap is removed with brain gently teased from the cranial cavity in a rostro caudal direction. Micro-dissection forceps are used to gently tease apart the cranial nerves. The brain is then rinsed in PBS 1X and placed in a 15ml conical tube with 4% PFA at 4°Cwith agitation overnight. The vertebral column stored in 4% PFA is then placed into a 100mm petri dish with PBS 1X. Moving from caudal to cranial, fine-tipped offset bone nippers were used to reveal the dorsal aspect of the spinal cord. The vertebral column is then held vertically, and the spinal cord is eased from the spinal canal using micro-dissection forceps and placed into the 100mm petri dish. The spinal cord was then placed into a new 15ml conical tube with 4% PFA at 4°C with agitation overnight. The following day, the brain and spinal cord are both transferred to 30% sucrose (w/v) for an additional 24h. The following day, the spinal cord is sectioned above the lumbar enlargement region with microscissors. The brain, the lumbar region and the thoracic and cervical regions are both placed in optimal cutting temperature (OCT) and stored in -80°C.

## Cryosectioning
Lumbar spinal cords and cervical and thoracic spinal cords stored in OCT were placed in -20°C for one hour prior to cryosectioning to allow for the temperature to equilibrate. Spinal cords were then sectioned transversely in the cranial to caudal direction at 30μm slices and placed free-floating in a 24 well microplate filled with PBS 1X at 20 sections per well. Sections were allowed to equilibrate in PBS 1X for 1 hour. Sections were then rinsed with PBS 1X to remove residual OCT and were then redistributed to a 48 well plate in PBS for immunoblotting.

## Spinal cord immunoblotting
Spinal Cords were rinsed with PBS (1X). Spinal Cords were then permeabilized in 0.3% TritonX-100/PBS 1 hour at room temperature with agitation. The spinal cords were then blocked at room temperature with 5% NGS/PBS/0.1% TritonX-100. The spinal cords were then incubated with the respective primary antibody in 5% NGS/PBS/0.1% TritonX-100 overnight at 4degC. The primary antibodies used are listed in . The next day, the spinal cords were washed 3 times for 15mins with 0.1% TritonX-100/PBS(1X). The spinal cords are then incubated with the respective secondary antibodies in 5% NGS/PBS/0.1% TritonX-100 for 2hrs in the dark at room temperature. The secondary antibodies used are listed in . The spinal cords were then washed 3 times for 15mins with 0.1% TritonX-100/PBS(1X). The spinal cords were rinsed with PBS 1X. The spinal cords were then rinsed with 70% ethanol, and then incubated with Auto-fluorescent eliminator (EMD Millipore) for 5mins. The spinal cords were then rinsed 2 times for 5mins with 70% ethanol. Spinal cords were rehydrated in PBS (1X) for 5mins and then transferred to phosphate buffer (1X). Using a dissecting microscope, spinal cord sections were then mounted onto Superfrost Plus charged slides (Fisherbrand) and allowed to dry. 200μL of Fluoromount with DAPI (Sigma) was then added to the slide and a #1.5 22x48mm coverslip (Fisherbrand) was mounted on top. Confocal images were taken by an Olympus FV1000 Laser Scanning Confocal. Laser settings (laser strength, gain, and offset) and magnification were maintained across treatment groups. Post-processing of images was performed by ImageJ and Cell Profiler as described below.

## RNA extraction
Spinal cord and brain tissue was isolated as described above and then frozen at -80°C. Tissue samples were homogenized in 1ml of TRIZOL reagent with a power homogenizer (Fisher Scientific). The sample was then transferred to a phase lock gel tube, shaken vigorously, and incubated at room temperature for 5mins. 200μL of chloroform was added, shaken vigorously again for 15s and then incubated for 2mins at room temperature. The sample is then centrifuged for 15mins at 12,000gs at 4°C. The aqueous phase is then mixed with an equal volume of ethanol and then the RNA is isolated using a PureLink RNA mini kit by manufacturer’s instructions.

## qPCR
RNA (200ng) was reverse transcribed (Superscript IV Reverse Transcriptase (Thermo Fisher)) and the output volume of 20μL was diluted in nuclease-free water to 40μL for a working concentration of 5ng/μL. Real time PCR was performed using SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) on a QuantStudio 3 System (Applied Biosystems) with reaction specificity confirmed by melt curve analysis. All comparisons (Control vs Experimental) for each qPCR reaction was run on the same qPCR plate and was run in a triplicate. For qPCR primer sequence, see .

## Tissue protein extraction
Spinal cord and brain tissue was isolated as described above and then frozen at-80°C until protein extraction. Tissue samples were homogenized with a microtube pestle in 500ul of RIPA lysis buffer (Sigma) supplemented with protease inhibitors. The tissue was then passed through a 70μm cell filter and collected in a 1.5mL microtube. The lysate was then agitated at 300rpms for 30mins at 4°C and then centrifuged for 20mins at 12,000rpms at 4°C. The supernatant was then transferred to a pre-chilled microtube and stored at -80°C.

## RNA Seq of NEMFR86S MEFs
Concentrated RNA was sent for bulk RNAseq to Azenta. In brief, sample quality control and determination of concentration was performed using TapeStation Analysis by Azenta, followed by library preparation and sequencing. Computational analysis included in their standard data analysis package was used for data interpretation.

## Image analyses
Images were analyzed in bulk through Cell profiler. Z-projections were taken from each image by maximum intensity and then separated by fluorophore. Nuclear/Cytoplasmic (N/C) Ratios were taken by comparing area of nucleus (DAPI) and area of the cytoplasm (Phalloidin or brightfield). Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Intensities were standardized to area.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## NemfR86S Mice display nuclear loss of NEMF in the primary motor cortex and show a specific motor neuron defect in the spinal cord.
A) Primary Motor Cortex was isolated from 21-day old Wild Type and NemfR86S mice. Neurons in the ventral horn were immunostained for the nucleus (DAPI, blue) and NEMF (red). B) Nuclear/Cytoplasmic ratios of NEMF in WT and NemfR86S. Data analyzed by unpaired two-tailed t-test. C-D) Lumbar Spinal Cords were immunostained for the nucleus (DAPI, blue) and neurons (Nissl, red), and NEMF (C) and TDP-43 (D) (green). Arrows indicate pathological NEMF or TDP-43 Nissl-positive neurons. Individual colors in plots represent one trial. (**** p<0.0001).
(TIF)
S2 Fig

## NemfR86S MEFs display Importin-β specific nuclear import defects and a ‘leaky’ nuclear pore.
A) Western Blot Analysis of GFP and GFP-3X-NLS expression in WT and NemfR86S MEFs, and in LTN1 and NEMF siRNA treated WT MEFs. B) Expression of GFP-3X-NLS co-stained with Importin-β in WT MEFs. C-D) qPCR validation of Ltn1 and Nemf siRNA knockdown (n = 3). E) Normalized Cell survival of WT and NemfR86S MEFs expressing LTN1 and NEMF siRNA (n = 3). F) Expression of GFP, GFP-3X-NLS, and mCherry-PY-NLS co-stained with Importin-β in WT MEFs treated with IPZ. G) FITC-conjugated dextrans (60-70kDa, and 500kDa). Nuclei labeled with DAPI (blue). H) Quantification of the integrated intensity of dextrans within the nucleus. Individual colors in plots represent one trial. (ns p>0.05, ** p<0.01).
(TIF)
S3 FigNegative Controls for NEMF and Importin-β PLA A) PLA of NEMF and Importin-β alone, or without primary antibodies (red). Nuclei labeled with DAPI (blue).
(TIF)
S4 Fig

## NemfR86S MEFs show cytoplasmic mis-localization nuclear transport factors and an increase in an amyloid-like phenotype.
A) Quantification of WT and NemfR86S MEF cell size in square microns using phalloidin as cell maker. Data analyzed by unpaired two-tailed t-test. (n = 999–1000) B) Growth curves of WT (n = 3, r2 = 0.99) and NemfR86S (n = 3, r2 = 0.98) over 48 hours at 15min intervals. Data was analyzed by a nonlinear regression for Malthusian growth. C) Western Blot analysis of global protein synthesis by puromycin immunostaining with or without cycloheximide (CHX) pre-treatment. D) Quantification of puromycin immunostaining standardized to stain-free total protein stain (n = 3). E) Quantification of the percentage of cells with cytoplasmic puncta from . Data was analyzed by two-way ANOVA with Šídák’s multiple comparisons test (n = 3). F-J) Quantification of Nuclear/Cytoplasmic Ratio of indicated proteins. Data analyzed by unpaired two-tailed t-test (n = 100). K) Staining of amyloid in WT and NemfR86S MEFs by AmyloGlo. Nuclei labeled with Lamin A/C. L) Quantification of the Integrated Intensity of AmyloGlo. Data analyzed by two-tailed t-test. (n = 30–60) M) Normalized Cell Survival of IPZ treated WT and NemfR86S MEFs (n = 3). Individual colors in plots represent one trial. (ns p>0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.0001, ****p<0.0001).
(TIF)
S5 Fig

## NemfR86S MEFs show cytoplasmic mis-localization of nucleoporins, but not Exportin-1 or Transportin-1.
A) Immunostaining of Exportin-1 or Transportin-1 (red) in WT and NemfR86S MEFs. Nuclei labeled with DAPI (blue). B) Immunostaining of NEMF (green) and NPM1 (red) in WT and NemfR86S MEFs. C) Immunostaining of RPL3 (60S, green) and RPS6 (40S, red) in WT and NemfR86S MEFs. D) Immunostaining of Nup153, and Nup98, and mAb414(green) co-stained with Importin-β (red). Nuclei labeled with DAPI (blue). E) Percentage of Nuclear Signal of Nup153, Nup98, and mAb414 in WT and NemfR86S MEFs (n = 30–33 nuclei). Individual colors in plots represent one trial. Scale bars are 20μm.
(TIF)
S6 FigLate onset NemfR487G spinal motor neurons show appearance of phospho-TDP-43 at 6- and 12-months A) Immunofluorescent staining of phospho-TDP-43 (red), ChAT (green) in WT, and NemfR487G lumbar spinal cord motor neurons at 21 days, 6 months, and 12 months. Nuclei labeled with DAPI (blue). B) Percentage of ChAT+ cells with pTDP-43 cytoplasmic inclusions in WT and NemfR487G mice (n = 3). Data analyzed by two-way anova with Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. (n = 3). (ns p>0.05, *** p<0.001).
(TIF)
S7 FigA-B) qPCR relative fold change of Bax and Sorl1 in MEFs, spinal cord, brain in WT and NemfR86S mice. Data analyzed by two-way anova with Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. (n = 3). C) Relative expression of Sort1 and Dnajc5 exon splicing inclusion from WT and NemfR86S MEFs cDNA. D) Brightfield Images of WT and NemfR86S Primary Neurons at 14 days post-plating. E-F) qPCR relative fold change of Stmn2 and Apoe in WT and NemfR86S primary neurons (n = 3). G) Gene Ontology Analysis of significantly dysregulated genes in NemfR86S (ns p>0.05, *p<0.05, **p<0.01).
(TIF)
S8 Fig

## RNA Quality is maintained high through all reads.
A) qPCR log2FoldChange plotted over RNA for MEFs (r2 = .76,*p<0.05), Spinal Cord (SC) (r2 = .89,**p<0.01), and Brain (r2 = .05,*p>0.05). A simple linear regression determined the best-fit model. B) Tapestation Analysis comparing RNA integrity number for WT, IPZ-treated, and IVM-treated RNA samples. Data analyzed by one-way anova with Tukey’s multiple comparison test. C) RNA quality scores throughout Sanger Sequencing Position as presented by Azenta. (ns p>0.05).
(TIF)
S9 FigIPZ and IVM Cell Viability Curves and Gene Ontology Analyses A-B) Cell Viability Curves for IPZ (A) and IVM (B) treated MEFs. Data analyzed by one-way with Tukey’s multiple comparison test C) Percentage of cells with pTDP-43 cytoplasmic inclusions in DMSO-CTRL and IPZ-treated WT MEFs (n = 3). E) Gene Ontology Analysis of significantly dysregulated genes in NemfR86S and IPZ-treated samples. F) Brightfield Images of DMSO-CTRL and IPZ-treated WT Primary Neurons at 14 days post-plating. G-H) qPCR relative fold change of Stmn2 and Apoe in WT and IPZ-treated primary neurons (n = 3). (ns p>0.05, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, **** p<0.0001).
(TIF)
S10 FigqPCR Validation and STMN2 expression in HEK293 cells A) Immunofluorescent staining of TDP-43 and pTDP-43 in DMSO control and Importazole-treated (IPZ) SK-N-MC (neuroblastoma) cells. B) Quantification of Nuclear/Cytoplasmic Ratio of TDP-43 (n = 80–96). C) Percentage of cells with pTDP-43 cytoplasmic inclusions in DMSO contorl and IPZ-treated (n = 3). D) qPCR relative fold change in DMSO control and IPZ-treated SK-N-MC cells for STMN2 (n = 3). E) qPCR validation of NEMF, LTN1, and Importin-β siRNA knockdown in SK-N-MC cells (n = 3). F-G) qPCR relative fold change of STMN2 or APOE treated with LTN1, NEMF, or Importin-β siRNAs in SK-N-MC cells (n = 3). Data analyzed by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test. H) qPCR relative fold change in DMSO Control and Importazole (IPZ) treated HEK293 for STMN2 (n = 3). I) qPCR validation of LTN1 (RNF160), NEMF (SDCCAG1), Importin-β (KPNB), Importin-α (KPNA), or Transportin-1 (TPNO1) siRNA knockdown in HEK293 cells (n = 3). Data analyzed by two-way ANOVA with Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. J-K) qPCR relative fold change of STMN2 or APOE treated with LTN1, NEMF, Importin-β, Importin-α, or Transportin-1siRNAs in HEK293 cells (n = 3). Data analyzed by one-way anova with Tukey’s multiple comparison test. Individual colors in plots represent one trial. (ns p>0.05, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001 **** p<0.0001).
(TIF)
S1 Table

## List of Cell Culture Reagents.
(TIF)
S2 Table

## List of Plasmid and SiRNAs.
GFP-Stop, GFP-Nonstop, and GFP-PolyK-(AAA)10 plasmids were previously described in Davis et al, 2021 [ ].
(TIF)
S3 Table

## List of Primary Antibodies.
(TIF)
S4 Table

## List of Secondary Antibodies.
(TIF)
S5 Table

## List of Products used in Experiments.
(TIF)
S6 Table

## List of Primers.
(TIF)
S1 Data

## Numerical Data Files.
(ZIP)

We wish to thank current and former members of the Sher lab for critical discussions and advice. We wish to thank Dr. Gregory Cox (Jackson Laboratory and University of Maine) for help with providing NEMF mutant mice and with suggestions for research strategies. We thank Dr. Joshua Dubnau for experimental design advice. We thank Dr. Onn Brandman for the kind gift of the GFP stalling reporters. We thank Dr. Leonard Petrucelli (Mayo Clinic) for the kind gift of the mouse-reactive phospho-TDP43 antibody. We thank Wendy Ackmentin for her incredible help on all aspects of keeping the lab facilities running.
 10.1371/journal.pgen.1011411.r001Author response to previous submission
Submission Version0

## Transfer Alert
This paper was transferred from another journal. As a result, its full editorial history (including decision letters, peer reviews and author responses) may not be present.

2 Apr 2024

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Sher Response to Reviewers PLoS Genetics.pdf
10.1371/journal.pgen.1011411.r002Decision Letter 0
CoxGregory A.Academic EditorWilliamsScott M.Section Editor© 2024 Cox, Williams2024Cox, Williamshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
20 May 2024

Dear Dr Sher,
Thank you very much for submitting your Research Article entitled 'Importin-β specific nuclear transport defects recapitulate phenotypic and transcriptional alterations seen in neurodegeneration' to PLOS Genetics.
The manuscript was fully evaluated at the editorial level and by independent peer reviewers. The reviewers appreciated the attention to an important problem, but raised some substantial concerns about the current manuscript. Based on the reviews, we will not be able to accept this version of the manuscript, but we would be willing to review a much-revised version. We cannot, of course, promise publication at that time.
Should you decide to revise the manuscript for further consideration here, your revisions should address the specific points made by each reviewer. We will also require a detailed list of your responses to the review comments and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript.
If you decide to revise the manuscript for further consideration at PLOS Genetics, please aim to resubmit within the next 60 days, unless it will take extra time to address the concerns of the reviewers, in which case we would appreciate an expected resubmission date by email to plosgenetics@plos.org.
If present, accompanying reviewer attachments are included with this email; please notify the journal office if any appear to be missing. They will also be available for download from the link below. You can use this link to log into the system when you are ready to submit a revised version, having first consulted our Submission Checklist.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please be aware that our data availability policy requires that all numerical data underlying graphs or summary statistics are included with the submission, and you will need to provide this upon resubmission if not already present. In addition, we do not permit the inclusion of phrases such as "data not shown" or "unpublished results" in manuscripts. All points should be backed up by data provided with the submission.
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool.  PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.
PLOS has incorporated Similarity Check, powered by iThenticate, into its journal-wide submission system in order to screen submitted content for originality before publication. Each PLOS journal undertakes screening on a proportion of submitted articles. You will be contacted if needed following the screening process.
To resubmit, use the link below and 'Revise Submission' in the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder.
We are sorry that we cannot be more positive about your manuscript at this stage. Please do not hesitate to contact us if you have any concerns or questions.
Yours sincerely,
Gregory A. Cox
Academic Editor
PLOS Genetics
Scott Williams
Section Editor
PLOS Genetics
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #1: see attached review
Reviewer #2: Altered nucleocytoplasmic transport (NCT) capacity has been implicated in multiple neurodegenerative diseases. However, it remains unclear as to whether this phenomenon is a driver of toxicity in disease. In this study, Plessis-Belair and colleagues identify and characterize NCt alterations and hallmarks of neurodegenerative pathology in a mouse model based on the expression of mutant NEMF, a gene previously linked to neurodevelopmental alterations. The authors demonstrate that this model shares many features of neurodegenerative disease including impaired nuclear import, TDP-43 pathology, and transcriptional alterations. Additionally, the authors provide evidence that transient inhibition of importin B alone is sufficient to trigger disease associated pathology. While of potential interest and significance to a broad readership, there are a number of improvements that should be made to strengthen the overall conclusions and completeness of the study prior to publication. These are detailed below.
1. The study and/or manuscript would benefit from a better description of the mouse model used. For example, is mutant NEMF expressed throughout development? Is this a conditional model? Is mutant NEMF expressed in all cell types? Is mutant NEMF OE or is this a CRISPR generated mutation? Can the authors please detail additional hallmarks of neurodegeneration such as neuronal loss, GFAP immunoreactivity, Iba1 immunoreactivity, survival deficits, behavioral abnormalities etc?
2. Are the phenotypes observed in MEFs recapitulated in CNS cell types (ie primary neuron or glial cultures from the mutant mice)?
3. Cell based studies appear rely on OE of mutant NEMF. Could the authors provide evidence that endogenous levels of mutant NEMF induce similar pathophysiological phenomena?
4. The authors state that Nups and NTRs are “sequestered” in cytoplasmic puncta in the context of mutant NEMF expression. However, there is little evidence to support this. In particular, the typical expression patterns of the proteins evaluated appear to remain largely intact. Thus, it is unclear if this is truly sequestration away from normal function or simply a few molecules trapped in abnormal cytoplasmic puncta. What percentage of molecules are in puncta as opposed to normal function and is this sufficient to recapitulate inhibition or loss?
5. Does OE or activation of importin B reverse or prevent pathologic alterations in mutant NEMF model?
6. Although NCTs reporters suggest that transportin mediated nuclear import and nuclear export are not disrupted, can the authors please perform immunostaining to determine if their localization is intact or altered?
7. For the dextran assay, it is unclear why the authors decided to isolate nuclei as opposed to using more conventional permeabilized cell assays. Importantly, the nuclei look rather disrupted and dextran molecules in and outside of the nucleus are hard to see given the lack of individual channel images presented.
8. Are mutant NEMF cells dying in culture? Many images presented appear to contain a number of unhealthy looking cells.
9. IPZ and IVM are clearly toxic to cells. Can the authors please comment on whether transcriptomic changes are truly a reflection of the effects of impaired NCT or simply a reflection of cell death cascades?
10. Can the authors please demonstrate that their importazole treatment blocks import (importin B vs transportin) as expected via use of NCT reporters?
11. siNEMF recapitulates transcriptional alterations but earlier experiments presented suggest that NEMF KD does not recapitulate mutant NEMF phenotypes. These seemingly discrepant results would benefit from additional discussion.
12. NEMF and Importin B staining and localization appear quite different in MEFs (Fig 3) vs in vivo (Fig 1). Staining in motor cortex (S1) vs spinal cord (Fig 1) also appear quite different even in WT mice. Can the authors comment on this and/or the specificity of antibodies used?
13. PLA results are difficult to interpret as presented. It appears the majority of the NEMF signal is within the nucleus and importin B granules are largely not colocalizing with cytoplasmic NEMF. Yet there are abundant PLA signals in the cytoplasm. Can the authors please comment on antibody specificity and include higher magnification images of no primary and no probe controls for PLA to ensure specificity of all signals?
14. In S5, much of the pTDP signal appears to fill the nucleus in an age dependent manner. This is not typical of pTDP immunoreactivity in other neurodegenerative mouse models where signal is observed as cytoplasmic puncta. Can the authors please comment on this and/or verify their findings with conventional DAB based IHC?
15. TDP-43 regulatory sequences are not conserved in mouse vs human STMN2 RNA. Thus, it is well known that STMN2 does not represent a TDP-43 target in mouse models. As a result, it is unclear whether downregulation of STMN2 in NEMF MEFs actually reflects TDP-43 loss of function pathology. It is suggested that the authors evaluate bonafide mouse TDP-43 targets.
16. Could the authors please speculate on the mechanisms by which mutant NEMF or WT NEMF may contribute to altered NCT and neurodegeneration in the discussion?
17. Overall, the title and abstract are written in a manner that suggests the focus of this manuscript is on defining the role of importin B in neurogenerative disease. However, the data and manuscript are largely focused on characterizing NCT defects in an NEMF mouse model. Thus, it is suggested that the title and abstract be re-written to more accurately represent the data presented in this manuscript.
Reviewer #3: In this paper, Plessis-Belair et al. collect evidence that Importin-beta transport defects elicit phenotypic and transcriptional alterations connected with TDP-43 proteinopathies. This study is high quality and quite compelling. Overall, it helps build a narrative that Importin-beta nuclear import dysfunction is likely to be a pathological contributor to disease. I recommend publication once a couple of key issues are addressed:
1. It remains possible that the Importin-β transport defects are a consequence rather than a cause of disease in the NEMF mouse model. Hence It is important to demonstrate that correcting the Importin-beta nuclear import dysfunction could be therapeutic. Thus, can the deficits observed in Figure 4 be corrected by upregulation of importin-beta activity, for example, by overexpressing importin-beta, importin-alpha, or perhaps both as has been suggested by Rossoll and colleagues (PMID: 36482422 & PMID: 38254150).
2. By the same logic, can the deficits observed in Figure 4 be exacerbated by importazole.
Addition of these studies will help confirm or refute the central hypothesis of this paper.
**********

Have all data underlying the figures and results presented in the manuscript been provided?

Large-scale datasets should be made available via a public repository as described in the PLOS Genetics
data availability policy, and numerical data that underlies graphs or summary statistics should be provided in spreadsheet form as supporting information.
Reviewer #1: None
Reviewer #2: None
Reviewer #3: No: Numerical data missing?
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Plessis-Belair_review.docx
10.1371/journal.pgen.1011411.r003Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
7 Aug 2024

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Plessis-Belair_Sher_Reviewer_Responses.docx
10.1371/journal.pgen.1011411.r004Decision Letter 1
CoxGregory A.Academic EditorWilliamsScott M.Section Editor© 2024 Cox, Williams2024Cox, Williamshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
28 Aug 2024

Dear Dr Sher,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript entitled "NEMF mutations in mice illustrate how Importin-β specific nuclear transport defects recapitulate neurodegenerative disease hallmarks" has been editorially accepted for publication in PLOS Genetics. Congratulations!
Before your submission can be formally accepted and sent to production you will need to complete our formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. Please be aware that it may take several days for you to receive this email; during this time no action is required by you. Please note: the accept date on your published article will reflect the date of this provisional acceptance, but your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until the required changes have been made.
Once your paper is formally accepted, an uncorrected proof of your manuscript will be published online ahead of the final version, unless you’ve already opted out via the online submission form. If, for any reason, you do not want an earlier version of your manuscript published online or are unsure if you have already indicated as such, please let the journal staff know immediately at plosgenetics@plos.org.
In the meantime, please log into Editorial Manager at https://www.editorialmanager.com/pgenetics/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information to ensure an efficient production and billing process. Note that PLOS requires an ORCID iD for all corresponding authors. Therefore, please ensure that you have an ORCID iD and that it is validated in Editorial Manager. To do this, go to ‘Update my Information’ (in the upper left-hand corner of the main menu), and click on the Fetch/Validate link next to the ORCID field.  This will take you to the ORCID site and allow you to create a new iD or authenticate a pre-existing iD in Editorial Manager.
If you have a press-related query, or would like to know about making your underlying data available (as you will be aware, this is required for publication), please see the end of this email. If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming article at this point, to enable them to help maximise its impact. Inform journal staff as soon as possible if you are preparing a press release for your article and need a publication date.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Genetics!
Yours sincerely,
Gregory A. Cox
Academic Editor
PLOS Genetics
Scott Williams
Section Editor
PLOS Genetics

www.plosgenetics.org

Twitter: @PLOSGenetics
----------------------------------------------------
Comments from the reviewers (if applicable):
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #2: The authors have substantially revised this manuscript and in doing so have sufficiently addressed my concerns.
Reviewer #3: The authors have addressed my prior concerns.
**********

Have all data underlying the figures and results presented in the manuscript been provided?

Large-scale datasets should be made available via a public repository as described in the PLOS Genetics
data availability policy, and numerical data that underlies graphs or summary statistics should be provided in spreadsheet form as supporting information.
Reviewer #2: None
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
----------------------------------------------------

Data Deposition

If you have submitted a Research Article or Front Matter that has associated data that are not suitable for deposition in a subject-specific public repository (such as GenBank or ArrayExpress), one way to make that data available is to deposit it in the Dryad Digital Repository. As you may recall, we ask all authors to agree to make data available; this is one way to achieve that. A full list of recommended repositories can be found on our website.
The following link will take you to the Dryad record for your article, so you won't have to re‐enter its bibliographic information, and can upload your files directly: 

http://datadryad.org/submit?journalID=pgenetics&manu=PGENETICS-D-24-00242R1

More information about depositing data in Dryad is available at http://www.datadryad.org/depositing. If you experience any difficulties in submitting your data, please contact help@datadryad.org for support.
Additionally, please be aware that our data availability policy requires that all numerical data underlying display items are included with the submission, and you will need to provide this before we can formally accept your manuscript, if not already present.
----------------------------------------------------

Press Queries

If you or your institution will be preparing press materials for this manuscript, or if you need to know your paper's publication date for media purposes, please inform the journal staff as soon as possible so that your submission can be scheduled accordingly. Your manuscript will remain under a strict press embargo until the publication date and time. This means an early version of your manuscript will not be published ahead of your final version. PLOS Genetics may also choose to issue a press release for your article. If there's anything the journal should know or you'd like more information, please get in touch via plosgenetics@plos.org.
10.1371/journal.pgen.1011411.r005Acceptance letter
CoxGregory A.Academic EditorWilliamsScott M.Section Editor© 2024 Cox, Williams2024Cox, Williamshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
19 Sep 2024

PGENETICS-D-24-00242R1 
NEMF mutations in mice illustrate how Importin-β specific nuclear transport defects recapitulate neurodegenerative disease hallmarks 
Dear Dr Sher, 
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript entitled "NEMF mutations in mice illustrate how Importin-β specific nuclear transport defects recapitulate neurodegenerative disease hallmarks" has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Genetics! Your manuscript is now with our production department and you will be notified of the publication date in due course.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. 
Soon after your final files are uploaded, unless you have opted out or your manuscript is a front-matter piece, the early version of your manuscript will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting PLOS Genetics and open-access publishing. We are looking forward to publishing your work! 
With kind regards,
Anita Estes
PLOS Genetics
On behalf of:
The PLOS Genetics Team
Carlyle House, Carlyle Road, Cambridge CB4 3DN | United Kingdom
plosgenetics@plos.org | +44 (0) 1223-442823
plosgenetics.org | Twitter: @PLOSGenetics