3686acsomegaACS OmegaACS OmegaAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC1090559910905599109055993843489410.1021/acsomega.3c08824A Review on Carbon Nanotubes Family of Nanomaterials
and Their Health Field
BritoCharles
L SilvaJoão V GonzagaRodrigo V La-ScaleaMauro A GiarollaJeanine FerreiraElizabeth I †Department
of Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of São Paulo, Avenida Professor Lineu Prestes, 580, Bloco 13, São Paulo CEP 05508-000, Brazil‡Department
of Chemistry, Federal University of São
Paulo, Diadema 09972-270, Brazil*Email: elizabeth.igne@gmail.com
13220249886878687–8708232024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 The use of carbon
nanotubes (CNTs), which are nanometric materials,
in pathogen detection, protection of environments, food safety, and
in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases, as efficient drug delivery
systems, is relevant for the improvement and advancement of pharmacological
profiles of many molecules employed in therapeutics and in tissue
bioengineering. It has contributed to the advancement of science due
to the development of new tools and devices in the field of medicine.
CNTs have versatile mechanical, physical, and chemical properties,
in addition to their great potential for association with other materials
to contribute to applications in different fields of medicine. As,
for example, photothermal therapy, due to the ability to convert
infrared light into heat, in tissue engineering, due to the mechanical
resistance, flexibility, elasticity, and low density, in addition
to many other possible applications, and as biomarkers, where the
electronic and optics properties enable the transduction of their
signals. This review aims to describe the state of the art and the
perspectives and challenges of applying CNTs in the medical field.
A systematic search was carried out in the indexes Medline, Lilacs,
SciELO, and Web of Science using the descriptors “carbon nanotubes”,
“tissue regeneration”, “electrical interface
(biosensors and chemical sensors)”, “photosensitizers”,
“photothermal”, “drug delivery”, “biocompatibility”
and “nanotechnology”, and “Prodrug design”
and appropriately grouped. The literature reviewed showed great applicability,
but more studies are needed regarding the biocompatibility of CNTs.
The data obtained point to the need for standardized studies on the
applications and interactions of these nanostructures with biological
systems.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Nov 6; Accepted 2024 Jan 24; Revised 2024 Jan 17; Collection date 2024 Feb 27.

1.

## Introduction
Nanoscience and nanotechnology
are areas of knowledge and innovation
that have aroused increasing interest in the scientific community,
since they are conceptualized as a set of techniques used to manipulate
molecules on a nanometer scale (10–9 m). − The great interest in the study of these materials is because they
present physicochemical properties different from those of the already
known base materials, which allows countless new possibilities of
applications. These involve the integration of multiple areas of science,
including chemistry, biology, medicine, pharmacy, and engineering,
with the purpose of promoting quality of life and the promotion of
health in society. − 
Various materials have been worked on to the nanometer scale,
among
them. In the carbon nanotube (CNT) atoms, carbons are arranged in
condensed aromatic rings, formed by graphene sheets rolled in cylinders. A sheet
of graphene is a 2D structure composed of a network of carbon atoms
arranged in hexagonal form and among them by hybridization of their
electron orbits, according to the number of layers of graphene.
CNTs, which can also be called pristine, are commercially available
in two forms: single layer (SWCNT), with about 0.4 to 2.22 nm diameter,
and multilayer (MWCNT), which may vary from 1 to 100 nm diameter ( ). Additionally, the CNT nanoscale diameter makes it attractive,
as it provides a large area/volume ratio allowing the use of CNTs
as biomolecule carriers, that is, molecules that can interact with
cells and tissues. − MWCNT is the most used for the targeted release of
drugs, because of its photothermal properties, due to its ease of
absorption.
 CNTs have stood out as the most promising nanomaterial in
the 21st
century with numerous applications, as
in tissue regeneration, − gene therapy, − and release
system, as it is biocompatible and useful in the detection of tumors. − 
Therefore, it is possible to understand the applications of
CNT
in medicine and pharmacy, with the field of health being the most
advanced.
CNTs should be subjected to chemical treatment through
functionalization,
adsorption, or binding of either atoms or molecules to their walls
or tips. Functionalization makes CNTs more biocompatible and, therefore,
facilitates their interaction with organic, biological molecules or
with other chemical groups, such as drugs or DNA. , Moreover, functionalization with the adsorption of chemical groups,
such as hydroxylation, makes nanotubes soluble in aqueous medium and
facilitates interaction with cell macromolecules. , In addition, CNTs result in lower toxicity to cells in cultures,
thereby increasing its potential for application in biological areas
and medical care. , Furthermore, solubility is an
important parameter in making CNTs biocompatible under physiological
conditions. The main applications of CNTs in therapeutics − are shown in the following table ( ).
 The development of
efficient methodologies used in the functionalization
of CNT is very promising for biological and therapeutical applications.
There are several methods, which have been used to attach molecules
to the walls of functionalized CNT7. , 
The
purpose of this review is to describe the state of the art,
the perspectives, and the challenges concerning the application of
CNTs in the medical area.

2.

## Carbon Nanotubes
2.1.

## Functionalization and Biocompatibility in
Pharmaceutical Applications
The diversity of applications
or potentialities of CNTs makes the research in this area of knowledge
quite multidisciplinary. − Functionalization is a synthetic
process ( ),
which is intended to insert functional groups in the CNT walls for
various applications, for instance, enhancement of biocompatibility
within the body, enhancement of encapsulation tendency, solubility,
delivery of drugs, and imaging, among others. , In this regard, functionalization of CNT (CNT-F) has been outstanding
as an excellent tool in the field of nanomedicine facilitating the
encapsulation of CNT with biopolymers or by covalent bonds of solubilizing
groups anchored in a portion of the CNT wall. , Additionally, our research group has been studying the best proportion
of those acids in the mixture with the aim of increasing the number
of carboxyl groups in CNTs. In this case, carboxyl groups are inserted
on the surface of CNTs, which increases their dispersibility in aqueous
solutions ( ). Thus, CNT-F can be linked to a wide variety
of active molecules including peptides, proteins, nucleic acids, and
other therapeutic agents.
 CNT-F are more soluble and stable in water and serum and have been
shown to penetrate mammalian cells, contributing to the transport
of biological molecules without affecting their activity. , Furthermore, CNT-F shows a long half-life in the blood circulation
and low absorption by the reticuloendothelial system with absence
of side effects, being thus suitable for the process of drug release. , Hence, the use of nanomaterials as CNT in medical practice is very
promising, leading to more refined and efficient treatment.
However, even though a significant number of studies have already
highlighted the advantages of medical devices, their clinical use
has not yet been completed. Care related
to its toxicity, biosafety, and biodegradation remains. The effects
of CNTs on the human organism are not well-elucidated, mainly due
to a systematicization of toxicological tests that generate controversial
results. Thus, the toxicity of CNTs should be further investigated
to allow for the use of these materials in medicine in the coming
years.
Therefore, the biological employment of functionalized
CNTs is
currently under much investigation. In this review, we highlight
the most recent approaches of CNTs in different applications in the
medical field.

2.2.

## Application of CNT in Tissue
Engineering
CNTs have been showing high applicability for
use as biosensors,
as they have intrinsic electronic and optical properties which enable
signal transduction. Its physical structure,
including large surface area and semiconductor property, allows the
measurement, detection, or adsorption of biomolecular interactions
along the side walls of the CNTs. The proximity of charges or polarized
biomolecules produces effects that are propagated over CNTs isolated
or arranged in networks, generating a transient field effect that,
in its turn, makes it possible to quantify the degree of binding specific
or not for biomolecules. depicts the use of many different
CNTs for tissue engineering.
 

## (a) Cardiac Tissue
Carbon nanotubes that favor the
regeneration of heart cells destroyed after a heart attack, due to
a lack of oxygen supply. During in vivo experiments,
the cardiac tissue was six times denser in the presence of the conductive
nanopatch than in its absence, which confirms the patch’s effectiveness. , Made from tiny chains of carbon
atoms folded on themselves to form nanofibers, it conducts electricity
and mimics the rough surface of natural fabrics. The researchers observed
that the higher the concentration of nanotubes, the more efficient
the regeneration of heart cells. One of the medical applications of
using CNTs is tissue engineering. Work developed by Gorain et al. demonstrates a viable application of CNTs to
assist in the repair of cardiac tissue in situations of cardiac tissue
death, which corresponds to myocardial infarction. The inclusion of
SWCNTs or MWCNTs in fibrous polymeric materials resulted in a remarkable
improvement in cardiac tissue repair, promoting an improvement in
the stimulation and electrical conductivity of cardiomyocytes. In
addition, CNTs allowed improvement in the potential of cell growth,
proliferation, differentiation, maturation, and cardiomyocyte functioning.
This area is very challenging, as there are great difficulties due
to the lack of integration between physical, electrical, chemical,
and mechanical properties with cardiac tissue repair substances.
CNTs with their appreciable electrical properties help in the transduction
of this type of energy through signals to cardiomyocytes, improving
the clinical feasibility of myocardial tissue engineering. However,
the work indicates that further studies are necessary to make CNTs
viable in therapeutics in the repair of cardiac tissue.
In
work developed by Li et al. the binding
of SWCNT functionalized with Caspase 3 RNA, F-CNT-siCas3, is proposed
in order to work as a new alternative treatment option for the early
phase of myocardial infarction treatment. In vivo studies in mice indicated that this transporter had a positive effect
on cardiac function, as it effectively reduced the expression of Capase3
mRNA, which is associated with apoptosis of cardiac cells. In addition,
the set showed good water solubility, biocompatibility, and high transfection
efficiency of up to 82%. Notwithstanding, there is a need for toxicity
tests to complement it.
A study developed by Zhao and co-workers employed CNT matrices functionalized with silk
nanofibrous biomaterials
to induce the formation of oriented engineered cardiac tissues with
enhanced functionalities. The developed CNT/silk composite demonstrated
excellent conductivity and mechanical properties through excellent
dispersion of CNTs in the composite nanofibers. Furthermore, the compound
scaffolds are highly biocompatible and able to promote cell spreading
and guide the cellular organization of cardiomyocytes. Nanofiber alignment
control for the CNT/silk scaffolds further induces the formation of
cardiac tissues that mimic native myocardium.

## (b) Bone
Tissue
In bone tissue, during the process
of bone matrix synthesis and organization of a trabecular system,
the collagen triple helices spontaneously form bundles that act as
a nucleation site for deposition of hydroxyapatite nanocrystals. Similarly,
the structure of carbon atoms gives CNTs a porous three-dimensional
plane, which also allows them to control crystal nucleation events
and inorganic component growth. Studies
have shown that CNTs promote proliferation of osteoblasts and bone
formation, therefore representing an enormous technological advancement
in the field of bioengineering. , 
Additionally,
the association of CNTs with other polymers, whether natural or synthetic,
improves the mechanical properties of these polymers, , resulting in more resistant biocomposites with greater capacity
for increased nucleation and growth of hydroxyapatite crystals, , when compared to the use of polymers in isolation. The literature
focuses on the study of CNTs in the research on CNT scaffolds for
bone regeneration, .
Tissue engineering-based regenerative medicine has been extensively
researched for situations that are difficult to treat with existing
treatments and large bone defects for which an effective treatment
option has not been established. , The current
gold standard for the treatment of large bone defects after tumor
resection or trauma is autologous bone graft. However, some notable shortcomings include the limited amount of
material available and the pain at the site. Although allogeneic bone is relatively plentiful and can be used
for major defects, it can also potentially activate an immune system
response and may also present some difficulty in grafting. , The development of scaffolds is vital to regenerative medicine,
and there has been a body of research on the use of carbon nanotubes
(CNTs) as scaffolding. Patel and co-workers demonstrated that coating of CNTs with biopolymer
nanofibers can modulate multiple cell and tissue interactions that
are useful for tissue healing and bone regeneration. This coating
significantly reduced the intensity of inflammatory signals and promoted
angiogenesis. Furthermore, CNT-coated nanofibers increased bone matrix
production of bone-forming cells in vivo and accelerated
the adhesion and osteogenesis of MSCs in vitro. These
results support the idea that coating biopolymer nanofibers of CNTs
is a promising way to promote tissue healing and the bone regeneration
process through a series of events orchestrated in anti-inflammation,
pro-angiogenesis, and cell-stimulation. Stocco and co-workers performed a study of CNT scaffolds based on
polymeric nanofibers with potential application in the treatment of
meniscus injuries of the knee. In this case, polycaprolactone fibers
aligned with CNT have been used in two different concentrations, 0.05%
and 0.10%, with the highest concentration having the best mechanical
properties.
In work developed by Kittana et al., MWCNTs were used together with chitosan, C-MWCNTs,
for physiological
repair of connective tissues with biophysical properties adapted to
the target tissue, denominating optimized engineered connective tissues
(ECTs). In this work, one started with human fibroblasts (HFF-1) in
collagen type I enriched with three different percentages (0.025,
0.05, and 0.1%) of C-MWCNT. Each percentage showed some advantage,
with supplementation with 0.025% C-MWCNT moderately increasing tissue
stiffness and supplementation of ECTs with 0.1% C-MWCNT reducing tissue
contraction and increasing elasticity and extensibility. It is understood
from this work that C-MWCNT supplementation can improve the biophysical
properties of ECTs, which may be advantageous for applications in
connective tissue repair.
Glass ionomer cements (GICs) are materials
with low tensile and
shear strength, therefore, being contraindicated for areas subject
to large occlusal loads. In this way, the incorporation of carbon
nanotubes in the GIC contributes to increasing surface hardness. Another
application of CNTs due to their excellent biocompatibility and toughness
properties can reinforce any material. As an example, there is the
work developed by Goyal and Sharma, in
which glass ionomer dental cement is studied. This material, despite
having anticary properties and adhesion to a tooth, nevertheless has
low mechanical properties. Composites of GIC and multiwalled carbon
nanotubes (MWCNTs) were evaluated for potential application as types
of dental restorative cements. The composite did not show insignificant
changes in temperature and chemical properties compared with the control
group. On the other hand, significantly improved mechanical properties
were found.

2.3.

## Applications of CNTs as
Biosensors
The construction of biosensors is an alternative
in the preparation
of electrodes that can provide good results in application in several
areas such as healthcare. The advantages of its application are related
to its ease of preparation, relatively low cost, versatility, and
selectivity. In this case, CNTs are excellent materials for the development
of biosensors without clinical analysis. Together with the biological
material of interest, these materials can improve the analytical response,
promoting the transfer of electrons more easily.
The association
between nanotechnology and health care has led to the development
of new technologies that are more efficient, faster, and more useful
in the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of any disease. In this
range of technologies, biosensors with carbon nanotubes are devices
that have been developed and used in recent years, namely, due to
their high sensitivity, molecular specificity, speed of analysis,
low cost, and ease of use.
This review aims to present, in a
general and updated view, some
emerging technologies in the form of biosensors with carbon nanotubes
that are implemented in the clinical area, mainly for the detection
of tumor and in different pathologies which are transmitted by viruses,
bacteria, and parasites. shows the use of many different
CNTs for biosensors, and indicates one approach about CNT as biosensor.
 

## (a)
Oxidative Stress
A new electrochemical enzymatic
biosensor was designed to evaluate hydrogen peroxide, H2O2, which is an important biomarker and is related to
oxidative stress. Intracellular or extracellular factors that increase
the concentration of H2O2 to more than 100 nM
interrupt its biological activity and trigger reactive oxygen species
(ROS). The sensor employed a glassy carbon electrode modified with
multiwalled carbon nanotube covered by a poly(safranine T) polymer
film. Catalase was immobilized on the modified electrode, and the
enzyme biosensor was used for measurement of hydrogen peroxide, with
a very low detection limit of 34 nM. The selectivity was found to
be excellent in relation to common interferences, and the biosensor
showed very good recovery in peroxide measurements in commercial samples. 

## (b) Diagnostic
In the study developed
by Ji, Lee, and
Kim, multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs,
diameter 20 nm, length 5 μm) were used as a biosensor to detect
early prostate cancer by using a simple carbon nanotube. This device
was identified as an inexpensive, simple, and sensitive biosensor,
the MWCNTs being bioactivated with PSA antibody (monoclonal antibody
to prostate specific antigen) on micropore filter paper (pore size
0.45 μm) by using N-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)-N′-ethyl carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC) and N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide sodium salt (NHSS). The prepared
biosensor can test from 0 to 500 ng/mL PSA level within 2 h with detection
limit of 1.18 ng/mL by measuring resistance. The detection range and
sensitivity of the prepared sensor are good enough to diagnose early
stage prostate cancer (>4 ng/mL PSA). This biosensor is about 20
times
cheaper (manufactured biosensor price: 2.4$) and over 10 times faster
than the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), which is a general
method for detecting a specific protein in modernized hospitals. In
addition, the maximum detection limit is about 50 times higher than
that of ELISA.
Fan et al., by
using a smartphone-based electrochemical system with a differential
pulse voltammetry (DPV) measurement, developed a method for cancer
antigen 125 (CA125) detection. This antigen is an important tumor
marker, which is related to ovarian cancer, lung cancer, breast cancer,
and other types of disease. , This smartphone-based
electrochemical system was developed with the combination of the screen-printed
immunosensor modified by MWCNTs/Thi/AuNPs nanocomposites, which have
been used to immobilize the CA 125 antibody and to perform the differential
pulse voltammetry (DPV) measurement for Test CA125, transmitting the
detection results to the smartphone via Bluetooth. This system was
also evaluated for the analysis of the human serum sample, and the
detection results showed good agreement with Roche Electrochemical
Luminescence Immunoassay (ECLIA) tests. The proposed system provides
a new low-cost, portable method for detecting tumor markers for remote
medicine centers in regions with scarce resources.
A stable,
unlabeled, ultrasensitive field-effect transistor (FET)
biosensor based on a high-purity semiconductor carbon nanotube (CNT)
film is reported to detect exosomal miRNA, which is an important potential
tumor biomarker. This biosensor named
CNT miR-FET was functionalized by DNA, which directly converts the
electrical tracking signal caused by the interaction between the biomolecules
of the sensor interface into a readable electrical signal, which establishes
the basis for detection. Among the great advantages of this biosensor
is the ability to distinguish the level of miRNA expression in cancer
patients. Furthermore, this device has the potential to be integrated
with microfluidic technology to rapidly and ultrasensitively detect
multiple tumor biomarkers on one chip, thus achieving accurate tumor
diagnosis.
Electroactive carbon nanotubes functionalized with
dopamine (DA)/mucin-1
and Ag were used as a signal to generate
probes in the construction of electrochemical immunosensors for the
early diagnosis of breast cancer. This device served as a support
to immobilize the antibody (anti-MUC-1), while the response of functionalized
electroactive carbon nanoprobes was used for quantitative measurement
of MUC-1. Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) and Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
(EIS) were performed to characterize the transduction surface at different
manufacturing steps. This device has presented itself as a new simple
and low-cost strategy overcoming the problem of biological damage
involved in applications in the diagnostic area that can serve as
a basis for detection of other analytes. Furthermore, this device
can be used for monitoring disease progression, which is more challenging
than detection.
An amperometry sandwich immunosensor for carcinoembryonic
antigen
was fabricated using functionalized carbon nanotubes decorated with
concanavalin A together with horseradish peroxidase, HRP-Ab2. The carcinoembryonic antibody was immobilized
on the gold electrode modified by a cysteine monolayer. This biosensor
exhibited high sensitivity, a low detection limit, long-term maintenance
of bioactivity, and cost-effectiveness. Thus, the immobilized technique
and detection methodology could be developed for clinically interesting
biospecies.
The CNT can also be used to recognize other infectious
agents,
such as protozoa, viruses, and bacteria, in addition to other infectious
agents. In a portable microfluidic electrochemical immunosensor for Plasmodium vivax, which is the etiologic agent of malaria,
antibodies determination was developed by Regiart et al. This device consists of a nanostructured gold
surface containing MWCNTs, followed by the immobilization of the PvMSP119
protein, which was applied to human serum samples. This sensor demonstrated
better performance than the Elisa assay, in which it had improved
sensitivity and accuracy and less assay time (2.5 h shorter) using
fewer reagents. Furthermore, this microfluidic electrochemical immunosensor
can be used for the point-of-care diagnosis of P. vivax malaria in human serum samples.
Paul et al. developed a nanofiber-based
chemoresistive biosensor for malaria detection through histidine-rich
protein II (HRP2) present in Plasmodium sp. The detection
platform is formed by the deposition of nanofibers, which contain
MWCNTs-ZnO, between the source and drainage electrodes modeled on
a thin, flexible poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) substrate. This
approach creates the functional groups on the surface of the nanofiber
that are used for the one-step immobilization of HRP2 antibodies without
further surface modification. The device has good sensitivity, a wide
detection range, and a specific target for HRP2 antigens. This platform
presents itself as an alternative and with great potential that can
be used through specific markers associated with the identification
of various pathologies.
There are works in the literature in
which CNT is used in the recognition
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M.tb). This parasite
is responsible for promoting tuberculosis (TB), a disease that is
among the 10 leading causes of death in the world. Rizi et al. developed a DNA
biosensor using multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), polypyrrole
(PPy), and hydroxyapatite nanoparticles (HAPNPs) for highly sensitive
and specific recognition of M.tb. The biosensor consisted of an M.tb ssDNA probe covalently linked to the HANPs/PPy/MWCNTs/GCE
surface that hybridized to a complementary target sequence to form
a double DNA. The DNA biosensor exhibits a wide detection range from
0.25 to 200.0 nM with a low detection limit of 0.141 nM. The performance
of the biosensor designed for clinical diagnostics and practical applications
was revealed through hybridization between DNA probe modified GCE
and DNA extracted from clinical sputum samples. This biosensor may
serve as a promising screening tool for identifying M.tb at the point
of care in an underserved and vulnerable population.
Another
electrochemical DNA biosensor was developed by Thakur et
al. (2017), in which the identification
of the antigen was MPT64 from M.tb. In this platform, the polymer
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) doped with carbon nanotubes
(CNTs) functionalized with carboxylic groups was used, to which it
was bound to streptavidin. The biosensor presented a low detection
limit and stability of 27 days at 4 °C and can be reused 7 times
after regeneration.
Cabral-Miranda et al. conducted studies
with biosensors reported on the Zika virus (ZIKV), which emerged as
a global threat after its spread. This virus induces microencephalies
and other brain damage, and there are no reliable serological tests
capable of distinguishing between ZIKV and other Flavivirus infections,
in particular, Dengue virus (DENV). This platform consisted of CNT
functionalized with carboxylic groups (−COOH) on the surface
of the working electrode, bound with carbodiimide hydrochloride, EDAC,
and N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS). Subsequently, the
specific antigens NS1 and ED III, corresponding to ZIKV, were immobilized.
This device was applied to blood-free antibodies in saliva and found
to be highly sensitive and specific for the detection of ZIKV.
A fast, simple, and sensitive method for the determination of the
human immunodeficiency virus p24 (HIV-p24) has been developed by Ma
et al. Thus, a new electrochemical sensor
of molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs) was constructed on the surface
of a modified glassy carbon electrode (GCE) containing multiwalled
carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) using acrylamide (AAM) as functional monomer, N,N′-methylenebis(acrylamide) (MBA) as cross-linking
agent, and ammonium persulfate (APS) as initiator. The proposed electrochemical
biosensor MIPs exhibited specific recognition for HIV-14 with superior
performance to most other devices based on other methods for the recognition
of HIV-p-24. In these studies, real samples were analyzed in human
sera with simple, low-cost, effective, and sensitive determination
of HIV-p24 antigen, and this analysis provides promising potential
in the clinic.
Lee et al. proposed
an immunosensor
for the detection of swine influenza virus H1N1, and this assay was
based on the excellent electrical properties of SWCNT. For the construction
of this film two bilayers of poly(diallyl dimethylammonium chloride)
(PDDA) and poly(stylenesulfonate) (PSS) were first self-assembled
as a precursor layer in the substrate pattern for charge increase
followed by the assembly of (PDDA/SWCNT) as a material electrochemical
transducer. In addition, anti-SIV and SIV antibodies were used during
the assay. This biosensor demonstrated high selectivity and suggested
a potential application of this assay as a detection or monitoring
system at the point of care.
Biosensors in CNTs for rapid and
highly efficient detection of
avian influenza virus H5N1 subtype DNA sequences have also been also
developed. In this case, SWCNTs and nitrogen-doped CNTs (N-MWCNTs)
were used as two active sensing elements. The lowest concentration of DNA T detected was 2 pM for the SWCNT
and 20 pM for the N-MWCNT sensor after 15 min of incubation. This
means that the SWCNT-based sensor showed higher sensitivity compared
with the N-MWCNT-based devices. No detection response to noncomplementary
H1N1 DNA was observed. CNT-based DNA sensors are small, flexible,
easy to use, and highly sensitive, making them promising in clinical
diagnostics as well as for portable applications.
In a further
study, Palomar et al. proposed an impedimetric
biosensor controlled by layers of CNTs
presenting high performance in the detection and quantification of
anticholera toxin antibody. To form the sensor device, the CNT deposits
were functionalized via electrocoating of poly(pyrrole-nitrilotriacetic
acid) (poly(pyrrole-NTA)) followed by the formation of a Cu(II) complex
with NTA functions. The bioreceptor unit, Subunit B of cholera toxin,
modified with biotin, was then immobilized via coordination of the
biotin groups with the NTA-Cu(II) complex. After optimization, the
resulting impedimetric cholera sensor showed excellent reproducibility,
increased sensitivities, and a very satisfactory detection limit of
10–13 g mL–1. This procedure is
currently being studied for other, more sophisticated immune systems
in real samples.
Considering what has been reported in previous
work, it is important
to highlight the contribution of CNT in the rapid and selective identification
of a given pathology. This is mainly due to the electrical properties
and ability to bind to biological molecules; it is possible to create
a perspective on the use of these materials in the diagnosis of COVID-19.
Recent studies have also claimed the utility of a specific acidified
CNT coupled to RNA lyase with a conversion effect as a likely inhibitor
for SARS-CoV-2. Yang et al. demonstrated the acid-sensitivity of coronaviruses
toward acidic and higher-temperature environments (above 56 °C
for more than 30 min). Thus, CNTs manufactured by acidizing followed
by conjugating a special RNA lyase to exploit the capacity of photothermal
conversion may prove to be a potential
toolkit in the illumination and inhibition of SARS-CoV-2. In this
way, CNTs are a promising material in the diagnosis of COVID-19.

2.4.

## Applications of CNTs as Chemical Sensors
In this part of the work, electronic devices capable of monitoring
and quantifying the presence of biologically important descriptors,
drugs, and reaction mechanisms are described. demonstrates the use of many different CNTs,
and indicates
one approach of CNTs as chemical sensors. 
 

## (a) Monitoring of Drug
Shi and co-workers elaborated
a new sensor, bismuth oxide-carboxylated multiwalled carbon nanotube/glassy
carbon electrode (Bi2O3-MWCNTs/GCE), for monitoring
of the flavonoid drug baicalein. In this drug is a flavonoid compound
that was originally extracted from the roots of the plant Scutellaria baicalensis. It has been found to have various
biological effects and properties, such as anticancer, anti-inflammatory,
antineurotoxicity, free radical scavenging, and antioxidant effects. , However, excessive intake of baicalein can cause serious side effects. The method is both stable and effective and
was successfully used for determination of baicalein in human urine
and the Chinese herb Oroxylum indicum. 
Pedrozo-Peñafiel et al. studied an electrochemical sensor to quantify
primaquine (PQ), which is an antimalarial drug, in which a glassy
carbon electrode (GC) modified with MWCNT was used. This modified
system promoted an improvement in the analytical signal compared
to that observed with the GC electrode. The device allowed for low
Limit of Detection (LOD), selectivity, and the ability to determine
very low levels of primaquine on the order of 250 ng L–1. In addition, they performed a study of recoveries in urine samples,
and the results were statistically similar to those obtained by HPLC.
Damphathik et al. successfully developed
an electrochemical sensor for the determination of artemisinin (ARN),
which is a drug used to combat malaria, in real samples of drugs and
plants. The ARN and its derivatives are considered as drugs of first
choice for the therapeutic treatment of malaria. One of the major
problems faced by society in this area is the adulteration and falsification
of antimalarial drugs, which generally contain other drugs or other
dangerous impurities. There are many
techniques that are employed for the detection of RNA, such as spectrometry, liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass
spectrometry (HPLC-MS), and gas chromatography
mass spectrometry (GC-MS). Often these
techniques have limitations, such as long analysis time, high consumption
of reagents, and need for user training. In this way, electrochemical
sensors were employed to effectively detect RNA in antimalarials,
mainly focused on the development of alternative methods, because
of their many advantages, including high sensitivity, simple use,
low cost, rapid detection, and on-site analysis. This same paper proposed a device based on a glassy carbon
electrode modified with hybrid nanocomposites of cobalt phthalocyanine,
graphene nanoplatelets, MWCNTs, and ionic liquids. The ARN electrochemical
sensor provided several advantages such as simple manufacturing, low
consumption of reagents and sample, low cost, and short-term analysis.
The modified electrode successfully detected RNA content in real samples
at reliable and acceptable levels compared with the standard HPLC
technique.
Rafati and Afraz developed
an electrochemical
device to detect zidovudine (ZDV), which is an anti-HIV drug, employing
a Ag nanofilm-multiwalled carbon nanotubes modified glassy carbon
electrode. The detection and determination of ZDV is of great importance
due to its undesirable effects above 10 μM human serum concentrations. This platform showed a low, good sensitivity,
accuracy, and fast response to the ZDV and shows an average recovery
of 98.6% in real samples.

## (b) Monitoring of Glucose
In a paper
developed by Comba
et al., an amperometry enzyme electrode
was prepared with glucose oxidase, which was immobilized by a cross-linking
step with glutaraldehyde in a mixture containing albumin and a new
carbon nanotube-mucin compound (CNT-muc). The new CNT-muc compound
provided a sensitivity of 0.44 ± 0.01 mA·M–1 and a response time of 28 ± 2 s. These values were, respectively,
20% higher and 40% shorter than those obtained with a sandwich biosensor
prepared without CNT. This device showed good repeatability, reproducibility,
and intraday stability in the presence of standard glucose solutions
but also was useful for the analysis of real blood plasma samples.
Considering that this platform has demonstrated long-term stability
under storage conditions of use, it indicates that it can be employed
for glucose assessment in a real biological system. These results
are very interesting, as it may be a more viable alternative suitable
for glucose determination in diabetic patients, as it represents a
very economical, robust, and highly sensitive platform for glucose
quantification in complex samples.

## (c) Diagnostic
Phonklam et al. proposed an electrochemical
sensor capable of early diagnosis and
follow-up of patients for the treatment of acute myocardial infarction
by monitoring the biomarker cardiac troponin T (cTnT). In this work,
an impression polymer (MIP), consisting of poly(methylene blue) (PMB),
was immobilized on multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) modified
with electropolymerized polyaniline and cTnT. Due to high sensitivity
coupled with specificity, cardiac troponin T (cTnT) has been widely
used as a crucial cardiac biomarker for the diagnosis of acute myocardial
infarction. This is due to its prominent release into the bloodstream
during cardiac ischemia. , The developed MIP sensors
showed excellent sensitivity, selectivity, and binding affinity for
the detection of cTnT in a real and diluted sample that integrated
with screen-printed carbon electrode (SPCE) has high potential for
cTnT point-of-care testing.

## (d) Identification of Skin
Problems
Kurbanoglu and
Ozkan developed a new enzymatic device
for the detection of catechol using MWCNTs associated with gold nanowires
and the tyrosinase class of enzyme. These enzymes tyrosinases (Tyr)
also named phenol oxidases catecholates, phenolate, catechol oxidase,
or polyphenol oxidase are extensively found in nature and participate
in melanin biosynthesis in the human biological system. Due to overexpression
of the pigment melanin, some skin problems can occur, and inhibition
of melanin biosynthesis can help treat these conditions. The device
showed low limits of detection and quantification in monitoring the
concentration of Tyr in a biological system. With this, this device
has the ability to indicate whether the treatment for the dermatological
problems resulting from Tyr activity is being effective.

## (e) Identification
of Blood Proteins
Zelada-Guillén
et al. produced an ultrasensitive and
real-time potentiometric sensing medium of CNT blood proteins. In
this work, the ability of the functional hybrid carbon nanotubes/aptamer
material to create a new generation of nuclease-resistant aptasensors
using the potentiometric sensor to recognize a protein-specific RNA
aptamer was demonstrated. African trypanosomes were chosen for this
work as a model system in real blood samples containing the target
protein. This work is intended to indicate the great potential of
this device for real-time diagnostic tests for a wide range of diseases
but also for the rapid molecular detection of several proteins.

## (f) Identification of Endogens Biological
CNTs can
also be used for analytical purposes in an attempt to quantify drugs
or important endogenous biological molecules. Thus, work developed
by Silva et al. built an electrochemical
sensor based on oxidized capsaicin/CNT/glassy carbon electrode (GCE)
for the simultaneous quantification of dopamine (DA), epinephrine
(EP), xanthurenic acid (XA), ascorbic acid (AA), and uric acid (UA).
The proposed sensor is easy to prepare and has analytical characteristics
comparable to those of other more complex sensors found in the literature.
The analytical curves obtained for XA, AA, DA, EP, and UA showed linear
ranges, between 10 and 95, 5–75, 5–115, 50–1150,
and 5–70 μmol L–1, respectively. The
detection limits were 8.76, 1.95, 1.80, 7.20, and 1.56 μmol
L–1 for XA, AA, DA, EP, and UA, respectively. This
capsaicin/multiwalled carbon nanotubes/glassy carbon electrode-based
oxidized platform is reported for the first time and is capable of
detecting these analytes at a micromolar level.

## (g) Evaluation
Free Radicals in Mechanism of Reaction
Another interesting
aspect of the application of CNT is in drug reaction
mechanism studies. In this application, our work group presents experience
with some works published in the study of the nitroheterocyclic reduction
mechanism using MWCNT functionalized with carboxylic groups immobilized
on the surface of a glassy carbon electrode (GCE-CNT-F) to evaluate
the reduction behavior of the nitrofurazone (NF), which has antichagasic activity. The biological activity
of this class of compounds is dependent on the kinetic stability of
the same radical. , , The presence of CNT-F did not change the NF mechanism, as it presents
the same signs when only the vitreous carbon electrode is used without
modification (GCE-SM). However, CNT-F significantly increased the
analytical signals of the anionic nitro radical, approximately 140
times higher, and with a potential attenuation of 200 mV compared
to the GCE-SM system. The kinetics results showed the longest half-life
of the radical, indicating greater stability at the lowest concentration.
Another paper developed by our work group was an insertion of hemin
together with CNT. It was observed that the synergistic effect among
glassy carbon, HEM, and MWCNT in the developed sensor was proven by
an electrocatalysis effect represented by reducing the overpotential
and increasing the current values, reaching a potential anticipation
until 250 mV for the former case and a gain of 40 times in acidic
media for the latter. 

2.5.

## Application of CNTs as Photosensitizers in
Photothermal and Photodynamic Therapies with CNTs on Anticancer Applications
Even CNTs only functionalized with −COOH already present
remarkable photosensitizer effects and potentially can be used for
development of Photothermal therapy (PTT) and Photodynamic therapy
(PDT). In this regard, in some alternatives,
SWCNTs or MWCNTs have been explored as an adjuvant in photothermal
treatments due to their light absorber property, being effective against
breast cancer in the PTT by development of the CNTs complex with PEG,
leading a suppression of tumor growth and reducing the amount of tumor-induced
bone destruction and melanoma tumor
size after NIR laser radiation. 
CNTs were applied in a complex with ruthenium(II) producing reactive
oxidative species (ROS) ( ) achieving anticancer efficacies in both in
vitro and in vivo models. Furthermore, CNTs were explored to produce a complex with
carbon nanodots (CDs), which presented chemical catalytic activity
for H2O2 decomposition. In addition, TiO2 and nanotubes (CDots/TiO2 NTs) were effective
in PDT. Additionally, CNTs nanosystems
could be effective in the control of primary tumors and metastases
in breast cancer, to efficiently, in vivo, promote more than 88.6% EMT-6 cells death at a
concentration of 50 μg mL–1 under 1.0 W cm–2 NIR laser irradiation and present PTT efficiency
for in vivo antitumor treatment. Moreover, CNTs complexes were used against cancerous bone
tumors in a complex of gelatin, akermanite with magnetic nanoparticles
of iron oxide leading to a nanosystem with increased adsorption on
the surface of bovine serum albumin and less degradation of nanocomplex
able to do PTT efficiently killing tumor cells through hyperthermia
treatments. 
 In addition to the source photosensitizer
properties of CNTs, these
structures can also act as drug carriers. In this sense, many research
groups have been studying the chemophototherapy properties of CNTs,
for instance, against the MCF-7 tumor model using CNTs linked to a
photothermal agent (ICG-NH2) and targeted group (hyaluronic acid)
as well as attached to doxorubicin (DOX). This has led to reduced
side effects and improved therapeutic efficacy. In a PTT system using CNTs functionalized with TAT-chitosan
as prodrug carrying DOX there is production of a system more sensitive
to the redox process from hyaluronic acid. Besides that, CNTs, DOX, and gadolinium have been applied against
cancer effectively to accumulate at the tumor site with synergistic
antitumor efficacy. In addition, the
complex between CNTs with DOX promotes effective MDA-MB-231 cell death
by mitochondrial disruption and ROS generation. 
Moreover, some agents could improve the nanosystem
photosensitizer
effect and biocompatibility, where CNTs complexed to poly(N-vinyl pyrrole), PEG, folic acid (targeting group), and
loading DOX improves water dispersion and biocompatibility and reduces
the phagocytosis of the reticular endothelial cells; PEGylated CNTs linked to a metformin promote low dosage
1/280 of typical monotherapy, and CNTs
were used in colon cancer studies complexed to hyaluronic acid and
chlorin e6 able to act as a PDT agent and drug carrier promoting an
enhanced apoptosis of the cancer cells. Additionally, new therapies for cancer treatment are constantly
being developed. Therefore, the use of CNT in PTT and/or PDT combined
with probes leads to the construction of theragnostic agents. demonstrates the
use of many different CNTs in photodynamic therapies.
 In this way, CNT was used against human squamous cell
carcinoma
by combining indocyanine green (probe) and hyaluronic acid. This complex
was used to produce a nanosystem capable of promoting a synergistic
action by PTT and PDT in a breast tumor model. The result was more efficient tumor suppression and increased
blood circulation time. Another interesting
application is the use of CNT with manganese dioxide and PEG acting
as lymphatic theragnostic agent. In this work, there was efficiency
of tumor action by ablation of tumors using a synergistic PTT and
PDT. In pancreatic cancer studies CNTs
were able to have activity when combined with conjugate dye (CY7)
linked to targeted antibodies (anti-IGF-1R) ( ).
 The applications of CNTs in different and promising nanosystems
for the treatment of tumors were described. In this regard, CNTs have
been reported to be effective in targeting and killing cells, such
as melanoma, using antibody conjugates and papillary thyroid cancer.
Additionally, PEGylated CNTs could prolong blood-time circulation
and improve the biocompatibility of nanosystems. In this regard, CNTs
complexed to a PEG derivative and chitosan nanoparticles to target
cancer tissue lead to a PDT and PTT agent. Both present with physiological
good stability and the conversion of surface charges after exposure
to tumoral acidic pH to promote dePEGylation. The PEGylated CNTs targeted with CREKA peptide with affinity
for fibrin could, in vivo, accumulate in tumor tissues about 6.4-fold
higher than control. 
Furthermore,
with the medical technological advance, gene therapies
are promising for cancer therapy, mainly due to their high selective
potential. The use of CNTs in PTT and/or PDT combined with gene therapy
has been described, for instance, in the development of a CNTs complex
with the expression vector pCMV-GFP (a green fluorescent protein)
containing a cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter. This system is able to
activate the promoter-based NIR-responsive RNAi system Hsp70B′
(effective against malignant tumor cells and human breast cancer). In another paper where CNTs were lipid-coated
to siRNA and against MRC-5 cells model, the CNTs were able to lead
tumor inhibition both in vitro and in vivo. 
Another type of CNTs is the carbon nanotube ring (CNTR), which
can also be used in the PTT. Song and colleagues developed a gold-CNTR
nanocomplex, with photoacoustic imaging agent, able to act as theragnostic
agent and tumor inhibition both in vivo and in a
U87MG in vitro cells model. 

## (a) CNTs in Antibacterial and Other Clinical Applications
CNTs photoconvert near-infrared (NIR) to heat efficiently, as well
as some nanomaterials such as polypyrrole (PPy) that present high
conductivity properties and photothermal conversion. In this regard,
Tondro and colleagues investigated the
photothermal and photodynamic potential of a nanocomposite of polypyrrole
on MWCNTs (PPy-coated CNTs) as a bactericidal agent. Additionally,
the bactericidal effect could be related mainly to oxidative stress
and membrane injury by production of heat and a high level of ROS. 
In different ways, CNTs have been explored
to overcome the resistance of microorganisms to treatments as well
as to obtain novel treatment protocols. In this regard, CNTs used
in the PDT triggering the CNT interaction with bacterial cells in
the presence of visible light led to the Staphylococcus aureus cell membrane damage; toluidine blue,
a cationic photosensitizer, complexed to CNTs could be used in the
PDT against Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus
aureus. 
Furthermore,
CNTs can be used to treat some inflammatory conditions
such as chronic inflammation and progressive plaque lesions of arteriosclerosis
by photothermal ablation. For this purpose, CNTs were complexed to
phenoxylated dextran, making them selective for inflammatory macrophages,
which are involved in these processes. 

2.6.

## Carbon Nanotubes: Applications as Drug Delivery
System
Several platforms for drug delivery have been developed
to improve the efficacy and selectivity of drugs and bioactive compounds,
with different approaches such as prodrug design, nanocapsules, nanofluid,
and targeted drug delivery systems, among others ( ).
 Targeting groups are employed to increase the selectivity
of drugs
for specific cells, tissues, or diseases. It has been an effective
tool in the treatment of pathological disorders, as it can increase
the chemotherapeutic effect and decrease the toxicity in normal tissues.
Therefore, CNTs have been explored in this field since drugs can be
encapsulated within CNTs forming complexes or conjugates on their
surfaces through covalent bonds that promote drug release. 
As those nanocarriers are alternatives
that can be used in drug
delivery platforms, in this review we describe the use of CNT in this
area, with emphasis on controlled and targeted drug delivery. − 

## (a) CNT Prodrug Approaches for Delivery
The nature
of carriers for prodrug design represents a challenge, which must
be faced in order to aid the drugs to cross the different physiological
and physicochemical barriers toward a better activity. 
In the last years, CNTs have aroused
much interest, mainly in the scientific area, because of their nanometric
dimensions and unique structure. They have great potential in medicine,
being biocompatible, and have been considered as a tool for the delivery
of biologically active molecules and drugs. , CNTs appeared as the new nanocarriers in drug delivery systems and
biomedical applications, and therefore, they can be used in prodrug
design to solve problems of drug/bioactive compounds. Literature data
indicate that CNTs are flexible carriers because of their ability
to overcome cellular barriers.
Prodrugs are molecules obtained
by binding the prototype drug/bioactive
compound to a carrier, making it inactive or less active, and which,
by chemical and/or enzymatic reactions, undergo hydrolysis, releasing
the drug. , 
The improvement of the
properties of a drug by a prodrug design
process should consider some criteria, such as the existence of functional
groups capable of undergoing reversible derivatization; the existence
of mechanisms in the organism able to bioactivate the prodrug; facility
and simplicity of the synthesis and purification of the prodrug; chemical
stability of the prodrug; regeneration, in vivo,
of the parent molecule in ideal amounts. In addition, the drug carrier
must have low toxicity. − 
The bond between drug/bioactive compound must be reversible,
and
it depends on the chemical groups available in the parent drug/bioactive
compound. This and the purpose of the designing allow one to choose
the proper carrier, which must be nontoxic, in principle. − 
A rapid progression of nanomaterials in the medical and pharmaceutical
fields has stimulated their use in the diagnosis and treatment of
various pathologies. Several drug delivery
studies have used CNT as a carrier agent. The studies mentioned have
sought to promote therapeutic guidance and diagnosis.
The main
rationale behind using CNT for drug delivery lies in maximizing
the biological activity of potent drugs and reducing their side effects
and toxicity. Therefore, CNT appears as a promising nanomaterial applicable
in studies of drug delivery in the fight against diseases such as
cancer and other fatal diseases. − shows some
of the applications of CNTs carrier agents in studies of drug delivery.
 CNT complexes are formed between
oppositely charged particles (e.g.,
CNT-polymer, CNT-drug, CNT-moiety, and CNT-drug-polymer). CNT complexes
involve electrostatic interactions between polyions, dipoles, and
hydrogen bonds. This avoids the use of cross-linking chemicals and
agents as well as possible toxicity and other reagent effects. , 
An interesting approach is the use of nanotubes as drug delivery
nanocapsules, as they have the property of transporting an encapsulated
drug to a specific target and ejecting it. This system is known as
“magic bullet”, and the suction energy must be determined
from the radius of a CNT, which will provide the amount of drug absorbed
by a determinate nanotube. , Paul Erlich, at the
beginning of the 20th century, proposed the concept of “magic
bullet” for nanocapsules , to provide
a more effective treatment, a low toxicity, and to reduce adverse
drug reactions (ADRs). − 
The use of CNT has been
prominent in the biomedical area mainly
because it presents an improvement in the dispersibility in biological
means. Surface functionalization is a key element for CNT studies
as it promotes the reduction of toxic effects and confers selectivity
for a previously established molecular target. , 
CNT has low solubility in water, a limiting factor for its
use
for drug delivery systems; the functionalization of CNT surface increases
the solubility and favors the formation of a complex between the drug
and functionalized CNTs through electrostatic interactions. 
Previous studies have indicated biodegradation
mediated by the
oxidation process by CNT functionalization, which occurs in isolated
microglia cells. These observations support the use of CNT as a delivery
agent for several drugs, among them the anti-neoplastic ones. These
results demonstrated the importance of surface chemical functionalization
toward the development of CNT to increase their biocompatibility and
biodegradability for future biomedical applications in the CNS. , 
The energy interaction between CNTs and cisplatin (anticancer)
shows that the radius of the nanotube must be higher than 4.785 Å
and that the suction energy peak appears with a radius of 5.27 Å. The ultrashort SWCNTs (US-Tubes) are
derived from the SWCNTs by a fluorination and pyrolysis method. This
type of CNT is also an excellent candidate for a nanoencapsulation
system, as these CNTs fulfill the in vivo release
of drugs, improving properties such as cellular absorption, and avoid
the reticuloendothelium system. 
As already mentioned, nanoencapsulation occurs through suction
energy, but defects in the walls of the CNTs can also contribute to
the drugs entering. − 
Another approach explored is the nanofluid
system containing CNT,
which may be an injectable suspension and should meet the same conditions
as other injectable drugs. Conditions such as particle size control,
syringeability, sterility, zeta potential, and pyrogenicity are essential
for the safety of injectable drugs. 
Theoretically, nanofluids are liquid suspensions containing nanoparticles
having a size of less than 100 nm, and the employment of CNTs in these
systems becomes useful since the particles in a suspension cannot
provide tissue toxicity or blockage of blood vessels. They emphasize the use of MWCNT as targeting
for tumors in intravenous chemotherapy for its greater mechanical
resistance. , 
In order to use the CNTs
in a nanofluid system for drug delivery
the capillary forces must be checked to understand the interaction
between the liquid carrier and the CNTs. − 
Chitosan (CH) is a cationic polymer derived from chitin and
is
the second most abundant polysaccharide in nature. It is biodegradable,
biocompatible, and nontoxic and can lead to specific release properties. − Exploring such properties, hydrophobic drug loading systems encapsulated
within chitosan-based nanoparticles have been extensively studied
in recent years, presenting promising results. In a study developed
by Dramou and colleagues camptothecin,
which is an anti-neoplastic, was covalently linked with CH, folic
acid, and CNT oligosaccharides in order to increase intracellular
cellular uptake and also to promote controlled release of the drug.
A folate complex was employed to target the conjugate selectively
to the cancer cells that express the folic acid receptor. The results in vitro demonstrated that the release of camptothecin at
pH 5 was greater than at pH 6.8 and 7.4. Moreover, in MTT assays this
conjugate showed greater inhibition in the cell growth of colon cancer
cells.
Furthermore, Mohapatra and colleagues developed another study using the CH complex together with
CNT.
The results indicated this complex promotes significantly greater in vivo transfection than CH alone as well as increased
DNA and peptide transfer into cells.
Rathod and collaborators promoted
a dual functionalization on the CNT surface using ethylenediamine
(EDA, which is a cationic unit) and phenylboronic acid (PBA, a lectin
mimetic) complexed with paclitaxel (PLX). The use of EDA is justified
as studies have shown excellent affinity for sialic acid residues
(AS), which are negatively charged in the extracellular domain in
colon cancer cells. PBA stands out as a portion of the recognition,
allowing greater selectivity to target cells. In the release studies,
phosphate buffer (pH, 6.8) containing 20% acetonitrile was used as
the release medium. The comparison between PLX with functionalized
CNT and pristine samples was promoted. The results were very close,
with a release rate of about 40% at the end of 24 h. Among the factors
that did not allow a greater release are the difference in tube diameter
and length and the high affinity between the tube wall and the PLX.
Further studies will be conducted by this research group to increase
the percentage of PLX release.

## (aa) Lymphatic Targeting
The lymphatic
system protects
the organism against foreign macromolecules, viruses, bacteria, and
other pathogens and eliminates altered cells and aged or damaged blood
cells. Some types of cancer can travel
to other parts of the body through the bloodstream or lymphatic vessels
through the metastatic process. Thus, the lymphatic system exerts
an important function in the fight against cancer, and the lymph nodes become a potential target in studies
on cancer chemotherapy.
Ji and co-workers synthesized the CNT complex previously functionalized with
poly(ethylene glycol) (O-mMWNRC-PEG), exhibiting magnetic properties,
linked to doxorubicin. This CNT presents excellent adsorption and
the ability to target lymphatic system cells. In this study, the authors
compared the in vitro and in vivo activity of the doxorubicin conjugated with the multiwall magnetic
nanotube with the drug itself. Experiments in vitro demonstrated that the conjugate was effective in inhibiting the
growth of breast cancer EMT-6 cells. Furthermore, studies in vivo showed the conjugate was in the vicinity of the
tumors, promoting the release of doxorubicin for a long period of
time, also inhibiting the growth of breast cancer cells.
In
studies developed by Yang et al., the
MWCNT complex was functionalized with folic acid and coated
with a layer of magnetite nanoparticles and an inner surface loaded
with cisplatin through nanoprecipitation. With the help of an external
magnet, the cisplatin delivery system was migrated to the lymph nodes,
while folate functionalization was responsible for recognition and
internalization in tumor cells, thereby demonstrating the controlled
release of cisplatin into HeLa cancer cells.

## (ab) Brain
Targeting
There are many pathologies related
to the brain, such as Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s
disease, and stroke, among others, which are prevalent, and the drugs
used present low efficacy in the treatment. Many of these difficulties
are mainly associated with the blood-brain barrier (BBB), which is
impermeable, and the release of drugs is very limited. Thus, release
systems employing nanomaterials are considered promising and versatile
for the central nervous system because they can overcome such limitations
comparatively to the drug itself. Among
these nanomaterials used in medicine, CNTs, including both SWCNTs
and MWCNTs, have attracted tremendous attention due to their excellent
aspects in surface area, electrical conductivity, and biological properties.
In studies conducted by Kafa et al., they synthesized the MWCNT-F conjugate with angiopep-2, a ligand
for low density lipoprotein receptor (LRP1)-related protein-1. This
compound showed promising results being radiolabeled to facilitate
quantitative analyses by crystallography. In vitro assays demonstrated that the conjugate increased BBB transport 
compared to its equivalents individually. Furthermore, in experiments in vivo and after intravenous administration, the conjugate
showed a significantly greater brain uptake.
A conjugate between
an MWCNT functionalized and a peptide was intended
to penetrate the intracellular medium in the treatment of orthotopic
glioma. This conjugate was synthesized by You and co-workers and showed a reduced toxicity and also an increased
recognition of cancer cells, BBB penetration, and increased anticancer
activity due to the production of ROS, as observed.
MWCNTs conjugated
with berberine for the treatment of Alzheimer’s
disease was also studied. Berberine
has biological activity and is used in therapeutics in the fight against
dementia and other neurological disorders. The conjugate showed an
increase in drug absorption in the brain when compared to the pure
drug, with potential amyloid reduction induced by Alzheimer’s
disease.

## (ac) Ocular Drug Targeting
An ocular
system has many
anatomical and physiological barriers, which makes the delivery of
drugs very difficult. For this very reason, ophthalmic drugs do not
reach the target. Conventional ophthalmic
formulations are easily drained, but prodrugs with nanomaterial as
carriers allow the prolonged delivery of drugs and the interaction
with cornea.
Lu and co-workers studied the cytotoxicity and genotoxicity of plasma-modified MWCNTs,
including hydroxyl MWCNT (MWCNT-OH), MWCNT carbonyl (MWCNT-COOH),
and MWCNT pristine with human ocular cells, such as retinal epithelial
cells. Analyzed by transmission microscopy (TEM), all those nanomaterials
were able to cross membranes without damaging the cells, as proven
by few morphological changes observed. MWCNT–OH exhibited better
biocompatibility compared with other materials. The level of cellular
apoptosis was less than 1.5%, and the release occurred after 72 h
without damaging the cells. This material can be considered as a potential
carrier for ocular genetic diseases.
However, regarding this
topic there are few studies so far, and
therefore, CNT research on the release of drugs into the ocular system
should be more explored, considering its potentiality.

## (ad) Neglected
Diseases
Drug delivery systems employing
nanoparticles seem to be a new area in neglected disease (ND) research,
which comprises a group of 17 parasitic infections that are endemic
in many developing countries. However, it was possible only to verify
the use of the CNT against leishmaniasis.
Leishmaniasis is caused
by Leishmania protozoan parasites and affects over
10 million people in more than 90 tropical and subtropical countries
in the new and old world. Human infection
is mediated by about 21 species of Leishmania parasites.
There are at least three different forms of leishmaniasis. Visceral leishmaniasis is the most fatal infection.
Nowadays, available treatments are very toxic and very expensive.
To face this challenge, CNT can be used because of its ability to
easily circumvent cell membranes, acting on multiple targets, and
for its biocompatibility. It is reported by many groups that surface-functionalized
CNTs are capable of reducing the toxic effect and also increaseing the biocompatibility, thus providing a potential nanoparticle in
drug release studies.
Saudagar and co-workers reported
the synthesis of a conjugate between CNT-F with a chain of carboxylic
acids and betulin (BET), which is a pentacyclic triterpenoid. The
conjugate provided a slow release of betulin. The IC50 for betulin
and CNT-betulin against intracellular Leishmania donovani amastigotes was 8.33 ± 0.41 and 0.69 ± 0.08 μg/mL,
respectively, which shows an increase in the activity. The cytotoxicity
assay was performed on the J774A1 macrophage cell line, being 211.05
± 7.14 and 72.63 ± 6.14 μg/mL for betulin and CNT-betulin,
respectively. Thus, the results demonstrate better antileishmanial
efficiency of the CNT-betulin conjugate than betulin alone, with no
significant cytotoxicity observed on host cells.
Studies employing
SWCNT and MWCNT conjugated with cisplatin (CP-SWCNT
and CP-MWCNT) against Leishmania major were performed. This study was carried out to evaluate the
cytotoxicity and antileishmanial activity of cisplatin linked to CNT
against both promastigotes and amastigotes of Leishmania major
in vitro. In IC50 assays in promastigote cells, CP-SWCNT
and CP-MWCNT were 4- to 7-fold more active than CP and glucantime,
which were used as controls. In the studies with amastigote forms,
CP-SWCNT and CP-MWCNT were shown to be 11 and 7 times, respectively,
more active when compared to control.

## (ae) Cancer Therapy
Preclinical in vitro and in vivo tests showed CNTs as promising nanocarriers
for cancer treatment, , − but neither FDA approvals nor clinical trials have been reported
so far. CNTs, once in the vicinity of the tumor, can: (i) release
their cytotoxic content next to the cancer cells; (ii) bind to the
membrane of the cancer cells and release their content in a sustained
way; (iii) be internalized into the cells. 
Moreover, surface modification using cancer cell targeting
molecules provides CNTs with enhanced tumor cell specificity, which
could overcome the cytotoxicity and the multidrug resistance issues. − However, concerns over certain issues such as biocompatibility and
toxicity have been raised and warrant extensive research in this field. 
For example, Yu and co-workers synthesized
the paclitaxel (PTX) conjugate with noncovalently associated SWCNTs
to CH and hyaluronan to obtain the specific targeting property. The
results showed that the release of PTX was triggered at pH 5.5, and
a significant improvement in intracellular reactivity with oxygen
species (ROS) was observed, which should have increased activation
of activated kinase proteins by cellular apoptosis. Cell viability
tests indicated that PTX-conjugated SWNT destroyed A549 cancer cells
more efficiently than did free PTX.
CNT-F conjugated to the
anti-neoplastic drug methotrexate (MTX)
employing fluorescent nanoreleasers was studied by Ajmal and co-workers; the studied CCNTs showed promising biocompatibility,
and the CNT-MTX conjugate demonstrated a potent cytotoxic effect and
carcinogenic activity in a human lung cancer cell line.
Lu and
co-workers performed studies
using doxorubicin (DOX) conjugate MWCNT, which in turn is conjugated
with folic acid (FA) and magnetic nanoparticles (MN), constituting
the DOX-FA-MN-MWCNT system. This study addresses the release of DOX
in the treatment of two-way cancer cells, with the first being by
magnetic orientation and the second by ligand–receptor interactions.
Free DOX presented low cell viability due to its low solubility when
compared to its complex. In addition, this conjugate showed enhanced
cytotoxicity in relation to U87 human glioblastoma cells compared
to DOX. Through transmission electron microscopy and laser scanning
confocal microscopy, the authors confirmed that DOX-FA-MN-MWCNT can
be efficiently absorbed by U87 cells with subsequent intracellular
release of DOX followed by going into the nucleus with the nanocarrier
left in the cytoplasm. This treatment promoted selective killing of
U87 cancer cells at the site of magnetic targeting without affecting
the healthy cells used as controls.

3.

## Risks and Effects of CNTs
CNTs have enabled us to generate
nanomaterials with characteristics
of unique chemicals, arousing the interest of different scientific
areas for their potential applications. Both single-walled and MWCNTs
functionalized or not are promising materials for biomedical applications.
However, several questions about their toxicological profile should
have been answered because many works did not relate. However, one
of the restrictions on the use of CNTs in vivo is
their reduced biocompatibility and poor dispersibility. Furthermore,
even today, there are still some points that must be experimentally
evaluated regarding the toxicity of CNTs. In this sense, Lemos et
al. employed poly(ethylene glycol) chains were covalently linked to
MWCNTs (PEG-MWCNTs) through an aliphatic nucleophilic substitution
chemical reaction and radiolabeled with 99 mTc. Biodistribution studies
were carried out in tumor-bearing mice, and the results revealed that
the produced system displays a prolonged blood circulation time and
relevant tumor uptake rates. Toxicological data were obtained from
testing on healthy animals, and the data revealed that PEG-MWCNTs
did not induce an important toxicity profile. Considering all the
results obtained in this work, the PEG-coated MWCNTs can be considered
a potential candidate for future oncology. On the other hand, Liang et al. identified that MWCNT exposure was
observed to cause damages to the viability of ocular cells; however,
the underlying mechanisms remain not well-understood. This study provides
the first evidence that DNA hypermethylation in the promoter (cg14583550)
and downregulated expression of FANCC gene may be underlying mechanisms
associated with MWCNT-induced retinal toxicity. 
Due to the variation in structure, size, and chemical
surfaces
among SWCNTs and MWCNTs the solubilizing
agents also have an imperative part in the toxicity of CNTs. In natural
dispersants, individual CNTs tend to bundle, which leads to toxicity. 
This is possibly due to MWCNT, as the
same numerous aspects have
been responsible for the toxicity of CNTs; that is, metal impurities
in CNTs have a considerable impact on toxicity. Another important
aspect that must be considered is the procedure for obtaining CNTs.
There are different methods of obtaining SWCNT and MWCNT, and these
can generate varied products, with different types and amounts of
impurities, which could result in a wide variety of waste. Therefore,
to regulate CNTs, agencies must request scientific evidence from manufacturers
that their use does not harm public health. One solution to the issue
of regulation would be to adapt existing standards.

4.

## .Genotoxicity of CNTs Applied in Health
The respective review
aims to analyze the genotoxicity of the applied
nanostructures in health since, although these materials are widely
used on industrial and commercial products in the medicinal sector,
the potential health risks associated with exposure to them still
need to be understood. The possibility of CNTs presenting different
actions becomes a challenge in being integrated temporarily or definitively
as part of a biological system, since their objective is to restore
or replace the function of organs and tissues. In this sense, testing genotoxicity assesses the ability
of CNTs to damage the genetic information of cells and cause mutations
or induce modifications in the structure of the deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA) of a living organism, even if the damage is not potentially
mutagenic or carcinogenic. The way to
identify possible chromosomal aberrations is based on increased erythrocyte
frequency; polychromatic tests with micronuclei and tests indicating
oxidative stress can lead to injuries to cells, in addition to polymorphisms. 
Although nanostructures have been widely
used, potential health
risks need to be addressed; therefore, this review aims to analyze
the genotoxicity of nanostructures applied in health. Three studies
included in this review evaluated the risks of carbon nanotubes according
to in vitro and in vivo tests, .
 According to the data of , one of the studies
evaluated SWCNT and MWCNT; the
histopathological examination detected inflammation in lung cells,
including infiltration of immune system cells such as macrophages
and neutrophils after the first exposure. The comet test does not
indicate tail alteration in the DNA of lung cells exposed to SWCNT
and MWCNT. The in vitro test of chromosomal aberrations
also did not find structural aberrations in DNA. Despite the episode
detected, no genotoxic effects of SWCNT and MWCNT were observed in
the erythrocyte micronucleus in mammals. 
The second paper quantitatively analyzed the chromosome spindle
pole of lung epithelial cells, which showed a significant increase
in centrosome fragmentation at doses of 0.024 and 2.4 μg/mL
of MWCNT and aberrations with morphological changes of the spindle
and centromere fragmentation. Cytotoxicity analysis after 24 and 72
h of exposure to MWCNT showed a decrease in cell viability with increasing
exposure time regardless of dose. 
The third study found that human bronchial epithelial cells exposed
to a concentration of 3 μg/mL of MWCNT for 5 days underwent
regulation of mitochondrial genes, decreasing intracellular mitochondrial
abundance and oxygen consumption, inducing cellular mitophagy two
hours after exposure. While MWCNT induced an increase in mitochondrial
gene expression, it decreased the oxygen consumption rate and consequently
mitochondrial abundance. Although the results were similar at a concentration
of 12 μg/mL of MWCNT during the same period, this dose was considered
cytotoxic after the fifth day of exposure. 
Although carbon nanotubes are a commercially important product,
the studies analyzed presented controversies in their results. Nakanishi
et al. point out that SWCNT and MWCNT, even at doses that triggered
an inflammatory process in rat lung cells, did not show genotoxic
potential. Siegrist et al. showed in an in vitro analysis
that MWCNT caused mitotic and chromosomal disruption in primary human
lung cells. In both in vitro and in vivo tests, MWCNTs were shown to promote genotoxic potential in populations
exposed to this type of nanomaterial. Snyder et al. point out that MWCNTs, although not inducing significant
mutations in mitochondrial genes, have caused significant regulations
and decrease in intracellular mitochondrial abundance. Wu et al. reported in their study that MWCNT induced
genotoxicity in cells, mainly those with long-term exposure.

5.

## Concluding Remarks
The field of biomaterials sciences
is growing, and CNTs have been
intensively studied in recent years for several areas. In this Perspective,
we highlight biomedical CNT applications based on CNT mechanical and
electronic characteristics that can be relevant in several areas.
Many approaches have been investigated for the application of CNTs
such as drug delivery, gene delivery, DNA, RNA, antibody, and steering
groups, among others, forming complexes through covalent, noncovalent,
or both bonds. In these systems, we highlight their use in the design
of sensors, probes, tissue engineering, and photodynamic therapy,
among others. CNTs allow us to associate some tools used in drug design
with improving the characteristics of these molecules. In addition,
it is worth mentioning that CNT functionalization can make CNTs more
biodegradable and biocompatible. As we have presented here, it is
possible to conjugate the drug and also theragnostic agents with the
functionalized CNT and adsorb directing groups in its cavity, reducing
toxicity. Nanotubes show themselves as a multiplatform for biomedical
applications, and we believe that in the very near future many examples
can arise.
Although most studies focus on the area of cancer
due to the possibility
that these nanosystems target the drug, increasing selectivity and
consequently reducing toxicity, which is extremely necessary to improve
the therapeutic use of antitumor drugs that usually present significant
toxicity, it is also possible to use theranostic agents for imaging
and monitoring of treatment. Although the use of CNTs and the diversity
of their applications are promising, it is worth mentioning that there
is a need for more studies, mainly in vivo, to ensure
their safety, since there are still divergent data in the literature
about their toxicity. In general, toxicological studies involving
nanoparticles are still scarce, and their results are controversial
compared to each other, mainly due to incipient standardization.
The studies are mainly silent on the characterization of particles,
contributing little to the understanding of their interaction in the
environment and making it difficult to assess the real risk of exposure
to these materials. Despite this, most studies indicate some acute
toxic effects, which demonstrates the need for a better understanding
of the effects of these materials before they are used in everyday
processes/products.
The analysis of the risk to human health
depends mainly on the
regulatory structure, involving the generation of protocols. They
must be based on a multidisciplinary interaction, mainly between chemistry,
responsible for the synthesis, quantification, and characterization
of materials, biology, and medicine, in the design of tests and the
interpretation of results in order to obtain a risk assessment in
the most reliable way possible. With the increase in research in this
area, which includes monitoring CNTs and human health, it will be
possible to assess the risk of contamination by these materials through
probabilistic calculations. Therefore, new legislation should appear
in the near future, indicating guide values for each nanomaterial
and situation, in addition to new treatment technologies for this
type of waste.
Knowledge of the risks that CNTs cause to people
will be important
so that the production, commercialization, and disposal of CNTs are
carried out appropriately and sustainably. Therefore, in order to
sell safe products, the products must comply with the standards required
by legislation regarding environmental and public health aspects.

## Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Coordenação
de Aperfeiçoamento
de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES) for scholarships to Silva,
J.V. and Gonzaga, R.V. and to CNPq, for scholarship to Ferreira, E.I.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References