2933advsciAdvanced ScienceAdv Sci (Weinh)WileyPMC1252049712520497125204974071908010.1002/advs.202503712RelA Inhibits Embryonic Myogenesis by Coordinately Regulating a Novel Distal Enhancer of Myogenin
HossainMd Nazmul GaoYao IslamSharmeen ChenLi‐Wei LiXinrui KouZhongyun LawNathan C de AvilaJeanene Marie ZhuMei‐Jun DuMin 
1
Nutrigenomics and Growth Biology Laboratory, Pullman, WA, 99164, USA
2
Department of Animal Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, 99164, USA
3
School of Food Science, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, 99164, USA*
E‐mail: min.du@wsu.edu

✉Corresponding author.
28720251238e03712e0371215102025© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley‐VCH GmbHThis is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract
Skeletal muscle is crucial for lifelong metabolic health, with its development initiating during embryogenesis and guiding later growth. Single‐cell RNA sequencing of E13.5 mouse embryos suggests that maternal obesity impairs embryonic myogenesis, primarily during myotube formation, and is correlated with the downregulation of myogenin (Myog) expression. Spatial transcriptomic sequencing further confirms these findings. Conversely, maternal obesity induces the upregulation of RelA, a transcription factor and inflammatory signaling effector, in the myogenic cells of obese embryos. Additionally, single‐cell ATAC sequencing suggests that a cis‐regulatory region, located 4 kb proximal to the Myog promoter, exhibits coordinated expression with Myog and acts as an enhancer of Myog. In obese embryonic myogenic cells, RelA is recruited to this region, inhibiting Myog expression and myotube formation. Notably, in vitro RelA knockdown or inhibition rescues Myog expression and promotes myogenic differentiation. Similarly, metformin treatment of obese mothers restores embryonic Myog expression and myogenesis by suppressing RelA. Together, the multi‐omics analyses demonstrate that RelA targets a distal Myog enhancer to coordinately inhibit Myog expression and embryonic myogenesis.
Keywords: embryonic myogenesis, enhancer, inflammation, maternal obesity, myogenin, RelA

Maternal obesity (MO) accounts for more than 40% of pregnancies in the United States, induces inflammation, and impairs embryonic myogenesis, known to program muscle dysfunction in offspring. Inflammation enhances the binding of RelA to a novel distal enhancer located 4 kb upstream of myogenin promoter to inhibit embryonic myogenesis, which is recovered by metformin treatment during early pregnancy.

 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2025 Jun 17; Received 2025 Feb 26; Collection date 2025 Oct.

1.

## Introduction
Skeletal muscle is the major tissue for locomotion and metabolism, constituting 30–40% of body mass.[
 , , 
] Myogenesis starts during early embryogenesis, and the majority of the primary and secondary muscle fibers form during the prenatal stage through a sequential progression of myogenic progenitor cells to multinucleated myotubes and fibers. During the early stage of embryogenesis, myogenic progenitor cells originate from the dermomyotome of embryonic mesoderm and migrate to their designated locations in the body to develop into various muscle groups.[
 
] Embryonic myogenesis starts around embryonic day 9.5 (E9.5) in the mesoderm of mice when PAX3 and PAX7‐positive myogenic progenitor cells first appear.[
 , 
] During E10.5 to E12.5, these progenitor cells express the first myogenic regulatory factor (MRF), MYF5, which initiates myogenic lineage commitment.[
 
] A portion of MYF5+ cells also contributes to the brown adipocyte lineage.[
 
] Subsequently, MYOD1, another member of MRFs, appears and enforces the differentiation of myogenic progenitor cells to myoblasts.[
 
] Later, myoblasts undergo terminal differentiation and fuse to form multinucleated myotubes, which is governed by myogenin (Myog).[
 
] The myotubes form during this stage become primary myofibers and work as a scaffold for secondary myofiber formation during the fetal stage.[
 
] These, altogether, determine the post‐natal muscle development and its long‐term metabolic function.[
 
]

The expression of MRFs is regulated by essential regulatory factors, including other MRFs and non‐coding RNAs, with concomitant epigenetic modifications of their promoters.[
 
] Distinct distal enhancers have been identified for Myf5 and Myod1, which possess the binding motifs of regulatory factors.[
 , , 
] Consistently, Myog expression is initiated by MYOD1, a co‐transcription factor myocyte enhancer factor 2C (MEF2C), as well as regulated by myogenin itself as a positive feedforward loop, followed by the removal of inhibitory epigenetic marks in the promoter.[
 , 
] Available studies suggest that, MYOD1 can modulate 3D chromosome architecture to alter interactions between regulatory elements and target genes including Myog.[
 , 
] However, the dynamics of Myog expression and the involvement of possible cis‐regulatory elements and enhancer have not been defined.
The worldwide steady escalation of the obesity rate in reproductive‐age women over the past decades (currently ≈39.8% in the United States) has turned it into a pandemic.[
 , , , , 
] Maternal obesity (MO) not only affects maternal health but also exerts a negative impact on the development of their offspring, including myogenesis.[
 , 
] Recent studies, including our studies, have reported that MO induces a low‐grade chronic inflammation in the uterine microenvironment and upregulates nuclear factor kappa B (NF‐kB) signaling in embryos.[
 , , 
] As effectors of NF‐kB signaling, the NF‐kB family consists of RelA (P65), c‐Rel, RelB, P50 (NFKB1), and P52, which form RelA‐P50 and RelB‐P52 heterodimers to activate gene expression.[
 
] As the key mediatory pathway of inflammation, NF‐kB signaling is involved in various pathophysiological processes, affecting myoblast proliferation and myogenic differentiation.[
 , 
] In satellite cells, NF‐kB enhances the cell cycle progression from G1 to S phase, while inhibiting myogenic differentiation.[
 
] However, the impact of NF‐kB in embryonic myogenesis has yet to be explored, partially due to the technical challenges for studying early embryos. Using single‐cell (sc) multi‐omics, we explored the effects of inflammation and its effector, RelA, in impairing embryonic myogenesis due to MO.
We conducted scRNA and scATAC sequencing of E11.5 and E13.5 embryos, and spatial transcriptomic profiling of the myotome of E13.5 embryos from control and obese mice. We found that RelA binds with a novel distal enhancer that also possesses binding motifs of MYOD1, MEF2C, and MYOG, which suppresses Myog expression in embryos due to MO. Both in vitro knockdown and in vivo inhibition of RelA rescued embryonic myogenesis. These studies suggest that RelA and the associated NF‐kB signaling is a potential therapeutic target to rescue embryonic myogenesis in offspring from mothers with obesity and other inflammatory conditions.

2.

## Results
2.1.

## Single‐Cell Transcriptomic and ATAC Sequencing of the Mouse Embryos
To induce obesity, we randomly divided female mice into control (CT) and MO groups. CT group was exposed to a control diet containing 10% energy from fat, and the MO group was exposed to a High‐fat diet (HFD) containing 45% energy from fat until there was a 20% difference in the body weight between the two groups in ≈10 weeks (Figure
 ; Figure , Supporting Information). We also conducted an intraperitoneal glucose tolerance test (IpGTT) and fasting blood glucose test, where obese mice exhibited higher fasting blood glucose and less glucose tolerance (Figure , Supporting Information).
During the first wave of myogenesis, myo‐progenitor cells highly express Myf5 to initiate myogenic commitment, and Myog expression escalates later and reaches its peak at E13.5 for terminal differentiation of myoblasts and their fusion to form myotubes.[
 
] To investigate the impact of MO on myoblast differentiation and myotube formation, we conducted scRNA‐sequencing of embryonic tissue at E11.5 and 13.5 and scATAC‐seq at E13.5 from C57BL/6 control and obese female mice. For scRNA‐seq data processing, after filtering out the low‐quality cells, we recovered a total of 43,813 cells from where 27,359 cells were from E11.5 to 18,454 cells from the E13.5 group. Using Seurat V5, we combined all the cells from two developmental time points and clustered them following the non‐linear dimensional reduction technique: UMAP. We identified 20 different cell clusters from our integrated data set and annotated them based on the expression of specific marker genes (Figure  ; Tables and , Supporting Information). Among the major cell clusters, cluster 0 was embryonic fibroblast cells, expressing fibrogenic marker genes Col6a1, Col6a3, Col1a1, and Pdgfra, accounting≈15% of all cells; clusters 1 and 2, two next major clusters, accounted for ≈13% of cells and expressed embryonic mesenchymal marker genes Prrx1 and Twist1 (Figure  ; Table , Supporting Information).[
 , 
] On the other hand, clusters 9 and 17 expressed myogenic markers Myod1 and Cdh15; clusters 6 and 7 highly expressed osteochondrogenic marker genes Msx1 and Sox9 (Figure  ; Table , Supporting Information).[
 , 
]

 With the progression of embryonic days from E11.5 to E13.5, there was a significant decline in the mesenchymal cell population (clusters 1 and 2), and a gradual increase in the fibrogenic (cluster 0), osteochondrogenic (clusters 6 and 7) and myogenic cells (clusters 9 and 17; Figure , Supporting Information). The gradual decrease in mesenchymal progenitor cell population and concomitant increase in the lineage‐specific cell types showed an ongoing progression of organogenesis and illustrated a landscape of embryonic development during E11.5 and E13.5.[
 
]

In scATAC‐seq, we recovered ≈16 283 cells after initial pre‐processing and quality control to remove the low‐quality cells. Clustering and UMAP visualization of those cells by following non‐linear dimension reduction methods using Signac 2.1.0, we identified 27 unique cell clusters (Figure  ). To interpret the cell type, we conducted the cross‐modality integration and label transfer from our scRNA‐seq data and predicted the cell types of scATAC‐seq clusters (Figure  ). Major cell clusters such as neurogenic, chondrogenic, and myogenic clusters had very high (>90%) prediction scores, while the mesenchymal and fibrogenic cell clusters had a comparatively low prediction score (<80%) which could be due to their heterogeneity during this developmental stage (Figure , Supporting Information). The predicted clusters exhibited similar gene activity patterns when compared to the marker gene expression from scRNA‐seq (Figure , Supporting Information). For instance, the fibrogenic cluster (Cluster 0) had higher expression of the Col6 gene in both scRNA and scATAC‐seq data; the myogenic clusters 17 and 9 expressed Myod1, Cdh15, Myog, and Myh3 for both scRNA and scATAC‐seq (Figure , Supporting Information). Similar to scRNA‐seq, mesenchymal cell cluster (cluster 1) and fibrogenic cell cluster (cluster 0) possessed the majority of cells in scATAC‐seq (Figure  ). We identified 266 959 variable peaks across the cells, of which 41% overlapped with the promoter, 15% with exons, and 28% with introns and intergenic regions (Figure , Supporting Information). Altogether, our scRNA and scATAC‐seq captured the landscape of early embryonic development and the developmental trajectories of myogenic, osteogenic, and fibrogenic cells.

2.2.

## Myogenic Developmental Trajectory
During early embryonic development, the myotome‐derived Pax3, Pax7, and Myf5+ myogenic progenitor cells differentiate into myocytes and fuse to form Myh3, Myl1+ multinucleated myotubes under the governance of MRFs Myf5, Myod1 and Myog (Figure
 ). Cell clusters 9 and 17 from our scRNA‐seq expressed those marker genes and MRFs (Figure , Supporting Information). Therefore, we extracted all cells from both clusters and subclustered them into 7 unique clusters (clusters 0 to 6) to reconstruct the myogenic developmental trajectory (Figure  ). During embryonic myogenesis, the PAX3+ mesenchymal progenitor cells are the first cells to appear from the dorsomedial lips of dermomyotome that express Pax7 to form myotome, which was identified in cluster 1 (Figure  ).[
 
] MYF5 is the earliest MRF that determines their myogenic lineage specification.[
 
] MYOD1 is the later transcription factor that starts expressing ≈E10.5 and overlapping Myf5 expression which were identified in cluster 0 (Figure  ). Myod1 expression induces differentiation of myoblasts into committed myogenic lineage cells and peaked among cells of clusters 4 and 5 (Figure  ).[
 
] MYOG is the last regulatory factor in embryonic myogenesis required for the fusion of mononucleated myoblasts to multinucleated Myh3 and Myl1+ myotubes which were observed in clusters 3 and 6 (Figure  ).[
 
] Brown adipocytes, contributed by multiple tissue lineages including Pax3 and Myf5+ mesenchymal progenitor cells, are positive for Ebf2 which were present in cluster 2 (Figure  ).[
 
]

 Additionally, compared to E11.5, E13.5, myogenic cells exhibited a lower prevalence of progenitor cells and a higher prevalence of differentiated myoblasts and myotubes (Figure , Supporting Information). The expression of Pax3, a marker of progenitor cells, was not identifiable at E13.5, while Myh3 and Myl1 were highly expressed in E13.5 myogenic cells (Figure , Supporting Information).
To identify similar cellular heterogenicity in the myogenic cell population from our scATAC‐seq at E13.5, we extracted cells from clusters 9 and 17. Both clusters exhibited higher activity and accessibility of myogenic marker genes Pax7, Myod1, Myog, and Myh3 (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). Further clustering of both clusters 9 and 17 exhibited 5 sub‐clusters. Two sub‐clusters from cluster 17 exhibited higher activities of Myod1, Myog, Myh3, and Myl1, which denotes as differentiated myoblasts and multinucleated myotubes respectively (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). On the other hand, three sub‐clusters from predicted cluster 9 expressed Pax3, Pax7, Myod1, and Ebf2 that identified them as the mesenchymal progenitors, proliferating myoblasts, and BAT lineage cells, respectively (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). Additionally, Myod1 was only found in proliferating myoblasts not in the other two clusters (Figure  ).
Cumulatively, these data identify the heterogenic cell types present in the myogenic cell populations of embryos and portray the gradual progression of myogenic developmental trajectory based on their gene expression and chromatin accessibility. In addition, a portion of BAT progenitor cells were also identified with a mesenchymal progenitor origin.

2.3.

## 
Myog and Myotube Formation were Inhibited in Differentiated Myoblasts due to Maternal Obesity
The commitment of progenitor cells to the myogenic lineage and their fusion to multinucleated myotubes are two major steps of myogenesis. We compared the expression and accessibility of MRF genes between cells from CT and MO groups in both scRNA and scATAC‐seq (Tables and , Supporting Information) Combined E11.5 and E13.5 scRNA‐seq data didn't exhibit difference in the expression of Myf5 and other early myogenic marker genes such as Pax7 (Figure , Supporting Information). Similarly, the expression of Ebf2, the earliest gene expressed in the BAT progenitor cells didn't differ (Figure , Supporting Information). We observed a lower expression of Myod1 in proliferating myoblasts, however, the difference was not significant and percentage of cells didn't differ between the two groups (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). MO impaired the expression of Myod1 and Myog in the differentiated myoblast cells (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). The markers of the terminal stage of embryonic myogenesis, Myog, Myh3 and Myl1 were expressed much lower in myotubes from MO group (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). The percentages of differentiated myoblasts and myotubes were also ≈32% and ≈25% lower in MO embryos, respectively (Figure  ). In term of embryonic days, Myod1 and Myog both were downregulated in myoblasts and myotubes during E11.5 however only Myog exhibited lower expression in both cell types during E13.5 (Figure , Supporting Information). Additionally, gene ontology (GO) analysis of the downregulated genes identified their association with major biological processes including “Muscle cell differentiation”, “Myoblast Differentiation”, “Myoblast fusion” and “Myotube cell Development”, suggesting the downregulation of myogenic differentiation and myotube formation. (Figure , Supporting Information). In short, the negative impact of MO on embryonic myogenesis was highly evident in the differentiated myoblasts and myotubes.
In our scATAC‐seq at E13.5, the number of cells in both myogenic clusters from the CT and MO groups was comparable (Figure , Supporting Information). Gene accessibility profiles from our scATAC‐ seq also exhibited a similar impact of MO on the myogenic developmental trajectory. The accessibility of Pax7 and Myf5 in the myogenic progenitor cell population and Ebf2 from brown adipocyte lineage didn't vary between the progenitor cell populations from CT and MO groups along with their gene activity (Figure , Supporting Information). However, the accessibility of Myod1 differed in the proliferating myoblasts between the two groups (Figure  ). Furthermore, Myog accessibility in the differentiated myoblasts and myotubes especially in the promoter region was lower in MO (Figure  ).
Taken together, the scRNA and scATAC‐seq analysis of embryonic tissue samples showed that MO impairs Myog expression and embryonic myogenesis, mainly during the terminal differentiation and myotube formation.

2.4.

## Maternal Obesity Induces an Inflammatory Response and Activates NF‐kB Signaling in Embryos
Maternal obesity elevates pro‐inflammatory cytokine levels in maternal circulation and induces an inflammatory response in the embryos.[
 , 
] To explore the impact of MO on inflammatory response in embryos, we conducted the Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of upregulated genes from the DEGs between CT and MO embryos. The GO analysis suggests the association of upregulated genes in MO with biological processes “Regulation of inflammatory response”, “Canonical NF‐kB signaling”, “IL‐6 and IL‐8 production”, and “IL‐6 mediated signaling pathway” (Figure
 ; Figure , Supporting Information). In addition, GO analysis identified the involvement of upregulated genes in MO with molecular functions: “TNF receptor superfamily binding”, “NF‐kB binding”, and “TNF receptor binding” (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). Additionally, analysis of transcription factors (TF) associated with the upregulated genes by ChEA3 identified members of the NF‐kB family (NFKB1, RelA) among the top associated TF lists. (Figure  ). These data showed the up‐regulation of inflammation in MO embryos.
 NF‐kB family, consisting of RelA, c‐Rel, RelB, P50, and P52, exists as RelA homodimer, RelA‐P50, and RelB‐P52 heterodimers when activated,[
 
] mediating the canonical and non‐canonical NF‐kB signaling pathways respectively.[
 
] Proinflammatory cytokines, including TNF‐a (tumor necrosis factor‐alpha), IL‐1 (interleukin‐1), IL‐6, and IFN‐I (type I interferons) are major activators of canonical NF‐kB signaling.[
 
] However, the expression of the NF‐kB family genes didn't alter due to MO (Figure , Supporting Information).[
 , 
] In canonical NF‐kB signaling, RelA homodimer or RelA and P50 heterodimer form a complex with IκBα (inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa B) and remain inactive. Upon activation by different external stimuli, IκB kinase (IKK) phosphorylates IκBα and triggers its degradation by ubiquitination. This process leads to the rapid nuclear translocation of the canonical RelA dimer and triggers the expression of their targeted genes.[
 
] To further identify the most active transcription factors of the NF‐kB family, we performed motif enrichment analysis in myogenic cell clusters based on scATAC‐seq (Table , Supporting Information). RelA (P65) and P50 (NFKB1) were among the top active motifs in the myogenic cells (Figure  ). Additionally, among the members of the NF‐kB family, RelA motif activity was upregulated (Fold change: 2.26) in the MO embryos (Figure  ), which was confirmed by the differential motif activity analysis (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). In short, MO activates NF‐kB signaling in myogenic cells demonstrated through the upregulation of RelA dimer activity.

2.5.

## Spatial Transcriptomic Profiling of Myotome Reveals Myog Inhibition and NF‐kB Upregulation Due to MO
To gain deep insight into the embryonic myotome due to MO, we conducted GeoMx DSP transcriptomic profiling of myotome (Figure
 ; Figure , Supporting Information) and principal component analysis (PCA) grouped samples from CT and MO into distinct clusters, indicating differences in their transcriptional profiles. (Figure  ). A list of down‐regulated genes and up‐regulated genes were identified between CT and MO embryos (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). Similar to scRNA‐seq, the GO analysis with the differentially expressed genes revealed the association of the biological process “Regulation of inflammatory response” with the up‐regulated genes and “Muscle cell differentiation” with the down‐regulated genes (Figure  ). Furthermore, significant down‐regulation of Myod1 and Myog, as well as Myh3 was observed in the MO embryos (Figure  ). On the other hand, Pax7 was higher in MO embryos, whereas Pax3 and the levels of Mef2a, and Mef2c didn't differ (Figure , Supporting Information). In terms of canonical NF‐kB signaling, a higher relative abundance of RelA and P50 was observed in the MO group (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information).
 Overall, similar to our findings from scRNA and scATAC‐seq, the GeoMx spatial transcriptional profiling confirmed the suppression of myogenesis and the up‐regulation of NF‐kB family members RelA and P50 due to MO in the myotome.

2.6.

## NF‐kB Binds to an Enhancer of Myog to Down‐Regulate Its Expression
Enhancers are cis‐regulatory regions that enhance the expression of nearby genes.[
 
] The promoter‐enhancer interaction, i.e., cis‐regulatory interactions can be identified from scATAC‐seq data by analyzing the cis‐co‐accessible networks (CCANs).[
 
] CCAN analysis of our current scATAC‐seq datasets revealed a co‐accessible region (Chr1: 134285400‐134286400) proximal to the Myog promoter (Figure
 ). The accessibility of this co‐accessible enhancer region was cell‐type specific and was only found in myogenic cell clusters (Figure  ). Also, the activity of this enhancer region followed a similar pattern of changes as the Myog promoter and its expression (Figure  ). The accessibility of this enhancer region was highly correlated with Myog promoter accessibility (R2 = 0.82) and gene activity (R2 = 0.83) (Figure  ). In alignment with this finding, the accessibility of this identified enhancer region was lower in both MO myoblasts and myotubes where Myog expression was inhibited (Figure  ). This enhancer region possesses several binding sites of NF‐kB family members: RelA, P50, and MYOD1and MYOG, and their co‐factor MEF2C from JASPER database (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information).[
 
] In ReMap, a database of regulatory regions based on DNA binding experiments like ChIP‐seq, exhibits active MYOG and MYOD1 binding activities in this region in C2C12 cells, embryonic myoblasts and myotubes (Figure , Supporting Information). We observed lower accessibility of the MYOD1, MYOG, and MEF2C binding sites on the enhancer region, as well as their lower motif binding activity in MO myogenic cells (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). We didn't observe changes in the motif binding activity of other MRFs (Figure , Supporting Information).
 Together, we identified an enhancer region of Myog ≈4 kb upstream of its promoter, which is highly correlated with its promoter activity and expression. Additionally, the presence of a binding site on the enhancer and upregulation of motif activity suggest enhanced recruitment of RelA dimer to the enhancer region and the down‐regulation of Myog expression by inhibiting the enhancer function in MO embryos.

2.7.

## Binding of RelA to the Myog Enhancer Inhibits Its Expression and Impacts Myotube Formation
To confirm our findings from scRNA, scATAC‐seq, and spatial sequencing, we conducted RT‐qPCR analysis of E13.5 CT and MO embryonic tissue samples. The expression of Myod1 and Myog was lower in MO embryos (Figure
 ). Similarly, the protein levels of MYOG and MYH3 were lower in MO embryos, which aligns with the findings from scRNA and spatial Seq (Figure  ). However, the mRNA expression of Myf5 did not deviate in the MO embryo (Figure  ). In addition, immunofluorescence staining of E13.5 embryos with MYH3 antibody showed a smaller myotome in the cryosections of MO embryos relative to CT embryos (Figure  ).
 RelA is a key mediator of canonical NF‐kB signaling, and its phosphorylation is an indication of its active state, which enhances its nuclear translocation.[
 
] E13.5 embryos from MO mice had a higher ratio of p‐RelA/RelA (Figure  ). By ChIP assay using an antibody against RelA, we found higher recruitment of RelA to the enhancer region of both E11.5 and E13.5 MO embryos (Figure  ), which might suppress the binding of other transcription factors and inhibit Myog expression.
Together, these analyses verify our findings from scRNA, scATAC and spatial seq that MO elevated the binding of RelA dimer to the enhancer region of Myog and inhibition of myogenesis.

2.8.

## 
Myog Expression and Myotube Formation are Impaired in Differentiated Myoblasts Due to RelA
The nuclear translocation of the RelA homodimer, or a heterodimer of RelA with another member of the NF‐κB family, is required for the activation of NF‐κB signaling and for binding to the regulatory regions of target genes to exert its transcriptional effects.[
 
] The release of sequestrated RelA dimer by phosphorylation and ubiquitination of IκBα triggers its rapid translocation to nucleus, however the overexpression of RelA is also associated with its nuclear positivity in both in vivo and in vitro condition, independent of its phosphorylation status in the canonical NF‐kB signaling cascade.[
 , 
] Therefore, to explore the role of RelA on myogenesis, we overexpressed RelA in C2C12 cell, as well as activated the NF‐kB signaling TNF‐a and evaluated their impact on myogenesis (Figure , Supporting Information). We used scrambled plasmid with GFP as a positive control to evaluate the transfection efficiency and non‐specific effect on myogenesis (Figure , Supporting Information). In the RelA overexpression (RelA OE) group, we observed a higher level of total RelA without changing its phosphorylation level, and the RelA level was unchanged in the TNF‐a group (Figure
 ). Consistently, we observed lower levels of MYOG and MYH3 in t‐a and RelA OE groups (Figure  ). Immunofluorescence imaging also exhibited a lower number of myotubes in both the RelA OE group and TNF‐a treated group (Figure  ). Similarly, RT‐qPCR also showed the inhibition of Myod1 and Myog expression in RelA OE and TNF‐a groups (Figure  ). Activation of NF‐kB signaling by TNF‐a or RelA OE increased the translocation of RelA homodimer or RelA‐P50 heterodimer into the nucleus which increased their binding with enhancer region of Myog and inhibited myogenesis in C2C12 cells. Together, these data show that activation of canonical NF‐kB signaling impairs Myog expression and myotube formation.
 To further verify the role of canonical NF‐kB signaling on myogenesis, we knocked down RelA by siRNA following the activation of NF‐kB signaling by TNF‐a in C2C12 cells (Figure , Supporting Information). In the absence of TNF‐a, RelA KD only had minor effects on Myod1, and Myog expression, and myotube formation (Figure  ). Consistently, NF‐kB activation by TNF‐a reduced the myotube formation in CON cells, which was absent in RelA KD cells (Figure  ). Similarly, the mRNA levels of Myod1 and Myog were not impacted in RelA KD cells after TNF‐a addition (Figure  ). Knockdown of RelA didn't activate the canonical NK‐kB signaling in RelA KD cells and didn't exhibit deleterious effects on myoblast differentiation nor myotube formation (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). Collectively, these data verify the crucial role of RelA in inhibiting Myog expression and myotube formation in C2C12 myogenic cells due to inflammation.

2.9.

## Metformin Treatment Attenuates NF‐kB Signaling and Rescues Myogenesis in MO Embryos
Proinflammatory cytokines, including TNF‐a, IL‐1, IL‐6, and IFN‐I are major activators of canonical NF‐kB signaling.[
 
] To explore the impact of NF‐kB activation in committed myoblasts and their myogenic differentiation, we used TNF‐a to induce inflammation in confluent C2C12 myoblasts (Figure , Supporting Information). Furthermore, we used Caffeic Acid Phenethyl Ester (CAPE) and Metformin (MET) to inhibit the canonical NF‐kB pathway (Figure , Supporting Information). CAPE specifically inhibits the ubiquitination and phosphorylation‐mediated activation of the RelA dimer and prevents their translocation into the nucleus to regulate their target genes.[
 
] On the other hand, MET effectively inhibits the TNF‐a, HIF‐1a, and IL‐6‐mediated activation of inflammatory signaling in both AMP‐activated protein kinase (AMPK) and AMPK‐independent pathways.[
 
] Immunofluorescence imaging exhibited a lower number of myotubes in TNF‐a treated group, on the other hand, the number of myotubes were increased after addition of CPAE and MET (Figure
 ). Similarly, RT‐qPCR showed the inhibition of Myod1 and Myog expression in TNF‐a group, which was rescued by MET and CAPE (Figure  ). Activation of NF‐kB signaling by TNF‐a increased the p‐RelA/RelA ratio, which reduced MYOG and MYH3 contents in the myogenic cells (Figure  ), and CAPE and MET rescued the expression of MYOG and MYH3 by reducing the p‐RelA/RelA ratio (Figure  ). Notably, the number of differentiated myoblasts was comparatively lower in the TNF‐a group, indicating the negative impact of inflammation on myogenic differentiation (Figure , Supporting Information). Together, these data show that activation of canonical NF‐kB signaling impairs Myog expression and myotube formation.
 Metformin (MET) has long been used to control pre‐gestational and gestational diabetes, and prevailing data suggest additional health benefits of in‐utero exposure to offspring.[
 , 
] Therefore, we treated MO mice (Figure , Supporting Information) with MET from one week before breeding to E13.5 for embryonic tissue collection (Figure  ). Embryos from Met‐treated embryos didn't differ in their body weight (Figure , Supporting Information), however, it reduced the inflammatory response in MO embryos as evidenced by the reduction of the p‐RelA /RelA ratio (Figure  ). Excitingly, MET recovered Myod1 and Myog expression in MO embryos (Figure  ). Similarly, the protein contents of MYOG and MYH3 were elevated in MO embryos treated with Met (Figure  ). In short, MET treatment of obese maternal mice suppressed inflammation and the canonical NF‐kB signaling in embryos, which rescued embryonic myogenesis (Figure  ).

3.

## Discussion
The obesity pandemic in pregnant women is well documented to exert negative impacts on the development of skeletal muscle, including reduced muscle strength, endurance capacity, and smaller muscle mass of offspring.[
 , , , , , 
] The prenatal stage is critically important for skeletal muscle development.[
 
] The primary myofibers form during the embryonic stage and lay the foundation for later muscle fiber development. Here, using multiomics tools, including scRNA‐seq, scATAC‐seq, and spatial transcriptomic profiling, we comprehensively analyzed the myogenic lineage specification and differentiation in mouse embryos. Our data suggest the existence of a distal cis‐regulatory enhancer region of Myog, which mediates the inhibition of embryonic myogenesis induced by MO.
Embryonic myogenesis can be separated into myogenic commitment and differentiation. During E11.5, we identified the downregulation of Myod1 in myoblasts, but didn't observe a change in proliferating myoblast cell populations in MO embryos. Proliferating myoblasts also express Myf5, which precedes Myod1 expression and rapidly downregulates during differentiation; Myf5 and Myod1 share similar binding sites and functionalities to induce the transcription of genes related to myogenic differentiation.[
 
] We identified a lower percentage of differentiated myoblasts in the MO embryos.[
 , 
] More importantly, we observed downregulation of Myog in differentiated myoblasts at both E11.5 and E13.5 stages due to MO.[
 
] We also identified a lower percentage of differentiated myoblasts and myotubes in the MO embryos. Consequently, our data suggest that the MO mainly affects the terminal differentiation and myotube formation during embryonic myogenesis while having less effect on the myogenic commitment and proliferation.
Expression of Myog is regulated by various transcription factors including MYF5 and MYOD1.[
 , , 
] These transcription factors bind to different conserved DNA binding motifs on the Myog promoter, which regulate its context‐dependent expression.[
 
] In scATAC‐seq, we identified an enhancer region that is −4 kb upstream to the Myog TSS, and its location overlaps with a region recently confirmed as an active motif binding site by Self‐transcribing active regulatory region sequencing (STARR‐seq) in murine embryonic stem cells.[
 
] Global Run‐on sequencing (GRO‐seq), STARR‐seq, and several other methods can measure enhancer activity, but have limitations in identifying the enhancer‐promoter pair.[
 
] Our CCAN analysis identified the Myog enhancer‐promoter pair, which is highly correlated with Myog activity. Additionally, the accessibility of this enhancer region was highly cell‐type‐specific and only accessible in the myogenic cells. These enhancer regions also possess binding sites of transcription factors MYOD1, MEF2C, and even MYOG to regulate Myog expression. One of the potential roles of this enhancer region is likely to fine‐tune the Myog expression depending on cell states. During the decline of Myod1 expression after the myogenic commitment, co‐transcription factors like MEF2C bind to these regions to up‐regulate Myog expression. Additionally, MYOG has its autoregulatory positive feedforward mechanism in combination with MEF2C.[
 , 
] We observed downregulation of MEF2C expression in both differentiated myoblasts and Myotubes, as well as lower activity in their binding sites on the enhancer due to MO, which might reduce the overall Myog expression. These observations in combined with other reports confirm the existence of an enhancer region that is correlated with Myog expression.
Obesity, metabolic diseases, and several pathological conditions in pregnant mothers including pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) can induce an inflammatory condition in the intrauterine microenvironment and activate inflammatory response in embryos.[
 
] In this study, we found that RelA activity was highly up‐regulated among the members of the NF‐kB family due to MO and inhibition of RelA with Metformin both in vivo and in vitro rescued myogenesis. These data are concordant with in vitro studies that revealed increased myogenic activity in RelA−/−
C2C12 cells and primary mouse embryonic fibroblast cells.[
 
] Importantly, we discovered a novel enhancer containing RelA and P50 binding sites in the vicinity of Myog promoter and ChIP‐PCR confirmed higher binding of RelA dimer to the enhancer region in MO embryos. These findings suggest a potential mechanism leading to Myog down‐regulation during embryogenesis.
Metformin has been widely used in the treatment of gestational diabetes in women and comes with multiple benefits to both mothers and their embryos because of its ability to cross‐placenta.[
 , 
] Pre‐pregnancy and pregnancy treatment with metformin showed variable effects on offspring at different stages of their life. Periconceptional metformin treatment improves embryonic myogenesis which was associated with the inhibition of canonical NF‐kB signaling, consistent with our previous discovery that metformin suppresses fibrogenesis in E13.5 MO embryos.[
 , 
] Recent studies showed that metformin administration induced fetal growth restriction in murine and primate models during late gestation,[
 , 
] however, metformin administration during the first trimester has not been associated with developmental abnormalities or adverse outcomes at both fetal and adult stages.[
 , , 
] These results highlight the periconceptional use of metformin as a potential therapeutic agent to mitigate maternal inflammatory responses and improve embryonic myogenesis for obese mothers.
In summary, we found that MO impairs embryonic myogenesis via inhibition of Myog and terminal myogenic differentiation. Canonical NF‐kB signaling is a key mediator that inhibits Myog expression through the recruitment of RelA dimer to the enhancer region. Our findings also show that NF‐kB is a potential therapeutic target to rescue embryonic myogenesis and prevent the long‐term impact of MO on offspring health.

4.

## Experimental Section

## Mice
Wild‐type C57BL/6J female mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME, USA). To induce obesity, wild‐type C57BL/6J female mice (Jackson Lab., Bar Harbor, ME, USA) were assigned to two groups randomly at 8 weeks of age. CT group was provided a control diet containing 10% of energy from fat (D12450H, Research Diets, New Brunswick, NJ, USA), and the MO group was provided a high‐fat diet containing 45% of energy from fat (D12451, Research Diets) ad libitum for 10 weeks. Both groups were then mated with randomly selected C57BL/6J males, and mating was confirmed by the presence of a vaginal plug in the morning. At E11.5 and E13.5, embryos were collected after euthanizing the mice by CO2 inhalation and cervical dislocation following AVMA Guidelines (2020). All animal studies were conducted in WSU following IACUC‐approved protocol: 6704.

## Single‐Cell RNA Sequencing
Embryos at the same developmental stage were collected during each of the time points, E11.5, and E13.5, and the developmental stages were confirmed following the Theiler stages 19 and 21 with somite numbers 45–47 and 52–55, respectively. By using a dissection microscope (Leica DFC450C), the head and first 7 somite pairs and internal organs were removed. Embryonic tissues were incubated at 37 °C for 15 min with TryLE Express dissociation reagent (Gibco; Cat# 12 605.010) after mincing finely, and the digesta was filtered through a 40 µm cell strainer. According to 10 × Genomics protocol, libraries were constructed by using Chromium Single Cell 3′ Library & Gel Bead Kit v3 and sequenced in an Illumina NovaSeq 600S4 as described in our previous study.[
 
]

## Processing of scRNA‐Seq Data and Differential Gene Expression Analysis
Raw sequence was preprocessed by using Cell Ranger V7.0 and mapped with the mouse mm10 reference transcriptome. R package Seurat V 4.3.0 was used to merge libraries from two embryonic stages, and all cells possessing UMIs >200 000 and <500 genes were removed; cells with >20% mitochondrial genes were removed, including doublets, for further analysis. After global normalization, scaling, and reducing the linear dimensionality, top 35 components were processed using Seurat to visualize in a 2D map via Uniform Manifold Approximation (UMAP). The pseudo‐bulk single cell aggregation technique with edgeR assessed gene expression differences between cell clusters and two groups over all clusters. All readings were aggregated using “Seurat2PB” to create the pseudo‐bulk sample. To determine DEGs between CT and MO groups, we employed quantile‐adjusted conditional maximum likelihood (qCML) with a threshold value of p < 0.05 after normalizing aggregated data.

## Gene Ontology and KEGG Pathway Enrichment Analysis
For gene ontology analysis, we used the R package “clusterProfiler” and the “gseGO” function for identifying enriched biological and molecular functions associated with the differentially expressed genes between the CT and MO groups. “ChEA3” was used to identify enriched transcription factors associated with the upregulated genes in myogenic clusters of MO embryos.

## Single‐Cell ATAC Seq
Single nuclei were isolated by following protocol CG000124 from 10x genomics. Briefly, the single‐cell suspension from 13.5 embryos was prepared using a similar protocol for scRNA‐seq as described above and diluted to a concentration of 100 cells uL−1. To obtain 2  ×  106 cells, 200 uL of the cell suspension was taken and pelleted by centrifuging at 300 ×g for 5 min at 4 °C. Cells were resuspended in 200uL lysis buffer (10 mm Tris‐HCl pH 7.4, 10 mm NaCl, 3 mm MgCl2 and 1x PBS) and incubated on ice for 1 min. The suspended cells were then washed with Nuclei wash buffer (10x Genomics PN‐ CG000124), resolved in resuspension buffer (10x Genomics PN‐ CG000124), and centrifuged at 500xg for 10 min at 4 °C twice. The pellets were resuspended in nuclei wash buffer and resuspension buffer, and isolated nuclei were inspected visually, and the nuclei concentration was assessed and proceeded for library preparation according ×10 Genomics single‐cell ATAC‐Seq protocol and sequenced.

## Processing of scATAC‐Seq Data
Raw scATAC‐seq data were analyzed by Cell Ranger ATAC (V 2.1.0) and aligned with the mouse genome reference (mm10). R package Signac (V1.14.0) was used to process data from the CT and MO groups. Data from both groups were merged by using the “merge” function of Signac and normalized by using Term frequency‐inverse document frequency (TF‐IDF). Dimensionality reduction was conducted by singular value decomposition (SVD), and cells were plotted in non‐linear dimension reduction for visualization by the “RunUmap” function, similar to scRNA seq. Gene activity matrices were created by “GeneActivity” function of Signac and merged with ATAC data set as a new assay. To predict the cell types of scATAC‐seq clusters, we transferred the cell label from our scRNA‐seq data by cross‐modality integration. The differentially accessible peaks between cell types were computed with the “FindMarkers” function in Signac and filtered by logfc.threshold  =  0.2 and p‐value level p < 0.05 were visualized by the default coverage plot function.

## Motif Activity Analysis
Transcription factor activity was analyzed using the positional weight matrix of the motif in the JASPER2020 database and using ChromVAR. Motif information from the JASPER database was merged with the Signac Seurat object and the differential activity of motifs was calculated using the “FindMarekrs” function. An adjusted p‐value level P < 0.05 was used to filter the top differentially active motifs, and the “FindMotifs” function was used to test their fold enrichment and plotted by the “MotifPlot” function.

## Finding Co‐Accessible Sites
Cicero package was used for identifying CCANs using the scATAC‐seq data of myogenic clusters. The myogenic cell cluster data set extracted from the Signac Seurat object were converted to CellDataSet format and cicero object, respectively. The “run_cicero” function was used to find the CCAN network and merged with the dataset to visualize along with the gene accessibility coverage plot.

## Spatial Transcriptomic Sequencing
For special transcriptomic sequencing, a total of 6 embryos from each of the CT and MO groups were selected, where each embryo was randomly selected from one pregnant mouse. Samples were fixed with 10% formalin and embedded with paraffin following formalin‐fixed paraffin‐embedded tissue (FFPE) protocol. Embedded tissues were sectioned at a thickness of 5 µm and mounted on glass slides, dewaxed and incubated overnight with GeoMx RNA detection probes. MYH3 fluorescent‐tagged antibody were used to identify myotome and locate regions‐of‐interest (ROIs). The photocleaved indexing oligos were then collected in the GeoMx Digital Spatial Profiler (Nanostring, Seattle, WA, USA) by profiling ROIs using region‐specific cleaving. To generate a digital quantification of the RNA expression, cleaved indices were sequenced and quantified using Illumina Next Sequeq 2K (San Diego, CA, USA). The downstream analysis was conducted by GeomxTools 3.10.0 through following similar procedure used in our previous study.[
 
]

## Cell Culture
C2C12 (ATCC CRL‐1772) myoblast cells were incubated with a growth medium composed of DMEM with 10% FBS (Gibco # 10.439.001) and 1% penicillin‐streptomycin (Sigma, #P0781). When reached 100% confluency, growth medium was supplemented with 2% horse serum to induce myogenic differentiation. The canonical NF‐kB signaling was activated in the differentiating myoblasts by TNF‐a (5 ng mL−1). In addition, 500 µm MET (Metformin; MP Biomedicals, Cat# 151 691) or 10 µm CAPE (Caffeic acid phenethyl ester) were used to inhibit the canonical NF‐kB signaling. After 6 days, the myotubes were visualized by immunohistochemical staining using myosin heavy chain (MHC) antibody (MF‐20, DSHB, Iowa City, IA).

## RelA Overexpression
To overexpress RelA, RelA cFlag pcDNA3 (Addgene, Plasmid#20012) were used in C2C12 cells and GFP plasmid as a negative control for evaluation of transfection efficiency. Plasmid transfection was performed using Lipofectamine 3000 transfection kit (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, in 24‐well plate when the cell reached to 60–70% confluency, 500 ng of plasmid DNA for each well were mixed with P3000 reagent in Opti‐MEM reduced serum media and diluted with equal amount of lipofectamine 3000. The DNA‐lipid complex was incubated for 15 min in RT and added to cells for transfection. The transfection media were replaced with regular growth medium after 24 h of incubation and the transfection efficiency were evaluated based on the expression of GFP.

## RelA Knockdown
For RelA knockdown in C2C12 myoblast cells, we used RelA Pre‐designed Silencer Selected SiRNA (ID: s72857, Invitrogen, CA, USA) and a non‐targeting negative control siRNA. Briefly, 5 nmol of oligo siRNA was diluted to a final concentration of 20 µm. C2C12 cells in the second day of incubation were incubated with a Lipofectamine 3000 Transfection Reagent (Invitrogen) and siRNA (25 nm) in OPTI‐MEM Reduced Serum Medium (Gibco). The transfection medium was replaced by the growth medium after 24 h of incubation.

## RT‐qPCR
Following DNase treatment, total mRNA was extracted from tissue or cells by TRIzol reagent (Sigma, St. Louis, MO), and cDNA was prepared using an iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Cat# 1708841, BIO‐RAD) by reverse transcription. The RT‐PCR was conducted using SsoAdvanced Universal SYBR Green Supermix (Bio‐Rad, Cat# 172570) by iQ5 RT‐PCR detection instrument (Bio‐Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). The relative expression of mRNA was determined using the ΔΔ− Ct method after normalization to the 18S RNA. Primer sequences used in this study are listed in Table (Supporting Information).

## Western Blotting
Western blot analyses were used to analyze the protein content. Proteins from homogenized tissues and cells were extracted using lysis buffer (100 mm Tris–HCl, pH 6.8, 2.0% SDS, 20% glycerol, 0.02% bromophenol blue, 5% 2‐mercaptoethanol, 100 mm NaF and 1 mm Na3VO4), and separated by 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate‐polyacrylamide gels electrophoresis (SDS‐PAGE) as described previously.[
 
] Antibodies used for western Blotting are listed in the key resources table.

## ChIP‐qPCR Assay
For ChIP‐qPCR, sample fixation, chromatin isolation, immunoprecipitation, and DNA isolation were done by using SimpleChIP Enzymatic Chromatin IP Kit (Cell Signaling Technology, #9003) following the manufacturer's protocol. Chromatin was fragmented through sonication, using 6 × 10s impulses with 1 min pauses. RelA (NF‐κB p65; PCRP‐RELA‐2B6‐s, DSHB, Iowa City, IA) antibody was used for overnight incubation, and spin‐column purification method was used for DNA purification. The purified DNA was then used as a template for qPCR to assess the enrichment of specific target regions. Primers used to amplify the Myog promoter and enhancer regions in ChIP‐qPCR are listed in the Table (Supporting Information).

## Statistical Analysis
A total of 15 randomly selected embryos from three pregnant mice for the CT and MO groups were collected respectively for single‐cell RNA sequencing at E11.5 and E13.5 time points and single‐cell ATAC sequencing at E13.5. The transformation, normalization, quality control method and software used for pre‐processing of sequencing data are described above in the “Processing of scRNA‐seq data” and “Processing of scATAC‐seq data” sections. On the other hand, a total of five pregnant mice from each of the CT, MO, and MO‐MET groups were used to collect embryos at E 11.5 and E13.5 for biochemical analysis. Each pregnancy was considered as an experimental unit. For cell culture studies, three separate experiments (n = 3) were carried out with 3 technical replicates for each experiment. Data were analyzed using R version 4.3.1, and student's t‐test or one‐way ANOVA was used to compare statistical significance between or among groups. Data are reported as mean ± SEM and visualized using GraphPad Prism version 8.0.0 for Windows (GraphPad Software, Boston, Massachusetts, USA). Statistical differences were indicated as ∗
p < 0.05, ∗∗
p < 0.01, and ∗∗∗
p < 0.001.

## Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Author Contributions
M.N.H., M.D. designed the study methodology, M.N.H., Y.G., S.I., L.C., X.L., Z.K, and J.M.D.A. conducted the experiments M.N.H., and N.L. analyzed the sequencing data N.L and M. Z. provided key experimental resources. M.N.H. prepared the original draft and M.D. reviewed & edited with input from all the other authors.

## Supporting information
Supporting Information
Supporting Information

## Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the valuable guidance of Derek Pouchnik (Center for Reproductive Biology, Washington State University) and Mustika Rahmawati during sample preparation. Funding: This research work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant R01HD067449.

Hossain M. N., Gao Y., Islam S., et al. “RelA Inhibits Embryonic Myogenesis by Coordinately Regulating a Novel Distal Enhancer of Myogenin.” Adv. Sci.
12, no. 38 (2025): e03712. 10.1002/advs.202503712

## Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo, reference number GSE278631.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Supporting Information
Supporting Information

## Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo, reference number GSE278631.