4638plantbiojPlant Biotechnology JournalPlant Biotechnol JWileyPMC1212090612120906121209064010732310.1111/pbi.70048Ecotype‐specific phenolic acid accumulation and root softness in Salvia miltiorrhiza are driven by environmental and genetic factors
YuHaomiao LiaoJinqiu JiangYuanyuan ZhongMingzhi TaoShan ChaiSongyue WangLong LinLi YangRuiwu DengXuexue ZhangYunsong PuXiang LiuMoyang ZhangLi 
1
College of Science, Sichuan Agricultural University, Ya'an, China
2
College of Life Science, Sichuan Agricultural University, Ya'an, China
3
Industrial Crop Research Institute, Sichuan Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Chengdu, China
4
Joint Center for Single Cell Biology, Department of Plant Sciences, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China*

Correspondence (Tel +86 13458555238; email zhangli@sicau.edu.cn (L.Z.); Tel+86 13551552521; email cooljeep@sjtu.edu.cn (M.L.))

✉Corresponding author.
193202523622242224–22413052025© 2025 The Author(s). Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Summary

Salvia miltiorrhiza Bunge, a renowned medicinal herb in traditional Chinese medicine, displays distinctive root texture and high phenolic acid content, traits influenced by genetic and environmental factors. However, the underlying regulatory networks remain unclear. Here, we performed multi‐omics analyses on ecotypes from four major Chinese regions, focusing on environmental impacts on root structure, phenolic acid accumulation and lignin composition. Lower temperatures and increased UV‐B radiation were associated with elevated rosmarinic acid (RA) and salvianolic acid B (SAB) levels, particularly in the Sichuan ecotype. Structural models indicated that the radial arrangement of xylem conduits contributes to greater root hardness. Genomic assembly and comparative analysis of the Sichuan ecotype revealed a unique phenolic acid metabolism gene cluster, including SmWRKY40, a WRKY transcription factor essential for RA and SAB biosynthesis. Overexpression of SmWRKY40 enhanced phenolic acid levels and lignin content, whereas its knockout reduced root hardness. Integrating high‐throughput (DNA affinity purification sequencing) and point‐to‐point (Yeast One‐Hybrid, Dual‐Luciferase and Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay) protein‐DNA interaction detection platform further identified SmWRKY40 binding sites across ecotypes, revealing specific regulatory networks. Our findings provide insights into the molecular basis of root texture and bioactive compound accumulation, advancing breeding strategies for quality improvement in S. miltiorrhiza.
Keywords: evolution, genetic and environmental factors, phenolic acid metabolism, multi‐omics analysis, S. miltiorrhiza

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2025 Feb 27; Received 2025 Jan 6; Accepted 2025 Mar 1; Collection date 2025 Jun.

## Introduction
In recent years, Salvia miltiorrhiza Bunge, commonly known as Danshen, has garnered extensive interest in pharmaceutical research due to its medicinal properties, particularly in treating cardiovascular diseases and other ailments (Li et al.,  , ; Shi et al.,  ; Xiao et al.,  ). This perennial herb has long been valued in traditional medicine and serves as a rich source of bioactive compounds, especially phenolic acids like rosmarinic acid (RA) and salvianolic acid B (SAB), which contribute significantly to its therapeutic efficacy (Yan,  ; Zhou et al., ). The phenolic acids accumulate primarily in the roots, where their synthesis and accumulation are subject to complex regulatory mechanisms involving genetic and environmental influences (Liang et al.,  ). Notably, these variations in phenolic acid levels often correlate with changes in root morphology and mechanical properties, including root softness and lignification levels (Chen et al.,  ; Yajun et al.,  ). These traits not only impact the quality and consistency of S. miltiorrhiza's medicinal products but also highlight the plant's adaptive responses to the diverse regional environments across China, where it is widely cultivated (Qin et al.,  ; Saini et al.,  ). As such, elucidating the regulatory networks underlying these traits is essential for optimizing cultivation practices to enhance the quality and consistency of bioactive compounds in S. miltiorrhiza.
The biosynthesis of phenolic acids in S. miltiorrhiza is a highly regulated process shaped by intricate interactions between genetic and environmental factors (Guo et al.,  ; Shi et al.,  ). At the genetic level, specific gene clusters have been identified as central to phenolic acid biosynthesis, with transcription factors (Shi et al.,  ; Shuangqian et al.,  ; Wang et al.,  ; Zhang et al.,  ), such as the WRKY (Saha et al.,  ) and MYB (Ma et al.,  ) families, playing critical regulatory roles in modulating gene expression. These transcription factors are often sensitive to external stimuli and can act as molecular hubs that integrate environmental signals into genetic responses. Additionally, various environmental factors—such as ultraviolet (UV) radiation (Yin et al.,  ), temperature fluctuations (Li et al.,  ), heavy metal stress (Fan et al.,  ) and soil mineral composition (Lv et al.,  )—have been shown to significantly influence the phenolic acid content in S. miltiorrhiza roots. For example, studies indicate that UV‐B exposure and cooler temperatures can stimulate phenolic acid production, potentially due to stress‐induced regulatory pathways that activate biosynthetic genes (Xiaojian Yin et al.,  ). Yet, despite these advances, the extent to which genetic and environmental factors interact to shape root structure, lignin distribution and consequently the root's medicinal and mechanical properties, remains largely unexplored.
Previous studies on S. miltiorrhiza have primarily focused on identifying individual genes or specific environmental factors that influence phenolic acid accumulation and root characteristics (Cao et al.,  ; Deng et al.,  ; Huang et al.,  ; Jia et al.,  ; Li et al.,  ; Liu et al.,  ; Lv et al.,  ; Zhou et al.,  ). However, these studies often fall short in capturing the broader, interconnected network of interactions that govern both phenolic acid biosynthesis and root structure, particularly with regard to root softness and lignification patterns. Furthermore, the genetic basis of root softness remains poorly understood, and there is limited knowledge about how lignin distribution patterns vary among ecotypes of S. miltiorrhiza, which exhibit distinct phenolic profiles and morphological traits across different growing environments (Chen et al.,  ; Yajun et al.,  ; Yu et al.,  ; Zhang et al.,  ). This gap in understanding poses challenges to developing high‐quality S. miltiorrhiza cultivars that combine enhanced phenolic acid levels with optimal root characteristics suited for medicinal use.
Therefore, our study employs a multi‐omics approach that integrates genomic, transcriptomic, metabolomic and interactive‐omics data to unravel the regulatory networks underlying phenolic acid accumulation and root texture variation across different S. miltiorrhiza ecotypes. By examining these data across various ecotypes, we aim to identify key environmental factors, transcriptional regulators and gene clusters that collectively influence these critical traits. This comprehensive approach not only reveals potential molecular markers that can guide breeding strategies for high‐quality S. miltiorrhiza cultivars but also offers insights into the adaptive evolution of S. miltiorrhiza in response to diverse environmental conditions in its natural habitats. By characterizing the complex gene–environment interactions that drive phenolic acid biosynthesis and root morphology, our study contributes to a deeper understanding of the genetic and environmental basis for the medicinal qualities of S. miltiorrhiza, thereby paving the way for advancements in both agricultural and medicinal applications of this valuable herb.

## Results

## Regional adaptation and structural traits in Salvia miltiorrhiza influence phenolic acid accumulation and root softness
The quality traits of traditional Chinese medicinal (TCM) herbs are generally thought to be influenced by both genetic and environmental factors, a hypothesis widely accepted as the basis for their authenticity. To evaluate this hypothesis, we performed a systematic analysis of germplasm resources from four major S. miltiorrhiza‐producing regions in China: Zhongjiang, Sichuan (Sm.SC); Shangluo, Shaanxi (Sm.SX); Yincheng, Henan (Sm.HN); and Mengyin, Shandong (Sm.SD) (Figure  , Table  ). The primary roots of Sm.SC exhibited a notably thicker structure, with finer side roots and softer root textures than other ecotypes (Figure  ). These regions span from the eastern coast to the central plains and from the northwest to the southwest of China. The average daily temperature during the root enlargement phase showed a declining trend with elevation, varying distinctly across these regions without overlap (Figure  ).
 We further assessed the influence of 15 environmental factors, including ultraviolet radiation, sunshine duration and wind speed, on the accumulation of active medicinal compounds in S. miltiorrhiza roots (Figure  , Table  ). Random sampling of air temperature, UV‐B radiation intensity and soil copper (Cu) content in the four regions revealed consistent trends (Figure  ). Lower temperatures and higher UV‐B exposure were associated with elevated levels of rosmarinic acid (RA) and salvianolic acid B (SAB), while elevated Cu concentrations, particularly in the Shandong region (Sm.SD), showed a negative correlation with RA and SAB levels (Figure  ). To further confirm the impact of these environmental factors, we subjected 6‐month‐old S. miltiorrhiza seedlings to UV‐B radiation, cold and Cu stress. These treatments significantly inhibited root growth and development (Figure  ). Specifically, UV‐B and cold exposure promoted RA and SAB biosynthesis, whereas Cu stress reduced their accumulation. Lignin content under these stress conditions followed the same trend as RA and SAB (Figure  ).
We then evaluated phenotypic traits, RA, SAB and lignin content across various S. miltiorrhiza ecotypes. Sm.SC roots exhibited the greatest thickness, softest texture and highest levels of RA and SAB. Interestingly, total lignin content did not show a consistent trend across populations. We observed that RA and SAB levels inversely correlated with root hardness, whereas lignin content correlated positively with root hardness (Figure  ). Further structural analysis through histological staining and scanning electron microscopy revealed that lignified areas in Sm.SC roots displayed a clustered, circular distribution, in contrast to the radial arrangement found in other ecotypes, such as Sm.SD, which has lower phenolic acid content and higher hardness (Figure  ).
To better understand how xylem distribution patterns affect root mechanical strength, we modelled the anatomical structure of S. miltiorrhiza roots using two simplified models. A composite material model was developed with high‐hardness materials as the framework and low‐hardness fillers to simulate the mechanical effects of different conduit arrangements (Figure  ). Stress displacement dynamics were examined under two configurations: circular and radial distributions (Figure  , Appendix  ). Roots with radially arranged conduits exhibited higher resistance to bending and compression, as shown by stress heatmaps and pressure displacement curves (Figure  ). Virtual simulation channels further allowed us to monitor root strip deformation under compressive and bending stresses dynamically, presented as video supplements in Appendix  .
Finally, comparative metabolomic and GC–MS analyses between Sm.SC and Sm.SD roots indicated a higher concentration of S‐type lignin monomers (syringyl) and derivatives in Sm.SD (Figures  and , Table  ). The three hydroxyl groups on the benzene ring of the S‐type lignin monomer contributed to flexible anisotropy during polymerization (Morreel et al.,  ), influencing the radial distribution of lignin within root structures (Meyermans et al.,  ). Based on these findings, the significant differences in appearance, environmental adaptability, medicinal quality and mechanical strength, especially the high phenolic acid content and reduced hardness in Sm.SC roots prompted the selection of Sm.SD, which diverges markedly from Sm.SC, for further comparative studies.

## Genetic diversity and selective sweeps in Salvia miltiorrhiza reveal tandem duplications linked to lignin and phenolic acid biosynthesis
The blank of high‐quality genetic map of S. miltiorrhiza with unique soft roots and high‐phenolic acid traits seriously restricts its quality formation research and genetic improvement. To investigate the genetic influences on the metabolic evolution of S. miltiorrhiza, we selected the Sichuan ecotype (Chuandanshen No. 1, CDS‐1) as a representative sample. Using the PacBio platform, we generated 125.47 Gb of genomic data with a coverage depth of 93.84×, resulting in a 603.67 Mb chromosome‐level reference genome (Figure  , Table  ). Hi‐C‐assisted assembly further organized this genome into eight chromosomes (2n = 16), achieving a mapping rate of 97.93% when raw Illumina reads were aligned to the genome. The assembly metrics showed that the contig N50 reached 1.95 Mb, and the scaffold N50 reached 67.23 Mb (Figure  , Table  ). Genome annotation predicted 31 976 genes and 8929 noncoding RNAs, with over 50% of the genome comprising repetitive sequences and transposable elements. In summary, Sm.SC has a larger genome size, more comprehensive reads coverage and higher assembly integrity than Sm.SD and Sm.SX (Table  ). The high‐quality data generated in this work also provides an expansion from Labiatae for the pan plant genome project (Liu et al.,  ).
To contextualize these findings, we constructed a comparative genomic map with Sm.SX and Sm.SD genomes (Figure  ). Analysis of gene family expansion and contraction (Figure  ) and evolutionary rates (Figure  ) indicated that Sm.SX diverged from Sm.SD approximately 1.86 million years ago, with Sm.SC diverging from Sm.SX around 1.62 million years ago. The phylogenetic tree, built from 2211 orthologous single‐copy genes across the Lamiaceae family, highlighted 526 gene family expansions and 615 contractions unique to Sm.SC. GO and KEGG enrichment analyses identified expanded pathways linked to phenylalanine metabolism, acyltransferase activities and the WRKY transcription factor family, while contracted pathways were primarily related to photosynthesis and tyrosine metabolism (Table  ).
 Despite strong genomic collinearity across the Lamiaceae family, we observed chromosomal inversions in Sm.SX and Sm.SD (Figure  ). Given these similarities, but marked differences in phenotype and metabolite content, we focused on a comparative analysis between Sm.SC and Sm.SD. Transcriptome analysis identified 1247 upregulated and 1501 downregulated genes in Sm.SC, many of which are involved in phenolic acid metabolism, such as TAT2, C4H, CHI and RAS (Figure  ). Mapping these genes on a metabolic pathway map revealed upregulation in upstream (TAT and PAL) and downstream (RAS and CYP98A) genes, while CAD genes were downregulated in Sm.SC (Figure  ). Metabolomic profiling showed elevated levels of L‐phenylalanine, L‐tyrosine, salvianolic acid B (SAB) and S‐type lignin precursors in Sm.SC, while downstream lignin monomers like coniferin were reduced (Figure  ).
In constructing a transcriptional regulatory network, we identified WRKY family transcription factors as key regulators in the phenolic acid pathway. Further comparison with the Arabidopsis genome database (TAIR, https://www.arabidopsis.org/), based on gene sequence homology, a WRKY gene located at the core of the regulatory network was defined as SmWRKY40, which shows a particularly strong association with RA, SAB and S‐type lignin components (Figure  , Figure  , Tables  and ). We further examined genetic diversity by resequencing 30 individuals with varying phenolic acid levels, generating data on 581 286 SNPs and 19 788 InDels (Tables  and ). Phylogenetic analysis based on these SNPs identified 27 280 selective sweep intervals across three subpopulations (Figure  , Table  ). The SmWRKY40 gene was found within a gene cluster of lignin synthesis‐related genes, including CCR and HCT, indicating a tandem duplication event that serves as a molecular switch for regulating lignin monomer synthesis (Figure  ). This gene cluster's origins trace back to early plant evolution (Kruse et al.,  , ), with HCT and WRKY40 conserved across angiosperms, while RAS is specific to Lamiaceae (Figure  ). SmRAS (SmiChr070974) and SmWRKY40 (SmiChr070967), as central elements in the cluster, showed significantly higher expression in Sm.SC than in Sm.SD (Figure  ). Although the cluster displayed population‐level genetic variation, including InDels in HCT promoter regions and SNPs in RAS coding regions, SmWRKY40 remained highly conserved (Figure  ).

## 
SmWRKY40 regulates phenolic acid metabolism and cell wall development in Salvia miltiorrhiza through transcriptional activation of key enzymes
We cloned the open reading frame (ORF) of SmWRKY40 and inserted it into the pCAMBIA‐1305 expression vector to verify its nuclear localization in tobacco leaves via a transient expression system (Figure  ). The transcriptional activation function of the N‐terminal WRKY domain was then confirmed (Figure  ). Quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis showed that SmWRKY40 was highly expressed in the roots of both S. miltiorrhiza cultivars, Sm.SC and Sm.SD (Figure  ). SmWRKY40 expression was significantly upregulated in response to abscisic acid (ABA) and yeast extract, as well as under various stress conditions, including UV‐B exposure, low temperature, NaCl and drought (Figure  ).
Using a hairy root transformation system (Figure  ), we observed that SmWRKY40 overexpression promoted the growth of transgenic hairy roots (Figure  ), while CRISPR‐Cas9‐mediated knockout of SmWRKY40 resulted in reduced growth and a softer root texture (Figure  ). High‐performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis confirmed that SmWRKY40 positively regulated the accumulation of phenolic acids, specifically rosmarinic acid (RA) and salvianolic acid B (SAB), in transgenic hairy roots (Figure  ). Toluidine blue staining and scanning electron microscopy further revealed that xylem duct development was more advanced in SmWRKY40‐overexpressing hairy roots, while xylem formation was significantly impaired in smwrky40 mutants (Figure  ). These findings were corroborated by morphological examination and lignin composition analysis of the hairy roots (Figure  ).
 To elucidate SmWRKY40's role in phenolic acid metabolism, we assessed the transcript levels of key enzymes in this pathway. qPCR analysis showed that SmWRKY40 positively regulated the expression of critical enzymes, including RAS, CYP98A14 and CCR2 (Figure  ). Transgenic Arabidopsis lines overexpressing SmWRKY40, as well as atwrky40 mutant lines complemented with SmWRKY40, were generated (Figure  ). Comparative phenotypic analysis and lignin component quantification in these lines indicated that SmWRKY40 promotes growth, development and lignin biosynthesis (Figure  ). Histological staining (Figure  ) and analysis of lignin monomer composition (Figure  ). The functional characterization in the ontology and heterologous systems confirmed that SmWRKY40 regulates cell wall thickening and promotes syringyl lignin accumulation, further highlights its role in lignin and cell wall metabolism, and suggests that WRKY40 is highly conserved for the regulatory function of plant cell wall and root development, while its complex evolution in Lamiaceae broadens the diversity of secondary metabolic networks of plant kingdom.

## 
SmWRKY40 directly regulates phenolic acid and tyrosine metabolism in Salvia miltiorrhiza through ecotype‐specific interactions
To further investigate the transcriptional regulatory function of SmWRKY40, we purified GFP‐tagged SmWRKY40 protein and incubated it with genomic libraries from Sm.SC and Sm.SD. Using a DNA affinity purification sequencing (DAP‐seq) approach, we conducted high‐throughput screening to identify potential binding sites of SmWRKY40. In total, we identified 22 632 binding sites from the Sm.SC library and 9584 from the Sm.SD library (Table  ). Approximately 13.5% of these sites were located in promoter regions, 25% and 30% in intronic regions and 13.1% and 18% in exonic regions for Sm.SC and Sm.SD, respectively (Figure  ). Binding motif analysis revealed a specific affinity of SmWRKY40 for W‐box elements (TTGACT/C) present in both libraries (Figure  ). The distribution patterns of these binding sites relative to transcription initiation sites were notably similar across the two ecotypes (Figure  ).
 Gene ontology analysis of the gene set highly enriched in promoter regions linked these regulatory interactions to distinct biological processes. In Sm.SC, we found a strong enrichment of genes related to phenylalanine/tyrosine metabolism, notably including two key tyrosine metabolism genes, SmTAT2 and SmHPPR (Figure  ). In contrast, Sm.SD showed a higher enrichment of genes associated with plant‐pathogen interactions, photosynthesis and hormone signalling pathways, suggesting that SmWRKY40 target genes have diversified with ecotype differentiation (Figure  ). Within the phenolic acid metabolism pathway, SmWRKY40 consistently regulated both upstream tyrosine metabolism genes and downstream phenylalanine pathway genes in both ecotypes (Figure  ). However, SmWRKY40 did not bind to the SmHCT promoter in Sm.SC, whereas in Sm.SD, this regulatory interaction, conserved from a shared ancestor, was retained within the CCR‐HCT gene cluster (Figure  ).
The physical interactions between SmWRKY40 and the promoters of target genes were validated through dual‐luciferase (dual‐LUC) assays (Figure  ), yeast one‐hybrid assays (Figure  ) and electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) (Figures  and ). These results collectively confirmed that SmWRKY40 binding patterns for SmTAT2, SmHPPR, SmRAS, SmCYP98A14 and SmCCR were consistent across ecotypes. However, the lack of SmWRKY40 binding to the SmHCT promoter in Sm.SC corresponded with a marked reduction in the accumulation of S‐type lignin in the roots (Figure  ).

## Distinct haplotypes of the RAS gene drive metabolic divergence in Salvia miltiorrhiza populations
We performed a comparative analysis of genomic data from Sm.SC and Sm.SD, complemented by population resequencing. This analysis revealed two distinct haplotypes of the RAS gene: the 146C‐haplotype in Sm.SC and the 146G‐haplotype in Sm.SD (Figure  ). A single nucleotide variation between these haplotypes results in a critical amino acid change, substituting nonpolar glycine (Gly) with polar alanine (Ala), thereby causing the loss of a β‐turn in the protein's secondary structure. This structural alteration was further confirmed in a three‐dimensional protein model (Figure  ). To assess the population distribution of these haplotypes, we designed cloning primers targeting the first exon containing the SNP. PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing enabled us to evaluate haplotype frequencies across populations (Figure  ). Our findings indicated that populations with the 146C‐haplotype exhibited significantly higher levels of RA and SAB compared to those with the 146G‐haplotype (Figure  ). Moreover, a positive correlation was observed between RA and SAB contents and root acyltransferase activity within these populations (Figure  ).
We cloned the two haplotypes of the RAS gene from Sm.SC and Sm.SD cDNA. Subcellular localization experiments confirmed that the SNPs did not affect the localization of the RAS protein, which was observed in both the nucleus and cell membrane (Figure  ). Both haplotype variants were expressed and purified using an E. coli expression system (Figure  ), and their optimal enzymatic activity conditions were determined to be pH 8.0 at 25 °C (Figure  ). Molecular docking simulations indicated that RAS retains both RA synthase activity and the ancestral acyltransferase activity typical of the BAHD acyltransferase family, suggesting potential catalytic activity for S‐type lignin precursors (Figure  ). In vitro enzyme assays confirmed that RAS catalyses the polymerization of caffeoyl‐CoA and danshensu to form RA (Figure  ) and can also use caffeoyl‐CoA as an acyl donor with quinic acid as an acyl acceptor to produce caffeoyl quinic acid (Figure  ).
 Kinetic analysis revealed differing substrate preferences: the 146C‐haplotype RAS showed a higher affinity for RA precursor substrates (Figure  ), while the 146G‐haplotype RAS displayed a preference for caffeoyl quinic acid precursors (Figure  ). These results highlight the role of SNPs as a key driver of metabolic diversity within S. miltiorrhiza populations.

## The effect of different haplotypes of RAS on the synthesis of rosmarinic acid and S‐type lignin precursor in S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots
On the premise of fully characterizing the differences in enzyme kinetics in vitro, we further constructed transgenic lines of SmRAS
146C and SmRAS
146G through the hairy root transformation system (Figure  ). Compared with the UBQ‐GFP lines, the growth and development of the OE‐SmRAS
146C hairy root strain were significantly promoted, manifested by more significant increases in root length, root diameter and total biomass (Figure  ). The growth and development promotion of OE‐SmRAS
146G hairy roots is not significant, and their coarseness actually decreases (Figure  ). The contents of danshensu, rosmarinic, quinic acid and caffeoylquinic acid in OE‐SmRAS
146C and OE‐SmRAS
146G hairy roots were specifically detected via HPLC system, representing the downstream pathways of danshensu and lignin, respectively (Figure  ). It is worth noting that OE‐SmRAS
146C hairy roots consume more danshensu and accumulate more rosmarinic acid, while OE‐SmRAS
146G hairy roots consume more quinic acid and accumulate more caffeoylquinic acid (Figure  ). The anatomical characterization of xylem development confirms that the cell wall of OE‐SmRAS
146G hairy roots thickens, while the xylem of OE‐SmRAS
146C hairy roots tends to aggregate towards the centre, which may be an intrinsic mechanism leading to the plasticity of root hardness and phenotypic diversity in S. miltiorrhiza (Figure  ).
 

## SmRAS haplotypes differentially regulate lignin biosynthesis and root development in athct2 Arabidopsis mutants
Using homologous identification and multiple sequence alignment, we identified AtHCT2 as a homologue of SmRAS (Figure  ). We then generated athct2 mutants (Figure  ) and expressed different SmRAS haplotypes in both wild‐type Col‐0 and athct2 mutant Arabidopsis lines (Figures  and ). While overexpression of SmRAS in the Col‐0 background inhibited Arabidopsis growth and development, it alleviated growth deficits in the athct2 mutants (Figure  ). Notably, the OE‐SmRAS
146G haplotype exhibited a stronger effect in promoting lateral branching and lignin accumulation in athct2 mutants (Figure  ).
 Quantitative phenotype and lignin content analyses supported these findings (Figure  ). Additionally, histochemical staining and quantitative assays of lignin monomers showed that HCT2 positively regulates syringyl lignin content and cell wall thickening. The athct2 mutant phenotypes were effectively rescued by RAS overexpression, with OE‐RAS
146G demonstrating a more substantial compensatory effect than OE‐RAS
146G (Figure  ).

## 
SmWRKY40 and SmRAS haplotypes modulate stress response by balancing antioxidant activity and reducing oxidative damage
To investigate the conserved biological functions of SmWRKY40 in stress adaptation across species, we used heterologous expression and mutant complementation platforms. Our findings indicate that SmWRKY40 enhances tolerance to UV‐B (Figure  ) and cold stress (Figure  ) while increasing sensitivity to Cu2+ stress (Figure  ). Under UV‐B stress, SmWRKY40 overexpression in Arabidopsis significantly improved seed germination rates (Figure  ) and promoted root elongation in seedlings (Figure  ). Conversely, the atwrky40 mutant showed pronounced developmental defects under UV‐B stress, partially mitigated by reintroducing SmWRKY40. These effects were consistent in both controlled tablet and potted plant experiments (Figure  ). Phenotypically and physiologically, the positive influence of SmWRKY40 under UV‐B stress was evidenced by increased photosynthetic pigment accumulation (Figure  ), reduced catalase (CAT) activity and lower levels of malondialdehyde (MDA) and superoxide anions (O2
−) (Figure  ).
 We also generated transgenic yeast strains expressing SmWRKY40 and the two SmRAS haplotypes (146C and 146G). In yeast, SmWRKY40 overexpression enhanced growth under UV‐B and cold stress but intensified toxicity under Cu2+ stress, with these effects evident in both plate assays (Figures  , and ) and liquid culture growth curves (Figures  , and ). The 146C‐haplotype of SmRAS conferred slightly greater stress adaptation than the 146G‐haplotype, although both haplotypes showed a lesser effect on stress responses compared to transcription factor overexpression (Figures  , and ). Consistent with the Arabidopsis results, SmWRKY40 and RAS in yeast modulated stress responses primarily by balancing CAT activity and reducing MDA and O2
− accumulation (Figure  ). These findings deepen our understanding of stress response regulation through the interplay between transcription factors and metabolic enzymes.

## Discussion
This study utilized a multi‐omics approach to investigate the genetic and environmental factors shaping the soft‐root phenotype and high phenolic acid content in S. miltiorrhiza (Danshen), an important TCM herb. By examining germplasm from multiple regions across China, we identified distinct environmental adaptations influencing phenotypic and biochemical traits, especially in the Sichuan ecotype (Sm.SC). Our analysis revealed that specific environmental stressors, notably UV‐B radiation and low temperatures, stimulate the biosynthesis of rosmarinic acid (RA) and salvianolic acid B (SAB). Furthermore, genetic profiling uncovered a phenolic acid metabolic gene cluster unique to Sm.SC, centred around SmWRKY40. This transcription factor appears to be a key regulator of phenolic acid and lignin synthesis, suggesting it has a critical role in determining root texture and phenolic content.
Our findings emphasize the dual roles of genetic and environmental factors in shaping S. miltiorrhiza's key traits, such as RA and SAB accumulation, which are integral to its medicinal value (Shi et al.,  ; Xu et al.,  ). A basic consensus is that salvianolic acid levels vary between ecotypes in response to both genetic background and environmental conditions, such as UV exposure (Yin et al.,  ) and salt stress (Lv et al.,  ), which induce secondary metabolite pathways. Previous work focused more on the regulatory functions of key genes themselves during the secondary metabolic process, and environmental factors such as abiotic stress (Lv et al.,  ), hormone signalling (Li et al.,  ) and light signalling (Yin et al.,  ) affect metabolite accumulation only by altering gene expression. An innovative point of this work lies in the bridge between environmental perturbations and genomic variation, a new perspective of genome evolution driven by environmental factors and how the dynamic balance of the two affects the quality of medicinal plants. We expand on these insights by detailing how environmental cues modulate phenolic acid metabolism in S. miltiorrhiza. The identification of the SmWRKY40‐regulated gene cluster adds a new layer of understanding, linking genetic regulation directly to environmental responsiveness in promoting essential metabolites.
Our study also revealed a positive correlation between UV‐B and cold stress and the accumulation of RA and SAB, paired with a decrease in lignin content under copper (Cu) stress, which is highly consistent with previous reports (Yin et al.,  ; Zhong et al.,  ). This pattern suggests a trade‐off in resource allocation within the root's biochemical pathways, with stress responses prioritizing phenolic acid over lignin production. This evidence also skillfully echoes the recently proposed biomechanical theory of medicinal plants, emphasizing the internal mechanism of mechanical structure affecting the quality of traditional herbs (Wang et al.,  ). These metabolic shifts are supported by histological observations: the distinct clustered and circular lignin arrangement in Sm.SC roots, as opposed to the radial distribution seen in other ecotypes, contribute to a softer root texture. This structural adaptation indicates that cellular organization significantly affects root biomechanics and that phenolic acid levels may be preserved through these adaptive cellular modifications.
Our findings further support the concept that genetic clusters serve as centralized regulators of metabolic adaptation in plants (Li et al.,  ; Zhao et al.,  ). Specifically, the regulation of phenolic acid and lignin synthesis by the SmWRKY40 cluster underscores the idea that adaptive mechanisms operate at both genomic and cellular levels. Moreover, our results corroborate the idea that secondary metabolites like RA and SAB, which are often associated with plant stress tolerance, are accumulated in response to specific environmental stressors. The function of SmWRKY40 reinforces the role of transcriptional networks in facilitating adaptive growth strategies, where the modulation of phenolic acid levels is closely linked with root structural adjustments to optimize resilience and resource allocation.
Previous studies have shown that AtWRKY40 can significantly alleviate retrograde signal‐induced mitochondrial stress and chloroplast damage in plants (Olivier et al.,  ), and play an irreplaceable role in plant adaptation to drought stress (Che et al.,  ). The heterologous expression and mutant complementation of SmWRKY40 in Arabidopsis further confirmed its involvement in plant stress resistance and expanded its biological functions in cell wall development and secondary metabolism regulation. However, several limitations in this study warrant discussion. Although we identified environmental triggers and genetic regulators influencing phenolic acid content, the exact signalling pathways linking these external cues to SmWRKY40 expression remain undefined. Future studies should focus on upstream signalling molecules and pathways, including hormone‐mediated responses, that may govern SmWRKY40 regulation in response to environmental changes (Li et al., ). Furthermore, field validation of our findings in broader environmental settings would provide a more comprehensive understanding of genotype‐environment interactions. The genetic variation observed in SmWRKY40 between ecotypes also suggests a potential avenue for selective breeding to enhance phenolic content, which could have practical applications in S. miltiorrhiza cultivation.
In summary, this study provides valuable insights into the convergence of genetic and environmental factors that shape key traits in S. miltiorrhiza. By advancing our understanding of how these factors interact to influence phenolic acid levels and root texture, our findings open new avenues for optimizing the quality of traditional Chinese medicine through targeted breeding and environmental management.

## Methods

## Experimental model and subject details
Four different ecotypes of S. miltiorrhiza were used. The Sichuan ecotype (Chuandanshen No. 1, CDS‐1) came from Zhongjiang County, Deyang City, Sichuan Province. The Shandong ecotype (DSS3) was provided by the Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences. The Shaanxi ecotype (Shanhuang, shh) was first harvested in Shaanxi in 1999, provided by the Institute of Medicinal Plant Development of the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. The Henan ecotype was collected by us in Yichuan County, Nanyang City, Henan Province All materials were propagated through root segments and planted in the planting resource garden in Zhongjiang County, Sichuan Province. A. thaliana (col‐0) and tobacco (N. benthamiana) were preserved by the research team, and the mutants (atwrky40 and athct2) were purchased from AraShare Biotechnology (Fuzhou, China). The environmental conditions in the plant greenhouse were 22 °C, 1500 lx, 16 h light/8 h dark. To generate SmWRKY40 and SmRAS (149G and 149C), the ORF were separately cloned into pCAMBIA1300. The constructs were introduced into A. thaliana and hair root by A. tumefaciens mediated transformation.

## Determination of plant phenotype and chemical composition
Using a root scanner to analyse the root phenotype of S. miltiorrhiza, and measuring the root hardness using a Leeb hardness tester. Referring to the methods previously reported (Yao et al.,  ; Zhong et al.,  ), the content of tanshinones and salvianolic acid compounds in roots was analysed by high‐performance liquid chromatography, and the total lignin content in roots was determined by acetylation method.

## Decomposing analysis and histological staining
Plant tissue is embedded in paraffin or OCT, and layered specimens of plant tissue are obtained through vibration slicing or frozen slicing machines. Staining the tissue specimens with toluidine blue and safranin‐O‐fast green, and observing the microstructure of the tissue sections under a stereomicroscope. In addition, the microscopic structure of the root xylem was analysed using a scanning microscope imaging platform.

## Quantitative analysis of lignin monomer components by GC–MS
Accurately weigh 0.1 g of dry powder, add 2 mL of 4 mol/L NaOH solution, seal and hydrolyze at 95 °C for 24 h; Add 1.6 mL of 6 mol/L HCL after cooling; 13 000 r/min centrifuge for 5 min and then take 500 μL supernatant was extracted twice with 1 mL ethyl acetate. The organic phase was dried with nitrogen and dissolved in 1 mL methanol. After passing through a 0.45 μm filter membrane, it was used for GC–MS detection. The chromatographic conditions are set as follows: column box temperature of 70 °C, injection temperature of 250 °C and split ratio of 1:10; The mass spectrometry conditions are set as follows: ion source temperature of 200 °C, interface temperature of 250 °C, solvent delay of 3 min.

## Construction of a 3D model of the root, dynamic simulation of extrusion and bending deformation processes
An approximate reinforced concrete composite structure model was constructed using ABAQUS v.2022 cfinite element analysis tool (Dassault Systemes, Paris, France) (Lefèvre et al.,  ). Total of 17 high‐hardness strip structures (set to approximate the hardness of wood) and 1 low‐hardness material wrapped in the outer layer (set to approximate the hardness of rubber). Further simulation was conducted on the dynamic process of composite materials under different duct arrangements in response to bending and compression deformation, and the output results were plotted as pressure displacement curves. The highest point of the curve reflects the maximum stress of the composite material, and the slope of the curve reflects the viscoelasticity of the composite material.

## 
De novo sequencing, chromosome‐level assemble and comprehensive annotation of the genome of Sichuan ecotype S. miltiorrhiza

We extensively collect fresh tissues (including roots, stems, leaves and flowers) and immediately freeze them in liquid nitrogen for subsequent DNA and RNA isolation. Further construction of a DNA library exceeding 20 kb was carried out for single‐molecule sequencing, using PacBio Sequel platforms (Menlo Park, CA) to generate sequencing depth covering at least 100× of SMRT data. At the same time, a terminal Illumina strategy covering 60× and reading up to 350 base pairs was carried out, and paired libraries with insertion sizes of 5, 10 and 20 kb were constructed. Illumina sequencing was generated using the HiSeq 4000 platform (San Diego, CA). Next, we used FALCON v.0.3.0 (Chin et al.,  ) to perform the PacBio assembly following the recommended pipeline. Contigs generated by Illumina sequencing were polished using SMART Quiver v.2.3.9 (Chin et al.,  ) to obtain a preliminary assembly version. To eliminate possible genomic heterozygosity caused by cross‐pollination, we also used Purge Haplotigs v.2.26.0 (Roach et al.,  ) to optimize the assembly process. CEGMA v.2.5 (Parra et al.,  ) and BUSCO v5.2.2 (Simão et al.,  ) were used to evaluate the integrity of genome assembly.
To construct a Hi‐C library, the cell nucleus was fixed with paraformaldehyde, digested and labelled with biotin. Then cut the cross‐linked DNA using restriction endonucleases. For end repair, add biotin to label the oligonucleotide end. Connect adjacent chromatin DNA fragments using T4 DNA ligase. Finally, protease is added to digest T4 DNA ligase, allowing histones and DNA to be cross‐linked. After extracting genomic DNA, it is randomly broken into short fragments of 350 bp. Capture biotin‐labelled DNA molecules using affinity magnetic beads embedded with specific antibodies, followed by end repair, addition of poly A tail, adapter connection, PCR amplification and template purification. The constructed library was sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq PE150 platform. The analysis of Hi‐C data referred to previous reports (Pan et al.,  ).
Annotate duplicate components based on homologous alignment and de novo search (Price et al.,  ). Homology prediction is performed by comparing the Repbase database with genome assembly using RepeatMask (http://www.repeatmasker.org/). Extracting tandem repeat sequences from genome assembly using TRF (http://tandem.bu.edu/trf/trf.html). Using LTR_ FINDER (Price et al.,  ), RepeatScou and Repeat Modeller construct a database of repeating elements from scratch by predicting from scratch. All repeat sequences with a length greater than 100 bp and a gap ‘N’ <5% are used to construct the original transposable element (TE) library. The Repbase and TE libraries are processed by UCLUST (Edgar,  ) to generate non‐redundant libraries, which are then handed over to RepeatMask for duplicate identification. Functional gene annotations mainly refer to the databases of NCBI non‐redundant protein database (Machanick and Bailey,  ), Blast2GO (Conesa and Götz,  ), KEGG (Ogata et al.,  ), InterPro (Hunter et al.,  ) and KOG (Koonin et al.,  ).

## Genomic evolution analysis
The release and integration of a large‐scale plant pan‐genome database (plantGIR, http://plantgir.cn/) have provided the possibility for comparative genome analysis (Liu et al.,  ). We collected reference genomes from five other representative species of the Lamiaceae family: Sm.SX (Pan et al.,  ), Sm.SD (Song et al.,  ), Salvia bowleyana (Zheng et al.,  ), Scutellaria baicalensis (Wang et al.,  ) and Salvia europaea (Xu et al.,  ). Next, six sets of orthologous single‐copy gene sets of genomes were obtained through Orthofinder v2.5.4 (Emms and Kelly,  ), and phylogenetic trees of six species were constructed based on this, reflecting the genetic distance between genomes through the topological structure. In addition, CAFE v.5.2.1 (Mendes and Vanderpool,  ) was used to perform expansion/contraction analysis on gene families in 6 sets of genomes, and the differentiation time of the S. miltiorrhiza genome was estimated and corrected based on the known species divergence years in the Timetree (http://www.timetree.org/) (Kumar et al.,  ) and Paleobiodb (https://www.paleobiodb.org/) (Benton et al.,  ) database. Genomic collinearity analysis is achieved through MCScanX (Wang et al.,  ).

## Population variation analysis based on resequencing
A total of 30 representative individuals with a gradient distribution pattern of phenolic acid content were collected (10 high phenolic acid accumulations, 15 medium phenolic acid accumulations and 5 low phenolic acid accumulations). Leaf DNA was extracted and used to construct an Illumina paid end library (500 bp insert size). High‐quality reads with an average sequencing depth exceeding 10× generated for subsequent analysis. BWA‐MEM v.0.7.17 (Li and Durbin,  ) was used to map filtered high‐quality reads to the reference genome of S. miltiorrhiza, while SAMtools v.1.17 (Li et al.,  ) was used to read segment replies, sequence sort and remove redundancy. Identify SNPs under the optimal parameters of GATK HaplotypeCaller v.4.1.4.1 (McKenna et al.,  ) and annotate SNPs to corresponding loci in the reference genome via ANNOVAR v.2019.10.24 (Wang et al.,  ). Based on PopGenome v.2020 (Pfeifer et al.,  ), genetic differentiation (Fst) between Sm.SC and Sm.SD was detected within a window size of 200 kb and a step size range of 10 kb. The window with the top 5% highest Fst ranking was set as the interval most affected by domestication selection, and further research was conducted on the candidate genes included.

## Metabolomics analysis
Accurately weigh 50 mg of freeze‐dried sample powder, add 1 mL of 80% methanol solution pre‐cooled at −20 °C, extract by vortex oscillation and centrifuge at 12,000 rpm for 5 min, and pass the supernatant through 0.22 μM membrane. The prepared extract was used for UPLC‐MS/MS detection. Ultra‐performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) uses the Agilent SB‐C18 column, ultrapure water and acetonitrile solution as the mobile phase, controlling the flow rate at 0.35 mL/min, column temperature at 40 °C and injection volume of 4 μL. The tandem mass (MS/MS) spectrometry uses an electric spray ion source, with a set temperature of 550 °C and an ion spray voltage of 5, 500 V (positive ion)/‐4, 500 V (negative ion). The MRM mode is selected for QQQ scanning. The raw data is analysed qualitatively and quantitatively based on the MWDB (Metaware database) metabolite database.

## Transcriptomic analysis
Take out the root sample of S. miltiorrhiza from Sichuan and Shandong and quickly freeze them in liquid nitrogen for 5 min, and then freeze the sample in a refrigerator at −80 °C for future experiments. Total RNA was extracted from each sample using the Tiangen RNA Pure kit for plants (Tiangen, Beijing, China). The cDNA libraries were constructed according to the manufacturer's instructions of the NEB Next Ultra RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina (New England Biolabs, Ipswich). Total cDNA libraries were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform (Illumina, Inc., San Diego). RNA‐seq was performed by Metware Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Wuhan, China).

## Regulatory network inference
We employed an integrated‐omics model to depict the potential phenolic acid regulatory network in RNA‐seq and metabolic profiles. The detailed calculation pipeline was based on our previous report (Liu et al.,  , ). Specifically, we imported the normalized gene expression and metabolite accumulation matrices into the R package imsbInfer on GitHub to generate potential regulatory relationships. Based on Pearson correlation calculation (with a screening threshold of P < 0.01, and |cor| > 0.9), combined with known upstream and downstream relationships (especially the topological structure centred on transcription factors), Cytoscape v.3.7.2. was used to visualize the biological network involved in phenolic acid metabolism regulation. The size of nodes reflects the network path, while the colour and width of edges reflect the cor and P values.

## cDNA cloning and vector construction
Using the total RNA of S. miltiorrhiza as a template, cDNA libraries were prepared by reverse transcriptase. After adding cloned primers with enzyme cleavage sites, the ORF of the target gene was amplified by PCR. UBQ10‐WRKY40‐GFP and UBQ10‐RAS‐GFP vectors were constructed for hairy root induction and transgenic Arabidopsis preparation. The protein expression tool used in the enzymatic experiments for RAS is a pET28a vector with a 6 × His tag fused to the N‐terminus, recombinant plasmid transfer into E. coli DH5α After coating on LB solid containing 50 mg/L kanamycin. The detailed cloning primers and restriction site information are as follows: F‐WRKY40‐Kpn I: 5′‐TAGGTACCATGGAGTTCACAAGCCT‐3′, R‐WRKY40‐BamH I: 5′‐AAGGATCCGCATTTGTCCGTGT‐3′. F‐RAS‐Kpn I: TAGGTACCATGAAGATCGATATCACAGA, R‐RAS‐BamH I: AAGGATCCAATATCATAAAACAACTTCT. The multiple cloning site (MCS) of the pCAMBIA1305 vector was selected in the segment between downstream of the UBQ10 promoter and upstream of the GFP‐tag, and the MCS of the pET28a vector was located in the segment between the T7 promoter and the HA termination signal.

## Subcellular localization experiment
Import the target gene vector fused with GFP into Agrobacterium GV3101 and culture in liquid YEB medium until OD600 = 0.6. Add equal volume half‐strength MS liquid medium with 200 μM acetosyringone (AS) and 0.5 mM MgCl2, mix and annotate Agrobacterium containing target genes and organelle markers onto the back of mature tobacco leaves, incubate in dark for 1 day and light for 1 day. After that, place the leaf tissue under a confocal laser microscope (Olympus, FV1000, Japan) for imaging.

## Hairy root transgenic and gene editing system
Referring to the previous method (Zhong et al.,  ), the plant expression vector and the CRISPR‐Cas9 vector fused with the target gene gRNA were introduced into Agrobacterium C58C1. Cut leaves from sterile seedlings of S. miltiorrhiza as explants, and use C58C1 to infect the scratched leaves. The infected leaves were first placed on half‐strength MS medium and incubated in the dark for 2 days. After washing with sterile water three times, they were transferred to a half‐strength MS solid medium containing 0.5 mg/L IBA and 600 mg/L carboxybenzyl penicillin. After the hairy roots grow to 5 cm, transfer to a liquid 6,7‐V medium containing 0.5 mg/L IBA and 600 mg/L carboxybenzyl penicillin for suspension culture. When the hairy roots develop to a volume exceeding 2/3 of the tissue culture bottle, they are removed for subsequent research.

## Mutant identification and genetic transformation of Arabidopsis
The Arabidopsis mutants used in this study were prepared through T‐DNA insertion, and the genomic DNA of the tested plants was amplified using a universal T‐DNA backbone primer BP and a target gene‐specific end primer LP/RP in different combinations. The positive homozygous mutants were screened by agarose gel electrophoresis according to the band size. Transgenic Arabidopsis was obtained by infecting inflorescences with Agrobacterium GV3101. Positive plants were screened on a half‐strength MS medium with 25 mg/L Hyg, and genomic DNA was extracted and target genes were amplified to identify the positive transformed plants.

## DNA affinity purification sequencing (DAP‐seq)
For the DAP‐seq input library, genomic DNA was extracted from Sm.SC and Sm.SD leaves. The SmWRKY40 protein is produced using an in vitro transcription/translation system (Promeg Biotechnology Co., Ltd. Madison). DAP‐seq was based on the published protocol with slight modifications (Bartlett et al.,  ), DNA fragments captured by immunoprecipitation will be subjected to 20 cycles of linear PCR amplification and purified using AMPure XP magnetic beads (Beckman Coulter, Inc. Brea). NGS sequencing was performed using the Illumina platform, and Bioinformatics analysis was done after refinement based on the published protocols (Yu et al.,  ). Two biological replicates and one Input were set as controls in the DAP‐seq experiment.

## Dual‐Luciferase reporter assay, yeast one hybrid, transcriptional activation activity and EMSA manual
We constructed the pGreenII‐62SK‐WRKY40 vector and the pGreenII‐0800 LUC vector inserted into the RAS and HCT promoters to verify the interaction in the tobacco expression system. The tobacco expression system and the specific test methods are as described above. The interaction of the transcription factor with the promoter was verified by comparison of fluorescence intensity.
The ORF of SmWRKY40 was constructed into the multiple cloning sites (MCS) of the pGADT7 vector, and the promoter region 1 kb upstream of the RAS and HCT genes was constructed into the MCS of pHIS2. The combined plasmids were co‐transformed into S. cerevisiae (Y187), and positive transformants were screened in SD‐Trp/‐Leu plates and interactions in SD‐Trp/‐Leu/‐His plates. In addition, we constructed the ORF of SmWRKY40 onto the pGBKT7 vector, transferred it into yeast Y187 and coated it on SD/‐Trp/‐His+x‐α‐gal medium, the transcriptional activation activity of transcription factors was determined through blue and white spot screening.
Construct the ORF of SmWRKY40 into the prokaryotic expression vector pET‐28a, and introduce it into E. coli BL21, induce it with 0.1 mM IPTG at 16 °C for 20 h and obtain the recombinant protein through the Ni‐IDA purification column. A biotin‐labelled probe was synthesized for the DNA sequence rich in W‐box elements on the promoter of the target gene. The probe was incubated with SmWRKY40 protein under suitable conditions, and then SDS‐PAGE and autoradiography were used to determine whether the protein interacted with DNA.

## 
In vitro enzyme kinetics experiment
Recombinant proteins for RAS146C and RAS146G, and homologues from sweet orange were produced in E. coli. Referring to the previous method (Zhong et al.,  ), the relevant coding sequences were cloned into the pET‐28a expression vector in‐frame and downstream of the sequence of the 6 × His tag using a Clon Express MultiS One Step Cloning Kit (Vazyme Biotech Co., Ltd, Nanjing, China). Transform the recombinant vector into E. coli BL21 (DE3) for heterologous protein production. Select a single colony and culture it in LB liquid medium containing kanamycin until OD600 = 0.6–0.8, then add isopropyl thiol at 16 °C, isopropylthio‐β‐galactoside (IPTG, final concentration 0.1 mM) was induced for 20 h. Harvest cells (6000 × 
g
. 10 min at 4 °C) and crush them with an ultrasonic crusher. Centrifugation (14,000 × 
g
. 15 min, 4 °C) to remove cell debris. Purify the target protein using Ni‐IDA pre‐installed gravity column and confirm it by SDS‐PAGE electrophoresis.
For acyltransferase, in a total volume of 100 μL in vitro enzymatic assay was performed under the condition (Meyermans et al.,  ; Zhou et al.,  ), 150 μM Acyl donor with 50 μM acyl receptor, 5 mM MgCl2 and 500 ng purified protein (buffer containing 100 mM Tris–HCl buffer and 0.1% glycerol, pH 8.0). After incubating at 25 °C for 2 h, add 10 μL cold methanol to stop reacting. Then the reaction mixture through 0.2 μM filter filtration, was used for subsequent LC–MS analysis. Each reaction undergoes three independent experimental replicates and three technical replicates. In this work, caffeoyl‐CoA was used as an acyl donor, while danshensu and quinic acid were used as acyl receptors. All HPLC‐grade purity chemicals are purchased from Shanghai Yuanye Bio‐Technology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China).

## Stress response and physiological detection
Plant stress experiments were conducted using SmWRKY40 transgenic Arabidopsis and mutant complement lines, specifically by adding 100 μM CuSO4 to half‐strength MS solid culture medium or nutrient soil to simulate Cu2+ toxicity (process for 2 weeks), culturing plants in a 12 °C environment (process for 2 weeks) to simulate cold stress. Plants are exposed to a shelf 60 cm away from UV‐B lamps (6 h/day, for 2 weeks) to simulate high doses of UV‐B stress. The experimental groups are compared with Arabidopsis cultivated under normal nutrition, light and temperature conditions. The experimental methods for yeast are different. The ORF of SmWRKY40 and RAS were constructed into the polyclonal site of the pYES2 expression vector, and the recombinant vector was introduced into the stress‐sensitive yeast strain INVSC1. Positive transformants were screened on SD medium with Ura deficiency. Corresponding stress treatments were added during the subsequent solid plate culture and liquid culture processes. Referring to previous reports (Yu et al.,  ), the content of carotenoids, chlorophyll, MDA, O2
− and CAT enzyme activity in organisms under stress was measured using a kit produced by Nanjing Jiancheng Biotechnology Co., Ltd (Nanjing, China).

## Real‐time quantitative PCR (RT‐qPCR) detection
The primer sequences with measured genes were designed through the Primer 3 (https://primer3.ut.ee/). The RT‐qPCR conditions consisted of pre‐denaturation at 95 °C for 3 min, followed by 40 cycles of denaturation at 95 °C for 5 s and annealing and extension at 60 °C for 30 s. The relative expression of genes was calculated with the 2−ΔΔct method (Livak and Schmittgen,  ), and the SmACTIN gene was selected as the internal reference gene. All experiments were set up with 3 biological replicates and 3 technical replicates.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
All data in this study were analysed using the Origin v.2020 and SPSS statistics program by two‐tailed Student's t‐test (*P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01), and the means were compared by the least significant difference (LSD) test at the 0.05 level of significance.

## Author contributions
Haomiao Yu: Designed this study, carried out genetics and physiological experiments, integrated‐omics data analysis and manuscript writing. Jinqiu Liao and Yuanyuan Jiang: Germplasm resources collection, phenotypic and biochemical analyses and experimental data analysis. Mingzhi Zhong and Shan Tao: Construction of cloning vectors, establishment of a prokaryotic expression system, protein induction and purification and enzyme kinetic analysis. Songyue Chai, Long Wang and Li Lin: Genome, transcriptomic and metabolomics analyses. Ruiwu Yang, Xuexue Deng and Yunsong Zhang: Genetic and physiological analysis. Xiang Pu: Designed and directed biochemical experiments on protein induction, isolation and purification and enzyme kinetics. Moyang Liu: Designed the multi‐omics framework for the whole study, guided the bioinformatics analysis, provided a high‐performance computing platform and reviewed and revised the manuscript. Li Zhang: Led the whole study, provided the experimental platform and funding support.

## Conflict of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.

## Supporting information

Appendix S1 Supplementary table  .

Figure S1 Meteorological map of environmental meteorological factors in different S. miltiorrhiza producing areas.

Figure S2 Phenotype and composition detection of S. miltiorrhiza root under UV‐B exposure, cold stress and Cu2+ stress.

Figure S3 3D modeling and stress simulation of the effect of different xylem arrangement on mechanical strength of roots.

Figure S4 Comparative metabolome analysis of Sm.SC and Sm.SD mature roots.

Figure S5 Statistics of whole genome sequencing and chromosome mount information.

Figure S6 Comparative transcriptomic analysis of Sm.SC and Sm.SD mature roots.

Figure S7 Transcription factor‐metabolite association analysis of phenolic acid metabolic pathways.

Figure S8 Cross‐species evolutionary analysis of the WRKY40‐CCR‐HCT metabolic cluster.

Figure S9 Subcellular localization and expression pattern of SmWRKY40.

Figure S10 Preparation flow of transgenic/gene‐edited hairy roots.

Figure S11 qPCR analysis of phenolic acid metabolism pathway genes in hairy roots and hair root.

Figure S12 Identification of Arabidopsis mutants and transgenic plants.

Figure S13 SmWRKY40 binding peaks on promoters of other pathway genes.

Figure S14 Comparison of the binding of WRKY40 transcription factors to the promoters of the RAS and HCT2 genes.

Figure S15 Haplotype comparison of rosmarinic acid synthase (RAS) from Sm.SC and Sm.SD.

Figure S16 Association analysis of RA and SAB content with haplotypes and acyltransferase activity in population samples, and groping of reaction conditions of rosmarinic acid synthase (RAS) from Sm.SC and Sm.SD.

Figure S17 Phylogeny and multiple sequence alignment of SmRAS and homologous sequences.

Figure S18 Identification of Arabidopsis mutants and transgenic plants.

Figure S19 Heterologous expression validates the biological functions of SmWRKY40 and SmRASs in response to cold stress.

Figure S20 Heterologous expression validates the biological functions of SmWRKY40 and SmRASs in response to Cu2+ stress.

Table S1 Basic information on germplasm resources of S. miltiorrhiza with different ecotypes.

Table S2 Investigation of the meteorological environment in different S. miltiorrhiza production regions.

Table S3 Comparative metabolomic analysis of Sm.SC and Sm.SD.

Table S4 Statistics of the whole‐genome sequencing data based on the PacBio platform.

Table S5 Hi‐C assisted assembly data statistics.

Table S6 Genomic orthologous identification of S. miltiorrhiza and its related species.

Table S7 Comparative transcriptomics analysis of Sm.SC and Sm.SD.

Table S8 Comparative analysis of key enzyme genes and metabolites in the phenolic acid metabolic pathway in Sm.SC and Sm.SD.

Table S9 Gene‐metabolite regulatory network of phenolic acid metabolism pathway constructed based on integrative omics analysis.

Table S10 Data statistics for population resequencing of Sm.SC and Sm.SD.

Table S11 Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) statistics on HIC_ASM_6 in Sm.SC and Sm.SD population resequencing.

Table S12 Statistics of large segment variation (Indel) located on HIC_ASM_6 in Sm.SC and Sm.SD population resequencing.

Table S13 Population differentiation (Fst) statistics of Sm.SC and Sm.SD on HIC_ASM_6.

Table S14 Statistics of the peaks of interaction with SmWRKY40 in phenolic acid metabolism clusters of Sm.SC and Sm.SD based on DAP‐seq.

## Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge funding by National Modern Agricultural Industry Technology System Sichuan Innovation Team (SCCXTD‐2020‐19), Sichuan Science and Technology Program (2021YFYZ0012, 2024ZHCG0155), Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan Province (2023NSFSC1269, 2023NSFSC1271, 2023NSFSC0663), The Key Project for Synthetic Biology of Shanghai (24HC2810800) and Featured Medicinal Plants Sharing and Service Platform of Sichuan Province.

## Contributor Information
Moyang Liu, Email: cooljeep@sjtu.edu.cn.
Li Zhang, Email: zhangli@sicau.edu.cn.

## Data availability statement
The genome sequencing, RNA‐seq and DAP‐seq data performed in this study have been deposited in the NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/, PRJNA862689, SAMN29989663), National Genomics Data Center (https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/, PRJCA010426, PRJCA023817) and can be accessed via the corresponding author if necessary.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

Appendix S1 Supplementary table  .

Figure S1 Meteorological map of environmental meteorological factors in different S. miltiorrhiza producing areas.

Figure S2 Phenotype and composition detection of S. miltiorrhiza root under UV‐B exposure, cold stress and Cu2+ stress.

Figure S3 3D modeling and stress simulation of the effect of different xylem arrangement on mechanical strength of roots.

Figure S4 Comparative metabolome analysis of Sm.SC and Sm.SD mature roots.

Figure S5 Statistics of whole genome sequencing and chromosome mount information.

Figure S6 Comparative transcriptomic analysis of Sm.SC and Sm.SD mature roots.

Figure S7 Transcription factor‐metabolite association analysis of phenolic acid metabolic pathways.

Figure S8 Cross‐species evolutionary analysis of the WRKY40‐CCR‐HCT metabolic cluster.

Figure S9 Subcellular localization and expression pattern of SmWRKY40.

Figure S10 Preparation flow of transgenic/gene‐edited hairy roots.

Figure S11 qPCR analysis of phenolic acid metabolism pathway genes in hairy roots and hair root.

Figure S12 Identification of Arabidopsis mutants and transgenic plants.

Figure S13 SmWRKY40 binding peaks on promoters of other pathway genes.

Figure S14 Comparison of the binding of WRKY40 transcription factors to the promoters of the RAS and HCT2 genes.

Figure S15 Haplotype comparison of rosmarinic acid synthase (RAS) from Sm.SC and Sm.SD.

Figure S16 Association analysis of RA and SAB content with haplotypes and acyltransferase activity in population samples, and groping of reaction conditions of rosmarinic acid synthase (RAS) from Sm.SC and Sm.SD.

Figure S17 Phylogeny and multiple sequence alignment of SmRAS and homologous sequences.

Figure S18 Identification of Arabidopsis mutants and transgenic plants.

Figure S19 Heterologous expression validates the biological functions of SmWRKY40 and SmRASs in response to cold stress.

Figure S20 Heterologous expression validates the biological functions of SmWRKY40 and SmRASs in response to Cu2+ stress.

Table S1 Basic information on germplasm resources of S. miltiorrhiza with different ecotypes.

Table S2 Investigation of the meteorological environment in different S. miltiorrhiza production regions.

Table S3 Comparative metabolomic analysis of Sm.SC and Sm.SD.

Table S4 Statistics of the whole‐genome sequencing data based on the PacBio platform.

Table S5 Hi‐C assisted assembly data statistics.

Table S6 Genomic orthologous identification of S. miltiorrhiza and its related species.

Table S7 Comparative transcriptomics analysis of Sm.SC and Sm.SD.

Table S8 Comparative analysis of key enzyme genes and metabolites in the phenolic acid metabolic pathway in Sm.SC and Sm.SD.

Table S9 Gene‐metabolite regulatory network of phenolic acid metabolism pathway constructed based on integrative omics analysis.

Table S10 Data statistics for population resequencing of Sm.SC and Sm.SD.

Table S11 Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) statistics on HIC_ASM_6 in Sm.SC and Sm.SD population resequencing.

Table S12 Statistics of large segment variation (Indel) located on HIC_ASM_6 in Sm.SC and Sm.SD population resequencing.

Table S13 Population differentiation (Fst) statistics of Sm.SC and Sm.SD on HIC_ASM_6.

Table S14 Statistics of the peaks of interaction with SmWRKY40 in phenolic acid metabolism clusters of Sm.SC and Sm.SD based on DAP‐seq.

## Data Availability Statement
The genome sequencing, RNA‐seq and DAP‐seq data performed in this study have been deposited in the NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/, PRJNA862689, SAMN29989663), National Genomics Data Center (https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/, PRJCA010426, PRJCA023817) and can be accessed via the corresponding author if necessary.