pmciScienceiScience3532isci101724038iScience2589-0042ElsevierPMC12962103PMC12962103.112962103129621034179791710.1016/j.isci.2026.114996S2589-0042(26)00371-81149961ArticleTranscriptional control of PPP2CB by YAP1 and TEAD1 mediates AMPK inhibition and mTORC1 activation in vascular smooth muscle cells
KumariyaSanjana StuckJoanna Grano de OroArturo OsmanIslamislam.osman@utoledo.edu 1Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Center for Hypertension and Personalized Medicine, University of Toledo, College of Medicine and Life Sciences, Toledo, OH, USA∗Corresponding author islam.osman@utoledo.edu2These authors contributed equally
3Senior author
4Lead contact
2032026122202629350788211499621820251312026922026120220260603202609032026© 2026 The Author(s)2026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
We previously demonstrated that the transcriptional co-factor Yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1) promotes vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) phenotypic switching and neointima formation. However, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here, using YAP1 silencing and overexpression assays in human VSMCs, we demonstrate that YAP1 is necessary and sufficient to activate mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) and that mTORC1 activity is required for YAP1-induced VSMC proliferation. Mechanistically, we report that YAP1 inhibits AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), a negative regulator of mTORC1, thereby relieving AMPK-mediated suppression of mTORC1. We identify the protein phosphatase 2A catalytic subunit PPP2CB as a YAP1-regulated transcriptional target that contributes to AMPK inhibition and mTORC1 activation. We further show that a transcription factor, transcriptional enhancer activator domain 1 (TEAD1), mediates YAP1-dependent PPP2CB expression and that the upstream AMPK kinase CAMKK2 is required for YAP1-dependent modulation of AMPK/mTORC1 signaling. Together, these results define a YAP1/AMPK/mTORC1 signaling axis that drives VSMC proliferation, with potential broader relevance given the ubiquitous expression of these signaling molecules.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•YAP1 promotes VSMC proliferation via the activation of mTORC1 signaling
•YAP1 inhibits AMPK signaling, relieving AMPK’s negative control of mTORC1
•YAP1 transcriptionally activates PPP2CB to suppress AMPK signaling
•CAMKK2 also mediates YAP1-dependent changes in AMPK/mTORC1 signaling

Vascular remodeling; molecular mechanism of gene regulation

## Subject areas
classification descriptionvascular remodelingmolecular mechanism of gene regulationpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDPublished: February 12, 2026

## Introduction
Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) are the predominant cell type in the walls of blood vessels, constituting the bulk of the vessel wall. Unlike terminally differentiated cardiac and skeletal myocytes, VSMCs exhibit a distinct capacity for phenotypic switching or plasticity, which allows them to change their phenotype in response to various environmental cues, such as growth factors and vascular injury. The transition from a contractile to a synthetic phenotype is characterized by hyperproliferative and migratory properties. Phenotypic switching of VSMCs is a hallmark of vascular remodeling, which contributes to various occlusive vascular diseases, such as post-angioplasty restenosis, atherosclerosis, and hypertension. , However, the mechanisms underlying VSMC phenotypic switching remain incompletely understood. Elucidating these mechanisms is key to understanding the pathophysiology of these vascular diseases and ultimately identifying promising molecular targets for developing new therapeutics.
Yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1, often called YAP) is a transcriptional co-factor that plays a critical role in the regulation of cell proliferation, organ growth, and dedifferentiation of post-mitotic cells into their respective tissue progenitors. , Consistently, YAP1 has been identified as a potent oncogene that drives malignancy in multiple cancer types. Remarkably, YAP1 is not required for the homeostatic proliferation of adult tissues, such as the skin and the gastrointestinal tract, which makes it a very promising target in oncology. As such, multiple YAP1 inhibitors are currently undergoing clinical trials to test their efficacy in combating multiple cancer types. Mechanistically, YAP1 lacks a DNA-binding domain and thus requires interaction with transcription factors, mainly transcriptional enhancer activator domain proteins (TEADs), to regulate gene expression. , While YAP1 primarily functions as a transcriptional co-activator, it can also function as a transcriptional co-repressor. Binding to TEADs is essential for YAP1 to mediate its oncogenic functions by transcriptionally regulating genes involved in cell cycle regulation, cell growth, proliferation, apoptosis, and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. , , , TEADs harbor a conserved DNA-binding domain that specifically recognizes the muscle-specific cytidine-adenosine-thymidine (MCAT) motif within the promoter and enhancer regions of their target genes. , YAP1 is mainly regulated by the upstream Hippo kinase cascade, which leads to enhanced phosphorylation and subsequent inactivation of YAP1. 
Over the past decade, we and others have established the Hippo-YAP1 signaling pathway as a key regulator of VSMC phenotypic switching and proliferation. , , , , We previously found that YAP1 is highly induced during neointima formation, where it plays a key role in promoting VSMC phenotypic switching, proliferation, and migration. Consequently, SMC-specific deletion of Yap1 in adult mice is sufficient to attenuate arterial injury-induced neointimal hyperplasia. Surprisingly, we previously demonstrated that the effects of YAP1 in VSMCs are independent of canonical YAP1 targets, such as CCN1 and MYC, suggesting that YAP1 activates a specific transcriptional program in VSMCs to mediate its proliferative response. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms mediating YAP1-induced VSMC proliferation remain incompletely understood.
Mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) is a master regulator of cell growth and metabolism, integrating diverse upstream signals, including growth factors, cellular energy status, oxygen level, and amino acids, to positively regulate cell growth and proliferation, protein synthesis, and inhibit autophagy. , , In the context of vascular biology, mTORC1 signaling plays a pivotal role in governing VSMC phenotypic switching and neointima formation. , mTORC1 exerts its pro-proliferative effect in VSMCs by phosphorylating key downstream targets, including p70 ribosomal S6 kinase (S6K or p70S6K) and the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1 (4EBP1). This leads to enhanced ribosomal biogenesis and cap-dependent translation of cell cycle regulators, including cyclin B1, cyclin D1, cyclin E, cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK1 and CDK2), and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), thereby accelerating VSMC proliferation and contributing to pathological vascular remodeling. , Consequently, pharmacological inhibitors of mTORC1, such as rapamycin and its derivatives, are widely employed in drug-eluting stents to mitigate post-angioplasty restenosis by inhibiting VSMC proliferation and migration , while promoting VSMC differentiation. Despite the well-established role of mTORC1 in driving VSMC phenotypic switching and neointima formation, the upstream regulatory mechanisms regulating mTORC1 activation in these conditions remain incompletely understood. Intriguingly, YAP1 has been shown to activate mTORC1 signaling in various cellular contexts and by multiple mechanisms. , , , , However, whether YAP1 exerts similar regulatory control over mTORC1 in VSMCs and the precise molecular mechanisms underlying this potential crosstalk remain unexplored.
Adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a key energy sensor that maintains cellular energetics by activating ATP-producing catabolic pathways (such as fatty acid oxidation, autophagy, and increased glucose uptake and metabolism) and inhibiting ATP-consuming anabolic pathways (such as protein, fatty acid, and cholesterol synthesis). Of particular interest is AMPK that acts as a key upstream negative regulator of mTORC1 signaling, inhibiting protein synthesis and promoting autophagy to preserve cellular energy. , AMPK is activated primarily by two major upstream kinases, namely liver kinase B1 (LKB1) , and Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase 2 (CAMKK2), in response to energetically stressful conditions that increase AMP/ADP:ATP ratio and in response to elevated intracellular Ca2+ levels, respectively. Both kinases phosphorylate AMPK at Thr172 to promote its activation.
In VSMCs, AMPK activation strongly inhibits VSMC proliferation and migration via mTORC1-dependent and -independent mechanisms. , Notably, previous studies have established AMPK as an upstream regulator of YAP1 by directly phosphorylating it, leading to its cytoplasmic retention, inactivation, and suppression of its transcriptional activity. In addition, AMPK can inhibit YAP1 indirectly by enhancing the activity of upstream kinases in the Hippo pathway, such as LATS1/2. However, whether YAP1, in turn, regulates AMPK in a feedback mechanism remains to be determined.
In this study, we sought to elucidate the molecular mechanism(s) by which YAP1 induces human coronary artery smooth muscle cell (HCASMC) proliferation. We found that YAP1 expression in VSMCs is both required and sufficient to induce mTORC1 activation, which plays a key role in YAP1-induced VSMC proliferation. Mechanistically, we identify a link between YAP1 and AMPK signaling and demonstrate that it plays a key intermediary role in YAP1-induced mTORC1 activation. We further identify TEAD1 as a key transcription factor that mediates YAP1 regulation of AMPK via the enhanced expression of the catalytic subunit PPP2CB of the protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A). Furthermore, we identify CAMKK2 as another crucial mediator of YAP1-mediated changes in AMPK/mTORC1 signaling. Together, our study uncovers an important link between YAP1 and AMPK signaling, where YAP1 inhibits AMPK to activate mTORC1-dependent VSMC proliferation.

## Results

## YAP1 is required and sufficient to activate mTORC1 signaling in VSMCs
To understand how YAP1 regulates VSMC proliferation, we examined its effects on one of the major regulators of VSMC proliferation, mTORC1 signaling. , , We found that siRNA-mediated depletion of basal YAP1 expression in HCASMCs led to a significant reduction in the phosphorylation of key mTORC1 substrates (p70S6K, S6, and 4EBP1), which was accompanied by downregulation of proliferation markers (cyclin D1 and PCNA) and upregulation of p27Kip1, a key cell cycle inhibitor ( A). Consistently, adenovirus-mediated overexpression of YAP1 in HCASMCs resulted in hyperphosphorylation of mTORC1 substrates, upregulation of proliferation markers, and downregulation of p27Kip1 ( B). Notably, YAP1 silencing studies were conducted in complete media, supplemented with growth factors, demonstrating that YAP1 is required for growth factor-mediated mTORC1 activation. Conversely, YAP1 overexpression studies were performed in serum-free conditions, lacking growth factors, demonstrating that forced expression of YAP1 is sufficient to rescue the inhibition of mTORC1 signaling caused by growth factor withdrawal. Together, these studies demonstrate that YAP1 is both required and sufficient to induce mTORC1 activation in HCASMCs. 
In addition to the observed effects on mTORC1 signaling, we observed that silencing of endogenous YAP1 expression enhanced, while overexpression of YAP1 reduced, the protein expression of TAZ, a YAP1 paralog , ( A and 1B), suggesting a potential compensatory mechanism. However, under these experimental conditions, TAZ does not seem to be sufficient to compensate for the loss of YAP1 effects on mTORC1 signaling.

## YAP1 requires mTORC1 activation to promote VSMC proliferation
Next, we tested the role of mTORC1 in our previously reported YAP1-induced VSMC proliferation. We first validated the effects of rapamycin, a pharmacological mTORC1 inhibitor, , , in VSMCs. Treatment of HCASMCs with rapamycin (50 nM) markedly attenuated both basal and YAP1-induced hyperphosphorylation of mTORC1 substrates (p70S6K, S6, and 4EBP1) ( A), which was associated with a mobility shift of these proteins during SDS-PAGE, commonly observed with significant alteration of the phosphorylation status of proteins. Notably, while rapamycin also markedly inhibited YAP1-induced PCNA expression, it failed to rescue YAP1-induced p27Kip1 downregulation, suggesting mTORC1-independent mechanisms. Consistently, we found that silencing of YAP1 induced, whereas YAP1 overexpression repressed, the mRNA expression of CDKN1B (p27Kip1) ( ), suggesting that YAP1 regulates p27Kip1 at the transcriptional level. 
To test the role of mTORC1 in YAP1-induced VSMC proliferation, we performed multiple cell proliferation assays, including the WST-1 cell viability assay to measure cell metabolic activity, the CyQUANT cell proliferation assay to quantify cell count by fluorescence-based visualization of DNA content, and the EdU incorporation assay to detect cells actively undergoing DNA synthesis. Importantly, we found that rapamycin significantly inhibited both basal and YAP1-mediated VSMC proliferation, as indicated by WST-1 ( B), CyQUANT ( C and 2D), and EdU incorporation assays ( E and 2F). Together, these data demonstrate that mTORC1 plays a key role in mediating YAP1-induced VSMC proliferation.

## YAP1 activates mTORC1 via inhibition of AMPK signaling
To delineate the potential signaling pathway(s) that mediate the effects of YAP1 on mTORC1 activation in VSMCs, we tested its effects on the key upstream regulators of mTORC1. In non-vascular cell types, YAP1 has been reported to enhance mTORC1 activation by activating phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (PKB or AKT) signaling and by enhancing the expression of several key amino acid transporters, such as SLC7A5. In addition, we previously demonstrated that TEAD1, a closely-related transcription factor to YAP1, upregulates the amino acid transporter SLC1A5 to activate mTORC1 signaling in VSMCs. Accordingly, we initially tested the effects of YAP1 on AKT signaling and the expression levels of SLC1A5 and SLC7A5 in HCASMCs. Surprisingly, silencing YAP1 enhanced AKT phosphorylation at Thr308, rather than inhibiting it ( A), potentially due to the release of the inhibitory feedback mechanism by mTORC1 on AKT signaling. Furthermore, silencing YAP1 had minimal effects on the expression levels of SLC1A5 and SLC7A5. Consistently, YAP1 overexpression had minimal effects on AKT phosphorylation and SLC1A5 or SLC7A5 protein expression ( B). Together, these data demonstrate that YAP1 activates mTORC1 in HCASMCs independently of AKT, SLC1A5, or SLC7A5. 
Previous studies have demonstrated that AMPK, a key negative upstream regulator of mTORC1, can inhibit YAP1, either directly by phosphorylating it or indirectly by enhancing the activity of upstream kinases in the Hippo pathway, such as LATS1/2. We argue that YAP1 may, in turn, regulate AMPK in a bidirectional inhibitory feedback loop to activate mTORC1. Indeed, we found that silencing YAP1 induced AMPK activation, as evidenced by enhanced Thr172 phosphorylation of AMPKα and the phosphorylation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), a downstream substrate of AMPK ( A). Consistently, YAP1 overexpression inhibited basal AMPK signaling, as evidenced by decreased phosphorylation of AMPK and ACC ( B). Therefore, these data reveal that YAP1 acts as an upstream negative regulator of AMPK signaling.
Because AMPKα1 is the main AMPK catalytic subunit expressed in VSMCs, to test whether AMPK is involved in mediating the effects of YAP1 on mTORC1 signaling, we silenced endogenous YAP1 in the absence or presence of an AMPKα1 siRNA (siAMPKα1). We found that silencing AMPKα1 was sufficient to inhibit both basal and siYAP1-mediated AMPK activation ( C). AMPK is reported to inhibit mTORC1, at least in part, by directly phosphorylating Raptor (a component of the mTORC1 complex) at Ser792. Consistently, we found that siYAP1-mediated activation of AMPK was associated with enhanced Raptor phosphorylation. Importantly, silencing of AMPKα1 inhibited siYAP1-induced phosphorylation of Raptor, which was associated with a marked reversal of the inhibitory effects of siYAP1 on S6 phosphorylation. Together, these data demonstrate that YAP1 activates mTORC1, at least in part, by inhibiting AMPK signaling in VSMCs.
Previous studies have demonstrated that AMPK can activate AKT under energy-stress conditions to promote cell survival. , Accordingly, we examined whether the observed siYAP1-mediated AKT phosphorylation in VSMCs ( A) is dependent on AMPK. While silencing AMPKα1 abrogated siYAP1-induced AKT phosphorylation ( C), surprisingly, it enhanced, rather than inhibiting, basal AKT phosphorylation. We did not detect increased cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), a marker of apoptosis, under any of these experimental conditions ( C).

## PPP2CB contributes to YAP1-mediated inhibition of AMPK signaling in VSMCs
Next, we investigated how YAP1 regulates AMPK activity in VSMCs. Because YAP1 is a transcriptional co-factor that exerts its effects by regulating gene expression, we hypothesized that YAP1 may influence AMPK signaling by regulating the gene expression of an AMPK complex subunit or by modulating the expression of an upstream regulator(s) of AMPK. The human AMPK signaling network currently comprises ∼240 genes that include AMPK complex subunits, multiple upstream kinases and phosphatases, and downstream signaling components. , To identify potential YAP1 target genes that might regulate AMPK signaling, we performed de novo analysis of YAP1 ChIP-seq data, using multiple human cell lines, including fibroblast IMR90, breast cancer MDA-MB-231, and glioblastoma SF268, which were curated from the Cistrome Data Browser. YAP1 ChIP-seq data were aligned with ChIP-seq tracks of epigenetic markers of open chromatin (H3K27Ac, H3K4Me3, and H3K4Me1) across 7 cell types from the ENCODE project and visualized using the UCSC genome browser. This analysis identified YAP1 binding peaks that overlapped potential regulatory regions of genes expressing the AMPK complex subunits (PRKAA1, PRKAA2, PRKAB1, PRKAB2, and PRKAG2), genes expressing AMPK upstream kinases or their subunits (STK11, CAB39, CAMKK2, and MAP3K7), genes expressing cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) subunits (PRKACB, PRKAR1B, and PRKAR2B), and genes expressing the protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) subunits (PPP2CB, PPP2R1A, PPP2R1B, and PTPA). A representative example of YAP1 ChIP-seq data that overlapped the potential regulatory regions of PPP2CB and PPP2R1B genes is shown in C. Next, we tested the effects of silencing YAP1 on the mRNA expression levels of these identified potential YAP1 target genes in HCASMCs ( A). 
Among the tested genes, we found that silencing YAP1 significantly reduced the mRNA expression of the genes expressing the AMPKα1 subunit (PRKAA1), AMPKγ2 subunit (PRKAG2), PKA regulatory subunit (PRKAR1B), and both a catalytic subunit (PPP2CB) and a regulatory subunit (PPP2R1B) of PP2A ( A). Given that PP2A is a well-described negative regulator of AMPK in VSMCs, we rationalized that the siYAP1-mediated downregulation of PPP2CB and PPP2R1B, but not the other identified genes (positive regulators of AMPK signaling), may explain the observed increase in AMPK Thr 172 phosphorylation after silencing YAP1 ( ). Consistent with our YAP1 silencing data, YAP1 overexpression upregulated the mRNA expression levels of PPP2CB and PPP2R1B ( B). Notably, YAP1 ChIP-seq data analysis demonstrated YAP1 binding peaks in the proximal promoter region of the human PPP2CB gene that overlapped the epigenetic markers of promoters (H3K27Ac and H3K4Me3). We also identified YAP1 binding peaks in an intronic region of the human PPP2R1B gene that overlapped the epigenetic markers H3K27Ac and H3K4Me1, commonly found near gene regulatory elements ( C). Consistent with our RT-qPCR data, we found that silencing YAP1 downregulated, while YAP1 overexpression enhanced, the protein expression levels of PPP2CB and PPP2R1B, respectively. ( D and 4E). Together, these data suggest that PPP2CB and PPP2R1B are transcriptional targets of YAP1, which may mediate its inhibitory effects on AMPK signaling.
Because PPP2CB is a catalytic subunit of PP2A, we chose to test its potential role in mediating the effects of YAP1 on AMPK/mTORC1 signaling. First, we silenced PPP2CB using siRNA (siPPP2CB) to test its effect on basal AMPK activation. We found that silencing of endogenous PPP2CB expression was sufficient to induce basal AMPK phosphorylation at Thr172 ( A). Next, we overexpressed YAP1 in the absence or presence of siPPP2CB. Silencing PPP2CB led to partial reversal of the inhibitory effects of YAP1 on AMPK Thr172 phosphorylation ( F and B). This was associated with reduced phosphorylation of mTORC1 activation markers (S6 and 4EBP1) and downregulation of the proliferation marker PCNA.
Previous studies have demonstrated that AMPK and mTORC1 form a bidirectional inhibitory loop, where, in addition to the negative regulatory effects of AMPK on mTORC1 signaling, mTORC1 activation can negatively regulate AMPK via phosphorylation at Ser347, thereby impeding Thr172 phosphorylation in the activation loop. Consistently, we found that YAP1-induced mTORC1 activation correlated with AMPKα phosphorylation at the inhibitory Ser347 site ( F and B). Notably, this was markedly lost after silencing PPP2CB, likely a consequence of mTORC1 inhibition ( F and B). Together, these data identify PPP2CB as a transcriptional target gene of YAP1 and demonstrate a key role for PPP2CB in mediating YAP1 effects on AMPK/mTORC1 signaling in VSMCs.

## YAP1-mediated PPP2CB expression requires TEAD1 expression
YAP1 requires binding to transcription factors, predominantly the TEAD family of transcription factors, to regulate gene expression. , , We previously found that TEAD1 is the most abundant TEAD in HCASMCs, and similar to YAP1, it plays a key role in promoting the proliferation of VSMCs. , Accordingly, we tested the potential role of TEAD1 in YAP1-mediated PPP2CB expression in VSMCs. De novo analysis of TEAD1 ChIP-seq data from the ENCODE project revealed conserved TEAD1 binding peaks across several cell lines, including liver cancer HepG2, lymphoblast K562, and pluripotent stem cell WTC11, within the proximal promoter region of the human PPP2CB gene ( A). These TEAD1 binding peaks aligned perfectly with the identified YAP1 binding peaks, as shown in ( C). Using the HOCOMOCO collection of transcription factor binding models, we identified a TEAD1-binding motif, MCAT element, that overlapped with the TEAD1/YAP1 binding peaks in the human PPP2CB gene proximal promoter region ( A, highlighted in green), and which is conserved across different species ( ). Conversely, TEAD1 ChIP-seq data did not reveal any TEAD1 binding peaks that overlapped with YAP1 binding peaks in the human PPP2R1B gene locus ( ). Together, these observations suggest that TEAD1 may mediate the effects of YAP1 on PPP2CB but not on PPP2R1B gene expression. Consistently, we found that silencing TEAD1 modestly downregulated PPP2CB mRNA and protein expression levels, while TEAD1 overexpression induced them ( B–5E). Conversely, TEAD1 had no effects on PPP2R1B expression. Similar to YAP1, we found that silencing TEAD1 activated basal AMPK activity, while TEAD1 overexpression inhibited it. Together, these data demonstrate that TEAD1 phenocopies the effects of YAP1 on PPP2CB expression and AMPK signaling. 
To directly test the role of TEAD1 in YAP1-mediated PPP2CB expression, we overexpressed YAP1 while simultaneously silencing TEAD1 ( F). Consistent with our prior observations, we found that the overexpression of YAP1 induced basal TEAD1 protein expression. Importantly, we found that silencing of TEAD1 markedly inhibited YAP1-mediated PPP2CB expression and rescued the inhibitory effects of YAP1 on AMPK Thr172 phosphorylation. Furthermore, silencing of TEAD1 partially rescued the effects of YAP1 on mTORC1 activation and PCNA expression. Together, these data demonstrate a key role for TEAD1 in mediating the effects of YAP1 on PPP2CB/AMPK/mTORC1 signaling.
To further examine the transcriptional mechanism by which TEAD1 regulates PPP2CB, we sought to validate the TEAD1 ChIP-seq data ( A) and test whether TEAD1 is enriched at the MCAT element identified in the human PPP2CB promoter in HCASMCs. Accordingly, we designed primer sequences spanning the MCAT element ( ) and performed a ChIP-qPCR assay, using 2 different TEAD1-specific antibodies (Ab#1 and Ab#2) ( G). Compared with the IgG control, we observed significant enrichment of TEAD1 in the promoter region of the human PPP2CB gene in HCASMCs. Fold enrichment varied between ∼13- and 38-fold for the two TEAD1-specific antibodies. The specificity of TEAD1 binding to the human PPP2CB promoter region was further validated by using primers flanking human PPP2CB exon 6 as a negative control. Together, these data identify PPP2CB as a transcriptional target gene of YAP1/TEAD1 and demonstrate a key role for TEAD1 in mediating YAP1 effects on PPP2CB/AMPK/mTORC1 signaling in VSMCs.

## CAMKK2 participates in regulating YAP1-mediated AMPK inactivation in VSMCs
Because silencing PPP2CB partially reversed the effects of YAP1 on AMPK signaling ( F), we argued that the effects of YAP1 on AMPK signaling may also be dependent on an upstream AMPK kinase(s). Although silencing YAP1 per se did not alter the mRNA expression of the 2 major upstream AMPK kinases, LKB1 (encoded by the STK11 gene) , or CAMKK2 in VSMCs ( A), we rationalized that YAP1 may still be regulating LKB1- or CAMKK2-dependent pathways without altering their gene expression. To test this possibility, we first simultaneously silenced YAP1 and LKB1 by using siRNAs and assessed the effects on AMPK Thr172 phosphorylation ( A). We found that siYAP1-induced AMPK phosphorylation was not rescued by silencing LKB1. 
Next, we shifted our focus to CAMKK2. Preliminary experiments were conducted to examine the basal protein expression of CAMKK2 in HCASMCs. Surprisingly, we did not observed clear protein bands for CAMKK2 in HCASMCs ( A). To exclude antibody specificity problems, we used mouse brain tissue lysate, which is rich in CAMKK2 expression, as a positive control. Unlike HCASMCs, we detected a clear band for CAMKK2 at the expected molecular weight of ∼65 kDa in adult mouse brain tissue lysate. Notably, in our RT-qPCR experiments ( A), we observed a much lower abundance of basal CAMKK2 versus STK11 mRNA expression in HCASMCs ( B). Despite the low abundance of CAMKK2 in HCASMCs, we argued that it may still play a role in siYAP1-mediated AMPK phosphorylation. Accordingly, we silenced YAP1 while simultaneously silencing CAMKK2 using siRNA (siCAMKK2). To validate the successful knockdown of CAMKK2, we relied on measuring the mRNA transcript levels ( B). To our surprise, despite the low basal abundance levels, we found that siCAMKK2 markedly abolished the effects of siYAP1 on AMPK activation ( C). Similar to the observed effects of siAMPKα1 ( C), siCAMKK2 partially rescued the inhibitory effects of siYAP1 on mTORC1 signaling ( C and ). This was associated with marked reversal of the inhibitory effects of siYAP1 on phosphorylation of AMPKα at Ser347 (the inhibitory site) ( ). Together, these data demonstrate that CAMKK2 plays a key role in mediating the effects of YAP1 on AMPK/mTORC1 signaling.
Previous studies have demonstrated that CAMKK2 can promote the phosphorylation of AKT at Thr308 in an AMPK-independent manner. Consistently, we found that silencing CAMKK2 reduced siYAP1-induced AKT phosphorylation ( ). These findings suggest that siYAP1-mediated AKT Thr308 phosphorylation is mediated, at least in part, by CAMKK2 signaling.
Next, we sought to examine how YAP1 might influence CAMKK2 signaling in VSMCs. YAP1 deficiency has been reported to induce apoptosis in multiple systems, , , a process that might result in elevated intracellular calcium levels. Because CAMKK2 is activated by increased intracellular calcium levels, we hypothesized that siYAP1 might induce apoptosis in VSMCs to activate CAMKK2/AMPK signaling. However, silencing YAP1 failed to induce PARP cleavage or alter the phosphorylation levels of Ataxia-Telangiectasia mutated (ATM) protein, a marker of DNA damage , ( D and ). Together, these results suggest that YAP1 influences CAMKK2 activity through mechanisms distinct from apoptosis or DNA damage.

## Discussion
Previous studies, from our group and others, have demonstrated that YAP1 is induced in response to vascular injury in the vascular wall, where it plays a key role in promoting VSMC phenotypic switching and neointima formation. , , , YAP1 inhibition in the vascular wall has been reported to exhibit a multitude of favorable pleiotropic effects, including attenuation of arterial injury-induced neointimal hyperplasia, amelioration of endothelial dysfunction, , reduction of vascular stiffness, improvement of pulmonary hypertension, and attenuation of atherosclerosis. , , Together, these observations establish YAP1 as a promising molecular target in a multitude of vascular wall diseases.
With regard to the molecular mechanisms mediating YAP1 effects in promoting VSMC proliferation and neointima formation, we have previously demonstrated that YAP1 does not regulate the canonical targets, CCN1 or MYC, in VSMCs, suggesting that a specific transcriptomic signature mediates YAP1 effects in VSMCs. On the other hand, we demonstrated that the YAP1/TEAD1 complex directly binds to the PDGFRβ promoter, boosting its transcription. Elevated PDGFRβ levels amplify downstream PDGF-BB proliferative signaling, fueling VSMC cell cycle entry and proliferation. Furthermore, YAP1 overexpression in VSMCs has been reported to diminish the assembly of the myocardin/SRF complex at CArG-box promoters, leading to downregulation of contractile markers and dedifferentiation of VSMCs. The current study extends these earlier observations and identifies a critical mechanism by which YAP1 promotes VSMC proliferation, where YAP1 inhibits AMPK signaling to activate mTORC1-dependent VSMC proliferation. Mechanistically, we identify two mechanisms by which YAP1 regulates AMPK. YAP1/TEAD1 complex directly binds to the promoter of PPP2CB, a catalytic subunit of PP2A, enhancing its transcription. Induced PPP2CB expression dephosphorylates AMPK at Thr172, leading to its inhibition. Furthermore, we identify CAMKK2, a principal upstream AMPK kinase, as another crucial mediator of YAP1-mediated changes in AMPK/mTORC1 signaling.
mTORC1 is a central hub that integrates numerous upstream signaling cues to promote VSMC growth, proliferation, and protein synthesis. , , mTORC1 is activated by growth factors, angiotensin II, inflammatory cytokines, , and mechanical stretch/integrin signaling to drive vascular remodeling. , , mTORC1 inhibitors are very effective in blocking VSMC proliferation and migration , while promoting VSMC differentiation. Accordingly, mTORC1 inhibitors, such as rapamycin and its derivatives, are widely utilized in the clinic in drug-eluting stents to limit post-angioplasty restenosis. Our study suggests that YAP1 inhibitors may serve as effective alternatives to mTORC1 inhibitors in drug-eluting stents, and as discussed above, they may exert additional pleiotropic, favorable effects in the vessel wall beyond mTORC1 inhibition. An alternative potential strategy to utilizing YAP1 inhibitors in drug-eluting stents would be to use AMPK isoform-specific activators. Given that AMPKα1 is the predominant catalytic subunit in VSMCs, using AMPKα1 isoform-specific activators, such as 5-(5-hydroxyl-isoxazol-3-yl)-furan-2-phosphonic acid (compound 2, C2), might be a promising therapeutic strategy. Additionally, C2 protects AMPK phosphorylated at Thr172 from phosphatase-mediated dephosphorylation. , 
YAP1 has been linked to mTORC1 activation in non-vascular cells via activation of AKT and upregulation of amino acid transporters. , Consistently, we report here that YAP1 is both required and sufficient to activate mTORC1 signaling in VSMCs and that mTORC1 is crucial in mediating YAP1-dependent VSMC proliferation. However, in contrast to other systems, mTORC1 activation by YAP1 in HCASMCs seems to occur independently of AKT or the amino acid transporters SLC1A5 and SLC7A5. Conversely, we demonstrate that silencing YAP1 triggers the activation of AMPK signaling, a key negative regulator of mTORC1, , while YAP1 overexpression suppresses it. We also found that AMPK partly mediates the effects of YAP1 on mTORC1 signaling in VSMCs. Together, these observations suggest that YAP1 activation of mTORC1 signaling is an evolutionarily conserved biological process that is maintained across various systems. However, YAP1 may utilize different mechanisms to activate mTORC1 in a context-dependent manner.
AMPK has been documented as a key negative regulator of YAP1 activity, mediating its effect through both direct and indirect LATS kinase-dependent phosphorylation of YAP1 across multiple cell types. , Our data demonstrate the presence of a bidirectional inhibitory loop where YAP1, in turn, acts as an upstream negative regulator of AMPK activity. Our findings suggest that YAP1 may utilize this pathway to reinforce its own activity and oncogenic potential, a hypothesis that warrants further investigation. It is worth noting that both negative , and positive effects of YAP1 on AMPK signaling have been documented in non-vascular cells. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms linking these two signaling components remain largely undefined. Using an unbiased de novo analysis of publicly available ChIP-seq data and targeted RT-qPCR/western blot analyses, we identify PPP2CB and PPP2R1B, catalytic and regulatory subunits of the protein phosphatase PP2A, as transcriptional target genes of YAP1. Genetic depletion of PPP2CB assays demonstrates a critical role for PPP2CB in mediating the negative effects of YAP1 on AMPK activation. It is noteworthy that silencing PPP2CB led to only a partial reversal of YAP1-induced changes in AMPK/mTORC1 signaling, which is likely because of the incomplete knockdown of the protein ( F and B).
We identify TEAD1 as a key transcription factor that mediates YAP1 induction of PPP2CB expression and AMPK inhibition. Intriguingly, TEAD1 does not regulate PPP2R1B expression in VSMCs, suggesting that YAP1 may interact with other transcription factors to regulate PPP2R1B expression. While TEAD proteins are the main transcription factors that mediate YAP1 functions in most systems, , YAP1 has been reported to interact with other transcription factors, such as SRF, SMADs, and NOTCH, to mediate its transcriptomic effects. 
In addition to being regulated by protein phosphatases, AMPK is regulated by at least two key upstream kinases, LKB1 and CAMKK2, which phosphorylate AMPK at the Thr172 residue in its activation loop. , , Our study implicates CAMKK2, but not LKB1, in siYAP1-mediated AMPK activation. These observations are consistent with previous reports that AMPK complexes containing the α1 catalytic subunit, as is the case in VSMCs, are better substrates for CAMKK2 versus LKB1. , Morevoer, CAMKK2 is typically activated in response to enhanced calcium signaling ; these observations suggest that YAP1 may influence calcium signaling in VSMCs to alter CAMKK2 activity. Notably, recent reports have demonstrated that YAP1 may influence calcium homeostasis in other cellular contexts by regulating calcium-handling proteins, such as SERCA2a and RyR2. Future studies are warranted to determine whether YAP1 impacts calcium signaling, and subsequently, CAMKK2 activity, in VSMCs.
Because we found that YAP1 depletion in VSMCs leads to AKT activation, we also sought to examine the potential underlying molecular mechanisms involved. Conditions where mTORC1 is inhibited are commonly associated with enhanced AKT Thr308 phosphorylation, because of the release of the negative feedback inhibition by mTORC1 on PI3K/AKT signaling. Furthermore, previous reports have demonstrated that AMPK can indirectly phosphorylate AKT at Thr308 via a ubiquitin ligase, whereas CAMKK2 can directly phosphorylate AKT at this residue. , , Consistently, we found that silencing either AMPKα1 or CAMKK2 inhibited the loss of YAP1 effects on AKT Thr308 phosphorylation. However, it remains unclear whether these effects are mediated by the effects of AMPK/CAMKK2 on AKT or because of the release of the negative feedback inhibition by mTORC1 on PI3K/AKT signaling.
Notably, YAP1 has a paralogous gene, called TAZ, which shares 46% amino acid identity with YAP1. Intriguingly, YAP1 and TAZ may exert overlapping or distinct functions in a cell- and context-dependent manner. In some scenarios, YAP1 and TAZ may even have opposite effects on cell function. , In this study, we observed that silencing of endogenous YAP1 increased, whereas YAP1 overexpression reduced, TAZ protein expression in VSMCs, suggesting a potential compensatory mechanism. However, under these experimental conditions, TAZ does not seem to be sufficient to compensate for the loss of YAP1 effects on PPP2CB/AMPK/mTORC1 signaling or VSMC proliferation.
In summary, the results of this study demonstrate a key molecular mechanism by which YAP1 promotes VSMC proliferation. YAP1 inhibits AMPK signaling to activate mTORC1-dependent VSMC proliferation. Mechanistically, we identify two mechanisms by which YAP1 regulates AMPK. YAP1/TEAD1 complex directly binds to the promoter of PPP2CB, a catalytic subunit of PP2A, enhancing its transcription. Induced PPP2CB expression dephosphorylates AMPK, leading to its inhibition. Furthermore, we identify CAMKK2, a principal upstream AMPK kinase, as another crucial mediator of YAP1-mediated changes in AMPK/mTORC1 signaling.

## Limitations of the study
As the findings from the current work are based on cell culture studies in HCASMCs, future in vivo studies are warranted to examine whether YAP1 regulates AMPK/mTORC1 signaling in vivo. Furthermore, because the efficacy of YAP1 inhibitors in combating multiple cancer types is being tested through ongoing clinical trials, there is a pressing need to explore and delineate the potential effects and underlying molecular mechanisms of YAP1 in different physiological systems. Given the widespread expression and multitude of cellular processes regulated by AMPK and mTORC1, it would be intriguing to examine whether YAP1 similarly regulates AMPK/mTORC1 signaling in other systems, which will likely have broader implications beyond their described roles in VSMCs.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Requests for further information and resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Islam Osman (islam.osman@utoledo.edu).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new, unique reagents.

## Data and code availability

•Data: This paper analyzes ChIP-seq datasets from existing, publicly available data, accessible at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSM1696207 (for YAP1 in IMR90 cell line), https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSM1614029 (for YAP1 in MDA-MB-231 cell line), https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSM1515739 (for YAP1 in SF268 cell line), https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE96195 (for TEAD1 in HepG2 cell line), https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE170823 (for TEAD1 in K562 cell line), https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE231223 (for TEAD1 in WTC11 cell line), and https://hocomoco14.autosome.org/motif/TEAD1.H14CORE.0.PSM.A#mainInfo (for TEAD1-binding motif)]. Accession numbers are listed in the . All data reported in this paper will be shared by the upon request.
•Code: This paper does not report original code.
•Additional information: Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon reasonable request.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the 10.13039/100000050National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (R00 HL153896 to I.O.). Funding for open access was provided by the 10.13039/100000050National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. We thank Dr. Jiliang Zhou at LSU Health Shreveport for sharing the GFP, YAP1, and TEAD1 adenoviruses. We also thank the University of Toledo’s Integrated Core Facilities, particularly the Advanced Microscopy & Imaging Center, for providing access to IncuCyte S3 and Cytation 5 for cell imaging. We extend our sincere thanks to Dr. Andrea Kalinoski and Dr. David Weaver for their guidance on the use of these instruments and the required software, which supported imaging for the proliferation assays performed in this study.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, I.O.; validation, I.O. and S.K.; methodology, experimental design, and formal analysis, S.K.; investigation, S.K., J.S., and A.G.d.O.; writing – original draft, S.K.; writing – review & editing, I.O., J.S., and A.G.d.O.; funding acquisition, I.O.; resources, I.O.; supervision, I.O.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Primary cell culture
Human coronary artery smooth muscle cells (HCASMCs, cat. #: C-017-5C; Lot: 2206118), human vascular smooth muscle cell basal medium (cat. #: M231500), smooth muscle growth supplement (SMGS, cat. #: S00725), and rapamycin (cat. #: PHZ1235) were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Carlsbad, CA). HCASMCs were obtained from a 17-year-old male donor, and the supplier verified that the cells were mycoplasma-free using a direct culture test. The authenticity of HCASMCs was confirmed by the supplier and further validated by the robust expression of smooth muscle cell-specific differentiation markers. HCASMCs (passages 3–5) were cultured in VSMC basal medium supplemented with SMGS and antibiotic/antimycotic solution (complete media) and maintained under controlled conditions at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2. Upon SMGS supplementation, the final concentrations of key components are as follows: fetal bovine serum (FBS, 5%), human epidermal growth factor (EGF, 0.5 ng/mL), human basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF, 2 ng/mL), recombinant human insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1, 0.01 μg/mL), heparin (5 ng/mL), and bovine serum albumin (BSA, 0.2 μg/mL). In select experiments, to induce VSMC quiescence, cells were switched from complete media to serum-free media devoid of SMGS for a minimum of 2 days before treatments.

## Mice
Male C57BL/6J mice, 12 to 20 weeks of age, were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (cat. #: 000664) and maintained as an in-house breeding colony. Mice were housed on a standard chow diet with ad libitum access to food and water and kept on a 12:12-h light/dark cycle. Mice were euthanized by CO2 inhalation followed by thoracotomy. All procedures were conducted in accordance with and received approval from the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the University of Toledo Health Science Campus.

## Method details

## Small interfering (siRNA) transfection
Scrambled control siRNA duplex (cat. #: 4390843), human YAP1 siRNA duplex (cat. #: s20367), human PRKAA1 (AMPKα1) siRNA duplex (cat. #: s100), human PPP2CB siRNA duplex (cat. #: s10960), human STK11 (LKB1) siRNA duplex (cat. #: s13579), human CAMKK2 siRNA duplex (cat. #: s223143), and human TEAD1 siRNA duplex (cat. #: s13961) were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific. The siRNA duplex sequences are provided in the key resource table. siRNA delivery into HCASMCs was performed via electroporation using the Invitrogen Neon transfection system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), following the manufacturer’s protocol as previously described. , , 

## Adenoviral vector construction and cell transduction
Adenoviral vectors encoding YAP1 or TEAD1 were generated as previously described. , These vectors feature an independent cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter-driven transcription cassette for green fluorescent protein (GFP), enabling real-time visualization of transduction efficiency. The adenovirus expressing GFP alone was used as the control.

## Water-soluble tetrazolium-1 (WST-1) cell viability assay
WST-1 cell viability assay was conducted according to the manufacturer’s instructions as previously described. , Briefly, HCASMCs were uniformly seeded in 96-well plates in complete medium, with the respective treatments, as described in the respective figure legends. Post-treatment, cells were incubated with the WST-1 reagent (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, cat. #: 5015944001; 10 μL/100 μL of media) for 2 h at 37 °C. Afterward, the absorbance was measured at 450 nm using a microplate reader (BioTek Epoch2, Agilent Technologies), as a measure of cell viability.

## CyQUANT direct cell proliferation assay
Cell count analysis was performed using the CyQUANT direct cell proliferation assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: C35011), following the manufacturer’s instructions as previously described. Briefly, HCASMCs were plated uniformly into 96-well plates in complete medium, with the respective treatments, as described in the respective figure legends, followed by incubation with 10X CyQUANT direct detection reagent (10 μL/100 μL of media) for 1 h at 37°C. Post-incubation, green-fluorescent dye-stained nuclei were imaged using the IncuCyte S3 Live-cell analysis system (Sartorius, Ann Arbor, MI) using the green fluorescence filter. Images were analyzed to determine the cell count per field.

## 5-Ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (EdU) incorporation assay
EdU incorporation assay was performed using the Click-iT EdU imaging kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: C10086) following the manufacturer’s instructions as previously described. , , Briefly, HCASMCs were equally plated onto 96-well plates in complete medium and treated as described in the respective figure legends, followed by 24 h incubation with EdU (10 μM). EdU-positive nuclei were stained with an Alexa Fluor 594 dye following the manufacturer’s instructions. DAPI (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: P36941) was used to co-stain cell nuclei. Cells were imaged using a BioTek Cytation 5 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) microscope and analyzed to quantify EdU-positive cells per field.

## Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis
Total RNA was isolated from HCASMCs using TRIzol reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: 10296028). RNA quantification and purity assessment (A260/A280) were performed using a NanoDrop One spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For cDNA synthesis, 1 μg of RNA per sample was reverse transcribed using the High-Capacity cDNA reverse transcription kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: 4368814). The resulting cDNA was used to perform qRT-PCR using PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. # A25742) and the CFX96 Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) employing the following cycling conditions: (i) 2 min at 50 °C, then 10 min at 95 °C (1 cycle), and (ii) 15 s at 95°C, then 1 min at 60 °C (40 cycles). qRT-PCR was conducted using gene-specific primers, as outlined in . Samples were run in duplicate, with each experiment repeated at least three times. The comparative threshold cycle method (2−ΔΔCT method) was used to analyze the relative gene expression, with β2-microglobulin (β2M) serving as the internal control gene for CT value normalization. Primer specificity was assessed by visual inspection of melting curves to ensure that a single peak was present for each primer pair. Melting curves were generated by increasing the temperature from 65 °C to 95 °C in 0.5°C increments at 10-s intervals. To confirm the amplicon size of PCR products, at the end of the experiment, PCR products were analyzed using standard agarose gel electrophoresis as previously described. 

## Protein extraction and western blotting
HCASMCs or C57BL/6J male mouse brain tissues were lysed using ice-cold RIPA lysis buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: 89901) supplemented with Halt protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: 78441). Lysates were centrifuged, and the supernatant was collected and used to determine protein concentrations using a standard BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: 23227). Protein samples were mixed with 4x Laemmli sample buffer (Bio-Rad, cat. #: 1610747) in a 3:1 ratio and heated at 95 °C for 5 min. Equal amounts of protein (5–10 μg/lane) were resolved on 7.5%, 10%, or 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel and subsequently transferred onto a PVDF membrane (Bio-Rad, cat. #: 1620177). After blocking with 5% non-fat milk, the membranes were probed with the corresponding primary antibodies. Primary antibodies used in this study were as follows: YAP1 (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. #: WH0010413M1, 1:1000), p-p70S6KT389 (Cell signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, cat. #: 9234, rabbit, 1:1000), p70S6K (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 2708, rabbit, 1:1000), pS6S235/236 (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 4858, rabbit, 1:1000), S6 (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 2217, rabbit, 1:1000), p4EBP1T37/46 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: PA5-17728, rabbit, 1:1000), Cyclin D1 (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 2978, rabbit, 1:1000), PCNA (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: MA511358, mouse, 1:1000), p27Kip1 (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 3686, rabbit, 1:1000), TAZ (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 72804, rabbit, 1:1000), pAKTT308 (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 2965, rabbit, 1:1000), AKT (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 4691, rabbit, 1:1000), SLC1A5 (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 5345, rabbit, 1:1000), SLC7A5 (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 5347, rabbit, 1:1000), pAMPKαT172 (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 2535, rabbit, 1:1000), pAMPKαS347/345 (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 98840, rabbit, 1:1000), AMPKα1 (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 5832, rabbit, 1:1000), pACCS79 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: PA5-17725, rabbit, 1:1000), pRaptorS792 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: PA5-17116, rabbit, 1:1000), Raptor (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: 42–4000, rabbit, 1:1000), PPP2CB (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: PA5-102700, rabbit, 1:1000), PPP2R1B (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: PA5-141034, rabbit, 1:1000), TEAD1 (Abcam, Waltham, MA, cat. #: ab133533, rabbit, 1:1000), LKB1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: AHO1392, mouse, 1:1000), CAMKK2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: MA5-37515, mouse, 1:1000), PARP (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 9542, rabbit, 1:1000), pATMS1981 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. #: MA5-32751, rabbit, 1:1000), Vinculin (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. #: V4505, mouse, 1:5000), HSP90 (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 4874, rabbit, 1:1000), and β-Actin (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 3700, mouse, 1:1000). Following incubation with primary antibodies, PVDF membranes were washed 3x with TBST and incubated with the appropriate Horseradish Peroxidase (HRP)-linked secondary antibody. Secondary antibodies used in this study include Anti-rabbit IgG (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 7074, 1:2000) and Anti-mouse IgG (Cell signaling Technology, cat. #: 7076, 1:2000). After secondary antibody incubation, membranes were washed 3x with TBST, then incubated with a chemiluminescent HRP substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and imaged using the Amersham ImageQuant 800 Western blot imaging system (Cytiva, Wilmington, DE). HSP90, Vinculin, or β-Actin were used as internal controls. The protein bands shown in the corresponding figures are representative of at least three independent experiments.

## Quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay
ChIP-qPCR assays were conducted following the manufacturer’s protocol (Active Motif, Carlsbad, CA) as previously described. , Briefly, after 72 h of adenovirus-mediated TEAD1 transduction, HCASMCs were washed and fixed with formaldehyde, followed by chromatin immunoprecipitation using two distinct anti-TEAD1 antibodies (Abcam, cat. #: ab133533, Ab#1; or BD Biosciences, cat. #: 610923, Ab#2), or rabbit IgG control (Cell signaling Technology, Cat. #: 2729). Equal amounts of chromatin were used for immunoprecipitation with the anti-TEAD1 or IgG control antibodies. The precipitated genomic DNA was purified and then amplified by qPCR. The primers used for the quantitative evaluation of TEAD1 enrichment at the human PPP2CB promoter MCAT region and exon 6 regions are provided in . Data were expressed as relative binding using the 2−ΔΔCT method, with IgG control samples set to 1.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
All data are presented as means ± standard error of the mean (SEM) from at least three independent experiments. Whenever possible, the investigator responsible for data analysis was blinded to the experimental groups. For comparisons involving more than two groups, statistical analysis was performed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by Tukey’s post-hoc analysis. For data involving two groups only, an unpaired two-tailed t test was used for samples exhibiting a normal distribution (with normality assessed using the Shapiro-Wilk test). If the data did not meet normality assumptions, the unpaired non-parametric Mann-Whitney test was applied. All statistical analyses were conducted using GraphPad Prism 10.1.2 software, and a p-value <0.05 was considered statistically significant.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S6, Tables S1 and S2, and Data S1

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2026.114996.