3686acsomegaACS OmegaACS OmegaAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC1072029710720297107202973810791910.1021/acsomega.3c06409Recent Advances in Design and Application of Nanomaterials-Based
Colorimetric Biosensors for Agri-food Safety Analysis
ZhouJiaojiao LiuYuantao DuXiaoping GuiYue HeJiangling XieFang CaiJie †National
R&D Center for Se-Rich Agricultural Products Processing, Hubei
Engineering Research Center for Deep Processing of Green Se-Rich Agricultural
Products, School of Modern Industry for Selenium Science and Engineering, Wuhan Polytechnic University, Wuhan 430023, China‡Key
Laboratory for Deep Processing of Major Grain and Oil, Ministry of
Education, Hubei Key Laboratory for Processing and Transformation
of Agricultural Products, Wuhan Polytechnic
University, Wuhan 430023, China§Ankang
R&D Center for Se-enriched Products, Key Laboratory of Se-enriched
Products Development and Quality Control, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Ankang Shaanxi 725000, China*caijievip@whpu.edu.cn (J.C.).
281120238494634646346–4636115122023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 A colorimetric sensor
detects an analyte by utilizing the optical
properties of the sensor unit, such as absorption or reflection, to
generate a structural color that serves as the output signal to detect
an analyte. Detecting the refractive index of an analyte by recording
the color change of the sensor structure on its surface has several
advantages, including simple operation, low cost, suitability for
onsite analysis, and real-time detection. Colorimetric sensors have
drawn much attention owing to their rapidity, simplicity, high sensitivity
and selectivity. This Review discusses the use of colorimetric sensors
in the food industry, including their applications for detecting food
contaminants. The Review also provides insight into the scope of future
research in this area.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Aug 28; Accepted 2023 Nov 3; Revised 2023 Oct 12; Collection date 2023 Dec 12.

1.

## Introduction
According to a joint report
released in 2019 by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the World Health Organization
(WHO), around 600 million people suffer from foodborne illnesses each
year as a result of consuming unsafe foods. Food safety issues are a global concern and can occur at various
stages in food processing, production, transportation, sale, and storage. There are many methods used for food safety testing,
such as gas chromatography (GC), high
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), mass spectrometry (MS), and polymerase
chain reaction (PCR). The major disadvantages
of above methods include complex pretreatment procedures, trained
personnel, expensive instruments, and nonportability of analysis. , Nowadays, nanotechnology is rapidly developed in the food industry,
especially nanosensors for agri-food safety detection. In the past
decade, it has become a promising scientific field with the potential
to answer the aforementioned questions. Innovation in functional materials
has been driven by nanotechnology. Agriculture is the most important
and stable sector of the country as it produces and provides raw materials
such as food by growing plants and raising livestock. Nanomaterial-based methods have gained increased attention
as alternatives to traditional methods for agri-food safety analysis. Biosensors are analytical devices based on receptors
in detection and sensors used for response measurements, which have
gained increasing attention due to their effective, sensitive, selective,
fast, and low-cost benefits. In particular,
colorimetric biosensors are unique owing to their low cost, simplicity,
rapidity, and naked-eye observation ability. Various colorimetric methods have been developed for food safety
or quality analysis. − Many colorimetric detection kits have been also successfully
commercialized, including ELISA kits for food safety application and
personal glucose meters. , 
The basic principle
of a colorimetric biosensor is to record the
color change in the system induced by the analyte. Colorimetric biosensors
have the advantage of allowing for preliminary judgments on the measured
object through color changes with the naked eye. Compared with other detection methods, colorimetric method
has many advantages, such as low cost, simplicity, and portability. The sample can be solid or opaque liquid, which
is not affected by reference materials that may change over time.
This method also plays an important role in the detection of some
special samples (such as harmful byproducts generated in industrial
production processes). For example, Thornton et al. used nanofibers
for the colorimetric detection of hydrochloric acid and studied the
reusability of the fibers. After the initial doping level was reduced,
the detection limit remained consistent, and after 15 repetitions,
complete dedoping was observed. It is expected that the detection
limit will not be further reduced in additional repeated use, and
it is expected to have a virtuous cycle in practical applications
for remote detection. Herein, we describe
the signal amplification strategies used in colorimetric biosensors
( ). The recent
developments in this area are summarized, including the colorimetric
detection of mycotoxins, heavy metals, antibiotics, pesticide residues,
foodborne pathogens, and other illegal additives. Finally, the challenges
and perspectives of this area are presented. This study may serve
as a useful reference for the rational design of nanomaterials, thereby
expanding their applications in agri-food safety analysis.
 
2.

## Signal Amplification Strategy
2.1.

## DNA Amplification
Methods
The introduction
of signal amplification technology is indispensable for improving
the sensitivity of colorimetric analysis and achieving sensitive detection.
The incorporation of signal amplification technology into colorimetric
biosensors has significantly promoted the development of food safety
analysis techniques. These methods include nonenzymatic and enzyme-assisted
amplification techniques.
Hybridization chain reaction (HCR)
is an isothermal, nonenzymatic, DNA self-assembly technique for the
template-free amplification of DNA sequences. Specifically, the recognition of a target initiates the cross-opening
of DNA hairpins, leading to the formation of polymeric DNA nanowires.
In general, HCR exhibits linear growth in the presence of an initiator.
Ma et al. used HCR to amplify the signal induced by the specific binding
between a target and an aptamer. Under
optimized conditions, good analytical performance was achieved with
a linear range of 0.1–750 μM. Then, the clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/Cas system was used
to recognize the amplified products. Finally, the target was converted
to amplified fluorescent signals that can be detected by a smartphone.
Moreover, nonlinear HCR systems, including branched and dendritic
HCR systems, have been developed using complex monomers. Nonlinear
HCR systems facilitate the formation of branched DNA nanostructures
to achieve sensitive and selective detection. , Various complex DNA nanostructures, such as ladder- and ring-like
DNA nanostructures and DNA hydrogels, have also been reported via the ingenious HCR.
Catalytic hairpin assembly (CHA) is an isothermal, enzyme-free
amplification process for detecting multiple targets. Specifically,
a pair of metastable hairpin DNA probes is activated by a single-stranded
target, and a number of hybrid double strands are cyclically assembled
through a toehold-mediated strand replacement reaction, thus achieving
signal amplification through producing multiple outputs from a single
input in a cyclic format. Lv et al. established
an enzyme-free double amplification method for tetracycline measurement
in milk. This sensor system combined
DNAzyme cleavage with CHA. The addition of tetracycline caused the
release of DNA1 from the aptamer-DNA1 complex because of the specific
interaction between tetracycline and the aptamer. The released DNA1
then hybridized with DNA2, activating the catalytic activity of the
DNAzyme. This led to the cleavage of the substrate and the generation
of new single-stranded DNA, which subsequently triggered the CHA reaction
between H1 and H2. Consequently, G-quadruplex-heme DNAzyme was produced
as a colorimetric signal readout. Under optimal conditions, within
a dynamic range from 1 pM to 10 nM, there is a linear correlation
between the absorption intensity and the logarithm of tetracycline
concentration. The assay presents a detection limit of 0.89 pM. This
method has high selectivity for tetracycline detection in milk samples.
Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) can amplify the signal
of the input template in a short time, eliminating the need for highly
complex thermal cycle equipment. All strand replacement reactions
occur under isothermal conditions with simple operation, high specificity,
and easy product detection. To accelerate
the detection process, Dangtip et al. developed a colorimetric method
based on LAMP using the pH indicator xylenol orange (XO). The pH range of XO is suitable for the instantaneous
color change of the pH decline in positive LAMP reactions. This method
reduced the time required for conventional nucleic acid amplification
and downstream confirmation and could eventually be redesigned to
detect other aquatic and zoonotic pathogens. Aubret et al. developed
an aptasensor that incorporated the specificity of aptamers and amplification
of LAMP. Two types of biomarkers, a nucleic
acid target and thrombin, were chosen as model analytes. First, aptamer-coated
magnetic beads were used to capture the targets, leading to the formation
of a sandwich complex after the addition of the second aptamer. The
second aptamer was integrated into a large oligonucleotide dumbbell
sequence designed for LAMP detection. After rinsing steps, isothermal
dumbbell index amplification was used to detect targets with detection
limits of approximately 1 pM for oligonucleotides and 100 pM for thrombin,
respectively ( B). Therefore, LAMP is promising for improving the detection efficiency
of trace targets.
 Rolling circle amplification (RCA) is an isothermal amplification
process that involves a cyclic DNA template and a DNA polymerase used
to lengthen DNA strands in linear or hyperbranched modes. Zhang et al. developed a dual-sensitivity smartphone
colorimetric system based on an RCA coil for gathering gold tetrahedra.
Initiated by complementary DNA, a large amount of ssDNA was generated,
which amplified the reaction signal. Simultaneously, the gold tetrahedra
gathered more gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) to amplify the signal. By
selecting aptamers with strong binding affinity, this method achieved
a detection limit of 0.8 pM for creatine kinase isoenzyme detection.
The amplification strategy using rolling circle amplification was
successfully used for the detection of creatine kinase isoenzymes,
demonstrating its potential for application in food safety analysis
( E). 
Recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA)
is an isothermal amplification
method carried out at 37–42 °C, which does not require
complex laboratory equipment, and is considered to be a fast and sensitive
technique for target detection. Li et
al. established a colorimetric method for Salmonella measurement using RPA. The minimum
detection concentration for this method is 5 × 103 colony forming units/mL (cfu/mL), which is are much lower than that
of ELISA (105 ∼ 107 cfu/mL). Specifically,
invA from Salmonella genomic DNA was isothermally
amplified to generate double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) amplicons, which
were directly quantified using a photosensitization colorimetric assay.
This method can be used to rapidly and inexpensively detect Salmonella spp ( D).
Exponential amplification reaction (EXPAR)
exponentially synthesizes
short oligonucleotides to act as primers, which is characterized by its simplicity, ultrahigh sensitivity,
and short reaction time. In the EXPAR assay, a primer hybridizes with
a template to generate double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), which can be extended
by DNA polymerase. Subsequently, nicking enzyme cleaves the dsDNA
to generate 3′-OH ends, which serve as a primer to activate
the next cycle. Notably, DNA polymerases and nicking endonucleases
may induce nonspecific amplification, leading to false-positive results
( F). 
Nicking enzyme amplification reaction
(NEAR) is another commonly
isothermal amplification method for the short oligonucleotides, which
exploits a DNA polymerase and nicking endonuclease to rapidly produce
and release a desired sequence because of an insufficiently stable
duplex ( G). , The sequence is then regenerated and undergoes another round of
amplification, resulting in the linear amplification of short oligonucleotides.
NEAR is especially suitable for point-of-care (POC) testing due to
its operation at a constant temperature and avoiding specialized instrumentation.
A comparison of the different amplification methods is demonstrated
in . All these
methods exhibit high amplification efficiency; however, they are still
being optimized for practical applications.
 
2.2.

## Enzyme-Assisted Amplification
Strategy
DNAzymes are single-stranded DNA catalysts that
catalyze various
reactions, including the cleavage and ligation of both RNA and DNA. DNAzymes consist of binding and catalytic sites. Owing to their excellent properties, DNAzymes
have a wide range of analytical applications due to their high stability,
low cost, and easy preparation. For example, Pan et al. proposed a
versatile biosensor for mycotoxin assays based on CHA and DNAzyme-cascaded
hydrolysis reaction. The addition of
mycotoxin induced the release of trigger DNA from the aptamer-trigger
DNA duplex. The trigger DNA then initiated the CHA, yielding abundant
partial duplexes with toeholds, which were used for the assembly of
DNAzyme-cascaded hydrolysis reactions. In the presence of Mg2+, the substrate strand was cleaved into two fragments, accompanied
by a fluorescence signal change for detection.
Nanozymes are
artificial nanomaterial-based enzymes. Nanozymes are widely used for signal amplification in biosensors
because they effectively mimic the catalytic sites of natural enzymes.
Based on the inhibitory effect of glyphosate on the peroxidase-like
activity of porous Co3O4 nanoplates, Luo et
al. developed a nanozyme for the colorimetric detection of glyphosate. Qualitative detection of glyphosate was achieved
by observing the color change of the nanozyme-based system. Similarly,
Wu et al. proposed a MnO2 nanozyme-mediated CRISPR-Cas12a
system for SARS-CoV-2 detection. MnO2 nanorods linked to magnetic beads via an ssDNA linker were
used as oxidase-mimicking nanozymes. Color variation occurred when
Cas12a was activated by SARS-CoV-2 and indiscriminately cleaved the
ssDNA linker.
Natural enzymes, such as horseradish peroxidase
(HRP), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), acetylcholinesterase (AChE), glucose oxidase (GOx), superoxide
dismutase
(SOD), and laccase have also been used for signal amplification. Wang et al.
prepared a mesoporous core–shell palladium@platinum (Pd@Pt)
nanozyme and Pd@Pt-HRP complex (HRP coupled with Pd@Pt nanozymes)
as signal amplifiers in a Staphylococcus aureus colorimetric immunoassay. Consequently,
the Pd@Pt-HRP probe exhibited remarkable peroxidase-like catalytic
activity, leading to high sensitivity. Due to the expansion of publications,
this Review only outlines representative examples.

2.3.

## Nanomaterial-Assisted Amplification Strategy
Nanomaterials,
including various nanostructured materials, have
been widely used to develop biosensors. The introduction of nanomaterials into biosensors can amplify signals,
thereby overcoming the limitations of classical analytical methods
and meeting the need to detect trace amounts of various analytes. 
Carbon-based nanomaterials are one of
the most representative materials, including carbon nanotubes (CNTs),
graphene oxide (GO), and carbon quantum dots (CQDs) CNTs are graphite
sheets composed of numerous carbon atoms. Owing to their unique structural
characteristics, they have a high surface area and aspect ratio and
are ideal carriers for multiple labels. Wang et al. synthesized a composite material composed of ZnFe2O4 nanomaterials, CNTs, and glucose oxidase, which
was used for glucose detection. After
addition, glucose was oxidized by glucose oxidase, and the intermediate
product H2O2 further oxidized the substrate
of 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) to form a blue
product. Graphene is a single-carbon layer of graphite with a simple
atomic structure, and GO is a commonly studied derivative of graphene
that contains oxygen functional groups on its surface. Li et al. developed a novel GO composite probe
for multistage signal amplification to improve detection sensitivity. The GO composite probe was constructed through
layer-by-layer assembly and integrated into an indirect competitive
ELISA. The detection limit was 0.02 ng/mL for okadaic acid, which
was 100-fold lower than that of conventional iELISA. CQDs are a class
of carbon nanomaterials with advantages such as low toxicity, environmental
protection, low cost, light stability, good charge transfer, and enhanced
electronic conductivity. Yue et al. designed
a two-component colorimetric probe based on CQDs and o-phenylenediamine for the detection of Cu2+. The photoelectrons generated by the CQDs were
captured by the oxygen solution, leading to the generation of superoxide
free radicals. The colorless o-phenylenediamine was
oxidized by superoxide free radicals to form yellow oxidation products.
This sensor system was applied to analyze Cu2+ in seawater
and tap water samples and achieved satisfactory results.
Metal
nanoparticles, especially AuNPs and AgNPs, are widely used
in colorimetric biosensors. Jabariyan
et al. used grape juice to prepare AgNPs and applied them to the colorimetric
detection of Cd2+. Owing to
the strong coordination interaction between Cd2+ and the
peptide bonds or hydroxyl groups of the compounds in grape juice,
AgNPs was easily aggregated after the addition of Cd2+,
resulting in color changes in the solution. Yu et al. proposed a colorimetric
biosensor based on the Mn2+-mediated aggregation of AuNPs
for the fumonisin B1 assay. Following
hydrolysis of ascorbic acid 2-phosphate (AAP), the resulting ascorbic
acid (AA) caused the MnO2 shell to decompose, releasing
Mn2+ ions that then deposited onto the surface of AuNPs,
leading to their aggregation. The color change induced by the aggregation
of AuNPs could be detected using a smartphone.
Hybrid nanostructures
have been successfully used to produce many
hybrid nanoparticles using innovative nanocomposite technologies and
advanced surface passivation methods. Owing to their color adjustability
and light resistance, hybrid nanostructures have demonstrated significant
performance improvements in various applications. Malahom et al. successfully developed a sensitive paper-based
CN-selective test kit using catalytic colorimetry for Ag3PO4/Ag nanocomposites. The
composite instantly oxidized the color-developing substrate under
acidic conditions. Cyanide gas was complexed with the covalent bond
of Ag+, which changed the color intensity of the detection
area without H2O2. The color intensity of the
paper-based test kit decreased with increasing cyanide concentration,
and this test kit was successfully applied to real food samples, such
as fruit juice. Facure et al. established a fast and sensitive food
antioxidant colorimetry method based on a MnO2/graphene
quantum dot (MnO2/GQD) composite material. The composite material exhibited excellent oxidase-like
catalytic activity, which triggered the colorimetric reaction of TMB.
The ability of antioxidants to reduce oxTMB was evaluated by the color
changes during the oxidation process. This method can be used for
the accurate determination and identification of antioxidants in real
food samples.
Recently, emerging novel nanomaterials, such as
metal–organic
frameworks (MOFs), nanoclusters, covalent–organic frameworks, and MXenes have
also been reported for food safety assays. Among them, MOFs with diverse
skeleton composition, abundant organic ligands, high specific surface
area and good biocompatibility have broad application prospects. Ma et al. established a real-time platform for
seafood freshness monitoring based on MOF and advanced computer technology. The fuel monomer was loaded with a parallel
template formed by chitosan and UiO-66. The sensor platform formed
a gas fingerprint after detecting the gas released by the inverted
shrimp, and monitored the freshness of the shrimp by recognizing the
odor fingerprint of the shrimp through a high-performance computer.
In another work, Zhan et al. designed a MOF skeleton-based film for
the establishment of a label-free colorimetric sensor array. This array can be used to identify fresh and
spoiled food by reading signals from its spectrum or from photos by
a smartphone camera. Lai et al. synthesized a manganese ion modified
porphyrin metal–organic skeleton, which catalyzed the oxidation
of TMB in the absence of hydrogen peroxide to produce blue TMB oxide,
thus establishing a simple colorimetric detection method for glutathione. Zhang et al. reported a switchable colorimetric
probe toward fipronil residue sensitized by aptamer-catalyzed activity
of affiliative ZIF-8. With the help of
smartphone image acquisition, fipronil-responsive discoloration degree
was converted into the ratio of green and blue (G/B) with a detection
limit of 0.036 μM.

3.

## Recognition Elements
3.1.

## Antibodies
Immunoassays using antibodies
as target recognition elements are the most widely used detection
method, they are fast, easy to use, and can detect a wide range of
analytes. Antibodies can also be obtained in the laboratory by injecting
target molecules into animals and collecting their blood. Antibodies
are commonly used in commercial bioanalytical assays. Larkin et al.
reported a dual-reading AuNP-based sandwich immunoassay for detecting
disease biomarkers using equipment-free colorimetry and sensitive
scanning. This study was conducted to identify anthrax biomarkers. AuNP-antibody conjugates were utilized as both
signal transduction and amplification agents to catalyze the reduction
and precipitation of platinum or gold on the surface. This led to
the generation of distinct colorimetric or optical scanning signals,
which were used for detection purposes. A novel sandwich pair of monoclonal
antibodies for the detection of anthrax protective antigens was identified
using the generated Pt colorimetric readings.
ELISA is a commonly
employed technique in the food industry for detecting the presence
of various target analytes. While ELISA is known for its simplicity
and high sensitivity, there are certain limitations associated with
this method. The most significant problem is the laborious preparation
and purification of enzyme-antibody conjugates. Therefore, it is necessary to develop appropriate methods
to address these problems for practical applications.

3.2.

## Aptamers
Aptamers are single-stranded
oligonucleotides with specific recognition and binding abilities toward
target molecules, which can be obtained using the exponential enrichment
of ligand phylogenetic evolution (SELEX) method. Aptamers have the
advantages of a small molecular weight, easy modification and synthesis,
and good stability. In recent years,
aptamers have garnered attention in the biosensor field as signal
recognition elements. Aptamers have become more popular than antibodies
for the molecular diagnosis of a wide range of biomarkers. They can
be chemically modified or conjugated with different labels, enabling
their use in building sensitive and highly selective sensors. 
Aptamer-based biosensors can be used to
detect factors harmful to human health, and the scope of application
of these methods is far greater than that of conventional methods.
Therefore, various biosensors have been developed by fixing aptamers
on carriers, such as QDs and AuNPs, which have distinctive characteristics. Zhu et al. used boron nitride QDs to anchor
porous CeO2 nanorods with aptamers for the sensitive determination
of kanamycin. The incorporation of kanamycin aptamers and boron nitride
QDs led to improved dispersion and substrate affinity of the resulting
boron nitride QDs/CeO2 nanozyme. Kanamycin inhibited the
catalytic activity of nanozymes via aptamer-target binding. The limit
of detection for kanamycin was 4.6 pM. Wang et al. established a new colorimetric aptasensor for carbendazim
based on the specific binding ability of the aptamer and color change
before and after the aggregation of AuNPs. The aptamer was randomly
coiled in solution, combined with the AuNPs, and wrapped around the
surface of the AuNPs. Upon binding to the target, the aptamer underwent
a conformational change and formed a three-dimensional structure,
resulting in unprotected AuNPs that readily aggregated in the presence
of a salt solution, accompanied by a color change of the AuNPs after
aggregation. Consequently, the limit of detection for carbendazim
was 2.2 nM. 
The recognition ability
of the aptamer toward the target can be
combined into a supramolecular complex via noncovalent interactions
such as hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic effects, and electrostatic interactions.
These interactions can wrap a small-molecule target or insert the
aptamer into a large-molecule target structure. The successful screening of aptamers indicates their significant
potential applications in food safety analysis.

3.3.

## Molecular Imprinted Polymers
Molecularly
imprinted polymers (MIPs) are synthetic receptors for target molecules
and are analogues of the natural antibody–antigen system. Zeng et al. synthesized a molecularly imprinted
polymer consisting of a copper-based metal organic skeleton (MIP/HKUST-1)
on a paper carrier using the sol–gel method for the selective
recognition of tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA). The adsorbed TBBPA was degraded under the action of hydrogen peroxide.
The combined action of hydrogen peroxide and HKUST-1 reduced the color
of oxTMB. This strategy was used for ultrasensitive and highly selective
colorimetric detection of TBBPA. In another work, Zhao et al. reported
a new dual-chemosensor using MIPs for rapid detection of atrazine
in apple juice. MIPs can effectively
extract atrazine from apple juice, and the prepared gold nanoparticles
of different sizes increase with the concentration of atrazine. The
color of the samples gradually changed from red to blue with a limit
of detection as low as 0.0012 mg/L. This method has low cost and intuitive
results judgment. In future research, strategies such as amplifying
signals and reducing nontargeted adsorption should continue to be
adopted.

3.4.

## Peptide-Based Recognition Elements
Peptides with secondary structural rigidity and recognition flexibility,
are more suitable than nucleic acids as a wide range of target molecular
receptors. They can interact with different binding sites on the target
molecules, and there is increasing recognition of the prospect of
peptides as biosensors, which can provide a high level of specificity,
sensitivity, and stability for the detection process. Wei et al. reported a colorimetric strategy for disease
biomarker detection based on peptides. By introducing cucurbit[8]uril,
it can selectively accommodate two n-terminal aromatic
residues of peptides at the same time. Gold nanoparticles modified
with n-terminal aromatic residues can form large
polymers. This results in less aggregation of gold nanoparticles and
enables the detection of proteins, which has also been verified in
the labeled serum samples. Lee et al.
proposed a colorimetric strategy for rapid detection of Aspergillus niger based on the interaction between
fungal spores and AuNPs modified with specific binding peptides. Through
phage screening, the peptide ligand toward Aspergillus
niger spore binding was identified, which showed strong
affinity and specificity through polyvalent effect. Consequently,
the peptide ligand was fixed on AuNPs. The method can rapidly bind
the spores of Aspergillus niger, resulting
in obvious changes in the color intensity of the supernatant after
precipitation. The method can be applied to the rapid detection of
relatively large size target microorganisms. 

3.5.

## Cell-Based Recognition Elements
Cell
is the basic structure and functional unit of organism, cell detection
or quantification is a common problem in life science research, colorimetry
is one of the cell detection technologies, usually using antibodies
as cell recognition elements. , The exploration of
cell-based biosensors has been reported for monitoring toxic and harmful
substances. − 
Huang et al. constructed a DNA logic-gated
module via cell-derived nanovesicles for programmable recognition
capability. The module is fixed on the
surface of the nanovesicles, allowing the nanovesicles to perceive
tumor cell targeting factors and use the signal as an input and output
logic-gated. Under the guidance of the DNA logic gate, the gold carbon
dots inside the encapsulated nanovesicles are delivered to the target
cells. Finally, the fluorescence changes of gold carbon dots are used
to reflect the changes in intracellular redox status. Similarly, Sun
et al. reported a fluorescent biosensor based on 293/hTLR4A-MD2-CD14
cells for bacterial lipopolysaccharide detection. This assay is carried out in a 96-well microplate which
is nondestructive, user-friendly, and highly efficient. Specifically,
a recombinant plasmid was transferred into 293/hTLR4A-MD2-CD14 cells
through lipid-mediated, DNA-transfection way. LPS was able to bind
to TLR4, and a coreceptor-induced signaling pathway could result in
green fluorescent protein expression. The cells treated with LPS can
be visually and continuously observed under a high content screening
imaging system. The designed biosensor can detect low concentrations
of LPS with a detection limit of 0.075 μg/mL.

3.6.

## Others
Digital colorimetry is a chemical
instrumental method based on the color image processing of the analyzed
sample. Molecular sensors that utilize digital colorimetry represent
a promising avenue of research for identifying various substances,
in addition to traditional methods such as the use of antibodies,
aptamers, and DNAzymes. Monogorova et al. established an expressive
qualitative and semiquantitative multisensory digital colorimetric
analysis method for the raw materials of non-narcotic analgesics,
which combined a molecular sensor complex with sample preparation
and signal processing for the clear and usable analysis of drugs.
The “barcode” multisensory digital colorimetric method
can be employed for the rapid semiquantitative detection of drugs.
The concentration of each active substance is used to generate a specific
colorimetric code. The colorimetric code generated by this approach
contains comprehensive information regarding the nature and approximate
quantity of the active ingredient in the drug, using only a minimal
amount of data. This makes the method both convenient and highly accurate.
This method can also be assisted by using the software “barcode”
scanner on a smartphone. Despite its clear advantages, digital colorimetry
also has certain drawbacks, including relatively low repeatability
and selectivity. Further research is needed to address these issues
and improve the overall performance of this approach. 

4.

## Applications of Colorimetric
Biosensors for
Food Safety Analysis
4.1.

## Mycotoxins
Mycotoxins
are secondary
metabolites produced by filamentous fungi that are toxic at both acute
and chronic exposure levels, interfere with nutritional processes,
and may cause growth retardation in humans and livestock, seriously
affecting human health. Matthia et al.
found that the high permeability of the blood–brain barrier
to some mycotoxins (deoxynivalenol, citrinone and zearalenone) may
expose the brain to high concentrations of these toxins. Other toxins
can also reduce the vitality and integrity of the blood–brain
barrier, which demonstrates the importance of minimizing mycotoxin
contamination to reduce the risk of contact between humans and animals. 
Aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) is recognized as the
most toxic among all the aflatoxins. Both
AFB1 and its main metabolite, aflatoxin M1 (AFM1), pose significant
risk to human health. These toxic metabolites are present in food
and feed at trace levels, highlighting the urgent need for the development
of highly reliable and sensitive methods for their detection. Lerdsri et al. designed a sensitive colorimetric
aptasensor for the rapid quantification of AFB1. Based on the aggregation
of AgNPs and local surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), the binding of
the aptamer to AFB1 led to a conformational change, resulting in the
dissociation of the positively charged perylene diimide (PCPD) aptamer
complex, and the final release of PCPD induced AgNP aggregation. A
new hue was generated for the surface plasma wavelength shift originating
from the AgNPs. This method was successfully used for the detection
of AFB1 in peanut, corn, and chicken feed samples ( C). Liu et al. studied the use of magnetic GO combined with technology
to screen a high-affinity aptamer of aflatoxin M1 (AFM1) and established
an aptamer-AuNP colorimetric assay using the selected aptamer as a
specific recognition probe to effectively monitor the content of AFM1
in milk. 
 Zearalenone (ZEN) is an estrogenic
mycotoxin produced by Fusarium oxysporum that threatens
the safety of food and
agricultural industries. ZEN exerts toxic effects on humans and animals
through mutagenicity, teratogenicity, carcinogenicity, nephrotoxicity,
immunotoxicity, and genotoxicity. Sun
et al. constructed an efficient aptasensor for the detection of ZEN
based on stimulus-responsive functionalized MOF nanocontainers and
a trivalent DNA peroxidase mimic enzyme (DNAzyme). Under the optimum
conditions, the absorbance change and logarithmic concentration of
ZEN exhibited a good linear range with a detection limit of 0.36 pg/mL
( B). This sensor is both sensitive and economical
and has the potential to be widely used in the field of food safety.
Ochratoxins are mainly produced by Aspergillus and Penicillium
fungi commonly found in food, causing both economic losses and significant
health risks threat to human health. Consequently, detecting ochratoxins
has become increasingly important. Ochratoxin A (OTA) is the most
abundant toxic ochratoxin. Lv et al.
proposed a colorimetric aptasensor for the detection of OTA by using
the aptamer-enhanced oxidase activity of MnO2 nanoflowers,
and this sensor achieved a detection limit of 0.068 ng/mL for OTA
( D). While significant progress has been made in
the development of detection methods for ochratoxin A (OTA), many
of these approaches are still limited by their ability to produce
only a color change. As a result, these methods often suffer from
poor visual resolution and have limited utility in semiquantitative
analysis. To overcome this limitation, Tian et al. designed a high-resolution
colorimetric method for OTA detection based on aptamer structural
transformation and enzyme-induced AuNR metallization. Specifically,
the aptamer bound to OTA, resulting in the formation of G-quadruplexes
and the release of ALP-labeled complementary DNA (cDNA-ALP). After
magnetic separation, cDNA-ALP catalyzed the reduction of Ag+ to Ag by ascorbic acid 2-phosphate, forming an Ag shell on the AuNR
surface, which caused a blue shift in the longitudinal LSPR peak of
the AuNRs and a multicolor change. Under the optimal conditions, the
limit of detection for OTA was 9.0 nM ( A). This method
is expected to be used for the on-site visual semiquantitative determination
of mycotoxins in food.
A summary of the colorimetric sensors
used for the detection of
different mycotoxins is listed in .
 
4.2.

## Heavy Metals
The presence of heavy
metals in air, water, soil, and food represents a significant threat
to both human health and the environment. The prolonged half-lives
of heavy metal ions can lead to their accumulation in various parts
of the body and pose significant health risks. Additionally, their nonbiodegradability and potential for
accumulation can cause serious environmental damage, particularly
when released in large quantities. Common examples of heavy metal
ions include mercury (Hg), lead (Pb), and copper (Cu).
For the
detection of Pb2+, Huang et al. reported a rapid detection
method without labeling and enzymes based on the combination of DNA
enzyme-mediated RNA cleavage and DNA HCR. This method is not only cost-effective and convenient to operate,
but also does not require any modification of AuNPs. Moreover, it
exhibits resistance to the interference of other metal ions, making
it highly suitable for environmental monitoring and food safety evaluation
purposes. Zeng et al. used V6O13 nanoribbons
as catalysts and colorimetric sensors for the simultaneous determination
of Cd2+ and Pb2+ in real water samples. Cd2+ or Pb2+ can inhibit the peroxidase activity of
V6O13 nanoribbons and change the solution from
light blue to colorless. The detection limits of the sensor for Cd2+ and Pb2+ were 1.89 μg/L and 2.11 μg/L,
respectively ( A). 
 Mercury is one of the most toxic heavy metals, and several methods
have been developed for the detection of Hg2+. However,
most of them are associated with certain limitations, such as high
cost, time consumption, and insensitivity. For these reasons, Feng
et al. successfully synthesized C@MoS2 with a hollow nanotube
structure by the hydrothermal vulcanization of glucose using MoO3-EDA nanowires as precursors and used Hg2+ to initiate
the catalytic performance of C@MoS2. Thus, a label-free
colorimetric platform based on C@MoS2 was constructed for
the determination of Hg2+. This platform has potential
applications in environmental monitoring, biomedical sensing, and
food detection ( B). 
A summary of the colorimetric
sensors used for the detection of
different heavy metals is presented in .
 
4.3.

## Antibiotics
Antibiotic residues and
abuse have many adverse effects on human health, such as the transmission
of antibiotic-resistant pathogens through contaminated food, immune
system weakness, allergic or toxic reactions, and intestinal microflora
imbalance. Therefore, there is an urgent
need to develop a simple and rapid technique for detecting residual
antibiotics to ensure food safety. Common
antibiotics include tetracyclines (TCSs), chloramphenicol (CAP), and
tobramycin (TOB).
TCSs are typical low-molecular-weight antibiotics
widely used for the prevention and treatment of diseases. Zhang et al. used a TCS-specific aptamer, gold
nanoclusters, and the hydrogen peroxidase substrate 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine
(TMB) to establish a TCS colorimetric sensor platform for use in drugs
and milk. Simultaneously, a novel colorimetric sensor was constructed
by combining the excellent properties of the TCS aptamer with the
peroxidase activity of glutathione-stabilized gold nanoclusters (GSH-AuNCs)
to detect TCS with high specificity and sensitivity. This sensor platform
successfully detected TCS in drugs and milk ( A). Tang et
al. first proposed a colorimetric biosensor based on a G-four-stranded
DNA enzyme for the detection of tetracycline antibiotics such as tetracycline,
oxytetracycline, aureomycin, and doxycycline ( C). Due to
the abuse of antibiotics in the cattle industry, resulting in milk
pollution and affecting the dairy industry and human health, Díaz
et al. studied the colorimetric detection of kanamycin, oxytetracycline,
sulfamethoxine, and ampicillin in raw milk by aptamer-conjugated AuNPs. This method has the potential to be applied
for the semiquantitative analysis of antibiotic residues in raw milk.
 CAP is another a common antibiotic that threatens
human health.
Yan et al. developed an aptamer-mediated colorimetric assay for CAP
detection. Specifically, horseradish peroxidase (HRP) was covalently
linked to the aptamer through the biotin–streptavidin system
to generate signals, and CAP preferentially bound to the aptamer. This assay has been used to detect CAP in food
samples and successfully applied to labeled food samples (honey and
fish) ( B).
TOB is an aminoglycoside antibiotic with anti-infective properties,
however, high levels remain in the human body, posing a serious threat
to human health, including neuromuscular block, allergic reactions,
and nephron toxicity. Tavakoli et al. controlled the catalytic activity
of AuNPs using three-way connecting pockets. In the absence of TOB,
the AuNP surface was covered by three-way connecting pockets, which
prevented their catalytic activity in the reduction of 4-nitrophenol
in the presence of NaBH4. In the presence of TOB, the formation
of a pocket was prevented, which facilitated the access of 4-nitrophenol
to the AuNP surface. The catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenol led
to the color of the solution changing from yellow to colorless. This
method exhibited good selectivity and has been successfully applied
for the quantitative determination of TOB in human serum and milk
( D). The detection
limits of this method were 1.38 μM and 1.42 μM, respectively. 

4.4.

## Pesticide Residues
Food safety is
facing increasing challenges from the high concentrations of pesticide
residues in fresh agriculture products, which pose a major threat
to food safety. Although pesticides can prevent plants from being
attacked by pests, pesticide abuse results in uncontrolled levels
of residues and metabolites in the environment. Pesticides are found
in grains, vegetables, beer, and other contaminated foods as well
as water. Human intake of pollutants can cause headaches, vomiting,
itching, skin irritation, dyspnea, and other symptoms. Because pesticide
testing can eliminate substandard products and ensure food safety, monitoring pesticide residues in food is very
important. 
Carbaryl is an effective,
long-residual, and broad-spectrum carbamate insecticide. Deng et al. developed a polychromatic colorimetric
sensor based on zinc (4-pyridinyl)porphyrin–dodecyl trimethylammonium
bromide (ZnTPyP-DTAB) peroxidase activity and gold nanodouble-pyramid
etching to detect carbaryls. The coordination
interaction between zinc and nitrogen in the porphyrins was affected
by the steric effects of the carbaryl group, which decreased the catalytic
activity of ZnTPyP-DTAB. The detection limit for carbaryl was 0.26
mg/kg.
Organophosphorus pesticides (OPs) exhibit high insecticidal
activity
and are widely used to control pests and improve agricultural production
efficiency. , Malathion is a broad-spectrum
organophosphoryl pesticide marketed around the world. Ge et al. designed a new, highly sensitive
colorimetric platform based on an Fe–N/C single-atom nanozyme.
The synthesized nanozyme directly oxidized TMB into blue products
( B). Malathion can inhibit the activity of acid
phosphatase, accompanied by recovery of the catalytic activity of
the nanozyme. Consequently, this colorimetric assay achieved a detection
limit of 0.42 nM for malathion detection.
 Omethoate is another highly toxic organophosphorus
pesticide. Zhang
et al. designed an ultrasensitive multicolor colorimetric sensor for
omethoate detection by inhibiting the metallization of silver on the
surface of AuNRs induced by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) ( A). This colorimetric sensor had a high sensitivity for omethoate. Li
et al. reported a multichannel colorimetric assay for differentiating
different pesticides using Pt nanoparticles (PtNPs) as nanozyme sensing
receptors ( C). PtNPs directly catalyzed the oxidation
of TMB. Different colorimetric reactions were obtained based on the
inhibition or enhancement of the catalytic activity of the pesticides
on PtNPs. Five pesticides, dursban, dimethoate, 3-ketocarbofuran,
glyphosate, and malathion, were successfully distinguished.

4.5.

## Foodborne Pathogens
Foodborne diseases
caused by pathogens are among the most significant public health problems
worldwide. Owing to their different food compositions and processing
methods, the food supply chain is very complex, which may lead to
the emergence and reappearance of foodborne pathogens. To prevent
and identify health and safety problems, the detection of foodborne
pathogens is important at all levels of the food production chain.
Common foodborne pathogens include Salmonella, Escherichia coli (E. coli), and Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus).
The rapid and portable detection
of foodborne pathogens is of great significance. Dester et al. designed
a colorimetric biosensor for E. coliO157:H7 DNA detection based on AuNPs. This biosensor demonstrated high specificity
and sensitivity to E. coliO157:H7 DNA at a concentration as low as 2.5 ng/μL.
The test was completed within 30 min ( A).
 AuNPs can be stabilized by the modification of
oligonucleotides
and destabilized by bacterial nucleases, which selectively cut oligonucleotide
probes designed to induce the aggregation of AuNPs. A label-free colorimetric
method was developed to detect nucleases secreted by Gram-positive
(S. aureus) and Gram-negative bacteria
(Salmonella). Nucleases
produced by active bacteria with aggregated AuNPs can detect bacterial
pathogens using light signal sensors for zoonotic and foodborne life,
providing a practical basis for the detection of nucleases in many
types of food samples. This method showed sensitivity and specificity,
and nuclease (1 CFU/mL) in the supernatant of bacterial cell culture
was detected in less than 2 h. Based on the oxidase-mimicking activity
of octahedral Mn3O4 NPs mediated by oligonucleotides,
Zhu et al. established a novel unlabeled and sensitive aptasensor
for the detection of S. aureus ( B). Aptamers were adsorbed
on the surface of octahedral Mn3O4 nanoparticles
and inhibited enzyme activity by blocking electron transport to the
TMB. Aptamers preferentially bound to bacterial cells, resulting in
oxidase activity recovery. With an increase in the concentration of S. aureus, the color change from green to yellow
was easily recognized by the naked eye. The detection limit of this
method was 3 CFU/mL.

4.6.

## Allergen
An allergen
is any antigenic
substance that can mediate immediate allergic reactions and associated
clinical reactions in individuals. Common
allergens include pollen, fungal spores, and drugs, which can enter
the body through inhalation, ingestion, injection, or exposure. 
Chang et al. reported a sensitive colorimetric
method to detect the Japanese cedar pollen allergen, Cry j 2. The method coupled a CHA amplification strategy
with a signal transduction based on the surface plasmon resonance
of gold nanoparticles. The assay achieved a detection limit as low
as 0.2 ng/mL. Moreover, the assay enables the detection of Cry j 2
spiked in soil solutions by avoiding any interference from the contaminants.
The present method provides a new strategy for the development of
detection methods for fungal or plant allergens. Linghu et al. developed
a magnetic separation immunocolorimetric method to detect sesame allergens. Sesame monoclonal antibody was modified with
AuNPs as a signaling probe, and sesame allergens were attached to
carboxyl functional magnetic polystyrene microspheres as a trapping
probe. When sesame allergens were contained in the sample, two immune
complexes would be formed. The sesame allergens in samples quantified
by immune complex have been successfully detected in real samples
such as bread and biscuits.

4.7.

## Other Illegal Additives
Common contaminants
in food include not only heavy metals and mycotoxins, but also illegal
additives that may be used to deceive consumers or achieve certain
purposes, such as increasing the nutrient content or extending shelf
life. Illegal use of food additives in animal husbandry can have serious
consequences for human health. Therefore, it is important to ensure
that food additives are used legally and safely. Simple on-site detection
of illegal additives can help reduce the risk of fraud. Common illegal food additives include dexamethasone
(DEX), phosphates, tea polyphenols, and melamine.
The residues
of DEX to food have been widely studied in recent decades. The long-term
intake of DEX has a strong endocrine disturbance. Qin et al. designed a colorimetric sensor based on unmodified
aptamers and AuNPs ( B). Aptamer adsorption onto
AuNPs stabilized them. After the addition of DEX, the aptamer preferentially
bound to DEX, inducing its desorption from the AuNPs. Upon adding
salt, the AuNPs aggregated, followed by a color change of the solution.
The establishment of aptasensors effectively prevents antibody screening
and has significant potential for DEX determination.
 Excess sulfite (SO32–) causes serious
health problems in humans, making its detection highly valuable. Zhang
et al. proposed a colorimetric sensor for SO32– based on Co–Mn mixed-metal-oxide (Co–Mn MMO) nanorods.
The nanocomposite catalyzed the oxidation of the chromogenic substrate
TMB to blue OXTMB. Under the optimum conditions, the linear range
of SO32– detection was 1.56–15.58
μM, and the detection limit was 62.68 nM. Combined with mobile
phone chromaticity analysis, on-site semiquantitative visual detection
of SO32– in food samples was be realized
( C). 
Catechin is a tea polyphenol that is
the main antioxidant ingredient
in green tea. However, its excessive intake is harmful to human health.
Li et al. established a chrono colorimetric sensor array based on
color changes caused by AuNPs at different reaction time intervals
to identify catechins, in which Ag+ was reduced to Ag by
various catechins and deposited on the surface of the AuNPs. Different
RGB (red, green, and blue) colors form cores at different time intervals,
corresponding to certain catechins. Based on RGB fingerprints, different
types of catechins were distinguished using linear discriminant analysis
( A). 

5.

## Conclusions
In summary,
this review highlights various colorimetric methods
and their potential applications in food analysis. Specifically, the
review focuses on the detection of food contaminants using colorimetric-based
sensors. Two important aspects of colorimetry are discussed, which
are signal amplification technology and material identification methods.
However, this method still has a long way to go before it can mature
and be converted into commercial products. First, due to the wide
variety and quantity of food contaminants, there are still many specific
adaptors for special foods that have not been screened out. Second,
the ability of adaptors to recognize targets is easily affected by
environmental factors such as pH, temperature, and time, and further
stability and good performance need to be given. Third, the use of
nanomaterials in our daily lives is increasing, and people are also
increasingly concerned about their toxicity to humans and other organisms,
Liu et al. investigated carbon nanotube toxicity and found that it
can affect behavior and fate in vivo, including inhalation, intravenous
injection, skin or oral administration. Although colorimetry is widely used for food detection, certain
challenges remain.
The first challenge is the use of color rendering
materials. With
the promotion of green chemistry and the complexity, high cost, and
environmental harm associated with traditional synthetic methods,
there is an urgent need to develop environmentally friendly materials.
One way is to achieve green and low-cost material synthesis. An increasing
number of researchers have made progress in this regard. Another approach
is to develop degradable materials that can significantly reduce environmental
pollution. Therefore, colorimetric sensors are microsensors for green
environmental protection, which meet the trends and needs of the future
development of science, technology, and society.
The second
challenge is to detect objects and ensure optimal performance.
It is crucial to consider whether multiple objects can be detected
simultaneously without affecting the detection performance. For instance,
water samples may contain various heavy metal ions that require further
investigation for their simultaneous detection.
The third challenge
is the detection equipment. In general, different
instruments are required for standard detection techniques, and complex
sample-processing problems arise when pretreating actual samples.
However, with the advancements of the digital era, rapid and accurate
detection of samples can be achieved through the use of test strips
or mobile phone applications.
Although colorimetry presents
many challenges, it remains a classic
method due to its convenience and simplicity. As science and technology
continue to progress, it is important to strive for further advancements
in detection methods to achieve more rapid, convenient, and accurate
results.

## Acknowledgments
This study was supported
by the Research and Innovation
Initiatives of WHPU (2022J09) and Key Laboratory of Se-enriched Products
Development and Quality Control, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Affairs (Se-2021C01). The authors would like to thank Shiyanjia Lab
for the language editing service.

## Author Contributions
⊥ J.Z. and
Y.L. contributed equally to this work. Investigation:
J.Z., Y.L. and J.C. Conceptualization: J.Z. Writing—review
and editing: J.Z., Y.L. and J.C. Formal analysis: J.Z. and J.C. Review
and editing: J.H., Y.G., F.X., and J.C. Funding acquisition: J.Z.
and X.D. Project administration: J.C. Supervision: J.C.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References