822acssdMolecular PharmaceuticsMol PharmPMC1277657712776577127765774131477310.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.4c00600Chemically
Cross-Linked Nanocapsules from Terpolymers
of Polyethylene Glycol-Polylactide with Cationic Pendent Groups for
Pgp-siRNA and Doxorubicin Codelivery in Overcoming Multidrug Resistance
in Breast Cancer
LinZheng-Ian TsaiTzu-Hsien WuLi-Hsien LuChien-Hou HsuChih-Yuan LiangHaiqing LinHsin-Yu FangYi-Ping LawWing-Cheung ChangCheng-Hsi LiouHau-En YangChengbin ChengPei-Wen LeeChe-Hsin ChenChih-Kuang 
a
Polymeric
Biomaterials Laboratory, Department of Materials and Optoelectronic
Science, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung
80424, Taiwan

b
Department
of Medical Education and Research, Kaohsiung
Veterans General Hospital Kaohsiung, Kaohsiung
81362, Taiwan

c
Division
of Cardiology and Department of Internal Medicine, Ditmanson Medical Foundation Chiayi Christian Hospital, Chiayi
60002, Taiwan

d
Department
of Biological Sciences, National Sun Yat-sen
University, Kaohsiung
80424, Taiwan

e
Department
of Fiber and Composite Materials, Feng Chia
University, Taichung
40724, Taiwan

f
Guangdong
Key Laboratory for Biomedical Measurements and Ultrasound Imaging,
School of Biomedical Engineering, Shenzhen University Medical School, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong
518060, P. R. China

g
The
Shenzhen
Key Laboratory of Metabolism and Cardiovascular Homeostasis, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen
518060, China

h
School of
Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung
80708, Taiwan

i
Department
of Medical Research, Kaohsiung Medical University
Hospital, Kaohsiung
80708, Taiwan

j
Regenerative
Medical and Cell Therapy Center, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung
80708, Taiwan

k
Department
of Industrial and Systems Engineering, The
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong
999077, P. R. China

l
Department
of Biomedical Sciences, National Sun Yat-Sen
University, Kaohsiung
80424, Taiwan

m
Aerosol
Science Research Center, National Sun Yat-sen
University, Kaohsiung
80424, Taiwan

n
College
of Semiconductor and Advanced Technology Research, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung
80424, Taiwan

o
Department
of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung
80708, Taiwan

p
Department
of Medical Research, China Medical University
Hospital, China Medical University, Taichung
404327, Taiwan
*
Email: cbyang@szu.edu.cn.
*
Email: pwcheng@vghks.gov.tw.
*
Email: chlee@mail.nsysu.edu.tw.
*
Email: chihkuan@mail.nsysu.edu.tw.
281120252317979–102812026© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyThis article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0

## Abstract
Cancer remains one
of the leading causes of mortality worldwide.
Among current treatment strategies, chemotherapy continues to play
a central role; however, its therapeutic efficacy is markedly compromised
by the development of multidrug resistance (MDR) in cancer cells.
To address this challenge, a new triblock copolymer, poly­(ethylene
glycol)-b-poly­(lactide)-b-poly­(cationic
polylactide) (PEG-b-PLA-b-CPLA),
was first synthesized and converted into biodegradable charged nanocapsules
(BCNCs) without the use of surfactants or additives via our developed
nanoemulsion interfacial cross-linking technique. With favorable biodegradability,
BCNCs exhibit the ability to coload both hydrophobic drugs and hydrophilic
genes. Compared with other drug/gene carriers, they feature controllable
charge and surface poly­(ethylene glycol) (PEG) density, high colloidal
stability, and sequential release of the loaded genes and drugs. When
loaded with a hydrophobic anticancer drug, dehydrochlorination doxorubicin
(Dox), and a hydrophilic P-glycoprotein (Pgp) silencing gene (Pgp-siRNA),
the resulting Pgp-siRNA/Dox-coloaded BCNCs successfully demonstrated
the ability to overcome MDR in MCF-7/ADR cells, due to enhanced cellular
uptake, Pgp silencing efficiency, and effective endosomal/lysosomal
escape of the loaded therapeutics.
Keywords: cancer, multidrug resistance, polylactide, nanocapsules, drug/gene coloading

 
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 May 31; Accepted 2025 Nov 19; Revised 2025 Nov 14; Collection date 2026 Jan 5.

## Introduction
Cancer-related diseases have been a major
cause of human mortality.
In clinical practice, patients with cancer are typically treated with
surgical removal of tumor tissues and radiotherapy, followed by chemotherapy.
,
 The success of chemotherapy has significantly improved patient survival
rates. However, numerous limitations remains, such as severe adverse
effects, off-target toxicity, and the development of multidrug resistance
(MDR). Among these challenges, MDR is
considered the most critical factor contributing to chemotherapy failure.
−

 The overexpression of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transport proteins,
particularly P-glycoprotein (Pgp), has been identified as a key mechanism
driving MDR.
,
 Of various strategies to overcome
MDR, gene therapy is considered one of the most effective approaches
due to its ability to downregulate of Pgp expression.
,
 Therapeutic small interfering RNA (siRNA) can degrade Pgp-encoded
mRNA by forming an RNA-induced silencing complex in the cytoplasm.
Consequently, siRNA have been extensively combined with clinically
used anticancer drugs, such as doxorubicin hydrochloride (Dox·HCl)
and paclitaxel (Ptx) to develop siRNA/drug combinational therapies
for overcoming MDR in cancer.
,
 Such combinational
therapies have been reported to effectively improve the chemotherapeutic
efficacy of anticancer drugs in MDR cancer cells both in vitro and
in vivo.
−

 This improvement occurs because siRNA therapy can effectively inhibit
Pgp-mediated drug efflux and antiapoptotic mechanism in MDR cancer
cells.
,
 However, due to the fragile nature of siRNA,
the successful delivery of siRNA into the target MDR cancer cells
remains challenging. Moreover, its strong anionic charge and the relatively
large molecular weight further hinder cellular uptake. Accordingly, developing an efficient gene delivery
carrier is essential for the success of siRNA-based gene therapy.
,
 For combination therapies involving both genes and drugs, carriers
must deliver hydrophilic siRNA and simultaneously load hydrophobic
anticancer drugs. Such a demand to coload
chemically distinct therapeutic agents considerably increases the
complexity of designing and preparing of drug/gene codelivery carriers.
In this context, various types of drug/gene codelivery systems,
such as liposomes, vesicles, polymeric micelles, nanoemulsions, nanobubbles, mesoporous silica nanoparticles, and other functional inorganic nanoparticles
(NPs), have been developed and employed
for siRNA/drug combination therapies for overcoming MDR and enhancing
the antitumor efficacy of loaded anticancer drugs. Despite their promising
performance in reversing MDR, several intrinsic limitations, such
as poor biodegradability, limited drug loading capacity, and insufficient
colloidal stability, continue to hamper their clinical availability. In particular, the ability to tune positive
charge and polyethylene glycol (PEG) density is considered an important
feature for optimizing MDR reversal efficacy.
−

 Moreover, it
is ideal for the gene component of gene/drug codelivery carriers to
be released first, enabling the downregulation of malignant genes
in cancer cells. After sensitizing cancer cells via the delivered
therapeutic genes, the encapsulated anticancer drugs can subsequently
exert maximum efficacy. Among the challenges
in developing gene/drug codelivery carriers, biodegradability is considered
the most important factor, as it highly affects clinical applicability.
,
 In this context, several synthetic biodegradable aliphatic polyesters
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), such as poly­(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA), poly­(lactic acid) (PLA), poly­(glycolic
acid), and polycaprolactone, have been used as the constituent materials
for gene/drug codelivery carriers. For
example, Su and co-workers prepared PLGA NPs using a solvent evaporation
method, followed by coating the NP surface with cationic polyethylenimine
(PEI). These NPs, capable of coloading
Ptx and Stat3 siRNA, have been demonstrated to effectively induce
cellular apoptosis in A549 lung cancer cells. Additionally, Qiao and
co-workers developed a novel copolymer PEG-b-PLA-Phis-ss-OEI,
using oligoethylenimine (OEI), a less toxic PEI polymer, as the cationic
resource. The polymer can simultaneously
form a polyplex with Dox·HCl and MDR1 siRNA. This polyplex carrier
effectively overcame MDR in MCF-7/ADR cells due to the efficient delivery
of Dox·HCl and MDR1 siRNA. To avoid using nondegradable and toxic
cationic polymers, emulsion-based methods have been employed to prepare
gene/drug codelivery carriers. For instance, Paulmurugan and co-workers
used a water-in-oil-in-water (W/O/W) double emulsion method to prepare
PLGA-b-PEG NPs for the simultaneous encapsulation
of a hydrophobic drug, 4-hydroxytamoxifen, and a hydrophilic miR-21
gene. This NP formulation exhibited a
clear synergistic effect in reducing breast cancer cell proliferation.
Similarly, Liang and co-workers utilized a double emulsion method
to convert PEG-b-PLA into NPs. Such NPs were capable of codelivering Dox·HCl and
miR-519c to HepG2 cells. By inhibition of MDR via miR-519c, this NP-mediated
combination therapy successfully suppressed tumor growth in HepG2-xenografted
nude mice.
Previously, our group synthesized a new biodegradable
gene delivery
polymer, cationic polylactide (CPLA), and successfully used CPLA-mediated
siRNA therapies to suppress the proliferation of various cancer cells,
including pancreatic, prostate, and leukemia cells.
,−

 With its amphiphilic properties, CPLA was further converted into
nanocapsules (NCs) for codelivering Dox and IL-8 siRNA in prostate
cancer. These NCs demonstrated favorable
biodegradability, negligible cytotoxicity, improved gene and drug
loading capacity, and the ability to overcome MDR in cancer cells.
However, without a stealth coating, such as a PEG layer on the surface,
CPLA NCs lack sufficient colloidal stability for in vivo applications.
To enhance the codelivery capabilities of PLA-based NCs, a new triblock
biodegradable copolymer PEG-b-PLA-b-allyl-functional PLA (PEG-PLA-APLA) will be synthesized via ring-opening
polymerization (ROP), followed by conversion of the APLA block into
a CPLA block via thiol–ene click functionalization. The resulting
polymers, PEG-b-PLA-b-CPLAs (PEG-PLA-CPLAs),
featuring a PEG-protective layer and a controlled charge density are
hypothesized to possess amphiphilic surfactant properties suitable
for preparing oil-in-water (O/W) nanoemulsions, in which oil droplets
are expected to be uniformly distributed in the aqueous phase with
sizes typically below 500 nm due to the surfactant behavior. Moreover, PEG-PLA-CPLAs are considered to adsorb
at the O/W interface. The small droplet size allows UV light to penetrate
the nanoemulsions. By utilizing the remaining
allyl functionalities on the CPLA block, the applied UV light can
initiate radical chain polymerization of the PEG-PLA-CPLA adsorbed
at the O/W interface, forming carbon–carbon cross-links. With
this adsorption property and UV-initiated cross-linking capability,
PEG-PLA-CPLAs can be converted into biodegradable charged NCs (BCNCs)
after removal of the oil templates. During the NC preparation process,
hydrophobic anticancer drugs can be loaded into the oil phase in advance,
eliminating the need for toxic cationic polymers or surfactants. Following
the adsorption of negatively charged Pgp-siRNA onto the positively
charged surface and removal of the oil templates, Pgp-siRNA/Dox-coloaded
BCNCs are expected to form.
This novel structural design endows
BCNCs with several biomedical
advantages. First, by using FDA-approved polymers such as PLA and
PEG as constituent materials,
,,
 BCNCs exhibit high clinical applicability, while PLA ensures biodegradability.
Second, the presence of carbon–carbon cross-links and PEG layers
is expected to improve the colloidal stability. Third, the charge
and PEG density of BCNCs can be adjusted by controlling the charge
density of the CPLA block and incorporating additional CPLAs as cosurfactants
during the nanoemulsion interfacial cross-linking process. Fourth,
the CPLA layer, which adsorbs negatively charged genes, was observed
to degrade faster than the PLA core, which encapsulates hydrophobic
anticancer drugs in the BCNCs. Thus, they are expected to exhibit
a faster release rate of Pgp-siRNA than Dox.
,
 In addition, the degradable nature of the CPLA segment is anticipated
to promote the unpacking efficiency of the adsorbed Pgp-siRNA. Such
a sequential release profile and unpacking efficiency are hypothesized
to enhance the antitumor efficacy of Dox as Pgp is downregulated in
advance.
Compared with the polymeric NP-based gene/drug codelivery
carriers
prepared via precipitation, micellization, or double emulsion methods,
BCNCs offer significant advantages. These include the elimination
of nondegradable agents such as PEI, poly­(vinyl alcohol), spermidine,
or cholesterol, and employing tedious preparation procedures by virtue
of the unique constituent polymers and novel carrier structural design.
−

 In particular, relative to previously developed polymeric NPs, BCNCs
are distinguished by their cross-linked structure and fast-degrading
gene adsorbing polymer segment, which are expected to confer enhanced
in vivo stability as well as increased gene unpacking efficiency.
Based on these material features, well-defined PEG-PLA-CPLAs were
first synthesized. BCNCs with optimal formulation were characterized
in terms of colloidal stability, particle size, and zeta potential.
Using the optimized formulation, Pgp-siRNA/Dox-coloaded BCNCs were
evaluated for cellular uptake, Pgp silencing efficacy, endosomal/lysosomal
escape, and MDR reversal efficacy in MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR cancer cells.
In addition, their MDR reversal capability was demonstrated in another
MDR cancer cell line, MES-SA/Dx5. Ultimately, a preliminary in vivo
study was conducted to evaluate the antitumor efficacy and biosafety
of Pgp-siRNA/Dox-coloaded BCNCs.

## Experimental Section

## Measurements
Nuclear magnetic resonance (1H NMR) spectra of polymer
samples were recorded on a Varian INOVA
500 500 MHz spectrometer at 25 °C, using CDCl3 as
the solvent. Gel permeation chromatography (GPC) analyses were performed
on a JASCO PU-4180 Plus system equipped with an RI-4030 detector. N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF) was employed
as the eluent, and the chromatographic column contained cross-linked
divinylbenzene particles with a particle size of 5 μm and a
pore size of 103 Å. Calibration curves to determine the number-average
molecular weight (M
n) of test samples
were based on polystyrene standards. Polydispersity index (PDI) values
of test samples were acquired from the used software. Fourier-transform
infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectra were measured on an IR spectrometer
(Nicolet iS50/Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a scanning rate of 500
to 4000 cm–1 with an increment of 1 cm–1 for 32 scans via an attenuated total reflectance sampling device.
A dynamic light scattering (DLS) (nano-ZS90/Malvern, Inc.) instrument
was employed to obtain the intensity-average hydrodynamic diameters
of BCNC-relevant samples in an aqueous solution. Measurements were
conducted at 25 °C, with viscosity and refractive index values
set based on water. Additionally, the DLS instrument was equipped
with a 4 mW He/Ne laser light source (λ = 633 nm) at a 90°
scattering angle. The intensity-averaged hydrodynamic diameters were
calculated by a cumulant method and Mie theory. Transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) images of BCNC samples were acquired using a JEM-1400
TEM instrument (JEOL). For sample preparation, 10 μL of a 0.1
mg/mL BCNC solution was applied to a carbon-coated copper grid and
stained with ruthenium tetroxide. The average diameter of BCNC samples
was measured from TEM images by using Image-Pro Plus software. The
maximum absorption peak of Dox was determined at 485 nm using a UV–visible
spectrophotometer (V-770/Jasco Inc.). Two calibration curves were
generated using Dox in (i) phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing
0.5% (w/v) Tween 80 and (ii) dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), based on five
concentrations and corresponding absorbance values. Fluorescence spectra
of 1,1-dioctadecyl-3,3,3,3-tetramethylindotricarbocyanine iodide-loaded
BCNC-3 (Dir-BCNC-3) were recorded by using a fluorescence spectrometer
(F-4500/Hitachi) with an excitation wavelength of 754 nm.

## Materials
α-Methoxy-ω-hydroxyl polyethylene
glycol (mPEG-OH, MW 2 kDa), 4-dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP; 99+%),
lactide (LA; 98%), 1-[4-(2-hydroxyethoxy)-phenyl]-2-hydroxy-2-methyl-1-propanone
(I2959; 98%), 2-(diethylamino)­ethanethiol hydrochloride (DEAET; >98%),
2,2-dimethoxy-2-phenylacetophenone (DMPA; 98%) were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich. Allyl-functional lactide (ALA) was synthesized following
our previously reported method. Dichloromethane
(DCM; HPLC), tetrahydrofuran (THF; HPLC), toluene (HPLC), diethyl
ether (HPLC), acetone (HPLC), ethyl acetate (EA; HPLC), DMSO (HPLC),
and DMF (HPLC) were purchased from J.T.Baker. EA, DCM, and DMF were
dried through distillation over CaH2. LA was recrystallized
from dried EA four times before usage. mPEG-OH was dried prior to
use following this procedure: 1 mL of dried DCM was used to dissolve
mPEG-OH, and the solvent was completely removed under vacuum. This
process was repeated five times, followed by an additional five repetitions
using toluene as the solvent. Dox·HCl (98%–102%) was obtained
from Sigma-Aldrich and subsequently converted to hydrophobic Dox via
HCl removal according to a previously reported protocol. Dir was purchased from MedChemExpress. All chemicals
were used as received, unless otherwise stated.

## Synthesis of
PEG-PLA-APLAs
The synthesis of PEG45-PLA56-APLA42 was employed as an example
of the PEG-PLA-APLA preparation. A 10 mL reaction flask equipped with
a magnetic stirring bar was preloaded with LA (864.0 mg; 6.0 mmol;
60 equiv), DMAP (48.8 mg; 0.4 mmol; 4 equiv), and mPEG-OH (MW 2 kDa,
200.0 mg; 0.1 mmol; 1 equiv). The flask was sealed and degassed under
vacuum for 3 h, followed by filling with nitrogen gas. Subsequently,
5 mL of dry DCM was introduced to the flask to dissolve all the reactants
for the first stage of ROP of LA, which was conducted at 35 °C
for 72 h. At this point, approximately 90% of LA monomers had converted.
Subsequently, ALA monomers (1020.0 mg; 6.0 mmol; 60 equiv) were added
to the flask to conduct the ROP without stopping the ongoing reaction.
After approximately 90% conversion of ALA monomers, the polymerization
was terminated, and the resulting PEG45-PLA56-APLA42 was precipitated using cold ether. After vacuum
drying, a white powder of PEG45-PLA56-APLA42 was obtained. 1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3, ppm): δ 1.42–1.59 (br m, CH
3 units from LA and ALA), 2.58–2.77 (br m, CH
2CH = CH2 units from ALA), 3.35 (s, terminal
CH
3O of mPEG-OH), 3.55–3.69 (br
m, CH
2O of mPEG-OH), 5.09–5.29
(br m, CHCH3 units from LA, CHCH3, CHCH2CH = CH2; and CH2CH = CH
2 units from
ALA), 5.69–5.84 (m, CH2CH=CH2 units from ALA). M
n
NMR = 17.2 kDa, M
n
GPC = 12.1
kDa, and PDIGPC = 1.33. FTIR (cm–1):
alkene C–H stretching 3082, CO stretching 1750, CC
stretching 1643, C–H bending 1455, C–H stretching 1357,
and C–O stretching 1085.

## Synthesis of PEG-PLA-CPLAs
Taking PEG-PLA-CPLA-80 as
an example, PEG45-b-PLA56-b-APLA42 (100.00 mg; [ene]0 = 0.206
mmol, 1.0 equiv), the thiol-containing agent DEAET (34.79 mg; [SH]0 = 0.206 mmoL; 1.0 equiv), and DMPA (21.11 mg, 0.082 mmol,
0.4 equiv) were dissolved in 5 mL of chloroform in a flask to conduct
a thiol–ene click reaction. The molar ratio of [ene]0:[SH of DEAET]0:[DMPA]0 was maintained at 1:1:0.4.
The solution was degassed by three freeze–pumping–thaw
cycles and subsequently irradiated with UV light (λmax = 365 nm, 6 W, 0.12 A) for 30 min. The resulting product was purified
by dialysis against acetone (MW cutoff: 3.5 kDa) for 5 days to remove
unreacted DEAET and the photoinitiator. After complete vacuum drying,
PEG-PLA-CPLA-80 was obtained. PEG-PLA-CPLA-50 was synthesized using
the same procedure, except that the molar ratio of [ene]0:[SH of DEAET]0:[DMPA]0 was adjusted to 1:0.7:0.4. 1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3, ppm) of PEG-PLA-CPLA-80:
δ 1.34–1.42 (br m, (CH
3CH2)2NH+Cl– from amine-functionalized
units), 1.47–1.59 (br m, CH
3 of
units from LA and amine-functionalized units), 1.62–1.72 (br
m, CH2CH
2CH2SCH2 from amine-functionalized units), 1.90–2.13 (br m,
CH
2CH2CH2SCH2 from amine-functionalized units), 2.56–2.67 (br m,
CH2CH2CH
2SCH2 from amine-functionalized units), 2.92–3.26 (SCH
2CH
2NH+Cl–(CH
2CH3)2 from amine-functionalized units), 3.34 (s, terminal
CH
3O of mPEG-OH), 3.57–3.65 (br
m, CH
2O of mPEG–OH), 5.05–5.24
(br m, CHCH3 of units from LA, CHCH3 and CHCH2CH2CH2S from amine-functionalized units). 5.69–5.84
(m, CH2CH=CH2 of units from
amine-functionalized units). M
n
NMR = 21.6 kDa, M
n
GPC = 14.2
kDa, and PDIGPC = 1.29. FTIR (cm–1):
alkene C–H stretching 3083, N–H stretching 2250–2700,
CO stretching 1764, CC stretching and OH resulting
from environmental humidity 1649–1636, C–H bending 1458,
C–H bending 1361, and C–O stretching 1089.

## Preparation
of BCNCs and Therapeutics-Loaded BCNCs
BCNCs were prepared
by an oil-in-water (O/W) nanoemulsion interfacial
cross-linking method ( c). Taking BCNC-3 as an example, PEG-PLA-CPLA-80 and CPLA-60
(6 mg; weight ratio 2:3) (Figure S1) were
dissolved in a chloroform template (55, 80, or 110 μL), followed
by dispersing the oil template into 4 mL of an aqueous solution containing
0.05 wt % I2959. The resulting milky O/W emulsion was ultrasonicated
(Q125, Qsonica) at 50% amplitude for 30 min. After ultrasonication,
the emulsion became transparent (Figure S2). The transparent emulsion was subsequently irradiated with UV light
(λmax = 365 nm, 6 W, 0.12 A) for 30 min to induce
nanoemulsion interfacial cross-linking. After cross-linking, the chloroform
template was removed by evaporation, and BCNC-3 was prepared. BCNC-1
and BCNC-2 were prepared similarly using PEG–PLA-CPLA-50 and
PEG-PLA-CPLA-80, respectively, in the same amount as for BCNC-3.
 For Dox-loaded
BCNC-3 (Dox-BCNC-3), the same procedure was followed,
except that 2 mg of Dox was preloaded into the chloroform template.
The resulting Dox-BCNC-3 was dialyzed against 0.5% (w/v) Tween 80
in a PBS solution (MW cutoff: 3.5 kDa) for 4 h to remove unencapsulated
Dox and residual I2959. After the dialysis, Dox-BCNC-3 was prepared.
To determine the Dox loading content (LC) and encapsulation efficiency
(EE), Dox-BCNC-3 was lyophilized and dissolved in DMSO, followed by
measurement of the absorbance value at 485 nm on the UV–vis
spectrophotometer. According to the Dox-DMSO calibration curve, the
Dox loading amount was determined. Subsequently, the LC and EE of
Dox-BCNC-3 were calculated using the following equations:
LC(wt%)=(weightofloadedDoxweightofBCNC−3)×100%EE(wt%)=(weightofloadedDoxweightofinitialDoxfeeding)×100%For the preparation of
gene-loaded BCNCs, such as negative control
siRNA (siNC)/Dox-BCNC-3, Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3, siNC-BCNC-3, and Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3,
BCNC-3 with or without Dox was gently mixed in sterilized water, followed
by enabling the solution to stand for 30 min as a definite polymer/siRNA
weight ratio. Custom-synthesized siNC (sense: 5′-UUCUC CGAACGUGUCACGUTT-3′;
antisense: 5′-ACGUGA CACGUUCGGAGAATT-3′), and Pgp-siRNA
(sense: 5′-GAAACCAACUGUUAGUGUAdTdT-3′; antisense: 5′-UACACUGACAGUUGGUUUCdTdT-3′)
were purchased from Guangzhou Ribobio Co., Ltd. These siRNA molecules
can be labeled with fluorescein amidites (siFAM) at the 5′
end for fluorescence detection using a fluorescent microscope or flow
cytometry.

## Colloidal Stability of BCNCs
To
evaluate the colloidal
stability of BCNC samples, the samples were dispersed in pH 7.4 PBS
at a concentration of 1 mg/mL and incubated at 37 °C with mild
shaking. At specific time points (1, 3, 5, and 7 days), particle size
changes were monitored using DLS. Additionally, to mimic physiological
conditions, the BCNC samples (1 mg/mL) were further diluted 1000-fold
in pH 7.4 PBS to a final concentration of 1 × 10–3 mg/mL and dispersed in a 0.1 M NaCl solution and bovine serum albumin
(BSA; Sigma-Aldrich; 1 mg/mL) solutions. These suspensions were incubated
at 37 °C, followed by the DLS measurements at 1 to 7 days for
acquiring the particle size changes of BCNC samples. Furthermore,
the storage stability of BCNC-relevant samples was evaluated in pH
7.4 PBS at 25 °C for 7 days.

## Degradation Behavior of
BCNCs
The degradability of
the major constituent polymers, PEG-PLA-CPLA-80 and CPLA-60 for BCNCs,
was measured by GPC. In the measurement, 3 mg of each polymer was
dissolved in 1 mL of PBS at pH 7.4 and pH 5.5 and stirred gently at
37 °C. At predetermined time points, 1 mL aliquots were collected,
and the solvent was completely removed under vacuum. The residual
polymers were subsequently dissolved in DMF for the GPC analysis.

## Agarose Gel Retardation Assay for siRNA-Loaded BCNCs
To
determine the minimum amount of BCNC-3 required for complete siRNA
encapsulation, we performed agarose gel electrophoresis was performed.
The siRNA amount was fixed at 10 pmol (0.133 μg), followed by
mixing it with BCNC-3 at polymer/siRNA weight ratios of 1:1, 2:1,
4:1, 8:1, 16:1, 32:1, and 64:1. The mixtures were allowed to stand
at room temperature for 30 min, followed by the addition of an appropriate
amount of 5× loading buffer. Samples were loaded onto a 1 wt
% agarose gel containing GelRed and electrophoresed at 100 V for 15
min. The gel was visualized under a UV transilluminator (FluorChem
E/ProteinSimple), and the gray values of the bands were analyzed by
using ImageJ software.

## Serum Enzymatic Protection Assay for siRNA-Loaded
BCNCs
To evaluate the stability of Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3 against
enzymatic degradation,
RNase A (No. 10109169001, Sigma-Aldrich) was used to mimic serum RNA-degrading
enzymes in vivo. Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3 was incubated in RNase A solution
(0.25 μg/μL) at 37 °C for 30 min to 12 h. After incubation,
1 wt % sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) was added for 5 min at 4 °C
to detach the adsorbed Pgp-siRNA from the BCNCs. The released siRNA
was subsequently electrophoresed at 100 V for 15 min, visualized under
a UV transilluminator, and analyzed using ImageJ software.

## In Vitro
siRNA and Dox Release from Therapeutics-Loaded BCNCs
To obtain
the Pgp-siRNA release profiles of Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3 with
or without the Dox loading, a siRNA release assay was performed. In this assay, the Pgp-siRNA-loaded NCs were
dispersed in a 96-well plate, and each well was filled with 10×
its volume of PBS buffer (pH 5.5 or 7.4). Sequentially, the plate
was shaken at 100 rpm at 37 °C. At predetermined release times,
the solution in each well was removed and centrifuged at 4 °C
at 13,000 rpm for 5 min, followed by measuring the siRNA concentration
in the supernatant (2.5 μL) using a micro nucleic acid quantification
instrument (EPOCH 2/BioTek). The siRNA concentrations of naked siRNA
and a no added sample (processed using the same procedure) were used
as the standard and the blank control, respectively. As a result,
the percentage of siRNA release from Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3, with or without
Dox loading, at each release time point was calculated by dividing
the siRNA concentration in the supernatant by that of the corresponding
naked siRNA.
To determine the Dox release profiles from Dox-loaded
BCNC samples, a dialysis bag (MW cutoff: 3.5 kDa) containing those
samples was prepared and placed in 45 mL of PBS solution (pH 7.4)
containing 0.5% (w/v) Tween 80 as the release medium. The medium was
maintained at 37 °C with gentle stirring. At specific time intervals,
3 mL of the release medium was withdrawn for UV–vis measurements
and replaced with an equal volume (3 mL) of fresh PBS solution. Based
on the calibration curve of Dox in PBS solution containing 0.5% (w/v)
Tween 80, the Dox concentrations at specific time points were calculated.
Accordingly, the Dox release profiles were obtained.

## Cell Culture
and Cytotoxicity Assessment
To evaluate
the biocompatibility of BCNCs and the cytotoxicity of therapeutics-loaded
BCNCs, MCF-7 (breast cancer cell line), MCF-7/ADR (multidrug-resistant
human breast cancer cell line), HepG2 (hepatocellular carcinoma cell
line), HeLa (human cervical cancer cell line), and MES-SA/Dx5 (multidrug-resistant
human uterine sarcoma cell line) were used for study. A 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-diphenyl
tetrazolium bromide (MTT) colorimetric assay was employed for the
assessment. Cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle
medium/nutrient mixture F-12 (DMEM/F-12; Gibco) supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco) and 1% penicillin–streptomycin
(Gibco) at 37 °C in a 5% CO2-humidified atmosphere.
Under these culture conditions, cells were seeded into 96-well
plates at a density of 5 × 103 cells/well and incubated
for 24 h. Subsequently, BCNCs were added at concentrations of 10,
20, 40, 80, 160, 320, and 640 μg/mL, followed by incubation
for 48 h. Untreated cells served as the control group. After incubation,
20 μL of an MTT solution (5 mg/mL) was added to each well, and
the plates were incubated for 4 h. Subsequently, the medium was removed,
and 150 μL of DMSO was added to dissolve the MTT formazan crystals.
The plate was shaken for 15 min to ensure complete mixing. Ultimately,
the optical density (OD) of each well was measured at 570 nm using
a Microplate Reader (800TS/BioTek), with 630 nm as the reference wavelength.
Cell viability was calculated using the following equation.
cellviability(%)=ODsample−ODblankODcontrol−ODblank×100%In the formula,
ODblank, ODsample, and ODcontrol represent
the OD values of the solvent for the used
culture medium, the sample-treated culture medium, and the untreated
culture medium, respectively.
Using the same cell culture procedures,
therapeutics-loaded BCNCs
were tested for their antitumor efficacy based on the corresponding
cell viability. The loaded therapeutics included Dox, siNC, and Pgp-siRNA.

## Intracellular Uptake of Therapeutics-Loaded BCNCs
The
cellular uptake and intracellular release of therapeutics-loaded BCNCs
were evaluated through confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM; TSC-SP5II/Leica)
and flow cytometry (FACSAria/Becton Dickinson). For CLSM observation,
the concentrations of loaded or free therapeutics, such as Dox and
siFAM, were set at 5 μg/mL and 50 nmol/L, respectively. MCF-7
and MCF-7/ADR cells were seeded at a density of 1 × 105 cells/well and incubated for 24 h. Subsequently, the culture medium
was replaced with a serum-free medium containing therapeutics-loaded
BCNCs. After a specified incubation period, cells were fixed with
4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min and stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) at 50 μg/mL to visualize the nucleus. During CLSM observation,
filter settings were as follows: FAM was excited with a 488 nm laser,
and emission was collected with a 525/50 nm band-pass filter. Dox
was excited by a 540 nm laser, and the emission was gathered with
a 605/50 nm band-pass filter. To monitor endolysosomal escape of therapeutics-loaded
BCNCs, cells were stained with LysoTracker Red to label endosomal
and lysosomal compartments, with the nucleus exhibiting red fluorescence
after staining.
Flow cytometry was used to quantify the fluorescence
intensity of therapeutics-loaded BCNC-treated cells. For this assay,
MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR cells were seeded in six-well plates at a density
of 1 × 106 cells/well and incubated for 24 h. Subsequently,
the medium was replaced with a serum-free medium containing therapeutics-loaded
BCNCs. After the incubation period, cells were harvested using trypsin
and centrifuged at 1200 rpm for 10 min. The collected cells were washed
three times with PBS (pH 7.4) before flow cytometry analysis. Fluorescence
intensity was measured by using the signals from Dox and FAM labels.

## Gene Transcription Level Assay
The intracellular Pgp
mRNA level was measured in accordance with our previous report.
,
 MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR cells (1 × 105 cells/well) were
seeded in six-well plates and cultured at 37 °C in a humidified
atmosphere containing 5% CO2 for 24 h. After cultivation,
cells were treated with Pgp-siRNA, siNC-loaded BCNCs, or naked siRNA
molecules. Following 48 h of incubation, cells were harvested using
trypsin and washed twice with pH 7.4 PBS. Total RNA was extracted
from the treated cells using TRIzol reagent (No. 15596026/Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Subsequently, 1 μg
of total RNA was reverse-transcribed into cDNA using the QuantiTect
Reverse Transcription Kit (No. 205311, Qiagen) according to the instructions
from the supplier. The mRNA level of the Pgp gene was further quantified
by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) using
a QuantStudio 1 system (Applied Biosystems) with Bestar Sybr Green
qPCR Master Mix (No. DBI-2043, DBI Bioscience). Gene expression was
normalized to β-actin, which served as an internal control.
The primer sequences were as follows: Pgp-F: 5′-CCATAGCTCGTGCCCTTGTTAGA-3′,
Pgp-R: 5′-CGGTGAGCAATCACAATGCAG-3′. β-actin-F:
5′-CTCCATCCTGGCCTCGCTGT-3′, β-actin-R: 5′-GCTGTCACCTTCACCGTTCC-3′.

## Western Blotting Analysis
The Pgp silencing efficacy
of Pgp-siRNA-loaded BCNCs was assessed by Western blot. MCF-7/ADR
and MES-SA/Dx5 cells were seeded in six-well plates at a density of
2 × 105 cells per well. Cells were treated with 2
mL of fresh culture medium containing the corresponding formulations
(final Pgp-siRNA concentrations: 50 nM per well) and incubated for
48 h. After incubation, cells were harvested by trypsinization, centrifuged,
and washed three times with cold PBS (pH 7.4). Subsequently, the cells
were resuspended, homogenized, and lysed in RIPA buffer (No. 89901,
Thermo Fisher Scientific), containing 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonylfluoride.
Protein extracts were obtained by centrifugation, and protein concentrations
were determined using a bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Pierce Biotechnology).
Equal amounts of protein were separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis and transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes,
which were blocked with TBST buffer containing 5% (v/v) BSA for 60
min at room temperature. Membranes were incubated overnight at 4 °C
with primary monoclonal antibody against Pgp (C219, GeneTex; 1:500
dilution in TBST buffer with 5% BSA). For internal controls, anti-β-actin
antibody (A2228, Sigma-Aldrich) was used for MCF-7/ADR cells, and
the antiglyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) antibody
(G9545, Sigma-Aldrich) was used for MES-SA/Dx5 cells. After washing,
membranes were incubated with goat antimouse IgG-peroxidase-linked
secondary antibody (1:2000 dilution in TBST buffer with 5% BSA) at
room temperature for 60 min. Protein signals were visualized using
an ECL kit (Nos. 1863096 and 1863097, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and
the Pico Plus Detection Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Images were
acquired using the ChemiDoc MP Imaging System (Bio-Rad) and analyzed
with ImageLab Software (Bio-Rad).

## Animals and Tumor Models
BALB/c nude mice (20 ±
2 g, 6 weeks old) were purchased from the National Laboratory Animal
Center (Taipei, Taiwan). To establish an orthotopic MCF-7/ADR tumor
model, MCF-7/ADR cells (3 × 106) in 100 μL of
a mixture consisting of PBS and matrigel 1:1 (w/w) were injected into
the right mammary fat pads of the mice. At the end of the experiments,
all of the mice were euthanized via CO2 inhalation. All
animal experiments related to biodistribution and toxicity studies
were conducted in accordance with the Guidelines for the Care and
Use of Laboratory Animals of Kaohsiung Medical University and were
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC)
of Kaohsiung Medical University (IACUC Approval No. 110141). The antitumor
efficacy experiments were performed in accordance with the Regulations
for the Administration of Affairs Concerning Experimental Animals
of the People’s Republic of China and were approved by the
Animal Ethical and Welfare Committee of Shenzhen University (AEWC-SZU)
(Ethics Approval No. AEWC-A202401956).

## Statistical Analysis
Quantitative data are presented
as the mean ± standard deviation (SD) and were analyzed using
one-way or two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc tests,
using GraphPad Prism software. A p-value <0.05
was considered statistically significant (*p <
0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001).

## Results and Discussion

## Synthesis and Characterization of PEG-PLA-CPLAs
CPLA,
a tertiary amine-functionalized PLA, has been previously synthesized
by our group (Figure S1) and successfully
used as a promising gene delivery carrier for targeting various cancer
cells due to its high gene delivery efficiency, biodegradability,
biosafety, and rapid degradation.
,−

 Nonetheless, the absence of a stealth coating on the resulting CPLA/gene
polyplexes resulted in low stability under physiological-mimicking
conditions and raised hemolysis concerns ( a). Moreover,
particulate properties, such as size and structure of the polyplexes,
are difficult to control.
,
 In this context, a
new triblock copolymer, PEG-PLA-CPLAs, was prepared to generate well-defined
BCNCs ( b).
The additional PEG and PLA blocks are expected to improve colloidal
stability and enhance the coloading capacity for both hydrophobic
and hydrophilic therapeutics. Additionally, gene payloads located
in the CPLA interfacial layer of the NCs are anticipated to be released
faster than hydrophobic anticancer drugs from the PLA core to the
faster degradation rate of CPLA relative to PLA. Based on this NC structure design, PEG-PLA-CPLAs were synthesized
by a sequential ROP procedure and a subsequent thiol–ene postmodification.
Subsequently, the copolymers were converted into NCs using CPLAs
as a cosurfactant through an O/W nanoemulsion cross-linking process
( c). The resulting
NCs are referred to as BCNCs. Following single-loading or coloading
with hydrophobic Dox and Pgp-siRNA, the NCs are termed Dox-BCNCs,
Pgp-siRNA-BCNCs, or Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNCs.
To synthesize PEG-PLA-CPLAs,
the precursor PEG-PLA-APLAs were prepared using mPEG-OH (MW = 2 kDa;
number-average degree of polymerization (DP
n
) = 45) and DMAP as the initiator and the organocatalyst in
a sequential ROP procedure, with LA and ALA as the monomers at the
first and second stages, respectively ( c and Table S1). In the first stage of the ROP of LA monomers ([mPEG-OH]0h:[DMAP]0h:[LA]0h = 1:4:60; 35 °C, 72 h,
in DCM; approximately 90% conversion of LA), PLA was successfully
covalently attached to the ω-chain end of the mPEG-OH to form
PEG-b-PLA-OH. Subsequently, the second-stage ROP
of ALA monomers was performed without interrupting the ongoing reaction
([mPEG-OH]72h:[DMAP]72h:[ALA]72h =
1:4:60; 35 °C, 72 h, in DCM; approximately 90% conversion of
ALA monomers). The resulting polymer, termed PEG45-b-PLA56-b-APLA42 (the
subscript number denoting the DP
n
 value
of the corresponding repeating unit), was successfully synthesized,
and its well-defined chemical structure was thoroughly characterized
by 1H NMR, FTIR, and GPC ( ). According to the 1H NMR result
( a), the DP
n
 of the PLA blocks (56) in PEG45-b-PLA56-b-APLA42 was calculated by comparing the resonance intensities of
the CH protons from ALA and LA monomers and the allyl
CH
2 protons (CH = CH
2) from ALA at 5.09–5.29 ppm with the resonance intensities
of the 180 protons from CH
2CH
2O units of mPEG-OH at 3.55–3.69 ppm. The DP
n
 of the APLA block (42) was determined by
comparing the allyl CH protons (CH=CH2) from units of ALA at 5.69–5.84 ppm with the same reference
protons from mPEG-OH. The IR spectra also revealed multiple absorption
peaks consistent with the chemical structure of PEG45-b-PLA56-b-APLA42 ( b), including 3082
cm–1 (CC from the ALA units), 1750 cm–1 (ester bonds from both the ALA and LA units), 1643
cm–1 (CC from the ALA units), 1455 cm–1 (methylene groups from the ALA units), 1357 cm–1 (methyl groups from both the ALA and LA units), and
1085 cm–1 (ether bonds from the PEG block). GPC
results showed that PEG45-b-PLA56-b-APLA42 exhibited a M
n
GPC value of 12.1 kDa and a PDI value of 1.33
( c). Compared
with mPEG-OH eluted at 32.1 mL, PEG45-b-PLA56-b-APLA42 exhibited
a smaller elution volume of 27.1 mL, indicating that the PLA and the
APLA blocks were successfully and sequentially grown on the ω-chain
end of mPEG-OH. Additionally, the monomodal molecular weight distribution
and low PDI further demonstrated the living character of the ROP procedure.
However, a small shoulder peak at 29.1 mL was observed. The peak was
attributed to residual PLA homopolymers initiated by trace amounts
of water or impurities, which could not be completely fractionated.

 Serving as the precursor polymer for PEG-PLA-CPLAs,
PEG45-b-PLA56-b-APLA42 has undergone postmodification treatment of its
APLA block.
The APLA block was converted into cationic LA (CLA) units by converting
the allyl groups into tertiary amine moieties through a controlled
UV-induced thiol–ene functionalization ( c). Using DEAET as the thiol-containing agent
and DMPA as the photoinitiator, the thiol–ene click reaction
was performed under UV irradiation (λ = 365 nm) at room temperature
for 30 min. After unreacted agents were removed, PEG45-b-PLA56-b-poly­(ALA0.53-co-CLA0.47)42 (PEG-PLA-CPLA-50)
and PEG45-b-PLA56-b-poly­(ALA0.2-co-CLA0.8)42 (PEG-PLA-CPLA-80), exhibiting charge densities of 47.0 and
82.1%, respectively, were obtained by controlling the molar ratio
of [ene]0:[SH]0:[DMPA]0 during functionalization
( ). Taking PEG-PLA-CPLA-80
as an example ( a), the mole fraction of CLA units relative to the original APLA
block was calculated to be 82% by comparing the resonance intensities
of allyl CH protons (CH=CH2) of ALA units at 5.69–5.84 ppm with the methyl CH2CH
3 protons of CLA units at 1.34–1.42
ppm. This result indicates that the charge density of PEG-PLA-CPLAs
can be precisely controlled by adjusting the reaction conditions during
thiol–ene modification. Accordingly, an optimal charge density
can be imparted to PEG-PLA-CPLAs to balance transfection efficiency
and the toxicity. Moreover, the allyl functionality of the original
APLA block can be preserved and utilized for further chemical modification
such as cross-linking of PEG-PLA-CPLAs. In addition to the 1H NMR result, IR analysis further confirmed the well-defined chemical
structure of PEG-PLA-CPLAs ( b). Using PEG-PLA-CPLA-80 as an example, the IR absorption
spectrum displayed several characteristic absorption peaks relating
corresponding to its chemical structure, including, 2250–2700
cm–1 (amine salts from CLA units), 1764 cm–1 (ester bonds from both ALA and LA units), 1649–1636 cm–1 (CC from ALA units and OH from the environment
humidity), 1458 cm–1 (methylene groups from ALA
units), 1361 cm–1 (methyl groups from both ALA and
LA units), and 1089 cm–1 (ether bonds from the PEG
block). GPC results showed that PEG-PLA-CPLA-80 had a weight distribution
curve similar to that of the precursor polymer PEG45-b-PLA56-b-APLA42,
with a slightly smaller elution volume (26.9 mL) ( c). Due to the original peak
of PEG45-b-PLA56-b-APLA42, PEG-PLA-CPLA-80 retained a minor residual peak.
The M
n
GPC and PDI were determined
to be 14.2 and 1.29,kDa, respectively, indicating that the incorporation
of tertiary amine moieties via thiol–ene modification on the
precursor polymer backbone had no significant effect on the hydrodynamic
volume. Importantly, undesired reactions, such as cross-linking, were
completely avoided during the thiol–ene functionalization.

 

## Preparation
of Well-Defined BCNCs via PEG-PLA-CPLAs
With hydrophilic
PEG and CPLA segments on the two side blocks and
a hydrophobic PLA segment in the middle, PEG-PLA-CPLAs were designed
as a new degradable amphiphilic polymeric surfactant capable of directly
forming O/W nanoemulsions without the need for nondegradable or toxic
small-molecule surfactants ( c). Following the formation of transparent O/W nanoemulsions,
the PEG-PLA-CPLAs are expected to orient their two hydrophilic segments
toward the aqueous phase, while the hydrophobic PLA segment points
inward toward the oil template. Accordingly, our nanoemulsion interfacial
cross-linking technique can be used to covalently bond the PEG-PLA-CPLAs
at the O/W interfaces via radical chain polymerization. Due to the
use of oil templates and the balanced interactions among the three
segments at the O/W interfaces, PEG-PLA-CPLAs can form cross-linked
BCNCs after interfacial cross-linking and removal of the oil template.
During the nanoemulsion interfacial cross-linking, PEG-PLA-CPLAs,
chloroform, and I2959 were used as the polymeric surfactant, the oil
template, and the photoinitiator, respectively ( ). Two PEG-PLA-CPLAs with charge densities
of 47.0 and 82.1% (PEG-PLA-CPLA-50 and PEG-PLA-CPLA-80) were used
to prepare BCNC-1 and BCNC-2, respectively. With a surfactant/oil
template ratio of 0.04 and an oil/water weight ratio of 24, a transparent
O/W nanoemulsion was obtained after 30 min ultrasonication by combining
the three components (Figure S2). Taking
BCNC-2 as an example, IR analysis showed that the adsorption peaks
associated with the original allyl functionality of the precursor
PEG-PLA-CPLA-80 at 993, 1643, and 3082 cm–1 have
disappeared after UV treatment (λ = 365 nm) for 30 min under
the transparent emulsion conditions ( a). This indicates
that PEG-PLA-CPLAs can be cross-linked through UV-irradiated nanoemulsion
cross-linking. In addition to forming the cross-linked structure,
it was observed that the particle size of BCNCs can be effectively
tuned by controlling the amount of the oil template and the charge
density of the BCNCs ( ). For BCNC-1, increasing the oil template volume from 55
to 110 μL resulted in an increase in particle size from 144
to 261 nm. In contrast, BCNC-2 showed less pronounced size changes
with variation in the oil template volume; at 110 μL, BCNC-2
had a particle size of 80 nm, compared with 261 nm for BCNC-1 ( b). The zeta potential
values of BCNC-1 and BCNC-2 were 21.8 and 25.7 mV, respectively ( ). Considering its
smaller particle size and higher zeta potential, BCNC-2 was selected
as the base formulation for coloading drugs and genes due to its favorable
surfactant effect and particulate properties. Given the chemical structure
of the precursors, BCNCs are expected to have a high PEG segment density
on the capsular surface, which may impede the adsorption of gene payloads. To address this, BCNC-3 was prepared using a
mixture of PEG-PLA-CPLA-80 and CPLA-60 (a CPLA polymer with a charge
density of 60%, Figure S1) at a 2:3 weight
ratio. Compared with BCNC-2, BCNC-3 exhibited an enhanced zeta potential
value of 38.1 mV and a larger particle size of 162 nm at the same
oil template volume of 110 μL ( and b). These results demonstrate that the particle size
of BCNCs can be readily tuned by adjusting the oil template volume
during nanoemulsion interfacial cross-linking. Additionally, both
the PEG segment density and the zeta potential of BCNCs can be modulated
by incorporating CPLAs as the cosurfactant during the preparation
procedure.
 Compared with PEI, a widely used
polymeric gene transfection agent,
BCNCs can adjust the surface potential from 21.8 to 38.3 mV. This is because the constituent polymers, including
PEG-PLA-CPLAs and CPLAs, are capable of tuning the amount of tertiary
amine bearing on the side chains. The tertiary amine is the positive
charge source for PEG-PLA-CPLAs and CPLAs. As a result, the toxicity
caused by excessive positive charges from polymers such as PEI, a
highly charged polymer, can be avoided in BCNCs. In addition, current PEGylated drug/gene codelivery carriers
developed to overcome MDR have limited ability to regulate surface
PEG density because their buildings blocks are solely PEG-based copolymers. In contrast, BCNC-3, composed of PEG-PLA-CPLA-80
and CPLA-60 as well as PEGylated and non-PEGylated cationic PLAs,
can adjust the PEGylated density on the particle’s surface.
It was reported that the PEG density on the carrier surface significantly
affected the gene adsorption capacity, binding ability with cell membranes,
and cell uptake efficiency. Correspondingly,
the ability to adjust the PEG density by using PEGylated and non-PEGylated
cationic PLAs as the constituent polymers enables BCNC-3 to alleviate
the innate limitations associated with PEGylation.
TEM analysis
confirmed that both BCNC-2 and BCNC-3 exhibit well-defined
capsular structures, likely consisting of a PLA core surrounded by
a PEG/CPLA shell, based on contrast differences ( c). Importantly, incorporation
of CPLA to adjust the PEG segment density of BCNCs did not affect
the capsular morphology. Based on the TEM images, BCNC-2 and BCNC-3
exhibited D
av values of 131 and 170 nm,
respectively, which were consistent with their corresponding DLS measurements.
To investigate the therapeutic-loading effect on the BCNC particulate
properties, BCNC-3 was preloaded with Dox and Pgp-siRNA/Dox. The resulting
Dox-BCNC-3 and Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 morphologies were observed by
TEM (Figure S3). The TEM images revealed
that BCNC-3 retained its original capsular morphology after the loading
with Dox and Pgp-siRNA/Dox. The calculated D
av values were 134 and 138 nm for Dox-BCNC-3 and Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3,
respectively, indicating that the loading of therapeutic agents has
no significant effects on the capsular morphology or particle size
of BCNC-3. In addition, DLS results showed that the particle sizes
and zeta potential of Dox-BCNC-3 and Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 were comparable
to those of BCNC-3 (Table S2). Based on
the TEM and DLS results, it was considered that the loading of therapeutics
had no appreciable influence on the particulate properties.
To demonstrate the colloidal stability of BCNC-2 and BCNC-3, the
samples were incubated in PBS (pH 7.4) at 37 °C for 7 days, and
their particle sizes were monitored daily by DLS (Figure S4). The particle size change was expressed as the
ratio d/d
0, where d represents the particle size at a given time point and d
0 indicates the initial size immediately after
preparation. A d/d
0 value
of 1 suggests no size change, whereas values of >1 reflect aggregation.
As presented in d, the non-cross-linked BCNC-2 (negative control) exhibited a continuous
increase in d/d
0 throughout
the incubation period, with particle size rising from 75 to 243 nm
by day 3. In contrast, both BCNC-2 and BCNC-3 maintained d/d
0 values close to 1 during the first
3 days. On day 3, their sizes remained nearly unchanged at 80 and
171 nm, compared with their initial sizes of 80 and 162 nm, respectively.
However, by day 5, both formulations showed a considerable increase
in d/d
0, indicating the
onset of aggregation. For example, BCNC-2 and BCNC-3 were measured
to have d/d
0 values of
6.3 and 3.6 after a 5-day incubation. Such a result suggested that
both BCNC-2 and BCNC-3 maintain their particulate structure for up
to 3 days in PBS (pH 7.4) but started to disassemble thereafter. To
further evaluate colloidal stability, BCNC-3 was incubated under physiologically
relevant conditions, including 1000-fold dilution (mimicking NPs suffering
from bloodstream dilution), NaCl solution (0.1M), and an esterase-containing
solution (1 mg/mL) (Figure S5). The d/d
0 values for BCNC-in the
three tested media on day 3 were measured as 1.8, 0.8, and 1.5 (after
deducting the particle size contribution from esterase). These values
indicate that BCNC-3 can retain its particulate structure in the test
physiological environments for at least 3 days. To assess storage
stability, BCNC-3 was incubated in PBS (pH 7.4) at 25 °C for
7 days. On day 7, the d/d
0 value was recorded as 1.1, suggesting that the particle size remained
constant during incubation. This result demonstrates the excellent
storage stability of BCNC-3.
Moreover, CPLA-60 was converted
into CPLA NCs via the same NC preparation
procedure as for BCNC-3. CPLA NCs were subsequently employed as a
non-PEGylated counterpart of BCNC-3. Both NCs were incubated in two
physiologically mimicking media, including BSA (0.1%)-containing solution
and NaCl solution (0.1 M), for 3 days, followed by monitoring their
size change via DLS (Figure S6). After
incubation in the BSA-containing solution, the d/d
0 values for CPLA NCs and BCNC-3 on day 3 were
measured as 1.8 and 1.2, respectively. When the incubation medium
was changed to a NaCl solution, the d/d
0 values for CPLA NCs and BCNC-3 on day 3 were 1.3 and
1.2, respectively. The DLS results showed that CPLA NCs exhibited
significant particle aggregation under these incubation conditions.
In contrast, BCNC-3 maintained the original particle size after being
treated with the same incubation conditions as CPLC NCs. Despite having
a similar particle core structure with CPLA NCs, BCNC-3 possesses
an additional PEG shielding layer that protects against interactions
with serum components such as BSA and NaCl. Accordingly, its particle structure was well preserved in the presence
of these components, particularly compared to the non-PEGylated counterpart
CPLA NCs.
Such colloidal stability results were presumably related
to the
hydrolytic degradation of the constituent polymers. In this context,
the constituent polymers, including PEG-PLA-CPLA-80 and CPLA-60 for
BCNC-3, were measured for their degradation rates when dissolved unimolecularly
in different physiologically mimicking environments rather than in
particulate form. The molecular weight changes were monitored by GPC
(Figure S7). For PEG-PLA-CPLA-80, the M
i/M
0 values decreased
to 0.2 and 0.3 at pH 7.4 and 5.5 PBS solutions, respectively, after
24 h (Figure S7a,c). Based on these values,
PEG-PLA-CPLA-80 was considered to have undergone complete degradation
of its PLA-based segments after 24 h incubation in the physiologically
mimicked environments of the study based on the measured M
i/M
0 values. At the same time,
the GPC curves continued to show peaks corresponding to the PEG segments
at 35.7 mL after 24 h of incubation at the two study pH values (Figure S7a,c). This indicates that PEG is nondegradable
in the test physiologically mimicking environments. However, the used PEG with a molecular weight lower than
10 kDa was reported to be readily eliminated from the human body. As for CPLA-60, it was also completely degraded
at pH 7.4 (M
i/M
0 = 0.1) after 24 h of incubation, whereas only a small portion of
polymer fragments remained at a pH 5.5 PBS solution (M
i/M
0 = 0.3) (Figure S7b,d). Overall, both PEG-PLA-CPLA-80 and CPLA-60 almost
degraded completely after 24 h incubation at pH 7.4 and pH 5.5, whereas
both degraded faster at pH 7.4 than at pH 5.5. Such degradation results
indicate that the constituent components for BCNCs can degrade into
small molecular weight species, ultimately being eliminated from the
human body. This is because polymers with a molecular weight lower
than 40 kDa were reported to be readily excreted from the human body.

The half-life of free Dox in the human
body was reported to be
approximately 30–40 h. Moreover,
the circulation time for most of the reported NPs in mice was observed
to be shorter than 72 h.
,
 With a stable particulate
morphology for at least 72 h, BCNCs are expected to minimize premature
drug leakage during blood circulation or before reaching target tissues.
Based on the degradation results, upon payload delivery, BCNCs are
expected to degrade into small species that can be excreted from the
body. Accordingly, the safety concerns
associated with BCNCs can be substantially reduced. In addition to
their well-defined capsular structure, BCNC-3 is characterized by
enhanced colloidal stability, favorable particle size, tunable PEG
segment density, and high zeta potential. Due to these biomedical
advantages, BCNC-3 was selected as the NC material for coloading therapeutic
drugs and genes to overcome MDR.

## In Vitro Drug and Gene
Release from BCNCs
Using BCNC-3
as the carrier formulation, a hydrophilic gene Pgp-siRNA and a hydrophobic
anticancer drug, Dox, were used as two chemically distinct model therapeutic
agents ( c).
For Pgp-siRNA loading, prepared BCNC-3 was directly mixed with Pgp-siRNA
for 40 min at various BCNC-3/Pgp-siRNA (NC/siRNA) weight ratios. The
minimal NC/siRNA weight ratio required for complete Pgp-siRNA loading
into BCNC-3 was determined by gel retardation assay. Upon the determination
of the minimal NC/siRNA weight ratio, Dox-BCNC-3 was prepared by dissolving
a specified amount of Dox in the nanoemulsion oil template prior to
BCNC-3 formation. Subsequently, the resulting Dox-BCNC-3 was mixed
with Pgp-siRNA for 40 min at the optimal NC/siRNA weight ratio, yielding
Pgp-siRNA and Dox-coloaded BCNC-3 (Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3), and the
Dox loading efficiency was determined by UV–vis analysis.
An agarose gel retardation assay was first employed to evaluate the
Pgp-siRNA loading capacity of BCNC-3. In the assay, BCNC-3 and Pgp-siRNA
were mixed with different NC/siRNA weight ratios, resulting in Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3
samples. The assay result showed that BCNC-3 fully retarded the Pgp-siRNA
electrophoretic migration at a BCNC-3/Pgp-siRNA weight ratio of 16:1,
indicating that BCNC-3 can fully load with Pgp-siRNA at an NC/siRNA
weight ratio higher than 16:1 ( a). In contrast, BCNC-2, which has a higher PEG segment
density than BCNC-3, was unable to completely retard Pgp-siRNA migration
even at a BCNC-2/Pgp-siRNA weight ratio of 64:1 (data not shown).
Such a result suggested that an ability to adjust the surface PEG
density is crucial on the siRNA loading capacity of BCNCs. Previous
reports also revealed that excessively high surface PEG density hampered
gene adsorption on charged NPs. According
to the assay result, the BCNC-3/Pgp-siRNA weight ratio for preparing
Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3 was set at 16:1, and the gene LC was calculated to
be 6 wt %.
 Moreover, an enzymatic
protection assay was employed to ensure
the siRNA protection ability of BCNC-3 ( b). In the assay, naked Pgp-siRNA and Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3
at an NC/siRNA weight ratio of 16:1 were incubated in a medium containing
0.25 μg/μL of RNase for 30 min. After the incubation and
a detachment treatment, most naked Pgp-siRNA lost its electrophoretic
band after 15 min, whereas Pgp-siRNA from Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3 retained
a clear bright band after 30 min of incubation. Using the band brightness
of intact Pgp-siRNA as the reference, the residual siRNA after 30
min incubation in an RNase-containing PBS solution was 6.5 for naked
siRNA and 84.0% for Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3 (Figure S8). To further evaluate the anti-RNase effect of BCNC-3 on loaded
Pgp-siRNA, the incubation time was extended from 30 min to 12 h (Figure S9). According to the band brightness,
the residual siRNA of Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3 was 80.9% of intact siRNA after
4 h of incubation, whereas the electrophoretic band of naked siRNA
almost disappeared. After 12 h of incubation, the residual siRNA of
Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3 remained at 64.1% relative to intact siRNA. These
results indicate that naked Pgp-siRNA were fully degraded by RNase
after only 4 h, whereas BCNC-3 effectively protected the loaded Pgp-siRNA
from RNase attack for at least 12 h.
Upon confirmation of the
protection ability on Pgp-siRNA, Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3
was evaluated for its Pgp-siRNA release profiles at pH 5.5 and pH
7.4 ( c). The
Pgp-siRNA release percentages of Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3 were calculated
according to the electrophoretic band brightness (using the band brightness
of naked Pgp-siRNA as the full siRNA release value) at different incubation
times and pH values (Figure S10). Results
showed that Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3 exhibited a higher release rate and amount
at pH 7.4 than at pH 5.5. At 12 and 24 h, 32.3 and 85.4% of the loaded
Pgp-siRNA were released at pH 7.4, whereas only 0.4 and 0.8% were
released at pH 5.5. This difference in Pgp-siRNA release amount is
due to the different degradation rates of the constituent CPLA segment
at the two pH values. Previously, we have demonstrated that CPLAs
degraded more rapidly at pH 7.4 than at pH 5.5. Accordingly, BCNC-3 exhibited an enhanced Pgp-siRNA release
amount at pH 7.4 compared to that at pH 5.5. Additionally, Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3
showed a considerable amount of Pgp-siRNA release at pH 7.4 after
8 h. It was considered that the high degradation level of the CPLA
segments from the constituent polymers of BCNC-3 after incubation
in pH 7.4 PBS for 4 h (Figure S7) resulted
in the enhanced Pgp-siRNA release as the adsorption and loading of
Pgp-siRNA on BCNC-3 rely on electrostatic interaction of the positively
charged CPLA segments and negatively charged Pgp-siRNA. Degradation
of the CPLA segments disrupts these interactions, promoting the release
of adsorbed Pgp-siRNA. Although pure CPLA segments started to have
significant degradation after 4 h at pH 7.4, the Pgp-siRNA release
amount remained lower than 5.6% before 8 h. BCNC-3 was measured to
retain an intact particulate structure at pH 7.4 for up to 3 days
(Figure S4). Such a particular structure
is considered to hinder the release of the loaded Pgp-siRNA despite
the constituent CPLA segments starting to decompose into small species.
It is thought that when the CPLA segments of BCNC-3 degrade into a
certain level, creating a critical void space within BCNC-3, the diffusion
resistance for the loaded Pgp-siRNA is significantly reduced, subsequently
resulting in an accelerated Pgp-siRNA release after 8 h, as presented
in c. In gene therapy, endosomal/lysosomal escape
and the subsequent cytosolic unpacking of therapeutic genes are considered
two major challenges for gene delivery vectors. Based on the release result, BCNC-3 is thought to reduce
leakage of the loaded gene therapeutics in acidic endosomal/lysosomal
environments while promoting the unpacking amount of the loaded gene
cargos in the neutral cytosolic compartment. With its high stability under acidic conditions, BCNC-3 is considered
to protect the loaded genes from decomposition during endosomal entrapment
and lysosomal hydrolase attack, ultimately resulting in high endosomal
escape efficiency for the loaded genes. Such an endosomal escape capability is thought to be an important
factor affecting the transfection efficiency of BCNC-3.
Upon
demonstrating the Pgp-siRNA loading capacity, BCNC-3 was employed
to load with the hydrophobic anticancer drug Dox. Through the mentioned in situ Dox loading process, Dox-BCNC-3 was observed to
have a drug LC of 8 wt %, which is a much higher value than that of
conventional micellar systems. Dox-BCNC-3
was further loaded with Pgp-siRNA at an NC/siRNA weight ratio of 16:1
through the mentioned procedure, resulting in the preparation of Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3.
Moreover, the Dox release profile of Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 was measured
in a pH 7.4 PBS solution, with those from free Dox, non-cross-linked
Dox-BCNC-3, and Dox-BCNC-3 (without Pgp-siRNA loading) as control
groups. As presented in d, free Dox, non-cross-linked Dox-BCNC-3, Dox-BCNC-3, and
Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 exhibited cumulative Dox release amounts of 72.4,
17.4, 21.2, and 19.6%, respectively, after a 6 h incubation period
at 37 °C, suggesting that there was no appreciable burst release
associated from the NCs, whereas free Dox displayed a significant
burst release. Nonetheless, at 24 h, the cumulative release amounts
of free Dox and non-cross-linked Dox-BCNC-3 were 93.9 and 60.1%, respectively,
which were significantly higher than those of Dox-BCNC-3 and Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3
(40.0 and 36.5%, respectively). This result implies that free Dox
was almost released out the feeding drug amount from a dialysis bag
after 24 h, accounting for the clinical limitations such as the short
half-life time and the quick bloodstream elimination. Additionally, it was observed that non-cross-linked Dox-BCNC-3
and Dox-BCNC-3 (with cross-linkages) exhibited comparable Dox release
amounts of 17.4 and 21.2% at 6 h. Meanwhile, after 24 h, non-cross-linked
Dox-BCNC-3 exhibited a Dox release of 60.1%, which was much higher
than the 40.0% observed for Dox-BCNC-3. These results indicate that
non-cross-linked BCNC-3 can still retain the particulate structure
at 6 h, thus displaying a drug release amount comparable to that of
the cross-linked counterpart. After 24 h, the constituent polymers
for non-cross-linked Dox-BCNC-3 began to have severe degradation (Figure S7). Without cross-linkages, it was considered
that the cavity of non-cross-linked Dox-BCNC-3 became much leakier
than that of Dox-BCNC-3 having cross-linkages, thereby resulting in
a higher drug release amount than the cross-linked counterpart. Additionally,
the adsorption of Pgp-siRNA on the NC surface was observed to reduce
the level of Dox release from Dox-loaded BCNCs. At 24 and 36 h, Dox-BCNC-3
showed cumulative Dox release of 40.0 and 75.1%, whereas Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3
exhibited 36.5 and 61.3%, respectively. Moreover, Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3
displayed a sustained and slow Dox release between 6 and 24 h (from
19.6 to 36.5%), followed by an accelerated release between 24 and
48 h (from 36.5 to 87.6%). These results suggest that the integrity
of the NC structure of Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 was presumably affected
after 48 h. With this disintegration property, the NCs are expected
to be ultimately eliminated from the human body after delivering the
Dox and Pgp-siRNA payloads to target tissues. Moreover, a comparison of the release profiles of loaded Dox and
Pgp-siRNA from BCNC-3 is presented in Figure S11. From this comparison, it was observed that after 8 h, Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3
exhibited a faster release of Pgp-siRNA than did Dox, whereas Dox
release was much slower than that of free Dox. Before 8 h, the release
of both Pgp-siRNA and Dox was dominated by diffusion. The Pgp-siRNA diffusion from BCNC-3 was strongly limited
by the cationic shell layer of BCNC-3 via an electrostatic interaction
at the early release stage. In contrast, the Dox diffusion was not
significantly affected by the cationic shell layer due to the hydrophobic
property of Dox. As a result, Dox was released faster than Pgp-siRNA
from Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 before 8 h. However, CPLA segments, the
major cationic resource of BCNC-3, degraded significantly after 8
h (Figure S7). Due to the degradation,
the Pgp-siRNA release was considerably enhanced because the electrostatic
interaction with BCNC-3 had been significantly reduced. Accordingly,
the loaded Pgp-siRNA from Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 exhibited a faster
release rate than the coloaded Dox in the late release period. Previously,
Yan and co-workers designed a chitosan-based micelle for coloading
Dox and Bcl-2 siRNA for overcoming MDR in hepatoma cells, in which 90.2% of Dox and 81.3% of Bcl-2 siRNA
were released within 10 h. However, Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 showed Dox
and Pgp-siRNA cumulative release amounts of 36.5 and 85.4%, respectively,
in 24 h. The higher release amount of Pgp-siRNA relative to that of
Dox enables Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 to silence Pgp expression in advance,
followed by releasing loaded Dox to kill the sensitized cancer cells.
Therefore, in addition to its coloading capability for hydrophobic
anticancer drugs and hydrophilic gene therapeutics, the sequential
release behavior of Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 can benefit the therapeutic
efficacy of the loaded anticancer drugs in MDR cancer cells.

## In Vitro
Cellular Uptake and Endolysosomal Escape of BCNCs
To ensure
the biosafety of BCNCs, BCNC-3 was used as a representative
NC to measure the cytotoxicity via an MTT assay. Four different cell
lines, including MCF-7/ADR, MCF-7, HepG2, and HeLa cells, were used
as the test cells, which were treated with BCNC-3 at concentrations
ranging from 10 to 640 μg/mL for 48 h. Using the untreated test
cells as the control (i.e., 100% cell viability), BCNC-3 at all the
incubation concentrations showed viability values higher than 85%
(Figure S12), indicating that BCNC-3 had
insignificant cytotoxicity and can be used as a safe carrier for drug
and gene delivery applications.
Sequentially, CLSM was employed
to observe the cell uptake of Dox (red fluorescence) and siFAM (green
fluorescence) by MCF-7/ADR cells, an MDR cell line, with the use of
BCNC-3 as the carrier ( a). Additionally, the nucleus was stained with DAPI (blue
fluorescence) to evaluate whether the therapeutics accumulated in
the cytoplasm of treated cells.
 The observation time was set to 4 h based on previous
reports showing
that NPs typically require 4–6 h to distribute throughout the
cytoplasm.

It was observed that
free siFAM was hardly taken up by MCF-7/ADR
cells, while free Dox exhibited only limited cellular uptake in these
cells. The difficulty of MCF-7/ADR cells in directly taking up free
siFAM can be ascribed to two major reasons. First, free siRNA itself
exhibits a strong negative charge, resulting in a strong electrostatic
repulsion between the siRNA phosphate backbones and the negatively
charged cell membranes. This repulsion
is considered an important factor hindering cellular uptake. Additionally,
free siRNA is readily degraded by extracellular nucleases. The susceptibility of free siRNA to enzymatic
degradation also makes it difficult for cells to take up. These results
indicate that, without the protection of gene delivery vectors, naked
siRNA is readily degraded in a cell culture environment, ultimately resulting in poor cellular uptake.
Although Dox can enter cells via diffusion, its accumulation was very limited, according to the low red fluorescence
intensity. This limited uptake is presumably due to the Pgp efflux
effect in MCF-7/ADR cells. In contrast,
when BCNC-3 was used as the carrier, the cellular uptake of both Dox
(Dox-BCNC-3) and siFAM (siFAM-BCNC-3) was significantly increased
in MCF-7/ADR cells according to the red or green fluorescence intensity.
These results revealed that BCNC-3 is capable of protecting the bioactivity
of siRNA and promoting the cell uptake amount via an endocytosis mechanism. It was considered that BCNC-3 can effectively
protect siFAM from nuclease attack, thus retaining the molecular integrity
and subsequent bioactivity. In addition, BCNC-3 provides the loaded
siFAM with a positively charged property, which was considered to
be a crucial factor facilitating the cell uptake in MCF-7/ADR cells.
Moreover, BCNC-3 can promote the Dox uptake in a MDR cell through
an evading effect, which prevents Pgp on the cell membrane from recognizing
the encapsulated Dox, subsequently allowing more Dox to be accumulated
in the cells. Additionally, for the trial
of siFAM/Dox-coloaded BCNC-3 (siFAM/Dox-BCNC-3), the treated MCF-7/ADR
cells exhibited strong red and green fluorescence intensities around
the nucleus, indicating that most of the loaded hydrophobic anticancer
drugs and hydrophilic siRNA genes have been simultaneously delivered
into the cells. In addition, the observed yellow fluorescence resulting
from the colocalization of the signals from Dox and siFAM suggests
that BCNC-3 can simultaneously deliver these two chemically distinct
therapeutics into a MDR cell line. Taken together, it is considered
that the positively charged surface and NC structure facilitate the
uptake of BCNC-3 by MDR cells. Having a negatively charged surface,
cancer cells therefore exhibit a high affinity for positively charged
BCNC-3. Additionally, the tunable surface
PEG density alleviates the endocytosis difficulty of BCNC-3. With an NC structure, BCNC-3 is unable to be
recognized by the Pgp around the surface of MCF-7/ADR cells. Accordingly, the loaded Dox has been massively
delivered into the cells with minimal concern of being pumped out
by Pgp. Moreover, the loaded siFAM will be replaced by Pgp-siRNA to
further observe its effect on enhancing the therapeutic efficacy of
Dox through knockdown.
The entrapment of internalized siRNA
is considered a major factor
affecting the RNA interference (RNAi) mechanism and the resulting
transfection efficiency. This is because siRNA is readily degraded
in endolysosomal compartments due to lysosomal enzymes and the acidic
environment. To efficiently perform the
RNAi process, internalized siRNA must escape from the endosome and
lysosome within a short time to avoid degradation. In this context,
siFAM-BCNC-3 was prepared, and the nucleus and lysosomes of MCF-7/ADR
cells were stained using DAPI and LysoTracker Red (red fluorescence; b). CLSM results
showed that after 4 h of incubation, a colocalized yellow fluorescence
signal, resulting from the overlap of the green fluorescence from
siFAM and the red fluorescence of the lysosomes, was observed and
highlighted with a yellow frame in b. The yellow fluorescence indicates that
most of the delivered siRNA remained within endolysosomal vesicles.
After 6 h of incubation, as indicated by the arrows in b, distinct green (from siFAM)
and red (from stained lysosomes) fluorescence signals were clearly
observed. This fluorescence separation indicates that the loaded siFAM
from siFAM-BCNC-3 successfully escaped from endolysosomal compartments
through BCNC-3.
,
 To further corroborate this observation,
the colocalization of the green and red fluorescence signals was quantified
using ImageJ (coloc2 plugin) based on the calculated Pearson’s
correlation coefficients from the two observed incubation times (Figure S13). The
coefficients were 0.8 and 0.64 at 4 and 6 h, respectively. The reduced
coefficient value indicates a decreased overlap between the two fluorescence
signals, further supporting the endolysosomal escape ability of BCNC-3.
These results demonstrate that BCNC-3 can facilitate the escape of
loaded genes from endo/lysosomal compartments, thereby enabling their
transfection functions in the cytoplasm. Consisting of PEG-PLA-CPLA-80/CPLA-60, BCNC-3 contains a considerable
amount of tertiary amine due to the cationic side groups from the
CPLA segments. It was reported that gene delivery vectors with tertiary
side groups can facilitate endosomal escape through osmotic swelling
and the proton sponge effect. This mechanism accounts for the endo/lysosomal
escape ability of BCNC-3 and enables BCNC-3 to be used as a promising
gene delivery platform for a variety of siRNA-based gene therapies.

## Pgp Silencing Effect and In Vitro Anticancer
Activity of BCNCs
on MDR Cells
Upon confirmation of the siRNA and anticancer
drug delivery capacities of BCNC-3, the Pgp silencing efficacy and
in vitro anticancer activity against MDR cells were further studied.
In this context, Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 and the corresponding experimental
trials were incubated in MCF-7/ADR cells for 48 h. After the incubation,
Pgp mRNA levels in the treated cells were measured through qRT-PCR.
The results showed that Pgp mRNA levels in cells treated with free
Pgp-siRNA, free Dox, and BCNC-3 ranged from 86.6 to 98.9% relative
to the untreated MCF-7/ADR cells ( a). This indicates that the naked gene, small-molecule
therapeutic agents, and NCs had a negligible effect on inhibiting
the Pgp mRNA expression. It was additionally noted that the Dox-BCNC-3-treated
cells exhibited a Pgp mRNA expression level of 74.4%. The reduced
Pgp mRNA expression is presumably attributable to two mechanisms. First, due to its high interaction affinity with
MCF-7/ADR cells, BCNC-3 may alter the composition of the cell membrane,
thereby interfering with the activity of Pgp. Second, the evasion
effect provided by BCNC-3 may impair Pgp recognition and subsequently
reduce its catalytic activity.
 In contrast, both the Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3- and Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3-treated
cells exhibited a significantly decreased Pgp mRNA expression level,
measured at 40.2 and 31.0%, respectively. At the same time, siNC/Dox-BCNC-3-treated
cells displayed a Pgp mRNA expression level of 70.8%. These results
confirmed that the major decrease in Pgp mRNA expression is due to
the loaded Pgp-siRNA within BCNC-3. Moreover, BCNC-3 plays a vital
role in protecting and delivering loaded Pgp-siRNA into MCF-7/ADR
cells, thereby facilitating the RNAi pathway and sequentially reducing
Pgp expression. In addition to qRT-PCR, Western blotting was performed
on MCF-7/ADR cells ( b). Upon treatment with free Pgp-siRNA and Pgp-siRNA/BCNC-3,
the Pgp expression levels in the treated MCF-7/ADR cells were downregulated
to 86.7 and 42.9%, respectively, compared to the blank control. The
Western blotting result for Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3 was consistent with the
qRT-PCR findings. Moreover, the Pgp silencing of BCNC-3 was also investigated
in another MDR cell. As presented in Figure S14, Western blotting results showed that the Pgp expression levels
of free Pgp-siRNA- and Pgp-siRNA/BCNC-3-treated MES-SA/Dx5 cells were
measured to be 85.9 and 4.1%, respectively, relative to the blank
control. These results indicate that BCNC-3-mediated delivery of Pgp-siRNA
considerably downregulated Pgp expression in MES-SA/Dx5 cells. Taken
together, it was considered that BCNC-3 can be used as a promising
Pgp-siRNA delivery agent for down-regulating the Pgp expression in
various MDR cancer cells.
Sequentially, BCNC-3-mediated Dox
cell uptake in MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR
cells was observed through CLSM, and the observation time was set
at 24 h. This is because our in vitro Dox release study showed that
BCNC-3 with the loading of Dox exhibited a considerable release amount
after 24 h of incubation in a pH 7.4 PBS solution. CLSM results showed
that siNC/Dox-BCNC-3- and Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3-treated MCF-7 cells
exhibited significantly higher Dox fluorescence intensity than cells
treated with free Dox-treated MCF-7 after 24 h of incubation. Meanwhile,
MCF-7 cells treated with siNC/Dox-BCNC-3 and Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3
had a comparable Dox fluorescence intensity ( c). As for the trial of free Dox, MCF-7 cells
can only take up Dox by a diffusion mechanism, indicating that there
is a Dox concentration equilibrium between cells and the cultivated
medium. In contrast to free Dox, Dox-loaded
BCNCs, such as siNC/Dox-BCNC-3 and Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3, facilitated
greater internalization of Dox by MCF-7 cells due to the electrostatic
interaction between the positively charged BCNC-3 and the negatively
charged MCF-7 cells. Additionally, the
size of BCNC-3, which is below 200 nm, benefits the loaded Dox to
be taken up through an endocytosis mechanism. In addition, the loaded Pgp-siRNA had no significant effect on the
Dox uptake amount because MCF-7 cells are not a strong MDR cell. When the study cells changed to MCF-7/ADR cells,
it was observed that after 24 h of incubation, Dox-treated MCF-7/ADR
cells showed a very limited fluorescence intensity, which is much
weaker than that from Dox-treated MCF-7 cells. Relative to Dox-treated
MCF-7/ADR cells, siNC/Dox-BCNC-3-treated MCF-7/ADR cells exhibited
a slight increase in the Dox fluorescence intensity. However, Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3-treated
MCF-7/ADR cells showed a very strong Dox fluorescence intensity. Such
results suggested that Pgp on the surface and nucleus of MCF-7/ADR
cells can recognize Dox, followed by pumping it out from the cells.
Accordingly, the amount of Dox from free Dox is lower in MCF-7/ADR
cells than that in MCF-7 cells. Moreover, although having an evading
effect on the surface Pgp, siNC/Dox-BCNC-3 had only a slight improvement
on the Dox cell uptake amount in MCF-7/ADR cells. This is because,
after 24 h of incubation, approximately 36.5% of the loaded Dox (according
to the release profiles) has been released from the capsular structure.
The released Dox was subsequently recognized by the Pgp on the nucleus,
followed by activating the pumping out mechanism, leading to poor
Dox uptake. As compared to siNC/Dox-BCNC-3,
Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 exhibited a considerably increased Dox cell uptake
in MCF-7/ADR cells. By silencing Pgp, Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 can inhibit
the function of Pgp in MCF-7/ADR cells, both at the cell membrane
and the nuclear surface, thereby sensitizing the cells and alleviating
MDR. Consequently, the Dox accumulation
in these MDR cells is significantly increased due to the carrier functions
of BCNC-3.
To confirm the CLSM results, flow cytometry was employed
to measure
the Dox fluorescence of MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR cells, which were treated
with free Dox, siNC/Dox-BCNC-3, and Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 ( d,e). In the flow
cytometry analysis, the cell uptake of Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 in MCF-7
cells over time was first analyzed by flow cytometry to ensure an
optimal incubation time (Figure S15). Flow
cytometry results revealed that the Dox fluorescence intensity was
increased by increasing incubation time, and the treated cells showed
the maximal Dox intensity at 24 h. This indicates that MCF-7 cells
had a saturated uptake level for BCNC-3 at 24 h. Accordingly, the
incubation time to observe the Dox cellular uptake amounts of the
test trials in MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR cells was set to 24 h. In MCF-7
cells, results showed that siNC/Dox-BCNC-3 and Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3
had a comparable Dox intensity, which is significantly higher than
that from free Dox. In MCF-7/ADR cells, the Dox fluorescence intensity
followed the order: Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 > siNC/Dox-BCNC-3 >
free
Dox. The flow cytometry results were in accordance with the CLSM results.
Both results verified that the NC structure of BCNCs enhances the
cellular accumulation of loaded hydrophobic anticancer drugs, even
in cancer cells without MDR. Moreover, due to the capacity of coloading
drugs and genes, BCNCs with a proper drug/gene therapeutic strategy
can enhance the delivery of drugs such as Dox, into MDR cancer cells,
for example, MCF-7/ADR cells. Owing to their material properties,
BCNCs have been demonstrated to play a vital role in drug formulations
designed to overcome MDR in cancer cells.
Sequentially, the
anticancer efficacy of drug- and gene-loaded
BCNCs was demonstrated on MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR cells through an MTT
assay ( ). The
incubation times were set as 48 and 72 h, respectively. This is because
previous reports showed that Pgp-siRNA delivery by vectors exhibited
a maximum gene knockdown effect at 48 h, and the effect remained for
at least 96 h. After 48 and 72 h incubation,
results showed that BCNC-3, Pgp-siRNA, and Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3 exhibited
negligible cytotoxicity under the NC incubation concentration of 6.25
μg/mL in MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR cells. In MCF-7 cells, free Dox
exhibited an antitumor efficiency (the percentage of cancer cells
killed relative to the original cell number) of 19.2%, whereas Dox-BCNC-3
showed an efficiency of 48.3% at a Dox concentration of 0.5 μg/mL
after 72 h of incubation, indicating that the enhanced cell uptake
via the NC can promote the antitumor activity of the loaded Dox. An
additional loading of siNC or Pgp-siRNA had no significant influence
on the antitumor efficacy of Dox-BCNC-3. In MCF-7/ADR cells, compared
to the antitumor efficacy of free Dox (5.2%), that of Dox-BCNC-3 was
moderately increased to 18.2%, suggesting that the NC evading effect
on overcoming MDR is limited. In contrast, the antitumor efficacy
of Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 reached 55.6%, which is much higher than that
of free Dox and Dox-BCNC-3, revealing that the loaded Pgp-siRNA successfully
inhibits the Pgp expression, facilitates the Dox uptake, and ultimately
enhances the cell killing efficiency on a MDR cancer cell. Notably,
when the Pgp-siRNA was replaced with siNC, the resulting siNC/Dox-BCNC-3
only exhibited an antitumor efficiency of 16.2%, which is comparable
to that of Dox-BCNC-3. As a result, the enhanced antitumor efficacy
of Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 relative to that of Dox-BCNC-3 is due to the
Pgp silencing function of loaded Pgp-siRNA.
 Moreover, the antitumor
efficiencies of therapeutic agent-loaded
BCNC-3, such as Dox-BCNC-3, siNC/Dox-BCNC-3, and Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3,
were evaluated on MES-SA/Dx5 cells, followed by comparison with that
of free Dox (Figure S16). Similar to the
results from MES-SA/Dx5 cells at 72 h, Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 showed
the antitumor efficiency of 43.4%, which was higher than 22.0% for
free Dox, 19.1% for Dox-BCNC-3, and 22.9% for siNC/Dox-BCNC-3. These
results indicate that the Pgp expression associated with MES-SA/Dx5
cells can be effectively inhibited by the Pgp-siRNA delivered by BCNC-3.
Due to the inhibition, the loaded Dox achieved significantly enhanced
antitumor efficiency compared with free Dox.

## Preliminary In Vivo Anticancer
Activity Study of BCNC-Mediated
Therapy
A preliminary in vivo study for evaluating the biodistribution,
cardiotoxicity, and antitumor effect of BCNC-3-mediated therapeutic
formulations has also been performed ( , , and ). The biodistribution of BCNC-3 was investigated
in MCF-7-bearing mice using hydrophobic Dir as a fluorescence probe
with free Dir as the control ( a). As for free Dir, no significant fluorescence intensity
was found at the tumor site at the observation times. In contrast,
a detectable fluorescence signal was observed at the tumor site (area
marked by a red circle line) 12 h postinjection of Dir-BCNC-3, and
it reached a maximum intensity at 48 h, followed by observing a decreased
intensity at 72 h. These results indicate that Dir, used to mimic
hydrophobic Dox, can be delivered into tumor tissues via BCNC-3 through
improving the water solubility and rapid clearance of the loaded Dir
and taking advantage of the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR)
effect.
,
 It was also noted that significant fluorescence
intensities were also observed in the liver at 12, 24, and 48 h, and
the intensity started to decrease at 72 h. Such high accumulation
is presumably due to the small particle size (<200 nm) and the
positively charged surface. The decrease
in the intensity also suggests that BCNC-3 started degrading into
small molecular weight species, which were subsequently excreted from
the mice. At 72 h postinjection of free Dir and Dir-BCNC-3, the injected
mice were sacrificed and the Dir fluorescence intensities in the major
organs were measured ( b,c). As compared with free Dir, Dir-BCNC-3 exhibited a 2.4-fold
higher fluorescence intensity at the tumor tissues, demonstrating
that the mentioned carrier functions are able to facilitate the tumor
site accumulation for the loaded agents. However, substantial Dir
accumulation was also observed in the liver and spleen for Dir-BCNC-3.
This is presumably because the mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS),
consisting of Kupffer cells in the liver and macrophages in the spleen,
has taken up a considerable proportion of BCNC-3, subsequently affecting
its accumulation in the tumor. In addition,
the lack of targeting ligands such as RGD peptides, folic acid, transferrin,
or aptamers of BCNC-3 was considered to limit the binding ability
to tumor cell receptors. Moreover, the
surface charge strength was selected based on the colloidal results,
instead of the in vivo results. This may also influence the in vivo
performances. To address the tumor accumulation
issue, improvement in preventing BCNC-3 from recognition by MPS is
of high importance in increasing the drug delivery efficiency of BCNC-3.
Moreover, the decoration of a proper targeting moiety and the optimization
regarding the surface charge strength were considered to enhance the
tumor cell binding ability and to reduce the nonspecific interactions
with serum proteins. Through the proposed
strategies, resulting BCNC-3 is expected to exhibit an improved tumor
accumulation capability.
 Specifically, to test the stability of Dir-BCNC-3
in physiologically
mimicking media, Dir release from Dir-BCNC-3 in a pH 7.4 PBS solution
was performed. Dir selectively exhibits fluorescence in a hydrophobic
environment, such as the inner cavity, while having very weak fluorescence
in an aqueous medium. Correspondingly,
the release of Dir from Dir-BCNC-3 can result in a decrease in the
original fluorescence emission intensity. By measurement of the decreased
fluorescence intensity of Dir-BCNC-3, the cumulative Dir release from
Dir-BCNC-3 can thus be evaluated. According to the fluorescence emission
spectra at different incubation times ( c), the Dir release profile of Dir-BCNC-3
at pH 7.4 was plotted ( d). According to the release result, Dir-BCNC-3 retained 75.1
and 71.7% of the loaded Dir after 48 and 72 h incubation, respectively,
indicating that Dir-BCNC-3 possesses good colloidal stability and
can preserve the fluorescence activity of Dir. This carrier property
makes Dir-BCNC-3 a suitable fluorescence probe for evaluating the
biodistribution of BCNC-3.
Moreover, due to concern about the
cardiotoxicity of Dox, the serum
biochemicals of mice were analyzed after 14 days of intravenous injection
with either free Dox or Dox-BCNC-3, at a Dox concentration of 4 mg/kg
based on the weight of each test mouse. These biochemicals included creatine kinase (CK), lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH), and serum creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB) ( ). Among these, CK and LDH are the major
enzymes to evaluate myocardial ischemia necrosis, while CK-MB serves
as a marker to detect a heart attack.
,
 The elevation
of these values indicates an increased risk of heart attack. Compared
with the PBS group, the free Dox group showed a significant increase
in all three measured biochemicals, indicating that free Dox severely
affected the heart and damaged myocardial cells ( ). However, relative to the
free Dox group, the Dox-BCNC-3 group exhibited considerably reduced
levels of CK, LDH, and CK-MB, suggesting that encapsulation with BCNC-3
can mitigate the cardiotoxicity of Dox.
The antitumor efficacy
of BCNC-3-mediated drug formulations was
preliminarily evaluated in MCF-7/ADR xenograft tumor-bearing mice
( ). As for
the PBS group, no significant change in the body weight of the test
mice was observed from the BCNC-3-treated groups with or without loading
of therapeutics ( a). In contrast, the free Dox group experienced a 6.5% weight loss
relative to the initial weight after 14 days, reflecting the toxic
effect of free Dox. Compared with the PBS group, the BCNC-3 group
exhibited a similar tumor volume ( b). Meanwhile, the tumor volumes following
treatment with the various therapeutic formulations followed the order:
free Dox > siNC/Dox-BCNC-3 > Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3. At the end
of the
experiment, the ex vivo tumor volumes and weights were also measured
( c,d). The
antitumor efficacy of the test groups from those results was in accordance
with that evaluated from observing the tumor volume change. Such results
indicate that the antitumor efficacy of Dox can be increased via the
encapsulation of BCNC-3. This is because BCNC-3 enables the encapsulated
Dox to have a prolonged blood circulation time and to decrease the
blood clearance, subsequently resulting in the EPR effect on the treated
tumor. With the loading of Pgp-siRNA,
it was considered that Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 successfully sensitized
the tumor cells through inhibiting the Pgp expression, thus exhibiting
the highest antitumor efficacy among the test groups.

To demonstrate the Pgp silencing effect of Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3
on the MCF-7/ADR xenograft tumor tissues, Western blot analysis has
been conducted on the excised tumor tissues from the PBS, free Dox,
and BCNC-3 relevant groups ( e). Using the band intensity from the PBS group as
the reference, the Pgp expression level from the BCNC-3, free Dox,
and siNC/Dox-BCNC-3 groups was measured to range from 96.0 to 78.1%,
implying they had no significant Pgp silencing effect.
,
 Meanwhile, the Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 group showed a Pgp expression
level of 38.0%, indicating that the delivery of Pgp-siRNA via BCNC-3
can downregulate the Pgp expression from the xenograft tumor tissues.
Such a result is consistent with the in vitro Pgp silencing result
of Pgp-siRNA/BCNC-3 on MCF-7/ADR cells ( b), suggesting the acceptable Pgp-siRNA delivery
efficiency of BCNC-3. However, optimizing the in vivo siRNA delivery
efficiency is still required through tuning their surface properties
and particular structures.
The excised tumor tissues from the
PBS, siNC-BCNC-3, free Dox,
and Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 groups have been further treated with H&E
staining and analyzed via a terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay to evaluate and compare their
antitumor efficacy ( f). H&E results showed that most excised tumor tissue
from the PBS and siNC-BCNC-3 groups had a high nuclear-cytoplasmic
ratio. This ratio was observed to decrease
with free Dox and was further considerably reduced with Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3,
indicating that Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 had significantly improved antitumor
efficacy compared with free Dox and the PBS group. The TUNEL assay,
which can detect DNA fragmentation in tumor cell nuclei, allows staining
of necrotic tumor cells and subsequent quantification of apoptotic
cells. Corroborating the H&E results,
TUNEL assay revealed that the PBS group exhibited an apoptotic cell
level below 10%, whereas siNC-BCNC-3, free Dox, and Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3
showed levels of 14.7, 47.4, and 79.6%, respectively. These findings
suggest that the antitumor activity of Dox can be improved by Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3
through its carrier functions and the Pgp silencing effect. Moreover,
BCNC-3-based siRNA complexes have no significant concern on the nonspecific
immune stimulation to tumor tissues because of the negligible apoptotic
cell level from siNC-BCNC-3.
In addition, major organs, such
as the liver, kidneys, spleen,
lungs, and heart, were harvested from Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3-treated
mice after 14 days of treatment and analyzed histologically via H&E
staining (Figure S17). Compared with the
PBS group, the Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 group showed no significant morphological
changes or pathological abnormalities in any of the examined organs.
These histological results indicate that the Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3
formulation effectively inhibits tumor growth without causing notable
organ toxicity. Optimization of the Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 formulation
for in vivo antitumor efficacy and biosafety is currently ongoing
in our laboratory.
Overall, it has been demonstrated that BCNC-3
is able to moderately
increase the antitumor efficacy of the loaded Dox via the evading
effect in MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR cells. Moreover, with the load of Pgp-siRNA,
Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 can significantly improve the antitumor efficacy
of Dox compared with Dox-BCNC-3, through Pgp silencing in MCF-7/ADR
and MES-SA/Dx5 cells. Preliminary in vivo studies demonstrated that
BCNC-3 decreases the cardiotoxicity of Dox while increasing its antitumor
efficacy in MCF-7/ADR-bearing mice. These results suggest that BCNC-3
is a promising platform to enhance the antitumor efficiency of various
hydrophobic anticancer drugs against different MDR cancer cells through
optimal drug/gene combination and its drug loading and delivery capabilities.

## Conclusions
In this study, a new triblock copolymer,
PEG-PLA-CPLAs,
was successfully
synthesized via ROP and thiol–ene modification followed by
thorough characterization of its chemical structure. Owing to its
amphiphilic properties, PEG-PLA-CPLAs were converted into BCNCs with
controllable particle sizes using our developed nanoemulsion interfacial
cross-linking method. One optimized formulation, BCNC-3, exhibited
tunable charge and surface PEG densities, their ability to coload
hydrophobic Dox and hydrophilic Pgp-siRNA, and a sequential release
profile for the loaded therapeutics. In addition, BCNC-3 demonstrated
improved colloidal stability in a physiologically mimicking environment
due to the incorporated cross-linkages. As a carrier for Dox, BCNC-3
significantly enhanced cellular uptake in MCF-7/ADR cells, a MDR cancer
cell line, via an evasion effect. As a vector for Pgp-siRNA, BCNC-3
enabled effective Pgp silencing and facilitated endosomal and lysosomal
escape in MCF-7/ADR cells. When coloaded with these two chemically
distinct therapeutics, the resulting Pgp-siRNA/Dox BCNCs exhibited
superior antitumor efficacy against MCF-7/ADR cells compared with
other control groups, both in vitro and in vivo. In addition, Pgp-siRNA/Dox
BCNCs have demonstrated Pgp silencing and antitumor effects in other
MDR cancer cells such as MES-SA/Dx5 cells. Owing to their carrier
functions, BCNCs are considered a promising platform for a wide range
of drug/gene combination therapies, with potential applications in
treating various intractable diseases beyond cancer.

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgments
The authors thank the National Science and Technology
Council of Taiwan (NSTC 110-2221-E-110-001-MY3, NSTC 112-2218-E-110-007,
NSTC 112-2811-E-110-015, NSTC 113-2221-E-110-008, NSTC 113-2218-E-110-004,
NSTC 113-2811-E-110-015, and NSTC 114-2221-E-110-011 to C.-K. Chen,
NSTC 114-2314-B-075B-010 to P.-W. Cheng, and NSTC 114-2314-B-705-002
to T.-H. Tsai), Ditmanson Medical Foundation Chiayi Christian Hospital
(R112-20, R112-044, R112-056, R113-35, R113-52, and R114-26), Kaohsiung
Veterans General Hospital (KSVNSU-112-007, KSVNSU-113-002, KSVNSU-113-009,
and KSVNSU-114-011 to C.-K. Chen and KSVGH-114-099 to P.-W. Cheng),
National Sun Yat-Sen University/Kaohsiung Medical University (NSYSU-KMU
joint research project #113-P32 and 114-P10), Kaohsiung Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital and National Sun Yat-Sen University joint research
program (CGMH-NSYSU-113-P02, CGMH-NSYSU-114-P01), Shenzhen Key Laboratory
of Metabolism and Cardiovascular Homeostasis (ZDSYS20190902092903237),
Shenzhen Natural Science Foundation (JCYJ20250604181041018), Guangdong
Provincial Medical Science and Technology Research Foundation Project
(A2025160), and Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation
(2025A 1515011418) for the financial support. The authors also gratefully
acknowledge the use of EM000900 equipment belonging to the Core Facility
Center of National Cheng Kung University. Moreover, the authors want
to express their sincere gratitude to Professor Tian-Lu Cheng from
the Department of Biomedical Science and Environmental Biology, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Professor Wen-Wei Lin from the School of Post
Baccalaureate Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, and Professor
Yuan-Chin Hsieh from the School of Medicine for International Students,
I-Shou University, for their invaluable assistance and professional
guidance on conducting the animal experiments.

The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.4c00600.
Details for animal experiments
and tumor implantation
procedures; protocols for in vivo biodistribution study, antitumor
efficacy evaluation and toxicity test; chemical structure of CPLA
polymers (Figure S1); appearances of prepared nanoemulsions after
ultrasonication treatment (Figure S2); TEM images of Dox-BCNC-3 and
Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 (Figure S3); DLS analyses of non-cross-linked
and cross-linked BCNC formulations under physiologically relevant
conditions (Figures S4–S6); GPC degradation profiles of PEG-PLA-CPLA-80
and CPLA-60 at different pH values (Figure S7); RNase protection and
pH-dependent siRNA release behaviors of Pgp-siRNA-BCNC-3 (Figures
S8–S10); cumulative release profiles of Dox and Pgp-siRNA from
Pgp-siRNA/Dox-BCNC-3 (Figure S11); in vitro cytotoxicity, cellular
uptake, and colocalization analyses in multiple cell lines (Figures
S12, S13, S15, and S16); Western blot quantification of Pgp expression
in MES-SA/Dx5 cells (Figure S14); histological examination of major
organs from treated mice (Figure S17); and synthesis, structural characterization,
and physicochemical properties of PEG-PLA-APLA terpolymers and BCNC
formulations (Tables S1 and S2) (PDF)

1.Z.-I.L. and T.-H.T. contributed equally to this work.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials