pmciScienceiScience3532isciiScience2589-0042ElsevierPMC12206134PMC12206134.112206134122061344058550710.1016/j.isci.2025.112748S2589-0042(25)01009-01127481ArticleCETSA-MS unveils novel targets engaged by rigosertib to promote anti-tumor activity and inflammatory responses
KechagioglouPetros YurugiHajime DupontCamille ChernobrovkinAlexey RomeroRossana HarmsGregory OsterMarie CiesekSandra TweedellRebecca KannegantiThirumala-Devi ZimmerStefanie CosenzaStephen FruchtmanSteven M. RajalingamKrishnarajkrishna@uni-mainz.de 1Cell Biology Unit, University Medical Center Mainz, Mainz, Germany2Pelago Bioscience AB, 171 65 Solna, Sweden3Institute for Medical Virology, Goethe University, University Hospital Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany4Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA5Institute for Pathology, University Medical Center Mainz, Mainz, Germany6Traws Pharma, Inc., Newtown, PA 18940, USA∗Corresponding author krishna@uni-mainz.de7Lead contact
20620252652025286489934112748511202422320252252025260520252906202501072025© 2025 The Author(s)2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Rigosertib (RGS) is a small-molecule inhibitor known to interfere with multiple disease signaling pathways. Despite its promise as an anti-cancer drug, the exact mechanisms of its action and rational for its observed clinical efficacy remain subjects of ongoing research. Our study aimed to elucidate the mechanism of action of rigosertib and to identify its novel targets. We observed that rigosertib exerts its inhibitory effect on RAS-MAPK signaling through reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced activation of c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling confirming previous studies. Using mass spectrometry-based cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA MS), we identified two potential novel targets, ERO1A and NQO2, which contribute to ROS-dependent JNK activation. Moreover, rigosertib induced caspase-1 activation and gasdermin cleavage leading to Nod-like receptor pyrin domain-containing 3 (NLRP3)-dependent inflammatory responses in human lung cancer organoids. Our results suggest that rigosertib may effectively inhibit RAS-MAPK signaling and reprogram the tumor immune environment, presenting the potential for a potent therapeutic strategy in cancer treatment.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Rigosertib does not exhibit a high-affinity interaction with C-RAF RAS-binding domain
•Rigosertib exerts its inhibitory effect through ROS-induced activation of JNK signaling
•CETSA-MS identifies ERO1A and NQO2 as targets that contribute to ROS-dependent JNK activation
•Rigosertib induces NLRP3-dependent inflammatory responses in human lung cancer organoids

Pharmacology; Biological sciences; Cancer

## Subject areas
PharmacologyBiological sciencesCancerpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesPublished: May 26, 2025

## Introduction
The ability of styryl benzyl sulfones to induce G2/M cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in tumor cells has raised significant interest in their potential as cancer therapeutics. Rigosertib (RGS, ON01910.Na), a styryl benzyl sulfone, was originally described as a non-ATP-competitive inhibitor of the Ser/Thr-protein kinase polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1). Further analysis showed that rigosertib induced mitotic arrest, followed by tumor cell-specific induction of apoptosis. Additionally, rigosertib demonstrated a low toxicity profile and was a potent inhibitor of tumor growth in several nude mouse xenograft models. , These findings established rigosertib as a promising anticancer agent. Currently, rigosertib is undergoing a phase 2 program for advanced squamous cell carcinoma complicating recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB-associated SCC) (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT03786237, NCT04177498). It is also being evaluated in a phase 2 trial in combination with pembrolizumab in patients with metastatic melanoma (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT05764395) and a phase 1/2a study to examine the combination of rigosertib and nivolumab in metastatic Kirsten rat sarcoma positive (KRAS+) lung adenocarcinoma patients who have progressed on standard first line treatment (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT04263090).
Although rigosertib was initially thought to be a PLK1 inhibitor, , , this mode of action has been challenged by subsequent research showing that rigosertib does not directly inhibit PLK1 kinase activity. Studies on mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) have demonstrated that 8 h of rigosertib treatment rather inhibits the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway and triggers apoptosis via the mitochondrial pathway. The ability of rigosertib to inhibit PI3K signaling was later confirmed by two studies in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells, and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) both in vitro and in orthotopic xenograft models. , Similarly, Prasad et al. reported the inhibitory efficacy of rigosertib on the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway in preclinical HNSCC models, as well as the potential of combinatorial treatment with standard therapeutics for HNSCC. 
In a later study, Athuluri-Divakar et al. reported that rigosertib acts as a RAS mimetic by binding to the RAS-binding domain (RBD) of RAF protein suggesting that rigosertib interferes with the binding of active RAS to its effector proteins, thereby blocking downstream RAS signaling and tumor cell proliferation. However, a subsequent study from Ritt et al. demonstrated that the inhibition of RAS/RAF/MEK signaling by rigosertib is rather mediated by a stress-induced phospho-regulatory circuit involving activation of c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway. The ability of rigosertib derivatives to bind directly to the RBD was also demonstrated by Liu et al. who showed that a rigosertib-platinum complex retained its ability to bind to RAF, displace RAS, and inhibit the RAS/REF/MEK pathway. In support, Prasad et al. have previously showed that rigosertib treatment did not result in changes of p38 MAPK, RAF, and ERK1 phosphorylation status in MCL cell line but induced JNK activation. The rigosertib-dependent c-JUN phosphorylation through oxidative stress induction was further confirmed in HNSCC cells, in addition to PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling cascade inhibition. 
An alternative mechanism of action has been proposed by Jost et al., where rigosertib acts as a microtubule destabilizing agent by binding to tubulin at the colchicine-binding site. This finding is consistent with previous results reporting that rigosertib induces cellular effects similar to those of low-dose microtubule depolymerizing agents. 
Rigosertib was further evaluated for its impact on tumor immune responses. In a preclinical study, a melanoma model treated with rigosertib showed enhanced response to immune checkpoint blockade therapy and promoted an inflammatory CD8+ T cell response. Zhou et al. demonstrated in colorectal cancer cells in vivo and in vitro that rigosertib’s immunomodulatory effect results from the downregulation of PD-L1 expression and a strengthened anti-tumor immunity in the CT26 murine colorectal syngeneic tumors. Accumulating data from non-cancer-related studies, reporting the rigosertib-dependent suppression of proinflammatory responses in experimental models of colitis and lipopolysaccharide-induced sepsis, respectively. , 
To date, rigosertib has been demonstrated to be a well-tolerated and promising anticancer agent in clinical settings, but its precise mechanism of action remains unclear. In order to elucidate the mechanism(s) of action of rigosertib, we set out to decipher whether rigosertib’s antitumor properties stem from its binding to the RBD domains of RAS target proteins, its microtubules destabilizing properties, or the inhibition of yet unidentified target(s). In addition, we investigated activation of cell death markers by rigosertib and its modulating effects on the tumor immune microenvironment.

## Results

## Rigosertib inhibits RAS-MAPK signaling without exhibiting a high-affinity interaction with C-RAF RAS-binding domain
We first tested the hypothesis that rigosertib acts as a RAS mimetic by evaluating its direct binding of clinical-grade rigosertib obtained from Onconova Therapeutics, Inc. (currently under the name of Traws Pharma, Inc.) to the RBD of C-RAF (C-RAF RBD) using a thermal shift assay. This technique measures protein stability changes, indicated by its thermal denaturation temperature, when bound by a compound. We used purified GST-C-RAF RBD protein and analyzed its thermal denaturation temperature (dTm) in the presence of high concentration of clinical-grade rigosertib. We observed a small but reproducible increase in dTm for GST-C-RAF RBD in presence of rigosertib compared to the DMSO control ( A). However, this temperature shift was smaller than previously observed with the same assay, and there was no significant increase of protein stability compared to the dTm shift measured for the GST control protein with rigosertib. Therefore, these results did not unambiguously demonstrate a significant binding of rigosertib to C-RAF RBD.
We then employed an indirect approach by testing whether rigosertib competes with active RAS for binding to C-RAF RBD using in vitro competition binding assays, similar to the previously published study. Purified GST-C-RAF RBD immobilized on beads was pre-incubated with rigosertib or DMSO overnight and then incubated with total lysates from EGF-stimulated HeLa cells. We quantified the amount of active RAS that bound to C-RAF RBD by western blot in presence or in absence of rigosertib. If rigosertib competitively displaced RAS from C-RAF RBD binding, we would expect a decrease in active RAS pull down by the C-RAF RBD beads. However, we did not observe any change of active RAS levels in rigosertib treated samples, suggesting that in the tested conditions, rigosertib does not compete with active RAS from HeLa cell lysates for binding to purified C-RAF RBD despite concentrations as high as 50 μM ( B).
Since this experimental setting did not allow precise monitoring of the relative amounts of active RAS in the cell lysates and C-RAF RBD used for the pull-down, we modified the competition binding assay using purified KRASwt loaded in vitro with GDP or GTPγS. Intriguingly, we did not observe any displacement of KRASwt-GTPγS binding to C-RAF RBD in presence of rigosertib, corroborating that rigosertib did not compete with active RAS for binding to C-RAF RBD in vitro ( C). We have also employed ON02180 Na (Z)-isomer as a control with the ON01910.Na (rigosertib) which is an active (E)-isomer in these assays.
Although the aforementioned results indicated that rigosertib does not act as a RAS mimetic, we sought to obtain stronger evidence utilizing a previously established NanoBiT assay to monitor RAS binding to C-RAF RBD. The NanoBiT system can track the dynamics of protein-protein interaction in live cells. It is based on the split NanoLuciferase enzyme, divided into two subunits, LgBiT and SmBiT, each fused to a protein of interest. The physical interaction between these two partner proteins results in complementation to reversibly reconstitute a functional NanoLuciferase enzyme. Using this NanoBiT cellular assay, we tested the effect of rigosertib on C-RAF RBD binding to the three RAS isoforms bearing the activating mutation G12V. As expected, BHK-21 cells transiently expressing the NanoBiT constructs SmBiT-C-RAF RBD and LgBiT fused to G12V mutated KRAS, HRAS, or NRAS showed a strong luminescent signal due to the intrinsic activity of these RAS G12V isoforms and their interaction with C-RAF RBD. Treatment with rocaglamide, a compound previously described to inhibit RAS activation, showed a strong decrease in luminescent signal, hence validating the NanoBiT assay ( A). In contrast to rocaglamide, following 8 h treatment with rigosertib, we observed only a minor decrease in luminescence for all three RAS isoforms, suggesting that KRAS G12V binding to C-RAF RBD is slightly impaired in presence of rigosertib ( A). 
We further compared the effect of rigosertib on RAS binding to C-RAF RBD with the G12C-specific compound ARS-1620. In cells expressing SmBiT-C-RAF RBD and LgBiT-KRAS G12C, rigosertib treatment was much less potent than ARS-1620 at decreasing the luminescent signal ( B). Finally, we established a cell-free NanoBiT system using lysates of HEK-293T cells expressing SmBiT-C-RAF RBD and LgBiT-KRAS G12C or G12V. This system was validated by confirming that ARS-1620 disrupted binding of C-RAF RBD to KRAS G12C ( C). Similar to the cellular system, rigosertib did not significantly disrupt the binding of C-RAF RBD to KRAS G12C in the cell-free system.
These results are consistent with a weak binding of rigosertib to C-RAF RBD, as reported by Ritt et al.. Taken together, even though rigosertib binds to C-RAF RBD to some extent, our results provide evidence that this interaction was not sufficient to induce a strong displacement of RAS binding to C-RAF RBD in vitro or in cellular assays. Therefore, these experiments did not confirm that rigosertib acts as a RAS mimetic by binding the RBD of C-RAF.
Previous publications demonstrated an inhibition of RAS/RAF/MEK signaling after 18 h treatment with rigosertib. , The latter study also showed that this pathway was not affected by shorter treatment times. We therefore examined the effects of rigosertib on RAS/RAF/MEK signaling after 2–24 h treatment with rigosertib in HeLa cells ( D). While RAS pull-down experiments showed decreased levels of active RAS after 2–4 h treatment with rigosertib, we detected a decrease of MEK1/2 (Ser217/221),ERK1/2 (Thr202/204) phosphorylation only after longer treatment times. Phosphorylation levels tended to be lower after 8 h and showed a clear reduction after 24 h of treatment ( D, 1E, and ). Rocaglamide served as a positive control, while the Z-isomer of rigosertib (ON02180.Na) did not show any effect on the protein expression levels. Although we could not confirm that rigosertib impairs RAS binding to its downstream effector C-RAF, our results confirmed the inhibition of RAF/MEK signaling after prolonged treatment with rigosertib.

## Rigosertib activates the JNK signaling pathway
Previous work showed that rigosertib activates the stress-response kinase JNK, leading to inhibitory hyperphosphorylation of the RAS effectors C-RAF, B-RAF, and of the RasGEF SOS1. , , This prompted us to investigate the involvement of the JNK pathway in rigosertib-mediated inhibition of RAS/RAF/MEK signaling.
In our experiments, we could affirm that 18 h treatment of HeLa cells with rigosertib led to a size shift of the bands detected by western blot for SOS1 and C-RAF, due to their hyperphosphorylation status ( A). The migration shift of C-RAF correlated to its phosphorylation on serine 642, an inhibitory post-translational modification proposed to be mediated by JNK. We detected similar SOS1 and C-RAF hyperphosphorylation in cells treated with the microtubule-targeting agent colchicine. Moreover, inhibition of JNK signaling using the JNK inhibitor SP600125 led to a decrease of both rigosertib- and colchicine-induced hyperphosphorylation of SOS1 and C-RAF. Thus, consistent with previous findings, we confirmed that rigosertib treatment phenocopies the effects of mitotic stress induced by microtubule destabilization. In addition, JNK inhibition partially restored phosphorylation levels of MEK1/2 and ERK1/2 after rigosertib treatment ( B and S3C), suggesting that rigosertib-mediated inhibition of RAS/RAF/MEK signaling would be at least partly dependent on the activation of JNK.

## Proteome-wide CETSA MS profiling for identification of novel (off-)targets for rigosertib in intact and lysed HL60, H358, and K562 cells
In order to identify the direct targets of rigosertib in tumor cells, we performed a mass spectrometry-based cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA MS) analysis. CETSA MS is a powerful technique that identifies targets within the entire proteome engaged by chemical ligands or small molecules of interest at physiological levels in cells. This study followed the general CETSA protocol, utilizing liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) for detection and implementing a two concentration CETSA MS profiling strategy in the compressed format. The analysis assessed protein stability in intact or lysed cells treated with the compounds at two different concentrations relative to non-treated control cells. Treated cells/lysates were aliquoted and subjected to a heat challenge at 12 different temperatures, after which individual samples from all temperature points were pooled for each test condition. Aggregated proteins were removed by centrifugation, and soluble protein amounts were measured using LC-MS ( A). To distinguish between compound-induced protein (in)stability and protein abundance/solubility changes, soluble protein amounts in non-heated samples were also measured. 
CETSA MS was conducted in multiple cell types to identify potential new protein targets of rigosertib across cell types. The experiments were performed in intact HL60 (acute promyelocytic leukemia), H358 (non-small lung cancer, KRAS G12C), and K562 (chronic myelogenous leukemia) cells, as well as clarified lysates of the same cells with three or five replicates for each experimental condition. Unbiased proteome-wide target engagement of rigosertib by CETSA MS profiling of cells treated with rigosertib showed no evidence of direct binding to previously suggested molecular targets such as microtubules or PLK1, or to any RBD-containing proteins ( A).
Compound-induced proteome thermal stability changes in lysed H358, HL60, and K562 cells incubated with 20 μM of rigosertib are summarized as volcano plots in B. Here, proteins were characterized by effect size (log-transformed fold-change for the compound-treated cells relative to control) and significance (−log10-transformed p value from moderated t test). Only five proteins showed significant thermal stability changes in at least one out of three experiments ( C). CPOX and FECH, both from the heme synthesis pathway, appear as off-target binders for various small molecules and are, thus, unlikely to be responsible for rigosertib’s pharmacology. RAP1A was also excluded from the potential targets as it was detected only in HL60 lysates treated with high rigosertib concentration. Stabilization of NQO2 (NRH:quinone oxidoreductase 2) was observed in all three cell lysates, while ERO1A (endoplasmic reticulum oxidation 1 A) was stabilized in H358 and K562 cell lysates.
Additionally, CETSA MS profiling in intact cells allowed the identification of indirectly stabilized/destabilized proteins, which could highlight events occurring downstream of rigosertib binding to its primary target(s). Compound-induced proteome thermal stability changes in intact cells incubated with 20 μM of rigosertib were summarized as volcano plots in D. 58 proteins showed significant changes in thermal stability upon incubation with 20 μM of rigosertib in at least one cell line, with 39 proteins stabilized and 29 destabilized by the compound. E shows the 24 proteins with the most significant changes. Rigosertib-induced thermal stability changes in the three cell lines are shown for the top 24 most significant protein hits ( E). In addition to the previously observed stabilization of CPOX, FECH, and NQO2, several other proteins showed a clear concentration-dependent stabilization or destabilization. For instance, microtubule-associated proteins CKAP2L and MAP7D1 were destabilized in intact K562 cells. Among the factors identified in intact cells were also ERO1A and many mitochondria-related factors: CYCS, CPOX, FECH, NIPSNAP2, TFAM, TST, GRPEL1, ATP5PD, ACO2, and ABHD10. These results suggest that rigosertib-induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and mitochondrial stress may contribute to JNK pathway activation.
A comparison of the proteome-wide thermal stability changes in intact and lysed cells is shown in A. Here, the CETSA amplitudes for the significantly stabilized/destabilized proteins (intact and lysate hits) are shown as a scatterplot with CETSA amplitudes from lysate on the x axis and from intact cells on the y axis. Stabilization of CPOX, FECH, and NQO2 occurs in both intact and lysed cells, ERO1A is mostly lysate-specific, and the remaining protein hits were found to shift only in intact cells. Therefore, NQO2 and ERO1A could be potential direct targets of rigosertib.
We investigated the consequences of rigosertib binding to NQO2 and ERO1A by analyzing their protein levels in H358 and HeLa cells treated with 2, 10, and 20 μM rigosertib ( A), but we did not observe significant changes in either case. However, rigosertib effectively rescued the thermal degradation of the ERO1A and NQO2 proteins ( B), indicating that these two proteins are stabilized in cells upon rigosertib treatment. We then assessed NQO2 enzymatic activity using recombinant human NQO2 protein. Various rigosertib concentrations were used (2, 10, 20, and 100 μM) to determine its inhibitory effect on NQO2 activity. Imatinib (10 and 100 μM), a known NQO2 inhibitor, was used as a positive control. We detected inhibition of the NQO2 activity at higher rigosertib concentrations, indicating that rigosertib has a relatively weak but significant inhibitory effect on NQO2 enzymatic activity ( A and 3B). 
A comparative analysis in K562 cells with several microtubule destabilizing agents, including rigosertib, revealed NEK7 as another potential direct target ( B). NEK7 (NIMA-related kinase 7) regulates proper spindle assembly and mitotic progression and coordinates the assembly of the NLR family pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3) into the core of the inflammasome. It should be noted that although CETSA MS profiling did not reveal PLK1 as a direct target of rigosertib, NEK7 is a downstream target of PLK1 during mitotic spindle formation as it is regulated by the PLK1-dependent NEK9 activation. In addition, NEK7 shares along with PLK1, NEK6, and NEK9 a common phosphorylation-site motif, raising the possibility that these proteins can phosphorylate the same substrates. This provides a plausible explanation for why rigosertib was initially described as a PLK1 inhibitor.
Although rigosertib has been proposed to directly bind to tubulin at the colchicine-binding site, tubulins did not appear among the most significant targets in the CETSA MS experiments. To investigate this more rigorously, we profiled colchicine, a recognized tubulin-binding compound and classical anti-mitotic drug, alongside with rigosertib in K562 cells using the same two concentrations (2 and 20 μM). C and S4D show the scatterplot of CETSA logFC values at 20 μM of either rigosertib or colchicine in intact K562 cells. A clear colchicine-specific stabilization of several tubulins (both alpha and beta) was observed (green). Several proteins were stabilized by both colchicine and rigosertib (red) in a highly correlated manner, such as the microtubule-associated proteins CKAP2L and MAP7D1, which might indicate a similarity in the mechanism of action of the two compounds. While the CETSA MS profiles of colchicine and rigosertib were very similar in intact cells, they differed significantly in lysed K562 cells, where no common protein hits were identified. Notably, colchicine stabilized several tubulins in lysed cells, whereas rigosertib did not ( D). Thus, in the tested cell lines and experimental conditions, rigosertib does not seem to directly target tubulins, contradicting previous reports and suggesting that rigosertib’s effect on microtubules occurs via a different, indirect mechanism.

## Rigosertib-dependent ROS generation activates JNK signaling
Studies have shown that rigosertib treatment promotes reactive oxygen species (ROS)-dependent activation of the JNK1/2 pathway. , , To further define the events upstream of this stress signaling cascade, we investigated the roles of ERO1A and NQO2, the two ROS-related targets identified by CETSA MS. Consistent with previous studies, we detected a significant increase in ROS levels after 3 h of rigosertib treatment in H358 cells (shCo_vehicle vs. shCo_RGS 2 μM), measured by fluorescence live cell imaging using Mitotracker Green for ROS detection ( C; , , , and ). Importantly, ERO1A knockdown H358 cells showed reduced ROS accumulation after rigosertib treatment (shCo_RGS 2 μM vs. shERO1A_RGS 2 μM), while NQO2 knockdown cells only partially prevented the rigosertib-induced ROS generation (shCo_RGS 2 μM vs. shNQO2_RGS 2 μM) ( C; , , , and ). Notably, ERO1A was revealed by CETSA MS as the main target in H358 lysates treated with rigosertib 2 μM, while NQO2 was stabilized in H358 lysates and intact cells treated with higher rigosertib concentration ( C and 2E).

## Video S1. Live cell imaging video of the effect of DMSO treated shCo (control) on ROS generation in H358 (NSCLC-KRAS G12C) cells treated with rigosertib 2 μM for 3 h

## Video S2. Live cell imaging video of the effect of rigosertib treated shCo on ROS generation in H358 (NSCLC-KRAS G12C) cells treated with rigosertib 2 μM for 3 h

## Video S3. Live cell imaging video of the effect of rigosertib treated ERO1A knock-down on ROS generation in H358 (NSCLC-KRAS G12C) cells treated with rigosertib 2 μM for 3 h

## Video S4. Live cell imaging video of the effect of rigosertib treated NQO2 knock-down on ROS generation in H358 (NSCLC-KRAS G12C) cells treated with rigosertib 2 μM for 3 h

We next examined whether ERO1A and NQO2 influence JNK pathway activation. As expected, rigosertib treatment of H358 cells resulted in activation of c-JUN through phosphorylation of residues Thr183/Tyr185 ( E). The same experiment was performed in H358 cells with ERO1A and NQO2 knockdowns. E shows that activation of c-JUN was partially restrained in either ERO1A or NQO2 knockdown H358 cells, indicating their role in JNK activation through oxidative stress induction. We have detected a slight increase in the protein levels of NQO2 in ERO1A knockdown cells in a cell type and passage dependent manner ( E). We then performed a double knockdown of ERO1A and NQO2 in H358 cells ( F). The decreased phosphorylated Thr183/Tyr185 residues after double ERO1A/NQO2 knockdown compared to single knockdown of these two proteins after 3 h and 24 h treatment with rigosertib ( A, S6B, and F), indicated that both proteins are involved in rigosertib-dependent JNK signaling activation through ROS generation. These findings suggest that ERO1A and NQO2 are the upstream targets of rigosertib that cause ROS generation leading to JNK cascade activation. However, Zhou et al. reported that the inhibition of rigosertib-mediated ROS generation did not abrogate the inhibition of RAS/MEK/ERK signaling pathway in KRAS-mutant colorectal cancer cell lines. 

## Rigosertib's effect on microtubule polymerization
Further, we explored how rigosertib-induced cellular stress could lead to a destabilization of microtubules, since different studies have proposed that either rigosertib or its contaminant impurity directly bind to tubulin at the colchicine-binding site, and treatment of cells with colchicine or other microtubule destabilizing agents (MDAs) induce comparable activation of JNK and inhibition of RAS/RAF/MEK signaling. To explore the hypothesis that rigosertib directly binds to tubulin, we conducted in vitro tubulin polymerization experiments. A concentration-dependent inhibition of tubulin polymerization by clinical-grade rigosertib was defined, showing that only high micromolar concentrations of rigosertib inhibit in vitro tubulin polymerization ( A and S7B). Colchicine was used as a positive control and strongly inhibited tubulin polymerization. These results confirm CETSA MS data that rigosertib has no direct effect on microtubule depolymerization at least at the relatively lower concentrations tested.

## Rigosertib promotes inflammasome activation and cell death induction in patient-derived lung cancer organoids
To investigate the rigosertib-dependent cell death in cancer cells, as opposed to the low toxicity seen in normal cells, , we used three-dimensional (3D) patient-derived lung adenocarcinoma organoids (LPTOs), as well as 3D organoids established from normal tissues, which better recapitulate the biology of the patient tumor. The organoids derived from normal tissues (P2N and P4N) were developed in our lab from tissues surgically resected at Universitätsmedizin Mainz, while we also used three commercial lung adenocarcinoma organoids, which included two patient-derived organoids (LPTO54 and LPTO85) and a PDX-derived organoid (PDXO344). LPTO54 contains wt KRAS, whereas LPTO85 and PDXO344 harbor KRAS G12D or G12C mutation, respectively, which both result in the activation of KRAS. To characterize the 3D organoids, we firstly examined the expression of a key lung adenocarcinoma marker, the luminal epithelial marker cytokeratin 7 (CK7), as well as the ciliated cell marker acetylated alpha-tubulin (Ac-Tub) ( A). All organoids expressed both CK7 and acetylated alpha-tubulin, confirming their epithelial origin. In addition, the organoids were stained with the fluorescent dye 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) to determine the number of nuclei and to assess cell morphology. Based on the fluorescence intensity of DAPI signal, nuclei seemed to be more spread in rigosertib-treated cancer organoids compared to the vehicle group, indicating the loss of organoid (3D) formation due to the induction of cell death in rigosertib-treated organoids. 
We further determined the rigosertib effect on cell death initiation in the patient-derived lung cancer organoids using the the CellTiter-Glo3D assay. Rigosertib reduced the cell viability of both normal and cancerous organoids ( B). However, organoids from the KRAS wild-type patient (LPTO54) showed a significantly greater reduction (p ≤ 0.0001) in cell viability after 72 h of rigosertib treatment. Importantly, rigosertib also decreased the viability of the LPTO85 (KRAS G12D) (p ≤ 0,001) and PDXO344 (KRAS G12C) (p ≤ 0,001) organoids by at least 50% ( B). Supporting these findings, widefield microscopy demonstrated rigosertib-induced loss of membrane integrity in LPTO54 organoids compared to the control organoids after 72 h ( and ). Both LPTO54 and PDXO344 patients are positive to the lung adenocarcinoma prognostic marker thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) based on organoid immunohistochemistry (IHC) data and were classified as stage 1A. Meanwhile, LPTO85 were TTF-1 negative and classified as stage 1B. TTF-1 positivity in lung adenocarcinoma is associated with better progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival than in TTF-1 negative groups. This may explain the higher sensitivity of LPTO54 (TTF-1+, stage 1A, KRASwt) and PDXO344 (TTF-1 focal, stage 1A, KRAS G12C) organoids to rigosertib treatment compared to LPTO85 (TTF-1-, stage 1B, KRAS G12D) organoids.

## Video S5. Video from the LPTO54 organoids treatment with DMSO for 0 h, 24 h, 48 h, and 72 h obtained by widefiled microscope

## Video S6. Video from the LPTO54 organoids treatment with rigosertib for 0 h, 24 h, 48 h, and 72 h obtained by widefiled microscope

Recent studies described a rigosertib-dependent immunogenic cell death induction in colorectal cancer, as well as enhanced inflammatory cytokines secretion in colon cancer. The NLRP3 inflammasome is considered a critical component of the innate immunity that is responsible for pyropoptic cell death and proinflammatory cytokines secretion. , However, its diverse roles across different tumor types are still a challenging topic in terms of treatment strategies. Given the emerging evidence that ROS can activate the NLRP3 inflammasome, as well as the necessity of NEK7 for NLRP3 assembly and activation, we investigated whether NLRP3 inflammasome activation could be a consequence of rigosertib treatment. Upon inflammasome stimulation, the apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase recruitment domain (ASC) facilitates the recruitment of caspase-1 to the NLRP3 complex. Caspase-1 is a cysteine protease that cleaves the pyroptosis-mediator gasdermin (GSDMD) into two fragments. , , The GSDMD N terminus oligomerizes in membranes to form pores, allowing the secretion of the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and interleukin-18 (IL-18). , Thus, we assessed the effect of rigosertib treatment on the release of proinflammatory cytokines and activation of inflammatory cell death. The initiation of pyroptosis was monitored by a caspase-1 activity ELISA assay using the cell supernatant. As expected, caspase-1 activity was significantly increased after 48 h of rigosertib treatment in LPTO54 (p ≤ 0.0001) and LPTO85 (p ≤ 0,01) organoids, while there were significantly lower changes in caspase-1 activity observed in normal P2N and P4N organoids (p ≤ 0,05) ( C).
Cell viability and inflammatory responses were further validated biochemically by protein expression levels of apoptosis (cleaved caspase-3) and pyroptosis (cleaved GSDMD) mediators. Rigosertib treatment (2 μM, 72 h) did not lead to any significant caspase-3 activation in either normal or cancerous organoids ( D and 4F, upper panel). In contrast, GSDMD cleavage (p20) was significantly increased in LPTO54, aligning well with the activity profile of caspase-1 ( C). These data suggest that rigosertib-induced cell death in LPTO54 is likely executed by pyroptosis, while pathways other than pyroptosis and caspase-3-mediated apoptosis seem to be responsible for cell death observed in LPTO85 and PDXO344.

## Rigosertib activates NLRP3 inflammasome in THP1 cells
To further investigate the role of rigosertib on the NLRP3 inflammasome, we made use of THP1 (human monocytic cell line derived from an acute monocytic leukemia patient) cells, a common model to study monocyte/macrophage functions. THP1 monocytes were differentiated to macrophages by phorbol 12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA), and immune responses were stimulated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Consistent with our data obtained from lung cancer organoids, rigosertib treatment resulted in a significant activation of inflammatory responses. Caspase-1 activity was significantly increased upon rigosertib treatment of THP1 monocytes ( A). As expected after LPS treatment, both THP1 monocytes and macrophages showed elevated caspase-1 activity, while the addition of rigosertib in THP1 macrophages, significantly raised the caspase-1 activity levels. Besides, significantly higher IL-1β levels were detected by ELISA in the macrophages supernatants, after treatment with rigosertib ( B). Meanwhile, significantly higher IL-18 levels were detected in the rigosertib-treated macrophages after LPS stimulation ( C). Thus, the IL-18 and IL-1β rates are assumed to be a cell type-dependent factor. To further corroborate the involvement of the NLRP3 inflammasome in rigosertib-induced caspase-1 activation, we used bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) as a second model system. Infected BMDMs derived from mice were lacking key molecules (Nlrp3−/− or Asc−/−) involved in the activation of NLRP3 inflammasome dependent cell death. Whereas 18 h rigosertib treatment (2 μM) lead to clear induction of caspase-1 activity in the BMDMs derived from the wild-type mice; knockdown of either NLRP3 or ASC prevented caspase-1 activation ( D). The data presented herein confirm the rigosertib-dependent stimulation of inflammation and show the activation of caspase-1 through inflammasome assembly and consequent secretion of IL-1β and IL-18, which seems to be cell type dependent.

## Discussion
This study employed in vitro binding assays and competition experiments in HeLa and BHK-21 cells, revealing that rigosertib does not directly displace RAS from its RBD-containing effectors, indicating it does not function as a RAS mimetic. However, our experiments confirm that rigosertib inhibits EGF-induced RAS/RAF/MEK signaling after 18 h of treatment in serum-starved HeLa cells. It remains to be determined what causes the inhibition of RAS after only 2 h of rigosertib treatment and why the inhibition of its downstream effectors is “delayed” by several hours.
While rigosertib’s inhibition of RAS/RAF/MEK signaling contributes to its antitumor activity, its upstream target(s) remained unknown for years. To unravel its mechanism of action, we performed compressed CETSA MS profiling in intact HL60, H358, and K562 cells, along with their lysates. The analysis quantified more than 7,000 protein groups, representing a large portion of the soluble proteome. Only a few proteins showed clear and consistent rigosertib-induced thermal stability changes across different matrices. Among these were the ferrochelatase FECH and the oxygen-dependent coproporphyrinogen-III oxidase CPOX, both involved in the heme synthesis pathway. However, since both FECH and CPOX are common off-target binders for small molecules, they are unlikely to be responsible for rigosertib’s pharmacological effects. We also observed the stabilization of NQO2 and ERO1A in lysed cells. ERO1A is induced under persistent endoplasmic reticulum stress and is implicated in the generation of ROS. NQO2 produces ROS when derailed from its normal function by inhibitors or structural damage (direct) , and as deleterious byproduct of its normal activity (indirect). Studies have highlighted the role of elevated ROS in activating signaling pathways, including the JNK cascade, resulting in cell death. , Interestingly, a recent study suggested that targeting of NQO2 with curcumol in NSCLC cells induces ROS/ER stress and JNK pathway activation and sensitizes cancer cells to apoptosis. Collectively, these results support the proposed mechanism whereby rigosertib induces oxidative stress.
To characterize rigosertib’s anti-tumor effect on the RAS/RAF/MEK signaling pathway, we examined the model proposed by Ritt et al., which suggests that rigosertib indirectly inhibits MAPK signaling via an oxidative stress-mediated phospho-regulatory circuit. Our data align with this mechanism, where rigosertib-mediated stabilization, primarily of ERO1A and to a lesser extent NQO2, leads to ROS production and downstream activation of c-JUN. This results in the inhibitory hyperphosphorylation of key components of the stress signaling pathway, such as C-RAF. However, our data is also in line with Günther et al., who suggested that rigosertib-induced ROS production leads to DNA damage and cell death through JNK activation in breast and prostate cancer cells. Recently, researchers confirmed both RAS/MEK/ERK signaling inhibition and ROS generation in rigosertib-treated colorectal cancer cells, though these effects were independent of each other. 
Beyond JNK activation, rigosertib was proposed to directly bind to tubulin acting as a microtubule destabilizing agent. However, CETSA MS profiling did not show any direct binding of rigosertib to either tubulins or PLK1 kinase at concentrations up to 30 μM. Moreover, our experiments demonstrated that rigosertib can directly inhibit tubulin polymerization in vitro but only at high concentrations (>50 μM). Nonetheless, indirect perturbation of microtubules was observed in intact K562 cells, as evidenced by the destabilization of MAP7D1 and CKAP2L. Comparative analysis of known microtubule destabilizing compounds revealed NEK7 as another potential direct target of rigosertib. Remarkably, CETSA MS profiling revealed that rigosertib displayed similar sensitivity patterns on NEK7 as several microtubule disruptors, like vincristine, vinblastine, and vinorelbine, indicating its relevance to tubulin depolymerization. PLK1, which plays a role in spindle assembly and microtubule-kinetochore attachment, was reported to activate NEK7, which may explain why rigosertib was initially described as PLK1 inhibitor. Moreover, rigosertib and colchicine, a known microtubule destabilizer, induced a strikingly similar pattern of changes in the thermal stability of the proteome in intact K562 cells, suggesting a similar mechanism of action.
Since several reports describe the modulation of proinflammatory cytokines by rigosertib, , , , we investigated its effect on the inflammatory response using lung cancer and normal organoids as in vitro cancer models. Thanks to their 3D architecture, organoids offer unique properties for the preclinical investigation of oncogenic processes that are difficult to study in traditional in vitro systems. We observed limited viability of the rigosertib-treated organoids derived from lung adenocarcinoma patients, while organoids derived from normal tissues showed little cytotoxicity after treatment. We further assessed the activation/cleavage of GSDMD, caspase-1, and caspase-3 to determine the induction of pyroptosis and apoptosis in lung cancer organoids compared to normal ones. We observed robust induction of pyroptosis in LPTO54 organoids (wild-type RAS) as evidenced by significantly increased GSDMD cleavage and inflammatory caspase-1 activity in the cell supernatants of rigosertib-treated cancer organoids, while (caspase-3-dependent) apoptosis was not activated in any of the tested organoids. We expedited these findings by examining the effect of rigosertib on THP1 cells, demonstrating that rigosertib activates caspase-1 and triggers IL-1β and/or IL-18 secretion. It remains to be determined which type of cell death pathway causes the reduced viability of rigosertib-treated PDXO344 (KRAS G12C) and LPTO85 (KRAS G12D). Notably, we did not observe a significant change in MEK1/2 phosphorylation in any of the rigosertib-treated organoids suggesting that reduced MAPK signaling does not contribute significantly to the cell death observed in these organoids. This contrasts with previous observations in rigosertib-treated cell lines, likely reflecting the more complex and physiologically relevant architecture of organoids. Collectively, our data suggest that rigosertib is a multi-kinase inhibitor, which elicits its anti-tumor properties in a context-dependent manner through engagement of different pathways to induce cell death.
Although challenges remain in combining anticancer treatments with pyroptotic-inducing strategies, an increasing number of studies have found a variety of drugs, including the chemotherapeutics doxorubicin, paclitaxel, cisplatin, 5-FU etc., which can elicit tumor cell death by inducing pyroptosis. , , , , , Given the established role of inflammation in cancer development, regulation, and response to therapy, , the observed rigosertib-induced inflammatory signatures may enhance its anti-tumor efficacy by supporting the conversion of “cold” to “hot” tumors, a common hallmark of successful tumor treatment with immunomodulatory agents. This effect may provide significant clinical benefits in patients with NSCLC and other diseases by enhancing the effectiveness of different treatment strategies.
Overall, our study provides deeper insights into the mechanisms of action of rigosertib, highlighing cell type- and concentration-dependent modes of action. Rigosertib appears to be an effective compound for inhibition of RAS/RAF/MEK signaling, partially mediated by the engagement of ERO1A and NQO2 proteins, which drive ROS-dependent JNK activation in certain tumor and cell types. Depending on the tumor/cell/organoid type, however, inhibition of the oncogenic pathway may not depend on JNK activation (H358 cells, colorectal cancer cells ). Moreover, rigosertib’s ability to modulate the inflammatory responses suggests a reprogramming of the tumor immune environment, which may contribute to the synergistic effect seen with immune checkpoint inhibitors in both preclinical and clinical settings. These findings support rigosertib’s promise as a multi-faceted therapeutic agent, particularly in cancer treatments involving immune modulation.

## Limitations of the study
In this manuscript, we have primarily investigated two targets of RGS that are relevant to ROS production, despite the fact that multiple targets have been identified in a cell type- and concentration-dependent manner. While our focus is on these two targets, we cannot rule out the possibility that other targets may also contribute to RGS’s mechanism of action. Additionally, we show that at higher concentrations, RGS may act as a tubulin disruptor; however, it is uncertain whether such concentrations are achievable under clinical treatment conditions.
The experimental models used in this study did not account for sex- or gender-specific effects. Currently, there is no evidence suggesting that sex or gender influences the outcomes observed. However, the majority of research to date has focused on rigosertib’s general efficacy and mechanisms of action across various cancer types, with limited attention to potential sex- or gender-related differences. This represents a limitation of the present study as well.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Krishnaraj Rajalingam (krishna@uni-mainz.de).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability

•Data: CETSA-MS data have been deposited at Zenodo and are publicly available as of the date of publication. The accession number is listed in the .
•Code: The study did not generate new code.
•Other items: Original western blot images have been deposited at Zenodo. The accession number is listed in the . Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
The graphical abstract was drawn using Biorender.com.
This work was supported by the subproject TP05 of CRC1292 funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (10.13039/100004875DFG), Germany.

## Author contributions
P.K., H.Y., C.D., R.R., S.C., and S.M.F. contributed to the conceptualization, performed experiments, data curation, and analysis. A.C. contributed to the CETSA analysis. G.H. performed microscopy analysis. M.O. provided technical support. K.R. contributed to the design, analysis and supervision of the projet. P.K. and K.R. wrote the manuscript with inputs from all authors.

## Declaration of interests
K.R. is the founder and managing director of KHR biotech GmbH, SJP Biotec GmbH, and KRAS Research GmbH and has served as a consultant for Onconova therapeutics in the past. S.M.F. and S.C. were employees of Onconova therapeutics (now TRAWS pharma). A.C. is an employee of PelagoBioSciences.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Cell lines
HeLa cells and HEK-293T cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Sigma, F9665). BHK-21 cells were cultured in EMEM supplemented with 1x non-essential amino acid (GIBCO, M7145) and 10% FBS. H358 (KRAS G12C) cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) and stimulated, if needed, with 100 ng/mL human epidermal growth factor (EGF) (Cat# RP-10927, Invitrogen) for 5 min. THP1 monocytes cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) and differentiated into macrophages with 300 ng/mL phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) (Sigma, P1585) overnight. Then THP1 monocytes and macrophages were stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (Sigma, L6143) for 30 min and 6 h of 2 μM rigosertib treatment.
Sex of the cell lines.•HeLa: Female
•HEK-293T: Female
•BHK-21 (ATCC CCL-10): Male
•H358 (ATCC CRL-5807): Male
•THP1 monocytes: Male + Female

## Human tissue material
Normal human lung organoids were derived from tumor adjacent normal lung after tumor resection. Tissue samples used in this study were provided by the University Medical Center of the JGU Mainz. Written informed consent was obtained from all patients, and the study was approved by the ethical committee at the University Medical Center of the JGU Mainz.
Lung cancer organoids were purchased form Sigma and maintained according to the manufacturers instructions.
Sex of the used organoids:•LPTO54 (#SCC600): Male
•LPTO85 (#SCC601): Female
•PDXO344 (#SCC603): Male
•P2N and P4N: unknown

## Bone marrow derived macrophages (BMDMs)
Primary BMDMs (WT, Nlrp3-/- and Asc-/-) were kindly provided by Dr. Kanneganti (Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital). The cells were cultured and employed to assess caspase-1 activity as described in. Briefly, a culture medium was prepared with 290 mL IMDM (GIBCO, 12440-053) supplemented with 10% FBS, 150 mL L929-conditioned medium (Cellbiologics, 3368), 5 mL (1%) non-essential amino acids (Sigma, M7145), and 5 mL (1%) penicillin and streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 15070-063). Frozen cells were resuspended in 20 mL BMDM culture media. 70 μm cell strainer was used to filter the BMDM culture media containing the cells. The resulting cell suspension was plated, which contains the bone marrow progenitor cells, into two 150 mm tissue culture dishes by adding 10 mL to each. Then, an additional 10 mL of BMDM culture media was added to each dish. The plated bone marrow progenitor cells were incubated at 37°C for 3 days. Then, each dish was removed, and an additional 8 mL of BMDM culture media was added and returned to the incubator at 37°C. On day 5 after the initial plating, each dish was removed, and an additional 5 mL of BMDM culture media was added and returned to the incubator at 37°C. On day 6, the media from each dish was discarded and cells were gently scraped to perform the experiment. BMDMs were then seeded into 12-well plates with antibiotic-free medium at a density of 1 × 106 cells per well and incubated overnight. Next day, the culture media was replaced with stimulation media (DMEM supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS and antibiotics) and cells were treated with rigosertib 2 μΜ for 18 h. The supernatant was harvested for caspase-1 detection by Caspase-Glo® 1 Inflammasome Assay.

## Method details

## Thermal shift assay
Thermal Shift Assay reactions were prepared in triplicates in a MicroAmp Fast Optical 96-Well Reaction Plate (Applied Biosystems #4346907) using Protein Thermal Shift Dye Kit (Applied Biosystems #4461146). Each reaction well contained 1 μg of purified GST-C-RAF RBD fusion protein (Thermo Fisher Scientific #1862334) or purified GST, 1 μL DMSO or 1 μL of 2 mM rigosertib stock in DMSO, and Protein Thermal Shift Dye in 1x buffer, for a final reaction volume of 20 μL per well. Melt Curve experiment was performed with StepOne Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems) and data was analyzed with TSA-CRAFT software. 

## Competition assay for binding to C-RAF-RBD
Purified GST-C-RAF-RBD (2.5 μg per binding reaction) immobilized on beads was incubated at 4°C overnight with either DMSO or rigosertib (diluted in DMSO) at a final concentration of 2, 10 or 50 μM. HeLa cells were serum-starved for 18 h, and stimulated with EGF at 50 ng/mL for 5 min before preparation of cell lysates in RAS binding buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1% NP-40, 5% glycerol with protease inhibitor cocktail). For each condition, 200 μL of cell lysate were incubated with the binding reaction for 1h at 4°C.
For in vitro competition assay, 2.5 μg of immobilized GST-C-RAF-RBD per condition was incubated overnight at 4°C in 200 μL of RAS binding buffer containing DMSO, or 2, 10, or 50 μM of either rigosertib or ON01280.Na control compound. To prepare in vitro GDP- or GTPγS-loaded RAS, 0.1 μg of purified KRASwt was added to 100 μL RAS binding buffer with 2 μL of 0.5M EDTA, and incubated with 1 μL of 100 mM GDP or 10 mM GTPγS for 15 min on a ThermoMixer at 30°C. The loading reaction was terminated by placing the tube on ice and adding 6.4 μL of 1 M MgCl2. These loading reactions were then incubated for 1 h at 4°C with 200 μL of C-RAF-RBD binding reaction for each condition.
After incubation, the beads were washed twice with RAS binding buffer to remove unbound proteins, and resuspended in 50 μL of SDS-PAGE sample buffer (125 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 4% SDS, 10% glycerol, bromophenol blue, 0.1 M DTT). The levels of active RAS bound to C-RAF-RBD were then analyzed by Western blot.

## NanoBiT assay
The NanoBiT constructs were generated using N-terminal LgBit and C-terminal SmBit plasmids from Promega as described in our previous study. 
For in cell NanoBiT, BHK-21 cells were transfected with SmBiT-C-RAF-RBD and either LgBiT-KRAS G12C, LgBiT-KRAS G12V, LgBiT-NRAS G12V or LgBiT-HRAS G12V using PEI transfection reagent (Polyethylenimine, PEI 25000, Sigma). Cells were harvested 24 h after transfection, and seeded in a white 96-well plate. After an additional day, the medium was changed to serum free medium and treated for 2 to 8 h with rigosertib, ON02180.Na, rocaglamide (Active biochem), or ARS-1620 (Selleckchem, S8707).
For cell-free NanoBiT system, HEK-293T cells were transfected with SmBiT-C-RAF-RBD and either LgBiT-KRAS G12C or G12V. Total cell lysates were prepared 48 h after transfection in 1 mL of Passive Lysis Buffer (Promega). Cell lysates were dispensed in white 96-well plate (40 μg, 100 μL/well) with increasing concentration of rigosertib, ON02180.Na or ARS-1620, and incubated on ice for 2 to 4 h.
After treatment, Nano-Glo Live Cell Substrate (Promega N205A) was added to each well according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Luminescence was measured using a TECAN Spark microplate reader with an integration time of 1,000 ms.

## Active RAS pulldown
HeLa cells were cultured in 6-well plates in complete DMEM. Once the cells reach near confluence (70–80%), medium was exchanged to serum-free medium for 24 h before cell collection, and treated during the indicated time with rigosertib at 2 μM, colchicine at 100 nM (Sigma, C9754) and JNK inhibitor SP600125 at 10 μM (Selleckchem, S1460). After treatment, cells were stimulated with EGF at 100 ng/mL for 5 min. Total cell lysates were prepared in 400 μL of RAS binding buffer. Protein concentration was determined using Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay Reagent (Thermo Scientific), and then adjusted to obtain equal protein concentration for all the samples. Before active RAS pulldown, 20% of the total cell lysates was kept for Western blot analysis. C-RAF-RBD immobilized on agarose beads (20 μL) was added to the rest of lysate and rotated at 4°C for 1 h. After incubation, the beads were washed twice with RAS binding buffer, and resuspended in 50 μL of SDS-PAGE sample buffer for Western blot analysis.

## SDS-PAGE and western blotting
After a denaturation step of 5 min at 95°C, proteins were separated on 12%, 10% or 7.5% SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane for immunoblotting analysis. The membranes were blocked with 3% BSA/TBST (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% Tween 20) for one hour at room temperature, then incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibody diluted at 1/1,000 in 1% BSA/TBST. The membranes were then washed with TBST and incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibody diluted 1/40,000 in TBST for one hour at room temperature. After washes in TBST, the signal was visualized using Immobilon Western Chemiluminescent HRP Substrate (Millipore) and ChemiDoc Touch Imaging System (Bio-Rad). Quantification of immunoblots was performed with ImageJ 1.53c or Image Lab 6.0.1.

## Antibodies
Antibodies directed against C-RAF (#9422), p-c-RAF Ser338 (#9427), MEK1 (#2352), pMEK1/2 Ser217/221 (#9154), ERK1/2 (#9102), pERK1/2 Thr202/Tyr204 (#9101), p-SAPK/JNK (Thr183/Tyr185) (#4668), SAPK/JNK (#9252) and Caspase-3 (#9662) were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology. Anti-pan RAS (sc-166691), anti-GST (sc-138) and anti-SOS1 (sc-17793) antibodies were purchased from Santa Cruz. Antibodies directed against p-C-RAF Ser642 (SAB4301383) and Vinculin (SAB4200080) were obtained from Sigma. HRP conjugated β-Actin antibody (ab49900), anti-human GSDMD (ab210070), ERO1L (ab177156) and NQO2 (ab236917) were purchased from Abcam and anti-Cyclin D1 antibody (1677-1) from Abcam. Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated antibodies for Mouse and Rabbit IgG were obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific (A16066 and A16096, respectively).

## In vitro tubulin polymerization
In vitro tubulin polymerization assay was performed according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Tubulin Polymerization Assay Kit, Cytoskeleton, BK006P). The assay was performed with inhibitors indicated in the figure legend and the value was obtained by using TECAN Spark micro plate reader.

## NQO2 enzymatic activity assay
The enzymatic activity of the recombinant human NQO2 protein was determined spectrophotometrically at 25°C. 100 ng of recombinant NQO2 protein was mixed with 50 μL of 50 mM Tris-KOH buffer, pH 7.4, with 1 μM FAD, 0.01% Tween 20 and 0.18 mg/mL BSA. Varying concentrations of rigosertib were used into the reaction mix. Imatinib is known that inhibits the NQO2 activity and it was used as a positive control. Enzymatic reactions were initiated by adding 300 μM menadione as a substrate along with 500 μM 1-Methyl-1,4-dihydronicotinamide (NMEH) as a cosubstrate. 600 μM MTT was added at the end and the absorbance of the samples was measured at 595 nm.

## Thermal shift assay
4 × 106 H358 cells were treated with either dmso or rigosertib 20 μM for 6 h. Then, lysates were collected and gradient heating (30, 31.7, 34.8, 39.3, 45.3, 49.9, 53°C and 55°C) was performed by using qPCR. Western blotting was used to detect the differences in the denaturation of ERO1A and NQO2 proteins after treatment with rigosertib.

## Lentiviral-mediated knockdown of CETSA MS revealed targets
All shRNAs plasmids were purified from the MISSION shRNA Human Library (Sigma) following manufacturer’s instructions. As control the non-targeting control shRNA (shCo) MISSION pLKO.1 puro (Cat# SHC001) was included.
shRNA targeting ERO1L (ERO1Α), NQO2 and NEK7
shERO1L TRCN0000059754, NM_014584.1-752s1c1,
CCGGGCTGAATATGTAGATTTGCTTCTCGAGAAGCAAATCTACATATTCAGCTTTTTG
shNQO2 TRCN0000304012, NM_000904.3-849s21c1,
CCGGCCACTCCAGCATGGCACATTACTCGAGTAATGTGCCATGCTGGAGTGGTTTTTG.
For the production of lentiviral particles, the following packaging plasmids were used: pHDM-G (encoding VSV-G), pHDM Hgpm2 (encoding codon-optimized HIV gag-pol proteins), pHDM tat 1b (encoding HIV Tat1b protein) and pRC CMV-Rev1b (encoding HIV rev protein). Lentiviral particles were generated following standard protocols. In short, lentiviral supernatants were produced in 293T cells by co-transfection of the cells with lentiviral packaging plasmids (0.3 μg each), lentiviral expression constructs (1 μg) and 10.8 μL of 10 mM polyethylenimine (PEI). The viral particles were harvested after 48 h and sterile-filtered. H358 cells were infected with lentiviral particles in the presence of 10 μg/mL of polybrene (Cat# sc-134220, Santa Cruz). Cells were then selected with puromycin 2.5 μg/mL (Cat# 0240.3, Carl Roth), until a stable knockdown was achieved.

## siRNA transfection
siRNAs were purchased from Qiagen.
siERO1L FlexiTube siRNA 5 nmol, siRNA Name: Hs_ERO1L_5, Cat# SI03135384.
Sense strand: 5′-AAGTGACTACTTTAGGTATTA-3′
siNQO2 FlexiTube siRNA 5 nmol, siRNA Name: Hs_NQO2_2, Cat# SI00661290.
Sense strand: 5′-CCGCATGTGTCTGTATTCATA-3′
Negative control siRNA (siCo) Cat# 1027310
2 × 105 cells/well in 12-well plates were transfected with the transfusing Lipofectamine RNAiMAX Transfection Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 13778030) by spinoculation according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For the spinoculation transfection, cells were centrifuged at 800 x g for 30 min at 32°C with the transfection reagents. Medium was exchanged 24 h post-transfection for medium without FBS and cells were treated with rigosertib 2 μM. Depending on the type of the experiment, 3 or 24 h after treatment, lysates were harvested for protein extraction. In addition, the knockdown was verified by Western blot.

## Transient transfections of stably transfected cells
H358 cells stably transfected with shRNA targeting ERO1L (ERO1A), NQO2 or with control empty vector shRNA (shCo) were transiently transfected with either a negative control siRNA (siCo), siERO1L or siNQO2 in the presence of transfusing Lipofectamine RNAiMAX Transfection Reagent. After overnight transfection, medium was exchanged to serum-free medium with rigosertib 2 μM for 3 or 24 h. Cells were analyzed by western blot.

## Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
Secreted protein concentration of IL-18 and IL-1β were measured by ELISA. The assays were performed according to manufacturer’s instructions (Human IL-18 ELISA Kit, Cat# BMS267-2, Human IL-1 beta Uncoated ELISA, Cat# 88-7261, and Mouse IL-1 bets ELISA Kit, Cat# BMS6002, Invitrogen).

## Caspase-1 activity
The caspase-1 activity was measured using the Caspase-Glo® 1 Inflammasome Assay (Promega, G9952). The assay was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions.

## Live-cell imaging and cell tracking analyses
ERO1A and NQO2 knockdown H358 cells were cultured in sterile chambers (1 × 104 cells/well) (μ-slide 8-well, ibidi) and treated with rigosertib 2 μM along with CellROX Green Reagent (Thermofisher, C10444) at a final concentration of 5 μM. The chamber with the treated cells was kept under 5% CO2, 37°C, and 90% humidity in a OkoLabs environmental incubator (H-301K environmental chamber, Oko Touch, Oko Pump, T-Control, and CO2 control, OkoLabs) on the Leica Confocal microscope table, and the green fluorescence due to ROS generation was detected.
The images of the live cells were acquired with a Leica SP8 confocal microscope using a 10 ×0.3 NA objective, with 488 nm excitation and emission window of 500 nm–560 nm for ROS detection and with simultaneous scanning differential interference contrast transmission imaging in a 1178 μm × 1178 μm frame format with 400 lines per second, 1.15 μm/pixel (1024 × 1024 pixel per frame), and with two times averaging per line with a frame acquisition of every 15 min per selected position within the chamber. The images were first acquired in multiple regions of each cell type for greater than 3 h.
The image sequences were imported into Imaris version 9.3.1 and detected automatically by fluorescence with both the whole-cell spot and whole-cell surface analysis. Then the image sequences processing was done using ImageJ/Fiji. The fluorescence was then selected and reported for all cells within the whole picture frame from each time point (every 15 min for 3 h), and the average fluorescence was measured and comparatively reported from each frame from the start to the end point. The same procedure was followed for all the 3 independent experiments. The graphs were created with GraphPad Prism (RRID:SCR_002798), and significance was determined using two-way ANOVA test.

## Organoid derivation from lung tissue
Fresh tissue was cut into small pieces, transferred into conical tubes and incubated for 60 min at 37°C with 18.75 Units Collagenase II (Worthington Biochemical corporation #LS004174), 200 μg Hyaluronidase (Sigma-Aldrich #H4272) and 500 μg Primocin (InvivoGen #ant-pm-1) in 10 mL basal medium (advanced Dulbecco`s modified Eagle medium (DMEM)/F12 medium supplemented with 10 mM HEPES and 1x GlutaMAX) on a shaker. Pieces were resuspended vigorously and FCS was added to neutralize the digestion solution. Tubes were spin down and the pellet washed with basal medium (400 x g at 4°C). If necessary, the pellet was treated with TrypLE Express (Gibco #12605010) for 5 to 15 min at 37°C and wash with basal medium. The cell suspension was filtered through a 70 μM cell strainer and after one more washing resuspended in Matrigel for organoid derivation.

## Culture of lung normal and 3dGRO LUAD human organoids
Lung organoids and 3dGRO LUAD organoids (Sigma-Aldrich #SCC600, #SCC601 and #SCC603) were embedded in Matrigel (Corning #356255) and four 10μL drops of embedded organoids were pipetted to each well of a 24 well plate (40 μL/well). For polymerization, plates were incubated upside down for 45–60 min at 37°C. Matrigel domes containing lung or 3dGRO LUAD organoids were overlaid with 500 μL of lung organoid or 3dGRO lung organoid media, respectively. Lung organoid media: Basal medium supplemented with 1x B27 supplement (Thermo Fisher Scientific #12587–010), 50 μg/mL Primocin (InvivoGen #ant-pm-1), conditioned medium produced in-house: 20% R-spondin1 (RSP1) conditioned medium, 10% mNoggin conditioned medium, 1.25 mM N-acetyl-L-cysteine (Sigma-Aldrich #A9165), 5 mM Nicotinamide (Sigma-Aldrich #N0636), 500 nM A83-01 (TGF-βi) (Tocris Bioscience #2939), 500 nM SB 202190 (p38i) (Tocris Bioscience #1264), 25 ng/mL FGF7 (Peprotech #100-19) and 100 ng/mL FGF10 (Peprotech #100-26). 3dGRO lung organoid media: Basal medium supplemented with 1x B27 supplement (Thermo Fisher Scientific #12587–010), 50 μg/mL Primocin (InvivoGen #ant-pm-1), conditioned medium produced in-house: 10% mNoggin conditioned medium, 1.25 mM N-acetyl-L-cysteine (Sigma-Aldrich #A9165), 500 nM A83-01 (TGF-βi) (Tocris Bioscience #2939), 25 ng/mL FGF7 (Peprotech #100-19) 100 ng/mL FGF4 (Peprotech #100-31), 250 nM CHIR 99021 (Miliporesigma #SML1046) and 100 nM SAG (Enzo #ALX-270-426-M001). 10 μM Rho kinase inhibitor Y-27632 (Abmole #M1817) was included for the first 2 days after first seeding or splitting.
For passaging, Matrigel domes were incubated with cell recovery solution (Corning #354253) for 45-60min at 4°C and if necessary, pellets were treated with TrypLE Express for 3–5 min at 37°C. Medium was refreshed every 2–3 days.
RSP1 and mNoggin (kind gift from Henner F Farin, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy, Frankfurt) conditioned medium was produced according to the methods described in Farin et al. and Wallaschek et al. , 

## Immunofluorescence staining, clearing and image acquisition of organoids
Organoids were stained as previously described by van Ineveld et al. In brief, organoid media was removed and the Matrigel domes were washed once with ice-old PBS. Cell recovery solution was added and the plate was incubated on a shaker for 60 min at 4°C. Released organoids were then transferred to a 15 mL conical tube previously coated with Anti-Adherence Rinsing Solution (Stemcell #07010) and washed with ice-cold PBS (700 x g for 10 min at 4°C). Pellets were resuspended with ice-cold 4% PFA and incubated for 45 min at 4°C. After incubation, 10 mL of PBS with Tween 20 were added and tubes were spin down at 4°C. Organoids were then block with ice-cold organoid washing buffer (OWB) for at least 15 min at 4°C and subsequently transferred to a 48-well plate. Organoids were stained with primary antibodies (Cytokeratin 7 [1:300], Thermofisher #MA5-32173, Acetylated Tubulin [1:300], Sigma #T7451) in OWB overnight on a shaker at 4°C. Stained organoids were washed three times with OWB with mild shaking and incubated overnight with secondary antibodies (α-rabbit AlexaFlour 488 [1:500], Invitrogen #A-11008, α-mouse AlexaFlour 647 [1:1,000], Invitrogen #A-21235) and DAPI (0.5 mg/mL) at 4°C on a shaker. Organoids were washed three times with OWB with mild shaking, transferred to 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes and spin down. Pellets were resuspended in around 60 μL FUnGI, incubated for 20 min at RT and transferred to slides with coverslips. Samples were analyzed with confocal microscopy using Leica SP-8 microscope (20x, oil immersion) and image processing was done using ImageJ/Fiji.

## Cell viability assay Glo 3D
Organoid cell viability was determined using CellTiter-Glo 3D Cell Viability Assay (Promega #G9682) following the manufacters intructions. In brief, organoids were realeased from Matrigel using Cell recovery solution and washed with ice-cold PBS. Pellets were resuspended in 100 μL PBS and transferred to an opaque 96-well plate. Both the plate and the Glo3D solution were incubated at RT for 30 min and 100 μL of Glo3D solution was added to each well. The plate then placed on a shaker (800 rpm) for 5 min and incubated in the dark for 25 min. Luminescence acquisition was done on a TECAN reader.

## Live cell imaging of organoids
Organoids were imaged every 24 h using an inverted widefield microscope (Leica DMi8 S TIRF) equipped with an incubation housing system for temperature and CO2 controlling. Brightfield images were taken with a 5x objective, analyzed using ImageJ/Fiji and are shown after Extended Depth of Field processing. 

## CETSA
Sample matrix HL60, H358 and K562 cells were cultured in at 37°C, 5% CO2 in medium with supplements according to standard protocols. For the experiment, the cells were pelleted, washed with Hank’s Balanced Salt solution (HBSS, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and pelleted again. Cell viability was measured with trypan blue exclusion and cells with a viability above 90% were used. For the experiment, cell pellets were re-suspended in CETSA buffer (20 mM HEPES, 138 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, pH 7.4) and used as the 2x cell suspension.
For the lysate experiment, cells were lysed by three rounds of freeze-thawing. The lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 30,000 x g for 20 min and used immediately in the CETSA experiment constituting the 2x lysate. For the experiment on intact cells, the cells were incubated with compound at 2 or 20 μM final concentration for 60 min at 37°C. For the lysate experiment, cells were subjected to three freeze/thaw cycles with liquid nitrogen followed by centrifugation at 30,000 x g for 20 min. The supernatant was used as the 2x matrix for the profiling in clarified lysate. The lysate was then incubated with the compound at 2 or 20 μM final concentration for 15 min at room temperature.

## Compounds
Rigosertib (RGS) was provided by Onconova Therapeutics as dry powder and stored at −20°C. Colchicine was procured as dry powder from Cayman Chemical. For the experiment RGS was dissolved in water, while Colchicine in DMSO as 10 mM stock solution.

## Compressed CETSA MS experiment
For each experiment, the cell suspension or cell lysate was divided into four aliquots each and mixed with an equal volume of either of the two compound concentrations or positive control at 2x final concentration in the experimental buffer. The resulting final concentrations of the compound was 2 and 20 μM; 30 μM for the positive control, 1% DMSO was used as a negative (vehicle) control. Incubations were performed as described above.
Each of the treated cell lysates or cell suspensions were divided into nx12 (12 temperature points, n number of replicates, n = 5 for compound-treated and vehicle, n = 1 for positive control) that were all subjected to a heat challenge. After heating, the cell suspensions were subjected to 3 freeze/thaw cycles. All temperature points for each test condition were pooled to generate individual (compressed) samples.
Precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation and supernatants constituting the soluble protein fraction were kept for further analysis.

## Protein digestion and labeling
Equal amounts of total protein from each soluble fraction were subjected to reduction, denaturation and alkylation with 2-chloroacetamide. Proteins were subsequently digested with Lys-C and trypsin.
After complete digestion had been confirmed by nano LC-MS/MS, samples were labeled with 16-plex Tandem Mass Tag reagents (TMTPro, Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

## LC-MS/MS analysis
For each TMT16-plex set, peptides were separated by multidimensional chromatography, and highresolution MS/MS data was acquired with Q Exactive HFx (Thermo Scientific).

## Protein identification
Protein identification was performed by database search against 95,607 human protein sequences in Uniprot (UP000005640, download date: 2019-02-21) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm as implemented in the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software package. Data was re-calibrated using the recalibration function in PD2.4 and final search tolerance setting included a mass accuracy of 10 ppm and 50 mDa for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. A maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites was allowed using fully tryptic cleavage enzyme specificity (K, R, no P). Dynamic modifications were oxidation of Methionine, and deamidation of Asparagine and Glutamine. Dynamic modification of protein N-termini by acetylation was also allowed. Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine, TMTPro-modification of Lysine and peptide N-termini were set as static modifications.
For protein identification, validation was done at the peptide-spectrum-match (PSM) level using the following acceptance criteria; 1% FDR determined by Percolator scoring based on Q-value, rank 1 peptides only.

## Quantification and statistical analysis

## Quantification and statistical analysis LC-MS/MS
For quantification, a maximum co-isolation of 50% was allowed. Reporter ion integration was done at 20 ppm tolerance and the integration result was verified by manual inspection to ensure the tolerance setting was applicable. For individual spectra, an average reporter ion signal-to-noise of >20 was required. Further, shared peptide sequences were not used for quantification.
Protein intensities were normalized ensuring same total ion current in each quantification channel. Intensity values were then log2-transformed and aligned between treatments and replicates, so as each protein has the same mean intensity in all treatments and replicates. To estimate effect size (amplitude) and p-value (significance) of the protein hits, compound-induced protein stability changes relative to the vehicle control were evaluated using moderated t-test implemented in the limma R-package. Benjamini-Hochberg correction is applied to the t-test derived p-values to adjust for multiple comparison. ns: not significant p > 0.05, (∗) p ≤ 0.05, (∗∗) p ≤ 0.01, (∗∗∗) p ≤ 0.001, (∗∗∗∗) p ≤ 0.0001.

## Quantification and statistical analyses immunoblots
Quantification of immunoblots was performed with ImageJ 1.53c or Image Lab 6.0.1. For statistical analyses, at least three independent experiments (n = 3 biological replicates) were performed. p-values were calculated using one-way or two-way ANOVA in Prism version 10.3.0 (507), with p < 0.05 considered statistically significant. Where indicated in the figure legends, statistical significance was determined using two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, or one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. Data are presented as the median, mean with standard deviation (SD), or mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM), as specified in the figure legends. ns: not significant p > 0.05, (∗) p ≤ 0.05, (∗∗) p ≤ 0.01, (∗∗∗) p ≤ 0.001, (∗∗∗∗) p ≤ 0.0001.

## Statistical analyses NanoBit-Assays
NanoBit assay data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism 10.3.0 (507). Luminescence values were first background-corrected and normalized to the control condition. For comparison between two groups, an unpaired, two-tailed Student’s t test was performed to determine statistical significance. All data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) from three independent biological replicates (n = 3). ns: not significant p > 0.05, (∗) p ≤ 0.05, (∗∗) p ≤ 0.01, (∗∗∗) p ≤ 0.001, (∗∗∗∗) p ≤ 0.0001.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S8

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2025.112748.