pmcPLoS BiolPLoS Biol212plosbiol101183755plosPLOS Biology1544-91731545-7885PLOSPMC12700454PMC12700454.112700454127004544138552010.1371/journal.pbio.3003521PBIOLOGY-D-25-029501Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyBacteriologyBacterial PhysiologyBacterial SporulationBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMicrobial PhysiologyBacterial PhysiologyBacterial SporulationBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCell ProcessesCell Cycle and Cell DivisionBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyBacteriologyBacterial PhysiologyBacterial SporesBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMicrobial PhysiologyBacterial PhysiologyBacterial SporesResearch and Analysis MethodsImaging TechniquesFluorescence ImagingBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene Identification and AnalysisGenetic ScreensBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesCell WallsBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGenomicsBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryEnzymologyEnzymesHydrolasesBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsEnzymesHydrolasesIdentification of sporulation genes in Bacillus anthracis highlights similarities and significant differences with Bacillus subtilis
A comprehensive set of B. anthracis sporulation genesRamírez-GuadianaFernando H.ConceptualizationData curationInvestigationMethodologyValidationWriting – original draft BroganAnna P.Data curationFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – review & editing YuYuanchenInvestigationWriting – review & editing MidonetCarolineInvestigationWriting – review & editing SherJoel W.Software SchmidErnst W.MethodologySoftwareWriting – review & editing RoneyIan J.Investigation https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0236-7143RudnerDavid Z.ConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionProject administrationSupervisionWriting – original draft 1
Department of Microbiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America2
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of AmericaGoleyErin DanielleAcademic Editor .

## Data Availability
Raw Tn-seq sequence reads are available in the Sequence Read Archive (Accession: PRJNA1303624). Original and uncropped minimally adjusted images of the Western blot shown in the manuscript can be found in .

## Introduction
Bacillus anthracis endospores are the infectious biological entities that cause the zoonotic disease anthrax. Upon abrasion, ingestion, or inhalation, spores access subcutaneous tissues, gastrointestinal mucosa, or alveolar spaces where they are phagocytosed by macrophages, germinate, and cause cutaneous or systemic disease [ – ]. Because vegetative cells survive poorly in the environment, the cycle of germination, growth, and sporulation is critical to B. anthracis pathogenesis [ ]. Although anthrax is often associated with bioterrorism, most human cases arise from contact with infected animals or contaminated animal products [ , , ]. Environmental fluctuations due to climate change, deforestation, and agricultural encroachment have increased seasonal anthrax outbreaks in endemic areas and have led to the emergence of new zoonotic pathogens from the Bacillus cereus group, which includes B. anthracis [ , – ]. A deeper understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying B. anthracis sporulation and germination will facilitate the development of strategies for more effective disease prevention and treatment.
For over half a century, the nonpathogenic soil bacterium Bacillus subtilis has served as a model for sporulation and germination of endospore-forming pathogens like B. anthracis. Molecular, genetic, and cytological studies in B. subtilis have identified virtually all the genes required for these processes and defined the molecular basis for how this organism enters and exits dormancy (reviewed in [ – ]). By contrast, only a handful of sporulation and germination factors have been characterized in B. anthracis and other members of the B. cereus group [ ]. Almost all of these are homologs of B. subtilis proteins. Phylogenetic studies suggest that B. subtilis and B. anthracis shared a common ancestor >800 million years ago [ ], suggesting that there are likely to be similarities and differences between sporulation and germination in the two species. Here, we leveraged high-throughput genetics and modern molecular approaches to investigate how good a model B. subtilis has been for this important human pathogen.
Sporulation in B. subtilis and B. anthracis involves a set of highly orchestrated morphological processes. Upon nutrient limitation, both species initiate endospore formation [ , ]. The first landmark event in this process is an asymmetric division that generates a large cell (called the mother cell) and a smaller cell (the prospective spore or forespore). After polar division, the mother cell membranes migrate around the spore in a phagocytic-like process called engulfment, generating a cell within a cell. Membrane fission at the cell pole releases the forespore into the mother cell cytoplasm. The mother cell then assembles a set of protective layers around the forespore, while the prospective spore prepares for dormancy. Upon maturation, the mother cell lyses, releasing the spore into the environment.
This differentiation process takes ~7 hours in B. subtilis and requires >140 genes that are controlled by a series of stage- and compartment-specific transcription factors [ , , ]. Although the mother cell and forespore follow distinct programs of gene expression they remain linked through signal transduction pathways. Entry into sporulation is governed by two transcriptional regulators: the response-regulator Spo0A and the stationary phase sigma factor σH. The proteins produced under their control shift the cell division site from a medial to a polar position. These regulators are also responsible for the expression of compartment-specific transcription factors that are held inactive prior to polar division. Asymmetric division triggers the activation of the first cell-type-specific sigma factor σF in the forespore. σF controls the expression of several forespore proteins, including a secreted signaling molecule that activates the first mother cell transcription factor σE. Proteins produced under σE control degrade the septal peptidoglycan that separates the two cells and promote the migration of the mother cell membranes around the forespore. During this process, a transenvelope complex is assembled in the membranes that separate the mother cell and forespore. This complex, which resembles a specialized secretion system, allows the mother to maintain forespore physiology and developmental gene expression [ – ]. After the completion of engulfment, a second forespore transcription factor σG produces two signaling proteases that are secreted into the space between mother and forespore membranes where they trigger the activation of the mother cell transcription factor σK. A large set of proteins produced under the control of σE and σK in the mother cell is responsible for assembling a thick layer of spore-specific peptidoglycan between mother cell and forespore membranes and a multi-layered proteinaceous coat on the spore exterior [ ]. In addition, σG in the forespore controls the expression of proteins that prepare the spore for dormancy, including DNA-binding proteins that compact and protect the spore chromosome; a membrane complex that imports dipicolinic acid, facilitating spore dehydration and heat-resistance; and germinant receptors that enable the dormant spore to detect nutrient signals and trigger exit from dormancy [ , ]. Finally, a set of cell wall degrading enzymes produced in the mother cell under σK control induce mother cell lysis and release of the mature spore.
Here, we performed a high-throughput sporulation screen in B. anthracis using transposon-insertion sequencing. Our screen identified over 150 potential sporulation genes, more than half of which encode homologs of B. subtilis sporulation factors. To validate the hits from the screen, we constructed an ordered transposon-mutant library that contains ~70% of the nonessential genes in B. anthracis. We analyzed a subset of Tn mutations that, in B. subtilis, impair polar division, engulfment, forespore and mother cell transcription, signaling between the two compartments, and maintenance of forespore physiology. In almost all cases, the B. anthracis mutants had similar although not identical morphological defects. We investigated a subset of the 50+ genes that were critical for sporulation in B. anthracis but not in B. subtilis and performed a thorough characterization of a gene that is unique to B. anthracis. The detailed characterization of this factor revealed that B. anthracis-specific sporulation factors modulate pathogen-specific growth and physiology in ways that facilitate efficient sporulation. Altogether, our findings indicate that B. subtilis is an excellent model for spore formation in B. anthracis and also highlight the importance of directed studies in the pathogen. The genetic and molecular tools established here will enable mechanistic dissection of B. anthracis sporulation, illuminate adaptations linked to pathogenesis, and enable deeper exploration of developmental processes across the B. cereus group.

## Results

## A screen for mutants defective in B. anthracis sporulation
To screen for sporulation-defective mutants by transposon-insertion sequencing (Tn-seq) [ ], we built a plasmid-based transposon delivery system for B. anthracis modeled after one used previously for B. subtilis [ ]. This plasmid harbors a temperature-sensitive replicon, a hyperactive allele of the mariner-Himar1 transposase, and a spectinomycin resistance cassette flanked by inverted repeats recognized by the transposase (see Materials and methods). An MmeI restriction site was engineered into one of the inverted repeats to aid in the preparation of the sequencing library. Using this system, we generated a library with >106 transposants in the plasmid-less Sterne strain 9131 and mapped the insertion sites by next generation sequencing (see Materials and methods). The library contained >170,000 unique insertions that were well distributed across the genome ( ), with a Tn insertion, on average, every 35 bp. Using EL-ARTIST [ ] to analyze the results of this Tn-seq experiment, we identified essential genes in the parental strain. Of the 5,456 genes in the B. anthracis genome, 400 were predicted to be essential for growth in BHI medium ( ).
 We used the Tn library to screen for genes required for spore formation, heat-resistance, germination, and outgrowth. The library was grown in Phage Assay (PA) medium and at the onset of starvation, an input sample was collected and the remaining culture was sporulated by nutrient exhaustion ( ). The culture was harvested seven hours after starvation, a time when Sterne strain 9131 produced the maximum number of heat-resistant spores (see Materials and methods). The culture was then incubated at 65 °C for 30 min to kill vegetative cells and sporulation-defective mutants. The spores were plated on BHI agar plates and ~106 colonies from the germination-proficient spores were pooled. Finally, the transposon-insertions at the onset of starvation and after sporulation, heat treatment, germination, and outgrowth (for simplicity, referred to as sporulation) were mapped by next generation sequencing. The location and number of reads for each transposon-insertion were compared between the input and output samples ( and ). We identified >200 genes in which transposon-insertions were statistically (Mann–Whitney U; p ≤ 0.05) underrepresented by ≥3-fold after sporulation compared to the onset of starvation ( and – ). Visual inspection of the transposon-insertion profiles revealed that ~22% of these genes had relatively few insertions at the onset of starvation and most of these were not considered further. In total, our screen identified 159 putative sporulation genes in B. anthracis.

## Similarities between B. anthracis and B. subtilis sporulation
In B. subtilis, ~142 genes are required for efficient sporulation [ ]. Our Tn-seq screen identified 79 of these as putative sporulation genes in B. anthracis (magenta circles in and – ). Among the 142 B. subtilis sporulation genes, 74 have “spo” names and 56 of these display strong sporulation defects (≤5% sporulation efficiency compared to wild-type (WT)) when mutated. Our B. anthracis sporulation Tn-seq screen identified 38 of these ( ). shows the Tn-seq profile from a small region of the B. anthracis genome that contains three of these spo genes, spoIIGA, spoIIGB (sigE), and spoIIIG (sigG). Fig A in contains Tn-seq profiles that highlight 11 additional B. anthracis spo genes. Of the 56 B. subtilis spo genes with strong sporulation defects, 18 were not identified in our B. anthracis Tn-seq screen. Two barely missed our cutoff (spoIIAB, spoVM) and two (spo0A, spo0H) had almost no insertions at the onset of sporulation. Eleven have paralogs in B. anthracis (e.g., spoIIP, spoIIIJ, and spoIVH) and might require the loss of both genes to impair sporulation. In addition, the sigK gene that encodes pro-SigmaK, is not interrupted by an intervening (skin) element in B. anthracis [ ]. Accordingly, B. anthracis has a single sigK gene rather two gene fragments (spoIVCB, spoIIIC) and lacks spoIVCA that encodes the recombinase that excises the skin element during sporulation. This accounts for two more missing genes. The final gene was spoIISB which encodes an anti-toxin that inhibits the SpoIISA toxin during sporulation in B. subtilis [ ]. Thus, SpoIISA is unlikely to impair sporulation in B. anthracis. We conclude that most of the core sporulation factors in B. subtilis are required for spore formation in B. anthracis.
B. subtilis has an additional 19 genes that do not have spo names but, when mutated, have strong sporulation defects (≤5% sporulation efficiency compared to WT). Among these, 10 were hits in our B. anthracis screen ( ). Of the remaining 9, one barely missed the cutoff (gerM); one (ricT) had insertions exclusively at the 3′ end of the gene after sporulation; two (ricA, ricF) had virtually no insertions at the onset of sporulation; and three (asnO, yqhT, and ccdA) have putative paralogs. The remaining two genes (fin and putB) were unambiguously not underrepresented in the B. anthracis screen, suggestive of real differences in sporulation between B. anthracis and B. subtilis. Finally, similar to B. subtilis, a subset of the genes in the TCA cycle were hits in the B. anthracis screen, while several others were essential ( ).
Altogether, these findings suggest that the core machinery that drives spore formation is hard-wired in both the model and pathogen. We note that 63 of the B. subtilis sporulation genes with more mild mutant phenotypes were not identified in our screen. Although some of these genes are not present in B. anthracis (yerC, skfE, and skfF), the failure to identify the others (e.g., racA, sirA, fisB, spoVIGA, and spoVIGB) suggests that our screen was not sensitive enough to detect them or that they are not critical for sporulation in B. anthracis.

## Differences between B. anthracis and B. subtilis sporulation
Our Tn-seq screen identified 58 putative sporulation genes in B. anthracis that are present in B. subtilis but have not been reported to be required for efficient sporulation in the model (yellow circles in and ). None of these genes were identified as hits in a previous B. subtilis sporulation Tn-seq screen [ ]. Among the 58 genes, 25 of them are induced during B. subtilis sporulation but have modest or no reported phenotypes [ , , ]. The identification of the B. anthracis homologs in our screen, underscores species-specific differences and highlights the importance of investigating sporulation in the pathogen. shows the Tn-seq profile from a small region of the B. anthracis genome that contains one of these B. anthracis genes, yyaC. Fig B in compares Tn-seq profiles from regions of the B. anthracis and B. subtilis genomes that contain five hits (yyaC, yqfT, yhfN, ytxC, and ysxE) in the B. anthracis screen but not the B. subtilis screen.
Finally, our Tn-seq screen uncovered 22 putative sporulation gene in B. anthracis that are not present in the B. subtilis genome (cyan circles in and ). One such gene, locus 04176 (renamed ipdA), is illustrated in and two additional examples are shown in Fig C in .

## Validation of hits from the screen
To experimentally validate hits from the sporulation screen, we constructed an ordered Tn mutant library using the Knockout Sudoku method [ ] (See Materials and methods). Briefly, ~52,000 transposants from our Tn library were arrayed in 96-well plates and saturated cultures from the arrayed mutants were distributed combinatorially into 47 distinct pools. These pools were sequenced and individual Tn mutants mapped to their unique well in the arrayed library based on the pools in which the mutant was identified. We then cherry-picked a mutant from all represented genes in the library to generate a condensed collection. This nonredundant quality-controlled collection contains 3,826 Tn mutants that represent ~70% of the 5,456 genes in the B. anthracis genome.
To test the hits from our screen, we transduced the Tn mutations into Sterne strain NR-9401. This strain sporulates asynchronously, but the total number of heat-resistant spores that can be recovered after 30 hours of nutrient exhaustion is approximately 10-fold higher and more reproducible than the plasmid-less strain we used to build the ordered mutant library (see Materials and methods). In total, we tested the sporulation efficiency of 71 hits from our screen. Of these, 62 were validated, with sporulation efficiencies ranging from <0.0001% to 40%. Forty-three of these had sporulation efficiencies of ≤5% compared to WT. The complete dataset can be found in – .

## Analysis of conserved sporulation genes
Our data indicate that homologs of many of the well-characterized B. subtilis sporulation genes are important for efficient sporulation in B. anthracis ( ). To investigate whether these factors play similar roles in the morphological process of sporulation, we optimized conditions to visualize B. anthracis sporulation by fluorescence microscopy. shows a comparison of a sporulation time course of WT B. subtilis and the plasmid-less B. anthracis Sterne strain. Other than the striking difference in cell size, the morphological process of sporulation was similar between model and pathogen. To monitor gene expression in the mother cell and forespore compartments, we generated transcriptional reporters in which the spoIIQ promoter was fused to yfp and the spoIID promoter was fused to cfp. In B. subtilis, spoIIQ is expressed under the control of the first forespore-specific transcription factor σF and spoIID is controlled by the mother cell-specific transcription factor σE [ , ]. As can be seen in and Fig D in , the B. anthracis promoters have similar compartment-specific expression patterns to those in B. subtilis. We selected five genes (spoIIE, spoIIR, spoIID, spoIIQ, and spoIIIAE) that have been extensively characterized in B. subtilis and analyzed the B. anthracis Tn mutants during sporulation by fluorescence microscopy.
 

## spoIIE.
In B. subtilis, the dual-function membrane phosphatase SpoIIE promotes the shift from medial to polar division at the onset of sporulation and is required for the activation of σF in the forespore after cytokinesis [ – ]. The failure to activate σF in the ∆spoIIE mutant prevents the signal transduction pathway that activates σE in the mother cell [ ]. Similarly, the B. anthracis spoIIE::Tn mutant was delayed in polar division (Figs D and E in ) and failed to activate σF in the forespore and σE in the mother cell ( ). At later time points, the forespore compartments enlarged and the sporangia became wider with additional septa. These pleiotropic phenotypes have not been reported for the B. subtilis spoIIE mutant and hint at potential differences between the two species.

## spoIIR.
The B. subtilis SpoIIR protein is produced under σF control in the forespore and functions as a secreted signal that activates σE in the mother cell [ , ]. Sporulating cells lacking spoIIR fail to activate σE. In the absence of σE-directed gene expression, a second asymmetric septum is formed at the opposite cell pole, generating a disporic mutant [ ]. The B. anthracis spoIIR::Tn mutant had similar phenotypes ( and Fig D in ). In addition and similar to the B. anthracis spoIIE::Tn mutant, a subset of the developmentally arrested cells formed additional septa at late timepoints (Fig E in ).

## spoIID.
B. subtilis spoIID encodes a cell wall hydrolase required for the morphological process of engulfment [ – ]. After polar division, SpoIID is produced in the mother cell under the control of σE [ ]. The protein specifically localizes to the polar septum where it degrades the septal PG and promotes the movement of the mother cell membranes around the forespore [ , ]. Sporulating cells lacking SpoIID arrest at a very early stage of engulfment with a characteristic membrane bulge at the septal midpoint, due to the activity of a second PG hydrolase SpoIIP [ ]. The B. anthracis spoIID::Tn was impaired in engulfment; however, unlike the B. subtilis mutant, engulfment was arrested when the mother cell membranes had migrated approximately halfway around the forespore ( , Fig D and E in ). These findings suggest additional PG hydrolases in B. anthracis can initiate engulfment, but SpoIID-mediated cell wall cleavage is critical for the late stages of membrane migration.

## spoIIQ.
In B. subtilis, SpoIIQ has been implicated in several steps in spore morphogenesis. SpoIIQ is a bitopic membrane protein produced in the forespore under σF control [ ]. SpoIIQ specifically localizes to the septal membrane through interactions with the bitopic SpoIIIAH protein and the lipoprotein GerM that are both produced in the mother cell [ – ]. These transenvelope interactions promote the migration of the mother cell membrane around the forespore during engulfment [ ]. Sporulating cells lacking spoIIQ have a modest but reproducible delay in engulfment. SpoIIQ-SpoIIIAH-GerM also reside in a larger transenvelope complex called the SpoIIQ-SpoIIIA complex that is required to maintain forespore development and is thought to function as a feeding tube that allows the mother cell to nurture the developing forespore [ – , ]. In the absence of SpoIIQ, B. subtilis sporulating cells fail to assemble this complex, shrink in size, and have large membrane invaginations [ ]. They also fail to maintain forespore gene expression. The mutant phenotype of B. anthracis spoIIQ::Tn was more pleiotropic ( , Fig D and E in ). The early stages of engulfment looked similar to WT with modest delays. However, at later time points the forespores appeared heterogenous with a subset arrested prior to the completion of engulfment. Finally, the forespores at this late time point had membrane blebs but did not appear to shrink. We contrast these phenotypes with the spoIIIAE::Tn mutant phenotype described below.

## spoIIIAE.
spoIIIAE encodes one of the proteins in the SpoIIQ-SpoIIIA complex [ ]. In B. subtilis, sporulating cells lacking spoIIIAE have a similar phenotype to the spoIIQ mutant: the engulfed forespores shrink, the spore membranes develop large invagination, and forespore gene expression cannot be sustained [ ]. The B. anthracis spoIIIAE::Tn mutant had similar yet distinct phenotypes. Engulfment in the mutant was similar to WT; however, in most cases, the forespores barely grew in size ( , Fig D and E in ). The diminutive forespores lacked the membrane invaginations observed in the B. subtilis spoIIIAE mutant. Although the spoIIIAE::Tn mutant activated σF in the forespore and σE in the mother cell at early stages in sporulation, by hour 4, the σF activity reporter (YFP) was no longer detected in most forespore compartments ( , Fig D in ). A loss of metabolic potential in the forespore could impair ongoing synthesis of YFP, but cannot explain the loss of fluorescence from the existing pool. Our findings suggest that this normally stable protein unfolds or is degraded in the spoIIIAE::Tn mutant. Altogether, these phenotypes support the idea that the SpoIIIA proteins are required to maintain the metabolic potential of the forespore and suggest that the loss of potential is experienced by the B. anthracis forespore at an even earlier stage of development. These data also indicate that SpoIIQ is not as critical for this process in B. anthracis, which is reminiscent of the modest phenotypes observed in sporulating B. subtilis lacking SpoIIQ’s interaction partner SpoIIIAH [ ].
In summary, our analysis indicates that the well-characterized sporulation factors in B. subtilis play similar but, in several cases, not identical roles in B. anthracis. These findings highlight the power of B. subtilis as a model and the importance of follow-up studies in the pathogen.

## Sporulation genes that are important in B. anthracis but are not critical in B. subtilis
Fifty-eight of the B. anthracis genes that were hits in our sporulation screen have B. subtilis homologs that are not required for efficient sporulation in the model. We chose seven (yyaC, yhfN, yqfT, yuzB, ysxE, ytxC, and murAB) to characterize further. We focused on genes that are induced during sporulation in B. subtilis [ , ] but have not been reported to have mutant phenotypes. We anticipated that the B. anthracis Tn mutants might have interesting morphological defects, and we liked the idea that studies on the pathogen could inform the model.
The B. subtilis yyaC gene is expressed under the control of σF in the forespore and encodes a soluble protein that is predicted to be in the peptidase HybD-like domain superfamily (IPR023430). Foldseek [ ] predicts that YyaC is structurally similar to the B. subtilis germination protease Gpr that is expressed at a later stage in sporulation [ ]. B. anthracis has a true Gpr homolog, suggesting that, if YyaC is a protease, it has a different function. Analysis of the yyaC::Tn mutant by fluorescence microscopy revealed that at a late stage in sporulation the forespores become shrunken with large membrane invaginations ( and Fig Fa in ). These defects are similar to the “collapsed forespore” phenotype in B. subtilis spoIIQ and spoIIIA mutants [ ] and raise the possibility that YyaC-mediated degradation of forespore proteins is critical to maintain metabolic potential of the developing spore. We also observed increased cell lysis at late stages of sporulation in the yyaC::Tn mutant ( ), suggesting that loss of forespore metabolic potential leads to mother cell lysis.
 A second mutant, yqfT::Tn, also had collapsed forespores. However, these forespores had abnormal and heterogeneous morphologies and appeared to lose the ability to maintain compartmentalization ( and Fig Fa in ). At late stages of differentiation, the σF and σE fluorescent reporters were present in both compartments of the sporangia. The B. subtilis yqfT gene is expressed under σE control and encodes a soluble protein of unknown function. How this mother cell protein supports forespore development in B. anthracis remains to be discovered.
One of the B. anthracis mutants, yuzB::Tn, was impaired in entry into sporulation (Fig Fa in ) and 4 hours after nutrient exhaustion only a small subset of cells had polar septa ( ). yuzB is not expressed during sporulation in B. subtilis and encodes a small soluble protein. Foldseek predicts that YuzB has a thioredoxin fold, suggesting this protein could be involved in maintaining the cellular redox state as B. anthracis exhausts its nutrients. Two of the mutants we analyzed, yhfN::Tn and ytxC::Tn, produce dormant spores that were more spherical than WT ( and Fb in ). Aside from this subtle phenotype, the mutants appeared to undergo differentiation normally. Several of the mutants, exemplified by ysxE::Tn, produced normal-looking spores yet had a strong sporulation defect ( and Fb in ). These mutant spores fail to mature and could have defects in DPA accumulation, core dehydration, or germination.
Finally, we analyzed the B. anthracis murAB::Tn mutant. MurAB and its essential paralog MurAA catalyze the first committing step in PG precursor synthesis [ ]. A recent B. subtilis study, using a sensitized background that is partially impaired in engulfment, reported a more pronounced engulfment defect when murAB was also deleted [ ]. However, B. subtilis sporulating cells that only lack murAB had no phenotype. Interestingly, the B. anthracis murAB::Tn mutant was severely impaired in sporulation (Fig G in ). The nutrient-exhausted cells had morphological defects at early stages of sporulation, followed by impaired polar division, defects in engulfment, and spore lysis (Fig G in ). These data suggest that MurAB is more critical for cell wall synthesis during starvation and sporulation and could reflect a greater division of labor between the two paralogs in B. anthracis compared to B. subtilis.
Altogether, our initial characterization of the B. anthracis sporulation genes that have B. subtilis homologs with weak or undetectable mutant phenotypes indicates that there are several additional factors required for sporulation in B. anthracis. Since 25 of these genes are induced during sporulation in B. subtilis, our findings suggest that some of these factors may play similar roles in B. subtilis, but alternative genes or pathways exist that compensate for their absence. Synthetic lethal sporulation screens with the B. subtilis mutants could be a fruitful path to revealing their function. Alternatively, enrichment screens in B. anthracis (see below) could guide functional characterization.

## 04176 (IpdA) is required for the morphological process of engulfment
Finally, we turned out attention to a putative sporulation factor 04176 that is unique to B. anthracis. Based on the experiments described below, we have renamed this protein IpdA for Inhibitor of polysaccharide deacetylases. The ipdA::Tn mutant is severely impaired in sporulation (<0.01% of WT) ( and ) and fluorescence microscopy indicates that ipdA::Tn mutant cells are engulfment-defective and have septal membrane bulges that protrude into the mother cell cytosol ( and Fig H in ). This phenotype is reminiscent of B. subtilis mutants lacking the engulfment cell wall hydrolases SpoIID ( ) or SpoIIP [ , , ]. Importantly, expression of ipdA in trans restored efficient sporulation and normal engulfment to the ipdA::Tn mutant, confirming that the defects were attributable to the loss of IpdA ( and ).
 IpdA is a small soluble protein with a predicted signal peptide. It does not have a B. subtilis homolog based on a BLAST homology search. However, Foldseek predicts that IpdA is structurally similar to B. subtilis IseA ( ), a secreted inhibitor of cell wall hydrolases that contain NlpC/P60 catalytic domains [ – ]. Neither IseA nor the NlpC/P60 peptidoglycan hydrolases have been implicated in sporulation in B. subtilis (Fig Ia in ) and our analysis of an iseA mutant indicates that sporulation is unaffected in its absence ( and Fig Ib in ).
To investigate whether B. anthracis ipdA is induced during sporulation, we fused its promoter to yfp and monitored fluorescence during a sporulation time course. As can be seen in , ipdA was induced at an early stage of sporulation, prior to asymmetric division ( and Fig J in ). Consistent with the idea that ipdA is controlled by the response-regulator Spo0A, its promoter region contains four near-consensus Spo0A binding motifs [ ]. By contrast, analysis of an iseA transcriptional reporter revealed that it is not specifically induced during B. subtilis sporulation (Fig J in ), consistent with our findings that it is not required for successful sporulation.
B. subtilis IseA inhibits NlpC/P60 cell wall hydrolases by binding the catalytic groove of these enzymes (Fig Ka in ) [ ]. Importantly, several of these enzymes are required for cell separation after cytokinesis. Based on the structural similarity between IseA and IpdA, our initial hypothesis was that IpdA also inhibits PG hydrolases that function in cell separation during vegetative growth. In this model, the absence of IpdA leads to inappropriate septal PG cleavage after polar division resulting in septal bulges. To investigate this idea, we analyzed sporulating cells lacking the mother cell transcription factor σE in the presence and absence of IpdA. In B. subtilis, σE controls the expression of the engulfment cell wall hydrolases SpoIID and SpoIIP [ ]. If IpdA inhibits vegetative cell wall hydrolases then sporulating cells lacking σE and IpdA should have septal bulges, while the matched ipdA+ cells should not. As can be seen in and Fig H in , no septal bulges were observed in the sigE::Tn mutant in the presence or absence of IpdA. These findings suggest that IpdA does not inhibit the vegetative PG hydrolases and instead is required to promote or enable the cell wall degrading activities of the engulfment enzymes. Consistent with the idea that IpdA does not inhibit NlpC/P60 cell separases, AlphaFold-multimer (AF-M) did not predict interactions between IpdA and any of the B. anthracis NlpC/P60-containing PG hydrolases (Fig Kb in ).

## Evidence that IpdA inhibits the polysaccharide deacetylase PdaN to promote engulfment
To investigate IpdA function, we performed a one-by-all AF-M screen, in which IpdA was folded pairwise with each protein in the B. anthracis proteome. Five independent models were generated for each prediction and the confidence metrics were analyzed using a published pipeline [ ]. An average model score was assigned to each prediction based on how well the predicted contacts agreed across the five models, and the average predicted alignment error (pAE) across the contact region in the best model was measured ( ). Hits with an average model score ≥3 and an average pAE ≤ 5 Å were considered strong candidates. Forty proteins met these criteria ( ) of which 12 were predicted to be secreted or membrane anchored ( ). In a complementary approach, we performed a classical genetic enrichment for suppressors of the ∆ipdA mutant. Four independent cultures of the mutant were subjected to cycles of sporulation, heat-kill, and reinoculation into sporulation medium. After 3–5 cycles, the sporulation efficiency of each culture increased >1000-fold. A single colony from each was re-tested ( ) and the suppressor mutations identified by whole–genome sequencing. Three of the suppressors mapped to gene 04184 and one mapped to gene 02960 ( ). The 04184 protein is a member of the YkyA protein family (PF10368) that is annotated as a putative cell wall binding lipoprotein, although we could not find experimental evidence for PG binding. Based on our characterization of 04184, we have renamed the gene pdcF for polysaccharide deacetylase co-factor. 02690 is homologous to a putative secreted polysaccharide deacetylase YheN (or PdaN) in B. subtilis [ ] and we used the PdaN nomenclature for 02690 ( ). Previous biochemical studies of B. anthracis PdaN indicate that it can deacetylate N-acetyl-glucosamine (GlcNac) in vitro [ ]. Importantly, PdaN was among the strongest hits in our AF-M screen ( ). Furthermore, three other polysaccharide deacetylases (00373, 05406, and 02021) [ ] were also strong hits ( ). We validated pdcF and pdaN as suppressors of ∆ipdA using the Tn-insertion mutants ( ). Both loss-of-function mutants improved sporulation efficiency by >1000-fold.
 shows the high-confidence AlphaFold3-predicted IpdA-PdaN complex. Importantly, residues in a short α-helix of IpdA are predicted to bind and block PdaN’s catalytic pocket. Similar complexes are predicted for the other three deacetylases (Fig L in ). PdcF (04184) is predicted to be a lipoprotein with a four-helix bundle. Strikingly, AlphaFold3 (AF3) predicts a high-confidence interaction between PdaN and PdcF ( and Fig Ma and N in ), suggesting the two proteins function as a complex and may require each other in vivo for proper deacetylase activity. Importantly, AF3 predicts that IpdA can bind and inhibit PdaN in the context of the PdcF-PdaN complex ( and Fig Mb in ). Transcriptional reporters in which the pdaN and pdcF promoters were fused to yfp indicate that both factors are expressed during vegetative growth (Fig O in ), consistent with the model that they act together to modify the envelope during growth. In support of this idea, expression of both genes, but not either one alone, in B. subtilis caused impaired growth (Fig Pa in ). Furthermore, fluorescence imaging revealed that co-expression of pdaN and pdcF specifically impaired cell elongation, resulting in short chubby cells ( and Fig Pb in ). These morphological defects are strikingly similar to the phenotypes associated with B. subtilis cells depleted of the PG hydrolases CwlO and LytE required for cell wall elongation [ , ]. Collectively, these findings argue that PdaN and PdcF act together to deacetylate peptidoglycan, blocking cell wall cleavage.
Although the pdaN::Tn mutant significantly suppressed the sporulation defect of ∆ipdA ( ), it only modestly suppressed the engulfment defect ( ). By contrast, pdcF::Tn was more effective at suppressing the septal bulges in the ∆ipdA mutant. These data raise the possibility that additional deacetylases are inhibited by IpdA and these enzymes might impair engulfment in the ∆ipdA pdaN::Tn background (see Discussion). Similarly, our findings also suggest that PdcF is required for the activity or membrane localization of one or several additional deacetylases. In support of this latter model, vegetative B. anthracis cells lacking pdcF but not pdaN are more susceptible to lysozyme than WT (Fig Q in ). Since deacetylation provides high-level lysozyme resistance in B. anthracis [ ], this result argues that PdcF functions as a co-factor for several deacetylases and in its absence the cell wall is more acetylated and susceptible to lysozyme.
To investigate whether IpdA inhibits PdaN as predicted by the structural prediction, we substituted alanines for the three residues (N73, Q76, and D80) predicted to bind and occlude PdaN’s catalytic pocket. Consistent with the AF3 prediction, this protein variant failed to rescue the ∆ipdA mutant ( ). Immunoblot analysis of IpdA-His during a sporulation time course revealed that the levels of the IpdA variant were reduced relative to the WT protein ( ). The reduced protein levels could be due to instability caused by the amino acid substitutions or could result from a failure to interact with PdaN, leading to release of the mutant protein into the medium. We tentatively conclude that IpdA binds and inhibits PdaN in a manner predicted by AlphaFold.
Altogether, our data are consistent with a model in which induction of IpdA at the onset of sporulation inhibits PdaN and possibly other vegetative deacetylases. The acetylated PG sugars ensure that the sporulation-specific cell wall hydrolases can efficiently cleave the septal PG and promote engulfment. To further investigate this model, we co-expressed PdaN and PdcF in B. subtilis cells at the onset of sporulation and visualized the engulfment process over time. As can be seen in and Fig R in , engulfment was impaired and many cells had septal bulges similar to those observed in the B. anthracis ∆ipdA mutant. Importantly, the engulfment defects required expression of both proteins (Fig R in ). We observed similar septal bulges in sporulating B. subtilis cell when we induced the expression of B. subtilis pdaC at the onset of sporulation (Fig R in ). PdaC is a membrane anchored MurNAc deacetylase that is not normally produced during sporulation [ , ]. We conclude that one or both of the engulfment hydrolases in B. subtilis require acetylated peptidoglycan to degrade the septal cell wall. We infer that the B. anthracis enzymes require a similar substrate and that induction of IpdA at the onset of sporulation ensures the septal PG remains sufficiently acetylated ( ) (See Discussion).
 

## Discussion
Altogether, our Tn-seq screen identified 159 genes as potential sporulation factors in B. anthracis. Validation using our ordered transposon-mutant collection confirmed 87% of the tested hits, suggesting ~139 of the identified factors are required for efficient sporulation. Among these, we identified 79 genes that have B. subtilis homologs required for sporulation; >50 conserved genes that, in B. subtilis, are not critical for spore heat-resistance although several are induced during sporulation; and >20 B. anthracis genes required for sporulation that are not present in B. subtilis. The full dataset, the ordered mutant collection, and the tools we generated, provide a strong foundation for follow-up studies on these newly identified sporulation factors.
An important limitation of our study arises from the use of heat-resistance as the sole criterion for successful spore formation. Sporulation genes that contribute to other spore resistance properties were likely missed. For example, genes that encode coat and exosporium proteins are largely absent from our dataset. Most of these proteins are not critical for heat-resistance but protect spores from enzymatic degradation of the spore peptidoglycan or function in adhesion [ , ]. Several of these factors have been identified and characterized based on homology and through proteomic studies [ ]. The further characterization of these proteins and others will benefit from the ordered Tn collection.
Earlier work used a transposon site hybridization (TraSH) assay to screen for B. anthracis genes required for growth, sporulation, and germination [ ]. This study identified 31 genes with B. subtilis homologs required for sporulation or germination, many of which were hits in our screen. Most of the other genes identified in the TraSH assay were not found in our Tn-seq screen, likely because mutants impaired in growth after germination were among the hits in the TraSH screen [ ]. Nonetheless, this study was the first to suggest that B. subtilis is a worthy model for B. anthracis. Our results confirm and extend this conclusion. We have found that most of the core sporulation factors that drive morphogenesis in B. subtilis are required for endospore formation in B. anthracis and our cytological analysis of a subset of these factors suggest that they have similar functions. Several B. subtilis factors with more modest sporulation defects, like RacA that anchors the replication origins at the cell poles [ ], SirA that inhibits additional rounds of replication [ , ], or FisB that catalyzes membrane fission [ ] were not identified as B. anthracis sporulation genes in out screen. Directed experiments will be required to assess their contributions to morphogenesis in the pathogen. We also did not identify any of the sensor kinases that initiate the sporulation program in B. subtilis. The B. subtilis kinases have relatively modest phenotypes due to functional redundancy and pioneering work by Hoch and Perego indicates that the degree of redundancy among sporulation histidine kinases in B. anthracis is equally high [ , ].
Although most of the core sporulation machinery is shared between model and pathogen, our identification of >70 genes that are required for sporulation in B. anthracis but not B. subtilis points to meaningful differences in the sporulation program between the two species. Among the >50 genes that are present in both species but are only required for sporulation in B. anthracis, 25 are induced during sporulation in B. subtilis [ , ]. We suspect that the B. subtills homologs play similar roles in sporulation but their absence can be compensated for by other factors or pathways. The characterization of these genes in both B. anthracis and B. subtilis will provide insight into how and why these factors became more critical in the pathogen. It will also be interesting to investigate whether the remaining 25+ genes that are required in B. anthracis sporulation but not B. subtilis sporulation as well as the genes that are unique to B. anthracis are specifically induced during sporulation as was the case with ipdA ( ). Over two decades ago, DNA microarrays were used to profile genes that are induced during sporulation in B. anthracis [ ]. These experiments defined five waves of gene expression during sporulation and identified >2000 genes that are growth phase-regulated. Some of the genes that we identified here were among this set. Transcriptional profiling using RNA-seq during sporulation in WT and in mutants lacking the sporulation transcription factors will supplement this earlier profiling study and will provide an important complement to the sporulation Tn-seq dataset described here.
It is noteworthy, that unlike B. anthracis, the molecular mechanisms underlying endospore formation in Clostridiodes difficile have striking differences in the factors and pathways that drive morphogenesis compared to B. subtilis [ – ]. Key differences include the absence of a phospho-relay that governs entry into sporulation in B. subtilis and likely B. anthracis; differences in cell-type-specific transcription factor activation throughout differentiation; and differences in the factors involved in engulfment and cortex assembly. Finally, the germination pathway in C. difficile lacks the canonical germination receptors found in B. subtilis that function as ligand-gated ion channels. Instead, germinants are thought to be sensed by two soluble pseudoproteases CspA and CspC that, in turn, activate a subtilisin-like serine protease CspB. CspB proteolytically activates the cortex degrading enzyme SleC. Thus, germination in C. difficile proceeds from “outside in” rather than “inside out” in B. subtilis and B. anthracis [ ]. Phylogenetic studies suggest that B. subtilis and C. difficile shared a common ancestor ~2.5 billion years ago [ , ] (compared to the ~800 million years between B. subtilis and B. anthracis). We suspect that the differences in sporulation in C. difficile are partly due to this deeper branching but also the differences in niches in which B. subtilis and B. anthracis reside and differentiate into dormant spores. Future studies into C. difficile and B. anthracis sporulation have the potential to reveal aspects of the morphogenetic pathways that are more plastic and those that are more hard-wired. Finally, the work described here provides a roadmap for similar genome-wide studies into endospore formation in species that reside between C. difficile and B. subtilis on the phylogenetic tree.
Finally, we turn to IpdA, a newly discovered B. anthracis sporulation factor that is not present in B. subtilis. IpdA is expressed at the onset of sporulation, prior to asymmetric cell division. Our genetic analysis and structural predictions suggest that IpdA inhibits the polysaccharide deacetylase PdaN and likely other PG deacetylase, enabling proper engulfment to occur ( – ). B. anthracis encodes 10 secreted polysaccharide deacetylase [ ], several of which contribute to the high level of deacetylation of the B. anthracis peptidoglycan during growth [ ]. More than 88% of the glucosamine residues and ~34% of the muramic acid residues lack N-acetyl groups in B. anthracis [ ]. These modifications are associated with host lysozyme resistance and capsule attachment [ ]. By contrast, during B. subtilis vegetative growth, only 17% of the glucosamine residues lack N-acetyl groups and virtually all muramic acid residues are N-acetylated [ ]. Unsurprisingly, B. subtilis is highly susceptible to lysozyme (Fig Qa in ). Our data support the model that the IpdA-inhibition of PdaN and likely additional deacetylases identified in our AF-multimer screen ensure sufficient acetylated peptidoglycan to enable the cell wall hydrolase activity of SpoIID and/or SpoIIP that thins the septal PG and promote migration of the membranes around the forespore ( – ) [ , , ]. Future studies will focus on testing the predictions of this model for IpdA function. More generally, our findings provide an example of how differences in the cell biology between B. anthracis and B. subtilis translate into distinct requirements for successful sporulation. We hypothesize that other pathogen-specific sporulation factors exist that remodel the cell envelope of vegetative B. anthracis as it enters sporulation. These factors could ensure the removal of B. anthracis’ surface layer (S-layer) proteins, capsule, or neutral cell wall polysaccharides, none of which are present in the B. subtilis envelope.
Furthermore, our identification and characterization of IpdA highlight the potential for new discoveries that extend beyond the sporulation pathway. Specifically, our findings indicate that members of YkyA/PdcF protein family function as membrane tethers and co-factors for secreted enzymes like PdaN. Gene neighborhood analysis identified several examples of genes encoding YkyA/PdcF family members adjacent to secreted polysaccharide deacetylase genes (Fig Sa in ). In all cases, AF3 predicted that these proteins interact in a manner similar to PdcF and PdaN (Fig Sb in ). Furthermore, the Pfam database has several examples of fusions between a YkyA/PdcF domain and putative enzymatic domains (Fig T in ). Again, AlphaFold predicts these domains interact in a manner similar to PdcF and PdaN (Fig T in ). In addition, our characterization of IpdA led us to discover that IseA-family members can inhibit distinct enzymes involved in modifying the cell wall. As discussed above, B. subtilis IseA inhibits NlpC/P60 endopeptidases that cleave the peptide crosslinks of peptidoglycan. Another IseA-family member, Tai3, functions as an immunity factor of a type VI effector protein called Tae3 in Ralstonia pickettii ( ) [ ]. Tae3 is a D,D-endopeptidase that lyses target cells by cleaving crosslinks in the peptidoglycan [ ]. Tai3 prevents Tae3-mediated autolysis. Interestingly, all three IseA-family members inhibit their targets in different ways. IseA binds the catalytic groove of its target endopeptidases through an unstructured region that mimics the stem peptide ( ) [ ]. Tia3 inhibits Tae3 using part of the same unstructured loop but binds its target in a distinct manner [ ] ( ). Finally, IpdA is predicted to interact with PdaN using a short α-helix that lies adjacent to this unstructured region, making contacts with residues that surround the catalytic pocket ( and ). We hypothesize that the IseA fold is readily evolvable to inhibit enzymes that cleave or modify extracytoplasmic glycopolymers. We suspect that IseA-family members inhibit a diverse collection of cell wall remodeling enzymes and that the IseA scaffold could be used to evolve novel and potent inhibitors.

## Conclusions
Our genome-wide analysis demonstrates that while B. subtilis provides an excellent framework for understanding sporulation, B. anthracis and likely other pathogens utilize distinct mechanisms with species-specific factors. Our work highlights how differences in cell envelope biology necessitate unique adaptations for successful spore formation. These findings underscore the dual themes of conservation and innovation that shape bacterial developmental programs. The datasets, tools, and conceptual framework we provide establish a foundation for dissecting sporulation in B. anthracis and we hope will catalyze comparative studies of other spore-forming Bacilli and Clostridial species.

## Materials and methods

## Bacterial strains and media
B. anthracis strains were cultured in brain-heart infusion (BHI) broth or agar. When required, BHI medium was supplemented with chloramphenicol (5 µg/mL), erythromycin (5 µg/mL), kanamycin (25 µg/mL), or spectinomycin (300 µg/mL). Sporulation of B. anthracis was induced at 37 °C by nutrient exhaustion in PA medium [ ]. B. subtilis strains were grown in Luria–Bertani (LB) broth or agar. When required, LB medium was supplemented with chloramphenicol (5 µg/mL), erythromycin (1 µg/mL) plus lincomycin (25 µg/mL), or spectinomycin (100 µg/mL). Sporulation of B. subtilis was induced at 37 °C by nutrient exhaustion in supplemented Difco Sporulation medium (DSM) [ ] or by resuspension according to the method of Sterlini–Mandelstam [ ]. Sporulation efficiency was determined in 24–30-hour cultures as the total number of heat-resistant (B. anthracis: 65 °C for 30 min, or B. subtilis: 80 °C for 20 min) colony forming units (CFUs) compared to WT heat-resistant CFUs. The transposon-sequencing screen and the transposon-mutant collection were constructed in BaR1, the plasmid-free Sterne derivative of B. anthracis 9131 [ ]. For sporulation efficiency assays, transposon mutants were transduced into BaR6 (B. anthracis Sterne NR-9401). B. anthracis 9131 (BaR1) spores are more adherent to glass and plastic tubes reducing the accuracy of CFU quantification. B. subtilis strains were derived from the prototrophic strain PY79 [ ]. B. subtilis insertion-deletion mutants were from the Bacillus knock-out (BKE) collection [ ] or were generated by direct transformation of plasmids into B. subtilis. All strains, plasmids, and oligonucleotide primers can be found in Tables A–C in , and a description of plasmid constructions can be found in Supplemental Methods in .

## CP51-mediated transduction
A temperature-sensitive mutant of the generalized transducing phage CP51 was used to transduce antibiotic-marked alleles [ ]. Briefly, the donor strain was grown in BHI supplemented with 0.5% glycerol, then mixed with phage CP51 and PA soft agar. The mixture was poured onto nutrient broth/yeast extract/glycerol (NBYG) agar plates and incubated overnight at 30 °C. The transducing lysate was prepared by collecting the soft agar and resuspending it in BHI supplemented with 0.5% glycerol, 10% dimethyl sulfoxide, and 20 mM MgSO4, followed by filtration through a 0.45 μm filter. The recipient strain was grown in BHI supplemented with 0.5% glycerol, mixed with the transducing lysate, and incubated with constant agitation at 37 °C for 45 min. The mixture was then plated on BHI agar plates supplemented with the appropriate antibiotic and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Transductants were confirmed by PCR.

## Electroporation
Transposon and allelic exchange plasmids, prepared from the Escherichia coli strain SC110 (dam−, dcm−), were transformed into B. anthracis by electroporation. Electrocompetent cells were prepared by growing B. anthracis in BHI with 0.1% glucose (BHIG) and 0.005 µg/mL tunicamycin. Low concentrations of tunicamycin increase transformation efficiency ~30-fold, likely due to the partial inhibition of TagO, the committing enzyme for the synthesis of secondary cell wall polysaccharides [ , ]. Cells were harvested at an OD600 of 0.3, chilled on ice, and washed 4 times in cold electroporation buffer (0.5 M sucrose, 10% glycerol). 100 µL of cells (concentrated 1000-fold) were mixed with ~2 µg plasmid DNA and transferred to a cold 1 mm electroporation cuvette. The electroporator settings were 25 µF, 200 Ω, 1.85 kV. Immediately after electroporation, cells were resuspended in 1 mL recovery medium (BHIG supplemented with 20 mM MgCl2 and 2 mM CaCl2) and incubated with constant agitation for 2 hour at 30 °C. The culture was plated on BHI agar supplemented with the appropriate antibiotic and incubated overnight at 30 °C.

## Allelic exchange
Deletions and integration of transgenes at neutral loci in the genome were generated by allelic exchange using pFR50, derived from pMAD [ ]. This modified vector carries a thermosensitive origin of replication, an erythromycin resistance cassette for Bacilli, and mCherry fused to the B. subtilis veg promoter. 1 kb DNA fragments flanking the deletion or insertion site were subcloned into this vector with a second antibiotic resistance cassette between them. The plasmids were prepared in E. coli strain SC110 and electroporated into B. anthracis followed by selection on BHI agar supplemented with erythromycin. A streak-purified pink colony was then grown in 5 mL BHI-Erm at 30 °C. After 10 hour of growth, the culture was serially diluted and plated on BHI-Erm and incubated overnight at 42 °C to select for a single crossover integration (loop-in). A single colony was then grown without selection in 5 mL BHI at 30 °C for 10 hour. The culture was serially diluted and plated on BHI agar supplemented with the second antibiotic. Plates were incubated overnight at 37 °C. Colonies were screened for loop-out by the loss of pink color and sensitivity to erythromycin. Allelic exchange was confirmed by PCR.

## Transposon library construction and Transposon-insertion sequencing
Tn-seq was performed as described previously [ , , ] with modifications described below. The B. anthracis transposon library was generated using the transposon delivery plasmid pFR38. This E. coli-Bacillus shuttle vector contains a temperature-sensitive replicon for Bacilli, an erythromycin resistance cassette, the mariner-Himar1 transposase C9, and a spectinomycin resistance cassette flanked by inverted repeats recognized by the transposase. One of the two inverted repeats contains an MmeI endonuclease restriction site. There is enough readthrough of the spec gene to provide expression of downstream essential genes in operons when co-oriented. pFR38 was introduced into the B. anthracis WT strain BaR1 via electroporation. Transformants were selected at 30 °C on BHI agar supplemented with erythromycin. Ten test tubes with 4 mL of BHI supplemented with spectinomycin were each inoculated with 4 transformants and grown at 22 °C for 16 hour. The cultures were pooled and transposants were selected on BHI agar plates supplemented with spectinomycin at 42 °C. Approximately 1,000,000 transposant colonies were pooled, diluted to an OD600 of 5, distributed into 500 µL aliquots, and frozen in 15% glycerol at −80 °C. One aliquot was used to prepare genomic DNA (gDNA) to determine the depth of the library. The gDNA was digested with MmeI, followed by barcoded adaptor ligation. The transposon-chromosome junctions were amplified in 18 PCR cycles using a universal primer that binds the adaptor and a primer that binds within the transposon. The PCR product was gel-purified and sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq platform using TruSeq reagents (Tufts University Core Facility [TUCF]). The reads were mapped to the B. anthracis BaR1 genome.

## Gene essentiality
Essential genes were determined from the Tn-seq described above using EL-ARTIST [ ]. 0.03 was used as the p-value cutoff for calling a region significantly underrepresented in reads and a sliding window size of 7 was used in the analysis.

## Sporulation Tn-seq screen
A frozen aliquot (500 µL) of the Tn-library was thawed, washed twice in PA medium, and diluted into 50 mL PA medium to an OD600 of 0.05. The culture was grown at 37 °C and growth was monitored by OD600 over time. An aliquot was harvested at the onset of starvation (input) and the rest of the culture was sporulated for 7 hour. Spores from the BaR1 strain are less adherent after 7 hour of sporulation and the maximum number of heat-resistant CFUs can be recovered. The sporulated sample was incubated at 65 °C for 30 min to kill vegetative cells and sporulation-defective mutants and plated on BHI agar. Approximately 1,000,000 heat-resistant colonies were pooled (output). gDNA was isolated from the input and output samples and processed for transposon-sequencing as described above. Reads were mapped to the B. anthracis BaR1 genome, tallied at each TA site, and genes in which reads were statistically underrepresented were identified using the Mann–Whitney U test. Visual inspection of transposon-insertion profiles was performed with the Sanger Artemis Genome Browser and Annotation tool [ ]. Some of the genes listed in – that were chosen for further characterization based on visual inspection of the insertion profiles despite having a P-value >0.05 and/or a fold-enrichment of less than 3.

## Construction of the ordered transposon-mutant library by Knock-out Sudoku
The ordered library was constructed based on the protocols in Baym and colleagues 2016 [ ]. Briefly, ~52,000 B. anthracis transposon-mutant colonies were picked using a RapidPick MP robot and transferred into 182 96-well plates containing 140 µL BHI-Spec per well. Construction of this progenitor collection was divided into three rounds with ~17,472 transposon mutants picked per round. The arrayed mutants were grown overnight at 30 °C with agitation at 600 rpm. The next morning, 4 × 20 µL of culture from each well was removed using a 96-channel Gilson PlateMaster P220 and deposited into four pools (rows, columns, plate rows, and plate columns) using 8-channel and 12-channel reservoir plates, and two single-well plates. In total, we generated 47 address pools: 8 row pools, 12 column pools, 13 plate rows, and 14 plate columns (using 13 × 14 plate grid). 50 µL of 20% glycerol was added to the remaining culture in each well of the progenitor collection and cryopreserved at −80 °C. The transposon-chromosome junctions of the transposons in each pool were determined by barcoded Tn-seq in a single NextSeq run.
To locate a Tn mutant in each gene within the progenitor collection, the sequencing dataset was parsed to identify the address pools in which each Tn mutant was found. A set of four pools containing a single Tn insertion dictates the coordinates of the well. In the cases where multiple distinct Tn insertion sites were identified for a given gene, we chose the Tn that had inserted co-directionally with the gene and had inserted closest to a position 1/5th of the gene length. When these criteria could not be satisfied, we used the next best Tn insertion (prioritizing co-directional insertion and then closeness to the 1/5th position). In total, we identified Tn mutants in 3,826 genes in singly occupied wells in the progenitor collection. We identified Tn mutants in 40 additional genes in doubly occupied wells. Tn mutants in 86 genes had insufficient address data to map. No mutants were identified for 1,504 genes in the B. anthracis genome. In many cases, this was due to gene essentiality and/or small size.
After transposon mapping, we used the colony picking robot to cherry-pick the Tn mutants from the progenitor collection and inoculate BHI supplemented with spectinomycin. These mutants were arrayed in 40 96-well plates. The 40 plate collection was pooled using the same strategy as the original progenitor collection with a 6 × 7 plate grid. The Tn-insertion sites in the 33 pools were determined using barcoded adaptors and Tn-sequencing. The insertions were mapped and their location in the condensed collection was validated. The nonredundant quality-controlled collection contains 3,826 Tn mutants that represent 70% of the 5,456 genes in the B. anthracis genome. We preserved two plates (D41 and D42) in which the 40 doubly occupied wells were struck for single colonies and single colonies inoculated into four wells in the final collection. Although these wells are not concretely mapped, they can be checked for the presence of either Tn mutant. The direction and position of the Tn insertions chosen for the final collection can be found in . The ordered B. anthracis Tn-mutant collection has been submitted to NIAID for consideration to be included in the BEI Resources program.

## Enrichment screen for ∆ipdA suppressors
Four colonies of ∆04176::kan (∆ipdA::kan) in the BaR6 background were separately grown in 3 mL PA-Kan for 30 hour at 37 °C. The sporulated cultures were heat-killed (65 °C for 30 min), and 30 µL of the heat-treated material was used to inoculate 3 mL of PA-Kan medium for another round of sporulation. Heat-resistant CFUs were assessed after each cycle. After the fifth enrichment cycle, individual heat-resistant colonies from each culture were re-tested and gDNA from a representative suppressor from each culture was prepared and subjected to whole–genome sequencing (SeqCenter).

## Fluorescence and phase-contrast microscopy
Vegetative and sporulating cells and dormant spores were collected by centrifugation at 8,000 × g for 1 min and immobilized on 2% agarose pads. Phase-contrast and fluorescence microscopy were performed using an Olympus BX61 microscope equipped with an UplanF1 100× phase-contrast objective lens and a monochrome CoolSnapHQ digital camera (Photometrics). Membranes were stained with 1-(4-trimethylammoniumphenyl)-6-phenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene p-toluenesulfonate (TMA-DPH; Molecular Probes) at a final concentration of 50 μM. Exposure times were typically 100, 200, and 500 ms for YFP, CFP, and TMA-DPH, respectively. Image analysis and processing were performed using MetaMorph software (Molecular Devices; version 7.7).

## Immunoblot analysis
B. anthracis sporulating cells were collected by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 2 min. Whole cell extracts were prepared by resuspending cell pellets in 50 µL lysis buffer (20 mM Tris pH7.5, 1 mM EDTA) containing 10 mg/mL lysozyme, 10 mM MgCl2, 25 units DNase I, 0.08 mg/mL RNase A, and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) and incubating at 37 °C for 15 min. The samples were then mixed with an equal volume of 2× SDS-PAGE sample buffer containing 10% BME and heated at 50 °C for 15 min prior loading. Equivalent loading was based on OD600 at the time of harvest. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE on a 20% polyacrylamide gel. Proteins were transferred to a PVDF membrane and blocked for 1 hour in 1× PBS-0.5% Tween-20 containing 5% nonfat milk. The blocked membrane was washed 4 times for 5 min with PBS-0.05% Tween-20 (PBST) and probed overnight at 4 °C with mouse anti-His tag antibody (GenScript) at a 1:4,000 dilution in PBST containing 3% BSA. The next morning the membrane was washed 4 times for 5 min with PBST and then incubated for 1 hour at room temperature with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse immunoglobulin G (Bio-Rad) at 1:10,000 dilution in PBST containing 3% BSA. The membrane was washed 4 times for 5 min with PBST and then incubated with Western Lightning reagent (PerkinElmer) and detected using a ChemiDoc MP, Imagin System (BIO-RAD). To control for loading, the lysates were separately resolved by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Two biological replicates were analyzed, and a representative immunoblot and a Coomassie-stained gel are shown.

## AlphaFold2 Multimer screen
A one-by-all AF-M screen was performed using local Colabfold version 1.5.2 in January of 2025 [ , ]. IpdA (A0A6L7GZZ9) was folded pairwise against the proteome of B. anthracis (UP000000594). Each prediction was run with all five AF-M models, using three recycles, no dropout, no templates. These runs were performed using a local installation of Colabfold running on NVIDIA A6000 GPUs managed by the HMS O2 computing cluster. MSAs were generated using MMseqs2 API server [ ]. All predictions used paired and unpaired MSAs, and structures were unrelaxed. To analyze the results of the pairwise screen, we utilized a published analysis pipeline [ ]. Predictions were considered a hit when the average models score was ≥3 and the average pAE ≤ 5 Å across the contact region in the best model. The metrics for each prediction are listed in .

## Genomic neighborhood and domain fusion analysis
Gene neighborhood analysis was performed as previously described [ ] using EFI-EST v2.0 from the Enzyme Function Initiative (available at: https://efi.igb.illinois.edu/efi-est/). Alignment score cutoff of 35% was used for the analysis. Gene neighborhood diagrams were generated to visualize the 10 nearest genes surrounding the pdcF (ykyA) gene. Domain fusions were identified for the YkyA protein family (Pfam ID: PF10368) on the InterPro website, available at: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/entry/pfam/PF10368/.

## Spot-dilution assays
B. subtilis strains were grown at 37 °C in LB medium until mid-exponential phase. Cultures were normalized to OD600 = 0.6 and 10-fold serial dilutions were generated. 5 μL of each dilution was spotted onto LB agar supplemented with or without indicated concentrations of IPTG. Plates were incubated at 37 °C overnight and photographed the next day.

## Lysozyme sensitivity assays
B. anthracis and B. subtilis strains were grown at 37 °C in sporulation media until mid-exponential phase and then back-diluted 50-fold and distributed into 96-well microtiter plates containing lysozyme. The OD600 was recorded every 3 min for 5 hour using an Infinite M Plex plate reader (Tecan). The 96-well plate was maintained at 37 °C with constant agitation between measurements. Growth kinetics were analyzed in technical triplicate, and the values were averaged. The results reported are representative of experiments that were performed on at least two biological replicates.

## Supporting information
S1 Data

## Source data for , , , , and Figs Qa, Qb, and Qc in .
(XLSX)
S1 Table

## Gene essentiality in B. anthracis BaR1.
(XLSX)
S2 Table

## Sporulation genes in B. anthracis with spo names.
(XLSX)
S3 Table

## Sporulation genes in B. anthracis (lacking spo nomenclature).
(XLSX)
S4 Table

## TCA cycle B. anthracis genes.
(XLSX)
S5 Table

## Genes that are present in B. subtilis and B. anthracis but are only critical for sporulation in B. anthracis.
(XLSX)
S6 Table

## Sporulation genes that are only present in B. anthracis.
(XLSX)
S7 Table

## Top hits from the AlphaFold-Multimer interaction screen of IpdA with all proteins in the B. anthracis BaR1 proteome.
(XLSX)
S8 Table

## Location of the B. anthracis Tn mutants in the condensed collection.
(XLSX)
S1 Raw Images

## Raw images related to .
(PDF)
S1 Text

## Including: Supplemental Methods.
Plasmid constructions. Table A. List of Bacillus strains used in this study. Table B. List of plasmids used in this study. Table C. List of oligonucleotide primers used in this study. Fig A. Examples of genes required for B. anthracis sporulation that are also critical for B. subtilis sporulation. Transposon-insertion profiles from seven regions of the B. anthracis genome. Each contains a gene (or genes) that encode B. subtilis homologs that are required for B. subtilis sporulation. Each vertical line represents a transposon-insertion site, and its height reflects the relative number of insertions mapped to that site. The maximum height for each panel was set to the indicated number of reads shown in the right corner. Transposon-insertions in B. anthracis sigF, spoIIAB (IIAB), spoIIAA (IIAA), spoIIID (IIID), spoIIQ, spoIIIE, spoIVA, spoIVFB, spoIVFA, spoVD, and spoVV were underrepresented after sporulation, heat treatment, germination, and outgrowth compared to the input library. Fig Ba. Examples of transposon-insertion profiles of B. anthracis and B. subtilis genes that are critical for sporulation in B. anthracis but not in B. subtilis. Transposon-insertion profiles from three regions of the B. anthracis genome and the corresponding regions of the B. subtilis genome. Each line represents a transposon-insertion site, and its height reflects the relative number of insertions mapped to that site. The maximum height for each panel was set to 200 reads. Transposon-insertions in yyaC, yqfT (T), and yhfN were underrepresented after sporulation, heat treatment, germination, and outgrowth in B. anthracis compared to the input library (onset). By contrast, transposon-insertions in the homologous genes (dark gray) in B. subtilis were not underrepresented after sporulation, heat treatment, germination, and outgrowth. The B. subtilis Tn-seq data are from Meeske and colleagues 2016 [ ]. Fig Bb. Examples of transposon-insertion profiles of B. anthracis and B. subtilis genes that are critical for sporulation in B. anthracis but not in B. subtilis. Transposon-insertion profiles from two regions of the B. anthracis genome and the corresponding regions of the B. subtilis genome. Each line represents a transposon-insertion site, and its height reflects the relative number of insertions mapped to that site. The maximum height for each panel was set to 200 reads. Transposon-insertions in ytxC and ysxE were underrepresented after sporulation, heat treatment, germination, and outgrowth in B. anthracis compared to the input library (onset). By contrast, transposon-insertions in the homologous genes (dark gray) in B. subtilis were not underrepresented after sporulation, heat treatment, germination, and outgrowth. The B. subtilis Tn-seq data are from Meeske and colleagues 2016 [ ]. Fig C. Examples of B. anthracis sporulation genes that are not present in B. subtilis. Transposon-insertion profiles from two regions of the B. anthracis genome. Each line represents a transposon-insertion site, and its height reflects the relative number of insertions mapped to that site. The maximum height for each panel was set to the indicated number of reads shown in the right corner. Transposon-insertions in 01531 and gerN were underrepresented after sporulation, heat treatment, germination, and outgrowth in B. anthracis compared to the onset of starvation. Fig D. Conserved B. anthracis sporulation genes exhibit mutant phenotypes that are similar, but not identical, to B. subtilis mutants. Representative fluorescence images of the indicated B. anthracis mutants during a sporulation time course. Time after the onset of sporulation is indicated in the top left corner. All strains harbor a forespore (PspoIIQ-yfp) transcriptional reporter. σF (SigF) activity in the forespore was visualized with YFP (false-colored green). The membranes were stained with TMA-DPH (false-colored red in the merged images). The B. anthracis spoIIE::Tn mutant is delayed in polar division, fails to activate σF, and over time has impaired morphogenesis, similar to what has been reported for B. subtilis ∆spoIIE. The B. anthracis spoIIR::Tn mutant divides at both poles generating disporic sporangia. In some cases, both forespores activate σF, in others only one of the two forespores has σF activity. Over time, additional polar septa form. The spoIID::Tn mutant is impaired in engulfment and, in most cases, fails to complete it. However, unlike the B. subtilis ∆spoIID mutant, the B. anthracis mutant does not form characteristic septal membrane bulges. The spoIIQ::Tn mutant engulfs almost as well as wild-type, but a subset of cells fails to complete the process. The mutant displays heterogeneous morphologies with unusual membrane blebs. The spoIIIAE::Tn mutant produces small forespores. This phenotype is reminiscent of the collapsed forespores observed in B. subtilis ∆spoIIIA and ∆spoIIQ mutants. Finally, the YFP fluorescence from the σF reporter accumulates to wild-type levels at hour 3 of sporulation but is almost completely lost by hour 4. The reduction in expression of a σF-responsive gene is consistent with previous studies in B. subtilis that report a loss in metabolic potential at late timepoints in the absence of the spoIIIA locus. Scale bars indicate 5 μm. Fig E. Conserved sporulation genes have similar but not identical mutant phenotypes. Representative fluorescence images of the indicated B. anthracis sporulation mutants during a sporulation time course. Time after the onset of sporulation is indicated in the top left corner. Membranes were stained with TMA-DPH. Carets highlight unusual features. Scale bar indicates 5 μm. Fig Fa. Genes that are important for sporulation in B. anthracis but are not critical for spore formation in B. subtilis. Representative fluorescence images of the indicated B. anthracis mutants at the indicated times after the onset of sporulation. All strains have forespore and mother cell transcriptional reporters. The membranes were visualized with TMA-DPH. Scale bar indicates 5 μm. Fig Fb. Genes that are important for sporulation in B. anthracis but are not critical for spore formation in B. subtilis. Representative fluorescence images of the indicated B. anthracis mutants at the indicated times after the onset of sporulation. All strains have forespore and mother cell transcriptional reporters. The membranes were visualized with TMA-DPH. Scale bar indicates 5 μm. Fig G. MurAB is important for sporulation in B. anthracis. (a) Representative phase-contrast and fluorescence images of wild-type (WT) and murAB::Tn strains during a sporulation time course. Time after the initiation of sporulation in PA medium is indicated in the top left corner. The membranes were stained with TMA-DPH. The sporulation efficiencies of wild-type and the mutant determined in the BaR6 background are shown in the bottom right of the phase-contrast images. (b) Representative fluorescence images of WT and murAB::Tn during exponential growth in BHI medium. Optical densities are indicated above the images. Exponentially growing cells lacking murAB are slighter wider and curvy or bent compared to WT. Scale bars indicate 5 μm. (c) Transposon-insertion profile of the region containing the murAB gene. Insertions in murAB are underrepresented after sporulation, heat treatment, germination, and outgrowth compared to the onset of sporulation. Fig H. Sporulating cells lacking ipdA and sigE lack septal bulges. Representative images of the indicated B. anthracis strains during a sporulation time course. Time after the onset of sporulation is indicated in the top left corner. In B. subtilis, sporulating cells lacking sigE do not initiate the mother cell program of gene expression, including expression of the engulfment cell wall hydrolases. B. anthracis sporulating cells lacking ipdA and sigE do not form septal bulges, suggesting the engulfment hydrolases are responsible for these bulges. Yellow carets highlight septal bulges in the ∆ipdA mutant. Membranes were stained with TMA-DPH. Scale bar indicates 5 µm. Fig I. IseA is not required for sporulation in B. subtilis. (a) Transposon-insertion profile of a region of the B. subtilis chromosome encompassing iseA. Transposon-insertions in iseA are not underrepresented after sporulation, heat treatment, germination, and outgrowth compared to the onset of starvation. The Tn-seq data are from Meeske and colleagues 2016 [ ]. The p-value and fold-change in transposon-insertions after sporulation compared to onset are 0.10 and 0.93, respectively. (b) Representative images of the indicated B. subtilis strains during a sporulation time course. Time after the onset of sporulation is indicated in the top left corner. Sporulating cells lacking IseA engulf normally and are indistinguishable from wild-type. The ∆spoIID mutant displays characteristic septal bulges (yellow carets). The sporulation efficiencies of wild-type and the mutants are shown in the bottom right of the images at hour 4 of sporulation. Scale bar indicates 5 µm. Fig J. Transcription of B. anthracis ipdA but not B. subtilis iseA is induced at the onset of sporulation. Representative fluorescence images of B. anthracis and B. subtilis strains harboring ipdA and iseA promoter fusions to yfp or venus (false-colored green) during a sporulation time course. B. anthracis and B. subtilis were induced to sporulate by nutrient exhaustion and by resuspension, respectively. Membranes were stained with TMA-DPH. White carets highlight examples of sporulating cells that have induced PipdA-yfp prior to polar division. Scale bars indicate 5 µm. Fig K. AlphaFold3 predicts interactions between B. subtilis IseA and the NlpC/P60 catalytic domains of cell wall hydrolases. (a) Predicted structures of B. subtilis IseA (white) bound to LytE, LytF, CwlO, and CwlS (cyan). An unstructured loop in IseA is predicted to interact with the catalytic grooves of all four cell wall hydrolases. Only the catalytic domains of the four hydrolases are depicted. Catalytic residues are shown in magenta. Key interacting residues in IseA are colored dark blue. Predicted alignment error (pAE) plots, as well as predicted template modeling (pTM) and interface predicted template modeling (ipTM) scores, are shown for each prediction. (b) IpdA is not predicted to interact with any of the NlpC/P60 domain-containing proteins in B. anthracis. pAE plots, and pTM and ipTM scores for each prediction are shown. Fig L. AlphaFold-predicted structures of B. anthracis IpdA (white) bound to four polysaccharide deacetylases (cyan). The catalytic residues of the deacetylase (magenta) and Zn2+ ligand (purple) are shown. Predicted alignment error (pAE) plots, average model scores, and lowest pAE from the AlphaFold2-multimer screen are shown on the right. Fig M. Predicted structures of B. anthracis PdaN bound to PdcF with and without IpdA. (a) AlphaFold3-predicted complex of PdaN (cyan) and PdcF (pink). Cartoon and surface models are shown. The predicted lipidated N-terminus of PdcF is in dark blue. pAE plot and ipTM score are shown on the right. (b) AlphaFold3-predicted complex of PdaN (cyan), PdcF (pink), and IpdA (white). Cartoon and surface models are shown. pAE plot and ipTM score are shown on the right. Fig N. PdaN’s N-terminus transitions from low to high per-residue local confidence in the presence of PdcF. AlphaFold3-predicted structures of PdaN, the PdaN/IpdA complex, and the PdaN/PdcF complex. The structures are colored based on a per-atom confidence estimates. Dark blue indicates very high-confidence, while yellow and orange indicate low and very low confidence, respectively. The per-residue local confidence of the N-terminus of PdaN is low or very low in the first two models. However, the per-residue local confidence of this region becomes high in the predicted complex with PdcF. The increase in local confidence provides additional support for the predicted PdaN/PdcF model. Fig O. The pdaN and pdcF genes are expressed prior to the onset of starvation and throughout sporulation. Representative fluorescence images of B. anthracis strains harboring pdaN and pdcF promoter fusions to yfp during a sporulation time course. Time (in hours) before and after the onset of sporulation are indicated in the top left corner. Membranes were stained with TMA-DPH. Scale bar indicates 5 µm. Fig P. Expression of B. anthracis pdaN and pdcF in B. subtilis inhibits cell elongation. (a) Photographs of spot-dilutions of the indicated B. subtilis strains on LB agar plates. 10-fold serial dilutions of the indicated strains were spotted on LB agar supplemented without or with 50 µM or 500 µM IPTG. The pdaN and pdcF genes were fused to the Pspank (PIPTG) promoter. The B. subtilis pdaC gene was fused to the Phyperspank (Physpank) promoter. The Phyperspank promoter is ~7-fold stronger than the Pspank promoter. (b) Representative fluorescence and phase-contrast images of exponentially growing cells before and after addition of IPTG. Exponentially growing cultures of the indicated strains expressing cytoplasmic mCherry (red) were analyzed at the indicated times after IPTG (500 µM, final) addition. Short, chubby cells (yellow carets) and lysed cells (white carets) are characteristic of inhibition of cell wall elongation. Scale bar indicates 5 µm. Fig Q.
B. anthracis cells lacking pdcF are more sensitive to lysozyme. Growth curves of B. subtilis (a) and B. anthracis (b) chronically exposed to lysozyme (2 µg/mL for B. subtilis; 600 µg/mL for B. anthracis). The indicated strains were grown in sporulation media until mid-exponential phase and back-diluted into fresh media with and without the indicated concentrations of lysozyme. OD600 was recorded every 3 min for 5 h. Growth curves show the mean of three technical replicates ± standard deviation. (c) Growth curve of the indicated B. anthracis strains before and after acute exposure to 1 mg/mL lysozyme (arrow). The indicated strains were grown in sporulation media until mid-exponential phase and back-diluted to an OD600 of 0.05. When the cultures reached an OD600 ~0.3, they were divided in two. One subculture was exposed to lysozyme (1 mg/mL, final) and the other was left untreated. OD600 was recorded every 30 min for 3 hour. (d) Representative phase-contrast images of the indicated strains in (c) 3 hour after addition of lysozyme (1 mg/mL, final). Yellow carets highlight lysed cells. Scale bar indicates 5 µm. Representative growth curves from one of two biological replicates are shown in panels a–c, with the corresponding underlying data available in . Fig R. Expression of B. anthracis pdaN and pdcF in B. subtilis causes septal membrane bulging during sporulation. Representative images of the indicated strains during a sporulation time course. Sporulation was induced by the resuspension method, and IPTG (500 µM, final) was added to the cultures at the time of resuspension (0 hour). Cells were examined by fluorescence microscopy at the indicated time points. Septal bulges (yellow carets) are highlighted. Scale bar indicates 5 µm. Expression of B. subtilis PdaC, a membrane anchored MurNAc deacetylase that is not normally produced during sporulation, was included for comparison. Fig S. Genes encoding secreted polysaccharide deacetylases can be found adjacent to homologs of PdcF. (a) Gene neighborhood analysis using PdcF as the query identifies a subset of Bacilli in which genes encoding a putative polysaccharide deacetylase (pda) and a PdcF homolog (pdcF, ykyA) are adjacent to each other. (b) AlphaFold3 predicts that the putative deacetylases (Pda) and their putative PdcF co-factors form a complex. Predicted structures are colored based on per-atom confidence estimates. Dark blue indicates very high-confidence, and light blue indicates confident. The pAE plots and ipTM and pTM scores are shown to the right. The AlphaFold3-predicted structures of the deacetylases are also shown. The predicted structures are colored based on per-atom confidence estimates. The N-terminal domains of both are orange indicating very low per-atom confidence estimates. Fig T. The YkyA domain is fused to different enzymatic domains. (a) Schematic from Pfam highlighting examples of stand-alone YkyA domains like PdcF and gene fusions with polysaccharide deacetylase domains and DUF4015 domains. (b) AlphaFold3-predicted structure of AWM75_04935 lipoprotein from A. urinaehominis. The structure on the left is colored based on a per-atom confidence estimates. Dark blue indicates very high-confidence, and light blue indicates confident. The two adjacent structures are colored using the same scheme as PdaN (cyan) and PdcF (pink). The YkyA domain is fused to the DUF4015 domain in this protein. The unstructured region that links the two domains interacts with the four-helix bundle, similar to PdaN and PdcF. The pAE plot is shown on the right.
(PDF)

We thank all members of the Bernhardt–Rudner supergroup for helpful advice, discussions, and encouragement; the MicRoN core for advice on fluorescence microscopy, James Kirby, Steve Leppla, Terri Koehler, Roger Plaut, Anne Moir, David Popham, Michael Springer, Michael Baym, and Buz Barstow for sharing strains, protocols, instruments, and invaluable advice. A portion of this research was conducted on the O2 High Performance Computing Cluster, which is supported by the Research Computing Group at Harvard Medical School.

## Abbreviations
AF-MAlphafold-Multimer
BHIbrain-heart infusion
BKEBacillus knock-out
CFUs, colony forming units
DSMDifco Sporulation medium
gDNAgenomic DNA
GlcNacN-acetyl-glucosamine
LBLuria-Bertani
NBYGnutrient broth/yeast extract/glycerol
PAPhage Assay
pAEpredicted alignment error
PBSTPBS-0.05% Tween-20
PGpeptidoglycan
RMSDroot mean squared deviation
Tn-seqtransposon-insertion sequencing
TraSHtransposon site hybridization
WTwild-type
 10.1371/journal.pbio.3003521.r001Decision Letter 0
Vazquez HernandezMelissaSenior Editor© 2025 Melissa Vazquez Hernandez2025Melissa Vazquez Hernandezhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
17 Sep 2025

Dear David,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript entitled "A high throughput genetic screen in Bacillus anthracis identifies similarities and differences in sporulation between the pathogen and the Bacillus subtilis model" for consideration as a Research Article by PLOS Biology.
Your manuscript has now been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editorial staff [as well as by an academic editor with relevant expertise] and I am writing to let you know that we would like to send your submission out for external peer review.
However, before we can send your manuscript to reviewers, we need you to complete your submission by providing the metadata that is required for full assessment. To this end, please login to Editorial Manager where you will find the paper in the 'Submissions Needing Revisions' folder on your homepage. Please click 'Revise Submission' from the Action Links and complete all additional questions in the submission questionnaire.
Once your full submission is complete, your paper will undergo a series of checks in preparation for peer review. After your manuscript has passed the checks it will be sent out for review. To provide the metadata for your submission, please Login to Editorial Manager (https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology) within two working days, i.e. by Sep 19 2025 11:59PM.
If your manuscript has been previously peer-reviewed at another journal, PLOS Biology is willing to work with those reviews in order to avoid re-starting the process. Submission of the previous reviews is entirely optional and our ability to use them effectively will depend on the willingness of the previous journal to confirm the content of the reports and share the reviewer identities. Please note that we reserve the right to invite additional reviewers if we consider that additional/independent reviewers are needed, although we aim to avoid this as far as possible. In our experience, working with previous reviews does save time.
If you would like us to consider previous reviewer reports, please edit your cover letter to let us know and include the name of the journal where the work was previously considered and the manuscript ID it was given. In addition, please upload a response to the reviews as a 'Prior Peer Review' file type, which should include the reports in full and a point-by-point reply detailing how you have or plan to address the reviewers' concerns.
During the process of completing your manuscript submission, you will be invited to opt-in to posting your pre-review manuscript as a bioRxiv preprint. Visit http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/preprints for full details. If you consent to posting your current manuscript as a preprint, please upload a single Preprint PDF.
Feel free to email us at plosbiology@plos.org if you have any queries relating to your submission.
Kind regards,
Nonia
Nonia Pariente, PhD
Editor in Chief
PLOS Biology
on behalf of
Melissa
Melissa Vazquez Hernandez, Ph.D.
Associate Editor
PLOS Biology
mvazquezhernandez@plos.org
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003521.r002Decision Letter 1
Vazquez HernandezMelissaSenior Editor© 2025 Melissa Vazquez Hernandez2025Melissa Vazquez Hernandezhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
13 Oct 2025

Dear David,
Thank you for your patience while your manuscript "A high throughput genetic screen in Bacillus anthracis identifies similarities and differences in sporulation between the pathogen and the Bacillus subtilis model" was peer-reviewed at PLOS Biology. It has now been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editors, an Academic Editor with relevant expertise, and by three independent reviewers. As mentioned in my earlier email, I'm handling this temporarily while my colleague Melissa is out of the office.
You'll see that reviewer #1 is very positive about the study, and only has textual and presentational requests. Reviewer #2 calls this “an excellent contribution” and just has minor textual requests (their point 27 seems to request some data, but we will not require this). Reviewer #3 is also very positive, drawing parallels with your previous PLOS Biology paper on B. subtilis; he wants you to define “sporulation gene” and to flag some limitations/ caveats.
After discussion with the Academic Editor, I'd like to stress that no further experimental data will be required. Based on the reviews, we are likely to accept this manuscript for publication, provided you satisfactorily address the remaining points raised by the reviewers and the following data and other policy-related requests:
IMPORTANT - please attend to the following:
a) Please could you change your Title to something shorter and more direct? We suggest: "Identification of sporulation genes in Bacillus anthracis highlights similarities and significant differences with Bacillus subtilis"
b) Please address all of the requests from the reviewers.
c) Please address my Data Policy requests below; specifically, we need you to supply the numerical values underlying Figs 1ABC, 4B, 5ABH, S1, S2AB, S7C, S9A, S11AB, S12, S13AB, S16B, S17B, either as a supplementary data file or as a permanent DOI’d deposition.
d) Please cite the location of the data clearly in all relevant main and supplementary Figure legends, e.g. “The data underlying this Figure can be found in S1 Data” or “The data underlying this Figure can be found in https://zenodo.org/records/XXXXXXXX
e) Please make any custom code available, either as a supplementary file or as part of your data deposition.
f) Please include the URLs of your funder in the Financial Disclosure statement, and write out more explicitly who was funded by each grant.
As you address these items, please take this last chance to review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the cover letter that accompanies your revised manuscript.
In addition to these revisions, you may need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests shortly. If you do not receive a separate email within a few days, please assume that checks have been completed, and no additional changes are required.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within two weeks.
To submit your revision, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' to find your submission record. Your revised submission must include the following:
- a cover letter that should detail your responses to any editorial requests, if applicable, and whether changes have been made to the reference list
- a Response to Reviewers file that provides a detailed response to the reviewers' comments (if applicable, if not applicable please do not delete your existing 'Response to Reviewers' file.)
- a track-changes file indicating any changes that you have made to the manuscript.
NOTE: If Supporting Information files are included with your article, note that these are not copyedited and will be published as they are submitted. Please ensure that these files are legible and of high quality (at least 300 dpi) in an easily accessible file format. For this reason, please be aware that any references listed in an SI file will not be indexed. For more information, see our Supporting Information guidelines:

https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/supporting-information

*Published Peer Review History*
Please note that you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:

https://plos.org/published-peer-review-history/

*Press*
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, please ensure you have opted out of Early Article Posting on the submission form. We ask that you notify us as soon as possible if you or your institution is planning to press release the article.
*Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please do not hesitate to contact me should you have any questions.
Sincerely,
Roli
Roland G Roberts, PhD
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology
rroberts@plos.org
on behalf of
Melissa Vazquez Hernandez, Ph.D.
Associate Editor
mvazquezhernandez@plos.org
PLOS Biology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DATA POLICY:
You may be aware of the PLOS Data Policy, which requires that all data be made available without restriction: http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/data-availability. For more information, please also see this editorial: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001797
Note that we do not require all raw data. Rather, we ask that all individual quantitative observations that underlie the data summarized in the figures and results of your paper be made available in one of the following forms:
1) Supplementary files (e.g., excel). Please ensure that all data files are uploaded as 'Supporting Information' and are invariably referred to (in the manuscript, figure legends, and the Description field when uploading your files) using the following format verbatim: S1 Data, S2 Data, etc. Multiple panels of a single or even several figures can be included as multiple sheets in one excel file that is saved using exactly the following convention: S1_Data.xlsx (using an underscore).
2) Deposition in a publicly available repository. Please also provide the accession code or a reviewer link so that we may view your data before publication.
Regardless of the method selected, please ensure that you provide the individual numerical values that underlie the summary data displayed in the following figure panels as they are essential for readers to assess your analysis and to reproduce it: Figs 1ABC, 4B, 5ABH, S1, S2AB, S7C, S9A, S11AB, S12, S13AB, S16B, S17B. NOTE: the numerical data provided should include all replicates AND the way in which the plotted mean and errors were derived (it should not present only the mean/average values).
IMPORTANT: Please also ensure that figure legends in your manuscript include information on where the underlying data can be found, and ensure your supplemental data file/s has a legend.
Please ensure that your Data Statement in the submission system accurately describes where your data can be found.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CODE POLICY
Per journal policy, if you have generated any custom code during the course of this investigation, please make it available without restrictions. Please ensure that the code is sufficiently well documented and reusable, and that your Data Statement in the Editorial Manager submission system accurately describes where your code can be found.
Please note that we cannot accept sole deposition of code in GitHub, as this could be changed after publication. However, you can archive this version of your publicly available GitHub code to Zenodo. Once you do this, it will generate a DOI number, which you will need to provide in the Data Accessibility Statement (you are welcome to also provide the GitHub access information). See the process for doing this here: https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/archiving-a-github-repository/referencing-and-citing-content
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DATA NOT SHOWN?
- Please note that per journal policy, we do not allow the mention of "data not shown", "personal communication", "manuscript in preparation" or other references to data that is not publicly available or contained within this manuscript. Please either remove mention of these data or provide figures presenting the results and the data underlying the figure(s).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REVIEWERS' COMMENTS:
Reviewer #1:
The manuscript by Ramírez-Guadiana et al. describes the use of TnSeq to identify genes required for spore formation, germination, and/or outgrowth (defined as sporulation for the purposes of the manuscript and this review) of the important pathogen Bacillus anthracis. Prior to this study, little was known about the genes required for sporulation in this pathogen or the related Bacillus cereus group because it had long been assumed that the sporulation program would be essentially the same in B. anthracis as in B. subtilis. However, as the authors point out, B. anthracis and B. subtilis diverged over 800 million years ago, and consistent with this phylogenetic divergence, they find that one-third of the genes important for sporulation in B. anthracis are not important in B. subtilis and that at least ~15% of the genes that modulate sporulation in B. anthracis are not conserved in B. subtilis. After constructing an ordered TnSeq library for B. anthracis, a notable feat in itself, the authors analyze the roles of several widely conserved sporulation genes, as well as new sporulation genes identified in their screen. Impressively, they delineate the mechanism of one of these novel sporulation genes by demonstrating that the gene encoding IpdA, which they name for "Inhibitor of Polysaccharide Deacetylases," directly binds to the polysaccharide deacetylase PdaN and likely antagonizes the activity of this peptidoglycan-modifying enzyme. Their data suggest that preventing the deacetylation of polar septum peptidoglycan promotes the activity of the peptidoglycan hydrolases responsible for driving engulfment. Excitingly, IpdA homologs are found in a range of organisms, with their phylogenetic analyses suggesting that the IpdA scaffold may generally inhibit enzymes that modify peptidoglycan. Collectively, their detailed mechanistic study of IpdA and comparative analysis of sporulation in B. anthracis and B. subtilis represent a major contribution to the sporulation field.
The manuscript is well-written, and the work presented has been conducted rigorously. I particularly appreciated the Discussion section, which is thought-provoking and effectively highlights the broader implications of their findings, such as the broader role of IseA homologs and how their comparative analyses may identify "hard-wired" vs. more "plastic" processes during sporulation. Finally, they propose that differences in cell envelope composition drives some of the organism-specific adaptations identified in their study.
I have only minor comments related to the presentation and discussion of the authors' results.
For the discussion of the results in Figure 3, I would suggest breaking up the paragraph into discrete paragraphs (line 331 after "spore"; line 336 after "discovered," and line 341 after "nutrients." It was a bit hard to keep track of all the phenotypes as written.
- I would also suggest reordering the microscopy images to match the order in which they are described in the text. Specifically, the yhfN mutant should move before the ysxE strain.
- Providing different-colored carets for the various phenotypes highlighted (e.g., circular spores vs. distorted forespores) would be helpful.
- The authors should provide scale bars on the images where they are zoomed in. Adding a small gap between the zoomed-in region of the dual reporter fluorescence microscopy image (between the third and fourth columns) would allow the reader to more quickly recognize that the 5.75 hr phase-contrast images are distinct from the fluorescence microscopy images shown to the left.
Do the authors know what the dark spots observed by phase-contrast microscopy in Figure 3 represent/ reflect?
Is the yyaC mutant more prone to lysis? It looks like some vegetative cells may already be lysing? Did the authors see a decrease in vegetative cell counts for any of the mutants analyzed?
Did the transposon used by the author have an outward-facing promoter? Would they expect their transposon insertions to have a polar effect on the expression of downstream genes? Please provide some of this information in the Methods and/or Results section.
Can the authors speculate on why the B. anthracis spoIIE mutant forms multiple septa relative to a B. subtilis spoIIE mutant.
For the membrane bulge observed in engulfment mutants, the authors should consider referencing the finding by Lopez-Garrido et al. (2018), which indicates that forespore shape is influenced by the translocation of the chromosome into the forespore.
- Is the membrane bulging in the B. anthracis spoIID mutant less frequent than some of the other mutants identified?
- Does a B. anthracis spoIIP mutant generate membrane bulges similar to the ipdA mutant (or are the bulges less frequent like in a spoIID mutant?)
Do the authors know whether PdaN or IpdA specifically localize to the polar septum? I am wondering if deacetylation is restricted to this site or whether all vegetative peptidoglycan is no longer deacetylated upon IpdA production.
Line 143: please hyphenate "sporulation-defective"
Line 269: consider adding a semi-colon after "engulfment" so that it reads "… engulfment,; however, unlike…"
Line 319: the phrasing "we liked the idea that…" might be a bit colloquial for a paper.
Line 332: "heterogeneous" has been misspelled.
Line 382: I think "investigated" should be "investigate"
Line 411: Please remove the "s" after "models"
Line 543: "anthracis" is misspelled
Figure 4 legend: "false" is misspelled
Reviewer #2:
In this study Ramirez-Guadiana et al. determined and analyzed the molecular basis of sporulation in Bacillus anthracis and compare these findings to what is known for the sporulation model organism Bacillus subtilis. The authors identified 159 putative sporulation genes by Tn-insertion analysis using NGS. Deeper analysis revealed 58 putative sporulation genes present in B. anthracis but not previously implicated in sporulation in B. subtilis. As an example, the authors then characterized one candidate B. anthracis protein termed IpdA encoded by the gene BA_04167 in detail. Thus, this study keeps the door open to similar explorations of functions of candidate genes/proteins left unattended herein.
General comments:
1) In my opinion, this study is an excellent contribution to our understanding of which genes/proteins are surely/likely/possibly involved in sporulation of the notorious biothreat agent B. anthracis. The strength of the approach described here is the combination of global methods such as transposon-mutagenesis and omics (NGS of Tn-mutants) as well as genetic manipulation (directed mutant analysis) followed by careful observation by fluorescence microscopy for phenotypic analysis and in silico structural biology approaches.
2) At the same time, the manuscript remains easy to read (though it puts a significant - positive - strain on the reader's stamina for its volume of text and data).
3) Overall, I encountered only minor issues related to writing or data presentation as outlined in detail below.
Specific (minor) comments:
4) Line 34: "new sporulation genes" is too vague. Better: "newly identified…in B. anthracis".
5) L 37: better "…deacetylase PdaN in B. anthracis".
6) L 45: better "B. anthracis endospores are the infectious biological entities that cause the zoonotic disease anthrax".
7) L 51-53: better "Environmental fluctuations possibly due to global climate change, or human activities such as deforestation…to the discovery of new…".
8) L 54-56: this section is very vague and concludes with a hollow statement not matching the quality of the rest of the manuscript text. I suggest the authors formulating a scientific rationale for studying sporulation in the high-consequence spore former B. anthracis. Compare L 118-121 for a well formulated statement.
9) L 78: "it" is vague, please use a specific sentence object such as "the mature spore" instead.
10) L 109 (and elsewhere): why only "~70% of the non-essential genes in B. anthracis"?
11) L 110: better: "…Tn mutations[sic!] that, in B. subtilis, are known to impair polar division…". Please check correct use of "mutant" and "mutation" throughout the text (for instance see L 220).
12) L 120: better "…and likely enable deeper…".
13) L 139: since "PA" has not been introduced at this point, better "…phage assay medium…".
14) L 151 (and elsewhere): does "at the onset of sporulation" essentially mean: before cells have initiated sporulation?
15) L 159 (and elsewhere): "(≤5% of wild-type)" does certainly always mean "(≤5% sporulation efficiency compared to wild-type) [L 176]", right? Then please complete the term where needed.
16) (L 177: there is a "the" missing before "cut off".)
17) L 222-225: what about the other 9 (i.e., 62 out of 71) hits?
18) (L 344: "…had strong sporulation defects. These mutants failed to mature…".)
19) L 370-375: for Fig. 4A-C the order of their first reference in the text is out of order.
20) (L 411: "An average model…")
21) L 452, 454 and 456: meant here instead: "mutant protein" or "variant protein".
22) (L 514: "…thought to be sensed…".
23) Fig. 5I is not mentioned in the text.
24) (L 592: "…derivative of B. anthracis…")
25) References: make sure to format the text (e.g., italicize species names).
26) Figure 2: add to caption the information that close up figures are close ups of the figures right above, respectively.
27) Figure 3: the percentages of sporulation given do not seem to match the visual observation of the images for ysxE::Tn and ytxC::Tn. The last two lines of the figure legend are descriptive results and should be restricted to the results text section.
Out of curiosity: the ysxE::Tn and ytxC::Tn mutants have low sporulation efficiencies but there are some spores. Have you repeatedly cultivated these mutants over several sporulation cycles to see if secondary mutations compensate for the Tn-induced defect?
28) Figure 4: in the figure legend, row 1 and 2 of panel A should be better explained. Lines 8 and 14-15, respectively, of the figure legend are descriptive results and should be restricted to the results text section.
29) Figure 5: lines 11-12 and 13-14, respectively, of the figure legend are descriptive results and should be restricted to the results text section.
30) Legends of supplementary figures: There are descriptive results here as well.
31) Figure S6B is missing a scale bar.
Reviewer #3:
[identifies himself as Patrick Eichenberger]
This article by Ramirez-Guadiana et al reports a Tn-seq screen aimed at identifying genes required for efficient sporulation in the bacterial pathogen Bacillus anthracis. It is a follow-up to a paper by the same group (Meeske et al 2016 PLOS Biol) that applied a similar technique to the study of spore formation in the model organism Bacillus subtilis. The study is impressive by its scope and thoroughness. One of the main conclusions is that there is a significant overlap between genes required for sporulation in both organisms, thus justifying the use of model organisms that are more amenable to genetic manipulation for the study of complex developmental processes. Nevertheless, the study also demonstrated that there are several species-specific differences that merit investigation directly in the pathogen. As proof-of-concept, the last section of the article focuses on the characterization of ipdA, a gene of previously unknown function that is necessary for sporulation in B. anthracis but absent in B. subtilis. In general, the experiments are very well done with reasonable interpretation of the data. The necessary controls were included. I have a few suggestions listed below, but my comments are mostly minor.
Main point:
I think it is important to define exactly what is meant by the term "sporulation gene" in the context of the paper as there are many potential definitions. The authors state that there are 159 putative sporulation genes in B. anthracis. However, this is based primarily on heat resistance, which is only one phenotypic category. I would argue that the number is in fact considerably higher than this, based on transcriptomics. A "sporulation gene" could also reasonably be defined as a gene expressed during sporulation, whose expression is dependent on a sporulation transcription factor. Furthermore, a large functional category of sporulation genes, those that encode coat and exosporium proteins, is left out of the total when heat resistance is the main criterion, because the spore coat is dispensable for heat resistance, but these genes are key for other functions. In fact, it is already known from previous work that the composition and morphology of the spore coat is one of the main differences between all species of endospore formers. However, it would not be easy to identify coat genes in a Tn-seq approach, because there is no simple way to screen for them as some of the phenotypes are subtle. Nevertheless, I think that it would be helpful to comment on that limitation in the paper.
Minor points:
l.81 "Although the mother" Should be "mother cell", not just "mother"
l.193 "Our Tn-seq screen identified 58 putative sporulation genes in B. anthracis that are present in B. subtilis but have not been reported to be required for efficient sporulation in the model (yellow circles in Fig. 1C and Table S5)." This is an oversimplification. While it is true that these genes were not identified in the B. subtilis Tn seq screen (2016 paper mentioned above), some of these genes had already been identified as genes required for sporulation in B. subtilis. For example, ypjB, yhbH and prkA are all featured as SigE-dependent genes that are necessary for heat-kill resistance in B. subtilis in Ref 16 (albeit with modest phenotypes). So, the statement that "25 of them are induced during B. subtilis sporulation but lack reportable phenotypes [16, 29]" is not a fully accurate representation of the previous work.
l. 236 "transcriptional reports" should be "transcriptional reporters"
l.251 "These pleiotropic phenotypes have not been reported for the B. subtilis spoIIE mutant and hint at differences between the two species." I would be more cautious here. The fact that they have not been reported does not mean that they don't exist in B. subtilis (in fact, I know from personal experience that a similar phenotype can be observed in a spoIIE mutant in B. subtilis after a few hours). It is fine to report the phenotype, but I would not infer that it signals major differences between the two species.
l.270 "mother membranes" should be "mother cell membranes".
l.345 "ysxE" You could mention here that YsxE has been characterized as an inner spore coat protein in B. subtilis (McKenney et al. 2010, Current Biology). Furthermore, since ysxE is part of the spoVID operon, it may play a role in a SpoVID checkpoint in B. anthracis similar to the mechanism described in B. subtilis by Delerue et al. (2022, Dev Cell).
Not sure that panel A in Fig.1 is necessary (could be moved to the suppl)
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003521.r003Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version2
7 Nov 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Point-by-point responses (Ramirez et al).pdf
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003521.r004Decision Letter 2
Vazquez HernandezMelissaSenior Editor© 2025 Melissa Vazquez Hernandez2025Melissa Vazquez Hernandezhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
10 Nov 2025

Dear David,
Thank you for the submission of your revised Research Article "Identification of sporulation genes in Bacillus anthracis highlights similarities and significant differences with Bacillus subtilis" for publication in PLOS Biology. On behalf of my colleagues and the Academic Editor, Erin Danielle Goley, I am pleased to say that we can in principle accept your manuscript for publication, provided you address any remaining formatting and reporting issues. These will be detailed in an email you should receive within 2-3 business days from our colleagues in the journal operations team; no action is required from you until then. Please note that we will not be able to formally accept your manuscript and schedule it for publication until you have completed any requested changes.
IMPORTANT: Many thanks for the additional data strengthening the claims. The Academic Editor was able to evaluate this, but has a comment regarding the presentation of the curves in S17 "are the curves presented averages of replicates or a single representative curve? That should be denoted in the legend (average with SD would be ideal)". Could you please adjust this? I have asked my colleagues to include this request alongside their own.
Please take a minute to log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information to ensure an efficient production process.
PRESS
We frequently collaborate with press offices. If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximise its impact. If the press office is planning to promote your findings, we would be grateful if they could coordinate with biologypress@plos.org. If you have previously opted in to the early version process, we ask that you notify us immediately of any press plans so that we may opt out on your behalf.
We also ask that you take this opportunity to read our Embargo Policy regarding the discussion, promotion and media coverage of work that is yet to be published by PLOS. As your manuscript is not yet published, it is bound by the conditions of our Embargo Policy. Please be aware that this policy is in place both to ensure that any press coverage of your article is fully substantiated and to provide a direct link between such coverage and the published work. For full details of our Embargo Policy, please visit http://www.plos.org/about/media-inquiries/embargo-policy/.
Thank you again for choosing PLOS Biology for publication and supporting Open Access publishing. We look forward to publishing your study. 
Sincerely, 
Melissa
Melissa Vazquez Hernandez, Ph.D., Ph.D.
Associate Editor
PLOS Biology
mvazquezhernandez@plos.org