pmcMater Today BioMater Today Bio3810mtbio101757228Materials Today Bio2590-0064ElsevierPMC13241989PMC13241989.113241989132419894225607910.1016/j.mtbio.2026.103253S2590-0064(26)00497-71032531Review ArticleEnhancing anti-fibrotic therapy: nanomedicine approaches to overcome current limitations
WuLincan LiXinxuanfeng7890@163.com YangLinayanglina1984@163.com aDepartment of Geriatrics, The First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, 110001, ChinabDepartment of Infectious Disease, The First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, 110001, ChinacDepartment of International Physical Examination Center, The First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, 110001, China⁎Corresponding author. xuanfeng7890@163.com⁎⁎Corresponding author. Department of International Physical Examination Center, The First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, 110001, China. yanglina1984@163.com62026185202638510362103253132202629420261652026180520260706202608062026© 2026 The Authors2026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Fibrosis, as a shared hallmark, is prevalent in a variety of chronic diseases. However, current pharmacological strategies for fibrosis are limited in clinical application and efficacy due to issues such as insufficient targeting capability, systemic toxicity, and low bioavailability. The advent of nanotechnology has ushered in an era of novel therapeutic strategies for fibrosis, revolutionizing the treatment landscape. This article systematically reviews the dual applications of nanomaterials in fibrosis treatment: first, as nanoparticle drug delivery systems (NDDS) to enhance targeting, control release, and improve drug bioavailability; second, as therapeutic agents directly alleviating the onset and progression of fibrosis. Furthermore, this article further discusses the applications of nanomaterials with diverse designs and compositions in fibrosis affecting different organs.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•The emergence of nanocarriers has significantly enhanced the therapeutic efficacy of anti-fibrotic drugs.
•Intelligent responsive design achieves precise drug release in both temporal and spatial dimensions.
•Nanomaterials possess the capability of active microenvironmental regulation that goes beyond mere drug delivery.
•The personalized design of nanomaterials is critical for overcoming the pathological barriers of various organs.

## Keywords
FibrosisNanoparticle drug delivery systemNanomaterialsTargeted delivery systemIntelligent responsepmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1

## Introduction
Fibrosis is a common end-stage pathological manifestation in various chronic inflammatory and injury-related diseases. It is marked primarily by injury-induced secretion of excessive extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins by effector cells, leading to abnormal ECM deposition, which ultimately results in cellular dysfunction and organ failure. Fibrosis predominantly affects core organs, such as heart, liver, lungs, and kidneys, and may also involve tissues such as the pancreas, intestines, eyes, and bones [ ]. Taking the liver as an example, hepatic fibrosis has been recognized as a common pathological feature of various chronic liver diseases (including non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), chronic viral hepatitis), which may ultimately lead to cirrhosis, liver failure, and hepatocellular carcinoma. According to statistics, cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma resulting from the progression of chronic liver disease cause approximately 2 million deaths annually, accounting for 4% of global mortality rates [ ], [ ]. These figures indicate a significant clinical burden of fibrosis-related diseases. Therefore, research on the treatment of fibrotic diseases is crucial.
Traditional anti-fibrotic drugs mainly include small-molecule inhibitors, anti-inflammatory agents, and natural products. Most of these drugs are still in the experimental stage and face challenges in clinical translation due to issues including non-targeted systemic side effects and low bioavailability. For example, pirfenidone (PFD) and nintedanib (NIN) have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the clinical treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), but still encounter limitations in their clinical application and therapeutic efficacy because of adverse reactions and poor targeting [ ], [ ]. Furthermore, fibrosis involves complex pathophysiological mechanisms, including multiple effector cells, their receptors, and various signaling pathways [ ]. To precisely target signaling molecules that promote fibrosis development, researchers have developed small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) designed for specific genes, offering a more precise therapeutic strategy for anti-fibrosis treatment. However, the clinical translation of this gene-silencing approach is hampered by challenges including cytotoxicity and off-target effects [ ]. Therefore, there are currently no anti-fibrotic drugs that combine high safety with high efficacy without significant limitations.
With the remarkable progress in nanotechnology over the past decade, researchers have designed diverse nanomaterials as nanocarriers for drug delivery. These systems significantly address the limitations of pharmacological strategies including low bioavailability, poor targeting, in vivo instability, poor solubility, and systemic adverse reactions. They enable the precise delivery and accumulation of drugs at lesions, allowing for controlled release at the target location and continuously exerting therapeutic efficacy [ ]. Based on their chemical properties, nanomaterials are primarily categorized into organic nanomaterials, inorganic nanomaterials, and cell-derived nanomaterials [ ]. Moreover, building upon traditional nanomaterials, researchers have developed emerging types such as metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) [ ] and biomimetic nanomaterials [ ]. Owing to their unique physicochemical properties, nanomaterials can not only act as delivery carriers—achieving targeting and controlled release by modulating the physical properties, structures, compositions, and surface modifications of engineered nanoparticles—but also function as therapeutic agents which can directly mitigate fibrosis by eliminating reactive oxygen species (ROS), modulating the action of immune cells and pro-inflammatory cytokines, and regulating the metabolism of ECM proteins [ ].
This review provides a comprehensive overview of the emerging role of nanomaterials in fibrosis therapy. First, it systematically elaborates on how nanomaterials function as nanocarriers to overcome the limitations of existing therapeutic strategies via targeted delivery, controlled release, and enhanced drug bioavailability. Second, it explores the use of nanomaterials as direct therapeutic agents that exert anti-fibrotic effects by modulating the pathological microenvironment. Finally, the review focuses on the specific applications of nanomaterials in fibrosis affecting different organs and tissues ( ). 

2

## Nanoparticle drug delivery systems
To systematically elaborate on how nanomaterials, as nanocarriers, address the shortcomings of anti-fibrotic therapeutics, this section first outlines the mechanisms of action and limitations of existing anti-fibrotic therapeutics. It then categorizes and discusses different types of delivery nanocarriers. Lastly, it explains the strategies of targeting delivery, controlled release, and enhanced drug bioavailability mediated by NDDS.
2.1

## The mechanisms and limitations of anti-fibrotic therapeutics
2.1.1

## Small-molecule inhibitors acting on signaling pathways
Pirfenidone (PFD) is a drug commonly used to treat IPF clinically, and numerous studies have demonstrated its therapeutic potential in other diseases, such as nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), acute pancreatitis, and systemic sclerosis, confirming PFD as a multi-target anti-fibrotic agent [ ]. The primary effects of PFD can be summarized in two aspects: On one hand, PFD inhibits fibroblast activation and proliferation, blocks their transition into myofibroblasts, and reduces the synthesis and deposition of collagen by interfering with the transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) signaling pathway, thereby alleviating fibrotic progression. On the other hand, PFD possesses anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties, which are mediated through the down-regulation of pro-inflammatory factors such as tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and interleukin-4 (IL-4), the inhibition of the nucleotide-binding oligomerisation domain (NOD)-like receptor pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome formation, and the modulation of immune cell activity and proliferation [ ]. Additionally, PFD has been verified to possess antioxidant properties. PFD mitigates oxidative stress-induced damage by up-regulating antioxidant genes and down-regulating genes associated with the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase complex [ ].
Nintedanib (NIN) is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor whose primary mechanism of action involves inhibiting the phosphorylation of growth factor receptors such as vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR), platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR), and fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR), thereby blocking the fibrotic signaling pathway. This process suppresses the proliferation, migration, and transition of fibroblasts and myofibroblasts, delaying fibrotic progression [ ].
Nilotinib (NIL), a BCR-ABL inhibitor initially applied in oncology, has been demonstrated in recent studies to have potential in treating fibrotic diseases [ ]. In liver fibrosis models, NIL inhibits the activation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) and the synthesis of ECM proteins by down-regulating the expression of pro-inflammatory factors, TGF-β and platelet-derived growth factor receptor-β (PDGFR-β), thereby alleviating fibrotic progression—particularly at lower doses [ ]. Another study showed that NIL also restores TNF-mediated apoptosis of fibro/adipogenic progenitors (FAPs) by inhibiting the TGF-β1/p38 pathway, exhibiting anti-fibrotic potential in a mouse model of chronic muscle injury [ ].
However, these small molecule inhibitors can regulate multiple pro-fibrotic signaling pathways, which can effectively alleviate fibrosis, but in practical applications, these drugs generally have poor water solubility, low targeting, and low oral bioavailability. Moreover, long-term use of these drugs can lead to multiple adverse effects. For instance, PFD and NIN have been shown to cause systemic adverse reactions including gastrointestinal disturbances and elevated liver enzymes in clinical applications [ ], [ ]. NIL faces even more severe challenges, such as concentration-dependent cardiotoxicity, significant individual differences, complex drug interactions, and extremely poor central permeability [ ]. These issues have prompted researchers to continue to explore and optimize the dosing regimens of these drugs. Taking PFD as an example, in a recent study, in order to adjust the appropriate dose for different patients to reduce or avoid multiple adverse reactions caused by PFD, researchers used published population pharmacokinetic (PK) models to simulate PFD dosing regimens. The results showed that considering the adverse reactions of PFD and the patient's own health status (such as severe liver injury), appropriate reduction of drug dosage (such as adjusting the drug dose to 267 mg BID) could also maintain the treatment concentration, which provided a set of drug use reference based on simulation data for the clinical application of PFD. However, this strategy currently lacks clinical data support, and its safety and efficacy remain to be verified [ ].

2.1.2

## Broad-spectrum anti-inflammatory drugs
Inflammation serves as the initial and critical factor in the development of many fibrotic diseases [ ], making its control a crucial part of anti-fibrotic therapy. Glucocorticoids (GCs) are important anti-inflammatory agents and immunosuppressants, primarily functioning to inhibit the activation and infiltration of inflammatory cells, as well as suppress the expression of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), and pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α and various interleukins [ ]. Deficiency of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in endothelial cells, cardiomyocytes, and vascular smooth muscle cells promotes the development of renal and cardiac fibrosis. Hence, GR can serve as a key molecule in anti-fibrotic therapy, indicating the potential of targeting GR for anti-fibrotic effects [ ], [ ]. Consequently, GCs can achieve anti-fibrotic effects by targeting this receptor. According to different dosage forms, GCs can be divided into systemic GCs and inhaled GCs (ICS). Long-term systemic therapy with GCs can lead to systemic side effects, with osteoporosis and fractures being common adverse reactions. GCs may reduce bone formation by promoting osteoblast apoptosis and inhibiting Wnt signaling, which suppresses osteoblast differentiation and prolongs osteoclast lifespan, ultimately resulting in osteoporosis [ ], [ ]. Although ICS has strong local effects and low systemic exposure, dose-dependent adverse effects still exist, such as growth inhibition and increased risk of pneumonia [ ].

2.1.3

## Endogenous substances and natural products
Bilirubin (BR) is a major endogenous antioxidant agent that inhibits liver fibrosis by reducing the production of ROS in HSCs, decreasing the expression of α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), blocking the activation of HSCs, and increasing the MMP-2/TIMP-1 ratio to promote the degradation of ECM [ ]. Additionally, BR has been demonstrated to possess anti-inflammatory effects. It can down-regulate the expression of pro-inflammatory markers such as TNF-α, myeloperoxidase (MPO), and IL-1β, and reduce the levels of pro-inflammatory cell genes [ ]. However, the application of BR is limited by its own physicochemical properties. BR exhibits poor water solubility, instability, and rapid metabolism in vivo, making it difficult to cross physiological barriers and effectively deliver to target tissues, resulting in low bioavailability and nonspecific systemic distribution [ ].
Nitric oxide (NO) is an important endogenous substance for protecting the heart. By inhibiting mitochondrial cytochrome-c oxidase and activating the KATP channel, NO reduces the production of ROS and attenuates oxidative stress, thereby promoting myocardial tissue repair. Additionally, it regulates cardiovascular function by activating the soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC)-cGMP-protein kinase G (PKG) pathway. Through the sGC-cGMP-PKG pathway, NO also inhibits activation of fibroblasts and their transformation into myofibroblasts, reduces excessive synthesis and secretion of ECM proteins, and suppresses the expression of pro-fibrotic factors such as TGF-β [ ]. At present, nitrates have been widely used in the treatment of cardiovascular diseases such as myocardial infarction (MI), but traditional NO donor drugs suffer from a lack of target specificity, non-specific release and poor stability, which limit their clinical translation [ ].
In recent years, studies on selective phytochemicals have revealed that natural products such as resveratrol (Res) and curcumin (Cur) can serve as novel anti-fibrotic agents by modulating multiple signaling pathways including PI3K/AKT and TGF-β/Smad3 to alleviate fibrosis. Compared to traditional drugs, selective phytochemicals are safer and more cost-effective, leading to an increasing number of research efforts on these new anti-fibrotic agents [ ].
Res is a natural antioxidant agent. Wu et al. [ ] found that Res can prevent diabetes-induced cardiac fibrosis by inhibiting the ROS/ERK/TGF-β/periostin pathway. Additionally, another study demonstrated that in a TiO2-induced mouse model of liver fibrosis, Res improved superoxide dismutase (SOD) and glutathione peroxidase (GPX) activities, reduced lipid peroxidation, and down-regulated the level of pro-inflammatory markers such as IL-6 and TNF-α, thereby improving liver function [ ]. These studies suggest that Res has the potential as a drug for preventing and alleviating fibrosis. Cur, an active component of turmeric, has been shown in numerous studies to reduce the necrosis and apoptosis of myocardial cells, inhibit oxidative stress and inflammatory responses, decrease the deposition of collagen, and suppress cardiac fibrosis, making it a potential cardiovascular-protective agent [ ].
Although these selective phytochemicals possess diverse pharmacological activities, they face a major challenge in clinical applications—low bioavailability [ ]. Taking Cur as an example, many studies have shown that the oral bioavailability of Cur is only 1%, which is the most important obstacle to clinical translation, mainly limited by its poor gastrointestinal absorption and rapid degradation and metabolism in vivo. First, Cur has poor water solubility (about 11 ng/mL), making it difficult to be absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract. Second, under alkaline conditions, Cur degrades quickly. Third, a small amount of Cur can be quickly converted into water-soluble metabolites such as glucuronide in the liver and blood, which are excreted in the urine [ ].

2.1.4

## Gene silencing therapy
Fibrosis is a complex pathological process involving multiple signaling molecules. TGF-β is recognized as a key mediator in promoting fibrosis. Among its isoforms, TGF-β1 is the primary functional subtype, which is activated by stimuli such as ROS and plasmin, leading to the phosphorylation of downstream Smad3 and its overexpression. Abnormal up-regulation of the TGF-β1/Smad3 signaling pathway promotes fibroblast activation and their transition into myofibroblasts. This process leads to extensive deposition of ECM. Additionally, this pathway regulates various miRNAs to facilitate fibrotic tissue formation [ ].
Similar to TGF-β, studies have shown that the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) also functions as a vital mediator in multiple stages of fibrosis. For example, in liver injury models, EGFR has been implicated in mediating ROS generation and HSC activation [ ]. Similarly, in fibroblasts from the unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) model, EGFR activation mediates the proliferation and migration of fibroblasts, and acts as a critical initial step in driving the TGF-β signaling pathway, thereby promoting the transformation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts [ ].
In addition, a number of studies have indicated that IL-11 functions as a critical downstream signaling factor in multiple pro-fibrotic pathways, participating in fibrotic processes across various organs [ ], [ ]. In the NASH mouse model, excessive IL-11 binds to the over-expressed IL-11 receptor subunit α (IL-11 R A) on HSCs, activating the ERK signaling pathway. This process enables the activation of HSCs, which subsequently secrete ECM proteins, cytokines, and chemokines, thereby driving fibrotic and inflammatory responses [ ].
Collectively, targeting key signaling factors in fibrosis represents a crucial therapeutic strategy for fibrotic diseases. Over the past decade, siRNA has attracted considerable attention, with researchers developing numerous siRNA-based drugs for targeting specific genes. Particularly in renal diseases, owing to the unique physiological structure of the urinary system, systemically administered siRNA is rapidly taken up by the kidneys, thereby conferring a therapeutic advantage for renal disorders. However, in the practical application of siRNA, due to its lack of target specificity, it is difficult to control the balance between local and systemic knockdown. Furthermore, siRNA can bind to intracellular RNA-sensing pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), triggering an immune response, causing excessive cytokine production and leading to inflammation [ ].
In conclusion, existing anti-fibrotic agents have many limitations in clinical translation and therapeutic efficacy. Recently, to overcome these shortcomings, researchers have combined nanomaterials with these drugs. For example, many studies have designed BR-derived nanoparticles (BRNPs), which link BR to different nanocarriers through covalent binding, and have demonstrated in multiple pathological models that BRNPs preferentially accumulate in ROS- and inflammatory cell-rich lesions, significantly improving the limitations of BR's own physicochemical properties [ ]. Besides, Jin et al. [ ] compared inhaled or orally administered free Cur and NIN with Cur- and NIN-loaded nanoparticles and found that nanoparticles have lower cytotoxicity and stronger anti-fibrotic effects than free drugs, resulting in increased deposition and higher bioavailability of drugs in the lungs.
On the other hand, given the complexity of fibrotic diseases and the adverse effects of drugs, monotherapy may not be sufficiently effective, so combination medication is becoming an important treatment strategy. Zheng et al. [ ] combined GCs with immunosuppressants for the treatment of retroperitoneal fibrosis, and found that such a combination regimen could cover more signaling pathways while controlling inflammation and fibrosis without serious adverse effects. However, traditional co-delivery is still difficult to avoid the limited efficacy caused by untargeted systemic distribution of drugs. The nano co-delivery system provides a platform to solve the above problems with its good multi-drug delivery capabilities. Many studies have shown that nano co-delivery systems can significantly improve the liver targeting, bioavailability, and anti-fibrotic effect of drugs [ ]. Therefore, it is of great significance to explore NDDS in depth to develop more efficient and safe anti-fibrotic strategies.

2.2

## The types and characteristics of nanocarriers
With in-depth research in nanotechnology, researchers have found that nanocarriers can significantly improve the circulation time and the therapeutic efficacy of drugs [ ]. For instance, Bartneck et al. [ ]found that, in contrast to free dexamethasone, dexamethasone encapsulated in liposomes exhibited superior anti-inflammatory effects, which significantly reduced T cell activity and promoted M2 phenotype macrophage polarization, thereby markedly ameliorating liver injury and fibrosis. This section specifically discusses the characteristics of different types of nanocarriers and analyzes their current limitations ( ). 
2.2.1

## Organic nanocarriers
Organic nanocarriers exhibit excellent biocompatibility, high drug loading capacity, and ability to reduce systemic toxic side effects of drugs. They primarily include lipid-based nanocarriers (liposomes, lipid nanoparticles) and polymer nanocarriers (micelles, hydrogels, polymer nanoparticles) [ ].
Liposomes, the earliest lipid-based nanocarriers, consist of one or more lipid bilayers that can encapsulate hydrophilic and hydrophobic drugs in distinct compartments, thereby enhancing drug solubility and establishing a multifunctional drug delivery platform. However, liposomes face challenges such as complex production processes and low drug encapsulation efficiency. To address these issues, researchers have developed more stable and easily preparable lipid nanoparticles (LNPs). Compared to the simple lipid bilayer structure of liposomes, LNPs possess diverse structures and designs, endowing them with superior drug-loading capacity. LNPs are composed of multiple lipid components, primarily including polyethylene glycol (PEG) lipids, ionizable cationic lipids, and helper lipids (cholesterol and phospholipids). This composition confers unique advantages in nucleic acid drug delivery and RNA stability maintenance [ ], [ ]. However, lipid-based nanocarriers have unique liver tropism, and when nanodrugs with liposomes and LNPs as carriers are intravenously administered, they tend to preferentially accumulate in the liver and are rapidly cleared by non-specific phagocytosis mediated by Kupffer cells [ ]. Therefore, when considering the use of lipid-based nanocarriers for extrahepatic organs, nanoparticles can be directly delivered to the target organ by changing the route of administration. Nebulizer inhalation is the most direct method of pulmonary administration. Due to their excellent biocompatibility, lipid-based nanocarriers have been demonstrated to serve as inhalation formulations for pulmonary diseases, exhibiting favorable therapeutic outcomes [ ]. As shown in studies by Chennakesavulu et al. [ ] and Kotta et al. [ ], liposome-based pulmonary inhalation formulations can achieve controlled and sustained drug release with favorable pulmonary deposition rates and low cytotoxicity. These findings indicate that lipid-based nanocarriers provide an efficient and low-toxicity drug delivery strategy for pulmonary fibrosis treatment.
Unlike lipid-based nanocarriers, polymer nanocarriers exhibit greater compositional diversity and possess regulative physicochemical properties. Micelles are formed through the self-assembly of amphiphilic block copolymers, featuring a hydrophobic core and a hydrophilic shell. This structure enhances the bioavailability of loaded drugs, improves the solubility of hydrophobic drugs, and prolongs their systemic circulation time [ ]. Kumar et al. [ ] found that cationic polymer-based micelles effectively addressed the instability of miRNA and the poor bioavailability of hydrophobic drugs, leading to a significant alleviation of liver fibrosis. Although micelles have been widely explored as effective nanocarriers that enhance drug delivery efficiency and bioavailability in multiple fields, their applications face several challenges. For instance, polyethylene glycol (PEG), a commonly used material for micelle preparation, has been found in recent studies to induce accelerated blood clearance (ABC), significantly reducing the circulation time and therapeutic efficacy of PEG micelles. Additionally, the stability of micelles is dependent on the drug loading dose [ ]. These limitations have affected the clinical application of micelles.
Owing to its highly hydrated three-dimensional polymer networks, hydrogels possess tunable physicochemical properties that allow them to withstand adverse conditions. They have been demonstrated as effective carriers for delivering various cells and drugs, playing a significant role in diseases such as cancer and diabetes [ ]. For instance, Sun et al. [ ] designed a metal polyphenol-based polymer hydrogel (CMC-OD-TA/Fe hydrogel) with excellent stability, high drug loading capacity, and favorable degradation characteristics. These properties enable the hydrogel to maintain structural stability of loaded exosomes and facilitate their sustained, controlled release. Similar to micelles, hydrogels may also induce immune responses due to certain materials during application, which can block hydrogel infiltration and significantly reduce the therapeutic efficacy of the loaded drugs [ ].
Polymeric nanoparticles are a class of particulate nanocarriers with various structures and compositions, prepared from different natural or synthetic materials via methods such as electrostatic complexation, chemical cross-linking, and covalent bonding, allowing for controlled drug release [ ]. For instance, researchers have developed bilirubin-based polymeric nanoparticles (BX-001N), which are formed through covalent linkage between chemically synthesized bilirubin 3α with PEG. This design overcomes the limitations of low water solubility and poor cellular uptake of free bilirubin [ ]. Although polymeric nanoparticles demonstrate excellent efficacy in drug delivery, their complex composition and structure pose challenges for in vivo degradation. For instance, non-degradable polymeric nanocarriers may induce cytotoxicity [ ]. Additionally, a study found that although polymeric nanoparticles made from materials such as PLGA and PLCL are generally tolerated by cells and do not have a significant impact on mitochondria, lysosomes, and intracellular biological processes, the accumulation of their degradation products will cause an increase in osmotic pressure, thereby inducing cell death [ ].

2.2.2

## Inorganic nanocarriers
Inorganic nanomaterials exhibit unique advantages in drug delivery: their high surface area-to-volume ratio endows them with exceptional drug-loading capacity. Furthermore, their inherent physicochemical properties, such as catalytic, optical, or magnetic characteristics, enable them to function as therapeutic agents with multiple effects including antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties [ ]. Mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) are inorganic nanomaterials characterized by excellent biocompatibility, tunable pore structure, and ease of surface functionalization. As nanocarriers, MSNs can be modified to construct molecular gates that prevent pore blockage, thereby enhancing drug loading efficiency and controlled release [ ]. Niu et al. [ ] loaded the anti-fibrotic agent costunolide (COS) into MSN coated with pH-sensitive layers, which protected the nanoparticles from degradation in the stomach and controlled the delayed, sustained release of COS in the intestine, significantly enhancing its anti-hepatic fibrosis effects. Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) are among the most widely used inorganic nanomaterials. A study has demonstrated that AuNPs, whether as drug carriers or free nanoparticles, possess excellent antioxidant properties, enabling synergistic therapeutic effects with drugs [ ].
Although inorganic nanoparticles are widely recognized for their favorable physicochemical properties, their non-degradable nature may lead to potential toxicity. A study has demonstrated that AuNPs stimulate and induce the activation of Kupffer cells, recruit other monocytes, and exert toxic effects on the damaged liver by inducing inflammatory responses and accelerating stress-induced apoptosis [ ]. In addition, many studies have shown that inorganic nanoparticles can induce the activation of NLRP3 inflammasomes through mechanisms such as particle endocytosis, lysosomal damage, and induction of ROS generation, ultimately leading to damage to various cells and tissues in vivo [ ]. Recently, plant-mediated green synthesis has garnered attention due to its sustainable and environmentally friendly characteristics. Compared to traditional chemically synthesized inorganic nanoparticles, those produced via plant-mediated routes exhibit better stability, superior biomedical properties, and no significant toxicity, providing a novel approach for developing safer nanoparticles [ ].
Therefore, in order to overcome limitations to clinical translation of inorganic nanoparticles posed by cytotoxicity, the future research should focus on the mechanism of tissue and cell damage caused by inorganic nanoparticles, surface modification and engineering of nanoparticles, as well as the development of more degradable materials with good biosafety such as plant-derived inorganic nanoparticles, thereby reducing the toxic side effects caused by the physical and chemical properties of nanoparticles and the adverse effects caused by long-term accumulation in vivo.

2.2.3

## Metal-organic framework (MOF)
Over the past decade, metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) have been shown to exhibit promising potential as nanocarriers for the diagnosis and treatment of various diseases, including infections, tumors, and diabetes. MOFs are inorganic-organic hybrid materials self-assembled from metal ions and organic components. Their diverse structures and compositions endow them with multiple properties, conferring biomedical advantages such as compositional tunability, surface modifiability, high drug loading capacity, and controlled release capabilities [ ]. For instance, Liu et al. [ ] embedded 18β-glycyrrhetinic acid (GA) into cyclodextrin-metal-organic framework (CD-MOF) to synthesize GA@CD-MOF nanoparticles and investigated their drug loading and release mechanisms in a bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis mouse model. The results revealed that GA@CD-MOF nanoparticles significantly improved the solubility and bioavailability of GA, with a biphasic drug release pattern. During the initial burst release phase, 52% of GA was released from the CD-MOF, followed by a sustained release via cyclodextrin encapsulation over 120 h. These characteristics markedly improved therapeutic efficacy in the pulmonary fibrosis model, inhibiting the activation of the TGF-β/Smad3 pathway and the proliferation of fibroblasts ( ). Additionally, MOFs possess acid-sensitive properties, enabling them to function as pH-responsive drug delivery systems for intelligent site-specific release [ ]. In addition to serving as a nanocarrier to enhance therapeutic efficacy, the structure and physicochemical properties of MOFs endow them with antioxidant enzyme-like and oxidase-like activities, enabling their use as therapeutic agents to regulate ROS in the microenvironment [ ]. 
While MOFs are widely applied, they also present several unresolved challenges. First, the stability and degradation capacity of MOFs are highly dependent on their components. Second, current evaluations of MOF cytotoxicity are predominantly based on in vitro studies, with a lack of comprehensive in vivo evaluations [ ]. Therefore, it is imperative to further investigate the in vivo degradation pathways of MOF materials and to conduct more extensive safety assessments in animal models.

2.2.4

## Cell-derived nanocarriers
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are bioactive natural nanoparticles, such as exosomes and microvesicles, which serve as critical mediators for intercellular communication. Characterized by low immunogenicity and high biocompatibility, EVs can function as drug carriers and therapeutic agents in numerous diseases. Furthermore, engineering modifications to EVs can enhance their specific targeting as drug delivery carriers [ ], [ ]. For instance, Wu et al. [ ] developed a liver-targeting fucoxanthin vesicle system (GA-LpEVS-FX) to evaluate its therapeutic efficacy in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). EVs modified with GA exhibited potent hepatocyte targeting capabilities and significantly improved the stability and bioavailability of fucoxanthin (FX), thereby maximizing the therapeutic effects of FX. Despite substantial progress in EV research, current applications of EVs remain limited due to challenges in their preparation, purification, and characterization. Establishing a unified and standardized set of analytical and operational protocols is essential to minimize variability and facilitate translation [ ].
Over the past decade, research on biomimetic nanomaterials has garnered significant attention. Biomimetic nanomaterials are constructed by encapsulating nanoparticles in natural biological membranes to mimic the behavior or composition of organisms, thereby creating more precise drug delivery platforms [ ]. Fei et al. [ ] utilized the high affinity of platelet membranes for damaged vascular systems to coat poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles loaded with TGF-β siRNA, thereby developing biomimetic nanoparticles (PMVs@siRNA NP) that can directly target injured kidneys. However, similar to EVs, achieving large-scale production with uniform quality remains a core challenge that must be overcome before biomimetic nanomaterials can achieve clinical translation [ ].

2.3

## Targeting enhancement strategy
The emergence of nanocarriers has provided an appropriate tool for drug delivery. However, to facilitate the precise delivery of NDDS to target organs, further engineering of nanocarriers is required. As mentioned earlier, researchers can optimize the physical properties and surface modification of nanocarriers to enable their successful delivery to target organs, thereby enabling the accumulation of drugs at the lesion site to reach therapeutic concentrations.
2.3.1

## Passive targeting
Passive targeting refers to the strategy of modifying the physical properties of nanoparticles—such as particle diameter and surface charge—so that they can traverse the pathophysiological structures of target organs and accumulate in their vicinity. For example, nanoparticles are designed with various physical properties to leverage the Enhanced Permeability and Retention (EPR) effect for cancer treatment, enabling them to extravasate through leaky vessels and remain in the tumor microenvironment due to reduced lymphatic drainage [ ].
A study demonstrated that nanoparticles with a diameter around 80 nm can successfully cross the liver parenchyma and accumulate in interstitial cells involved in hepatic fibrosis, significantly inhibiting the fibrotic progression [ ]. This result indicates that optimizing the size of nanoparticles enables them to cross specific physiological barriers in target organs.
With in-depth research on the size of nanoparticles and pathophysiological structures in vivo, researchers have discovered that the size design of nanoparticles must strike a balance between avoiding rapid in vivo clearance and traversing pathophysiological barriers. Generally, nanoparticles ≤15 nm are easily excreted through the kidneys, while those >200 nm are often phagocytosed by the MPS as foreign bodies. Therefore, optimizing nanoparticle size can prevent their rapid clearance and prolong their in vivo circulation time [ ]. But this does not mean that the application of nanoparticles ≤15 nm is entirely limited. In fact, their propensity for renal excretion highlights the ability of nanoparticles with small particle sizes to smoothly cross the complex physiological structure of the kidneys and reach the renal tubule region. Chan et al. [ ] prepared folic acid-conjugated gold nanoparticles with a particle size of approximately 7 nm. Research demonstrated that these nanoparticles could successfully pass through the glomerular filtration barrier and, when combined with an active targeting strategy, bind to renal tubular cells to alleviate renal tubulointerstitial fibrosis. These studies indicate that optimizing the size of nanoparticles can enable them to overcome physiological barriers and reach the lesion area, thereby providing a basis for their retention at the site of the disease.
Furthermore, different surface charges can also influence the passive targeting capability of nanoparticles. Zhao et al. [ ] investigated the impacts of liposomes with different surface charges on the pulmonary bio-barrier and found that compared to positively charged liposomes, negatively charged and electrically neutral liposomes exhibited better biocompatibility, cell viability, and pulmonary deposition. These liposomes remained stable in the presence of pulmonary surfactants and were less readily taken up by macrophages.

2.3.2

## Active targeting
Based on passive targeting, active targeting is achieved by conjugating targeting molecules, such as antibodies and peptides, to the surface of nanoparticles, enabling ligand-receptor specific binding [ ]. In various tissues and organs, multiple key cells participate in fibrosis, including HSCs in liver fibrosis and mesangial cells (MCs) or renal tubular epithelial cells (RTECs) in kidney fibrosis. This precise targeting strategy directly targets these critical effector cells, thereby mitigating the fibrotic progression.
HSCs are crucial effector cells in hepatic fibrosis. When the liver is damaged, various cytokines and chemokines activate the HSCs, causing them to produce large amounts of ECM [ ]. Activated hepatic stellate cells (aHSCs) overexpress multiple receptors and endogenous proteins, including PDGFR-β, sigma-1 receptor, and CD44, providing therapeutic targets for fibrotic treatment [ ]. Building upon this, researchers developed a PDGF-derived pPB peptide that specifically recognizes and binds to PDGFR-β on aHSCs. This peptide was conjugated to nucleic acid lipid nanoparticles loaded with high-mobility group box-1 (HMGB1) siRNA (SNALPs), enabling precise delivery to aHSCs and down-regulating the expression of HMGB1, thereby simultaneously exerting anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic efficacy in a mouse model of liver cirrhosis [ ]. Aminoethyl anisamide (AEAA) can serve as a ligand for sigma-1 receptors. Zhang et al. [ ] modified AEAA onto nanoparticles to achieve active targeting of aHSCs. Furthermore, the team compared the targeting efficiency of AEAA and VA against aHSCs, finding that AEAA-modified nanoparticles exhibited superior anti-fibrotic efficacy compared to VA-modified nanoparticles, demonstrating greater advantages in targeting aHSCs. Hyaluronic acid (HA), a natural polymer that targets overexpressed CD44 on HSCs, was conjugated with endogenous bilirubin by researchers to develop hyaluronic acid-bilirubin nanoparticles (HABN). The HA shell interacts with aHSCs that highly express CD44 and undergoes significant internalization, enabling efficient bilirubin uptake and maximizing its antioxidant activity, thereby inhibiting fibrosis [ ].
MCs are essential components of glomerular filtration, and their proliferation contributes to various renal diseases, such as end-stage renal disease (ESRD). Numerous studies have found that α8 integrin is specifically expressed in MCs, providing a target for active targeting of these cells [ ]. Based on this, Fang et al. [ ] conjugated α8 integrin antibodies onto AuNPs loaded with dexamethasone and TGF-β siRNA. This design enabled precise targeting of MCs, resulting in anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic efficacy. In addition to MCs, targeting RTECs is another major strategy in the treatment of kidney fibrosis. RTECs play a critical role in urine reabsorption, and their activation can cause renal dysfunction, leading to inflammation and fibrosis [ ]. In one study, results showed that kidney injury molecule-1 (KIM-1), which is highly expressed only in damaged proximal RTECs, can function as a scavenger receptor, regulating phagocytosis in these injured cells [ ]. Accordingly, He et al. [ ] used bionic high-density lipoprotein nanoparticles (bHDLs), which naturally target scavenger receptors, as drug carriers. When injected into a mouse model of UUO, the nanoparticles were observed to accumulate extensively in the damaged kidneys and enter cells via KIM-1-mediated endocytosis, enabling precise targeting of damaged RTECs.

2.3.3

## Endogenous organ targeting
Unlike active targeting, which is driven by ligand-receptor specific binding and offers direct, precise targeting, endogenous organ targeting employs different compositions modified on the surface of nanoparticles to bind with various proteins in the blood. These proteins act as ligands to bind with receptors on target cells, representing an indirect targeting strategy [ ]. For example, Zhang et al. [ ] designed a retinol-conjugated polyetherimine (RCP) nanoparticle system that recruits retinol-binding protein (RBP) in the blood to form a protein corona. By binding with retinol-binding protein receptor (RBPR) on aHSCs, this system achieved endogenous organ targeting ( ). Additionally, vitamin A (VA) is indicated to recruit RBP in circulation and bind to it. The VA-RBP complex then is taken up by aHSCs with high expression of RBPR [ ]. Therefore, a VA-modified nanodrug delivery system can bind with RBP in the blood, thereby targeting aHSCs [ ]. Liu et al. [ ] developed VA-modified PEG-PLGA polymer micelles that specifically target aHSCs, enhancing drug delivery efficiency and anti-fibrotic effects. 
In summary, passive targeting, active targeting, and endogenous organ targeting constitute the three major strategies for precise delivery of therapeutic agents by NDDS. They all serve the same goal — increasing lesion-specific enrichment. In practical applications, these three targeting strategies are often complementary. Among them, passive targeting is the most basic targeting strategy, but it essentially depends on the pathophysiological structure of the lesion, limited by vascular heterogeneity (such as blood flow rate and blood vessel density) and tissue permeability. Moreover, it lacks specificity, resulting in some nanoparticles still being retained in other organs. In contrast, active targeting and endogenous organ targeting significantly enhance the accuracy of NDDS drug delivery and promote the internalization of nanoparticles, but there are also cases where the same receptor exists on multiple cell surfaces, causing the nanoparticles to disperse [ ]. Therefore, building upon passive targeting as the foundation and skillfully combining it with active or endogenous organ targeting strategies is the mainstream design approach to achieve high-precision drug delivery. In addition, further research on surface receptors of key effector cells should be conducted to further improve targeting of specific cells.

2.4

## Controlled release strategies
The above optimization of NDDS targeting ability significantly improves the accumulation of drug-loaded nanoparticles around target cells. However, if the focus is solely on the biodistribution of drugs while ignoring whether the drugs are released at the right time and space, it will be difficult to fully exert the efficacy of the drugs. Therefore, intelligent responsive NDDS have emerged, the core of which is to achieve precise release of drugs in target tissues and cells. This controlled release strategy uses the microenvironmental characteristics of the lesion as a trigger signal to cause the nanocarrier to undergo conformational changes after exposure to environmental changes, thereby releasing drugs [ ]. Unlike endogenous stimulation caused by cellular and subcellular microenvironments, intelligent responsive strategies using external stimuli as trigger signals can be actively controlled by humans, reducing the fluctuation of drug release efficiency caused by individual patient differences to a certain extent [ ]. In summary, this section describes the main current anti-fibrotic intelligent response strategies, including endogenous stimuli-responsive drug delivery caused by low pH of lysosomes and persistent overproduction of intracellular ROS, and exogenous stimuli-responsive drug delivery caused by external magnetic fields, infrared light irradiation, and ultrasound (US) stimulation.
2.4.1

## pH-responsive release
pH-responsive NDDS can sense changes in ambient pH and undergo changes in structure and surface charge at specific pH levels. Current studies have suggested that this response strategy improves drug release efficiency at the organ (gastrointestinal pH gradient changes), tissue (tumor targeting), and cellular (endosomal and lysosomal acidification) levels. During fibrosis, increased levels of glycolysis and increased lactate metabolites due to changes in intracellular energy metabolism, as well as inflammatory responses, together lead to an acidic environment outside the cell. In addition, after the cells take up the nanoparticles, the endosomal or lysosomal pH decreases. Both acidic environments provide conditions for pH-responsive strategies. Among them, acid-labile covalent linkers and pH-disturbed supramolecular interactions are the main strategies to achieve pH response [ ], [ ].
Electrostatic interactions can serve as a trigger for pH-responsive release. Jing et al. [ ] designed an intelligent NDDS for NIL loading via electrostatic interactions. The study demonstrated that NIL was liberated much more extensively in acidic conditions (pH=5.0) than in neutral conditions (pH=7.4). This intelligent NDDS ensures that NIL can be triggered for release in the acidic environment, enabling more accurate drug accumulation in target cells and maintaining effective concentrations.
Acid-labile covalent linkers are also a common strategy for achieving pH-responsive drug release. Morelli et al. [ ] reported a nanoparticle which dexamethasone was conjugated to Avidin-Nucleic-Acid-Nano-Assemblies (ANANAS) via an acid-sensitive hydrazine linker (ANANAS-Dex). The acid-sensitive hydrazone linker in ANANAS-Dex, upon reaching the lysosomes of target tissues, was cleaved under acidic stimulation, resulting in the liberation of dexamethasone. When evaluating the pharmacokinetics of ANANAS-Dex, it was found that free dexamethasone was hardly detectable in plasma, whether intravenously or intranasally administered. In addition, after intranasal administration, nanoparticles significantly accumulated in the lungs and maintained high drug concentrations for a prolonged duration. These results indicate that ANANAS-Dex can avoid exposure of dexamethasone to the systemic circulation, increase drug accumulation at the lesion site, and achieve a highly effective anti-pulmonary fibrosis effect.
Zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8), a MOF nanoparticle, has been demonstrated to dissociate in acidic environments (pH=5.5), thereby enabling drug release [ ]. Qin et al. [ ] took advantage of this feature to encapsulate PFD in ZIF-8 modified with VA (VA-PFD@ZIF-8@DMPC NPs). By using PBS solutions of different pH levels to simulate the pH value of the human physiological environment and lysosomal environment, the researchers found that the cumulative release of the nanoparticles reached 38% and 76% at 6 h and 72 h under the acidic environment of pH=5.0. In contrast, under the neutral environment of pH=7.4, the cumulative release was only 6.74% and 9.45%. These results further demonstrated the acid-sensitive properties of ZIF-8. Subsequent in vivo and in vitro experiments proved that the nanoparticles significantly prolonged the liver retention time of PFD and improved the effect of PFD in alleviating fibrosis ( ). 
Overall, compared with traditional anti-fibrotic therapy, this type of pH-responsive NDDS, based on an acid-sensitive design, has the advantage of maintaining high stability in the plasma, ensuring that encapsulated drugs do not leak in the pH-neutral blood circulation. Compared with free drugs, this reduces the non-target organ exposure and systemic toxicity. In addition, some studies have shown that, to address the limitation that drugs are easily degraded and inactivated by endosomes/lysosomes after entering cells, pH-responsive nanoparticles can cause endosomal membrane disruption through two mechanisms, and ultimately lead to the endosome/lysosomal escape of drugs: one is the “proton sponge” effect, in which nanoparticles play a buffering role when protons enter endosomes, resulting in chloride ions influx and increased osmotic pressure, which eventually leads to endosome/lysosomal rupture; the other is pH-induced swelling, which directly destroys endosome/lysosomal membranes [ ]. However, Kermaniyan et al. [ ] raised questions about this. They investigated three different compositions of pH-responsive nanoparticles and found that their size swelled to 120%∼200% of their original dimensions at low pH (5.6∼6.0) with good buffering capacity. But no large areas of green fluorescence were observed in the Calcein Assay, indicating that neither the “proton sponge” effect nor pH-induced swelling caused endosome escape. These findings suggest that the mechanism by which pH-responsive NDDS triggers endosome escape is still controversial, and other factors may influence this process. Therefore, the mechanism by which pH-responsive NDDS promotes endosomal escape still needs to be further studied.

2.4.2

## ROS-responsive release
During fibrosis, TGF-β promotes mitochondrial ROS generation while inhibiting antioxidant systems, thereby mediating intracellular redox imbalance and ultimately leading to ROS accumulation in the fibrotic microenvironment [ ]. Consequently, ROS response strategies demonstrate promising potential in anti-fibrotic therapy.
Sulfur-containing chemistries exhibit high sensitivity to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and hydroxyl radicals (HO−). Oxidative reactions with these radicals can lead to chemical bond cleavage or alterations in hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity, thereby enabling ROS-responsive drug release. For instance, Hao et al. [ ] developed a ROS-responsive intelligent NDDS (RES/CRGD-PMK-MCs) using poly(L-methionine-block-Nε-trifluoro-acetyl-L-lysine) (PMK) as the carrier. The results showed that the PMK carrier is a methionine copolymer containing thioether groups. Under ROS stimulation, the thioether groups in PMK were oxidized, transforming from hydrophobic to hydrophilic groups, which facilitated the liberation of the loaded Res in an oxidative environment ( ). In another study, Huang et al. [ ] created a VA-modified cross-linked nanopolymer (T-C-siRNA). Using ROS-labile dithioketal (TK) as crosslinker, they synthesized a nanopolymer core that disintegrates and releases drugs in activated hepatic stellate cells exposed to high ROS environments. 
In addition to sulfur-containing bonds, Liang et al. [ ] designed a highly ROS-sensitive nanomaterial—six arm-poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid-peroxyoxalate bond-polyethylene glycol) (6 S-PLGA-PO-PEG). It was found that the peroxyoxalate bonds in 6 S-PLGA-PO-PEG were highly sensitive to ROS and could be broken under ROS stimulation, thereby allowing nanocarrier cleavage to release the loaded drugs. In release experiments, under H2O2 conditions, the drug release rate of 6 S-PLGA-PO-PEG was significantly higher than that in ordinary PBS, which confirmed that high ROS levels could promote drug release. Additionally, the researchers used ROS with DCFH-DA and found that the unloaded 6 S-PLGA-PO-PEG had a significant ROS-scavenging effect. This result indicates that the nanocarrier also effectively reduces local ROS levels, thereby improving the lesion microenvironment.
According to Mu et al. [ ], they utilized 4-formylphenylboronic acid as a crosslinking agent to cross-link dextran and chitosan, with the addition of graphene oxide (GO) and salvianolic acid B (SalB) to synthesize microspheres. Under oxidative stress conditions, the phenylboronic acid ester bonds are cleaved, leading to the disintegration of the microspheres and triggering drug release. The drug release curve showed that the cumulative drug release rate of the microspheres exceeded 90% within 3 days under the stimulation of 0.1% H2O2 solution, which showed their good ROS responsiveness. Phenylboronic acid ester bond, as a ROS response component, can also be modified on the surface of the nanocarrier as a ROS response switch to enhance intelligent response to drug release. For example, Zhou et al. [ ] used mesoporous organosilica nanoparticles (MON) to encapsulate platinum nanoparticles (Pt NPs) and modified phenylboronic acid pinacol ester (PBAP) (PMON@Pt) on the surface of the nanoparticles. In addition, the MON has degradable tetrasulfide bonds inside. This dual ROS-responsive structure enables the nanocarrier to rapidly disintegrate when exposed to ROS, especially H2O2. Experiments showed that under H2O2 conditions, the degradation rate of PMON@Pt reached 66% at 72 h, and the release rate of Pt NPs reached 5.20%. These data significantly exceeded the drug release rate under normal physiological state (0.54%) and the drug release rate of MON@Pt without PBAP modification (0.95%). In conclusion, as a highly efficient ROS-responsive chemical element, the phenylboronic acid ester bond (and its derivative PBAP) can specifically cleave in a ROS-rich microenvironment and trigger drug release, providing a reliable strategy for the design of ROS-responsive intelligent delivery systems.
This type of intelligent responsive NDDS with ROS as a trigger signal can selectively release loaded drugs in ROS-enriched regions. Compared with traditional anti-fibrotic therapy, this strategy has the following unique advantages: First, the release rate of ROS-responsive NDDS is highly sensitive to ROS levels in the microenvironment. During the advanced stage of fibrosis, high ROS levels trigger rapid drug release. Second, some ROS-responsive NDDS react with ROS to break chemical bonds while also consuming local ROS, achieving the dual effects of drug release and microenvironment repair, which can be synergized with anti-fibrotic drugs to alleviate fibrosis. However, ROS levels at lesion sites are difficult to determine and are affected by individual heterogeneity, which means that even if nanoparticles exhibit a good ROS response in cell or animal experiments, they cannot guarantee accurate triggering in complex human environment, which may lead to a significant reduction in efficacy [ ]. Considering this, Lv et al. [ ] developed a ROS-responsive NDDS with self-accelerating release properties (PTKTD). The study has shown that TK bonds can be broken under the stimulation of 0.1 mM H2O2. Based on this, they loaded the ROS inducer α-TOS in PTKTD. When the TK bonds in the nanocarriers were partially cleaved in tumor cells with a ROS concentration of about 10×10−5 M, a small amount of α-TOS could be released, thereby inducing tumor cells to produce a large amount of ROS and further promoting the disintegration of PTKTD. This strategy realizes a positive feedback drug release system based on ROS response, which provides a reference for further improving the ROS response strategy in the future.

2.4.3

## Other stimuli-responsive strategies
Besides ROS-responsive and pH-responsive nanosystems based on the microenvironmental stimuli of the lesion site, there are also magnetic-responsive, photoreactive, and ultrasound-responsive intelligent nanosystems that respond to external stimuli.
Magnetic-responsive nanoparticles have been demonstrated as effective carriers for thrombolytic drugs, enabling their successful delivery to the embolized site under the guidance of external magnetic fields, thereby exhibiting efficient thrombolytic efficacy [ ]. Building on this, Xu et al. [ ] designed a magnetic-responsive nanoplatform (FeM@Sr-TNK NPs) that utilizes mesoporous dopamine (mPDA) loaded with Fe3O4 as a carrier to deliver the thrombolytic drug TNK-tPA. Leveraging the magnetic response properties of Fe3O4, this approach overcomes the challenges of thrombus-induced blood flow stagnation and poor drug targeting, enabling nanoparticles to achieve targeted thrombolysis independently of factors such as blood flow and concentration gradients. This significantly enhances thrombolytic efficacy.
Selenium-containing carbon nitride nanoparticles (CNPs) exhibit absorption bands covering both visible and near-infrared (NIR) regions, enabling them to serve as carriers for light-responsive controlled drug release [ ]. Liu et al. [ ] developed a light-responsive nanoparticle delivery system (M-PEISeCCNs@DNA) using selenium-containing CNPs as carriers. Under 808 nm NIR irradiation, these nanoparticles underwent photodegradation and photo-corrosion, generating oxygen to improve hypoxic microenvironments while releasing the SPB1 plasmid. This mechanism modulated the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway mediated by SBP1/NOTCH2 axis, and inhibited epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which collaboratively prevents hepatic fibrosis.
Yin et al. [ ] developed an US-responsive dual nanozyme composite (UVLp), which released nanozymes and L-arginine under ultrasound-mediated conditions. The results showed that L-arginine was oxidized to NO, working synergistically with the nanozymes to exert antioxidant and anti-fibrotic effects. In addition to single-responsive intelligent NDDS, multiple intelligent response strategies can be combined to achieve multi-step controlled drug release, further enhancing drug accumulation at the lesion site. For instance, Liang et al. [ ] developed a ROS/US dual-responsive smart nanocarrier encapsulating resmetirom and perfluorohexane (PFH). In the ROS-rich environment associated with metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH), the ROS-sensitive TK linker was cleaved. Subsequent US exposure triggered the liquid-gas phase transition of PFH, inducing cavitation and releasing resmetirom. This dual-triggered mechanism significantly promoted hepatic drug accumulation and permeation.
In general, when the above-mentioned intelligent responsive NDDS are exposed to stimuli in the fibrotic pathological microenvironment (low pH, high levels of ROS) or artificially given external stimuli (external magnetic field, infrared light irradiation, ultrasound), the internal structure of the carrier changes, such as the cleavage of chemical bonds and the degradation of materials, so that the encapsulated drugs can be released at the lesion site. Compared with nanoparticles without engineering treatment, the intelligent responsive NDDS significantly increase the accumulation of drugs at lesions, while reducing the distribution of drugs in non-lesional sites and reducing systemic toxicity and side effects. In addition, by combining multiple response strategies, such as ROS pre-triggered release and US-enhanced drug penetration [ ], intelligent responsive NDDS can achieve finer dynamic regulation of drug release according to external stimuli and phased changes in the pathological microenvironment.

2.5

## Enhancement of drug bioavailability
In addition to boosting drug delivery to the lesion site through enhancement of targeting and controlled release, nanocarriers can fundamentally address the issue of low bioavailability by improving oral absorption rate, solubility, and pharmacokinetics of the drugs.
To investigate the effect of nanocarrier rigidity on oral absorption, Yu et al. [ ] prepared poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)-lipid nanoparticles with varying rigidity and found that high-rigidity nanoparticles exhibited superior delivery efficiency and cellular uptake. Moreover, the team investigated the effects of ligand modification on nanoparticles with different rigidity. The results demonstrated that ligand-modified low-rigidity nanoparticles showed excellent oral absorption rates and significantly alleviated hepatic fibrosis. This study demonstrates that the combination of appropriate nanocarrier rigidity and surface modification can effectively overcome the barriers posed by the intestinal mucosal and epithelium to drug absorption and delivery, providing a strategy for the efficient oral utilization of drugs.
Improving drug solubility is also an important part of enhancing drug bioavailability. Li et al. [ ] encapsulated the ASK1 inhibitor selonsertib in β-D-galactose-conjugated GBRNP micelles (Sel@GBRNPs). The results demonstrated that this strategy not only precisely targeted hepatocytes to enhance the accumulation of selonsertib in the liver but also significantly improved drug encapsulation efficiency and solubility, thereby increasing bioavailability.
Furthermore, nanocarriers can also reduce drug metabolism and clearance efficiency. As previously mentioned, NO is essential for maintaining cardiovascular homeostasis. However, the non-specific distribution of NO and its reaction with ROS to produce more toxic reactive nitrogen species (RNS) significantly diminishes the therapeutic efficacy of NO [ ], [ ]. To overcome these limitations, Lu et al. [ ] designed nanoparticles that can markedly address them. They conjugated isosorbide mononitrate (ISN), a NO donor, onto cardiac targeting peptide (CTP)-modified (4-(hydroxymethyl) phenyl) boronic acid (PBA). This strategy leverages CTP to directly target ischemic cardiomyocytes and utilizes the oxidation byproduct of PBA, hydroxybutyric acid (HBA), to clear ROS, thereby significantly enhancing the bioavailability of NO.
Unlike strategies of optimizing the drug's own properties, certain nanoparticles can actively modulate physiological barriers to enhance drug permeation. Research has demonstrated that titanium dioxide nanoparticles (TiO2) can inhibit the AKT signaling pathway, reducing the adhesion capacity of human hepatic sinusoidal endothelial cells, inducing cell contraction and deformation, thereby creating intercellular gaps, and promoting endothelial cell leakage to facilitate drug transport [ ]. This discovery provides a viable strategy for enhancing drug delivery across physiological barriers. However, a potential drawback of this approach is that inorganic nanoparticles might excessively and uncontrollably induce endothelial leakage. To address this, the research team identified that angiopoietin-1 (Ang1) can rapidly reverse TiO2-induced endothelial cell leakage, further refining this strategy [ ].
In summary, nanocarriers have significantly advanced anti-fibrotic therapy. First, nanocarriers enhance drug loading capacity and enable co-delivery strategies, allowing synergistic effects of drugs with different mechanisms of action to combat fibrosis at multiple stages. Second, engineered nanocarriers enable targeted and controlled-release strategies, improving precision drug delivery and prolonging therapeutic duration. Third, nanocarriers can improve drug solubility and stability, preventing premature degradation in vivo and collectively enhancing drug bioavailability to maximize therapeutic efficacy. However, the application of nanocarriers still faces certain challenges: the long-term biosafety and potential toxicity of nanoparticles in vivo remain unclear, and the preparation of some nanoparticles still poses considerable difficulties. Future research should further investigate the in vivo degradation and toxicity of nanoparticles, and develop standardized preparation protocols tailored to the specific types of nanoparticles.

3

## The therapeutic effects of nanomaterials
With the advancement of nanomaterial research, it has been discovered that, beyond their role as nanocarriers, the complex and diverse compositions and physicochemical properties of nanomaterials endow them with the ability to modulate the pathological microenvironment of fibrosis, enabling them to function as therapeutic agents to regulate multiple critical pathological processes in fibrosis. For instance, MgH2 nanoparticles, as hydrogen storage materials, may inhibit oxidative stress responses and suppress TGF-β and AKT signaling pathways through their hydrolysis products, thereby reducing renal injury and fibrosis [ ].
The occurrence and development of fibrotic diseases are influenced by a combination of several pathological processes. First, tissue damage (such as infection, toxins and cell damage) induces the generation of a large amount of ROS. The oxidative stress response activates the TGF-β/Smad pathway and recruits a large number of inflammatory cells. Then, ROS, pro-inflammatory factors, and TGF-β jointly mediate the activation of fibroblast effector cells, which mediates the production of a large number of ECM proteins (such as collagen I and III), as well as imbalances in matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs). Ultimately, oxidative stress, inflammation, and ECM deposition combine to disrupt the normal physiological structure of tissues, leading to fibrosis [ ], [ ]. Accordingly, inhibiting oxidative stress, inflammation and ECM deposition is the core mechanism to alleviate fibrosis. This section focuses on the therapeutic effects of nanomaterials themselves, elaborating on how they achieve modulation of the pathological microenvironment of fibrosis through three core mechanisms: mimicking antioxidant enzyme activity, regulating immune cells and inflammatory factors, and modulating ECM metabolism ( ). 
3.1

## Mimicking antioxidant enzymes activity
As mentioned earlier, oxidative stress is an important driver of fibrosis. The excessive production of ROS promotes TGF-β-mediated pro-fibrotic pathological processes, such as epithelial apoptosis, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and fibroblast activation. Activated TGF-β can increase ROS generation by promoting mitochondrial damage and NADPH oxidase (NOX) activity, while inhibiting antioxidant systems such as SOD, collectively mediating redox imbalance and further aggravating oxidative stress injury. ROS generation and TGF-β mutually promote each other, jointly mediating the initiation and progression of fibrosis. Accordingly, targeting the massive generation of ROS is a crucial strategy for anti-fibrotic therapy [ ]. In recent years, researchers have developed various nanoparticles capable of mimicking the activity of antioxidant enzymes, investigating their therapeutic efficacy in fibrosis models.
Many studies have shown that inorganic nanoparticles, which possess excellent chemical properties and catalytic properties, have unique advantages in anti-oxidation [ ]. Based on this, Jing et al. [ ] designed triangular Ag@Pt nanozymes by combining Ag and Pt, which used the synergistic interaction of the two metal particles and unique physical properties of nanozymes (large surface-to-volume ratio and special local curvature) to give the nanozymes excellent SOD and catalase (CAT) activity, which allows them to consume O2− and H2O2 in a concentration- and time-dependent manner, and produce O2, which alleviates hypoxia while clearing ROS. However, the in vivo degradation of inorganic nanoparticles is a major problem that limits their clinical translation. A study has shown that long-term accumulation of AgNPs can prevent cell development and trigger apoptosis and necrosis [ ]. Although the 4-week treatment with Ag@Pt nanozymes did not cause significant liver toxicity and was well metabolically cleared, the study had a relatively short observation period, considering that the treatment of fibrosis is a long-term process. Therefore, the observation period should be extended in the future to obtain a more reliable safety assessment.
Compared with Ag@Pt nanozymes, Prussian blue nanozyme (PB), as an iron-based nanomaterial approved by the FDA for clinical application, therefore has a solid foundation for the clinical translation in anti-fibrotic therapy. PB has been demonstrated in numerous studies to serve as a drug carrier, photothermal converter, and bioactive agent, playing a significant role in various diseases [ ]. Xu et al. [ ] utilized PB to exert anti-fibrotic effects by disrupting the oxidative-inflammatory-fibrotic network. The results showed that PB exhibited activities of SOD, CAT, and peroxidase (POD), enabling it to eliminate ROS and reduce oxidative stress-induced activation of HSCs, thereby achieving anti-fibrotic effects. However, the specific molecular mechanism of the antioxidant effect of PB is not fully explored and requires in-depth investigation combining with bioinformatics technologies such as single-cell sequencing and proteomics in the future.
In addition to metal-based nanozymes that can mimic multi-enzyme activity and exert strong anti-oxidative stress effects, MOFs and polymeric nanomaterials also have good ROS-scavenging capacity.
Similar to PB, zirconium-based metal-organic frameworks (UIO-66) have multiple enzymatic activities that together form a complete ROS scavenging chain that can break down H2O2 while avoiding the formation of harmful hydroxyl radicals (•OH). In addition, UIO-66 does not completely remove ROS, but retains a certain amount of ROS to promote tissue repair [ ]. Du et al. further combined UIO-66 with Fe3O4, which exhibits a variety of enzyme activities, and the obtained Fe3O4@UiO-66 was greatly improved in terms of stability and catalytic performance. This design disrupts the ROS-inflammatory positive feedback loop in the heart failure microenvironment, improving cardiac structure and cardiac performance, and reducing fibrosis [ ].
As a polymeric material with antioxidant effects, polydopamine (PDA) has attracted much attention in the field of nanomedicine. Hydrogen peroxide radicals (HOO·) in PDA activate the antioxidant activity of PDA by reacting with ortho-quinone to generate highly reactive semiquinone radicals. Furthermore, Zheng et al. [ ] compared the antioxidant capacity of three PDA nanoparticles with different morphological structures and found that mesoporous dopamine polymers (mPDAs) have the best pore size and specific surface-to-volume ratio, which can provide more sites for ROS reactions, thereby clearing more ROS ( ). The combination of mPDA with metal ions can further enhance its antioxidant activity, especially Cu2+-based mPDA (CMP). CMP demonstrates potent SOD- and CAT-like activities and plays a significant role in mitigating hepatic fibrosis [ ] ( ). However, the antioxidant activity of PDA is overly dependent on HOO•, which limits its application range and makes it difficult to exert antioxidant effects in environments lacking HOO•. Additionally, the antioxidant activity of PDA may decrease with the increasing number of purification steps [ ]. Therefore, when selecting PDA nanoparticles as antioxidants, it is necessary to avoid over-purification and retain the active ingredients. Besides, in-depth research on the pathological microenvironment and its free radical components is necessary to avoid the limitation of the ROS scavenging ability of PDA. 
In conclusion, through the investigation of nanoparticle compositions and structures, it is found that physical properties, such as pore size and surface-to-volume ratio, provide a solid basis for nanoparticles to exhibit excellent antioxidant activity. These nanoparticles react with ROS in close contact and exhibit anti-oxidative enzymes (SOD, CAT and POD) activities, scavenging excess ROS in the fibrotic microenvironment, mitigating damage caused by oxidative stress, and alleviating fibrosis by inhibiting the interaction between ROS and TGF-β.

3.2

## Regulating immune cells and inflammatory factors
The occurrence of oxidative stress and inflammation often overlaps with each other, so both antioxidant and anti-inflammatory therapies are important treatment strategies. Of note, a variety of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles often have antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects at the same time, such as PB and gold nanoparticles, which can not only alleviate oxidative stress injury by mimicking antioxidant enzyme activity and other mechanisms, but also inhibit the polarization of M1 macrophages and regulate the NF-κB signaling pathway, exerting anti-inflammatory effects [ ], [ ].
Similarly, Cerium oxide nanoparticles (CeO2NPs) have been demonstrated to have significant hepatoprotective effects in chronic liver disease models. CeO2NPs down-regulated pro-inflammatory cytokines including IL-1β, TNF-α, iNOS, and COX-2, as well as reduced the expression of M1 phenotype macrophages, thereby exerting anti-inflammatory effects. Additionally, in this study, CeO2NP exhibited characteristics of regulating oxidative stress and apoptosis. Collectively, these mechanisms synergistically work to achieve the goal of alleviating hepatic fibrosis [ ].
In addition to the aforementioned inorganic nanoparticles exhibiting significant anti-inflammatory effects, studies have demonstrated that hydrogels not only function as drug carriers, but also possess anti-inflammatory and antioxidant efficacy through multiple mechanisms. A study has demonstrated that decellularized ECM-derived hydrogels can alleviate fibrosis in animal models [ ]. To explore the underlying mechanism, Evangelista-Leite et al. [ ] analyzed decellularized lung ECM-derived hydrogels. Their research revealed that the hydrogels are rich in various bioactive peptides. Proteomic and transcriptomic analyses indicated that the hydrogels down-regulated the expression of pro-inflammatory factors in the COVID-19 pathway by modulating key molecular and signaling pathways such as the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway and chemokine signaling pathways, thereby synergistically exerting antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and anti-fibrotic effects, effectively mitigating pulmonary fibrosis. However, immunogenicity remains a major obstacle limiting the clinical translation of decellularized ECM-derived hydrogels. Removing the cellular components and only preserving the ECM structure is beneficial for reducing the immunogenicity of the hydrogels and promoting tissue repair. But in practical applications, the choice of decellularization method, differences in tissue origin, and alteration of ECM structure can lead to antigen retention and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), leading to innate and adaptive immune responses after hydrogel implantation [ ]. Therefore, research on decellularized ECM-derived hydrogels should focus on the optimization of decellularization and antigen removal methods to develop more biocompatible hydrogels.

3.3

## Modulating ECM metabolism
MMPs are a class of zinc- and calcium-dependent proteolytic enzymes that degrade ECM proteins. TIMPs are inhibitors of the MMP family. Dysregulation of the MMP/TIMP balance is closely associated with fibrosis. Numerous studies have demonstrated that anti-fibrotic drugs promote ECM clearance by modulating the MMP/TIMP ratio, ultimately alleviating hepatic fibrosis [ ].
Some nanomaterials, such as silicon dioxide (SiO2) and titanium dioxide (TiO2), exhibit excellent capacity to promote ECM metabolism. According to Peng et al., SiO2 and TiO2 suppressed the expression of fibrosis markers, including collagen type 1 (Col-1) and α-SMA, effectively inhibiting HSC activation and reducing ECM production. Simultaneously, these NPs up-regulated the expression of MMP-13 and down-regulated the level of TIMP-1, thereby promoting ECM degradation. Ultimately, SiO2 and TiO2 reduced ECM deposition [ ].
Collectively, various nanomaterials have shown good anti-fibrotic effects in vitro and animal models, mainly by inhibiting the excessive production of ROS and the recruitment of inflammatory cells, thereby inhibiting the activation and transformation of effector cells, or regulating MMP/TIMP ratio to promote ECM degradation. However, the current research on the nanomaterials' own anti-fibrotic mechanisms is incomplete. Due to the cascade of “oxidative stress → inflammation → effector cell activation → ECM deposition” in the fibrosis process, it is difficult to distinguish whether the anti-fibrotic effect of nanoparticles is derived from the indirect antioxidant/anti-inflammatory mechanism or whether there is a more direct target, which still needs to be further elucidated. In addition, inorganic nanomaterials have anti-fibrotic effects but also pose pro-fibrotic risks. For instance, AgNPs can generate free radicals through direct redox reactions (Fenton reaction), and TiO2NPs can cause mitochondrial damage, leading to oxidative stress damage [ ]. Therefore, future research should focus on how to balance the anti-fibrotic and pro-fibrotic effects of inorganic nanoparticles, and find the best treatment window through multi-parameter synergy.

4

## Application of anti-fibrosis therapy strategy based on nanomaterials in various organs
The preceding sections have elaborated on how nanomaterials serve as carriers to optimize drug delivery and utilization efficiency, as well as their anti-fibrotic mechanisms as therapeutic agents. However, different organs and tissues exhibit unique physiopathological environments in fibrosis. It is necessary for researchers to develop different and appropriate nano-therapeutic platforms tailored to specific conditions. This section specifically discusses the therapeutic strategies combined with nanomaterials in fibrosis of the heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, and other organs and tissues. This discussion is presented in conjunction with the pathological processes of fibrosis and the challenges of drug delivery in each organ ( ). 
4.1

## Cardiac fibrosis
Cardiac fibrosis can be classified into replacement fibrosis and interstitial/perivascular fibrosis. Replacement fibrosis occurs following myocardial infarction (MI), during which myofibroblasts replace necrotic cardiomyocytes to form scars, disrupting the tissue framework. In contrast, interstitial/perivascular fibrosis results from long-term stress overload or metabolic diseases, resulting in ECM deposition in the interstitium and perivascular areas. During the progression of cardiac fibrosis, damaged cardiomyocytes secrete TGF-β, which promotes the transformation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts [ ]. Thus, targeting these injured cells to block their pro-fibrotic pathway represents a promising therapeutic strategy. EVs as drug carriers have garnered significant attention in the treatment of cardiac fibrosis. However, research has shown that systemic administration of EVs is difficult to deliver effectively to the heart, with most EVs residing in the liver and spleen—key components of the MPS [ ]. This implies that achieving precise cardiac delivery based on EVs requires overcoming two challenges: non-specific systemic distribution and MPS phagocytosis. To address these challenges, Chen et al. [ ] designed a two-step delivery system. First, researchers administered siCltc-loaded exosomes (ExosiCltc) for pretreatment to inhibit MPS phagocytosis. Subsequently, they developed CTP-modified, Cur-loaded exosomes (Cur@ExoCTP) to directly target damaged cardiomyocytes, thereby enhancing the bioavailability and therapeutic efficacy of Cur ( ). 
Biomimetic nanomaterials, as an emerging class of nanomaterials, possess the inherent biological composition or activity derived from living organisms, similar to EVs. In the treatment of cardiac fibrosis based on NDDS, biomimetic nanomaterials can leverage their coating membrane structures and surface modifications to evade nonspecific systemic distribution and MPS phagocytosis. As an illustration, He et al. [ ] developed a bilayer membrane-structured biomimetic nanoparticle (SPIN). SPIN leverages the platelet membrane's natural ability to target damaged endothelial cells and the cardiac stromal cell membrane's properties of immunomodulation and immune evasion. This approach addresses the issues of nonspecific biological distribution and rapid MPS clearance, facilitating the targeted delivery of PLGA nanoparticles encapsulating cardiac stromal cell secreted factors to the post-infarction heart, thereby reducing oxidative stress and inflammation. In another study, Wang et al. [ ] developed a mitochondria-targeting biomimetic nanozyme system (B-Ce@D-P@M). The modification with triphenylphosphine (TPP) enhanced targeting capability for mitochondria, while coating with macrophage membrane conferred evasion of MPS clearance. Additionally, the inflammatory homing capability of the macrophage membrane improved cardiac targeting. The porous structure of mPDA enabled controlled drug release. Together, these features synergistically increased drug accumulation in the heart. By simultaneously scavenging ROS and chelating excess calcium ions, this system protected mitochondrial integrity and promoted myocardial repair, thereby reducing inflammation and fibrosis.
After MI, the heart undergoes three overlapping phases: the inflammatory phase, proliferative phase, and mature phase. Dysregulation at any of these phases is detrimental to cardiac repair [ ]. To enable staged and hierarchical regulation of the pathological process following MI, Song et al. [ ] developed a ROS-responsive dual-drug-loaded core-shell microgel (SaB/Cand@C-S MGs). During the inflammatory phase, the outer layer of the hydrophilic tannin B (SaB)-encapsulated hydrogel shell cleared ROS and released SaB through hyperbranched poly(acrylate-capped thioketone-containing ethylene glycol) (HBPAK) under ROS stimulation, exerting the effects of anti-inflammation and promoting angiogenesis. In the proliferative phase, the hydrophobic candesartan (Cand) was liberated from the oleogel core. This process inhibited Ang II-induced smooth muscle vasoconstriction, promoted the down-regulation of TGF-β and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), and suppressed fibrosis. Compared to single-phase drug delivery strategies, this MI-specific staged drug delivery strategy significantly enhances therapeutic efficacy. A staged therapeutic approach can also be employed in the treatment of myocardial ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury. Luo et al. [ ] designed a ROS-responsive hydrogel system (S1&FT/Lipo-QCFT) using 2-formylphenylboric acid (2-FPBA) as a crosslinker, integrating liposomes loaded with anti-fibrotic drug FT011 and superoxide inhibitors S1QEL1.1 and tannic acid (TA) to synthesize a hydrogel containing both Schiff base and phenylboronic acid ester bonds. In the acute phase of myocardial I/R injury, S1QEL1.1 and TA are released following ROS stimulation from mitochondria, reducing early myocardial inflammation and oxidative stress-induced damage. Subsequently, FT011 is gradually released, exerting an anti-fibrotic effect during the chronic phase.

4.2

## Hepatic fibrosis
Hepatic fibrosis is typically induced by chronic liver injury (including cholestatic liver injury and toxic liver injury), which mediates inflammation in hepatocytes or cholangiocytes. This inflammation induces effector cells, primarily HSCs, driven by factors such as TGF-β, to activate and transform into myofibroblasts, resulting in the secretion of ECM components like Col-1 [ ]. Consequently, both aHSCs and TGF-β serve as primary therapeutic targets for hepatic fibrosis. Targeting the central signaling pathway, Chen et al. [ ] developed LNPs loaded with siRNA targeting type I TGF-β receptor mRNA (LNP-siTGFβRI), enhancing the stability of the siRNA. Based on the particle diameter of approximately 67.66 nm, LNP-siTGFβRI can cross sinusoidal endothelial fenestrae into Disse space, where it binds to TGF-βR1 on aHSCs. This action inhibits the TGF-β/Smad signaling pathway, reduces the level of pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic factors, and significantly alleviates hepatic fibrosis. Considering that excessive collagen production and reduced collagen degradation can lead to abnormal ECM deposition, Qiao et al. [ ] designed VA-modified hyperbranched lipid nanoparticles (VLNPs) loaded with siCol1α1 and siTIMP-1. These nanoparticles utilized VA to bind to RBP from the blood to target aHSCs. Subsequently, siCol1α1 and siTIMP-1 modulated the synthesis and degradation of collagen, achieving favorable anti-fibrotic effects.
Inflammation is a vital component of liver fibrosis. Therefore, a combined therapeutic strategy that combines anti-inflammatory effects with inhibition of HSC activation represents a promising approach for treatment. For instance, Jia et al. [ ] prepared a pPB-modified stable nucleic acid lipid nanoparticle delivery system loaded with heat shock protein 47 siRNA (HSP47-siRNA) to achieve precise targeting of aHSCs and effectively exert therapeutic effects on liver fibrosis. However, HSP47-siRNA exhibits only anti-fibrotic activity without addressing the critical role of inflammation in liver fibrosis. Consequently, the research team prepared nanoparticles loaded with high-mobility group box-1 siRNA (HMGB1-siRNA@SNALP-pPB) in another study, which simultaneously possess both anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic activities. Compared to previous studies, HMGB1-siRNA@SNALP-pPB demonstrated superior therapeutic efficacy [ ].
However, drug delivery to HSCs is often hindered by pathological barriers in the fibrotic liver environment, leading to suboptimal drug delivery efficiency. Therefore, optimizing NDDS to overcome these barriers is crucial. To address this challenge, Zhang et al. [ ] proposed a hierarchical and sequential strategy to breach dual pathological barriers in hepatic fibrosis, which involves the liver sinusoidal capillarization and abnormal ECM deposition. First, they developed HA-modified lipid nanoparticles loaded with simvastatin (HA-NPs/SMV). This design leverages HA to target LSECs and SMV to restore endothelial fenestrae, thereby overcoming the first barrier. Subsequently, they designed collagenase I and VA codecorated nanoparticles loaded with siCol1α1 (CV-NPs/SiCol1α1). The nanoparticles utilize VA to target aHSCs, collagenase to degrade collagen deposition and siCol1α1 to inhibit collagen synthesis, overcoming the second barrier. This therapeutic strategy effectively addresses the obstacles posed by pathological barriers to drug delivery, enhancing the efficacy of hepatic fibrosis treatment. Similarly, Li et al. [ ] developed collagenase-decorated melanin nanoparticles loaded with quercetin (MNP-QUE-COL), which degrade the collagen barrier to enable nanoparticle targeting of macrophages and promote their polarization into an anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype, significantly improving liver function in mice with hepatic fibrosis.
Kupffer cell-mediated rapid liver clearance has been a problem that is difficult to overcome in liver disease treatment. In order to promote the treatment of HCC, Tang et al. [ ] developed self-peptide-modified liposomes (S-Lip) that mimic the CD47-signal regulatory protein α (SIRPα) interaction leveraging the high expression of SIRPα on the surface of Kupffer cells, which can bind to Kupffer cells to stimulate the “don't eat me” signal, prompting Kupffer cells to shift from M2 phenotype to M1 phenotype, thereby preventing their phagocytosis of chemotherapy drugs and improving the efficiency of intrahepatic drug delivery. Unlike simple immune evasion, in the treatment of NAFLD, the researchers tend to achieve a balance between immune evasion and target cell delivery, so they mixed traditional liposomes with S-Lip to construct a hybrid liposomal system (MLip), which showed the best phagocytosis inhibition and drug delivery efficiency at a 1:1 mixing ratio, significantly extending the residence time of MLip in the liver. Building upon this, the researchers modified collagenase I on its surface and encapsulated silibinin to ablate the ECM deposition around the cell and fully exert to the anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic effects [ ] ( ). These two works together demonstrate the broad applicability of the CD47-SIRPα “don't eat me” signal-based liposomal platform in the treatment of liver disease, and the flexibility to design delivery and treatment strategies according to the type of disease. 

4.3

## Pulmonary fibrosis
Pulmonary fibrosis, particularly IPF, is a progressive and fatal interstitial lung disease characterized by persistent chronic epithelial injury and excessive ECM deposition. The core mechanism of pulmonary fibrosis lies in the injury to alveolar epithelial cells. This epithelial injury leads to the dysfunction of the epithelial barrier, allowing pathogens and inflammatory factors to invade, thereby activating fibroblasts and immune cells. Additionally, damaged epithelial cells secrete pro-fibrotic factors and produce ROS, which mediate EMT and abnormal ECM deposition through TGF-β, Wnt/β-catenin, and Notch signaling pathways. Among these, the loss of stem cell function in alveolar type II epithelial cells (AT2) is a crucial event in the pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis [ ]. Based on the aforementioned mechanisms, the protection and repair of AT2 function have become a key strategy in anti-fibrotic therapy. Wang et al. [ ] designed an inhalable LNPs delivery platform for co-delivery of two therapeutic mRNAs, using pulmonary surfactant dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) and ionizable lipid to synthesize LNP, enabling them to penetrate the mucosal barrier and enhance nanoparticle infiltration into the pulmonary mucosa, thereby improving drug delivery to the lungs. Notably, in bleomycin-induced mouse pulmonary fibrosis models, it was found that CYB5R3 and BMP4 mRNA can maintain AT2 homeostasis and promote their differentiation into AT1, restore mitochondrial function, prevent cellular senescence, reduce the expression of fibrosis markers and inflammatory cell infiltration, and finally alleviate pulmonary fibrosis ( ). 
The activation and transformation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts are critical events in the abnormal deposition of ECM due to the secretion of large amounts of ECM proteins. Building upon this, Yu et al. [ ] prepared engineered nanoparticles (CDH2-MelNPs) that can target CDH2-rich myofibroblasts via surface-modified CDH2 antibodies, thereby inducing a reduction in membrane CDH2 expression, down-regulating Rho activation, and ultimately promoting the transformation of myofibroblasts into fibroblasts.
Immune cells have been established to be critical factors in pulmonary fibrosis. Among them, macrophages exhibit a dual function during fibrosis: in the pro-fibrotic aspect, macrophages can secrete pro-fibrotic factors to recruit and activate fibroblasts, as well as produce TIMPs to inhibit ECM degradation; in the anti-fibrotic aspect, they can secrete cytokines to mediate the apoptosis of myofibroblasts and release MMPs to degrade the ECM [ ]. Moreover, research has shown that monocyte-derived alveolar macrophages (Mo-AMs) play a crucial role in promoting fibrosis [ ]. Building upon this, Singh et al. [ ] developed mannosylated albumin nanoparticles (MANPs) that utilize the mannose-specific targeting of the highly expressed mannose receptor CD206 on pro-fibrotic macrophages (Mo-AMs) through the surface coating of nanoparticles, achieving active targeting. Multiple experiments have shown that MANPs can be efficiently endocytosed by Mo-AMs. Subsequently, MANPs release TGF-β siRNA, which then silences TGF-β1 in Mo-AMs, thereby inhibiting fibrosis-related signaling pathways, reversing the process of pulmonary fibrosis, and significantly improving lung function.
In addition to delivering inhibitors, directly regulating the inflammatory environment represents an alternative strategy. Ci et al. [ ]directly used immunosuppressive dead cells obtained by liquid nitrogen freezing to achieve the treatment of severe pneumonia. These dead cells retain a variety of cytokine receptors on the membrane surface, allowing them to scavenge free inflammatory factors. This design allows them to actively inhibit cytokine storms as cytokine scavengers while serving as drug delivery carriers, significantly improving the anti-inflammatory effect. This research provides new insights for the treatment of pulmonary fibrosis: biomimetic nanoplatforms for pulmonary fibrosis can further integrate the function of “scavenging profibrotic factors” on the basis of actively targeting specific macrophage subsets (such as MANPs strategies), and achieve multi-level intervention from “inhibiting intracellular pathways” to “improving the extracellular microenvironment".

4.4

## Renal fibrosis
The glomerular filtration barrier (GFB) is a unique physiological structure of the kidney, comprising fenestrated endothelial cells, the glomerular basement membranes, and the podocyte gap membrane. The fenestrae size of glomerular endothelial cells ranges from 80 to 150 nm, while the podocyte gap is approximately 32 nm. Additionally, the glomerular surface carries a negative charge. These structural characteristics confer strict size and charge selectivity to the glomerular filtration barrier, restricting nanoparticle penetration [ ]. Therefore, optimizing the size and surface charge of nanoparticles can ensure their passive targeting to the glomerulus. Wang et al. [ ] enhanced the electrostatic binding of nanoparticles to the glomerulus by modifying the nanoparticle surface with a cationic cell membrane-penetrating peptide R8 (CCP R8). Simultaneously, the researchers precisely controlled the nanoparticle size to around 110 nm, enabling it to pass through the endothelial pores without leaking through the podocyte gaps. Experiments confirmed that nanoparticles can efficiently accumulate in the kidney.
Renal fibrosis represents the major pathological process driving the progression of chronic kidney disease (CKD) to end-stage renal disease (ESRD), manifested by glomerulosclerosis, tubular atrophy, and interstitial fibrosis [ ]. Diabetic nephropathy is a major form of CKD in which advanced glycation end products (AGEs) are critically involved. They promote ROS generation and induce oxidative stress to drive renal fibrosis [ ]. To prevent the occurrence of fibrosis, Sun et al. [ ] developed CSMDNPs, which were coated with low-molecular-weight polyethylene glycol-modified chitosan, enabling them to target the Megalin receptor on renal tubular epithelial cells, ensuring the nanoparticles can be effectively directed to the kidneys. For the nanoparticle core, researchers utilized melanin nanoparticles (MNP) loaded with dapagliflozin (DA), leveraging the antioxidant properties of MNP and the hypoglycemic effects of DA to synergistically treat diabetic nephropathy.
MicroRNAs (miRs) have been indicated to regulate renal fibrosis. Some miRs are regulated by the TGF-β signaling pathway, which can promote EMT and excessive collagen deposition, thereby inducing the onset and progression of renal fibrosis. Conversely, certain miRs can serve as regulatory factors to alleviate fibrosis and represent promising targets for anti-fibrotic therapy [ ]. Lv et al. [ ] developed HTP@miR210, employing N,N,N-trimethylchitosan (TMC) to encapsulate miR210, thereby overcoming its instability and protecting it from degradation. Additionally, given the significantly up-regulated expression of CD44 during renal fibrosis, researchers modified nanoparticles with hyaluronic acid (HA) to enhance their targeting capability by leveraging HA's specific binding to CD44. These approaches markedly improved the delivery efficiency and bioavailability of miR210, thereby enhancing its efficacy on renal interstitial fibrosis.
Inflammation is a key factor in initiating renal fibrosis. Inflammatory cells secrete pro-inflammatory factors, which promote the activation of fibroblasts and the proliferation of myofibroblasts, induce the massive secretion of ECM proteins, and facilitate the development of fibrosis [ ]. Zhou et al. [ ] loaded dexamethasone and captopril onto PLGA-ILs co-modified with polyethylene glycol (PEG) and α8 integrin antibodies, forming DXMS/CAP@PLGA-ILs. Based on the small particle size (approximately 119.1 nm) of the nanoparticles and the specific targeting of MCs by the α8 integrin antibodies, this approach enhanced drug accumulation and efficient delivery in the kidney. In a mouse model of glomerulonephritis, its effects of anti-inflammation and anti-fibrosis were demonstrated, reducing the level of pro-inflammatory factors, pro-fibrotic factors, and ROS, thereby alleviating glomerulonephritis.

4.5

## Fibrosis in other organs
Fibrosis also occurs in other parts of the body, such as the pancreas, eyes, intestines, and bones.
Pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs) are critical effector cells in numerous pancreatic disorders. Pancreatic injury and inflammatory responses mediate the aberrant activation of these cells, inducing their transformation into myofibroblast-like phenotypes. This process leads to excessive ECM production, thereby promoting pancreatic fibrosis [ ]. Accordingly, Qi et al. [ ] proposed the use of VA-modified ROS-responsive polymer micelles to deliver Res and surface-adsorbed RNA interference drugs (siLOXL1). Upon ROS stimulation, the released drugs eliminate ROS and suppress PSC activation, thereby reversing the fibrotic process.
Subretinal fibrosis represents the advanced stage of age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Among these, the aberrant activation of Yes-associated protein (YAP) induced by TGF-β2 can promote the development of subretinal fibrosis [ ]. It has been reported that verteporfin (VP) can inhibit angiogenesis by suppressing YAP phosphorylation and regulating the expression of cofilin and VEGF2 [ ]. Consequently, Zuo et al. [ ] designed a ROS-responsive nanoparticle (PMSN-VP@PPCeO2 NPs) loaded with VP and CeO2. The researchers encapsulated VP in polydopamine-coated mesoporous silica nanoparticles (PMSN-VP) and connected CeO2 encapsulated in PLGA-PEG-PBA via borate ester bonds (PPCeO2). Under ROS stimulation, the borate ester bonds were cleaved, releasing PMSN-VP and PPCeO2, thereby enhancing the drug loading efficiency. In vitro experiments demonstrated that PMSN-VP@PPCeO2 exhibited anti-angiogenic, antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects. Furthermore, in a laser-induced choroidal neovascularization (CNV) model, this nanoparticle was shown to effectively alleviate retinal dysfunction caused by CNV.
Intestinal fibrosis represents the end-stage of many gastrointestinal diseases. In inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), including ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, fibrosis-induced intestinal stenosis is a critical contributor to intestinal obstruction and recurrent surgical interventions. However, current medications for fibrosis in IBD primarily target inflammatory mechanisms without effectively reversing deep transmural fibrosis, while their non-targeted systemic side effects significantly limit clinical application [ ]. To address this, Zhang et al. [ ] demonstrated that simvastatin (SV) and patchouli alcohol (PA) inhibit TGF-β-induced fibroblast activation and pro-inflammatory macrophage polarization. By loading these drugs onto chitosan-modified PLGA nanoparticles, they leveraged chitosan's ability to disrupt tight junctions, successfully delivering the drugs to the colonic inflammatory epithelium, which enhanced drug accumulation at the lesion site, improved the inflammatory immune microenvironment and alleviated intestinal fibrosis.
Bisphosphonates (BPs) are first-line anti-resorption agents for osteoporosis treatment. However, long-term use of BPs can induce progenitor cell-to-fibroblast transformation, leading to pathological fibrosis [ ]. Xiao et al. [ ] developed a hydrogel bone adhesive, which consists of Mg-ALN MOF embedded in a gelatin/dialdehyde starch network. The results showed that this adhesive effectively mitigates the adverse effects of BPs while promoting the repair of osteoporotic fractures. This adhesive stimulates the MOF through an acidic microenvironment, continuously and slowly releasing Mg and alendronate (ALN). This mechanism not only inhibits osteoclast activity but also blocks the sclerostin (SOST)/TGF-β signaling pathway, thereby suppressing excessive fibrosis induced by BPs.
In brief, the application of NDDS in anti-fibrotic therapy needs to be designed according to the specific anatomical structure and pathological environment of each organ, so that NDDS can break through the unique pathophysiological barriers of each organ and achieve efficient drug delivery. However, there are still many areas that can be improved within the existing strategies.
First, the above strategies for optimizing targeting ability are mainly through the modification of nanocarrier surfaces with target ligands. These methods enable nanoparticles to precisely target key effector cells, improving drug delivery efficiency, but they also come with complex fabrication processes and high costs. Therefore, future research on the targeting ability of nanocarriers may focus on their own components. As mentioned earlier, LNPs have unique liver tropism, but different lipid components may affect their liver targeting efficiency. For example, Muto et al. [ ] investigated ionizable cationic lipids in LNPs and found that different ionizable lipid components affect the targeting ability of LNPs to HSCs, among which LNP-loaded siRNA prepared with ALC-0315 showed dose-dependent, durable and potent gene repression activity on healthy mouse HSCs and cultured human primary HSCs and aHSCs. ALC-0315 LNP can be endocytosed by hepatocytes in an ApoE-dependent manner and may also be taken up by aHSCs in other independent ways. Although the study did not further test the ability of ALC-0315 LNP in a mouse model of liver fibrosis, this discovery provides a simpler manufacturing process and targeting ideas for nanocarrier research.
Second, nebulizer inhalation nanopreparations have become an important strategy for the research and treatment of pulmonary fibrosis, which avoids the uptake of nanoparticles by MPS, and the application of mucus-penetrating materials significantly increases the pulmonary infiltration of nanodrugs. However, the shear damage caused during the atomization process may reduce the stability of the nanoparticles and cause obstacles for the transportation of drugs. Therefore, optimization of inhaled formulations is essential for the treatment of pulmonary fibrosis. Bai et al. [ ] developed the “LOOP” platform, which aims to minimize the changes in LNP before and after nebulization and ensure LNP stability by improving the LNP dialysis system and adjusting the “lipid component-activity” relationship according to the buffer. This study lays a solid foundation for the design of high-stability inhalation nanocarriers, and also suggests that the structural stability of different nanocarriers during inhalation should be deeply evaluated in the future.
Third, complex cardiac structures (dense tissue, high blood flow rate, and strong mechanical movement) significantly increase the difficulty of achieving efficient drug delivery. Even though NDDS can formulate unique delivery strategies according to changes in the pathological microenvironment, nanoparticles are difficult to avoid retention in liver, lungs, and other organs in the circulation. Therefore, compared to traditional delivery strategies that rely on systemic circulation to reach the heart, nanoparticle patch systems combined with microneedle patches are more efficient in achieving local continuous release of nanoparticles by implanting the patch directly on the surface of the heart [ ]. Future research on the treatment of cardiac fibrosis can focus on how to shift nanoparticle delivery from the systemic circulation-based strategy to direct local delivery using microneedle patches.
Fourth, as mentioned earlier, delivering drugs to the kidneys requires strict control of nanoparticle size and the application of specific binding to ensure that their size can pass through the filtration barrier while accurately targeting cells to prevent rapid excretion. In addition to the complex tissue structure of the kidney, there is a high degree of heterogeneity in many renal fibrosis diseases, making it difficult to comprehensively optimize nanoparticles by traditional experimental methods [ ]. In recent years, artificial intelligence (AI) has been explored in nanomedicine, which can simulate the behavior of nanoparticle ligand-receptor specific binding, drug encapsulation and release, and predict the interaction between nanoparticles and components in the pathological microenvironment, thus providing a new tool for personalized customization of NDDS [ ]. Therefore, incorporating AI may bring new opportunities for the development of renal fibrosis NDDS.

5

## Conclusion and future perspectives
In conclusion, nanomaterials have achieved substantial research progress in the field of anti-fibrosis, primarily encompassing two aspects: First, nanomaterials can serve as nanocarriers to overcome the insufficient bioavailability of existing anti-fibrotic drugs. This enables precise targeting (passive, active, or endogenous organ targeting) and controlled release (intelligent response systems) by modifying the surface of the nanocarrier or optimizing its structure and composition. Additionally, the high drug loading capacity and improved drug solubility of the nanocarrier enhance the bioavailability of the drug. Second, nanomaterials can function as therapeutic agents to directly ameliorate the pathological microenvironment of fibrotic lesions, including simulating antioxidant enzyme activity to eliminate ROS, down-regulating the expression of pro-inflammatory cells and pro-inflammatory factors, and regulating MMPs and TIMPs to reduce abnormal ECM deposition. Collectively, these studies have significantly mitigated the limitations of drug therapies and provided novel insights for treating fibrosis.
Although the combination of nanomaterials and anti-fibrotic drugs has shown excellent therapeutic effects in preclinical studies, its clinical translation is still in the early stages, and only a small number of nanodrugs have entered clinical trials. Among them, BMS-986263, a nanoparticle loaded with HSP47 siRNA using retinol-coupled LNP as a carrier, has entered phase II clinical trials. In a study of patients with HCV-associated advanced fibrosis, the formulation improved METAVIR stage by grade ≥1 in 21% of patients in the 90 mg dose group with a favorable safety profile [ ]. However, the studies of most nanodrugs are still limited by many problems.
First, large-scale production of nanomaterials is difficult. The internal structure and composition of nanoparticles are complex and variable, and their fabrication processes involve multiple technologies, posing challenges from laboratory to industrial-scale production.
In the case of EVs, there are the main problems in the transition from the laboratory scale to large-scale production. Firstly, production efficiency is low. The yield of traditional 2D cultures is far from sufficient for a single animal experiment. For example, only 109 EVs were obtained from 7 days of cultivation per T25 flask, while the therapeutic amount of EVs was about 1011. Different cell sources and culture conditions can also cause significant differences in EVs yield. This means that achieving large-scale production of EVs requires large numbers of cells and time. Secondly, there are many problems in production, including intrinsic problems of EVs (the functional heterogeneity of EVs is not fully understood), problems with separation technology (mechanical damage to EVs caused by ultracentrifugation and filtration separation), and storage problems (−80 °C may also cause loss of biological function and content release of EVs). These issues make it difficult to establish consistent quality control standards and ensure batch consistency. At present, researchers have explored various methods to increase the yield of EVs, such as 3D culture and artificial EVs preparation. But these methods may affect the protein composition and function of EVs, and the preparation of artificial EVs also involves organic solvent residues and different sizes and morphologies. Therefore, large-scale production for EVs still needs to be studied in depth [ ], [ ].
As an emerging nanocarrier, MOFs also face challenges in preparation technology. The synthesis conditions are strict (usually high temperature, prolonged reaction time, and use of harmful solvents), which have a significant impact on the pore structure, particle size and morphology of MOFs, so it is difficult to achieve large-scale preparation of MOFs with uniform quality and size while maintaining high crystallinity and functionality. Further research on MOF synthesis technology has shown that mechanochemistry and continuous flow synthesis can synthesize MOFs under low- or non-toxic conditions at room temperature, and show high space-time yield (STY). These two methods have been used by some companies and show good potential for large-scale production. However, there are still limitations to the application scope of these technologies. For example, the slow metal-to-linker exchange kinetics (Ti-based or Cr-based MOFs), or the mechanical instability of some MOF structures, are not suitable for mechanochemistry. In addition, when reactants have insufficient solubility, an additional washing step is required, which compromises the efficiency advantage of continuous flow synthesis. These issues continue to hinder the large-scale production of MOFs [ ].
In addition to the preparation process of the nanomaterials themselves, it is also necessary to consider the damage to their loaded drugs during the encapsulation process. For example, the nanoencapsulation of curcumin involves a variety of traditional physical and chemical technologies and some emerging encapsulation technologies that are still under experiment, each of which has its own advantages and disadvantages, and the technology needs to be selected according to actual needs. During the preparation of nanoparticles, the heat-sensitive properties of curcumin should also be considered to prevent its loss of activity due to heat. In addition, it is necessary to consider the release rate and targeting of curcumin to fully design nanocarriers. The above factors affect the industrialization and large-scale production of curcumin nanoparticles [ ].
Second, the long-term safety of nanomaterials remains to be further evaluated. The prolonged retention and accumulation of nanomaterials and their degradation products within organs, particularly in the liver, can lead to potential toxic effects. Notably, inorganic nanomaterials, due to their non-degradability, accumulate more extensively and remain longer in organs such as the liver and spleen, leading to tissue damage and inflammatory or fibrotic responses [ ]. Although inorganic nanomaterials produced by plant-mediated synthesis have demonstrated excellent biocompatibility and low toxicity in recent years, studies on their long-term safety remain insufficient, thus failing to fully resolve the issue of inorganic nanomaterial in vivo toxicity [ ].
Third, there are differences between animal models and the physiological and pathological environment of humans. For instance, studies on IPF often use bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis mouse models, which exhibit pathological manifestations similar to those in IPF patients but cannot fully simulate the chronic, progressive, and irreversible pathological process of IPF [ ]. These challenges limit the clinical translation and application of nanomaterials.
Therefore, future research on nanomaterials should focus on the following aspects. First, optimize the preparation and purification technology of nanomaterials. For example, as an important class of nanoparticles, separation methods of EVs have their advantages and disadvantages, and combined with the suggestions in the MISEV2023, separation methods should be innovated and various technologies should be combined, for example, first, low-speed centrifugation and filtration to remove cells and debris, then SEC or density gradient centrifugation to remove free proteins and lipoproteins, and finally affinity capture can be used to enrich specific EV subtypes [ ].
Secondly, the anti-fibrotic mechanism of nanomaterials should be further investigated according to the pathological characteristics of fibrotic diseases. Recently, many studies have demonstrated that cellular senescence is closely related to fibrotic diseases, and the process of tissue fibrosis can be significantly alleviated by giving anti-senescence drugs (such as dasatinib and quercetin). Besides, further studies have found that mitochondrial dysfunction is a key link in mediating aging-related fibrosis [ ]. Mitochondria-targeting nanomaterials have made progress in tumor therapy. Among them, mitochondria-targeted liposomes have been proven to show good anti-tumor effects in a variety of cancers [ ]. In addition to delivering drugs to improve mitochondrial function, liposomes-mediated mitochondrial transfer strategies have also shown good results in the treatment of fibrotic diseases. Wang et al. [ ] designed a strategy to simultaneously enhance dysfunctional mitochondrial autophagy and promote healthy mitochondrial transfer, by encapsulating Parkin-specific mRNA in liposomes to construct mitophagy-enhanced nanoparticles (MENs) and anchoring them to healthy mitochondria by electrostatic interaction, achieving degradation of damaged mitochondria, restoring mitochondrial homeostasis, and ultimately alleviating pulmonary fibrosis.
Additionally, the research of nanomaterials should be closely linked to emerging technologies to explore more efficient and safe anti-fibrotic strategies.
CAR T cell therapy is an emerging live cell immunotherapy that has made breakthroughs in oncology treatment and has potential in the treatment of multiple chronic and inflammatory diseases [ ]. In recent years, based on the surface receptors of key effector cells in organ fibrosis, researchers have encapsulated mRNA encoding targeting peptide- or ligand-CARs in LNPs. These LNPs deliver mRNA to T cells, so that the mRNA can be transiently translated to produce anti-fibrotic therapeutic agents, which can target key effector cells in different organs and eliminate themselves after one week [ ], [ ]. This immunotherapy, which combines with nanomaterials to generate CAR T cells in vivo, avoids the long-term side effects. Besides, this strategy can be repeatedly administered according to the patient's condition, and simplifies the preparation process. In addition, the principle of CAR-T cell targeting can be combined with biomimetic nanomaterials. Zhao et al. [ ] cultured T cells with FAP-targeted CARs on the surface in vitro to achieve precise targeting of activated fibroblasts by extracting the cell membrane as the biomimetic shell of the nanoparticles. This method, which combines the mechanism of CAR T cell targeting with biomimetic nanomaterials, provides a new strategy for the application of nanomaterials in precision medicine.
The development of clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)-associated protein (CRISPR/Cas) gene editing technology provides us with a powerful therapeutic approach for gene targeting and has been shown to treat cystic fibrosis (CF) through selective target gene editing [ ]. Nevertheless, its clinical translation is limited by the low delivery efficiency of gene-editing elements and low tissue targeting. Combining nanomaterials with gene editing technology can significantly improve the delivery and gene editing efficiency of the elements. In addition, according to the characteristics of organ structure (like high blood flow, low pressure and large area of pulmonary capillaries), researchers optimize nanocarriers, such as the preparation of ionizable LNPs (CrLNPs) and lipid polymers (PEI-based LNPs) with high Cas and sgRNA loading capacity and high gene editing efficiency, so that they can achieve lung-specific accumulation through charge interactions [ ], [ ].
The combination of emerging technologies has prompted new perspectives in the research of nanomaterials. First, how can we combine the physical and chemical properties and engineering modifications of nanomaterials with the principles of therapeutic cells and gene editing technology to develop nanodrugs with simpler preparation processes, controllable in vivo behavior, and more clinical translation potential? Second, how can we achieve a precise treatment strategy with high load and delivery efficiency through nanomaterial design?
Overall, research on nanomaterials provides novel tools and methodologies for addressing the challenge of fibrosis. By fostering deep interdisciplinary integration, they facilitate precise targeting and improvement of the fibrotic microenvironment. It is believed that with the relentless efforts of numerous researchers, these nanotechnologies can be combined with more novel therapeutic strategies and then be translated into clinical therapeutic interventions, ultimately achieving the reversal of fibrotic processes.

## Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

## Availability of data and materials
Not applicable.

## Funding
This work was supported by the 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 82470775) and 10.13039/501100018617Liaoning Revitalization Talents Program (Grant No. XLYC2412078).

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Lincan Wu: Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Xin Li: Supervision. Lina Yang: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Supervision.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 

## Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.

## Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 82470775) and 10.13039/501100018617Liaoning Revitalization Talents Program (Grant No. XLYC2412078). The authors are grateful for the collaborative support and guidance from colleagues in the research group. We acknowledge the use of BioRender.com for the creation of graphical content in this article.