pmcLife Sci AllianceLife Sci Alliance3573lifesciall101728869lsaLife Science Alliance2575-1077Life Science Alliance LLCPMC12769094PMC12769094.112769094127690944149079710.26508/lsa.202503460LSA-2025-034601Research ArticleResearch Articles4717Brain vascular stability relies on PAK2–cilia–PDGF-BB–HSPGs on basolateral side of endothelium
Basolateral vascular stability signalingPrabhudesaiShubhangi Data curationFormal analysisValidationInvestigationVisualizationMethodologyWriting—review and editinghttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-2832-2581ThirugnanamKarthikeyan Data curationFormal analysisValidationInvestigationVisualizationMethodologyWriting—review and editingSongXuehong ValidationInvestigationVisualizationMethodologyYangHua ValidationInvestigationVisualizationMethodologyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8163-2338ErredeMariella Data curationValidationInvestigationVisualizationMethodologyGirolamoFrancesco ValidationInvestigationVisualizationMethodologyNeumannThomas ResourcesMethodologyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-1265-3685MarzulloAndrea ValidationVisualizationMethodologyBaftiSepand ResourcesSoftwareMethodologyWriting—review and editingVanderhoefKayla InvestigationVisualizationMethodologyRarickKevin R Data curationInvestigationVisualizationMethodologyWriting—review and editinghttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-2035-5258SpearmanAndrew D MethodologyWriting—review and editingPanAmy Y Data curationFormal analysisValidationMethodologyAlvarezClaudia Alvarez Data curationInvestigationVisualizationYangJiyuan Data curationValidationInvestigationVisualizationMethodologyZhangFuming Data curationValidationInvestigationVisualizationDordickJonathan S SoftwareFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyVirgintinoDaniela ResourcesData curationFormal analysisValidationInvestigationVisualizationMethodologyWriting—original drafthttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-1454-2719WangLianchun ; ). Primitive embryonic vessels cannot withstand shear stress, a tangential blood flow–related force on blood vessels. Supporting cells such as mural cells are needed to promote and maintain vascular stability. Vascular stability is established by paracrine signaling mechanisms involving brain endothelial cells (ECs) and mural cells such as pericytes. One of the well-established signaling paradigms in the field is the secretion of platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB) by ECs and its binding to platelet-derived growth factor receptor-β (PDGFR-β) on pericytes ( ). EC-derived PDGF-BB has been suggested to bind to perivascular heparan sulfate (HS) ( ) to confer pericyte recruitment and stabilization of vessels ( ; ). Deficiency in HS ( ) or deficient PDGF-BB binding to HS ( ; ) impairs vascular development. Furthermore, HS in mural cells is dispensable for PDGF-BB signaling and pericyte recruitment in brain vasculature ( ). These studies collectively suggest the importance of EC-derived PDGF-BB-HSPG interaction in facilitating vascular stability during embryonic development.
Previous work from our laboratory showed that PDGF-BB can induce primary cilium, a microtubule structure on brain microvascular ECs ( ). Cilia are present on virtually all vertebrate cells. In ECs lining the vasculature, cilia are thought to exist on the apical surface of the ECs facing the lumen of blood vessels, and thus sense blood flow and serve as mechanosensors in multiple model systems ( ; ; ; ). Within the vascular system, primary cilia are present on arteries, veins, lymphatics ( ), corneal endothelium, and endocardial and smooth muscle cells of arterial and airway endothelia ( ). Endothelial cilia have been shown to be essential for developmental vascular integrity in zebrafish ( ; ). Previously, we showed that the vascular stability redhead (rhd) p21-activated kinase 2a (pak2a) mutant with cerebral hemorrhages was rescued by cilium (Arl13b mRNA) expression ( ), which implies that ciliogenesis mechanisms mediated by PAK2-ARL13b signaling is responsible for vascular stability. However, the underlying endothelial cilium-based mechanisms associated with brain vascular stability were not known, which were investigated here. EC cilia are known to control endothelial permeability by regulating the expression and localization of junction proteins ( ). Apically localized cilia in zebrafish ECs have been suggested to regulate shear stress, Notch activation, and foxc1b expression, which leads to recruitment of vascular mural cells to facilitate vascular stabilization ( ). Current thinking for endothelial cilia in promoting vascular stability in developing endothelium is that apical EC cilia, through shear stress mechanism, facilitate signaling molecules that promote interaction with mural cells that are located basolaterally. Based on current findings, we postulate a different model wherein brain endothelial cilia located on the “abluminal (basolateral)” side are responsible for facilitating interactions with mural cells to promote vascular stability. We investigate this hypothesis in this study and identified the underlying mechanisms associated with basolateral EC cilia–mediated embryonic vascular stability.

## Results

## Pak2a rhd mutants show defective brain EC junctions, and pericyte recruitment to vascular cilia
Brain vascular instability is associated with disruption of endothelial cell junctions and defective pericyte recruitment ( ). We investigated vessel junctions in pak2a mutants by staining for claudin 5, an established marker for brain EC junctions ( ) ( ). Cell junctions were assessed in pak2ami149/mi149 homozygous (hom) bleeders ( ), pak2ami149/+ heterozygous (het) non-bleeders ( ), and pak2a+/+ WT ( ), in the primordial hindbrain channel (PHBC) 80 microns posterior of the middle cerebral vein (MCeV) at the 52-h post-fertilization (hpf) time point. Compared with pak2a WT ( ) and pak2a het non-bleeders ( ), pak2a hom bleeders ( ) showed loss of EC junctions ( ). We also investigated pdgfrb+ pericytes and cilia in pak2a WT, pak2a het non-bleeders, and pak2a hom bleeders at 52 hpf. To assess pericytes and cilium coverage on ECs, triple-transgenic line (pdgfrb: GFP; kdrl: mCherry; and beta-actin: Arl13b-GFP) was created, which was crossed into pak2a hets. Incross of these hets resulted in triple-transgenic pak2a hom embryos. Pdgfrb positivity is marked as star-shaped pericytes ( inset, white and red asterisks), and arl13b positivity is marked as string-shaped cilia ( , white arrow) in the hindbrain vasculature. Representative images for pak2a WT ( ), pak2a het non-bleeders ( ), and pak2a hom bleeders ( ) at 52 hpf are shown. Quantifications of pericytes and cilia are described in the Materials and Methods section. We compared the number of pericytes ( ), distance of pericytes from EC cilia ( ), and vessels ( ), and percentage of pericytes close to vessels with ( ) or without ( ) cilia. Comparisons were made between pak2a hom bleeder, pak2a het non-bleeder, and pak2a WT embryos. pak2a hom bleeder and pak2a het non-bleeder showed fewer pericytes ( ). There was no significant difference in the distance of pericytes from EC cilia ( ) or vessels ( ) in all three groups. Compared with WT brain where most of the pericytes are close to vessels with cilia ( ), in pak2a hom bleeders, a median of 25% are next to vessels with cilia (P = 0.04) and 75% are next to vessels without cilia (P = 0.04) ( ). The distribution is opposite (67% vessel with cilia and 33% vessels without cilia) for heterozygous non-bleeders ( ). Finally, we noticed pdgfrb+ pericytes with varying arm lengths (short arm <5 μm, white asterisk, ; long arm >5 μm, red asterisk, ) in our transgenic fish ( ). pdgfrb+ pericytes with short-arm and long-arm lengths showed equal distribution in pak2a hom bleeders ( ). This result contrasts with pak2a het non-bleeder and WT data where pericytes with short-arm length were greater in number than pericytes with long-arm length ( ). These results collectively suggest that pak2a regulates EC junctions, pericyte morphology, and proximity to EC cilia.
 

## Brain endothelial cilia are localized at the basolateral surface
For pericytes in tissue to interact with endothelial vascular cilia, we hypothesized that the brain endothelial cilia on the basolateral side would greatly facilitate the interaction. Basolateral endothelial cilium localization in lymphatic vessels supports this hypothesis ( ). We investigated brain EC cilium location in multiple model systems including human primary microvascular brain ECs embedded in a collagen matrix under laminar shear stress, a zebrafish model, mice, and human brains. In these models, brain EC cilia were stained either for Arl13b ciliary marker or for acetylated α-tubulin ciliary marker, or for both. Brain microvascular ECs in microfluidic chips subjected to steady-state flow formed a tube-like configuration ( ), which distinguished the lumen and the basolateral side of the endothelium. Our data show that cilia were located predominantly in the basolateral side ( , arrowheads) of the endothelium. In zebrafish, we used a double-transgenic line that expresses mCherry in the vasculature and fusion ciliary protein marker Arl13b-GFP under b-actin promoter to investigate brain EC cilium location ( ). Remarkably, EC cilia were found jutting out into the abluminal (basolateral) side ( , white arrows). Quantification ( ) shows that in MTA and MCeVs in zebrafish, the percentage of cilium frequency is roughly equal across the luminal and abluminal side. In mouse cortex sections, we performed immunohistochemistry for Arl13b protein ( , black arrow). Quantification shows that abluminal cilium length is ∼4–5 μm, whereas luminal cilium length is 3–4 μm ( ). Furthermore, more than double the number of EC cilia are localized on the basolateral abluminal side compared with apical luminal side ( ). Finally, in a 22-wk fetal human brain cortex, we observed ARL13B cilia in abluminal location on a CD31 vessel ( , white arrows). The CD31 microvessels ranged from capillaries, small arterioles, and venules, and ARL13B+ cilia were measured in three distinct zones of telencephalon wall, namely, ventricular zone (VZ), subventricular zone (SVZ), and cortical plate (CP). Quantification shows a propensity for brain EC cilia to be present in the basolateral side versus apical side in the VZ and SVZ vasculature ( ). In the VZ and SVZ, ARL13B+ cilia were detected only on the surface of CD31+ ECs of microvessels no larger than 15 μm in diameter, with their average internal diameters between 7.45 μm in VZ and 7.73 μm in SVZ, respectively. In the CP, ARL13B+ cilia were not detected on the surface of CD31+ ECs of microvessels. The density of ARL13B+ cilia in VZ and SVZ vasculature was similar (P > 0.05). On average, in the VZ there were 0.57 ± 0.6 abluminal cilia/100 μm–cumulative vessel length (CVL) (1 cilium on 175 μm of explored microvessels) and 0.24 ± 0.42 luminal cilia/100 μm–CVL (1 cilium on 416 μm). In the SVZ, there were 0.67 ± 0.9 abluminal cilia/100 μm–CVL (1 cilium on 149 μm) and 0.27 ± 0.41 luminal cilia/100 μm–CVL (1 cilium on 370 μm) ( ). These data collectively in multiple model systems suggest that brain endothelial cilia are primarily located on the basolateral side, which can facilitate interactions with cells of the brain microenvironment such as mural cells.
 

## PDGF-BB secretion in brain ECs is induced by Pak2a and cilium signals
Past work has provided extensive evidence that the platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB) secreted by ECs binds to PDGFR-β on pericytes to promote vascular stability. This concept is based on mouse knockouts for PDGF-BB or PDGFR-β that die perinatally and show reduced mural cell coverage of endothelium, increased pericyte/mural cell detachment, capillary dilation, and widespread microaneurysms resulting in severe hemorrhaging ( ; ; ; ; ). Our previous work also showed that PDGF-BB was a potent inducer of PAK2a and ARL13b signals in brain microvascular ECs ( ). Furthermore, pak2a hom bleeders showed fewer pdgfrb+ mural cells, and of the ones present, most mural cells misaligned to brain vessels with no cilia ( ). Thus, we hypothesized that Pak2a may induce PDGF-BB signal to promote mural cell recruitment. We tested this hypothesis in primary human brain microvascular ECs and investigated PDGF-BB levels by ELISA in supernatants from PAK2 and ARL13b knockdown brain ECs ( ). Indeed, PAK2 and ARL13b knockdown human brain ECs both show reduced PDGF-BB secretion in the supernatant ( ) with PAK2 knockdown showing more pronounced effect (50% decrease) than ARL13b knockdown (20% decrease) EC supernatants compared with control ECs.
 

## PDGF-BB ligand is expressed in a gradient fashion proximal to brain ECs in vertebrates
PDGF-BB contains a retention motif, an HS binding sequence that is necessary for interaction with basement membrane HSPG molecules localized on the basolateral side of the endothelium ( ). This retention is necessary for pericyte recruitment and has led to the hypothesis that PDGF-BB released from ECs is retained by the EC basement membrane to promote a gradient around these cells. However, to our knowledge, this gradient has never been observed in vivo in the literature. Here, we stained for endomucin (vessel marker) ( ) and PDGF-BB ( ) in WT Ext1fl/fl mouse E11.5 cortex and clearly observed a gradient of PDGF-BB surrounding the endothelial vasculature ( ). We also stained PDGF-BB protein in zebrafish brain, which also showed pockets of robust expression proximal to vessels ( , arrows), and a gradient-like expression pattern ( , orange boxes). To evaluate whether brain ECs in culture retain PDGF-BB on the HS chains, we treated human brain microvascular ECs with heparinase (0.2 IU/ml) for 2 h. Heparinase cleaves HSPGs from cell surface ( ). Indeed, PDGF-BB levels are higher in heparinase-treated control ECs in two independent experiments ( , heparinase-treated samples, P < 0.005 or P < 0.05) compared with the untreated control. These results collectively suggest that PDGF-BB is found immediately outside of vertebrate brain vessels and is retained on the EC surface and surrounding extracellular matrix via binding to HSPG to create a gradient-like pattern.

## PDGF-BB gradient is disrupted in pak2- and heparan sulfate–deficient background in vivo
As PAK2 induces PDGF-BB levels in brain ECs in vitro ( ), we investigated whether the number of PDGF-BB sources and gradients was different between embryonic brains of pak2a WT fish ( ) and pak2a hom bleeder fish ( ). Qualitatively, PDGF-BB staining is vastly reduced in pak2a hom bleeders ( ) compared with pak2a WT fish ( ). In the head ( ) and PHBC ( ), the number of PDGF-BB sources remains unchanged between pak2a hom bleeders compared with pak2a WT embryos ( ), but in both cases, the number of PDGF-BB gradients is vastly decreased in pak2a hom bleeders compared with pak2a WT embryos ( and ). We further evaluated the PDGF-BB gradients by measuring the number of PDGF-BB rings of expression within a gradient ( ) and the distance of the farthest point in the gradient from the initiating source ( ). The number of rings was statistically significant (**P < 0.01, ), whereas the distance of furthest ring from the source was not ( ). In heart ( ), both PDGF-BB sources and PDGF-BB gradients are decreased in pak2a hom bleeders compared with pak2a WT embryos. Others have hypothesized that the PDGF-BB gradient is formed because of interactions with HSPGs secreted from ECs ( ). The abundance and structure of HS in each cell type are determined by the cellular expression of the enzymes responsible for HS biosynthesis and remodeling ( ). Thus, we investigated the status of the PDGF-BB gradient surrounding endomucin-positive vasculature in e11.5 embryos with endothelial-specific (TIE2-CRE) knockout of the HS copolymerase enzyme Exostosin-1 (Ext1) (Ext1ECKO), in which endothelial HS expression is abolished ( ; ). Indeed, we observed that the PDGF-BB gradient is disrupted upon knockout of EC-HS expression (Ext1ECKO) ( ) compared with littermate-matched E11.5 control (Ext1fl/fl) ( ) mouse brains. We quantified the PDGF-BB gradient in the mouse brain and found that the PDGF-BB gradient extended further from endomucin-positive vessels in the Ext1fl/fl brain section ( ) compared with a diminished gradient in the Ext1ECKO brain section ( ). These data collectively suggest that pak2a and HS biosynthesis is intricately linked on the basolateral side of the endothelium to promote PDGF-BB gradient formation.
 

## PDGF-BB is found in brain EC cilia in vitro
As HS and brain EC cilia are observed on the basolateral side, and bound PDGF-BB is released from ECs upon HS cleavage ( ), we investigated whether PDGF-BB is present inside the brain EC cilium, as cilium is a source of ligands for signaling ( ; ). We performed immunofluorescence for ARL13B and PDGF-BB proteins in brain ECs ( ). Indeed, we observed PDGF-BB enriched in the brain EC cilia ( , box magnified). Previously, we had reported that some brain ECs in the G0 cell cycle phase exhibit 2 ciliary phenotypes ( ). In the immunofluorescence image, note two ciliary dot-like structures in brain ECs ( ). Interestingly, PDGF-BB was found to be colocalized to a single cilium ( , arrow). The significance of the PDGF-BB cilium localization in one of the two cilia is not known. Because brain EC cilia are tiny (1–2 μm), they are often observed as dot-like structures and are difficult to visualize the conventional axoneme–basal body structure of the cilium. In the past, upon treatment of brain ECs with PDGF-BB, we have observed the entire ciliary structure: basal body (centrin2) and axoneme (ARL13b) in primary human brain ECs ( ). Furthermore, we showed that PDGF-BB induced PAK2 and ARL13b protein levels in brain ECs ( ). These results collectively suggest a feedforward and feedback signaling loop exists wherein PDGF-BB promotes EC–ciliogenesis (PAK2a-ARL13b) signaling axes, which in turn promotes more PDGF-BB secretion from ECs. To test the feedforward–feedback mechanism in brain ECs, we compared ARL13b and PAK2 expression in lysates from control siRNA and efficacy-confirmed PDGF-BB siRNA brain ECs ( ). Indeed, we noticed a reduction in both ARL13B and PAK2 proteins in PDGF-BB siRNA ECs compared with control siRNA ECs ( ), confirming the feedforward–feedback PDGF-BB-PAK2/ARL13B-PDGF-BB regulatory mechanism in brain ECs.
 

## PAK2/ARL13b–heparan sulfate proteoglycan connection in vitro and in vivo
PAK2 and ARL13b induce PDGF-BB in brain ECs ( ), and PDGF-BB is retained by HS on the cell surface and within periendothelial cellular matrix ( ). Thus, we investigated the status of HS expression in PAK2 and ARL13b loss-of-function ECs ( ). We performed qRT-PCR for genes of HS chain biosynthesis (EXT1, EXT2) and sulfation modification and remodeling (NDST1, NDST2, HS6ST1, HS6ST2, HS6ST3, HS2ST1, SULF1, SULF2) in PAK2 siRNA ( ) and ARL13b siRNA ( ) brain ECs and compared their expression with control siRNA brain ECs ( ). Four of the enzymes showed up-regulation (EXT1, HS6ST1, HS6ST2, and HS2ST1) in PAK2 siRNA brain ECs, five enzymes showed no change, and one enzyme showed down-regulation (NDST1) ( ). For ARL13b siRNA ECs, 2 enzymes showed up-regulation (HS6ST2 and HS6ST3), five enzymes showed no change, and three enzymes showed down-regulation (EXT2, NDST1, and NDST2) ( ). HS6ST2, HS6ST3, and NDST1 enzymes are regulated in both PAK2 and ARL13b siRNA ECs compared with control ECs. qRT-PCR data in human brain ECs with PAK2 or ARL13b siRNA suggest that HS chain biosynthesis and modifications are likely altered under PAK2 and/or ARL13b modulations. As we observed a greater number of HS enzyme changes in PAK2 siRNA ECs, we isolated HS from PAK2 siRNA brain ECs and performed disaccharide composition analysis, which showed a global reduction in sulfation, including N-sulfation (NS), 2-O-sulfation (2S), and 6-O-sulfation (6S), in HSPGs on primary brain ECs ( ). Defective N-sulfation abolishes HS to bind PDGF-BB ( ). We also performed PDGF-BB binding assay on PAK2 siRNA ECs and ARL13b siRNA ECs using an ELISA that detects cell surface–bound PDGF-BB ( ). Heparinase I treatment of ECs was used as a positive control. Indeed, PAK2 siRNA ECs and ARL13b siRNA ECs show reduced PDGF-BB binding to ECs compared with control siRNA ECs ( ). Finally, we stained for HS in pak2a WT fish ( ) and pak2a hom fish ( ) and found little to no staining on vessels prone to hemorrhage in pak2a hom fish. Collectively, these data suggest that PAK2 is required for appropriate HS biosynthesis and sulfation on brain EC surface to facilitate HSPG formation and PDGF-BB binding.
 

## Pak2a: EC cilia and role of HSPG
Thus far, we have provided evidence that PAK2 can induce PDGF-BB expression in brain ECs, and influences HSPG modifications on the surface of brain ECs, which is necessary for PDGF-BB binding to cell surface. The EC cilium status under pak2 loss-of-function conditions remains unknown. To investigate this question, we stained for ciliary marker ARL13b in PAK2 siRNA cells and counted the number of ARL13b cilia ( ) and the length ( ) of the cilium. In PAK2 knockdown brain ECs, the percent cilia and the length of cilia are significantly smaller compared with control siRNA knockdown brain ECs ( ). To evaluate the contribution of HSPGs to cilium length and numbers, we treated PAK2 and control siRNA cells with heparinase II and stained for ARL13b, PDGF-BB, and HSPGs. Upon heparinase treatment, control siRNA cells showed little to no difference in the number of cilia or cilium length, indicating that basal HS expression is not associated with cilium morphology or ciliogenesis ( ). Upon PAK2 siRNA and heparinase II treatment, the number of cilia is not different when compared to PAK2 siRNA-alone cells, suggesting that most of the cilium effect is from PAK2-level modulation. However, cilium length in PAK2 siRNA ECs + heparinase is significantly (P = 0.01) smaller than PAK2 siRNA ECs without heparinase ( ). We also performed comparable experiments in ARL13b siRNA cells and found that cilium numbers were greatly reduced under the ARL13b knockdown condition and the effect of heparinase was negligible ( ). As per cilium length, we found that ARL13b siRNA ECs + heparinase have significantly longer cilia ( , P = 0.032) compared with ARL13b siRNA ECs without heparinase. Thus, the heparinase treatment causes opposite effects on cilium length in PAK2 and ARL13b knockdown ECs, which requires additional investigation.
 To assess for in vivo EC cilia under pak2a modulation, we investigated EC cilium numbers (ARL13b-GFP) along 100 μm of MtA and MCeV vessel length in pak2a hom bleeders and compared them with pak2a WT. We found that pak2a hom bleeders have fewer EC cilia in the MtA and MCeV vessels compared with pak2a WT ( ). We already showed in previous panels that pak2a hom bleeders have no HSPGs on the same brain vessels ( ). The PAK2:EC cilium datasets when combined with data from the previous section (PAK2:HSPG) collectively suggest that PAK2 controls HSPG deposition and modifications on the cell surface, which partly influences cilium development and PDGF-BB binding on the cell surface.

## PDGF-BB and cilia rescue pak2a cerebral hemorrhage phenotype
Because pak2a knockdown shows reduced PDGF-BB protein expression in brain ECs and influences HSPG synthesis and sulfation modifications on the abluminal EC surface that are important for PDGF-BB binding, we hypothesized that injecting PDGF-BB protein will rescue cerebral hemorrhage observed in pak2a hom bleeders. We injected 1 ng of the human PDGF-BB protein into a clutch of pak2a het embryos and imaged embryos that showed the bleeding phenotype compared with bleeders from a vehicle-injected clutch of embryos ( ). Comparing the size and extent of hemorrhage, we observed a decrease in both parameters in PDGF-BB–injected embryos ( ) compared with vehicle-injected control pak2a hom bleeders ( ). The bleeding area was smaller in PDGF-BB–injected embryos compared with control vehicle–injected embryos ( , P < 0.01). We also investigated cilium numbers in the PDGF-BB–injected embryos ( , white arrows) and compared them with control vehicle–injected embryos ( ). We observed an increase in EC cilium numbers in PDGF-BB–injected embryos compared with control vehicle–injected embryos ( ). Previously, we already showed that injecting ciliary ARL13b mRNA in embryos from incross of the pak2a het clutch also rescued the hemorrhage phenotype ( ). Taken together, results from our previous work and current work suggest that PDGF-BB can induce PAK2 and ARL13b ciliogenesis signal intracellularly in brain ECs. Ciliogenesis PAK2/ARL13b signals inside the cell can induce PDGF-BB protein expression that is secreted from ECs and found on the basolateral side of developing blood vessels. On the basolateral side, PDGF-BB binds to HSPGs to create gradients that facilitate pericyte recruitment to promote and maintain embryonic vascular stability (Graphical abstract).

## Discussion
In this study, we report the identification of the PDGF-BB gradient on the basolateral side of brain ECs, which we hypothesize associates with endothelial cilia and HSPGs on the basolateral side to facilitate migration of pdgfrb+ pericytes closer to the endothelium to promote vascular stability. Salient features of this study include the identification of brain endothelial cilia on the basolateral side, identification of PDGF-BB gradients in vivo on the basolateral side in close apposition to brain ECs, the identification of HSPGs in the PDGF-BB-PAK2 and ciliogenesis mechanism that is critical for vascular stability, and the identification of PDGF-BB as a potential vascular stabilizing factor in vivo.
To date, endothelial cilia have been widely considered as blood flow sensors ( ; ) and thus primarily considered to be located on the apical side of ECs. The presence of endothelial cilia on the basolateral side has been observed previously in lymphatic vessels ( ). In brain collateral arteries, basolateral ciliary pockets have been identified ( ), but whether these ciliary pockets emerged from basolateral or apical cilia is not fully clear. Here, we show the presence of brain endothelial cilium basolateral location in cortex vessels in zebrafish, mice, and humans ( ). Quantification of basolateral brain endothelial cilium location in mice and humans shows that this is the preferred site on these vessels compared with apical location ( and ). In addition, brain microvascular ECs subjected to flow conditions in vitro in a microfluidic device also show the predominant basolateral location, thus collectively arguing for a critical function for the basolateral endothelial cilia. However, the functional role of basolateral endothelial cilia in embryonic brain vascular development is not known. Our studies highlight the potential for basolateral brain endothelial cilia to serve as contributors of ligands such as PDGF-BB to extracellular space to perform paracrine and juxtacrine function such as recruitment of supporting mural cells to promote vascular stability (Graphical abstract). Support for this idea comes from initial observation wherein we identified that brain endothelial cilia contain PDGF-BB ( ). We present evidence here that brain ECs secrete PDGF-BB in culture but whether PDGF-BB is secreted from brain cilium–associated extracellular vesicles ( ) or non-ciliary extracellular vesicles is not known. We also showed here that PAK2 and ciliogenesis signal ARL13B induce the release of PDGF-BB from brain ECs. Thus, multiple signals control PDGF-BB release from brain ECs, which can act on brain ECs in an autocrine manner or on mural cells in a paracrine/juxtacrine manner. For autocrine effects, we previously showed that PDGF-BB–like VEGF-A can promote EC ciliogenesis in brain ECs through VEGF receptor-2 (Graphical abstract) ( ). In this study, we show that PAK2 and ciliary ARL13b signaling promotes secretion of PDGF-BB from brain ECs ( ), which promotes paracrine/juxtacrine PDGFR-β–expressing mural cell recruitment (see Graphical abstract).
What happens to PDGF-BB once released from brain ECs? Evidence in the literature shows that specific heparin-binding sequences in PDGF-BB promote its interaction with HSPGs on the endothelial basolateral surface ( ; ). This is a key point as mural cells also express HSPGs, but it is the endothelial HSPGs in the central nervous system that facilitate PDGF-BB–mediated PDGFR-β activation ( ). Inductive reasoning suggests that PDGF-BB secreted from brain ECs interacts with HSPGs juxtaposed to the endothelium and stays proximal to brain ECs to form a gradient or concentration depots of the PDGF-BB ligand. This idea was suggested by and , but to our knowledge, the PDGF-BB gradient or concentration depots were not observed in vivo. Here, using PDGF-BB–specific antibodies, PDGF-BB ligand gradients were observed juxtaposed to mouse cortex brain ECs and zebrafish brain ECs ( ). Furthermore, the PDGF-BB gradient was disturbed in pak2a mutant fish and in Ext1 EC KO mice ( ), which collectively argues for an endothelial-specific PAK2a-mediated PDGF-BB gradient formation surrounding the brain vasculature.
The expression of enzymes of the HSPG synthesis and modification was significantly altered in PAK2 siRNA and ARL13b siRNA ECs, and global sulfation was affected on the brain EC surface of PAK2 siRNA cells, which directly influenced the binding of PDGF-BB to the EC surface ( ). N-sulfation in HSPGs is known to be critical for PDGF-BB binding ( ), which supports our findings. Down-regulation of Ndst1 in PAK2 siRNA ECs is expected to reduce cell surface N-sulfation of HSPGs, which is known to be important for PDGF-BB binding ( ). HSPG protein staining around zebrafish brain vessels in pak2a mutant is less, which directly supports the fewer PDGF-BB gradient formation data around pak2a mutant brain vessels ( ).
Finally, the clinical implication of this finding is directly relevant to intraventricular hemorrhage, a pediatric condition, where during embryonic development, dysregulation of vascular development processes is considered as a major contributing factor to the etiology of unstable brain vessels in the germinal matrix leading to hemorrhage ( ). We injected human PDGF-BB protein in a 1-cell-stage embryo derived from cross of pak2a heterozygous adults, which rescued the brain bleeding phenotype in zebrafish ( ). This remarkable finding is consistent with the interpretation that diminishment of the PDGF-BB protein in pak2a rhd vessels is a causal event to vascular instability. We also observed increased EC cilia in PDGF-BB–injected embryos ( ). Cilium-dense vessels include angiogenic central arteries (CtAs). In comparison, cilium-poor vessels include MCeV and PHBC. Interestingly, the PDGF-BB gradient is not proximal to cilium-rich vessels and pericytes with shorter arm are often found next to CtAs with cilia. These results collectively argue for pericyte preference to cilium-rich vessels to promote vascular stabilization. Previously, injecting human ARL13b mRNA in embryos from mating of pak2a heterozygous adults also rescued the bleeding phenotype, and this rescue was dependent on when (24 versus 30 hpf) the mRNA injection occurred ( ). As both Pak2 and Arl13b promote PDGF-BB secretion from brain ECs, these data collectively argue that PDGF-BB is a key molecule when up-regulated at the right embryonic time (24 hpf) facilitates embryonic brain vascular stability. However, how the PDGF-BB gradient facilitates pericyte recruitment to cilium-dense vessels remains uncertain. Limitations of our study include the lack of functional test in mammals for PAK2–cilium–PDGF-BB interactions, specifically the endothelial cell–autonomous PAK2 contribution and the rescue of the signaling pathway in mammals.
A summary model illustrating the proposed PAK2–cilium–PDGF-BB–HSPG signaling axis and its role in embryonic vascular stability is provided in the Graphical abstract. For PDGF-BB to facilitate embryonic brain vascular stability temporally, spatial interaction with HSPGs on basolateral EC surface is necessary to promote a gradient of PDGF-BB ligand formation, which will help recruit pdgfrb+ mural cells to the ECs. Our findings here imply that the PDGF-BB autocrine endothelial signaling loop promotes endothelial ciliogenesis and PDGF-BB secretion, which creates a gradient of the PDGF-BB ligand surrounding the vasculature in association with HSPG. The PDGF-BB:HSPG association in a juxtacrine fashion promotes pdgfrb+ mural cell recruitment to facilitate vascular stability during vertebrate embryonic development.

## Materials and Methods

## Zebrafish
All studies on zebrafish were carried out under approved protocol AUA320 at the Medical College of Wisconsin (MCW). Zebrafish were kept in tanks on a recirculating aquatic housing system. The RT and water temperature were maintained at 28.5°C. The triple-transgenic zebrafish line Tg(pdgfrb: GFP; kdrl: mCherry; and beta-actin: Arl13b-GFP) that labels star-shaped pericytes (green), blood vessels (red), and string-shaped cilia (green), respectively, was generated by crossing three single-transgenic lines. The Tg(beta-actin: Arl13b-GFP) line was obtained from Dr. Brian Ciruna, Toronto, Canada. The Tg(pdgfrb:Gal4;UAS-GFP) line ( ) was obtained from Dr. Naoki Mochizuki, Osaka, Japan, and Tg(kdrl: mCherry) lines were obtained from ZIRC. Although pericytes and cilia are both labeled with GFP, they have distinct shapes ( ). The zebrafish redhead (rhdmi149) ( ) mutant line used in this study was obtained from Dr. Sarah Childs, Toronto, Canada. A small percentage of the rhdmi149 homozygous embryos develop brain hemorrhage between 48 and 50 h post-fertilization (hpf). The rhdmi149 has a point mutation (SNP) (T/A) in the pak2a gene. For more information about the hypomorphic mutation and the percentage of embryos that develop brain hemorrhage, please refer to . In this study, homozygous rhdmi149 mutants have been designated as pak2ami149/mi149, heterozygous rhdmi149 mutants as pak2ami149/+, and WT fish as pak2a+/+. The WT fish in and are pak2a+/+ genotypes, which were generated from an incross of pak2ami149/+ heterozygous adults. Heterozygous mutant adults (pak2ami149/+) were crossed into fluorescent triple-transgenic fish described above. Fluorescent embryos were raised to adulthood and genotyped to identify fluorescent fish that were heterozygous for the rhd mutation (pak2ami149/+). In , , and , the WT fish is triple-transgenic in the AB background. Details for genotyping protocol are available in supplemental materials. For , WT controls were a standard control MO injected (2 ng) into triple-transgenics in the AB background. All embryos included in quantification of phenotypes were genotyped.

## Genotyping rhdmi149 fish adults and embryos
A custom SNP genotyping assay request for the rhdmi149 mutation was submitted online using the Thermo Fisher Scientific custom assay design tool. SNP mutation details were as follows: ZDB-GENE-021011-2, Chr 2: 36628880 (GRCz11), ZDB-ALT-071121-1, mi149/redhead, point mutation (T/A). A TaqMan SNP genotyping assay for the rhdmi149 mutation was designed by Thermo Fisher Scientific (Assay ID: ANZTY9A, Cat# 4332077). Please refer to the protocol online (https://www.thermofisher.com/document-connect/document-connect.html?url=https://assets.thermofisher.com/TFS-Assets%2FLSG%2Fmanuals%2FMAN0009593_TaqManSNP_UG.pdf) for further details on the assay.

## Zebrafish embryo mounting and 3D imaging
Embryos were dechorionated at the desired stage (52 hpf) and were anesthetized in 0.016% Tricaine and then mounted in a 1% solution of low melting agarose in fish water in a glass-bottom dish. The low-melt agarose was cooled to 37°C before adding to the embryo for mounting. Post-solidification of the agarose, the embryos were imaged on a Keyence microscope at RT. The objectives for imaging in all figures except were performed using CFI Plan Apo 40x, Numerical Aperture 0.95, WD 0.21 mm, water lens. We used CFI Plan Apo 20x, Numerical Aperture 0.75, WD 1.0 mm for . An area of the zebrafish embryo brain 190 μm posterior to the mid-cerebral vein (MCeV) and 150 μm dorsal to the primordial hindbrain channels (PHBC) was imaged using a Keyence microscope and analyzed for pericytes and cilia ( ). For , the number of cilia (green) was counted in 150 μm of MtA and 150 μm of MCeV starting at the base of these vessels where they intersect the PHBC. For , the number of endothelial cilia was quantified in a region of the head 160 μm posterior to the MTA/MCeV and 90 μm dorsal to PHBC. For z-stack imaging, an appropriate pitch was selected to capture ∼34 continuous images. The first slice of the z-stack was chosen starting at the depth of focus (upper limit) at which the blood vessel metencephalic artery (MtA), MCeV, central arteries (CTAs), and PHBC in the brain area first came into focus. The end position (lower limit) of the z-stack was chosen at the depth of focus where the vessels ended just before they went out of focus. For more details on Keyence z-stack imaging, refer to our previous publication ( ).

## Zebrafish injections
Zebrafish protein injections were carried out with human recombinant PDGF-BB protein (PHG0045; Life Technologies) (1 ng/embryo), which was injected into entire clutches of one-cell-stage embryo of a cross between heterozygous mutant adults (pak2ami149/+). An equivalent volume of vehicle was injected into separate clutches at the one-cell stage as control for the experiment.

## Mice
Mouse studies in MCW were performed under approved protocols AUA1022 and AUA7184 and at USF were performed under AUA IS00011193. The ARL13b-EGFP transgenic mice in the C57BL/B6 background were procured from Clapham laboratory at HHMI Janelia Research Campus ( ). The conditional Ext1 flox (Ext1fl/fl) mice ( ; ; , ) were bred with Tie2Cre transgenic mice ( ; ; ) to generate Tie2Cre+Ext1fl/fl (Ext1ECKO) mice. For , Tie2Cre+Ext1fl/fl (Ext1ECKO) embryos were compared with littermate WT Ext1fl/fl controls (Ext1fl/fl).

## Mouse qRT-PCR primers
Primers used include the following: Ext1 (Forward: 5′-GCT​CTT​GTC​TCG​CCC​TTT​TGT-3′, Reverse: 5′-GTG​GTG​CAA​GCC​ATT​CCT​AC-3′), Ext2 (Forward: 5′-ATG​TGT​GCG​TCG​GTC​AAG​TAT-3′, Reverse: 5′-AGA​ATG​GGG​CCA​AAA​CTG​AAA-3′), Ndst1 (Forward: 5′-CTG​CCT​GTT​CAG​CGT​TTT​CAT-3′, Reverse: 5′-CGA​GTA​GAG​GCT​CTC​CAC​AAA-3′), Ndst2 (Forward: 5′-TTC​CTG​GCT​TAT​TAT​GTG​TCC​AC-3′, Reverse: 5′-GGG​TTC​AGT​TCG​AGC​TGT​CT-3′), Hs2st1 (Forward: 5′-GCT​CCT​CAG​GAT​TAT​GAT​GCC-3′, Reverse: 5′-TTT​CTC​GGA​CTT​CGT​GTC​TTG-3′), Hs6st1 (Forward: 5′-ACG​CCC​AGG​AAG​TTC​TAC​TAC-3′, Reverse: 5′-GTT​GTA​CGG​GCA​GTC​CAT​GAA-3′), Hs6st2 (Forward: 5′-CCC​CGA​AAG​GCG​TCT​TCT​TC-3′, Reverse: 5′-CAT​GGG​GCC​GAA​AAT​CTT​GGA-3′), Hs6st3 (Forward: 5′-TCC​AGT​GTC​ACG​TTA​CCT​GAG-3′, Reverse: 5′-TGT​AGG​TGC​AAT​CCA​TAA​ACT​CC-3′), Sulf1 (Forward: 5′-GAT​CCC​CGA​GGT​TCA​GAG​GA-3′, Reverse: 5′-GGT​GTA​GTC​ACA​AAG​GCA​TTG​A-3′), Sulf2 (Forward: 5′-GGC​AGG​TTT​CAG​AGG​GAC​C-3′, Reverse: 5′-GAA​GGC​GTT​GAT​GAA​GTG​CG-3′), Pak2 (Forward: 5′-CGA​CTC​CAA​CAC​AGT​GAA​GCA​G-3′, Reverse: 5′-TCA​CTA​CTG​CGG​GTG​CTT​CTG​T-3′), Arl13b (Forward: 5′-GAA​CCA​GTG​GTC​TGG​CTG​AGT​T-3′, Reverse: 5′-GTT​TCA​GGT​GGC​AGC​CAT​CAC​T-3′), and Gapdh (reference gene) (Forward: 5′-GTC​TCC​TCT​GAC​TTC​AAC​AGC​G-3′, Reverse: 5′-ACC​ACC​CTG​TTG​CTG​TAG​CCA​A-3′). All primers were synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT).

## Human samples
The sampling and handling of fetal human specimens conformed to the ethical rules of the Section of Molecular Pathology, Department of Precision and Regenerative Medicine and Ionian Area, University of Bari, and approval was gained from the local Ethics Committee of the National Health System in compliance with the principles stated in the Declaration of Helsinki. Fetal tissue was collected after obtaining informed consent from the mother at the end of the abortion procedure.

## Cell culture
Primary human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMECs) (Cat# ACBRI 376; Cell Systems Corporation) were maintained at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator in an endothelial cell complete medium (Cat# C22010; PromoCell). All cell culture wells were seeded equally, and wells were randomized to control versus experimental conditions with duplicates or triplicates per condition. All experiments were performed between passages 4 and 6. Respective siRNAs from Horizon-inspired cell solutions Control (Cat# D-001810-01-05), ARL13B (Cat# J-017365-09-0005), PDGF-BB (Cat# J-011749-05-0005), and PAK2 (Cat# J-003597-10-0005) at the concentration of 25 nM were transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 reagent (Cat# 11668019; Gibco) and incubated for 48 h. Heparinase (heparinase I/III blend from Flavobacterium heparinum (Cat# H3917-50UN; Sigma-Aldrich)) concentration used in the experiments was 0.2 IU/ml for a time period of 2 h.

## Primary brain EC transfection and Western blotting
Briefly, HBMECs were seeded into six-well culture dishes for Western blotting ∼24 h before transfection. Respective siRNA (control and PDGF-BB) was transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 reagent (Cat# 11668019; Gibco) and incubated for 48 h. Cell lysates were collected from HBMECs using RIPA buffer (Cat# R2078; Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with cOmplete Mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Cat# 11836170001; Roche) and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor (Cat# 4906845001; Roche). Protein concentration in clarified lysates was determined using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and equal amounts of total protein (20–30 μg per lane) were mixed with 4× Laemmli sample buffer, boiled for 5 min at 95°C, and resolved by SDS–PAGE. Proteins were transferred to PVDF membranes, blocked in 5% nonfat dry milk in TBST, and probed with the following primary antibodies: ARL13B (Cat# 17711-1-AP; Proteintech), PAK2 (Cat# 2608S; Cell Signaling Technology), PDGF-BB (Cat# NBP1-58279; Novus Biologicals), and β-actin (Cat# MA1-744; Thermo Fisher Scientific) as a loading control. HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit (Cat# 7074; Cell Signaling Technology) and anti-mouse (Cat# 7076; Cell Signaling Technology) secondary antibodies were used for chemiluminescence detection. Band intensities were quantified by densitometry using ImageJ software (NIH). For each blot, background signal was subtracted, and the intensity of each target band was normalized to the corresponding β-actin band from the same lane. Normalized values were then expressed as a fold change relative to control siRNA-treated cells. Data represent the mean ± SEM from at least three independent biological experiments.

## 3D microfluidic assay
To generate 3D EC vessels, we used the Nortis ParVivo triple-channel microfluidic chips, which we will refer to as the microphysiological systems (MPS). To form each chamber’s extracellular matrix, collagen type I (7 mg/ml) (Corning Life Sciences) was injected into microfluidic chips via injection ports into collagen chambers followed by incubation at 37°C overnight for polymerization. Upon polymerization, glass mandrels that run through the middle of each chamber are extracted to form a tubular scaffold with a diameter of 125 μm. HBMECs were cultured in EC growth medium in T-75 flasks. Once cells reached confluency, they were detached using TrypLE and suspended in solution at a dilution of three million cells/ml. Cells are then seeded (2.5 μl) into the MPS via cell injection ports, and flow is blocked to trap cells within the surrounding matrix for 45 min before opening perfusion valves to release cells that have not adhered to the matrix. The MPS are placed in incubators within their perfusion modules and are subjected to continuous perfusion of medium at the flow rate of 1 μl/min (shear stress of 0.9 dyne/cm2). Fully confluent EC tubes form over the course of 7–10 d in the MPS.

## 3D MPS staining and imaging
The following process was performed by perfusing solutions lumenally at 6 μl/min using silicone microtubing connected to syringes containing solutions on a syringe pump. EC tubes were fixed using 4% PFA for 20 min followed by a PBS wash for 20 min. ECs were then permeabilized with 0.2% Triton solution for 1 h at RT, followed by a PBS wash for 20 min. Blocking buffer (PBS, 2% BSA, 5% NGS, 0.1% NaN3) was perfused (20 min) and trapped in the MPS for overnight incubation at 4°C. After incubation, EC tubes were washed with PBS for 20 min, followed by perfusion of the primary antibody solution containing ARL13B (Cat# 17711-1-AP; Proteintech) and acetylated α-tubulin (Cat# 32-2700; Thermo Fisher Scientific) both at a dilution of 1:200 (20 min), followed by a 48-h incubation at 4°C. EC tubes were then washed with PBS for 20 min, and the previous step was repeated with secondary antibody (Cat# ab150088; ab150077; Abcam) solution (1:300) containing DAPI (1:300) for nuclear staining. ECs were then washed with PBS for 20 min again before imaging. Fixed and stained EC tubes were then imaged with a Leica SP8X confocal system (Leica DMI6000 microscope) using a 25X water immersion objective.

## qRT-PCR assays

## Endothelial cells
Total cellular RNA was extracted using the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer’s protocol, and cDNA was synthesized using the iScript cDNA synthesis kit (Cat#1708891; Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Quantitative RT–PCR was performed in 20 μl reaction volumes containing 10 μl of iTaq Universal SYBR Green Supermix (Cat#1725124; Bio-Rad), 5 μl of diluted RT product as a template, and 20 pmol of specific primers. The primer sequences for all genes are provided in the supplemental material document. PCR amplification was performed for 40 cycles at 95°C for 5 s and 60°C for 30 s using the Bio-Rad CFX96 real-time PCR system. For each target gene, average Ct values from six replicates were normalized to GAPDH Ct values, and relative gene expression was calculated using the 2−ΔΔCt method.

## ELISA
Briefly, HBMECs were grown in a six-well dish, and the cells were transfected with control, ARL13B, and PAK2 siRNA with and without heparinase; 100 μl of the cell-free supernatant was used for the assessment of PDGF-BB. The protocol was followed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Human PDGF-BB ELISA Kit, Cat# ELH-PDGFBB-1; RayBiotech).

## Human brain microvascular endothelial cell surface PDGF-BB binding assay
The primary HBMEC surface PDGF-BB binding assay was conducted as previously described ( ; ; ; ; ; ). Cells were seeded at a density of 4 × 104 cells per well in 96-well plates. After overnight culture, the cells were washed and fixed in 4% PFA at RT for 15 min. After washing and blocking in 2% BSA overnight at 4°C, human PDGF-BB-His (Cat# 10572-H07Y; Sino Biological) at a concentration of 1,000 ng/ml in the 2% BSA blocking solution was applied and incubated for 90 min at RT. Wells with PDGF-BB at 1,000 ng/ml plus heparin at 100 μg/ml were included as HS-dependent controls. Cells were then washed and incubated with anti-His antibody conjugated with HRP (Cat# 652504; BioLegend) at a dilution of 1:4,000 in 2% BSA for 1 h at RT. After extensive washing, ELISA substrate was applied. After 20 min, color development was stopped with 0.2 M H2SO4. Absorbance at 450 nm was measured to quantify cell surface PDGF-BB binding, after subtracting the value of background wells, which had no PDGF-BB.

## Heparan sulfate structural analysis
HBMECs transfected with PAK2 siRNA or control siRNA were cultured in six-well plates, rinsed with PBS, and lysed with 1 ml of 0.1 M NaOH, followed by the addition of 8 μl of acetic acid ( , , ; ). The cell lysate was treated with actinase E (Kaken Biochemicals) (5 mg/ml) and digested overnight at 55°C. After deactivating actinase E at 100°C for 30 min, the digested solution was transferred to a 3,000 MW cutoff filter (Thermo Fisher Scientific). CHAPS (final concentration 2%) was added and mixed with the digested solution in the filter of the spin tube. The filter unit was washed three times with 400 μl distilled water to enrich released HS. Next, 300 μl of digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium acetate containing 2 mM calcium chloride, pH 7.0) was added to the obtained HS samples, along with recombinant heparin lyases I, II, and III (expressed in E. coli in Fuming Zhang laboratory) ( ), and digested at 37°C overnight. The resultant HS disaccharides were collected by filtering the digested HS through the 3,000 MW cutoff filter, and the filter unit was washed twice with 200 μl distilled water. All filtrates containing HS disaccharides were combined and freeze-dried. The dried samples were then labeled with 2-aminoacridone (AMAC) (Sigma-Aldrich) for LC-MS analysis. A mixture containing all HS disaccharide standards prepared at 1 ng/μl was similarly AMAC-labeled and used as an external standard. HS disaccharide standards (UA-GlcNAc, UA-GlcNS, UA-GlcNAc6S, UA2S-GlcNAc, UA2S-GlcNS, UA-GlcNS6S, UA2S-GlcNAc6S, UA2S-GlcNS6S, where UA is 4-deoxy-α-L-threo-hex-4-enopyranosyluronic acid) were purchased from Iduron. The AMAC-labeled disaccharides were separated by reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) coupled to a triple quadrupole mass spectrometry system equipped with an ESI source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). LC was performed on an Agilent 1200 LC system at 45°C using an Agilent Poroshell 120 ECC18 (2.7 μm, 3.0 × 50 mm) column. Mobile phase A was 50 mM ammonium acetate aqueous solution, and mobile phase B was methanol. The mobile phase passed through the column at a flow rate of 300 μl/min with the following gradient: 0–10 min, 5–45% B; 10–10.2 min, 45–100% B; 10.2–14 min, 100% B; 14–22 min, 100–5% B. Injection volume was 5 μl. The online MS analysis was performed in multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mode with the following MS parameters: negative ionization mode with a spray voltage of 3,000 V, a vaporizer temperature of 400°C, and a capillary temperature of 250°C.

## Staining protocols

## Fish
Triple-transgenic heterozygous mutant adults (pak2ami149/+) were crossed to each other. At 52 hpf, embryos with bleeding in the brain (bleeders) were separated from the non-bleeders. Both bleeder and non-bleeder embryos that were single-transgenic (red) (Tg(kdrl: mCherry)) were selected. Embryos were dechorionated, anesthetized with Tricaine, and fixed with 4% PFA in PBS for 2 h at 4°C. Embryos were washed twice with PBS and stored in 10% methanol at −20°C overnight. The next day, embryos were washed three times with PBST (PBS containing 0.1% Tween-20) and permeabilized in acetone at −20°C for 8 min. Embryos were then washed 3 times in PBST and blocked in 10% normal goat serum in PBS for 1 h at RT. After this step, embryos were incubated with either PDGF-BB antibody (Cat# sc-365805, 1:50; PDGF-B Antibody; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.) or HS antibody (Cat# 370255-S, 1:100; Amsbio LLC) at 4°C overnight. The next day, embryos were washed three times, 5 min each with PBST. Embryos were then incubated with Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) cross-adsorbed secondary antibody (green) (Cat# A-11001, 1:250; Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the dark for 2 h. Embryos were then washed with PBST four times, mounted in 50% glycerol/PBS, and imaged using a Keyence microscope. After imaging, all embryos were collected in separate PCR tubes for genomic DNA extraction and genotyping.
For claudin 5b immunofluorescence experiments, non-transgenic heterozygous mutant adults (pak2ami149/+) were crossed to each other. Bleeders and non-bleeder embryos were separated. Double immunofluorescence was performed using the same protocol as stated before. Embryos were incubated with two primary antibodies: Claudin 5 antibody (Cat# 4C3C2, 1:50; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Kdrl antibody (Cat# ES1003, 1:500; Kerafast). Secondary antibodies used were Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) cross-adsorbed secondary antibody (green) (Cat# A-11001, 1:250; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Alexa Fluor 568 goat anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) cross-adsorbed secondary antibody (red) (Cat# A-11011, 1:250; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Embryos were genotyped according to the protocol in supplemental materials.

## Immunofluorescence staining of mouse embryos
Embryos were isolated at E11.5, immediately frozen in OCT medium (Cat# 23-730-571; Thermo Fisher Scientific), and stored at −80°C. Tail biopsies were taken for genotyping by PCR. Embryos were sectioned at 10 μm using a cryostat microtome at −20°C, mounted on charged glass slides, and air-dried at RT for 30 min. Samples were fixed in cold acetone for 10 min, then washed three times with 0.1% Tween-20 in PBS (PBST) for 10 min each. Sections were blocked in PBS containing 10% goat serum, 3% BSA, and 0.2% Triton X-100 for 2 h. They were then incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies: rat anti-endomucin IgG1 (sc-5394; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and rabbit anti-PDGF-B polyclonal IgG (sc-7878; Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Subsequently, sections were incubated with Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated goat anti-rat IgG (A-11008; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Alexa Fluor 594–conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (A-11012; Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 2 h at RT. Slides were mounted with antifade mounting medium. Immunostained tissue images were captured using a confocal laser-scanning microscope (LSM Meta 510). All samples were visually inspected under the microscope, and representative images were obtained at a resolution of 1,024 × 1,024 using a 63× objective lens with 3× optical zoom.

## Cilium immunofluorescence labeling
Transgenic Arl13b-EGFP mice (C57BL/6 background) were anesthetized in an induction chamber using 5% inhaled isoflurane and then moved to the surgical table and positioned on a sterile drape over a heating pad to maintain body temperature. Isoflurane anesthesia was maintained at 1.5% and continuously delivered via a nosecone. To perfuse and fix the brains for immunohistochemical labeling, a thoracotomy was performed to access the heart for transcardiac gravity-fed perfusion to flush and clear circulating blood from the organs with heparinized PBS followed by 4% formaldehyde solution. Brains were placed in a 4% formaldehyde solution overnight before sectioning or paraffin embedding. For immunohistochemical labeling, tissues from ARL13b-EGFP transgenic mice were dehydrated through graded ethanol, cleared with xylene, and paraffin-infiltrated using automated tissue processing (Sakura Tissue TEK, VIP5, and VIP6). All paraffin-embedded tissues were sectioned at 4 μm and placed on poly-L-lysine–coated slides. Sections were stained immunohistochemically with an automated immunostaining platform Leica Bond RX using standard labeled streptavidin–biotin detection. Briefly, sections were deparaffinized, rehydrated, and protein-blocked (30 min, X0909; DAKO). Antibodies for GFP (Cat# ab290; Abcam) were incubated for 1 h at RT. After TBST washing, biotinylated anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (Cat# 715-066-152; Jackson ImmunoResearch) were incubated for 45 min at RT before streptavidin-HRP and DAB for visualization. Hematoxylin was applied as a nuclear counterstain. Omission of primary antibody was performed as a negative reagent control. High-resolution images were obtained with a Hamamatsu NanoZoomer 2.0-HT high-resolution digital slide scanner.

## Human fetal brain histology and immunostaining
Human fetal brains were from the archive of the Department of Translational Biomedicine and Neuroscience—DiBraiN, Human Anatomy and Histology Unit, Bari University School of Medicine. The samples included in the study were from two fetuses at 22 wk of gestation, spontaneously aborted because of preterm rupture of the placental membranes with no history of neurological pathologies. The fetal age was estimated based on the crown-rump length and/or pregnancy records (counting from the last menstrual period). At autopsy, the fetuses did not reveal macroscopic structural abnormalities and/or malformations of the CNS. The dorsolateral wall of the telencephalic vesicles (future cerebral hemispheres) was dissected along the coronal planes in samples 0.5 cm thick, fixed by immersion in 2% PFA plus 0.2% glutaraldehyde in PBS, pH 7.6, overnight at 4°C, then archived and stored in 0.02% PFA in PBS at 4°C. For the present study, fetal brain samples (n = 6/fetus) were cut using a vibrating microtome (Leica Microsystem) into 30-μm-thick sections, parts of which were processed for routine histological analysis with toluidine blue staining to rule out the presence of microscopic malformations. All the other sections were stored at 4°C in 0.02% PFA in PBS and submitted to immunofluorescence confocal microscopy protocols. Double immunostainings were carried out with rabbit pAb anti-ARL13B (Cat# 17711-1-AP; Proteintech) at a dilution of 1:300 in blocking buffer (BB; 1% BSA and 2% FCS in PBS) and mouse mAb anti-CD31 (Cat# M0823; Dako) at a dilution of 1:40 in BB. Free-floating sections were washed with 3x PBS before permeabilization with 0.5% Triton X-100 (Cat# 1610407; Bio-Rad) in PBS for 30 min at RT. This was followed by blocking in BB for 30 min at RT and overnight incubation with the combined primary antibodies, at 4°C. Sections were washed with 3x PBS and incubated with the secondary Abs, Alexa Fluor 555 goat anti-mouse (Cat# A21425; Thermo Fisher Scientific) (1:400 dilution in BB) and biotinylated goat anti-rabbit (Cat# BA-100; Vector) (1:400 dilution in BB) for 1 h at RT, the latter then revealed by streptavidin-conjugated Alexa Fluor 488 (Cat# S-32354; Thermo Fisher Scientific) (1:400 dilution in BB) incubated 1 h at RT. The sections were then washed 3x with PBS, and nuclear counterstaining was performed with TO-PRO-3 (Cat# T3605; Thermo Fisher Scientific) (diluted 1:3 K in PBS) for 10 min at RT. Finally, the sections were allowed to adhere to polylysine slides (Menzel-Glaser) by drying for 10 min at RT, coverslipped with Vectashield (Cat# H-1900; Vector Laboratories), and sealed with nail varnish. Negative controls were prepared by omitting the primary antibodies and by mismatching the secondary antibodies. Quantification of ARL13b+ cilia in human CD31+ vessels is described in the supplemental methods document.

## Human fetal brain cilium quantification
Fetal brain telencephalon from 22 wk of gestation was used in the cilium analysis. Quantitative assessment of ARL13B+ cilium density was carried out on three sections per brain by computer-aided morphometric analysis using Leica Confocal Multicolor Package (Leica Microsystems) and ImageJ (NIH, Bethesda, MD) software. The number of ARL13B+ cilia was interactively counted and normalized to the same cumulative vessel length (CVL = multiple of 100 μm of vessel length). The CD31+ microvessels included in the morphometric analysis ranged from capillaries (9.9 μm in diameter) to small arterioles and venules (10–30 μm in diameter). The internal minor diameter and length of CD31+ vessels were automatically calculated using ImageJ measure tools. The numbers of ARL13B+ cilia were categorized based on their precise locations as follows: basolateral (abluminal) or apical (luminal) cilia in the three distinct zones of the telencephalon wall, ventricular zone (VZ), subventricular zone (SVZ), and cortical plate (CP). The accurate identification of ARL13B+ cilia in each of the described categories, abluminal and luminal, primarily depended on the examination of single optical planes of confocal z-stacks at intervals of 0.35 μm.

## Laser confocal microscopy analysis
The stained sections were examined using a Leica TCS SP8 confocal laser-scanning microscope (Leica Microsystems) with sequential scanning ( ). Confocal images were acquired at 250-nm intervals along the z-axis of the sections using 40x and 63x oil-immersion objectives, with zoom factors ranging from 1.5 to 3. Z-stacks (projection images), and single z-slices were analyzed by Leica confocal software (Multicolor Package; Leica Microsystems).

## HBMEC cilium staining in vitro
Immunofluorescence analysis was performed as described previously ( ; ). Briefly, HBMECs were seeded into six-well plates on coverslips. All the IF experiments for ARL13B and PDGF-BB colocalization and ciliary quantification under ARL13B and PAK2 knockdown with and without heparinase were performed by seeding cells on the same day with similar seeding density and cell synchronization. Cells were washed thrice with 1X PBS (Cat# 10010023; Gibco) and fixed with 4% PFA (Cat# 15710; Electron Microscopy Sciences) for 15 min. Fixed cells were washed again with 1X PBS before permeabilization with 0.1% Triton X-100 (Cat# 1610407; Bio-Rad) for 15 min. This was followed by blocking in 4% BSA in PBS and overnight incubation with primary antibodies of ARL13B (Cat# 17711-1-AP, dilution 1:500; Proteintech) and PDGF-BB (Cat# NBP1-58279, dilution 1:500; Novus Biologicals). Cells were again washed with 1X PBS and incubated with Alexa Fluor 488 anti-rabbit (Cat#A21206; Invitrogen) (1:500) and Alexa Fluor 568 anti-rabbit (Cat# A10042; Invitrogen), for 90 min at RT, and washed before mounting with DAPI (Cat# LS-J1033-10; LifeSpan Biosciences) and imaged using a Zeiss confocal microscope at a magnification of 63X. The number of cilia and their length were quantified by the number of nuclei to cilia using ACDC v0.93 cilium-specific software, which runs on a MATLAB platform as described previously ( ).

## Quantification and statistical analysis

## Pericyte and cilium analysis
Triple fluorescent heterozygous mutant adults (pak2ami149/+) were crossed, and the embryos were collected for imaging and analysis. At 52 hpf, embryos from clutches were divided into two groups: bleeders (B) and non-bleeders (NB). Triple fluorescent embryos were selected, and their hindbrain areas were imaged using a Keyence microscope. Cilium and pericyte numbers and their distances from vessels were measured in the hindbrain region. A rectangular area (length = 190 μm posterior to the MCeV and width = 150 μm dorsal to the PHBC) was analyzed in all images ( ). The BZ-X Analyzer software (Keyence) was used for distance and area measurements. The “X-Y measure” tool was used for measuring distances, the “area measure” tool was used for measuring areas, and the “count” tool was used for counting cilia and pericytes. For endothelial cilium quantification ( ), four control images from double-transgenic zebrafish Tg(beta-actin: Arl13b-GFP; kdrl: mCherry) were used to quantify abluminal versus luminal endothelial cilia in 52-hpf zebrafish embryo brains. For each image ( ), the number of cilia (green) was counted in 150 μm of MtA and 150 μm of MCeV starting at the base of these vessels where they intersect the PHBC. For PDGF-BB:cilium rescue experiments ( ), we performed immunofluorescence experiment using ARL13B primary antibody (Cat# 17711-1-AP, dilution 1:50; Proteintech) and Alexa Fluor 488 donkey anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) secondary antibody (green) (Cat# A-21206,1:250; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The number of endothelial cilia was quantified in a region of the head 160 μm posterior to the MTA/MCeV and 90 μm dorsal to PHBC. All bleeders were genotyped to confirm homozygous (pak2ami149/mi149) genotype. All statistical tests performed on the data are indicated in the figure legends. Data were presented as the mean and standard error of the mean or 95% confidence intervals (CIs) or median and interquartile ranges. The Shapiro–Wilk test was performed to check normality of the data. A two-sample t test or Welch’s t test was used to compare the differences in outcome measures between two groups. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Dunnett’s test to adjust for multiple comparisons was used for comparisons among more than two groups. Some data were log-transformed to meet parametric assumptions. The Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon or Kruskal–Wallis test with Dwass–Steel–Critchlow–Fligner method for multiple comparisons adjustment was employed where parametric assumptions were not satisfied. A chi-squared test or Fisher’s exact test was used to examine the associations between the longest arm categories and the genotypes. False discovery rate (FDR) was used to adjust for multiple comparisons. Count data were analyzed by generalized linear model (GLM) with the Poisson or negative binomial distribution. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. SAS version 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc.) was used for statistical analysis.

## Claudin junction analysis
We quantified the number of claudin junctions in the claudin double immunofluorescence images. In these images, claudin junctions are labeled green and blood vessels are labeled red ( ). The junctions were counted along the PHBC, starting at the base of the MCeV and 80 μm posterior to it ( ). Any point where two or more lines intersect was considered as a junction.

## PDGF-BB gradient quantification

## Zebrafish

## Number of PDGF-BB sources in head, PHBC, and heart
A PDGF-BB–positive source was determined as a strong punctate-like staining ( , white box) with some stained dots showing “Wi-Fi”–like symbol–shaped gradients ( ). Sources of PDGF-BB (with and without Wi-Fi rings) were counted in the head, heart, and below PHBC regions. In addition, for the head, the number of rings within a PDGF-BB gradient was counted as follows: PDGF-BB–labeled source have “Wi-Fi”–shaped gradient with rings that radiate from the center of the source ( , green illustration). The number of rings in the gradients emerging from each PDGF-BB–labeled source in the head was counted. For some sources that contain multiple gradients around the center of the source, the average number of rings in all gradients was used as the number of rings for that source. We counted the number of rings in all sources in the head, and average number of PDGF-BB gradient rings for that head was determined. The data plotted ( ) are the average number of PDGF-BB gradient rings for all heads in the group.

## Distance of the farthest ring from the center of the PDGF-BB source
We also measured the distance of the farthest ring from the center of each source. For sources that have multiple Wi-Fi gradients, the average of the farthest ring distances was used. After determining the farthest ring distance for all the sources in the head, the average farthest ring distance for that head was plotted ( ).

## Mouse
Radial fluorescence intensity analysis of PDGF-BB and endomucin signals was performed using the Fiji Radial Profile Extended plugin that quantified spatial gradients around endothelial cells ( ).

## Supplementary Material

## Reviewer comments

## Acknowledgements
We thank members of the Developmental Vascular Biology Program and collaborators who provided valuable input for this study. S Prabhudesai, K Thirugnanam, KR Rarick, and R Ramchandran were funded through R33HL154254. S Prabhudesai, K Thirugnanam, L Wang, and R Ramchandran are also funded through R01HL179583 grant. Additional support for the Developmental Vascular Biology Program (RR laboratory) came from Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Research Institute, Medical College of Wisconsin. L Wang was supported by 5R01HL093339, 4R01AG074289, and 4R01AG069039. The authors of the Department of Translational Biomedicine and Neuroscience, University of Bari, thank Antonella Bizzoca for technical assistance. All figures were created using BioRender.

## Author Contributions

S Prabhudesai: data curation, formal analysis, validation, investigation, visualization, methodology, and writing—review and editing.
K Thirugnanam: data curation, formal analysis, validation, investigation, visualization, methodology, and writing—review and editing.
X Song: validation, investigation, visualization, and methodology.
H Yang: validation, investigation, visualization, and methodology.
M Errede: data curation, validation, investigation, visualization, and methodology.
F Girolamo: validation, investigation, visualization, and methodology.
T Neumann: resources and methodology.
A Marzullo: validation, visualization, and methodology.
S Bafti: resources, software, methodology, and writing—review and editing.
K Vanderhoef: investigation, visualization, and methodology.
KR Rarick: data curation, investigation, visualization, methodology, and writing—review and editing.
AD Spearman: methodology and writing—review and editing.
AY Pan: data curation, formal analysis, validation, and methodology.
CA Alvarez: data curation, investigation, and visualization.
J Yang: data curation, validation, investigation, visualization, and methodology.
F Zhang: data curation, validation, investigation, and visualization.
JS Dordick: software, formal analysis, investigation, and methodology.
D Virgintino: resources, data curation, formal analysis, validation, investigation, visualization, methodology, and writing—original draft.
L Wang: conceptualization, supervision, funding acquisition, validation, investigation, methodology, and writing—review and editing.
R Ramchandran: conceptualization, resources, formal analysis, supervision, funding acquisition, investigation, and writing—original draft, review, and editing.

## Conflict of Interest Statement
R Ramchandran is the President and Founder of a start-up company CIAN, Inc. that is based on developing ciliary protein biomarkers for brain and vascular injury.

## Data Availability
The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article; further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.