101genesdevGenes & DevelopmentGenes DevCold Spring Harbor Laboratory PressPMC1187499411874994118749943979412510.1101/gad.352129.124ESRP2–microRNA-122 axis promotes the postnatal onset of liver polyploidization and maturation
BangruSushant ChenJackie BakerNicholas DasDiptatanu ChembazhiUllas V DerhamJessica M ChorghadeSandip ArifWaqar AlencastroFrances DuncanAndrew W CarstensRuss P KalsotraAuinash 1Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA;2Cancer Center at Illinois, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA;3Carl R. Woese Institute of Genomic Biology, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA;4Division of Nutritional Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA;5Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, Chicago, Illinois 60642, USA;6Department of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA;7Department of Pathology, Pittsburgh Liver Research Center, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA8Present address: Department of Cell Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
✉Corresponding author: kalsotra@illinois.edu
✉Corresponding author.
132025395-6325325–347192025
© 2025 Bangru et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
This article is distributed exclusively by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the first six months after the full-issue publication date (see http://genesdev.cshlp.org/site/misc/terms.xhtml). After six months, it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International), as described at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.Previous version available: This article is based on a previously available preprint posted on bioRxiv on July 9, 2024: "
ESRP2-microRNA-122 axis directs the postnatal onset of liver polyploidization and maturation
".In this study, Bangru et al. describe a temporal regulatory switch that controls hepatocyte polyploidization and maturation through the activation of an RNA alternative splicing program during postnatal liver development. Specifically, epithelial splicing regulatory protein 2 (ESRP2) regulates the processing and expression of liver-enriched miRNA miR-122 and functionally relevant mRNAs that subsequently promote cytokinesis failure and hepatocyte binucleation.
Keywords: RNA processing, polyploidy, genome editing, protein–RNA interactions, ESRP2, microRNA, single-cell transcriptomics, eCLIP, hepatocyte maturation

## Abstract
Hepatocyte polyploidy and maturity are critical to acquiring specialized liver functions. Multiple intracellular and extracellular factors influence ploidy, but how they cooperate temporally to steer liver polyploidization and maturation or how post-transcriptional mechanisms integrate into these paradigms is unknown. Here, we identified an important regulatory hierarchy in which postnatal activation of epithelial splicing regulatory protein 2 (ESRP2) stimulates processing of liver-specific microRNA (miR-122) to facilitate polyploidization, maturation, and functional competence of hepatocytes. By determining transcriptome-wide protein–RNA interactions in vivo and integrating them with single-cell and bulk hepatocyte RNA-seq data sets, we delineated an ESRP2-driven RNA processing program that drives sequential replacement of fetal-to-adult transcript isoforms. Specifically, ESRP2 binds the primary miR-122 host gene transcript to promote its processing/biogenesis. Combining constitutive and inducible ESRP2 gain- and loss-of-function mouse models with miR-122 rescue experiments, we demonstrated that timed activation of ESRP2 augments the miR-122-driven program of cytokinesis failure, ensuring the proper onset and extent of hepatocyte polyploidization.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Jul 17; Accepted 2024 Dec 17.

After fate determination, individual cells within tissues acquire distinct physiological and morphological features as they mature to become fully functional. Maturity arises through a complex interplay of genetic and environmental cues in the perinatal period that foster cell states that establish/maximize specific functions ( ). Liver maturation is similarly defined through functional specialization, wherein hepatocytes consolidate a vast array of biosynthetic, metabolic, and detoxification activities postpartum, zonated based on their location across the lobule ( ; ; ). These activities involve processing, partitioning, and metabolizing macronutrients; synthesizing bile, glycogen, urea, and serum proteins; and breaking down xenobiotics ( ). The ability of hepatocytes to develop these diverse functional traits is achieved in part by adaptations to postnatal feeding–fasting periods, oxygenation, and hormonal changes that occur during the suckling-to-weaning transition period ( ; ; ; ). This requires precise activation of transcriptional, post-transcriptional, and signaling programs to ensure proper differentiation, growth, and maturation of hepatocytes ( ; ; ; ; ).
Hepatocyte maturity and proliferation are inversely correlated. Although hepatocytes are highly proliferative in the fetus, they adopt a quiescent state after birth, undergoing concurrent structural, functional, and metabolic maturation ( ; ). Notably, this adaptive mature state is reversible, as quiescent hepatocytes can re-enter the cell cycle following injury and regenerate a damaged liver ( ; ; ). Another defining feature of liver maturation is hepatocyte polyploidization. It is estimated that >70% of rodent and 40% of human hepatocytes have >2n chromosomal DNA content, making the liver one of the most polyploid organs in mammals ( ; ). Polyploid hepatocytes in mice emerge between 2 and 3 weeks after birth ( ), and the primary mechanism for somatic increase in hepatocyte ploidy is programmed cytokinesis failure, which produces tetraploid and octoploid cells with one or two nuclei ( ; ). This postnatal surge in ploidy and binucleation overlaps with terminal differentiation and increased size of hepatocytes ( ). It is believed that polyploidization serves as a means to gain specialized functions, boost hepatic gene expression for higher metabolic activity, and provide extra genome copies to buffer against genotoxic damage ( ; ; ). Several intracellular and extracellular factors have been identified that influence hepatic polyploidy, including transcription factors such as E2F1/7/8 ( ; ; ) and cMyc ( ), cell cycle regulators such as p53 ( ) and Rb ( ), signaling pathways such as insulin–PI3K–AKT ( ) and Hippo–Yap ( ), and microRNAs such as miR-122 ( ). However, how these diverse factors cooperate to balance the ploidy and proliferation states of maturing hepatocytes is poorly understood.
In this study, we delineate a cell type-specific and developmental stage-specific RNA processing program that guides hepatocyte maturation and polyploidization in murine livers. In-depth molecular and phenotypic analyses identified a critical role for epithelial-specific RNA binding protein ESRP2 in governing hepatocyte size, proliferation, ploidy, and metabolism. Combining single-cell and bulk hepatocyte RNA-seq analyses with targeted deletion of Esrp2 in mouse livers revealed its requirement in the genesis and maintenance of the adult transcriptome necessary for supporting the mature phenotype of hepatocytes. We also demonstrated that ectopic expression of ESRP2 is sufficient to activate an adult gene expression program in neonatal livers, evoke premature cell cycle exit, and induce early maturation and polyploidization of hepatocytes. Next, by CRISPR-mediated FLAG tagging of the Esrp2 allele and using eCLIP to purify native ESRP2 protein–RNA complexes from mouse livers, we determined the hepatic ESRP2 RNA-binding landscape at single-nucleotide resolution. Specifically, we discovered robust ESRP2 binding to the miR-122 host gene transcript and showed that ESRP2 stimulates the processing and optimal expression of mature miR-122. Finally, by leveraging constitutive/inducible mouse models of hepatocyte-specific ESRP2 depletion and overexpression along with miR-122 rescue experiments, we demonstrated that a programmed increase in miR-122 processing via postnatal ESRP2 activation stimulates cytokinesis failure and expansion of binucleate hepatocytes. Thus, ESRP2 acts in a strict temporal window to activate an RNA processing program, which dictates the terminal differentiation, maturation, and polyploidization of hepatocytes.

## Results

## ESRP2 expression in maturing hepatocytes is regulated transcriptionally and post-transcriptionally
ESRP2 is a conserved RNA binding protein that activates an adult splicing program in hepatocytes ( ), but how its developmental expression/activity are controlled is undetermined. ESRP2 is absent in fetal hepatocytes, but its expression increases gradually during the late gestational period, suggesting a transcriptional regulatory mechanism that modulates Esrp2 gene expression in a manner that is dependent on developmental cues. The interplay between active and repressive histone modifications often dictates the accessibility of transcriptional machinery to specific gene loci ( ; ). We therefore analyzed the ENCODE chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) data from mouse livers and determined the status of chromatin-associated histone modifications and their corresponding marks around the Esrp2 gene body ( A). A dramatic shift in the histone marks on the Esrp2 gene locus was evident during the transition from early embryonic stages to adulthood. Particularly, marks of transcriptional activation H3K4me1, H3K4me3, H3K36me3, H3K27ac, and H3K9ac were largely absent over the Esrp2 gene until birth ( A). In contrast, the transcriptional silencing mark H3K27me3 was predominant in the embryonic stage but was replaced with activation marks in the adult liver. These data imply that developmental changes in histone modifications facilitate Esrp2 transcription, resulting in its increased mRNA expression.
 Unexpectedly, although histone modifications changed dramatically from E13.5 to P0, ESRP2 protein expression was only detected starting around P7 ( B). Further quantification of hepatic ESRP2 mRNA and protein levels exhibited strong upregulation in protein levels (approximately eightfold) between P10 and adulthood but showed only modest changes in RNA levels (∼1.5-fold) ( C). These results suggest that ESRP2 protein abundance in maturing hepatocytes is regulated post-transcriptionally at the level of either mRNA translation or protein stability (or both). To investigate whether the delayed postnatal appearance of ESRP2 was due to increased protein synthesis, we performed polysome profiling of hepatocytes isolated from mouse livers ( ; ) at four developmental time points (E18, P7, P14, and P28). Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) analyses of fractionated lysates showed a gradual shift of Esrp2 mRNA from the mRNP/monosome to polyribosome fractions at P7 ( D), representing increased accessibility to translational machinery occurring ∼1 week after birth.
Given that the splicing activity of RNA binding proteins can be coordinated through their nuclear–cytoplasmic distribution, we prepared nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions from hepatocytes isolated from P10 and P21 livers and assayed the relative ESRP2 protein levels in these fractions. We chose to conduct the ESRP2 subcellular fractionation studies at P10 and P21 because the most striking maturational changes in the liver (both molecular and functional) happen around P14. The subcellular fractionation results showed that although ESRP2 was primarily cytoplasmic at P10, it became predominantly nuclear by P21 ( E). Particularly, ESRP2 protein abundance increased sharply in the nuclear fraction at P21, whereas the cytoplasmic levels were unchanged between P10 and P21. We next examined the zonal and subcellular distribution of ESRP2 by immunofluorescence on liver sections that were costained either with CTNNB1 to mark the cell boundaries or with CDH1 and GLUL to mark the periportal and pericentral hepatocytes, respectively. ESRP2 was uniformly expressed in all hepatocytes across the three zones of the liver lobule ( F; ), and similar to the immunoblot results, the ESRP2 signal shifted from a predominantly cytoplasmic location at P10 to a predominantly nucleoplasmic location at P21 ( G). We further noticed that within the nucleoplasm, ESRP2 displayed a punctate staining pattern that concentrated near the euchromatic and away from the heterochromatic centers ( ). Collectively, these data highlight the multitiered control of ESRP2 expression in maturing hepatocytes, suggesting its stage-specific role in RNA processing during postnatal development.

## ESRP2 is a determinative alternative splicing factor required for complete hepatic polyploidization and maturation
Numerous changes in mRNA abundance and splicing occur within the first 3 weeks of life ( ; ; ), as hematopoiesis and proliferative activity are reduced, and gene products involved in metabolism are induced ( ; ). During this period, the liver transitions from an immature to a mature state as hepatocytes exit the cell cycle, become polyploid, and organize within a zonated lobular structure ( ; ; ). Given that these cellular and molecular changes coincide with the postnatal upregulation of ESRP2 and its downstream RNA processing activities ( ), we set out to investigate ESRP2's direct contributions toward hepatic maturation using three independent gain- and loss-of-function models. In the first model, the Esrp2 gene was deleted in the mouse germline, resulting in a constitutive whole-body knockout (KO) ( A). In the second model, ESRP2 was ectopically expressed in neonatal mouse livers ( B). For the third model, we generated transgenic mice with loxP sites surrounding exons 3–13 of the Esrp2 gene to acutely disrupt its liver expression using a hepatocyte-specific CRE recombinase ( C; ).
 We first determined the spatiotemporal necessity and sufficiency of ESRP2 in coordinating postnatal alternative splicing transitions. Previously, we created a tetracycline-inducible FLAG-tagged ESRP2 transgenic mouse line that, when crossed with ApoE-rtTA mice, produced TRE-ESRP2;ApoE-rtTA bitransgenic progenies, allowing conditional, doxycycline (Dox)-dependent expression of ESRP2 in hepatocytes ( ). Owing to the ESRP2 protein reaching substantial nuclear concentrations only around P14, we induced the bitransgenic neonates at birth and harvested their liver tissues at P6 as a midpoint between birth and 2 weeks ( B). At these early stages of development, the newborn pups depend on the mother's milk for sustenance. Therefore, we fed the nursing dams a Dox-containing diet to dose the pups indirectly through breastfeeding. Western blot analysis confirmed the successful expression of exogenous FLAG-tagged ESRP2 in P6 bitransgenic livers at levels (∼1.5 times) comparable with P28 wild-type livers ( D; ). As expected, we did not detect any ESRP2 protein in P6 littermate control or P28 Esrp2 germline KO livers ( D). Next, we performed splicing-sensitive RT-PCR assays to interrogate whether early induction of ESRP2 promotes a premature advent of the adult RNA splicing program. We chose to evaluate Arhgef10l and Lsm14b as candidates because both transcripts encode a developmentally regulated alternative exon whose splicing is controlled by ESRP2. For instance, the 15 nt alternative exon in Arhgef10l was predominantly skipped in P6 but included in P28 livers, whereas the 78 nt alternative exon in Lsm14b was predominantly included in P6 but skipped more in P28 livers ( E). The P28 Esrp2 KOs failed to undergo postnatal transitions and mimicked the wild-type P6 splicing patterns for both transcripts. Remarkably, forced expression of ESRP2 in P6 livers resulted in a neonatal-to-adult switch in splicing for both Arhgef10l and Lsm14b, demonstrating that earlier than normal ESRP2 expression is sufficient to induce a premature shift in splicing of target transcripts ( E).
Because ESRP2 was ablated in the germline, it was unclear whether failure to switch splicing from a neonatal-to-adult pattern resulted from a direct consequence of ESRP2 deficiency or the cascade of events manifested due to the absence of ESRP2 during development. To address this, we examined the acute effect of Esrp2 KO in adult livers by using adeno-associated viral vectors expressing CRE recombinase driven by the hepatocyte-specific thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG) promoter ( C). Robust depletion of the ESRP2 protein was evident in the adult Esrp2f/f mouse livers 2 weeks after AAV8-TBG-CRE viral vector transduction compared with AAV8-TBG-GFP controls ( F). Importantly, acute loss of ESRP2 from adult hepatocytes reverted the splicing of Arhgef10l and Lsm14b to neonatal patterns, similar to what was observed in the germline KOs ( E,G), indicating that continuous expression of ESRP2 in adulthood is necessary to maintain correct splicing patterns of target transcripts. These data provide compelling evidence that ESRP2 is a determinative factor required for both the genesis and maintenance of the adult hepatic splicing program and that its temporally regulated expression ensures a timely switch in alternative splicing within maturing hepatocytes.
To determine how the postnatal onset of ESRP2 activity affects liver maturation, we next analyzed hepatocyte size, proliferation, and ploidy content from wild-type, Esrp2 KO, and overexpression (OE) mice. Liver sections immunostained with HNF4A and CTNNB1 (to mark cell boundaries) showed hepatocytes with significantly reduced cell area from P14, P21, P28, and P56 (adult) Esrp2 germline KO mice compared with those of wild-type controls ( H,K; ). We also detected a considerable increase in hepatocyte proliferation—indicated by increased 5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (EdU) labeling of new DNA synthesis and HNF4A immunostaining of liver sections—from Esrp2 KO relative to wild-type mice ( H,L; ). Increased hepatocyte proliferation in Esrp2 KOs was not linked to liver injury or compensatory regeneration, as histological analysis and measurement of serum ALT and AST levels showed no signs of liver damage, hepatocyte death, or inflammation ( ). Although some aspects of hepatic physiology, metabolism, and gene expression are sexually dimorphic ( ; ; ; ; ), in our analysis, we did not observe any sex-specific differences in cell size and proliferation between wild-type and Esrp2 KO livers ( ). We further investigated whether the ESRP2-driven hepatocyte splicing program differs between males and females. However, ESRP2 protein expression and the splicing pattern of ESRP2 target genes showed no evidence of sexual dimorphism ( ).
Importantly, acute depletion of ESRP2 from adult livers led to a significant increase in the EdU-labeled hepatocyte population at 2 and 4 weeks after AAV8-TBG-CRE injections compared with AAV8-TBG-GFP controls ( M; ), suggesting that increased proliferation resulted directly from ESRP2 deficiency rather than indirectly from a developmental failure to exit the cell cycle. Hepatocyte size in the acute knockouts also trended lower but did not reach statistical significance ( ). No differences in liver weight to body weight ratios or signs of liver damage were evident at 4 weeks after acute knockout of ESRP2 ( ). To further investigate whether premature ESRP2 expression alters the course of hepatic maturation, we induced age-matched TRE-ESRP2;ApoE-rtTA bitransgenic (ESRP2 OE) and littermate control pups with Dox starting at P0 and harvested their livers at P14 or P21. Notably, earlier than normal ESRP2 activation evoked a premature decrease in hepatocyte proliferation with a simultaneous increase in cell size ( I,K,L), indicating that ESRP2 promotes cell cycle exit and hypertrophic growth of hepatocytes.
Acquisition of polyploidy in the postnatal period is a conserved feature of liver growth and maturation ( ). At birth, the majority of mouse hepatocytes are diploid mononucleated cells that undergo normal cycling. However, between P14 and P21, a specialized mitotic program involving programmed cytokinesis failure promotes rapid binucleation and polyploidization of hepatocytes ( ; ; ). To determine whether a lack of ESRP2 affects ploidy in the liver, we isolated primary hepatocytes from adult wild-type and Esrp2 KO mice and measured their ploidy states (2c, 4c, and 8c) by flow cytometric quantification of DNA content. As expected, only a tiny fraction of wild-type adult hepatocytes was diploid, and most of the population exhibited tetraploid or octaploid DNA content ( J,N; ). The Esrp2 KO livers, however, showed a marked reduction in octaploid hepatocytes, with a concomitant increase in tetraploid and diploid hepatocytes. Furthermore, ESRP2 deficiency resulted in a significant increase in the percentage of Ki-67+ hepatocytes ( ). This is consistent with increased EdU labeling, indicating that reduced ploidy of Esrp2 KO hepatocytes is not due to their inability to synthesize DNA and/or proliferate. We next evaluated the impact of early ESRP2 induction on the ploidy spectrum of maturing hepatocytes. We therefore administered Dox to TRE-ESRP2;ApoE-rtTA bitransgenic (ESRP2 OE) and littermate control pups starting at P0 and then collected their hepatocytes at P21 to analyze their ploidy states. At P21, only a small percentage of control hepatocytes were octaploid, whereas the majority were diploid or tetraploid ( J,N). However, earlier than normal ESRP2 expression boosted the number of octaploid and tetraploid cells in P21 livers ( J,N), indicating that premature ESRP2 activation accelerates the postnatal polyploidization of hepatocytes. Additionally, we counted the number of mononucleated versus binucleated hepatocytes per field and found significantly more mononucleated to binucleated cells in the adult Esrp2 KO and fewer mononucleated to binucleated cells in the P21 ESRP2 OE livers, relative to littermate controls ( ). Together, these gain- and loss-of-function experiments illustrate that ESRP2 is a determinative RNA processing factor that facilitates polyploidization and maturation of hepatocytes.

## Identification of ESRP2-mediated transcriptome changes in maturing hepatocytes
To study mechanisms underlying the immature phenotype of ESRP2-deficient hepatocytes, we performed single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) on liver cells isolated from wild-type P14, adult, and Esrp2 KO mice ( ). We captured a total of 12,435 cells that were evenly distributed among the three sample groups and had a mean UMI count of 4065 and a median of 1759 genes expressed per cell ( ). Cell types were identified based on the top differentially expressed genes and from canonical cell type-specific markers ( ), which, after filtering, dead cell removal, and batch correction, yielded 10,026 hepatocytes and 2409 nonparenchymal cells (NPCs) ( ). Because ESRP2 expression in the liver is hepatocyte-specific, we focused our analyses on hepatocyte populations. As expected, wild-type P14 and adult hepatocytes formed distinct nonoverlapping clusters in the UMAP plot, representing stark differences in their transcriptomes ( ). The majority of ESRP2-deficient hepatocytes, however, clustered adjacent to P14 and away from adult hepatocytes.
To determine whether all or some of the Esrp2 KO hepatocytes resemble a P14-like state, we conducted pseudotime ordering of cells through the postnatal maturation process. The majority of P14 and adult hepatocytes resided on the far ends of the pseudotime trajectory; however, ESRP2-deficient hepatocytes occupied a position toward the middle of the maturation trajectory, forming some branches that were not populated by P14 or adult cells ( A,B). Interestingly, although many ESRP2-deficient hepatocytes ordered closer to the immature P14 hepatocytes, some Esrp2 KO hepatocytes also ordered near the wild-type adult hepatocytes along the pseudotime. This suggests that despite the lack of ESRP2, a minor proportion of KO hepatocytes may still adapt to mature and support the functions of an adult liver. Next, we assessed the strength of various metabolic pathways between wild-type and Esrp2 KO hepatocytes. Several mature metabolic gene sets were dampened in Esrp2 KO hepatocytes, as is evident from a global shift in their pathway score distribution ( B; ). Although the gene sets belonging to glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, glycogen metabolism, and the pentose phosphate pathway showed the most significant decrease ( B), other pathways such as fatty acid and amino acid metabolism were only slightly reduced in the Esrp2 KO hepatocytes ( ).
 Thousands of genes in the liver can exhibit sexually dimorphic expression ( ; ; ). To confirm that the observed expression differences in Esrp2 KO hepatocytes were genotype-dependent and not influenced by sex, we conducted qRT-PCR analysis and validated both the genotype-driven changes and the expression of known sexually dimorphic genes ( ). The data indicated that sex-dependent expression of metabolic and detoxification genes is not altered in ESRP2-deficient hepatocytes. To explore the gene regulatory networks that might be contributing to the immaturity of ESRP2-deficient hepatocytes, we used the SCENIC pipeline to generate regulons for transcription factors and their coexpressed genes from individual hepatocytes ( ). Esrp2 KO hepatocytes were particularly stunted in their adult regulons (e.g., HNF4A, DBP, and CEBPA), which are typically activated during postnatal development ( C). However, regulons that are active in P14 but silenced in adult hepatocytes were less affected by ESRP2 deficiency. This indicates that the lack of ESRP2 hinders the ability of hepatocytes to mature, but these hepatocytes do not regress to a completely immature fetal-like state.
Although scRNA-seq provided critical information about the differences in hepatocyte cell states between wild-type and Esrp2 KO livers, it only measured ∼10% of the transcriptome and did not capture any splice variants. Therefore, to assess the global impact of ESRP2 on developmentally regulated splicing, we conducted high-resolution poly(A)+ RNA sequencing of wild-type and Esrp2 KO hepatocytes isolated from E18, P14, and 8 week old wild-type as well as 8 week old Esrp2 KO livers ( ). We also investigated the effect of early ESRP2 induction on the splicing pattern of maturing hepatocytes by inducing TRE-ESRP2;ApoE-rtTA bitransgenic and control pups with Dox starting at P0 and then isolating and sequencing their hepatocyte RNAs at P8. ESRP2 deficiency affected the splicing of many more transcripts than abundance, indicating a more significant impact on pre-mRNA processing ( ). We identified 582 significantly changing splicing events within 394 genes in Esrp2-KO compared with WT adult hepatocytes, with an expected distribution of splice event type and minimal overlap with mRNAs regulated at the abundance levels ( D). To further explore the impact of alternative splicing on the coding potential of target transcripts, we investigated the distribution of ESRP2-regulated exons along the length of respective mRNAs, as previously described ( ). We found that ∼67% of differentially spliced exons were located within the coding sequence (CDS) ( ). The CDS-mapped alternative exons were further classified based on whether they were open reading frame-preserving (i.e., the exon length is a multiple of 3). We found that 62% of the ESRP2-regulated exons preserved the open reading frame, whereas 38% did not ( ). Moreover, we found that in only ∼10% of the cases, ESRP2-regulated exons were predicted to undergo nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) and thereby produce transcripts that are unproductive in terms of protein expression. These data are consistent with our observation that most transcripts harboring ESRP2 target exons did not exhibit a significant change in their overall RNA abundance ( ).
We noted that the transcripts exhibiting altered splicing patterns in ESRP2-deficient hepatocytes form highly connected networks of biological processes associated with tissue morphogenesis, cell proliferation, and EMT, with particular enrichment for molecular functions related to protein phosphorylation, cytoskeletal organization, and Rho/Ras signaling ( E). Further analysis of the ESRP2-regulated splicing events in hepatocytes identified 21 genes encoding components of cell division and/or actin cytoskeletal organization, a subset of which is related to the NCBI MeSH terms “proto-oncogene” or “tumor suppressor” ( F). Next, we selected ESRP2-regulated cassette exons with at least 80% sequence conservation between mice and humans (n = 462) and probed their protein features and functional properties. Compared with randomized sets of exons, ESRP2-regulated exons showed particular enrichment for nuclear localization signals and intrinsically unstructured polypeptide regions ( G). We further noticed that the exons containing unstructured regions were significantly enriched for phosphorylation sites and often encoded conserved serine/threonine residues that are frequently phosphorylated in response to changes in cellular state and/or activities.
Comparative analysis of the wild-type E18 to adult and Esrp2 KO transcriptomes revealed that almost one-third of differentially spliced mRNAs in ESRP2-deficient hepatocytes revert their splicing pattern toward the neonatal (E18) stage ( H,I). The remaining two-thirds of mRNAs showed missplicing exclusively in the Esrp2 KO hepatocytes, as their splicing pattern was unaffected during hepatocyte maturation. However, a large but separate set of developmentally regulated events showed only a modest adult-to-neonatal splicing shift in Esrp2 KOs, suggesting that other factors might promote these postnatal transitions ( H,I). Thus, our global analysis revealed portions of the hepatocyte transcriptome that undergo dampening of the adult or reactivation of the neonatal splicing program in the absence of ESRP2. Upon analyzing the splicing patterns further, we found that developmentally regulated events can be classified into two classes. Approximately 65% of splicing events undergo “early transitions,” meaning their PSI changes maximally between E18 and P14, whereas the other class of events (∼35%) undergo “late transitions,” meaning their PSI changes maximally between P14 and adult time points ( ). To identify putative regulatory elements (sequence motifs) associated with splicing transitions occurring early or late during hepatocyte maturation, regression analysis between motif counts and splicing changes at each time point was conducted for the enriched hexamers. The first and last 250 nt of the upstream and downstream introns were used in these analyses with the exclusion of the core splice sites. We identified several motifs in each intronic region, including some that resemble the binding sites of known splicing factors ( ). Among them, the ESRP binding motif showed a strong association with splicing transitions, particularly in the late postnatal stages. Consistent with the motif analysis and delayed ESRP2 expression during hepatocyte maturation, ESRP2 deficiency mainly affected the late set of splicing transitions. ( J; ). Notably, forced expression of ESRP2 in hepatocytes of P8 livers resulted in a premature neonatal-to-adult shift in splicing of ∼20% of the late events, a subset of which was also regulated reciprocally in the adult Esrp2 KO hepatocytes ( K).

## Determination of ESRP2 protein–RNA interactions, its binding site preference(s), and direct targets in hepatocytes
To generate the ESRP2–RNA interaction map at a single-nucleotide resolution and characterize its hepatic splicing regulatory network, we performed eCLIP-seq ( ), a technique in which RNA binding proteins are covalently attached to RNA in vivo by UV-cross-linking followed by immunoprecipitation, purification, and sequencing. Due to a lack of antibodies to immunoprecipitate ESRP2, we engineered a 2xFLAG tag at the N terminus of the Esrp2 gene using CRISPR–Cas9 genome editing in mice ( A,B). We verified the successful expression of FLAG-tagged ESRP2 in adult transgenic mouse livers without any noticeable phenotypic differences, including ESRP2 protein levels or changes in the PSI of target exons when compared with wild-type livers ( C). Freshly isolated primary hepatocytes from FLAG-ESRP2 transgenics were UV-exposed, and protein–RNA complexes were immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG antibody ( D). We isolated and sequenced 50–200 nt RNA fragments that were cross-linked to and copurified with FLAG-ESRP2. After mapping and filtering, reads from biological replicates were merged to determine the distribution of ESRP2 binding sites by clustering the overlapping reads and identifying statistically significant peaks relative to Input. FLAG-ESRP2 eCLIP tags were broadly distributed across the transcriptome, with 90% of peaks mapping to 685 annotated RefSeq genes, and the majority (∼85%) residing within intronic (35.9%) and 3′ UTR (50.8%) elements ( E), suggesting that at least 7% of mouse genes are subject to ESRP2 regulation in hepatocytes.
 We next integrated the Esrp2 KO RNA-seq and FLAG-ESRP2 eCLIP-seq data sets to identify pre-mRNAs that have eCLIP tags within close proximity of alternatively spliced exons, which were also misspliced in ESRP2-deficient hepatocytes. We detected robust binding clusters within 500 nt upstream of and downstream from exons whose PSI values were significantly altered in Esrp2 KO hepatocytes ( F; ). Notably, the global intersection of two data sets revealed that only one-third of variably spliced events in Esrp2 KOs had a binding peak nearby, which improved to 50% if we focused on cassette exons ( G), suggesting that ESRP2 regulates a broad splicing program in hepatocytes via a series of primary (direct) and secondary (indirect) targets. To further distinguish direct from indirect splicing targets, we compared ESRP2 binding preferences across constitutive and alternative exons expressed within maturing hepatocytes. Approximately 2% of “all exons” and 5% of “all alternative exons” had ESRP2 binding in flanking introns; however, this percentage increased to ∼10% if the alternative exons were also developmentally regulated ( H). ESRP2-regulated exons, which exhibited a significant PSI change in ESRP2-depleted or overexpression hepatocytes, showed noticeably higher binding proportions (∼50%) in surrounding introns. Of note, exons reciprocally regulated in Esrp2 KO and OE data sets had the highest percentage of binding (∼80%), providing a strong likelihood for direct regulation by ESRP2 ( H).
To investigate the sequence features of ESRP2-binding sites, we used an independent read mapping and analysis pipeline that leverages cross-link-induced mutation sites (CIMS) and accurately maps positions of protein–RNA cross-linking in CLIP data ( ). Uridine was the most preferred nucleotide at the cross-link site and was also enriched at the flanking positions ( I). Guanine and adenine were the second and third most common nucleotides at other positions. We next evaluated nucleotide frequencies in the sequences surrounding ESRP2 cross-link sites (−10 nt to +10 nt) separately within introns and 3′ UTRs ( J). The de novo k-mer enrichment analysis identified UUG- and UGG-containing motifs as the top enriched sequence elements with cross-linking occurring at U residues. Similar UG-containing sequence motifs for ESRP proteins have been identified in vitro by SELEX-seq ( ) and RNA bind-n-seq ( ), confirming the accuracy of our in vivo ESRP2-binding site determination with FLAG-ESRP2 eCLIP.
Previous studies have shown that linear sequence motifs alone are often insufficient to fully capture the binding specificities of RBPs, and other contextual features such as RNA secondary structure and surrounding base composition contribute to binding specificity ( ; ). Proteins with a single RNA binding domain (RBD) are believed to interact with three to five contiguous RNA bases, whereas proteins with multiple RBDs can interact with bipartite motifs separated by one or more bases, where the two cores in bipartite motifs are bound by distinct RBDs within the same protein ( ; ). We found that ESRP2, which contains three RRM domains ( ), prefers binding UG dinucleotides followed by a polyG tract spaced by 6 nt, with no preference for specific bases in the intervening spacer ( J). These results raise a possibility in which the downstream polyG sequence might promote or stabilize ESRP2 interactions with the primary UG-rich motif and thereby increase its RNA binding specificity.
Finally, to characterize the positional effects of ESRP2 protein–RNA interactions on splicing outcomes at a transcriptome-wide scale, we plotted the density of eCLIP peaks within 600 nt upstream of and downstream from cassette exons whose inclusion was repressed ( K, red) or promoted ( K, blue) by ESRP2 ( K). This analysis revealed that ESRP2 binding to the intron downstream from a regulated exon was generally associated with ESRP2-mediated promotion of exon inclusion, whereas binding to the upstream intron was associated with exon skipping. Similar position-dependent RNA regulatory maps have been reported for other splicing regulators, which function in a cell type- or condition-specific manner ( ). Collectively, our integrated RNA-seq and eCLIP-seq analyses established that position-dependent ESRP2 binding facilitates the postnatal splicing switch for a functionally coherent set of RNAs, which supports physiological specialization and maturation of hepatocytes.

## ESRP2 binds the miR-122 host gene transcript and promotes its processing/biogenesis during postnatal liver development
Because programmed cytokinesis failure drives hepatocyte binucleation and polyploidy ( ), we reasoned that ESRP2-mediated post-transcriptional processing of one or more cytokinesis effector(s) might directly contribute to postnatal polyploidization of hepatocytes. Prior studies have demonstrated that the liver-enriched microRNA miR-122 is induced during postnatal development and stimulates physiological polyploidization of hepatocytes by inhibiting the expression of a set of procytokinesis targets ( ). Surprisingly, in our mapped FLAG-ESRP2 eCLIP-seq reads, we detected extensive ESRP2 binding to the miR-122 host gene transcript ( A). Moreover, although the expression of the miR-122 nascent transcript was significantly increased, mature miR-122 levels were reduced in ESRP2-deficient hepatocytes compared with wild-type controls, pointing toward a processing defect ( A). To further validate this observation, we used a TaqMan qRT-PCR assay to compare mature miR-122 levels in wild-type and ESRP2-deficient livers across six postnatal time points (P0, P7, P14, P21, P28, and P56). In agreement with earlier reports ( ; ), hepatic miR-122 expression surged during the first 4 weeks of life ( B). However, starting at P14 and continuing through adulthood, ESRP2 KO livers exhibited consistently lower mature miR-122 levels relative to wild-type counterparts ( B).
 The canonical microRNA biogenesis pathway involves two sequential processing events catalyzed by RNase III enzymes. In the nucleus, the microprocessor complex involving Drosha/DGCR8 cleaves primary microRNA transcripts (pri-miRs) to produce precursor microRNAs (pre-miRs), which are exported to the cytoplasm, where Dicer processes them into mature microRNAs that are eventually loaded into the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) ( ; ). Upon further analysis of eCLIP data, we noted four distinct clusters of ESRP2 cross-linked fragments that mapped to the UG-rich segments of the miR-122 host transcript both upstream of and downstream from the stem–loop region ( A). These ESRP2 binding clusters (>30 reads) were adjacent to the Drosha/DGCR8 cleavage site within the RNAfold-predicted ( ) secondary structure and likely facilitate binding to the base of the miR-122 stem loop ( C). To determine which step of miR-122 biogenesis was affected by ESRP2 (i.e., whether ESRP2 facilitates Drosha/DGCR8-mediated processing of the nascent or Dicer-mediated processing of the precursor miR-122 transcript), we quantified both pri-miR-122 and pre-miR-122 transcript levels in P14 and adult wild-type as well as Esrp2 KO mouse livers. Notably, Esrp2 deletion resulted in a significant accumulation of unprocessed pri-miR-122 transcripts, with a concomitant reduction in the levels of processed pre-miR-122 transcripts ( D). Based on the disparate expression patterns of pri-miR-122 and pre-miR-122 in ESRP2-deficient livers, we conclude that the nuclear activity of ESRP2 boosts miR-122 biogenesis by promoting Drosha-mediated cleavage. This conclusion is further supported by the fact that miR-122 levels are closely associated with ESRP2 protein expression during a narrow window of postnatal liver development. For instance, between P0 and P14, miR-122 levels increase by nearly 10-fold ( B), whereas ESRP2 protein abundance increases by 16-fold ( C). Also, a significant reduction in premature and mature miR-122 transcripts in ESRP2-deficient hepatocytes is evident only after P14, the same time frame when ESRP2 protein levels rise naturally and its localization becomes progressively nuclear ( C,D, B).
miR-122 antagonizes the expression of a large proportion of hepatic mRNAs that encode for a variety of developmental, metabolic, and homeostatic functions ( ). We therefore posited that reduced miR-122 levels in ESRP2-deficient hepatocytes may result in chronic derepression of crucial targets and pathways. Accordingly, we queried the expression of a direct miR-122 target gene set in Esrp2 KO hepatocytes, which was derived by intersecting previously published Ago-CLIP-seq and RNA-seq data sets from miR-122 KO and control mouse livers ( ). Our comparison of wild-type and ESRP2 KO transcriptomes indicated that in the absence of ESRP2, the abundance of miR-122 target mRNAs increases significantly relative to nontargets ( E; ). This was particularly evident for transcripts encoding proteins involved in cell–cell junctions, cytoskeletal rearrangement, and cell division ( ). Collectively, these results support a model in which ESRP2 binds multiple UG-rich segments within the pri-miR-122 host transcript to stimulate DROSHA-mediated post-transcriptional processing of miR-122.

## Timed activation of the ESRP2–miR-122 axis promotes hepatic polyploidization
The data presented above revealed an ESRP2–miR-122 axis that is temporally activated in hepatocytes ∼2 weeks after birth. To assess the physiological contribution of this axis, we asked whether ESRP2-driven miR-122 biogenesis potentiates postnatal hepatic binucleation and polyploidization. We first confirmed whether ESPR2 was able to increase miR-122 levels in vivo, for which we induced TRE-ESRP2;ApoE-rtTA bitransgenic pups with Dox starting at P0 and harvested their livers at P14 and P21 ( , A). Of note, ectopic expression of ESRP2 led to an increase in miR-122 levels in both P14 and P21 livers ( B). We also measured the mRNA levels of cytokinesis-associated factors Rhoa, Mapre1, Racgap1, and Slc25a34, which are direct targets of miR-122 and, when depleted forcibly, cause a marked increase in binucleate hepatocytes ( ). We observed a significant downregulation of all four factors in ESRP2-overexpressing livers in comparison with uninduced littermate controls ( C). These data illustrate that earlier than normal ESRP2 activation augments the miR-122-driven program of cytokinesis failure and thereby accelerates the ploidy spectrum of hepatocytes.
 To further demonstrate that the newly elucidated ESRP2–miR-122 axis critically contributed to the postnatal polyploidization of hepatocytes, we performed a functional rescue experiment by blocking the pathway with an miR-122 antagomir. For this purpose, we first prepared primary hepatocyte cultures from P14 TRE-ESRP2;ApoE-rtTA bitransgenic mouse livers and exposed them to either vehicle or Dox-containing mitogenic growth media ( D). More than 95% of mouse hepatocytes at the P14 stage are diploid, and their binucleation status can be tracked over time in vitro ( ). Accordingly, we cotransfected cells with control, miR-122 mimic, or miR-122 antagomir oligonucleotides in the presence or absence of Dox. Four days later, cells were either fixed and processed for binucleation analysis or lysed to extract total RNA to measure the transcript levels of ESRP2, miR-122, and specific cytokinesis factors ( D). As anticipated, the miR-122 mimic suppressed the expression of cytokinesis factors Rhoa, Mapre1, Racgap1, and Slc25a34 ( E,F), and miR-122-supplemented hepatocytes were enriched for binucleate cells when compared with scrambled control ( H,I). Importantly, similar to the in vivo studies, transient induction of ESRP2 in primary cultures was sufficient to increase miR-122 levels; evoke reduction in Rhoa, Mapre1, Racgap1, and Slc25a34 mRNAs; and stimulate hepatocyte binucleation ( E,F,H). Finally, to verify that increased binucleation upon ESRP2 induction was mediated through miR-122, we cotransfected the miR-122 antagomir in Dox-induced TRE-ESRP2;ApoE-rtTA bitransgenic hepatocyte cultures. Supplementing ESRP2-expressing hepatocytes with the miR-122 antagomir not only reduced miR-122 levels but also restored the expression of cytokinesis factors and reversed ESRP2-driven accumulation of binucleate cells ( E,F,H). ESRP2 expression itself, however, remained unchanged in the antagomir-treated cells ( G). These data demonstrate that miR-122 upregulation critically contributes to the ESRP2-driven increase in hepatocyte binucleation and polyploidy.

## Discussion
The postnatal period of mammalian development is important, as numerous changes take place in the liver during this time ( ; ; ). The suckling-to-weaning transition period (P14–P21 in rodents) is particularly significant for liver maturation, as hepatocyte size, ploidy, and metabolism increase markedly during this time frame ( ). However, very little is known about the molecular mechanisms and upstream signals that instruct these structural or functional transitions. Crucially, the driving factors of liver maturity, such as how hepatocytes exit the cell cycle, become polyploid, or acquire specialized functions, are inadequately understood. Based on the findings from this study, we posit a model of post-transcriptional regulatory hierarchy for liver maturation and polyploidization in which a programmed increase in miR-122 processing via postnatal ESRP2 activation promotes cytokinesis failure and supports diploid-to-polyploid conversion of hepatocytes ( ). Five principal observations support this model.
 First, the normal emergence of polyploid hepatocytes coincides with ESRP2 expression and its downstream RNA processing activities. Second, both germline depletion and acute depletion of ESRP2 from mouse livers result in reduced hepatic maturity, indicated by increased proliferation, decreased size, and a reduced ploidy spectrum of ESRP2-deficient hepatocytes. Third, earlier than normal activation of ESRP2 in neonatal livers impedes proliferation, evokes cellular hypertrophy, and accelerates hepatocyte maturity and polyploidy. Fourth, ESRP2 is required for the genesis and maintenance of the adult liver transcriptome, including the processing and optimal expression of mature miR-122. Fifth, timed processing and biogenesis of miR-122 by ESRP2 repress cytokinesis-associated factors, promoting cytokinesis failure and postnatal expansion of binucleate hepatocytes. ESRP2 deficiency derepresses these factors, resulting in deficits in the temporal specification and complete polyploidization of hepatocytes.
RNA processing and miRNA-mediated gene silencing are fundamental mechanisms that fine-tune gene expression to regulate tissue development and physiology ( ; ; ; ), and their dysregulation is associated with an increasing number of human diseases, including cancer ( ; ; ). The interplay between miRNAs and RBPs leads to global changes in gene expression in which miRNA(s) control expression of RBPs to regulate tissue-specific RNA processing decisions ( ; ; ; ; ) or RBPs modulate miRNA biogenesis, stability, and localization through alternative processing and/or maturation ( ; , ; ; ; ; ). However, most studies interrogating relationships between miRNAs and RBPs use in vitro approaches or cell culture models. Here, we identified the post-transcriptional ESRP2–miR-122 axis operative in vivo during a critical period of postnatal liver development that enables functional maturation and polyploidization of hepatocytes.
ESRPs are a conserved family of epithelial-specific RBPs that exert broad control over many physiological processes, including tissue regeneration and the epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) during development and cancer progression ( ; ; ; ). Most epithelial tissues express both ESRP1 and ESRP2, but the liver is unique, as ESRP2 is the sole paralog present in human and mouse hepatocytes ( ). ESRP2 is a key splicing factor in the liver that maintains the nonproliferative, mature phenotype of adult hepatocytes ( ). Following injury, ESRP2 activity is transiently suppressed to activate a fetal splicing program, which attenuates Hippo signaling and facilitates liver regeneration ( ). However, persistent suppression of ESRP2 in chronic liver disease is detrimental and affects liver functioning and recovery ( , ). Therefore, delineating mechanisms regulating ESRP2 expression/activity in developing and diseased livers is critically important. In this study, we provide multiple lines of evidence that ESRP2 activity in maturing hepatocytes is synchronized through overlapping transcriptional, post-transcriptional, and subcellular localization mechanisms.
Whether liver cells exhibit fetal or adult phenotypes is controlled by families of factors that regulate the synthesis, splicing, stability, and translation of mRNAs ( ; ; ; ). This biology permits fetal liver cells to be enriched with proteins that allow functions required to accomplish liver organogenesis (e.g., proliferation, migration, and morphogenesis) while limiting the expression of proteins that are unnecessary in utero due to redundant maternal metabolic, detoxification, and excretory functions. However, postpartum, hepatocytes must acquire the proper repertoire of proteins that enable them to both survive ex utero and assume mature liver functions that are vital for the life of the organism. For instance, sequential changes in alternative splicing in the postnatal period help generate new proteoforms to support hepatocyte maturity ( ; ). Consistent with our previous smaller-scale study ( ), ESRP2 deficiency prevented the fetal-to-adult switch in splicing for hundreds of RNA transcripts that normally shift their splicing patterns in the suckling-to-weaning transition period. We also demonstrated that premature ESRP2 activation in the livers of newborn pups forces an earlier than normal onset of the adult RNA processing program, accelerating hepatocyte maturation and polyploidization.
To identify a mechanistic connection between ESRP2 and how it regulates hepatocyte ploidy, we sought to determine its direct targets. For this, we developed a mouse model using CRISPR–Cas9 mutagenesis in which the endogenous Esrp2 allele was FLAG-tagged, enabling a direct pull-down of ESRP2-bound RNAs. eCLIP-seq provided a network of high-confidence in vivo ESRP2–RNA interactions at single-nucleotide resolution. We found that ESRP2 binds extensively to the intronic and 3′ UTR segments of RNA transcripts and prefers a bipartite motif in which the binding site is UG-rich followed by a polyG tract. It remains to be seen whether ESRP2 binding to the 3′ UTRs affects the expression of corresponding transcripts and whether that contributes to hepatocyte polyploidy and/or maturity.
Integration of eCLIP-seq and RNA-seq data sets from Esrp2 KO and OE livers deconstructed the ESRP2 splicing regulatory network, revealing its direct RNA targets in hepatocytes. Surprisingly, we detected robust ESRP2 binding to the liver-specific miR-122 host gene upstream of the region that encodes the miRNA stem–loop sequence. Furthermore, we noted that mature miR-122 levels closely mirror ESRP2 protein expression in the postnatal period. ESRP2 deletion caused an accumulation of unprocessed primary miR-122 transcripts, with a corresponding decrease in processed pre-miR-122 and miR-122 transcripts. This was particularly interesting because a postnatal surge in miR-122 is required for the physiological polyploidization of hepatocytes ( ; ). Additional inquiry revealed that in ESRP2-deficient hepatocytes, there is a selective and significant increase in the levels of miR-122 target genes, especially cytokinesis factors. Importantly, in vivo and primary cell culture experiments demonstrated a direct dependence of miR-122 and its gene regulatory network on ESRP2, indicating that timed activation of ESRP2 boosts the miR-122-driven program of cytokinesis failure and the postnatal expansion of binucleate hepatocytes.
In conclusion, this study provided deep and mechanistic understanding of the function and regulation of an RNA binding protein in liver maturation. We also uncovered the ESRP2–miR-122 axis that coordinates the postnatal switch from cytokinesis to endoreplication, ensuring the proper onset and extent of liver polyploidization. Our observation of drastically reduced numbers of octaploid hepatocytes in Ersp2 KOs compared with wild-type adult mice suggests that ESRP2 preferentially regulates cytokinesis by tetraploid hepatocytes. However, it is unclear how ESRP2 activity could differentially affect diploid versus tetraploid cells. Furthermore, although we demonstrated that the increased incidence of binucleation in ESRP2-expressing hepatocytes is dependent on miR-122, loss of ESRP2 does not completely inhibit miR-122 production or entirely block hepatic polyploidization. Further investigations should examine whether increased polyploidy in ESRP2-expressing hepatocytes is solely dependent on miR-122 or whether other intermediary factors are also involved. Also, because ESRP2 promotes liver maturation, it might make the hepatic environment more permissive to miR-122 expression without the need for a direct interaction. Future studies involving deletion of ESRP2 binding sites within the primary miR-122 host transcript in vivo could test this alternative possibility.

## Materials and methods

## Animal husbandry
National Institutes of Health (NIH) and institutional guidelines were followed in the use and care of laboratory animals, and experimental protocols were performed as approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign (UIUC). Mice were housed on a standard 12 h light/dark cycle at 18°C–23°C ambient temperature and 40%–60% humidity and allowed ad libitum access to water and a normal chow diet (Envigo Teklad 2918). Genomic DNA was derived from tail biopsies, and genotyping was performed using standard procedures. Both male and female mice were used in this study. For all end point tissue harvesting experiments, animals were always sacrificed in the morning between 0800 and 1200 h to maintain consistency in diet/fasting levels and control for circadian effects. Whole-liver tissues and hepatocytes were isolated from mice following the guidelines for euthanization and/or anesthesia.

## Mouse models
Generation of germline Esrp2 KO ( ) and Dox-inducible, hepatocyte-specific ESRP2 overexpression (TRE-ESRP2; ApoE-rtTA) ( ) mice was described previously. All mice reported in this study were F1 progeny of TRE-ESRP2 and ApoE-rtTA transgenic mouse matings and always hemizygous for both transgenes and the ApoE-rtTA transgene. For conditional knockout of Esrp2, flox/flox (f/f) animals were generated in which exons 3–13 of the Esrp2 gene locus were floxed ( ). The targeting vector for Esrp2 was designed in collaboration with the University of Pennsylvania Gene Targeting Core. The vector featured a loxP site in intron 2 upstream of exon 3 and a neomycin selection cassette flanked by FRT sites in intron 14 followed by another loxP site. The targeting vector was electroporated into V6.5, hybrid C57BL6/129Sv mouse ES cells, and neomycin-resistant clones were isolated, screened by Southern blotting, injected into Balb/c blastocysts, and implanted into pseudopregnant females. Chimeras were generated, and males were crossed to C57BL/6J females. Germline transmission was confirmed by PCR/Southern blots, and the conditional allele was created by crossing the chimeric male with a B6(C3)-Tg(Pgk1-FLPo)10Sykr/J female to remove the neomycin cassette. Progeny were screened for removal of the neomycin cassette by PCR analysis. Heterozygous Esrp2f/wt mice were crossed to produce homozygous Esrp2f/f conditional mice with no apparent phenotype and to maintain the line. For acute knockout studies, Esrp2f/f mice were injected via tail vein with either AAV8-TBG-CRE or AAV8-TBG-GFP virus (viral titer of 5 × 1011 genome copies) (Vector Biolabs Inc.) in which the CRE or GFP proteins were expressed only in hepatocytes ( ) due to the use of the TBG promoter (thyroxine binding globulin and hepatocyte-specific expression).
 To generate N-terminal 2xFLAG-tagged ESRP2 transgenic mice at the UIUC Transgenic Mouse Core Facility, crRNA (gRNA sequence CCGCGTGTGTGGCCGAGCGCCC), tracrRNA, espCas9, and an oligonucleotide repair template encoding two tandem copies of the FLAG epitope tag (5′-GATTACAAGGATGACGACGATAAGGCAGATTACAAGGATGACGACGATAAG-3′) were injected into C57BL/6J embryos to derive F0 progeny ( ). To identify the positive founder animals, mice were genotyped using standard PCR on tail clip-derived genomic DNA. The germline incorporation of the 2xFLAG tag was further confirmed by Sanger sequencing of the F1 progeny. For eCLIP experiments, heterozygous FLAG ESRP2Tg/wt mice were used.

## Diet scheme
For all experiments, the nursing female was fed a standard diet containing 6.0 g/kg doxycycline (Teklad, Envigo) starting on the day the pups were born. This diet was continued until P21, followed by a 0.1 g/kg doxycycline diet until the end of the experiment.

## Hepatocyte isolation
Hepatocytes from mouse livers of the indicated genotypes were isolated using adapted protocols from previously described methods ( ; ). Briefly, P14 or adult (P56) mice were anesthetized in a chamber supplied with 2.5% isoflurane in oxygen at 1 L/min and maintained on the anesthetic during the procedure. The liver was perfused via cannulation of the portal vein with 50 mL of solution A (1× HBSS without Ca2+ and Mg2+, 0.5 mM EDTA) followed by 50 mL of solution B (1× HBSS with Ca2+, 5.4 mM CaCl2, 0.04 mg/mL soybean trypsin inhibitor, 3000 U of collagenase type IV [Worthington Chemicals]). Subsequently, the liver was massaged in a Petri dish containing 1× HBSS to release cells from the liver capsule, which were passed successively through and 70 and 40 μm filters to obtain a single-cell suspension. The cells were then centrifuged at 50g for 5 min at 4°C to separate live hepatocytes from nonparenchymal cells (NPCs) and dead cells. Hepatocytes were further washed three times in 1× HBSS, flash-frozen in liquid N2, and stored at −80°C until further use.

## Bulk RNA-seq and data analysis
Hepatocyte RNAs were isolated using an RNeasy tissue minikit (Qiagen), and the RNA quality was assessed with an Agilent Bioanalyzer followed by quantification by a Qubit fluorimeter at the Functional Genomics Core in the Roy J. Carver Biotechnology Center at UIUC. Hi-Seq libraries were prepared, and 150 bp paired-end Illumina sequencing was performed on a HiSeq4000 or NovaSeq6000 at the High-Throughput Sequencing and Genotyping Unit at UIUC. For the purposes of this study, all transcriptomic analyses were performed on samples from male mouse livers but later verified through orthogonal methods for both sexes. RNA-seq reads were processed for quality/read length using Trimmomatic (version 0.38) and then aligned to the mouse genome (mm10) using STAR (version 2.4.2a). RNA abundance levels were determined as transcripts per million (TPM) using count and differential expression values obtained from DESeq2 (version 1.8.2) and HTseq (version 0.6.1). RNAs were considered differentially expressed following imposed cutoff clearance (false discovery rate [FDR] < 0.05, |log2 (fold change)| > 1). Differential splicing analysis was carried out using rMATS (version 3.2.5), and significant events were identified with imposed cutoffs (FDR < 0.10, junction read counts ≥10, percent spliced-in ≥15%). Motif analysis for differentially spliced exons was performed using rMAPS with default parameters, and putative motifs were identified as described previously ( ). Gene ontology analysis was performed using DAVID (version 6.8) and mapped with the “Enrichment Maps” plug-in in Cytoscape. All expressed genes with transcripts per million (TPM) > 1 served as background, and the biological functions were analyzed with three pathways (Biocarta, KEGG, and Panther). Functional clustering was performed, and the top clusters (P < 0.05) are represented. For exon ontology analysis, regulated exons in maturing hepatocytes were identified, and their mouse coordinates (mm10) were converted to corresponding human exons in the hg19 annotation using UCSCliftover with a minimum ratio of bases matching as 0.8. The selected exons in hg19 were further checked for gene identity match to the mouse exon's parent gene. Once verified, the exon sets were analyzed for ontological processes using exon ontology and FasterDB packages ( ).

## Isolation of liver cells, single-cell library preparation, and sequencing
After the mouse was anesthetized through continuous inhalation of 2% isoflurane, a 5 cm long incision was made in the abdomen to expose the portal vein and inferior vena cava. To perfuse the liver, the portal vein was cannulated, and ∼30 mL of solution I (1× HBBS without Ca2+/Mg2+ with 1 mM EDTA) at 37°C was passed followed by ∼40–50 mL of solution II (HBSS with 0.54 μM CaCl2, 40 μg/mL Trypsin inhibitor, 15 mM HEPES at pH 7.4, 6000 U of collagenase IV) at 37°C. The liver was excised and massaged in washing solution (DMEM + Ham's F12 [50:50] with 5% FBS, 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin) at 4°C to release cells from the liver capsule. The cell suspension was then passed through 40 μm filters to remove doublets/undigested tissue chunks, pelleted by centrifugation at 350g for 4 min at 4°C to remove debris, and resuspended in 15 mL of wash buffer. Cells were counted with an automated hemocytometer, and ∼1 million to 1.5 million cells were processed for library preparation. A MACS dead cell removal kit (Miltenyl Biotec) was used to remove dead cells and obtain single-cell suspensions with high viability. Following this, single-cell sequencing libraries were prepared (from a pool of two mouse livers for each time point) using the 10X Genomics Chromium single-cell 3′ kit v3 and sequenced with an Illumina NovaSeq6000 on an SP/S4 flow cell to obtain 150 bp paired reads.

## Single-cell RNA-seq analysis
Single-cell libraries produced more than 1.5 billion reads. We used Cell Ranger v3.1 pipelines from 10X Genomics to align reads and produce feature barcode matrices. Seurat v4.0 ( ) was used for QC, and analysis of individual feature barcode matrices were further integrated after removing batch-specific effects using Harmony v1.2.0 ( ). Data were log-normalized, scaled, and clustered after PCA analysis. Hepatocyte and NPC clusters were identified based on the expression of multiple marker genes. To identify cell types within the subset of NPCs, they were further subjected to unsupervised UMAP clustering.
Monocle v2.0 was used to perform pseudotime analysis according to the online documentation ( ). The CellDataSet class monocle objects were made from log-normalized Seurat object-containing cells under consideration. Dimensionality reduction was performed with the DDRTree algorithm, and the 1500 most significant deferentially expressed genes were used to perform pseudotime ordering and obtain cell trajectories. Genes with expression patterns covarying with pseudotime were determined by the “differentialGeneTest()” module, clustered, and plotted using the “plot_pseudotime_ heatmap()” module. Expression patterns in clusters were distinguished as upregulated/downregulated along the pseudotime, and gene ontology analysis was performed using DAVID 6.8 ( ) to identify biological pathways that were upregulated or downregulated along the pseudotime.
SCENIC ( ) pipeline was used to estimate the AUCell score activity matrix from the log-normalized Seurat object containing the subset of hepatocytes. Unlike the standard SCENIC workflow, where this AUCell score activity matrix is binarized by thresholding to generate a binary regulon activity matrix, we retained the full AUCell score for all further analyses. UMAP plots, heat maps, and violin plots demonstrating regulon activities based on AUCell scores were made in Seurat 3.1. AUCell scores were plotted over pseudotime cell trajectories using Monocle 2.0. All software or algorithms used for sequencing analyses are listed in .

## Polysome gradient fractionation
For isolation of polysomes from P14 and P28 livers, a modified perfusion protocol was developed in which the animals were first perfused via portal vein cannulation with 75 mL of solution I (300 μg/mL cycloheximide in 1× HBSS with phenol red) at a rate of 3.5 mL/min. EDTA was excluded from solution I due to its dissociative effects on ribosomes and associated complexes. Instead, liver perfusion and hepatocyte wash buffers were supplemented with 300 μg/mL cycloheximide to arrest translating ribosomes. For the E18 and P7 time points, hepatocytes were isolated with a digestion protocol in which all solutions contained cycloheximide as reported previously ( ; ), because perfusions at these time points are not feasible.
Purified hepatocytes were thawed in polysome lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mg/mL heparin, 1% nonidet-P40, 0.5% deoxycholate, 40 mM dithiothreitol, 1 U/mL SUPERaseIn RNase inhibitor [Thermo Fisher], 150 µg/mL cycloheximide) and lysed through gentle pipetting. The cell nuclei and cell debris were removed by centrifugation at 12,000g for 1 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and then centrifuged again at 16,000g for 7.5 min at 4°C to remove the remaining cell debris and organelles. The resulting supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube where 400 µL was layered onto a 10 mL linear sucrose gradient (15%–45% sucrose [w/v] made using a Biocomp gradient master) and centrifuged in a SW41Ti rotor (Beckman) at 38,000 rpm for 125 min at 4°C, as previously described. Polysome profiles were recorded using a UA-6 absorbance (ISCO) detector at 254 nm, and fractions were collected along the gradient corresponding to the RNP, monosome, light polysomes (two to four ribosomes), and heavy polysomes (more than five ribosomes). RNAs for downstream sequencing and validations were purified using an adapted protocol ( ). The sucrose gradient fractions were mixed with 0.05 vol of 3 M sodium acetate plus 2 μL of glycogen followed by addition of 2 vol of 100% EtOH and stored overnight at −80°C to precipitate RNA/protein. The pellets were suspended in molecular-grade water, and after DNase digestion, samples were phase-separated using 3 vol of acid phenol:chloroform (5:1) mixture. The aqueous phase was phase-separated again with chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (24:1). After that, the aqueous phase was mixed with 0.1 vol of 3 M sodium acetate and 2 μL of glycogen and precipitated with 2.5 vol of EtOH overnight at −80°C. The pelleted RNAs were then used for poly(A)+ selected deep sequencing or qRT-PCR.

## Histology and immunofluorescence staining
Liver tissues were fixed in 10% buffered formalin for 24 h, processed, and embedded in paraffin. Five micrometer tissue sections were cut, deparaffinized in xylene, and moved through serial alcohol washes (100%, 95%, 80%, and 50%) to rehydrate. For H&E staining, sections were washed in hematoxylin for 2 min and eosin for 1 min successively, cover-slipped with permount medium, and imaged on a Hamamatsu Nanozoomer at the Institute for Genomic Biology (IGB) Core Facility at UIUC. For immunofluorescent staining, deparaffinized and rehydrated sections were antigen-retrieved in a slow cooker for 10 min at 120°C. The retrieval was performed in either TE (Tris-EDTA at pH 8.0) or citrate buffer (10 mM sodium citrate, 0.05% Tween 20 at pH 6.0). The sections were then washed in buffer A (TBS + 0.05% Triton X-100) and blocked for 2 h in 10% normal goat serum (NGS) containing 1% BSA at room temperature. Primary antibodies were applied to the sections at standardized concentrations and incubated overnight at 4°C. Next, the sections were washed in buffer A, and secondary fluorescent antibodies were applied for 1 h at room temperature. Last, ToPro nuclear stain was applied for 15 min at room temperature, and the sections were cover-slipped using CC aqueous mounting media. All sections were imaged on a Zeiss LSM 710 microscope at the IGB Core Facility at UIUC. To stain for nascent DNA synthesis in maturing livers, mice were treated with a 2 h pulse of EdU (5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine) administered intraperitoneally at 50 μg/g of body weight. Mice were sacrificed, and the livers were harvested and paraffin-embedded. Five micrometer sections were deparaffinized, rehydrated, and antigen-retrieved in citrate buffer (10 mM sodium citrate, 0.05% Tween 20 at pH 6.0). The sections were then washed in buffer A (TBS + 0.05% Triton X-100) and blocked for 2 h in 10% NGS and 1% BSA at room temperature. EdU-labeled DNA was stained with Alexa fluor 488 using a Click-iT EdU Alexa fluor kit (Thermo Fisher) per the manufacturer's protocol.
Cell counting for all liver immunofluorescence images was conducted using ImageJ with the cell counter plug-in. For counting HNF4A+ hepatocytes, nuclei suspected to be stained by the antibodies were marked manually within each image, and the numbers were recorded using the plug-in. To differentiate between proliferative and nonproliferative cells, nuclei were classified into two categories: type 1 (HNF4A+, PH3+) and type 2 (HNF4A+, PH3−). The final counts for each type were also recorded using the cell counter plug-in. Additionally, the ROI manager in ImageJ was used to measure and tabulate the area of the marked regions of interest (ROIs) or cell areas.

## Protein isolation and Western blot analysis
Protein isolation was performed on frozen liver tissue or isolated hepatocyte fractions using homogenization in a bullet blender followed by sonication. The homogenization buffer contained 10 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.5), 0.32 M sucrose, 5 μM MG132, 5 mM EDTA, and Pierce proteinase inhibitor tablet (one tablet/20 mL of buffer volume). Prior to sonication, 20% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) to a final concentration of 1% (v/v) was added. Protein concentration was measured using a Thermo Scientific BCA assay kit. Approximately 50 μg of total protein sample was loaded onto a 10% SDS-PAGE gel, and after separation by gel electrophoresis, proteins were transferred onto a PVDF membrane. Membranes were visualized for equal loading using Ponceau (PonS) staining solution (0.5% [w/v] PonS, 1% acetic acid) and then blocked using 5% milk powder (w/v) in TBST (Tris-buffered saline, 0.1% Tween 20) for 2 h at room temperature. Blots were incubated in primary antibodies at the respective concentrations overnight at 4°C ( ). After TBST washes, blots were incubated in HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature and developed using a Clarity Western ECL kit (Bio-Rad).

## Gene expression and splice isoform analysis
Total RNAs from primary hepatocytes or mouse livers were isolated using either RNeasy kit (Qiagen) or TRIzol reagent (Life Technologies). Following DNase I treatment, 5 μg of RNA was reverse-transcribed to cDNA using random hexamers and a Maxima reverse transcriptase kit (Thermo Scientific). The cDNA was diluted to a final concentration of 25 ng/μL and used for quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) or splicing-sensitive RT-PCR assays. Downstream analyses for PSI and log2 fold change calculations were performed as described previously ( ). For quantifying expression of U6 snRNA and miR-122, TaqMan assays 001973 and 002245 (Life Technologies) were used, respectively.

## Enhanced cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (eCLIP)
Isolated hepatocytes from FLAG-ESRP2Tg/wt mice were suspended in 1× PBS and cross-linked with one pulse of 400 mJ/cm2 of 254 nm UV radiation to stabilize RBP–RNA interactions. Subsequent immunoprecipitation (IP) of FLAG ESRP2–RNA complexes, RNA isolation, library preparation, and sequencing were performed as described previously ( ). Briefly, cross-linked cells were lysed in buffer and sonicated, followed by treatment with RNase I (Thermo Fisher) to fragment RNA. FLAG M2 antibody (Sigma Aldrich F1804) was precoupled to antimouse IgG Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher 11201D), added to the lysates, and incubated for 3 h at 4°C. Prior to IP washes, 2% of the sample were removed to serve as the paired input sample. For IP samples, high-salt and low-salt washes were performed, after which RNA was dephosphorylated with FastAP (Thermo Fisher) and T4 PNK (NEB) at low pH, and a 3′ RNA adaptor was ligated with T4 RNA ligase (NEB). Fifteen percent of IP and input samples were run on an analytical 4%–12% PAGE gel, transferred to PVDF membrane, blocked in 5% dry milk in TBST, incubated with ESRP2 antibody (Rockland 210-301-C32), washed, incubated with HRP-conjugated antimouse secondary (Bio-Rad 1706516), and visualized with chemiluminescence imaging to validate successful IP. The remaining IP and input samples were run on a 4%–12% PAGE gel and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, after which the region between 78 and 155 kDa was excised from the membrane, treated with proteinase K (NEB) to release RNA, and concentrated by column purification (Zymo). Input samples were then dephosphorylated with FastAP (Thermo Fisher) and T4 PNK (NEB) at low pH, and a 3′ RNA adaptor was ligated with T4 RNA ligase (NEB) to synchronize with IP samples. Next, reverse transcription was performed with AffinityScript (Agilent), followed by ExoSAP-IT (Affymetrix) treatment to remove unincorporated primer. RNA was then degraded by alkaline hydrolysis, and a 3′ DNA adaptor was ligated with T4 RNA ligase (NEB). qRT-PCR was used to determine the required amplification cycles, followed by PCR with Q5 (NEB) and gel electrophoresis to size-select the final library. Libraries were sequenced on the NovaSeq6000 platform (Illumina). eCLIP was performed on IP from two independent samples, along with paired size-matched input before the IP washes.

## Primary hepatocyte cultures
Primary hepatocyte culture experiments were performed as described previously ( ). Briefly, hepatocytes from wild-type P14–P15 C57BL/6 mice were seeded at a density of 40,000–50,000 per well in 24 -well Primaria cell culture plates (Corning) in growth media as follows: DMEM-F12 with 15 mM HEPES (Corning), 5% FBS (Atlanta Biologicals), antibiotic–antimycotic solution (Corning), and ITS supplement containing 5 μg/mL insulin, 5 μg/mL transferrin, and 5 ng/mL sodium selenite (Roche). After 16 h, growth media was replaced with fresh media lacking antibiotic–antimycotic solution, and cells were transfected with 25 nM miRIDIAN miR-122 mimic (Fisher C-300591-05-0005), miRIDIAN negative control (Fisher CN-001000-01-05; Life Technologies), or 10 nM mirVana miR-122 inhibitor (assay ID MH11012; Thermo Fisher 4464084) using Lipofectamine 2000. Six hours after transfection, media was replaced with fresh growth media containing 0.5% FBS. Morphological changes were documented in cultures fixed with 4% PFA. The numbers of mononucleate and binucleate hepatocytes were quantified on day 4.

## Ploidy analysis
For detection of ploidy populations, freshly isolated primary hepatocytes were washed twice in PBS, adjusted to a density of 1 million to 2 million cells/mL, and incubated on ice with 2 μL/mL fixable viability dye (FVD) eFluor 780 (eBioscience). Following two washes with PBS, hepatocytes were fixed with 2% PFA, washed an additional two times with PBS, and incubated with permeabilization buffer (0.1% saponin, 0.5% BSA in PBS) + 15 μg/mL Hoechst 33342 (Life Technologies). Cells were washed twice and stored in PBS until flow cytometry analysis. We also detected Ki-67 in hepatic ploidy populations. Hepatocytes were prepared using the same methods as above, except that following FVD 780 incubation they were fixed with Foxp3 fixation buffer (eBioscience) at room temperature, washed twice with permeabilization buffer (eBioscience), and incubated in permeabilization buffer with mouse anti-Ki-67 eFluor 660 antibody (Invitrogen) + 15 μg/mL Hoechst 33342. Cells were washed twice with PBS and stored in permeabilization buffer until flow cytometry analysis. Cells were analyzed with an LSR II flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) running BD FACSDiva software v9.0. FACS plots were generated using FlowJo 10.8.2 (FlowJo LLC).

## Statistical analysis
All quantitative experiments (qRT-PCR, Western blots, and immunofluorescence) have at least three independent biological repeats. The results were expressed with mean and standard deviation unless mentioned otherwise. Differences between groups were examined for statistical significance using unpaired t-test with Welch's correction (for two groups) or one/two-way ANOVA for more than two groups using GraphPad Prism 6 software. All P-values are listed on respective comparisons in plots; P-value < 0.05 was deemed significant.

## Data availability
All relevant data are available here and in the . Raw RNA-seq and eCLIP-seq data files are available for download from NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo) under accession numbers GSE217391 and GSE151309.

## Supplemental Material
Supplement 1

## Acknowledgments
We thank the members of the Kalsotra laboratory for valuable discussions and comments on the manuscript. This work was supported through National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants R01AA010154, R01HL126845, and R21HD104039 to A.K., and R01DK103645 to A.W.D.; a Chan Zuckerberg Biohub Chicago Award, and Muscular Dystrophy Association research grant MDA1072487 to A.K.; the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (A.W.D); the NIH Tissue Microenvironment Training Program (T32-EB019944) and University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) Scott Dissertation Completion Fellowship to S.B.; the NIH Chemistry–Biology Interface Training Program (T32-GM070421) to N.B; the Herbert E. Carter Fellowship in Biochemistry to U.V.C.; the Danica Dabich Fellowship in Biochemistry to J.M.D.; and NIH Predoctoral National Research Service Award Fellowship F30DK108567 to W.A. The Transgenic Mouse Core, High-Throughput Sequencing/Genotyping Core, and Histology/Microscopy Core Facilities at UIUC and the Pittsburgh Liver Research Center Advanced Cell Tissue and Imaging Core (P30DK120531) supported this project.
Author contributions: S.B. and A.K. conceived the project and designed the experiments. S.B., J.C., N.B., U.V.C., D.D., J.M.D., S.C., W.A., F.A., and A.W.D. performed experiments. A.W.D. and R.P.C. provided reagents. S.B. and N.B. performed the bioinformatics analysis. S.B. and A.K. analyzed the data, interpreted the results, and wrote the manuscript. All authors discussed the results and edited the manuscript.

## Footnotes
Supplemental material is available for this article.
Article published online ahead of print. Article and publication date are online at http://www.genesdev.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gad.352129.124.

## Competing interest statement
The authors declare no competing interests.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Supplement 1

## Data Availability Statement
All relevant data are available here and in the . Raw RNA-seq and eCLIP-seq data files are available for download from NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo) under accession numbers GSE217391 and GSE151309.