822acssdMolecular PharmaceuticsMol PharmPMC1295834712958347129583474170161910.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.5c01220TRIPODD
Enables Single-Cell Quantification of Therapeutic
Efficacy
McMahonNathan P SolankiAllison MontañoAntonio R OzdemirE Sila SamkoeKimberley S WangLei G GibbsSummer L 

†Biomedical
Engineering Department, 
‡Knight Cancer Institute, 
§Cancer Early Detection Advanced Research
Center, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon
97201, United States

∥Thayer School of Engineering at Dartmouth College, 
⊥Department of Surgery,
Geisel School
of Medicine at Dartmouth College, Dartmouth
College, Hanover, New Hampshire
03755, United States

#
Biomedical
Engineering, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois
60616, United States
*
Email: gibbss@ohsu.edu. Phone: 503-494-8940.
172202623315721572–1585532026© 2026 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyThis article is licensed under CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0

## Abstract
Targeted, small-molecule therapeutics have improved patient
survival
across cancer types, with >20 tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs)
receiving
FDA approval as cancer therapies. While the initial TKI response is
often promising, it is typically transient due to tumor evolution
and subsequent therapeutic resistance driven by primary or acquired
resistance mechanisms. While resistance mechanisms vary, there are
currently no spatially resolved methodologies that provide a quantitative,
mechanistic understanding of drug delivery and therapeutic response
across therapeutic modalities (e.g., chemotherapy, radiotherapy, TKIs,
immunotherapy) to enable personalized cancer therapy. Herein, we utilize
our previously reported fluorescence imaging platform, Therapeutic Response Imaging through Proteomic and Optical Drug Distribution (TRIPODD), which is a quantitative
protocol capable of interpreting the relationship between drug delivery
and therapeutic response within the spatial context of a tumor to
evaluate single-cell response and resistance to epidermal growth factor
receptor TKI therapy. In this study, we applied TRIPODD to quantify
the therapeutic response of EGFR-TKI-sensitive nonsmall cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) xenografts to erlotinib, as a proof of concept for
the platform. Through these studies, we were able to identify unique
signatures of therapeutic response linked to the accumulation and
engagement of erlotinib on a single-cell basis, demonstrating the
utility of our TRIPODD platform technology in evaluating the treatment
response and resistance at the single-cell level in heterogeneous
tumors.
Keywords: intracellular paired agent imaging, fluorescence imaging, drug target availability, cyclic immunofluorescence, cancer heterogeneity

 
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Aug 19; Accepted 2025 Dec 5; Revised 2025 Dec 5; Collection date 2026 Mar 2.

## Introduction
The discovery and advancement of targeted,
small-molecule therapeutics
have improved patient survival across cancer types. Enthusiasm for
molecularly targeted therapy is demonstrated by the Food and Drug
Administration’s (FDA) approval of >20 tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs), a class of small-molecule therapeutics, for the treatment
of numerous cancers. However, while initial
response in patients treated with TKIs is often promising, it is also
typically transient due to tumor evolution and subsequent therapeutic
resistance driven by primary or acquired resistance mechanisms. One potential acquired resistance mechanism is
the temporal and spatial variation in blood flow, impacting drug delivery
both directly into a tumor and in its surrounding tumor microenvironment
(TME). Abnormal vasculature is a recognized phenotype of solid tumors,
resulting in impaired blood supply and increased tumor interstitial
pressure.
,
 These phenomena can result in hypoxic conditions
that promote genetic instability and may prevent antitumor immune
activity while also limiting therapeutic delivery and therefore efficacy. TME modulation strategies are under investigation
to increase tumor drug penetration and improve drug delivery to its
target. For example, the inhibition of vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF-A) has demonstrated the ability to renormalize vasculature
in various solid tumor types.
,
 However, there are currently
no spatially resolved methodologies that provide a quantitative, mechanistic
understanding of drug delivery and therapeutic response across treatment
modalities (e.g., chemotherapy, radiotherapy, TKIs, and immunotherapy)
to enable personalized cancer therapy.
We have previously reported
a fluorescence imaging platform, Therapeutic Response Imaging through Proteomic and Optical Drug Distribution (TRIPODD),
,
 which
is a quantitative protocol capable of interpreting the relationship
between drug delivery and therapeutic response within the spatial
context of a tumor. TRIPODD concomitantly provides single-cell quantification
of drug presence and spatial proteomic therapeutic response through
the combination of two complementary technologies: intracellular paired
agent imaging (iPAI) and oligonucleotide-conjugated antibody (Ab-oligo)
cyclic immunofluorescence (cyCIF).
−

 To account for off-target drug
accumulation, iPAI utilizes a combination of spectrally distinct,
fluorescently labeled targeted and control (untargeted) TKI drug derivative
imaging agents to measure drug target availability (DTA). To account for nonspecific drug accumulation
that often obfuscates quantitative molecular cancer imaging due to
variable enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effects, the ratio of the targeted to the untargeted
agent enables assessment of drug uptake and retention (i.e., DTA).
When the targeted agent is administered at a “trace”
level (i.e., <5% of target sites are occupied by the targeted agent),
the resulting value can be shown to be proportional to the concentration
of targets available for binding.
,
 We have previously
established that as the concentration of the administered parent drug
increases, DTA will decrease, as potential drug-binding sites are
occupied by the parent drug administered therapeutically.
,
 Importantly, the iPAI probes have a similar binding affinity to
their parent drug and are intended only for DTA quantification after
completion of treatment with the parent drug. The iPAI technique is,
therefore, capable of assessing spatially resolved DTA heterogeneity
across tumor tissues.
Therapeutic response can be linked to
DTA using cyCIF performed
on the same tissue sample from which iPAI was quantified. The cyCIF-defined
spatial proteome can characterize treatment response mechanisms at
the single-cell level, such as perturbed cell signaling, pro- or antiapoptotic
signatures, and patterns
of immune cell recruitment, phenotype, and localization within the
TME.
−

 Previously, we have demonstrated the feasibility of collecting both
iPAI and cyCIF imaging data on the same tissue section using our DNA
barcoded cyCIF methodology (i.e., Ab-oligo cyCIF), as proof-of-concept
for the TRIPODD platform. We have also
shown the flexibility of the Ab-oligo cyCIF methodology for integration
with a variety of immunofluorescence techniques and have developed novel fluorophore technology (i.e.,
OregonFluor probes) optimized for iPAI in live cells and tissues. Herein, we report on the first use of the TRIPODD
platform to evaluate the therapeutic response in tumors dosed longitudinally
with clinically approved therapeutics. In the current study, we applied
the TRIPODD platform to quantify therapeutic response of epidermal
growth factor (EGFR)-TKI-sensitive nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
xenografts to erlotinib, a first-generation EGFR TKI, treatment using
a limited cyCIF-staining panel to quantify EGFR, phosphorylated EGFR,
and cell state (i.e., proliferation and apoptosis). Using the TRIPODD
platform, we were able to identify unique signatures of therapeutic
response linked to accumulation and engagement of erlotinib on a single-cell
basis, demonstrating the utility of our platform technology to evaluate
treatment response and resistance at the single-cell level in heterogeneous
tumors.

## Materials and Methods

## iPAI Probe Synthesis
The targeted and untargeted (control)
intracellular paired agent imaging (iPAI) agents were derivatives
of erlotinib (Erl), a first-generation, reversible TKI targeting EGFR.
Briefly, site selection for the synthesis of erlotinib derivates
to generate targeted and untargeted drug imaging agents was guided
by the structure of the parent drug bound to the EGFR crystal structure.
,
 Our novel OregonFluors (OF), OF550 and OF650, were selected for
agent labeling due to their spectral separation, overall charge, charge
distribution, molecular weight, structural similarity, and stability
in varied biological environments. OF550
has maximum excitation and emission peaks at 552 and 575 nm, respectively.
OF650 has maximum excitation and emission peaks at 649 and 668 nm,
respectively. This novel class of rhodamine derivatives enables maintained
biodistribution similarity between the targeted and untargeted agents,
with stable fluorescence emission in varied biological environments. OF550 and OF650 were used as labels to synthesize
cell membrane-permeant targeted (T) and untargeted (UnT) iPAI agents,
resulting in four unique probes: (1) OF550Erl(T), (2) OF650Erl(T), (3) OF550Erl(UnT), and (4) OF650Erl(UnT).

## Cell Lines
The human NSCLC cancer cell line HCC827,
containing the exon 19 deletion EGFR mutation, used in this study
was purchased from ATCC (Manassas, VA). The HCC827 cell line was selected
due to its therapeutic sensitivity to EGFR TKIs.
,
 The HCC827 cells were maintained at passage numbers <25 throughout
experimentation and were regularly tested for mycoplasma contamination.
The HCC827 cell line was expanded in Roswell Park Memorial Institute
(RPMI) 1640 medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) containing
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin/glutamine
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) and grown in a 37 °C, 5% CO2 incubator.

## In Silico Molecular Dynamics Studies of Erlotinib and iPAI Agents
In silico molecular dynamics (MD) studies were conducted to assess
the binding of erlotinib and iPAI erlotinib agents to the EGFR protein.
The crystal structure of EGFR in complex with erlotinib has been previously
reported. MolView (molview.org), an open-source
tool, was used to obtain the structures for the four iPAI agents (OF550Erl(T), OF650Erl(T), OF550Erl(UnT), and
OF650Erl(UnT)). AutoDock Vina (version 1.1.2, Linux) was
used to model the docking of erlotinib and iPAI erlotinib agents to
EGFR. Hydrogen atoms were added to all
receptors, and grid box dimensions were defined specific to the size
of the receptor-binding pockets or interfaces. All-atom AMBER-type
force-field parameters were generated for the four iPAI agents and
the parent erlotinib. AMBER tools were used to generate gromacs-type
force fields for the protein–drug complexes and calculate partial charges at HF/6-31G (AM1-BCC). The General AMBER Force Field (GAFF) was used to calculate the bonded and van der
Waals interactions in the appropriate molecular protonation state.
A total of six initial configurationsEGFR alone, EGFR + erlotinib,
EGFR + OF650Erl(T), EGFR + OF650Erl(UnT), EGFR
+ OF550Erl(UnT), and EGFR + OF650Erl(UnT)were
simulated for 100 ns using the GROningen MAchine for Computer Simulations
(GROMACS-2018) on a cloud computing cluster at Oregon Health and Science
University (OHSU, Portland, OR). MD simulations were carried out in
an aqueous environment. The TIP3P water model was used to solvate
the system in an aqueous environment, with counterions (Na+ or Cl–) added to ensure charge neutrality. A 3D
periodic box was used to center the complex within at least 1 nm of
the edge, accounting for >2 nm of solvent buffer. The equilibration
and production runs were completed in an isothermal–isobaric
(NPT) ensemble, where the temperature was maintained at 300 K and
the pressure was maintained at 1 bar using a V-rescale thermostat and a Parrinello–Rahman barostat, respectively.
The MD simulations employed a leapfrog algorithm with a 2 fs time
step to integrate the equations of motion. The long-ranged electrostatic
interactions were calculated using the particle mesh Ewald (PME) algorithm with a real-space cutoff of 1.2 nm.
Lennard–Jones (LJ) interactions were also truncated at 1.2
nm. Root-mean-square deviations (RMSDs) of the complex structures
were calculated as a function of time to monitor when the systems
reached equilibration. To study the fluctuations in EGFR residues
upon interaction with different probes, the RMSF was calculated using
GROMACS functions as follows.
The average binding free energy
was derived from the Gibbs free energy, G

1G=Ebnd+Eel+EvdW+Gpol+Gapol−TS2G=GMM+Gpol+Gapol−TSwhere G
MM, G
pol, and G
apol represent
the molecular mechanics, polar, and apolar contributions, respectively.
E

bnd
 represents the bond energy, E
el represents
the electrostatic energy, and E
vdW represents
the van der Waals energy. The entropic contribution (TS) was not included
in our calculations. The GROMACS g_mmpbsa package
was used to obtain the G
MM, G
pol, and G
apol contributions.
,
 This package allowed the user to define the protein and ligand during
the calculation and measure the average binding free energy between
the ligand and protein, ΔG, as follows
3ΔG=Gcomplex−(Gprotein+Gligand)where G
complex represents the free energy of the ligand–protein complex, G
protein represents the free energy of the protein
in its unbound state, and G
ligand represents
the free energy of the ligand in its unbound state.

## In Vitro iPAI Studies
Cells were plated in phenol-red-free
media at a density of 1 × 105 cells/ml (100 μL/well)
in 96-well glass-bottomed cell culture plates. After equilibrating
cells for 24 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2, cells were stained
with Cetuximab (Eli Lilly and Co., Indianapolis, IN) that was directly
conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 (AF488, Thermo Fisher Scientific, final
concentration = 5 μg/mL with a dye-to-protein ratio of 3.3)
for 45 min at 37 °C and at 5% CO2, followed by brief
rinsing in prewarmed phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). iPAI-targeted
agents (OF650Erl(T) and OF550Erl(T)) and iPAI
control agents (OF550Erl(UnT) and OF650Erl(UnT)) were applied to distinct cells at the following equal molar concentrations:
paired targeted agents at 250 nM; and paired control agents at 2 μM.
iPAI agents were allowed to incubate for 1 h at 37 °C and 5%
CO2. The media in all wells were briefly washed five times
with 100 μL per wash using phenol-red-free media and then replaced
with fresh media prior to imaging on a Zeiss AxioObserver (Carl Zeiss
AG, Oberkochen, Germany) modified with a Yokogawa CSU-X1 spinning
disk confocal unit outfitted with a 20x-0.8 PlanApo objective. The
following exposure times and excitation (x) and emission (m) filter
combinations were utilized for image collection: AF488 at 2000 ms,
470/40x, 525/50m; OF550 at 2000 ms, 550/25x, 605/70m; and OF650 at
2000 ms, 640/30x, 690/50m.

## MTS Assay Validation
To determine the in vitro half-maximal
inhibitory concentration (IC50), cells were trypsinized,
counted, and plated in 96-well glass-bottomed cell culture plates
(Cellvis, Mountain View, CA) at a density of 5 × 104 cells/ml (100 μL/well). Cells were allowed to adhere and equilibrate
overnight at 37 °C and 5% CO2. The culture medium
was then replaced with increasing concentrations of the parent drug,
OF650Erl(T), or OF550Erl(UnT) (0–10 μM)
and allowed to incubate at 37 °C and 5% CO2. After
72 h, 20 μL of the MTS CellTiter 96 AQueous One Solution
Cell Proliferation Assay Reagent (Promega, Madison, WI) was added
to each well and gently mixed. The cells were incubated for an additional
3 h at 37 °C with 5% CO2. The plates were read for
absorbance at 490 nm (SpectraMax M5, Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale,
CA). The wells containing only media were used as a positive (untreated)
control for cell viability signal, and cells permeabilized with 0.1%
Triton-X served as a negative control. GraphPad Prism (La Jolla, CA)
was used to analyze the resulting dose–response curves.

## Kinase Binding Assay
In vitro binding affinity was
evaluated for the fluorescently labeled EGFR iPAI agents and parent
erlotinib using the Z’-LYTE kinase assay via the Thermo Fisher
Scientific SelectScreen Kinase Profiling Service. Briefly, the individual
compounds were screened over a titration curve starting at 10 μM
against purified EGFR and the associated Tyr04 fluorescent ligand.
The resulting inhibition behavior was analyzed by using GraphPad Prism.

## In-Cell Western Assay
HCC827 cells were seeded at 4
× 104 cells/well into a black-walled 96-well plate
(Greiner) using culture media and incubated overnight at 37 °C
and 5% CO2. The cells were then incubated with either parent
erlotinib (0–5 μM), OF650Erl(T) (0–50
μM), or OF550Erl(UnT) (0–50 μM) for
24 h. Control cells were treated with human epidermal growth factor
(GE Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) at 100 ng/mL for 30 min at 37 °C
and 5% CO2 prior to the initiation of the in-cell western
assay. After incubation and between each of the following steps, the
wells were washed three times with Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered
saline (DPBS) containing Mg2+ and Ca2+. Cells
were fixed in a 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) solution for 15 min, permeabilized
with 0.1% Triton-X-100 in PBS containing Mg2+ and Ca2+ for 45 min, and blocked with intercept blocking buffer for
1 h at room temperature. The cells were incubated with primary anti-EGFR
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) and anti-pEGFR (Cell Signaling Technology,
Danvers, MA) antibodies overnight at 4 °C. Wells were subsequently
incubated with IRDye 800CW-labeled goat antimouse and VRDye 490-labeled
goat antirabbit IgG secondary antibodies at room temperature for 2
h. After washing, 100 μL of DPBS containing Mg2+ and
Ca2+ was added to each well for imaging. The plate was
scanned on Odyssey M (LI-COR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE) using the plate
scanning function in the 488 and 800 nm channels, and the mean fluorescence
of each well was determined using Empiria Studio (LI-COR Biosciences).

## Animal Care and Use
All animal experiments were approved
by the OHSU Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) and
conducted under approved protocol TR04_IP00000202. Mice were housed
in an OHSU vivarium, an IACUC and AAALAC-approved facility, and were
inspected daily and supplied with standard food and water to ensure
that they were not in pain or distress throughout the duration of
the experiments. At least 1 week prior to tumor resection, mice were
placed on a chlorophyll-free diet (Animal Specialties, Inc., Hubbard,
OR). All rodent surgical procedures were carried out under full anesthesia,
utilizing a 90/10 mixture of ketamine/xylazine. Ketamine (Hospira
Inc., Lake Forest, IL) was administered at a dose of 100 mg/kg, and
xylazine (AnaSed, Shenandoah, IA) was administered at a dose of 10
mg/kg by intraperitoneal (IP) injection. The toe pinch method confirmed
the depth of anesthesia and ensured a lack of reactivity prior to
the commencement of any surgical procedures. Mice euthanasia was initiated
by standard carbon dioxide inhalation under full anesthesia at the
end of each experiment. Euthanasia of all mice was confirmed by physical
examination to ensure that heartbeat and respiration had ceased. This
method of euthanasia is humane, rapid, and consistent with the recommendations
of the Panel on Euthanasia of the American Veterinary Medical Association.

## Mouse Xenograft Models
Athymic nude mice (Homozygous
490, Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA) were implanted with
HCC827 cells to generate a cell line-derived xenograft (CDX) model
for in vivo erlotinib dosing studies. Cultured cells were first trypsinized
and resuspended in RPMI phenol-red-free media without serum to a concentration
of 3 × 107 cells/ml. Cells were implanted into the
rear flanks of anesthetized mice at a final concentration of 1.5 ×
106 cells/flank in 50% (v/v) Matrigel (Corning Inc., Corning,
NY), resulting in two tumors per mouse. A total of two athymic nude
mice were implanted for two cohorts included in an in vivo competitive
binding study: iPAI agent (OF650Erl(T) and OF550Erl(UnT)) injected mice or iPAI agent (OF650Erl(T) and OF550Erl(UnT)) plus parent erlotinib injected mice. A total of n = 12 athymic nude mice were implanted for two dosing cohorts:
one for erlotinib treatment and one for control mice without erlotinib
treatment. Mice were monitored daily after implantation for tumor
growth and body weight. Tumor growth was recorded every 3 days until
tumors reached ∼300 mm3.

## In Vivo Competitive Binding
HCC827 xenograft-bearing
mice were systemically administered parent erlotinib via tail vein
injection 24 h prior to systemic administration of equivalent doses
of parent erlotinib and OF650Erl(T) and OF550Erl(UnT) (all at 2.5 mg/kg) 4 h prior to mouse euthanasia and tumor resection.
The resected tumor tissues were immediately frozen in optimal cutting
temperature compound (OCT; Fisher Scientific, Hampton, NH) in blocks
prior to sectioning at a thickness of 10 μm. Tissue sections
were subsequently imaged on a Zeiss AxioScan.Z1 slide scanner (detailed
below) using the Cy2 channel (for autofluorescence focal map generation),
Cy3 channel (for OF550Erl(UnT)), and Cy5 channel (for OF650Erl(T)). After image acquisition, a custom MATLAB script was
used to calculate DTA images on a per-pixel basis for each tissue
image.
,
 DTA was calculated as
4drugtargetavailability(DTA)=αITIUTwhere I

T
 represents the signal from the targeted agent OF650Erl(T), I

UT
 represents the
signal from the untargeted agent OF550Erl(UnT), and α represents a scaling factor to account for the signal
intensity difference between the target and untargeted agents caused
by collection in their respective fluorescence imaging channels. The
scaling factor was determined by imaging the stock-injected solutions
of targeted and untargeted agents at titrated concentrations on the
Zeiss AxioScan.Z1 to generate linear calibration trend lines for each
agent, where the ratio of the slope of the untargeted agent trend
line to the slope of the targeted agent trend line was defined as
the scaling factor. DTA for each tissue section was quantified by
calculating the tissue mean DTA through manual segmentation of the
tissue using ImageJ version 1.51 (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD) and extracting the mean DTA from the tissue sections. The mean
fluorescence signal or DTA value from each section was divided by
the highest mean fluorescence or DTA value, respectively, to calculate
the relative fluorescence intensity or DTA values.

## In Vivo Erlotinib Treatment Studies
Parent erlotinib
(LC Laboratories, Woburn, MA) was resuspended in vehicle (0.3% w/v
sodium carboxymethylcellulose +0.1% v/v Tween 20) and administered
at 100 mg/kg qd via oral gavage to n = 6 mice until tumors regressed to roughly half their starting volume
or toxicity was observed.
−

 Control mice (vehicle-only [n =
3] or no administration [n = 3]) were treated accordingly
until the tumors doubled in volume (∼600 mm3). Tumor
volume was defined as [width2 x length]/2. Mouse weights
were recorded daily, and any visible signs of toxicity were noted.
Twenty-four hours following the last erlotinib administration, iPAI
agents (2.5 mg/kg of both OF650Erl(T) and OF550Erl(UnT)) were coadministered systemically via the tail vein. To serve as
an additional control, one mouse per treatment cohort was not administered
the iPAI agent. Tumors were resected 4 h following iPAI agent administration,
and the tissue was fresh-frozen immediately into the OCT compound.
All imaging was performed ex vivo after tumor resection
and tissue sectioning onto glass slides as described below.

## TRIPODD: iPAI + Ab Panel Staining and Imaging
Frozen
tissue blocks were sectioned at a thickness of 10 μm (Leica
Biosystems cryostat, Wetzlar, Germany) onto SuperFrost Plus glass
slides (ThermoFisher Scientific). To acquire full tissue iPAI fluorescence
images, unmounted slides were imaged on the Zeiss AxioScan.Z1 slide
scanner microscope equipped with a Colibri 7 light source (Carl Zeiss
AG) and Orca Flash4 v.2 (Hamamatsu Photonics, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka,
Japan). Images were collected with a 20x-0.8 M27 PlanApo objective
using the following exposure times and excitation (x) and emission
(m) filter combinations for image collection: OF550 at 300 ms, 550/25x,
605/70m; and OF650 at 500 ms, 640/30x, 690/50m. Following iPAI imaging,
tissue sections were fixed in 4% PFA for 10 min at room temperature
(RT) and stained with an antibody (Ab) viability and EGFR status panel
using standard immunofluorescence protocols. Briefly, slides were
washed thrice in PBS for 5 min, followed by trypsinization with 0.3%
Triton-X-100/PBS for 10 min at RT. Antibodies were introduced in two
stages. First, upon an additional PBS wash step (3 × 5 min),
the tissue was incubated with phospho-EGFR mAb (Tyr1068, D7A5, Cell
Signaling Technology) for 1 h at RT. This was followed by one wash
with PBS containing Tween 20 detergent PBS-T (1 × 5 min) and
two washes with PBS (2 × 5 min). The tissue was then stained
with donkey antirabbit secondary + Alexa Fluor 546 (AF546, Thermo
Fisher Scientific) for 45 min at RT. Subsequent PBS-T (1 × 5
min) and PBS (2 × 5 min) washes preceded additional staining
with a three Ab panel consisting of the following directly conjugated
mAbs for 1 h at RT: cleaved caspase 3 (CC3, Asp175) + Alexa Fluor
488 (AF488, Cell Signaling Technology), Ki67 (D3B5) + Alexa Fluor
647 (AF647, Cell Signaling Technology), and Cetuximab + Cy7 (Eli Lilly
& Company, Indianapolis, IN; Lumiprobe, Hunt Valley, MD). Tissues
were washed in PBS and postfixed with 4% PFA for 10 min at RT, prior
to DAPI staining for nuclear visualization (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
MI) and mounting with Fluoromount-G (SouthernBiotech, Birmingham,
AL). Full tissue Ab panel fluorescence images were acquired on the
AxioScan.Z1 using the following imaging conditions: UV (DAPI) at 5
ms, 392.5/12.5x, 445/35m; AF488 (CC3) at 600 ms, 470/40x, 525/50m;
AF555 (pEGFR) at 1000 ms, 550/25x, 605/70m; AF647 (Ki67) at 200 ms,
640/30x, 690/50m; and Cy7 (EGFR) at 1000 ms, 710/75x, 810/90m. Tumor
area and viability were further assessed with standard histology by
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. For all whole-slide imaging,
image tiles were captured with 10% overlap and stitched together using
Zeiss Zen software to produce a single tissue map.

## TRIPODD Image Analysis
After iPAI and immunofluorescence
image data were collected from each tissue section, the image data
sets were spatially registered. The targeted and untargeted iPAI agent
images were utilized to generate DTA tissue maps for each section,
as described in .
Targeted, untargeted, and DTA images were then manually registered
to their corresponding EGFR immunofluorescence images, which served
as fiducial markers for image registration of the iPAI and immunofluorescence
data sets. Registration of the iPAI and immunofluorescence image data
was performed with the built-in ImageJ registration plugin, “Align
image by line ROI.” Cell segmentation and feature extraction
of the fully registered data sets were performed with QiTissue software
(QiBiotech Inc., Raleigh, NC). The features that were extracted included
nuclear size and mean intensity for each marker. Nuclear size was
used for outlier filtering, where cells smaller than the fifth and
larger than the 95th quantile of nuclear size were excluded from further
analysis.
To equivalently scale the single-cell feature data
from the segmented cells, the values for each protein marker, targeted
iPAI agent (OF650Erl(T)) image, untargeted iPAI agent (OF550Erl(UnT)) image, and DTA image were z-scored using the median
and standard deviation across all cells from untreated tissues for
each marker. Unsupervised clustering utilizing Euclidean distance
was applied to assess the potential for administration of vehicle-only
treatment or iPAI injection to influence protein expression compared
to the no-treatment administration and no iPAI probe injection groups,
respectively. Unsupervised clustering was applied to all cells from
all samples, with no knowledge of the cohort applied to the clustering
algorithm. K-means clustering (k = 5) was applied
to all cells from all samples that received iPAI injection to identify
signatures of therapeutic response or no response. The k = 5 selection was made empirically after evaluating clustering outcomes
across a range of values (k = 2–7). Lower
values (e.g., k = 2–3) resulted in overly
coarse separation that primarily reflected treatment versus control
status without capturing within-group heterogeneity, whereas higher
values (k > 5) produced oversegmentation and unstable,
biologically redundant clusters. Cluster stability was assessed qualitatively
by comparing cluster composition across independent replicates.

## Results

## In Silico Molecular Dynamics of Erlotinib and iPAI Probe Binding
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were performed to evaluate
the targeted agent (T) and untargeted agent (UnT) binding behavior
of the erlotinib iPAI agents ( A) into the EGFR ATP-binding pocket compared with the
binding of the erlotinib parent drug. The four agent configurations
that were simulated included (1) OF650Erl(T), (2) OF650Erl(UnT), (3) OF550Erl(T), and (4) OF550Erl(UnT). The iPAI-targeted agents (OF650Erl(T) and OF550Erl(T)) demonstrated binding modes similar to the parent erlotinib
drug-binding mode ( B). Binding free energies (ΔG) were
calculated for EGFR bound to the parent erlotinib drug, OF650Erl(T), and OF550Erl(T) ( C). Normalized ΔG for
EGFR bound to parent erlotinib was −81.84 kJ/mol and −36.44
kJ/mol for EGFR bound to OF650Erl(T) and −47.71
kJ/mol for EGFR bound to OF550Erl(T). The molecular dynamics
of binding between the iPAI-untargeted agents (OF650Erl(UnT) and OF550Erl(UnT)) and EGFR was also assessed. However,
after minimization, OF650Erl(UnT) completely dissolved
from EGFR, while OF550Erl(UnT) stayed intact but was pulled
out from the EGFR-binding pocket, showing their untargeted behavior
(Figure S1A,B). Since the control agents
did not bind to EGFR, the binding free energies could not be reliably
calculated.
 

## In Vitro iPAI Agent Binding and Targeted Activity Characterization
Targeted and untargeted behavior of erlotinib iPAI agents was evaluated
in vitro by costaining cells with the iPAI agents and EGFR immunofluorescence
to compare iPAI agent cellular localization to that of the EGFR protein.
The untargeted iPAI agents (OF550Erl(UnT) and OF650Erl(UnT)) demonstrated diffuse intracellular localization within
the cytoplasm ( D). Overlaid images of the untargeted iPAI agents and EGFR immunofluorescence
showed that both untargeted iPAI agents had similar cytoplasmic localization,
while EGFR localized to the cell membrane showed minimal colocalization
of the EGFR protein with either of the untargeted iPAI agents. The
targeted iPAI agents (OF550Erl(T) and OF650Erl(T)) were observed to primarily stain cell membranes, with some intracellular,
cytoplasmic localization observed. Overlays of the targeted iPAI agents
and EGFR immunofluorescence images demonstrated colocalization of
membrane-specific signals, while the intracellular signal from the
targeted iPAI agents showed minimal colocalization with EGFR antibody
staining ( D).
Notably, both colors (i.e., OF550 and OF650) of the targeted and untargeted
iPAI agents exhibited highly colocalized in vitro staining patterns,
permitting selection of a single pair for additional characterization,
where the OF650Erl(T) and OF550Erl(UnT) iPAI
pair were used in subsequent studies.
Targeted activity was
further characterized by quantifying therapeutic efficacy and binding
affinity, as quantified using percent inhibition and pEGFR/EGFR ratios
of the selected iPAI-targeted and untargeted pair, OF650Erl(T) and OF550Erl(UnT), compared to the unlabeled parent erlotinib.
Therapeutic efficacy was quantified in the erlotinib-sensitive HCC827
cells. The untargeted iPAI agent, OF550Erl(UnT), showed
minimal effect on cell proliferation at doses ranging from 0 to 10
μM. The targeted iPAI agent, OF650Erl(T), demonstrated
dose-dependent proliferation inhibition in HCC827 cells but exhibited
lower therapeutic efficacy than unlabeled, parent erlotinib ( A). Percent inhibition
quantification showed that parent erlotinib exhibited dose-dependent
kinase binding and superior affinity to either the targeted or untargeted
iPAI agents. The targeted iPAI agent exhibited a greater kinase binding
affinity than the untargeted iPAI agent, which showed a minimal kinase
binding affinity ( B). Binding efficiency was also quantified as the ratio of
pEGFR to EGFR expression measured by immunofluorescence for cells
treated with either parent erlotinib, OF650Erl(T), or OF550Erl(UnT). Parent erlotinib showed substantially greater binding
efficiency than either iPAI agent, where low pEGFR/EGFR ratios were
observed with doses >10 μM of the parent erlotinib. Similar
to other validation assays, OF650Erl(T) showed a greater
binding efficiency than OF550Erl(UnT). Cells dosed with
OF650Erl(T) showed pEGFR/EGFR ratios that decreased with
increasing dose. However, for cells treated with OF550Erl(UnT), there was no observable dose-dependent relationship between pEGFR/EGFR
ratios and administered dose. further validating the targeted and
untargeted behavior of each iPAI agent ( C).
 

## In Vivo Competitive Binding of iPAI Agents and Erlotinib Parent
Drug
Competition for the erlotinib EGFR-binding site was
assessed for the targeted iPAI agent and parent erlotinib via in vivo
administration in tumor-bearing mice. HCC827 xenograft-bearing mice
were administered either the erlotinib iPAI agent pair only or the
erlotinib iPAI probe pair plus the parent erlotinib TKI. Targeted
and untargeted iPAI agent intensities were measured on whole-tissue
section images, enabling the quantification of relative fluorescence
intensities and calculation of DTA for each representative image ( D). The relative
targeted iPAI agent intensity was highest in the HCC827 tissue following
erlotinib iPAI agent administration without parent erlotinib. The
HCC827 tissue that received both the erlotinib iPAI agents and erlotinib
parent TKI exhibited a 27% lower relative targeted iPAI agent intensity.
In contrast, the relative untargeted iPAI agent signal was only 10%
lower in the HCC827 tissue that received both the erlotinib iPAI agents
and parent erlotinib compared to the HCC827 tissue that received only
the iPAI agents. DTA tissue maps were calculated for each tissue section
and scaled equivalently by applying the same contrast settings to
both DTA tissue maps. Calculated relative DTA showed a 42% increase
in the tissue that received the erlotinib iPAI agents only vs coadministration
of the agents with parent erlotinib, demonstrating that the targeted
iPAI agent competes for the same EGFR-binding sites as the parent
erlotinib. Comparing the relative targeted iPAI probe intensities
alone (i.e., 73%) to the binding difference by DTA (i.e., 58%) suggests
that there is ∼15% more bound parent erlotinib when measured
by DTA compared to when measured by targeted iPAI probe intensity
alone. This suggests that nonspecific accumulation of the targeted
iPAI probe can skew results and cause underestimation of the targeted
bound drug, in this case, erlotinib ( B).

## Erlotinib Treatment of HCC827 CDX Mice
After HCC827
xenografts reached ∼300 mm3, mice were randomly
selected for placement into one of the following cohorts: (1) 100
mg/kg erlotinib treatment, (2) vehicle-only, or (3) no treatment (n = 4 mice per group). Once tumors doubled in volume (600
mm3) or shrank to 100 mm3, mice were euthanized,
tumors were resected, and the tissue was processed for TRIPODD analysis
( A). The treated
cohort demonstrated sensitivity to erlotinib, as evidenced by a rapid
decrease in tumor volume, while the control mice displayed a notable
increase in tumor volume ( B). Bodyweight also decreased in the erlotinib-treated
cohort compared with the control mice whose body weight remained stable
( C). Similar
trends in tumor volume growth and body weight change were observed
between the two control cohorts (Figure S2).
 All tissues were processed by using the TRIPODD
analysis platform.
Following spatial registration, cell segmentation, and processing
of iPAI and immunofluorescence imaging data, unsupervised clustering
of the cells revealed that there was minimal difference in protein
expression between the vehicle-treated and no-treatment populations
within the control cohorts. Therefore, samples from the vehicle-treated
and no-treatment groups were considered as a single control cohort
in downstream analyses (Figure S3A). Unsupervised
clustering comparing mice injected with iPAI agents and mice not injected
with iPAI agents further revealed that the single iPAI dose had minimal
effect on protein expression (Figure S3B).
K-means clustering of single-cell feature data revealed
five distinguishable
cell populations ( A). Clusters 1 and 3 were largely composed of cells from the
control group and shared similar EGFR, pEGFR, and Ki67 levels as markers
of cell viability. The major observed differences between clusters
1 and 3 were the increased levels of cleaved caspase 3 (CC3), targeted
and untargeted iPAI agent signals, and DTA. Cells from tissues treated
with 100 mg/kg erlotinib were separated into three distinct clusters
(i.e., clusters 2, 4, and 5). Cluster 2, 4, and 5 were all composed
of cells with decreased cell viability proteomic signatures (i.e.,
EGFR, pEGFR, and Ki67) relative to the median value of control tissues.
Clusters 2, 4, and 5 also all exhibited targeted and untargeted iPAI
agent levels greater than the median value of vehicle-treated cells.
Cluster 2 was composed of cells largely with CC3 expression near the
median level in vehicle-treated cells and DTA below the median value
of vehicle-treated cells. Cluster 4 contained cells with a high expression
of CC3, relative to the median levels of vehicle-treated cells, indicative
of cells undergoing apoptosis. Additionally, cells in cluster 4 generally
exhibited DTA values below the median DTA of cells from the control
cohort. Cluster 5 showed a similar distribution of CC3 to cluster
2, but the cells largely exhibited DTA values higher than the median
DTA from control tissue cells.
 Visualization of DTA and EGFR spatial patterns
in a representative
region of interest from a treated tissue demonstrated lower DTA within
the tumor cells (EGFR+) relative to the nontumor tissue areas (EGFR–, B). This spatial
pattern observation aligns with the fact that systemically administered
iPAI agents were delivered to the xenograft tumor cells through the
nontumor, mouse vasculature. In these nontumor areas, DTA would be
higher, as few drug targets would be expressed and minimal drug would
bind. Additionally, while there were many tumor cells present, as
delineated by the EGFR+ signal, there were a few proliferating cells,
consistent with the K-means clustering results. Furthermore, H&E
staining revealed a loss of tumor cell organization and a decrease
in the overall population of viable tumor cells ( C). In contrast, a representative
image from a control tissue showed a greater proportion of Ki67+ tumor
cells (Figure S4A) and a more organized,
viable tumor sample (Figure S4B). A scatter
plot of cell locations within a treated sample, with each cell color-coded
by cluster identity, revealed a mixture of clusters within a single
sample ( D,E).
As shown by the overall K-means cluster results, the three main clusters
present in the treated sample were clusters 2, 4, and 5, which were
all largely composed of cells from treated samples. A similar scatter
plot of cell locations from a representative control sample revealed
a mixture of clusters 1 and 3, which were composed of untreated cells
(Figure S4C). In both representative spatial
plots of the clustering results, distinct regions of tissue were also
identified, where cells from the same cluster were predominantely
located together, suggesting that features of the tumor and its TME
drive proteomic expression, iPAI agent distribution, and DTA levels.
Signal intensity of all markers was also visually assessed in representative
ROIs from the control, no-treatment cohort, and the treated cohort
( ). Height
maps of DTA signals permitted three-dimensional (3D) visualization
of DTA intensity, where the height per pixel represented the quantified
level of DTA at that pixel. Height maps in all images were scaled
equivalently across the control and treated images for qualitative
comparison ( A,B). Additionally, the contrast level of
each immunostained biomarker and DTA was set equivalently across all
images from both cohorts to enable qualitative assessment. DTA height
maps between the treated and control images revealed differences in
the pattern of DTA distribution and in the level of DTA present in
each cohort. In the control tissue, DTA height map topography and
pixel pseudo-color intensity were relatively consistent across the
image ( A).
Additionally, in the control tissue, expression of EGFR ( A, orange box) and
pEGFR ( A, pink
box) were consistent across the images. Cell proliferation, as visualized
by Ki67 expression, was homogeneous across the control tissue ROI,
while cell apoptosis, as visualized by CC3, was not readily observed
in this representative ROI. In contrast to the control tissue, the
DTA map for the treated sample showed substantially more heterogeneity
in the DTA height map topography and pixel intensity ( B). Furthermore, positive EGFR
( B, orange
box) and pEGFR ( B, pink box) signals were present but were more heterogeneous than
in the control sample. Additionally, in the treated sample, Ki67 expression
appeared more limited, while CC3 expression was readily visible. Notably,
these qualitative observations on the ROIs of representative images
were in alignment with the quantified results ( and S4).
 

## Discussion
Accurate quantification of drug localization
within the TME is
paramount to understanding and predicting therapeutic outcomes for
patients. Many molecularly targeted therapeutics bind to intracellular
targets, which are not readily accessible in live cells due to the
plasma membranes. Furthermore, current drug engagement measurements
are largely limited to bulk sampling (e.g., plasma analysis) and indirect
measurements of therapeutic response (e.g., western blotting). Efficiently
modifying standard-of-care therapeutics with fluorescent readouts
provides a unique opportunity to probe high-affinity, small-molecule
targeted drugs with direct relevance to the clinic. As such, cell
membrane-permeant, fluorescently labeled small molecules targeting
intracellular domains afford the unique opportunity to probe the intracellular
proteome and quantify therapeutic efficacy. Herein, fluorescently labeled erlotinib probes were utilized to
quantitatively evaluate DTA of the EGFR kinase signaling cascade,
an attractive therapeutic target, owing to the aberrant nature of
this pathway in many diseases. The TRIPODD platform provides an opportunity
to fill an unmet need by combining spatially resolved iPAI and cyclic
immunofluorescence on a single tissue.
,

The validation
of targeted and untargeted iPAI agent activity,
as well as extension of the TRIPODD platform to assess longitudinal
therapeutic response, was evaluated. The on-target binding activity
of two targeted and two untargeted (control) erlotinib iPAI agentsOF650Erl(T), OF550Erl(T), OF650Erl(UnT), and
OF550Erl(UnT)to the EGFR ATP-binding pocket was
assessed using in silico molecular docking studies. Both targeted
agents, OF650Erl(T) and OF550Erl(T), displayed
EGFR binding modes similar to those the parent erlotinib drug, demonstrating
their affinity for the EGFR target ( B). Validation of the untargeted agents,
OF650Erl(UnT) and OF550Erl(UnT), was also demonstrated,
as neither agent bound appreciably to the EGFR ATP-binding pocket
(Figure S1A,B). Binding free energy (ΔG) calculations of all iPAI agent configurations confirmed
that both targeted agents retain EGFR-binding affinity, while the
ΔG could not be calculated for either untargeted
agent since neither successfully bound to the EGFR ATP-binding pocket
( C and S1). Root-mean-square fluctuation (RMSF) of parent
erlotinib and all iPAI probe configurations confirmed that all erlotinib
iPAI agent configurations facilitated some conformational changes
in EGFR around the protein residues 845–852 (Figure S1C,D).
Further iPAI probe validation was assessed
in vitro by costaining
HCC827 cells with an EGFR extracellular domain-targeted antibody and
either the targeted iPAI probes, OF650Erl(T) and OF550Erl(T), or the untargeted iPAI probes, OF650Erl(UnT) and OF550Erl(UnT) ( D). Minimal colocalization with the cell membrane-specific
staining pattern of the EGRF antibody was observed for both untargeted
agent configurations (i.e., OF650Erl(UnT) and OF550Erl(UnT)), demonstrating their untargeted activity and reduced
EGFR-binding affinity. In contrast, substantial cell membrane-specific
staining patterns, colocalized with the EGFR antibody, were observed
for the targeted agent configurations (i.e., OF650Erl(T) and OF550Erl(T)). Additionally, no major difference in
the staining pattern was observed between the two targeted agent configurations.
Observed colocalization between the targeted probes and the EGFR antibody
provided in vitro validation of the on-target activity of the targeted
iPAI agents. Considering this in vitro result along with the in silico
molecular docking studies, the optimal iPAI agent pair configuration
was determined to be OF650Erl(T) and OF550Erl(UnT) for subsequent studies utilizing iPAI agents.
Therapeutic
efficacy of the optimal iPAI agent pair, OF650Erl(T) and
OF550Erl(UnT), was assessed to determine
the extent to which therapeutic efficacy was perturbed after erlotinib
fluorophore modification. The half-maximal inhibitory concentration
(IC50) values for unlabeled, parent erlotinib, and OF650Erl(T) and OF550Erl(UnT) were quantified ( A). Parent erlotinib
demonstrated the greatest IC50 concentration value, 0.27
nM, followed by OF650Erl(T), 8.62 nM. Notably, the IC50 value of OF550Erl(UnT) could not be calculated,
as no concentration of OF550Erl(UnT) demonstrated an observable
in vitro inhibitory effect. Notably, the targeted agent, OF650Erl(T), demonstrated proliferation inhibitory activity (IC50 = 8.62 μM), albeit with reduced efficacy compared
to the parent erlotinib (IC50 = 0.27 μM). A similar
result was also observed in a kinase binding assay comparing parent
erlotinib with OF650Erl(T) and OF550Erl(UnT) for EGFR kinase binding affinity in vitro ( B). Kinase binding affinity, measured by
percentage kinase inhibition, demonstrated that OF550Erl(UnT) had the lowest kinase binding affinity of 3.73 μM, while OF650Erl(T) exhibited substantially greater kinase binding affinity
of 16.84 nM, although this remained lower than that of parent erlotinib,
which demonstrated a kinase binding affinity of 0.40 nM. The binding
free energy of OF650Erl(T) was ∼55% lower than that
of parent erlotinib, indicating that OF650Erl(T) had lower
binding affinity for the EGFR ATP-binding pocket and therefore lower
efficacy than parent erlotinib. Together, these in vitro binding studies
confirmed the targeted iPAI agent reliably maintained binding affinity
to EGFR as a robust readout for erlotinib localization, while the
untargeted, the control iPAI agent had the expected disrupted binding
affinity to mimic nonspecific therapeutic binding.
In vivo validation
of targeted and untargeted iPAI agent activity
was quantified through a competitive binding study in xenografted
tumor tissue ( D). There was a greater relative decrease in fluorescence signal
intensity in the targeted agent imaging channel compared to the untargeted
agent imaging channel in the tissues when the iPAI probes were coadministered
with parent erlotinib (i.e., competitive binding tissues). This suggested
that the targeted agent competed with parent erlotinib for the EGFR
ATP-binding sites. Furthermore, the calculated relative DTA in the
competitive binding tissue was 42% lower than that of tissues that
received only the iPAI agents without the parent erlotinib. This data,
in conjunction with our previously reported studies,
,,
 demonstrated the potential of
the DTA metric to detect the presence of parent erlotinib and therefore
the potential for the TRIPODD platform to characterize drug-binding
spatial distribution during the treatment course.
As a proof-of-principle
to assess therapeutic response using the
TRIPPODD platform, HCC827 xenograft-bearing mice were divided into
either control or erlotinib treatment cohorts, where iPAI agents were
injected just prior to euthanasia. Unsupervised cluster analysis revealed
that iPAI injection had minimal influence on biomarker expression
(Supporting Figure 2A). Following tumor
tissue resection, image collection (i.e., iPAI and immunofluorescence
imaging), and downstream analysis, most control cohort cells retained
similar “cell viability” biomarker expression, defined
herein as EGFR, pEGFR, and Ki67 ( A). However, the control tissue cells displayed
variability in cleaved caspase 3 (CC3), targeted and untargeted iPAI
agent uptake, and DTA, which resulted in statistical separation of
clusters 1 and 3. This observation was additionally evident through
the spatial distribution of iPAI agents. Therefore, the heterogeneous
erlotinib parent drug distribution in untreated xenograft tissues
may be due to key features of tissue architecture, such as vasculature
and lymphatics, for transport.
The iPAI signatures of the treated
cells fluctuated across three
unique clusters, demonstrating the variability of drug delivery and
subsequent distribution across tissues. Notably, DTA was decreased
in the presence of parent erlotinib, indicating an inverse relationship
between DTA and the presence of parent erlotinib. However, a comparison
of the full TRIPODD signature (i.e., iPAI + immunofluorescence single-cell
intensities) suggested that cluster 4 was composed mostly of apoptotic
cells (CC3-positive), demonstrating that DTA alone was insufficient
to characterize the therapeutic effect. A comparison of the nonapoptotic
TRIPODD signatures observed in clusters 2 and 5 revealed similar cell
viability signatures, while EGFR, pEGFR, and Ki67 were quantified
at subcontrol levels. This was in line with the measured sensitivity
of HCC827 cells to erlotinib treatment. However, the major difference
between clusters 2 and 5 was in their DTA levels. The TRIPODD signature
in cluster 2 suggested that while exhibiting the effects of treatment
with measurable erlotinib still present in the cells as measured by
DTA, these cells were not yet undergoing apoptosis. Therefore, the
TRIPODD signature in cluster 5 suggested that a sublethal dose of
erlotinib had reached these cells, as apoptosis did not appear to
be ongoing based on the CC3 levels. This sublethal dose delivery resulted
in suppressed cell viability, which subsequently resulted in a more
rapid clearance of the lower drug concentration from the cells, which
led to elevated DTA levels. The spatial variability of DTA in treated
tissues was visualized as variable DTA levels ( B). Interestingly, there were regions of
high DTA in the nontumor cell regions that were identified by the
lack of EGFR. Since the nontumor cell regions were mouse stromal tissue
where erlotinib and iPAI agents were delivered through the mouse vasculature,
spatial mapping of the various cluster identities per cell was identifiable,
where a mix of clusters was observed on a single tissue section, demonstrating
the potential for inter- and intratumoral variability of drug delivery
( E).
Notably, the signatures of DTA and protein expression were also
visualized in representative ROIs from a control, untreated tissue
sample, and a treated tissue sample ( ). The 3D height map of DTA from the control
sample showed baseline DTA topography ( A). In the control samples where erlotinib
was not present, it was evident that DTA was roughly equivalent across
the ROI with slight variations, as visualized by the DTA height map,
which was supported by the clustering of untreated cells to clusters
1 and 3 ( A).
Importantly, clusters 1 and 3 did not exhibit marked differences in
proteomic expression. Comparison of the DTA topography in the treated
tissue versus that in the control tissue showed substantially greater
DTA heterogeneity in the treated samples ( B). Importantly, the areas with low DTA were
largely composed of viable tumor cells, which were positive for EGFR,
pEGFR, and Ki67, and dying cells, which were positive for CC3. This
was indicative of bound erlotinib in these areas where the molecular
target was present and likely to bind in the erlotinib-sensitive HCC827
xenografts. The surrounding areas, where DTA was elevated, showed
some CC3-positive cells but mostly appeared as cells devoid of positive
signal for any of the stained biomarkers, suggesting that they may
have been mouse stromal tissue infiltrate or areas of dead cells that
no longer expressed CC3, and erlotinib was no longer present. Notably,
these qualitative observations were in alignment with the results
of the performed cluster analyses. Clusters 2 and 5 were largely composed
of tumor cells that had not yet undergone apoptosis, with the major
difference being in the DTA levels. Inspection of the treated tissue
DTA maps revealed that some areas of viable tumor were adjacent
to nontumor areas with high DTA, while other viable tumor cells appeared
to have lower DTA. It is unclear what factors influenced the difference
in DTA between clusters 2 and 5 in the current work and will be investigated
further in subsequent studies. The confirmation of the quantitative
cluster analysis results and the qualitative observations in the representative
ROIs provided evidence that DTA can be a spatially resolved metric
for assessing a single-cell therapeutic response for the first time
in a longitudinal treatment study ( ).
 This proof-of-principle longitudinal erlotinib treatment
study
in HCC827 xenograft tissues demonstrated the utility of the TRIPODD
platform to identify unique signatures of therapeutic response and
nonresponse using the combination of iPAI and immunofluorescence signatures.
The relatively small sample size was intentional for this proof-of-principle
study, where future studies will require an increased sample size
to evaluate the TRIPODD platform’s ability to identify unique
signatures of therapeutic response. The increased sample size will
also enable exploration into the impact that reduced affinity by the
targeted probe relative parent drug has on analysis results in cases
where DTA fails to correlate with biomarker signatures. The limited
immunofluorescence panel in this proof-of-principle study did not
facilitate further spatial analysis of tissue architecture to assess
this observation and identify key tissue architectural features (e.g.,
vasculature and lymphatic vessels) that may play a role in variable
drug delivery. Future studies will incorporate extended immunofluorescence
panels to study downstream cell signaling in the EGFR cascade, as
well as the role that tissue architecture plays in the TRIPODD signatures
to enhance spatial analyses of local neighborhoods of similar TRIPODD
signatures and the use of more sophisticated clustering approaches,
facilitating greater resolution of TRIPODD signatures.
−

 Additionally, the HCC827 xenograft model was employed for the development
and validation of the TRIPODD platform, but future studies will incorporate
immune-competent model systems to assess the role of the TME and immune
infiltrate in drug delivery and efficacy. Additionally, future studies
will incorporate later-generation EGFR TKIs (e.g., osimertinib), which
are superior to erlotinib in effectively treating EGFR-mutated NSCLC, increasing the generalizability of the TRIPODD
platform. The data presented herein provide validation of the TRIPODD
imaging platform’s capability to characterize in situ therapeutic
response and mechanisms of therapeutic resistance. The TRIPODD platform
can be readily applied to a broad range of model systems, where further
development of platform will enable the study of novel therapeutic
strategies.

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Dr. Stefanie
Kaech Petrie,
Dr. Crystal Chaw, Dr. Brian Jenkins, Dr. Felice Kelly, and Ms. Hannah
Bronstein in the Advanced Light Microscopy at OHSU for technical and
acquisition assistance with AxioScan.Z1 slide scanning microscopy
studies. This work was funded by an ASPIRE Award from the Mark Foundation
for Cancer Research (Gibbs) and R21CA257942 from the NIH/NCI (Gibbs).

The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.5c01220.
In silico molecular docking studies for the untargeted
erlotinib agents, tumor growth and weight curves demonstrating that
vehicle treatment did not affect either parameter, clustering results
showing that neither vehicle injection nor iPAI injection affected
measured protein expression, and TRIPODD platform characterization
of the control tumor tissues (PDF)

∇.N.P.M. and A.S. contributed equally to this
work.

The authors declare
the
following competing financial interest(s): L.G.W., A.R.M. and S.L.G.
are inventors on patent application PCT/US21/53806, Zwitterionic cell-permeant
and water-soluble rhodamine dyes for quantitative imaging applications,
submitted to the World Intellectual Property Organization and held
by Oregon Health and Science University that covers the composition
and methods of use of the ORFluor compounds used herein.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials