pmcCurr Res Microb SciCurr Res Microb Sci4130crmicrCurrent Research in Microbial Sciences2666-5174ElsevierPMC12686926PMC12686926.112686926126869264137773910.1016/j.crmicr.2025.100513S2666-5174(25)00173-71005131Research PaperThe transcriptional regulator HapX contributes to virulence and regulates the transcriptional response in Paracoccidioides brasiliensis in two ways
RochaOlivia Basso BailãoAlexandre Melo SilvaLana O’Hara Souza JuniorMarcos Antonio Batista de Carvalho de SouzaEduardo Carvalho Luzineduardoluzin@discente.ufg.br MoreiraThalison Rodrigues SaarRodrigorodrigosaar@ufg.br de OliveiraMilton Adriano Pelli GrazianiDanieldanielgraziani@ufg.br GonçalesRelber Aguiar NovaesEvandroevandro.novaes@ufla.br SoaresCélia Maria de Almeidacmasoares@gmail.com aLaboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Goiás, Goiânia, BrazilbDepartment of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, Institute of Biology, State University of Campinas, Campinas, BrazilcDepartment of Biosciences and Technology, Institute of Tropical Pathology and Public Health (IPTSP), Federal University of Goiás, BrazildInstitute of Tropical Pathology and Public Health, Federal University of Goiás, BrazileVeterinary and Animal Science School, Federal University of Goiás, BrazilfLife and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Medicine, University of Minho, Braga, PortugalgDepartment of Biology, Federal University of Lavras, Brazil⁎Corresponding author. cmasoares@gmail.com2025151120259490430100513151120251012202511122025© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Highlights
•During iron deprivation, HapX accumulates in yeast cells of P. brasiliensis.
•HapX positively and negatively regulates transcriptional response.
•HapX impacts additional pathways beyond iron homeostasis.
•HapX plays a multifunctional role in adaptation to nutritional stress and virulence.
•ChIP-seq analysis confirm the interactions of HapX to promoters of regulated genes.

Iron is an essential micronutrient for fungal pathogens, and its acquisition is tightly regulated to ensure survival in environments with limited iron, such as those found within hosts. The transcription factor HapX plays a central role in maintaining iron homeostasis and regulating adaptive responses during iron deprivation in fungi. In this study, we investigated HapX's global regulatory functions through transcriptomic profiling, ChIP-seq analysis, and immunodetection. Silencing HapX resulted in reduced fungal growth and decreased virulence under iron-limiting conditions, both in vitro and in vivo. Transcriptomic analysis of the silenced strain revealed significant upregulation of genes involved in metal transport (zinc, copper, and calcium) and cell wall remodeling, indicating that HapX normally represses these genes, which become derepressed upon its silencing. ChIP-seq analysis confirmed HapX binding to the promoters of key genes involved in metal ion regulation and metabolic adaptation. This finding underscores HapX's dual role as a transcriptional activator and repressor. Taken together, our findings establish HapX as a regulator of fungal physiology under iron-restricted conditions and highlight the HapX–iron axis as a promising target for antifungal intervention.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Keywords
Paracoccidioides brasiliensisHapXTranscriptional analysisIron homeostasispmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes1

## Introduction
The ability of living organisms to survive infection depends on their ability to obtain and use macro and micronutrients within the host. Metals are among the essential micronutrients, and maintaining a delicate equilibrium is crucial, as excessive concentrations of those metals can prove toxic. Fungi, for instance, require intracellular metals, such as zinc, iron, copper, and magnesium, to facilitate their proliferation. As a microbicidal mechanism, hosts have evolved sophisticated mechanisms to regulate the availability of nutrients in their environment ( ). A substantial body of research has already demonstrated the impact of micronutrients during infection. This evidence indicates that deficiencies in iron and/or zinc can result in a reduction in the pathogenicity of various organisms ( ).
Among the neglected fungal diseases, paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM) stands out as a significant public health concern. It is caused by fungi of the Paracoccidioides genus. The disease primarily affects individuals in rural areas who work with soil management and are of active working age ( ; ). When diagnosed, treatment for the disease is prolonged and has several side effects, which sometimes lead patients to abandon the treatment. Even after completing treatment, patients may experience recurrences ( ; ). The genus Paracoccidioides comprises seven species of thermodimorphic fungi. In their habitat, soil, they appear as hyphae. After being inhaled, and the temperature in the host increases, they transit to the yeast phase. This transition is part of the morphological and metabolic changes the fungus undergoes to successfully infect the host ( ). Among the mechanisms necessary for colonization, nutritional regulation is critical. The host environment is hostile and lacks resources such as micronutrients necessary for the survival of pathogens; therefore, the fungus employs strategies to circumvent host immune responses ( ).
Paracoccidioides species employ a variety of iron (Fe) acquisition strategies to support their survival and pathogenicity. An extensive search for orthologous sequences in Paracoccidioides species, based on genes known to be involved in iron metabolism in model organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Aspergillus spp., revealed that Paracoccidioides spp. possess several components of the reductive iron uptake assimilation (RIA) machinery. However, this system appears incomplete, as these fungi lack ferric permeases and likely rely on zinc permeases to compensate for this deficiency. Additionally, the study identified genes responsible for siderophore production (SidA, SidF, SidD, and SidC) and uptake (Sit1, MirB, and MirC). The transcripts of orthologous genes related to siderophore synthesis and uptake are induced in Paracoccidioides spp. under iron-restricted conditions ( ) . In agreement with iron playing an fundamental role in the pathobiology of Paracoccidioides spp iron supplementation increases mice susceptibility to the fungi infection ( ).Moreover, it was observed that these organisms synthesize and secrete hydroxamate-type siderophores, which, along with xenosiderophores, help maintain iron homeostasis during scarcity ( ; ) .Notably, the production of siderophores and consequently the fungal virulence of P. brasiliensis in a Tenebrio molitor infection model, was significantly affected when the sidA gene was silenced using antisense RNA technology ( ). These findings underscore the pivotal role of siderophores in the virulence of Paracoccidioides spp.
Regarding the utilization of host iron-binding proteins, it has been observed that Paracoccidioides spp. use hemoglobin as an iron source through a receptor-mediated mechanism, involving the Rbt5 receptor. Furthermore, silencing the expression of this receptor impaired the fungi's survival in a murine infection model ( ) . Interestingly, it was found that these fungi also recruit a heat shock protein (HSP30) to the cell wall when interacting with hemoglobin. This protein was classified as a putative heme oxygenase ( ). Despite their similarities to other pathogenic fungi, Paracoccidioides spp. exhibit certain unique features. In P. brasiliensis, increased expression of iron-regulated transporters (ZRTs) during iron deprivation has been identified, suggesting that the fungus can utilize non-classical RIA, by employing iron/zinc permeases ( ).
The regulation of gene expression in different nutritional contexts involving iron has been precisely outlined in A. fumigatus. In this organism, the bZIP- transcription factor HapX, and the GATA-factor SreA play key roles in a well-orchestrated negative feedback loop. HapX contains a basic leucine zipper domain (bZIP), that is responsible for DNA interaction. HapX functions in the activation of genes responsible for Fe uptake and the repression of genes involved in Fe utilization pathways during iron scarcity ( ). In contrast, SreA represses HapX expression and consequently represses genes responsible for iron uptake during iron repletion ( ). Additionally, the HapX ortholog in Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Php4, only functions as a repressor when iron is limited ( ). In C. albicans, the Hap43 ortholog, and in C. neoformans, HapX, act as both activators and repressors, but do not promote iron detoxification during periods of iron excess ( ). Taken together, these data demonstrate the importance of HapX and its homologs in adapting to adverse nutritional conditions.
To our knowledge, up to now, functional analysis of HapX in the genus Paracoccidioides has not been performed. This gene shows structural and functional features with other fungal bZIP transcription factors for iron regulation. Deficiency in HapX, attenuates the virulence of P. brasiliensis and resulted in a wide range of changes in gene expression. Additionally, the genes regulated by HapX have not been studied in the pathogen. A silenced strain for HapX was obtained. Deficiency in HapX, attenuates the virulence of P. brasiliensis emphasizing the role of adaptation to iron in pathogenicity. Decreasing in HapX expression resulted in a wide range of changes in gene expression, particularly in metabolic and transport processes. Our study provides novel insights into the regulatory role of HapX in P. brasiliensis, a pathogen for which the protein function had largely remained unexplored. Through a combination of transcriptomic profiling, ChIP-seq, and functional assays, we demonstrate that HapX governs not only iron homeostasis, but also broader cellular processes such as metal cross-regulation, lipid metabolism, and extensive cell wall remodeling. Notably, we reveal that silencing HapX disrupts multiple metal transporter systems and activates compensatory pathways, for the underscoring for the first time the intricate coordination necessary for fungal adaptation to iron-limiting environments. Our findings advance the understanding of HapX as a central hub linking nutrient sensing to virulence traits and lay the groundwork for exploring targeted antifungal strategies against this clinically relevant pathogen.

2

## Material and methods
2.1

## Microorganisms and cultivation
The Paracoccidioides brasiliensis fungal species (ATCC 32,069 – Pb18) was maintained on solid Brain Heart Infusion (BHI) medium (KASVI, Pinhais, PR, Brazil) which was supplemented with 4 % (w/v) glucose (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). For experimental procedures, cells were cultured in liquid BHI medium containing 4 % (w/v) glucose at 36 °C for 48 h.
Agrobacterium tumefaciens (LBA1100) and Escherichia coli (BL21 D3C43 and DH5α) were grown in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium supplemented with 100 µg/mL ampicillin. The bacteria were then incubated at 37 °C for 18 to 24 h prior to experiments.

2.2

## Obtaining the P. brasiliensis HapX silenced strain
Silencing of the HapX gene in Paracoccidioides brasiliensis was achieved using antisense RNA (aRNA) in combination with A. tumefaciens-mediated transformation (ATMT), as previously described ( ; ). Briefly, a 102-bp antisense fragment of the P. brasiliensis HapX gene (GenBank accession number PADG_07492; see a) was amplified by PCR using the primers F (5′-CCGCTCGAGCGGTCGAACCCCTTCCT3’) and R (5′ GGCGCGCCTTTGGTCAGC-3′). The amplified PbHapX fragment was cloned into the pCR35 vector, which contains the cbp1 promoter from Histoplasma capsulatum and the cat-B terminator from A. fumigatus ( ). This PbHapX-aRNA cassette was subsequently inserted into the binary vector pUR5750, which carries a transfer DNA (T-DNA) region harboring the hygromycin resistance gene (hph) from E. coli. A. tumefaciens strain LBA1100 was transformed with the pUR5750::PbHapX-aRNA construct and cultured in induction medium (IM) containing spectinomycin (250 µg/mL), kanamycin (100 µg/mL), and 0.2 M acetosyringone at 28 °C. The transformed A. tumefaciens cells were then co-cultivated with P. brasiliensis at a 1:5 ratio on sterile Hybond™ N+ membranes (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK) placed on solid IM medium at 28 °C for three days. Following co-cultivation, P. brasiliensis transformants were recovered as previously described.The mitotic stability of the transformants was assessed after three passages on selective BHI agar [1.1 % (w/v) glucose] supplemented with hygromycin (75 µg/mL). Subsequently, transformants were passed seven times in alternating presence and absence of hygromycin (75 µg/mL) to confirm stable integration. Afterward, strains were maintained on BHI medium containing hygromycin to ensure continued selective pressure. P. brasiliensis HapX-silenced transformants (AsHapX) were evaluated for growth in modified chemically defined minimal medium (MMcM; McVeigh/Morton) ( ), supplemented either with 3.5 µM FeSO₄ (iron-sufficient control) or 50 µM bathophenanthroline disulfonic acid (BPS; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) to induce iron starvation. Transformed cells were first grown in liquid BHI medium for 72 h at 37 °C with constant shaking (150 rpm), then harvested and seeded onto MMcM agar plates containing 3.5 µM FeSO₄ or 50 µM BPS at serial dilutions (10⁶, 10⁵, and 10⁴ cells/mL). Plates were incubated at 37 °C for seven days.

2.3

## Quantification of transcripts by RT-qPCR
For HapX silencing levels analysis, P. brasiliensis WT and AsHapX transformants were incubated for 48 h in BHI liquid media containing 1.1 % (w/v) glucose at constant shaking at 150 rpm. Subsequently, the cells were centrifuged and resuspended in MMcM medium with 3.5 µM of FeSO₄ as a control, or in iron-deprivation with 50 µM BPS. After 10 min in shaking at 37 °C total RNA was obtained through mechanical cell rupture (Mini-Beadbeater—Biospec Products Inc, Bartlesville, OK, USA) and TRIzol™ Reagent (TRI reagent, Sigma Aldrich), precipitated with isopropanol, and resuspended with diethyl pyrocarbonate- (DEPC-) treated water. The cDNA was generated by reverse transcription of the RNA using the M-MLV Reverse Transcriptase kit (Sigma Aldrich, USA) and submitted to quantitative PCR (qPCR) with SYBR™ Green PCR master mix in a QuantStudio 5 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Transcription levels of HapX were accessed using the oligonucleotides HapXF: (5′ AGCCCAGTTCCTCCCAGAC 3′) and HapXR (5′ AAAGCAGCCTCCCGTTTGTCA 3′).
For transcription levels of iron-responsive genes, P. brasiliensis WT and AsHapX5 transformants were incubated for 10 min in MMcM medium supplemented with 3.5 µM FeSO4, 50 µM BPS or 50 µM BPS + 20 µM Zinc ( ) at constant shaking at 150 rpm. RNA was extracted and cDNAs were generated as described above. Transcription levels of Sit1 (PADG_00462), a siderophore iron transporter, and SreA (PADG_05497), transcription factor that is repressed during iron deprivation were accessed with the following oligonucleotides: Sit1F (5′ GGCAATCATTTTC CCTGTGTG 3′)Sit1R (5'CGCGAAGACTGCAATCAAAG 3′), for SreAF (5′ ATTTGCAACGCTTGTGGACTC3’) and SreAR (5′ GAGTCCATTGTGTTCTTTGTGT 3′).Data was normalized with the oligonucleotides designed for ribosomal L34 coding gene (PADG_04085); L34F: (5′ TCTCTCCCGCGAATCCACA 3′), and L34R: (5′AGGCGGAGAATGGGCGAG 3′), and qPCR was performed with biological triplicates in each reaction. The expression levels of the zinc transporters ZRT1 (PADG_08567) and ZRT2 (PADG_06417) were also evaluated using the following oligonucleotides: ZRT1F (5′ CCGCTCGAGCGGGCCCGTCTCGCCACTG3’), ZRT1R (5′ GGCGCGCC AGGGGTGGACAGGCCGAA3’) and ZRT2F (5′ GGCGCGCCAGGGGTGACAGGC3’), and ZRT2R (5′ CCGCTCGAGCGGGATCGGAACTATAATG 3′). The data were also normalized using the ribosomal L34 coding gene (PADG_04085).

2.4

## Recombinant protein expression
The complete coding sequence of the HapX gene (PAAG_04257) was cloned into the pET32a vector (Genone Biotechnologies, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil). The 1502 bp sequence, which was selected for use in E. coli, was integrated between the BamHI and NotI cloning sites. The recombinant protein containing the His tag at its N-terminal. E. coli -BL21 DE3 C43 cells were transformed with the plasmid pET32a::PlHapX and grown at 37 °C in LB medium containing 100 µg/mg ampicillin until reaching O.D. 0.5 at a wavelength of 600 nm. HapX recombinant protein (rHapX) was induced by addition of 1.0 mM IPTG (isopropyl-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside; Sigma Aldrich) for 4 h. The recombinant HapX solubilization was performed by incubation with 1 µg/mL lysozyme in PBS 1x for 1 hour followed by addition of 1 % (w/v) sarcozil (Sigma Aldrich, USA) ( ). The samples were sonicated in 5 cycles of 10 min in an ultrasonic bath with ice (Ultra sonic cleaner — Odontobras, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil), with 30-second intervals under vigorous agitation (Vortex mixer VX-200 — Labnet, USA). The sonicated samples were passed 10 times through a 0.8 mm needle and then 10 times through a 0.45 mm needle. Soluble fraction was obtained after centrifugation for 20 min at 16,000 g, purified through affinity chromatography using a NI-NTA Agarose resin (InvitrogenTM, Waltham, MA, USA), and eluted with 250 mM imidazole. Protein induction, solubilization and purification were evaluated by SDS-PAGE.

2.5

## Polyclonal antibodies production
BALB/c mice (8–12-week-old mice) were maintained at Multiuser Center for Animal Production and Experimentation (IPTSP/UFG). The animal experiments were approved by the Ethical Committee for the Use of Animals of the Federal University of Goiás (CEUA / UFG - protocol number 042/16). To generate polyclonal antibodies, immunizations were conducted with 50 μg of purified recombinant HapX in three doses at 15-day intervals using Freund's adjuvant (Sigma-Aldrich,USA); the control group was immunized with the adjuvant alone. After immunization, animals were euthanized and whole blood was collected. The polyclonal antibodies were purified by chromatography in nickel resin (Qiagen Inc., Germantown, MD, USA).

2.6

## Western blot
The P. brasiliensis WT and AsHapX5 strains were cultivated in MMcM medium supplemented with 3.5 µM FeSO₄ or 50 µM BPS for 24 h at 37 °C with constant shaking. After incubation, the cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed, and resuspended in 50 µM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5; Sigma-Aldrich, USA). Protein extraction was performed using glass beads and a BeadBeater homogenizer (BioSpec, USA). The quality of the protein extracts was assessed by SDS-PAGE, and protein quantification was carried out using the Bradford assay (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). A total of 30 μg of protein separated by SDS-PAGE was transferred to a Hybond nitrocellulose membrane (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA) (Figure S1). The membrane was then incubated for 1 hour at room temperature with anti-HapX polyclonal antibodies diluted 1:2000 in blocking buffer (PBS 1x containing 5 % (w/v) non-fat milk and 0.1 % (v/v) Tween 20). Negative controls were prepared using rabbit pre-immune serum diluted 1:1000. Following incubation, the membrane was washed three times for 15 min each with washing buffer. Subsequently, it was incubated with a peroxidase-conjugated secondary anti-mouse IgG antibody (1:1000 dilution). Detection was performed using the ECL Western Blotting Substrate Kit (GE Healthcare, USA), and chemiluminescent signals were captured with the Amersham Imager 600 (GE Healthcare, USA).

2.7

## Immunofluorescence assay
Cells were cultured in MMcM medium supplemented with 3.5 µM Fe or 50 µM BPS for 24 h at 37 °C with shaking. The cells were washed twice (800Xg, 5 min, 4 °C) with PBS1X. The cells were then fixed with ice-cold methanol (Sigma Aldrich, USA) for 2 h, washed twice with PBS 1X, and then treated with 5 % (v/v) Triton X-100 (Sigma Aldrich, USA) for 20 min. The cells were washed again and incubated with polyclonal anti-HapX primary antibodies at a dilution of 1:125 for 1 h. The secondary antibody, which is anti-mouse in nature, coupled to the Alexa Fluor 647 fluorophore (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) was then added at a concentration of 2 µg/mL and incubated for 1 h. Cells were washed 3 times with PBS 1x and then visualized on the Axio Scope A1 fluorescence microscope for pixel quantification on AxionVision Software (Carl Zeiss, AG, Germany, USA).

2.8

## Macrophage infection and confocal analysis
Murine macrophages strain J774.A1 (BCRJ, Brazil) were maintained in high-glucose Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) supplemented with 10 % (v/v) fetal bovine serum (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) at 5 % CO2. For the assay, 106 macrophage cells were activated with 100 U/mL murine gamma interferon (IFN-γ,). For the internalization assay, round coverslips were added to the bottom of the wells. After 24 h of activation, 5 × 106 fungal cells of WT and AsHapX5 transformants were added. After 24 h of incubation, the wells were washed 3 times with PBS 1X. For infection microscopy analysis cells were fixed with methanol and incubated with calcofluor white (CFW,100 µg/mL in PBS 1X) (Sigma Aldrich, USA), for 30 min. The coverslips were observed with a confocal microscope (TCS SP8 DMi8, Leica Microsystems, Germany) under an HC PL APO 63x/1.40 oil immersion objective. The wells for the phagocytosis assay were washed 3 times with PBS 1X and then the macrophages were lysed with ice-cold water. The recovered fungal cells were plated in BHI medium supplemented with 10 % (v/v) fetal bovine serum and incubated at 37 °C for 10 days.

2.9

## Virulence assays
All animal experiments were approved by the Animal Use Ethics Committee of the Federal University of Goiás (CEUA/UFG, protocol number 042/16). Ps brasiliensis wild-type (WT), pUR5750 (empty vector), and AsHapX transformant strains were cultured in BHI medium supplemented with 4 % (w/v) glucose for 72 h at 37 °C. After incubation, cells were harvested by centrifugation and washed twice with sterile 0.9 % (w/v) NaCl solution. A total of 30 C57BL/6 mice were obtained and maintained at the Multiuser Center for Animal Production and Experimentation (IPTSP/UFG). The animals were divided into three experimental groups (WT, AsHapX, and empty vector), with 10 mice per group. Prior to infection, mice were anesthetized via intraperitoneal injection of ketamine hydrochloride (100 mg/kg; Park, Davis & Company, Detroit, USA) and xylazine (10 mg/kg; Bayer, Germany). For infection, approximately 1 × 10⁵ yeast cells suspended in 100 µL of 0.9 % (w/v) NaCl solution were administered intranasally. Cell viability was assessed using trypan blue (500 μg/ml) (Sigma Aldrich) exclusion, and all inoculate used exhibited viability rates above 80 %. Following infection, the animals were monitored daily for survival over a period of 100 days.

2.10

## Transcriptional analysis by RNA seq
The Pb18 WT and AsHapX5 strains were cultivated for a period of three days in BHI medium, after which they were incubated for ten minutes in liquid MMcM medium containing 50 µM BPS. The cells were centrifuged at 800 g, 5 min, 4 °C and RNA was obtained using the TRI Reagent (Sigma Aldrich, USA) and the RNA Miniprep (ZymoResearch, California, USA), in biological triplicates. The cDNA libraries were prepared and sequenced on the Illumina NewSeq6000 Sequencing System from GenOne Biotechnologies (Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil). More than 39 M paired end reads (2 × 150) were obtained from each of the 6 libraries. High sequencing quality was observed using the FastQC program. Sequences were mapped to the P. brasiliensis Pb18 genome v.2, downloaded from NCBI (GCF_000150735.1), using the STAR program ( ). Alignment and read counting by STAR were performed with the following parameters: outFilterMultimapNmax20alignSJoverhangMin8alignSJDBoverhangMin 1 outFilterMismatchNmax999-outFilterMismatchNoverLmax0.10outFilterMatchNmin50- outFilterScoreMinOverLread0outFilterMatchNminOverLread0alignMatesGapMax1000 alignIntronMax1000quantModeGeneCountsoutSAMtypeBAMUnsorte.
Read count tables were input to R for differentially expressed gene detection using the DESeq2 package ( ). All libraries (2 treatments × 3 replicates) were analyzed together for dispersion estimation using a negative binomial model (GLM). After model fitting, the contrast AsHapX5 vs. Pb18WT was analyzed. Genes were considered significant if they had an adjusted p-value (FDR) of less than 0.05 and at least 2 × of differential expression (|log2FoldChange| ≥ 1). Differentially expressed genes were displayed in a heat map and volcano plot using the R packages gplots and EnhancedVolcano. To identify the enriched the gene ontology (GO) terms and eukaryotic orthologous groups (KOG), the UniProt annotation of Pb18 (https://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/502780) was used in AgriGO v.2 (http://system sbiolo gy.cau.edu.cn/agriGOv2/) and FunFEA package in Rstudio v.2025.05.01 ( ). The transcriptome data have been deposited at NCBI as a BioProject with the identifier PRJNA1223884.

2.11

## Quantification of glucan
Aniline blue (AB, Sigma-Aldrich) was used to stain P. brasiliensis yeast cells to evaluate possible changes in the β-glucan content of the cell wall comparing wild-type and AsHapX5 mutants grown in iron depletion (50 µM BPS) for 24 h. After cells were fixed in 100 % methanol at −80 °C for 20 min, washed, and incubated with a solution of pure aniline blue (Sigma) for five minutes. The stained cells were washed twice with 1 × PBS and visualized using a Zeiss Axiocam MRc-Scope A1 fluorescence microscope. A minimum of 50 cells per slide (in triplicate) were analyzed for each condition to quantify fluorescence intensity.

2.12

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis (ChIP)
P. brasiliensis WT yeast cells were grown in MMcM liquid medium containing 50 µM BPS for 24 h to induce iron deficiency and the expression of HapX protein. For cross-linking, 1 % v/v formaldehyde (Sigma Aldrich, USA) was used, followed by incubation for 20 min at 37 °C with shaking. Cross-linking was stopped by the addition of 125 mM glycine (Sigma Aldrich, USA), followed by incubation for 10 min under the same conditions as before. For chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), cells were washed, frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized for 3 h. The lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 % (v/v) Triton X-100, 0.1 % (v/v) deoxycholate, 0.1 % (w/v) SDS) and beads were used for mechanical fragmentation with a bead beater (Mini-Beadbeater-Biospec Products Inc., Bartlesville, OK, USA) followed by sonication (Bandelin, Berlin, GE).The cells were then centrifuged (10,000 g, 15 min, 4 °C) and the supernatant collected. Co-immunoprecipitation was performed with the Dynabeads Immunoprecipitation Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The anti-HapX antibodies were used to bind the target fragmented DNA. Briefly, the anti-HapX antibodies were bound to the beads and then incubated with the fragmented DNA sample, after which the antibodies and the interacting DNA were eluted from the beads. Three replicates of ChIP-seq libraries were constructed and sequencing was performed in the Illumina NextSeq2000 by GenOne Biotechnologies (Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil). Sequence quality was evaluated with FastQC program ( ) before and after the clean-up step with Trimmomatic v. 0.39 ( ). This software was used to remove the sequencing adapters and to remove low quality sequences with the following parameters: ILLUMINACLIP:Adapters.: fa:2:15:7 SLIDINGWINDOW:4:10 MINLEN:31. Sequences were mapped to the P. brasiliensis genome with the STAR program, using the same parameters described for the RNA-Seq. Genome regions with higher Chip-Seq depth were then identified as sequences that interact with HapX. Sequencing depth along the genome was estimated with BEDtools coverage ( ). Chip-Seq peak regions were defined as those with sequencing depth higher than the 80th percentile in the depth distribution of all three replicates. BEDtools intersect was used to identify Chip-Seq peaks that overlapped in all three replicates.
To identify the primary binding motifs where HapX putatively binds, the ChIP Seq peak sequences were submitted to the MEME server, version 5.5.7 ( ). Subsequently, the domains were submitted to the MAST tool, which is integrated into the MEME server, with the objective of identifying the position of the domains within the sequences that had been revealed by ChIP seq. Subsequently, the TOMTOM, also included in the MEME server was employed to confirm the presence of the previously identified domains and to ascertain their similarity to other existing domains.

2.13

## Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism software, version 9.0. Data is presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). The results of both in vivo and in vitro assays represent three independent experiments. For in vivo virulence assays each control or experimental group, which received only the vehicle or the treatment, consisted of ten animals. Statistical significance was assessed using the Student’s t-test (Mann–Whitney) test. Differences were considered statistically significant at p-values of ****p < 0.0001, ***p ˂ 0.001.

3

## Results
3.1

## Characterization of HapX silencing at the transcriptional and phenotypic levels
A HapX silenced mutant was generated using ATMT technology. The cassette containing the antisense HapX (AsHapX) was randomly inserted into yeast cells ( a and b). Generating complemented strains through homologous recombination is technically challenging in this genus due to the low efficiency of this process, as well as the limited availability of selection markers and functional heterologous promoters. Consequently, the research community has frequently used screening multiple knockdown transformants and replicating findings in independent clones as an alternative validation strategy ( ). In this way, the HapX expression level was evaluated in the silenced strains AsHapX5, AsHapX10 and AsHapX23 compared to the wild type (WT) ( c). All the silenced strains exhibited significantly lower HapX gene expression than the WT, with AsHapX5 demonstrating the most significant reduction. To test whether HapX plays a role in fungal growth during iron deprivation, the silenced and wild type (WT strain) were grown in 3.5 µM FeSO4 or 50 µM BPS. The HapX silenced strains exhibited reduced growth compared to the WT ( d). HapX and SreA are connected by negative transcriptional feedback, as described ( ). We tested the level of SreA expression in the silenced AsHapX5, AsHapX 10 and AsHapX 23, as shown in Supplementary Figure 2. Decreased HapX expression was correlated with a significant increase in SreA expression in all silenced mutants. Additionally, the level of Sit1, the transporter for siderophores, increased, suggesting that HapX plays a role in regulating iron homeostasis. These findings, supported by RT-qPCR data, demonstrate that HapX was successfully silenced in P. brasiliensis. 

3.2

## Iron depletion promotes an increase in HapX expression
Polyclonal antibodies specific to HapX were generated. The protein was produced by heterologous expression in E. coli BL21 codon plus C43 (DE3), as illustrated in Supplementary Figure 3. As shown, in the figure, the recombinant protein has a molecular mass of 73 kDa, which corresponds to the HapX molecular mass of 53 kDa plus the histidine tag in the vector. The protein was purified, as depicted in Supplementary Figure 3a. The polyclonal antibodies recognized the recombinant protein, but the pre-immune sera did not (Supplementary Figure 3 b). Western blot analysis using WT and AsHapX5 extracts under iron-sufficient and iron-depleted conditions demonstrated the antibody's specificity. No reaction was observed in the control using pre-immune sera, confirming the antibody’s specificity ( a). Western blot analysis revealed that HapX expression is higher in the wild-type strain than in the mutant under iron-deprivation conditions. These results suggest that HapX accumulation is positively regulated in the wild-type strain during iron limitation and reduced in the mutant ( a, b). Immunofluorescence analysis was conducted utilizing anti-HapX as the primary polyclonal antibodies and Alexa 647 mouse conjugated as the secondary antibody. Higher fluorescence in iron-deprived yeast cells was verified by comparing them to cells grown in the presence of iron, which indicates increased expression of HapX in iron-deprived conditions ( a, b).Additional control of HapX staining is depicted in Supplementary Figure 4. 

3.3

## AsHapX5 exhibits attenuated virulence
In other pathogens iron acquisition from the host is a critical virulence determinant. In this way, we investigated whether silencing HapX affects fungal virulence during infection. First, we evaluated whether the infection of J774 macrophages by the AsHapX5 strain altered the level of J774 macrophage phagocytosis compared to the wild-type (WT) strain. After a 24-hour ex vivo interaction at a ratio of one macrophage to five fungal cells, AsHapX5 exhibited increased susceptibility to phagocytosis. This was evidenced by a significantly lower colony-forming unit (CFU) recovery compared to the WT strain ( a and b). The representative images in Figure 4a show a higher number of AsHapX fungi because these mutants adhere to and are internalized by macrophages more readily than the wild type. b, on the other hand, shows fewer recovered AsHapX colonies because the assay only reflects fungi that survives phagocytosis. These results suggest that the silenced mutant is less virulent and more easily recognized and eliminated by macrophages. 
To corroborate these findings, we performed an in vivo assay using mice as the animal model. The animals were infected intranasally with the WT strain, the AsHapX5 silenced, or the empty vector control. A 100 % mortality rate was observed in mice infected with the WT and empty vector strains, with all animals dying 50 days post-infection. In contrast, mice infected with the AsHapX5 strain exhibited delayed mortality. While animals infected with the WT strain began dying as early as day 13, mortality in the AsHapX5 group did not begin until day 24. By the end of the 100-day observation period, approximately 30 % of the AsHapX5 - infected mice were still alive ( c). These results suggest that the absence of HapX significantly reduces the virulence of P. brasiliensis.

3.4

## Transcriptomic analysis of the AsHapX5 mutant in iron deprivation
To investigate how the fungus regulates gene expression in response to reduced HapX levels, a transcriptomic analysis was performed to compare the AsHapX5 and WT under iron-deprived conditions. After data curation a total of 434 differentially expressed transcripts were identified (see Supplementary Figures 5 and 6). Annotated transcripts are listed in Supplementary Tables 1 and 2. Gene ontology enrichment analysis classified approximately 41.4 % of these transcripts into biological pathways (see Supplementary Figure 6a). Fold-change analysis revealed 386 ​​transcripts derepressed in AsHapX (Supplementary Table 1), while 48 were positively affected by HapX (see Supplementary Table 2) (Supplementary Figure 6b). The regulated categories included those related to protein synthesis and degradation, transcription, the cell cycle, the biogenesis of cellular compounds, energy production, and metabolism (see Supplementary Figure 6c, Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Table 2).
Gene ontology enrichment analysis revealed a significant derepression of several functional categories under iron-deprivation conditions in the AsHapX5 (Table S1 and Figure S6). We observed the enrichment of functional categories related to cellular processes and signaling pathways. These categories included those associated with the cell wall and membrane, post-translational modifications, and signal transduction mechanisms. Categories involved in gene information processing and general metabolism, particularly lipid metabolism, were also enriched. This indicates broad metabolic reprogramming in response to the absence of HapX.

3.5

## HapX negatively regulates functions of zinc and other metals
Transcriptome analysis under iron deprivation and HapX silencing revealed significant alterations in genes related to metal homeostasis and transport. These results highlight Paracoccidioides' adaptive responses to metal scarcity (see Tables S1 and 1). To identify genes negatively regulated by HapX at the transcript level, we examined upregulation during steady-state iron-starved incubation in AsHapX compared to wild-type (WT) identification in the same condition (see Supplementary Table 1, Figure S6 and ). Of the 386 genes negatively affected by HapX, approximately 8.5 % were involved in general metabolism, and around 1 % were associated with energy production. Genes related to the cell cycle and DNA processing accounted for 3.8 %; about 2.3 % were involved in transcriptional regulation, similar to the proportion observed for genes linked to cellular transport. Approximately 4.7 % of the regulated genes were related to the biogenesis of cellular components, and around 5.7 % encoded metal-binding proteins. 
Our transcriptomic analysis revealed that the ZRT1 and ZRT2 genes, which encode zinc transporters, were significantly upregulated in the HapX knockdown strain under iron-deprived conditions. RT-qPCR validated these findings by confirming the increased expression of both genes in the absence of HapX during iron limitation ( ). Interestingly, zinc supplementation reduced ZRT1 and ZRT2 transcript levels, returning them to basal expression (Figure S7). These results suggest that zinc transporter induction in the HapX mutant is influenced by zinc availability and may reflect a compensatory response to metal imbalance during iron starvation. 
Additionally, the expression of a calcium-binding protein (PADG_02399) increased, suggesting a compensatory increase in calcium uptake during iron deprivation ( ). This is further supported by the increased expression of a cation efflux protein (PADG_06308). In the HapX-silenced strain, the copper transporter CRT3 also showed elevated expression. The CorA-like mitochondrial Mg²⁺ transporter (PADG_08314) was derepressed in AsHapX, suggesting its involvement in alternative metal transport routes during stress. Additionally, several transcripts encoding zinc finger domain-containing proteins, including those with Zn (2)-C6 (PADG_02229), ZZ-type (PADG_12,282), and FYVE-type (PADG_05485) domains, were derepressed in AsHapX. 

3.6

## HapX negatively regulates functions of genes involved in cell wall
HapX silencing also led to significant derepressing of genes involved in cell wall biogenesis and remodeling, suggesting a key adaptive mechanism in response to iron deprivation ( ). Transcripts encoding mannan endo-1,6-alpha-mannosidase (PADG_01494), chitinase (PADG_03347), alpha-1,3-glucanase, glucan endo-1,3-beta-d-glucosidase, and two 1,3-beta-glucanosyltransferases were depressed indicating active remodeling of the cell wall structure. These results are corroborated by glucan quantification performed with aniline blue, with the mutant strain exhibiting higher fluorescence than the wild type (see Figure S8). This response likely helps maintain cell integrity under iron-limited conditions. Additionally, increased expression of three hydrophobin genes, was detected as shown in . Another important finding was the increase in the expression of gene encoding laccase (PADG_03184), putatively producing melanin. 

3.7

## Genes induced by HapX during iron starvation
To identify the genes positively affected by HapX, we analyzed the transcription levels of genes that were down-regulated during the steady-state iron-starved condition in the AsHapX strain compared to the wild-type (WT) strain. Table S2 depicts these genes. A total of 48 transcripts decreased in the AsHapX -silenced strain. Approximately 16 % of the regulated genes are involved in general metabolism, 4 % are related to the biogenesis of cellular components, and 10 % correspond to metal-binding genes. Some of the identified genes did not fall into any known functional classification. These findings suggest that HapX plays a central role in not only iron metabolism but also the regulation of broader metabolic and structural processes.

3.8

## Identification of genes regulated by HapX as determined by transcriptome and ChIPSeq analysis
The interactions between HapX and genes within the Paracoccidioides genus remain poorly known. A ChIP-Seq experiment using anti-HapX polyclonal antibodies identified 1513 promoters exhibiting ChIP-Seq peaks, suggesting that these genes are putative targets regulated by HapX. The functional classification of the characterized targets is presented in S3 Table and . The large number of promoter interactions is consistent with HapX’s role as a transcription factor. 
A direct comparison of the transcriptome and ChIP-seq datasets revealed several targets identified as significant in both analyses ( ). Enriched categories such as transport, the electron transport chain, the TCA cycle, cell wall carbohydrate synthesis, and metal binding were related to HapX functionalities. Analysis of the ChIP-Seq and transcriptome datasets revealed that HapX exerts regulatory influence on genes associated with cellular transport, the cell wall, and beta oxidation ( ). Notably, among the identified genes in both analyses, copper transporter CRT3; chitinase; 1,3-beta-glucanosyltransferase; alpha-1,3-glucanase; glucan endo-1,3-beta-d-glucosidase and fungal calcium-binding domain-containing protein were found. This suggests that HapX interacts with and regulates processes related to these genes. Identifying genes that are regulated in the transcriptome and interact with HapX in the ChIP-seq assay provides strong evidence that these genes are influenced by HapX-mediated transcriptional control. 

3.9

## Motifs for HAPX binding
The main HapX binding motifs to P. brasiliensis DNA sequences were identified by MEME analysis, and the most enriched peaks are shown in . The major motif was the sequence 5′ GGGGGCTGGG 3′ with an E-value of 5.3 e-049. The second most significant motif in the analysis was the sequence 5′ CAAGCAGCTG 3′ with an E value of 2.09 e-035. The third most significant motif had an E value of 6.7 e-37 and had the sequence 5′ CCCCCCTCCC 3′. An analysis of the MAST tool included in the MEME suit reveals that multiple binding motifs are present in several gene sequences, occurring in different positions. In some cases, the same motif is observed in different positions along the gene, which could explain the results observed in ChIP-Seq. The MEME tool TOMTOM enables users to search for domains within a database and ascertain whether the domain identified is analogous to any regulatory domain that has been previously documented. Two of the three principal binding motifs identified by ChIP-seq analysis are associated with the C2H2 class of zinc fingers, which in eukaryotes represent the largest family of transcription factors ( ). This class of transcription factors has been identified in genes encoding proteins with diverse functions, including stress response and virulence in fungi. The third motif is part of the bHLH class, which is present in several eukaryotic organisms, including mammals and fungi. The functions of this motif are diverse, varying according to the organism in which it is present ( ). In the fungus Ganoderma lingzhi, transcription factors with the bHLH domain are associated with the regulation of lipid metabolism ( ). 

4

## Discussion
Iron homeostasis in fungi is governed by the actions of transcription factors such as HapX and SreA, which regulate the genes involved in siderophore production and iron uptake. In iron-limiting conditions, the expression of HapX is observed to increase, as evidenced by studies in A. fumigatus, C. neoformans and P. brasiliensis ( ; ; ). HapX plays a pivotal role in maintaining iron balance within the cell by repressing pathways involved in iron consumption and concurrently activating mechanisms that facilitate iron acquisition. In P. brasiliensis, the silencing of HapX led to a reduction in growth in iron deprivation, thereby confirming its essential role. A similar outcome was observed in Beauveria bassiana ( ), where HapX knockout impaired growth in iron-rich conditions and blocked it in the presence of BPS.
Under iron-deprived conditions, increased expression of SreA and Sit1 in the absence of HapX indicates a disruption in the fungal response to iron starvation. Typically, HapX represses SreA under iron-limiting conditions, promoting an appropriate adaptive response. Silencing HapX leads to SreA upregulation, which may hinder the organism’s ability to cope with iron scarcity because SreA is typically active under iron-replete conditions. The upregulation of Sit1, a gene that encodes a siderophore transporter, likely reflects an attempt to compensate by boosting iron acquisition. In A. nidulans, iron homeostasis is tightly controlled by the interaction between the transcription factors SreA and HapX. SreA represses HapX during iron sufficiency and HapX represses SreA during iron deprivation ( ). These findings reinforce the crucial role of HapX in regulating iron homeostasis under limiting conditions.
The recombinant protein HapX has been successfully produced through the process of heterologous expression in bacteria. In addition, polyclonal antibodies directed against this protein have been produced. Confocal immunofluorescence analysis revealed elevated HapX expression in P. brasiliensis under iron-limiting conditions. Analogous findings were reported in A. fumigatus, where northern blot analysis demonstrated elevated HapX expression during iron depletion. These observations underscore the conserved role of HapX in the fungal response to iron scarcity and its transcriptional activation under such stress conditions ( ). Additional data demonstrate that HapX silencing leads to reduced virulence both in macrophages and in vivo in mouse infection models. In a similar manner, in A. fumigatus, HapX inactivation resulted in a reduction in virulence in leukopenic mice ( ). Furthermore, the loss of HapX in C. neoformans led to a reduction in virulence in murine models ( ). These findings underscore the pivotal function of HapX in not only maintaining iron homeostasis but also in the process of fungal pathogenicity.
Silencing HapX resulted in significant transcriptomic alterations, particularly in genes associated with metal homeostasis, lipid metabolism, and cell wall remodeling. The negative control of metal transporters such as ZRT1 and ZRT2 (zinc), CRT3 (copper), suggests a systemic reorganization of metal metabolism, possibly as compensatory mechanisms to cope with iron deficiency. The co-regulation between iron and zinc, also observed in A. fumigatus, may reflect cross-utilization of transporters under stress conditions ( ; ), as suggested by the increased expression of ZRTs in AsHapX5 in this study. In P. brasiliensis, zinc permeases increased in iron deprivation, suggesting that ZRTs may also be capable of absorbing iron in addition to zinc ( ; ). A complementary analysis was performed to assess whether, after zinc supplementation, the expression levels of ZRT in the AsHapX5 strain were restored to those observed in the WT (Supplementary Figure 7). The results showed that expression levels were indeed reestablished, suggesting that the increased expression of ZRTs in AsHapX5 is likely a secondary response to zinc deficiency caused by HapX silencing.
During HapX silencing, there was an increased expression of CTR3 and genes that code for proteins with zinc finger domains. This suggests that HapX normally limits the activity of these genes. The increased activity of CTR3, a gene involved in copper transport, and of zinc finger transcription factors—often associated with regulatory functions in metal homeostasis and stress responses—suggests that HapX may directly or indirectly reduce their expression to maintain metal balance within the cell. Therefore, when HapX is missing, these transcripts become active. The absence of HapX disrupts the tight regulation of iron homeostasis, a critical process for maintaining the balance of metals inside cells. Without functional HapX, cells cannot detect or respond appropriately to iron deprivation. This can lead fungus trying to compensate for the lack of iron by increasing the expression of genes involved in the uptake of other metals, such as copper, zinc, and calcium. This nonspecific metal uptake probably reflects the cell's attempt to deal with the metabolic stress caused by an imbalance in iron. Our data show that CTR3 (copper transporter) and calcium-related transcripts, including calcium-binding proteins, increased when HapX was silenced.
The absence of HapX resulted in significant remodeling of the fungal cell wall. This was evidenced by the derepression of genes that encode chitinases, glucanases, mannosidases, and hydrophobins.This indicates that HapX functions as a negative regulator of various cell wall components. The increased expression of these structural and modifying proteins suggests that the fungus is making a compensatory effort to reinforce the cell wall in response to the stress of iron deprivation. Similarly, the upregulation of laccase, a key enzyme in melanin biosynthesis, reflects a cellular adaptation aimed at enhancing surface protection. Melanin contributes to the hydrophobicity of the cell wall and provides resistance against environmental stresses, which may improve fungal survival under hostile conditions ( ). The same is observed for hydrophobins, whose expression is also derepressed in the absence of HapX. This supports the idea that HapX plays a critical role in maintaining cell wall homeostasis. In the fungus F. oxysporum, HapX regulates genes involved in cell wall degradation during iron deprivation ( ). Taken together, these findings suggest that HapX acts as a central repressor of genes involved in cell wall remodeling. Without HapX, the release of this repression triggers a robust transcriptional response aimed at reinforcing the fungal surface and potentially enhancing survival in iron-limiting environments ( ; ).
Transcripts related to β-glucan metabolism were differentially regulated in the AsHapX strain. Microscopy analyses revealed an increased β-glucan content in the AsHapX compared to the wild-type strain. β-Glucan is a key component of the fungal cell wall that acts as a potent activator of the host immune response. It promotes recognition by pattern recognition receptors and enhances inflammation. Thus, the increased β-glucan content in the silenced strain suggests that HapX silencing altered cell wall composition, rendering it more immunogenic ( ; ). Along with the virulence data, these findings suggest that structural modifications to the cell wall may reduce the fungus's ability to evade host immune defenses, ultimately decreasing virulence.
The GO terms of the differentially expressed genes illustrate the profile of changes in metabolism and cell cycle after HapX knockdown. A comprehensive analysis of the transformant revealed an enrichment of major processes, including protein metabolism and signal transduction. These findings suggest substantial alterations in the regulatory mechanisms employed by yeast cells to maintain homeostasis under conditions of iron deprivation. The loss of balance resulting from HapX reduction may have consequences for the cell that are not yet fully understood. However, it is likely associated with the cell wall and its role in facilitating fungal survival in host conditions.
The induction of SreA in the mutant strain indicates a loss of HapX-mediated repression, disrupting the delicate balance required for iron sensing and regulation. This derepression of genes involved in metal transport and binding highlights the dual role of HapX as both an activator and repressor of distinct genetic programs necessary for adaptation to iron starvation. The observed transcriptional changes underscore the importance of HapX in fine-tuning metal homeostasis and metabolic pathways, ensuring cellular survival under fluctuating environmental iron levels ( ; ).
The ChIP-Seq analysis conducted in this study offers a comprehensive overview of the regulatory network mediated by HapX in P. brasiliensis. The significant number of promoter regions bound by HapX underscores its function as a broad-spectrum transcriptional regulator, thereby reflecting the intricacy of fungal adaptive strategies under iron-limiting conditions. This extensive binding profile is consistent with the function of HapX described in other pathogenic fungi, suggesting a conserved mechanism of response to nutritional stress. ChIP-seq analysis of HapX in A. fumigatus under iron deprivation revealed, through gene ontology enrichment, a strong association with metal-binding proteins. This finding was also observed in our study, both at the transcriptomic level and in our ChIP-seq interaction analysis ( ).
The collective analysis of the data indicates that HapX exerts a regulatory influence over a wide network of genes, thereby facilitating the adaptation of P. brasiliensis to iron-poor environments, such as those encountered within the host tissues. Its absence leads to the activation of alternative survival pathways, but at the cost of reduced virulence and profound reorganization in cellular physiology. These findings contribute to our expanding understanding of Paracoccidioides biology under nutritional stress and underscore the HapX–iron axis as a promising target for specific antifungal therapies. As a transcription factor, HapX may represent a challenging target for drug discovery strategies, since it lacks enzymatic activity and obvious ligand-binding pockets. However, transcription factors are increasingly explored as targets in anticancer research, where their activity can be modulated by disrupting protein–protein or protein–DNA interactions — an approach that could also be envisioned for antifungal drug development ( ). Moreover, similar to other fungal transcription factors, HapX has no human homologs, reducing the likelihood of off-target effects and supporting its potential as a selective target against pathogenic fungi ( ).
The results of this study regarding the role of HapX during iron limitation, along with previous findings in C. neoformans and A. fumigatus under similar conditions, suggest that the regulatory mechanism mediated by HapX is complex and varies among fungal species ( ; ). For example, HapX negatively regulates the expression of GATA factors in A. fumigatus and S. pombe but positively regulates them in C. neoformans ( ; ; ). While HapX is crucial for adapting to iron deprivation, further investigation is needed to understand how it regulates genes not directly involved in iron acquisition, particularly with respect to the affected metabolic pathways. Comparisons with other fungal pathogens mentioned above reveal conserved and species-specific functions of HapX in the regulation of iron homeostasis and virulence. These findings show that the HapX response mechanism is still a challenge that needs further study.
Although our integrative approach combining RNA-seq, qPCR, and ChIP-seq provided a comprehensive overview of HapX-mediated regulation, we recognize inherent limitations in the interpretation of these datasets. RNA-seq captures global transcriptional changes that may include indirect or compensatory effects rather than exclusively reflecting direct HapX-dependent regulation. Similarly, ChIP-seq data can be affected by factors such as antibody affinity, chromatin accessibility, and noise in peak-calling algorithms, which complicate the discrimination between true binding events and transient or non-functional DNA interactions. Additionally, the dynamic nature of transcription factor binding means that only a subset of potential interactions may be detected under the specific experimental conditions used. Therefore, while the overlap between transcriptomic and ChIP-seq datasets reinforces the robustness of our findings, we acknowledge that further functional validation—such as promoter mutagenesis or reporter assays—would strengthen the causal link between HapX binding and gene regulation.

5

## Conclusion
This study emphasizes the pivotal role of HapX in orchestrating the adaptive response of P. brasiliensis to iron-restricted environments. Using a combination of transcriptomic, immunofluorescence, and ChIP-seq analyses, we demonstrate that HapX acts as a repressor and activator of distinct gene networks that are crucial for metal homeostasis, cell wall remodeling, and metabolic balance. The absence of HapX leads to widespread transcriptional deregulation, including the derepression of genes involved in the uptake of alternative metals (zinc, copper, and calcium) and the synthesis of structural components of the fungal cell wall. This indicates the fungus employs disorganized, albeit compensatory, survival strategies. The increase in virulence-related defects and reduced growth under iron deprivation reinforce the importance of HapX in maintaining fungal fitness in hostile environments, such as those encountered during host infection. Furthermore, the broad set of genes directly bound by HapX supports its role as a regulator in response to nutritional stress. Considering the essential processes for fungal survival within the host, such as the regulatory axis controlling iron acquisition and virulence, our findings highlight HapX as a promising target for the development of new antifungal strategies.

## Author contributions
Olivia Basso Rocha: investigation, methodology, visualization, data curation, validation and writing. Alexandre Melo Bailão: review and editing. Lana O’Hara Souza Silva: methodology, visualization and data curation. Marcos Antonio Batista de Carvalho Junior: methodology and writing. Eduardo Carvalho Luzin de Sousa: methodology. Thalison Rodrigues Moreira: data curation. Rodrigo Saar: methodology. Milton Adriano Pelli de Oliveira: methodology. Daniel Graziani: methodology. Evandro Novaes: data curation. Relber Aguiar Gonçales: methodology and validation. Célia Maria de Almeida Soares: conceptualization, investigation, funding acquisition, writing – original draft, methodology, data curation, supervision, formal analysis, writing – review and editing.

## Funding
This work was performed at Universidade Federal de Goiás supported by grants from FAPEG (Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de Goiás), Project INCT-IPH (Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia de Estratégias de Interação Patógeno-Hospedeiro); CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico/01300003409/2024-41), CAPES (Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior/ Finance Code 001). OBR, MABR, ECLS are fellows from CAPES. AMB, EN and CMAS are research fellows from CNPq.
Data availability statement
The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in NCBI as a BioProject with the identifier PRJNA1223884.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
Celia Maria de Almeida Soares reports financial support, article publishing charges, and equipment, drugs, or supplies were provided by Foundation for Research Support of Goiás State. Olivia Basso Rocha reports financial support, article publishing charges, and equipment, drugs, or supplies were provided by Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel (Capes). Eduardo Luzin reports financial support was provided by Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel. Alexandre Melo Bailao reports was provided by National Council for Scientific and Technological Development. Marcos Batista de Carvalho Junior reports financial support was provided by National Council for Scientific and Technological Development. Evandro Novaes reports financial support was provided by National Council for Scientific and Technological Development. Celia Maria de Almeida Soares reports financial support was provided by National Council for Scientific and Technological Development. If there are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 Appendix

## Supplementary materials

Image, application 1
Image, application 2

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.crmicr.2025.100513.