pmcFEMS Microbiol RevFEMS Microbiol Rev2714femsmrfemsreFEMS Microbiology Reviews0168-64451574-6976Oxford University PressPMC12035536PMC12035536.112035536120355364024029310.1093/femsre/fuaf014fuaf0141Review ArticlePseudomonasAcademicSubjects/SCI01150
Pseudomonas aeruginosa as a model bacterium in antiphage defense research
BaeHee-WonProgram of Biopharmaceutical Science, Department of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy and Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, CHA University, Gyeonggi-do 13488, KoreaChoiShin-YaeProgram of Biopharmaceutical Science, Department of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy and Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, CHA University, Gyeonggi-do 13488, KoreaKiHyeong-JunProgram of Biopharmaceutical Science, Department of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy and Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, CHA University, Gyeonggi-do 13488, Koreahttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7942-5893ChoYou-HeeProgram of Biopharmaceutical Science, Department of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy and Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, CHA University, Gyeonggi-do 13488, Korea , Smith et al. ). We do not conceptually distinguish defense from resistance, tolerance, or persistence, given that in case of antibiotics, resistance, tolerance, and persistence can be defined based on the bacterial responses to the antibiotics (Brauner et al. , Balaban et al. , Yan and Bassler ). For example, the CRISPR-Cas system is one of the highly specialized antiphage defense systems and its genes generally belong to the accessory genome, indicating that it is “acquired” rather than “intrinsic” in regard to genomic makeups. The CRISPR-Cas systems target the phages only after the corresponding spacer acquisition, indicating that it is “adaptive” rather than “innate” in regard to mechanistic details. The concept of defense systems is even more complicated when it comes to its regulation in response to phage infections. For example, the Bacillus subtilis SigX, an extracytoplasmic function sigma factor contributing to survival at high temperature (Huang et al. ), is transiently upregulated by phage infections to confer resistance to the cell by inhibiting phage adsorption to its secondary receptor (Tzipilevich et al. ). This defense system is “intrinsic” rather than “acquired”, because SigX belongs to the core genome of B. subtilis (Brutsche and Braun ). It is important to clarify that this inducible response is specifically against phage infections so that this system can be regarded as an antiphage defense system. It is still elusive that this SigX-mediated antiphage defense is not a general stress response, because the exact cue to induce the SigX function is yet to be revealed (Hughes and Mathee , Tzipilevich et al. ). Although deeper understanding of mechanical insights into antiphage defense systems may be necessary for more specific definition, it is true that bacteria continually evolve various strategies to overcome phage infections, resulting in accumulation of diverse antiphage defense and/or resistance systems.
The rapid development of in silico methods and high-throughput screening technologies has revolutionized the field of antiphage defense systems: once only a handful of defense mechanisms were known, over a hundred distinct antiphage defense systems can be identified and characterized across various bacterial species based on sequence homology and genetic organization (Mutalik et al. , Vassallo et al. , Georjon and Bernheim ). These systems exhibit incredible diversity, with molecular mechanisms ranging from simple phage receptor blockade to more sophisticated phage genome cleavage (Bernheim and Sorek , Hampton et al. ). This explosion of knowledge has revealed that antiphage defense systems are far more intricate and complex than previously expected, providing new insights into how bacteria survive phage predation in natural environments.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) has attracted attention for its diverse and adaptable defense strategies (Silby et al. ). This opportunistic pathogen is notorious for its intrinsic antibiotic resistance and ability to thrive even in hospital settings or the lungs of cystic fibrosis patients (Malhotra et al. ). Its remarkable ability to evade both chemical and biological threats including phages is due in part to its highly evolved and diverse antiphage defense systems (Botelho et al. ). These defense systems, combined with its well-defined gene regulation networks, not only protect PA from phage predation but also play critical roles in its genomic evolution, contributing to its adaptability and survival in diverse ecological niches (De Smet et al. ). Therefore, studying the PA antiphage defense systems will offer valuable insights into both the complexity of antiphage responses and the broader ecological and evolutionary implications of phage–bacteria interactions. By focusing on the diversity and universality of the PA defense systems, we can better understand how bacteria balance highly conserved and specialized mechanisms to defend against phage threats.
In this review, we provide a concise summary of antiphage defense research, highlighting two predominant approaches to study these systems. We examine the key defense mechanisms and their classification. Additionally, we underscore the significance of PA in antiphage defense research, focusing on its genomic variability and adaptability in overcoming dynamic environmental challenges including phage predation. By examining both conserved and specialized defense systems, we aim to outline the broader implications of PA as a key model organism in studying the flexibility, diversity, and universality of bacterial antiphage defense systems.

## Classification of antiphage defense systems

## Identification of antiphage defense systems
Antiphage defense systems, especially the acquired ones have been actively identified mostly based on bioinformatic discovery using bacterial genome databases (Fig.  ). The initial attempt had been performed by the Rotem Sorek group, which revealed 10 new defense systems (Doron et al. , Bernheim and Sorek ). The rationale of their approach is that antiphage defense systems are often clustered on the bacterial genome (Makarova et al. , Doron et al. ). The well-known defense systems such as restriction–modification (RM) and CRISPR-Cas systems are the very ground for the defense cluster and the putative domains of the genes with “guilt-by-association” can set the priority of the genes for experimental validation: the genes can be polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplified (if the corresponding bacterial genomes are available) or chemically synthesized and then introduced into model bacterial species, such as Escherichia coli and B. subtilis (Fig.  ). This approach enabled the prediction of the genes potentially involved in antiphage defense (Gao et al. , Hochhauser et al. ). Notably, the newly verified defense genes can act as a new ground for the defense cluster in other genomes, given that the defense genes are often found in genomic islands associated with prophages and mobile genetic elements (Rocha and Bikard , Getz and Maxwell ). The drastically increasing repertoire of the antiphage defense systems led to high-performance bioinformatics pipelines for reliable and fast discovery of new defense genes. For example, DefenseFinder (Tesson et al. ), PADLOC (Payne et al. ), and IslandViewer (Bertelli et al. ) are widely used for high-fidelity identification of the known defense system, which can be used to identify defense clusters from the newly sequenced bacterial genomes.
 This guilt-by-association approach has allowed discovery of new antiphage defense systems, it still has some limitations because it requires functional verification of their defense activity, especially for the genes that may lack sequence similarity to the known systems. Another approach employing functional selection rather than bioinformatic prediction was recently performed by the Mike Laub group to identify 21 previously undiscovered antiphage systems with no known sequence similarity (Vassallo et al. ) as outlined in Fig.  . In their approach, the genomic library from 71 clinical E. coli strains was created in E. coli K-12 as a surrogate host and functional screening the genomic fragments for defense activity against phage infections. This approach directly confirms functionality of potential defense systems and can reveal the new systems with no sequence homology to the known defense systems. Despite these advantages, this approach still requires time-consuming and labor-intensive experimental procedures and is only applicable to model bacteria with enormous genetic tractability. More importantly, the two bacterial systems (E. coli and B. subtilis) and their phage collections may not warrant the functional expression of the heterologous defense genes from the phylogenetically distant bacterial species, which might interfere with unique lifecycles of their own phages.

## Mechanisms of antiphage defense systems
The increasing repertoire of the antiphage defense systems discovered and characterized so far enabled us to broadly categorize into three distinct groups based on their mode of action (MoA): infection exclusion, intracellular immunity, and abortive infection (Abi). Infection exclusion systems block either viral adsorption to the receptor or genome entry into the cytoplasm (Labrie et al. , Dy et al. , Hör et al. ) (Fig.  ), which should occur either at the cell surface or at the cell envelope including cytoplasmic membrane. In contrast, intracellular or direct immune systems interfere with any stage of the phage lifecycle after genome entry (i.e. phage nucleic acids and protein synthesis, virion assembly, and phage progeny release), which mostly occur in the bacterial cytoplasm (Seed , Chevallereau et al. ). It is evident that the membrane component(s) can work together with the intracellular immunity, as exemplified in the Zorya defense systems (Hu et al. ). Zorya systems contain the membrane-embedded sensor/transducer (ZorAB) to recognize phage genome entry and the intracellular effectors (e.g. ZorCD) to degrade invading phage genome for intracellular immunity (Table  ), where the intracellular effectors can vary depending on the types of Zorya systems.
 Unlike the infection exclusion and the intracellular immune systems, Abi systems induce self-inflicted dormancy or death of the infected bacteria that are activated by phage infection and thus limit phage productivity, thereby providing protection to the bacterial population (Lopatina et al. , Aframian and Eldar ). Figure  illustrates the Abi systems, which function similarly to apoptotic cell death observed in virus-infected cells of mammalian immune systems. However, Abi systems do not seem to require other cells to initiate the cell death process, which is yet to be elucidated. Whereas infection exclusion and intracellular immune systems ensure bacterial growth as a solitary defense, Abi infection systems that accompanies the death of the infected cells can be regarded as a social defense deemed belonging to the multicellular behavior. In this review, we focus on the concept of these three antiphage defenses rather than the MoAs of individual defense systems, which are briefly summarized in Table  .
 

## Infection exclusion systems
Infection exclusion is defined as resistance through the systems that work at the cell surface and envelope, which means that these systems interfere with the first two, likely coupled stages of the phage lifecycle, i.e. the phage adsorption to the receptor and the phage genome penetration into the cytoplasm (Fig.  ). Infection exclusion systems can act outside of the bacterial cell, unlike intracellular immune and Abi systems that should operate inside of the infected cells (Arias et al. ). Infection exclusion systems can shield, alter, or eliminate the receptors to prevent the phage adsorption outside of the cell (i.e. adsorption blockade) as well as directly disturb the genome entry at the cytoplasmic membrane (i.e. entry blockade). Infection exclusion systems may also include so called superinfection exclusion systems if the bacterial host exploits the prophage-derived infection exclusion systems, well reviewed elsewhere (De Smet et al. , Schroven et al. ). The adsorption blockade would be the simplest and presumably the most prevalent defense mechanism, in that it occurs at the very first stage of the phage lifecycle to make the host bacteria invisible to the predatory phages (Labrie et al. , Samson et al. , Gaborieau et al. ). For example, bacterial biofilms can be a powerful maneuver for the adsorption blockade: phage penetration and access to the host cells are restricted by the extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) or capsular polysaccharide (CPS) present in biofilms (Darch et al. , Vidakovic et al. ). Phage particles may occasionally become inactive due to binding and sequestration by the biofilm matrix components.
As a first line of defense systems, the adsorption blockade would benefit bacteria by completely preventing phage infection in terms of predation. However, it is noted that the absence of functional receptors may negatively impact bacteria, as these receptors play essential roles in bacterial physiology in regard to molecular transport, nutrient uptake, surface attachment, and motilities (Nikaido , Schroven et al. ). More importantly, phages would be able to develop new adsorption mechanisms.
As another layer of defense, the entry blockade is often directed by proteins that anchor in the outer or cytoplasmic membrane(s) or interact with membrane-bound proteins to prevent phage genome translocation into the cytoplasm (Seed , Leavitt et al. ). The entry blockade is more complicated and less understood in that it requires intricate cellular machinery to prevent the second stage of the phage lifecycle. One of the best examples is E. coli DicB that specifically inhibited infection by λ and other phages that use the ManYZ membrane proteins for cytoplasmic entry of phage DNA (Wang et al. , Ragunathan and Vanderpool ). The entry blockade usually targets a related group of phages (Labrie et al. , Azam and Tanji ). However, compared to receptor blockade, entry blockade provides a clear advantage to the bacterial population: the entry blockade often leads to irreversible phage inactivation, as the incoming phages have already undergone permanent structural changes upon adsorption.

## Intracellular immune systems
Following genome entry, the incoming phage genome should be subjected to the subsequent three steps of the lytic lifecycle by hijacking the host machinery, which include the synthesis of phage genome and materials (nucleic acids and proteins etc.), the virion assembly, and the progeny phage release (Campbell , Weigel and Seitz ). These steps can be targeted by the intricate bacterial machinery primarily working in the cytoplasm (Krupovic et al. , Pires et al. ) (Fig.  ). A large repertoire of these machineries currently comprises the intracellular immune systems, which would be limited to those defense systems that do not cause the cell death or dormancy, distinguishing these from a number of Abi systems (Flajnik and Kasahara , Georjon and Bernheim , Getz and Maxwell ). In this regard, intracellular immune systems are considered as solitary defense systems like infection exclusion systems, given that Abi systems sacrifice the first infected cells to confine the phage infection not to spread out to other bacterial cells in the community.
The heteroimmunity between related phages, which involves phage repressors is one of the classic and canonical examples of intracellular immunity. Phage repressors are prophage-encoded or derived from first invading phages, which inhibits the function of the phage DNA to silence the phage lifecycle in a way to maintain lysogeny or to prevent superinfection (Berngruber et al. , Mavrich and Hatfull ).
Intracellular immune systems range from those specialized in phage genome cleavage to those that inhibit phage nucleic acid (DNA and/or RNA) synthesis, which are concisely summarized by Tal and Sorek ( ). The systems that cleave phage genome include CRISPR-Cas systems (Jinek et al. , Nussenzweig and Marraffini , Watson et al. ), type I and II RM systems (Tao et al. , Loenen et al. ), and prokaryotic argonaut (Makarova et al. , ), whereas nucleotide modifying enzymes such as prokaryotic viperins, dCTP deaminases and dGTPases as well as the secondary metabolism to produce DNA intercalating chemicals (e.g. anthracyclines) can inhibit the synthesis of phage DNA and/or RNA (Kronheim et al. ).
Recently, antiphage defense through phage tail assembly inhibition has been demonstrated as an intracellular immune system (Patel et al. ). Despite the lack of comprehensive understanding about the mechanistic details, new antiphage defense systems identified from functional selection contain putative DNA binding domains with unknown function, suggesting that diverse intracellular immune systems await further identification and characterization (Roach et al. ). Unlike those that cleave the phage genome, the immune systems that inhibit phage DNA/RNA synthesis should be strictly and selectively controlled, because they may occasionally disrupt the bacterial DNA/RNA synthesis. These intracellular immune systems are noteworthy due to their values in biotechnological and pharmaceutical applications, in that they act on nucleic acids in various mechanisms as in the cases of restriction enzymes and CRISPR nucleases.

## Abi systems
These specialized defense systems sacrifice individual cells through irreversible cell death or reversible dormancy to prevent phages from spreading throughout the population of the cells, which shares conceptual similarities with the Fas-mediated apoptosis of the virus-infected cells in the mammalian immune systems (Barber ) (Fig.  ). It is recently evident that some presumable Abi systems do not result in cell death but rather reduce cellular metabolism and generate persister cells (Fineran et al. , Lopatina et al. ). It should also be noted that unlike the canonical CRISPR-Cas eventually targeting phage genomes, some CRISPR-Cas systems such as type I CRISPR immunity in Pectobacterium atrosepticum can induce bacterial dormancy, indicating that some CRISPR-Cas systems function as Abi systems (Watson et al. ).
Toxin–antitoxin (TA) systems are one of the long-known Abi systems with numerous examples. These systems encode a toxin with an activity that inhibits an essential cellular function and a cognate antitoxin (Yamaguchi et al. , Harms et al. ). TA systems are classified into eight types (I–VIII) based on the nature and MoA of antitoxins (Jurėnas et al. ). While antitoxins are either RNAs (types I, III, and VIII) or proteins (types II, and IV–VII), type VIII toxins are RNAs and the majority of toxins are proteins (types I–VII). TA systems are well reviewed in Jurėnas et al. ( ). These systems were discovered in the context of plasmid addiction as well (Carattoli , Van Melderen and Saavedra De Bast ). The first example of a TA system as an antiphage defense system is the Type I TA system, Hok/Sok (Gerdes et al. , Song and Wood ).
Retrons, the bacterial genetic elements discovered decades ago, were recently characterized as antiphage defense systems working thorough Abi (Millman et al. ). Retrons were identified due to their frequent association with the other defense genes (Millman et al. , Bobonis et al. ). Antiphage defense units of retrons are composed of a reverse transcriptase, a noncoding RNA, and an effector protein. In the case of retron Ec48, for example, it sequesters RecBCD, normally required for bacterial survival during phage infection.
The antiphage defense systems mediated by intracellular signaling nucleotides also belong to the Abi systems. These systems include CBASS (cyclic oligonucleotide-based antiphage signaling system), Pycsar (pyrimidine cyclase system for antiphage resistance), and Thoeris (Doron et al. , Cohen et al. , Tal et al. ). These systems encode an enzyme to generate signaling nucleotides and an effector protein to induce cell death. The effector functions resemble those of toxins in TA systems, but these effectors become activated only when the signaling nucleotides are generated by the cognate enzymes in response to phage infections (Russell et al. , Lopatina et al. ). It is noteworthy that these systems highlight the cross-kingdom conservation of the molecular mechanisms in immune systems (Bernheim et al. ).
Other defense systems that work through Abi are PrrC and bacterial gasdermins: PrrC is the tRNA(Lys) anticodon nuclease, which is activated by the phage T4 Stp protein and then leads to ribosomal dysfunction by tRNA depletion (Kaufmann , Meineke et al. ). Gasdermin proteins are known to form large membrane pores in human cells that release immune cytokines and induce cell lysis (Xia et al. , Russo et al. ), whose homologs have also been identified in bacterial immune systems (Johnson et al. ). The bacterial gasdermins (bGSDM) are activated by a similar cascade involving caspase-like proteases that removes the inhibitory C-terminal peptide with concomitant bGSDM pore assembly and cell death called pyroptosis.
These Abi systems benefit the bacterial community by providing protection at the population level when cell numbers are sufficient. However, they inevitably sacrifice individual cells that might otherwise be crucial to the population survival, particularly in natural environments where cell density is lower. More importantly, it needs to be more comprehensively investigated whether or not the death of the infected cells could influence the other cells in the population or vice versa (Fig.  ).

## 
Resources of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in antiphage defense research

Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) is a Gram-negative opportunistic pathogen that is commonly found in a variety of environments such as water, soil, and plants (Mena and Gerba , Pereira et al. ), and can infect various organisms, including plants, animals, and humans (He et al. , Breidenstein et al. ). This multihost opportunistic pathogen is also one of the most common causes of healthcare-associated diseases, including airway infections, urinary tract infections, wound infections, and bloodstream infections, especially in patients with immunocompromised individuals or those with chronic diseases (Martínez-Solano et al. ). Moreover, most PA-caused infections are significantly difficult to treat with conventional antibiotic regimes, as PA displays a high degree of intrinsic resistance to a wide range of currently used antibiotics such as β-lactams, aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones, and macrolides (Pachori et al. ), resulting in significant morbidity and mortality rates (Pang et al. ).
PA is renowned for its genetic tractability as a model bacterium with unique genomic and biological characteristics particularly in terms of phage–bacteria interactions involving various PA phages and their well-defined receptors. Significant attention has been paid to experimental phage therapy involving PA strains and PA phages. Now the importance regarding PA biology in antiphage defense research can be summarized in three key aspects: the genome plasticity and extensive accessory genome, the diversity of PA phages, and the phage receptors.

## Genomic landscape of PA
PA employs a range of adaptive strategies that enable it to thrive in diverse environments, including within hosts and under hostile conditions. One of its key attributes is prevalent antibiotic resistance, driven by the rapid acquisition of resistance genes through genetic mutations and horizontal gene transfer (Partridge et al. ). Additionally, PA forms biofilms, which are surface-attached bacterial communities within complex extracellular matrix, providing robust protection against external threats such as antibiotics, immune responses, and even phage attacks (Blackman et al. ). These capabilities are orchestrated by sophisticated regulatory mechanisms, allowing PA to balance solitary and social behaviors to enhance survival and fitness. These adaptive features make PA a remarkably resilient model bacterium, capable of continuous genomic evolution in response to dynamic environmental changes, leading to substantial clonal diversity among environmental and clinical isolates (Ryall et al. , Moradali et al. ).

## Genomic plasticity and diversity
PA exhibits exceptional genomic plasticity, which underpins its ability to adapt to a wide range of natural and host environments. This adaptability leads to extreme genetic diversity in the PA isolates, reflecting the versatile lifestyle of this bacterial species (Grosso-Becerra et al. ). PA possesses a large, highly variable genome, notable for having one of the highest proportions of regulatory genes (∼10%) among sequenced bacterial genomes (Wolfgang et al. ). The size of PA genomes ranges from 5.5 to 7 Mb, with a G + C content of 65%–67%. The reference strains PAO1 and PA14, for instance, contain more than 500 regulatory genes (Stover et al. , Lee et al. ). This feature suggests that PA may provide a means to coordinate gene expression for growth and survival in hostile conditions including exposure to antibiotics, phages, and immune responses.
In a previous study by Wolfgang et al ( ), 24 strain-specific gene clusters, termed “variable segments,” were identified as preferential sites for the integration of genetic islands, using whole-genome DNA microarrays of 18 PA strains. Although these variable segments are scattered throughout the genome, a substantial number are located immediately adjacent to tRNA or tmRNA genes (Fig.  ). It should be noted that the variable segments generally exhibit a distinct GC content distribution, indicative of horizonal gene transfer from phylogenetically distant sources.
 Comparative genome studies such as that by Mathee et al. ( ) using the genome data of PAO1, PA14, 2192, C3719, and PACS2 highlights the presence of “regions of genome plasticity” (RGPs) on the PA genomes (Mathee et al. , Klockgether et al. ), with at least 89 RGPs identified in the PA genomes. Notably, Freschi et al. ( ) performed the comparative genomic analyses using the sequenced 1,311 PA genomes and suggested that only a small fraction (665 genes) belong to the core genome, which is essential for basic cellular functions, constituting only 1.2% of the entire PA pangenome. In contrast, the PA pangenome has 26,420 flexible genes (48.7%) that are present in more than one strain and 27,187 unique genes (50.1%) that are present so far in single strains. Large proportions of flexible and unique genes constitute the accessory genome, enriched with prophages and mobile genetic elements (MGEs), and primarily located at the RGPs, which contribute to the adaptability of this bacterium. As noted in Fig.  , they appear to have been acquired through horizontal gene transfer from various sources (Thomas and Nielsen ). The individual composition of these accessory genes accounts for the extreme genetic diversity in PA among all the bacterial species. Thus, the PA chromosome is often described as a mosaic structure, with the conserved core genome segments interspersed by the accessory gene regions. Continuous genomic alterations, particularly through the en bloc acquisition of accessory genes, constantly reshape the genome makeups and modulate the phenotypes of the strains (Weimann et al. ).

## Genomic adaptability: defense islands
The extraordinary adaptability associated with the ultimate genomic plasticity positions the PA strains and their genomes as an ideal source for studying new antiphage defense systems. Alongside its genomic diversity and genetic tractability, the extensive collection of diverse PA phages (see the next section) further supports its utility in antiphage defense research. For example, a recent study by Costa et al. ( ) demonstrated that clinical PA strains with high frequency of phage resistance harbor rich array of antiphage defense systems and that individual defense systems target specific phage genera.
Specialized genomic regions, defined as defense islands, contain the accessory genes dedicated to antiphage defenses. They harbor diverse well-known antiphage defense systems such as RM systems, CRISPR-Cas genes, TA systems, and other Abi systems (Hussain et al. , Hochhauser et al. ). Many newly identified defense systems, often predicted through bioinformatics, are likely concentrated in these defense islands, underscoring their evolutionary significance in safeguarding bacterial populations from phage predation. Johnson et al. ( ) revealed that PA possesses unparalleled diversity in antiphage defense systems, with two core RGPs (cDHS1 and cDHS2, i.e. core defense hotspots 1 and 2) serving as the integration sites for defense islands. They are also present in PAO1 at the previously identified variable segments (Fig.  ). Defense islands at cDHS1 are larger (median size of 26 kb) and contain over 30 distinct defense systems, while those at cDHS2 are smaller (median size of 6 kb) with 24 distinct defense systems. Many of the cDHS-associated genes remain functionally uncharacterized, potentially representing novel antiphage defense mechanisms. The redundancy and diversity of these systems in the PA defense islands reflect the intense evolutionary arms race between PA and their phages.

## Phage strains in PA
Another impact of PA in antiphage defense research is that a panel of phage strains that infect PA strains have also been identified extensively (Costa et al. ). Phages that infect the Pseudomonas genus were first described in the mid-twentieth century (Kellenberger and Kellenberger , Holloway and Fargie ), and there are currently (14 November 2024) 1084 fully sequenced Pseudomonas phage genomes in NCBI database. Specifically, more than 750 of these are PA phages, making them the most represented within the Pseudomonas phage genomes. There are some representative groups of PA phages, most of them are double-stranded (ds)DNA phages (myophages, podophages, and siphophages), whereas some are either single-stranded (ss)DNA phages (inophages) or ssRNA phages (fiersphages) (Table  ).
 

## Myophages
Myophages have dsDNA genomes of relatively larger size (typically 40∼300 kb) and contractile tail morphology. A specific group called jumbo phages are defined as those with an exceptionally large genome size exceeding 200 kb (Harding et al. ). For example, the PA phage ΦKZ was the first jumbo phage discovered in 1978, but more than 20 species have been isolated since then. Jumbo phages, like other myophages, mainly target lipopolysaccharide (LPS) as their receptor (Olszak et al. ). They encode many hypothetical proteins as well. These aspects make jumbo phages widely studied in phage–bacterial interactions and antiphage research (Malone et al. , Li et al. ). PA jumbo phages share some lifestyle features, although most of them are classified into two major phage clusters, i.e. ΦKZ-like phage clusters (now classified into the Chimalliviridae family) and T4-like phage clusters (Naknaen et al. ). Unlike the T4-like jumbo phages (e.g. PAoct5, MIJ3, and Callisto), the Chimalliviridae phages encode conserved proteins responsible for the formation of the phage nucleus-like shell and tubulin spindle during phage replication (Chaikeeratisak et al. ). A large proteinaceous nuclear shell is formed in the cytoplasm of the infected bacteria after phage DNA injection. It surrounds the phage DNA and separates it from the host cytoplasm, allowing the replication and transcription of phage DNA to safely occur inside the phage nucleus (Chaikeeratisak et al. ). This feature provides pan-resistance to the DNA-targeting bacterial immune system and (Mendoza et al. ) ends up with recent identification of new intracellular immune system called “jumbo phage killer” (Juk) that specifically detects ΦKZ-like jumbo phages early in infection, blocks phage replication, and rescues the infected bacterial cell (Li et al. ).
In addition to the fundamental aspects regarding phage–bacteria interactions, ΦKZ-like jumbo phages and other myophages show effective and robust killing activity against PA strains and thus great potential in tackling urgent healthcare challenges, especially antibiotic resistance and biofilm-related infections caused by PA strains. It is recently reported that the nucleus-forming jumbo phage, ΦKZ shows superior characteristics to a T4-like jumbo phage, Callisto in regard to antibacterial activity in vitro, antibacterial efficacy in vivo, and phage-resistance emergence (Naknaen et al. ).

## Podophages
Podophages have dsDNA genomes of relatively small size (40–50 kb) and the stubby, noncontractile tail morphology. Representative podophages belong to the PA phage genus Phikmvvirus including ΦKMV, LUZ19, MPK6, and MPK7 (Bae and Cho , Lavigne et al. ). They are similar to E. coli phage T7 in genome signature as well as lifecycle. For example, ΦKMV is a highly virulent phage, producing large (3–15 mm diameter) discernable plaques on its susceptible hosts (Virus Taxonomy 2019 Release; Lammens et al. ). These podophages use TFP as their primary receptor (Table  ), with two exceptions of LKA1 and MPK6 that require LPS (Ceyssens et al. , Heo et al. ). It should be noted that LKA1 and MPK6 produce smaller plaques (∼1 mm) than ΦKMV and MPK7 (Lavigne et al. , Yu et al. ).
There is another podophage group belonging to the genus Jamesmcgillvirus, which include the PA phage strains PaMx32 and PaMx41, showing unusually lower GC content (∼45%) (Sepúlveda-Robles et al. ). PaMx41 has been used to screen for its gp24 mutants (X37Q) that escape the CBASS-mediated defense mechanism, leading to identification of Acb2, which are encoded by other naturally CBASS-resistant podophages such as PaMx33, PaMx35, and PaMx43 and even by temperate phages (e.g. JBD67) (Huiting et al. ).
Based on their similarity to E. coli phage T7, PA podophages can be extensively investigated to identify the phage elements useful for genetic tools in PA strains. For example, Klimuk et al. ( ) revealed that bacterial RNA polymerase activity could be inhibited by T7 Gp2-like proteins from these podophages, which include LUZ19 Gp25.1 and LKA1 Gp36. Moreover, their high in vitro killing activity has been translated into therapeutic applications in various animal infection models with no adverse side effects observed (Cámara et al. , Wan et al. ). A phage cocktail for human clinical trials for burn wound infections also included a PA podophage (BFC-1) (Merabishvili et al. , Rose et al. ). Hence, deeper understanding of the lifecycle of these podophages and the roles of the phage gene products in their lifecycle are also important and helpful in antibacterial discovery and treatments.

## Siphophages
Siphophages have dsDNA genomes of relatively small size (35–60 kb) and the long, noncontractile, flexible tail morphology. Some siphophages such as YuA and MP1412 (Ceyssens et al. , Bae et al. ) have an elongated head morphotype (B3), in contrast to most of the known siphophages showing the B1 morphotype (Ackermann ). This includes PA phages of the Casadabanvirus genus: D3112, DMS3, MP22, MP29, and LPB1 (Heo et al. , Chung and Cho ). These siphophages have ∼37 kb DNA genome containing about 55 protein-coding genes. They are mostly temperate phages and require TFP as their receptor. They undergo Mu-like phage lifecycle, integrating into the host genome to form lysogeny. Consequently, they often provide the phage morons, i.e. the genes that are expressed in the stationary prophage, which provide a selective advantage to the bacterial host (Juhala et al. , Tsao et al. , Shah et al. ). They are not essential for the phage lifecycle but can enhance bacterial fitness or pathogenicity. Phage morons have been shown to affect bacterial physiology in diverse ways, including elevation of antibiotic resistance, modulation of motility and sessility, and alteration in cellular metabolism (Taylor et al. ). Many notable prophage-encoded functions are revealed from these PA siphophages in PA strains, which includes motility inhibitors, quorum-sensing inhibitors, and anti-CRISPR proteins, indicative of the relevance of the resources to study antiphage defense mechanisms in PA strains, based on the synteny within these phage strains despite their different phenotypes (Bondy-Denomy et al. , Chung et al. , Pawluk et al. , Bondy-Denomy et al. , Shah et al. ). Their temperate nature associated with prophage-mediated phenotypic conversion will thus be pivotal in phage biology as well as in antiphage defense research, in that they possess lots of the genes awaiting functional characterization to understand phage-driven survival and evolution of the host PA strains.

## Inophages
Inophages have ssDNA genomes of small size (5,000–10,000 nt) and filamentous morphology similar to that of the E. coli phage M13. Inophages are continuously extruded from the infected bacterial cell without causing regulated cell lysis, allowing for persistent phage replication and long-term interaction with the host bacteria. The most well-known PA inophage is Pf1, which is nonintegrative and infects PAK via TFP as its receptor (Secor et al. ). Other PA inophages are known as prophages integrated into the host PA genomes: Pf4 and Pf5 are the prophages in strains PAO1 and PA14, respectively at the different genomic locations (att1 vs att2) (Table  and Fig.  ) (Kim et al. ). Pf4 has been extensively studied as well, in that it can be induced under certain stress conditions particularly in biofilm formation and dispersal (Rice et al. , McDougald et al. ). Pf4 often remains dormant within its bacterial host PAO1, but contributes to the generation of small colony variants, facilitates microcolony formation, and enhances bacterial virulence (Tortuel et al. , Gavric and Knezevic ). Furthermore, Pf4 promotes tolerance to tobramycin and resistance to sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (Long et al. ). It also reduces swimming and twitching motility (Schmidt et al. , Tortuel et al. ). Recently, Pf4-encoded PfsE has been identified as an antiphage defense protein to inhibit TFP assembly by specifically interacting with the pilus platform protein (PilC) (Tortuel et al. ).
Sweere et al. ( ) reported that Pf1-like inophages were detected in 25 of 37 PA-infected wounds in their patient cohort and confirmed a positive correlation between inophage-positiveness and disease severity. The Pf4 from PAO1 can be endocytosed into the mammalian immune cells and the production of Pf4 RNA can trigger type I cytokine production through Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) and suppress opsonization for phagocytic cells. It should be noted that this immune modulation is unique to Pf4, in that the E. coli inophage, fd, did not affect cytokine production or phagocytosis (Secor et al. ). Despite the aforementioned impacts of inophages and the related prophages detected in over 20% of all the sequenced PA strains, the roles of PA inophages in phage–bacteria interactions and bacteria–mammalian need to be further examined.

## Fiersphages
Fiersphages have smallest (less than 4,000 nt) ssRNA genomes and tailless icosahedral morphology similar to that of the E. coli phage MS2 (Emesvirus zinderi). The virion consists of 180 coat proteins (CPs) in 90 capsomers and 2 maturation proteins (MPs) (Golmohammadi et al. , Ni et al. ). The genome contains only four proteins: CP, MP, lysis protein (LP) and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RP). The mechanism of their genome replication can mirror that of many eukaryotic RNA viruses, which are more prevalent than DNA viruses in the infectious diseases in crops, livestock, and humans (Koonin , Wu et al. ). This feature will make the fiersphages useful models for comparative virology, providing insights into RNA virus biology and evolution. This is largely based on the high mutation rates of error-prone RNA replication and would be the rationale for the diversity of the RNA viruses (Holmes ). Studying RNA phages will also contribute to our understanding about the early evolution of life and the “RNA world” hypothesis, which posits that early life forms may have relied on RNA as both genetic material and catalysts (Morris and Mattick ). Although more than 90% of known phages to date are dsDNA phages, the first ssDNA, dsRNA, and ssRNA phages were isolated back in the 1930s and 1970s (Sertic and Boulgakov , Loeb and Zinder , Vidaver et al. ). This represents the underappreciation of the fiersphages in phage biology.
It is remarkable that all phages in this and related families require bacterial pilus as their receptor. For example, both MS2 and Qβ (Qubevirus durum) require the conjugative sex pilus encoded by F plasmid, whereas the broad host range phage, PRR1 (Perrunavirus olsenii) require the conjugative pilus encoded by IncP plasmids such as RP4 (RK2), which are occasionally observed in some Gram-negative bacteria with antimicrobial resistance (Kotilainen et al. , Harb et al. ). The fiersphages that infect PA strains are PP7 (Pepevirus rubrum) and LeviOr01 (Pepevirus spumicola). Both of which require TFP for their infection although they are selected by different group of pilins (Pourcel et al. , Kim et al. , Bae et al. ).
In the era of RNA pharmaceuticals after COVID-19, RNA phages need to be more extensively investigated and more actively translated into synthetic biology tools for delivering RNA-based genetic materials and enhancing the therapeutic potential (Damase et al. , Rinoldi et al. ). Studying fiersphages not only enhances knowledge of phage diversity but also informs broader fields of virology, evolution, and biotechnology.

## Phage receptors of PA
The nature and location of the host cell receptors recognized by phages varies greatly depending on the phage and host bacterial cell, ranging from peptides or protein regions to polysaccharide moieties. Indeed, phages have been shown to adsorb to the receptors on the various locations of the bacterial surface structures, which represent the cell wall components such as lipoteichoic acids, LPS, and OM proteins (Xia et al. , Marti et al. , Hantke ) and the cellular appendages such as flagella and pili (Guerrero-Ferreira et al. , Shin et al. ). This diversity in receptors may be reflected by the diverse mechanisms to overcome the evolutionary strategies adopted by the phages. In all cases to date, adsorption has been shown to be associated with the components or protruding structures of the bacterial cell surface. As a Gram-negative bacterium, PA provides the OM structures and the OM-embedded proteins (e.g. OprF and OprM) as well as the cellular appendages (e.g. flagellum and TFP). Among those, LPS and more preponderantly TFP are the primary receptors for the aforementioned PA phages (Köhler et al. , Kim et al. ), although some phages such as OMKO1 use OprM and flagellum as their primary receptors (Kortright et al. , Kim et al. ) (Table  ).

## LPS
LPS consists of three parts: lipid A, the core polysaccharide, and O-polysaccharide (O-antigen). The O-antigens consisting of group A and B polysaccharides are highly diverse and determine the serotypes of the PA stains, with the core polysaccharides being more conserved across the PA strains. For this reason, phages targeting O-antigens have a narrower host range than those like ΦPLS27 and ΦCTX that are adsorbing to the core polysaccharide (Rakhuba et al. , Bertozzi et al. , De Smet et al. ). Heo et al. ( ) demonstrated that two LPS-specific phages (MPK1 and MPK6) require group B polysaccharide of O-antigens, whereas MPK1 has other minor receptors in the absence of group B polysaccharide.
It is noted that LPS is selected mostly by myophages as their receptor, whereas the other phages utilize predominantly TFP in PA strains (Table  ). Considering the distribution of LPS that is on the entire cell surface, LPS would be a more accessible scaffold as the phage receptor than TFP, which is located only at the pole of the cell (Chiang et al. ). Moreover, unlike LPS, TFP is structurally dynamic and even absent in some strains (Persat et al. ). Nevertheless, it is speculative that most myophages use LPS as their receptor due to their long, rigid tails, which tend to adsorb to the large and static scaffold. Given that LPS just provides the adsorption scaffold for the phage particles, the phages that bind to LPS would require another maneuver to actively inject their genome into the cytoplasm. This can be achieved by more complex structure of their virion and large repertoire of the genes, which are specialized in phage genome entry and warrant further verification.

## TFP
As described in the previous section, most PA phages described in this review utilize TFP as their receptor as a conduit for genome entry (Table  ). Unlike LPS, TFP is a highly dynamic cellular appendage that plays critical roles in various bacterial processes, including twitching motility, mechanosensing, surface attachment, biofilm formation, and DNA uptake (Mattick , Leighton et al. ). TFP is a long, hairy structure that extends from the surface of the cell and largely made up of the major pilin protein (PilA) and polymerized into a helical filament with some minor pilin proteins assembled into the TFP filament (Proft and Baker , Pelicic ). The complex machinery works at the cell pole to polymerize the TFP filament, which requires many accessory proteins (e.g. PilB, PilT, PilQ, and PilC). The pilin polymerization leading to the TFP assembly and extension is driven by the PilB ATPase, while the pilin depolymerization resulting in the TFP disassembly and retraction is mediated by the PilT ATPase. The iteration of polymerization and depolymerization makes TFP a highly dynamic structure that can extend up to several micrometers and retract fully within seconds and thus provide versatility for the bacterial processes including phage uptake (Craig et al. , Koch et al. ). It should be noted that TFP-specific phages bind to the different locations on the TFP helical filament (Aas et al. ). As illustrated in Fig.  , most of the TFP-specific phages such as JBD30 and PP7 bind to the shaft of TFP (Thongchol et al. , Valentová et al. ), whereas some F10-like phages such as JBD68 bind to the tip of the TFP (Sztanko et al. ). Upon binding, rapid retraction or axial bending of TFP filament could induce physical proximity for the phages to attach to the OM of the cells and generate a mechanical force for the phage genome to be released from the phage particles and penetrate into the cell envelope (Fig.  ). A recent study by the Junjie Zhang and Lanying Zeng groups unveiled the exact mechanism for the genome entry for the fiersphage PP7 (Thongchol et al. ): PP7 hijacks TFP retraction to be brought closer to the cell envelope and detaches TFP for the MP-bound genomic RNA to be pulled through the OM PilQ dodecamer into the cytoplasm just as a pop tab on a coke can (Nudleman and Kaiser , Thongchol et al. ) (Fig.  ). Although more precise mechanisms for the genome entry for TFP-specific phages might differ and yet to be discovered, the physical proximity and the mechanical force should be essential for the phage genome to be released from the capsid and enter into the cytoplasm, whether or not the process can be facilitated by additional phage enzymes (Kindt et al. , Purohit et al. ).
 Given that TFPs are pivotal in phage–bacteria interactions with their dynamic nature and multifunctionality, TFPs show extensive natural variability in the pilin structures, which can be categorized into three key aspects: PilA sequence variability, pilin component diversity, and posttranslational modifications (Nguyen et al. , Giltner et al. , Zöllner et al. ). PilA exhibits significant sequence variability among various PA strains, which are often grouped into five allelic variants (Kus et al. ). Notably, the pilin alleles covary in the same operon with the accessory pilin components (TfpX, TfpY, and TfpZ) for pilin component diversity and/or the glycosylase enzymes (TfpO and TfpW) for posttranslational modifications (Asikyan et al. ). Each PA strain expresses one of five PilA alleles, although the majority of the pilus fiber consists of PilA, the minor components are also present in surface-exposed TFPs (Nguyen et al. , Leighton et al. ): For example, PAO1 and PAK contain group II (G2) pilin with no accessory genes linked to the pilA gene, whereas PA14 contain group III (G3) pilin with the tfpY gene linked to the pilA gene (Asikyan et al. , Giltner et al. ). It is probable that the TFP natural variability plays a role in infection exclusion if the structural variation could affect the phage–TFP interactions. It should be noted that the siphophage MP22 can infect both PAO1 and PA14, whose pilin groups differ and that the fiersphage PP7 can infect PAO1, but not PAK, both of which have G2 pilins (Heo et al. , Chung et al. , Kim et al. ). Nevertheless, the pilin natural variability needs to be more comprehensively investigated as an important determinant in selecting phage species, which would function as an infection exclusion measure.

## Antiphage defense systems in PA
As an important human pathogen in the era of antibiotic resistance, PA strains have been extensively isolated and characterized due to their clinical, ecological, and biological significance, comparable to any other important bacterial pathogens (Alonso et al. ). The Pseudomonas genome database (http://pseudomonas.com) currently contains 633 complete and 7,982 draft whole genome sequences of PA strains, which can serve as a reliable source for antiphage defense genes. Furthermore, the versatility of PA to adapt itself to dynamic and challenging environments enables this bacterium into genetic as well as phenotypic adaptations (Moradali et al. ). Genetic or inherent adaptation is often via acquisition of specialized or professional genetic elements to enhance the repertoire of the accessory genome and operates over long timescales, whereas phenotypic adaptation does not involve specialized genetic changes, but relies on the genes belonging to the core genome and often on inducible gene expression for rapid adaptation (Moradali et al. ). Therefore, the antiphage defense systems can be largely categorized in this respect as they can function as adaptation processes to phage infections: acquired defense systems are defined as the defense systems belonging to the accessory genome, in contrast to intrinsic defense systems that require the genes on the core genome. For example, biofilm growth or EPS production that can act as receptor shields is considered as intrinsic antiphage defenses in PA strains. If the accessory proteins in the pilA gene cluster could direct the antiphage defense (Harvey et al. , Sztanko et al. ), it should be acquired antiphage defense, because the accessory genes (tfpO and tfpW) encoding glycosylases are not the core genes in the PA strains. Nevertheless, both are antiphage defense systems with the same MoA of infection exclusion.

## Acquired defense systems
These systems are bona fide antiphage defense systems in the accessory genome generally acceptable in the antiphage defense research community (Georjon and Bernheim ). Considering the genomic plasticity of PA strains, acquired defense systems should refer to those directed by the accessory genome of this species, because they have the professional defense function against phage predation. Thus, the PA pangenomes would be enriched with considerably diverse professional antiphage defense genes. According to Johnson et al. ( ), the PA pangenome has the particularly highest Shannon entropy of defense (a measure of the uncertainty or randomness of a system), indicating its extremely enriched immune systems. This suggests that PA would be a great model bacterium for characterization and discovery of novel antiphage defense systems and mechanisms. CBASS and Type I RM systems are the most common antiphage defense systems present in 53% and 49% of the PA pangenome, respectively, followed by Gabija, CRISPR-Cas, Wadjet, and Juk, all present in more than 20% of the PA pangenome. Moreover, of the ten most common antiphage defense systems, only four (Type I and II RM, Type I–F and I–E CRISPR-Cas) systems are known in PA, implying that numerous antiphage defense systems remain undiscovered.
The defense islands in PA strains are considered as a rich source of previously unidentified antiphage defense genes (Johnson et al. , Costa et al. ). The use of these genes as targeting sites for the integration of MGEs is well-documented as well (Williams ). At least 4,640 PA genomes from the Pseudomonas genome database reveal an extensive diversity in antiphage defense systems, which are clustered at the two conserved genomic loci, cDHS1 and cDHS2. Both cDHS1 and cDHS2 can serve as the hotspots for the defense islands as a consistent source for antiphage defense mechanisms in the PA pangenome. Based on these genomic makeups, Johnson et al. ( ) also demonstrated that a 3-gene operon (Shango) commonly present in cDHS1 (∼12% of the analyzed PA genomes) is a novel antiphage defense system in PA strains.
Burke et al. ( ) also suggested a positive correlation between phage resistance and antiphage defense systems: a total of 75 antiphage defense genes and 44 candidate defense genes were identified from 100 PA clinical isolates by PADLOC, which are not evenly distributed throughout the strains. The most prevalent one is PD-T4-6 (encoding a kinase) found in 97 PA strains, followed by SoFic (standalone protein with Fic domain) encoding a protein capable of AMP ligation onto proteins (88 strains), RM systems (67 strains), CRISPR-Cas systems (42 strains), and CBASS (42 strains). It should be noted that RM, CRISPR-Cas, and SoFic systems are also the most prevalent in the bacterial defensomes of 7,759 high-quality bacterial population genomes reconstructed from soil, marine, and human gut environments (Beavogui et al. ). This suggests that the antiphage defense systems in PA would reflect the universality of the antiphage defense systems, despite the limited number of the PA strains used in the study (Burke et al. ).
More importantly in the study by Burke et al ( ), the association of antiphage defense systems with phage resistance is largely attributed to intracellular immunity and Abi in PA strains, although the other study by using a panel of 403 E. coli and 96 phage strains suggests that the phage resistance in E. coli is preponderantly associated with infection exclusion (Gaborieau et al. ). To unify and better understand such species-specific differences in prevalence of antiphage defense mechanisms, which may reflect the complex evolutionary trajectories involving horizontal gene transfer in diverse bacteria species, more and more bacterial and phage species and strains need to be included for functional validation of the association between the types of the antiphage defense systems and the phage resistance phenotypes in the pan-bacterial defensome.

## Intrinsic defense systems
Although the concept of antiphage defense systems has become increasingly broadened, a unified definition of what constitutes an antiphage defense system is still controversial, as several different layers of antiphage resistance mechanisms exist. For example, the infection exclusion systems interfering with phage adsorption can be considered as antiphage defense systems, as described in the earlier section of this review. However, by definition, the infection exclusion systems involving the genes of the accessory genome as the key determinant would be acquired defense systems, whereas those involving the core genes as the key determinant should be intrinsic or core-gene defense systems. It is evident that the core genes have essential roles in the bacterial growth and survival in the natural habitats, their roles in antiphage defense would be regarded as fortuitous. This is why these systems are regarded as intrinsic or nonprofessional defense systems.
An authentic example of the intrinsic antiphage defense systems is the defense system that involves the stress-responsive sigma factor (σX) in B. subtilis, in that it was activated in response to phage infection in the neighboring bacteria and rendered the cells reversibly resistant to phages through the σX-dependent gene expression network (Tzipilevich et al. ). There are, however, a few examples of intrinsic defense systems in PA, since the current knowledge about the antiphage defense systems of the PA pangenome has been obtained largely based on the homology with those of the acquired defense systems in other bacteria.
Although not much has been known about intrinsic defense systems against the majority of the DNA phages, our group demonstrated that the RNA phage, PP7 could not infect PA strains (e.g. PAK and PA14), which have the different PilA alleles from that of the susceptible stain, PAO1 (Kim et al. ). This is an example of intrinsic antiphage defense systems deploying the core gene (pilA) natural variability for adsorption blockade. Moreover, our recent study showed that the PA mutants for the secondary lipid A acylase gene (htrB2) are highly susceptible to the RNA phage infection (Bae et al. ), suggesting that HtrB2-mediated OM integrity functions as an intrinsic defense against the RNA phages (i.e. entry blockade). Consequently, the aforementioned genes (pilA and htrB2) are the examples of the intrinsic defense genes in PA strains, since these genes are part of the core genes within the PA strains and thus play their own innate physiological roles, which are not specialized for antiphage defense. Considering the physiological versatility and adaptability of clonally diverse PA strains in clinical and environmental habitats, more intrinsic defense systems can be identified from PA strains and genomes.

## Concluding remarks and perspectives
The evolutionary interplay between bacteria and phages has driven the emergence of diverse antiphage defense strategies. In this review, we summarized the recent advancement in identifying and characterizing antiphage defense systems to understand their diversity from an evolutionary perspective across many bacterial species. We emphasize the significance of PA as a model bacterium in antiphage defense research, owing to its adaptability and versatility reflected by the extensive accessory genome. PA has been instrumental in studying various aspects of phage–bacteria interactions. For instance, the first intracellular immune system against jumbo phage (JukAB) was identified from a PA strain (PA14) (Li et al. ). And the first virion assembly inhibitor (Tab) and even the first anti-CRISPR genes were identified from the PA siphophages such as JBD26, DMS3, and MP29 (Bondy-Denomy et al. , Patel et al. ).
Many PA strains possess a vast array of genes in the accessory genome, which comprises up to 99% of the PA pangenome (Kung et al. ). The accessory genome including high number of prophages and MGEs encodes numerous antiphage defense systems, many of which are shared by other bacterial species, underscoring their evolutionary importance. Additionally, the PA phage genomes offer valuable insights into the complex molecular interactions that buttress our knowledge regarding pan-bacterial antiphage defense systems (Hampton et al. ). By examining phage–bacteria interactions in clinical and environmental PA isolates alongside their phage counterparts, we aim to shed light on underappreciated dimensions of antiphage defense mechanisms that warrant further exploration.
In addition to exploring further identification and characterization of new antiphage defense systems, we also need to pay attention to the regulatory mechanisms of the antiphage defense systems, which must be finely tuned to be activated only in response to phage attacks, ensuring efficient resource management. Recent studies have revealed conserved and specialized regulatory pathways that govern the regulation of CRISPR-Cas systems (Patterson et al. ). These pathways vary across bacterial species, representing both the remarkable diversity of CRISPR-Cas systems and the unique lifestyles of the bacteria with a given CRISPR-Cas system (Louwen et al. , Burstein et al. ). In this regard, PA, with its well-defined and complex regulatory networks, including quorum sensing and c-di-GMP signaling as well as specific and general stress responses involving conserved transcription factors such as OxyR and Anr (Balasubramanian et al. ), provides an excellent model for studying how regulatory systems coordinate antiphage defenses. Coupled with extensive data on PA phages and their genomes and lifecycles, this allows for detailed exploration of how PA detects and responds to its phages, being adapted through interconnected gene expression regulatory networks.
Notably, most antiphage defense research has so far focused on DNA phages, with limited attention to RNA phages. However, RNA phages are generally abundant in animal feces, wastewater, and various terrestrial and marine ecosystems (Callanan et al. , Neri et al. ). Recent studies have dramatically expanded the known diversity of RNA phages, increasing the number of recognized ssRNA phage species from 4 to 882 species these days (Callanan et al. ). Despite this, defense systems against RNA phages remain largely unknown. Although we are just beginning to study the RNA phage lifecycles and their host tropism, which are clearly associated with the bacterial defense systems against RNA phages. These studies as well as the reverse genetic systems for RNA phages will provide a promising avenue for facilitating in-depth understanding of RNA phage–bacteria interactions. Given that phage production is observed from cDNA-harboring bacterial cells, the reverse genetic system can be used to screen for novel defense systems against RNA phages (Fig.  ). Characterizing and modulating those anti-RNA phage defense systems will also drive new RNA phage discovery. Additionally, these studies may reveal innovative defense mechanisms with potential applications, such as molecular tools for RNA processing on biopharmaceutical purposes. Finally, this research holds the potential to uncover new therapeutic strategies, as phage therapy is gaining momentum as a treatment for antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections (Kim et al. ). Understanding how PA counters phage infections may guide the development of more effective phage-based therapies to treat the infections caused by multidrug-resistant PA strains.
 

## Acknowledgments
We are grateful to our colleagues who contributed to the pioneering studies that are reviewed in this article.

## Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Funding
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grants (RS-2022-NR070540 and RS-2022-NR067344).