pmcAcc Chem ResAcc Chem Res822acssd0157313arAccounts of Chemical Research0001-48421520-4898pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC11443489PMC11443489.111443489114434893919897410.1021/acs.accounts.4c003201ArticleSynthesis at
the Interface of Chemistry and Biology
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3188-1202SchultzPeter G. Department of Chemistry,
L.S. Sam Skaggs Presidential Chair, Scripps
Research, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, United States*Email: schultz@scripps.edu.2908202417092024571847189126312642280520240108202431072024011020240210202426012026© 2024 American Chemical Society2024American Chemical Societyhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/Permits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Conspectus
 
Chemical synthesis as a tool
to control the
structure and properties
of matter is at the heart of chemistry—from the synthesis of
fine chemicals and polymers to drugs and solid-state materials. But
as the field evolves to tackle larger and larger molecules and molecular
complexes, the traditional tools of synthetic chemistry become limiting.
In contrast, Mother Nature has developed very different strategies
to create the macromolecules and molecular systems that make up the
living cell. Our focus has been to ask whether we can use the synthetic
strategies and machinery of Mother Nature, together with modern chemical
tools, to create new macromolecules, and even whole organisms with
properties not existing in nature. One such example involves reprogramming
the complex, multicomponent machinery of ribosomal protein synthesis
to add new building blocks to the genetic code, overcoming a billion-year
constraint on the chemical nature of proteins. This methodology exploits
the concept of bioorthogonality to add unique codons, tRNAs and aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases to cells to encode amino acids with physical, chemical
and biological properties not found in nature. As a result, we can
make precise changes to the structures of proteins, much like those
made by chemists to small molecules and beyond those possible by biological
approaches alone. This technology has made it possible to probe protein
structure and function in vitro and in vivo in ways heretofore not possible, and to make therapeutic proteins
with enhanced pharmacology. A second example involves exploiting the
molecular diversity of the humoral immune system together with synthetic
transition state analogues to make catalytic antibodies, and then
expanding this diversity-based strategy (new to chemists at the time)
to drug discovery and materials science. This work ushered in a new
nature-inspired synthetic strategy in which large libraries of natural
or synthetic molecules are designed and then rationally selected or
screened for new function, increasing the efficiency by which we can
explore chemical space for new physical, chemical and biological properties.
A final example is the use of large chemical libraries, robotics and
high throughput phenotypic cellular screens to identify small synthetic
molecules that can be used to probe and manipulate the complex biology
of the cell, exemplified by druglike molecules that control cell fate.
This approach provides new insights into complex biology that complements
genomic approaches and can lead to new drugs that act by novel mechanisms
of action, for example to selectively regenerate tissues. These and
other advances have been made possible by using our knowledge of molecular
structure and reactivity hand in hand with our understanding of and
ability to manipulate the complex machinery of living cells, opening
a new frontier in synthesis. This Account overviews the work in my
lab and with our collaborators, from our early days to the present,
that revolves around this central theme.

National Institutes of Health10.13039/100000002RGM145323AALSAM Foundation10.13039/100017908NAAbbVie10.13039/100006483NAScripps Research10.13039/100011769NANovartis10.13039/100004336NAMerck10.13039/100004334NAAlzheimer''s Drug Discovery Foundation10.13039/100002565NACalifornia Institute for Regenerative Medicine10.13039/100000900NABill and Melinda Gates Foundation10.13039/100000865NAMichael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson''s Research10.13039/100000864NAU.S. Department of Energy10.13039/100000015NAHoward Hughes Medical Institute10.13039/100000011NAOffice of Naval Research10.13039/100000006NApmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDdocument-id-old-9ar4c00320document-id-new-14ar4c00320ccc-price

## Key References
PollackS.J.; JacobsJ.W.; SchultzP.G.Selective chemical
catalysis by an antibody
. Science1986, 234 ( (4783), ) 1570–15733787262
10.1126/science.3787262. The first example, simultaneous with Lerner, in which immunological
diversity was exploited to generate highly selective catalysts.
WangL.,Expanding the genetic code of Escherichia coli
. Science2001, 292 ( (5516), ) 498–50011313494
10.1126/science.1060077. The first demonstration
that the genetic code of living cells could be expanded to add new
building blocks with novel chemical properties.
XiangX.D., A combinatorial approach to materials discovery
. Science1995, 268 ( (5218), ) 1738–174017834993
10.1126/science.268.5218.1738. The first demonstration of the synthesis
and screening of combinatorial materials libraries.
JohnsonK., A stem cell-based approach to cartilage repair
. Science2012, 336 ( (6082), ) 717–721.22491093
10.1126/science.1215157( ) The identification and characterization
of small molecules that control cell fate.

## Introduction
I started my journey in chemistry as a
freshman at Caltech inspired
by Dave Evans’s Advanced Chem 2 course. After taking a year
away from Caltech working night shift pouring molten aluminum and
making sand castings in a foundry (which taught me how lucky I was
to have the opportunity for a career doing science), I returned to
Caltech and shortly thereafter started my graduate career in the Dervan
lab exploring the thermal and photochemistry of a reactive intermediate,
the 1,1-diazene. My intent was to go into physical organic chemistry,
and I had already conceived a clever way to directly observe a large
array of highly reactive molecules (strained alkynes, diradicals,
and the like) at 4 K using low energy photodissociative electron transfer
from sodium atoms codeposited with simple halides. I only mention
the latter, because at the time, we were required to write three proposals
in our second year for the candidacy exam, a very valuable educational
exercise which forced me early to start thinking about what science
I might pursue in my independent career. But my interest somewhat
serendipitously turned to the biological sciences during my third
year of graduate school, when I decided to take on a very different
project focused on generating sequence-specific DNA cleaving molecules.
After some self-education in biochemistry and wrong turns, I managed
to synthesize and characterize a series of polypyrrole-based amides
that had quite impressive DNA binding selectivity. I then went to a postdoc with Chris Walsh where I taught
myself basic molecular biology and protein chemistry and then (while
still a postdoc at MIT) started a lab at Berkeley with four daring
graduate students—Spencer Anthony-Cahill, Chris Noren, Ron
Zuckermann and Jeff Jacobs. The central theme of the lab was, and
still is, the synthesis of molecules and molecular systems with novel
biological and chemical properties. What made our approach different
at the time (so different some thought it did not belong in a chemistry
department) was to ask whether we could exploit the sophisticated
synthetic machinery of the cell, together with traditional chemical
tools, to access macromolecules with properties not easily made by
traditional chemical approaches alone. To this end, we focused initially
on exploiting immunological diversity and the highly efficient biosynthetic
machinery of ribosomal protein synthesis.

## Catalytic Antibodies and
Molecular Diversity
One of our early inspirations from Nature
was the “synthetic
strategy” she uses to solve the problem of molecular recognition
of foreign pathogens by antibodies. Rather than rationally design
and serially optimize receptors one at a time as chemists had historically
done, the immune system creates a large library of some billion plus
germline antibodies by genetic recombination of V, D and J genes (with
junctional and insertional diversity) to produce modest affinity receptors,
and then through somatic mutation and clonal selection optimizes affinity
and selectivity. Importantly, this whole
process takes only weeks and results in high affinity, highly selective
receptors, in contrast to the then widely practiced iterative design
and synthesis of molecular hosts and artificial enzymes. The question
we asked (and was asked independently by the Lerner lab), was whether
we could exploit this natural diversity system to make selective catalysts.
We pursued a strategy based on Pauling’s theory of enzymic
catalysis which states enzymes have evolved maximal affinity to the
transition state rather than the ground states of a reaction coordinate. If this is the case, then eliciting antibodies
to analogues of high energy transition states of a reaction of interest
should lead to selective catalysts—as Feynman would say, “proof
by synthesis”. This was indeed the outcome of our early catalytic
antibody experiments carried out by Jeff Jacobs and Scott Pollack
in which simple phosphonate or phosphate transition state analogues
of ester hydrolysis reactions were used as antigens. , Importantly, to avoid criticism that this was not chemistry (which
I heard repeatedly), we learned to make monoclonal antibodies to isolate
antibodies of defined structure that could be biochemically and structurally
characterized in detail.
An early encouraging result was the
use of a phosphonate diester
to elicit an antibody that catalyzed a transesterification reaction
with an apparent second-order rate constant of 5.4 × 104 M–1 min–1, very much faster
than that of the uncatalyzed reaction (2.6 × 10–4 M–1 min–1) [ ]. We then sought to explore the scope of antibody catalysis and distinct
strategies for eliciting antibody catalysts from the immune system,
an effort led early on by John Jacobsen, Kevan Shokat, Linda-Hsieh
Wilson and Andrea Cochran. One interesting example exploited the Haldane
notion of substrate strain to elicit an antibody ferrochelatase, the enzyme that catalyzes the last step in heme
biosynthesis—metalation of the porphyrin ring. An N-methyl porphyrin was used as a hapten to mimick the distorted “open”
configuration of the ferrochelatase bound porphyrin substrate, and
a catalytic antibody was isolated that catalyzed the reaction with
Zn2+ at a rate only 10-fold slower than the natural enzyme
[ ]. Spectroscopic
and X-ray structural analyses showed that the antibody bound the substrate
in a high energy distorted conformation, again providing proof by
synthesis of the Haldane substrate strain hypothesis. − Another strategy involved designing haptens that elicited catalytic
groups (e.g., a general base or acid) in the antibody combining site
appropriately positioned to accelerate the reaction of interest. For
example, haptens were designed that contained an ammonium ion which
resulted in a complementary aspartate in the combining site positioned
to act as a general base to catalyze an elimination reaction. Perhaps the best such example of this strategy
came from Lerner and Barbas in which a hapten with a β-diketo
group was used to elicit a combining site lysine (through formation
of a covalent antibody-hapten enamine) such that the Lys was appropriately
positioned to catalyze an aldol reaction by formation of a Schiff
base intermediate. This work likely inspired
Barbas to later pursue the notion of organo-catalysis. Other examples
of antibody catalysis included pericyclic reactions such as Claisen,
oxy-Cope and Diels–Alder reactions, anti-Baldwin cyclization
reactions, amide hydrolysis, oxidation and reduction reactions and
cationic rearrangements. , 
 The first detailed structural characterization
(with Ray Stevens)
of the evolution of antibodies from their germline origins to the
final affinity-matured antibody also provided fundamental insights
into how the immune system generates high-affinity receptors for virtually
any molecule. As described above, diversity of the antibody repertoire
results from the combinatorial association of V, D, and J gene segments
during the primary immune response, junctional diversity due to imprecise
V–(D)–J joining, and later, somatic mutations introduced
into the antibody genes as part of the affinity maturation process.
Our studies of the immunological evolution of four distinct catalytic
antibodies, first initiated by Phil Patten, revealed that in addition
to sequence diversity, the structural plasticity and resulting polyspecificity
of the germline repertoire plays a critical role in its ability to
bind an almost infinite array of molecular structures with modest
affinity. − The binding of hapten to the germline antibody induces CDR loop
and side chain conformational rearrangements that enhance the complementarity
between the antibody and the hapten. Somatic mutations introduced
into the germline antibody in or distal to the hapten-combining site
restrict this conformational flexibility and create a lock and key
high affinity binding mode in the affinity-matured antibody. This
transition from induced-fit to lock and key binding modes provides
an important additional mechanism, configurational diversity, beyond
simple sequence diversity that explains the tremendous binding potential
of the humoral immune system.
Diversity based approaches to
chemistry, whether based on immunological
diversity as in antibody catalysis, or early parallel chemical methods
like Geysen’s synthetic peptide pin technologies, began to change the way chemists thought about
synthesizing molecules with specific chemical, biological or even
materials properties. Rather than using an iterative design, synthesis,
characterization approach, chemists began, like Nature, to build
efficient diversity-based synthetic processes and screen/select for
molecules with new properties. Our work at Berkeley caught the attention
of an early Silicon Valley pioneer, Alex Zaffaroni, and together we
brainstormed how such approaches could change drug discovery. This
was my first lesson that one could scale the impact of science significantly
with the resources of the commercial sector. We founded what was the
first combinatorial technologies company, Affymax. There we made very
large spatially arrayed peptide libraries using photolithography which
were then screened using affinity-based methods for high affinity
ligands. This technology also led to
the photolithographic synthesis of oligonucleotides on a chip (and
Affymetrix), which played a major role in early analysis of the transcriptome. Affymax was also among the pioneers of phage
display technologies, and in addition to creating peptide libraries
developed the early phage display antibody libraries. − In the group I formed at Affymax, Mark Gallop was among the first
to reduce DNA-encoded library technology to practice, and Pim Stemmer
developed DNA shuffling technology, an important step in improving
the efficiency of laboratory-based protein evolution. At the same time Jon Ellman, then a postdoc in my lab,
independently conceived of using combinatorial methods to synthesize
nonoligomeric molecules which dramatically broadened the impact of
combinatorial technologies on the drug discovery enterprise. 
At Berkeley I had become interested in
materials science (perhaps
harking back to my physical organic days) and soon became convinced
that much of materials discovery was empirical due to the complex
compositions and structures of modern solid-state materials and the
effects of dopants, defects and processing on materials properties.
I recruited a materials scientist, Xiao-Dong Xiang, fresh out of a
postdoc in physics at Berkeley and together we made the first combinatorial,
spatially addressable library of solid state materials using sputtering
and masking methods (10,000 sites/square inch), which we probed for
superconductivity with a scanning four-point probe , , [ ]. DOE was unwilling to fund this effort, perhaps because
I was new to the field or they did not view it as hypothesis driven,
but I was able to convince HHMI that materials play an important role
in medicine (an important lesson—trust your own instincts,
even when at odds with the norm). We went on to develop more sophisticated
laser ablation deposition methods and scanning tip probes/imaging
systems and applied these tools to the development of novel phosphorescent,
magneto-resistive and ferroelectric materials. Alex and I again founded
a company, Symyx, led by Henry Weinberg as the CSO and Isy Goldwasser
as President, that developed combinatorial synthesis and characterization
methods that have transformed the way many in the chemical industry
and now academics look for new heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysts,
solid state materials and polymers. It
was a challenge raising funding for Symyx as many investors and industry
leaders questioned both the strategy and even the need for new materials,
but persistence paid off. More recently, we applied these same approaches
to the development of new cathodes, anodes, and electrolytes for lithium-ion
batteries at Wildcat Technologies in an effort led by Dee Strand.
Wildcat actually fabricates “device libraries” of pouch
cell batteries and cycles them hundreds at a time, which has led to
the discovery of new disordered rocksalt cathode materials with significantly
improved energy densities (15 to 20% higher than high nickel NMC and
without cobalt or nickel) and safety versus the best cathodes currently
in use [ ]. What the folks who early on critiqued
this combinatorial approach to materials science and drug discovery
did not understand was that these technologies simply allow one to
design, execute and interrogate the same experiments traditionally
designed and executed by chemists much faster, more uniformly
and more cost effectively—an important advance for
collection of the large data sets that are now being analyzed for
new chemical and materials insights and principles.
 

## Expanding
the Genetic Code
At the same time we were exploiting diversity-based
synthetic strategies,
we also asked if we could reprogram the highly evolved protein biosynthetic
machinery of the cell to expand the genetic code itself. Except for
a handful of proteins that incorporate selenocysteine and pyrrolysine,
all forms of life use the same 20 amino acid code. A logical question
for a chemist to ask is why 20, and why these simple 20 basic building
blocks of life. In other words what would we look like if God had
worked the seventh day and added for example a keto or aldehyde side
chain to the code (versus having to make the cofactor pyridoxal).
Although the central dogma—four building blocks in DNA encode
the 20 amino acids in proteins (using 61 three nucleotide codons)
was largely viewed as immutable, it was clear that the ribosome and
EF-Tu can accept a wide array of amino acid side chains. We therefore
decided to take on this challenge which many, including my first NIH
study section, thought unlikely to succeed. Our first attempt involved
the development of an in vitro coupled transcription/translation
system with chemo-enzymatic loading of tRNAs with noncanonical amino
acids, − but the real goal was to add new building blocks
to life itself by exploiting the translational machinery of living
cells, a project in my lab first undertaken by a young, bold David
Liu. 
To this end it was necessary
to create new tRNAs and aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases (aaRSs) that recognize noncoding codons and noncanonical
amino acids (ncAAs), and that are exquisitely bioorthogonal to the
host cell’s endogenous components (do not cross-react with
host tRNAs and aaRSs) to ensure high translational fidelity [ ]. Today, this notion
of bioorthogonality is a general theme in chemical biology, but at
the time it was an emerging concept. We had already determined one
could use the amber nonsense codon to site-specifically encode noncanonical
amino acids in vitro. One then needed to generate
(i) a tRNA that specifically translates the nonsense codon but is
not a substrate for any of the endogenous aaRSs in the host cell and
(ii) a cognate aaRS that aminoacylates this new tRNA and no other
tRNA in the host cell (>80 in the case of E. coli). Even more challenging was to engineer/evolve this aaRS to recognize
the noncanonical amino acid of interest and no other endogenous amino
acids in the host cell. Finally, the noncanonical amino acid must
get into the cytoplasm of the host in reasonable concentrations and
not be cytotoxic. A key insight was that the recognition of tRNAs
by their cognate synthetases involves interactions in the acceptor
stem that are conserved in bacteria but are distinct from those in
archaea bacteria and eukaryotes. With this in mind, we chose the Methanococcus jannaschii (Mj) tRNA(Tyr)/MjTyrRS pair as our first candidate orthogonal bacterial
pair. Nonetheless, it was still necessary to improve the bioorthogonality
of this tRNA using a series of positive and negative selections. The next challenge was to alter the specificity
of the aaRS to recognize the ncAA of interest and no endogenous amino
acid in the host.
 To accomplish this, Lei Wang developed a two-step
scheme that could
select from a structure-based library of aaRS active site mutants,
synthetases that could incorporate the ncAA at a promiscuous site
in response to the amber nonsense codon, UAG, in an essential protein.
The negative selection involved suppression of the nonsense codon
in a lethal gene product in the absence of the ncAA. This positive/negative
selection scheme proved very powerful and together with related schemes
has allowed our lab and many others to genetically encode ncAAs with
excellent efficiencies, fidelities and yields in bacteria and mammalian
cells of up to 11 and 3 g/L, respectively. , − Similar schemes together with viral and other delivery
methods have been used to create bioorthogonal pairs to genetically
encode ncAAs in higher organisms including yeast, worms, flies and
mammalian cells. We were also able to both encode and biosynthesize
a novel bioorthogonal amino acid (p-aminophenylalanine)
to make a completely autonomous 21 amino acid bacterium. Most recently, we were able to add a 21st amino
acid to the genetic code of human hematopoietic stem cells (and their
progeny) and engraft them into mice. It would be of interest to challenge
such mice with an immunogen and see if clonal selection leads to mature
antibodies that contain an ncAA in the varaible region. 
The above technology has allowed my lab
and many others to genetically
encode well over 300 structurally diverse noncanonical amino acids
(now enabled by GCE4All workshops) [ ]. These include photo-crosslinkers which
are now a widely used tool to covalently fix protein–protein
interactions in living cells, allowing the isolation of interactors
that may not be stable to other methods of isolation. We have recently
applied this technology to elucidating the interactomes of short open
reading frame encoded peptides (SEPs) where we identified the transcriptional
activator SEHBP (short ORF-encoded histone binding protein). We and others have also encoded ncAAs that can
be used to control protein activity in and outside the cell with light
including catalytic activity, transcription, cell signaling, and protein
localization. A series of biophysical probes including fluorescent
amino acids, IR active probes, isotopically and spin-labeled amino
acids have also been genetically encoded, as have post-translationally
modified amino acids including phospho-Tyr and phosphono-Tyr and acylated
lysines that are found in histones. Other useful ncAAs that have been
encoded are photosensitizers, metal ion binding and cofactor containing
amino acids to create new catalytic sites, amino acids with altered
pKas and steric properties to probe enzyme mechanisms, chemically
reactive amino acids (Michael acceptors, isothiocynanates, etc.) to
make covalent binding antibodies, and redox-active ncAAs. We and others
also showed that in addition to amino acid side chains, one can also
make changes to the protein backbone, for example, introduce alpha
hydroxy acids into proteins, potentially allowing the synthesis of
templated unnatural biopolymers (e.g., PLGA-like polymers). Solution
of the X-ray crystal structures of several evolved synthetases showed
the active sites to have a high degree of structural plasticity, reminiscent
of germline antibodies, explaining to a large degree our ability to
relatively easily alter their specificity. It became clear that some
of the evolved synthetases, as well as those that have naturally evolved
to encode pyrrolysine in certain methanogens are polyspecific, that
is they can aminoacylate their cognate tRNA with a number of distinct
ncAAs but in general do not use the common 20 amino acids as substrates.
The latter have been quite useful starting points for generating aaRSs
to a large number of distinct ncAAs.
 One of the most useful classes
of genetically encoded amino acids
are those that have bioorthogonal chemical reactivity (ref ( ) and references therein).
These genetically encoded chemistries include oxime formation, "click"
chemistry, isothiocyanate couplings, Diels–Alder and Michael
addition reactions, cross-couplings, metathesis reactions and fluorosulfate
addition reactions. These chemistries have been used to label proteins
site-specifically with optical probes for a wide variety of in vitro and in vivo imaging experiments
not feasible with GFP fusions. One of the first and most robust bioorthogonal
reactions for selective protein modification at commercial scale is
based on genetically encoded p-acetylphenylalanine.
This amino acid reacts selectively with alkoxy-amines and has been
used to modify proteins site-specifically with biophysical probes,
long-chain polyethylene glycols, beads and resins, polypeptides, oligonucleotides,
and drugs. In fact, there are eight such candidates that have been
advanced into human clinical trials by Ambrx and others. The ability
to precisely control the structure of such conjugates enables optimization
of the half-life, efficacy, and safety of biologics, in a fashion
similar to what is routinely accomplished by med chemists with small
molecule drugs. We exploited the chemical precision of this methodology
at Ambrx (now part of Johnson & Johnson) to synthesize site-specific
antibody-drug conjugates. − Indeed, two Ambrx ADCs, developed under the direction
of Feng Tian and myself are showing very exciting results in the clinic
in Her2 positive breast cancer and prostate cancer patients with the
potential to be best in class therapies. Sutro has also used an orthogonal
tRNA/aaRS pair to make an advanced clinical stage ADC for ovarian
cancer, and Astra Zeneca is using this technology for their next
generation ADCs. ncAAs have also been used to create bioorthogonal
protein interfaces in essential proteins to make organisms dependent
on an ncAA for survival, an approach that we have applied to the creation
of conditional live vaccines. Another
novel application of ncAAs was the demonstration that immunogenic
amino acids can be used to break tolerance to host proteins. Collectively, these evolved aaRSs have been
distributed broadly throughout the scientific community (>2,500
distributions
from my lab alone) as probes of protein structure and function and
to engineer proteins with new activities.
We and others have
been able to use amber and ochre nonsense codons
together to efficiently introduce two distinct ncAAs into proteins
using mutually orthogonal tRNA/aaRS pairs. , To obtain additional codons beyond the natural termination codons,
we developed a four-base codon/cognate tRNA pair. This required some in vitro evolution
of the tRNA sequence to obtain good suppression efficiencies but worked
quite well. This strategy was further improved when the four base
codon is based on TAGX (X = G, C, T, A) as a result of the Church
lab substituting all the TAG termination signals in the E.
coli genome with TAA. This allowed the release factor RF1,
which competes with four base frameshift translation of TAGX, to be
removed. More recently, the Chin lab
has removed two Ser codons from the bacterial genetic code and reassigned
these codons to ncAAs. Another strategy
we pursued collaboratively with Floyd Romesberg was to generate altogether
new codons by expansion of the genetic alphabet itself. A third selective,
stable base pair was synthesized that is orthogonal to the Watson–Crick
G-C and A-T base pairs based on hydrophobicity (i.e., hydrophobic
base pairs will form a stable and selective self-pair in water but
will not pair with bases containing hydrogen bonding groups). Through
a large synthetic and sometimes empirical effort we were able to generate
orthogonal hydrophobic base pairs with stability and selectivity comparable
to the Watson–Crick base pairs that could be selectively incorporated
into DNA by DNA polymerase in vitro. − Impressively, Floyd was able to independently extend this work to
a hydrophobic base pair that could be incorporated into plasmids in
bacteria to encode an ncAA. 
In
retrospect it is surprisingly easy to add new building blocks
to the genetic code, even though the code itself has been conserved
throughout evolution and through all kingdoms of life. This raises
the fundamental question of whether organisms with additional amino
acids with new functional groups (beyond Nature’s limited set)
might have an evolutionary advantage. To address this question, we
placed bacteria under various forms of selective pressure, provided
the bacteria with additional genetically encoded ncAAs, and asked
how the bacteria evolved to these challenges. For example, in one
experiment we generated a protein in which a single ncAA mutation
increased the thermal stability of the protein metA by a remarkable
21 °C in response to growth at nonpermissive temperatures. In this case the bacteria covalently stabilize
the protein homodimeric interface of metA using a keto amino acid
that forms a hemithioacetal with Cys. In other experiments ncAAs have
been shown to confer increased catalytic activity to enzymes, growth
advantages to phage, and increased affinity for antibodies and peptides. − Recently, we have expanded this approach by developing a method
to randomly insert ncAAs into proteins to broadly select for enhanced
or novel properties (e.g., covalent antibodies). But the question
remains—why the original 20 amino acids considering the fact
that noncanonical amino acids can provide unique solutions to evolutionary
challenges, and it is relatively easy to add more building blocks
to the code.
As the field continues to grow one can envision
creating completely
unnatural templated polymers using a family of orthogonal aaRSs, synthetases
that have expanded sites to accommodate large side chains such as
single molecule dyes, genomically recoded organisms with genomes that
encode 21 or more amino acids and can autonomously evolve, embryonic
stem cells (or iPS cells) and their progeny that encode 21 amino acids,
and a new generation of protein-drug conjugates with precisely defined
and optimized pharmacological properties. In summary our efforts,
and now those of many other laboratories, have removed a billion-year
constraint imposed by the central dogma, allowing the synthesis of
proteins and even whole organisms with novel properties not restricted
by the 20 common amino acids. This work also helped define a new frontier
in synthesis in which chemists can now manipulate large complex systems
to create new macromolecular structures not easily accessed by traditional
chemical or biological approaches alone.

## Recent Excursions in Synthetic
Biology
The development of the above technology involved
the creation of
large structure-based libraries of tRNA and aaRS mutants with subsequent
selection for new functions. Although powerful, this process requires
generation of mutant libraries, their transformation into a selection
system, identification of clones with improved properties, isolation
of the corresponding genes, and then repeating the process serially
until the desired phenotype is obtained. Although DNA shuffling improved
the efficiency of this approach, an even more efficient approach is
the use of orthogonal replication systems in which a gene of interest
can be replicated with a high error rate independent of the host genome.
This allows mutants to be continuously generated and selected with
each round of cell division without impairing host organism viability.
In E. coli such a replication system would in theory
allow over 300 rounds of mutagenesis and selection in a single week.
The first such schemes created were based either on cytoplasmic protein-primed
DNA replication in yeast by Chang Liu, or by a phage-based system in bacteria by David Liu. More recently, a PDR1 bacteriophage-based orthogonal
replication system has been developed in bacteria by Jason Chin (all of whom are incredibly talented ex-co-workers).
Although powerful, the ideal system would have high error rates (100,000
times that of genomic replication), high transformation efficiencies
so that large libraries can be used as start points, rapid doubling
times, and exploit the robust recombinant techniques and selection
systems of bacterial genetics. To this end Christian Diercks and I
recently developed an orthogonal DNA replication system in E. coli based on the controlled bacterial expression of
the replisome of bacteriophage T7 (consisting of T7 DNA polymerase,
a T7 RNA polymerase-lysozyme fusion, T7 ssDNA binding protein and
a mutated T7 primase/helicase) [ ]. The subsequent directed
evolution of T7 DNA polymerase identified highly mutagenic clones
that display mutation rates of up to 100,000-fold above the genomic
mutation rate. The system maintains circular plasmids that enable
high transformation efficiencies and seamless integration of the replication
system into standard molecular biology workflows in E. coli without impacting its own replication. The utility of this mutagenesis
system for the accelerated evolution of genes was demonstrated by
increasing the activity of TEM-1 β-lactamase roughly 1,000-fold
for several monobactam and cephalosporin antibiotics in 1 week, recapitulating
the vast body of work on extended-spectrum β-lactamases collected
over decades. We are now applying this technology to the rapid evolution
of high affinity nano/monobodies, enzymes, and viral delivery systems.
 Recently, we have begun to ask whether we can look
backward at
evolution and shrink the code rather than expand it. For example,
we have used filamentous phage as a model system to investigate the
feasibility of entirely removing methionine (Met) from the proteome.
It has been hypothesized that Met was one of the last amino acids
to be added to the code, and it is close to Leu in steric and electronic
properties and thus possibly dispensable. To date we have shown that
all 24 elongation Met sites in the M13 phage genome can be replaced
by other canonical amino acids. Most
of these changes involve substitution of methionine by Leu, but in
some cases additional compensatory mutations were required in nearby
residues. The next major hurdle is to assemble all these mutations
into a single genome and then remove all the initiation methionines.
Another major event in evolution was the emergence of energy producing
mitochondria in eukaryotes. The endosymbiotic theory of mitochondrial
evolution describes a series of events beginning with bacterial engulfment
by an archaeon host cell, followed by extensive genetic alterations
that culminated in modern mitochondria. The genetic prerequisites
for the formation of a mitochondria from a bacterium include significant
genomic reduction and loss of the cell wall, retargeting of proteins
to and from mitochondria, and horizontal gene transfer between the
bacterium and host to promote coexistence. The ultimate validation
of this proposed series of events would be to recapitulate these evolutionary
steps in a synthetic model system. To this end Angad Metha, Lubica
Supekova and I designed a system to study endosymbiotic evolution
in the laboratory using the model bacterium E. coli and eukaryote Saccharomyces cerevisiae. E. coli deficient in NAD+ due to deletion of nadA were engineered to export adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
via an adenosine diphosphate ADP/ATP translocase to provide an energy
source for yeast. In parallel, mitochondrial defective S.
cerevisiae were prepared by disruption of the cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2) gene (NB97), rendering the strain incapable
of growth in media with a nonfermentable carbon source. We found that
it was also necessary to express SNARE-like proteins in E.
coli to prevent cytosolic clearance of the bacteria in yeast.
A PEG fusion protocol was adapted to permit fusion of E. coli ΔnadA into S. cerevisiae NB97, resulting in endosymbionts capable of surviving up to 4 passages,
after which the endosymbionts released bacteria. Recently, we have identified transposon insertions in three
key genes, rcsC, cpxA and idnK, that significantly enhance endosymbiont stability
on passaging, i.e., increase stable coexistence.
These mutations likely act by modifying growth of bacteria in the
high osmolality of the yeast cytosol, and by upregulating protective,
stress response mechanisms. These synthetic
endosymbionts have also permitted a preliminary study of bacterial
genome reduction within a yeast host by elimination of amino acid
and cofactor biosynthetic pathways. We
are now using larger scale transposon mediated methods and L-form
bacteria strategies to further reduce the bacterial genome.

## Drug Discovery
and Chemical Biology
I somewhat serendipitously became interested
in drug discovery
when I founded the semiautonomous Genomics Institute of the Novartis
Research Foundation (GNF), coincident with moving my lab to Scripps
Research in 1999. Our initial focus at GNF was to develop and apply
high throughput technologies to discover cellular signaling pathways
and regulatory mechanisms that might represent new targets for drug
development. As part of this effort, we provided the first large scale
transcriptome gene atlas to the scientific community, a project led by John Hogenesch. We also developed high
throughput phenotypic cellular screening methods by adopting the robust
robotic technologies used in the automobile manufacturing sector (the
yellow Staubli robots that are now commonplace in the life sciences)
[ ]. This effort
was led by Bob Downs, an ex-GM chief engineer, and Jeremy Caldwell,
a young cell biologist. We used these tools (which were subsequently
widely adopted by pharma and the NIH) to screen millions of compounds
from chemical libraries, thousands of genes by siRNA knockdown and
overexpression, and secreted proteins for novel cellular activities. − We also developed with Ray Stevens and Scott Lesley the first microcrystal-based
automated structural genomics tools (which led to the formation of
Syrrx). , But as the yearly budget at GNF grew well
beyond the initial targets, Joerg Rinehardt (Chairman of Novartis, emeritus) asked whether we could help pay the bills by using
these technologies to make a drug—which I took as an interesting
challenge. So with the leadership of a young Nathanael Gray, who had
gotten his PhD with me making early kinase directed libraries, we set out to make a drug—which turned
out to be one of the very first NMP-ALK inhibitors for lung cancer. Over the next 6 years we were able to move some
15 candidates into the clinic, including drugs for cancer, infectious
disease, autoimmune and degenerative disease. Importantly, the HTS
screening tools we developed, along with million plus compound libraries,
enabled us to quickly and at rather modest expense carry out many
cell-based screens to identify good starting points for med chem campaigns—allowing
us to explore many more innovative, yet risky ideas than could be
done by Novartis at that time with its more conventional tools.
This foray into drug discovery spread to my lab at Scripps. We
decided to focus on a fledgling area that biotech and pharma had not
seriously pursued at the time—regenerative medicine, an effort
initiated by Sheng Ding and Xu Wu. Our approach was not to develop
stem cell therapies, but rather to identify druglike molecules that
were able to control the fate of endogenous stem cells in
vivo. Given the lack of understanding of targetable proteins
that might allow us to control stem cell self-renewal and selective
differentiation, we took a chemical biological approach using image-based
cellular screens. One early effort identified a Smoothened agonist
from a phenotypic screen that selectively induced mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs) to differentiate into osteoblasts. We then went on to identify an aryl hydrocarbon receptor
antagonist that was able to selectively expand cord blood hematopoietic
stem cells for bone marrow transplants (and moved into the clinic by Novartis). This was followed by discovery
of a molecule that induced MSCs to differentiate into chondrocytes
and make cartilage in animal models of osteoarthritis. The molecule acts by binding filamin A and disrupting its
interaction with the transcription factor core-binding factor β
subunit (CBFβ), thereby regulating the CBFβ-RUNX1 transcriptional
program. Again, this effort led to a clinical stage program at Novartis
to repair traumatic joint damage. Another example was the identification
of a molecule that induced oligodendrocyte precursors to differentiate
selectively into oligodendrocytes which spurred a large interest in
this approach for the treatment of multiple sclerosis. More recently in a collaboration with Mike Bollong
we have identified molecules that inhibit myofibroblast transdifferentiation
in fibrosis and that expand lung stem
cells (AEC2 cells) selectively by preventing the degradation of autocrine
factors. A lung nebulized version of
the latter candidate is active in multiple lung damage models (bleomycin,
elastase, smoking, LPS) and will begin clinical trials in idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis shortly. We also identified molecules that activate
the TEAD YAP transcriptional program through two distinct, novel mechanisms. One such molecule when delivered selectively
to the heart by pericardial injection in animal models after heart
failure shows a very significant decrease in infarct size, decreased
fibrosis and significantly improved ejection fraction. This molecule
will soon enter IND-enabling studies as a potential transformative
therapy for heart repair. We have also identified molecules that expand
retinal pigmented epithelial cells and repair wounds. In each case
we identified the active molecule from unbiased cell-based screens
(which have been unfairly criticized as nonhypothesis driven, rather
than discovery-based research), and deconvoluted the targets using
a combination of genomic, proteomic, and affinity-based methods. Collectively,
these programs and others like it are ushering a new opportunity in
medicine to not just slow disease progression, but to reverse the
damage of disease and aging. These druglike molecules have also revealed
new pathways and mechanisms for controlling stem cell self-renewal
and selective differentiation. The lab has also pursued other interesting
chemical biology challenges including the identification of molecules
that modulate circadian rhythm with Steve
Kay, molecules that activate telomerase to abrogate effects of aging
with Ron DePinho, and molecules that
activate cellular stress response pathways by previously unknown mechanisms. Ardem Patapoutian and I even attempted a screen
for small molecule activators of TRPM8 with the idea they could be
used to make room temperature beer taste cold, but our attempt at
“green chemistry” failed.
GNF was so successful
that Novartis decided to internalize it,
but the lessons learned there enabled us to set up a nonprofit translational
sciences institute, Calibr, in 2013 which is now part of Scripps Research
as the Calibr-Skaggs Institute for Innovative Medicines. Calibr has
already advanced nine programs into clinical development, has an additional
five programs in IND-enabling studies, and has a rich pipeline of
some 50 earlier stage programs, a level of productivity unprecedented
in nonprofit research institutions. These efforts (led by the team
of Arnab Chatterjee, Travis Young, Sean Joseph, Case McNamara, Kristen
Johnson, Jing Li, Matt Tremblay and Weijun Shen) include a long-acting
small molecule that has the ability to treat or prevent the transmission
of HIV, a molecule that may dramatically shorten the treatment times
for tuberculosis, switchable CAR-T cells for the treatment of blood
cancers, solid tumors and autoimmune disease, oral peptide and antibody
single and dual agonists for the treatment of ulcerative colitis,
obesity and NASH, Treg inducers for brain diseases, STING agonists
for bladder cancer, and candidates for pandemic coronavirus and flu,
to name a few. This work is supported by largely unrestricted funding
by foundations and pharma, including funding first from Merck, and
now from AbbVie and Gilead. A significant focus of Calibr is on global
health, including pandemic preparedness with very generous funding
and support from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (Bill Gates
has been an inspiring role model in the philanthropic community).
As part of this effort we built the ReFRAME library, the largest collection
of approved or clinical stage drugs (over 13,000) for drug repurposing
that we provide freely to the scientific community and has resulted
in the rapid advance of new and repurposed drugs into the clinic for
a range of diseases. All told I have
been lucky enough to lead outstanding teams of scientists that have
advanced some 30 programs into the clinic or to FDA approval. I was
given a unique opportunity to learn drug discovery from the bottom
up rather than the top down, unlike most academics who transition
to pharma. This pursuit has been especially gratifying when these
drugs, enabled by chemistry, have impacted close friends and family,
and has reinforced my strong appreciation and admiration for all those
advancing the frontiers of medicine in the pharmaceutical and biotech
industry.

## Conclusion
There are significant efforts beyond those
described above that
we have pursued over the years—from semisynthetic sequence-specific
DNases and RNases , and the first DNA-scaffolded
nanocrystal arrays to engineered small
molecule protein switches and single
molecule spectroscopy. But probably
my biggest regret is in the ideas I did not pursue because I thought
them too risky. Scientists, especially younger ones, should like Indiana
Jones in the last scene from the Last Crusade, be
willing to step out into the unknown and assume a bridge will materialize
that leads them to success. Older scientists should give back to the
profession through mentoring and through public service that enables
future generations of scientists.
I would like to think I have
done the latter through undergraduate
and graduate teaching, mentoring co-workers, serving on Boards, and
as President and CEO of Scripps. Scripps Research is now on a great
trajectory, and we are building a new model for nonprofit research
institutes in which we not only push the frontiers of basic research,
but also accelerate the translation of new discoveries into innovative
medicines that directly impact patients and public health (through
our Calibr-Skaggs translation arm). An important aspect of this “business
model” is that the licensing revenues from partnering these
clinical stage drugs can be reinvested in the research enterprise
to create a self-sustaining model to fund innovative, high risk, high
reward research that is not always endorsed by more conservative federal
agencies.
In conclusion, the combination of modern biological
tools and the
synthetic machinery of the cell with more traditional chemical tools,
has allowed the generation of small molecules, macromolecules and
complex molecular systems with new properties that are not easily
realized by chemical approaches alone. These efforts have significantly
expanded the complexity of molecules and systems of molecules we can
tackle as chemists and are not only impacting our understanding of
biology at the molecular level, but also leading to new medicines
to treat human disease. All of that said the most important and rewarding
aspect of my career in science has been the incredibly talented and
fun group of co-workers whom I have had the privilege of mentoring
(although some wound up mentoring me), and who have gone on to their
own highly successful and impactful careers in science and science
related professions [ ]. I am indebted to them for all the above and looking forward
to our next reunion.
 

## Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written by P.G.S.
National Institutes
of Health RGM145323A (P.G.S), ALSAM, Calbr-Skaggs, Department of Energy,
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Novartis, Merck, Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation, Office of Naval Research, Abbvie, CIRM, Michael
J. Fox, Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation.
The author declares no
competing financial interest.
Peter Schultz, Ph.D., is a Professor
of Chemistry, Chief Executive
Officer and the Sam Skaggs Presidential Chair at Scripps Research.
Schultz earned his undergraduate (summa cum laude) and doctoral degrees
(in Chemistry) at the California Institute of Technology. After postdoctoral
studies at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, he joined the
faculty at the University of California, Berkeley in 1985, where he
was a chemistry professor, a principal investigator at the Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory and a Howard Hughes Medical Institute
investigator. He joined Scripps Research in 1999 and was appointed
chief executive officer in 2016. Schultz’s research interests
span synthetic and chemical biology to drug discovery and materials
science. Schultz has founded nine biotech/tech companies that have
pioneered the development and application of new technologies to challenges
in human health and materials science. In 1999, he founded the Genomics
Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation, serving as its director
for more than 10 years. In 2013, he established Calibr, a nonprofit
biomedical research institute designed as a new model to accelerate
the discovery of innovative medicines, and which is now an operating
division of Scripps Research. In his spare time, he enjoys flying,
fishing, kayaking, hiking and biking.

## Acknowledgments
We’d like to thank Kristen Williams for her preparation
of this manuscript, and Michael Pigula, Christian Diercks, Dave Wemmer,
and Travis Young for their editing and suggestions.