1472neurotherNeurotherapeuticsNeurotherapeuticsElsevierPMC1266456612664566126645664106795510.1016/j.neurot.2025.e00763Intrathecal STAT3 inhibitor Bt354 ameliorates chronic constriction injury-induced nociceptive sensitization by modulating neuroinflammation
ChengHao-Jung ChenNan-Fu TangYueh-Chiao ShihPo-Chang ChenWu-Fu ChiuYa-Jen SungChun-Sung WenZhi-Hong aDivision of Pain Management, Department of Anesthesiology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, 112201, TaiwanbDivision of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, Kaohsiung Armed Forces General Hospital, Kaohsiung, 80284, TaiwancInstitute of Medical Science and Technology, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, 804201, TaiwandDepartment of Marine Biotechnology and Resources, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung 804201, TaiwaneInstitute of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, 80424, TaiwanfDepartment of Neurosurgery, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 833401, TaiwangNational Museum of Marine Biology and Aquarium, Pingtung, 94450, TaiwanhSchool of Medicine, National Yang-Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, 112304, Taiwan⁎Corresponding authors. cssung@vghtpe.gov.twwzh@mail.nsysu.edu.tw
1First author: Hao-Jung Cheng and Nan-Fu Chen contributed to this study equally.
9102025226e00763e0076330112025© 2025 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Neuropathic pain poses a significant societal and clinical burden and is closely linked to neuroinflammation of the central nervous system. Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is a key regulator of inflammatory processes and has been implicated in the development of nociceptive hypersensitivity. In this study, we aimed to elucidate the therapeutic potential and underlying mechanisms of STAT3 inhibition in a rodent model of neuropathic pain. Using behavioral assessments of nociceptive sensitivity and immunofluorescence analysis, we investigated the analgesic mechanisms of the intrathecal STAT3 inhibitor, Bt354, in rats subjected to chronic constriction injury (CCI) of the sciatic nerve. Cellular and molecular markers of glial activation and inflammation were examined to assess the effects of Bt354 on neuroinflammatory pathways. Intrathecal administration of Bt354 significantly reduced CCI-induced mechanical allodynia and thermal hyperalgesia, accompanied by a marked decrease in phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3) expression in spinal neurons. Bt354 treatment attenuated the polarization of M1-type microglia and A1-type astrocytes, suppressed inflammasome-related signaling, and mitigated neuroinflammatory responses. Importantly, Bt354 inhibited the nuclear translocation of neuronal pSTAT3, which is a critical step in regulating pro-inflammatory gene transcription. Moreover, CCI-induced angiogenesis and microglial phosphorylation of CREB and P38 were mitigated by pSTAT3 inhibition. These findings suggest that STAT3 plays a central role in the pathogenesis of neuropathic pain by regulating glial cell polarization and neuroinflammation. Targeting STAT3 with Bt354 may represent a promising therapeutic strategy for treating neuropathic pain.
Keywords: Neuropathic pain, Neuroinflammation, STAT3, NLRP3, Glial cell polarization

## Graphical abstract
Schematic illustration of the proposed molecular mechanisms underlying the analgesic effects of Bt354 on CCI-induced nociceptive signaling. Upon stimulation, signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 phosphorylation (pSTAT3) and rapidly translocates to the nucleus, where it promotes the expression of downstream targets, such as the Lactate Dehydrogenase A (LDHA)/phosphorylated TANK binding kinase 1 (pTBK1) pathway. This signaling cascade activates the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome, leading to the release of interleukin-1β (IL-1β) from neurons to microglia, thereby promoting microglial polarization toward the pro-inflammatory M1 phenotype. IL-1β furthermore stimulates phosphorylation of P38 (pP38) and cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB), resulting in increased interleukin-6 (IL-6) expression and release back to neurons, sustaining STAT3 activation and forming a positive feedback loop. Simultaneously, M1 microglia interact with A1 astrocytes, amplifying neuroinflammation. The LDHA/pTBK1 axis also contributes to angiopoietin-2 (Ang2) upregulation, promotes angiogenesis. These converging processes collectively enhance nociceptive signaling. Bt354 attenuates CCI-induced nociception by downregulating pSTAT3 levels, thereby disrupting the pathological cascade. Schematic representation of the proposed molecular mechanisms by which Bt354 alleviates CCI-induced nociceptive signaling. Following chronic constriction injury (CCI), neuronal STAT3 is phosphorylated and translocated to the nucleus, where it induces the expression of LDHA and pTBK1. This signaling promotes activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome, resulting in IL-1β release from neurons, which acts on microglia to induce the pro-inflammatory M1 phenotype (CD86). IL-1β further activates p38 and CREB in microglia, driving the expression and release of IL-6, which feeds back to neurons to sustain STAT3 activation—forming a pathogenic positive feedback loop. Simultaneously, M1 microglia interact with A1 astrocytes (C3d), exacerbating neuroinflammation. The LDHA/pTBK1 axis also upregulates Ang2, which promotes angiogenesis (CD31) in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. In general, CCI amplifies nociceptive signal transduction by upregulating pSTAT3 and its downstream pathways, including neuroinflammation, angiogenesis, and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines. However, Bt354 inhibited pSTAT3 expression and attenuated CCI-induced nociception by mediating the pSTAT3 cascade. Consequently, Bt354 exhibits antinociceptive sensitization properties in neuropathic pain management.
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Jul 26; Revised 2025 Sep 16; Accepted 2025 Sep 24; Collection date 2025 Oct.

## Introduction
Neuropathic pain has been a heavy burden on society since the aging world, physical and psychological impairment, and decreased work productivity, affecting more than 7–10 ​% of the global population. However, current treatments provide insufficient analgesic effects and have dose-limiting adverse side effects in neuropathic pain [ , ]. This highlights the critical need for innovative, effective, and safe therapies to manage neuropathic pain.
Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), a member of the STAT protein family, plays a key role in mediating the pro-inflammatory responses associated with various central nervous system (CNS) disorders, including traumatic brain injury, Alzheimer's disease (AD), and multiple sclerosis [ , , ]. Previous studies have indicated that STAT3 plays a critical role in regulating microglial polarization and astrocyte activation during neuroinflammation [ , , ]. Under physiological conditions, STAT3 resides in the cytoplasm in its inactive monomeric form. Upon stimulation by interleukin-6 (IL-6) or other pro-inflammatory cytokines [ ], STAT3 is phosphorylated at tyrosine residue 705 (Y705), dimerized, and translocated into the nucleus where it functions as a transcription factor that drives the expression of inflammation-related genes [ , ]. Several reports have shown that the pharmacological inhibition of STAT3 can attenuate neuroinflammatory responses and reduce neuropathic pain behaviors [ , , , ]. Moreover, Dominguez et al. demonstrated that IL-6 neutralization significantly suppresses spinal STAT3 activation, supporting a direct link between IL-6 signaling and STAT3-mediated transcription in neuropathic pain [ ]. Bt354 is a novel and specific inhibitor that prevents STAT3 from entering the nucleus and phosphorylates it at Y705, exhibiting potent anticancer properties [ ]. Moreover, Bt354 mitigates the migration and proliferation of glioblastoma multiforme cells by suppressing phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3) and inducing apoptosis [ ]. However, the potential effects of Bt354 on neuropathic pain have not yet been investigated.
Additionally, the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3) forms a multiprotein inflammasome complex that detects cellular stress or damage and promotes neuroinflammation through the maturation and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-1β (IL-1β) [ , ]. Excessive activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome contributes to neuropathic pain by driving neuroinflammation in the spinal cord dorsal horn (SCDH) [ , , ]. Emerging evidence suggests a mechanistic link between STAT3 signaling and NLRP3 inflammasome activation. STAT3 overexpression has been shown to upregulate NLRP3 expression [ ]. In an ischemic stroke mouse model, pSTAT3 was identified as an upstream regulator of NLRP3, as pSTAT3 inhibition attenuated NLRP3 expression [ ]. As a consequence, abnormal STAT3 signaling potentiates neuroinflammation through NLRP3 activation in the context of neuropathic pain. However, direct evidence linking the STAT3-mediated regulation of the NLRP3 inflammasome to neuropathic pain remains limited and warrants further investigation.
STAT3 is a critical regulator of neuroinflammation and nociceptive sensitization in SCDH. In this study, we investigated the analgesic potential of Bt354, a synthetic inhibitor of STAT3 phosphorylation, in rats with chronic constriction injury (CCI)-induced neuropathic pain. By examining its effects on glial activation, pro-inflammatory signaling, and NLRP3 inflammasome activity, we aimed to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying neuropathic pain and assess Bt354 as a promising therapeutic candidate. This study aimed to advance our understanding of STAT3-dependent pathways and their modulation for effective neuropathic pain management.

## Materials and methods

## Animal
Adult male Wistar rats (250–285 ​g; BioLASCO Taiwan Co., Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan) were maintained under a controlled 12 ​h light/dark cycle (lights on at 8:00 a.m.) in a temperature- and humidity-regulated environment (22 ​± ​1 ​°C; 70 ​% humidity). The animals were housed in Plexiglas cages with free access to food and water ad libitum. All surgical procedures and drug administration were performed under general anesthesia with 2.5 ​% isoflurane under sterile conditions. To prevent postoperative infections, the rats received an intraperitoneal injection of cefazolin (170 ​mg/kg).
All animal protocols were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the National Sun Yat-sen University (approval no. IACUC-11237), and all the procedures adhered to the ethical standards outlined by the American Physiological Society. Following the behavioral assessments, the rats were humanely euthanized for spinal cord collection and subsequent analyses. Throughout the study, every effort was made to minimize animal use and suffering. Only animals exhibiting normal motor function without signs of hematoma or neurological impairment following catheter implantation were included to ensure that the experimental outcomes were not confounded by surgical complications.

## Intrathecal catheter implantation and induction of neuropathic pain
Catheter implantation was performed according to the method described by Yaksh and Rudy [ ]. Briefly, a 9 ​cm PE-5 catheter (inner diameter, 0.008 in; outer diameter, 0.014 in) was carefully inserted through the intervertebral space at the lumbar level and advanced rostrally with its proximal end secured to the cranial surface of the skull. Rats displaying signs of severe neurological impairment or cerebrospinal fluid hematoma were excluded from the subsequent experiments. Immediately after catheterization, chronic constriction injury (CCI) was induced in the right sciatic nerve following the protocol developed by Bennett and Xie [ ]. A 5-mm segment of the nerve at the midthigh level was exposed and loosely ligated at four points using 4-0 chromic gut sutures. In addition, a series of skin incisions spaced 1 ​cm apart were made along the surgical site to facilitate exposure and nerve manipulation. All the incisions were closed in layers using sutures. All surgical procedures were performed under general anesthesia induced by inhalation of 2.5 ​% isoflurane.

## Compound preparation
Bt354, the pSTAT3 inhibitor, was obtained from the National Health Research Institute (Taipei, Taiwan). For administration, Bt354 was dissolved in a vehicle comprising 30 ​% (v/v) dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; D2650, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) diluted with artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF). The aCSF solution contained 2.6 ​mM ​K+, 21.0 ​mM HCO3−, 151.1 ​mM Na+, 1.3 ​mM Ca2+, 3.5 ​mM glucose, 0.9 ​mM ​Mg2+, 2.5 ​mM HPO42−, and 122.7 ​mM Cl−.

## Experimental grouping
To investigate the temporal progression of nociceptive responses following chronic constriction injury (CCI), behavioral assessments were conducted at 3, 7, 14, 21, and 28 days post-CCI (d). To evaluate the acute analgesic effects of pSTAT3 inhibition, Bt354 was administered intrathecally at doses of 0.1, 1, 5, 10, and 20 ​μg (dissolved in 10 ​μL of 30 ​% dimethyl sulfoxide [DMSO]) following CCI induction on 5d. Each group consisted of six rats (n ​= ​6).
To assess the preventive analgesic effects, continuous intrathecal infusion of Bt354 (at 0.25 ​μg/μL/h or 1 ​μg/μL/h) or vehicle (1 ​μL/h of 30 ​% DMSO) was initiated immediately after CCI surgery using osmotic pumps (models 2001 and 2002; DURECT Corporation, Cupertino, CA, USA). Animals were randomly assigned to the following groups (n ​= ​6 per group): (I) Control group – rats without CCI, receiving vehicle infusion only; (II) 7d group – rats subjected to CCI and vehicle infusion for 7 days; (III) 14d group – rats subjected to CCI and vehicle infusion for 14 days; (IV) 7d ​+ ​L group – rats subjected to CCI and Bt354 infusion at 0.25 ​μg/μL/h for 7 days; (V) 14d ​+ ​L group – rats subjected to CCI and Bt354 infusion at 0.25 ​μg/μL/h for 14 days; (VI) 7d ​+ ​H group – rats subjected to CCI and Bt354 infusion at 1 ​μg/μL/h for 7 days; (VII) 14d ​+ ​H group – rats subjected to CCI and Bt354 infusion at 1 ​μg/μL/h for 14 days.

## Nociceptive behavioral assessments
To evaluate thermal sensitivity, rats were placed in transparent enclosures on elevated glass platforms, allowing radiant heat to be applied from below. Thermal hyperalgesia was assessed using a plantar test apparatus (IITC analgesiometer; IITC Inc., Woodland Hills, CA, USA) following the method described by Hargreaves et al. [ ]. A low-intensity radiant heat stimulus (active intensity ​= ​30) was applied perpendicularly to the medial plantar surface of the right hind paw through a glass. Paw withdrawal latency (PWL, s) was calculated as the average of three positive responses. Rapid paw withdrawal or licking was considered nociceptive behavior. A maximum PWL of 30 ​s was defined as the cut-off value.
In addition, to assess mechanical sensitivity, the rats were placed in transparent enclosures on elevated metal mesh floors, allowing easy access to the hind paws. Mechanical allodynia was evaluated using a calibrated series of von Frey filaments (Stoelting, Wood Dale, IL, USA) applied perpendicularly to the central plantar surface of the right hind paw, in accordance with the method established by Chaplan et al. [ ]. Each filament, with a logarithmically graded bending force ranging from 0.2 to 10 ​g, was gently applied until it formed a slight bend, indicating consistent pressure. The paw withdrawal threshold (PWT, g) was calculated using the “up-down” paradigm, as defined by Chaplan, based on the pattern of three affirmative nocifensive responses. Brisk paw withdrawal or licking upon filament application was considered a positive nociceptive response. A PWT of 10 ​g was defined as the cutoff value, indicating the maximal threshold measurable using this method.

## Immunofluorescence assay
Immunofluorescence and image quantification were performed as previously described [ , , ]. At 7d and 14 ​d after CCI, the rats were euthanized using deep anesthesia with isoflurane and transcardially perfused with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4) containing heparin (200 U/mL), followed by 4 ​% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Lumbar spinal cord tissues from all groups were embedded together in OCT (Sakura Finetek, Torrance, CA, USA), sectioned at 20 ​μm on a Microm HM550 cryostat (Microm International, Waldorf, Germany), mounted serially on microscope slides, and applied for immunofluorescence studies. Sections were blocked for 1 ​h in 1X PBS containing 0.2 ​% BSA, 0.3 ​% Triton X-100, and 0.05 ​% Tween-20, then incubated overnight at 4 ​°C with the following primary antibodies: mouse monoclonal anti-GFAP (MAB3402, Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA), mouse monoclonal anti-CD11b (CBL1512, Millipore), mouse monoclonal anti-CD86 antibody (Sc-28347, Santa Cruz, Dallas, Texas, USA), goat polyclonal anti-C3d (AF2655, R&D Systems, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA), rabbit monoclonal anti-LDHA (NBP2-67483, Novus Biologicals, LLC, Centennial, CO, USA), rabbit monoclonal anti-pTBK1 (5483, cell signaling, Danvers, MA, USA), rabbit polyclonal anti-NLRP3 (bs-10021R, Bioss, Woburn, MA, USA), mouse monoclonal anti-STAT3 (9139s, cell signaling), rabbit monoclonal anti-pSTAT3 (9145s, cell signaling), rabbit polyclonal anti-IL-1β (AB9722, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), mouse monoclonal anti-IL-6 (ab9324, Abcam), rabbit polyclonal anti-Ang2 (ab125692, Abcam), rabbit polyclonal anti-CD31 (GB11063-2, Servicebio, Wuhan, Hubei, China), rabbit monoclonal anti-pCREB (9198s, cell signaling), and rabbit monoclonal anti-pP38 (4511s, cell signaling). After incubating in the blocking buffer, the sections were incubated with a mixture of Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated mouse monoclonal anti-NeuN (MAB377X, Millipore), Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-mouse IgG antibody (715–545-151, Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West Grove, PA, USA), Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG antibody (711–546-152, Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories), Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-goat IgG antibody (705–546-147, Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories), Cy™ 3-conjugated anti-mouse IgG antibody (715–165-151, Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories), Cy™ 3-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG antibody (711–166-152, Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories), DAPI (D21490, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA), or DRAQ5 (ab108410, Abcam) for 40 ​min at room temperature. Imaging was performed using a Leica DM-6000B microscope (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany) equipped with K5 CMOS and K8 sCMOS cameras and operated using Leica Application Suite X software (version 3.8.1.26810; Leica Microsystems BV, Rijswijk, The Netherlands). To ensure consistency, identical exposure settings and acquisition parameters were applied to all tissue sections on each slide. Quantitative analysis of immunofluorescence images was performed as described in our previous publication [ , ], using Fiji software (version 2.14.0, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA), an ImageJ-based platform with plugins for pixel intensity quantification. Pixel intensities within immunoreactive-positive areas between lamina I–III in the ipsilateral SCDH were selected, and the mean fluorescence intensity was calculated for each sample. The thresholds of the fluorescence intensity and background were set to the same level in each group. Group values were obtained by averaging six rats per group, and immunoreactivity levels were normalized to those of the control group, which were set to 1. The analyses were confined to laminae I–III of the SCDH, which contain superficial spinal neurons that are known to mediate nociceptive sensitization [ , ] and directly contribute to nociceptive transmission to the brain [ ]. Confocal microscopy was performed using a Leica TCS SP5-II system (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) equipped with a Leica HyD hybrid detector. Representative fluorescence and co-localization images were acquired at magnifications of 100X, 400X, and 630X.

## Co-localization analysis
Co-localization analysis was conducted using Pearson's correlation coefficient, with calculations performed using the Intensity Correlation Analysis module in Fiji 2.14.0, an ImageJ program with a plugin (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). Pearson's coefficient values below 0.1 were considered indicative of no co-localization, whereas values exceeding 0.5 were interpreted as reflecting strong or near-complete co-localization [ ]. To assess the nuclear expression of pSTAT3 and pCREB, Mander's coefficients were calculated using the JACoP plugin in ImageJ software. This coefficient quantifies the proportion of the fluorescent signal in one channel that coincides with that in another channel and is commonly used to evaluate the signal overlap between different fluorescence channels [ ]. For nuclear co-localization analysis, the total DAPI signal in each image was normalized to 100 ​%, and the percentage of DAPI signals overlapping with pSTAT3 or pCREB fluorescence was calculated for each experimental group [ ].

## Statistical analysis
Sample size determination was conducted using G∗Power 3.1 [ ], employing conventional parameters: effect size of 0.3, significance threshold (α) of 0.05, and statistical power of 0.80. Based on these criteria, a minimum of six animals per group were required for behavioral assessments. Six rats per group were used for immunofluorescence analyses. Data are expressed as mean ​± ​standard error of the mean (SEM). Immunofluorescence intensities were evaluated relative to those of the control, 7d, and 14d groups. Intergroup comparisons were performed using a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by a Bonferroni post-hoc test for multiple comparisons. A P-value of less than 0.05 was considered significant. All statistical analyses were performed using SigmaPlot software (version 15.0; Systat Software Inc., San Jose, CA, USA).

## Results

## CCI upregulates phosphor-STAT3 protein expression in the ipsilateral SCDH
Using immunofluorescence staining, we evaluated the expression of phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (pSTAT3) in the ipsilateral spinal cord dorsal horn (SCDH) following CCI ( a). Quantitative analysis at 3, 7, 14, 21, and 28 days post-CCI (d) revealed a significant upregulation of pSTAT3 at 7d (P ​= ​0.024) and 14d (P ​< ​0.001), with the peak expression observed at 14d ( b) after CCI. Notably, pSTAT3 levels began to decline on 21d. These findings indicated that CCI induced an increasing pattern but robust upregulation of pSTAT3 in the ipsilateral SCDH, particularly at 7d and 14d.
 

## CCI-induced nociception is significantly ameliorated by Bt354
To evaluate the acute analgesic effects of intrathecal Bt354, a specific pSTAT3 inhibitor, CCI rats were randomly allocated into six groups and started to administer Bt354 intrathecally (0, 0.1, 1, 5, 10, and 20 μg/10 ​μL) on 5d. CCI-induced thermal hyperalgesia was assessed using paw withdrawal latency and transformed into the percentage of maximum possible effect (MPE%) ( c). Based on the MPE% results, intrathecal injection of Bt354 presented a significant analgesic effect, with pharmacodynamic activity lasting up to 24 ​h. Moreover, MPE% was converted into the 24-h area under the curve, which indicated that Bt354 exhibited a dose-dependent pattern, and the ED50 of Bt354 is 1.176 ​± ​0.28 ​μg, which was better than that of Gabapentin (ED50 ​= ​2.3 ​± ​1.5 ​μg) [ ], a clinically utilized analgesia ( d).
Additionally, to evaluate the chronic analgesic effects of Bt354 in CCI rats, low (0.25 ​μg/h; L) or high (1 ​μg/h; H) doses of Bt354 were administered intrathecally via osmotic pumps. Nociceptive behaviors, including mechanical allodynia (assessed by paw withdrawal threshold [PWT]) and thermal hyperalgesia (assessed by paw withdrawal latency [PWL]), were measured every two days beginning on 1d. PWT in the CCI group began to decline on 1d and continued to decrease, reaching a peak on 14d ( e). In contrast, both the CCI ​+ ​Bt354 ​L and CCI ​+ ​Bt354 ​H groups exhibited significantly higher PWT values than the CCI ​+ ​vehicle group from 3d to 14d. Similarly, the PWL in the CCI ​+ ​vehicle group began to decrease on 1d and reached its lowest point on 14d ( f). In contrast, PWL values in the CCI ​+ ​Bt354 ​L and CCI ​+ ​Bt354 ​H groups were significantly elevated relative to those in the CCI ​+ ​vehicle group throughout the observation period, from 1d to 14d. Notably, Bt354 treatment groups demonstrated sustained improvements in both PWT and PWL, indicating a robust and dose-dependent analgesic effect. These findings suggested that continuous intrathecal administration of Bt354 effectively prevented CCI-induced nociceptive sensitization, supporting its potential as a therapeutic agent for the treatment of neuropathic pain.

## Bt354 alleviates CCI-upregulated STAT3 and neuronal pSTAT3 protein expression in the ipsilateral SCDH
Immunofluorescence staining was performed to assess whether Bt354 attenuated CCI-induced upregulation of STAT3 and pSTAT3 in the ipsilateral SCDH. As shown in a, immunofluorescence analysis revealed that CCI upregulated STAT3 and pSTAT3 expression in the 7d and 14d groups. Intrathecal low (0.25 ​μg/h; L) or high (1 ​μg/h; H) dose of Bt354 for 7 or 14 days alleviated CCI-induced upregulations of STAT3 and pSTAT3 in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups. Quantitative analysis indicated that CCI significantly increased STAT3 expression in laminae I–III in the 7d and 14d groups, which was markedly attenuated by intrathecal infusion of Bt354 in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups ( b). Similarly, CCI upregulated pSTAT3 immunoreactivity in the ipsilateral SCDH in the 7d and 14d groups, which was significantly mitigated by Bt354 administration in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups ( c).
 Furthermore, to determine the cellular distribution of pSTAT3 expression, double immunofluorescence staining was performed using the neurons-specific marker neuronal nuclei (NeuN, green), microglia-specific marker cluster of differentiation molecule 11B (CD11b, green), astrocytes-specific marker glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP, green), and pSTAT3 (red) in lamina I-III in the ipsilateral lumbar SCDH of the control, 7d, 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups ( d). Co-localization of NeuN positivity with pSTAT3 (yellow, identified by white arrows) indicated predominant neuronal expression of pSTAT3, whereas GFAP- and CD11b-positive cells showed minimal co-localization. Pearson's correlation analysis indicated that pSTAT3 co-localization with NeuN was higher than that with GFAP or CD11b ( e), suggesting lower expression in astrocytes and microglia. Confocal microscopy further supported the neuronal localization of pSTAT3 ( f). Collectively, the CCI-induced upregulation of STAT3 and pSTAT3 in the ipsilateral SCDH was attenuated by intrathecal Bt354 treatment, and pSTAT3 was predominantly expressed in neurons rather than in non-neuronal glial cells.

## Bt354 inhibits CCI-induced nuclear phosphor-STAT3 upregulation
To evaluate the nuclear expression of pSTAT3 in the ipsilateral SCDH, immunofluorescence staining of pSTAT3 and the nucleus was performed. As shown in a, double immunofluorescence labeling for pSTAT3 (red) and a nuclear marker (DAPI; blue) was performed. Co-localized signals (pink, identified by white arrows) indicated that CCI enhanced nuclear pSTAT3 expression in the 7d and 14d groups. Intrathecal administration of Bt354 for 7 or 14 days attenuated nuclear pSTAT3 expression in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups. Quantitative analysis using Mander's correlation coefficient revealed that CCI significantly upregulated nuclear pSTAT3 levels in laminae I–III in SCDH of the 7d and 14d groups ( b). However, Bt354 administration significantly decreased the CCI-induced nuclear pSTAT3 expression in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups. Overall, these data indicated that Bt354 effectively mitigated CCI-induced upregulation of nuclear pSTAT3 expression in the ipsilateral SCDH.
 

## Bt354 significantly decreases CCI-induced glial cell activation and polarization
To assess whether Bt354 attenuated CCI-induced microglial activation and polarization, immunofluorescence staining of CD11b and Cluster of Differentiation 86 (CD86, an M1 microglial marker) was performed. Immunofluorescence revealed that CCI increased the expression of CD11b and CD86 in the 7d and 14d groups ( a). Intrathecal infusion of Bt354 for 7 or 14 days reduced the CCI-induced upregulation of CD11b and CD86 in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups. Quantitative analysis indicated that CCI significantly increased CD11b expression in laminae I–III in the 7d and 14d groups, which was markedly attenuated by Bt354 administration in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups ( b). Similarly, CCI-induced CD86 upregulation in the 7d and 14d groups was significantly reduced by Bt354 treatment in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups of the ipsilateral SCDH ( c).
 To examine astrocyte activation and polarization in the ipsilateral SCDH, immunofluorescence staining for GFAP and Complement component 3d (C3d, A1 astrocyte marker) was performed. As shown in a, immunofluorescence revealed that CCI upregulated GFAP and C3d expressions in the 7d and 14d groups. Intrathecal infusion of Bt354 for 7 or 14 days reduced the CCI-induced upregulation of GFAP and C3d in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups. Quantitative analysis confirmed that CCI significantly increased GFAP expression in laminae I–III in the 7d and 14d groups, which was markedly attenuated by Bt354 administration in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups ( b). Similarly, the CCI-induced C3d upregulation was significantly alleviated in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups in the ipsilateral SCDH ( c). Overall, Bt354 effectively mitigated glial cell activation and pro-inflammatory polarization in the ipsilateral SCDH following CCI.
 

## Bt354 reduces CCI-induced neuronal NLRP3 inflammasome expression
Immunofluorescence staining was performed to determine whether Bt354 attenuated the CCI-induced elevation of nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3) expression in the ipsilateral SCDH. As shown in a, CCI increased NLRP3 expression in the 7d and 14d groups. Intrathecal administration of Bt354 for 7 or 14 days suppressed CCI-induced NLRP3 upregulation in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups. Quantitative analysis of NLRP3 immunoreactivity demonstrated that CCI significantly increased NLRP3 expression within laminae I–III in the 7d and 14d groups, which was markedly attenuated by Bt354 administration in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups ( b). Double immunofluorescence staining was performed using NeuN (green), CD11b (green), GFAP (green), and NLRP3 (red) in the laminae I–III of the ipsilateral lumbar SCDH in the control, 7d, and 14d groups ( c). Merged signals (yellow, identified by white arrows) indicated that NLRP3 was predominantly expressed in neurons rather than in other non-neuronal cells, which was further verified by Pearson's correlation coefficient ( ). Collectively, the pSTAT3 inhibitor mitigated CCI-induced upregulation of the neuronal NLRP3 inflammasome in the ipsilateral SCDH.
 

## Bt354 alleviates CCI-induced neuronal LDHA and phosphor-TBK1
Immunofluorescence staining was performed to investigate whether Bt354 modulated the CCI-induced upregulation of the Lactate Dehydrogenase A (LDHA) and phosphorylated TANK binding kinase 1 (pTBK1) signaling cascade in the ipsilateral SCDH. As shown in a, CCI upregulated LDHA and pTBK1 expressions in the 7d and 14d groups. Intrathecal administration of Bt354 for 7 or 14 days decreased CCI-induced LDHA and pTBK1 expression in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups. Quantification of LDHA immunoreactivity revealed that CCI significantly upregulated LDHA expression in laminae I–III of the ipsilateral SCDH in the 7d and 14d groups, which was significantly alleviated by Bt354 administration in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups ( b). Similarly, the CCI-induced pTBK1 upregulation in the 7d and 14d groups was robustly mitigated in the ipsilateral SCDH of the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups ( c). Double immunofluorescence staining was performed using NeuN (green), LDHA (red), and pTBK1 (red) in laminae I-III of the ipsilateral lumbar SCDH in the 14d group ( d). Merged signals (yellow, indicated by white arrows) indicated that LDHA and pTBK1 were mainly expressed in neurons. Furthermore, LDHA inhibition markedly reduced CCI-induced NLRP3 expression ( ), supporting the hypothesis that LDHA serves as an upstream regulator of the TBK1 [ ] and NLRP3 [ ]. Taken together, these results indicated that Bt354 effectively attenuated CCI-induced activation of the neuronal LDHA/pTBK1/NLRP3 pathway in ipsilateral SCDH.
 

## Bt354 reduces CCI-induced microglial phosphor-CREB expression
Immunofluorescence labeling was performed to examine the effect of Bt354 on CCI-triggered phosphorylated cAMP-response element binding protein (pCREB) upregulation. As shown in a, CCI upregulated pCREB expression in the 7d and 14d groups. Intrathecal injection of Bt354 for 7 or 14 days decreased the CCI-induced upregulation of pCREB in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups. Quantification of pCREB immunoreactivity indicated that CCI significantly increased pCREB expression in laminae I–III in the 7d and 14d groups, which was significantly mitigated by Bt354 administration in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups ( b). Double immunofluorescence staining was performed using CD11b (green), NeuN (green), GFAP (green), and pCREB (red) in laminae I-III in the ipsilateral lumbar SCDH in the control, 7d, and 14d groups ( c), as well as in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups ( ). The merged signals (yellow, identified by white arrows) highlight the predominant co-localization of CD11b and pCREB. As shown in d, Pearson's correlation analysis indicated that pCREB mainly co-localized with CD11b instead of GFAP or NeuN. Triple immunofluorescence staining was performed using pCREB (red), DAPI (blue), and CD11b (green) ( e). Merged signals (pink, identified by white arrows) revealed that CCI upregulated microglial nuclear pCREB expression in the 7d and 14d groups, which was attenuated by Bt354 administration in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups. In general, Bt354 alleviated CCI-driven nuclear pCREB expression in microglia in the ipsilateral SCDH.
 

## Bt354 mitigates CCI-upregulated pro-inflammatory cytokines expression
As shown in a, CCI increased interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) expression in the 7d and 14d groups. Intrathecal administration of Bt354 for 7 or 14 days attenuated CCI-induced IL-1β and IL-6 expressions in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups. Quantitative analysis of IL-1β immunoreactivity indicated that CCI significantly enhanced IL-1β expression in laminae I–III of the ipsilateral SCDH in the 7d and 14d groups, which was significantly reduced by Bt354 administration in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups ( b). Similarly, CCI-induced IL-6 upregulation in the 7d and 14d groups was considerably decreased in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups in the ipsilateral SCDH ( c). Double immunofluorescence staining was performed using CD11b (green), NeuN (green), GFAP (green), and IL-1β (red) in the ipsilateral lumbar SCDH in the control, 7d, and 14d groups ( d). Merged signals (yellow, marked by white arrows) revealed that IL-1β primarily co-localized with microglia and neurons, with less expression in astrocytes. These observations were further supported by Pearson's correlation analysis, which revealed significantly higher co-localization coefficients of IL-1β with CD11b and NeuN than with GFAP, indicating that IL-1β was primarily expressed in both neurons and microglia. Similarly, double immunofluorescence staining was performed using CD11b (green), NeuN (green), GFAP (green), and IL-6 (red) in the ipsilateral lumbar SCDH of the control, 7d, and 14d groups ( e). Co-localized signals (yellow, indicated by white arrows), in conjunction with Pearson's correlation analysis, demonstrated that IL-6 was distributed in both microglia and neurons. Collectively, Bt354 effectively suppressed CCI-induced pro-inflammatory IL-1β and IL-6 generation upregulation in the neurons and microglia of the ipsilateral SCDH.
 

## Bt354 inhibits CCI-induced upregulation of phosphor-P38
To investigate whether Bt354 modulated CCI-induced activation of phosphor-P38 (pP38), immunofluorescence staining was performed. As shown in a, CCI increased pP38 expression in the ipsilateral SCDH in the 7d and 14d groups. Intrathecal administration of Bt354 for 7 or 14 days downregulated CCI-induced pP38 expression in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups. Quantitative analysis of pP38 immunoreactivity demonstrated that CCI significantly upregulated pP38 expression within laminae I–III in the 7d and 14d groups, which was effectively attenuated by Bt354 administration in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups ( b). Double immunofluorescence staining for CD11b (green) and pP38 (red) in laminae I–III of the ipsilateral lumbar SCDH demonstrated merged signals (yellow, indicated by white arrows) in the control, 7d, and 14d groups, indicating pP38 activation in microglia ( c). Together, these results indicated that Bt354 mitigated the CCI-induced upregulation of microglial pP38 expression in the ipsilateral SCDH.
 

## Bt354 suppresses CCI-induced angiogenesis
Immunofluorescence staining was performed to assess whether Bt354 attenuated CCI-induced upregulation of angiopoietin-2 (Ang2) and cluster of differentiation 31 (CD31) in the ipsilateral SCDH. CCI upregulated Ang2 and CD31 expressions in the 7d and 14d groups ( a). Intrathecal injection of Bt354 for 7 or 14 days alleviated the CCI-induced upregulation of Ang2 and CD31 in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups. Quantification of Ang2 immunoreactivity indicated that CCI significantly increased Ang2 expression in laminae I–III in the 7d and 14d groups, which was markedly attenuated by Bt354 administration in the 7d ​+ ​L, 7d ​+ ​H, 14d ​+ ​L, and 14d ​+ ​H groups ( b). Similarly, the CCI-induced upregulation of CD31 in the ipsilateral SCDH of the 7d and 14d groups was significantly alleviated in the 14d ​+ ​L and 14d ​+ ​H groups. CD31 expression in the 7d ​+ ​L and 7d ​+ ​H groups showed a decreasing pattern; however, there was no statistically significant difference compared to that in the 7d group ( c). Overall, Bt354 effectively mitigated CCI-induced angiogenesis in the ipsilateral SCDH.
 

## Discussion
In this study, CCI-induced neuropathic pain upregulated neuronal nuclear pSTAT3 expression in the ipsilateral SCDH. Intrathecal injection of Bt354, a small-molecule pSTAT3 inhibitor, attenuated nociception and STAT3/pSTAT3 expression, especially within neurons, and reduced the nuclear localization of pSTAT3 after CCI. Additionally, Bt354 attenuated CCI-induced neuroinflammation by reducing glial cell activation, polarization of M1 microglia and A1 astrocytes, and production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1β and IL-6. Moreover, CCI-induced neuronal NLRP3 inflammasome activation and microglial pCREB and pP38 activation were alleviated by Bt354 treatment. Moreover, CCI-induced neuronal LDHA, pTBK1, and angiogenesis—Ang2 and CD31 upregulation–were attenuated by intrathecal Bt354 administration. Collectively, these findings suggest that Bt354 is a potent therapeutic candidate for neuropathic pain that targets neuronal and glial STAT3-mediated inflammatory signaling.
Bt354, a small-molecule pSTAT3 inhibitor, has shown therapeutic potential and exhibited high specificity and antitumor properties for cancer treatment in vitro and in vivo [ , ]. Through prediction from SwissADME and blood–brain barrier (BBB) permeability criteria [ ], Bt354 demonstrated favorable physicochemical properties, including a molecular weight of 381.46 ​Da (within the optimal range of 400–600 ​Da), topological polar surface area of 88.12 ​Å2 (TPSA <90 ​Å2), and LogP of 3.12 (within the ideal range of 2–4), suggesting that it has the potential to cross the BBB. Moreover, the dosage used in mice is twice that used in rats [ ], and the equilibrium dosing conversion ratio of peripheral to central administration is 100:1 [ ]. Chen and colleagues orally administered Bt354 (10–40 ​mg/kg/day) in cancer mice [ ], equivalent to intrathecally injected 50–200 ​μg/kg/day in rats after dose conversion. In our study, the intrathecal doses of Bt354 (0.25 ​μg/h and 1 ​μg/h, equivalent to 20 ​μg/kg/day and 80 ​μg/kg/day, respectively) were selected based on the ED50 (1.176 ​± ​0.28 ​μg) of the analgesic effect on CCI-induced neuropathic pain and less than the dosages used in the cancer therapies.
Additionally, a previous review demonstrated that several approaches, such as antisense oligonucleotides, gene therapy, natural compounds, and synthetic small molecules, have been employed over the past decade to inhibit aberrant STAT3 signaling. However, no STAT3-targeting drugs have been approved by FDA [ ]. Furthermore, Wang et al. reported that current pSTAT3 inhibitors face some disadvantages, including compensatory pathway activation, kinase inhibitor limitations, and protein interaction inaccessibility, especially within the SH2 domain, making this target difficult to assess and resulting in small molecular STAT3 inhibitors rarely being developed into clinical drugs [ ]. Notably, Bt354 is predicted to bind to the SH2 domain of STAT3 [ ] and exhibits BBB permeability, molecular specificity, and safety, highlighting its potential as a therapeutic agent for modulating pSTAT3 signaling in neuropathic pain.
Neuroinflammation, defined as the production of pro-inflammatory mediators in the CNS, contributes to the development and persistence of neuropathic pain by increasing dorsal horn neuronal excitability and facilitating nociceptive sensitization [ , ]. Concomitantly, the activation of glial cells, particularly astrocytes and microglia, contributes to central sensitization by releasing cytokines, chemokines, and neuromodulators that alter synaptic transmission and neuronal responsiveness [ ]. Both M1 microglia and A1 astrocyte polarization can release pro-inflammatory and neurotoxic mediators, including IL-1β and IL-6, during neuroinflammation [ , ]. Eliav et al. illustrated that IL-1β can mediate nociception and that systemic or intrathecal IL-1β injection induces hyperalgesia [ ]. Moreover, intrathecal IL-6 administration activates STAT3 and leads to neuroinflammation in neuropathic pain induced by CCI and spinal nerve ligation [ , ]. Lan and colleagues illustrated that STAT3 promotes M1 microglial polarization in response to intracerebral hemorrhage-induced stroke [ ]. Besides, STAT3 is believed to enhance the A1/A2 astrocyte ratio in rodent models of AD and spinal cord injury rodent models, causing neurotoxicity and neuroinflammation [ , ]. Excessive pSTAT3 expression leads to the upregulation of the A1 astrocyte phenotype in mice [ ]. In addition, STAT3 serves as a key transcriptional regulator of angiogenesis [ ], a process that is increasingly recognized as being intricately linked with neuroinflammation and the pathophysiology of neuropathic pain [ , ]. Moreover, we found that pSTAT3 is mainly expressed in neurons rather than in astrocytes or microglia in the ipsilateral SCDH, consistent with previous studies [ , ].
Additionally, based on our recent findings, the CCI-induced neuronal LDHA/TBK1 signaling axis contributes to the initiation of angiogenesis and neuroinflammation during neuropathic pain [ ]. Angiogenesis is a fundamental process in tissue repair and organ regeneration that supports homeostasis by forming new blood vessels [ ]. Alterations in the vascular and metabolic activities have been consistently observed in neuropathic pain. Preclinical studies using micropositron emission tomography with [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose and 99mTc autoradiography demonstrated increased regional blood flow and metabolism in both the peripheral and central nervous systems of rat models [ , , ]. Moreover, clinical observations further support altered cerebrovascular dynamics and impaired brain energy homeostasis in patients with fibromyalgia and migraine [ , ]. These vascular and metabolic changes are strongly associated with inflammation [ ] and VEGF and Ang2 upregulation [ ]. VEGF expression was largely localized in astrocytes [ ], whereas Ang2 is predominantly expressed in the neurons . Although VEGF has been extensively studied in the context of neuropathic pain, we focused on neuron-specific mechanisms involving Ang2. Notably, Ang2 is markedly upregulated under inflammatory conditions [ ], is regarded as an inflammatory marker [ ], and contributes to cytokine synthesis and neuroinflammatory signaling [ , ]. Moreover, a previous study indicated that STAT3 upregulates gene transcription in LDHA [ ]. Therefore, pSTAT3 might regulate angiogenesis by modulating the LDHA/TBK1 pathway.
In the normal state, the activated NLRP3 inflammasome protects the CNS from invading pathogens and responds to the clearance of damaged cells, promoting repair and acting as a neuroprotective role. However, abnormalities in NLRP3 expression in the CNS would lead to the continuous release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1β, thereby enhancing neuroinflammation [ ]. Moreover, NLRP3 inflammasome initiation is accompanied by the progression of neuropathic pain [ ], which is activated in the peripheral nerves and SCDH [ , ]. Chen & Smith suggested that direct or indirect NLRP3 inhibition can ameliorate neuropathic pain [ ]. Wahlman et al. revealed that chemotherapy-induced nociception can be attributed to NLRP3 suppression [ ]. Additionally, Bai and coworkers reported that STAT3 overexpression upregulates NLRP3 activation in a neuroblastoma cell line [ ]. Zhu et al. reported that pSTAT3 is an upstream regulator of NLRP3 expression, as demonstrated by pSTAT3 inhibition in the ischemic stroke mouse model [ ]. Besides, we found that the LDHA inhibitors, FX11 and oxamate, significantly decreased CCI-induced NLRP3 upregulation in the ipsilateral SCDH. LDHA promotes NLRP3 expression and stability, and LDHA knockout (KO) results in NLRP3 downregulation [ ]. Cui et al. reported that TBK1 activates the NLRP3 inflammasome, which is mitigated by TBK1 KO [ ]. Moreover, a previous study demonstrated that NLRP3 is mainly expressed in neurons [ ], consistent with our findings. Therefore, pSTAT3 may activate the neuronal NLRP3 inflammasome via the LDHA/TBK1 axis during neuropathic pain.
Qin and coworkers reported that pCREB is a key regulator of neuroinflammation [ ]. The activation of the CREB pathway enhances nociception and neuroinflammation during neuropathic pain [ , , ]. In this study, we found that pCREB was mainly expressed in the nucleus of microglia rather than in neurons and astrocytes, which is consistent with previous publications and can also be observed using a confocal system [ , ]. Moreover, recent reports indicated that IL-1β contributes to the activation of the CREB signal transduction [ , ]. Dang and colleagues demonstrated that IL-1β induces CREB phosphorylation via P38 [ ]. Moreover, IL-1β-induced pCREB upregulates IL-6 production by binding to the promoter of IL-6 [ ], which enhances STAT3 expression and phosphorylation [ ]. Consequently, pSTAT3 may mediate p-CREB expression and IL-6 production by regulating NLRP3 inflammasome-derived IL-1β generation.
Herein, we propose that pSTAT3 and its inhibitors play critical roles in modulating neuropathy-induced nociceptive sensitization in the CNS. Following CCI, neuronal STAT3 is phosphorylated and translocated into the nucleus. pSTAT3 functions as a transcription factor, inducing the expression of its downstream target LDHA, which in turn enhances TBK1 phosphorylation. This pathway further promotes the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome and the release of IL-1β from neurons. IL-1β then acts on the surrounding microglia to induce their polarization into the pro-inflammatory M1 phenotype (CD86). The M1 microglia further amplify the inflammatory response by phosphorylating P38 and CREB, thereby enhancing the expression and release of IL-6. Notably, IL-6, in turn, phosphorylates STAT3 in the neurons. Consequently, neuronal pSTAT3 promotes IL-1β production through NLRP3 inflammasome activation, inducing microglial activation and subsequently increasing IL-6 expression. Elevated IL-6 levels further enhance neuronal pSTAT3 activation, forming a self-amplifying, positive feedback loop. Moreover, M1 microglia interact with pSTAT3-induced A1 astrocytes (C3d) during neuroinflammation. Additionally, the LDHA/pTBK1 axis contributes to the upregulation of Ang2 and CD31, promoting angiogenesis.
Collectively, intrathecal administration of Bt354 disrupts CCI-induced pSTAT3-related pathways by inhibiting pSTAT3 upregulation, mitigating glial activation, and attenuating IL-1β and IL-6 production, resulting in the alleviation of neuroinflammation, angiogenesis, and nociception. Through these mechanisms, Bt354 exhibits significant anti-nociceptive effects, underscoring its therapeutic potential for managing neuropathic pain.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization (Chun-Sung Sung (CSS), and Zhi-Hong Wen (ZHW)); data curation (Hao-Jung Cheng (HJC), Nan-Fu Chen (NFC), Yueh-Chiao Tang (YCT), Po-Chang Shih (PCS), Wu-Fu Chen (WFC)); formal analysis (HJC, NFC, YCT, Ya-Jen Chiu (YJC), WFC); methodology (HJC, PCS, CSS, ZHW); project administration (CSS, ZHW); Resources (NFC, PCS, CSS, ZHW); software (HJC, YCT, YJC); supervision (CSS, ZHW); validation (PCS, WFC, ZHW); visualization (HJC, YCT, CSS, ZHW); writing – original draft (HJC, YCT, ZHW); writing – review and editing (HJC, NFC, YCT, CSS, ZHW). All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

## Ethics approval
All animal experimental procedures were approved by the National Sun Yat-sen University Institutional Committee for the Care and Use of Animals (Approval No. IACUC-11237).

## Consent for publication
Not applicable.

## Availability of data and materials
Data is provided within the manuscript or supplementary information files.

## Funding
This study was supported by National Science and Technology Council, Taiwan, NSTC 114-2320-B-110-008 and NSTC 113-2314-B-075 -067 -MY2; Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taiwan, V114C-139; and Kaohsiung Armed Forces General Hospital, Taiwan, KAFGH_A_114006.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare no competing interests.

## Acknowledgement
We would like to thank Editage (www.editage.com.tw) for English language editing.

## Footnotes
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurot.2025.e00763.

## Contributor Information
Chun-Sung Sung, Email: cssung@vghtpe.gov.tw.
Zhi-Hong Wen, Email: wzh@mail.nsysu.edu.tw.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary data
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
 

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
Data is provided within the manuscript or supplementary information files.