319nihpaCell reportsCell RepPMC122894081228940812289408NIHMS20926554048369210.1016/j.celrep.2025.115792Cholesterol metabolism regulated by CAMKK2-CREB signaling promotes castration-resistant prostate cancer
LinChenchu PulliamThomas L HanJenny J XuJiaqian RecioCarlos Vera WilkenfeldSandi R ShiYan KushwahaManoj BenchSarah RuizEduardo SenthilkumarSanjanaa DileepJayasurya ShepherdPeter DA NavoneNora M KlekersAlbert R WhitleyElizabeth M IttmannMichael M EberlinLivia S WangWenyi FrigoDaniel E 1Department of Cancer Systems Imaging, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77054, USA2UTHealth Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center Houston, TX 77030, USA3Department of Systems Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA4Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA5Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA6Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine, Phoenix, AZ 85054, USA7McKetta Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA8Department of Genitourinary Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA9Department of Abdominal Radiology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA10Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA11Departments of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA12Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA13Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA14Department of Chemistry, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA15Center for Nuclear Receptors and Cell Signaling, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA16Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77004, USA17Present address: Department of Internal Medicine, University District Hospital, San Juan, Puerto Rico18Present address: Pathogenesis LLC., Ocala, FL, USA19Deceased20Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, C.L., T.L.P., and D.E.F.; methodology, C.L., T.L.P., J.X., C. V.R., M.K., S.B., E.R., P.D.A.S., N.M.N., L.S.E., W.W., and D.E.F.; investigation, C.L., T.L.P., J.X., S.R.W., C.V.R., J.J.H., Y.S., M.K., S.B., E.R., S.S., J. D., E.M.W., M.M.I., L.S.E., and D.E.F.; visualization, C.L., T.L.P., C.V.R., M. K., and S.B.; funding acquisition, C.L., T.L.P., A.R.K., L.S.E., W.W., and D.E. F.; project administration, L.S.E. and D.E.F.; supervision, L.S.E., W.W., and D.E.F.; writing – original draft, C.L., T.L.P., M.K., S.B., and D.E.F.; writing – review & editing, C.L., T.L.P., J.X., S.R.W., C.V.R., J.J.H., Y.S., M.K., S.B., E.R., S.S., J.D., P.D.A.S., A.R.K., E.M.W., M.M.I., L.S.E., W.W., and D.E.F.
*Correspondence: frigo@mdanderson.org
7620254461157921157922772025This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Cell Rep

## SUMMARY
Castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) remains an incurable disease in need of improved treatments. CAMKK2 is an emerging therapeutic target whose oncogenic effects in prostate cancer have, to date, been largely attributed to its activation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). Here, we demonstrate that CAMKK2 promotes prostate cancer growth through an alternative downstream pathway involving CAMKI and CREB. Unbiased transcriptomics identify CREB-mediated transcription as a CAMKK2-regulated process, findings that we validate using diverse molecular, genetic, and pharmacological approaches in vitro and in vivo. CAMKK2 promotes CREB phosphorylation/activation through CAMKIα independently of AMPK, CAMKIV, or other CAMKI isoforms. Functionally, the CREB family members CREB1 and ATF1 exhibit close redundancy, necessitating co-targeting for optimal anti-tumor efficacy. An inhibitor of CREB1/ATF1 blocks CRPC with minimal side effects. Mechanistically, CAMKK2 and CREB increase CRPC growth through augmenting cholesterol metabolism. Together, these findings identify an oncogenic pathway that could be exploited for the treatment of CRPC.

## Graphical Abstract

 

## In brief
Sustained androgen receptor (AR) inhibition is a clinical challenge due to multiple AR reactivation mechanisms. Hence, delineating the signaling pathways downstream of AR that promote cancer progression may nominate novel, alternative therapeutic targets. Lin et al. identify CAMKI-CREB-mediated cholesterol metabolism as an alternative, AMPK-independent, and druggable pathway mediating AR-CAMKK2-driven CRPC.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoIssue date 2025 Jun 24.

## INTRODUCTION
Androgen receptor (AR) signaling is the major driver of prostate cancer, even in the late stages of the disease. As such, AR signaling inhibitors (ARSIs) are the first-line standard of care for essentially all advanced prostate cancers. Despite the near universal initial effectiveness of AR-targeted therapy, eventually all castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) patients relapse in ∼2–3 years. Although current AR-targeted therapies fail, AR is often reactivated through a variety of mechanisms (e.g., AR gene and enhancer amplification, AR mutations, AR splice variants, etc.) and continues to promote disease progression. Therefore, AR and its downstream effectors remain viable therapeutic targets in CRPC.
Previous work from our group and others identified calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase 2 (CAMKK2), a serine/threonine kinase, as an important direct downstream target of AR that promotes prostate cancer progression. – Accordingly, CAMKK2 levels track with disease progression (recurrence, Gleason score, metastasis), being highest in CRPC. , , Moreover, CAMKK2 mRNA levels have recently been incorporated into a new urinary test for high-grade prostate cancer, MyProstateScore 2.0 [MPS2], a Food and Drug Administration-approved biomarker that helps predict the likelihood of clinically aggressive disease in men with localized prostate cancer. Functionally, knockout (KO) or inducible knockdown (KD) of CAMKK2 in multiple prostate cancer xenograft models impaired CRPC growth. These data complement work demonstrating that deletion of Camkk2 inhibits prostate cancer in genetic mouse models (GEMMs). , Importantly, we and others have shown that a first-generation small molecule inhibitor of CAMKK2, STO-609, blocked prostate cancer cell growth in culture, in a xenograft mouse model of CRPC and a prostate cancer GEMM, , , , indicating that CAMKK2 is a driver of prostate cancer progression and is druggable. While there are ongoing efforts to develop novel CAMKK2 inhibitors suitable for clinical trials, – no clinical-grade inhibitors of CAMKK2 currently exist.
To date, CAMKK2’s pro-tumorigenic effects in prostate cancer have been almost exclusively attributed to its phosphorylation and subsequent activation of one of its known substrates, the AMP-activated prostate kinase (AMPK), a master regulator of metabolism. , However, additional evidence suggests that AMPK may not always be the downstream effector of CAMKK2 in prostate cancer and, in fact, under some conditions may have opposing effects. , These data suggest that our understanding of CAMKK2’s mechanisms of action in prostate cancer is incomplete. Here, we used unbiased transcriptomics to identify an alternative CAMKK2-mediated pathway that we validate using diverse in vitro and in vivo models, demonstrate that it promotes CRPC, and is druggable.

## RESULTS

## Phosphorylation of CREB at serine 133 and CREB activity correlate with AR-CAMKK2 signaling
To identify downstream targets of AR-CAMKK2 signaling in an unbiased manner, we performed RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) on RNA from C4-2 cells following CAMKK2 KO. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed that genes downregulated in CAMKK2 KO cells were significantly enriched in CREB activity-related genesets, including genes having at least one occurrence of the transcription factor binding site (CREB_Q2, CREB_Q2_1, and CREB_Q4) and genes involved in the cAMP pathway (WANG_RESPONSE_TO_FORSKOLIN_UP) ( ; ). The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and Reactome pathway analyses displayed similar results ( ), indicating a potential link between CAMKK2 and CREB-dependent transcriptional activity. These findings were of interest to us for two reasons. First, like CAMKK2, , , increased CREB activity has been observed across several cancer types including prostate. In liver, melanoma, prostate, and stomach cancers, high mRNA levels of CREB correlate with worse 5-year overall survival. In prostate cancer, increased phosphorylation of CREB on serine-133 (S133), a prerequisite for CREB activity that leads to the recruitment of the co-activator CREB-binding protein (CBP) and subsequent transcriptional activation, , correlates with poorly differentiated and bone metastatic prostate cancers relative to more benign tissues or cancers. – Second, CREB family members (CREB1 and ATF1) have been shown to be phosphorylated on S133 and activated by several upstream kinases including CAMKI (calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 1), CAMKIV (calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 4), and AMPK, the three major targets of CAMKK2. , – Hence, as an orthogonal approach, we performed western blots to assess the expression of AR, CAMKK2, and phosphorylation of CREB (p-CREB [S133]) in 11 prostate cancer patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models. These data further indicated that (1) CAMKK2 levels (two bands are observed due to the presence of an alternative, internal translation start site at methionine-49 [ ]) significantly correlate with AR and (2) both AR and CAMKK2 positively correlate with p-CREB ( ). In addition, p-CREB, like CAMKK2, increased in an isogenically matched hormone-sensitive prostate cancer (HSPC)-CRPC-mCRPC model of prostate cancer progression ( ). These data mirror reports that p-CREB levels and activity correlate with prostate cancer progression in separate clinical cohorts. – Moreover, p-CREB staining was increased in prostate tissues, especially in dorsal-lateral lobes, of conditional Pb-Cre;Pten deletion mice and TRAMP mice ( and ; ), two well-established genetic mouse models (GEMMs) of prostate cancer that were previously shown to express high levels of CAMKK2 compared with wild-type (WT) control mice. , Together, these data suggest a high correlation between AR-CAMKK2 signaling and phosphorylation of CREB, CREB activity, and prostate cancer progression.
 

## CREB is a downstream target of AR-CAMKK2-CAMKI signaling
Since p-CREB levels positively correlated with AR-CAMKK2 in prostate cancer and the primary CAMKK2 downstream targets have been reported to serve as the upstream kinases of CREB, , we sought to determine whether p-CREB and CREB transcriptional activity are regulated by the AR-CAMMK2 signaling pathway. To explore whether AR can promote the phosphorylation and activation of CREB, we first treated hormone-sensitive LNCaP cells with the synthetic androgen R1881 to test if p-CREB responded to the activation of AR in prostate cancer cells. Western blot analysis showed that androgen treatment increased p-CREB (S133) levels similar to CAMKK2 while enzalutamide, an AR antagonist, blocked the R1881-augmented CAMKK2 and p-CREB increases ( ). Since serine-133 is responsible for CREB transcriptional activity, a luciferase reporter containing 4x cAMP response elements (CREs) was created and used to measure CREB-dependent transcription in cells. Similar to p-CREB, androgen treatment increased CRE-mediated expression, an effect that was again blocked by enzalutamide ( ). To further confirm AR’s role, we used two separate small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) to deplete AR expression. Like enzalutamide treatment, siRNAs targeting AR reversed R1881-induced CAMKK2 and p-CREB levels ( ). Taken together, these data indicate that AR promotes the phosphorylation of CREB at S133 and downstream CREB activity in prostate cancer cells.
 A previous study reported that enzalutamide was able to increase p-CREB levels and thus, CREB activation was proposed as a mechanism of enzalutamide resistance and lineage plasticity. Given our findings that androgens were robust inducers of p-CREB, we wanted to further explore this seemingly paradoxical situation. To first identify whether this phenomenon was specific to enzalutamide or more broadly applicable to other AR antagonists, we treated LNCaP cells with different second-generation AR antagonists including enzalutamide and darolutamide alone and in combination with androgens. Our results reveal that indeed paradoxically, both AR agonists and antagonists increase p-CREB levels ( ). However, androgens were far better inducers of CREB phosphorylation compared with AR antagonists alone, but the AR antagonists could decrease androgen-mediated p-CREB to some extent ( ). Importantly, CAMKK2 was not changed following treatment with AR antagonists alone ( ), suggesting that while AR antagonists do also weakly activate CREB, this occurs via a CAMKK2-independent mechanism that is modest in comparison to the effects of AR-CAMKK2 signaling on CREB.
Next, we investigated whether CAMKK2 mediated AR-induced CREB phosphorylation and activity. STO-609, a pharmacological inhibitor of CAMKK2, was first used to inhibit the activity of CAMKK2. In both LNCaP and VCaP cells, p-CREB was increased after androgen treatment, while STO-609 blocked the increase of p-CREB ( and ; ), indicating that CAMKK2 was required for the androgen-mediated CREB phosphorylation. Interestingly, p-CREB levels were not altered by STO-609 when we performed the same treatment in RWPE-1 non-transformed prostate epithelial cells ( ). As STO-609 has been reported to have off-target effects, – we next confirmed CAMKK2’s role using molecular and genetic approaches. First, we established doxycycline (DOX)-inducible, CAMKK2-overexpressing LNCaP and VCaP cells. Doxycycline-mediated CAMKK2 expression increased p-CREB levels in both LNCaP and VCaP cells ( ; ). Since CRPC cells exhibited higher p-CREB levels ( ), we then reduced CAMKK2 expression using doxycycline-inducible short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) in C4-2 and 22Rv1 cells to validate CAMKK2’s regulation of CREB phosphorylation/activity in models of CRPC. Doxycycline-induced KD of CAMKK2 decreased both p-CREB levels and CREB activity ( – ). Consistent with the human prostate cancer cell models, conditional KO of Camkk2 in prostate epithelial cells of TRAMP mice impaired disease progression and decreased p-CREB levels ( ; ). Together, these results demonstrate that AR-CAMKK2 promotes CREB (S133) phosphorylation and activity in both human HSPC and CRPC cells and in vivo mouse models of prostate cancer.

## CAMKI mediates AR-CAMKK2 phosphorylation and activation of CREB in an AMPK-independent manner
AMPK, CAMK1, CAMKIV, and possibly AKT have been identified as CAMKK2 downstream targets in various tissues ( ). The majority of CAMKK2’s oncogenic effects in prostate cancer have, to date, been largely attributed to AMPK. , Moreover, AMPK was identified as a CREB kinase in vitro. Thus, we initially hypothesized that AR-CAMMK2 increased p-CREB through AMPK. Using siRNAs targeting PRKAA1, which encodes the predominant AMPK α catalytic subunit in prostate cancer, , we observed that while p-AMPK and total AMPK were robustly silenced, p-CREB levels were unaltered in both HSPC and CRPC cells ( ; ), implying that AMPK does not facilitate AR-CAMKK2-mediated CREB phosphorylation. We next investigated the possible regulation of CREB by CAMKI (isoforms α, β, δ, γ) and CAMKIV to test the involvement of the other known major CAMKK2 substrates. Using RT-qPCR, we examined the expression status of CAMKI isoforms and CAMKIV in prostate cancer models. In most models in which we observed robust CAMKK2 regulation of CREB, CAMKIγ and CAMKIV could not even be detected, suggesting that they were not involved ( ). We then used siRNAs to KD CAMKIα, β (PNCK) and δ. Interestingly, only KD of CAMKIα diminished AR-induced p-CREB levels and CREB activity ( – ; – ). Of note, although endogenous CAMKIβ/PNCK was difficult to detect by western blot, p-CREB could be increased following exogenous CAMKIβ/PNCK overexpression. Conversely, KD of exogenous CAMKIβ/PNCK reversed AR-mediated p-CREB expression ( ). Unlike what has been observed in ovarian cancer cells, CAMKK2 did not regulate AKT phosphorylation in any of the prostate cancer models tested ( ), suggesting that AKT is not a CAMKK2 substrate in prostate cancer. Together, these data indicate that CAMKIα, and under some contexts CAMKIβ, is the kinase substrate that mediates AR-CAMKK2-induced CREB (S133) phosphorylation.
 

## CREB1 (S133) phosphorylation is required for maximal prostate cancer cell growth and CRPC tumorigenesis
Prior studies have implicated CREB in maintaining the malignant behavior in other cancer types. , Also, deletion or inactivation of CREB increased chemotherapy- and radiation-induced cell apoptosis but repressed neuroendocrine differentiation and angiogenesis. , , , Considering work from our laboratory and others that demonstrated CAMKK2 signaling promotes prostate cancer progression, , , , we hypothesized CREB was required for maximal AR-CAMKK2-mediated prostate cancer progression. To test this, lentiviral-mediated, doxycycline-inducible shRNAs and CRISPR-Cas9 were used to generate CREB1 KD and KO cells, respectively, to evaluate the role of CREB in prostate cancer cell growth. Doxycycline-inducible KD of CREB1 by two distinct shRNAs in LNCaP cells was sufficient to inhibit androgen-mediated cell growth and colony formation ( ; – ). Compared with control cells, CREB KD colonies exhibited both smaller size and fewer numbers. As an orthogonal approach, we used CRISPR-Cas9 to KO CREB1. CREB1 deletion in C4-2 and 22Rv1 cells both abrogated cell growth but to different extents with C4-2 cells being more sensitive to CREB1 KO than 22Rv1 cells ( and ). To assess the role of CREB in prostate cancer further, complementation studies were done by exogenously expressing CREB1 WT and CREB1 S133A mutant in CREB1 KO C4-2 cells ( – ; ). While CREB1 WT partially rescued the anti-growth effects of CREB1 KO, equivalent expression of the CREB1 (S133A) mutant did not rescue growth ( and ), indicating that the phosphorylation of CREB at S133 is required for maximal prostate cancer cell proliferation. The impact of CREB1 in CRPC tumorigenesis and progression were further confirmed in castrated mouse xenograft models of CRPC ( – ; ). CREB1 deletion not only had a profound effect on CRPC tumor growth but largely delayed initial tumor formation and extended overall survival of the tumor-bearing mice. Consistent with in vitro data, tumor growth was partially restored following re-expression of CREB1 WT, but not the S133A mutant, confirming the requirement of both CREB1 and S133 phosphorylation in CRPC tumor growth in vivo. We speculate that the reason for the partial and not full rescue of CREB1 may be attributable to exogenous CREB1 levels being unable to achieve endogenous CREB1 levels in the WT cells/tumors ( ; ). Regardless, these results together support a functional role for CREB S133 phosphorylation in CRPC both in culture and in vivo.
 Given the functional importance of CREB phosphorylation and activity for CRPC cell growth, we next performed transcriptomic profiling to characterize how CREB promotes CRPC. To do this, we analyzed RNA isolated from C4-2 Cas9 control, C4-2 CREB1 KO, C4-2 CREB1 KO + CREB1 WT, and C4-2 CREB1 KO + CREB1 (S133A) cells using RNA-seq. Our analysis revealed that 2,703 genes were significantly downregulated while only 179 genes were upregulated in CREB1 KO cells compared with C4-2 Cas9 cells (| LFC | ≥1 and padj < 0.01) ( ). Such biased gene expression alteration in the CREB KO group strongly supported key roles of CREB1 during transcriptional activation in CRPC. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of these downregulated genes further corroborated the requirement of CREB1 (S133) phosphorylation for maximal CREB-mediated transcription since CREB1 WT addback clustered with Cas9 control while S133A and KO clustered together. Like cell proliferation and tumor growth, the expression of a large proportion of genes that decreased following CREB1 KO were restored in CREB1 WT, but not CREB (S133A) addback cells. GSEA analysis of KEGG, Reactome, Hallmark, and gene ontology (GO) gene sets comparing the isogenic models revealed that gene signatures related to cell growth, steroid-cholesterol metabolism, protein trafficking, the unfolded protein response, extracellular matrix organization, and lipid metabolism-related signatures were downregulated in CREB1-null cells but could be restored in CREB1 WT but not S133A re-expressing cells ( – ). Collectively, our data demonstrate that CREB1 is required for maximal prostate cancer cell proliferation in vitro and CRPC tumor growth in vivo and modulates diverse cellular processes.

## CREB1 and ATF1 exhibit functional redundancy in prostate cancer
CREB1 and its family member ATF1 are highly homologous, sharing similar domain structures and exhibiting 69% amino acid homology overall and as high as 93% homology in their bZIP DNA-binding domains ( ). To investigate whether ATF1 has a shared or unique function in prostate cancer, we performed proliferation and transcriptomic analyses to compare the effects of CREB1 KO (2 single guide RNAs [sgRNAs]) and ATF1 KO (2 sgRNAs) in C4-2 cells. Similar to CREB1 KO, ATF1 KO alone led to a comparable reduction in cell growth ( ). Compared with Cas9 control cells, ATF1 KO also led to primarily decreased gene expression (ATF1 KO clone 1 [KO-1], 1,865 genes with decreased expression:145 genes with increased expression; ATF1 KO clone 2 [KO-2], 581 genes with decreased expression:100 genes with increased expression), suggesting ATF1, like CREB1, is primarily involved in transcriptional activation in prostate cancer. Moreover, the genes that were dramatically decreased in CREB1 KO cells were also largely decreased in ATF1 KO cells (84.5% in ATF1 KO-1; 94.05% in ATF1 KO-2) and vice versa (93.68% in CREB1 KO-1, 72.99% in CREB1 KO-2) ( ). These data indicated that CREB1 and ATF1 might have redundant functions in CRPC. To address the possibility of redundancy, we established CREB1/ATF1 double KO (DKO) models. DKO cells exhibited greater growth impairment compared with either CREB1 or ATF1 single KO (SKO) in both C4-2 and 22Rv1 cells ( and ). Cell-cycle analysis revealed DKO caused a reduction in the S-phase in comparison with control cells and SKO cells ( ). The impact of DKO on transcription was also notably more dramatic than with SKO of either CREB1 or ATF1 ( ). The number of downregulated genes in DKO was >500% more than that in SKOs, highlighting the functional redundancy between CREB1 and ATF1. In xenografted mice, DKO led to a profound impairment in tumor growth ( ), which corresponded to dramatic increases in time to tumor formation and overall survival ( and ). Nine out of 10 mice were even tumor free at 11 weeks when all mice in the control arm were dead due to excessive tumor burden. Moreover, three mice harboring DKO tumors survived >32 weeks. Accordingly, DKO tumors also displayed decreased proliferation, as detected by BrdU staining ( ).
 

## Pharmacologic targeting of CREB in prostate cancer
The observed functional redundancy between CREB1 and ATF1 suggested that from a therapeutic perspective, small molecule inhibitors capable of targeting both CREB family members could be highly efficacious for the treatment of CRPC. A recently developed small molecular inhibitor of CREB (CREB1 and ATF1 family members) is 666-15, which can block CREB-dependent transcriptional activity and has been demonstrated to inhibit tumor growth and metastasis in breast cancer and pancreatic cancer models. , Various prostate cancer cell models we tested including HSPC, CRPC, and enzalutamide-resistant cells all exhibited sensitivities to 666-15 with 50% inhibitory concentrations (IC50s) ranging from 100 nM–1 μM ( ). Interestingly, C4-2 cells exhibited increased sensitivity to 666-15 relative to isogenically matched, hormone-sensitive LNCaP cells, further suggesting an increased dependence on CREB during the transition from HSPC to CRPC ( and ). Compared with corresponding control, CREB1 and ATF1 single KO showed modestly reduced sensitivity to 666-15, while an obvious right-shifted IC50 was observed in the DKO cells ( ). These data not only further confirm the redundancy of CREB1 and ATF1 but also demonstrated the selectivity of 666-15 toward both CREB1 and ATF1. BrdU cell-cycle analysis showed that 666-15 treatment exhibited a dose-dependent G1/S cell-cycle arrest ( ), consistent with what we observed in DKO cells ( ). We then tested the efficacy of 666-15 in vivo in C4-2 CRPC xenograft models ( ). Even our lowest dose of 666-15 (2 mg/kg) exhibited dramatic inhibition of established C4-2 tumors propagated in castrated mice ( ) that led to prolonged survival ( ). Similar to a previous report, we observed no obvious toxicities or effects on markers of systemic metabolic homeostasis at the highest dose tested (10 mg/kg) ( – ). In line with our finding that 666-15 displayed G1/S cell-cycle arrest in vitro, reduced BrdU staining was also observed in 666-15-treated mice compared with the vehicle control group ( ). We then selected two PDX tumors for further testing that we identified as having high CAMKK2 and p-CREB levels ( ). 666-15 inhibited the growth of enzalutamide-resistant PDX MDA-PCa-274-2 PDXs while MDA-PCa-180-30 PDXs, derived from a patient who had progressed on both hormone therapy and chemotherapy, were refractory to 666-15 ( and ). These data suggest that pharmacological inhibition of CREB may be a potential strategy for enzalutamide-resistant prostate cancers. However, the response is not directly correlated with p-CREB levels, indicating a better biomarker is likely needed for patient selection.
 

## CAMKK2-mediated CREB signaling promotes prostate cancer cholesterol metabolism
When performing our prior GSEA to look for CREB- and p-CREB-regulated processes, we observed a significant enrichment in cholesterol metabolism gene sets ( and ; ). To validate whether CREB contributes to cholesterol metabolism, we performed Amplex Red Cholesterol Assays to measure cellular cholesterol in 666-15- and STO-609-treated cells ( ) as well as CREB1/ATF1 (CREB) DKO ( ) and CAMKK2 KO cells ( ) relative to controls. Both pharmacological and genetic inhibition of CREB and CAMKK2 decreased cellular cholesterol levels ( – ). Mass spectrometry also demonstrated that 666-15 treatment decreased the levels of cholesterol and/or cholesterol biosynthesis intermediates in both CRPC cells ( ) and the CRPC xenograft tumors described in ( ). To determine whether CAMKK2-CREB-mediated cholesterol accumulation was required for CRPC growth, we treated C4-2 cells with LDL (low-density lipoprotein) or HDL (high-density lipoprotein) ( – ). Consistent with a role for cholesterol in prostate cancer cell growth, treatment of cells with the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor atorvastatin blocked cell growth ( ). Among the cholesterol metabolism genes that displayed altered expression following CREB disruption were those involved in both cholesterol biosynthesis (e.g., HMGCR, SQLE) and uptake (e.g., LDLR), suggesting that CREB modulates multiple aspects of cholesterol metabolism ( ). Individual overexpression of several candidate cholesterol biosynthesis genes was unable to rescue 666-15-mediated cell growth inhibition, further suggesting that prostate cancer cells rely more on the combined regulation of multiple cholesterol biosynthesis genes and/or cholesterol transport ( – ). Interestingly, addition of HDL reversed 666-15- and STO-609-mediated growth inhibition to a greater extent than LDL supplementation ( and ). Likewise, HDL was better able to reverse the 666-15-mediated decrease in intracellular cholesterol levels ( ), suggesting that acute CREB inhibition may impair LDL uptake. However, both LDL and HDL addback were able to rescue growth in CREB DKO and CAMKK2 KO cells, indicating that cells can use both types of lipoproteins in response to chronic CREB or CAMKK2 inhibition ( and ). In support of a role for CREB in mediating cholesterol uptake, 666-15 was able to augment statin-mediated reductions in cholesterol and cell growth in the presence of exogenous cholesterol ( ), suggesting non-redundant functions of 666-15 and statins. Together, these findings indicate that CAMKK2-CREB signaling promotes prostate cancer in part through increasing intracellular cholesterol, potentially through multiple mechanisms.
 

## DISCUSSION
CRPC represents an incurable and lethal stage of prostate cancer where patients no longer respond to hormone therapy. The study presented here reveals an alternative strategy for the treatment of CRPC by targeting CREB, a downstream target of AR-CAMKK2 signaling. We demonstrate that CREB plays a critical oncogenic role in prostate cancer progression. Consistent with prior work reporting increased activated CREB, assessed by the levels of p-CREB (S133), in advanced prostate cancer patient samples, p-CREB (S133) was also increased in both Pten KO and TRAMP mice compared with their littermate controls ( and ). Functionally, downregulation of CREB1 expression by shRNA decreased AR-induced LNCaP cell growth and colony formation ( ; ), similar to previous studies. , , We further elucidated the proliferative roles of CREB1 and ATF1 in CRPC via CRISPR-Cas9-mediated KO models ( and ; and ). These data demonstrated the functional redundancy between CREB1 and ATF1 in culture and in vivo and therefore, need to co-target both for optimal anti-cancer efficacy ( ). Further, complementation studies confirmed the essential role of CREB S133 phosphorylation in CRPC growth ( ). Together, our data support an essential role for the CREB family in prostate cancer progression and potential as a novel therapeutic target for CRPC.
Although PKA is the most studied upstream kinase of CREB, here we investigated the regulation of CREB by AR-CAMKK2 signaling given the central role of AR in prostate cancer. Several previous studies have reported that phosphorylation of CREB at S133 is positively regulated by androgen treatment or correlates with AR expression in prostate cancer and even hepatocellular carcinoma. , – Interestingly, a divergent study revealed that p-CREB was paradoxically also increased by treatment with the antiandrogen enzalutamide in the absence of androgens. However, this study did not evaluate p-CREB levels following agonist/androgen treatment. In the present study, we found that androgen treatment robustly increased p-CREB levels in a dose- and AR-dependent manner in multiple prostate cancer models ( ). In agreement with the previous study, we also found that AR antagonists including enzalutamide and darolutamide had similar but weaker effects on p-CREB levels when used alone that were independent of changes in CAMKK2 expression ( ). However, in the presence of androgen, the antiandrogens clearly inhibited the androgen-mediated increases in both CAMKK2 and p-CREB ( ). Together, these findings indicate that both androgens and antiandrogens can enhance p-CREB but to different extents and via different mechanisms, but that together could impair each other through some mutual interaction. The mechanisms underlying these observations, which seem to run counter to each other, remain to be fully elucidated. This may be due in part to the complexity of dual regulations from both AR and PKA. To that end, previous studies attributed the androgen- or antiandrogen-mediated upregulation of p-CREB to PKA. , , Here, we demonstrated that AR-mediated CAMKK2 activity clearly represents another robust CREB stimuli ( ). This not only adds to our fundamental understanding of how AR regulates CREB activity but provides an alternative strategy for CRPC treatment. CREB has also been reported as a substrate for many kinases including ERK, AKT, and PAK4. These kinases have discrete responses to AR activation and AR inhibition, which underscore the complex upregulation of p-CREB observed following androgen or antiandrogen treatments. , , – Moreover, the crosstalk among these kinases, such as PKA-mediated deactivation of CAMKK2, adds an additional layer of regulation on p-CREB. – Therefore, it is likely that CREB’s net activity is determined by the integrated signals from multiple kinases that function in a context-dependent manner. Regardless, our data support that AR-mediated CREB has an oncogenic function in prostate cancer progression: AR-promoted CREB activity is positively correlated with prostate cancer growth while AR antagonist-induced p-CREB has been reported as a mechanism of resistance in NEPC cells. These data converge to highlight the potential of targeting CREB, which functions as a downstream effector of both AR agonist- and antagonist-mediated pro-cancer signals.
Although most research to date has identified AMPK as the primary effector of CAMKK2’s pro-cancer functions, recent work indicate that CAMKK2 has an AMPK-independent oncogenic function. , Our data here revealed that CAMKI but not AMPK mediates phosphorylation and activation of CREB downstream of AR-CAMKK2 signaling and therefore functions as an alternative downstream CAMKK2 target in prostate cancer ( ). Endogenously, only CAMKIα was responsible for AR-mediated CREB phosphorylation and activity. However, we cannot not rule out that under some contexts CAMKIβ/PNCK may also phosphorylate/activate CREB since overexpression of PNCK increased CREB phosphorylation while KD of exogenously expressed PNCK by siRNA could reverse it, indicating PNCK can function like CAMKIα but that the levels of CAMKI isoforms might ultimately determine the primary CAMKI isoform that regulates CREB phosphorylation. Little is known about the role of CAMKI in prostate cancer. To our knowledge, this is the first time CAMKI has been linked to CAMKK2 oncogenic functions in prostate cancer. These findings agree with a previous study in AML reporting that CAMKI-mediated CREB activation is required for cancer survival. Overall, these findings extended our understanding of how CAMKK2 promotes prostate cancer by identifying another downstream pro-cancer signaling mechanism.
In addition to elucidating the upstream mechanism of CREB regulation, we also demonstrated the central role of CREB as a transcription factor and the downstream processes it modulates. Transcriptomic analysis revealed that CREB controls the expression of diverse cellular processes including steroid-cholesterol metabolism, protein trafficking, the unfolded protein response (UPR), and lipid metabolism, which are all needed for cell growth ( and ; and ). The rewiring of cholesterol metabolism may contribute essential membrane constituents and metabolites for tumorigenesis as well as steroid hormone precursors, consistent with ongoing work focused on interfering with cholesterol metabolism to inhibit cancer progression. To that end, inhibition of cholesterol biosynthesis (e.g., statins) is being explored as a treatment for CRPC. Although cholesterol biosynthesis has not previously been linked to CREB in the context of cancer, the deregulation of sterol biosynthesis and cholesterol biosynthesis upon CREB and CREM deficiency has previously been reported in work examining CREB functions in neuronal synaptic plasticity. Beyond cholesterol biosynthesis, our data demonstrating that supplementation with LDL and in particular HDL can rescue the growth inhibitory effects of CAMKK2 and CREB blockade suggest that in addition to cholesterol biosynthesis, CAMKK2-mediated CREB activity may also promote cholesterol uptake ( ; and ), consistent with prior work demonstrating the pro-cancer effects of lipoprotein uptake in prostate cancer and clinical studies correlating high cholesterol-containing lipoprotein levels with disease progression. – The importance of both lipid metabolism and the UPR have also been reported as key pro-cancer elements for tumor cells to accommodate metabolic requirements and adapt to the harsh tumor microenvironment. CREB-mediated lipid metabolism via PPARγ, FASN, and ATP citrate lyase (ACLY) has been demonstrated in liver diseases as well as hepatic carcinoma. It was also shown in low vertebrates that CREB is required for UPR-mediated lipid metabolic reprogramming, supporting a central role for CREB in metabolism. By elucidating the CREB-mediated cellular processes in prostate cancer, we also provide a therapeutic basis for targeting CREB as 666-15-treated C4-2 cells exhibited broad inhibition at the transcriptional level, further confirming CREB transcriptional regulation of multiple processes in prostate cancer.
The CREB family consists of CREB, CREM, and ATF1. Given the high structural similarity between CREB1 and ATF1, this study also addressed the issue of whether ATF1 and CREB1 have overlapping functions. Previous studies focusing on early mouse embryonic development have indicated compensatory roles between CREB1 and ATF1. , Specifically, CREB1 and ATF1 co-regulate cell survival in certain stages to sustain early embryonic development. However, they are not equivalent as CREB1-deficient mice were perinatal lethality while ATF1-null mice were fertile, suggesting they may have both redundant and non-redundant functions. Both CREB1 and ATF1 in prostate cancer serve as transcriptional activators as many genes were downregulated following KO of either gene alone. Further comparison revealed that CREB1 and ATF1 SKOs shared a diverse set of downstream targets but downregulated them to distinct extents ( ). DKO of CREB1 and ATF1 led to a substantial increase in the number of downregulated genes and greater cell growth inhibition ( ). Therefore, the cell growth mechanism associated with CREB1 and ATF1 might not only depend on the regulation of phosphorylation as previously described, but also on the shared and unique transcriptional regulation by different CREB family members.
The vulnerability of cells to CREB1/ATF1 DKO led us to test the efficacy of a recently developed CREB inhibitor that inhibits both CREB1 and ATF1 isoforms in vitro and in vivo. The CREB inhibitor, 666-15, disrupts the interaction between CREB and CBP. Prior studies demonstrated that 666-15 significantly decreased CREB-dependent transcriptional activity. Others have confirmed the anti-proliferation and anti-metastatic effects of 666-15 in vitro and in vivo in other cancer types. , , , 
In vitro proliferation assays showed that a range of prostate cancer cell lines were inhibited by 666-15, with IC50s ranging from ∼100 nM to 1 μM ( ). We also found CRPC C4-2 cells to be more sensitive to 666-15 than their isogenically matched HSPC LNCaP parental cells from which they were derived ( ). Treatment of 666-15 significantly reduced tumor growth in castrated mice and showed no significant side effects ( ; ). These results are consistent with previous studies in breast cancer and AML. , Importantly, 666-15 impaired the growth of enzalutamide-resistant PDXs ( ).
Collectively, we elucidated a signaling axis that originates from AR, triggers CAMKK2-CAMKI-CREB-mediated transcription and cholesterol metabolism, ultimately promoting prostate cancer progression. As such, we propose that CREB and/or other components of this signaling cascade will emerge as novel targets for the treatment of advanced prostate cancer. Further, since overexpression and/or activation of CREB has been observed in other cancers, data generated from this study will likely have broader relevance for the treatment of other cancers.

## Limitations of the study
Although our study highlights cholesterol metabolism as a downstream effector of CREB signaling, CREB is known to regulate multiple downstream processes. It is likely that other CREB-mediated processes may also contribute to CRPC. Further, the CREB family consists of three members: CREB1, ATF1, and CREM. This study focused on the regulation and function of CREB1 and ATF1 given their phosphorylation by CAMKI and high similarity. However, CREM, the least studied of the CREB family members, may also influence prostate cancer biology but was not investigated. In addition, while we present evidence demonstrating that p-CREB correlates with tumor progression in transgenic mice, we have not tested the safety and efficacy of 666-15 in immune-competent animals. Hence, it remains unclear whether 666-15 affects the immune microenvironment. Also, while our data demonstrate a clear role for CAMKK2 in the regulation of CREB, we cannot rule out the possibility that its closely related homolog, CAMKK1, also regulates CREB. Finally, not all PDXs selected for high CAMKK2 and p-CREB expression responded to 666-15, indicating that CAMKK2 and p-CREB levels alone cannot predict 666-15 sensitivity. Thus, further work is needed to identify predictive biomarkers of CREB inhibitor efficacy.

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Daniel Frigo (frigo@mdanderson.org).

## Materials availability
Models generated in this study are available upon request from the corresponding author.

## Data and code availability
RNA-seq data have been deposited at GEO and are publicly available as of the date of publication. Accession numbers are listed in the .
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.
 

## STAR★METHODS

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

## Mice
All animal experiments were approved by and conducted under the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the MDACC and the University of Houston according to NIH and institutional guidelines. Animals were housed with littermates, up to 5 total mice/cage and given ad libitum access to standard chow diet and water. Only male mice were used due to the focus on prostate cancer (only occurs in males).
Conditional Camkk2 floxed and Pten floxed, TRAMP, and Pb-Cre4 mouse models have previously been described. – TRAMP and Ptenf/f mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories (stock numbers: 003135, 004597). Pb-Cre4 mice were purchased from the NCI Frederick Mouse Repository (stock number: 01XF5). Camkk2f/f mice were provided by Dr. Anthony Means (Baylor College of Medicine). Deletion of Camkk2 was directed to prostate luminal epithelial cells by breeding Camkk2f/f mice with Pb-Cre4 mice. Pb-Cre4Tg/+;Camkk2f/f mice were then crossed with TRAMP mice to acquire Pb-Cre4Tg/+;Camkk2f/f;TRAMPTg/+ mice. In the experiment, Pb-Cre4+/+;Ptenf/f were used as controls for Pb-Cre4Tg/+;Ptenf/f mice. Pb-Cre4+/+;Camkk2f/f;TRAMPTg/+ were used as controls for Pb-Cre4Tg/+;Camkk2f/f;TRAMPTg/+ mice. All initial mouse strains were generated on a C57BL/6 background and further backcrossed into C57BL/6 WT mice for three additional generations to limit genetic drift. All genotyping was performed by PCR/qPCR analysis using previously reported protocols. , , All experimental mice were males, and mouse prostate glands or tumors were harvested at 40 weeks after birth for Pten mice and 30 weeks after birth for TRAMP mice as indicated in the corresponding legends. At sacrifice, mouse prostates were further separated to anterior prostate (AP), ventral prostate (VP) and dorsolateral prostate (DLP) lobes for further analyses. NSG mice were purchased from either The Jackson Laboratory (stock number: 005557) or the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center (MDACC) Experimental Radiation Oncology Breeding Core. Nude mice were purchased from the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center Experimental Radiation Oncology Breeding Core. Fox Chase severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice were purchased from Charles River (strain code: 236). All mice were born (transgenic mice) and maintained (both transgenic and experimental mice) in a dedicated pathogen-free environment.

## Patient-derived xenografts (PDXs)
PDX models (MDA-PCa-180-30 and −274-2) were from the MDACC Prostate Cancer PDX Core. PDX seeds (F1 in Frigo lab) were implanted subcutaneously into the flank pocket of 7-week-old SCID mice to generate the F2 PDX model. Specifically, mice were weighed and anesthetized with isoflurane inhalation, followed by shaving to expose a large area across their back and wiped with 70% isopropanol and chlorhexidine scrub at implantation site. A small nick incision (∼0.6 cm) in the back area was made and subsequently, a glass micro-dissector was applied to make a pocket. The PDX seed (∼0.5 cm) was then placed in the pocket as far down as possible to ensure it remained in the pocket. After implantation, 1–2 wound clips were applied on the incision. Depending on the growth rate and the viability of the seeds, F2 PDXs were generally palpable for ∼2–4 weeks after implantation after which tumors were monitored weekly by caliper measurements. Once F2 tumors were generated (tumor length ∼1.5 cm), tumors were harvested fresh and sequentially passaged to five mice. Depending on the number of F1 seeds and the required number of experimental mice, F2 or F3 PDXs were used for the final experiments. Each experimental group consisted of 7–9 mice. Mice were randomized to treatment groups to reduce allocation bias. Sample size was based on prior studies using PDX models to ensure adequate power to detect treatment effects.

## Cell culture
LNCaP, VCaP, 22Rv1, RWPE1 and HEK293T cell lines were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (CRL-1740, CRL-2876, CRL-2505, CRL-11609 and CRL-3216). C4-2 cells were obtained from Dr. Nancy Weigel (Baylor College of Medicine). LNCaP-42DENZR and 16DCRPC cells were obtained from Dr. Amina Zoubeidi (Vancouver Prostate Center, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada). C4-2B cells were obtained from Dr. Sue-Hwa Lin. LNCaP cells were routinely cultured in RPMI-1640 supplemented with non-essential amino acids solution (1X), sodium pyruvate solution (1X) and fetal bovine serum (10%). VCaP cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with non-essential amino acids solution (1X), sodium pyruvate solution (1X) and fetal bovine serum (10%). LNCaP-42DENZR, 16DCRPC cells, and C4-2B cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 supplemented with fetal bovine serum (10%). HEK293T cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with fetal bovine serum (10%). C4-2 cells were cultured in IMEM supplemented with fetal bovine serum (5%). RWPE1 cells were cultured in Keratinocyte Serum Free Medium (K-SFM) ( ). Mycoplasma-free tests were routinely performed by MycoAlert Mycoplasma Detection Kit. Cell lines used for this study were authenticated prior to any experiments using short tandem repeat analyses via the MD Anderson Cytogenetics and Cell Authentication Core. In all experiments, cells were steroid-starved in corresponding phenol red-free medium containing 10% charcoal stripped-FBS (5% CS-FBS for C4-2 cells, RWPE1 cells were switched to 10% CS-FBS + phenol red-free RPMI-1640 medium) for 72 h before treatment unless otherwise noted. All experiments with C4-2 and 22Rv1 cells were done in the absence of androgens to better model CRPC.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Animal procedures
Xenografts were performed on 8-week-old male nude mice. Castrations were conducted one week before injections (7 weeks). 1×106 cells in 200 mL DPBS: Matrigel (1:1 vol/vol) were injected subcutaneously into flanks (8 weeks). When tumors were palpable, tumor size was measured by calipers. Tumor volume was calculated by the formula: length × width2/2.
For 666-15 treatment experiments, castrated nude mice with C4-2 cells were randomly grouped into vehicle control (5% Tween 80 and 1% N-methylpyrrolidone in PBS), 2 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg 666-15 IP treatment groups when the tumor volume reached 100 mm3. Mice were treated five days on and two days off a week (treated from Monday to Friday) and tumor size were measured three times a week (Monday, Wednesday, Friday). Tumors and major organs (heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney) were collected when tumor lengths in the control group reached 1.5 cm or signs of morbidity were observed. For the CREB KO/DKO experiments, tumor sizes were monitored once a week after cell injection. The observation of 0.5 cm tumor lengths was recorded as “tumor start”. When tumor lengths reached 1.5 cm, mice were recorded as “death” and tumors were harvested.
For 180–30 PDXs, mice were randomly grouped into vehicle control (5% Tween 80 and 1% N-methylpyrrolidone in PBS) and 10 mg/kg 666-15 IP treatment. For 274–2 PDXs, mice were randomly grouped into vehicle control (5% DMSO, 30% PEG 400 and 10% Tween-80 in PBS), 10 mg/kg enzalutamide and 10 mg/kg 666-15 intraperitoneal (IP) treatment. Mice were treated five times a week (Monday to Friday) and tumor sizes were measured twice a week. Tumors as well as major organs (heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney) and blood were collected when tumor lengths in the control group reached 1.5 cm or signs of morbidity were observed.

## Histology and immunostaining
One hour before harvesting the tumor, mice were IP injected with 100 mg/kg BrdU. Half of the tumor sample was snap frozen while the other half was immediately fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) overnight at 4°C. Following 3x PBS washes after overnight fixation, tissue/tumor samples were transferred and stored in 70% ethanol until paraffin processing. Paraffin processing of tissue was conducted by the MDACC Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Research Animal Support Facility. When staining, paraffin slides were rehydrated and further processed with antigen retrieval in citrate buffer for immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining. Peroxidase blocking was performed in 1% H2O2 plus 10% MeOH solution. Slides were then blocked with goat serum and incubated overnight with primary antibody. The catalog number and dilution strategy of primary antibodies are listed in . After washing with PBST (PBS with 0.02% Tween 20), the corresponding secondary antibodies were incubated for 30 min. Sections were developed by DAB. For hematoxylin and eosin staining (H&E staining), rehydrated sections were stained with hematoxylin solution first. After “blued” by rinsing in tap water, slides were destained with 1% acid alcohol. Subsequently, sections were washed and stained with eosin (mostly performed by the MDACC Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Research Animal Support Facility). Both IHC and H&E-stained slides were dehydrated (ethanol), cleared (xylene) and mounted before imaging. Images were collected by a Nikon ECLIPSE Ci-L or Olympus BX51 microscope and staining intensity was scored by pathologists (M. Ittmann, E. Whitley) or ImageJ software (Plugin: Colour Deconvolution ).

## Expression vectors and sgRNA design
The pDONR221-CREB1 plasmid was obtained from the DNASU plasmid repository (HsCD00040022) and used to generate CREBWT with PAM sequence mutant and CREBS133A mutant plasmids by Q5 Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (primers sequences are listed in ). Modified targets of interest (CREB1WT or CREB1S133A mutant) were transformed from pDONR221 to MSCV-IRES-GFP by Gateway cloning. The pcDNA3.1-CAMKI construct was generated from pDONR221-CAMKI (DNASU plasmid repository, HsCD00296769) and pcDNA3.1-nv5-DEST by Gateway cloning. The pCMV6-PNCK plasmid was purchased from OriGene (RC229215). The GIPZ lentiviral shRNAs targeting empty vector, CAMKK2 and CREB1 were purchased from the Baylor College of Medicine cell-based assay screening service. ShRNAs were then cloned into pINDUCER10 (gift from Dr. Thomas Westbrook, Baylor College of Medicine) to generate pINDUCER10-CAMKK2 and pINDUCER10-CREB1 plasmids as previously described. , To create the pGL4.26-CRE-luciferase construct, 4xCRE fragments (TGACGTCA, gBlocks from IDT, sequences listed in ) were cloned into pGL4.26 vector (Promega, E8441) using NheI and HindIII restriction sites.
The pCW-Cas9 and pLX-sgRNA were from Drs. Eric Lander & David Sabatini (Addgene; plasmids numbers: 50661, 50662). The pLX-sgRNA plasmid was modified to remove the extra Esp3I restriction site, which enables flanking corresponding gRNAs into it by simple restriction digestion and ligation. Oligos of sgRNAs targeting CAMKK2/CREB1/ATF1 were designed by http://crispor.tefor.net/and synthesized by Sigma (listed in ). SgRNAs of CAMKK2 were designed to target the conserved exon of the human CAMKK2 gene and sgRNAs of CREB1/ATF1 were designed to target exon 2 or 3 of the human CREB1/ATF1 genes.

## Genetic and molecular engineering of cells
Lipofectamine 2000 transfection reagent was used to co-transfect pCW-Cas9 with lentiviral packaging plasmids into actively growing HEK293T cells. After 48 h, medium containing virus was collected, filtered, and added to the target cells with 8 g/mL polybrene. Virus medium was replaced by fresh medium with 1 μg/mL puromycin after 48 h, which was used to select doxycycline-inducible Cas9 expressing target cells. Cas9 expression was then validated by western blot following doxycycline treatment (200–1000 ng/mL) and the optimal concentration of doxycycline was determined. The pLX-CAMKK2 sgRNAs, pLX-CREB1 sgRNAs and pLX-ATF1 sgRNAs were transfected into Cas9-inducible cells using the same lentivirial transduction strategy before selection with 10 μg/mL blasticidin. Cells expressing inducible Cas9 and sgRNAs were first treated with doxycycline for 7 days. After, single clones were isolated and screened to establish knockout cells. Each clone was validated by sequencing of the Cas9-edited region and western blotting of protein of interest. Double knockout (DKO) cells were established by sequential transduction method. In detail, C4-2 and 22Rv1 CREB1 single KO (SKO) cells were first established and validated. Coincidently, sequencing results showed that one C4-2 CREB1 KO subclone has the same genotype as one 22Rv1 CREB1 KO subclone. Therefore, the SKO subclones with the same genotype (one from C4-2 and one from 22Rv1) were selected to transfect with two sgRNAs targeting ATF1 respectively. Single clones of the DKO were selected and validated same as the SKO.
For knockdown cells, lentiviral transduction strategy was used to generate LNCaP-shCREB1, C4-2-shCAMKK2 and 22Rv1-shCAMKK2 cells. Briefly, the target plasmid was co-transfected with lentiviral packaging plasmids pMDL-G/P-RRE, pCMV-VSVG and pRSV-REV in a 5:2.5:1.5:1 ratio to activate HEK293T cells to acquire viral particles. Medium containing virus was collected 48 h post transfection, filtered through a 0.45 μM syringe filter and added to the target cells with 8 μg/mL polybrene in regular growth medium. After another 48 h, successfully transduced cells were selected with corresponding antibiotics (puromycin: 1 μg/mL for shRNA; G418: 1400 μg/mL for LNCaP overexpression, 800 μg/mL for VCaP overexpression). Various concentrations of doxycycline were tested (200–1600 ng/mL for shRNA, 20–100 ng/mL for overexpression) to select the optimal induction conditions for experiments.
Retroviral transduction strategy was used to establish CREB1 WT/S133A add back cells. The MSCV-IRES-GFP-CREB1/S133A construct was co-transfected with pCL10A1 in 1:1 ratio by FuGENE transfection reagent and the viral supernatant was collected as in the lentiviral method. After 48 h, yield sorting and purity sorting were performed to get GFP positive cells by BD FACS Aria Fusion Cell Sorter at the MDACC Flow Cytometry and Cellular Imaging Core Facility.
For overexpression of cholesterol metabolism genes, plasmids containing genes for HMGCR or SQLE in pDONR221 or SC5D in pDONR223 were cloned into pLenti-CMV-Neo-DEST (Addgene) via a Gateway LR reaction. Virus was produced and C4-2 cells were transfected. Selection was achieved with 1 mg/mL G418. Gene overexpression was confirmed with qPCR.

## siRNA and plasmid transfections
All transfections were conducted as previously described. , In brief, plasmids were transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 transfection reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For siRNA transfections, siRNAs were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific or Sigma. The siRNA duplex (final concentration 50 nM) and 2.5 μL Lipofectamine 2000 or 5 μL DharmaFECT 1 transfection reagent was diluted to 100 μL Opti-MEM I medium separately for 5 min. Then, the siRNAs and transfection reagent were mixed together for 15 min. Next, siRNA duplex/plasmid-transfection reagent complexes were added to 30–50% confluence cells with 800 μL experimental medium for 4–6 h. After 72 h, cells were collected for subsequent experiments. For CAMKI or PNCK overexpression, 1 μg of pcDNA3.1-nv5-DEST or pCMV6-PNCK plasmid was transfected into LNCaP cells after 12 h of corresponding siRNA treatment. Cells were collected 48 h after overexpression plasmid transfection. All dual transfections were conducted using Lipofectamine 2000 transfection reagent.

## Western blot
After the indicated treatments, cells were washed with PBS twice and protein was extracted by RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1% glycerol, 5mM EDTA) supplemented with Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOP or NaF + Na3VO4). Lysates were incubated on ice for 30 min followed by centrifuging 10 min at 4°C. Supernatants were subsequently collected and protein concentration was determined by Bio-Rad protein assay dye reagent concentrate. 30 μg of protein were subjected to gel-electrophoresis. Then, proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes and blocked with 5% non-fat milk in TBST (TBS +0.1% Tween 20) for 1 h at room temperature. Membranes were then incubated with the primary antibody in blocking buffer overnight at 4°C. The next day, the membranes were washed with TBST for 10 min three times before being incubated with the corresponding secondary antibody in blocking buffer for 1 h at room temperature. Following an additional three washes, the signal was visualized with Enhance Chemiluminescent Reagents with a film developer. Unless otherwise indicated, in scenarios where there are multiple protein isoforms (e.g., CAMKK2, CREB family members), both bands were used for densitometry quantification.

## RNA preparation and real-time PCR
After the indicated treatment, cells were washed with PBS twice and total RNA was isolated by Aurum Total RNA Mini Kit and cDNAs were synthesized by SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis System according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Real-time PCR samples were prepared by SYBR Green Master Mix and conducted by CFX96 Touch Deep Well Real-Time PCR System (Biorad). All primers were purchased from Sigma/IDT and listed in . The expression of target genes was normalized to RPLP0/36B4.

## RNA-sequencing
RNA for RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) was isolated using RNeasy Plus Kits according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After extraction, RNA quality and quantity were determined by Tapestation 4200 (Agilent) with High Sensitivity RNA ScreenTape Assay (Agilent) and Qubit fluorometer with Qubit RNA HS Assay Kit respectively. The RNA integrity number (RIN) for all RNA-seq samples was greater than 8. RNA-seq libraries were prepared using KAPA RNA HyperPrep Kits with Ribo Erase (Roche). Total RNA input for each library preparation was 500 ng quantified by Qubit, and PCR amplification was set with 8 cycles. The quality control of each RNA-seq library was tested by Qubit fluorometer and Tapestation 4200 before pooling. Nine libraries with different KAPA dual-indexed adaptors were multiplexed as one pool and sequenced on one lane of the Illumina HiSeq 4000 sequencing platform (Illumina) at the MDACC Advanced Technology Genomics Core (ATGC) with 5% PhiX spike-in and read format of 76–8-8–76, paired-end.

## RNA-sequencing analysis
Fastq files were trimmed by Trimmomatic (0.39) and then aligned to the GRCh38 assembly using STAR (2.7.0f) two-pass alignment. The transcripts abundance was counted using HT-seq (0.11.0). Differentially expressed genes were determined using the R package DESeq2 (1.30.1) with the following filters: absolute log fold change (LFC) ≥1 and adjust p value (padj) ≤ 0.01 unless otherwise noted. R package biomaRT was used for ID conversion and annotation. R package NMF, RColorBrewer and Venn were used for visualization.

## Gene set enrichment analysis
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) analysis was performed on the pre-ranked RNA-seq data generated by DESeq2 using the GSEA software tool 4.1.0 with default setting. V7.4 Hallmark, C2, C3, and C5 MSigDb collections were selected as the target gene sets. Significant pathways were set at p values <0.05 and false discovery rate q < 0.25.

## Proliferation assays
Cell proliferation assays were performed by measuring the cellular double-stranded DNA content using Hoechst 33342. Briefly, cells were plated in at least triplicates in 96 well plates at 2000–10000 cells/well depending on the cell type. After treatment (if required), plates were collected as indicated for DNA staining. The staining intensity was determined by a Synergy H4 microplate reader (Bio-teck) at Ex/Em 350/461. For the IC50 curve, the test sample data were normalized to corresponding vehicle treatment. Data are plotted as relative cell numbers.

## Clonogenic assays
Cells were plated at 5000 (LNCaP) or 1000 (C4-2 and 22Rv1) cells/well in 6-well plates. Colonies were allowed to form for 3–4 weeks. Media and treatments were refreshed every week. Cells were fixed with acetic acid/methanol 1:7 (vol/vol) and then stained with 0.5% crystal violet. The number of visible colonies were counted. Data are representative of three independent experiments with similar results.

## BrdU cell cycle analysis
Cells were treated as indicated and labeled with 10 μM BrdU 1 h prior to collection. Cells were fixed with 70% ethanol at 4°C overnight. After fixation, 2N HCl with 0.5% Triton-100 was used to carry out permeabilization and DNA hydrolysis. Following 1% BSA blocking, cells were stained with BrdU antibody for 1 h followed by 30 min FITC anti-mouse secondary antibody FITC. Before measurement, cell pellets were resuspended with PI/RNase solution for 30 min. To quantify the phases of cell cycle, cells were subjected to BD LSRFortessa Flow Cytometer (BD) analysis (at the MDACC Flow Cytometry and Cellular Imaging Core Facility) and gated for BrdU-FITC and PI staining populations.

## Luciferase reporter assays
To assess CREB transcriptional activity, cells were transfected with pGL4.26-CRE-luciferase reporter and β-galactosidase control vector and then treated as indicated in figures/figure legends. Before measurements, cells were lysed (25 mM Tris Phosphate, 2 mM EDTA, 10% Glycerol, 0.5% Triton X-100 and 2 mM DTT) and the supernatant was transferred to a white plate. Luciferase activity was measured by Synergy H4 microplate reader and normalized to β-galactosidase activity. 

## Amplex Red Cholesterol Assay
C4-2 cells were seeded on 10 cm dishes and grown in IMEM-FCS without phenol red for 48 h. Media was changed to 2 mg/mL lipoprotein-deficient serum (LPDS) and cells were treated with DMSO (vehicle), 5 μM lovastatin, 200 nM 666-15, or 10 μM STO-609 for 24 h or 10 mM methyl-beta-cyclodextrin (MβCD) (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min. Cells were homogenized in chloroform-methanol (v/v 2:1) and then 0.2 equivalents of water were added to induce phase separation. Samples were then centrifuged for 5 min at 14,000 rpm. The organic phase was transferred and vacuum dried. Cholesterol was dissolved and quantified per the Amplex™ Red Cholesterol Assay Kit protocol. Cell protein content was determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit. Cholesterol content was normalized to protein concentration.

## Mass spectrometry analysis of cholesterol
To determine the relative abundance of cholesterol, extracts were prepared and analyzed by liquid chromatography-high resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS). Cholesterol was extracted using 800 μL of methanol. Samples were homogenized and vortexed for 5 min, put on ice for 10 min and then centrifuged at 17,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. Supernatants were diluted by 80-folds in methanol and 10 μL of cholestrol-d7 (1 μg/mL) was added to each extracted sample in the final step as internal standard. 2 μL was injected. Mobile phase A (MPA) was water, and mobile phase B (MPB) was methanol. A Thermo Vanquish LC system included a Fortis Technologies PFP column (2.6 μm particle size, 50 × 2.1 mm) with column compartment set at 35°C. Autosampler tray was chilled to 8°C. Mobile phase flow rate was 300 μL/min, and gradient elution program was: 0 min, 65% MPB; 0–3 min, 65–95% MPB; 3–6 min, 95% MPB; 6.1–8 min, 65% MPB. Total run time was 8 min. Data were acquired using a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer under APCI positive ionization mode at a resolution of 120,000. All raw data files were imported into Skyline software for final analysis.
C4-2 cells were seeded on 10 cm dishes and grown in charcoal-stripped IMEM-FCS for 48 h. Cells were then treated with DMSO (Vehicle) or 200 nM 666-15 for 24 h. Cells were trypsinized, washed twice in PBS, and flash frozen in 1.5 mL tubes in liquid nitrogen. Cells were thawed to room temperature for 10 min. They were then centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 5 min and the supernatant was removed. After, 500 μL of a chloroform/methanol (2:1) mixture was added to the cell pellet and the mixture was vortexed for 10 s. Next, 10 μL of betaine aldehyde solution (0.2 mg/mL in acetonitrile: water (2:1) and 50 μL of acetonitrile were added to the tubes followed by 5 μL of supernatant being placed as drops on a glass slide to dry. DESI-MS was performed (Parameters: Voltage in positive polarity = 3000 V, Ion transfer tube temp = 310°C, Spatial resolution = 0.2 mm, Speed = 0.25 mm/s, Solvent = Methanol, Nitrogen cylinder pressure = 120 psi, Flow rate of solvent = 3 mL/min). MATLAB and MSI Reader were used to analyze the data and average intensities were graphed.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
One-way ANOVAs and Student t-tests were used to determine the significance among groups as indicated in the figures or figure legends. Log rank test was used to determine the significance of Kaplan-Meier (KM) curves. Grouped data were presented as mean ± SEM unless otherwise noted. p values were indicated in figures or figure legends. No special data inclusion/exclusion criteria were used in this study.

## Supplementary Material
1Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2025.115792.

## Highlights
CAMKK2 drives cancer via an alternative, AMPK-independent pathway involving CAMKI and CREB
CREB family members exhibit high redundancy in CRPC growth
Pharmacological targeting of CREB can overcome resistance to AR-targeted therapy
CAMKK2 and CREB promote CRPC through increasing cholesterol metabolism

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank members of the Frigo Laboratory for review of this manuscript, R. Berdeaux (UTHealth) for helpful discussions on CREB, M. Sutton (MDACC) for help with cholesterol assays, M. Murray (MDACC) for help with mycoplasma testing, M. White (University of Houston) for help with luciferase assays, the MDACC Functional Genomics Core for the shRNA constructs, the MDACC Flow Cytometry and Cellular Imaging Core for the cell-cycle assays, the MDACC Advanced Technology Genomics Core for sequencing, MDACC Research Histology Core for the tissue sample processing, and the MDACC Prostate Cancer PDX Core for PDX models. We thank B. Wei and P. Lorenzi in the MDACC Metabolomics Core for help with mass spectrometry analysis of cholesterol levels. This work was supported by Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas grant RP240072 (D.E.F.), National Institutes of Health grant R01CA184208 (D.E.F.), the MDACC Quantitative Imaging Analysis Core (QIAC) Partnership in Research Pilot Project Program (A.R.K. and D.E.F), an MDACC Institutional Research Grant (D.E.F.), the MDACC Odyssey Fellowship Program (C.L.), the Antje Wuelfrath Gee and Harry Gee, Jr. Family Legacy Award (C.L.), the Robert Hazelwood Graduate Fellowship for Cancer Research (C.L.), a TH & MP Scott Fellow Cancer Research Pilot Grant (T.L. P.), and the NLM Training Program in Biomedical Informatics and Data Science T15 LM007093 (C.V.R.).

## Footnotes
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
D.E.F. has received research funding from GTx, Inc, and has a familial relationship with March Biosciences, Biocity Biopharmaceuticals, and Barricade Therapeutics. D.E.F. has also been issued a patent on CAMKK2 as a target in cancer (USP 9999620; EP 2606130).

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
1

## Data Availability Statement
RNA-seq data have been deposited at GEO and are publicly available as of the date of publication. Accession numbers are listed in the .
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.