pmcClin Sci (Lond)Clin Sci (Lond)671portlandopencsClinical Science (London, England : 1979)0143-52211470-8736pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titlePortland Press Open AccessPMC12687432PMC12687432.112687432126874324108263110.1042/CS20256651CS-2025-66511Research ArticleImmunology & InflammationMetabolismPost-Translational ModificationsGlutamine alleviates immunosuppression in polymicrobial sepsis by augmenting bacterial phagocytosis through sustaining the GFAT-DRP1 dependent mitochondrial calcium dynamics
ZhuYuanfeng ConceptualizationFormal AnalysisFunding acquisitionMethodologyWriting – original draftWriting – review & editingzhuyfeng@tmmu.edu.cnChenXiaoli ConceptualizationData curationInvestigationMethodologyResourcesmenanda@tmmu.edu.cnXiaLin Data curationInvestigationValidation375441866@qq.comFanShijun Data curationInvestigationResourcesValidationfanshijun1211@hotmail.comChenQian Data curationInvestigationValidation441292855@qq.comWeiYan InvestigationValidation56333849@qq.comLuYongling InvestigationResourcesValidation517273656@qq.comhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4321-0732LiuXin ]. Advances in immune phenotypic studies have highlighted that sepsis-induced immunoparalysis impairs the ability to clear pathogens, thus rendering the host more vulnerable to secondary infections [ , ]. Phagocytosis is a conserved immune response essential for the timely recognition and elimination of pathogens or cell debris [ ]. Notably, immunocompromised patients frequently exhibit impaired bacterial phagocytosis and clearance [ ], a dysfunction closely related to the host’s inability to effectively eliminate invading pathogens during sepsis.
Macrophages are sentinel phagocytes responsible for detecting and eliminating invading microbes through processes such as phagocytosis, pathogen degradation, and antigen presentation. Compelling evidence indicates that macrophage phagocytosis is significantly impaired during the late stages of sepsis, leading to delayed pathogen elimination and contributing to the overall immunosuppressive state observed in patients and animal models [ , , , ]. Furthermore, enhancing phagocytotic capacity in macrophages may restore antimicrobial responses and mitigate sepsis-induced organ damage [ , ]. These findings underscore the scientific and translational importance of modulating macrophage phagocytosis in the context of sepsis. The process of phagocytosis begins with binding to phagocytic receptors, which triggers extensive actin polymerization to facilitate the capture and engulfing of pathogens [ ]. Notably, the regulation of actin remodeling is calcium-dependent. In fact, calcium plays a direct role in dissolving the actin coat around the phagosome during particle uptake and is involved in recruiting calcium-dependent kinases such as protein kinase C, calmodulin, and annexin to phagosomes before further regulating subsequent events such as fusion and actin shedding [ ]. A deeper understanding of the mechanisms governing calcium dynamics and calcium-dependent signals in macrophage phagocytosis is thus essential for developing novel antimicrobial strategies in sepsis.
Mitochondria support phagocytosis by fueling this energy-demanding process through ATP production. Defective bacterial phagocytosis has been associated with mitochondrial dysfunction across various pathological conditions, including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [ ], subarachnoid hemorrhage [ ], and Alzheimer’s disease [ ]. Additionally, recent studies have shown that macrophage phagocytosis of both tumor cells and apoptotic cells can be enhanced through mitochondrial fission—a process driven by dynamin-related protein 1 (DRP1) that facilitates the removal of damaged mitochondria under stress conditions [ , ]. Intriguingly, DRP1-dependent fission also regulates mitochondrial calcium dynamics by promoting mitochondrial calcium efflux [ ]. This not only prevents mitochondrial calcium overload and preserves mitochondrial integrity but also increases cytosolic calcium levels to potentiate phagocytosis [ , ]. Despite these advances, the underlying mechanisms governing mitochondrial fission and calcium dynamics—and thereby affecting sepsis-associated immunosuppression—remain unclear.
Growing evidence suggests that nutrient availability in the microenvironment significantly influences immune cell metabolism and function, including macrophage phagocytosis [ ]. Glutamine (Gln) is a key nutrient supporting the energy demand and synthetic metabolism in critical illness while also known for its immunomodulatory, anti-inflammatory, and antioxidative properties [ ]. The decline of plasma Gln, as commonly observed in critically ill patients, is associated with injury-induced immune dysfunction following major burn injury [ ]. Importantly, effective macrophage phagocytosis also depends on sufficient Gln availability, as demonstrated in tumor and neurodegenerative contexts [ ]. However, it remains unclear whether Gln deficiency contributes to impaired phagocytosis and immunosuppression in sepsis. Herein, we hypothesize that Gln enhances macrophage phagocytosis and alleviates immunosuppression in sepsis by promoting DRP1-mediated mitochondrial fission and regulating calcium dynamics. To test this, we assessed the ability of Gln to enhance bacterial phagocytosis and reverse immunosuppression in a murine model of polymicrobial sepsis. We further investigated whether these effects depend on glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate transaminase (GFAT)-driven activation of DRP1, mitochondrial fission, and subsequent calcium mobilization. Our findings aim to reveal a novel signaling axis through which Gln availability recovers macrophage immune function and highlight its therapeutic potential in treating sepsis-induced immunosuppression.

## Methods

## Chemicals and reagents
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) with and without L-Gln (C11995500BT, 11960044), DMEM with and without calcium ions (C11995500BT, 21068028), pHrodo™ deep red Escherichia coli (E. coli) BioParticle (P35361), pHrodo™ green Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) BioParticle (P35382), Fluo-4, AM (F14201), Rhod-2, AM (R1245MP), and disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS, A39267) were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, U.S.A.). J774A.1 (TIB-67) and RAW264.7 (TIB-71) macrophage cell lines were purchased from ATCC (Rockefeller, MD, U.S.A.). Fetal bovine serum (FBS, ST30-3302P) was purchased from PAN-Biotech (Aidenbach, Germany). 6-Diazo-5-oxo-L-nor-leucine (DON, HY-108357), CB-839 (HY-12248), Mdivi-1 (HY-15886), 5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-β-D-ribofuranoside (AICAR, HY-13417), (R)-N-(furan-2-ylmethyl)-2-(2-methoxyphenyl)-2-(2-oxo-1, 2-dihydroquinoline-6-sulfonamido)-N-(thiophen-2-ylmethyl)acetamide (OSMI-1, HY-119738), Thiamet G (HY-12588), Avotaciclib hydrochloride (HY-137432B), O-(2-acetamido-2-deoxy-D-glucopyranosylidene) amino N-phenyl carbamate (PUGNAc, HY-108241), (1Z, 1’Z)-N’, N’’-(5, 5’-(thiobis(ethane-2, 1-diyl))bis(1, 3, 4-thiadiazole-5, 2-diyl))bis(2-phenylacetimidic acid) (BPTES, HY-12683), and CGP37157 (HY-15754) were purchased from MCE (Monmouth Junction, NJ, U.S.A.). L-Gln (49419), lipopolysaccharides (LPS, L9143), ethylene glycol-bis(2-aminoethylether)-N, N, N′, N′-tetraacetic acid (EGTA, E3889), GTP agarose (G9768), and fluorescent yellow-green latex beads (L1030) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, U.S.A.). BAPTA, AM was purchased from Selleck (S7534, Houston, TX, U.S.A.). MitoTracker was purchased from Solarbio Life Sciences (M9940, Beijing, China). Primary antibodies against DRP1 were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (sc-271583, Dallas, TX, U.S.A.) and Abcam (ab184247, Cambridge, U.K). Primary antibody against O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) was purchased from PTM BIO (PTM-951RM, Zhejiang, China). Primary antibodies against p-DRP1 (Ser-616, ab314755), TOMM20 (ab186735), GFAT1 (ab125069), and GFAT2 (ab190966) were purchased from Abcam (Cambridge, U.K). Primary antibodies against AMPK (2532), p-AMPK (2535), CAMKK2 (16810), p-CAMKK2 (ab190966), P38 (9212), p-P38 (4511), ERK1/2 (4695), and p-ERK1/2 (5726). Primary antibody against p-DRP1 (Ser-637, PA5-37534) was purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, U.S.A.). Primary antibodies against cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) (19532–1-AP), PINK1 (23274–1-AP), and GSK3β (82061–1-RR) were purchased from Proteintech (Wuhan, China). Primary antibody against p-CDK1 (Thr-161) was purchased from ABclonal (AP0324, Wuhan, China). F-actin tracker (C2203S), primary antibodies against β-actin (AF0003) and α-tubulin (AF2827), HRP-conjugated (A0208, A0216), FITC-conjugated (A0562), Cy3-conjugated (A0521) secondary antibodies, and bovine serum albumin (BSA, ST023) were purchased from Beyotime Biotechnology (Shanghai, China).

## Animals
Wildtype Bagg’s albino/c (BALB/c) mice (male, 7–8 weeks old) were purchased from Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China). All mice were housed under standard specific pathogen-free conditions with free access to water and food. All animal experiments were performed at the Experimental Animal Center of the First Affiliated Hospital of the Army Medical University and were approved by the Institutional Animal Ethics Committee of the Army Medical University and complied with the national and institutional guidelines for animal care and use (No. AMUWEC20201492).

## Macrophage depletion in vivo

BALB/c mice were injected intravenously daily with either control liposomes (CP-005–005, Liposoma, Amsterdam, Netherlands) or clodronate liposomes (CP-005–005, Liposoma, Amsterdam, Netherlands) (50 mg/kg body weight each) for two consecutive days. Macrophage depletion was confirmed by immunofluorescence detection of F4/80 (53–4801-82, Invitrogen, San Diego, CA, U.S.A.) in liver tissue and flow cytometry analysis of F4/80-positive cells in peritoneal fluids.

## Animal experiments
A sepsis-induced immunosuppression model was established in mice through secondary bacterial infection following cecum ligation and puncture (CLP). Briefly, mice were anesthetized by an isoflurane inhalation combined with sodium pentobarbital (40 mg/kg) and subjected to a single puncture with a 16-gauge needle 1 cm from the cecum tip. Subsequently, 24 h post-CLP surgery, Pseudomonas aeruginosa [P. aeruginosa, 1 × 10⁹ colony-forming units (CFU)/kg] was injected intravenously. Gln (0.1 g/kg body weight), alone or combined with DON (1 mg/kg body weight), was administered intravenously every 24 h after bacterial infection. The seven-day survival rate of the mice was observed. For further experimental analysis, CLP mice were killed by cervical dislocation 48 h after P. aeruginosa infection, and blood samples were collected for bacterial load quantification and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Additionally, peritoneal macrophages were harvested for the detection of intracellular calcium ions, mitochondrial morphology, and Western blot analysis. After the experiments were completed, all the surviving mice were killed by inhalation of excessive carbon dioxide.

## Bacterial culture
Standard strains of E. coli (35218), S. aureus (25923), and P. aeruginosa (27853) were purchased from ATCC (Manassas, VA, U.S.A.). Inoculate the bacterial strains into lysogeny broth medium, culture at 37℃ until logarithmic phase (OD600=0.6–0.8), and then dilute to achieve a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of one per cell before further use.

## Isolation and induced differentiation of bone marrow-derived macrophages
The mice were killed using the cervical dislocation method and soaked in 75% ethanol. The hind legs’ femur and tibia were aseptically obtained. The muscles and connective tissue were removed, and both ends of the femur and tibia were cut off, exposing the bone marrow cavity. The bone marrow cavity was rinsed three times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and bone marrow fluid was collected. After centrifugation, the red blood cells were lysed, and the remaining cells were seeded in DMEM (containing 10% FBS and 10% L929 culture supernatant) and cultured at 37℃ in a humidified incubator supplemented with CO2 (5%). The cells differentiate into macrophages after 5–7 days.

## 
In vitro endotoxin tolerance model
Macrophages were pretreated with LPS (10 ng/ml) for 24 h to induce the immunosuppression model, followed by treatment with LPS (100 ng/ml) or other reagents for subsequent experiments and detection.

## Mitochondria isolation
Mitochondrial isolation was performed using a mitochondrial isolation kit (HY-K1060, MCE, Monmouth Junction, NJ). In brief, cells (2 × 107) were lysed with a mitochondrial separation reagent (1 ml) in an ice bath for 15 minutes (min). The cells were well homogenized, and then the homogenate was centrifuged at 4°C, 600 
g
 for 10 min. The supernatant was transferred to a clean eppendorf (EP) tube and centrifuged at 4°C, 11,000 
g
 for 10 min. The precipitate was purified cellular mitochondria. The mitochondria were lysed with a mitochondria lysis buffer for 20 min, and the mitochondrial proteins were further detected by Western blot.

## Phagocytosis assay
Phagocytosis was measured by a CFU assay or fluorescent assay, as we described previously [ ]. Firstly, the cells (5 × 105) were infected with E. coli and S. aureus for 2 h. Extracellular bacteria were killed by supplementation with 100 µg/ml ceftazidime. The cells were washed three times with sterile PBS to remove any residual antibiotic and lysed with saponin (0.3%, 47036–50G-F, Sigma Aldrich). The lysate was diluted, added to a nutrient agar plate, and incubated for 12 h at 37°C. The CFUs were detected using a SHINESO colony counter (Hangzhou, China). Bacterial uptake was assessed by measuring the phagocytic index, which was calculated as the ratio of intracellular bacteria to the total number of added bacteria. Secondly, macrophages (2 × 105) were seeded onto glass-bottom dishes. Subsequently, pHrodo™ deep red E. coli BioParticles (Red-E. coli) or pHrodo™ green S. aureus BioParticles (Green-S. aureus) were introduced and allowed to incubate at 37°C for 1 h. The cells were thoroughly washed with PBS, fixed with paraformaldehyde (4%), and counterstained with DAPI (C1005, Beyotime). The images were acquired using the Zeiss LSM880 laser scanning confocal microscopy (LSCM, Oberkochen, Germany). To quantify phagocytosis, the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of at least 100 cells was calculated.

## Cytosolic and mitochondrial calcium ion assays
Cytosolic and mitochondrial calcium ion levels were detected by Fluo-4, AM, and Rhod-2, AM, respectively. In brief, cells (5 × 105) were seeded in glass-bottom dishes or 24-well plates and treated as indicated. Fluo-4, AM (2 μM) or Rhod-2, AM (2 μM) was added to the culture supernatant and incubated for 30 min. Calcium ion levels were detected by LSCM or ACEA Novocyte flow cytometry (San Diego, CA, U.S.A.).

## Mitochondrial morphological determination
Mitochondrial morphology was detected by LSCM and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). For the LSCM assay, macrophages (1 × 105) were seeded in glass-bottom dishes, treated as indicated, and then the cells were incubated with MitoTracker (0.5 µM) at 37°C for 20 min. After being washed three times with PBS, the fluorescence images were detected by LSCM. For the TEM assay, macrophages (5 × 105) were seeded in six-well plates and treated as indicated. Cells were fixed with glutaraldehyde and dehydrated with gradient concentrations of ethanol and then placed in embedding boards containing epoxy resin. After polymerization at 60°C for 48 h, the samples were cut into ultra-thin sections with a thickness of 70 nm and collected on naked copper-mesh grids. The grids were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and examined by TEM (Hitachi HT-7800, Tokyo, Japan).

## Knockout of DRP1 in macrophages by CRISPR/Cas9
The Cas9 lentivirus containing specific guide RNA for DRP1 was designed and purchased from SIDBIO. J774A.1 cells were infected with lentivirus at a MOI of 20 for 72 h. DRP1-knockout cells for subsequent experiments were selected by exposure to puromycin (60209ES, 10 μg/ml, Yeasen, Shanghai, China).

## Overexpression of wildtype and O-GlcNAcylation site mutant DRP1 by lentiviral infection
Specific targeted macrophages overexpression lentivirus of DRP1 wildtype (DRP1WT) or glycosylation site mutations (threonine at sites 604 and 605 was mutated to alanine) DRP1 (DRP1MU) was designed and purchased from Gene (Shanghai, China). DRP1-knockout J774A.1 cells were infected with overexpression lentivirus at a multiplicity of infection of 20 for 72 h. DRP1-overexpression cells for subsequent experiments were selected by exposure to puromycin (10 μg/ml).

## GFAT activity assay by LC/MS
The activity of GFAT is measured by the amount of final product UDP-GlcNAc [ ]. The Orbitrap Exploris 120 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to analyze UDP-GlcNAc. The mass spectrometer was operated in negative ion mode and set to perform a complete FT-MS scan (m/z 70–1050, resolution=60,000). The sample was loaded into the Ultra High Performance Liquid Chromatography (UHPLC) system and separated by a Hydrophilic Interaction Liquid Chromatography (HILIC) column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH Amide, 130 Å, 1.7 µm × 2.1 mm × 100 mm, Waters, Milford, MA), which is directly coupled to the mass spectrometer. Solvent A consisted of ammonium acetate (20 mM) in Acetonitrile (ACN, 40%) with a pH of 9, while solvent B was pure ACN. These were used as mobile phases for UHPLC separation. The solvent gradient in UHPLC separation started from 60% to 99.9% solvent A at a flow rate of 400 µl/min within 0–3 minutes. The total chromatographic separation time for each analysis was 7 minutes. The fragmentation reactions of m/z 606.08 to 384.99 for UDP-GlcNAc were selected for quantitation using the chromatographic peak area in the selected ion chromatogram (SIC).

## GTP-binding activity assay
The GTP-binding activity assay was performed according to a previously described method [ ]. Briefly, macrophages (5 × 105) were seeded in six-well plates and treated as indicated. The cells were washed with PBS and suspended in GTP-binding buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.025 mM PUGNAc, and 2 mM PMSF). Samples were sonicated for 15 s and centrifuged at 4°C, 1500 
g
 for 15 min, and the protein concentration was determined using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (P0010, Beyotime). Proteins (300 µg) were incubated with GTP-agarose beads (100 µl) in a total volume of 500 µl of GTP-binding buffer overnight at 4°C. After washing three times with GTP-binding buffer, bound protein was eluted by adding SDS-PAGE buffer (50 µl, P0015, Beyotime) and incubated at 100°C for 5 min. Quantification of DRP1 pulled down by GTP-agarose beads was performed by Western blot.

## Intracellular chemical cross-linking with DSS
Intracellular chemical cross-linking with DSS was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol. In brief, cells were treated as indicated and then washed with PBS (pH=8.5). The cells were incubated with PBS (pH=8.5) containing 1 mmol/l DSS at 4°C with rotation for 3 h. The reaction was quenched by adding Tris (50 mM, pH=7.5) and incubating for 15 min at 4°C. The samples were mixed with Non-Reducing Lane Marker Sample Buffer (5×) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and heated at 100°C for 5 min. The protein oligomer was detected by Western blot.

## Immunofluorescence
Macrophages (1 × 105) were seeded in glass-bottom dishes, treated as indicated, and then fixed with paraformaldehyde (4%). After blocking with PBS containing BSA (5%), the cells were incubated with primary antibodies (1:400 dilutions) at 4°C for 20 h. After being washed three times with PBS, the secondary antibody (1:400 dilutions) was added and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. The fluorescence images were captured by LSCM.

## siRNA interference
J774A.1 cells (2 × 105) were seeded in six-well plates. Specific siRNAs for GFAT1, GFAT2, or CDK1 (SIDBIO, Chongqing, China) were diluted with Opti-MEM (120 µl, 31985070, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.) to a final concentration of 50 nmol/L, mixed with HiPerFect transfection reagent (12 µl, 301704, Qiagen, Dusseldorf, Germany), and incubated at room temperature for 20 min. The mixture of siRNA and transfection reagent was added to the cultured macrophages for a 48 h incubation. The efficiency of siRNA interference was determined by Western blot.

## Real-time PCR assay
mRNA was extracted using an mRNA extraction kit (DP419, Tiangen, Beijing, China) and reverse transcribed into cDNA with a ReverTra Ace-α kit (FSQ-201, Toyobo, Osaka, Japan) according to the operating instructions. The cDNA templates were then mixed with iTaq Universal SYBR Green Supermix (1725124, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, U.S.A.) and primers for target genes (sequences listed in ). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using a CFX96 Real-Time System (Bio-Rad).

## Immunoprecipitation
Protein A/G Dynabeads of 25 µl (88802, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were mixed with anti-DRP1 antibody (5 μg) and incubated at room temperature with rotation for 1 h. The Dynabeads were washed three times with PBS. Proteins (500 µg) were mixed with the antibody-Dynabeads mixture and incubated at 4°C with rotation overnight. The proteins bound to the Dynabeads were eluted with an elution buffer. A loading buffer was added and incubated at 100°C for 5 min, and then the proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis and transferred to a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF, ISEQ00010, Sigma) membrane. After blocking with QuickBlock Blocking Buffer (P0231, Beyotime) for 1 h, the membrane was incubated with anti-DRP1 antibody (1:100) or anti-O-GlcNAc antibody (1:1000) at 4°C overnight. The membrane was washed with Tris-buffered saline with Tween 20 (TBST) and incubated with an HRP-conjugated secondary antibody (1:2500) for 1 h. After washing with TBST, the protein bands were detected using Super ECL Plus Western Blotting Substrate (BG0001, BIOGROUND, Chongqing, China) and visualized using a VILBER Fusion FX Bio Imaging System (Greater Paris region, France).

## Western blot analysis
Macrophages were treated as indicated and then lysed with T-PER protein extraction reagent (78510, Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing a protease and phosphatase inhibitor mixture (04693159001, 4906837001, Roche, Mannheim, Germany). Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to PVDF membranes. After blocking with QuickBlock Blocking Buffer for 1 h, the membranes were incubated with the following antibodies at 4°C overnight: anti-DRP1 (1:100), anti-p-DRP1 (Ser-616) (1:1000), anti-p-DRP1 (Ser637) (1:1000), anti-O-GlcNAc (1:1000), anti-CAMKK2 (1:1000), anti-p-CAMKK2 (1:1000), anti-CDK1 (1:1000), anti-p-CDK1 (Thr161) (1:1000), anti-GFAT1 (1:1000), anti-GFAT2 (1:1000), anti-P38 (1:1000), anti-p-P38 (1:1000), anti-ERK1/2 (1:1000), anti-p-ERK1/2 (1:1000), anti-TOMM20 (1:1000), anti-PINK1 (1:1000), anti-GSK3β (1:1000), anti-β-actin (1:5000), anti-α-Tubulin (1:5000), and anti-GAPDH (1:2000). After washing with TBST, the membranes were incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:2000) at room temperature for 1 h. The protein bands were detected using Super ECL Plus Western Blotting Substrate and visualized with a VILBER Fusion FX Bio Imaging system.

## Gln concentration assay in plasma
Supernatants from serum of CLP mice were collected at the indicated times. The Gln concentration was detected using a colorimetric method with a Gln detection kit (ab197011, Abcam).

## F-actin measurement
Macrophages (2 × 105) were seeded in glass-bottom dishes and treated as indicated. The F-actin tracker was added and incubated for 20 min. F-actin levels were detected by LSCM and quantified as the MFI.

## ELISA
Supernatants of serum from CLP-induced immunosuppression mice were collected at the indicated time. TNF-α and IL-6 concentrations were measured by ELISA kits (88–7324-88, 88–7066-88, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the instructions.

## Statistical analysis
Quantitative data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation. The unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test was used for comparisons between two groups. Comparisons between multiple groups were made using one-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with post hoc Bonferroni correction. P-values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

## Results

## Gln alleviates sepsis-associated immunosuppression by enhancing macrophage bacterial phagocytosis
Sepsis increased the demand and consumption of Gln, resulting in its rapid decline in circulation [ , , ]. We initially addressed whether Gln availability was reduced in sepsis and compromised bacterial phagocytosis. Using a murine ‘two-hit model’ combining CLP with secondary infection of P. aeruginosa, we observed immunosuppressive manifestations, such as reduced TNF-α and IL-6 secretion, elevated bacterial load, and increased mortality upon secondary insult ( ). Meanwhile, plasma Gln levels in CLP mice rapidly declined, reaching a minimum on the third day, concurrent with the onset of immunosuppression ( ). Phagocytic activity of peritoneal macrophages in CLP mice was also significantly lower than in sham mice, indicating the inability of CLP mice to eliminate secondary P. aeruginosa infection ( ). We then examined whether exogenous Gln supplementation could reverse sepsis-associated immunosuppression ( ). As expected, Gln administration improved outcomes in model mice subject to a secondary P. aeruginosa infection. Treatment led to a considerable reduction in bacterial load ( ), increased production of TNF-α and IL-6 ( ), and a significantly higher survival rate ( ). To confirm that Gln-mediated alleviation of immunosuppression in sepsis was linked with macrophage phagocytosis, clodronate liposomes were used to deplete macrophages and abolish macrophage-dependent phagocytotic capacity ( and and ). In Gln-treated immunosuppressed mice without macrophage phagocytosis, bacterial load dramatically increased ( ) and survival rate significantly decreased ( ). These findings suggest that Gln reverses immunosuppression in sepsis by selectively enhancing macrophage bacterial phagocytosis.
 

## Gln augments macrophage phagocytosis by increasing actin polymerization via elevating cytoplasmic calcium ion
Next, we conducted in vitro experiments using macrophages with LPS tolerance, mimicking the immunosuppressive state seen in sepsis ( ). [ ]. In this model, we examined the role of Gln in supporting macrophage phagocytosis. Live bacteria phagocytosis assays revealed that both primary macrophages (BMDMs) and macrophage cell lines (J774A.1 or RAW264.7) displayed significantly reduced ability to phagocytose live E. coli and S. aureus in tolerant macrophages ( ). The absence of Gln, induced by extracellular starvation, further impaired bacterial phagocytosis ( ). Confocal microscopy experiments confirmed these findings, showing decreased engulfment of fluorescently labeled E. coli and S. aureus in tolerant macrophages cultured without Gln ( ), underscoring the importance of Gln as a key nutrient in macrophage phagocytosis. To explore how Gln enhances macrophage phagocytosis, we examined whether Gln affects the expression of pathogen recognition receptors. Our results showed no increase in mRNA expression of receptors such as Fcγ receptors (CD16, CD32, and CD64), toll-like receptors (TLR2 and TLR4), LPS receptor (CD14) or scavenger receptor [scavenger receptor class A type I (SR-AI) and scavenger receptor class B type I (SR-BI)] in macrophages ( ). Yet, Gln enhanced the phagocytosis of fluorescent microspheres by LPS-tolerant macrophages ( and ), indicating that phagocytic enhancement may be related to intracellular signaling rather than receptor modulation. Cytosolic calcium plays a crucial role in actin polymerization, a shared process in phagocytosis [ ]. We thus investigated whether Gln affects calcium levels to promote phagocytosis. Calcium ion assays revealed that Gln significantly increased cytoplasmic calcium ( and ) and actin polymerization ( ) in LPS-tolerant macrophages. This effect was blocked by BAPTA, AM, an intracellular calcium chelator, which reduced cytoplasmic calcium, actin polymerization, and Gln-induced phagocytosis ( and ). Interestingly, neither calcium-free media nor extracellular calcium chelation with EGTA affected Gln-induced calcium increases or phagocytosis ( and ), suggesting that Gln elevates cytoplasmic calcium independent of external calcium sources, likely through intracellular calcium pools. In summary, Gln enhances actin polymerization and macrophage phagocytosis by increasing cytoplasmic calcium levels, potentially involving intracellular calcium reservoirs.
 

## Gln facilitates mitochondrial calcium efflux by promoting DRP1-dependent mitochondrial fission in LPS-tolerant macrophages
Mitochondria serve as central metabolic hubs for buffering cytoplasmic calcium levels through DRP1-mediated fission [ , ]. We observed that Gln significantly promoted mitochondrial fission in LPS-tolerant macrophages, an effect suppressed by the fission inhibitor Mdivi-1 ( and ). Mdivi-1 also inhibits the Gln-induced rise in cytoplasmic calcium ( and ). In contrast with cytosolic calcium, mitochondrial calcium was significantly reduced by Gln but markedly elevated upon additional Mdivi-1 treatment ( and ). Moreover, Mdivi-1 disrupted Gln’s ability to enhance actin polymerization ( ) and phagocytosis ( and ) in LPS-tolerant macrophages. These results suggest that Gln promotes mitochondrial fission and calcium efflux, thus sustaining cytosolic calcium necessary for actin polymerization and phagocytosis in tolerant macrophages. Given that mitochondrial fission is mainly regulated by DRP1, with Mdivi-1 inhibiting this process, we hypothesized that Gln enhances DRP1 activity to induce fission and phagocytosis. To testify this hypothesis, we silenced DRP1 in LPS-tolerant macrophages ( ). Then DRP1 knockdown disrupted the elevation of macrophage mitochondrial fission induced by Gln ( and ) while abolishing cytoplasmic calcium elevation and mitochondrial calcium reduction ( and ). In line with this, Gln-induced macrophage phagocytosis was significantly reduced ( and ). We further explored how Gln affects DRP1 activity. Although Gln did not increase DRP1 protein levels ( ), it significantly increased DRP1 mitochondrial localization ( ). The immunofluorescence assay confirmed greater DRP1 co-localization with the mitochondrial marker TOMM20 in Gln-treated macrophages ( ), indicating enhanced DRP1 translocation from the cytoplasm to mitochondria. Additionally, Gln significantly increased the GTPase activity of DRP1 ( ). In summary, Gln promotes mitochondrial fission and cytoplasmic calcium elevation by increasing DRP1’s mitochondrial translocation and activity in LPS-tolerant macrophages.
 

## Gln promotes DRP1 oligomerization through GFAT rather than via glutaminases
The self-assembly of DRP1 into helical oligomers facilitates its mitochondrial translocation and stimulates its GTPase activity [ ]. We next investigated whether Gln affects DRP1 oligomerization, thus promoting its translocation and activation. As expected, Gln significantly increased DRP1 oligomer formation in LPS-tolerant macrophages ( ). To address the mechanism, we explored pathways of Gln utilization of either conversion into glutamate via glutaminases (GLSs) or participation in the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway (HBP) catalyzed by GFAT [ ]. We found that the GLS inhibitor CB839 did not affect DRP1 oligomer formation, whereas the GFAT inhibitor DON significantly suppressed it ( ). Consistently, DON, but not CB839, interfered with the Gln-induced changes in calcium ion dynamics and macrophage phagocytosis ( and ). Consistent with this, another GLS inhibitor BPTES was also unable to affect Gln-induced DRP1 oligomer formation, changes in calcium ion dynamics, and macrophage phagocytosis ( ). Further confirmation through siRNA-mediated GFAT knockdown showed that reduced GFAT expression diminished Gln-induced DRP1 oligomer formation ( ). Likewise, cytoplasmic calcium elevation and mitochondrial calcium reduction were significantly abolished, accompanied by the disruption of macrophage phagocytosis ( and ). Taken together, our data suggest that Gln promotes mitochondrial fission, elevates cytoplasmic calcium levels, and enhances macrophage phagocytosis through GFAT-mediated DRP1 oligomerization.
 

## Gln supports DRP1 oligomerization by GFAT-mediated O-GlcNAcylation modification
Protein O-GlcNAcylation is known to enhance the formation and stability of protein oligomers [ , ]. GFAT is the rate-limiting enzyme of HBP and regulates protein function through O-GlcNAcylation via catalyzing the production of UDP-GlcNAc, an O-GlcNAcylation substrate. Therefore, we next investigated whether Gln facilitates DRP1 oligomerization via GFAT-mediated O-GlcNAcylation. First, we assessed the expression and activity of GFAT. Gln up-regulated GFAT1 and GFAT2 levels in LPS-tolerant macrophages, suggesting a possible transcriptional control ( ). AMPK negatively regulates GFAT upon activation [ ]. Herein, Gln inhibited AMPK phosphorylation, suggesting that it could increase the activity of GFAT ( ). Mass spectrometry confirmed that Gln elevated UDP-GlcNAc production, which was inhibited by DON or the AMPK agonist AICAR ( ). Next, we investigated whether Gln promotes DRP1 oligomer formation through GFAT-mediated O-GlcNAcylation. The O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) inhibitor OSMI1 reduced DRP1 oligomerization and macrophage phagocytosis ( and ). The immunoprecipitation assay showed that Gln significantly promoted DRP1 O-GlcNAcylation ( ) and enhanced the O-GlcNAcylation deposited on DRP1 oligomers ( ). Moreover, DON significantly inhibited the O-GlcNAcylation of both DRP1 and DRP1 oligomers, confirming the dependence of GFAT in mediating DRP1 O-GlcNAcylation ( ). Of note, Gln had no effect on the protein levels of the writer and the eraser of O-Gln did not alter OGT or O-GlcNAcase (OGA) levels, indicating its effects are independent of these enzymes ( ). To affirm the necessity of O-GlcNAcylation, we transfected DRP1 KD J774A.1 cells with either DRP1WT and O-GlcNAcylation site (Ser-604 and Ser-605 sites) mutant (DRP1MU) plasmid. While DRP1 levels rose in both cell types ( ), DRP1MU cells had disrupted DRP1 O-GlcNAcylation ( ), oligomer formation ( ) or GTP-binding activity of DRP1 ( ) in response to Gln treatment, unlike the recovered activity in DRP1WT cells. Mitochondrial fission was not observed in DRP1MU macrophages despite Gln treatment ( and ). Correspondingly, Gln enhanced bacterial phagocytic activity in DRP1WT, but not DRP1MU macrophages ( and ). In summary, Gln promotes DRP1 oligomerization and macrophage phagocytosis via GFAT-mediated O-GlcNAcylation.
 

## Gln enhances DRP1 Ser-616 phosphorylation through the GFAT-CDK1 axis, independent of GFAT-mediated O-GlcNAcylation or other DRP1-related kinases
Phosphorylation at Ser-616 activates DRP1, while Ser-637 inhibits it [ ]. Therefore, we next examined Gln’s effect on DRP1 phosphorylation. Western blot results showed Gln increased phosphorylation at Ser-616, with no effect on Ser-637, and this was inhibited by DON ( ). Despite typical cross-talk between O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation at serine/threonine sites [ ], Gln enhanced DRP1 Ser-616 phosphorylation in both wildtype (DRP1WT) and mutant (DRP1MU) macrophages, unaffected by O-GlcNAcylation status but inhibited by DON ( ). This suggests GFAT modulates this phosphorylation independent of O-GlcNAcylation. Moreover, Gln did not affect the phosphorylation of CAMKK2, P38, and ERK1/2 ( ) or the protein expression of PINK1 and GSK3β ( ), excluding the involvement of these upstream molecules that catalyze the phosphorylation of DRP1 [ ]. CDK1 was recently shown to induce DRP1 Ser-616 phosphorylation [ ]. Notably, Gln significantly increased CDK1 mRNA and protein levels, inhibited by DON, indicating GFAT dependence ( ). Neither OGT nor OGA inhibitors affected Gln’s ability to promote CDK1 expression and DRP1 phosphorylation ( ). Treatment with an O-GlcNAcylation agonist PUGNAc also failed to promote the expression of CDK1 protein and phosphorylation of DRP1 in LPS-tolerant macrophages. Meanwhile, regardless of the presence or absence of PUGNAc, DON significantly inhibited the effect of Gln to promote CDK1 protein expression and DRP1 Ser-616 phosphorylation ( ).
 Phosphorylation at Thr-161 of CDK1 is essential to support its activity [ ]. Our subsequent experiments showed that Gln up-regulated the expression of CDK1 while significantly enhancing the phosphorylation of CDK1 Thr-161 ( ), suggesting that Gln promotes CDK1 activation by increasing its expression. Notably, GFAT inhibition via DON or GFAT knockdown reduced Gln’s effect on CDK1 and DRP1 Ser-616 phosphorylation ( ). To further clarify that DRP1 Ser-616 phosphorylation is mediated by CDK1, Avotaciclib hydrochloride or siRNA was used to respectively inhibit CDK1 or down-regulate its expression. Both Avotaciclib hydrochloride and CDK1-specific siRNA treatment significantly reduced the effect of Gln on promoting DRP1 Ser-616 phosphorylation ( ). Furthermore, the knockdown of CDK1 also significantly reduced the GTP-binding activity and mitochondrial fission induced by Gln ( and ). CDK1 deficiency inhibited Gln-induced cytosolic calcium increase, restoring mitochondrial calcium overload, actin polymerization, and suppressed macrophage phagocytosis enhancement ( and ). Consistently, overexpression of CDK1 enhanced the DRP1 GTPase activity and cytoplasmic calcium, suppressed mitochondrial calcium, and enhanced macrophage phagocytosis induced by Gln. However, this effect of CDK1 overexpression was suppressed by mitochondrial fission inhibitor Mdivi-1, which further suggests DRP1 as a key downstream substrate for CDK1 ( ). A study has shown that CDK1 can phosphorylate inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate receptors (IP3Rs), thereby promoting calcium ion release into the cytoplasm [ ]. However, we found that the endoplasmic reticulum calcium ion channel IP3Rs inhibitor 2-APB had no effect on the Gln-induced increase in cytoplasmic calcium or the decrease in mitochondrial calcium. Conversely, the mitochondrial Na+/Ca2+ exchanger (NCLX) inhibitor CGP37157 (CGP) significantly inhibited both the Gln-induced cytoplasmic calcium increase and the decrease in mitochondrial calcium ( ). Taken together, our data show that the GFAT-CDK1 axis drives Gln-induced mitochondrial fission and macrophage phagocytosis by phosphorylating DRP1 at Ser-616.
 

## Gln alleviates septic immunosuppression via the GFAT-CDK1-DRP1 axis
Our initial experiments in the present study demonstrated that Gln could alleviate sepsis immunosuppression by augmenting macrophage phagocytosis ( ), and the specific mechanism has also been elaborated in vitro ( – ). To further confirm the role of Gln in alleviating immune suppression in sepsis by regulating macrophage phagocytosis through the GFAT-CDK1-DRP1 axis, we conducted additional in vivo experiments by giving CLP mice Gln alone or together with DON treatment after a secondary bacterial injection ( ). The intracellular Gln concentration of peritoneal macrophages was significantly increased in the group treated with Gln alone ( ), while this significantly promoted the expression of CDK1 and the phosphorylation (Ser-616) of DRP1 in isolated peritoneal macrophages ( ). Although the intracellular Gln in peritoneal macrophages was not altered by further DON treatment ( ), DON significantly inhibited the protein expression of CDK1 and the phosphorylation (Ser-616) of DRP1 ( ). By using the immunofluorescent assay, we observed that Gln treatment significantly enhanced the co-localization of DRP1 and TOMM20, suggesting that Gln promotes the translocation of DRP1 to mitochondria, while DON significantly inhibited this process ( ). Furthermore, Gln significantly increased intracellular calcium levels while decreasing mitochondrial calcium in peritoneal macrophages of model mice, whereas this effect was markedly inhibited by co-treatment with DON ( ). In accordance with these results, Gln also significantly reduced the bacterial load in model mice, while DON co-treatment resulted in increased bacterial counts ( ). Consistently, the inflammatory mediators in the serum were also significantly reduced ( ), and the survival rate was also markedly decreased ( ) by DON co-treatment, compared with the group Gln given alone. In summary, Gln increases the expression of CDK1 in a GFAT-dependent manner, thereby increasing DRP1 phosphorylation (Ser-616) and its activity. This promotes mitochondrial fission and the subsequent calcium-mediated macrophage phagocytosis, thereby effectively clearing pathogens and improving the survival rate of immunosuppressive mice under secondary bacterial attacks.
 

## Discussion
Integrating metabolic control with signaling pathways is crucial for restoring impaired phagocytosis in sepsis, though the linking mechanisms remain unclear. Our study reveals that Gln can reverse compromised macrophage phagocytosis and mitigate immunosuppression in polymicrobial sepsis. This effect is due to the targeted induction of DRP1-dependent mitochondrial fission and calcium release, which maintains cytosolic calcium levels necessary for phagocytosis ( ). We show that Gln promotes GFAT-dependent protein O-GlcNAcylation, enhancing DRP1 oligomerization critical for its translocation and activation. Additionally, we uncover a novel GFAT-CDK1-DRP1 axis that increases DRP1 Ser-616 phosphorylation, further activating it. Taken together, the present study suggests potential pharmaceutical values for promoting macrophage phagocytosis and treating sepsis-associated immunoparalysis by targeting Gln availability and Gln-associated GFAT pathways.
 In our initial experiments, we observed a robust decline of Gln in the immunosuppressive phase of a classical murine model of sepsis, which is in agreement with the profound Gln deficit in critically ill patients [ ]. The rapid decrease in Gln is reasonable, as immune cells prefer to utilize Gln at high rates in catabolic conditions such as sepsis [ ]. Meanwhile, a compromised availability of Gln due to impairment in its synthesis may worsen the already appeared Gln shortage [ ]. Of note, it was previously observed that a reduction in Gln supplementation in culture medium from 0.6 to 0.05 mM greatly impaired proliferation of human lymphocytes and phagocytosis in mouse macrophages [ ]. Other studies, along with those performed in our lab, have also evaluated the contribution of Gln supply in sustaining the survival, proliferation, activation, and function of immune cells in critical illness [ ]. Here we report an additional therapeutic effect of Gln supply in a condition of sepsis-associated immunosuppression. These findings may together support the importance of extra Gln supply to reverse its insufficiency and rescue the compromised immune response. In view of bacterial killing as the primary biological feature in this stage, our research focused on its ability to reduce bacterial load and increase survival. We also confirmed this effect to be associated with macrophage bacterial phagocytosis. Therefore, our consideration to increase the availability of Gln in immunosuppressive conditions may strengthen the beneficial concept of immune-based effects for glutamine supplementation in treating sepsis.
An abundant expression of phagocytic receptors couples with intracellular signaling pathways to orchestrate the phagocytic machinery, allowing macrophages to efficiently capture and engulf pathogens. Our study found that Gln doesn’t affect the expression of these receptors but instead facilitates actin remodeling by maintaining cytosolic calcium levels. This finely tuned regulation is crucial, as cytosolic calcium links receptor sensing to downstream signaling that initiates actin remodeling and phagosome maturation [ , , ]. Our findings suggest a novel interaction between nutrients and secondary signals that supports bacterial phagocytosis. Mitochondria play a pivotal role in buffering intracellular calcium by regulating calcium uptake and efflux. Mitochondrial calcium efflux disorders, seen in murine cardiac tissues during sepsis, lead to calcium overload and worsen organ injury [ , ]. Here we strengthened this concept by demonstrating that impaired mitochondrial calcium efflux can also hinder macrophage phagocytosis and trigger immune dysfunction in sepsis. Interestingly, we discovered that Gln elevates intracellular calcium specifically by promoting mitochondrial efflux. This action prevents mitochondrial calcium overload, reducing the risk of cell death, while restoring intracellular calcium to enhance phagocytosis and cellular immunity. Our results align with a recent study showing that increased cytosolic calcium is crucial for macrophage phagocytosis, which can be compromised when Gln is redirected to tumors [ ]. Overall, these findings highlight Gln’s conserved role in stimulating immunity by enhancing mitochondrial calcium release, thereby supporting macrophage phagocytic activity against tumor cells or invading pathogens.
It is known that extrusion of calcium from mitochondria is intimately connected with the dynamin-like GTPase DRP1-executed mitochondrial fission, a process that can either augment phagocytosis of liver tumor cells [ ] or otherwise promote efferocytosis of multiple apoptotic cells [ ]. Inspired by these findings, we speculated that Gln may promote mitochondrial calcium release and sustain calcium-dependent phagocytosis by regulating the DRP1-dependent mitochondrial fission. As expected, our results demonstrated that Gln-starved tolerant macrophages displayed impaired translocation and activity of DRP1, which can be reversed by restoring the Gln supply. We also positively linked Gln availability with the sustaining of mitochondrial fission and calcium efflux that drive macrophage phagocytosis. Of note, recent work has provided opposite results by showing that 1) Gln promotes DRP1-dependent mitochondrial fission in macrophages [ ]; 2) Gln-starved tumor cells displayed elevated DRP1 Ser-616 phosphorylation and augmented mitochondrial fragmentation [ ]. These apparent discrepancies may be attributed to the cell type difference. In addition, the specific cell condition and demand of Gln may also explain the contradictory findings. However, it is important for further investigation to fully understand the possible ‘double-edge’ role of Gln in orchestrating DRP1 activation and mitochondrial fission.
Gln is primarily converted into glutamate and then α-ketoglutarate by an oxidation process called glutaminolysis [ ]. Gln can also be utilized in the hexosamine biosynthesis by its rate-limiting enzyme GFAT. By using chemical inhibitors and genetic ablation approaches to interfere with the Gln metabolic pathways, we excluded possible involvement of the canonical Gln decomposition pathway while identifying the alternative HBP pathway that might mediate DRP1-dependent mitochondrial fission in macrophages. We also confirmed that Gln could up-regulate expression of the rate-limiting enzyme GFAT and thereby augment the HBP pathway to support mitochondrial calcium release and bacterial phagocytosis. These results are supported by a recent study that similarly suggests a GFAT-dependent enhancement of mitochondrial fission and macrophage phagocytosis [ ]. However, our data additionally show the role of Gln to both activate the checkpoint enzyme and serve as the key substrate in the HBP, thereby deciphering the regulatory pattern in a more comprehensive manner.
Although Gln was shown recently to sustain mitochondrial fission in a GFAT-dependent manner, the connection between GFAT and DRP1 was not clearly elucidated in this study [ ]. To address this concern, we performed subsequent experiments to identify the precise mechanisms that link Gln and GFAT with DRP1 and DRP1-dependent mitochondrial fission. The oligomerization of DRP1 is indispensable for its complete activation [ , ]. Meanwhile, compelling evidence has demonstrated the role of O-GlcNAcylation to augment the formation and maintain the stability of oligomerized proteins, such as the heterodimer of NF-κB in microglia cells and the tetramerization of sterile alpha motif domain and histidine-aspartic domain-containing protein 1 in hepatocytes [ ]. In addition, GFAT is known as the rate-limiting enzyme of HBP, which achieves regulation of protein function mainly through O-GlcNAcylation modification of proteins by providing the final product of UDP-GlcNAc as an O-GlcNAcylation substrate [ ]. Therefore, it is reasonable to investigate whether Gln promotes DRP1 oligomer formation through GFAT-mediated O-GlcNAcylation modification. As expected, Gln facilitates DRP1 oligomerization through GFAT and O-GlcNAcylation of DRP1. By using site-directed mutation, we also identified two key serine residues (Ser-604 and Ser-605 sites) as the major sites for O-GlcNAcylation modification on DRP1 that mediate the series of actions by Gln. In summary, our results confirm the concept of interplay between O-GlcNAcylation and protein oligomerization while highlighting O-GlcNAcylation as a previously undefined Post-translational modification (PTM) mechanism driven by Gln to promote DRP1 oligomerization and sustain its immunomodulatory activity.
O-GlcNAcylation commonly occupies serine/threonine residues, where its cross-talk with other PTMs, such as phosphorylation, may extensively occur [ ]. Indeed, phosphorylation of DRP1 also plays an important role in regulating its activity, with two major phosphorylation sites that either promote (Ser-616) or suppress (Ser-637) its activation [ ]. These data thus suggest a possible interplay between protein O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation that co-ordinately regulates the DRP1 activation. In the present study, we confirmed that Gln selectively promoted phosphorylation of DRP1 at Ser-616, whereas it had no effect on the inhibitory Ser-637 phosphorylation in macrophages. This effect was mediated by GFAT but independently with its catalyzed protein O-GlcNAcylation. The unexpected findings thus inspired us to further explore the underlying mechanisms and screened out CDK1 as the candidate upstream kinase. As previously identified, CDK1 directly catalyzes DRP1 Ser-616 phosphorylation and thus promotes mitochondrial hyperfragmentation [ ]. In another study, Gln was shown to promote CDK1 protein expression in intestinal epithelial cells through mTORC1 activation mediated by phospholipase D [ ]. We similarly demonstrated that Gln up-regulates the expression of CDK1 protein, which subsequently induces the phosphorylation of DRP1 in LPS-tolerant macrophages in a GFAT-dependent manner. To further confirm that the CDK1–DRP1 axis is the mechanistic basis of Gln-induced mitochondrial calcium balance and phagocytosis restoration, we performed a series of complementary genetic and pharmacological interventions. These experiments collectively demonstrate that: 1) DRP1 acts as an essential downstream substrate of CDK1 that drives mitochondrial fission and phagocytosis induced by Gln; 2) another CDK1 substrate, IP3R, implicated in organellar calcium flux at the endoplasmic reticulum, was not required for regulating calcium release and phagocytic function. Although we cannot fully exclude the contribution of other CDK1-dependent pathways, these data indicate that the CDK1–DRP1 axis plays a central and non-redundant role in Gln-mediated immunometabolic reprogramming during sepsis. Taken together, our results thus suggest an additional non-enzymatic or non-canonical activity of GFAT rather than merely catalyzing the endpoint product of UDP-GlcNAc, which serves as the substrate for protein O-GlcNAcylation. However, the detailed mechanism by which Gln and GFAT up-regulate CDK1 expression is an important topic deserving further investigation.
To further explore the therapeutic efficacy by targeting the Gln-mediated GFAT pathway, we administered a chemical inhibitor of GFAT in Gln-treated CLP mice. Inhibition of GFAT substantially blocks the efficacy of Gln to enhance phagocytosis and rescue immunoparalysis in septic mice. Moreover, we also confirmed that glutamine can up-regulate CDK1 expression and enhance DRP1 phosphorylation (Ser-616) and its activity, thereby triggering mitochondrial fission and subsequent calcium ion-mediated macrophage phagocytosis. These in vivo results not only support data obtained from the in vitro experiments but also suggest the GFAT-CDK1-DRP1 axis as a putative therapeutic target in treating sepsis-associated immunosuppression.
The present study has several limitations. First, our conclusions are derived from pre-clinical models and lack validation in human patient samples, which limits its direct clinical translation. Second, the statistical power was constrained by a moderate sample size, while the use of parameter analysis on small sample sets may increase the risk of statistical errors. Future studies with larger cohorts and more robust methods are needed. Third, while we propose a GFAT-CDK1-DRP1 axis in cellular experiments, our in vivo verification was mainly obtained from pharmacological study by using a GFAT chemical inhibitor without more direct mechanistic validation via genetic knockout or rescue experiments. Finally, the precise mechanism by which GFAT regulates CDK1 protein expression remains unclear and necessitates further investigation.

## Clinical perspectives
Sepsis is a life-threatening clinical syndrome induced by infection and remains the leading cause of ICU mortality worldwide. Sepsis triggers impaired macrophage bacterial phagocytosis, resulting in the inability of the host to control secondary infection, a manifestation known as sepsis-associated immunosuppression. Gln is a widely recognized nutrient with immunomodulatory activity in critical illness. However, a mechanistic link between Gln availability and innate immune responses, such as phagocytosis, has not yet been fully established.
The present demonstrates that Gln can reverse sepsis-induced immunosuppression by restoring macrophage phagocytic function. This effect is achieved through the selective induction of dynamin-related protein 1 (DRP1)-dependent mitochondrial fission and mitochondrial calcium release, which sustains cytosolic calcium dynamics essential for bacterial phagocytosis. Mechanistically, Gln promotes both O-GlcNAcylation-dependent and -independent pathways via Gln-fructose-6-phosphate transaminase, which thereby facilitates the oligomerization and phosphorylation of DRP1, ultimately leading to its activation.
Our study highlights the clinical potential of Gln availability and its metabolic pathway as druggable targets to treat immune deactivation in sepsis.

## Supplementary material
Online supplementary material 1

## Data Availability
The authors declare that all the data supporting the findings of this study are available within the article and its supplementary.

## Competing Interests
The authors declare that there are no competing interests associated with the manuscript.

## Funding
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 82172202, China), Innovation Leading Talents project of Chongqing (No. cstc2022ycjh-bgzxm0148, China) and Natural Science Foundation of Chongqing (No. CSTB2022NSCQ-MSX0214, CSTB2024NSCQ-MSX0280, China).

## Open Access
This article has been published open access under our Subscribe to Open programme, made possible through the support of our subscribing institutions, learn more here: https://portlandpress.com/pages/open_access_options_and_prices#conditional

## CRediT Author Contribution
Yuanfeng Zhu: Writing-original draft, Writing-reviewing & editing, Formal analysis, Conceptualization, Methodology, Funding acquisition. Xiaoli Chen: Conceptualization, Data curation, Methodology, Investigation, Resources. Lin Xia: Data curation, Investigation, Validation. Shijun Fan: Data curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation. Qian Chen: Data curation, Methodology, Investigation, Validation. Yan Wei: Investigation, Validation. Yongling Lu: Investigation, Resources, Validation. Xin Liu: Writing-original draft, Writing-reviewing & editing, Conceptualization, Funding acquisition. Xi Peng: Writing-reviewing & editing, Funding acquisition, Supervision.

## Ethics Approval
All animal experiments were performed at the Experimental Animal Center of the First Affiliated Hospital of the Army Medical University and were approved by the Institutional Animal Ethics Committee of Army Medical University and complied with the national and institutional guidelines for animal care and use (No. AMUWEC20201492).

## Abbreviations
E. coliEscherichia coli
S. aureusStaphylococcus aureus
P. aeruginosaPseudomonas aeruginosa
IP3Rsinositol-1,4,5-triphosphate receptors
ACNacetonitrile
AICAR 5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-β-D-ribofuranoside
ANOVAanalysis of Variance
BALB/cbagg’ s albino/c
BPTES (1Z, 1’Z)-N’, N’’-(5, 5’-(thiobis(ethane-2, 1-diyl))bis(1, 3, 4-thiadiazole-5, 2-diyl))bis(2-phenylacetimidic acid)
BSAbovine serum albumin
CDK1cyclin-dependent kinase 1
CFUcolony-forming units
CLPcecum ligation and puncture
COPDchronic obstructive pulmonary disease
DMEMDulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium
DON6-Diazo-5-oxo-L-nor-leucine
DRP1dynamin-related protein 1
DRP1MU
glycosylation site mutations DRP1
DRP1WT
DRP1 wildtype
DSSdisuccinimidyl suberate
EGTAethylene glycol-bis(2-aminoethylether)-N, N, N′, N′-tetraacetic acid
ELISAenzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
EPeppendorf

E. coli

Escherichia coli

FBSfetal bovine serum
GFATglutamine-fructose-6-phosphate transaminase
GLSsglutaminases
Glnglutamine
HBPhexosamine biosynthesis pathway
HILIChydrophilic Interaction Liquid Chromatography
IP3Rsinositol-1,4,5-triphosphate receptors
LPSlipopolysaccharides
LSCMlaser scanning confocal microscopy
MFImean fluorescence intensity
MOImultiplicity of infection
NCLXmitochondrial Na+/Ca2+ exchanger
OGAO-GlcNAcase
OGTO-GlcNAc transferase
O-GlcNAcO-linked N-acetylglucosamine
OSMI-1 (R)-N-(furan-2-ylmethyl)-2-(2-methoxyphenyl)-2-(2-oxo-1, 2-dihydroquinoline-6-sulfonamido)-N-(thiophen-2-ylmethyl)acetamide
PTMpost-translational modification
PUGNAc O-(2-acetamido-2-deoxy-D-glucopyranosylidene) amino N-phenyl carbamate
PVDFpolyvinylidene fluoride

P. aeruginosa

Pseudomonas aeruginosa

SICselected ion chromatogram
SR-AIscavenger receptor class A type I
SR-BIscavenger receptor class B type I
TBSTTris-buffered saline with Tween 20
TEMtransmission electron microscopy
TLRtoll-like receptor
UHPLCultra High Performance Liquid Chromatography;