822acssdJournal of Medicinal ChemistryJ Med ChemPMC1199800811998008119980083977253510.1021/acs.jmedchem.4c02528Metabolic Stability
and Targeted Delivery of Oligonucleotides:
Advancing RNA Therapeutics Beyond The Liver
AnandPuneet ZhangYu PatilSpoorthi KaurKeerat 1Regeneron Genetic Medicines, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Tarrytown, New York 10591, United States*email: puneet.anand@regeneron.com.
81202568768706870–68961642025© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Oligonucleotides have emerged as a formidable new class
of nucleic
acid therapeutics. Fully modified oligonucleotides exhibit enhanced
metabolic stability and display successful clinical applicability
for targets formerly considered “undruggable”. Accumulating
studies show that conjugation to targeting modalities of stabilized
oligonucleotides, especially small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), has
enabled robust delivery to intended cells/tissues. However, the major
challenge in the field has been the stability and targeted delivery
of oligonucleotides (siRNAs and antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs))
to extrahepatic tissues. In this Perspective, we review chemistry
innovations and emerging delivery approaches that have revolutionized
oligonucleotide drug discovery and development. We explore findings
from both academia and industry that highlight the potential of oligonucleotides
for indications involving different extrahepatic organs—including
skeletal muscles, brain, lungs, skin, heart, adipose tissue, and
eyes. In all, continued advances in chemistry coupled with conjugation-based
approaches or novel administration routes will further advance the
delivery of oligonucleotides to extrahepatic tissues.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Oct 17; Accepted 2024 Dec 26; Revised 2024 Dec 11; Collection date 2025 Apr 10.

## Significance
siRNAs and ASOs have become powerful therapeutic
tools, evidenced
by a surge in approvals over the past decade. The significance of
oligonucleotides for the treatment of rare and common diseases cannot
be overstated, considering their precise silencing ability and therapeutic
potential. This Perspective presents strategies and examples for applying
these modalities to extrahepatic tissues, underscoring the importance
of innovative design and delivery in achieving effective oligonucleotide
therapeutics.

## Introduction
The nucleic acid therapeutic (NAT) field
has flourished in recent
years with the FDA approval of 24 drugs, including small interfering
RNAs (siRNAs), ASOs, aptamers, and mRNAs ( ). Of note, 20
of these 24 NATs were approved during the past decade. In particular,
the discovery of two classes of oligonucleotides, namely siRNAs and
ASOs, has brought to bear the true therapeutic potential of genetic
medicines by providing precision therapy (via selective gene silencing)
for many diseases. In a landmark Nobel
Prize-winning discovery, Fire et al. demonstrated double-stranded
siRNA-mediated gene knockdown in Caenorhabditis elegans; they also found that this process was catalytic, thereby requiring
only a few molecules of siRNA per cell. Separately, Elbashir et al. showed that a 21-mer siRNA duplex caused
sequence-dependent knockdown of mRNA in cultured mammalian cells. The initial example of successful gene silencing
in vivo by systemic delivery was demonstrated almost two decades ago. In this seminal study the authors administered
cholesterol-conjugated siRNA (for ApoB) iv in mice,
and found that cholesterol enabled binding of conjugated siRNA to
LDL-C, which subsequently led to ApoB silencing and thereby cholesterol
reduction in the liver and jejunum. Further,
Davis et al. provided the earliest evidence of gene silencing in humans
mediated by systemic administration of nanoparticles encapsulating
an siRNA. The primary subcellular location
where an siRNA performs its action is the cytoplasm; however, emerging data indicate that it may also operate
in the nucleus. The first siRNA therapeutic,
Onpattro, was approved by the FDA in 2018; remarkably, it was followed by the approval of five additional siRNA
drugs in a span of 5 years.
 The discovery of gene silencing by an ASO was first
reported in
1978. In this study, the authors, including Paul Zamecnik (regarded
as the father of ASO therapy), demonstrated that adding a synthetic
13-mer oligodeoxynucleotide—complementary to 13 nucleotides
at the 3′ and 5′ reiterated terminal sequence of Rous
sarcoma virus 35S RNA—to chick embryo fibroblast tissue cultures
infected with the Rous sarcoma virus led to the inhibition of virus
production. Further, they suggested that
this 13-mer ASO was likely working as an antiviral agent by specifically
blocking Rous sarcoma virus viral protein translation. ASOs operate in the nucleus and cytoplasm to
target mRNA. Foundational work carried
out by Izant and Weintrub in 1985 revealed that ASO delivery in Xenopus laevisoocytes inhibited actin gene activity, thereby
resulting in a decreased growth rate. The first ASO drug, vitravene, was approved in 1998. It is worth pointing out that both siRNA and
ASO drugs downregulate protein production, whereas mRNA-based therapeutics
(e.g., COVID-19 vaccines) upregulate the production of specific proteins.
Unmodified siRNAs and ASOs are labile in the cellular milieu and
can be degraded by nucleases, thereby necessitating the need to develop
therapeutic oligonucleotides with enhanced stability. Novel chemical
designs have been introduced and implemented, and these have greatly
facilitated the advancement of more stable oligonucleotides. Remarkably, chemical innovations in the field
have propelled oligonucleotide therapeutics toward clinical applications
for multiple therapeutic indications. Interestingly, it took precisely
two decades for the first ASO siRNA therapeutics to receive approval
following their initial discoveries in 1978 and 1998.
Delivery
of oligonucleotides to the target organ is another major
challenge, which requires uptake (entry), endolysosomal escape, and
in vivo efficacy. , The oligonucleotides must extravasate
into the tissue of interest, exhibit cellular uptake, display internalization
into endosomes, and then be released from the endosomes to carry out
its function. − Recent findings reveal that the delivery of siRNA to the liver is
achieved either via encapsulation into lipid nanoparticles or conjugation
to trivalent N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc). , Naked ASOs have been successfully administered locally for CNS and
eye indications but systemically for other indications. Notably, 21
oligonucleotides have been FDA approved, and there has been a remarkable
surge in the number of preclinical and clinical studies demonstrating
the safety, efficacy, and durability of responses to chemically stabilized
and/or conjugated oligonucleotides for various therapeutic indications. While therapeutic oligonucleotides were initially
used for rare diseases, a growing body of clinical studies suggests
that these modalities can be applied to both rare and common diseases.
Designing novel targeting ligands, expanding the repertoire of chemical
designs, enhancing metabolic stability, and applying innovative administration
routes are some areas of intense ongoing investigations to enable
the delivery of oligonucleotides to extrahepatic tissues. In this
review, we detail the progress made to the design and delivery of
oligonucleotides, provide examples of preclinical and clinical advancements,
and put forth some of the remaining challenges and our perspectives
on the oligonucleotide therapeutic landscape.

## Chemistry and Design of Oligonucleotides

## siRNAs

## Mechanism of Action
An siRNA is a short stretch of
19–23 mer double-stranded oligonucleotides (∼15 kDa),
and its mechanism of action initially involves interaction and binding
to the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) in the cytoplasm. Subsequently, the sense strand is removed leaving
functional RISC with antisense loaded. The antisense strand directs the RISC to its target mRNA, and the
argonaute 2 protein within the RISC acts as a slicer for the degradation
of mRNA. Argonaute 2 has a duck-shaped
structure consisting of a mid-domain, a PAZ domain, and a catalytic
PIWI domain. The 5′ phosphate
end of the antisense strand binds to the mid-domain, the 3′
antisense end binds to the PAZ domain, and the PIWI domain serves
as a slicer for the target mRNA. siRNA
therapeutics are potent (picomolar range) inhibitors in vitro and
have an EC50 of 100 ng/g of tissue or 1 ng of drug/g of
tissue in the RISC. In addition, siRNAs
are catalytic, exhibit specificity for their target mRNAs, and have
a durable mechanism of action. Notably,
it has been demonstrated that small amounts of siRNA molecules (∼1000)
per cell are required to achieve a maximum siRNA response. 

## Naked siRNA Molecules Have Poor Drug-Like Properties
While siRNA-based drugs have potential broad therapeutic applications
across multiple indications, these molecules have poor drug-like properties—primarily
due to their charge and size. The highly
negative charge on siRNAs renders them incapable of passively diffusing
through the lipid bilayer, and therefore they need a targeting moiety
for cellular uptake and endocytosis. Once
inside the endosomes, the siRNA molecules form a depot and are slowly
released into the cytoplasm. In fact, less than 1% of siRNA molecules
escape the endosomes and more than 99% of siRNA molecules are trapped
within the endosomes. Therefore, the
endosomal escape problem is considered to be a major rate-limiting
step in advancing siRNA therapeutic drug discovery, particularly for
extrahepatic tissues. Further, due to
its unfavorable physiochemical properties, siRNA is rapidly cleared
via first-pass metabolism through the kidneys. In addition, siRNAs can be degraded by nucleases (e.g.,
ribonuclease [RNase]) that recognizes 2′OH of the ribose to
cleave the phosphodiester linkage. Moreover,
siRNA may also activate an innate immune response through its interaction
with the TLR3 receptor, which recognizes the sugar and phosphate backbone
of siRNA. , 

## Chemical Modifications of siRNA
Despite some of its
inherent limitations and initial hiccups, the siRNA field has evolved
since its discovery almost two decades ago. The therapeutic potential
of siRNA was brought to realization by shifting the focus from minimal
to extensive modifications of siRNA and conjugation of siRNA to targeted
ligands for delivery to specific tissues ( ). Notably,
all six FDA-approved siRNA therapeutics currently target the liver
( ); , however, there has been substantial preclinical and clinical data
that support the targeted delivery of siRNA to extrahepatic tissues.
Chemical stabilization of siRNA, coupled with either formulation into
lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) or conjugation to trivalent GalNAc, has
had transformative implications in the field of siRNA therapeutics.
GalNAc can be attached to either the 3′ (preferred) or 5′
end of the sense strand, as the sense strand does not enter the RISC. The two principal chemical modifications that
are employed to stabilize siRNA include modifications to either the
phosphate backbone (phosphorothioate [PS]) or to the 2′ position
(2′ O-methyl [2′OMe] or 2′ deoxy-2′-fluoro
[2′F]) of ribose ( ). 2′OMe and 2′deoxy-2′F
modifications on the ribose sugar display an attenuated immune response
and increased potency of siRNA for its target mRNA. , These modifications do not interfere with RISC loading, and result
in enhanced metabolic stability. The
2′F modification locks the 3′- endo confirmation, thereby
increasing the affinity for the target mRNA. However, the 2′F
modification provides decreased resistance against nuclease degradation
compared with the 2′OMe modification. The PS modification was
discovered by Eckstein in 1966, and it
was successfully applied to oligonucleotide synthesis by Stec et al.
in 1984. PS modifications at the ends
of duplex siRNA provide protection against exonucleases. 
 

## Chirality of PS Modification Within The siRNA Duplex
The PS linkage is chiral, and it configures as right-handed (Rp) or left-handed (Sp) isomers ( ). Manoharan et al. recently published a study demonstrating
that the PS chirality of the antisense strand is an important parameter
that may govern Ago2 loading, RNA interference activity, and metabolic
stability. Using siRNAs against two different
targets (transthyretin [TTR] and complement factor 5), the authors
reported that the Rp isomer exhibited greater stability
for 5′ exonuclease, whereas the Sp isomer
displayed greater stability for 3′exonuclease, in a mouse model. Specifically, the authors found that Rp diastereomers at the 5′ end and Sp diastereomers at the 3′ end of the antisense siRNA strand
improved the PK and PD properties of siRNAs in vivo. Mechanistically, in silico modeling suggested that the Rp isomer at the 5′ end of antisense strand bound
with greater affinity to the mid-domain of the AGO2 protein, and the Sp isomer at the 3′ end of the antisense strand bound
with increased affinity to the PAZ domain. These data suggest that chirally pure PS may be an important consideration
in the design of oligonucleotides. While PS modifications generally
enhance siRNA stability, it is established that PS linkage results
in lower affinity for the target mRNA than natural phosphodiester
(PO) linkage. Also, it has previously been reported in mice that higher
PS content (13 vs 8) was associated with decreased activity of blunt
siRNA. 

## Introduction of Vinyl Phosphate Modification for Improved RISC
Loading
More recently, another phosphate modification, (5′-(E)-vinyl
phosphonate (5′-(E)-VP)) was applied into siRNA design by Alnylam
Pharmaceuticals at the 5′ end of the antisense strand, and
it was confirmed that the presence of 5′-(E)-VP increased siRNA
stability and potency ( ). Phosphorylation of the 5′
end of the antisense strand is potentially not a rate-limiting step
for the liver, but it may be for extrahepatic tissues. Therefore,
the delivery of oligonucleotides to these tissues may require the
addition of 5′-(E)-VP.
Collectively, the overarching
goal of these siRNA modifications is to increase metabolic stability
and reduce both the immune response and off-target effects.

## Extensive Modification of siRNA Molecules Affects Metabolic
Stability In Vivo
Previous studies have shown that fully
stabilized siRNA conjugated to cholesterol leads to increased accumulation
of siRNA in tissues such as the liver, kidney, and spleen following
systemic administration. In contrast,
systemic delivery of a partially modified siRNA (∼60% chemical
modification) conjugated to cholesterol resulted in significantly
lower tissue accumulation. Interestingly,
these findings were recapitulated with various other conjugated ligands
(cholesterol, docosahexaenoic acid [DHA], and GalNAc) or with different
systemic administration routes (iv vs sc). Several studies have reported that extensive chemical stabilization
is critical for developing therapeutic siRNA. A case in point is the FDA approval of fully stabilized vitrusiran
vs the discontinuation (due to mortality imbalance) of partially stabilized
revusiran. , − Revusiran,
targeting TTR (encoding TTR protein) for TTR amyloidosis,
is a first-generation GalNAc conjugate that is based on a standard
chemistry platform and has an alternating pattern of 2′F and
2′OMe modifications at all ribose positions. , In contrast, vitrusiran, which also targets TTR, is based on an enhanced stability chemistry approach in which the
siRNA contains a greater percentage of 2′OMe vs 2′F;
it also incorporates two additional PS linkages at the 5′ end
of the antisense and sense strands. Owing
to metabolic stability limitations, revusiran was administered weekly
at relatively high dosages, whereas vitrusiran is administered once
every 3 months at lower dosages ( ). Both revusiran and vitrusiran have the same sequence
but different chemistry, and these results show the translation of
siRNA chemical modifications to clinical success.

## Impact of the Position of Chemical Modifications on siRNA Activity
Alnylam showed that the position of chemical modifications within
the siRNA duplex impacts activity. Specifically, their team demonstrated
that the replacement of 2′-deoxy-2-fluoro with 2′O-Me
at positions 2, 6, or 14 of the antisense strand or at position 11
of the sense strand negatively impacted siRNA activity, thereby providing
evidence that steric hindrance subserved by 2′OMe must be considered
in the design of siRNAs. Further, it
was demonstrated that increasing the ratio of 2′OMe to 2′-deoxy
2-F (80/20) in siRNA chemistry improved the potency and durability
of the response in mice and nonhuman primates (NHPs). 

## The Structure of siRNA may Influence its Activity
Besides
chemical modifications and conjugation to targeting ligands, the siRNA
structure is also an important consideration for siRNA activity, and
various companies use different types of siRNA structures. Overhangs
of 2–3 bases at the 3′ end of the antisense strand have
been associated with increased RISC stability. Most companies, including Alnylam, employ a conventional
format (two nucleotide overhang at the 3′ end of the antisense
strand), whereas other companies such as Silence Therapeutics have
a blunt siRNA, and Dicerna (now Novo Nordisk) uses a tetraloop in
their siRNA design. Recent studies have
demonstrated that the systemic delivery of lipid-conjugated, asymmetric
siRNA structures leads to more effective mRNA silencing in mouse extrahepatic
tissues compared to lipid-conjugated blunt siRNA structures. 

## siRNA-Mediated Off-Target Effects and Potential Solutions
As with other classes of therapeutics, siRNA may mediate off-target
effects by binding to unrelated mRNA. To counter the problem of seed region-mediated off-target effects,
the addition of glycol nucleic acid (GNA) at position 7 of the antisense
strand has been successfully employed ( ), which promotes
binding of the antisense strand to the kink region of the argonaute
2 protein, and prevents binding to nontargeted mRNA through thermodynamic
destabilization. The purpose of GNA modification
at the seventh nucleotide is to weaken the binding between the antisense
strand and any unrelated mRNA that depends on base pairing in the
seed region. However, GNA modification does not disrupt on-target
binding since it is controlled by the entire sequence. Further, morpholino
modification at the 5′ position of the sense strand has been
shown to prevent phosphorylation of the sense strand, thereby preventing
the loading of the sense strand onto the RISC ( ). Additionally,
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) is employed to identify potential off-target
effects during the screening stage. Application of these approaches
will further advance the discovery and development of safer siRNA
therapeutics.

## ASOs

## Mechanism of Action
An ASO consists of 16–20
nucleotides that bind to complementary RNA and which may be delivered
locally or systemically. Upon administration,
ASOs (similar to siRNAs) are internalized into endosomes and are slowly
released from the endosomes to the nucleus to affect target mRNA silencing.
ASOs can mediate their action via several different mechanisms, and
two commonly used modes of operation include ribonuclease H1 (RNase
H1)-mediated (1) target mRNA degradation (by DNA gapmer ASO) or (2)
target mRNA modulation (by splice switching/steric blocking) ( ). Ionis Pharmaceuticals and Sarepta Therapeutics have been
pioneers in the discovery and development of therapeutic ASOs. Currently,
there are 11 approved ASOs for multiple diseases ( ). Early work from Ionis demonstrated
that binding of the DNA gapmer ASO to RNA (to form a DNA:RNA heteroduplex)
triggers the recruitment of RNase H1, therefore leading to degradation
of a specific mRNA. , It was shown that a gapmer must
contain 8–10 deoxynucleotides for optimal RNase H1 activity. It has been illustrated that there are “hotspots”
within a target mRNA molecule that are more susceptible to an ASO-based
RNase H1-mediated mechanism of action. 
 

## ASO Molecules Have Poor Drug-Like Properties
Like the
physio-chemical nature of siRNA-based drugs, naturally occurring ASOs
are labile and have unfavorable drug-like properties; these therefore
require chemical stabilization. The commonly
used chemical modifications in ASO design include backbone PS linkage
and 2′O-methoxyethyl (2′MOE) on the 2′ position
of the ribose ( ).

## First-Generation ASO Design
The first generation ASO
design by Ionis Pharmaceuticals involved chemical modification of
ASO drugs by using PS backbone modification ( ). , PS is more lipophilic
than PO, which facilitates the binding of PS-containing ASOs to serum
proteins and also prevents rapid clearance through the kidneys. , At least 10–12 PS are required to obtain optimum binding
to serum proteins. Systematic delivery
of PS ASOs largely resulted in delivery to the liver, kidney, lymph
nodes, spleen, bone marrow, and fat cells. Further, PS ASOs have a tissue elimination half-life of up to 48
h. 

## Second-Generation ASO Design
The second-generation
ASO design included the 2′MOE modification ( ) to ribose in addition to
the PS backbone, and it was shown that the presence of 2′MOE
increased the tissue half-life of PS ASOs to 2–4 weeks. , The 2′MOE modification rigidifies the overall structure,
increases affinity for the target mRNA, hinders nuclease attacks,
and decreases nonspecific interactions. Compared with first-generation
ASOs, those from the second generation displayed 10-fold greater potency.
Furthermore, systemic delivery of second-generation ASOs was shown
to preferentially biodistribute to the kidneys, liver, and white adipose
tissues, whereas local administration was found to be active in difficult-to-reach
organs including the CNS. Interestingly, a second generation ASO mipomersen
(targeting APOB for homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia)
showed potential for oral delivery with resultant pharmacological
responses in several species, including humans; however, mipomersen was discontinued due to its high dose
requirement, which led to severe treatment-associated adverse effects.
While second-generation ASOs have an overall favorable safety profile,
thrombocytopenia was observed in patients who were taking either inotersen
or volanesorsen (300 mg of these drugs was administered sc weekly). , 

## Generation 2.5 ASO Design
Ionis also introduced a 2.5-generation
design, which contained a constrained ethyl-modified oligonucleotide
(2′-cEt) modification , ( ); it was found that 2′-cEt ASOs 
exhibited comparable potency to locked nucleic acid (LNA) ASOs. Further,
they showed that 2′-cEt ASOs displayed favorable safety profiles
in clinical trials. − Remarkably, due to potency gain (compared with generation
2.0 ASO chemistry), generation 2.5 chemistry enabled efficacy of ASOs
in tier 2 tissues, including lung, heart, fat, bone, and bone marrow.
2′-cEt ASO modification was introduced following the discovery
of LNA ASOs, which were the first examples of constrained sugars within
nucleic acids ( ); these ASOs were shown to display 5–10 times greater potency
for the target mRNA than 2′MOE gapmers. Unfortunately, several
clinical trials found that PS LNA ASOs were associated with hepatic,
renal, and platelet toxicities; , however, emerging studies
suggest that certain chemical modifications applied to the ASO sequence
may potentially mitigate these associated toxicities (discussed below).

## Ligand-Conjugated Antisense Design
Ionis has also developed
a ligand-conjugated antisense platform for targeted delivery of ASOs
to specific tissues with the aim of increasing the therapeutic index
of ASOs. Their team conjugated ASO to GalNAc and showed that the resultant
ASO–GalNAc conjugate bound strongly to asialoglycoprotein receptors
(ASGPRs) expressed on hepatocytes, thereby resulting in increased
potency for liver targets by 30-fold in humans. In fact, Ionis and AstraZeneca recently reported the FDA
approval of their GalNAc-conjugated ASO eplontersen (targeting TTR), for the treatment of the polyneuropathy of hereditary
TTR-mediated amyloidosis in adults. 

## Toxicity Associated with Gapmer ASOs, and Potential Solutions
It is well-established that toxic PS ASOs in all chemical classes
may exhibit sequence-dependent toxicity. It was reported that toxic PS ASOs bound to paraspeckle proteins
with greater affinity than safer PS ASOs. , This resulted in the formation of an RNA-PS protein complex, and
it was observed that RNase H1 interaction (via its spacer domain)
with the paraspeckle protein within this complex ultimately led to
mislocalization of these complexes to the nucleolus. , Together, these events resulted in apoptosis and associated toxicity. , Remarkably, modification of toxic PS-ASOs at position 2 of the DNA
gapmer with 2′MOE markedly diminished hepatotoxicity in mice,
thereby significantly enhancing the therapeutic index of these ASOs;
this may in turn allow for higher systemic doses of these ASOs, with
the aim of delivering pharmacological levels of the drug to extrahepatic
tissues. The PS backbone in ASOs can
enhance toxicity, and Ionis recently showed that replacement of the
PS linkage at position 2 or 3 in the gap with a mesyl-phosphoramidate
(MsPA) linkage increased ASO stability and reduced its nonspecific
protein binding while maintaining RNase H1 activity. In addition, they reported that two MsPA modifications,
either in the 5′ region of the gapmer or in the 3′ wing,
enhanced activities of 2′OMe-modified gapmer ASOs, which may
likely be due to enhanced RNase H1 cleavage activity. These studies therefore provide evidence that elegant medicinal
chemistry approaches can address the problem of sequence-mediated
toxicity of gapmer ASOs.

## Phosphorodiamidate Morpholino Oligonucleotides
Phosphorodiamidate
morpholino oligonucleotides (PMOs) are gaining traction as efficient
steric block ASOs ( ). PMOs are short single-strand DNA analogs in which the ribofuranose
ring has been replaced by morpholino rings, and the backbone is connected
by phosphorodiamidates. Compared with
classical ASOs, PMOs are uncharged ( ). PMOs function as steric-block ASOs to
modulate splicing, thereby resulting in exclusion or inclusion of
a specific exon. Sarepta Therapeutics has pioneered the use of PMOs
for the treatment of Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). PMOs induce
exon skipping in DMD, which is caused
by a frameshift mutation that results in the translation of a defective
dystrophin protein. PMOs bind to their
target sites (containing the mutation) on the mRNA and block its interaction
with spliceosomes, which results in the removal of the mutated exon
and subsequent restoration of the truncated (but functional) dystrophin
protein. While four PMO drugs are currently FDA approved ( ), the major drawback
with PMOs is their rapid clearance through the kidneys (they have
a neutral charge, and the molecular mass of PMOs is below the cutoff
of renal clearance) after systemic administration, which means they
require frequent and high dosage ( ). Notably, the tissue half-lives of PMOs
are 7–14 days and these molecules are excreted in intact form
via urine. 

## Thiomorpholino Oligonucleotides
More recently another
class of ASO, termed thiomorpholino oligonucleotides (TMOs) ( ), was proposed for
the treatment of DMD. TMOs are similar
in structure to PMOs but contain a negatively charged sulfur atom
directly connected to a phosphorus atom. In a recently published study, the authors used myotubes from mdx
mice that are amenable to exon 23 skipping, and showed that self-delivery
of nanomolar concentrations of 20-mer TMO (but not 20-mer PMO) led
to efficient deletion of exon 23. In
addition, it was demonstrated that TMOs, 2′MOE PS, and 2′OMe
PS were all efficient in exon 23 deletion in myotubes; however, TMOs
displayed better effects at low nanomolar concentrations. Further, TMO chimeras containing either DNA
gapmer or DNA TMO mixmers displayed efficacy in exon 23 splice switching. Given that DNA gapmer ASOs are known to induce
an RNase H1-mediated response, it was surprising to see that these
can also operate via steric blocking (and not activating RNase H)
to induce exon 23 skipping. Stability studies with Tm assays revealed
that TMOs exhibit greater destabilizing effects compared to either
2′OMe PS or PMOs, necessitating further investigation to elucidate
the underlying mechanism. Notably, systemic
delivery (intravenous) of 50 mg/kg/week of TMOs for 4 weeks in mdx
mice led to an increased density of dystrophin protein in muscle fibers,
as demonstrated by immunohistochemistry (IHC). These results differed
significantly from the treatment of mdx mice with either PMO or 2′OMe
PS, where the dystrophin protein density was considerably lower. These promising preclinical data support the
continued exploration of TMOs as a potential therapeutic modality
for DMD.

## Chirality of ASOs
Like siRNAs, the PS group in ASOs
introduces chirality, resulting in a mixture of Rp and Sp diastereomers. The specific configuration
of these diastereomers can affect the ASO’s binding affinity
to target RNA and its interaction with proteins involved in RNA processing. However, the concrete benefits of generating
chirally pure stereomers in the context of oligonucleotides are still
being evaluated. Wave Life Sciences has also explored the use of phosphoramidate
(PN) linkages in their oligonucleotides. The PN backbone chemistry
introduces additional chiral centers, allowing for further optimization
of ASO properties. For example, the PN-1
chemistry (1,3 dimethylimidazolin-2-ylidene) PN developed by Wave
Life Sciences has shown to increase potency and durability of silencing
in preclinical studies. 

## Off-Target Effects of ASOs
ASOs may also exhibit off-target
effects that are hybridization-dependent or hybridization-independent.
Hybridization-dependent effects may arise from Watson–Crick
interactions of DNA gapmer ASOs with nontargeted mRNA, which can induce
RNase H1-mediated degradation of the corresponding mRNA. In addition, ASOs may cause hybridization-independent
steric blocking at a nontarget site, thereby preventing downstream
protein synthesis. One of the commonly employed strategies to mitigate
hybridization-dependent off-target effects is to introduce targeted
mismatches. In addition, ASOs may mediate
off-target effects that are secondary and are mediated through interactions
with paraspeckle proteins. , Therefore, harmful
off-target effects of ASOs need to be considered during the in silico
design stage.

## Delivery of Oligonucleotides
Oligonucleotides are conjugated
to various ligands or encapsulated
in retargeted nanocarriers for targeted tissue delivery. The ligands
may include sugars, lipids, aptamers, or antibodies. The two principal
approaches employed for oligonucleotide conjugate administration are
local and systemic routes. Commonly used local delivery methods involve
IT and icv administration for CNS indications, intravitreal (ivt)
administration for ocular indications, and inhalation for pulmonary
indications (discussed below). In contrast, systemic delivery mostly
encompasses iv or sc injections. While systemic delivery of siRNA
is clearly more convenient for patients, this administration route
requires crossing the BBB (for CNS indications), and (possibly) higher
doses that may lead to nonspecific biodistribution in peripheral organs.
These considerations necessitate the need to carefully examine the
delivery route of conjugated siRNA to achieve a favorable therapeutical
index. Unlike ASOs, siRNAs have been shown to work only when conjugated
to a targeted ligand or encapsulated into LNPs. Below is a description
of the targeting ligands or formulation systems currently being used
for delivery of RNA therapeutics in clinical and preclinical studies.

## Targeting Ligands and Delivery Platforms

## Lipid Nanoparticles
Nanoparticles (NPs) with different
physicochemical properties and from various sources have been successfully
employed for oligonucleotide delivery. Most NPs are relatively large,
and the encapsulation of siRNA into NPs (>6–8 nm) precludes
clearance of siRNA by the kidneys. Synthetic sources for NPs include
inorganic NPs, metal organic frameworks, and lipid and/or polymer-based assemblies − /nanogels /dendrimers. Natural sources include protein- or DNA-based nanovectors, viral /virus-like
particles, exosomes, and cell membrane-derived NPs. Among nanotechnologies for RNA delivery, LNPs are currently the
frontrunner delivery platform for clinical translation, with four
FDA approved drugs including one loading siRNA and three loading mRNAs. 
LNPs consist of a multicomponent lipid
formulation of a nucleic acid. The first
FDA-approved siRNA therapeutic, Patisiran (Onpattro), was encompassed
into LNPs. INN Patisiran is approved for polyneuropathy associated
with hereditary transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis (hATTR) and is
used for the treatment of transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis (ATTR). Patisiran consists of a minimally modified
siRNA (for TTR mRNA) and is encapsulated into four
lipid constituents: MC3 (ionizable cationic lipid), PEG-DMG (PEG-lipid),
cholesterol (sterol), and distearoylphosphatidylcholine (DSPC; phospho helper lipid). LNPs
are formed by mixing the lipids in ethanol and the nucleic acids in
an acidic aqueous solution. Subsequently, ionizable cationic lipid
MC3 interacts with negatively charged nucleic acids to form the core.
There is an enhancement of polarity during the fabrication process,
and the more polar lipids (PEG-lipid and DSPC) coat the surface of
the LNPs. PEG-DMG is important for LNP
size control and stability. Notably,
PEG-DMG’s sheddable nature allows LNPs to bind to ApoE in the
blood, which facilitates the delivery of LNPs to hepatocytes through
the interaction of ApoE with the low-density lipoprotein receptor
(LDLR).
LNPs have many benefits, such as large RNA cargo capacity,
high
encapsulation efficiency, redosability (safety), scalability, and
ease of modification and functionalization. , However, traditional LNPs tend to go to the liver for the following
reasons: 1) the liver harbors a substantially larger blood volume
and exhibits a slower flow rate compared to other organs, plus the
fact that liver sinusoidal endothelial cells have fenestrations that
allow LNPs to pass through; 2) ApoE-mediated delivery is via interactions
with the LDLR, which is highly expressed by hepatocytes; and 3) the
liver contains a high density of scavenger receptors, particularly
on hepatic reticuloendothelial system cells, which can recognize and
bind to the LNPs leading to preferential uptake by the liver. To broaden the application of LNP/RNA technologies,
it is important to detarget LNPs from the liver and retarget them
to the desired cells and tissues. , Tuning the
administration route is a straightforward and effective approach to
improve the biodistribution and therapeutic results of LNPs. , For systemic administration, it is important to design and develop
targeted LNPs that could circumvent the biological barriers during
blood circulation and extravasation to target nonliver cells. , 
For the detargeting of LNPs from the liver, an overarching
goal
is to ensure LNPs evade detection by the immune system and their binding
to APOE and/or other serum proteins that mediate nonspecific cellular
uptake during blood circulation. Strategies for generating NPs with
such attributes include cell membrane coating, protein modifications,
and a nonfouling biomaterials layer. However, these strategies need to be optimized so that there is
no deleterious effect on cellular uptake and endosomal escape. , Another approach for the detargeting of LNPs was recently introduced
by Saunders et al. where the authors developed a “nanoprimer”
that serves as a pretreatment approach to transiently occupy liver
cells, thereby facilitating the delivery of LNPs to other tissues. In a related approach, Ouyang et al. discovered
the threshold dose of nanoprimers that is required to overwhelm Kupffer
cell uptake rates. 
For the retargeting
of LNPs, researchers have found that particle
size, surface charge, and lipid composition play an important role
in the biodistribution of nanoparticles after iv injection. , Recently, a technology dubbed selective organ targeting (SORT) has
been reported that incorporates SORT molecules with different charges,
therefore precisely altering the biodistribution of the LNPs and further
mediating nonliver tissue-specific delivery. , Incorporating targeting ligands into LNPs has been effective in
enhancing the targeting precision and efficacy. Several ligands (e.g.,
aptamers, sugars, antibodies and antibody fragments, vitamins, and
aptamers) have been coupled on the LNP surface through various approaches,
including direct conjugation of targeting ligands onto preformed LNPs
and postinsertion of lipid conjugated molecules onto preformed LNPs,
thus enabling targeted delivery. Antibodies and their various formats
have been conjugated to LNPs, and the resultant conjugates have shown
successful retargeting of LNPs to multiple extrahepatic cells and
tissues, including immune cells, lymph nodes, bone marrow, cancer
cells, and endothelial cells ( ).
 

## N-Acetyl Galactosamine
Conjugation of chemically stabilized
siRNA to trivalent GalNAc has resulted in the FDA approval of five
therapeutics that are administered sc for various liver indications.
Trivalent GalNAc is conjugated to the 3′ end of the sense strand
using a pH labile hydroxy proline linker. GalNAc allows targeting
to the liver where it binds to ASGPRs expressed on hepatocytes (note that the ASGPR is conserved across species),
and there are ∼1 million ASGPRs on liver cells that recycle
every 15 min. While the endosomal escape
rate is very low, efficient recycling of the ASGPR enables pharmacological
levels of siRNA to be delivered to the cytoplasm within 3–4
days. Importantly, chemically stabilized siRNA is very stable in the
low acidic pH of endosomes and forms a long-term depot. In addition, the liver-to-kidney distribution
ratio is greater than 30 at pharmacological doses. Although these
GalNAc conjugates have a short plasma life due to rapid liver uptake,
residence time in the liver is long. Further,
the liver PK properties of siRNA conjugates are inversely corelated
to their RISC loading. Therefore, the
PD response of siRNA–GalNAc conjugates is dependent on their
liver PK and RISC PK profiles, but not their plasma PK profiles. It is important to emphasize that five of the
six approved siRNA therapeutics employ GalNAc as a targeting ligand
for liver delivery. Given the evolution of enhanced metabolic stability
of siRNAs, targeting of siRNAs to the liver via GalNAc is currently
considered the preferred route compared with siRNA delivery with LNPs.

## Antibodies
Antibodies convey a more targeted approach
to the delivery of oligonucleotides to extrahepatic tissues. Oligonucleotides
are conjugated to mAbs to generate antibody–oligonucleotide
conjugates (AOCs) ( ). An AOC marries the specificity of the mAb with the precision
therapy provided by oligonucleotides. Previous studies reported that
antibody–siRNA conjugates can bind to their target antigens
on the cell surface, become internalized, and mediate target mRNA
silencing ( ). , Sugo et al. conducted the first study demonstrating
antibody-mediated delivery of siRNA to muscular organs. Specifically, they conjugated an anti-CD71
antibody fragment to siRNA targeting hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase
(HPRT) to generate anti-CD71 siHPRT. Systemic administration of anti-CD71-siHPRT in mice led to robust
and durable HPRT gene silencing in skeletal muscle
and the heart. Further, intramuscular
injection of an anti-CD71 antibody fragment conjugated to siRNA targeting
myostatin was administered in a mouse model of peripheral arterial
disease, which led to a 72% reduction in MSTN mRNA
levels and a subsequent increase of 17% in muscle mass. 
 AOCs may be generated via different conjugation
chemistries including
random or site-specific conjugation. Genentech has pioneered the thiomab
platform (a mAb with an engineered cysteine), and their team has shown
that conjugation of siRNA (via a maleimide handle) to thiomabs led
to a homogeneous product. Further, thiomab–siRNA
conjugates were demonstrated to mediate modest target-dependent knockdown
in vitro and within tumor cells in vivo. Another conjugation platform that is widely used in the antibody–drug
conjugate (ADC) field employs the native cysteine thiol maleimide
Michael addition reaction, and 10 of the 13 FDA-approved ADCs are
based on this chemistry. Importantly,
conjugation of an oligonucleotide with an antibody to generate an
AOC has been found to improve the PK properties of the oligonucleotide. 
Many companies are using mAbs or their
formats for the targeted
delivery of oligonucleotides. Denali Therapeutics is developing an
oligonucleotide transport vehicle (OTV) platform for antibody-mediated
systemic delivery of ASOs to the CNS. Their team has engineered a human transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1)
binding site into one Fc portion of the antibody, which contains nonbinding
Fabs. The fused Fab portion has enhanced the PK properties of the
entire molecule, which is termed an antibody transport vehicle. As
an exemplar, they have demonstrated proof of concept using the MALAT1 ASO, which was conjugated to an antibody transport
vehicle via noncleavable maleimide linker to obtain an OTV with an
oligonucleotide-to-antibody ratio (OAR) of 1. The ASO is composed of a 3-10-3 locked nucleic acid DNA
gapmer with a fully modified phosphorothioate backbone. The OTV displayed long-term stability (3 weeks)
at 5 and 25 °C, and it was stable in plasma for 48 h at 37 °C. Systemically delivered OTV bound with a low
monovalent affinity (100–300 nM) to the apical domain of TfR1
on brain endothelial cells. It was then transcytosed by TfR1, and
the MALAT1 ASO was eventually released into the brain
parenchyma. Studies using SH-SY5Y cells
revealed that both naked ASO and OTV traffics in a similar fashion
(via the endolysosomal system). Additionally,
the in vivo plasma PK properties of the OTV were significantly more
favorable compared to the naked ASO. While the naked ASO exhibited
a plasma half-life of only minutes, the OTV extended this duration
to several hours. Remarkably, multiple
systemic (iv) dosing of OTV (containing doses of 2.5 mg/kg of ASO;
three doses were administered weekly for 3 weeks and the last one
for 3 days) resulted in ASO accumulation and MALAT1 knockdown (∼50%) throughout the mouse CNS: the OTV conjugate was able to cross the BBB to knockdown MALAT1 throughout the CNS.
Consistent with TfR1 expression
in muscle, robust MALAT1 knockdown was also observed
in the quadriceps, heart, and diaphragm.
Interestingly, the level of MALAT1 knockdown observed
in clearance organs (liver and kidney) was similar between OTV and
naked ASO administration, supporting the notion that the OTV does
not cause further knockdown in nontargeted tissues beyond what is
achieved by administration of the naked ASO. Importantly, systemic administration (through multiple dosing) led
to MALAT1 knockdown across all the major CNS cell
types and cortical layers of the brain. Furthermore, greater accumulation in brain ASO levels was observed
in human TfR knock-in mice after multiple iv injections with the OTV
vs a bivalent TfR:ASO (notably, the anti-TfR1 bivalent antibody had
stronger receptor affinity). The bivalent
TfR:ASO was localized to the vasculature whereas the OTV was also
distributed to the brain parenchyma. Systemic delivery of the bivalent TfR:ASO in mice likely led to
receptor dimerization, followed by internalization and degradation
of the TfR protein in the vasculature. This contrasted with the systemic delivery of the OTV, which did
not result in TfR degradation in the vasculature and parenchyma. In
addition, IT administration of the naked ASO in NHPs enabled modest
and uneven distribution of the ASO in the brain, whereas multiple
iv treatment of NHPs with the OTV (each dose: 30 mg/kg) resulted in
high and uniform distribution of the ASO across the CNS; this increased
accumulation of the ASO in OTV-treated NHPs was accompanied by greater
target gene silencing. Thus, the OTV
platform provides a novel delivery method to cross the BBB and deliver
ASOs to the brain.

## Lipids
A growing body of studies suggests that lipids
are emerging as robust ligands for enhanced biodistribution of oligonucleotides
to tissues. In one study, it was reported that optimization of the
hydrophobicity of targeting lipids led to siRNA being preferentially
delivered to either the kidney or the liver. The authors systemically injected mice with 20 mg/kg of different
lipid-conjugated siRNAs and found that more hydrophobic lipids (e.g.,
cholesterol) distributed siRNA to the liver, while less hydrophobic
lipids (e.g., DHA) had a greater propensity for delivering siRNA to
the kidney. The liver-to-kidney partitioning
of siRNA by lipids may be explained by the fact that enhanced hydrophobicity
of lipids leads to greater LDL-C binding, thereby resulting in greater
uptake by the liver. 
For local
delivery to the CNS, lipids (as targeting ligands) have been reported
to enhance siRNA retention and accumulation in the brain and stabilized
siRNA chemistry was shown to improve the durability of the response.
For example, it was found that intrastriatal administration of a DHA–siRNA
conjugate enabled broad tissue distribution and subsequent knockdown
of HTT mRNA in the striatum of mice. However, systemic administration (iv or sc)
of a DHA–siRNA conjugate precluded successful delivery of siRNA
to the brain, which was ascribed to unfavorable PK properties resulting
from the first-pass metabolism via the liver and kidneys. , In addition, transvascular delivery of DHA–siRNA conjugates
revealed binding of DHA to endothelial cells of the brain, but this
binding did not result in siRNA being transcytosed into the brain. However, disruption by mannitol of the BBB
led to transvascular delivery of the DHA–siRNA conjugate to
the neurons and glia. Further, mannitol-mediated
transvascular delivery of the DHA-HTT–siRNA
conjugate showed a strong relationship between PK and PD properties,
as revealed by enhanced HTT mRNA knockdown in brain
regions that had the highest siRNA accumulation. In another study, introduction of a lipophilic moiety (C16)
was shown to enhance siRNA uptake across the CNS following IT administration
of a C16–siRNA conjugate in mice (discussed below). Prakash
et al. demonstrated that attaching ASOs to fatty acids of varying
lengths (16–22 carbons) enhanced their binding to plasma proteins,
particularly albumin, which correlated with increased ASO activity
in mouse muscle tissue. Therefore, the
addition of a lipophilic molecule to an siRNA or an ASO can significantly
impact the PK/PD properties. Systemic delivery of siRNA to extrahepatic
tissues has been achieved via conjugation of siRNA to docosanoic acid
(DCA) or phosphatidyl choline (PC)-DCA. A recent study reported that functionalizing DCA with a PC headgroup
facilitated the delivery of chemically stabilized siRNA to many extrahepatic
tissues, including the kidney, heart, lungs, muscle, pancreas, bladder,
duodenum, and fat. In addition, the
authors showed that the biodistribution of siRNA to these tissues
can be altered by either modifying the linker length between the phosphate
and choline moiety of the PC group, or by increasing the PC headgroup
valency. This study highlights the impact
of the PC headgroup in the delivery of siRNA to extrahepatic tissues.
Taken together, these studies provide evidence that the conjugation
of lipids to siRNA enhances the ability of siRNA to cross the lipid
bilayer and enter cells. The mechanism likely involves binding of
lipid-conjugated siRNA to serum proteins or cell surface proteins,
which facilitates the cellular uptake of the conjugate via endocytosis.

## Peptides
Peptides are emerging as robust delivery vehicles
for the transport of various cargos, including oligonucleotides. , ( ). For instance,
cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) facilitate the intracellular transport
of cargo molecules that exhibit difficulty in crossing cellular membranes
alone. CPPs are gaining popularity considering
their potential for many therapeutic indications. CPPs are generally polycationic peptides composed of positively
charged amino acids, such as arginine, lysine, ornithine, and histidine.
Upcoming tumor-targeting therapies find polycationic CPPs to be efficient
since they hold a positive charge in physiological conditions, allowing
them to bind to carbohydrate chains on the cell membrane and enter
the cytoplasm of the cell. Sarepta Therapeutics
released data on their investigational drug, RC-1001, for the treatment
of DMD, a fatal disease that progresses due to frameshift mutations
in the DMD gene responsible for producing dystrophin
protein. RC-1001 is a CPP conjugated
to the PMO backbone, with the hypothesis that the resultant conjugate
promotes exon 23 skipping and enhanced production of functional but
attenuated dystrophin protein. Following in vivo studies of RC-1001
in mdx mice, greater levels of exon skipping and enhanced functional
dystrophin protein were observed in the CPP-conjugated PMOs compared
with PMOs alone. Further, a greater durability effect was observed,
with dystrophin production in muscle lasting for up to 60 days. In
a recent study, Klein et al. conjugated a PMO (specific for DMPK mRNA) to an arginine rich CPP peptide, Pip6a, and
found that systemic administration of the resultant conjugate significantly
enhanced ASO delivery in striated muscles of DM1 mice compared with
unconjugated PMO. In another study,
systemic delivery in mdx mice of a cyclic CPP–PMO conjugate,
but not unconjugated PMO, was shown to exhibit increased skeletal
muscle delivery coupled with enhanced exon skipping. Although currently no FDA approved medicines are on the
market due to insufficient in vivo data on the stability, toxicity,
and endosomal escape capabilities of CPPs, recent clinical trials
show promising results for future treatments. 
Another class of peptide-based delivery systems,
termed bicyclic peptides, has been introduced by Bicycle Therapeutics.
Bicycle molecules are made up of short linear peptides with three
points of reactivity via cysteine residues. These peptides are constrained by a central chemical scaffold that
forms a bicyclic structure containing 9–20 amino acids and
two loops. The small size of bicycle molecules promotes rapid tissue
penetration, and their constrained structure contributes to their
high affinity and increased selectivity to the desired target. Since
these peptides are synthetic, PK properties can be modulated by introducing
various chemical modifications. An especially unique characteristic
of bicycles is their ability to be conjugated together to form multimeric
bicycles that can significantly improve the functionality and affinity
for the target. Bicycle Therapeutics has explored versatile uses of
these peptides and has most recently developed bicycle–toxin
conjugates (BTCs) to allow for the delivery of toxin payloads to tumors.
An important advantage of BTCs over conventional antibody conjugates
is that bicycle molecules allow for precision-guided, rapid distribution
and faster clearance, thereby reducing the exposure time of the payload
in systemic circulation. Bicycle Therapeutics recently reported that
their nectin-4-targeting BTC (BT8009) has entered phase 2/3 clinical
trials for metastatic urothelial cancer. While the payload used in this case was monomethyl auristatin E,
oligonucleotides (siRNA or ASO) can also be potentially conjugated
to bicycles via a linker to generate bicycle–oligonucleotide
conjugates. In fact, Ionis Pharmaceuticals and Bicycle Therapeutics
recently announced a partnership to explore ASO delivery using bicycles
with a high affinity to the TfR1 receptor.
Arrowhead also uses
peptides for the targeted delivery of siRNA
to skeletal muscles. Their targeted RNA interference molecule (TRiM)
platform for muscle delivery consists of a peptide-targeting ligand
(linked to the 5′ end of the sense strand) that is specific
for αvb6 integrin receptor, linker, plus a PK/PD modulator (linked
to the 3′ end of the sense strand). The PK/PD modulator consists of a lipid moiety that facilitates
the delivery and cellular uptake. ARO–DM1 leverages this platform
with an siRNA specific for DMPK mRNA. Systemic administration (iv) of a single dose
of 15 mg/kg of ARO–DM1 showed much higher DMPK knockdown (∼80%)
in NHP triceps compared with a single 22 mg/kg dose of TfR-DMPK–siRNA
conjugate. , Proof-of-concept studies in
DM1-like mice confirmed DMPK1 silencing and attenuation
in splicing errors following systemic delivery of species-specific
ARO–DM1. , Arrowhead recently reported
that the ARO–DM1–1001 conjugate has entered phase 1
clinical trials [NCT06138743] for type 1 myotonic dystrophy (DM1)
( ). 

## Endosomal Escape Enhancers
As discussed earlier, the
entrapment of oligonucleotides into endosomes is a major therapeutic
challenge for extrahepatic tissue delivery. The endosomal escape problem
may be considered a silver lining for liver delivery since it enables
the formation of a long-term depot, and siRNA molecules are slowly
released over a period of several months. However, unlike ASGPRs that
are expressed abundantly on hepatocytes and have a robust recycling
mechanism, most receptors that are expressed on extrahepatic cells
likely do not have such high levels of expression or similar recycling
kinetics. Furthermore, receptor availability and trafficking may be
cell-type-dependent and may limit the amounts of oligonucleotides
delivered. Chloroquine (an endolytic agent) can enhance endosomal
escape as it is membrane permeable and is protonated in the acidic
pH of endosomes and is therefore retained in that location. Subsequently, the hydrophobic motif of chloroquinone
inserts into the endosomal bilayer, thereby disrupting the endosomes. However, chloroquinone operates nonspecifically
across all endosomes and can cause toxicity; it is therefore not a
viable option for endosomal escape of oligonucleotides. More recently, a synthetic lipid analog, SH-BC-893,
was shown to increase delivery of oligonucleotides to the cytosol. Compared to treatment of HeLa cells with ASO
(3-10-3 cEt gapmer) alone, cotreatment with ASO and SH-BC-893 led
to an almost 10-fold increase in the amount of ASO that escaped into
the cytosol. Enhanced accumulation of
ASO in HeLa cells was associated with a significant increase (approximately
100-fold) in ASO activity, as evidenced by the knockdown of the ASO
target, MALAT1. This
knockdown effect was observed to varying degrees across multiple cell
lines. Additionally, mice were systemically
treated with an ASO targeting Scnn1a mRNA, which encodes a subunit
of the ENaC sodium channel, a target for cystic fibrosis. Compared to saline-treated mice receiving ASO
alone, coadministration of SH-BC-893 improved Scnn1a knockdown from
17% to 59%. Additionally, the authors demonstrated that oral delivery
of SH-BC-893 enhanced the activity of systemically delivered ASOs. These data provide evidence that molecules
such as SH-BC-893, which modulate cellular trafficking, may enhance
oligonucleotide activity.
Sapreme Technologies has also developed
a platform to enhance the release of oligonucleotides from endosomes. Specifically, their team is developing an endosomal-specific
escape enhance platform that consists of an endosomal escape module
with a linker (dubbed SPT). SPT molecules
belong to a class of triterpenoids (saponins) that are endosomal selective
and require endocytic machinery, cholesterol, and acidic pH to be
active. Sapreme’s team screened
for triterpenoid molecules in an in vitro system, and they identified
several candidates with increased efficacy (for endosomal escape)
and reduced toxicity. SPT may be conjugated
to various targeting ligands, and the targeted delivery may result
in a lower effective dose requirement for SPT. In their proof-of-concept experiments, they conjugated
an oligonucleotide to GalNAc and SPT and showed that the resultant
conjugate was highly effective in reducing ApoB expression in ASGPR1-expressing
cells. In addition, the silencing potency
with GalNAc–ApoB siRNA–SPT conjugates was substantially
higher (by a factor of 100) compared with conjugates lacking SPT,
indicating that SPT is fundamental to the enhancement of endosomal
escape. Systemic administration of 1
mg/kg of a trivalent GalNAc–SPT–ApoB siRNA conjugate
displayed greater than 75% reduction (compared with a conjugate lacking
SPT) in APOB gene expression 24 h postdosing. These data suggest that Sapreme’s technology
in leveraging endosomal escape enhancement may potentially improve
the efficacy of siRNAs (or ASOs) within extrahepatic tissues where
endosomal escape is a major rate-limiting step.

## Preclinical and Clinical Studies

## Muscle Indications
In preclinical studies, Avidity
Biosciences demonstrated that a single systemic dose of an antibody–siRNA
conjugate in animals resulted in >75% mRNA knockdown in skeletal
and
cardiac muscles. Avidity Biosciences
is currently pursuing clinical trials to evaluate the potential of
an antibody–siRNA conjugate for the treatment of myotonic dystrophy
(Marina trial: NCT05027269). Avidity’s
investigational drug AOC 1001 consists of a humanized anti-TfR1 mAb
conjugated to DMPK siRNA (via a noncleavable linker), and the OAR
is 1 ( ). DM1 is a commonly inherited rare multisystem
disorder that predominantly affects smooth and skeletal muscles but
may also have an adverse effect on the patient’s eyes, heart,
endocrine system, and CNS. One of the
typical manifestations of this disease is myotonia, which is characterized
by difficulty opening and closing the hand. The prevalence of myotonic
dystrophy is estimated to be 1 in 20,000 people, and it is caused by a toxic gain-of-function mutation in DMPK mRNA that results in (CUG)n repeats. Patients with
DM1 have CUG repeats ranging from the hundreds to the thousands, and
this corelates with the severity of the disease ( ). These repeats form hairpin
structures that bind and sequester muscle blind-like protein (MBNL),
which is essential for splicing ( ). Sequestration of MBNL causes aberrant
splicing of multiple mRNAs in myotubes, thus driving the muscular
disease condition in patients with DM1. In NHPs, Avidity’s
team estimated that their siRNA for DMPK has an EC50 of 100 pM, suggestive of a robust potency of siRNA at low
doses. Drugs in phase 1/2 clinical studies from Avidity displayed
favorable safety and tolerability profiles in patients with DM1. Furthermore, administration of AOC 1001 in
patients resulted in a dose-dependent increase of siRNA in muscles,
which ultimately led to a mean reduction of 42% of DMPK mRNA (after 6 weeks) following a single dose of 1 mg/kg or two doses
of 2 mg/kg or 4 mg/kg. It has been speculated
that AOC 1001 operates in the nucleus, which may be supported by recent
results from the Corey laboratory that showed the presence of Argonaut
2 and RISC factors in the cell nuclei. In addition, Avidity’s data revealed that DMPK knockdown is associated with normalization of splicing and subsequent enhancement of clinical activity. Remarkably, multiple dosing of 4 mg/kg of AOC
1001 led to improvements in myotonia and total muscle strength that
translated into coordinated functioning of muscles in patients with
DM1. Because of these promising clinical
data, AOC 1001 has advanced to phase 3 clinical trials.
PepGen
has developed an enhanced delivery oligonucleotide (EDO) peptide platform
for in vivo delivery of ASOs in patients with DMD. These linear cell-penetrating
peptides are short in length (<20 amino acids). , Additionally, these nonimmunogenic peptides feature two flanking
polyarginine domains interspersed with non-natural amino acids to
enhance stability. , Furthermore, a hydrophobic core
exists between the arginine-rich (cationic) domains, likely aiding
in endosomal escape and nuclear delivery. , They also established proof of concept using enhanced nuclear delivery
of PMO23 (an ASO targeting exon 23 of dystrophin) in mice. , More specifically, in mice myotubes they showed a 25-fold increase
in nuclear delivery of PMO with EDO-conjugated PMO23 vs naked PMO23. Note that PGN–PMO23 is a murine analogue
of the clinical candidate PGN–PMO51. In addition, iv delivery
of two doses of 30 mg/kg (day 1 and day 15) of EDO-conjugated PMO51
in NHPs showed 72% ASO distribution in the nucleus of skeletal muscle
(quadriceps) cells. , A single dose of 10 mg/kg of
EDO-conjugated PMO23 resulted in substantial exon skipping activity
in the biceps and quadriceps of mice. , Interestingly,
multiple systemic dosing (Q4W at 30 mg/kg) of EDO-PMO23 in an mdx
mice model (mice with a single-point mutation in exon 23 of the dystrophin
gene) led to enhanced exon skipping (∼90%) and increased dystrophin
protein expression (up to 80% of normal), which was uniformly distributed
across muscle. Significantly, three
doses (Q2W) at 30 mg/kg of the clinical candidate (PGN-EDO51) in NHPs
resulted in a >70% increase of exon-skipping activity across different
skeletal muscle tissues, including the diaphragm. , In a phase 1 clinical trial (NCT06079736), healthy volunteers were
administered single ascending iv doses (5, 10, and 15 mg/kg) of PGN-EDO51.
There was a dose-dependent increase (albeit a modest one) in exon
51 skipping in muscle biopsies; this increase was sustained over a
period of 28 days. , Further, the increase in exon
skipping correlated with enhanced accumulation of the drug in the
biceps. , The safety and tolerability profile of PGN-EDO51
was favorable, and only mild-to-moderate adverse events were observed. , Based on the data from preclinical and phase 1 clinical studies,
their phase 2 studies will involve four iv multiple ascending doses
(Q4W) in a DMD population responsive to exon 51 skipping. , 
Dyne recently reported clinical data on their investigational
drug,
DYNE-251. Dyne’s technology is based on the FORCE platform,
which consists of three components: a Fab that targets TfR1; a cleavable
linker (valine-citrulline); and an exon-skipping PMO. , The oligonucleotide-to-antibody ratio is 2. DYNE-251 uses a PMO
that modulates exon 51 skipping of dystrophin mRNA, with the aim of
generating shorter but functional dystrophin protein. Since TfR1 is expressed on muscle cells, DYNE-251
is designed to provide targeted delivery of PMO to cardiac and skeletal
muscles, including the diaphragm. − Their phase 1/2 clinical trial
(termed DELIVER; NCT05524883) enrolled male patients aged 4–16
years who were amenable to exon 51 skipping. The DELIVER trial was initiated with multiple ascending doses (Q4W
for 6 months) of DYNE-251 or placebo via iv delivery. The safety profile of DYNE-251 was generally
favorable, with mild-to-moderate TEAEs with doses ranging from 0.7
mg/kg to 20 mg/kg. Impressively, patients
treated monthly for 6 months with DYNE-251 (5 mg/kg of PMO) showed
an increase in dystrophin levels (from 0.6% to 0.88% of normal) compared
with no meaningful dystrophin protein increase in patients treated
with placebo. These results were superior
to the data shown with eteplirsen, where 30 mg/kg QW treatment for
6 months only led to a modest increase in dystrophin protein levels
(from 0.24% to 0.30% of normal). In
addition, there was a significantly higher increase in the percentage
of dystrophin fibers in patients treated with DYNE-251 (5 mg/kg; Q4W)
vs eteplirsen (30 mg/kg; QW) over a period of 6 months. In their more recently released clinical data,
Dyne showed that treatment of patients with 20 mg/kg PMO equivalent
of Dyne-251 (Q4W for 6 months) led to mean absolute dystrophin expression
of 3.71% of normal, which is 10-fold higher than current standard
of care (eteplirsen). Across both the
20 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg PMO equivalent DYNE-251 treated patients, there
were notable functional improvements over time. While the safety data from 10 mg/kg and 20 mg/kg Dyne-251
was favorable, administration with 40 mg/kg Q4W of Dyne-251 showed
three serious TEAEs in two patients likely resulting from study drug. Therefore, Dyne is progressing with dose escalation
of up to a 20 mg/kg dosage for all cohorts.
Targeting of oligonucleotides
solely to skeletal muscle is garnering
attention, especially for conditions such as fascioscapulohumeral
muscular dystrophy (FSHD), a condition that primarily affects the
face, shoulders, and upper arms. Recently, Avidity Biosciences released
interim phase 1/2 data for their investigational drug, AOC 1020, for
FSHD. AOC 1020, also termed del-brax, is an antibody–oligonucleotide
conjugate, where the antibody part targets TfR1 and the conjugated
siRNA targets DUX4, a transcription factor. , del-brax is administered systemically (iv), and
it efficiently delivers DUX4 siRNA to muscle. Since DUX4 is expressed at
very low levels in muscle cells, the read-out for DUX4 silencing is indirectly assessed by measuring the levels of DUX4-regulated
gene expression. Patients treated with 2 mg/kg del-brax displayed a > 50% reduction in DUX4-regulated
genes
as measured using patient muscle biopsies. Furthermore, del-brax treatment led to a significant
decrease in the DUX4-regulated novel circulating
biomarker (undisclosed) and in the levels of creatinine kinase for
up to 4 months. Notably, there were
improvements in patients’ range of motion and function, and
the overall safety and tolerability profiles were also favorable.
These encouraging results demonstrate the potential for this first-in-class DUX4 silencing drug in the treatment of FSHD, and in general,
broadly support the targeted delivery of therapeutic oligonucleotides
to muscles.

## CNS Indications
In the CNS space, there is a major
therapeutic need for many diseases, including Parkinson’s disease,
Alzheimer’s disease, Huntington’s disease, and other
genetic-based neurodegenerative diseases. However, the biggest challenge
by far in the research and development for CNS therapeutics is overcoming
the BBB. Alnylam recently reported successful local delivery of siRNA
to the CNS. Their team conjugated a
fully stabilized SOD1 siRNA (containing 5′
vinyl phosphonate) to 2′O-hexadecyl (C16) and showed that a
single IT injection of the subsequent conjugate in rats resulted in
broad biodistribution of siRNA throughout the CNS. The authors used the same conjugation platform to generate
ALN-APP, which is an siRNA–C16 conjugate targeting APP mRNA. APP is a membrane-bound protein whose proteolytic
cleavage generates many fragments, including amyloid beta (Aβ)
peptide, which enters the brain parenchyma or microvasculature, thereby
leading to pathologies associated with Alzheimer’s disease
or cerebral amyloid angiopathy, respectively. In a Tg-hAPPSwDI/mNos2–/– (CVN) model of
disease, the Alnylam team found that a single icv dose (120 mg) of
ALN-APP resulted in 75% knockdown of APP mRNA within the cortex 30
days postdose. Importantly, there was
a significant reduction in the number of Aβ40 plaques in the
parenchyma of whole brain, hippocampus, and cortex after 3 or 6 months
postdosage. Further, Alnylam recently
demonstrated in NHPs that a single IT dose of 60 mg led to a ∼
50% reduction in protein knockdown of sAPPα and sAPPβ
(biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease) in the CSF after 6 months,
which supports the long durability of APP knockdown with ALN-APP.
Alnylam’s phase 1 clinical study (NCT05231785) showed that
ALN-APP had a favorable safety profile at doses of 25 mg, 50 mg, and
75 mg in patients with early onset Alzheimer’s disease. , Remarkably, a robust reduction (>50% mean knockdown up to 6 months)
of sAPPα and sAPPβ was observed with the 75 mg dose. , It is important to emphasize that these profound findings are the
first to be reported for CNS conditions using siRNA therapeutics.
Another company, Vect-Horus, developed targeted TfR1 VHH ligands
(∼14 kDa) that deliver siRNA to the CNS. VHH are variable-region
domains of heavy-chain antibodies found in Camelidae, and these VHH domains have deep tissue penetration properties. In addition, their team has created a PK-enhanced
conjugate, which is made up of the VHH domain that is fused to the
Fc domain of an IgG1 antibody. VHH–siRNA
conjugates were generated through a copper-free click reaction, with
a site-specific azido-linker on the VHH molecule and a complementary
constrained alkyne group on the siRNA. Further, Vect-Horus has developed novel VHH ligands with varying
affinities targeting TfR1 in rodents and humans. Following local icv
administration of TfR-binding VHH–siRNA conjugates in WT mice,
robust knockdown (80–90%) was observed in the CNS and spine,
indicating retention and uptake of TfR-binding conjugates in the brain
parenchymal cells and the spinal cord. Treatment of cultured murine neuroblastoma cells with TfR-binding
VHH–siSOD1m-5′VP and VHH–hFc-siSOD1m-5′VP
conjugates showed potent and dose-dependent silencing, with mean IC50 values of 7.4 nM and 8.7 nM, respectively. In contrast, the incubation of cells with siSOD1m-5′VP
alone showed no effect on mSOD1 mRNA levels. As such, PK-enhanced
VHH-conjugated siRNA binds efficiently to the TfR and is endocytosed,
followed by endosomal escape and delivery of released siRNA to the
cytoplasm or nucleus to mediate gene silencing. In general, these data suggest that VHH domains can potentially
be optimized to mediate the systemic delivery of oligonucleotides
to the CNS.
Recently, a branched siRNA modality termed divalent
siRNA (di-siRNA)
was introduced, which consists of two monovalent chemically stabilized
siRNAs connected via a triethylene glycol linker at the 3′
end of the sense strands. Local administration (icv) in mice of 475
μg of di-siRNA was shown to elicit robust and durable knockdown
(up to 6 months) of HTT mRNA in multiple regions
of the brain. A similar knockdown pattern
was observed with a separate target (APOE mRNA) in
mice after icv injection with 238 μg of di-siRNA scaffold. To translate these findings from mice to larger
mammals, the authors employed various local administration methods
for delivery of di-siRNA to the sheep CNS and found that there was
an efficient distribution of di-siRNA throughout the brain including
the cortex, caudent, and putamen. In
addition, icv administration of di-siRNA displayed broad distribution
of this branched siRNA within the spinal cord of sheep. Consistent with these findings, the authors
also demonstrated effective biodistribution in the CNS and spinal
cord of cynomologous macaques after icv administration of di-siRNA
(25 mg), and the increase in di-siRNA accumulation in the brain and
spinal cord resulted in potent silencing of HTT for
up to 1 month, showing that there was
a strong corelation between PK and PD properties. Importantly, the
safety profile of di-siRNA was favorable in NHPs, showing no significant
increase in the level of neuroinflammatory markers. Atalanta Therapeutics,
a spin-off company based on this technology, is further advancing
the di-siRNA platform.
Ionis has two FDA-approved ASO drugs
for CNS indications: Spinraza
(nusinersen) and Qalsody (toferson; ). Nusinersen was granted FDA approval in
2016 for spinal muscular dystrophy, which is caused by a loss-of-function
mutation of the SMN1 gene. Nusinersen operates via splice modulation of the SMN2 gene (a closely related ortholog of the SMN1 gene
but with a point mutation in intron 7) and leads to functional survival
motor neuron protein with exon 7 inclusion. Notably, nusinersen belongs to the class of splice-switching ASOs,
and contains a sequence of RNA oligonucleotides (with a PS backbone)
modified with 2′MOE. The approval
of Spinraza was regarded as a significant scientific breakthrough,
as it significantly alleviated the suffering of children with spinal
muscular atrophy. IT administration of nusinersen resulted in widespread
distribution of the drug throughout the CNS. 

## Pulmonary Indications
Hariharan and colleagues recently
reported that a di-siRNA molecule can be delivered locally to the
lungs in a mouse model of SARS-CoV-2. The authors chemically stabilized the di-siRNA molecule, which targeted
the mRNA sequence found in various variants of SARS-CoV-2 (including
delta and omicron), and found that the di-siRNA molecule mediated
degradation of viral mRNA inside the cells. Subsequently, they showed that viral protein translation was attenuated
in animal models by 60–80%, thereby preventing infection. This study represents the first example of
intranasal delivery of multimeric siRNA in an animal model of SARS-CoV-2
that is well-tolerated and induces robust viral gene silencing. 
Arrowhead is using its TRiM platform
to deliver siRNA to the pulmonary epithelium. Their molecule is dubbed
“ARO-RAGE”, which is a conjugate of chemically stabilized
siRNA (specific for the receptor for advanced glycation end products
[RAGE] mRNA transcript) and a targeting small molecule (specific for
integrin alpha-v beta-6 expressed on pulmonary epithelial cells). , RAGE is an upstream mediator of the Type 2 inflammatory pathway
and is abundantly expressed in the lung epithelium compared to other
tissues. , Further, RAGE can be cleaved
to generate soluble RAGE (sRAGE), which is secreted in the serum and
airways. In a rat model, their team demonstrated robust knockdown
(∼90%) of lung RAGE mRNA following a single inhalation of 0.5
mg/kg of a rat-specific RAGE–siRNA conjugate. It is noteworthy that the reduction in RAGE mRNA expression
was sustained for up to 2 months in rats. Furthermore, pretreatment in a rat asthma model with a RAGE-directed
siRNA conjugate led to reduced pulmonary inflammation, characterized
by decreased recruitment of eosinophils, neutrophils, and inflammatory
cytokines. Importantly, there was robust
reduction of RAGE mRNA expression (∼90%) in the lungs of NHPs
that inhaled a single dose of 1 mg/kg of ARO-RAGE vs saline. In addition, weekly sc dosing led to potent
and durable lung RAGE and sRAGE silencing in both rats and NHPs. Arrowhead has recently initiated a phase 1/2
clinical study (NCT05276570) with ARO-RAGE in individuals with and
without asthma. The study design included
single or multiple ascending doses in healthy volunteers and multiple
ascending doses in patients with mild-to-moderate asthma. No serious drug-associated adverse effects
were seen with the different cohorts. In healthy volunteers, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid sRAGE decreased
by ∼94% and serum sRAGE decreased by ∼88% at 4 weeks
following two doses of 184 mg of ARO-RAGE; notably, similar effects
on serum sRAGE reduction were observed in patients with asthma that
were administered with the same dose regimen. It should be noted that this is the first-in-human clinical
study with a potential siRNA therapeutic for a pulmonary indication.

## Skin Indications
A growing body of evidence suggests
that Janus kinase 1 (JAK1) is involved in multiple inflammatory diseases.
Recent studies in human skin explants demonstrated that intradermal
administration of a DCA conjugate of JAK1-specific (chemically stabilized)
siRNA resulted in knockdown of JAK1 mRNA transcript,
and this reduction in JAK1 expression was associated
with attenuation of interferon γ-induced JAK1-mediated upregulation
of the chemokines CXL9, CXL10, and CXL11. Further, the authors found that a single sc dose of 20 mg/kg of
their lead JAK1 siRNA (si3033) molecule in mice led
to a ∼50% reduction in JAK1 mRNA transcript
in tail skin following 1 week of administration, and the reduction
in JAK1 expression was observed (to a lesser degree)
for up to 5 weeks. Remarkably, in a
mouse model of vitiligo, prophylactic intradermal administration of
two 0.08 mg/kg doses of si3033 had an ameliorative effect, as demonstrated
by decreased skin infiltration of melanocyte-specific premelanosome
protein CD8+ T cells and reduced depigmentation of the
skin.

## Cardiovascular Indications
Accumulating studies highlight
the applicability of siRNA therapeutics for cardiovascular indications.
An example is the FDA-approved drug inclisiran, which was discovered
by Alnylam and developed by Novartis to treat hypercholesterolemia. Inclisiran is a chemically stabilized siRNA
that is conjugated to trivalent GalNAc and is used to target proprotein
convertase subtilsin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) mRNA. PCSK9 degrades the LDLR, and silencing of the PCSK9 gene by inclisiran can, therefore, lead to a reduction in LDL-C
levels. Indeed, phase 3 clinical data revealed that systemic administration
(iv) of inclisiran every 6 months led to a ∼ 50% reduction
in LDL-C levels, thereby demonstrating a potent and durable effect
of this drug in treating hypercholesterolemia. In the phase 3 clinical trials of inclisiran, approximately
3,200 patients were treated. These trials reported mild adverse events
at the injection site in some inclisiran-treated patients over an
18-month period. The approval of inclisiran
for hypercholesterolemia was a significant milestone, as oligonucleotides
were previously considered as therapeutics for only rare diseases.
Another therapeutic oligonucleotide, mipomersen, a PS 2′MOE
ASO that degrades the mRNA for apoB-100, was initially approved for
the treatment of homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (HoFH). LDL-C has a core apolipoprotein, apoB-100,
which is produced in hepatocytes and binds to the LDLR. Depletion
of apoB-100 mRNA by mipomersen led to reductions in LDL-C levels in
patients with HoFH. However, this drug
was discontinued due to significant liver toxicity. Nonetheless, numerous clinical trials are currently underway
for ASO therapeutics in the cardiovascular space. While oligonucleotides are mostly delivered to liver targets
for cardiovascular indications, recent studies support the role of
oligonucleotides in directly targeting vascular tissues. Comanche
Biopharma just reported FDA clearance of its siRNA-based investigation
drug (CBP-4888) application for the treatment of preeclampsia. CBP-4888 is formulated as a combination of
two chemically synthesized, lipid-conjugated siRNA duplex oligonucleotides
that target two soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1-like mRNA isoforms. In preeclampsia, sFLT1 is excessively produced
by the placenta and is associated with pathological conditions of
this severe vascular disease. Systemic administration (sc) of CBP-488
inhibited sFLT1 expression in the placenta and may
therefore serve as a potential therapeutic for treatment of preeclampsia.

## Adipose Indications
Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals recently
released data on their obesity programs, ARO-INHBE and ARO-ALK7. Inhibin subunit beta E (INHBE) is expressed
in hepatocytes and produces activin E, a dimeric INHBE protein. Activin E is secreted by hepatocytes and binds
to the ALK7 (activin receptor-like kinase 7) receptor, a TGF-ß
superfamily member, which is expressed on adipose tissue. This binding ultimately suppresses lipolysis
and promotes fat storage. ARO-INHBE consists of a GalNAc-conjugated
siRNA to silence INHBE in the liver. Consequently, systemic delivery of ARO-INHBE should result in inhibition
of the production of activin E. In preclinical studies, the Arrowhead
team showed that treatment of mice (on a high-fat diet) with a species
specific version of ARO-INHBE resulted in ∼95% suppression
of INHBE mRNA and 19% suppression in body weight gain relative to
animals that were treated with saline. Importantly, INHBE silencing reduced fat mass but preserved lean
muscle mass in a diet-induced mouse obesity model. It should be noted that INHBE siRNA targets the liver but
affects fat storage in adipose tissues. In contrast, ALK7 is preferentially expressed on adipose tissue,
and ARO-ALK7 targets ALK7 mRNA. ARO-ALK7 is a dual-lipid siRNA conjugate,
where a lipid is linked to the 3′ and 5′ ends of the
sense strand within the siRNA targeting ALK7. Weekly 3 mg/kg systemic dosing (sc) of mice with ALK7 siRNA
resulted in an 80% mRNA reduction in inguinal white adipose tissue
and a 40% mRNA reduction in perigonadal white adipose tissue depots,
and these findings corelated with a 37% decreased body weight gain
in ALK7 siRNA vs saline-treated mice. Further, ALK7 siRNA treatment reduced fat mass by 50% but not lean
muscle mass in a diet-induced model of obesity. A single sc administration of 3 mg/kg of ARO-ALK7 in NHPs
caused robust and durable ALK7 mRNA knockdown in adipose tissue. Of note, phase 1/2a clinical trials are being
initiated separately for both ARO-INHBE and ARO-ALK7 in volunteers
with obesity. 

## Eye Indications
Several studies are currently underway
to optimize the delivery and formulation of oligonucleotides for eye
diseases. Cheng et al. recently unveiled tetra siRNA and reported
that a single ivt administration in mice of tetra siRNA (targeting
Huntington mRNA) resulted in robust (∼75% protein knockdown)
and durable (lasting up to 6 months) gene silencing in photoreceptors. The authors translated these findings in pigs
and found that a single ivt dose of 300 μg led to a reduction
in Huntington protein of ∼80%, and the reduction was maintained
over a period of 4 months. As previously
discussed, Alnylam used a C16–siRNA conjugate for the delivery
of siRNA to the CNS. In the same publication, they also showed that
the C16–siRNA conjugate had a functional effect in the eye,
demonstrating that a single ivt administration of TTR-targeting C16–siRNA with vinyl phosphonate in NHPs led to
potent and durable TTR knockdown in the eye. Another method for delivering siRNA into the
eye is topically, which is less invasive compared with ivt delivery.
Many companies are investigating topical administration for eye indications.
Notably, Amber Ophthalmics has achieved success with their clinical
investigative drug, Nexagon (iufepirsen), an unmodified ASO formulated
into a gel. This ASO is targeted to
connexin-43 and is currently being used in phase 2 clinical trials
for the treatment of persistent corneal epithelial defect. 

## Challenges and Perspectives
We have provided a comprehensive
review delineating the progress
made in the design and delivery of oligonucleotides, and we have presented
examples from preclinical and clinical studies that exemplify the
therapeutic potential of these medicines. However, there remain challenges
in the field that must be addressed.

## Route of Administration for Oligonucleotides
While
systemic administration is employed for hepatic indications, local
administration is often the preferred route for delivery of oligonucleotides
to other tissues. In this context, conjugation of siRNA to target
ligands appears to be a commonly applied approach for the delivery
of siRNA. However, ASOs are single strand vs the duplex for siRNAs
(less overall charge), and the greater use of phosphorathioates makes
them more hydrophobic (and prone to protein-binding) than siRNAs;
both these features contribute to the cell permeability that ASOs
possess. Therefore ASOs, unlike siRNAs, do not have a strict requirement
for a ligand for cell permeability. The focus of future oligonucleotide
research is to target extrahepatic tissues via systemic administration
while minimizing biodistribution to clearance organs (liver and kidney)
and muscles. Single vs multiple dose regimens may also influence the
PK/PD response of oligonucleotides. Furthermore, oral delivery of
oligonucleotides remains a challenge since these molecules are sparingly
absorbed, and a recent study revealed that low intestinal permeability
is a major hurdle in the delivery of GalNAc–siRNA conjugates. Nonetheless, oral dosing may be beneficial
for GI indications such as Crohn’s disease. This would require
a complex enteric coating and an optimized formulation approach to
achieve oligonucleotide stability in the extreme acidic pH of the
stomach.

## Criteria for Selection of ASOs vs siRNA as a Therapeutic Modality
The choice of therapeutic oligonucleotide, siRNA or ASO, may be
an important consideration and may depend on where in the cell the
mRNA being targeted is located. ASO may be used for nuclear mRNA targets,
whereas siRNA may provide a more durable effect for cytoplasmic mRNA
targets. Further, the size of the targeted delivery vehicles (mAbs
(or their various formats) vs peptides) may play an important role
in modulating the PK properties and toxicology profile of oligonucleotide
conjugates following systemic administration.

## The Potential Role of Receptor Availability and Trafficking
for Delivering Oligonucleotides
Identifying high copy number
receptors with favorable intracellular trafficking is crucial for
achieving an optimal therapeutic index of oligonucleotides in extrahepatic
tissues. This approach enables the administration of more potent molecules
at significantly lower doses, thereby enhancing the overall likelihood
of reaching the optimal pharmacological dose in extrahepatic tissues.

## Bypassing the BBB for CNS Indications
Apart from the
liver, most preclinical and clinical efforts in the oligonucleotide
field are currently focused on delivering oligonucleotides systemically
to muscle or CNS tissues. However, targeted delivery will be key for
systemic coverage, especially for CNS indications, and we know that
the clinical success of nusinersen for spinal muscular atrophy required
IT (local) delivery to bypass the BBB. It will be a tour de
force in the CNS space to develop oligonucleotide therapeutics
that can be administered systemically while overcoming the BBB and
displaying favorable PK properties and efficacy. The TfR1 receptor
expressed on endothelial cells of the brain is mostly targeted to
systemically deliver oligonucleotides to the CNS. TfR1 receptors are
abundantly expressed on brain endothelial cells but are not found
on liver hepatocytes, and therefore, TfR1-oligo conjugates can circumvent
the first-pass metabolism effect.

## Influence of OAR and Receptor Affinity on the Therapeutic Potential
of AOCs
Ongoing clinical studies indicate that conjugating
oligonucleotides to antibodies (and their various formats) to create
AOCs enhances the targeted delivery of oligonucleotides to extrahepatic
tissues. In addition, an OAR of 1 for
AOCs appears to convey favorable PK properties and enhanced efficacy
in vivo. Higher OARs may result in decreased
PK, likely due to clearance through scavenger receptors expressed
on the liver. Optimization of the antibody format, site, linker, conjugation
chemistry, and receptor affinity will need to be carefully examined
to achieve a favorable therapeutic index for an AOC. Notably, in the
CNS space, a consensus is emerging that lower receptor affinity (nanomolar
range) may be advantageous to facilitate transcytosis of an AOC across
the BBB. AOCs can apply some learnings from the well-established field
of ADCs, with a few caveats. The main
difference between an AOC and a classic ADC is the physiochemical
property of the payload. An ADC generally contains a small-sized (<1
kDa) and hydrophobic payload whereas an AOC contains a larger sized
(>14 Kda) and highly polar payload. Therefore, the methods for
analytical
characterizations for an AOC would differ from those employed by an
ADC, and multiple orthogonal methods would need to be developed and
compared to obtain accurate OAR and AOC concentrations.

## Antibody Engineering Approaches to Diminish FcγR Effector
Function
Engineering of an antibody to generate Fc variants
that inhibit FcγR, but not FcRn, binding may be pursued to prevent
the induction of an unwarranted immune response. Selecting the right
IgG isotype may also be an important consideration in the design of
an AOC. The IgG4 isotype has a lower binding affinity to most FcγRs
compared to IgG1, resulting in a reduced likelihood of activating
immune responses. In addition, mAbs
can be deglycosylated or engineered (e.g., N297A mutation) to decrease
their affinity for FcγRs. Another
commonly applied engineering approach to silence the Fc effector function
is through the introduction of the LALA (L234A/L235A) mutation for
the IgG1 subclass. However, it is worth pointing out that these alterations
do not completely ablate the Fc effector function. In addition, it
is crucial for mAbs to retain FcRn binding since this interaction
sequesters the mAb in the acidic pH of endosomes, thereby preventing
catabolism of the antibody in the lysosomes. Subsequently, the antibody is recycled back to the surface of the
cell and into circulation, which ultimately results in an increase
in its half-life. To further increase
the PK property of mAbs, introduction of a triple substitution M252Y/S254T/T256E
(YTE) into the Fc region has been proposed to enhance the affinity
of mAbs for FcRn at pH 6.0. Taken together,
the aim of these antibody-engineering approaches for oligonucleotide
delivery is to attenuate the binding of mAb to FcγR without
adversely affecting FcRn binding.

## Improvements in Oligonucleotide Delivery via LNPs
Delivery
of oligonucleotides via LNPs also requires further refinement. Due
to the relatively large size of LNPs (>50 nm) and the lack of a
transcytosis
pathway for overcoming the endothelial barrier, the targeting sites
for LNPs are mainly constrained to the intravascular compartments
and lymphatic systems, extravascular compartments with leaky vascular
structures, or cells within the permeation range of LNPs that are
close to the administration site. , − Therefore, some extravasation and transcytosis mechanisms need to
be introduced to the LNP delivery system to broaden its application. − In addition, due to their physiochemical properties, LNPs tend to
be taken up by the liver, , meaning there is a
need for effective detargeting strategies. , , Detargeting is characterized
as the inhibition of LNP delivery to the liver, whereas retargeting
is defined as the furthering of LNP delivery to the desired extrahepatic
tissue. Some detargeting approaches that have shown success include
coating of nonfouling materials (to resist APOE binding) − or the addition of SORT molecules (to facilitate the binding of
LNPs to other serum proteins). , However, these technologies
have their own limitations since nonfouling materials may inhibit
endosomal escape , and SORT molecule composition
may need to be optimized across different species and populations
for appropriate serum protein binding. , Approaches
for the improvement of detargeting and retargeting may involve innovations
in lipid chemistry for lipid components in LNPs or LNP formulation,
or the engineering of appropriate protein corona on the LNP surface.
For retargeting strategies, engineered LNPs may be modified with various
targeted ligands (e.g., antibodies). Furthermore, various conjugation
chemistries can be optimized for both the detargeting and retargeting
of LNPs. Separately, lipids have also shown great promise as delivery
vehicles for oligonucleotides; however, lipid–oligonucleotide
conjugates display nonspecific targeting, and therefore, lipids are
better suited for local than systemic delivery.

## Identifying the Right Delivery Ligand for Oligonucleotides
In instances where the conjugated oligonucleotide is highly potent
but shows nontargeted biodistribution to peripheral tissues, a shorter
circulation time of the oligonucleotide conjugate may be advantageous
in reducing toxicity. Under such scenarios, peptides (or smaller antibody
formats) provide an advantage over bivalent antibodies as delivery
vehicles. Furthermore, cyclic CPPs exhibit greater protease stability
and thus may be favored over linear CPPs for the systemic delivery
of oligonucleotides to extrahepatic tissues. Lastly, identifying nontoxic
endosomal escape enhancers that, when conjugated to oligonucleotides,
specifically target oligonucleotide-containing endosomes may improve
the therapeutic index for oligonucleotides.

## Evaluating the Role of Oligonucleotides in Other Common Diseases
Other areas of investigation where oligonucleotides are gaining
traction is cancer, with several clinical trials ongoing; however, there is yet to be an approved oligonucleotide
therapy in this area. In addition, kidney indications, including acute
and chronic kidney diseases, are topics of research, where oligonucleotides
have yet to make their mark.

## Future Advances in Chemistry to Generate Best-in-Class Oligonucleotide
Therapeutics
Chemistry has largely played a critical role
over the past decade in the discovery of therapeutic oligonucleotides
for liver indications. Although numerous chemical modifications have
been incorporated into oligonucleotides, only a few of them have had
clinical success. Additional novel modifications will need to be introduced
to further advance the metabolic stability, safety, and efficacy of
oligonucleotides. As previously described, unmodified siRNA is labile
and can activate the immune responses. siRNA can be stabilized through
encapsulation into lipid nanoparticles (LNPs). Furthermore, extensive
chemical modifications of siRNA, such as enhanced stabilization chemistry
(ESC) and ESC+ designs, significantly enhance metabolic stability,
improve pharmacokinetic (PK) properties, and reduce off-target effects
mediated by the seed region. These examples illustrate how innovations
in chemistry have led to significant advancements in the field.
In this context, a very recent study reported a novel backbone modification
in siRNA, termed extended nucleic acid (exNA), which contained an
inserted methylene group. The presence
of exNA and PS modifications at the 3′ position of the antisense
strand did not interfere with RISC loading but, importantly, did enhance
resistance to in vivo 3′ exonuclease activity when compared
to the same siRNA-containing 3′ PS modification with no exNA
modification of the antisense strand. This study thus provides another
example of how new chemical approaches can enhance the stability of
oligonucleotides.
In conclusion, we believe that future progress
in the oligonucleotide
field will be led by continued advances in innovative chemical designs
and delivery platforms, in combination with novel administration routes
and optimized dose regimens, which will bring to fruition the expansion
of targeting oligonucleotides to extrahepatic tissues.

## Acknowledgments
The authors
acknowledge Christos Kyratsous and Olivier Harari
for valuable feedback.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
2′-cEt2′-O-(2-methoxyethyl)
ethyl
2′F2′-fluoro
2′MOE2′O-methoxyethyl
2′OMe2′ O-methyl
AOCantibody–oligonucleotide
conjugate
ADCantibody–drug
conjugate
ASGPRasialoglycoprotein receptor
ATTRtransthyretin-mediated
BTCbicycle–toxin conjugate
CPPcell penetrating peptide
DCAdocosanoic acid
DHAdocosahexaenoic acid
di-siRNAdivalent small
interfering RNA
DM1type 1 myotonic dystrophy
DMDDuchenne muscular dystrophy
DSPCdistearoylphosphatidylcholine
EDOenhanced delivery oligonucleotide
exNAextended nucleic
acid
FSHDfascioscapulohumeral
muscular dystrophy
GalNAcN-acetylgalactosamine
GNAglycol nucleic acid
HoFHhomozygous familial hypercholesterolemia
HPRThypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase
icvintracerebroventricular
ivtintravitreal
JAK1Janus kinase 1
LDLRlow-density lipoprotein receptor
LNAlocked nucleic acid
LNPlipid nanoparticle
mAbmonoclonal antibody
MBNLmuscle blind-like
protein
MsPAmesyl-phosphoramidate
NATnucleic acid therapeutic
NHPnonhuman primate
NPnanoparticle
OARoligonucleotide-to-antibody
ratio
OTVoligonucleotide
transport vehicle
PCphosphatidyl choline
PCSK9proprotein convertase subtilsin/kexin type 9
PMOphosphorodiamidate morpholino
oligonucleotide
PNphosphoramidate
POphosphodiester
PSphosphorothioate
RAGEreceptor for advanced glycation end products
RISCRNA-induced silencing complex
siRNAsmall interfering
RNA
RNaseribonuclease
Rpright-handed
SORTselective organ targeting
Spleft-handed
sRAGEsoluble RAGE
TfRtransferrin receptor
TMOthiomorpholino oligonucleotide
TRiMtargeted RNA interference
molecule
TTRtransthyretin
VPvinyl phosphonate

## Biographies
Puneet Anand obtained his PhD
in Biochemistry from Duke University,
followed by postdoctoral studies at Case Western Reserve University.
He is currently working as a Senior Principal Scientist at Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals and his research is focused on the targeted delivery
of oligonucleotides to extrahepatic tissues for various therapeutics
areas, including the CNS, skeletal muscle, and the ocular and pulmonary
systems.

Yu Zhang is a Principal Scientist
at Regeneron Pharmaceuticals.
He holds a PhD in Polymer Chemistry from the University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences. Following his postdoctoral training at Cornell
University, he now focuses on developing ligand-conjugated lipid nanoparticles
and oligonucleotides for the extrahepatic delivery of genetic medicines.

Spoorthi Patil is an undergraduate student
at Cornell University
College of Engineering pursuing a degree in Biomedical Engineering
with a concentration in Biomaterials and Drug Delivery. She is a co-op
at Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and is working to develop conjugated
lipid nanoparticles and oligonucleotides for extrahepatic delivery.

Keerat Kaur earned her PhD in Physiology
from New York Medical
College, and completed her postdoctoral research at Mount Sinai, specializing
in mRNA technology for cardiac reprogramming. She is now a Principal
Scientist at Regeneron, where she focuses on utilizing mRNA platform
for gene editing and gene therapy.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Due to a production
error, the version
of this paper that was published ASAP January 8, 2025, contained errors
in Figures 2 and 3. The corrected version was reposted January 9,
2025.

## References