pmcACS NanoACS Nano822acssd101313589nnACS Nano1936-08511936-086Xpmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC11238595PMC11238595.111238595112385953893262410.1021/acsnano.4c019831ArticleBottlebrush Polyethylene
Glycol Nanocarriers Translocate
across Human Airway Epithelium via Molecular Architecture-Enhanced
Endocytosis
HeZhi-Jian HuangBaiqiang https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6806-0566CaiLi-Heng †Soft
Biomatter Laboratory, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22904, United States‡Department
of Biomedical Engineering, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22904, United States§Department
of Chemical Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22904, United States*Email: liheng.cai@virginia.edu.270620240907202418274665881758617599080220241706202416062024110720241207202412072024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2024The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Bottlebrush polyethylene glycol nanocarriers translocate across human airway epithelium via molecular architecture enhanced endocytosis

16220242024.02.15.580508bioRxiv10.1101/2024.02.15.580508PMC1088875038405944 
Pulmonary drug delivery is critical for the treatment
of respiratory
diseases. However, the human airway surface presents multiple barriers
to efficient drug delivery. Here, we report a bottlebrush poly(ethylene
glycol) (PEG-BB) nanocarrier that can translocate across all barriers
within the human airway surface. Guided by a molecular theory, we
design a PEG-BB molecule consisting of a linear backbone densely grafted
by many (∼1000) low molecular weight (∼1000 g/mol) polyethylene
glycol (PEG) chains; this results in a highly anisotropic, wormlike
nanocarrier featuring a contour length of ∼250 nm, a cross-section
of ∼20 nm, and a hydrodynamic diameter of ∼40 nm. Using
the classic air–liquid-interface culture system to recapitulate
essential biological features of the human airway surface, we show
that PEG-BB rapidly penetrates through endogenous airway mucus and
periciliary brush layer (mesh size of 20–40 nm) to be internalized
by cells across the whole epithelium. By quantifying the cellular
uptake of polymeric carriers of various molecular architectures and
manipulating cell proliferation and endocytosis pathways, we show
that the translocation of PEG-BB across the epithelium is driven by
bottlebrush architecture-enhanced endocytosis. Our results demonstrate
that large, wormlike bottlebrush PEG polymers, if properly designed,
can be used as a carrier for pulmonary and mucosal drug delivery.

polyethylene glycolbottlebrushdrug deliveryhuman airwaymucusendocytosisDivision of Materials Research10.13039/100000078DMR-1944625Commonwealth Health Research Board10.13039/100013759NAUniversity of Virginia10.13039/100008457NAJuvenile Diabetes Research Foundation International10.13039/1000009011-INO-2022-1114-A-NDivision of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems10.13039/100000146CBET-2306012pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9nn4c01983document-id-new-14nn4c01983ccc-price1

## Main Text
Pulmonary drug delivery is critical
in the treatment of respiratory diseases, such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and pulmonary fibrosis. , However,
the human airway surface has a multiple-layer structure − that presents multiscale barriers to efficient and localized drug
delivery. Lining the airway surface is mucus, a viscoelastic, and
sticky hydrogel that traps essentially any inhaled particulates and
pathogens. − The mucus is further separated from the epithelium
by a periciliary layer, which provides a favorable environment for
cilia beating and cell surface lubrication ( A). Together with trapped objects, the mucus
hydrogel is transported out of the lung by coordinated cilia beating.
While essential to maintaining respiratory health, this mucociliary
clearance also prevents the retention of drugs within the airway. , Furthermore, the epithelial cells are connected by cell junctions
such as tight junctions and multiprotein complexes that seal intercellular
spaces between adjacent epithelial cells to prevent leakage of solutes
and water. This integrated epithelial barrier also prevents drug carriers
from traversing and reaching the underlying cells. − Thus, efficient
pulmonary drug delivery requires carriers that can quickly penetrate
mucus faster than its turnover rate, sneak through the periciliary
layer, and then be internalized and retained within epithelial cells.
 Recent advances in drug delivery have demonstrated
that coating
submicrometer latex particles with bioinert polymers such as polyethylene
glycol (PEG) promotes particle penetration through mucus. − However, as demonstrated by our previous work , , and others, , , − the mucus hydrogel is highly heterogeneous with a
wide distribution in the network mesh size from tens to hundreds of
nanometers; thus, the PEGylated solid particles can still be physically
trapped by local small meshes. Decreasing the particle size to ∼100
nm or less helps circumvent the physical confinement. However, such
small nanoparticles have a large surface curvature that inevitably
causes unreliable coating, such that the particles adhere to mucus
through nonspecific biochemical binding, a phenomenon commonly known as mucoadhesion. In addition, we recently discovered that the periciliary
layer is not simply filled with low-viscosity physiological liquid;
instead, it is gel-like with transmembrane mucins densely grafted
to cilia and the cell surface, forming a brush-like gel with a mesh
size of 20–40 nm ( B). This periciliary brush
gel serves as a protective layer additional to mucus to prevent external
objects from reaching the cell surface. It is highly desired to develop
a delivery system that sneaks through not only the physical and biochemical
barriers of mucus but also the tight periciliary brush gel to be efficiently
internalized by epithelial cells.
Here, we report a wormlike
PEG-based polymeric nanocarrier that
can rapidly translocate across all barriers within the human airway
surface. Guided by the molecular theory for the structure of bottlebrush
polymers in a good solvent, we design and synthesize a nanocarrier
consisting of a long linear backbone densely grafted by many (∼1000)
low MW PEG side chains (∼1000 g/mol). This results in a bottlebrush
PEG (PEG-BB) macromolecule featuring a contour length of ∼250
nm, a cross-section of ∼20 nm, and a hydrodynamic diameter
of ∼40 nm. Using the classic human bronchial epithelial cell
(HBEC) culture as a model system, we show that PEG-BB can rapidly
penetrate through endogenous airway mucus and the periciliary brush
layer to be internalized by epithelial cells across the whole epithelium.
By quantifying the cellular uptake of polymeric carriers of various
molecular architectures and manipulating cell proliferation and endocytosis
pathways, we show that translocation of PEG-BB across the epithelium
is driven by bottlebrush architecture-enhanced endocytosis. Our results
demonstrate that large, wormlike PEG-BB polymers, if properly designed,
can be used as carriers for pulmonary and mucosal drug delivery.

2

## Results and Discussion
2.1

## Design and Synthesis of PEG-Based Nanocarriers
with Different Molecular Architectures
The design of our
nanocarrier is inspired by the molecular structure of mucins, a bottlebrush
biopolymer featuring a large polypeptide backbone that is heavily
glycosylated with many sugar chains. − We seek to design a
mucin-like PEG-based polymer, which consists of a long linear backbone
densely grafted by many relatively short PEG side chains. Because
the side chains highly overlap with each other, the only way for them
to avoid molecular crowding is to extend radially away from the backbone,
forming a wormlike bottlebrush structure, as illustrated in C and S1. We hypothesize that the grafting density
of PEG side chains can be precisely controlled to enable a nonsticky
carrier, whereas the flexibility and wormlike geometry of the bottlebrush
carrier allow it to sneak through the tight mesh of mucus and periciliary
gels to be internalized by epithelial cells.
To test this hypothesis,
we design a PEG-BB nanocarrier with a precisely controlled molecular
architecture, denoted by three parameters, [nsc, s, Msc], where nsc is the number of PEG side chains, s is the molar ratio of spacer monomers to the side chains,
and Msc is the MW of the PEG side chain
( C). To guide
the design, we develop a scaling theory for the molecular structure
of a bottlebrush polymer in a good solvent (Supporting Information Text). Within a bottlebrush polymer, the size of
the side chain is (eq S6) 1where b and M0 are, respectively, the length and mass of a Kuhn segment
of the side chain, and l is distance between two
neighboring grafting sites. Note that the side chain size not only
increases with grafting density 1/l but also scales
with polymer MW by a power of 3/4, higher than 3/5 for an unperturbed
linear chain in a good solvent. 
Analogous to “sausage versus spaghetti”, the bottlebrush
polymer is essentially a wormlike “fat” linear polymer. − The cross-section, or effective monomer size, of the wormlike bottlebrush
is about twice the side chain size, be ≈ 2Rsc. The radius of gyration Rg of the “fat” linear polymer
is proportional to the self-avoiding random walk of the effective
monomers by a factor of α (eq S7) 2where α = 0.4 for a linear polymer in
a good solvent and Lmax = nscl is the contour length of the bottlebrush backbone.
In our
experiments, we use methacrylate-terminated PEG with Msc = 950 g/mol as the side chain. This MW is
nearly the same as that used for mucus-penetrating PEGylated nanoparticles. We use 2-methoxyethyl acrylate (MEA) as the
spacer monomer, as MEA is chemically similar to PEG but has a much
lower MW of 130 g/mol so that it does not alter the chemical nature
of the PEG carrier and only reduces the grafting density of PEG side
chains. Furthermore, we use fluorescein o-acrylate
as the fluorescent probe and fix its fraction at 1% to ensure relatively
bright fluorescence.
Using reversible addition–fragmentation
chain transfer radical
polymerization (RAFT), a living polymerization
technique widely used for controlled polymer synthesis, we copolymerize
the side chain, spacer monomer, and fluorescent probe at prescribed
ratios to create fluorescent PEG-based nanocarriers ( C). The PEG-BB consists of
990 side chains but no spacers, [990, 0, 950], as illustrated by the
upper panel of D. Successful synthesis is confirmed by proton nuclear magnetic resonance
(1H NMR) spectroscopy (Figures S2 and S3) and gel permeation chromatography (GPC) (solid blue line, E). The linear grafting
density of PEG side chains is very high, with four side chains per
nanometer, or l = 0.254 nm. Considering that for
PEG in water, b = 0.8 nm and M0 = 44 g/mol, − the cross-section of the PEG-BB, be ≈ 2Rsc ≈20
nm ( ); this value
is comparable to the lower limit of the mesh size of the periciliary
brush layer. By contrast, PEG-BB has a contour length Lmax ≈ 250 nm and Rg ≈ 36 nm ( ), comparable to the upper limit of the periciliary brush mesh size.
The predicted Rg is comparable to the
experimentally measured hydrodynamic diameter of PEG-BB, dh = 37 nm, as shown by the dynamic light scattering (DLS)
profile in F (Supporting Information Text). Moreover,
the predicted PEG-BB morphology is consistent with cryogenic transmission
electron microscopy (cryo-TEM) characterization, which reveals that
the two-dimensional (2D) projection of a PEG-BB has a cross-section
of 14.4 ± 2.7 nm and a contour length of approximately 240 nm
( G and S5). Furthermore, we verify that the size of
PEG-BB is nearly independent of temperature within the range between
20 and 45 °C ( H). Because the PEG-BB has a radius of gyration that is large
enough to be excluded from the periciliary brush, yet it has a cross-section
smaller than the average mesh size of the periciliary brush gel, this
polymer allows us to test whether the wormlike geometry enables the
translocation of the PEG-BB across the human airway surface barriers.

2.2

## Bottlebrush Architecture Enables Rapid Translocation
of PEG-Based Nanocarriers Across Human Airway Surface Barriers
We use the classic air–liquid-interface (ALI) culture system
to model human airway surface barriers. In the ALI system, HBECs are cultured on a porous plastic membrane,
through which nutrients are transported from the cell culture medium
on the basal side, whereas on the apical side, cells are in contact
with air. After approximately 4 weeks,
primary HBECs, or human airway epithelial basal cells, differentiate
into ciliated cells and goblet cells, forming a pseudostratified columnar
epithelium that recapitulates essential biological features of the
human airway epithelium. − Specifically, the pseudostratified airway epithelium
consists of three layers: (i) an intact endogenous mucus hydrogel
layer, (ii) a periciliary layer that separates the mucus hydrogel
from the epithelial cells, and (iii) a layer of epithelial cells connected
by cell junctions ( A). 
 We start with exploring the uptake of PEG-BB molecules
by HBECs
from the apical side, where both the mucus hydrogel and the periciliary
brush are present to serve as barriers to the delivery of drugs via
inhalation. Based on our previous study, , for well-differentiated HBEC cultures, we allow the mucus to accumulate
for 2 weeks, at which time point the mucus reaches a concentration
of ∼14% (solids) and a height of ∼15 μm; this
corresponds to approximately 1.5 μL mucus per well. To each
well, we add 10 μL of 1 mg/mL PEG-BB from the apical side so
that the final mucus concentration is approximately 2% (solids), comparable
to that of healthy mucus. We incubate the culture for about 1 min
and wash off any remaining PEG-BB using prewarmed DPBS, as illustrated
by A. Using
fluorescence confocal microscopy, we then immediately image the profile
of PEG-BB across the whole epithelial layer. Within such a short period
of incubation, HBECs at the apical focal plane exhibit pronounced
fluorescence [ B(i)], indicating rapid uptake of PEG-BB by HBECs. These results
suggest that PEG-BB molecules can easily penetrate through the mucus
and periciliary gels to be internalized by HBECs.
Interestingly,
for the cells that contain PEG-BB molecules, the
distribution of PEG-BB molecules within individual cells dramatically
changes with the depth of the epithelial layer. At the apical focal
plane, PEG-BB molecules spread the cross-area of the whole cell, as
reflected by the nearly homogeneous fluorescence bounded within the
contour of the cell cross-section [dashed line, B(i)]. However, as the focal plane moves
from the apical to the basal side, the fluorescence area within individual
cells dramatically decreases, as shown in B and Movie S1. This is likely because the incubation time of ∼1 min is
too short for PEG-BB molecules to reach the basal side of the epithelial
layer.
To determine the time scale required for PEG-BB molecules
to be
homogenized within the epithelial layer, we characterized the distribution
of PEG-BB fluorescence within the epithelial layer after different
incubation times. After 1 h of incubation, cells at the apical and
middle focal planes demonstrate comparable levels of PEG-BB fluorescence
fraction with values of 36 ± 6% and 35 ± 4%, respectively
(Figure S6). By contrast, at the basal
focal plane, the PEG-fluorescence fraction is significantly lower
at 22 ± 2%. Yet, this value is dramatically higher than that
at ∼1 min incubation time (6 ± 2%). At longer incubation
periods of 6 h and overnight, the PEG-BB fluorescence fraction becomes
uniform across the whole epithelial layer with a value of ∼35%
(Figure S6). These results suggest that
it takes approximately 1 h for PEG-BB to be homogenized within the
airway epithelium.
To explore the cellular uptake over longer
durations, after adding
PEG-BB to the apical side, we incubated HBECs overnight and then imaged
the distribution of PEG-BB molecules without washing off mucus ( C). We find that
the fluorescence of PEG-BB is heterogeneously present within cells
on the apical focal plane, as shown in D. To further explore the distribution of
PEG-BB across the epithelial layer, we added 70 kDa Texas Red dextran
to the apical side. As established in our previous study, these molecules penetrate the periciliary layer
but cannot cross the epithelial layer, allowing us to delineate the
boundary of the epithelial surface, as confirmed by a red fluorescence
layer in the middle panel of E. Within the periciliary layer, cilia exhibit green
fluorescence, suggesting that PEG-BB molecules can accumulate within
and fluorescently label the cilia ( E). Within the epithelial layer, PEG-BB molecules
are nearly homogeneously distributed, as shown by the bright green
fluorescence across the whole epithelium ( F). By dissociating the pseudostratified
epithelium into individual cells, we confirm that PEG-BB molecules
are internalized by HBECs; however, PEG-BB molecules are not present
in the nucleus and are present only in the cytoplasm ( G, Movie S2). Further, the side view of the epithelial layer reveals
that PEG-BB is within epithelial cells from the apical to basal sides
(Movie S3). These results demonstrate the
cellular uptake of PEG-BB molecules and their ability to penetrate
through the whole epithelial layer from the apical side.
Next,
we explore the uptake of PEG-BB from the basal side of the
airway epithelium, a process critical to the uptake of intravenously
administered drugs. We add PEG-BB molecules to the culture medium
on the basal side to reach a concentration of 100 μg/mL, incubate
the HBEC culture overnight, and change the medium to remove any free
PEG-BB ( A).
We find that the cells at the apical focal plane exhibit bright fluorescence
( B). Moreover,
PEG-BB molecules are present within the whole epithelial layer ( C). Interestingly,
compared to the uptake from the apical side, for the uptake from the
basal side, although PEG-BB molecules are less abundant within the
epithelial cells, they accumulate within the cilia ( C). This accumulation is further
supported by the observation that cilia are also visible due to the
presence of PEG-BB ( D). Nevertheless, these results demonstrate the uptake of
PEG-BB by HBECs from the basal side to the apical side.
 To determine whether the uptake of PEG-BB molecules
is because
of their bottlebrush molecular architecture, we synthesize a loosely
grafted PEG (PEG-LG) polymer with two neighboring PEG macromonomers
separated by five spacer monomers on average [(750, 5, 990)], as illustrated
by the lower panel of D and confirmed by 1H NMR (Figure S4) and GPC (dashed line, F). The number of side chains (nsc = 750) is less than that of PEG-BB (nsc = 990) to compensate for the contribution of MW by
the spacer. Despite the fact that the contour length of PEG-LG (∼1000
nm) is nearly four times that of PEG-BB, the grafting density is relatively
low at 0.65 nm–1, so that the side chains are far
apart enough not to experience molecular crowding. As a result, the
conformation of PEG-LG is coil-like with a hydrodynamic diameter of
31 nm, comparable to that of PEG-BB (dashed red line, E, Supporting Information Text). Similar to PEG-BB, the size of PEG-LG is
nearly independent of temperature (dashed red line in F). Following the same protocol
for studying cellular uptake of PEG-BB, we quantify the uptake of
PEG-LG by HBECs from the apical side and find that the PEG-LG fluorescence
on the apical focal plane is notably reduced ( E). Profiling the penetration of PEG-LG across
the whole epithelial layer further confirms the minimum uptake of
PEG-LG molecules, as shown by the negligible green fluorescence within
the epithelial cells in F.
To quantitatively compare the uptake of PEG-BB and
PEG-LG by HBECs,
we introduce the fluorescence fraction, a parameter that is defined
as the PEG fluorescence area divided by the total cell area, which
is equal to the image area as the cells are confluent. For the immediate
uptake of PEG-BB within ∼1 min from the apical side, the fluorescence
fraction decreases from 48 ± 11% to 6 ± 2% as the focal
plane moves from the apical to the basal side (light red bars, G). For overnight
uptake, regardless of whether PEG-BB molecules are added from the
apical side or the basal side, there is no significant difference
in fluorescence fraction at the apical focal plane (blue bars, G). However, changing
the molecular architecture from PEG-BB to PEG-LG results in a significant
reduction of fluorescence fraction from 32 ± 5% to 3 ± 1%
( G). These
results demonstrate that the bottlebrush architecture significantly
enhances the uptake of PEG-based carriers by the HBECs.

2.3

## Retention of PEG-BB Molecules within Cells
To explore the retention of PEG-BB molecules within cells, we quantify
the cellular uptake of PEG-BB by single NIH-3T3 fibroblasts, a widely
used cell line that allows for easy fluorescence staining and the
manipulation of biological pathways. We add PEG-BB into the culture
medium to reach a concentration of 100 μg/mL, incubate NIH-3T3
cells overnight, and replace the medium to wash off any free PEG-BB
molecules. Simultaneously, we used Hoechst 33342 to stain the genomic
DNA, or nuclei, of the cells. On Day 1, we find that all NIH-3T3 fibroblasts
are fluorescent regardless of variations in the area and intensity
of fluorescence among individual cells ( A). However, the number of fluorescent NIH-3T3
fibroblasts dramatically decreases as the culture time increases from
Day 1 to Day 3, as visualized by the fluorescence images in A. To quantify the
number of fluorescent cells, we introduce fluorescent cell fraction Fc, a parameter that is defined as the ratio
of the number of fluorescent cells to the total cell count. Specifically,
cells with any fluorescence regardless of the fluorescence area or
intensity are counted. As the culturing time increases from Day 1
to 3, the value of Fc decreases nearly
linearly from 100% to 51 ± 4%, as shown by the green squares
in C. These
results show the uptake of PEG-BB across the cell membrane but that
the retention of PEG-BB within the cells decays with time.
 To determine the role of cell proliferation in
the reduction of
PEG-BB fluorescence, we use colchicine to inhibit cell proliferation.
Because colchicine inhibits mitosis by disrupting tubulin polymerization, colchicine is cytotoxic and can be lethal to
cells at a high dose. To maintain cell
viability while inhibiting mitosis, we use colchicine at a concentration
of 20 ng/mL to treat NIH-3T3 fibroblasts
before adding PEG-BB. We use relative cell count, Cr, the cell count normalized to that of Day 1, to quantify
the proliferation of NIH-3T3 fibroblasts. Without the treatment of
colchicine, Cr doubles on Day 2 and triples
on Day 3, as shown by the green squares in D. By contrast, with the treatment of colchicine, Cr remains constant at 1 across Days 1, 2, and
3, as shown by the orange circles in D. These results validate that colchicine
at the concentration of 20 ng/mL is adequate to inhibit mitosis without
compromising cell viability. With cell proliferation inhibited by
colchicine, all NIH-3T3 fibroblasts retain PEG-BB fluorescence across
3 days without a noticeable decrease in both fluorescence intensity
and area among individual cells, as shown by the fluorescence images
in B and orange
circles in C. These results indicate that the reduction of intracellular PEG-BB
is due to cell proliferation. This understanding is further supported
by the DAPI fluorescence of cell nuclei, which decreases progressively
without colchicine treatment ( A) but remains nearly constant after inhibition of
cell proliferation ( B).
To further explore the effects of cell proliferation
on the retention
of intracellular PEG-BB, we introduce the fluorescence index, which
is the product of the fluorescent cell fraction and relative cell
count: P = Fc × Cr. This parameter describes the total number
of cells with intracellular PEG-BB. As expected, after cell proliferation
is inhibited by colchicine, the value of P remains
constant across 3 days, as shown by the orange circles in E. By contrast, for
the cells that proliferate, the value of P increases
by nearly 1.5 times from Day 1 to Day 2; this suggests that PEG-BB
molecules are passed to daughter cells during proliferation. Interestingly,
at a longer incubation time on Day 3, despite an apparent decrease
in fluorescent intensity within individual cells (images within the
lower two rows in A), the value of P remains nearly the same
(squares, E).
To better understand the retention of PEG-BB within individual
cells, we quantify the variation in intracellular PEG-BB fluorescence
among different cells. To do so, we introduce the fluorescent area
fraction, Fa, which is defined as the
fluorescent area of a cell, Af, divided
by the cytoplasm area. The cytoplasm area is calculated by subtracting
the nuclear area, An, from the cell area, Ac, as illustrated by the inset in F. As cells proliferate, Fa not only significantly decreases but also
shows a higher extent of variation, as shown by the green violin plots
in F. Note
that compared to Day 2, the variation in Fa is lower on Day 3. This is likely because on Day 3 the maximal value
of Fa within individual cells is relatively
low so the range of Fa becomes smaller
compared to Day 2. Nonetheless, after inhibiting cell proliferation
by colchicine, not only there is no significant difference in Fa values but also the variation in Fa remains nearly the same across 3 days, as shown by the
orange violin plots in F. These results show that the decay of intracellular PEG-BB
fluorescence is due to cell proliferation and that PEG-BB molecules
remain intracellular for at least 3 days after inhibiting cell proliferation.
The retention of PEG-BB persists within well-differentiated HBECs.
During the first week post uptake, there is a negligible decrease
in PEG-BB fluorescence (Figure S7). This
behavior is confirmed by live cell imaging at 7 days (Movie S4). After 14 days, the PEG-BB fluorescence
decreases significantly by nearly 50%, indicating that the half-decay
time for cell clearance of PEG-BB is approximately 2 weeks. These
results highlight the potential of PEG-BB as a carrier for sustained
drug delivery.

2.4

## Cellular Uptake of PEG-BB Nanocarrier is Driven
by Bottlebrush Architecture-Enhanced Endocytosis
To further
explore the role of molecular architecture in the cellular uptake
of polymeric carriers, we quantify the uptake of FITC-labeled 2 MDa
dextran by NIH-3T3 fibroblasts. This dextran has a MW on the same
order as PEG-BB but is a randomly branched molecule, a molecular architecture
that is qualitatively different from the brush-like PEG-BB. After
overnight incubation with 100 μg/mL 2 MDa dextran in the culture
medium, we find no intracellular fluorescence among all NIH-3T3 fibroblasts
( A and S8A). Further decreasing the dextran MW to 70
kDa results in an unmeasurable increase in cellular uptake ( B and S8B); this suggests that the MW of dextran molecules
has a negligible effect on their uptake by NIH-3T3 fibroblasts. However,
dextran and PEG are of different chemical species, which are known
to affect the efficiency of cellular uptake. − To this end,
we quantify the uptake of PEG-LG, which has a comparable MW and a
hydrodynamic size to PEG-BB but with loosely grafted PEG side chains.
Despite that the intracellular PEG-LG fluorescence is slightly higher
than that of 70 kDa dextran, it is dramatically lower than that of
PEG-BB, as shown by the fluorescence images in C and S8C. Together
with the minimum uptake of PEG-LG by HBECs, these results confirm
that the bottlebrush architecture enables the efficient cellular uptake
of PEG-BB polymers.
 The size of PEG-BB is too large to cross the epithelium
by diffusion
through cell junctions, which typically necessitate very small molecules
of 2–4 nm or less. Alternatively,
endocytosis allows a wide range of substances with various sizes and
extents of hydrophobicity to traverse the cell membrane. Given that neither HBECs nor NIH-3T3 fibroblasts
are phagocytic cells, we focus on examining whether the cellular uptake
of PEG-BB is regulated by pinocytosis pathways. To explore this, we
treat cells with wortmannin, a nonspecific inhibitor often considered
for macropinocytosis which is an endocytosis pathway for nonspecific
internalization of large amounts of extracellular fluid. Upon treating NIH-3T3 fibroblasts with wortmannin,
nearly all PEG-BB fluorescence is extracellular, outlining the cell
contour, as visualized by the left panel in D and S9A. Following
the removal of free PEG-BB by replacing the medium, negligible fluorescence
is detected within NIH-3T3 fibroblasts (right panel in D and S9A). Yet, recent studies suggest that wortmannin can also
impair clathrin- and caveolin-mediated endocytosis. To identify the specific endocytosis pathways involved
in PEG-BB internalization, we treat NIH-3T3 fibroblasts with chlorpromazine
which is known to inhibit clathrin-mediated endocytosis but recently found to impede macropinocytosis. A minimal cellular uptake of PEG-BB is also
observed ( E and S9B). Finally, treating NIH-3T3
fibroblasts with nystatin, an inhibitor of caveolin-mediated endocytosis, effectively prevents the cellular uptake of
PEG-BB ( F
and S9C). These results suggest that the
internalization of PEG-BB by NIH-3T3 fibroblasts is likely mediated
by both macropinocytosis and caveolin-mediated endocytosis.
Based on the knowledge obtained for the uptake of PEG-BB by NIH-3T3
fibroblasts, we applied the three endocytosis inhibitors to well-differentiated
HBECs. As expected, all these three inhibitors significantly reduce
the cellular uptake of PEG-BB molecules added from both the apical
and the basal sides, as shown by the fluorescence images in G–I. Quantitatively,
for HBECs treated with inhibitors, the fluorescence area decreases
from 32 ± 5% to ∼3% and from 26 ± 6% to ∼3%
for PEG-BB added to the apical and the basal sides, respectively ( J). Yet, the endocytosis
pathways that dominate the cellular uptake of PEG-BB remain to be
elucidated, which is beyond the scope of this work and will be the
subject of future explorations. Nevertheless, our results collectively
show that the internalization of PEG-BB by cells is regulated by bottlebrush
architecture-enhanced endocytosis ( K).

3

## Conclusions
We have discovered that
bottlebrush PEG polymers, if properly designed,
can rapidly penetrate through the mucus gel and the periciliary layer
to translocate across the human airway epithelium via molecular architecture-enhanced
endocytosis. Our PEG-BB is highly anisotropic, featuring a contour
length of ∼250 nm, a cross-section of ∼20 nm, and a
hydrodynamic diameter of ∼40 nm. The design of PEG-BB draws
inspiration from the brushlike mucin biopolymers and mucus-penetrating
PEGylated nanoparticles. The size and shape of PEG-BB are based on
the mesh sizes of the mucus hydrogel (10–100 nm) and periciliary
brush layer (20–40 nm). By comparing the cellular uptake of
bottlebrush PEG against loosely grafted PEG with a comparable size
but lower grafting density, we show that a high grafting density is
critical to efficient cellular uptake. Further, we show that the cellular
uptake of PEG-BB is significantly higher than that of randomly branched
dextran molecules regardless of dextran MW. Manipulating the proliferation
of NIH-3T3 fibroblasts reveals that the retention of internalized
PEG-BB is determined by the cell proliferation rate. Finally, by inhibiting
endocytosis pathways, we show that the uptake of PEG-BB by fibroblasts
and well-differentiated HBECs is regulated by endocytosis.
Compared
with existing mucosal delivery systems, the developed
PEG-BB allows for controlled synthesis and precise design. For example,
the ability of the PEGylated nanoparticles to sneak through the sticky
mucus hydrogel requires a uniform distribution and high grafting density
of PEG chains. However, these two parameters are difficult to precisely
control because of the nature of the grafting process. Most PEGylated
nanoparticles are synthesized using a grafting-through approach, where
functional PEG chains are attached to the grafting sites on the surface
of the nanoparticle. At a relatively
high grafting density, the already highly grafted chains generate
steric hindrance to prevent access to the grafting sites. This difficulty is further exacerbated for small
nanoparticles (<100 nm) with a relatively high surface curvature. By contrast, PEG-BB is synthesized by polymerizing
PEG macromonomers with a prescribed MW (Msc). Within a PEG-BB molecule, the PEG side chains are evenly distributed
and have a precisely controlled grafting density [1/(s + 1)]. Moreover, the total MW of PEG-BB, or the number of side chains
(nsc), can be tuned in a wide range through
well-established living polymerization techniques, which can be scaled up through batch and continuous flow
processing. Thus, compared with the PEGylated
nanoparticles, the synthesis of PEG-BB is more controlled, enabling
prescribed molecular architecture parameters [nsc, s, Msc].
The molecular architecture parameters offer independent control
over the geometry and physical properties of the PEG-BB as a nanocarrier.
For instance, using longer side chains and/or increasing the grafting
density increases the cross-section of the bottlebrush, so that the
extent of anisotropy of PEG-BB can be tuned for targeted therapeutic
delivery. − An example is that using a small number (∼30) of relatively
long PEG chains (10,000 g/mol) results in a PEG carrier with a spherical
geometry, which has been demonstrated to enable efficient in vivo
delivery of nucleic acid therapeutics such as small interfering RNA and antisense oligonucleotides. , By contrast, in our studies, PEG-BB consists of many (∼1000)
relatively short PEG chains (1 kDa), exhibiting a highly antistrophic,
wormlike geometry. Compared to conventional rigid nanoparticles that
can be easily trapped within network meshes, − PEG-BB is a flexible, wormlike
nanocarrier, enabling rapid transport through gels and extracellular
matrices via reptation. Moreover, drugs
for specific diseases can be loaded onto and released by PEG-BB using
a chemical approach. For instance, multiple kinds of small molecule
drugs can be conjugated to side chain macromonomers via cleavable
linkers that activate to release drugs, offering strategies for improving
monotherapies and combination therapies for multiple myeloma. Further, conjugating therapeutic agents to one
end of the side chains rather than to the bottlebrush backbone avoids
changing the molecular architecture by reducing the grafting density
of side chains, which may impact the cellular uptake of PEG-BB. Considering
that PEG-BB molecules easily dissolve in water and can translocate
across human airway epithelium from both the apical and basal sides,
PEG-BB might be administered intravenously or as a dry powder inhaler
and through nebulization.
We note that at least two open questions
are worth future explorations.
First, in the human airway epithelium, what types of cells exhibit
the most abundant cellular uptake of PEG-BB? This question might be
answered using flow cytometry and is
critical for identifying respiratory diseases for which PEG-BB is
most suitable as a drug carrier. Second, our work is a proof-of-concept
study focusing on qualitatively different molecular architectures.
It has yet to be determined systematically the effects of all three
molecular architecture parameters ([nsc, s, Msc]) on the ability
of PEG-BB to cross various biological barriers. For instance, how
does the extent of anisotropy of the wormlike PEG-BB carrier impact
its cellular uptake? Why does bottlebrush architecture enable more
efficient uptake compared to that of branched dextran molecules or
loosely grafted PEG? Previous large-scale simulations correlate the
receptor-mediated endocytosis of PEGylated solid nanoparticles to
the structural and free energy changes of grafted PEG chains. It would be interesting to test whether this
approach can be extended to account for the effects of the molecular
architecture parameters. Nevertheless, together with prescribed molecular
design and synthesis, the ability to rapidly penetrate through mucus
to be internalized by epithelial cells may pose PEG-BB as a precision
nanocarrier for mucosal drug delivery. Finally, considering that PEG has been used
as one of the major polymers for biomaterials research , and that biophysical and biochemical properties can be encoded into
the molecular architecture, PEG-BB may provide a building block for
biomaterials design.

4

## Experimental Section
4.1

## Materials for Polymer Synthesis
Fluorescein o-acrylate (Flo, 95%), 2-methoxyethyl acrylate [MEA, 98%,
monomethyl ether hydroquinone (MEHQ) as inhibitor], and poly(ethylene
glycol) methyl ether methacrylate (MEMA-PEG, 950 g/mol, MEHQ as inhibitor)
are purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and purified by recrystallizing in
acetone to remove inhibitors. 2-(Dodecylthiocarbonothioylthio)-2-methylpropionic
acid (DDMAT, 98%), 2,2′-azobis(2-methylpropionitrile) (AIBN,
98%), and N,N-dimethylformamide
(DMF, ≥99.8%) are purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as
received.

4.2

## Synthesis of PEG-Based Carriers
4.2.1

## Densely Grafted Bottlebrush PEG (PEG-BB)
A 25 mL Schlenk flask is charged with MEMA-PEG (2.28g, 1 mmol,
1200 equiv), Flu (12 equiv), DDMAT (1 equiv), AIBN (0.2 equiv), and
6 mL of DMF. We degassed the mixture using three freeze–evacuate–thaw
cycles and then sealed the flask under nitrogen. We immersed the sealed
flask in a heated oil bath at 70 °C for 12 h and then stopped
the reaction by exposing the solution to air, at which time point
the conversion of the polymerization was 82.5%, as confirmed by 1H NMR (Figure S2). At this conversion,
the DP of PEG is 990, and the DP of Flo is about 10. The reaction
mixture is precipitated in ethyl ether three times to remove unreacted
monomers and other impurities. Using a dialysis tube with a MW cutoff
(MWCO) of 3.5 kDa, we further purified PEG-BB through dialysis against
water for 3 days. The solution is freeze-dried for 3 days to obtain
the final product, which is a light-yellow powder.

4.2.2

## Loosely Grafted PEG (PEG-LG)
A
25 mL Schlenk flask is charged with MEMA-PEG (2.14 g, 2.25 mmol, 750
equiv), MEA (1.85 g, 11.4 mmol, 3800 equiv), Flo (45.5 equiv), DDMAT(1
equiv), AIBN (0.2 equiv), and 10 mL of DMF. We degassed the mixture
through three freeze–evacuate–thaw cycles and then sealed
the flask under nitrogen. Then, we placed the sealed flask in a heated
oil bath (70 °C) for 12 h. The reaction is stopped by exposing
the solution to air, with the final DP of PEG being about 750. The
reaction mixture is precipitated in ethyl ether and dialysis against
water for 3 days using tubes with a pore size molar mass cutoff of
3.5 kDa. Then, we freeze-dried the solution under vacuum for 3 days
to get the final product. The final molar ratio between MEMA-PEG and
MEA is 1:5, as confirmed by 1H NMR (Figure S3).

4.3

## Characterization of PEG-Based Carriers
4.3.1

## 1H NMR Characterization
Proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1H NMR) spectroscopy
is performed using a Varian NMRS 600 MHz spectrometer. For all samples,
deuterated chloroform (CDCl3) is used as a solvent, except
for PEG-LG which is analyzed by using deuterated water.

4.3.2

## Gel Permeation Chromatography Characterization
Gel permeation chromatography (GPC) measurements are conducted
using a TOSOH EcoSEC HLC-8320 GPC system equipped with two TOSOH Bioscience
TSKgel GMHHR-M 5 μm columns in series. The GPC system includes
a refractive index detector and operates at a temperature of 40 °C.
High-performance liquid chromatography grade trifluoroacetic acid
(TFA) is used as the eluent, and it is delivered at a flow rate of
1 mL/min. The samples for analysis are prepared by dissolving them
in TFA at a concentration of approximately 5 mg/mL.

4.3.3

## Dynamic Light Scattering
Dynamic
light scattering (DLS) and ζ-potential measurements are performed
on a Malvern Zetasizer Ultra with a 4.0 mW laser (633 nm) at different
temperatures. Samples are dissolved in water with a concentration
of 0.2 mg/mL and filtered (0.45 μm, PTFE) before measurement.
Size measurements are performed in square DTS0012 cuvettes (Malvern)
in triplicate. For PEG-BB and PEG-LG, the ζ-potential values
are −8.8 and −2.0 mV, respectively.

4.3.4

## Cryogenic Transmission Electron Microscopy
We dissolved PEG-BB in water at a concentration of 1 mg/mL. Grids
for cryo-EM were prepared using a Vitrobot Mark IV instrument (FEI).
Specifically, 3 μL of solution was dispensed onto copper mesh
grids coated with a lacey carbon film, which were subsequently blotted
with Whatman #1 filter paper; this process forms a thin layer of solution
with uniform thickness. The blotted grids were vitrified by being
plunged into liquid ethane cooled by liquid nitrogen. The grids were
then transferred to liquid nitrogen, secured in cartridges with clip
rings, inserted into a grid carrier cassette, and loaded into a Glacios
TEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating at liquid nitrogen temperature.
Imaging was performed at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV between
−3 and −6 μm under focus to provide phase contrast.
Micrographs were recorded with a Falcon 4 direct electron detector
with Velox (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

4.4

## Human Bronchial Epithelial Cell Culture
Primary human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs) are obtained from
Marsico Lung Institute Tissue Procurement and Cell Culture Core at
the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, under protocol number
194 03-1396 approved by the UNC Biomedical Institutional Review Board.
For statistics, we use HBECs from 5 nonsmoker (NS) donors without
a history of chronic lung diseases (age/sex/race: 49/Female/Caucasian,
17/Male/Caucasian, 30/Female/Hispanic, 27/Female/Caucasian, and 22/Female/Caucasian).
For cell expansion, we cultured HBECs using PneumaCult-Ex Plus Medium
(STEMCELL Technologies, Cat. no. 05040). We passage HBECs using Accutase
Cell Detachment Solution (Innovative Cell Technologies, Cat. no. AT
104). For all experiments, we use passage 2 cells, beyond which HBECs
may lose their stemness. We seed HEBCs
on Transwell inserts (Corning, Cat. no. 3460) at a density of 4.2
× 104 cells/well and add PneumaCult-Ex Plus Medium
(STEMCELL Technologies, Cat. no. 05040) to both the basal and apical
chambers. After 5–7 days, HBECs reach more than 90% confluence.
We transition the cultures to ALI by removing the apical medium and
replacing PneumaCult-Ex Plus Medium with PneumaCult-ALI Medium (STEMCELL
Technologies, Cat. no. 05001). The medium is changed every other day.
After 2 weeks of ALI culture, mucus started to accumulate, and it
is washed three times per week. To wash off mucus, we add 500 μL
of DPBS (Gibco, Cat. no. 14-200-075) to each insert, incubate the
cell culture for 15 min, and aspirate the DPBS in the apical chamber.
The washing process is repeated three times. After 4 weeks of ALI
culture, HBECs are fully differentiated. Based on our previous study, , we allow the mucus to accumulate for approximately 2 weeks without
washing, where it reaches a concentration of ∼14% solids with
a height of ∼15 μm.

4.5

## Measurement of the Translocation of PEG-Based
Carriers across the Airway Epithelial Layer
To measure the
uptake of PEG-BB from the apical side, we add 10 μL of 1 mg/mL
PEG-BB to the apical side of each HBEC culture, incubate the culture
for about 1 min, and then rinse the culture with prewarmed DPBS to
wash off any remaining PEG-BB. We use fluorescence confocal microscopy
(Leica, SP8) to quantify the uptake of fluorescent PEG-BB. The confocal
microscope is equipped with an environmental chamber, which has a
controlled temperature at 37 °C, CO2 at 5%, and humidified
air at 2 L/h, to allow for long-time live-cell imaging. For fluorescein,
a 512 nm laser is used for excitation, and a bandwidth of 500–600
nm is used for emission. Using Z-stack scanning, we image the full
thickness of the cell body of the airway epithelium at a step size
of 1.12 μm with a total of 15 frames. The periciliary layer
is about 7 μm6. Therefore, the whole airway epithelium
is around 23 μm thick, consistent with the literature value. 
To explore the cellular uptake over longer
durations, we add 10 μL of 1 mg/mL PEG-BB to the apical side
and incubate HBECs overnight. Imaging is performed to show the distribution
of PEG-BB molecules without washing off mucus. After performing initial
confocal microscopy with intact mucus, we add 10 μL of 100 μg/mL
70 kDa Texas Red dextran (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. no. D1830)
solution to the apical side and wait for about 1–2 h. The 70
kDa dextran molecules penetrate the periciliary layer but cannot cross
the epithelial layer, allowing us to delineate the boundary of the
epithelial surface. We use confocal microscopy
to image the full profile of the culture using the XZ scanning mode and to image the fluorescence of the cells at the
apical focal plane using the XY scanning mode.
To explore the uptake of PEG-BB from the basal side of the airway
epithelium, we add PEG-BB molecules to the culture medium in the basal
chamber to reach a concentration of 100 μg/mL, incubate the
HBEC culture overnight, and change the medium on the next day to remove
any free PEG-BB. We use confocal microscopy to capture fluorescence
at the apical focal plane.
To determine the effect of molecular
architecture on the uptake
of PEG, we studied the absorption of loosely grafted PEG (PEG-LG)
by HBECs from the apical side. We add 10 μL of 1 mg/mL PEG-LG
to the apical side of HBECs for overnight incubation. Imaging is performed
to show the distribution of PEG-LG molecules without washing off mucus.
A similar procedure is used to label the periciliary layer followed
by confocal imaging.

4.6

## Imaging of PEG-BB in HBEC Cytoplasm
We detach differentiated airway epithelial cells from the Transwell
membrane by incubating HBECs with 1 mL of accutase cell detachment
solution per well for 15 min at 37 °C. We add 200 μL of
PneumaCult-ALI Medium to a rectangle coverslip and use a 1000 μL
pipet tip to scrape a full thickness of airway epithelium into the
medium. Another rectangle coverslip is used to cover the medium containing
the airway epithelial sample. Afterward, the sample is mounted onto
a 63 × oil objective (NA 1.4) with preapplied lens oil for confocal
microscopy. For fluorescein, a 512 nm laser is used for excitation,
and a bandwidth of 500–600 nm is used for emission.

4.7

## NIH-3T3 Cell Culture, Imaging of PEG-BB Fluorescence,
and Mitosis Inhibition by Colchicine
For the culture of NIH-3T3
cells, we use Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium (Corning, Cat.
no. 10-013-CV) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (Life Technologies
Corporation, Cat. no. A3160401). The medium is changed every other
day. We passaged cells using Accutase Cell Detachment Solution (Innovative
Cell Technologies, AT 104).
To study the internalization of
PEG-BB by NIH-3T3 fibroblasts, we add PEG-BB to the culture medium
to reach a concentration of 100 μg/mL and incubate the cells
overnight. On the next day, the culture medium is replaced with the
fresh medium to wash off any free PEG-BB. After washing, we stain
cell nuclei by adding Hoechst 33342 (Thermo Fischer Scientific, 62249)
to medium at a concentration of 20 μg/mL and incubate NIH-3T3
fibroblasts for 5 min at 37 °C, followed by rinsing the cells
twice with DPBS to wash away the remaining Hoechst 33342 molecules.
Confocal microscopy is performed to image intracellular PEG-BB fluorescence.
To inhibit mitosis without impairing the viability of NIH-3T3 fibroblasts,
we choose 20 ng/mL colchicine (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. no.
227120010) to treat NIH-3T3 fibroblasts for 30 min at 37 °C before
treatment with PEG-BB. We use the same
protocols as above to incubate NIH-3T3 fibroblasts with PEG-BB, stain
nuclei, and image intracellular PEG-BB fluorescence.
For each
NIH-3T3 culture, we use a 10 × dry objective to image
a region of interest (ROI) with a dimension of 381.5 × 381.5
μm2. The sequential scanning mode is used to avoid
the overlap of fluorescence. For fluorescein, a 512 nm laser is used
for excitation, and a bandwidth of 500–600 nm is used for emission.
For Hoechst 33342, a UV laser of 405 nm is used for excitation, and
a bandwidth of 400–500 nm is used for emission.

4.8

## Measurement of the Cell Number, Fluorescent
Cell Fraction, Fluorescence Index, and Fluorescent Area Fraction
We count the cell number based on the number of nuclei stained
by Hoechst 33342. We use relative cell count (Cr), defined as the ratio of cell counts normalized to the initial
cell number on Day 1, to present the cell number on each day.
Fluorescent cell fraction (Fc) is defined
as the ratio of fluorescent cells to the total cell count. Regardless
of the size or intensity of the fluorescence, cells with any fluorescence
are counted. For each condition, 5 parallel wells of cell culture
are used for statistical analysis. Fluorescence index (P) is defined as P = Fc × Cr.
Fluorescent area fraction
(Fa) is derived
by the fluorescent area (Af) divided by
the cytoplasm area. The cytoplasm area is the cell area (Ac) minus the nuclear area (An). For each condition and time point, 100 cells are randomly chosen
for statistical analysis.

4.9

## Uptake of PEG-BB, 2 MDa Dextran, 70 kDa Dextran,
and PEG-LG by NIH-3T3 Fibroblast Cells
PEG-BB, 2 MDa FITC
dextran (Millipore Sigma, Cat. no. FD2000S), 70 kDa FITC dextran (Millipore
Sigma, Cat. no. FD2000S. no. FD70), and PEG-LG are added to the culture
medium to reach the same concentration of 100 μg/mL to incubate
with NIH-3T3 cells overnight. After incubation, we used 20 μg/mL
Hoechst 33342 to incubate NIH-3T3 cells for 5 min at 37 °C to
stain the cell nuclei and then DPBS to rinse the culture twice. After
rinsing, the same amount of 2 MDa FITC dextran, 70 kDa FITC dextran,
and PEG-LG are readded for prewashing imaging using confocal microscopy.
Washing with prewarmed medium is performed twice, followed by postwashing
imaging using confocal microscopy.

4.10

## Effects of Endocytosis Inhibitors on the
Uptake of PEG-BB by NIH-3T3 Fibroblasts and HBECs
We added
5 μg/mL chlorpromazine (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. no. J63659),
5 μg/mL nystatin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. no. BP29495),
and 0.1 μg/mL wortmannin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. no.
W0007) to the culture medium to incubate NIH-3T3 fibroblasts and HBECs
for 4 h at 37 °C to inhibit endocytosis. After inhibiting endocytosis,
we studied the cellular uptake of PEG-BB by NIH-3T3 fibroblasts and
HBECs using the same protocols described above.
To study how
inhibition of endocytosis affects PEG-BB uptake by NIH-3T3 cells,
we added 100 mg/mL PEG-BB to the culture medium and incubated cells
overnight. On the next day, we stain cell nuclei by adding Hoechst
33342 to the culture medium at a concentration of 20 μg/mL and
incubating NIH-3T3 cells for 5 min at 37 °C, followed by rinsing
the cells twice with DPBS to wash away free Hoechst 33342. We performed
confocal microscopy to capture both extracellular and intracellular
PEG-BB fluorescence, if any. After initial imaging with the presence
of extracellular PEG-BB in the culture medium, we used the fresh medium
to wash off any free PEG-BB. After washing, confocal microscopy is
performed again to image intracellular PEG-BB fluorescence if any.
To study the uptake of PEG-BB by HBECs from the apical and basal
sides, we add 10 μL of 1 mg/mL PEG-BB to the apical side and
add PEG-BB to the basal medium to reach a final concentration of 100
μg/mL, respectively. After overnight incubation, we do not wash
the cell culture to keep the mucus layer intact, and use confocal
microscopy to capture fluorescence at the apical focal plane for PEG-BB
added from both the apical and basal sides.

4.11

## Statistical Analysis
We perform
statistical analysis using the one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).
For the post hoc test after performing statistical analysis, we use
Tukey’s honestly significant difference test to determine the
significant differences between groups. p > 0.05
is considered statistically significant.

## Data Availability Statement
All data are
available in the manuscript or the Supporting Information.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.4c01983.Molecular structure of bottlebrush polymers in solution,
Cross-section of a bottlebrush polymer in solution. 1H NMR spectra,
TEM data, fluorescence images of PEG-BB, representative pre- and post-wash
images of NIH-3T3 fibroblasts, and cellular uptake and retention data
(PDF)
Z profile
of PEG-BB uptake by HBECs (AVI)
Localization of PEG-BB in the perinuclear
cytoplasm
of a single ciliated cell (AVI)
Full thickness of airway epithelium containing
intracellular
PEG-BB (AVI)
Retaintion of intracellular PEG-BB within HBECs (AVI)

## Supplementary Material
nn4c01983_si_001.pdf
nn4c01983_si_002.avi
nn4c01983_si_003.avi
nn4c01983_si_004.avi
nn4c01983_si_005.avi

## Author Contributions
∥ Z.-J.H.
and B.H. contribute equally. L.-H.C., Z.-J.H, and B.H.
designed the research. Z.-J.H. performed cell studies. B.H. synthesized
and characterized PEG-based nanocarriers. L.-H.C., Z.-J.H., and B.H.
wrote the paper. All authors reviewed and commented on the paper.
L.-H.C. conceived and supervised the study.
The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): L.H.C., Z.J.H.,
and B.H. have filed a provisional patent application based on PEG-BB
nanocarrier for pulmonary delivery.

## Notes
This manuscript was submitted to a preprint
server. Z.-J. H., B.H., L.-H.C. “Bottlebrush polyethylene glycol
nanocarriers translocate across human airway epithelium via molecular
architecture-enhanced endocytosis,” bioRxiv. DOI: 10.1101/2024.02.15.580508, accessed February 16, 2024.

## Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Richard
Boucher at UNC Chapel Hill
and Dr. Jae-Won Shin at the University of Illinois Chicago for discussions
on pulmonary drug delivery and endocytosis pathways. We thank Dr.
Kenichi Okuda at UNC Chapel Hill for HBECs, which are provided by
the UNC Marsico Lung Institute Tissue Procurement and Cell Culture
Core supported by NIH grant DK065988 and CF Foundation grant BOUCHE19R0.
Transmission electron micrographs were recorded at the University
of Virginia Molecular Electron Microscopy Core facility (RRID: SCR_019031),
which is supported in part by the University of Virginia School of
Medicine. L.H.C. acknowledges the support from NSF (CAREER DMR-1944625),
NSF CBET-2306012, the University of Virginia (UVA) LaunchPad for Diabetes,
the UVA Coulter Center for Translational Research, Juvenile Diabetes
Research Foundation (JDRF 1-INO-2022-1114 A-N), grant funding from
Virginia’s Commonwealth Health Research Board, and the UVA
Center for Advanced Biomanufacturing.