pmcPLoS PathogPLoS Pathog349plospathplosPLOS Pathogens1553-73661553-7374PLOSPMC12680359PMC12680359.112680359126803594132546610.1371/journal.ppat.1013587PPATHOGENS-D-25-024371Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesToxicologyToxic AgentsToxinsMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicineToxicologyToxic AgentsToxinsPhysical SciencesChemistryChemical CompoundsOrganic CompoundsCarbohydratesMonosaccharidesGlucosePhysical SciencesChemistryOrganic ChemistryOrganic CompoundsCarbohydratesMonosaccharidesGlucosePhysical SciencesChemistryChemical CompoundsCarbon DioxideBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryMetabolismCarbohydrate MetabolismGlucose MetabolismMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesBacterial DiseasesAnthraxMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesZoonosesAnthraxBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsPost-Translational ModificationPhosphorylationBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionBiology and life sciencesMolecular biologyMolecular biology techniquesDNA constructionPlasmid ConstructionResearch and analysis methodsMolecular biology techniquesDNA constructionPlasmid ConstructionEnvironmental regulation of toxin production in Bacillus anthracis
Environmental regulation of toxin production in Bacillus anthracis
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9038-740XBothraAnkurConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing PomerantsevAndreiInvestigation SchwarzBenjaminData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyVisualizationWriting – review & editing MondalAnupamFormal analysisVisualization BohrnsenEricInvestigation SangwanNitikaInvestigation StrombergKaitlin A.Investigation MoayeriMahtabFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – review & editing MaQianInvestigation FattahRasemInvestigation GanesanSundarInvestigationVisualization BosioCatharine M.Resources LepplaStephen H.Funding acquisitionResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America2
Laboratory of Bacteriology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, Montana, United States of America3
Neurobiology, Neurodegeneration, and Repair Laboratory, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America4
Biological Imaging Section, Research Technologies Branch, National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of AmericaMcClaneBruce A.Editor ]. To establish infection, B. anthracis produces anthrax exotoxins: protective antigen (PA), lethal factor (LF), and edema factor (EF). These toxins are crucial for the bacteria’s virulence and ability to cause disease. B. anthracis utilizes signaling pathways to detect and respond to environmental changes such as temperature, nutrient availability, and aeration when transitioning from soil to host tissues [ ]. The regulation of virulence factor expression is essential for the bacteria’s adaptation and survival in different environments.
The most severe form of anthrax infection is inhalation anthrax. Once the bacteria breach the host epithelial barrier, anthrax toxins and other major virulence factors (poly-D-gamma-glutamic acid capsule and secretory proteases) play critical roles in impairing the local immune response [ , ]. The B. anthracis pXO1 plasmid encodes the tripartite protein exotoxin complex (PA, LF, and EF) and a multidomain transcription factor, AtxA, which positively regulates the expression of several structural genes and anthrax toxin [ , ].
Previous studies highlighted the importance of glucose and carbon dioxide in anthrax toxin production [ – ] suggested an indirect association between the carbon catabolite repression protein CcpA and glucose availability on the expression of atxA and the toxin genes. Several studies [ , – ] have attempted to identify how B. anthracis utilizes glucose- and carbon dioxide-sensitive pathways to mediate signals and activate anthrax toxin production. However, none of these studies could demonstrate the role of specific genes or pathways in directly regulating atxA and the toxin genes.
The importance of sugar and carbon dioxide is not unique to B. anthracis. The dependency of bacterial virulence on carbohydrate metabolism has been long debated. Several zoonotic and human pathogens regulate expression of their virulence genes based on the type of carbohydrate they sense in their environment [ , , ]. In Firmicutes like B. anthracis, the phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) phosphotransferase system (PTS) couples the import and phosphorylation of preferred (glucose) and alternative carbon sources through sugar-specific membrane channels. A series of PTS proteins (EI, Hpr, and sugar-specific EIIA) are involved in this coupled reaction [ ]. The activity of PTS proteins and CcpA is dependent on the relative abundance of ATP, early glycolytic intermediates like fructose-1,6-bisphosphate, and PEP [ ]. The abundance of these metabolites has also been shown to modulate the phosphorylation of PTS-regulatory domain (PRD)-containing pathogen virulence regulators, called PCVRs [ , – ].
Based on secondary domain analysis and the presence of conserved histidine residues H199 and H379, AtxA is classified as a PCVR, with its transcriptional activity regulated by phosphorylation of these histidine residues [ , ]. AtxA has two DNA-binding HTH domains, two PTS regulatory domains (PRD1 and PRD2), and a putative EIIB domain (a component of PTS sugar transport EII-complexes) [ ]. We and others have shown that phosphorylation of H199 of PRD1 is necessary for AtxA activation while phosphorylation of H379 in PRD2 is inhibitory to toxin gene transcription [ , ]. However, the cellular systems responsible for AtxA phosphorylation and dephosphorylation are not known. Recently, a study by Bier et al. 2020 aimed to understand the role of PTS enzymes on regulating AtxA phosphorylation and its transcriptional activity [ ]. However the work failed to clearly define the mechanism by which central carbon metabolism regulates AtxA and toxin production. Therefore, in this report, we provide data to support that synergy between glucose metabolism and anaplerosis is essential for anthrax toxin production and that a physical interaction of AtxA with glucose specific PTS (PTSglu) proteins is pre-requisite for attaining its transcriptional activation property.

## Results

## Anthrax toxin production is dependent on central carbon metabolism
In this study, transcriptomic analysis (RNAseq) identified a total of 291 genes differentially expressed between bacteria grown aerobically in nutrient rich NBY-G medium (NBY + 10 mM glucose) or in the NBY-G medium with 0.9% (w/v) NaHCO3 and grown in air supplemented with 5% CO2 (“air” vs “CO2”) ( for list of differentially expressed genes). Transcriptional changes between the air and CO2-grown bacteria are compared in . A total of 120 upregulated (red) and 171 downregulated (blue) genes were identified in the 5% CO2 growth condition. The top 30 differentially expressed genes based on their FDR-adjusted p-values (padj) are represented in . Among the 291 significantly up-regulated and down-regulated genes, sap, pagR, pagA and branched-chain amino acid (BCAA) genes have previously been reported to show similar transcriptional changes [ , , ].
 We performed gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) of the entire transcriptome (5237 genes, including chromosomal and pXO1 genes) to identify key pathways altered under toxin-producing conditions (5% CO2). Notably, we observed a substantial downregulation of genes involved in central carbon metabolism, particularly pyruvate metabolism and TCA cycle-related genes. Gene sets significantly enriched with padj < 0.05 are depicted in . Focusing on key KEGG pathways for downregulated gene-sets (bar01200, bar00020, and bar00620), we identified the leading-edge genes, such as pckA, citZ, and sucC, ( , A), genes known to be regulated by carbon catabolite repression proteins like CcpA [ ]. These findings align with previous studies demonstrating that anthrax toxin production is indirectly governed by CcpA-regulated sugar metabolism [ , ].
Based on the identification of central carbohydrate metabolism genes, especially glycolytic and PTSglu genes from the GSEA as responsive to growth in CO2, we further investigated the role of fermentable sugars in anthrax toxin production. Bacteria were grown in minimal media supplemented with different carbon sources ( ). Remarkably, glucose with 5% CO2 induced a ~ 5-fold increase in the expression of the toxin component, protective antigen (PA), compared to other fermentable sugars with 5% CO2 ( ). Sugars containing one unit of α-D-glucose (e.g., sucrose, lactose, maltose) also triggered toxin component expression, but only in the presence of 5% CO2. Importantly, the enhanced toxin production was not solely due to improved bacterial growth because of presence of fermentable sugars; rather, the transcription of atxA and pagA was upregulated by 1.8-fold and 8-fold, respectively, under these conditions ( ) compared with the bacteria grown under no-sugar condition. It is important to note that other sugars like galactose do not have inhibitory effects on the genes regulated in presence of glucose. This suggests that glucose, combined with 5% CO2 synergistically activates the toxin synthesis machinery. Supporting these observations, our GSEA revealed significant upregulation of pathways such as bar00010, bar02060, bar00620, and bar01200 - containing glycolytic and TCA cycle genes - when transcript abundance was compared between bacteria grown in the presence or absence of supplemented sugar, while 5% CO2 was present in both cases ( ).

## Glycolysis and TCA intermediates are significantly altered under toxin producing conditions
Initial gene-set enrichment analyses in highlighted the potential for the role of central carbon metabolism, particularly glycolysis and the TCA cycle, in regulating anthrax toxin production. Specifically, a marked upregulation of glycolytic genes in the presence of glucose, contrasted with the downregulation of TCA and pyruvate metabolism genes under 5% CO2 supplementation, suggests a strong positive correlation between upper glycolytic intermediates and toxin production in B. anthracis, while an inverse correlation is observed between lower glycolytic or TCA intermediates and toxin production. To explore the steady-state levels of glycolytic and TCA intermediates in toxin producing versus non-producing conditions, we compared their relative abundance in bacteria grown in minimal RM media [ , ] with or without 10 mM glucose and 5% CO2 ( ).
 As shown in , the levels of central metabolic intermediates (FDR-corrected padj) shifted significantly in response to glucose and CO2. In wild-type (Wt) bacteria, glucose levels increased by 5.7-fold, while fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (FBP) and lactate levels were elevated by 2-fold and 2.7-fold, respectively. The concentration of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), a key regulator of glucose uptake via the PTSglu system, decreased by 0.49-fold under these conditions. These results are consistent with our GSEA analysis, which showed significant enrichment of glycolysis and pyruvate metabolism pathways under 10 mM glucose ( ). Additionally, genes involved in the glucose specific phosphoenolpyruvate:carbohydrate phosphotransferase system (PTSglu) showed a pattern of upregulation in GSEA ( A, ) and were enriched in the toxin-producing condition, albeit with a slightly relaxed significance threshold (padj < 0.188). We identified the leading-edge genes (PtsG, ptsHI operon) ( ), which are also under direct regulation of CcpA. These could be potential genes linking CcpA-mediated toxin regulation in B. anthracis. PEP levels are particularly important for regulating glucose uptake through PTSglu [ ], so we focused on PEP under different conditions. In Wt bacteria grown in 5% CO2 (without glucose), PEP levels dropped by 1.7-fold compared to growth in air ( ). Even with 10 mM glucose and 5% CO2, PEP levels remained suppressed by 1.1-fold compared to air-grown bacteria. Interestingly, this trend was consistent in the atxA null-mutant (ΔatxA), suggesting that PTSglu operates upstream of AtxA-dependent toxin production in B. anthracis.
To validate these observations, we measured glucose uptake and utilization under varying conditions. demonstrates that glucose uptake was significantly reduced in ΔatxA, with a 25% reduction in intracellular glucose compared to Wt, regardless of growth conditions. Similarly, glucose utilization was lower in ΔatxA, implying that AtxA either directly influences the PTSglu pathway or that glucose uptake and metabolism are upregulated only under toxin-producing conditions. Furthermore, our data also suggest that B. anthracis leverages glycolysis to generate high-energy molecules like NADH and acetyl phosphate, which may support the increased protein synthesis required for toxin production ( , ).
 presents a metabolic map comparison of glycolytic intermediates between bacteria grown in toxin-producing conditions (5% CO2 + 10 mM glucose) and non-toxin-producing conditions (air + no glucose), providing a better understanding of how PEP levels may regulate toxin production in B. anthracis. Under toxin-inducing conditions, we observed a significant depletion of PEP, the key molecule triggering PTSglu-dependent glucose uptake. Notably, pyruvate levels were significantly enriched under toxin-producing conditions, indicating higher PEP utilization ( A, ). Consistent with this, TCA intermediates (oxaloacetate, citrate, and isocitrate) were elevated, suggesting that anaplerotic carboxylases [ ] - enzymes for carbon-fixation through anaplerosis are active during toxin production ( A, ). Based on these metabolic profiles, we hypothesize that anaplerotic flux along with PTSglu plays a crucial role in modulating PEP levels in toxin-producing conditions. This suggests that B. anthracis prioritizes glucose utilization for toxin production, even though elevated levels of glycolytic intermediates such as pyruvate ( ) can negatively regulate PTSglu-dependent glucose uptake [ ].

## AtxA physically interacts with PTSglu and anaplerosis proteins
To better understand the mechanism of toxin production in the presence of 10 mM glucose and 5% CO2, we investigated whether AtxA, the transcription factor essential for toxin production, is directly regulated by the PTSglu system and/or anaplerosis. As seen in , omission of either glucose or 5% CO2 from the growth medium results in the loss of toxin induction. Therefore, we compared the AtxA interactome in bacteria grown with glucose in the absence and presence of external 5% CO2. AtxA-interacting proteins were isolated from Wt and ΔatxA strains overexpressing AtxA-His6 via pAMY1-atxA ( ) using co-affinity purification, as described in the methods section, followed by identification of the interactome through MS/MS analysis. and show the absolute abundance of peptides derived from the most strongly AtxA-interacting proteins in bacteria grown in the presence (A) or absence (B) of 5% CO2.
 Under 5% CO2, we specifically identified an interaction between AtxA and PtsG (Uniprot #A0A6L8PWR6, ), a glucose permease in the PTSglu pathway. Interestingly, we also detected an interaction between AtxA and pyruvate carboxylase in CO2 as well as in air (Pyc; Uniprot #A0A6L7HFM3, , ), one of the anaplerotic carboxylases in B. anthracis. However, the interaction of Pyc and AtxA in air questions its relation to CO2-dependent regulation. Additional AtxA interaction partners are presented in , , and . Interestingly over 42 and 67 different proteins were identified in the AtxA interactome in air and CO2 growth conditions, respectively ( ). As a transcription factor, it was expected that AtxA would interact with various proteins involved in coupled transcription-translation, regardless of the growth conditions. Over 50% of them belong to bacterial co-transcription/translation machinery.
To further investigate how PtsG might regulate AtxA function, we assessed the interaction between these proteins using Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging Microscopy (FLIM) in the presence of 5% CO2. We chose strains expressing AtxA-C4 and PtsG-mCherry fusion proteins for these experiments. The lifetime decay profile of the GFP variant C4 is shown in . Notably, the lifetime decay of AtxA-C4 was significantly reduced from 2.7 nano-second to 1.95 nano-second when PtsG-mCherry was co-expressed, indicating a 28% faster decay of GFP fluorescence. This faster decay suggests a strong physical interaction between AtxA and PtsG within the bacterial cell. Additionally, we observed a slight shift toward a faster decay profile for AtxA-C4 when compared to the diffusible C4 variant, likely due to homo-FRET between GFP units of AtxA-C4 dimers [ ]. These observations confirm a physical interaction between PTSglu and AtxA, suggesting that PTSglu may influence AtxA dimerization and activation, potentially modulating its role in toxin production in B. anthracis.

## PtsG and Pyc are essential for anthrax toxin production
Building on the observation that AtxA binds PtsG, we sought to determine the roles of PtsG as well as Pyc in anthrax toxin production. We generated null mutants of these genes (ΔptsG, Δpyc, and ΔptsG/Δpyc) in B. anthracis Ames 35 and tested their ability to produce the toxin components PA, LF, and EF under minimal medium conditions, with regulated amount of fermentable sugar (glucose) in the media.
As shown in , the ΔptsG mutant exhibited a nearly 90% reduction in the expression of all toxin components compared to Wt. The ΔatxA strain served as a negative control, as AtxA is essential for toxin production [ ]. Similarly, the Δpyc mutant showed significantly reduced levels of PA and LF, though not to the extent observed in the ΔptsG strain. Notably, the double mutant (ΔptsG/Δpyc) completely abolished toxin component expression ( ). This loss of toxin production in the ΔptsG strain was fully reversible when complemented with a single copy of the gene reinserted into the Bacillus genome ( ). Despite PtsG being a critical glucose transporter in B. anthracis, the ΔptsG mutants displayed growth patterns like Wt, with only minor, non-significant growth defects ( ).
 We measured the levels of key metabolites, including the lower glycolytic intermediates (particularly PEP and pyruvate) and TCA intermediates (citrate and oxaloacetate), in the ΔptsG, Δpyc, and ΔptsG/Δpyc strains under toxin-producing conditions in RM minimal media ( ). Consistent with our observations in , the levels of lower glycolytic intermediates were significantly reduced in the ΔptsG and ΔptsG/Δpyc strains, highlighting the importance of PEP in anthrax toxin production. Interestingly, the levels of upper glycolytic intermediates were significantly elevated in these mutants, suggesting enhanced gluconeogenesis and a subsequent depletion of PEP and PTS signaling. Additionally, the Δpyc strain showed significantly elevated pyruvate and lactate levels, confirming the loss of anaplerotic activity in these strains.
Since previous studies have reported that AtxA’s transcriptional activity depends on histidine phosphorylation [ , ], we investigated whether this post-translational modification could restore AtxA function in the absence of upstream PTSglu and anaplerotic signals. To test this, we generated ΔptsG and Δpyc mutants in the ΔatxA background and complemented them with phospho-mimetic and phospho-ablative mutants of AtxA at histidine 199 and 379 (H199D, H379D, H199A, and H379A, respectively). As previously reported [ ], we found that the H199D and H379D mutations had opposing effects on AtxA’s transcriptional activity, as measured by PA expression in the culture supernatant. However, these phenotypes were not restored in the ΔptsG/ΔatxA or Δpyc/ΔatxA strains ( ), further indicating that the interactions between AtxA and PtsG/Pyc are critical for AtxA’s transcriptional function.
To explore how the physical interaction between AtxA and PtsG might influence AtxA’s transcriptional activity, we examined the structure of AtxA’s EIIB domain and identified a conserved CIXR motif (residues 402–405). This CIXR motif forms a similar pocket to that found in homologous transcription factors such as MtlR, which binds inorganic phosphate during the phosphorelay in the PTSglu signaling pathway. We hypothesized that this CIXR motif is crucial for AtxA’s interaction with the PTSglu pathway, contributing to its functional activity. Indeed, mutations in this motif (C402A and C402G) completely abolished AtxA’s transcriptional activity in B. anthracis ( ). The role of EIIB domain was further supported by FLIM assay where interaction between AtxA-ΔEIIB-C4 and PtsG-mCherry resulted in GFP decay profile like AtxA-C4 alone with lifetime decay of 3.05 nano-second ( ). This suggests that the EIIB domain of AtxA is essential for in-cell interaction of AtxA with PtsG, with its deletion resulting in loss of anthrax toxin expression ( ). Surprisingly, the lifetime decay of AtxA-ΔEIIB-C4 (2.8 nano seconds) was 10% lower than AtxA-C4 (3.08 nano seconds) suggesting its role in regulating AtxA dimerization. Loss of EIIB may cause the AtxA-ΔEIIB-C4 protein to multimerize or aggregate [ ] inside cell resulting in stronger homo-FRET within aggregated C4, thus a faster lifetime decay profile.

## Loss of PtsG and Pyc attenuates B. anthracis virulence
Given the significant reduction in anthrax toxin production observed in the ΔptsG mutants (both single and double mutants with Δpyc), we sought to determine whether these effects would translate into reduced bacterial virulence and pathogenicity in an actual infection scenario. Since the primary role of PtsG is to import glucose into bacteria, we assumed that under limited nutrient conditions within the host environment, the ΔptsG and ΔptsG/Δpyc mutants would exhibit reduced germination or growth [ ]. Therefore, to understand the role of ptsG and pyc in regulating anthrax toxin production in animals, we bypassed the early stages of B. anthracis infection by subcutaneously injecting 1 × 105 vegetative bacteria into C57BL/6J mice. As shown in , the ΔptsG/Δpyc double mutant was completely attenuated, with 10 out of 15 mice surviving until 168 h post-infection, in stark contrast to mice infected with the Wt strain, which all succumbed to infection by 96 h post-infection. The single ΔptsG mutant also showed significantly reduced virulence, with 7 out of 15 mice surviving to 168 h post-infection. The attenuated phenotype of the ΔptsG mutant was completely reversed in the ptsG complemented strain (ptsG-Comp, ). These results suggest that PTSglu acts as a critical sensor to initiate toxin production and establish infection. Interestingly, the single Δpyc mutant did not show a major reduction in virulence, indicating that B. anthracis may be utilizing an alternative pathway to regulate PEP levels, thus maintaining PTSglu-dependent toxin production.
 Furthermore, when 8 × 106 spores of the ΔptsG and ΔptsG/Δpyc strains were injected subcutaneously, both mutants were completely attenuated, demonstrating a severe defect in their ability to establish and spread infection ( ). To validate these findings, we measured the dissemination of the ΔptsG mutant in the host post-infection. As illustrated in , the ΔptsG mutant showed approximately a 10-fold reduction in the number of bacteria disseminating to host organs by 48 h post-infection, further confirming the attenuated behavior of these mutants, likely due to the lack of toxin production.

## Discussion
The growth and progression of disease caused by B. anthracis are influenced by its metabolic functions and virulence factors [ , ], with both types of activities likely being synchronized during infection. The phosphoenolpyruvate:carbohydrate phosphotransferase systems (PTSs), which are bacterial sugar transport mechanisms, might play a role in this synchronization. These systems facilitate nutrient uptake, regulate overall metabolism, and influence virulence in a variety of pathogens [ ]. PTS systems facilitate the uptake of sugars via sugar-specific permeases known as enzymes II, which include the cytoplasmic domains EIIA and EIIB, as well as the membrane-spanning domain EIIC (and occasionally EIID). During the transport process, sugars are phosphorylated by phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) through intermediary phosphate carriers such as the general enzyme I and HPr. The phosphorylation state of PTS components is influenced by the availability of sugar substrates and the fluxes of glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, which together determine the PEP/pyruvate ratio. Consequently, PTS phosphorylation mirrors the overall metabolic state, a feature that many bacteria utilize as a sensory mechanism to regulate metabolism, respiration, motility, and virulence. However, the processes by which the specific phosphor-transfer reactions carried out by individual sugar-specific PTS branches or components are incorporated into a bacterial virulence strategy to regulate its pathogenesis are still not well understood.
In this study, we revealed a crucial synergistic role of the glucose transport protein PtsG and a metabolic regulator Pyc in B. anthracis virulence ( ). The long-standing role of glucose and CO2 in growth media is sought to be essential for anthrax toxin production and therefore its virulence. Our study correlates with the “Jail-break” model of anthrax pathogenesis [ ], which signifies the importance of the host systemic system to support B. anthracis growth and proliferation during pathogenesis.
 As shown in , we propose that these changes are coordinately regulated by PtsG and Pyc to activate AtxA, the master virulence regulator, and therefore anthrax toxin production and its virulence. The host lymph and blood are rich sources of both glucose and CO2, which may trigger metabolic changes in the bacteria. A previous study [ ] identified PtsG and BioY among the top 25 significantly induced genes when B. anthracis is grown in mammalian blood, suggesting a strong correlation of glucose and anaplerotic genes in anthrax biology, especially toxin production. The PtsG gene encodes the first component of PTSglu which senses the presence of free glucose in the environment, like host blood or lymph. BioY encodes for a biotin transporter involved in the uptake of biotin, which is essential for the function of anaplerotic carboxylases like Pyc. We showed that once the bacteria sense the presence of glucose and CO2 together in the growth environment, it immediately (within 15 min of glucose supplementation) activates PTSglu to take up the glucose. This triggers glycolysis to generate a pool of PEP, which initiates the phosphotransferase activity in the PTSglu to keep taking more glucose into the cell. Since a higher amount of fermentable sugar can build byproducts like pyruvate/lactate and acetate in the bacteria, it uses another metabolic regulator, Pyc, to activate the anaplerotic pathway, which uses external CO2 to pivot off the byproduct of PEP (pyruvate) so that bacteria could keep making more PEP and utilize it for the PTS machinery [ ]. The transcription factor AtxA, with its EIIB domain, physically interacts with PtsG and gets activated, possibly by its phosphorylation (from unknown mechanism) and dimerization during the phosphotransferase activity in PTS. The activated AtxA then regulates the expression of toxin genes and virulence in B. anthracis.
Using a global transcriptional profiling approach, we identified a set of 291 genes that were significantly dysregulated in bacteria under toxin-producing conditions. Using a similar approach, we previously identified 318 differentially regulated genes [ ]. The discrepancy in the number of genes identified in the two studies could be attributed to differences in bacterial growth stages (OD600 1.8 vs 2 in the previous study) or the use of different analysis tools for RNA mapping and differential gene expression. Nonetheless, given the similar levels of differentially expressed genes, we used our dataset to understand the global changes that occur in bacteria when grown in the absence and presence of 5% CO2 and how these changes correlate with anthrax toxin expression. Our data supports the hypothesis that once the bacteria sense the presence of glucose and CO2 together in the growth environment, they immediately modulate the central carbon metabolism pathways (bar_01200), the TCA cycle (bar_00020), and glucose-specific PTS (bar02060) ( ). There are several reports suggesting the role of sugar transport and sugar metabolism genes which all are under control of central carbon metabolism, to regulate anthrax toxin production and its pathogenesis [ , , , ].
As has been shown previously, the utilization of fermentable sugars like glucose will accumulate fructose-1,6-bisphosphate, an agonist of carbon catabolite repression (CCR), and drive the bacteria to utilize glycolysis to generate high-energy molecules [ ]. Other Firmicutes like S. pyogenes and B. subtilis have well-described PTS systems where the PTS components are under the influence of CCR and are known to regulate similar pathways as we discovered in B. anthracis [ , ]. This is validated by our metabolic profile of B. anthracis under toxin-producing conditions (glucose and 5% CO2, ), where we clearly observed that bacteria generate all the glycolytic intermediates; however, the Pentose-phosphate-pathway (PPP) and Tri-carboxylic acid (TCA) intermediates were significantly lower under these conditions. The observation was biochemically validated where we observed that B. anthracis takes up more glucose and the rate of glucose utilization is higher under toxin-producing conditions. Changes in the abundance of PEP and pyruvate, the key regulators of PTS, and the relative expression of anthrax toxin components under the toxin-producing conditions suggest a strong association of PTSglu with the activation of AtxA. The metabolic profile of ΔptsG and ΔptsG/Δpyc also validates our hypothesis as these mutants show a poor abundance of PEP, indicative of reduced glucose uptake and PTS flux, further supporting PtsG as the principal glucose permease linking carbon metabolism to toxin regulation. Also, the loss of pyc (Δpyc) impacts the bacteria to start accumulating pyruvate and lactate suggesting the loss of anaplerotic pathway in these mutants ( ).
However, it is not clear from our results which PTS component could result in AtxA phosphorylation, but our protein interaction data strongly suggest that AtxA does physically interact with PtsG in the cell ( ). Using a co-affinity purification approach we clearly identify the major interacting partners of AtxA under different growth conditions. Being a transcription factor, it is intuitive to identify several transcriptional and translational proteins to physically interact with AtxA. Such breadth of interacting partners is consistent with prior affinity-based studies of bacterial transcription regulators, which frequently co-purify with components of the transcription-translation machinery and metabolic partners [ , , ]. Specific pulldown of PtsG and Pyc as AtxA interactors under toxin-producing conditions validates our hypothesis that PTSglu and anthrax toxin expression are coupled. The interaction between PtsG and AtxA was further validated with the FRET-FLIM assay. There is an exponential correlation between the decay profile and distance between the FRET partners [ ]. Based on this correlation, a 28% faster decay of the GFP lifetime signal suggests a strong interaction between AtxA and PtsG with a possible distance of 22–28Å. However, this interaction was completely lost with the ΔEIIB domain of AtxA, suggesting a crucial role in interaction with PtsG and therefore its activation ( D, ). However, it is difficult to understand a faster lifetime decay in AtxA-ΔEIIB-C4 alone. One possible explanation for this phenotype could be an aggregation of AtxA-ΔEIIB-C4 in cell resulting in homo-FRET in C4 and thus a faster decay profile. Further, we identified the importance of C402 in the EIIB domain of AtxA, which possibly helps in AtxA dimerization as reported earlier [ , ]. However, based on the alpha-fold prediction [ ] of dimeric AtxA ( ) with the AtxA binding element of the pagA promoter [ ], the C402 of one unit of dimeric AtxA directly sits on top of the H379 of the other unit of the AtxA dimer with a possible distance of 10.2 Å, and thus may be involved in some electrostatic interactions ( ). Since the interaction volume of a phosphate ion can range up to 20 Å^3, the H379 phosphorylation may affect these interactions, resulting in AtxA de-dimerization. Interestingly, analogous regulatory modifications have been described for other PRD/EIIB-like transcriptional regulators: a cysteine residue within the EIIB-like domain of the Mga regulator in Streptococcus pyogenes was proposed to undergo phosphorylation [ ], and the Bacillus subtilis regulator MtlR has been shown to phosphorylate at C419 in the EIIB(Gat)-like domain [ ]. These parallels raise the possibility that C402 of AtxA may likewise be subject to redox- or phosphate-mediated modification that modulates its activity.
Complementation with phosphomimetic (H199D and H379D) and phosphoablative (H199A and H379A) mutants of AtxA also showed that the PtsG and AtxA interaction is a prerequisite for its activation irrespective of whether AtxA is phosphorylated or not. To the best of our knowledge, the critical interaction of PTS proteins with PRD-domain containing transcription factors for their activation has never been shown before. As a result of the loss of PTSglu function and anaplerotic (Pyc) function ( ), the ΔptsG/Δpyc double mutant completely lost virulence post-infection in mice. Given that attenuation persisted even when vegetative bacteria were used for infection ( ) and that all mutants exhibited near-normal growth in culture ( ), the reduced virulence most likely reflects a defect in infection establishment rather than an early germination or growth limitation. These strains possibly could not sense the presence of free glucose and CO2 in the host systemic system and thus could not activate the bacteria to produce enough toxin to suppress the host immune system and establish the infection. The hypothesis seems correct as spores of these mutants are completely attenuated in a mice model of infection ( ). Also, the dissemination rate of these mutants is extremely slow post-infection.
Our results demonstrated a direct interaction between AtxA and PtsG complement earlier findings by Bier et al. [ ], which proposed that PTSglu components may influence atxA gene expression indirectly through unknown regulators. Together, these observations suggest that both transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms contribute to AtxA regulation in B. anthracis, providing a more integrated view of how carbon-source sensing connects to toxin control. Thus, based on these findings, we finally propose AtxA as an integral component of the PTSglu, where the transcriptional activity of AtxA is regulated by environmental signals like glucose and CO2. The major limitation of our study is to understand how PTSglu and/or Pyc could affect AtxA phosphorylation, however, it has been previously known that other components of B. anthracis PTS machinery do not have a direct role in AtxA phosphorylation, in in vitro conditions. There could be several issues with these assays possibly because of the labile nature of histidine phosphorylation [ ]. Nonetheless, our data strongly supports our model suggesting the role of environmental signals, like glucose and free CO2, in the host systemic system as a key regulator of anthrax toxin production and pathogenesis. This study reveals how extracellular bacteria like B. anthracis adapts its metabolic pathways to survive and regulate virulence under diverse environmental conditions.

## Materials and methods

## Bacterial Strains, Growth, and Media Conditions
Bacterial growth conditions were used as described previously with modifications [ ]. The Escherichia coli strain DH5α was used for cloning purposes. For B. anthracis transformations, plasmids were first passed through E. coli SCS110 to obtain unmethylated DNA. E. coli and B. anthracis strains were grown in Luria Bertani (LB) broth or on LB agar plates (Difco). The B. anthracis Ames 35 (pXO1+, pXO2-; Wt) strain was grown in a modified Nutrient Broth Yeast Extract (NBY) medium, composed of 0.8% nutrient broth and 0.3% yeast extract, supplemented in some cases with 10 mM glucose (NBY-G). For selection, ampicillin (100 μg/mL), kanamycin (25 μg/mL), and erythromycin (400 μg/mL) were used in E. coli, while kanamycin (10 μg/mL) and erythromycin (10 μg/mL) were used for B. anthracis. All cultures were incubated at 37°C with proper aeration (using a 1:5 headspace ratio) and shaking at 200 rpm. For toxin synthesis, B. anthracis strains were grown in NBY medium supplemented with 0.8% sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO₃) and incubated for 4 h at 37°C in the presence of external 5% CO2. To assess growth kinetics, glycerol stocks of B. anthracis strains were streaked on LB agar plates, and an isolated colony was used to inoculate primary cultures. Log-phase bacterial cultures were then used to initiate secondary cultures at a starting optical density at 600 nm (A600) of 0.02. Growth was monitored by measuring A600 every 2 h for up to 10 h. For metabolomics experiments, strains were grown in RM minimal medium [ , ], with (RM-G) or without (RM) 10 mM glucose supplementation. For toxin production, the medium was supplemented with 0.8% NaHCO₃, and cultures were incubated for 4 h at 37°C under 5% CO2. A detailed description of plasmids and strains used in this study is provided in .

## Cloning and protein expression
All plasmids used in this study were created using NEB HiFi methods (New England Biolabs). Briefly, homologous sequences of 19–22 nucleotides were used to generate homologous pairs between the insert and the vector to create individual clones. All plasmids used in B. anthracis strains were first passed through the dam-/dcm-
E. coli strain SCS110. Primers and gBlocks used for all molecular work are listed in , .
 For the AtxA co-affinity purification assay, the atxA gene with a C-terminal His6 tag was cloned in frame under the IPTG-inducible Pspac promoter [ ] to generate the pAMY1-atxA clone. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to create H199A, H199D, H379A, and H379D mutants in pAMY1-atxA.
For the FLIM assay, a two-plasmid system was used as described previously [ ]. Briefly, pAMY1-ptsG-mCherry was created using PCR amplicons of the ptsG gene and mCherry derived from the B. anthracis genome and pTN8-mCherry plasmid (Kumaran S. Ramamurthi lab, NIH). The products contained homologous sequences between pAMY1 and the amplicon to generate pAMY1-ptsG-mCherry with the ptsG gene in frame under the IPTG-inducible promoter and an in-frame C-terminal mCherry gene. Similarly, pMR [ ] was used to generate pMRI-atxA-C4 with the IPTG-inducible atxA gene and a C-terminal GFP variant (C4).

## Null mutants and complementation generation
Single-gene knockout strains for ptsG and pyc, as well as the double knockout strain ptsG/pyc, were generated in B. anthracis Ames 35 (ΔptsG, Δpyc, and ΔptsG/Δpyc) and in the B. anthracis ΔatxA background (ΔptsG/ΔatxA and Δpyc/ΔatxA) using the method previously described [ ]. Briefly, two single-crossover plasmids derived from the temperature-sensitive shuttle vector pSC were used sequentially to insert loxP sites flanking the regions of interest in the ptsG and pyc genes. A third temperature-sensitive plasmid, pCrePAS [ ], expressing Cre recombinase, was then employed to excise the DNA region between the loxP sites, resulting in the deletion of the target gene from the B. anthracis Ames 35 genome. Positive colonies were confirmed by PCR using primers flanking the gene and internal gene-specific primers.
For the complemented strain (ΔptsG::ptsG), the ptsG gene along with 374 bp of upstream sequence was PCR-amplified using primers that introduced 5’ PstI and 3’ XbaI restriction sites. The amplified product was digested with PstI and XbaI and ligated into the pSC-ptsG-LFLR shuttle vector, which had previously been used for generating the ΔptsG strain. Positive clones were confirmed by sequencing, and unmethylated plasmid DNA was electroporated into the ΔptsG strain. Transformants were selected on LB agar plates supplemented with erythromycin (10 μg/mL). Once ptsG was reinserted at its native locus, pCrePAS was used again to excise the plasmid DNA between the loxP sites. Colony PCR was performed for confirmation using ptsG-specific primers. The details of the primers used in this study are listed in .

## Total RNA isolation
For total RNA isolation from B. anthracis, pellets from 5-ml bacterial cultures with average OD600 of 1.8 were resuspended in 1 mL TRIzol, and 250 µL of 0.1 mm zirconia beads (BioSpec Products) were added. The cells were homogenized using a FastPrep-24 homogenizer (MP Biomedicals) at a speed of 6.0 m/s for 60 sec, followed by a 5-min incubation on ice. This process was repeated for three rounds of homogenization. RNA was then isolated as previously described [ ]. Briefly, the aqueous phase from the TRIzol-lysed cells was treated with 0.5 M LiCl and 0.7 volumes of isopropanol, followed by a 2-h incubation on ice to precipitate the RNA. The samples were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C, and the resulting RNA pellet was washed twice with 75% nuclease-free ethanol. The air-dried RNA was resuspended in 100 µL of nuclease-free water and stored at -80°C for future use.

## Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR)
qPCR was done as described previously with modifications [ ]. The isolated RNA was treated with TURBO DNase I (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) to remove any residual DNA and then purified using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). One microgram of purified RNA was used to synthesize cDNA with the iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad). qPCR was performed using 5 ng of cDNA as the template per reaction in the QuantStudio 7 Flex Real-Time PCR System (Thermo-Fisher Scientific), with gene-specific primers listed in .

## Transcriptomics and Gene set enrichment analysis
All work described in this manuscript was conducted using B. anthracis Ames 35 (NC_007530) carrying the pXO1 plasmid (NC_007322) as the parent strain. Total RNA was isolated from B. anthracis strains grown under the various conditions outlined in the Results section and assessed for quality using an RNA TapeStation (Agilent). Samples with RNA integrity numbers (RIN) greater than 7.3 were selected for whole transcriptome analysis. The selected RNA samples were sent to Azenta Life Sciences for transcriptomic sequencing and analysis.
After library preparation and sequencing, reads were trimmed to remove adapter sequences and low-quality nucleotides using Trimmomatic v.0.36. The cleaned reads were then mapped to the reference genomes available in ENSEMBL using the Bowtie2 aligner v.2.2.6, and BAM files were generated. Unique gene hit counts were calculated using featureCounts from the Subread package v.1.5.2, and only unique reads aligning within gene regions were counted. The gene hit counts were then used for downstream differential expression analysis. Differential gene expression analysis was performed using DESeq2, comparing gene expression between the defined groups of samples. The Wald test was used to generate p-values and log2 fold changes. Genes with an adjusted p-value < 0.05 and an absolute log2 fold change > 1 were considered differentially expressed. Principal component analysis (PCA) was also performed to assess similarities and differences within and between the sample groups.
Significantly impacted pathways were identified using gene set enrichment analyses (GSEA) performed using fgsea [ ]. Pathway gene sets for B. anthracis AMES ancestor (KEGG Organism_code: bar) were obtained from KEGG and log2 fold change from differential gene expression analysis was used as the ranking metric. A threshold of adjusted p-value (padj) < 0.05 was set to identify significantly enriched gene sets. Plots summarizing pathway analysis were created with tidyverse and cowplot packages in R.

## Metabolite extraction and data analysis
Metabolite sample preparation and data analysis was done as described earlier [ ]. For all liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LCMS) methods, LCMS grade solvents were used. Tributylamine and all synthetic molecular references were purchased from Millipore Sigma. LCMS grade water, methanol, isopropanol, and acetic acid were purchased through Fisher Scientific.
B. anthracis strains were grown in RM minimal media with or without glucose and 5% CO2 as mentioned in the manuscript at 37°C to ~9 × 107 cells/ml before collection at 8,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. Cells were washed twice with HEPES-NaCl buffer and pellets were flash frozen in dry-ice and ethanol and stored at -80°C until processing. To process cells for metabolomic analysis, cell pellets were thawed on ice, resuspended in 150 μL ice-cold methanol (Sigma) and then incubated at room temperature for 10 min. Following incubation an equal volume of LCMS grade water was added, and the samples were vigorously vortexed, then centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 15 min. Supernatants were collected, filtered in a 0.2 μM nitrocellulose syringe filter (GE Healthcare), and then diluted 1:3 before analysis. All samples were separated using a SCIEX ExionLC AC system and measured using a SCIEX 5500 QTRAP mass spectrometer. Polar metabolites were analyzed using a previously established ion pairing method with modification [ ]. Quality control samples were injected after every 10 injections to control for signal stability. Samples were separated with a Waters Atlantis T3 column (100Å, 3 μm, 3 mm X 100 mm) using a binary gradient from 5 mM tributylamine, 5 mM acetic acid in 2% isopropanol, 5% methanol, 93% water (v/v) to 100% isopropanol over 15 min. Each metabolite was identified and measured with two ion fragmentation pairs and a defined retention time.
All signals were integrated using MultiQuant Software 3.0.3. Signals with greater than 50% missing values were discarded and remaining missing values were replaced with the lowest registered signal value. All signals with a QC coefficient of variance greater than 30% were discarded. Metabolites with multiple ion pairs were quantified with the signature that displayed the highest signal to noise. All filtered datasets normalized against the total signal sum for the injection prior to analysis. Single and multi-variate analyses were performed in MarkerView Software 1.3.1. All univariate comparisons were subjected to a Benjamini-Hochberg cut-off at a false discovery rate of 5%.

## Glucose uptake and utilization assays
For glucose uptake assay bacteria was grown in RM minimal media without glucose in presence and absence of 5% CO2 for 3hr till they at 37°C. Strains were grown overnight in 2 mL of LB medium at 37°C under aerobic conditions. The following day, cultures were centrifuged at 3,500g for 6 min at room temperature, washed once with NBY-G medium, and resuspended in fresh NBY-G. The cultures were then reinoculated in 5 mL of NBY-G or NBY medium and grown either in the presence of 5% CO2 (with 0.8% NaHCO₃ in the medium) or in air (with 50 mM MOPS in the medium). Cultures were grown until reaching an OD600 of 0.8, after which they were transferred to the Radioactivity lab incubator, preheated to 37°C and 5% CO2. To each culture, 1 µCi of [³H]-leucine was added and the cultures were incubated for an additional 30 min. Subsequently, 0.5 µCi of [¹⁴C]-2-deoxyglucose (prepared in 15 mM non-radioactive glucose) was added to each culture. Cultures grown in air were covered with non-breathable tape to minimize CO2 exchange. Samples were collected at different time points (15, 30, and 60 min). At each time point, 1 mL of culture was centrifuged at 13,000g for 6 min at room temperature, washed once with 1X PBS, and resuspended in 100 µL of 1X PBS. This suspension was then added to a scintillation cocktail for the measurement of CPM and DPM values.

## Whole cell lysate preparation and co-affinity purification and interactome analysis
B. anthracis strains were cultured in 200 mL of NBY-G medium with and without 5% CO₂. The strains used included ΔatxA::pAMY1 and ΔatxA::pAMY1-AtxA-TEV-His6. Positive controls for Ni-NTA purification consisted of lysates from the ΔatxA::pAMY1 strain spiked with E. coli-purified AtxA-His6, as well as purified AtxA-His6 in buffer for recovery control. Once cultures reached an OD600 of ~ 0.2, 50 µM IPTG was added, and growth continued until the cultures reached an OD600 of ~ 2. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 6,200g for 10 min at 4°C, and the wet weights were recorded. Pellets were snap-frozen on dry ice and stored overnight. The following day, the cells were thawed in an ice-water bath and resuspended in 50 mL of binding buffer (5 mM imidazole, 0.5 M NaCl, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 20 mM Tris pH 7.2) supplemented with an EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail. Cells were lysed by two rounds of French press, and the soluble fraction was collected by centrifugation at 10,000g for 10 min at 4°C.
For co-purification, the soluble material was clarified by an additional centrifugation at 18,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C, followed by a 20-min incubation at 37°C. In the meantime, 1 mL of Ni-NTA resin was equilibrated with 50 mL of binding buffer for 20 min. The equilibrated Ni-NTA resin was then added to the samples, and the mixture was incubated at 4°C for 2 h to allow His-tagged proteins to bind to the resin. Following incubation, the resin was transferred to a column and washed at room temperature by gravity flow using the following steps- three rounds of 5 mL binding buffer, two rounds of 5 mL Wash Buffer 1 (40 mM imidazole pH 7.9, 1.0 M NaCl, 20 mM Tris pH 7.2, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol), one round of 10 mL Wash Buffer 1, one wash with 1.5 mL High Salt Wash Buffer (40 mM imidazole pH 7.9, 1.5 M NaCl, 20 mM Tris pH 7.2, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol), and three rounds of 2.5 mL Wash Buffer 1. His-tagged AtxA and its interacting proteins were eluted in three 500 µL aliquots of elution buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.2, 800 mM imidazole pH 7.9, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol). The eluted samples were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and sent to the core facility for protein identification via mass spectrometry.

## Analysis of anthrax toxin proteins-PA, LF and EF
Bacillus strains were grown in NBY broth, and cells were harvested by centrifugation at 12,000g. The cell pellets were resuspended in 1X PBS. Cells were lysed using bead-beating with 0.1 mm Zirconium beads (MP-Biomedicals) using MP-FastPrep24 with a setting of 6 M/Sec for 60 seconds. The lysate was rested on ice for 5 min, and the lysis was repeated for three cycles. Lysate was cleared of cellular debris by centrifuging at 13000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C. Protein concentration in the whole-cell lysates was determined using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) and used to assess toxin protein synthesis. The culture supernatant was filtered through a 0.22 μm filter assembly, and proteins were precipitated with 20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA). The precipitated proteins were resuspended in resuspension buffer [1% SDS, 10% glycerol, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 2 mM EDTA, 100 mM DTT, and 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science)] and used to evaluate the secretion of PA, LF, and EF proteins. The volume of the supernatant was normalized to the total protein content estimated from the whole-cell lysate using the BCA assay. Immunoblot analysis was performed using primary antibodies raised in rabbit- anti-PA (1:5,000), anti-LF (1:5,000), and anti-EF (1:5,000).

## FRET-FLIM sample preparation and analysis for in-vivo interaction
For in-vivo interaction of AtxA and PtsG, FRET-measured by FLIM was performed with B. anthracis strain BH500 [ ]. The BH500 strain is cured of pXO1 and pXO2, which provides us flexibility to use multiple compatible plasmids in background of B. anthracis genome. Plasmids used for FLIM assay are listed in . Single colony of BH500 strains expressing fluorescently tagged proteins (C4, AtxA-C4 and PstG-mCherry) were used to synchronize the culture growth in NBY-G medium supplemented with 0.8% NaHCO₃ and incubated under 5% CO₂. Once cultures reached an OD600 of ~ 0.2, 50 µM IPTG was added, and growth continued until the cultures reached an OD600 of ~ 2. Cells or samples mounted in imaging buffer were imaged using Leica-DMI8- SP8 WLL FLIM-Falcon as described before [ ]. Briefly, coverslips were then mounted onto glass slides, and images were acquired using a Leica SP8WLL-FLIM falcon inverted confocal microscope with a 63 × oil immersion objective (Leica Microsystems, Buffalo Grove IL). For fluorescence resonance energy transfer by fluorescence lifetime imaging (FRET-FLIM) analysis, fluorescence decays were acquired and resolved by time-correlated single-photon counting using SP8 FLIM FALCON system equipped with a tunable white light laser system set at 488 nm excitation wavelength at 80 MHz frequency. Images were acquired at 512–512-pixel format, collecting over 1,000 photons per pixel. FRET efficiency transients and FRET-FLIM Images were analyzed and processed using LASX Single Molecule detection analysis software (Leica Microsystems, Buffalo Grove IL). The GFP lifetime decay profiles were plotted using GraphPad Prim.

## C57BL/6J mice infection
C57BL/6 J mice (in-house, male, 8 weeks old) were used for all the infection study. Mice were either subcutaneously (SC) infected with 1 x 105 CFU/ml of vegetative bacteria or with 8 x 106 CFU/ml of spores of B. anthracis strains prepared in PBS (1 mL) in the scruff of neck and monitored daily for signs of malaise prior to euthanasia and total organ (spleen, liver and kidney) harvest. All animal experiments were performed in strict accordance with guidelines from the NIH and the Animal Welfare Act, under protocols approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health (protocol LPD9E).

## Statistical analysis
Unless mentioned otherwise, a minimum of three independent experiments (biological) repeated thrice (technical) were done to ensure data reproducibility. GraphPad Software (Prism 6) was used to plot the data and significance of the results was analyzed using two-tailed Student’s t test or one-way ANOVA followed by a post hoc test (Tukey test). p-values < 0.05 were considered as statistically significant.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## A) Ridge plots representing significantly dysregulated metabolic pathways in B. anthracis Wt grown under toxin-producing conditions (glucose + 5% CO2) versus non-toxin-producing conditions (glucose + air).
Up-regulated pathways (NES > 0) are colored red, while down-regulated pathways (NES < 0) are colored blue. B) Representative enrichment score for the PTS pathways (bar02060_PTS). Vertical bars represent the grouping pattern of individual genes of the PTS pathway based on their net enrichment scores. The heatmap below indicates the leading genes identified based on their enrichment scores. C) Ridge plots representing significantly dysregulated metabolic pathways in B. anthracis Wt grown under toxin-producing conditions (glucose + 5% CO2) versus non-toxin-producing conditions (no glucose + 5% CO2). Up-regulated pathways (NES > 0) are colored red, while down-regulated pathways (NES < 0) are colored blue. D) Representative enrichment score for the PTS pathways (bar02060_PTS). Vertical bars represent the grouping pattern of individual genes of the PTS pathway based on their net enrichment scores. The heatmap below indicates the leading genes identified based on their enrichment scores.
(DOCX)
S2 Fig

## A) Bubble plot showing the relative abundance of divergent carbon metabolism metabolites significantly dysregulated under different growth conditions in B. anthracis Wt and ΔatxA.
The color gradient (red to blue) indicates fold change in metabolite levels compared to air and no-glucose conditions. Bubble size represents the p-value as -log(p). B) Scatter plot of selected glycolysis (black dots) and TCA (grey dots) intermediates comparing several growth conditions. Growth conditions for each comparison are mentioned at the top of each graph. The comparisons are made as follows: Variable-1 vs Variable-2 (constant). The x-axis indicates fold change in metabolite levels and y-axis represents the p-value as -log(p).
(DOCX)
S3 Fig

## A) Coomassie-stained polyacrylamide gel of the elutes from co-affinity samples.
Lanes are marked from 1-7 for the list of strains and growth conditions used in the table below. M = Protein molecular ladder. B,C) Bar graphs showing the absolute abundance (y-axis) of peptides for respective proteins (Uniprot IDs, x-axis) identified from co-affinity purification samples. Cyan bars indicate abundance in the pulled-down sample, while red bars indicate background or non-specific proteins. Each protein is classified based on its molecular function in the table below. B) AtxA interactions identified from bacteria grown in air. C) AtxA interactions identified from bacteria grown in 5% CO2. Glucose was present in both conditions.
(DOCX)
S4 Fig

## A) Immunoblotting for anthrax toxin components (PagA and Lef) in B. anthracis WT, ΔptsG, and its complemented strain (ΔptsG-Comp).
Supernatant volumes were normalized against total cellular protein for comparative analysis. Representative graph of n = 2 experiments. B) Growth kinetics of all B. anthracis strains under toxin-producing conditions (glucose + 5% CO2). Each data point represents the average of three replicates. Representative image of n = 2 experiments. C) Heatmap showing the relative abundance of significantly altered metabolites in ΔptsG, Δpyc, and ΔptsG/Δpyc mutants compared to their respective abundance in B. anthracis WT strain grown under toxin-producing conditions (glucose + 5% CO2). The left heatmap shows the log2 fold change in abundance as a color gradient from blue (low abundance) to red (high abundance). The right heatmap corresponds to the p-value of each data point on the left heatmap, represented as a color gradient from grey (p > 0.1, insignificant) to orange (p = 0-0.01, highly significant). D) Representative FRET-FLIM based interactions in strains expressing different FRET partners. The violin/distribution plot represents the median GFP decay profile (in nanoseconds, ns) GFP variant C4 in the respective strains. The graph represents n = 2 experiments, * indicates p-value. E) Immunoblotting for PagA showing effects of loss of the EIIB domain of AtxA (AtxA-ΔEIIB-C4) on anthrax toxin expression. Having AtxA variants expressed in the background of B. anthracis ΔatxA strains, with plasmid pAMY expressing the respective AtxA variants. Representative image of n = 3 experiments.
(DOCX)
S5 Fig

## A, B) Alpha-fold predicted structure of WT AtxA dimer with the pagA promoter carrying AtxA-binding elements.
The two units of the AtxA dimer are shown in rainbow and golden colors. B) Zoomed image of the interaction between C402 of one unit (rainbow-colored) and H379 of the other unit (golden-colored). The electrostatic interaction zones of both residues are shown as white clouds around them. C) Virulence of parent and PTSglu and Pyc mutants. A. Survival curves of mice infected sub-cuteneously (s.c.) with spores B. anthracis are shown. C57BL/6J mice were injected s.c. with 8X106 CFU of the Wt (red line; n = 5), ΔptsG (green; n = 5), and ΔptsG/ Δpyc (black; n = 5).
(DOCX)
S1 File

## List of 291 significant (padj<0.05) differentially expressed genes in Bacillus anthracis, presented as log₂ fold change values.
Gene expression was compared between bacteria grown in NBY-G medium without NaHCO₃ under air conditions and those grown in NBY-G medium with 0.8% NaHCO3 under 5% CO2.
(XLSX)
S2 File

## List of co-purified proteins identified as AtxA-interacting partners from Bacillus anthracis cultures grown in NBY-G medium with 0.8% NaHCO3 under 5% CO2 or in air without NaHCO3.
Proteins were identified by mass spectrometry following co-affinity purification of AtxA-His6.
(XLSX)

We thank NIAID Research Technologies Branch (RTB) staff for their support with mass-spectroscopy and microscopy. We thank Dr. Kumaran Ramamurthi (National Cancer Institute/NIH) and Dr. Kevin McIver (University of Maryland) for providing pTN8 and pKSM879 plasmids, respectively.
 10.1371/journal.ppat.1013587.r001Decision Letter 0
McClaneBruceAcademic Editor© 2025 Bruce McClane2025Bruce McClanehttps://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.Submission Version0
4 Nov 2025

PPATHOGENS-D-25-02437
Environmental Regulation of Toxin Production in Bacillus anthracis
PLOS Pathogens
Dear Dr. Bothra,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Pathogens. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Pathogens's publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jan 03 2026 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plospathogens@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/ppathogens/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
* A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'. This file does not need to include responses to any formatting updates and technical items listed in the 'Journal Requirements' section below.
* A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
* An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, competing interests statement, or data availability statement, please make these updates within the submission form at the time of resubmission. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Bruce A. McClane
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Michael Wessels
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Sumita Bhaduri-McIntosh
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0003-2946-9497
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

Additional Editor Comments:

Your manuscript has been reviewed by three experts They each agreed that the work was significant for the field, performed at a high standard, and represented considerable effort. However, as detailed in their reviews, they did request that you consider some modifications, either to correct minor errors or to broaden the discussion to consider issues such as whether PtsG might contribute to virulence by impacting in vivo growth as well as toxin production or how conclusions from this study might relate to earlier work (e.g., work by Bier et al published in 2020). It does not appear that suitable revision will require additional experiments. Therefore, please consider and respond to the Reviewer suggestions, as listed in their reports.

Journal Requirements:

Please respond directly to this email and provide any known details concerning your material's license terms and permissions required for reuse, even if you have not yet obtained copyright permissions or are unsure of your material's copyright compatibility. Once you have responded and addressed all other outstanding technical requirements, you may resubmit your manuscript within Editorial Manager.  
Potential Copyright Issues: 
i) Figure 6. Please confirm whether you drew the images / clip-art within the figure panels by hand. If you did not draw the images, please provide (a) a link to the source of the images or icons and their license / terms of use; or (b) written permission from the copyright holder to publish the images or icons under our CC BY 4.0 license. Alternatively, you may replace the images with open source alternatives. See these open source resources you may use to replace images / clip-art:
- https://commons.wikimedia.org
- https://openclipart.org/.
Note: If the reviewer comments include a recommendation to cite specific previously published works, please review and evaluate these publications to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. There is no requirement to cite these works unless the editor has indicated otherwise.

Reviewers' Comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: In PPathogens-D-25-025437, the authors investigate the molecular mechanisms behind how CO2, glucose, and the AtxA regulator are linked to toxin production in B. anthracis. AtxA is known to be essential for toxin gene expression, contain PTS regulatory domains (PRDs) that can be phosphorylated on conserved histidine residues through an unknown mechanism, and have a C-terminal EIIB domain that is required for dimerization and activity. Recent work from Bier et al (2020) found that PTS EI/Hpr-activated promoter expression of AtxA, but not PRD phosphorylation; however, they couldn’t identify what PTS components might be involved. The authors have previously looked at toxin production conditions (CO2) on the B. anthracis transcriptome and initiate this study with an in-depth RNA-seq analysis and metabolomics of the combined CO2 + glucose conditions to show synergism on AtxA-dependent toxin production and metabolic transitions. They find that ∆atxA leads to reduced glucose uptake, suggesting a novel connection, and mutation in the conserved C-terminal cysteine leads to inactivity. However, deletion the PTSglu (∆ptsG) reduces toxin gene expression and attenuation in a mouse model. The authors use co-purification/pull down and FRET/FLIM to support a direct interaction between AtxA (mainly the EIIB domain) and the PTS glucose component PtsG. Finally, the use a pyruvate carboxylase (∆pyc) mutant to support their hypothesis that PEP levels drive PTS-AtxA interactions to enhance activity (ie, toxin production and virulence). The propose that AtxA is part of the PTS glu circuit, thus leading to the influence of glucose and CO2.
This manuscript represents a significant amount of work (RNAseq, metabolomics, mutational analysis, FRET/FLIM, animal studies) to address what is still an important but unanswered question not only for AtxA toxin regulation, but also for a number of homologous PRD-containing regulators in G+ pathogens…mainly, how does the PTS influence the PRD regulator based on environmental conditions. To date, direct interactions between PTS components and these regulators have been speculated but never demonstrated. So, the apparent interaction between AtxA and PtsG is significant and novel. The same can be said for AtxA acting within the PTS-Glu circuit as a means of having CO2 and glucose regulate toxin production. Thus, this work has broader impact outside of B. anthracis. Overall, the study addresses an important knowledge gap, the conclusions are supported by the data presented and the experiments well planned. Some minor comments are noted.
Reviewer #2: In this manuscript entitled “Environmental Regulation of Toxin Production in Bacillus anthracis”, Bothra and colleagues confirm a synergistic effect of glucose and CO2 on AtxA-dependent toxin production. Then they demonstrated that deletion of AtxA reduced glucose uptake in the cell, suggesting that AtxA may act within the glucose-PTS system, and AtxA interacts with the PTS glucose permease PtsG. They showed that residue C402 located in the EIIB domain of AtxA is essential for its interaction with PtsG and PtsG is required for full expression of toxin component and full virulence in a mouse model of infection. Finally, the authors propose AtxA as an integral component of the PTSglu. The study is well conducted with correct controls and bring new information on the link between environmental factors and toxin production in B. anthracis.
Reviewer #3: The manuscript by Bothra et al examines the environmental signals and molecular mechanisms that govern the activity of AtxA, a multidomain transcription factor that regulates toxin production and capsule synthesis of the bacterial pathogen Bacillus anthracis. Glucose and carbon dioxide have long been known to influence toxin production, but the direct method of regulation of these signals with regards to AtxA activity and the expression of the toxin genes has remained unclear. AtxA is classified as a PCVR [PTS-regulator domain (PRD)-containing pathogen virulence regulator] with its activity regulated by phosphorylation of His residues within the two AtxA PRDs. AtxA also contains a putative EIIB domain characteristic of PTS sugar transport EII complexes. In this work, the authors provide data supporting a synergy between glucose metabolism and anaplerosis for the induction of toxin production as well as provide evidence for a physical interaction between AtxA and the glucose-specific PTS component PtsG that is critical for bacterial virulence.
The identification of the direct link between sugar metabolism, anaplerosis, and AtxA activity is a significant step forward in current understanding of toxin regulation. The current manuscript is a tour de force in terms of the number of methods and approaches used to decipher the model presented in Fig. 6. Overall, the data provided are convincing, although I have some questions (noted below) with regards to the virulence defect of the ptsG deletion strain in mice. It would seem that the authors are indicating that the principal role for PtsG is its role in toxin induction, however it’s not clear to me how one can completely separate toxin induction from a possible role for PtsG in bacterial growth and carbon metabolism within the host. Might both be important?
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: None
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Specific comments:
1. Might it be possible that the AtxA EIIB C204 site is phosphorylated? This possibility was recently proposed (although not directly demonstrated) for the Streptococcus pyogenes Mga transcriptional regulator, which also contains two PRDs and a EIIB-like domain with a key C residue that appears to link carbon metabolism with Mga-regulated virulence gene expression (Woo et al, Microbiology Spectrum 2024).
2. Starting line 277: Regarding the attenuation of the ptsG deletion strains – while I appreciate that the subcutaneous injection of vegetative cells into a mouse allows one to bypass the germination step required for spores, I don’t completely follow that one can conclude that PTS-Glu is required as a sensor for toxin production vs required for bacterial survival and replication in the host as a result of its role in carbon metabolism. Are the authors concluding that toxin production is key based on the timing of mice succumbing to infection by vegetative cells? Would vegetative cells that constitutively produce toxin bypass the need for PtsG?
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: 1. A key finding in this study was a physical interaction between AtxA and PtsG (PTS-glu) identified using a co-purification protocol. Yet, the authors find quite few other proteins that also come down with AtxA-His other than PtsG. One issue that should be simple to address is that it was quite difficult to figure out what the proteins were identified in the supplemental table. It was hard to figure out from the ORF/Protein designations given. I’m guessing most have gene names that ould be used or presented. The total number of interacting proteins was a bit surprising, but the authors suggest it’s normal for a transcription factor. Is there support for that in the literature and, if so, they should reference here. However, it does place more emphasis on the validation protocol for the interaction (FRET/FLIM). I know even this amount of experimentation was quite a bit of work but was surprised that the authors didn’t try do a reciprocal pull down/co-purification with PtsG-His which would have been typical. Was it tried and failed? Are there other PTS components beyond PtsG that might also interact?
2. The authors address in the last paragraph of the Discussion their conclusions and model here in relation to those from the Koehler and Perego labs related to phosphorylation, particularly the Bier et al 2020 study. This paragraph should be expanded a bit to encompass the model of PTS impacting atxA expression through an unknown PTS regulator. Is there a role for transcriptional regulation of atxA in the model presented by the authors or in interpretation of the data? This discussion in important to try and bring together the full picture of AtxA and toxin regulation from the literature.
Reviewer #2: I only have minor comments and correction.
L194 “As seen in Figure 1C, omission of either glucose or 5% CO2 from the growth medium results in the loss of toxin induction.” It’s not in Figure 1C but rather 1E
L196, for clarity it should be precised that there is glucose in the medium “Therefore, we compared the AtxA interactome in bacteria grown with glucose and with and without external 5% CO2”
Figure 3A and B: In the interactome study, does the authors identified protein involved in phosphorylation/ dephosphorylation of AtxA?
Figure 3C, is the scale of the different images the same? The FRET-FLIM experiment could have been performed in presence of CO2-bicarbonate, especially because CO2-bicarbonate might modify the conformation of AtxA and consequently its aggregation but also its interaction with proteins, and especially because the authors identified interaction between AtxA and PtsG in condition with 5% CO2 (figure3A). This is also true for the supplementary figure 4D, where the faster lifetime decay observed in AtxA-EIIB-C4 alone might not be observed in presence of CO2 bicarbonate.
Line 238 “Despite PtsG being a critical glucose transporter in B. anthracis” To confirm this, it could have been interesting to measure glucose uptake in the ptsG mutant.
Line 258 add figure 4B
Line 264 Please correct CRH motif by CIXR motif
Line 294, the author injected spores of the ΔptsG and ΔptsG/Δpyc strains, but did they checked the ability to germinate of this spore?
What is the diet of the mice used in this study? Does the diet of the mouse might influence the outcomes? High glucose diet should increase toxin synthesis and consequently virulence.
Figure 6 did not show interaction between AtxA and pyc, what is the authors hypothesis about this interaction?
Materials and methods
Line 484 please correct average AD600 by average OD600
Line 520 please insert the correct reference instead of DOI
Line 555 please replace update by uptake
Legend figure 2A Line 824 “growth conditions in in RM” remove in
Reviewer #3: Minor comments
1. Line 99: this section title is a bit awkward. Suggest changing it to ‘Anthrax toxin production is dependent on a central carbon metabolism gene’
2. Fig. 1C: I am not familiar with the True/False designation used for 1C. It would be helpful to include some description of what this panel is showing.
3. Line 420: incomplete sentence, “Also, how these extracellular bacteria adapted their metabolic pathways to survive under different environmental conditions.”
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]

Figure resubmission:

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that authors of applicable studies deposit laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
10.1371/journal.ppat.1013587.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
14 Nov 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.pdf
10.1371/journal.ppat.1013587.r003Decision Letter 1
McClaneBruceAcademic Editor© 2025 Bruce McClane2025Bruce McClanehttps://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.Submission Version1
18 Nov 2025

Dear Dr. Bothra,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Environmental Regulation of Toxin Production in Bacillus anthracis' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Bruce A. McClane
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Alice Prince
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Sumita Bhaduri-McIntosh
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0003-2946-9497
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064
***********************************************************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
10.1371/journal.ppat.1013587.r004Acceptance letter
McClaneBruceAcademic Editor© 2025 Bruce McClane2025Bruce McClanehttps://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.Dear Dr. Bothra,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "Environmental Regulation of Toxin Production in Bacillus anthracis," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the pre-publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Pearls, Reviews, Opinions, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript, if you opted to have an early version of your article, will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
For Research Articles, you will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Sumita Bhaduri-McIntosh
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0003-2946-9497
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064