pmcPLoS PathogPLoS Pathog349plospathplosPLOS Pathogens1553-73661553-7374PLOSPMC12965680PMC12965680.112965680129656804177475610.1371/journal.ppat.1014032PPATHOGENS-D-25-013681Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyVirologyViral ReplicationBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsPost-Translational ModificationPhosphorylationBiology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesRNA virusesOrthomyxovirusesInfluenza virusesInfluenza A virusH1N1Biology and life sciencesMicrobiologyMedical microbiologyMicrobial pathogensViral pathogensOrthomyxovirusesInfluenza virusesInfluenza A virusH1N1Medicine and health sciencesPathology and laboratory medicinePathogensMicrobial pathogensViral pathogensOrthomyxovirusesInfluenza virusesInfluenza A virusH1N1Biology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesViral pathogensOrthomyxovirusesInfluenza virusesInfluenza A virusH1N1Biology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesMolecular Probe TechniquesImmunoblottingResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesMolecular Probe TechniquesImmunoblottingBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyVirologyViral Transmission and InfectionBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionResearch and analysis methodsBiological culturesCell linesHeLa cellsResearch and analysis methodsBiological culturesCell culturesCultured tumor cellsHeLa cellsBiology and life sciencesBiochemistryProteinsDNA-binding proteinsTranscription FactorsBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionGene RegulationTranscription FactorsBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsRegulatory ProteinsTranscription FactorsThe CD97-PPM1G axis dampens antiviral immunity by dephosphorylating IRF7 in type I interferon pathway
CD97-PPM1G dampens interferon response through IRF7https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6658-828XChangHuasongData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationVisualizationWriting – original draft . The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (https://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/?pxid=PXD073631) via the iProX partner repository [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky869 and https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab1081] with the dataset identifier PXD073631. The RNA sequencing data have been deposited in NCBI under the accession code PRJNA1416578, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/1416578.PLOS Publication Stagevor-update-to-uncorrected-proofPublication Update2026-03-06

## Data Availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available within the article or the . The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (https://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/?pxid=PXD073631) via the iProX partner repository [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky869 and https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab1081] with the dataset identifier PXD073631. The RNA sequencing data have been deposited in NCBI under the accession code PRJNA1416578, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/1416578.

## Introduction
The innate immune response mediated by interferons plays a crucial role in controlling viral infections through the action of downstream interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) [ ]. When encountering viral infections, pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) identify pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), initiating the production of IFN-I via downstream signaling pathways. Viral RNA is identified by RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs), encompassing retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I), Melanoma Differentiation-Associated Protein 5 (MDA5), and Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology 2 (LGP2), culminating in MAVS-IRF3/IRF7-mediated transcription of specific genes and the generation of IFN-I [ , ].
IRF7 can be phosphorylated and activated through both the TBK1/IKKε and TRIF-dependent pathways, which are downstream of cytoplasmic RNA sensors [ ]. Once activated, IRF7 translocates to the nucleus, forms dimers, and initiates transcriptional activation, promoting the expression of IFN-α and IFN-β [ ]. As a crucial enhancer in the induction of IFN-I genes downstream of PRRs, the positive feedback loop involving IRF7-mediated IFN-I ensures the sustained production of substantial amounts of IFN-I. This robust response effectively combats infections caused by pathogenic microorganisms. Nevertheless, overactive immune responses can lead to severe pathological consequences, including the onset of autoimmune disorders [ ]. Therefore, the signaling transduction of IFN-I requires precise modulation to prevent immune dysregulation and maintain physiological balance. The regulation of IRF7 is governed by a complex network of mechanisms, which can either amplify or attenuate the IFN-I signaling cascade. For instance, the neutral E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase 3 (NEURL3) facilitates K63-linked ubiquitination of IRF7 to enhance the innate antiviral response [ ]. HSP70 exerts a negative regulation of IRF7 phosphorylation, leading to a reduction in IFN-I signaling [ ]. The p200 family protein IFI204 is involved in the negative regulation of the IRF7-mediated IFN-I response following RNA virus infection by inhibiting the binding of IRF7 to its specific promoter [ ]. However, the elaborate regulatory mechanisms of IRF7 still need to be investigated.
Protein phosphatases and kinases play a pivotal role in governing various cellular processes such as proliferation, differentiation, and stress responses [ ]. They achieve this regulation by controlling reversible protein phosphorylation, which is a crucial post-translational modification [ ]. PPM1G is a member of the PP2C family of serine/threonine (Ser/Thr) protein phosphatases [ ]. Reported functions of PPM1G include regulating protein translation and cell growth by dephosphorylating 4E-binding protein 1 [ ], participating in the exchange and dephosphorylation of H2A-H2B [ ], and being involved in the dephosphorylation of MAVS/STING [ ]. Nonetheless, it is yet to be determined whether PPM1G targets other innate immune proteins to modulate IFN-I signaling.
CD97 is a member of the Adhesion G protein-coupled receptors (AGPCR) family. We previously reported that CD97 negatively regulates RIG-I-mediated innate immune signaling in response to RNA viruses [ ]. However, it remains unclear whether CD97 influences innate immunity through other mechanisms. Here, we demonstrated that CD97 signaling establishes a negative feedback loop, restraining IRF7-mediated IFN-I expression in a PPM1G-dependent manner, potentially aiding viruses in evading immune elimination. Our findings also offer mechanistic insight into the CD97-PPM1G axis-mediated posttranslational modification of IRF7, shedding light on its role in negatively regulating the IFN-I response.

## Results

## CD97 enhances the replication of BEFV, SeV, and H1N1
Our previous finding that CD97 promotes the replication of VSV and SARS-CoV-2 has led us to further investigate the broader impact and mechanistic role of CD97 in the replication of diverse RNA viruses [ ]. To evaluate the impact of CD97 on Bovine Ephemeral Fever Virus (BEFV) replication, we generated Baby Hamster Syrian Kidney (BHK-21) cells overexpressing CD97, as confirmed by immunoblot analysis ( ). Upon BEFV infection in BHK-21 cells, the overexpression of CD97 led to a marked increase in the expression of BEFV nucleoprotein (N) compared to cells constructed with empty vector (EV) control ( ). Indeed, overexpression of CD97 significantly elevated the viral titer of BEFV at both 24 hours post-infection (hpi) and 48 hpi ( ). In contrast, knockdown of CD97 in BHK-21 cells results in a dramatic decrease in BEFV replication, as evidenced by reduced expression of BEFV N and viral titers ( - ). Furthermore, we generated A549 cells overexpressing CD97 to investigate the replication of Sendai virus (SeV) and Influenza A subtype H1N1 ( ). The results revealed that elevating CD97 expression led to an increase in SeV P and H1N1 M mRNA transcript ( and ), suggesting that CD97 promotes SeV and H1N1 replication. As anticipated, silencing CD97 in A549 cells suppressed the replication of both viruses ( - ). Collectively, these findings suggest that CD97 facilitates the replication of BEFV, SeV, and H1N1.
 

## CD97 attenuates the IFN-I response triggered by BEFV, SeV, and H1N1
As CD97 plays a role in virus replication, we investigated its involvement in the antiviral IFN-I response induced by BEFV, SeV, and H1N1. Following BEFV infection in CD97-overexpressing BHK-21 cells, IFN-β and ISG15 mRNA transcripts were diminished, whereas the knockdown of CD97 elevated their levels ( and ). Similar outcomes were evident in H1N1-infected A549 cells ( and ). To further confirm our findings, primary macrophages (PMs) were isolated from CD97-deficient (CD97-/-) mice and wild-type (CD97+/+) mice to investigate the IFN-I response. Flow cytometry was employed to confirm the CD97 deficiency ( ). As anticipated, CD97-/- PMs exhibited increased IFN-β and ISG15 mRNA transcripts induced by BEFV ( ). Importantly, CD97-/- PMs exhibited elevated IFN-β secretion, as detected by ELISA ( ). Likewise, CD97-/- PMs presented a heightened IFN-I response induced by SeV ( and ). These results were also demonstrated in bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDM) ( ). Taken together, these findings suggest that CD97 negatively regulates the IFN-I response induced by BEFV, SeV, and H1N1.
 

## CD97 interacts with the protein phosphatase PPM1G
To delve deeper into the mechanisms underlying CD97 involvement in the antiviral IFN-I response, we employed immunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry (IP-MS) to identify the proteins that interact with CD97. A schematic overview of the IP-MS approach is illustrated in . A total of 295 proteins were identified as interacting with CD97. Of these, 103 were exclusive to the CD97 interactome ( ), while those in the EV interactome were considered nonspecific bindings ( ). Furthermore, the biological processes associated with CD97-interacting proteins were analyzed using Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis. The GO analysis identified biological processes involved in protein-containing complex organization, protein import into the nucleus, and post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression ( ). Meanwhile, KEGG analysis identified processes including Human T-cell leukemia virus 1 infection, nucleocytoplasmic transport and Coronavirus disease- COVID-19 ( ). These data indicated that CD97 regulates viral replication through complex mechanisms.
 We hypothesize that some of the 103 proteins interacting with CD97 may regulate IFN-I signaling, with PPM1G potentially mediating the dephosphorylation of key immune proteins in this pathway. To confirm the interaction between CD97 and PPM1G, HEK-293T cells were transfected with Flag-CD97 and HA-PPM1G plasmids, followed by a Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) assay. The results showed that CD97 interacted with PPM1G, as demonstrated using either HA or Flag magnetic beads ( and ). The endogenous interaction was further confirmed using specific antibody ( ). CD97 was mutated at the C-terminal and N-terminal regions as previously described [ ]. Co-IP results showed that the C-terminal, but not N-terminal, of CD97 interacted with PPM1G ( ). The C-terminus of CD97 contains intracellular domains, the sequences of which were analyzed through cross-species comparisons ( ). We found that the sequence in the intracellular region is conserved. Previous studies indicated that the PRR motif of G protein-coupled receptors serves as an important binding site for intracellular signaling molecules [ ]. To assess the interaction with PPM1G, arginine (R) residues at positions 819 and 822 of human CD97 were mutated to alanine (A), which resulted in a significant decrease in interaction with PPM1G, as observed in the Co-IP assay ( ). This suggests that Arg-819 and Arg-822 residues of CD97 are crucial for binding PPM1G. Taken together, these data suggest that PPM1G may be involved in the CD97-regulated antiviral innate immune response.

## CD97 enhances virus replication through PPM1G-mediated downregulation of IFN-I
To investigate the mechanism of PPM1G involvement, we generated PPM1G-overexpressing BHK-21 cells to examine its role in the antiviral IFN-I response. Successful overexpression of PPM1G was confirmed by immunoblot analysis ( ). As anticipated, the overexpression of PPM1G suppressed IFN-β mRNA expression while increasing viral titers ( and ). In contrast, PPM1G knockout promoted IFN-β mRNA levels and inhibited viral replication ( - ).
 Given the CD97-PPM1G interaction, we investigated whether CD97 suppresses IFN-I signaling via PPM1G to facilitate viral replication. Accordingly, we assessed BEFV replication in CD97-overexpressing PPM1G-knockout cells. The results showed that CD97 failed to significantly promote BEFV replication following PPM1G knockout, as evidenced by BEFV G expression levels and viral titers ( and ). Similarly, we also generated PPM1G-overexpressing and PPM1G-knockout HeLa cells to assess VSV replication ( and ). Consistent results demonstrated that CD97 promotes VSV replication by inhibiting IFN-I signaling through PPM1G ( - ). Collectively, these findings demonstrate that CD97 facilitates viral replication by suppressing IFN-I signaling through PPM1G.

## CD97 promotes PPM1G-mediated dephosphorylation of IRF7
Since PPM1G suppresses IFN-I signaling, we speculated that it targets and negatively regulates a key adaptor in the innate immune pathway. To test our hypothesis, we performed Co-IP to investigate the interaction between PPM1G and key adaptor proteins in the IFN-I signaling pathway. The results demonstrated that PPM1G strongly interacts with IRF3 and IRF7, has a weak interaction with MAVS as previously reported [ ], and shows no interaction with TBK1 ( ). To eliminate nonspecific interactions, we employed Co-IP with both HA magnetic beads and a PPM1G antibody to further validate the interactions between PPM1G and IRF7/IRF3. The results provided additional evidence supporting their interaction ( , , and ). Importantly, we discovered a direct interaction between PPM1G and IRF7/3 through GST-pull down assays ( and ). Based on the characteristics of PPM1G, we hypothesized that it dephosphorylates IRF7 or IRF3. To validate our hypothesis, we evaluated the phosphorylation levels of IRF3 and IRF7 following the overexpression of PPM1G. The results demonstrated that PPM1G decreases the phosphorylation of IRF7 in a dose-dependent manner, but does not affect IRF3 phosphorylation during BEFV infection ( ). Moreover, PPM1G significantly suppressed IRF7 phosphorylation at 12 and 24 h post-infection with BEFV but had no significant effect on IRF3 or NF-κB p65 phosphorylation ( ). These findings indicate that PPM1G binds to IRF7 and suppresses its phosphorylation triggered by viral infection.
 Previous studies have shown that the aspartic acid residue at position 496 is essential for its dephosphorylation activity [ ]. We generated the D496A mutant of PPM1G to examine its impact on IRF7 phosphorylation and found that, unlike the wild-type PPM1G, the PPM1G-D496A mutant failed to suppress IKKε-induced IRF7 phosphorylation ( ). This result suggests that PPM1G decreases IRF7 phosphorylation through its enzymatic activity. Moreover, we evaluated the effect of PPM1G and PPM1G-D496A on IRF7- and IRF3-induced IFN-β and Interferon-Stimulated Response Element (ISRE) promoter activities. The results indicated that PPM1G inhibits the activity of the IFN-β and ISRE promoters induced by IRF7, whereas PPM1G-D496A does not affect these promoters ( and ). However, neither PPM1G nor PPM1G (D496A) had any effect on the IFN-β and ISRE promoter activities induced by IRF3 ( and ). To further prove the relevance of PPM1G activity, we analyzed its effect on constitutively active phosphomimetic IRF7/3. The results showed that PPM1G did not inhibit the activation of the IFN-β and ISRE promoters by IRF7/3(5D) ( - ). These data demonstrate that PPM1G specifically inhibits IRF7 phosphorylation.
To further verify the role of CD97 in PPM1G-mediated IRF7 dephosphorylation, we performed co-transfection experiments with CD97 and PPM1G. The results demonstrated that co-expression of CD97 and PPM1G synergistically suppressed IRF7 phosphorylation during VSV infection ( ). Overexpression of CD97 failed to inhibit IRF7 phosphorylation upon PPM1G knockout ( and ), confirming that CD97 suppresses IRF7 phosphorylation via PPM1G. Using co-immunoprecipitation with differentially tagged IRF7/3, we further confirmed that the inhibition of IRF7, but not IRF3, dimerization by CD97 is dependent on PPM1G ( and ). Furthermore, in line with the observation that CD97 knockout promotes IFN-I production in BMDMs, we confirmed that CD97 knockout also enhances IRF7 phosphorylation ( ). We also assessed whether CD97 influences the interaction between PPM1G and IRF7. Overexpression of CD97 was found to enhance the binding between PPM1G and IRF7 ( ). Since phosphorylated IRF7 translocates to the nucleus to initiate IFN-β transcription, we next examined the impact of CD97 on this process using a nucleocytoplasmic separation assay. The results revealed that CD97 overexpression markedly reduced the nuclear translocation of phosphorylated IRF7 following VSV infection, without affecting the distribution of total IRF7 ( ). Collectively, these findings suggest that CD97 promotes PPM1G-mediated dephosphorylation of IRF7, thereby suppressing the IFN-I response.

## CD97 promotes the transcription of PPM1G through IKZF1
To investigate whether CD97 regulates PPM1G through distinct mechanisms, we first examined PPM1G transcription following CD97 overexpression. The results showed that CD97 overexpression significantly increased the mRNA levels of PPM1G ( ). Similarly, PPM1G protein expression was elevated under both mock and BEFV infection conditions upon CD97 overexpression ( ). Conversely, CD97 knockout suppressed PPM1G expression in both HeLa cells and PMs ( and ), suggesting that CD97 promotes PPM1G transcription. To identify the transcription factors involved in PPM1G regulation, we constructed a luciferase reporter driven 2000 bp fragment of the human PPM1G promoter. Five truncated promoter variants (designated M1 to M5) were generated and their luciferase activities evaluated in HEK-293T cells ( ). The results indicated that promoters M1, M2, and M5 exhibited high luciferase activity, suggesting that the key regulatory region is located between positions -1223 bp and -639 bp ( ).
 We next performed transcriptomic analysis in CD97-overexpressing cells ( ) and predicted potential transcription factor binding sites within the PPM1G promoter using the JASPAR vertebrate database ( ). By integrating these datasets, five candidate transcription factors were identified. Among them, only IKZF1 expression was significantly upregulated by CD97 overexpression under both BEFV and VSV infection conditions, while the expression of SOX10, NEUROD1, CTF1, and Cdx2 remained unchanged ( and ). Further analysis showed that IKZF1 overexpression enhanced the luciferase activity of the PPM1G-M5 promoter construct ( ), and increased both the mRNA and protein levels of PPM1G during VSV infection ( and ). To evaluate whether CD97 regulates PPM1G transcription through IKZF1, we silenced IKZF1 expression using siRNA [ ]. The results demonstrated that CD97 could no longer significantly upregulate PPM1G mRNA levels upon IKZF1 knockdown ( ). Collectively, these findings suggest that CD97 promotes PPM1G transcription via the transcription factor IKZF1.

## CD97 deficiency in mice are more resistant to viral infections in vivo
To further investigate the role of CD97 in host defense against viral infection in vivo, we administered nasal infections with H1N1 to both CD97-/- and CD97+/+ mice. RT‒qPCR assays showed that CD97 deficiency significantly reduced H1N1 M mRNA levels while increasing IFN-β mRNA levels in lung and nasal turbinate tissues ( - ). H&E staining of the lungs following H1N1 infection showed that CD97-/- mice exhibited less thickening of alveolar walls compared to CD97+/+ mice ( ). Additionally, we observed that CD97+/+ mice began to lose weight on day 2, reaching a minimum by day 9, whereas CD97-/- mice experienced almost no weight loss following low-dose H1N1 infection ( ). When the infection dose was increased, the results revealed that CD97-/- mice exhibited significantly improved survival compared to CD97+/+ mice, as shown by the survival assay ( ). Collectively, these findings demonstrate that CD97-/- mice exhibit elevated IFN-I levels, which contribute to the attenuation of viral replication in vivo.
 

## The compound SANG attenuates viral replication by suppressing CD97 expression
To further validate the role of CD97 on viral replication, we employed the compound SANG to investigate its impact on CD97-mediated viral replication, as previously described [ ]. The results showed that SANG significantly reduced the expression of CD97 at concentrations of 1 µM and 2 µM in A549 cells ( ). A549 cells were then infected with H1N1 and SeV, followed by treatment with 1 µM SANG. The results indicated that SANG inhibited the mRNA levels of H1N1 M and SeV P. ( and ). Moreover, we examined the IFN-I response and IRF7 phosphorylation following SANG treatment. As expected, SANG decreased viral protein and CD97/PPM1G expression, and enhanced IRF7 phosphorylation upon SeV and BEFV infection ( and ). Consistently, SANG also promoted the IFN-I response upon viral infection ( and ). Most importantly, SANG improved by approximately 20% survival in CD97+/+ mice but did not further increase survival in CD97-/- mice ( and ). Taken together, these data suggest that SANG inhibits viral replication by suppressing the expression of CD97.
 

## Discussion
To maintain effective antiviral immunity while preventing autoimmune pathology, organisms require precise regulation of innate immune responses to balance immune activation and suppression [ ]. IRF7, a master transcriptional regulator of IFN-I signaling, undergoes phosphorylation via upstream innate immune pathways [ ]. In this study, we identified CD97 as a critical negative regulator of IRF7-mediated IFN-I signaling ( ). Our findings demonstrate that the protein phosphatase PPM1G specifically dephosphorylates IRF7, consequently suppressing IFN-I production and facilitating viral replication. CD97 overexpression promoted PPM1G recruitment to enhance IRF7 dephosphorylation. Furthermore, CD97 upregulated PPM1G expression through activation of the transcription factor IKZF1, resulting in sustained IRF7 inactivation.
 Protein dephosphorylation is essential for the termination of signaling, with protein phosphatases serving as the key enzymes responsible for removing phosphate groups from target proteins [ ]. Innate immune signaling can be regulated by protein phosphatases through the dephosphorylation of immune adaptor proteins. For example, PPM1B serves as a negative regulator of antiviral innate immunity by directly dephosphorylating TBK1, thereby suppressing its activity and downstream signaling [ ]; PPP6C-mediated dephosphorylation of STING serves as a critical regulatory mechanism to limit excessive STING-dependent cytokine production, thereby preventing potential autoimmune pathogenesis [ ]; PP1α, PP1β, and PP1γ subunits inhibit IRF7 phosphorylation triggered by Newcastle disease virus infection [ ]. In this study, we demonstrated that PPM1G directly interacts with IRF7 and suppresses its phosphorylation triggered by various viruses, which facilitate viral replication by dampening the IFN-I signaling response. Our findings provide novel mechanistic insights into the regulatory role of protein phosphatases in IRF7-mediated innate immune responses.
Phosphorylation constitutes the primary activation mechanism for IRF7, governing its nuclear translocation, dimerization, and transcriptional activity in IFN-I responses. Studies have reported that protein kinases such as TBK1 [ ], IKKε [ ], IRAK1 [ ], and IKKα [ ] are the key kinases for catalyzing the phosphorylation of IRF7. However, the mechanisms underlying the negative regulation of IRF7 have remained largely unclear. Our results demonstrate that CD97 facilitates the recruitment of PPM1G to suppress IRF7 phosphorylation triggered by various viruses, thereby downregulating IFN-I signaling. In addition, the TLR3 agonist poly(I:C), added to the cell culture medium, was used to assess IRF7 activation via alternative pathways. We found that the CD97-PPM1G axis consistently promoted IRF7 dephosphorylation ( ). This suggests that the influence of CD97-PPM1G on IRF7 may not be limited to the IFN-I pathway, warranting further investigation. Although our previous findings showed that CD97 suppresses RIG-I-mediated innate immune response [ ], the promotion of viral replication by CD97 significantly decreased following PPM1G knockout, suggesting that CD97 modulates IFN-I signaling through multiple mechanisms.
CD97 interacts with various cellular molecules via its cellular domain to regulate tumorigenic processes [ ] and cell communication [ ]. However, the interaction between CD97 and protein phosphatase in regulating targeted molecules remains obscure. GPR54, another GPCR, recruits calcineurin to dephosphorylate TBK1, thereby negatively regulating virus-induced IFN-I signaling [ ]. Additionally, GRP54 interacts with PP2A through the PRR motif in its C-terminal domain [ ]. We identified R819 and R822 as critical conserved residues mediating the specific interaction between CD97 and protein phosphatase PPM1G. These findings suggest that CD97, analogous to GPR54’s recruitment of calcineurin, recruits PPM1G to dephosphorylate IRF7. This function could be mediated by CD97 on the plasma membrane or in its internalized form. As previously reported, PPM1G, while primarily nuclear, exhibits some cytoplasmic signal [ , ]. This observation suggests that its recruitment likely involves translocation to the cytoplasm induced by viral infection or IFN-I signaling. This nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling behavior is shared by other phosphatases, such as PP2A [ ] and Pez [ ]. These proposed mechanisms warrant further investigation.
Notably, CD97 was also found to promote the mRNA transcription of PPM1G. We used a CD97(R819/822A) mutant to assess IFN-I signaling. Compared to wild-type CD97, the mutant significantly abrogated the inhibition of IFN-I signaling ( and ). However, it still promoted PPM1G expression to a similar extent ( ). These results suggest that the recruitment of PPM1G by CD97 is essential for IFN-I inhibition. Through RNA sequencing and prediction analyses, we identified IKZF1 as the transcription factor regulating PPM1G, with this process being mediated by CD97. Our study provides the first evidence that CD97 modulates the IKZF1-PPM1G-IRF7 regulatory axis to control antiviral IFN-I signaling. These findings establish a novel mechanism by which CD97 coordinates with protein phosphatases to fine-tune innate immune responses. Furthermore, we observed that viral infection downregulates CD97 expression at a later stage, suggesting a host-driven feedback strategy. We propose that viral infection or ligand [ ] may activate CD97 at both the mRNA and protein levels. A feedback mechanism may then function to balance the immune response by suppressing low-level IFN-I signaling, the precise regulation of which warrants further investigation.
In summary, our study establishes PPM1G as a critical checkpoint in IFN-I signaling that negatively regulates IRF7 activation. We elucidated a novel immunoregulatory axis between the CD97 and PPM1G, demonstrating their coordinated control of antiviral responses. Using CD97-deficient mice and the compound SANG, we validated CD97’s immunomodulatory function, offering a promising avenue for the treatment of viral diseases and drug design.

## Materials and methods

## Ethics statement
All animal experimentation was conducted in strict accordance with the State Council-approved People’s Republic of China Regulations on the Administration of Experimental Animal Affairs (1 November 1988). Mice were handled in compliance with the animal use policies set by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at Shandong Normal University (permission number: AEECSDNU2024074).

## Cell lines, mice and viruses
The cell lines used in this study included human cervical carcinoma cell (HeLa), Baby Hamster Kidney (BHK-21), Human alveolar epithelial cells (A549), and Human embryonic kidney cells (HEK-293T). These cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM; Shandong Sparkjade Biotechnology, CA0004–500ML) within a humidified incubator at 37°C with 5% CO2. The medium was enriched with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS; ExCell Bio, FSP500) and a penicillin-streptomycin solution (100 μg/mL; Beijing Labgic Technology, Bl505A).
B6;129P2-Adgre5tm1Dgen/JC57BL/6J mice, sourced from the Jackson Laboratory (JAX stock code 005788), were used in this study. Genotyping was performed according to a JAX-optimized protocol (28954). The BEFV and VSV strain utilized in this research was propagated in BHK-21 cells, while H1N1 and SeV strains were propagated in chicken embryos.

## Antibodies and chemicals
Rabbit anti-Flag-Tag antibody (AB0028), Rabbit anti-HA-Tag antibody (AB0025), Rabbit anti-β-actin antibody (AB0061), Rabbit anti-p-IRF3 antibody (CY6575), Rabbit anti-IRF3 antibody (CY5779), Rabbit anti-IRF7 antibody (CY5645), Rabbit anti-VSV-G antibody (AB0053), Rabbit anti-PPM1G antibody (CY7286), Rabbit anti-GAPDH antibody (AB0038), Rabbit anti-LaminA/C antibody (CY9727), Rabbit anti-GST antibody (AB0055), Rabbit anti-IKZF1 antibody (CY8190), Rabbit anti-SOX10 antibody (CY5826), Rabbit anti-NEUROD1 antibody (CY6781), and Rabbit anti-Cdx2 antibody (CY5117) were purchased from Abways Biotechnology Co.,Ltd. Rabbit anti-p-IRF7 antibody (24129S) was purchased from Cell Signaling Technology. Rabbit anti-CD97 antibody (clone ERP4427; ab108368) was purchased from Abcam. Rabbit anti-CD97 antibody (66972–1-Ig) was purchased from Proteintech Group, Inc. Sanguinarine (HY-N0052) were purchased from MedChemExpress.

## Generation of stable overexpressing and knockout cells
To generate CD97-overexpressing BHK-21 and A549 cells, as well as PPM1G-overexpressing HeLa cells, genes were synthesized from dsDNA templates of various species via PCR. Lentivirus packaging was performed to transfect the corresponding plasmids, following previously described protocols [ ]. After three days, cells were selected using puromycin. The overexpression and knockout of the genes were confirmed through immunoblotting.

## Viral infection
Six- to eight-week-old C57BL/6J mice were infected with H1N1 via intranasal injection, as previously described [ ]. Mouse weight was monitored for 12 days following the intranasal injection of H1N1 (10 MLD50), and survival was tracked for 14 days after intranasal injection of H1N1 (50 MLD50). RT‒qPCR was conducted to assess the expression of IFN-β and H1N1 M in various organs. Additionally, samples from virus-infected mice were subjected to H&E staining at the specified time points.

## siRNA silencing and RT–qPCR
siRNA was transfected into BHK-21 or A549 cells at a final concentration of 30 pM using the Attractene transfection reagent (301007; QIAGEN). The siRNA sequences used were provided by Beijing Tsingke Biotechnology Co., Ltd., and specific sequences are listed in .
Following the method described by Chang et al. [ ], RT–qPCR was employed to measure mRNA levels. After virus challenge, total RNA was extracted with the Total RNA Extraction Kit (AC0205-B, Shandong Sparkjade Biotechnology Co., Ltd). Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized using the RT Mix Kit with gDNA Clean for qPCR Ver.2 (AG11728, Accurate Biology). mRNA expression levels were quantified with the ChamQ Universal SYBR qPCR Master Mix (Q711, Vazyme Biotech) and analyzed using the 2-ΔΔCT method. Primer sequences for qPCR were designed with Primer Premier 6.0 software and are listed in .

## Immunoblotting and co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP)
The specified plasmids transfected HEK-293T cells for 36 hours. Washing the cells with PBS, the cells were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer (New Cell & Molecular Biotech, WB3100) and then kept on ice for 20 minutes. Co-IP was performed using anti-HA-tag mAb-magnetic beads (M132-11, MBL Life Science) or anti-DDDDK-tag mAb-magnetic beads (M185-11R, MBL Life Science) at 4°C for 2 hours. For immunoprecipitation of endogenous PPM1G, magnetic beads coupled with specific commercially PPM1G antibody. Following immunoprecipitation, the beads were washed three times with lysis buffer. The immunoprecipitates were eluted using SDS loading buffer (Beyotime, P0015) and denatured at 95°C for 10 minutes. To reduce nonspecific binding, the blots were blocked with Tris-buffered saline-Tween (TBST) containing 5% nonfat dry milk. Primary antibodies specific to the proteins of interest were applied, and the membranes were washed. Enhanced chemiluminescence reagents (ED0015-C; Shandong Sparkjade Biotechnology) were used as per the manufacturer’s instructions to visualize the membranes, as previously described [ ]. For a pull-down assay, purified GST-PPM1G or GST from Escherichia coli and attached to glutathione (GSH) agarose beads was incubated with HA-tagged IRF7/IRF3, which had been expressed in HEK-293T cells.

## Dual-luciferase reporter assay
HEK-293T cells (2 × 105) were seeded in 24-well plates and transfected with pRL-TK (10 ng; a Renilla luciferase plasmid), firefly luciferase (100 ng), and various concentrations of either control or protein-expressing plasmids. After 24 hours, the cells were harvested, and firefly and Renilla luciferase activities were measured using a dual-luciferase reporter assay system kit (DD1205-01; Vazyme Biotech) and a SpectraMax M5 microplate reader, following the manufacturer’s instructions. The relative fluorescence intensity of firefly luciferase was normalized to that of Renilla luciferase.

## Nuclear and cytoplasmic extraction (NE-PER)
NE-PER analysis was conducted using NE-PERTM kits (YB370765) purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Briefly, cells were lysed with cold CER reagents, and the cytoplasmic supernatant was obtained through centrifugation. The precipitate was then resuspended in cold NEB reagents for further lysis and centrifuged to isolate the nucleus. Both the cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions were subsequently boiled for immunoblot analysis.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism software (version 8.0; GraphPad, San Diego, CA, USA). Two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to assess statistical significance, while one-way ANOVA was employed for comparisons among multiple samples. Results are presented as means with standard error of the mean (SEM) and are representative of at least three independent experiments. A p value of 0.05 or less was considered statistically significant.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Flow cytometric verification of CD97 knockout in PMs.
PMs from two wild-type and two CD97 knockout mice were analyzed. After gating on live (FSC/SSC) and single cells (FSC-A/FSC-H), the absence of CD97 expression in KO cells was confirmed compared to WT controls, using an isotype-matched antibody for gating.
(TIF)
S2 Fig

## CD97 inhibits IFN-I signaling response induced by SeV and BEFV in BMDMs.
(A and B) RT–qPCR analysis of IFN-β and ISG15 transcripts in CD97+/+ and CD97-/- BMDMs. Cells were mock-treated or infected with BEFV (MOI 0.1) for 24 hours or SeV (MOI 0.1) for 36 hours. The results show the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments. ***, p < 0.001.
(TIF)
S3 Fig

## PPM1G dephosphorylates IRF7.
(A) Endogenous co-immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting analysis with an PPM1G antibody. (B) immunoblotting analysis of the indicated protein in BHK-21 cells infected with BEFV for the specified durations. (C-F) Dual-luciferase reporter assays measuring the promoter activity of IFN-β (C, E) and ISRE (D, F) induced by the constitutively active mutants IRF7(5D) (C, D) or IRF3(5D) (E, F), in the presence or absence of PPM1G. The results show the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments. ns, not significant. Data in (A, B) are representative of three independent experiments.
(TIF)
S4 Fig

## CD97 facilitates the PPM1G-mediated dephosphorylation of IRF7.
(A, B) Immunoblotting analysis of indicated proteins in PPM1G-deficient (A) HeLa and (B) BHK-21 cells after infection with VSV or BEFV, respectively. (C, D) PPM1G-knockout HeLa cells were co-transfected with plasmids encoding Flag- and HA-tagged IRF7 (C) or IRF3 (D), together with a CD97 overexpression plasmid or control. Dimerization was assessed by co-IP following VSV infection. (E) Immunoblotting analysis of CD97+/+ and CD97-/- BMDMs that were mock-treated or infected with VSV. Data in (A-E) are representative of three independent experiments.
(TIF)
S5 Fig

## SANG potentiates the IFN-I signaling response.
(A, B) Immunoblotting analysis of indicated proteins in (A) HeLa and (B) BHK-21 cells following SANG treatment and infection with SeV or BEFV, respectively. (C, D) RT-qPCR analysis of IFN-β and ISG15 mRNA levels in cells treated under the same conditions as in (A) and (B), respectively. The results show the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments. ***, p < 0.001. Data in (A-B) are representative of three independent experiments.
(TIF)
S6 Fig

## CD97 and PPM1G inhibits IRF7 phosphorylation induced by poly(I:C).
Immunoblotting analysis of IRF7 phosphorylation in control and CD97/PPM1G-overexpressing HeLa cells after stimulation with poly(I:C) for 12 h. Data are representative of three independent experiments.
(TIF)
S7 Fig

## The impact of a CD97 mutant on IFN-I and PPM1G.
(A, B) RT-qPCR analysis of IFN-β and ISG15 mRNA level in A549 cells overexpressing wild-type CD97 or the CD97(R819/822A) mutant after infection with (A) H1N1 or (B) SeV. (C) RT-qPCR analysis of PPM1G mRNA in A549 cells overexpressing the indicated CD97 constructs. The results show the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments. **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001; not significant.
(TIF)
S1 Table

## Sequences used for qPCR and siRNA in this study.
(DOCX)
S1 Data

## List of Candidate interactors of CD97 detected by mass spectrometry.
(XLSX)
Acknowledgments
We thank iProX [ , ] for depositing our proteomic data.

 10.1371/journal.ppat.1014032.r001Decision Letter 0
HemannEmilyGuest Editor© 2026 Emily Hemann2026Emily Hemannhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
22 Sep 2025

The CD97-PPM1G axis dampens antiviral immunity by dephosphorylating IRF7 in type I interferon pathway
PLOS Pathogens
Dear Dr. Chang,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Pathogens. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Pathogens's publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript within 60 days. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plospathogens@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/ppathogens/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
* A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'. This file does not need to include responses to any formatting updates and technical items listed in the 'Journal Requirements' section below.
* A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Emily Hemann
Guest Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Thomas Hoenen
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

Journal Requirements:

1) Please ensure that the CRediT author contributions listed for every co-author are completed accurately and in full.
At this stage, the following Authors/Authors require contributions: huasong chang, Wenjing Qi, Rukun Yang, Peili Hou, Ran Kang, Xiaoyu Liu, Yingying Li, Hongmei Wang, and Hongbin He. Please ensure that the full contributions of each author are acknowledged in the "Add/Edit/Remove Authors" section of our submission form.
The list of CRediT author contributions may be found here: https://journals.plos.org/plospathogens/s/authorship#loc-author-contributions
2) Please provide an Author Summary. This should appear in your manuscript between the Abstract (if applicable) and the Introduction, and should be 150-200 words long. The aim should be to make your findings accessible to a wide audience that includes both scientists and non-scientists. Sample summaries can be found on our website under Submission Guidelines:

https://journals.plos.org/plospathogens/s/submission-guidelines#loc-parts-of-a-submission

3) Please upload all main figures as separate Figure files in .tif or .eps format. For more information about how to convert and format your figure files please see our guidelines:

https://journals.plos.org/plospathogens/s/figures

4) We notice that your supplementary Tables are included in the manuscript file. Please remove them and upload them with the file type 'Supporting Information'. Please ensure that each Supporting Information file has a legend listed in the manuscript after the references list.
5) Please ensure that the funders and grant numbers match between the Financial Disclosure field and the Funding Information tab in your submission form. Note that the funders must be provided in the same order in both places as well.
- State the initials, alongside each funding source, of each author to receive each grant. For example: "This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (####### to AM; ###### to CJ) and the National Science Foundation (###### to AM)."
- State what role the funders took in the study. If the funders had no role in your study, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.".
If you did not receive any funding for this study, please simply state: u201cThe authors received no specific funding for this work.u201d

Reviewers' Comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: Here, Chang and Qi et al. seek to broadly extend their previous work on how CD97 regulates antiviral signaling and IFN production. The authors had previously shown that CD97 induces RNF125 leading to ubiquitin-mediated degradation of RIG-I, thereby dampening antiviral responses and promoting the replication of viruses such as VSV (PMID: 37978243). Here the authors find that CD97 also induces and recruits the protein phosphatase PPM1G, which dephosphorylates IRF7 to dampen IFN production. The authors further find that sanguinarine promotes survival of mice infected with IAV H1N1 in a CD97-dependent manner.
Given that the authors had already established the broad function of CD97 in negatively regulating antiviral responses before, most comments will largely focus on the main novel finding here, which is the function of PPM1G in IRF dephosphorylation.
Reviewer #2: In this manuscript, the authors describe a novel mechanism by which CD97 regulates antiviral immunity through the recruitment of PPM1G, a phosphatase that dephosphorylates IRF7, thereby suppressing type I interferon (IFN) responses. CD97, a member of the GPCR family, is identified as a pro-viral factor against multiple viruses. Using biochemical and in vivo approaches in cells and mice, the authors provide evidence that CD97 facilitates viral replication by inhibiting IRF7-mediated IFN responses. Furthermore, they propose sanguinarine (SANG) as a potential therapeutic agent to counteract CD97-mediated pro-viral activity. Overall, the study is carefully executed with appropriate controls, but several points should be addressed to strengthen the manuscript.
Reviewer #3: This study focuses on the interaction between the G protein-coupled receptor CD97 and phosphatase PPM1G, which recruits and dephosphorylates IRF7, leading to the inhibition of its activity. This process blocks the nuclear translocation of IRF7 and subsequent prevent activation of IFN-I signaling. The findings provide a theoretical basis for targeting CD97 as a potential antiviral strategy and developing SANG as a candidate small-molecule antiviral drug. Overall, this study provides evidence of a negative feedback loop of CD97 signaling through restraining IRF7-mediated IFN-I 69 expression in a PPM1G-dependent manner. While the study demonstrates innovation, there are several major and minor issues that need to be addressed.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: 1) The authors find that PPM1G interacts with both IRF3 and IRF7, but that IRF7 is the primary substrate for its dephosphatase activity. However, in the cell types in which these experiments were performed, IRF3 is the primary IRF driving IFN signaling at early times, while IRF7 may amplify responses after its own induction. At what time point of BEFV infection were the experiments in Fig. 5F performed? This has not been stated in the legend, and IRF7 phosphorylation relative to that of IRF3 is minimal in the -/+ BEFV in Fig 5F. The authors should repeat these experiments with PPM1G overexpression and include early, mid, and late time points of infection to further distinguish between dephosphorylation of IRF3 vs IRF7.
2) What does IRF3 vs IRF7 phosphorylation look like in PPM1G KO cells (sgPPM1G cells from Fig. 4). How does this look like in sgPPM1G cells with CD97 overexpression?
3) IRFs get hyperphosphorylated, but the antibodies used to probe phosphorylation are raised against specific phosphosites. PPM1G may dephosphorylate one or all relevant phosphosites on IRF7/3. Therefore, key experiments from point 2 above should look at IRF7/3 dimers by native PAGE immunoblotting.
4) The authors nicely show that PPM1G catalytic activity is important for IRF7 dephosphorylation/IFN suppression using this D496A mutant. To further prove that PPM1G activity is relevant, and to more convincingly distinguish between IRF7 vs IRF3, the authors should show whether, as expected, IFN induction by the “5D” constitutively active phosphomimetic IRFs is not affected by PPM1G.
5) CD97 both recruits PPM1G and induces its expression through IKZF1. Although CD97 may be internalized under certain circumstances, it is primarily localized to the cell surface. What then is the relevance of PPM1G recruitment by CD97 in its dephosphorylation of IRF7? This should be decoupled by looking at the effect of the CD97 R(819+822)A on downstream PPM1G activity and IFN induction (unless this PRR motif mutant also impacts PPM1G induction).
6) How broad is CD97/PPM1G activity on IRF7 during activation of other innate immune pathways? Is IRF7 activation downstream of TRIF activation affected by PPM1G (and/or CD97)? The authors should test this in TLR3-sufficient cells or by TRIF overexpression.
Reviewer #2: Major concerns
• A large portion of the study relies on BHK21 cells, which are known to be deficient in IFN production and are not physiologically relevant. Is the CD97–PPM1G–IRF7 mechanism specific to BHK21 cells? While the authors partially validate findings in other cells, myeloid cells (where IRF7 plays a central role) were not used and should be considered.
• The analysis of SANG-mediated inhibition of viral replication is underdeveloped. Additional controls are necessary, such as assessing IRF7 activation, PPM1G recruitment, and antiviral gene expression.
• Most biochemical experiments rely on overexpression systems. The authors should validate key findings using endogenous proteins to confirm physiological relevance.
• The connection between CD97 and PPM1G is primarily shown with overexpressed proteins. Stronger evidence is needed to demonstrate endogenous interactions.
• To rule out non-specific effects, NF-κB–dependent genes should be evaluated as additional specificity controls.
Specific Comments
• Figure 1A: Please include molecular weights on western blots. The anti-CD97 blot shows multiple cross-reactive species (lane 2).
• Figure 1B: CD97 expression is significantly decreased at 48 h. Could this be due to proteasomal degradation during viral infection? Some discussion would be helpful.
• Knockdown efficiency appears suboptimal, though downstream effects on viral replication are robust. Please provide quantification of blots. Also, clarify why siCD97-2 was chosen over siCD97-3 in Fig. 1K and L.
• PPM1G has been reported to interact with MAVS, yet this was not observed in the study. The authors should address this discrepancy. Additionally, Fig. 5A (lane 2) requires further justification.
• Figure 5F: The p-IRF7 level appears unexpectedly high in uninfected cells. Please provide a clearer blot showing virus-induced activation.
• Figure 5G: The data on IKKε-mediated IRF3 phosphorylation are unclear and should be improved.
• Figure 5L: Does PPM1G interaction promote CD97 degradation? Please clarify.
Reviewer #3: 1. In Figure 1, the authors conducted BEFV infection experiments in BHK-21 cells following CD97 knockdown. However, the knockdown efficiency at 24 and 48hours post-infection appears suboptimal, as the expression of the internal reference protein was also reduced. The authors did not specify the number of experimental replicates for the Western blot results. Furthermore, it is remarkable that viral replication capacity decreased by approximately 10-fold under this knockdown condition.
2. In this study, the authors utilized CD97 knockout mice for extensive experiments (including those shown in Figure 2, Figure 6, Figure 7, and Figure 8) but failed to provide genotyping or Western blot validation data for these knockout mice. This omission is unacceptable. For every experiment involving CD97 knockout mice, corresponding validation data should be presented in the main or supplementary figures.
3. The study involves extensive infection experiments with Sev, BEFV, and H1N1 viruses. However, viral protein levels were rarely detected when evaluating corresponding indicators. This experimental approach fails to confirm the validity of the experimental system. For example, in Fig. 5F, 5L, 5M, 5N and Fig. 6B, 6C, 6D, 6I, 6J, the absence of viral proteins detection undermines the reliability of the conclusions.
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: 1) Fig. 5L needs the no infection condition and total IRF7 blot as appropriate controls.
2) The authors should discuss what may activate CD97 signaling during infection/antiviral immunity.
Reviewer #2: See above
Reviewer #3: 1. The authors used IP-MS to screen for proteins interacting with CD97 and ultimately identified PPM1G as a CD97-interacting protein. The abundance and relevant mass spectrometry data for PPM1G should be clearly presented.
2. The term "ICID50" in line 518 should be corrected to "TCID50", and corresponding errors should be revised accordingly.
3. The transfection dosage of PPM1G in line 580 should specify the amount per unit volume of cell transfection.
4. For all Western blot experiments in the article, the number of independent experimental replicates should be clearly stated. This will allow readers to better evaluate the reproducibility and reliability of the experimental results.
5. PPM1G is primarily localized in the nucleus. In this study, PPM1G interacts with CD97 and subsequently recruits IRF3 for dephosphorylation. According to the author's schematic diagram, this process occurs in the cytoplasm. The authors should address and discuss this apparent discrepancy in the Discussion section.
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]

Figure resubmission:

Reproducibility:

?>
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Chang et al PLos Path 2025.docx
10.1371/journal.ppat.1014032.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
30 Jan 2026

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to reviews .docx
10.1371/journal.ppat.1014032.r003Decision Letter 1
HemannEmilyGuest Editor© 2026 Emily Hemann2026Emily Hemannhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
24 Feb 2026

Dear Dr. He,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'The CD97-PPM1G axis dampens antiviral immunity by dephosphorylating IRF7 in type I interferon pathway' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Emily Hemann
Guest Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Thomas Hoenen
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Sumita Bhaduri-McIntosh
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0003-2946-9497
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064
***********************************************************
The authors have thoroughly addressed reviewer comments through additional experiments and edits to the revised manuscript.
While the endogenous experiment to probe mechanism does not clearly delineate an effect on CD97 vs the CD97-PPM1G complex, the orthogonal methods (overexpression, knockout, biochemical, and endogenous) utilized to address this potential mechanism are sufficient.
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: The authors have addressed most of the queries raised. However, some changes would further enhance the quality of the manuscript.
1. Figure 5F: The p-IRF7 levels remain high in uninfected condition.
2. Figure 5G: Elevated p-IRF3 levels are observed in FLAG-IKKε–negative condition.
3. It would be valuable if the authors could further validate the co-IP findings (Figure 5M) using PLA.
4. It is unclear whether SANG suppresses CD97 expression or interferes with the CD97–PPM1G complex. In the Supplementary figure (S5A and B), both PPM1G and CD97 levels appear to be downregulated in the presence of SANG, which makes the mechanism difficult to interpret.
Reviewer #3: In this updated manuscript, the author has done a good job addressing my concerns and questions. I believe the study presents relatively strong evidence demonstrating that CD97 binds PPM1G, which then dephosphorylates IRF7. This blocks IRF7 nuclear translocation and subsequent IFN-I activation, ultimately facilitating viral replication.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: I am satisfied with the revisions
Reviewer #2: None
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
10.1371/journal.ppat.1014032.r004Acceptance letter
HemannEmilyGuest Editor© 2026 Emily Hemann2026Emily Hemannhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Dear Mr chang,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "
The CD97-PPM1G axis dampens antiviral immunity by dephosphorylating IRF7 in type I interferon pathway," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the pre-publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Pearls, Reviews, Opinions, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript, if you opted to have an early version of your article, will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
For Research Articles, you will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Sumita Bhaduri-McIntosh
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0003-2946-9497
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064