1472neurotherNeurotherapeuticsNeurotherapeuticsElsevierPMC1184035711840357118403573984890110.1016/j.neurot.2025.e00523Role of astrocytes connexins - pannexins in acute brain injury
TichauerJuan E RovegnoMaximiliano 1Departamento de Medicina Intensiva, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Chile⁎Corresponding author. maxrovegno@uc.cl
2212025221e00523e005232022025© 2025 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Acute brain injuries (ABIs) encompass a broad spectrum of primary injuries such as ischemia, hypoxia, trauma, and hemorrhage that converge into secondary injury where some mechanisms show common determinants. In this regard, astroglial connexin and pannexin channels have been shown to play an important role. These channels are transmembrane proteins sharing similar topology and form gateways between adjacent cells named gap junctions (GJs) and pores into unopposed membranes named hemichannels (HCs). In astrocytes, GJs and HCs enable intercellular communication and have active participation in normal brain physiological processes, such as calcium waves, synapsis modulation, regional blood flow regulation, and homeostatic control of the extracellular environment, among others. However, after acute brain injury, astrocytes can change their phenotype and modify the activity of both channels and hemichannels, which can result in the amplification of danger signals, increased mediators of inflammation, and neuronal death, contributing to the expansion of brain damage and neurological deterioration. This is known as secondary brain damage. In this review, we discussed the main biological mechanism of secondary brain damage with a particular focus on astroglial connexin and pannexin participation during acute brain injuries.
Keywords: Astrocyte, Connexins, Pannexins, Hemichannels, Acute brain injury

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Dec 11; Revised 2024 Dec 31; Accepted 2025 Jan 2; Collection date 2025 Jan.

## Introduction
Acute brain injuries (ABIs) are a group of heterogeneous diseases that produce alterations in neuronal activity and physical integrity or function of one or more areas of the brain after birth. ABIs are characterized by an acute clinical presentation in the range of minutes to hours, and a worldwide distribution with high morbidity, mortality, and devastating sequelae [ ]. ABIs include stroke, intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH), subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), traumatic brain injury (TBI), and hypoxic encephalopathy (HE). Stroke, englobing ischemic, ICH, and SAH are the second and third leading causes of death and disability worldwide, respectively [ ]. TBI is the primary cause of death and permanent brain damage in individuals younger than 45 years old [ ]. The main causes of TBI are road injuries and falls at extreme ages (children and elderly). Therefore, an approximate sum of the casualties related to ABIs provides us with the group of diseases with the greatest epidemiological impact.
Regardless of etiology, ABIs are characterized by one or more primary damage zones at injury foci, which propagate damage signals to neighboring parenchyma by systemic and local mechanisms. After an ABI (hypoxic-ischemic, hemorrhagic, or traumatic) a complex cascade of damage progression takes place, becoming independent from the initial injury. This involves both systemic and local factors, which contribute to the expansion of the original injury. This subsequent phase is known as secondary brain injury (SBI) and occurs in all ABIs with varying degrees of severity. Among systemic factors, the presence of hypotension and hypoxia doubles the likelihood of a poor neurological outcome [ ]. Other well-known systemic factors for SBI are hyper and hypocapnia, hyponatremia, anemia, hypoglycemia, and fever [ , , , , ]. Local factors for SBI include cellular and tissue biological mechanisms that amplify the injury including ischemia, excitotoxicity, inflammation, apoptosis, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, edema, and cortical spreading depression [ ].
A prominent component of SBI is the astrocyte participation. Reactive or dysfunctional astrocytes are critical for the propagation of damage to unaffected brain tissue. Several studies have shown that the latter could be associated with the dysfunction of the astrocyte syncytium, the transmission of cell-to-cell damage signals by gap-junctions or by paracrine signaling through connexin (Cx) hemichannels (HCs) or pannexins channels (Panx) [ , , ]. Indeed, the genetic reduction of Cx43, the main Cx-base channels in the astrocytes, has been shown to reduce astrocytic activation and neuronal cell death [ , , ]. On the other hand, Panx1 channels, have been described to activate the inflammasome in astrocytes and neurons and form large pores in the cell membrane whose activation can worsen the brain injury [ , ]. Interestingly, some studies have shown for example that the inhibition of Panx1 with probenecid can protect the brain against oxygen-glucose deprivation injury in primary astrocytes, and early brain injury after subarachnoid hemorrhage [ , ].
In this review, we examine the local mechanisms involved in secondary brain injury, describing their significance, main features, roles for the pathophysiology of acute brain injury and with a special focus on how astrocytic Cx43 ​HCs and Panx1 channels contribute to the propagation of danger signals and subsequent neuronal damage after injury.

## Astrocyte functions
Astrocytes are the most abundant fraction of glial cell types in the central nervous system (CNS) playing vital roles in maintaining CNS homeostasis. Their functions include providing structural support, contributing to the blood-brain barrier, regulating synaptic transmission, controlling local blood flow, and maintaining the extracellular fluid balance in the brain, such as fine regulation of [K+]e, [H+]e, glutamate, and water [ , , ]. A main characteristic of astrocytes is their highly complex 3D morphology with many fine processes. These processes cover over 80 ​% of the astrocytic plasma membrane, and more than 56 ​% of neuronal synapses are connected to them [ ]. Indeed, this physical proximity allows astrocytes to modulate synaptic activity, leading to the concept of tripartite synapses, which involve the pre-and postsynaptic neurons along with an astrocyte process [ ].
Intercellular communication in the tripartite synapsis is key to their role in both maintaining homeostasis and contributing to injury. Astrocytes are highly interconnected through connexin-based channels, forming functional syncytia allowing the spatial buffering of K+, H+, and glutamate in the brain ( ) [ ].
 During acute brain injuries, in the lesion core, neural cells die by necrosis and release damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) including HMGB1, HSPs, S100B, ATP, and glutamate [ ]. DAMPs can induce NF-κB signaling through pattern recognition receptors (eg. Toll-like receptors and RAGE) activating glial cells and changing their phenotype promoting the clearance of cellular debris by phagocytic cells [ ]. This reactive astrogliosis is preceded by microglial activation and starts within hours after the lesion, and is characterized by changes in gene expression profile, morphology, functional dynamics, and inflammatory profile expression [ , ]. Under pathological conditions, reactive astrogliosis can lead to injury recovery, for example, by the formation of “glial scar” to isolate the injury from healthy tissue, the secretion of neurotrophic mediators, and repair of synapses and blood-brain barrier (BBB), but also to the exacerbation of the inflammation, promoting the infiltration of inflammatory cells through the damaged BBB and inducing the spread of neuronal death [ ]. Astroglial reactivity is highly context-dependent and defines a broad spectrum of phenotypes ranging from homeostatic to pathologic [ , ]. For instance, after a TBI some reactive astrocytes proliferate to isolate damaged tissue while others more distant extend their processes toward the injury [ ]. These cells upregulate the expression of the glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and reduce the expression of homeostatic proteins such as glutamate transporter (eg. GLT-1), glutamine synthetase (GS), inwardly rectifying potassium channel Kir4.1 and Cx43 based gap junction channels resulting in the uncoupling of the syncytia, likely to avoid the bystander effect from injured cells [ , , ]. Interestingly, several studies also have shown that ABIs induce an increase in the expression and activity of the Cx43 HC and pannexins channel along with an increase in inflammatory mediators. For example, in several animal models of TBI, spinal cord injury (SCI), myelin injury, and hypoxic ischemia (HI), increased expression and activity of Cx43 HC and Panx1 was observed, along with increased astrogliosis, inflammatory cell infiltration, high extracellular levels of glutamate, ATP, HMGB1, proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α, increased neuronal autophagy (LC3-II), and apoptosis through caspase-3 activation. These effects were decreased when Cx43 or Panx1 were blocked using genetic or pharmacologic approaches [ , , , , , , , , , ], suggesting that astrocytic Cx43 HC and Panx1 channel could be potential targets for therapeutic interventions in ABIs.

## Connexins and pannexins proteins
Connexins (Cxs) are assembled transmembrane proteins that allow intercellular communication in two ways: (1) connecting cytoplasm of adjacent cells through gap junction channels (GJCs) made by the docking of two connexons or HCs located at opposed membranes between cells and (2) paracrine signaling, through HCs located at unopposed domains of cell surfaces. Each HC is an array of six Cxs surrounding a central pore called connexon. There are 21 Cxs in the human genome named according to their molecular weight [ ], and 11 are known to be expressed in CNS [ ]. GJCs allow direct cell-to-cell exchange of small molecules, ions, and second messenger as Ca2+ and inositol trisphosphate (IP3). GJCs coupling enables a functional syncytium, allowing for spatial buffering of small molecules in the astrocytic network. HCs permit the exchange of molecules and ions between the cytoplasm and the external medium, supporting autocrine and paracrine actions [ ]. Interestingly, Cx43 ​HCs and Cx43 GJCs are regulated oppositely by intracellular Ca2+ (Ca2+i) and by pro-inflammatory cytokines impairing the syncytium properties of astrocytes [ ].
Cx43 HC has several regulatory and phosphorylation sites for MAPK and PKC in the C-terminal tail. While MAPK activity has been described in the fully activated state of Cx43 HC, PKC regulates its activity by increasing the perm-selectivity of Cx43 (the ability to discriminate between cations and anions) [ , , , ] ( , A). Interestingly, Chen et al. found in TBI patients who underwent brain surgery, that Cx43 protein levels were negatively associated with the extent of disease severity. However, Cx43 phosphorylation status was strongly associated with extremely severe cases that also had high kinase activities for MAPK and PKC [ ]. Supporting the role of Cx43 phosphorylation in the pathology, Freitas-Andrade et al., found that knocking out phosphorylation sites for MAPK sites in Cx43 (Cx43 S255/262/279/282A), decreased the infarct volume and improved behavioral performance in a mouse model of stroke induced by permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion [ ]. Contrary to what Chen et al. found in their study on TBI patients, some experimental animal models for ABIs, have shown a transient induction in the levels of total Cx43 and p-Cx43 after brain injury induction, suggesting that Cx43 HC activity has a key role in the severity of ABI ( ). The differences can be explained by intracellular redistribution of the protein and its degradation over time.
 Pannexins are the mammalian orthologs of innexins. They are assembled in heptamers, forming a single membrane channel called pannexons. The pannexin family comprises three members (Panxs 1–3) [ ]. These channels share a similar topology with Cxs but with a great divergence in aminoacidic sequence [ ]. Several studies have shown regulatory sites in the cytoplasmic loops and C-terminal tail with regulatory roles in Panx1 trafficking and activity . Indeed, Src family kinases (SFK) have been described to participate in the N-glycosylation and trafficking of Panx1 to the plasma membrane through the dynamic regulation of Tyr 150, and in the Panx1 channel open probability through the phosphorylation of Tyr 198 and Tyr 308 , . Furthermore, the cleavage of the C-terminal at residues 376–378 mediated by caspases 3 and 7 results in a permanent channel opening ( , B). Panx1 activation leads to ATP release and influx of Cl− and Ca2+. The ATP released from Panx1 participates in several inflammatory mechanisms such as “find me” signals from apoptotic cells increasing the recruitment of phagocytes [ ]. Also, ATP activates P2X7R, which acts as a Ca2+ channel allowing the further efflux of ATP, and induces the activation of the inflammasome which results in caspase-1 activation and release of inflammatory cytokines [ , ]. Interestingly, recent studies have shown in patients with ICH or TBI, that serum Panx1 concentration was associated with disease severity and poor prognosis [ , ]. Consistent with these findings, several experimental animal models of ABIs, described a Panx1-dependent increase in the infiltration of inflammatory cells, activation of inflammasome, and inflammatory cytokines ( ) [ , , , , , ].
 Neurons express in vivo Cx36, Cx45, Panx1 and Panx2; astrocytes express Cx30, Cx43 and Panx1 [ , ]. Cellular signaling, facilitated by the opening of astroglial HCs, underlies critical biological processes within the nervous system [ , ]. The latter encompasses neuronal oscillations [ ], glutamate-glutamine shuttle [ ], memory [ , , , ], synaptic transmission, and plasticity [ , , ]. Moreover, Cx-based channels enable gliotransmission [ ]. That is, in response to stimulation with neurotransmitters or external signals, astrocytes may transmit specific messages to neighboring cells through calcium waves [ ]. Despite these vital functions, the uncontrolled activation of astroglial HCs leads to osmotic and ionic imbalance, cytoplasmatic Ca2+ overload, and the release of large quantities of potentially toxic molecules, such as glutamate, ATP, and d-serine [ , ]. In the basal state, HCs and pannexons remain closed, however, they can be opened by several stimuli. For example, an increase in K+e [ , , ] or Ca2+i can activate them [ , ]. In this context, ABIs such as TBI, SAH, or stroke are affected by increased K+e in contused [ ] or ischemic areas [ , ] and might induce the opening of Cx HCs – pannexins channel.
In the next sections, we will describe the main cellular mechanisms of secondary damage in ABIs and the participation of the Cx43 ​HCs and Panx1 channels. We summarized the experimental evidence of Cx43 and Panx1 participation in , , respectively.

## Ischemia
The human brain is highly metabolically active, receiving 15 ​% of cardiac output and consuming 25 ​% of oxygen transport despite accounting for only 2.5 ​% of total body weight [ ]. This makes the brain extremely vulnerable to reduced blood flow. Ischemia occurs when blood flow drops below 20 ml/100 ​g of tissue per minute resulting in a critical reduction of glucose and oxygen delivery.
The anatomical distribution and compromise of ischemia (global or regional-focal) depends on the type of brain injury, being global in cardiac arrest (CA), during the initial bleeding of an aneurysmal SAH, or in the intracranial hypertension crises that can occur in TBI. In stroke, it is regional and depends on the artery or arteries compromised by the embolism or thrombosis. In turn, ICH generates regional ischemia due to tissue displacement, which can be complicated in the case of herniations, compromising larger caliber vessels. Something similar occurs in extra-axial hematomas (epidural and subdural) or in hemorrhagic contusions that complicate a TBI. Interestingly, in Graham and Adams’ postmortem series of 1978, they showed that in a group of 151 patients who died after a TBI, 91 ​% had ischemic damage, classified as severe in 27 ​% of cases, showing that ischemic brain damage is common after head injury [ ]. Finally in SAH, ischemia occurs with regional distribution in the case of vasospasms and late cerebral ischemia, mainly due to microthrombosis of the vascular bed [ ].
Regardless of whether the origin of ischemia is focal or global, a cascade of events occurs that leads to reduced cerebral blood flow (CBF), decreased energy production, ion pump failure, mitochondrial damage, and massive neuronal depolarization. Increased cellular levels of Na+, Cl−, and Ca2+ ions activate phospholipases and proteases, including caspases, triggering the release of prostaglandins, leukotrienes, DNA, and cytoskeletal breakdown, ultimately destroying the cell membrane. In addition, energy failure forces anaerobic metabolism, causing lactate accumulation and decreased tissue pH. In some ABIs, the phenomenon of reperfusion may occur. This is the return of cerebral blood flow, due to the return of spontaneous circulation in the case of resuscitated CA, lysis of the intraluminal clot in the case of stroke, or decreased intracranial pressure in TBI, or after the initial bleeding of SAH. Re-oxygenation of tissue can cause the release of free oxygen radicals, mitochondrial damage, activation of coagulation, endothelial dysfunction, and rupture of the BBB, all of which alter microcirculation and increase tissue damage [ ].
Early studies using xenon CT and later PET-CT have shown ischemic areas in the brains of moderate to severe TBI patients, often around contusions. These ischemic zones are referred to as “traumatic penumbra,” distinct from the ischemic penumbra seen in stroke. PET-CTs used intravenous infusion of [18F] fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) and [15O]H2O, combined with single breath inhalation of [15O]CO and [15O]O2 to study the regional cerebral metabolic rate of glucose (CMRglc), CBF, the cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen (CMRO2) and oxygen extraction fraction (OEF), respectively. Findings compatible with ischemia are decreases in CBF, with low or maintained CMRO2 together with increases in OEF and even CMRglc, because of a switch to non-oxidative glucose metabolism [ ].
To study the mechanisms underlying the secondary damage after TBI and ischemia, different experimental method approaches have been used in animal models to reproduce aspects of the injury described in humans. For example, in the fluid percussion (FP) injury method, a pulse of fluid pressure pulse on a piston is transmitted to the intact dura through a craniectomy. In the controlled cortical impact method (CCI), a mechanical force is delivered to the intact dura via an impactor device using pneumatic pressure [ ]. On the other hand, ischemia has been studied in animal models, using methods that include occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (MCAO) or the carotid artery, both permanently and temporarily. Also, the oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD) method is used as an in vitro model to mimic in vivo models of brain ischemia [ ] ( , ). Combining both models in rats, Li et al. demonstrated an increase in the expression of Cx43 and the glutamate-aspartate transporter (GLAST or EAAT1), along with markers of oxidative stress and a reduction in the expression of Cx30 in cultured astrocytes and in the whole brain. Inhibition of Cx43 expression using siRNA reduced the increase of GLAST/EAAT1 and the markers of oxidative stress [ ].

## Excitotoxicity
Glutamate is the primary neurotransmitter in excitatory synapses within the brain [ ] and plays a key role in synaptic plasticity, supporting learning and memory [ ]. It is stored in synaptic vesicles at the presynaptic terminal and released into the synaptic cleft following stimulation. Glutamate then binds to receptors on both the postsynaptic neuron and the astrocytes, which are part of the tripartite synapse (presynaptic neuron, astrocyte, postsynaptic neuron) [ ]. Within minutes of trauma, there is an acute rise in extracellular glutamate levels due to massive depolarization secondary to trauma, ischemia, and spreading depression (discussed later). Glutamate then activates ionotropic and metabotropic receptors on postsynaptic neurons, including α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and kainic acid (KA) receptors, (permeable to Na+ and K+) and N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors (permeable to Ca2+) [ ]. The massive increment in glutamate increases Na+ and Ca2+ influx to the cell, leading to increases in Ca2+i, which triggers cell damage mechanisms leading to apoptosis via caspase activation. Astrocytes represent the main defense against excitotoxicity. Astrocytes reuptake the extracellular glutamate through glutamate-transporter 1 (GLT-1) and GLAST in a process that has a large energy cost. Also, astrocytes can metabolize glutamate into glutamine and buffer it via GJCs. However, if glutamate levels remain elevated and ATP depletion occurs, astrocytes can reverse the direction of glutamate transport, exacerbating excitotoxic neuronal damage [ ]. In a seminal article published in 1998, Bullock demonstrated the elevation of extracellular glutamate measured using microdialysis in 80 patients with TBI. Ischemic brain injury, focal contusions, intracranial hypertension, and poor outcome were associated with high levels of glutamate [ ].
Persistent activation of Cx HCs and Panx1 triggered by ABIs also could favor excitotoxicity by the release of transmitters such as ATP, glutamate, and d-serine, altering Ca2+i dynamics or the cytoplasmic ionic balance inducing neuronal cell death [ ]. Orellana et al. using primary mouse cultures, demonstrated the occurrence of transient astroglial permeabilization through Cx43 ​HCs and a reduction in GJCs communication in a hypoxia-reoxygenation model. This response was potentiated by TNFα and IL-1β and associated with the release of ATP and glutamate through Cx43 ​HCs. These molecules activate neuronal Panx1 resulting in neuronal death [ ]. On the other hand, it is been proposed that during ABIs, ATP, and glutamate released by surrounding astrocytes can induce the activation of neuronal NMDAR and SFKs which are physically linked to the NMDAR subunits, GluN2A, and GluN2B [ ]. Then, SFKs can phosphorylate Y308 at the Panx1 C-terminal domain increasing its activity and influx of Ca2+, and efflux of ATP [ , ]. Next, the ATP released from Panx1 can promote the activation of the purinergic receptor P2X7R and influx of Ca2+ which strongly activates the Panx1 channel in turn. This vicious cycle produced a sustained neuronal depolarization along with an overload of Ca2+i leading to neuronal cell damage and further death [ , ]. Supporting the role of Cx43 HC excitotoxicity, Sun et al. in a rat model of TBI, showed alterations in spatial memory and long-term potentiation (LTP), along with a decrease in GLT-1, an increase in P2X7R in astrocytes and an increase in Beclin (autophagy biomarker) in neurons, suggesting the induction of neurogenic autophagy. Interestingly, the pretreatment with the connexin blocker carbenoxolone (CBX) restored LTP, GLT-1, P2X7R, and Beclin expression levels [ ] implying that Cx43 HC could regulate the astrocytic glutamate uptake and P2X7R expression, that in turn could act as a mechanism to potentiate neurotoxicity. Indeed, Li et al. found in a mouse model of brain ischemia that Gap26 and Gap27, two mimetic peptides for Cx43 HC, prevented the induced increase in p-Cx43, extracellular glutamate, caspase-3 and significantly reduced cerebral the infarct volume [ ]. Therefore, modulation of Panx1 and Cx43 HC could function as a potential therapeutic strategy for ABIs.

## Inflammation
Primary brain injury, combined with secondary damage, leads to cell death and the release of damage-associated molecular pattern molecules (DAMPs), which serve as danger signals that activate the inflammasome and the innate immune system. Examples of DAMPs include ATP, S100B proteins, HMGB1, and even DNA or RNA fragments [ ]. DAMPs are recognized by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) such as the toll-like receptors (TLRs), nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like receptors (NLRs), scavenger receptors, and purinergic receptors to initiate the triggering of the inflammatory cascade [ ] The inflammatory response involves glial cells, microglia, astrocytes, and peripheral leukocytes. Microglia, the resident immune cells of the central nervous system (CNS), are among the first to respond to these signals. Within minutes of injury, microglia become activated, undergo morphological changes, transform into phagocytic cells, and secrete cytokines such as IFN-γ, IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α [ ]. Astrocytes, also play a crucial role in the immune response after injury by recruiting peripheral immune cells and regulating microglial activity through the release of cytokines such as TGF-β and chemokines. Surviving astrocytes undergo a phenotypic change known as reactive astrogliosis, which is marked by hypertrophy, hyperplasia, and increased expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein, a key component of their cytoskeleton [ ]. Endothelial cells in the CNS also become activated, and together with the coagulation system, facilitate the entry of peripheral myeloid cells (mainly neutrophils) and lymphocytes. These cells exacerbate inflammation, further damaging the brain parenchyma and vasculature, including degradation of the BBB.
During an ABI such as TBI, stroke, ICH, or SAH not only is the brain parenchyma affected, but the cerebral vasculature also suffers. Matrix metalloproteinases are activated within the BBB, breaking down the connections between astrocytes and endothelial cells and degrading the basal lamina. Simultaneously, proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-6, IL-1β and TNF-α, can reduce the expression of tight adherent junctions and increase the expression of adhesion molecules, particularly ICAM-1, in the endothelial cells of the neurovascular unit [ , , ]. This disruption increases the endothelial activation of the BBB creating a pathway for further peripheral inflammatory infiltration. Following an ABI, neutrophils (attracted by chemokines such as CXCL1) are the first immune cells to invade the tissue followed by monocytes (attracted by chemokines such as CCL2) which then differentiate into macrophages in the injured brain [ , ]. Both cell types adhere to the endothelium and migrate through the vessel walls toward the damaged tissue. Neutrophils contribute to secondary damage by releasing inflammatory mediators like reactive oxygen species (ROS), proteases, and metalloproteinases, with peak activity occurring 3–7 days after the injury. Furthermore, Vaibhav et al. using a mouse model of TBI showed that infiltrating neutrophils can fill subarachnoid and subdural spaces shortly after brain injury. Here the neutrophil TLR4 is activated by DAMPs inducing the secretion of a meshwork form by chromatin fibers with globular protein domains in a process dependent on the enzyme peptidylarginine deaminase that creates a neutrophil extracellular trap (NETs) inducing a worse TBI outcome. These detrimental effects were reduced when a recombinant human DNase-I was administrated to mice [ ]. Indeed, in the same study, serum levels of DNase activity and myeloperoxidase (MPO) DNA binding, a sensitive measure of NET formation, were decreased and increased, respectively, in a cohort of TBI patients compared with control patients with normal pressure hydrocephalus [ ].
Unlike neutrophils and monocytes, lymphocytes, the cells involved in the adaptive immune response, are recruited during the late stages of brain injury (3–7 days post-injury). Several lymphocyte subtypes, including CD4+ T cells (subsets Th1, Th2, Th17, and regulatory T (Tregs) cells), CD8+ T cells and γδT cells, have been shown to infiltrate the CNS [ ].Interestingly, Krämer et al. showed that the depletion of CD4+ T reg cells in mice subjected to the CCI method induced more severe motor deficits, along with an increase in GFAP protein levels, and an increased number of T cells infiltrating the ipsilesional tissue, suggesting that CD4+ Tregs attenuates reactive gliosis and lymphocyte infiltration [ ].
In contrast, brain inflammation is also part of a repair process, participating in waste removal, neurotrophin production, immune regulation, and wound healing. Functions that evolve differently over time [ , ].
Interestingly, different models of brain injury, have shown that the expression pattern of Cx43 and Panx1 changes in reactive astrocytes during neuroinflammation ( , ). Retamal et al. demonstrated in culture, that the release of IL-1β and TNF-α from LPS-activated microglia reduced astrocytic GJCs intercellular communication but increased the activity of Cx43 ​HCs affecting the glucose trafficking and modifying the metabolic status of astrocytes [ ]. On top of that, Froger et al. showed in mixed cultures of astrocytes and neurons that IL-1β and TNF-α potentiate NMDA excitotoxicity, an effect that was dependent on the presence of astrocytes wild-type (WT) but not Cx43 knock-out (KO) mice, suggesting that Cx43 is involved in neurotoxicity processes . The latter is consistent with other studies showing a neuroprotective effect of Cx43 blockers on neurologic impairment after brain injury ( ). On the other hand, different studies in animal models of HI and TBI have shown that the opening of Panx1 induced by injury mediators is associated with the activation of the inflammasome, the increase of pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-6, and neuronal cell death ( ).
The opening of connexin and pannexin channels mediated by inflammatory signals may allow the release of molecules such as ATP that can propagate inflammation ( ). Extracellular ATP can activate purinergic channels such as P2X7R which in turn allows the influx of ions including Na+, K+, and Ca2+. The increase in the intracellular concentration of Ca2+ causes the further opening of Cx43 HCs and Panx1 channels and the further release of ATP propagating this DAMP as a pathological signal to astrocytes and neurons [ ]. P2X7R activation is also associated with the activation of the inflammasome. This latter multimeric complex is composed of an apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing caspase recruitment domain (ASC), pro-caspase-1, and NOD-like receptor (NLR). The NLRP3 is the most characterized inflammasome which participates in the process and release of IL-1β and IL-18. In astrocytes and neurons, Silverman et al. demonstrated using in vitro cell cultures from embryogenic rat cortices that 130 ​mM KCl opened Panx1 channels and activated the Inflammasome leading to caspase-1 activation [ ]. Several studies using MCAO or TBI models and in vitro astrocyte cultures exposed to OGD have described that Panx1 blockade prevents NLRP3 and caspase-1 activation, IL-1β, ROS and AQP4 increase, neuronal cell death and gliosis formation. ( , ). [ , , , ]. Therefore, ATP release by Cx43 HC and Panx1 may represent a potential therapeutic target to dampen inflammatory cascades after brain injury.
 

## Apoptosis, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction
A central element in the induction of neuronal death that occurs due to the overactivation of the glutamate receptor is the increase in the concentration of intracellular Ca2+ (Ca2+i) and its entry into the mitochondria. This occurs through the participation of channels in the outer membrane of the mitochondria, such as the voltage-dependent anion channel (VDAC), and channels in the inner membrane of the mitochondria, such as the mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU) [ ]. In addition, there is an entry of calcium into the mitochondria from the endoplasmic reticulum [ ]. This sudden increase in Ca2+i can overwhelm mitochondrial calcium stores, leading to the opening of a non-selective pore across the outer and inner mitochondrial membranes, called the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) [ ]. The formation of the mPTP represents a point of no return, as the loss of membrane potential becomes irreversible. The formation of the outer membrane permeabilization channel, facilitated by BAX/BAK proteins (MOMP), results in the release of mitochondrial proteins like cytochrome c (cyt c), SMAC/Diablo complex, and apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF). These proteins activate cell death pathways, both dependent and independent of caspases [ ].
Ca2+ is the main second messenger in normal physiology. Controlled increases of Ca2+i from internal stores (mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum) and from extracellular space are critical to cellular signaling. Normally this results in a Ca2+i oscillation, which can eventually propagate to other cells as a Ca2+ wave. Cx-based channels allow the propagation of Ca2+ waves, as we already mentioned. There are two routes for Ca2+ waves, (1) Intercellular via GJCs, which directly connect the cytoplasm of adjacent cells, and (2) Paracellular via Cx HCs where they can release ATP, that will reproduce the Ca2+ wave in distant cells signaling through purinergic receptors [ ]. However, a sustained Ca2+i increases results in cell death and can be propagated using the same two routes described. This mechanism was named “bystander death” and is extensive to the spread of other pro-apoptotic signals not only high Ca2+i. This is particularly important to the astrocyte syncytium, indeed blockage of Cx43 decreased cell death after trauma in rat brain slices [ ], similarly a general blocker of connexins using CBX reduced cell death in brain slices exposed to OGD deprivation and in developing rats after intrauterine HI [ ]. Also, Cx HCs could contribute to cell death possibly via the Ca2+i overload, the release of essential molecules, or via a direct effect on mitochondria. Cx43 ​HCs blockade reduced the damage spread and apoptosis from the injury zone to distal zones in an in vitro model of trauma using astrocyte monolayers [ ]. Similarly, the selective Cx43 HC blockade in a sheep model of fetal ischemia results in a marked decreased in ischemia damage [ ].
Surprisingly, Azarashvili et al. found that Cx43 was present in the inner as well as outer mitochondrial membrane of several cells, including astrocytes [ ]. Furthermore, in the mitochondria, Cx43 was shown to interact with AIF and the beta subunit of the mitochondrial electron-transfer protein by co-immunoprecipitation assays [ ]. In models of heart ischemic preconditioning the expression of Cx43 increased in mitochondria . In contrast, brain ischemic injury decreased the total and phosphorylated fraction of mitochondrial Cx43 [ ]. These changes were prevented using CBX and the potassium channel agonist diazoxide trough PKCε-mediated mitochondrial phosphorylation of Cx43, and resulted in reduced cerebral infarct volumes and apoptotic indices [ ].
Mitochondria play a crucial role in managing oxidative stress, and their dysfunction makes cells more susceptible to ROS. Neurons, structured with large amounts of unsaturated fatty acids, polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) and with their high metabolic rate are particularly vulnerable to oxidative stress, especially given their limited defense mechanisms. Following ABIs, this creates a dangerous situation where excitotoxic mitochondrial dysfunction leads to the release of ROS, including superoxide (O2⋅−), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), peroxyl radicals (ROO−), and hydroxyl radicals (⋅OH). These radicals can damage lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids. Additionally, superoxide (O2⋅−) reacts with nitric oxide to form peroxynitrite (ONOO−), a reactive nitrogen species that has a longer half-life than superoxide itself [ ].
ROS-induced cell damage is characterized by lipid peroxidation, where electrons are transferred from membrane lipids (primarily PUFAs) to free radicals. This triggers a chain reaction that produces large amounts of lipid peroxyl radicals, lipid hydroperoxides, and peroxyl-fatty acid radicals. The ongoing redox reactions lead to the formation of neurotoxic aldehydes such as 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE) and acrolein (2-propenal). Lipid peroxidation is commonly assessed by measuring malondialdehyde (MDA) levels [ ], a reactive aldehyde that can interact with proteins, DNA, and lipids, forming covalent protein and DNA adducts. Additionally, inflammatory cells like microglia, neutrophils, and monocytes can release ROS, further contributing to oxidative stress. Regardless of its source, oxidative stress is highly toxic to cells, causing a range of damage from cell death to long-term synaptic dysfunction [ ]. Mitochondrial Ca2+ overload is a well-known condition that can lead to ROS production through mitochondrial dysfunction [ ]. However, to a lesser extent, it might be beneficial. Indeed, in heart ischemia preconditioning works by increasing mitochondrial potassium permeability and ROS production secondary to S-nitrosation of mitochondrial Cx43 [ ]. But with an overwhelming level of Ca2+i, mitochondrial Cx43 can serve as a channel to import Ca2+ into mitochondria [ ]. Triggering ROS-induced cell damage or mPTP formation and cell death. In the brain, to date we do not know whether modulation of ROS production is a tool to increase ischemia tolerance via mitochondrial Cx43.

## Edema
Nearly 50 ​% of fatalities from severe TBI are linked to the development of cerebral edema , which rises to 80 ​% in the case of malignant hemispheric infarct [ ]. In 1967, Klatzo et al. using a cold trauma model, described two types of cerebral edema based on their origin: cytotoxic and vasogenic [ ]. Cytotoxic edema results from cellular damage, failure of ion pumps, and channel activation, leading to cell swelling. Vasogenic edema, on the other hand, arises from increased permeability of the BBB. In extreme cases, cellular swelling can result in oncotic cell death due to the excessive influx of water and ions, ultimately rupturing the plasma membrane. During pure cytotoxic edema, cerebral water content doesn't increase, as water simply redistributes from the interstitial to the intracellular space. Recently, a third type of edema has been described: ionic, which accompanies cytotoxic edema, occurs by the passage of water either from the intravascular or from the cerebrospinal fluid to the interstitial fluid, requires an intact BBB, the presence of blood flow, and the active transcapillary passage of H2O and ions [ ]. This type of edema does increase brain water content. It has been suggested that cytotoxic edema predominates in TBI and stroke [ , ]. However, there is a temporal progression and interaction between the different types of cerebral edema. Katayama, using a CCI contusion model in rats, found elevated osmolarity and water content in injured tissue 6–12 ​h post-trauma [ ]. In the following days, secondary cellular injury leads to cytotoxic edema, where astrocytes play a crucial role, partly due to their greater number compared to neurons. Marmarou et al. used MRI to study apparent diffusion coefficients and water content in a cohort of 44 patients with severe TBI, showing that cytotoxic edema was the dominant component in diffuse TBI [ ]. In a bimodal pattern, BBB damage predominates in the pericontusional areas within the first 24 ​h after TBI [ ]. However, after 5 days, a progression of vasogenic edema occurs due to rupture of the BBB [ ]. Here, the development of inflammation becomes important, and the increase in the expression of metalloproteinases and mediators such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF-A), degrade the extracellular matrix and increase the permeability of the BBB [ ]. In stroke, ionic-cytotoxic edema occurs first, lasting a maximum of 2–3 days, and then vasogenic edema begins 12–72 ​h later and can last up to 14 days 14 días [ ]. In 15–40 ​% of patients with stroke, damage to the BBB along with reperfusion can cause a third phase called hemorrhagic transformation, characterized by extravasation of red blood cells into the brain parenchyma cerebral [ ]. We previously mentioned the ischemia cascade, where a reduction in CBF evolves into decreased energy production, ionic pump failure, mitochondrial damage, and massive neuronal depolarization. Here, cytotoxic edema is triggered by Na+ and Cl− influx. However the neuronal oncotic death is Ca2+ independent [ ], and its mechanism remains elusive. Using brain slices of rats and mice, Weilinger et al. demonstrated that neuronal death by swelling is sensitive to pharmacological and genetic disruption of Panx1 [ ]. The activation of Panx1 was mediated by ROS [ ]. Thereafter the ROS – Panx1 pathway became an interesting target for future pharmacological treatment of cerebral cytotoxic edema. Also, the brain water content after a trauma can be globally reduced through the knockdown of Cx43. In a model of TBI, Wu et al. using anti-Cx43 oligodeoxynucleotides injected into the lateral ventricle of rats, showed a decreased Cx43 expression, correlated with a decrease in brain water content, along with a reduction in the number of swollen and reactive astrocytes [ ].
Another interesting target to modulate brain edema is the astrocytic water regulation. Water content is critical for maintaining intracellular volume and to maintain normal CNS function. Astrocytes strictly regulate their cell volume, mainly through the expression of aquaporin-4 (AQP4), as part of their support functions. The AQP4 channel is formed by six membrane-spanning α-helices and two half-helices protein, arranged in tetramers [ ]. Aquaporin channels enable the bidirectional water flow, and AQP4 is densely expressed in astrocyte endfeet processes of perivascular astrocytes, in tripartite synapses, and the glia limitans [ ]. Where they can exert the greatest control over water flow. Interestingly, Panx1 appears to be upstream of AQP4 expression. Xion et al. using a mouse stroke model treated with intraperitoneal probenecid (a pannexin blocker), found a marked reduction in infarct volume, a decrease in brain water content, along with a reduction in HMGB1 release from neurons and a reduction in AQP4 expression in the cortical penumbra area . Finally, Jian et al. studied Panx1 blockade with probenecid in cultured neocortical astrocytes exposed to a 6 ​h OGD deprivation/24 ​h reoxygenation protocol . Panx1 blockade inhibited cell death, ROS generation, along with reduced NLRP3, caspase-1, and AQP4 expression. Furthermore, there was reduced IL-1β and HMGB1 release in probenecid-treated astrocytes compared to control, linking Panx1-inflammasome activity to AQP4 expression [ ].

## Cortical spreading depression
Cortical spreading depression (CSD), first described by Leao in 1944 [ ], is a slowly propagating wave of cellular depolarization (2–5 ​mm/min) involving neurons and astrocytes in brain tissue [ ]. CSD causes almost complete depolarization and breakdown of ionic gradients across the cell membrane [ ], suppression of electrical activity, cellular swelling, distortion of dendritic spines (beading), and changes in regional blood flow [ ]. ABIs such as TBI, stroke, ICH, SAH and HE may be complicated by CSDs [ ]. CSDs are repetitive and produce a metabolic overload that enhances secondary damage [ , ]. A clinical study in a mixed cohort of stroke and TBI patients used microdialysis to demonstrate a clear association between CSD frequency and brain glucose depletion in combination with an increase in brain lactate [ ]. Indeed, the incidence of CSD was independently associated with poor neurologic outcomes in a cohort of severe TBI patients [ ]. Furthermore, a prospective observational study using electrocorticography found more than 50 ​% of CSD incidence in ICU patients recovering from TBI, SAH, and stroke [ ]. In fact, in the case of malignant hemispheric infarcts, these were present in 88 ​% of patients [ ].
In animal models and patients, there are divergent responses of regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF). Normally, hyperemia occurs along with CSD, which is followed by a period of up to 2 ​h of oligemia [ ]. However, using animal models of stroke, CSD is associated with the propagation of ischemia to the penumbra area [ ]. In a series of 24 patients with severe TBI requiring neurosurgery, rCBF was monitored using a tissue thermodilution sensor, and the presence of CSD was monitored using electrocorticography [ ]. In 17 of the 24 patients, CSD was recorded, 73 ​% of which were associated with hyperemia and 27 ​% with oligemia. The presence of this reverse hemodynamic response (oligemia) was associated with a worse neurological outcome at 6 months [ ].
During a CSD at the extracellular level, there is an acute rise in potassium (K+e) together with a severe drop in Na+e, Ca2+e, Cl−e, and pHe [ , , ]. High K+e induces a massive presynaptic activation of voltage-gated Ca2+ (Cav) channels (Cav2.1) and the release of glutamate toward the synaptic cleft [ , , ]. The consequent activation and opening of the postsynaptic receptors, such as NMDA and AMPA/KA receptors, also leads to a massive ion and water inward current, inducing cell swelling and dendritic beading [ , ]. Under homeostatic conditions, the increment in extracellular concentrations of glutamate is tightly regulated in the tripartite synapses by the astrocyte syncytium and glutamate transporters such as GLT-1 and GLAST [ ]. This process is highly dependent on Na+/K+-ATPase with a significant energy cost [ , , ]. Using rapid-sampling microdialysis in a stroke animal model, Hopwood and collaborators described a significant increase in brain extracellular lactate and a decrease in glucose levels associated with the frequency of CSDs [ ]. The CSDs were correlated with temporary decreases in the rCBF, as measured by a Doppler laser in an animal model of TBI [ ].
The analysis of murine brain slices by optic light microscopy has shown that the CSD induces changes in optic light transmittance (LT), which depends on osmotic shifts related to cell swelling (LT increase) or cell shrinkage (LT decrease). But also in organelle swelling or dendritic beading that increases light scatterer, then decreasing LT [ , ]. These changes induced by CSD have also been associated with transient synaptic transmission suppression and reduction of neuronal connectivity, which produces neurological impairment after brain injuries [ , , ].
In vivo and ex vivo strategies have been used to study the CSD. These involved a broad range of stimuli, e.g., ischemia, pulse or sustained increase of K+e, repetitive electric depolarization, and pinprick trauma [ ]. Hypoxia is a potent stimulus used to reproduce CSDs in animal models [ ]. High concentrations of K+e comprise another strong stimulus used to trigger CSDs in experimental settings [ ]. These strategies help to study the mechanisms involved in CSD initiation-propagation according to the induction stimulus. Thus, it has been described that spreading depression in rat brain slices induced by hypoxia depends on a minimum threshold of Na+e concentration and its flux into the cell through NMDAR and TTX-sensitive and non-sensitive Na+ channels [ ]. On the other hand, CSDs induced by electrical stimulation or pulse of high K+e in rats are blocked by competitive and noncompetitive NMDA receptor antagonists but not AMPA-kainate receptors in vivo and ex vivo [ , ]. However, if a high K+e stimulus is sustained, the noncompetitive NMDA receptor antagonist fails to inhibit CSD [ ]. Interestingly, in in vivo assay, the intracerebral microdialysis with artificial cerebrum spinal fluid (aCSF) in the posterior rat cortex produced the inhibition of the CSD triggered by high K+ in the frontal side of the cortex. Still, this phenomenon was re-induced when the microdialysis probe was perfused with high K+e. However, CSD was not re-induced by the perfusion of high glutamate solution [ ], showing that CSD initiation does not only depend on glutamate receptor activity but also suggests the participation of other channels activated by K+.
Ketamine, a sedative drug, was proposed as a possible therapeutic drug due to its noncompetitive inhibitory effect on NMDA receptors [ ]. Feasibility studies have shown a reduction dose-dependent of CSDs with ketamine intravenous infusion [ , ]. However, ketamine causes significant sympathetic stimulation, which is a concern in patients with hemorrhagic risk and elevated blood pressure secondary to ABI. In addition, its sedative features complicate clinical examination [ ].
We recently published a study where using mice brain slices showed that cortical astrocyte Cx43 HC and Panx1 channel have significant participation in the CSD generation triggered by a pulse of high K+e
 . Both membrane channels are involved in CSD but with different dynamics. While blocking Cx43 HC reduced the initiation phase, blocking the Panx1 channel decreased the initiation and spreading phase . Moreover, neuronal connectivity impairment associated with CSD in the hippocampus was prevented by both Cx43 HC and Panx1 channel blockade, and, in the cortex, only Cx43 HC blockade was able to prevent the connectivity impairment . To date, there are no preclinical or clinical studies using this strategy to control CSD, and it is a novel objective to explore.
Summarizing, ABIs are a heterogeneous group of diseases with a high incidence and a great impact on society. They shared common mechanisms of damage progression, with variations in intensity, anatomical distribution, and temporal evolution specific to each of them. The study of these common mechanisms in secondary injury and the growing understanding of pathophysiology have allowed us to determine multiple pathways and putative molecular targets to be manipulated therapeutically. Here we have discussed the main known mechanisms of progression of secondary damage highlighting the role of astrocytes and their communication pathways, connexins hemichannels, pannexins channels, and connexin gap junctional channels. We have also reviewed the recognition of CSDs within the mechanisms of secondary damage, which, being silent to traditional clinical monitoring, may be responsible for poor clinical outcomes and the disparities that exist when only the study of intracranial hypertension is included in the clinical algorithms for prevention of secondary damage.

## Author contributions
JT and MR conceived and wrote this article. All the authors have read and approved the final manuscript and further agreed to be accountable for the content of the work.

## Ethics statement
Not required.

## Funding
This work was supported by Fondo Nacional de Desarrollo Científico y Tecnológico (FONDECYT/ANID Nº 11171155).

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: Maximiliano Rovegno reports was provided by National Agency for Research and Development. Maximiliano Rovegno reports a relationship with National Agency for Research and Development that includes: funding grants. If there are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgment
We especially thank “Florinda”, “Bicho” and “Giuseppe” for being our partners on our journey.

## Footnotes
This article is part of a special issue entitled: Neurocritical Care published in Neurotherapeutics.

## Contributor Information
Juan E. Tichauer, Email: jtichaue@uc.cl.
Maximiliano Rovegno, Email: maxrovegno@uc.cl.

## References