Environ Health Perspect253envhperEnvironmental Health Perspectives0091-67651552-9924American Chemical SocietyPMC1567942PMC1567942.115679421567942195493110.1289/ehp.94-15679421Research ArticlePredicting the carcinogenicity of chemicals in humans from rodent bioassay data.
GoodmanGWilsonRDepartment of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138.8199194134669195218010819911809200611092018Regulatory agencies currently rely on rodent carcinogenicity bioassay data to predict whether or not a given chemical poses a carcinogenic threat to humans. We argue that it is always more useful to know a chemical's carcinogenic potency (with confidence limits) than to be able to say only qualitatively that it has been found to be a carcinogen. In a typical bioassay, a chemical is administered to groups of 50 to 100 rodents at the highest feasible level (the maximum tolerated dose) and rarely at less than 1/10 this dose in order to maximize the statistical significance of any increase in tumors that might result. Recently, much experimental work has focused on the mechanisms by which site-specific toxicity arising from chronic administration at the maximum tolerated dose may lead to carcinogenicity. Extrapolation of high-dose results to low doses does not take into consideration the possibility of a threshold dose, below which the carcinogenic potency is much lower or even zero. Threshold dose-response phenomena may be much more relevant to the etiology of cancer in the rodent bioassays than was earlier realized; if so, there is an even greater need for establishing dose-dependent potency estimates. The emphasis of this review is on the interspecies comparison of high-dose potencies. The qualitative and quantitative comparison of carcinogenicities between mice and rats and between rodents and humans is reviewed and discussed. We conclude that there is a good qualitative (yes/no) correlation for both the rat/mouse and the rodent/human comparison. There is also a good correlation of the carcinogenic potencies between rats and mice, and the upper limits on potencies in humans are consistent with rodent potencies for those chemicals for which human exposure data are available. For the rodent/human comparison, the best estimate of the interspecies potency factor is lognormally distributed around 1 when the potencies in both species are measured in units of (mg/kg-day)-1.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightyespmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articleyespmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 
Environmental Health Perspectives 
Vol. 94, pp. 195-218, 1991 
 
Predicting the Carcinogenicity of 
 
Chemicals in Humans from Rodent 
Bioassay Data 
 
by Gay Goodman*" and Richard Wilson* 
 
Regulatory agencies currently rely on rodent carcinogenicity bioassay data to predict whether or not a given chemical 
poses a carcinogenic threat to humans. We argue that it is always more useful to know a chemical's carcinogenic potency 
(with confidence limits) than to be able to say only qualitatively that it has been found to be a carcinogen. In a typical 
bioassay, a chemical is administered to groups of 50 to 100 rodents at the highest feasible level (the maximum tolerated 
dose) and rarely at less than 1/10 this dose in order to maximize the statistical significance of any increase in tumors that 
might result. Recently, much experimental work has focused on the mechani by which site-specific toxicity arising from 
chronic administration at the maximum tolerated dose may lead to carcinogencity. Extrapolation of high-dose results to 
low doses does not take into consideration the possibility of a threshold dose, below which the carcuiogenic potency is much 
lower or even zero. Threshold dose-response phenomena may be much more relevant to the etiology of cancer in the ro- 
dent bioassays than was earlier realized; if so, there is an even greater need for establishing dose-dependent potency 
estimates. The emphasis of this review is on the interspecies comparison of high-dose potencies. The qualitative and quan- 
titative comparison of carcinogenicities between mice and rts and between rodents and humans is reviewed and discussed. 
We conclude that there is a good qualitative (yes/no) correlation for both the rat/mouse and the rodent/human comparison. 
There is also a good correlation of the carcinogenic potencies between rats and mice, and the upper limits on potencies 
in humans are consistent with rodent potencies for those chemicals for which human exposure data are available. For the 
rodent/human comparison, the best estimate of the interspecies potency factor is lognormally distributed around 1 when 
the potencies in both species are measured in units of (mg/kg-day) -'. 
 
Introduction 
 
Whenever researchers have thought that there is a simplifying 
feature about cancer, further studies have arrived to demonstrate 
complications. This particularly applies to any attempts to 
develop rules for discovering potential human carcinogens and 
for establishing low-risk exposure limits. Of course, we do not 
deliberately expose people to a chemical merely to find out 
whether it causes cancer; human epidemiological information 
comes from accidental, incidental, or therapeutic exposures. 
This forces us to search for other methods of predicting whether 
a chemical is carcinogenic to humans. Although the development 
of short-term in vitro and in viw tests holds promise for the future 
in predicting the carcinogenicity of substances, at the very least 
we are left with the task of interpreting the existing rodent 
bioassay data. The problem then becomes: how should we utilize 
the results of carcinogenicity tests in rodents for predicting 
cancer risk in humans? 
 
In long-term bioassays, chemicals are tested at the highest 
possible dose in order to maximize the sensitivity for detecting 
carcinogenic effects. To take a hypothetical example, if a car- 
cinogen induces a particular type of neoplasm with frequency 
 
*Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138. 
tSchool of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115. 
 
Address reprint requests to G. Goodman, Gradient Corporation, 44 Brattle 
Street, Cambridge, MA 02138. 
 
0.2 at dose d and with frequency 0.02 when the dose is (1/10)d, 
then in a test of 100 animals the carcinogenicity of the chemical 
would be detectable above background at the higher but not the 
lower dose. The maximum dose tested (MaxD) is usually set at 
the maximum tolerated dose (MTD), the highest dose that does 
not cause death, organ toxicity, or severe weight loss during a 
chronic dosing regime of several months' duration. The other 
doses in the bioassay are usually chosen as some fraction of the 
MTD, and are only rarely as small or smaller than MTD/10. One 
issue surrounding the fact that the bioassays are conducted at high 
doses is that the shape of the dose-response curve at much lower 
doses is not necessarily predicted by the dose-response near the 
MTD. Although we return to this point when discussing possi- 
ble mechanisms of chemical carcinogenesis, the high-dose to 
low-dose extrapolation is not the subject of this review. It is im- 
portant to acknowledge that there are two separate aspects of 
determining human risk from data taken in rodent bioassays, 
namely a) the high-dose/low-dose extrapolation and b) the in- 
terspecies extrapolation of high-dose potencies. We emphasize 
that here we are addressing mainly the second aspect, in which 
carcinogenic potencies obtained in rodents are used to predict 
potencies in humans exposed at similarly high doses. 
 
Which Chemicals Are Carcinogens? 
 
Twenty years ago, there were not many agents that were 
 
GOODMAN AND WILSON 
 
known to cause cancer in either laboratory animals or man. It 
was considered prudent to impose strict regulatory restrictions 
on the use of all such chemicals. It was generally anticipated that 
few new carcinogens would be discovered; certainly the percent- 
age of chemicals tested for carcinogenicity that turned up 
"positive" was low at that time. In one study of 120 pesticides and 
industrial chemicals given orally for 18 months at the MTD, only 
11 of the chemicals tested (9 %) caused cancer in mice (1). This 
oft-quoted study has been cited as evidence that chemicals can 
be given at near-toxic doses without automatically trigering car- 
cinogenicity secondary to toxic effects (2). Although we agree 
for other reasons (see above) that it is reasonable to test at the 
MTD, the results of Innes et al. (1) bear further analysis. In fact, 
among the 109 chemicals not found to be carcinogenic, 20 (17%) 
were considered by the authors to require further investigation. 
Ames and Gold (3) stated that this study was less thorough than 
modern protocols and pointed out that only one species was 
tested. We also note that even with the identical protocol, some 
additional chemicals would most likely have produced tumors if 
the duration of exposure or even observation had been extended 
to 24 months. 
 
In the intervening years, the available information has in- 
creased. We now know of hundreds of chemicals that can cause 
cancer in animals; many are impossible to ban, and some are of 
natural origin (4). New cancer bioassays involve dosing animals 
daily for a period on the order of a lifetime: 2 years for rats and 
mice. More animals are used, both sexes of two species are ex- 
posed, generally higher doses are administered, and the effects 
at several dose levels (usually at least three) are included (5). Of 
266 chemicals considered to have been adequately tested in rats 
and mice of both sexes at or near the MTD in 2-year protocols 
by the National Toxicology Program (NTP) and the National 
Cancer Institute (NCI), 51% percent were found to be positive 
for carcinogenicity in at least one sex-species group; the evalua- 
tion of positivity was according to the conclusions stated in the 
NCI/NTP Technical Reports (6,7). 
 
Almost the same data has been looked at in a slightly different 
way by Byrd et al. (8). Given that all experiments consisted of at 
least two dose groups and one control group, their criterion for 
positivity was an increased site-specific tumor incidence with 
p < 0.025 for an individual dose group, orp < 0.05 for any two 
dose groups (if one or both failed to meet the more stringent 
criterion), by Fisher exact test. Out of a total of 290 chemicals 
tested by the NCI/NTP and included on their Carcinogenic Bio- 
assay Database System (CBDS) magnetic tapes as of December, 
1987, 50% were positive in mice, 52% were positive in rats, and 
71% were positive in at least one sex-species group. If the tumor- 
bearing male and female animals were combined before testing 
for statistical significance, then the fraction labeled positive 
would be greater still. We note also that because the number of 
animals per dose group is usually 50 or 100, tumor incidences 
below the level of 5 % may go unobserved or be discounted due 
to lack of statistical significance. If the sensitivity were improved, 
for example, by using 1000 animals per dose group, many more 
chemicals might be shown to be carcinogenic. However, since the 
statistical criteria for positivity used by Byrd et al. were rather 
liberal (8), it is likely that many of the statistically significant dif- 
ferences in tumor incidence were false positives, reflecting mere- 
ly random variability (9-11). 
 
Along with an increase in the power of animal tests to iden- 
tify carcinogenic substances, there has been a parallel im- 
provement in the methodology for detecting trace amounts of 
chemicals. Thirty years ago, an upper limit on sensitivity of 
a few parts per million was common. It seemed likely that any 
carcinogen found in foodstuffs at that level would pose a 
significant risk and remedial action should be demanded. So 
few chemicals in commercial use were known to be car- 
cinogens that it seemed that they could be avoided and replac- 
ed by alternatives. This was the rationale that led to the inclu- 
sion of the Delaney Clause in the Food Additive Amendments 
of 1958 [reviewed by Hutt (12)]. If a few turned out to be 
essential or in unusual demand, then special legislation could 
be enacted, as later happened for saccharin. But we can now 
detect trace contaminant levels to one part in 1012 in some 
cases. As a result, in typical drinking water supplies, at least 
20 chemicals known to be rodent carcinogens are well above 
the detection level, and many other chemicals are present for 
which information as to carcinogenicity is either unavailable 
or inadequate. Because we find it technically or economical- 
ly unfeasible to remove all such chemicals from our drinking 
water, our diet, and the environment in general, it becomes 
necessary to rank chemicals according to the risk they are ex- 
pected to pose to human health. One means of achieving such 
a ranking is by measuring carcinogenic potencies in animals 
and finding some means of extrapolating these results quan- 
titatively to humans. 
 
It seems therefore unhelpful to classify chemicals as car- 
cinogens or noncarcinogens, but to assume that all chemicals are 
carcinogenic and that some have too low a potency to produce a 
statistically significant increase in tumors with a given ex- 
perimental protocol. This is a variation on a statement by 
Paracelsus: "All things are poisons, for there is nothing without 
poisonous qualities. It is only the dose which makes a thing a 
poison." [quoted by the Scientific Committee of the Food Safety 
Council (13)]. Under this scheme, a chemical that is truly non- 
carcinogenic at any dose is a special case and would be called a 
carcinogen of zero potency. 
 
The assumption that all chemicals may be carcinogenic only 
leads to a useful procedure if one can determine the quan- 
titative carcinogenic potency for each chemical and an upper 
limit to the potency in cases where the potency is too low to 
be detected. In the present paper we review the work of our 
group and of others on the interspecies correlation of car- 
cinogenic potencies, particularly between mice and rats. Fur- 
ther analysis is provided of the methodology, efficacy, and 
limitations for the use of rodent bioassay data in predicting 
human carcinogenic potencies. Gregory (14) and Dybing (15) 
have recently reviewed interspecies comparisons with respect 
to predicting carcinogenic risk in humans; we have attempted 
not to duplicate their efforts, and the reader is refered to these 
papers for alternative points of view. 
 
Quantitation: Relating Carcinogenic 
Potency to Other Parameters 
 
Currently, there exists no good alternative to animal bioassays 
for obtaining quantitative information on the carcinogenic poten- 
tial of chemicals in any species. The animal bioassay data base 
contains information on the tumorigenic effects of almost 1000 
 
196 
 
PREDICTING THE CARCINOGENVICITY OF CHEMIC4LS IN HUMANS 
 
chemicals. Although many chemicals have been tested for their 
ability to induce point mutations in Salmonella strains, and some 
have been assayed for other genotoxic, cytotoxic, or preneoplastic 
effects in a variety of short-term in vitro and in vivo tests, a quan- 
titative method that begins with data derived from such tests and 
ends with a prediction of carcinogenic potency in humans has not 
yet been put forward. As knowledge of the molecular mechan- 
isms of action of genotoxic carcinogens increases, short-term 
tests for genotoxicity should be designed to reflect the importance 
of different genetic end points in primary carcinogenesis (16). 
Research into the mechanisms of action of nongenotoxic car- 
cinogens, along with novel experiments to determine their likely 
importance in animals or humans when moderate levels of en- 
dogenous or environmental initiators are present simultaneously, 
should point the way toward development of yet another gen- 
eration of short-term tests. For example,knowledge that the 
tumor promoting action of 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate 
(TPA) is mediated by activation of protein kinase C, which is a 
key component of transmembrane signal transduction relevant 
to the regulation of cell division, suggests that other tumor 
promoters might function by disrupting the same or related 
pathways of signal transduction (17). It is conceivable that a sim- 
ple in vitro test for promoters having such activity could be 
designed (18). 
 
Although there is good reason to be optimistic that short-term 
tests will someday provide the means for predicting the potency 
of human carcinogens, that day has not yet arrived (19). It is clear 
that positivity on short-term tests for genotoxicity is highly cor- 
related with carcinogenicity for the known human carcinogens: 
of the 23 chemicals and chemical combinations designated by the 
International Agency for Research on Cancer ([ARC) to be 
causally associated with human cancer, all but two (asbestos and 
conjugated estrogens) are genotoxic or are expected to be so on 
the basis of chemical structure (20). But because of the paucity 
of data on human carcinogenicity and on definitive human non- 
carcinogens, there is only a very limited opportunity for attemp- 
ting to calibrate short-term test results to these data. The em- 
phasis has thus been on demonstrating agreement between short- 
term tests and rodent carcinogenicity bioassays, both qualitative 
(21-25) and quantitative (26-30). When the specificity of ex- 
isting short-term tests at distinguishing between rodent noncar- 
cinogens and carcinogens is analyzed, their power as predictive 
tools is less impressive than when sensitivity to rodent car- 
cinogens is the only criterion (31,32). The finding that a large 
proportion of known rodent carcinogens are not genotoxic in 
short-term tests (23) underscores the necessity of developing 
short-term tests for nongenotoxic carcinogens. Since the analysis 
of the efficacy of all short-term tests is focused primarily on ex- 
isting carcinogenicity data obtained in long-term animal studies, 
it is important to try and ascertain the best methods for retriev- 
ing information relevant to human carcinogenic potency from the 
bioassay data and to quantify the expected uncertainty in both the 
upper and lower bounds of such potency estimates. 
 
Dose Conventions 
 
Before testing for carcinogenicity was even contemplated, the 
testing of chemicals for toxic effects in animals was used for 
predicting toxic effects in humans. There are several ways to 
formulate the dosage administered for the purposes of such a 
 
comparison; see Calabrese (33) for a comprehensive review. The 
usual convention for normalizing dose is on a weight/weight 
basis; weight of the chemical divided by the weight of the animal. 
The reporting of dose as a fraction of body weight does not im- 
ply that equal effects will be produced in two species if the dosage 
is scaled according to their weights. It is merely a convention and 
no more. However, this convention arose out of an expectation 
that the amount of chemical (expressed as a weight) wh required 
to achieve the same toxic effect in the heavier animal that is pro- 
duced in the lighter animal by the amount w, is wn = w,(W.1 ), 
where Whand W are the weights of the heavier and lighter 
animals, respectively. A crude surface area correction is some- 
times applied to the usual dose convention, such that the predic- 
tion for equal toxicity becomes wh = w,(Whl )92A . If instead of 
the weight of chemical we now use the convention in which dose 
is normalized on a weight/weight basis, i.e., dose d = w/l W then 
the surface-area-corrected prediction for equal toxicities 
becomes d = ,(W^/ W)'k An excellent interspecies correlation 
of minimal toxic doses was found for a series of 18 chemo- 
therapeutic agents when the scaling factor was based on body 
surface area (34). It was later realized that these chemicals are 
not readily metabolized by liver microsomal enzymes, and thus 
interspecies variation in such metabolism was not a major fac- 
tor in the comparison (35). Calabrese (33) concludes that in the 
absence of an efficient drug-metabolizing system, a drug's tox- 
ic effects are similar among species when the dose is scaled on 
the basis of surface area. However, another study of the acute tox- 
icity of 400 chemicals revealed a good correlation with body 
weight (and not body weight to the 2/3 power) for more than 80% 
of the chemicals (36). One might expect that for all chemicals 
within a given chemical class, the same dose convention would 
be appropriate to the interspecies comparison of toxic effects. 
 
For carcinogenic potency, there exists a similar uncertainty as 
to which dose convention to use to simplify the interspecies com- 
parison. In addition, since cancer typically develops as a result 
of long-term exposure to a carcinogenic substance, the factor of 
time enters the determination of potency. With daily administra- 
tion, a steady-state coficentration of the active agent in the 
animal's system is approached. There is no obvious reason that 
the same interspecies scaling factor should apply here as is rele- 
vant to acute effects such as the response to a single dose of a 
drug. In the present paper, for simplicity, we refer to the daily 
dose administered on a weight/weight basis (typically milligrams 
per kilogram) for the lifetime of the animal or human. Use of this 
convention, by analogy with that described above for acute tox- 
icity, does not imply that weight scaling always produces a 1:1 
correspondence between effective carcinogenic doses in two 
species. For example, B6C3F1 mice and F344 rats demonstrated 
a better correlation of carcinogenic potencies with surface area 
scaling than with weight scaling, but for the same (B6C3FJ) mice 
strain and a different (Osborne-Mendel) rat strain the opposite 
was true: weight scaling yielded a higher degree of potency cor- 
relation than did surface area scaling (37). Based upon recent 
work on physiological parameters controlling pharmacokinetics, 
Travis et al. have suggested that the optimum interspecies scal- 
ing factor (for this chemical and this organ) is in fact closer to 
weight to the UA power (38). We consider that the best estimate 
for an interspecies scaling factor is an unknown, to be determined 
from existing data. In the risk-assessment procedure the most 
 
197 
 
GOODMAN AND WILSON 
 
accurate scaling factor ought, in principal, to be adopted on a 
case-by-case basis; unfortunately, relevant information is only 
rarely available. 
 
Indexes of Carcinogenic Potency 
 
The data from long-term bioassays can be analyzed according 
to any one of a number of dose-response models resulting, for 
each experiment, in a measure of the chemical's carcinogenic 
potency. One standard index of carcinogenic potency, is (3, which 
here we take to be the slope of the dose-response relationship at 
the dose of interest (37,39). In principle, the potency can be a 
function of dose d: (3 = R(d). In the limit where (3 is constant, a 
formula can be derived for the fractional probability P of produc- 
ing at least one tumor at a given site: 
 
P(d) = - (1-o) Io p(e- ) (1) 
 
where et is the background rate of animals with tumors at that 
site. This formula was specifically constructed to reach but not 
exceed P = 1 at high doses and to have the (linear) low-dose limit 
P = ca + (d, which means that ( is the initial slope of P versus 
d (39). The model was orginally derived in terms of tumor- 
bearing animals rather than animals with tumors at a specific site, 
but the form is the same in either case. 
 
Useful bioassay data fall approximately in the range of 10 to 
95 % tumor incidence at the most sensitive site. Gold and co- 
workers have chosen an expression for potency that emphasizes 
the region where data are available. Their index of potency is 
1/TD50, where TD50 is defined as the dose that, if administered 
daily for the "standard lifespan" of the species, "will halve the 
mortality-corrected estimate of the probability of remaining 
tumorless [ata given site] thrughout that period" (40). To derive 
this index, they used a mathematical model which, like Eq. (1), 
assumes linearity at low doses. Indeed, in the absence of inter- 
current mortality (i.e., deaths during the term of the study), the 
parameter (3 is equivalent to (hn 2)/TD50 (40). Because I/TD50 is 
defined in terms of a dose, the TD50, which falls in the middle of 
the range for which there are useful data, is fairly independent 
of the model used in its derivation. In most cases the TD50 turns 
out to be close in value to the maximum administered dose, 
which approximates the MTD (41-43). 
 
Extrapolation from High-Dose to 
Low-Dose Potencies 
 
A major problem with testing at doses near the MTD is that 
some toxic effects may be inevitable. Chemicals that are car- 
cinogenic only as a result of target-organ toxicity might exhibit 
a dose-response relationship that reflects the secondary nature 
of their carcinogenicity. Since toxic effects usually appear only 
above a threshold dose, one might anticipate that such secondary 
carcinogens would demonstrate a similar threshold behavior for 
tumorigenicity. Other chemicals might be primary carcinogens, 
and it is generally assumed that they would have some quan- 
tifiable carcinogenic potential at any dose. Given that such a 
distinction is meaningfil, both classes of animal carcinogens are 
likely to be relevant in principle to human cancer, even if only the 
primary carcinogens produce cancer at low exposure levels in 
 
humans. (We operationally define a "low" dose of a given 
substance rather loosely: a dose that is much less than the MTD 
for that substance in the species being addressed.) 
 
When attempting to extrapolate from a high-dose measure of 
potency (such as (l or 1/TD50) to a low-dose potency, the choice 
of dose-response model becomes crucial and can shift the out- 
come by many orders of magnitude. In some sense then, use of 
an index of carcinogenic potency that only reflects experiment- 
ally measurable (high-dose) effects permits one to beg the ques- 
tion of the validity of any given method for extrapolating from 
high to low doses. We are aware that there is no single correct way 
to determine low-dose potencies. The problem becomes a 
serious one in cases where there exists a threshold dose for car- 
cinogenicity. But for most if not all genotoxic carcinogens that 
have been tested adequately at low doses, a low-dose threshold 
has not been found. For such chemicals, the assumption of a 
linear dose response down to zero dose provides a reasonable 
estimate of the potency at low doses for the most sensitive site. 
Examples are 2-acetylaminofluorene (44,45), diethylnitrosamine 
and dimethylnitrosamine (46), and N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl)- 
nitrosamine (47). 
 
There is a now a substantial amount of evidence from ani- 
mal experiments indicating that cell proliferation is some- 
times associated with the process of chemical carcinogenesis 
when chemicals are administered at doses near the MTD. The 
degree of local cell proliferation is apparendy a good index for 
cell killing; indeed, it has been suggested by Swenberg (48) 
that, whereas the MTD as currently determined often results 
in a 20-fold increase in cell proliferation in some organ, the 
MTD ought to be redefined as that dose which results in no 
more than a 3- or 4-fold increase in cell proliferation in any 
organ. 
 
The possibility now exists that threshold phenomena for car- 
cinogenicity may be explained by increased cell proliferation. 
In rats given 2-acetylaminofluorine (2-AAF), which has a 
hockey-stick-shaped dose response for mouse bladder tumors 
with the number of tumors increasing sharply above 60 ppm, 
bladder hyperplasia also increases nonlinearly above 60 ppm 
(49). Similarly, investigation of the tumorigenicity of saccharin 
revealed that the threshold dose for bladder tumors in the male 
rat is explained by the dose-response for precipitation of silicates 
in the urine; female rats do not form these silicates in response 
to saccharin and are likewise not induced to form bladder tumors 
(49). A possible implication of findings such as these is that for 
chemicals that produce tumors in a given organ by a mechanism 
unrelated to genotoxicity (as evidenced by failure to produce 
genotoxic effects in short-term tests and either absence of DNA 
adduct formation in the target organ or a threshold response for 
tumorigenesis that does not match the dose-response for DNA 
adduction), induction of cell proliferation may be a necessary 
condition for tumorigenesis. But what we do not yet know with 
certainty is whether the isolated cases in which the dose-response 
for cell proliferation has been measured is indicative of the pat- 
tern one would find for most or all nongenotoxic chemicals: i.e., 
that there is a threshold dose below which a chemical produces 
neither cell proliferation nor neoplastic growth. It is vital that 
such dose-response information be forthcoming if we are to gain 
any measure of confidence in our ability to predict carcinogenic 
potencies based on cell proliferation studies. 
 
198 
 
PREDICTING THE CARCINOGENICITY OF CHEAMICAL IN HUMANS 
 
It is also far from certain that most genotoxic agents that cause 
cancer do so via genotoxic mechanisms, either in rodents or in 
humans. We have reported elsewhere that the carcinogenic 
potency (as obtained from the rodent bioassay) is more strong- 
ly related to the MTD for nonmutagens than for mutagens, 
although the differences are small (50). Our findings are consis- 
tent with the hypothesis that, even for most mutagens, at high 
doses carcinogenicity is induced via mechanisms associated with 
toxicity. Similarly, for genotoxic chemicals known to cause 
cancer in humans, most epidemiological evidence comes from 
high-dose exposures, approaching the MTD in many cases. Pro- 
bably the best-studied human carcinogen is tobacco smoke, 
which produces acute toxic effects in the lungs and respiratory 
system at all levels of usage. It may be argued that the target tissue 
dose level is high for the duration of inhalation, regardless of how 
few or how many cigarettes are smoked per day. For this reason, 
toxic effects cannot be ruled out as a contributing cause or even 
as the main cause of smoking-related carcinogenesis, despite the 
fact that cigarette smoke contains potent genotoxins. 
 
Although we have touched briefly upon the low-dose extra- 
polationproblem, itisnotthesubjectofthepresentpaper. Readers 
are referred to the review of Zeise et al. (51 ) for a thorough discus- 
sion of dose response based on available low-dose data. In the 
following, interspecies comparisons referprimarily topotencies 
obtained when the exposure doses were at high or intermediate 
levels for each of the species under consideration. 
 
Interspecies Conversion Factor 
 
In this review, we extrapolate the potency from species a to 
species b via the relation 3b = K1j3a (52). This equation defines 
the factor Kb., which is termed an interspecies conversion fac- 
tor. Because of a multitude of pharmacokinetic parameters deter- 
mining a given chemical's effective dose and the species- 
variability of particular biochemical pathways which decide its 
actual carcinogenicity, Kis not expected to have the same value 
for all chemicals. For the comparison of carcinogenic potencies 
between mice and rats, it has been found that Kvaries a factor of 
20 over more than 200 rodent carcinogens (37,53). Our task is to 
find appropriate values for the factor KhR for the rodent to 
human conversion. (Here we use subscriptR to indicate rodents 
in general, reserving the lowercase r for use later when we refer 
specifically to rats.) We begin with the hypothesis that a given 
chemical or agent that is a carcinogen in one rodent species is 
carcinogenic in another. We further propose that the carcin- 
 
ogenic potency in humans is close to that in rodents (KhR = 1) 
 
when the potencies are measured in units of (mg/kg-day)-', and 
how close KhR is to 1 can be derived from experimental and 
epidemiological data. A scientific study may disprove this pro- 
position for a given chemical or class of chemicals, in which case 
our hypothesis would have to be abandoned or modified. Possible 
modification might be that KhR is, on average, closer to 10, or to 
0.1. The whole process of risk assessment should therefore be 
iterative. As biological understanding improves upon the 
assumptions, the assessment may be modified appropriately. 
Some government agencies have made various assumptions 
about this factor in their risk assessments; these are summariz 
 
in Table 1. But we reemphasize that KhR is not a constant; it 
varies from chemical to chemical, although generalizations made 
on the basis of chemical class could be warranted. 
 
lible 1. Comparison of relative interspecies potency factors 
 
used by some policy makersa 
 
Method Rat Mouse Human Reference 
 
mg/kg-day 1 1 1 Crouch and Wilson (39); 
 
(chemical weight/ Crouch (37) (Food and 
body weight) Drug Administration) 
Percentage of diet 1 0.38 1.8 Anderson et al.(ll) 
 
(chemical weight/ 
diet weight 
 
(mg/kg-ay) x (W/r) 1 0.44 5.9 Anderson et al. (III) 
 
(surface area correction) (Environmental Protec- 
 
tion Agency) 
(mg/kg-day) x ($/W) 1 0.29 14 Travis (38) 
mg/kg-day x lifeime 1 1 35 NAS (162) 
 
aThe numbers given are relative to potency in rats = 1. W is the weight of 
species x (mouse or human); W is the weight of the rat. Weights used in the 
calculations were rat: 0.35 kg, mouse: 0.03 kg, human: 70 kg. 
 
Deriving Potency in Humans from 
Potency in Rodents 
 
There are several possible procedures for deriving carcinogenic 
potency in humans from the carcinogenic potency in rodents. a) 
Understanding the biological processes relevant to chemical car- 
cinogenicity, their kinetics, and how these differ between rodents 
and humans. b) Comparing "natural," background tumori- 
genesis in rodents and humans. c) Comparing carcinogenicity of 
chemicals in rodents and humans in those cases where there is 
adequate epidemiology in humans. d) Comparing carnnogenicity 
of chemicals in rats and mice, thereby obtaining what is probably 
an upper limit on the accuracy of the comparison between 
rodents and humans. 
 
Understanding Biological Mechanisms of 
Carcinogenesis 
 
The fact that interspecies variation in biological processes 
plays an enormous part in carcinogenesis can be seen by a 
reductio-ad-absurdium argument due to Peto (54). Suppose that 
all tissues of a human and a mouse were equally likely to develop 
neoplasms when, for example, bombarded uniformly by ioniz- 
ing radiation. The probability of getting a tumor in any given 
time period is therefore greater for a human han a mouse (simply 
because there is more tissue) by the ratio Mh/Mm, where Mh and 
Mm are the masses of the human and the mouse respectively. 
Now the incidence of cancer is well known to increase with age 
by a power of the time (55-57), the exact power depending upon 
the type of malignancy. Let us assume the fourth power. Then the 
probability of developing a tumor during the mouse's lifetime 
T. is less than that of developing one during the human's 
lifetime Th by (Tm/lTh)4. Therefore we expect that the lifetime in- 
cidence of radiation-induced cancer in mice will be less than that 
in humans by a factor of approximately 
 
(Mm/Mh)(Tm/Th)4 z (30 g/70 kg)(2 years/70 years)4 = 1/109. 
 
Yet evidence suggests that the actual mouse/human ratio for 
radiation-induced cancer is closer to unity (58). We all know the 
answer to this. paradox in general terms: it is because the se- 
quence of biochemical and physiological events leading to car- 
cinogenesis proceeds more rapidly in mice than in humans. The 
 
199 
 
GOODMANAND WIlSON 
 
rates of cell division are faster in smaller animals. The cardiac 
output of a mouse is 100% of its total blood volume per minute, 
whereas that ofa man is only 5% of his blood volume per minute 
(59). These and other factors, both understood and unknown, 
result in differential probabilities and lag times for tumor induc- 
tion, and different dose responses. 
 
The problem facing us is to find the best estimate that we can 
of the actual potency ratio for chemical carcinogenesis between 
experimental animals and humans. Clearly, when estimating a 
given chemical's carcinogenic potency in humans from its poten- 
cy in rodents, all available information on differences in the rates 
and mechanisms of its absorption, distribution to target organs, 
biochemical transformation to active or inactive metabolites, 
clearance, and mechanisms of carcinogenicity should be taken 
into consideration (60). Attention to differential pharmacokinet- 
ics may be of especial importance to the low-dose extrapolation 
(61). Unfortunately for the field of quantitative risk assessment, 
such information is lacking for most chemicals proven to be car- 
cinogenic in animal bioassays. But even given detailed know- 
ledge of pharmacokinetic and other relevant biological behavior 
in one species, there is not yet any formula for calculating quan- 
titatively a chemical's tumorigenicity from its actions at the 
molecular, cellular, or organ level. On the other hand, where 
such data are available in two animal species for a chemical that 
has been tested for carcinogenicity in both, it should be possible 
to calibrate some biological parameters to carcinogenic poten- 
cy. If these same parameters can be estimated in humans, for ex- 
ample, by measuring urine metabolites in exposed populations 
(62) or by analogy with related compounds (especially an- 
ticancer drugs) for which such data exists, then the animal- 
human extrapolation would thereby be facilitated. 
 
The question of whether target organ toxicity is a precursor to 
tumorigenesis was recently adddressed by Hoel and co-workers. 
Ninety-nine chemicals were tested for carcinogenicity and site- 
specific toxicity in long-term rodent bioassays; only 7 of the 53 
which were positive for carcinogenicity exhibited target organ 
toxicity that could have been causal to the observed neoplasms 
(63). However, some local responses normally associated with 
toxicity, such as hyperplasia and inflanunation, were considered 
by these authors to be corollaries of neoplasia rather than toxicity. 
By defining these responses as preneoplastic, it appears to us that 
they have ruled out a priori what might be an interesting effect. 
It would have been more informative to ask, instead: which toxic 
effects are associated with neoplasia? Therefore it is not clear to 
us whether they have adequately tested the relationship between 
toxicity and carcinogenicity. 
 
Great strides have been made in the area of biologically based 
modeling of the rates of progress through the stages of carcino- 
genesis. Models in which carcinogenesis proceeds in accordance 
with two rate-limiting, heritable, cellular transitions (from nor- 
mal to intiated and from initiated to transformed), and in which 
the clonal population size and the mitotic rate of the initiated cells 
are included among the variables, have been successful in 
explaning the incidence of various human cancers (64,65) and 
chemically induced bladder cancer in rats (66). Furthermore, 
experimentation based upon such models has permitted elucida- 
tion of the mechanism of action of at least one nongenotoxic, low- 
potency carcinogen: it was concluded that the tumor-promoting 
attributes of sodium saccharin are due to increases in the initiated 
 
cell population and mitotic rate (but not the probability of initia- 
tion), and that these effects are secondary to cytotoxicity (67,68). 
Such advances in understanding the cellular phenomenology of 
carcinogenesis should result in the development of sensible, 
short-term, in vivo animal tests that might predict low-dose car- 
cinogenic potency in humans with a higher degree of accuracy 
and at substantially less cost than a lifetime bioassay. There is 
also a need for studies designed to determine the low-dose 
response to tumor promoters in long-term animal bioassays in 
which the animals have been pretreated with an initiating agent 
(69). Such studies might then provide a calibration scale for past 
and future short-term in vivo initiation/promotion experiments, 
such as those proposed by Pbtter (70,71 ) or by Kunz et al. (72). 
 
But for the time being, it must be kept in mind that the existing 
methods for modeling do not predict the carcinogenic potencies 
of chemicals; rather, they offer a means of predicting the number 
of tumors produced and their rate of appearance given a fixed set 
of variables such as the number of normal and initiated cells and 
the rates of mitosis, differentiation, and death. Many of these 
variables are expected to depend upon the particular chemical 
under test, the dose at which it is administered, and the back- 
ground of initated cells in the organ under study. We do not know 
of any published report in which carcinogenic potency was 
derived from an experimental system designed around a 
biologically based model, and which is directly applicable to in- 
terspecies extrapolation. We anticipate that future attempts will 
entail calculation of an interspecies potency factor for each class 
of chemical carcinogens, based upon the physiological param- 
eters discussed above. 
 
Our present inability to predict carcinogenic potency given 
detailed pharmacokinetic data and information as to genotoxicity 
on short-term tests reflects a general lack of understanding of the 
mechanisms of carcinogenesis. Amid much enthusiasm over the 
association of ms oncogenes with neoplastic cells, there has been 
a question as to whether mutation of a ras proto-oncogene is 
causative for the development of some human malignancies or 
is a consequence of them (73). This problem may have been 
solved by recent analysis of ras mutations in the leukemic cells 
of relapsed patients who had undergone chemotherapy. Four pa- 
tients in whom mutations in ras genes were detected upon 
presentation no longer exhibited ras mutations upon relapse 
following chemotherapy-induced remission. It now appears that 
the bone marrow precursors of the leukemic white cells did not 
contain the ras mutation, which therefore must have arisen in a 
later stage of the disease (74). Other theories continue to be for- 
mulated and revised. The hypothesis that all carcinogens are 
mutagens (21) has been replaced by one which suggests that all 
initiators are genotoxic (75,76) and that tumor promoters are 
agents which directly or indirectly increase the mitotic rate of the 
 
initiated clonal cell population (66,64). It has been proposed that 
the carcinogenicity of nongenotoxins, including those that act 
only as tumor promoters or incomplete carcinogens, is secon- 
dary to a) site-specific cellular toxicity (4,77), perhaps mediated 
by oxygen radicals (78) orb) hormonal or immunological effects, 
including stimulation of cell proliferation. 
 
The phenomenon of tumor progression is still not well under- 
stood, although it appears that this, at least for some cancers, may 
be a stage affected by environmental carcinogens. As discussed 
by Higginson, latent carcinoma of the prostate occurs with the 
same high (10%) incidence in 75-year-old black and white men 
in the U.S. and in Japanese men, whereas active prostatic 
 
200 
 
PREDICTING THE CARCINOGENICI7Y OF CHEMICALS IN HUMANS 
 
carcinoma which is then diagnosed is much rarer, occurring in the 
ratio 60:30:1 in these samepopulations (79). (For 1984-1986, the 
average yearly age-adjusted death rate for prostate cancer was 
0.0232 % in U.S. males and 0.0051% in Japanese males.) Differ- 
ences in the incidence ofthe active form are thoughtto reflect en- 
vironmental (perhaps dietary) influencesontherateoftumorpro- 
gression. Japanese immigrants to the U.S. have a markedly higher 
death rate from cancer of the prostate than those remaining in 
Japan (80). 
 
Heritable changes in DNA may only be among the first (and last) 
of a sequence of events necessary to the creation of a typical 
cancerous cell. There is even a question as to whether single-base 
mutation, which is the lesion detected in the typical bacterial 
mutagenesis assay, is on the pathway for creation of most 
neoplasms affecting internal organs. It has been pointed out that 
persons with the inherited syndrome xeroderma pigmentosum 
(XP), who suffer from oneofseveral genedefects resulting in lack 
ofan enzyme activity necessary for excision repairofmismatched 
basepairs, do not appear to have an increased incidence of inter- 
nal cancers (81 ). This in spite of the fact that XP patients are more 
than 1000 times likeliertodevelop UV-induced skincanceronex- 
posed areas ofthebody than normal persons. Conversely, persons 
with Bloom's syndrome, an inherited disorder involving 
chromosomal fragility (resulting in frequent rearrangements and 
other aberrations), have an extraordinarily high age-adjusted 
death rate due to various types ofcancer (81 ). Out of 103 Bloom's 
syndrome patients diagnosed in a 30-year period, 28 malignant 
neoplasms were detected at a mean age of2O.7 years (82). Cairns 
has concluded that simple basepair mutations are not likely to be 
the rate-limiting components in most human carcinogenesis, and 
that major genomic changes such as rearrangements and deletions 
are probably more important (81 ). It has also been noted that the 
presence of mutagenic substances in the urine of smokers (62) 
"results in only a moderate excess of urinary and pancreatic 
cancers and in no large excess of leukemias, lymphomas, or solid 
cancers at other sites distant from the respiratory tract" (83). 
 
Accordingly, since we are as yet without a method for deriving 
carcinogenic potencies from biological first principles, it is 
useful to look at each of the indirect procedures listed above. This 
raises interesting and important questions in scientific inference, 
and as in all such problems, it is vital to get the assumptions 
straight. The first assumption is that a substance which is a 
carcinogen in one person is also a potential carcinogen in every 
other person. We make the further assumption that the car- 
cinogenic potency is about the same in each case, although we 
know that this is an oversimplification (see below). Since cancer 
is multicausal, the effect of a given carcinogen may be affected by 
the previous or subsequent actions of other agents. If one is aware 
of what the other predisposing factors or agents are, then the 
assumption is modified to apply only to persons with similar 
histories of exposure. In the most obvious example, cigarette 
smokers are found to have higher incidences of many types of 
malignancies, and to become progressively more susceptible with 
increasing alcohol consumption (84), which suggests that smok- 
ing confers enhanced sensitivity to chemical carcinogenesis. 
 
Intraspecies Heterogeneity of Responses 
 
Although human genetic heterogeneity is a real and largely 
 
uncontrollable variable in the scaling of carcinogenic potencies 
from laboratory animals to man, there is evidence to suggest that 
the differences in susceptibility are not large, except for a small 
percentage of people who are highly vulnerable. Knudson has 
suggested that there might exist four groups of persons with 
qualitatively different susceptibilities to cancer (85). The first 
group is impervious to environmental effects; the second group 
has what we consider to be a "normal" susceptibility to car- 
cinogenesis via chemical agents, viruses, and other environmen- 
tal factors; the third group (which includes persons with XP and 
Bloom's syndrome) has a genetic susceptibility to environmen- 
tal carcinogens; and the fourth group has an inherited gene (or 
developmentally sustained somatic genetic defect) that is 
equivalent to the first irreversible step along the path toward a 
particular cancer (85). Knudson points out that there are no 
distinct lines dividing the first three groups, and that whereas it 
is now considered likely that most human cancer befalls group 
two, in fact group two might be a subset of group three, meaning 
that virtually all susceptibility to environmental carcinogenesis 
might have a genetic basis (85). We note that unless one under- 
stands all environmental variables and controls for them, it is not 
usually possible to differentiate between a population distribu- 
tion of genetic susceptibilities and a similar distribution of other 
factors such as exposure to dietary carcinogens. 
 
That at least two-thirds of all cancers (excluding skin) can be 
attributed to environmental rather than genetic influences was 
demonstrated by the pioneering work of Higginson and Oettle, 
who compared the cancer incidences of the South African Bantu 
with U.S. blacks (86). More recently, it has been estimated that 
at least 75 to 80% of cancers are the result of environmental 
influences, which include smoking, alcohol consumption, hor- 
monal factors controlled by behavior (such as age at first preg- 
nancy), diet, viruses, ionizing radiation, and chemical car- 
cinogens from sundry sources (79,84,87). The fact that, except 
for rare cases of identifiable individuals at high risk, geograph- 
ical clusters of cancer attributable to environmental causes seem 
to be distributed over the exposed population, rather than being 
concentrated in families or within ethnic groups, suggests that 
there is a definable upper limit on the range of susceptibilities in 
the population at large. 
 
A review of human phenotypic variability with respect to the 
metabolism of several classes of carcinogens and pro-carcino- 
gens showed that in most cases the spread in rates of enzymatic 
deactivation and activation was within an order of magnitude. 
For one case in which the distribution was more extreme (three 
to four orders of magnitude for debrisoquine oxidation), there 
was also a marked variation among seven rat strains (88). The 
finding of huge phenotypic variation in some biochemical ac- 
tivities relevant to carcinogenesis is not, however, an indicator 
of prevalence. In the example noted, 75 to 80% of humans were 
found to fall witiin a 10-fold range of debrisoquine oxidation ac- 
tivity. It is also not unreasonable to imagine that, given the overall 
biochemical heterogeneity of our species, an individual might be 
more predisposed than average to develop a particular type of 
cancer and less predisposed to develop another. We expect that 
the net variability in susceptibilities (within the "normal" 
population) in each case to be less than the expected error in the 
scaling of carcinogenic potencies from rodents to humans, which 
is predicted to be accurate only within an order of magnitude 
 
201 
 
GOODMANAND WILSON 
 
on average, and is sometimes accurate only to within two orders 
of magnitude (39,89). Therefore, in most of what follows, excep- 
tions and caveats to our stated assumptions will be ignored. The 
question of which animal model best simulates the typical human 
response may be considered when such information is available. 
Pharmacokinetic studies of some chemicals may also suggest that 
the animal data extrapolates better to a fraction of the human 
population which is more (or less) sensitive than average. 
 
Comparison of Spontaneous Cancer Incidence 
(Background Tumors) 
 
The use of animal models for human carcinogenesis was 
originally based, in part, on the general observation that animals 
in the wild have roughly the same overall rates of malignancy as 
humans. Use of inbred rodent strains in carcinogen bioassays 
later became commonplace, and strains have been developed 
which, intentionally or not, are more susceptible than others to 
spontaneous and induced neoplasms at particular sites; e.g., liver 
tumors in male B6C3F1 mice. In an attempt to maximize the 
likelihood of detecting a carcinogenic response, ultra-susceptible 
strains have been used frequently in long-term bioassays. The 
deliberate use of strains having high, site-specific, spontaneous 
tumor rates inevitably forces us to reexamine one major rationale 
for the use of animals as models. A conviction often expressed 
is that chemical carcinogenesis at some highly sensitive site in 
an inbred rodent strain does not necessarily predict carcino- 
genicity at any site in humans. The view held by one of us (G.G.) 
is that carcinogenic effects in animals can be extrapolated to 
humans more logically when the animals under test are not sub- 
ject to unusually high background rates of cancer, whether these 
increased rates are genetically determined or are artifacts of the 
experimental design. An alternative view (held by R.W.) is that 
while it is likely that chemical carcinogenesis in animals with 
high background tumor rates at particular sites does predict car- 
cinogenicity in other species, the interspecies conversion factor 
is probably lower for these sites. 
 
Determination of background cancer rates in humans is 
somewhat of a subjective process. Without a detailed un- 
derstanding of all the factors which produce tumors, the best 
that one can usually do is to assume that the lowest rate observ- 
ed for a given site (in all populations) is the background rate. 
As discussed above, it has been estimated that at least 75 to 
80% of malignancies occurring in people living in the de- 
veloped nations are attributable to environmental factors, in- 
cluding diet. The percentage of U.S. deaths due to cancer was 
22 % in 1985, according to the Bureau of Vital Statistics. Based 
on this figure, the background (nonenvironmental) cancer rate 
in humans would be less than approximately 0.25 of 22 %, or 
5.5%. the results of several human autopsy studies suggest that 
the overall incidence of cancer is higher than 22%; approx- 
imately one-third of autopsies revealed cancer, and a surpris- 
ingly high percentage of the neoplasms found had been either 
misdiagnosed or undetected before death (90). Based on this 
autopsy estimate, the background cancer rate would then be 
0.25 of 33%, or 8.3%. However, since human autopsies are not 
expected to be as thorough as histopathological examinations 
performed at the end of 2-year rodent bioassays, this estimate 
is probably still too low. 
 
Table 2 lists control tumor rates (for all sites combined) from 
the unpublished NTP historical control database for strains com- 
monly used in carcinogenicity bioassays; these rates range from 
 
9% to more than 50%. It has been pointed out that the usual 
laboratory regime results in overfed, overweight animals with en- 
docrine disturbances and other abnormalities, and that these 
animals are therefore unsuitable for carcinogenicity testing of 
chemicals (91,92). It is possible to affect the background tumor 
rate for laboratory rodents by altering this regime; an easy 
method is to reduce caloric intake to 75 % of what is consumed 
during ad libitum feeding. In one such study of outbred Swiss 
mice, the incidence of total malignant tumors in otherwise un- 
treated animals was lowered from 11 to 4.4% in males and from 
14 to 4.4% in females (91,93). (Results of the Conybeare study 
are included in Table 2, along with some human cancer rates, for 
comparison with the NTP control group rates.) In a similar study 
involving inbred rats, the incidence of malignant mammary 
tumors was reduced from 25 to 3.8% in females; pituitary 
adenomas dropped from 24 to 3.8 % in males and from 48 to 10 % 
in females (94). These observations suggest that the rates of true 
spontaneous neoplasms in rodents are similar (within a factor of 
2) to those in man when diet is given proper consideration as an 
environmental variable. 
 
It seems reasonable to hypothesize that the potency of a car- 
cinogen when expressed as a fraction or multiple of background 
effects will be similar in rodents and humans. We have never seen 
explicitly stated the argument that comparison of background 
tumor rates implies that KhR 1, but it has been frequently 
implied and used. One of the major inadequacies of this 
hypothesis lies in its implicit assumption that carcinogenesis via 
environmental agents is mechanistically similar to spontaneous 
carcinogenesis. This subject is not yet close to resolution. A less 
 
Table 2. Comparison of overall tumor incidences in laboratory 
 
animals and humans. 
 
No. of % with tumors 
 
animals Malignant Benign Total 
Control animals for 2-year NTP bioassaysa 
 
B6C3F1 Mice 
 
Males 1692 42 35 64 
Females 1689 45 33 64 
F344 Rats 
 
Males 1596 55 95 98 
Females 1643 38 76 88 
Osborne-Mendel Rats 
 
Males 50 26 68 78 
Females 50 12 80 88 
Sprague-Dawley Rats 
 
Males 56 8.9 36 39 
Females 56 30 68 79 
Effect of diet on outbred Swiss miceb 
 
Ad libitum feeding 
 
Males 160 11 44 
Females 160 14 31 
75% of ad libitum feeding 
 
Males 160 4.4 23 
Females 160 4.4 11 
U.S. Cancer death rates 
 
Bureau of Vital Statistics, 1985 
 
Males 22.5 
Females 21.7 
Estimated spontaneous ratesc 
 
Males and females 5.5 
Estimated upper limit on 
 
spontaneous ratesd 
 
Males and females 12 
aNTP historical coiitrol data. 
 
bConybeare (93), tabulated by Roe (91). 
CDoll and Peto (84). 
 
dFrom observations on Mormons by Lyon et al. (163). 
 
202 
 
PREDICTING THE CARCINOGENIC1IY OF CHEMICALS IN HUMANS 
 
formidable problem is the discrepancy between animal and 
human data due to the reporting only of diagnosed human 
malignancies and not all tumors. Neoplasms that were un- 
diagnosed prior to death and/or did not lead to death are not nor- 
mally counted. 
 
For the sake of conformity with available data on the occur- 
rence of human neoplasms, one could remove from considera- 
tion latent malignancies in rodents that do not lead to death and 
are detected only during routine biopsy, such as testicular tumors 
in aged male rats. Alternatively, one may include latent 
malignancies to maximize statistical significance and then com- 
pensate for the elevation of the observed potency so as to derive 
an interspecies conversion factor applicable to active neoplasms. 
 
Interspecies Differences in the Tumor Site of 
Highest Sensitivity 
 
If the background rates of site-specific neoplasms are similar 
in animals and humans and if malignancies induced by a given 
chemical agent occur at the same sites in animals and humans, 
then the interspecies extrapolation would be straightforward. Un- 
fortunately, in reality things are not so simple. Carcinogens often 
induce neoplastic responses at different sites in different species. 
Another difficulty in making the animal/human comparison is 
that most human data on the effects of exposure to chemical car- 
cinogens are for malignancies at only the most sensitive site. This 
does not imply that other sites are unaffected. For any study of 
carcinogenesis in humans or animals, choosing the site of the 
dominant neoplastic response will confer higher statistical sen- 
sitivity on the result than would choosing any other site. A 
bioassay is more sensitive still if an increase in an unusual tumor 
is found, i.e., one that rarely occurs spontaneously. There is also 
some evidence to suggest that the interspecies (mouse/rat) cor- 
relation is stronger for chemicals which produce rare tumors in 
rats than for those which produce only common tumors (95). 
 
Initially, scientists often made the assumption that a chemical 
which causes cancer at a given site in one species is likely, in the 
absence of information to the contrary, to cause cancer at the 
same site in other species. Moreover, it seemed to make sense to 
look for cancer in those organs which manifested lesions in 
response to toxic insult. For example, when aflatoxin B1 was 
shown to cause hepatic necrosis in poultry, pigs, and calves, it 
was immediately tested for hepatocarcinogenic activity in rats 
[reviewed by Busby and Wogan (96)]. It is now well known that 
aflatoxin B1 is a highly potent rodent carcinogen. Although a 
clear association between hepatocellular cancer and aflatoxin 
intake was found in the earliest studies of human populations 
exposed to high levels of aflatoxin Bl, interpretation was com- 
plicated due to frequent simultaneous infection with hepatitis B 
virus. But several studies published since 1984 have specifical- 
ly addressed this question of confounding; it has now been 
established that aflatoxin B1 ingestion is a high risk factor for liver 
cancer, above and beyond hepatitis B infection (97,98). Vinyl 
choride is another example of a chemical which was known to be 
toxic to the human liver before being studied for possible he- 
patocarcinogenicity. In three rodent species a rare liver tumor 
(angiosarcoma) has been produced by vinyl chloride inhalation 
(99,100); angiosarcoma has also been found in humans among 
vinyl chloride workers (IOI). 
 
We are interested in the overall increase in cancer in humans 
due to exposure to a given chemical carcinogen, yet often only 
the incidence at the most sensitive site is recorded. Is it possible 
to predict the excess cancer incidence at all sites given the excess 
incidence at the most sensitive site? If so, then an approximate 
correction factor may be obtained as follows. It is well known that 
the principal site of cancer due to smoking is the lung. In the U.S. 
in 1985, there were 122,700 lung cancer deaths. Of these, approx- 
imately 112,240 were due to cigarette smoking (102). But a 
number of other cancers are also linked to cigarette smoking. The 
number of U.S. deaths in 1985 due to cancer other than lung 
cancer was 338,870; of these an estimated 30%, or 101,660, were 
also attributable to smoking. Thus, for those cancer deaths 
caused by smoking, the ratio total/lung is (101,660 + 112,240)/ 
112,240 = 1.9. For vinyl chloride, the excess of malignancies at 
nonhepatic sites is less than the excess of all liver tumors in- 
cluding angiosarcomas (103,104), and in a recent mortality study 
of vinyl chloride manufacturing workers, angiosarcomas were 
found to make up half of the total liver tumors (105). 
 
Crouch and Wilson looked at the ratio of the sum of potencies 
at all sites to the sum of potencies at the most sensitive site for all 
chemicals which had been tested by the NCI/NTP as of 1978 and 
which had been judged to be positive for carcinogenicity; they 
found that the ratio ofthe sums was approximately 2 in most cases 
(unpublisheddata). Forevaluatinganinterspeciesconversionfac- 
tor, they suggested using only the data for the most sensitive site in 
both species; statistical validity is improved, and the factors oftwo 
tendtocancel (39). A factoroftwois small, inany case, compared 
to other uncertainties inherent in the interspecies correlation. 
 
In practice, the mouse/rat and rodent/human interspecies com- 
parisons do correlate more closely when the tumor site is allowed 
to vary to accommodate the most sensitive site. In a survey of 58 
chemicals, Tomatis et al. found a correlation between induction 
of liver tumors in mouse and induction of tumors at any site in rat 
and hamster (106). This qualitative correlation was stronger for 
chemicals that also induce tumors in mice of both sexes at sites 
in addition to liver. It was later noted that if routes of exposure 
are similar for animals and humans, then the target sites are more 
likely to coincide, although more sites in animals are usually af- 
fected (107). It was therefore proposed by these authors that in- 
duction of any animal tumor should be considered as evidence 
for possible human carcinogenicity, even if tumors at that par- 
ticular site have not been shown to occur in humans. A dramatic 
argument in support of this approach can be found by examining 
the history of the known carcinogenicity of benzene. This 
chemical has long been associated with leukemia in humans, but 
was not observed to produce neoplasms in rats or mice. Now re- 
cent studies have shown statistically significant tumor incidences 
at numerous sites in rodents exposed by ingestion or inhalation 
(108) and gavage (109). An examination of human data for effects 
at multiple sites revealed a possible association with tumors at 
only a few of the sites affected in rodents: multiple myeloma and 
lymphatic and hematopoietic neoplasia (110). 
 
For some time, the above argument has been the basis of 
regulatory philosophy, e.g., as described by Anderson et al. (IMl). 
It is now common practice to evaluate a chemical's carcinogenic 
potency in animals and humans in terms of the most sensitive site, 
with the caveat that sites with an extraordinarily high background 
incidence, such as the liver in the males of some mice strains or 
the testicles of F344 rats, are sometimes disregarded. 
 
203 
 
GOODMAN AND WILSON 
 
Should We Include Benign Tumors? 
 
In the regulatory community there is considerable discussion 
about whether to include benign tumors along with malignant 
tumors when determining potency in rodents for the purpose of 
predicting potency in humans. The presence of benign tumors is 
generally accepted as a highly probable indication of eventual 
malignancy (97,112,113). If this is the case, then the induction of 
benign tumors by a chemical should be considered as evidence 
of that chemical's carcinogenicity. Recently, the relevance of 
benign neoplasms was evaluated for 143 chemicals tested in NTP 
bioassays. Only five chemicals produced solely benign 
neoplasms, and those observed are known to represent transitory 
or progressive stages in the development of malignancy (114). 
Qualitatively then, a chemical's ability to induce benign tumors 
is indicative of its carcinogenic potential. However, in a quan- 
titative statement of rodent carcinogenicity, benign tumors 
should only be included if they are also included inthe definition 
of the rodent-to-human interspecies conversion factor for car- 
cinogenic potency. If we generally evaluate Kby some procedure 
without including benign tumors, we might nevertheless wish to 
include benign tumors for a specific chemical in order to obtain 
a potency that is statistically significant. We could then use the 
value of K derived without benign tumors if we multiply the 
potency for induction of total tumors (benign and malignant) by 
the average ratio of malignant to total tumors found in chemical 
bioassays. 
 
Human/Rodent Chemical 
Carcinogenicities 
 
Qualitative Comparison (Human/Rodent) 
 
In all there are now 50 chemicals, groups of chemicals, or in- 
dustrial processes for which an IARC Working Group has con- 
cluded that there is sufficient evidence of human carcinogenicity 
(97). For most, the data on human exposures is inadequate to 
calculate a quantitative risk, and hence there is no opportunity 
to do a human/animal comparison of their carcinogenic poten- 
cies. But we can first ask the simpler question: do these human 
carcinogens always cause cancer in test animals? Wibourn et al. 
(IIS) evaluated the animal carcinogenicity of 30 chemicals (or 
groups of chemicals) for which sufficient evidence of human car- 
cinogenicity was reported in IARC Monographs volumes 1-41. 
These are listed in Table 3. (The authors excluded certain in- 
dustrial exposures which were among the 50 LARC human car- 
cinogens.) Of these 30 human carcinogens, there was sufficient 
evidence of animal carcinogenicity for 18 and limited evidence 
for 7; data for 3 were inadequate, and for 2 there were no data at 
all. The latter 5 agents are arsenic, certain combined chemo- 
therapies (including MOPP [mechlorethamine, vincristine, 
prednisone, and procarbazine]), conjugated estrogens, smoke- 
less tobacco products, and treosulphan. Note that these authors 
found that "new data would provide limited evidence" for the 
animal carcinogenicity of arsenic, referring to the work of 
Ishinishi et al. (116) and Pershagen et al. (117), which were the 
first adequate studies in which arsenic was administered via a 
respiratory route. It was also pointed out that there is sufficient 
evidence of animal carcinogenicity for some components of 
 
MOPP, namely, nitrogen mustard and procarbazine. Of the re- 
maining 3 agents, the conclusion of Wilbourn et al. was that they 
"had not been adequately tested in experimental animals and no 
statement can be made regrding their carcinogenicity in animal 
models" (115). In the most recent IARC assessment, limited 
evidence was also found for the carcinogenicity of conjugated 
estrogens in animals, based on studies published in 1983 and 
1984 (97). For arsenic, this IARC report cited a number of studies 
published since 1981 in support of the conclusion that there now 
exists limited evidence of its carcinogenicity in experimental 
animals. 
 
We believe that it makes far more sense to discuss a chemical's 
carcinogenic potency than the probability or possibility of its car- 
cinogenicity. In cases where the observed increase in neoplasms 
is not statistically significant, an upper limit to the potency can 
be derived. The following example illustrates the importance of 
this approach. Ten years ago, evidence for the carcinogenicity of 
benzene was considered inadequate or inconclusive. The obser- 
vation was made that since benzene-induced leukemia in humans 
occurred at only a very low incidence, studies in animals could 
not be expected to produce a statistically significant increase in 
leukemia or any other cancer unless large numbers of animals 
were exposed (118). This analysis tacitly assumed that the poten- 
cy in animals was of the same order as that in humans. Up until 
that time, no adequate study (lifetime exposure, sufficient 
numbers, high enough doses) of benzene's carcinogenicity in 
animals had been undertaken. It has been demonstrated since that 
benzene causes cancer in rodents at rates similar to what was ex- 
pected from the data in humans (108,109,119,120). Recent ex- 
perimental evidence prompted Wilboum et al., in their analysis 
of the response of animls to human carcinogens, to footnote the 
"limited" evidence for benzene's carcinogenicity in animals with 
the statement, "new data would provide sufficient evidence" 
(115). The absence in 1978 of benzene-induced neoplasia in 
rodents did not disprove the proposition that the carcinogenic 
potency of benzene is approximately the same in rodents as it is 
in humans, although it was sometimes mistakenly thought to do 
so. 
 
Quantitative Comparison (Human/Rodent) 
 
In 1977, Matthew Meselson and Sir Richard Doll suggested to 
one of us (R.W) the importance of quantitative comparison of the 
carcinogenic potencies in humans and laboratory animals for 
chemicals for which human data were available. The results of 
an initial study were included in a paper by Crouch and Wilson 
(39). There are several great practical difficulties in undertaking 
this comparison. The first is that there are a limited number of 
chemicals that are known to cause cancer in humans. In 1978, 
there were only approximately 25 substances on this list, 
including some which are classes of chemicals rather than uni- 
que compounds. The second difficulty is that the human data, for 
the most part, are for uncontrolled, unmeasured, short-term ex- 
posures. Consequently, epidemiological studies typically relate 
cancer to exposure only qualitatively. The tiird difficulty is that 
once a chemical has been branded a "human carcinogen," at- 
tempts are made to ban it, and interest in assessing its effects in 
animals declines. Thus, for many known human carcinogens 
adequate testing in animals has not been done. 
 
204 
 
PREDICTING THE CARCINOGENVICITY OF CHEMICALS IN HUMAWS20 
 
Table 3. Chemicals for which IARC found sufficient evidence of 
 
human carcinogenicity (1U5). 
 
Chemical Evidence in animals 
4-Aminobiphenyl Sufficient 
Analgesic mixtures containing phenacetin Limited 
Arsenic and certain arsenic compounds LiMiteda 
 
Asbestos Sufficient 
Azathioprine Limited t 
Benzene Sufficient 
Benzidine Sufficient 
Betel quid containing tobacco (chewing) Limited 
N-N-bis(2-chloroethyl)-2-naphthylamine 
 
(Chlornaphazine) Limited 
bis(Chloromethyl)ether and technical chloromethyl 
 
methyl ether Sufficient 
1,4-Butanediol dimethanesulphonate (Myleran) Limited 
Certain combined chemotherapy regimes for 
 
lymphomas including MOPP"C No data 
 
Chlorambucil Sufficient 
Chromium and certain chromium compounds Sufficient 
Coal tars Sufficient 
Coal-tar pitches Sufficient 
Conjugated estrogens Limited' 
 
Cyclophosphamide Sufficient 
Diethylstilbestrol Sufficient 
Melphalan Sufficient 
Methoxsalen with UV A (PUVA) Sufficient 
Mineral oils (containing various additives and 
 
impurities Sufficient 
Mustard gas Limited 
 
2-Naphthylamine Sufficient 
Shale oils Sufficient 
 
Smokeless tobacco products Inadequate 
soots Sufficient 
Tobacco Smoke Sufficient 
Treosulphan No data 
 
Vinyl Chloride Sufficient 
 
aListed as "inadequate" in IARC Monographs series prior to 1987; see text for 
details. 
 
bListe as "limited" in IARC Monographs series prior to 1987; see text for 
details. 
 
cMOPP, mechlorethamine, vincristine, prednisone, and procarbazine. 
 
We show in Figures IA and lB a comparison of carcinogenic 
potency in humans to that in rats and mice, respectively, taken 
from Crouch and Wilson (39). In most cases these authors had 
to estimate human exposures by reanalyzing the data from the 
original epidemiological literature. Consequently, the results 
contain considerable uncertainy. The error bars delimit one 
standard deviation. Where a bar has an arrow at the end, one 
standard deviation does not define a lower limit; the error in such 
cases encompasses zero potency. The lines log (nlh) = log ((3,) 
and log (nh) = log (fl.m) (i.e., Khr = Khm = 1) do not pass 
through the error bars on all the points. Nonetheless, the results 
are in rough agreement with the proposition that the interspecies 
factor for rat to human (Kh.) and for mouse to human (KJ,, are 
each about equal to 1, with most deviations falling within an 
order of magnitude. This range is small compared with the range 
of carcinogenic potencies in rodents' which vary over five orders 
of magnitude. We note that the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) uses Khr = 5.9 and Kh., = 13 in its risk assess- 
ment procedures (Table 1); by inspection it can be seen that these 
EPA values for the interspecies conversion factors are more likely 
to overestimate the risk. Although the simplest proposition (that 
Khr = Kh., = 1) is almost certainly not precisely true, the propo- 
sition that the values ofKand Kh., are lognormally distributed 
 
1042 
 
>' 10'I 
CP 
E 
 
C 
 
0 
E. 
 
4Arsenic 
 
I. 
 
Tv + '9' 
 
'9 
 
le 
 
'9 
'9, 
 
'9/ aoln 
,. ''v 
 
0'9tI I 
 
- .4. 
 
'vi ,iI'~~~~~~~. 
'9le 
'9~~~~~~~~~~. 
'9~~~~ 
 
10.4 10- 10- 10' I 10I 
 
Potency in Rat (mg/kg-day)-' 
 
--I- 
 
-f 
 
'9, 
 
'9 
 
A1 
 
102 10 
 
10 L 
 
I 
 
I 10 
0 
la 
 
0' 
E 
 
C 
 
9I0-I 
 
r-I 
e 
 
6-3 
 
+ Banzidine 
 
TrT 
 
1- + 
 
+ 
 
'SrT 
 
-3 I-2 I I I 2 
 
10- 10- 10 I 10I 102 
 
Potency in Mouse (mg/kg-doy)-' 
 
B 
 
3-----A 
 
le 
 
FiGuRE 1. Carinogenic potency in humans versus rats (A) and midce (B). From 
 
Crouch and Wilson (39). The point for gasoline, calculated by us, has been 
added to lB. (See text for details.) Otherwise, the data reflect information 
available in 1979. 
 
about I is consistent with the data. Letting x represent Inl(Khr) 
and ln(Kh,,), the probability of finding a value x is given by 
 
P(x)dx L exp (j)dx (2) 
 
where the standard deviation a is to be determined. 
 
Allen et al. performned a much more extensive survey of human 
carcinogenic potencies and made comparisons with rodent 
potencies (89). As noted above, probably the most difficult 
aspect of such a study is the evaluation of human exposures. The 
best estimates of the human TD25 values (with their associated 
uncertainties) for the 20 chemicals for which sufficient data were 
found is reproduced from Allen et al. (89) in Figure 2. Unfor- 
 
205 
 
L. 
 
GOODMANAND WILSON 
 
AFLATOXIN 
ARSENIC 
+ (4) 
 
+ (5) 1 rsOoaloy 
 
+ (6) 
 
ASBESTOS 
 
(-7--- (7abl 
 
I-.e-------I (7) 1 aa kxt 
 
BENZENE 
 
(a) 1 a 
 
a. (9)- * -I 
 
(10) 1 
 
(6) - 
bu (i 9)0 * 
 
BENZIDINE 
I (11) bladder (morbidity) 
 
CADMIUM 
W---~12) bkng 
 
CHLORAMBUCIL 
- *--- {(13) bukame (imorbidty) 
 
CHROMIUM 
 
at (morbidity) (15) * 
 
(I 6) 14) king 
 
| * | (16) * (14 
respiratory (15) + I 
(morbidity) 
 
(I (16) gaslrinleatinal 
 
CIGARETTE SMOKE 
 
N (I17-18) j-- I 
bung (17.18) O| *-| 
DES 
!O (19-21) vagina 
 
EPICHLOROHYDRIN 
all | (22) 1 
 
1(23) *] 
 
ESTROGENS 
-.--*--1---( (24) bread (morbidiy) 
* + (25) 
 
* (26) 
 
I-e-----i (27) endometrium (mobidit) 
1a* - (28) 
 
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 
 
Loglo lTD25 (mg/kg-day)) 
 
ETHYLENE OXIDE 
- ' I (29) al 
 
- * - (30) timIa 
i * I O (29) 
 
ISONIAZID 
(31) 1 . 
 
al (32) + I . 
 
(33) 0] 
 
repraoy (32) - * - 
 
MELPHALAN 
e * (34) bouk maoardity) 
 
METHYLENE CHLORIDE 
 
am { 
NICKEL 
 
( (38) I 
 
(35) 
 
i AL 
 
(39) 01 * I respirory 
 
PCBs 
 
&I 1(40-41)1 * 
dl 42) | 
 
h1tfphatic 1 (40?41){21 * 
diotive (42) - 0 
 
liver (42) 1 - 
 
PHENACETIN 
 
badder (mobidity) | 434) ) * 1-- 
real pelvti (mobdity) 1 (44)1 
 
RESERPINE 
 
.6 Z i breast (moeowdity) 
 
oi 
 
(47) SACCHARIN 
 
bdder (morbidy) (48) *I 
 
TRICHLOROETHYLENE 
 
, (49) 0? 
 
all (S0) ! 
 
VINYL CHLORIDE 
 
(51)' * I 
ON (52) | 
 
(53)1 0 
 
all(mobidty) (54) 1 * 
respiratory (53)1 (52)1 
 
respiratory (morbdity) (54) 1 * 
 
krw (52) ) - ' 
 
p a I I I I J 
 
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 
 
Logio [TD25 (mg/kg-day)) 
 
FIGURE 2. Best estimates and upper and lower bounds for TD25 values from each human study. Numbers in parentheses are citations which may be found in the 
 
original publication. (O) Data selected to represent the chemical when comparisons with bioassay-based estimates are made;(+) poor fit of linear dose-response 
model that is not due to lack of response. From Allen et al. (89). 
 
tunately, the detailed calculations upon which these estimates 
were based are unpublished, so that we are unable to judge their 
reliability. In Figure 3 we show their base case plot of human ver- 
sus rodent TD25 estimates. We note here that they have not deriv- 
ed a best fit line in the ordinary way. Their statistical significance 
statement is for how well the order of the potencies in rodents 
correlates with the order of the potencies in humans. However, 
by inspection of Figure 3 we deduce that the numerical values of 
the potencies also correlate reasonably well. The solid line cor- 
responds to Khr = Kh = 1; the dotted line, Khr = (Wht/Wr)'3= 
5.9; the dashed line, Khm = (Wh/Wm)A = 13. It can be readily 
seen that Kh,r 1 andKhm= 1 are more likely propositions than 
Khr = 5.9 or Khm = 13. The relationship for P(x) in Eq. [2] fits 
the data reasonably well with a = ln(5). 
 
While making this statement, we emphasize that neither 
Crouch and Wilson (39) nor Allen et al. (89) have proven that 
KhR = 1. These authors merely tested a proposition and found it 
consistent with the available data. This work and related work on 
the correlation between rat and mouse carcinogenic potencies 
have been criticized by Freedman and Zeisel, who highlight the 
 
limitations of the available data and insist that the proposition that 
K is distributed around the value of 1 is not proven (121). But in 
fact, the proposition has not been disproven for any chemical for 
which adequate data are available for both human and rodent ex- 
posures. However, for most chemicals the above proposition re- 
mains untested. There may be chemicals for which the rodent 
bioassay is a poor predictor of human carcinogenicity, with 
potencies in humans (if they were measured) such that KhR> > 
1 orKhR< <1. We know of no such chemicals, but this does not 
mean that they do not exist. 
 
Negative and Inadequate Epidemiology 
 
When we attempt to compare animal and human carcinogenic 
potencies, and in particular, when we try to understand the causes 
of any discrepancies, we are impressed by the importance of 
"negative epidemiology," i.e., studies where no statistically 
significant effect was observed. The absence of a significant 
effect does not, of course, prove that the chemical does not cause 
cancer; rather, any increased incidence is too small to be deter- 
 
206 
 
t 46) 
 
PREDICT7NG THE CARCINOGENICITYOF CHEMICALS IN HUMANS 
 
10, 
 
CI 10 
E 
 
4) . 
 
IN 0 
 
W -I I A 
 
10 1-4 10 1 2 10I 00 
I') ~ ~ ~ D5Etiae fo n 
N~~~~~~~~~m/gdy 
 
FIUE3 uanT 2etmte essaialT 2etmte.Fo lene0l 8) 
 
10I 
 
iimal Data 
 
mined unambiguously under the given exposure conditions. It 
becomes useful to express the result as an upper limit to the 
number of cancers that could have been caused, and then, if the 
exposure level is known, to derive an upper limit to the car- 
cinogenic potency, and therefore an upper limit to Kh, the lower 
limit being zero. Crouch and Wilson introduced this concept in 
their comparisons (39), and it was also used by Allen et al. (89). 
We believe that there are many more chemicals to which it might 
be applied. For example, contact with chlordane and heptachlor 
did not increase the age-corrected lung cancer mortality in a 
group of termite control workers, who were more likely to incur 
higher exposure to these agents than were any other segment of 
the population (122). Although this study did not correct for 
smoking, an estimated upper limit on potency might still be 
extracted. 
 
We shall illustrate next how a probable limit on human car- 
cinogenic potency can be derived from inadequate epidemio- 
logical results. Enterline and Viren have reviewed the evidence 
for the association between kidney cancer and exposure to 
gasoline fumes (123). They concluded that the bulk of evidence 
from cohort studies of petroleum-refining or distribution person- 
nel indicates a small excess of kidney cancers among older 
workers exposed for long periods. Let us do a back-of-the- 
envelope calculation of the upper limit to the potency of gasoline 
fumes for induction of renal cancer, based on data cited by these 
authors. Exposure levels were drawn from a study of the ambient 
concentration of hydrocarbons at gasoline marketing terminals; 
the mean value of the concentration as determined by personal 
samplers (worn 27 hr) was found to be 5.4 ppm (124). The 
highest renal cancer death rate reported for this industry was 
0.15 % for workers who had been exposed for 20 years or longer; 
 
this excess was statistically significant (125). The expected mor- 
tality rate from renal cancer for the whole U.S. population was 
0.071%. Assuming an average molecular weight of 80 daltons for 
the volatile constituents, then for a 70 kg man working 8 hr with 
inhalation volume 20.8 L/min, the daily dose would be 2.8 
mg/kg. Making the conservative assumption of a linear dose 
response between 0 and 2.8 mg/kg-day, then the potency (3 = 
(0.0015-0.00071)/(2.8 mg/kg-day) = 2.8 x 10-4 (mg/kg-day)'. 
(For simplicity we neglect correcting for length of working life, 
which would result in a lower predicted potency.) 
 
For calculation of a corresponding carcinogenic potency in 
rodents, we turn to a lifetime study in which rats and mice were 
exposed to volatilized gasoline for 6 hr/day (126). A dose-related 
increase in renal cancer was found in male rats; interpretation 
was simplified by the fact that the strain of rats used, F344, has 
a very low incidence of spontaneous kidney tumors. In dose 
groups of 100 animals each, at dose levels of 0, 67,292, and 2056 
ppm there were, respectively, 0, 1, 5, and 7 malignant neoplasms. 
Because the gasoline was vaporized to completion by heating, 
this study is not a perfect model for the human exposures. Ad- 
justing the molecular weight estimation to 128 daltons to reflect 
the mostly Cg composition of commercial gasoline, and assum- 
ing a weight of 0.5 kg and an inhalation volume of 0.10 L/min, the 
daily dose was 120 mg/kg. Since the response is essentially linear 
in the range of 0 to 292 ppm, we calculate the potency as ( 3 
 
(0.05 - 0.0)/(120 mg/kg-day) = 4.2 x 10-4(mg/kg-day)-'. (We 
assume here that there was one neoplasm per rat. If this was not 
the case, then the incidence rate would be lower, as would the 
potency estimate.) In Figure L4, we have added the data point just 
calculated to a figure published originally by Crouch and Wilson 
(39). With very little effort we have been able to increase the body 
 
20f7 
 
GOODMAN AND WILSON 
 
of quantitative knowledge pertaining both to the carcinogenic 
potency of gasoline in humans and to the interspecies correlation 
factor. 
 
There is an obvious tendency to concentrate on those chem- 
icals where a definite effect in humans has been found, and in- 
deed upon these the correlation principally depends. However, 
if a chemical is found to be carcinogenic in animals and is not 
found to be carcinogenic in man, it is of obvious interest to dis- 
cover the cause of this negative outcome. Is it because the 
chemical is an exception to the correlation; people were not ex- 
posed at sufficiently high levels or for sufficiently long durations 
or because the available epidemiological data are inadequate? 
 
Chemicals Not Known to Be Carcinogenic 
to Humans 
 
Ennever et al. discuss 29 chemicals for which at least one 
epidemiological study had found no evidence of human car- 
cinogenicity. They looked at the quantitative (+/-) evidence for 
rodent carcinogenicity for 20 of these chemicals. They reported 
that only one, methotrexate, was negative in rodents, and that the 
remaining 19 were positive. They concluded that the specificity 
of rodent bioassays for predicting human noncarcinogens is very 
low (127). 
 
Whereas Ennever et al. looked for qualitative agreement be- 
tween the rodent carcinogenicity bioassay and human data, we 
were able to ask more meaningful, quantitative questions about 
the agreement by examining the actual TD50 values (128). 
Starting with the rodent TD50 at the most sensitive site from the 
Carcinogenic Putency Database (CPDB) (129-131), we derived 
a predicted human incidence for the degree of exposure and dura- 
tion of follow-up corresponding to the most comprehensive 
epidemiological study available and then compared the predicted 
incidence with the observed incidence. If a chemical produced 
no statistically significant increase in cancer at any site in the ex- 
posed population, consistency with rodent results is inferred if 
the minimum rodent TD50 is sufficiently high that no attributable 
cases would have been expected under the actual conditions of 
human exposure and follow-up. For 18 of the 22 chemicals ex- 
amined, the human evidence is consistent with the predictions 
based on the rodent bioassay results. For two chemicals, di- 
chlorobenzidine and ethylene thiourea, there is not enough 
epidemiological information to make a useful comparison with 
rodent bioassay data. The two chemicals for which the human 
evidence is inconsistent with the predictions are actinomycin D 
and vinylidene chloride. But for actinomycin D, the conditions 
of the rodent bioassay were inappropriate for the comparison, 
and for vinylidene chloride the human exposure dose was uncer- 
tain; for either chemical future studies in humans might yet 
demonstrate consistency with the rodent results (128). 
 
RaVMouse Chemical Carcinogenicities 
 
Of the chemicals that have been tested in aninals, there are few 
for which reliable information as to human carcinogenicity 
exists. Many more chemicals have been tested in two rodent 
species, and hence there is a greater opportunity for performing 
either qualitative or quantitative interspecies comparisons of car- 
cinogenicity. Most assays are performed in rodents, primarily 
because of their relatively low cost, ease of maintenance, and 
 
short lifespan. Their use may be fortuitously appropriate in some 
cases. In one study of the efficacy of animal tests in the qualitative 
(yes/no) prediction of human toxicity for 20 chemicals, produc- 
tion of toxic lesions was found to be twice as predictive when the 
test species was the rat or the mouse as it was when dogs were 
tested, and limited data showed approximately the same correla- 
tion for monkeys as for these rodent species (132). Also on the 
basis of comparative toxicology, it has been suggested recently 
that the results in rabbits might extrapolate more accurately to 
humans than do results in rats (14). Interspecies comparisons are 
facilitated when all the animal tests are performed uniformly. The 
NCI/NTP tests of rats, mice, and hamsters conform to a standard 
protocol and therefore lend themselves to such comparisons 
(133,134). 
 
Qualitative Comparison (Rat/Mouse) 
 
The concordance of positive/negative results for carcinogen- 
icity between rodent species has been examined by several 
authors. The fraction concordant is defined as the number of 
chemicals positive (for at least one site) in both species plus the 
number of chemicals negative in both species, divided by the total 
number of chemicals tested. The NCI/NTP conclusions as to 
carcinogenicity for 266 chemicals adequately tested in both 
species were tabulated by Haseman and co-workers. With 
equivocal results excluded, 167/212 (76%) were concordant (6,7). 
Details of the correlations are reproduced from Haseman and 
Huff in Table 4. These results were similar to those of Purchase, 
who reported 82% concordance for a similar number of ex- 
periments (135), many of which were included in the later study. 
Byrd et al. reanalyzed the raw data of the NCI/NTP data base. 
They found that 76% of the results were concordant when weakly 
significant (p < 0.025) dose-response trends were counted as 
positive. They also looked at how well positivity/negativity for 
benign or malignant mouse liver tumors predicts the presence/ 
absence of a carcinogenic response in the rat at any site: the 
overall concordance was 155/290 (53%) for benign liver ade- 
noma and 165/290 (57%) for malignant liver carcinoma (8). 
When all the available bioassay data tabulated in the CPDB (not 
limited to the NCI/NTP subset) was evaluated with respect to the 
same correlation (for malignant and benign tumors combined), 
Gold et al. (136) found a concordance of 74/117 (63 %). With 
chlorinated chemicals (defined as compounds consisting only of 
C, H, Cl, and optionally 0) excluded, the concordance is 
improved: 60/86 (74%). 
 
Gold et al. also examined the overall positive/negative 
agreement for carcinogenicity between rats and mice for the 
 
Tlble 4. Correlations in tumor response for 266 NCI/NTP 
 
carcinogenicity studies.' 
 
Comparison +/+ +/- -/--/- Total % Concordant 
Male rats/female rats 74 25 12 181 292 87.3 
Males rats/male mice 46 43 36 145 270 70.7 
Male rats/female mice 59 33 36 145 273 74.7 
Female rats/male mice 46 32 37 156 271 74.5 
Female rats/female mice 57 23 39 156 275 77.5 
Male mice/female mice 78 10 23 177 288 88.5 
Rats/mice (overall) 67 32 36 131 266 74.4 
 
"Data reproduced from Haseman and Huff (6). Equivocal outcomes were con- 
sidered negative. 
 
208 
 
PREDICTING THE CARCINOGENICITY OF CHEMICALS IN HUMANS 
 
CPDB chemicals (136). Of the 392 chemicals tested in both 
species, 226 were positive in at least one sex/species group; 76% 
of the rat carcinogens were positive in the mouse, and 75 % of the 
mouse carcinogens were positive in the rat. The overall con- 
cordance was 76%. Their criteria for positivity were the same as 
those of Haseman and Huff (6). Experiments were classified as 
positive only if this was the published opinion of the author(s) of 
the original study; all other experiments were classified as 
negative. No quantitative dose-response or potency information 
was utilized. The predictivity of the ten most common target sites 
was also examined. Most sites were found to be good predictors 
of carcinogenicity at some site in the other species. The mouse 
liver and the rat urinary bladder/urethra were the least accurate 
predictors of a positive carcinogenic response in the other rodent 
species, and the predictivity for these sites is better for chemicals 
that produce tumors at another site as well. Chlorinated com- 
pounds were significantly less predictive than other mouse liver 
carcinogens: 45 % (14/31) of those positive in mouse liver are pos- 
itive in the rat, compared to 70% (60/86) of other compounds. 
 
The concordance between rats and mice for a "random" 
sample of 25 chemicals drawn from the first 192 NCI bioassays 
was assessed independently by three groups of statisticians as 
part of a symposium on statistical problems; the results were 
introduced and summarized by Young (137,138). The NCI had 
previously declared 46% of the 25 chemicals to be positive for 
carcinogenicity in at least one sex/species group, with 76% 
agreement between rats and mice. All three groups of statisti- 
cians evaluated the studies on a positive/negative basis for car- 
cinogenicity; potency information was discarded. 
 
The first analysis, the decision-tree approach of Sanathanan 
et al., is the most satisfying on the basis of current biological 
understanding and what logic tells us to expect for the minimal 
manifestations of carcinogenicity. They found an overall agree- 
ment of 75 % between rats and mice for tumors at any site (139). 
 
An even higher rate of agreement (83%) was achieved in the 
second analysis, by Louis, which combined data over both sexes 
and which included only malignant tumors (140). Several note- 
worthy approaches to combining bioassay data were included, 
although the author's Bayesian combination of potency informa- 
tion from all chemicals is puzzling to us, since no adjustments 
were made on the basis of chemical structrue or pharmacokinetic 
parameters. 
 
The third analysis, by Bickis and Krewski, which is actually 
four separate sub-analyses, was apparently conceived as a means 
of pointing out to others what they ought not do (141). Three of 
the authors' subanalyses rely on aggregate tumor data; in the re- 
maining one, their Decision Rule III, data for specific lesions is 
tabulated (which has been shown by several other studies cited 
earlier to be the better approach). When mock historical control 
incidences were included, using Decision Rule III resulted in 
96% (24/25) of the chemicals being found positive for car- 
cinogenicity in both species; the remaining chemical was positive 
in rats and inconclusive in mice. Therefore the agreement bet- 
ween rats and mice was 100% (24/24). When historical in- 
cidences were not considered, then with this decision rule only 
14 of the studies gave adequate results, and only 6 of these (43 %) 
were concordant in rats and mice. The authors make some in- 
teresting inferences about false negatives, false positives, and the 
pitfalls of using historical control data; none of the four sub- 
 
analyses would be selected by anyone who, upon rational con- 
sideration, is seriously intent upon getting the most reliable in- 
formation out of the rodent bioassay. We emphasize this judg- 
ment of ours because the figure of 96% positivity has misleading- 
ly been included in the abstract of an introduction to these papers 
(137), referring to the "most liberal" decision rule of Bickis and 
Krewski (141), which those authors themselves surely would 
never recommend. Their four decision rules were chosen as an 
exercise in illustrating the inadequacies of various simplifica- 
tions, rather than as complete methods in themselves. Thus, 
Young (137) has manufactured a huge inconsistency in the 
analysis of bioassay data, especially with regard to the decision 
of positivity, where none really exists. 
 
Haseman has recently evaluated the entire analytical exercise 
in detail (142). He points out that only very limited information 
was available to the statistical analysts: summarized site-specific 
tumor incidences, survival rates, and sex. All other information 
was withheld, including individual animal data, time-to-tumor, 
the identity of the chemical compounds, dose levels, tumor 
descriptions, and historical control data. Thus, the analysts were 
forced to rely upon nonstandard methods, which were less 
refined than what are normally used (142). We note also that the 
results would have been more meaningful if the bioassay data for 
a much larger group of chemicals, say the entire NCI data set, 
had been subject to differential statistical analysis. 
 
Quantitative Comparison (Rat/Mouse) 
 
Many toxicologists have only considered a chemical to be a 
potential human carcinogen if it has caused a significant number 
of tumors in two different animal species-usually rats and mice. 
It is this set of chemicals for which one performs quantitative 
studies of correlations between carcinogenic potencies in the two 
species. This leaves open the question of the meaning of the 
results of a bioassay in only one species, or bioassays in two 
species where a statistically significant number of tumors was 
found in only one of the species. Is the chemical a carcinogen in 
one species and a noncarcinogen (i.e., has zero carcinogenic 
potency) in the other? Or is the failure to find evidence of car- 
cinogenicity in the second species due to the limited sensitivity 
of the bioassay? 
 
A statistical study cannot answer this question directly. But if 
we reformulate the problem in mathematical terms then it can be 
more readily addressed. We begin by positing a model in which 
the carcinogenic potency in species b can always be derived from 
that in species a to within a certain accuracy, according to the 
formula 
 
lnfb = lna + InKba + E 
where e is a random error variable given by 
 
P(E)dE = 1 xp 2 _2_ de 
 
Then we ask, in those cases where a statistically significant 
increase in tumors is found only in one species, does this con- 
tradict the model? 
 
Crouch and 'Wilson took a qualitative argument, that the in- 
duction of tumors at one site in one species is an indicator of 
tumorigenicity at different sites in another species and made it 
quantitative (39). They calculated maximum likelihood esti- 
 
(3) 
 
(4) 
 
209 
 
GOODMAN AND W]LSON 
 
? 
 
-S -4 -3 -2 -I 
 
Log1o (Carcinogenic Potency, 1 ): B6C3Fl Mice 
 
or. -I 
 
V) 
v 
 
IO 
 
--2 
0 
o 
 
(-3 
 
0 
 
j()4 
 
A 
 
0 
 
-5 -4 -3 -2 -I 0 
 
Loglo(Carcinogenic Potency, e ): B6C3FI Mice 
 
FIGURE 4. Carcinogenic potency in B6C3F, mice versus F344 rats. (A) Dashed line is best fit of data shown. (B) Cases that are not in evident agreement with the 
 
dashed line of 4A. From Crouch (37). 
 
mates (MLE) of (3 from NCI/NTP bioassay data, took the 
geometric mean of the potencies at the most sensitive site in 
males and females, and compared these sex-averaged potencies 
for rats and mice. They found that the potencies were in better 
agreement if the comparison was based on the most sensitive site 
in each species than if the site was fixed. Crouch evaluated the 
correlation analytically using Eq. (3) and found the best fit solu- 
 
tion for the interspecies conversion factor K between rats and 
 
mice (37). For 42% (78/187) of the chemicals there was a 
statistically significant (p ? 0.025) tumorigenic response in one 
or both species. Of these, 47 % (37/78) were significant in both 
species; the correlation is shown in Figure 4A. For 19 of the 39 
chemicals which produced a significant response in only one 
species, the results were in self-evident agreement with Figure 
4A; results for the remaining 22 are shown in Figure 4B. As 
before, the error bars encompass zero when the data are not 
statistically significant. Although some of the error bars do not 
touch the best fit line (obtained from the experiments which pro- 
duced a significant response in both species), the deviation is not 
large. All the data are consistent with the correlation given by Eq. 
(3), with the error term defined in Eq. (4), with a chosen to fit 
the data. In each case the error c in the correlation equation is 
greater than the statistical uncertainty of the individual points. 
 
Crouch showed that there are few cases, if any, where one can 
say definitively that a chemical is carcinogenic in one rodent 
species and not in the other, based on the NCI/NTP bioassay 
results (37). More precisely, he found that the carcinogenic 
potency in one species is rarely more than 100 times less than the 
potency in the other. Metzger et al. broadened the scope of the 
analysis by looking at bioassay data other than that obtained by 
the NCI/NTP program; approximately the same interspecies 
(mouse/rat) correlation of minimum TD50 values (maximum 
potencies) was found in both NCI/NTP and non-NCI/NTP 
datasets (143). Rieth and Starr also found strong interspecies 
(mouse/rat) correlations for a) maximum carcinogenic potencies 
 
(1/TDSo values) for chemicals for which the authors' opinion was 
positive for carcinogenicity, and b) upper bound potencies (based 
on lower-bound estimates of TD50) for chemicals for which the 
authors' opinion was negative with respect to carcinogenicity 
(144). They found weaker interspecies correlations for the cases 
where the chemical was positive in mice but not rats, or positive 
in rats but not mice. It seems to us that these results are in accord 
with those of Crouch (37) and that the correlations described are 
consistent with the hypothesis that the interspecies comparison 
of potencies is meaningful even for chemicals which produce 
strong evidence of carcinogenicity in only one of the two rodent 
species. However, Rieth and Starr have a different interpretation. 
They point to the interspecies correlation of MTDs as a source 
of bias (see below). 
 
The findings of Crouch and Wilson (39) were confirmed by 
Gaylor and Chen (145); some of their results are reproduced in 
Table 5. They compared the minimum TD5o values in rats, mice, 
and hamsters for all the chemicals in the original CPDB (129) as 
a function of route of administration and tumor site. They 
reported that the geometric mean of the ratio for mice/rats is 2.2 
for diet and 1.13 for gavage. When the tumor site for both species 
was the liver, then the geometric mean (mice/rats) is 1.48 for diet. 
Inhalation gave the poorest interspecies correlation. When the 
route was diet, the ratio of minimum TD5o values (mice/rats) was 
distributed such that 73% (138/190) were between 0.1 and 10, 
1.6% (3/190) were greater than 100, and 0.53% (1/190) were less 
than 0.01. Similar ratios were found for the hamster/rat and 
hamster/mouse comparisons, although data was limited. The 
authors concluded that the variation in the minimum TD30 values 
across the three rodent species is generally within a flactor of 100 
over a wide range of chemical compounds. 
 
Chen and Gaylor (146) used the Crump linearized multistage 
model to find the upper confidence limit on potency (for the most 
sensitive site) at the lowest experimental dose for 38 NCI/NTP 
carcinogens; from the confidence limit they calculated the 
 
12 
 
& -2 
 
0 
 
C! 
 
-2 
 
0 
8. 
 
-3 -4 
 
B 
 
210 
 
PREDICTING THE CARCINOGENICITY OF CHEMICALS IN HUMANS 
 
Tible 5 Ratios of minimum TD,)5 values (mg/kg-day), from 
 
Gaylor and Chen (145). 
 
No. of SD 
 
Species Route Tumor site compounds Ratioa (log') 
Mouse: rat Diet All 190 2.20 1.90 
Mouse: rat Diet TBAb 33 2.22 1.58 
Mouse: rat Diet Liver 16 1.48 1.61 
Mouse: rat Gavage All 32 1.32 2.39 
Mouse: rat Gavage TBAb 11 4.22 1.61 
Mouse: rat Water All 10 0.69 2.42 
Mouse: rat IP All 16 1.41 1.24 
Mouse: rat IP TBAb 12 1.03 1.14 
Mouse: rat Inhalation All 7 11.2 3.28 
Hamster: rat Diet All 10 13.7 2.40 
Hamster: mouse Water All 7 8.49 1.57 
 
aRatio of geometric means. 
 
bTBA, tumor-bearing animals, any site. 
 
estimated "virtually safe dose" (VSD), defined as that dose 
which produces a cancer risk of 10 -6. For 69 same-sex 
comparisons between B6C3Fj hybrid mice and rats of three 
strains, the VSD ratios (rats/mice) varied from 0.020 to 49, with 
geometric mean 1.27 and standard deviation ln(6.23) = 1.83. The 
ratios of the minimum VSD values without regard to sex varied 
from 0.021 to 26, with geometric mean 1.37 and standard devia- 
tion ln(5.99) = 1.79. The VSD ratio r was distributed such that 
0.01 < r < 0.l for 12% (8/69), and 10 < r < 100 for the re- 
mainder (8/69). 
 
Biases 
 
Almost all experiments and correlations have biases, and it is 
important to discuss them. One obvious potential bias in the 
interspecies comparison of carcinogenic potency is that we nor- 
mally look only at chemicals that have been found to produce a 
statistically significant excess of tumors in both species. this 
leaves open the question: Are there chemicals which are car- 
cinogenic in only one of two species in which they were tested? 
If such chemicals exist, then the correlation is obviously limited. 
We addressed the question of the limit of sensitivity of the 
bioassay by plotting the carcinogenic potencies in mice versus 
those in rats, along with the associated statistical uncertainty, in 
Figure 4. The error bars show that in every case-there is an upper 
limit to potency, but the lower limit sometimes encompasses zero 
(Figure 4B). From the magnitude of the uncertainties it was con- 
cluded that for these examples, the occurrence of statistically 
significant (p ? 0.025) evidence of carcinogenicity in only one 
species did not provide evidence of exceptions to the correlation. 
However, Figure 4 only indicates consistency with the correla- 
tion; it does not prove that the correlation is in fact followed for 
every chemical. Some chemicals could be exceptions to the rule, 
but it is not possible to tell. 
 
There has been no systematic attempt, to our knowledge, to 
study the biases in the qualitative (yes/no) interspecies concor- 
dance studies of the type conducted by Haseman and Huff (6), 
Gold et al. (136), and others, in which carcinogenicity is scored 
on a positive/negative basis. Yet simple arguments suggest that 
the biases will be greater than those for the quantitative com- 
parisons. As evidenced in the above paragraph, one virtue of the 
quantitative procedure is that it permits interspecies comparison 
of chemicals positive in one species and nominally negative in 
another (Fig. 4B). The qualitative interspecies concordance 
 
studies are, of necessity, silent about these cases. 
 
As we have already noted, the experimental design of the 
typical bioassay is such that, for most chemicals, the carcino- 
genic potency at the most sensitive site is just above the limit of 
sensitivity. This means that the interspecies concordance of car- 
cinogenicity/noncarcinogenicity is very sensitive to the criteria 
for positivity in the individual bioassays. Recall the four decision 
rules set down by Bickis and Krewski (141), the most conser- 
vative of which leads to a high percentage of false negatives (the 
assignment of non-carcinogenicity to chemicals that would 
logically have been labeled as carcinogens under any set of 
reasonable positive/negative criteria), and the most liberal of 
which leads to the assignment of positivity in 100 % of the cases, 
a large number of which are false positives (chemicals of very 
low or zero potency that would logically have been labeled as 
noncarcinogens under any set of reasonable positive/negative 
criteria). If statistical decision rules for carcinogenicity are not 
tempered by judicious use of biological information, the outcome 
is far less convincing than when all data, however untidy, is 
allowed to play a role. On the other hand, if the details of the re- 
quirements for positivity/negativity are not decided in advance, 
there is enormous potential for bias (147). A further bias in posi- 
tive/negative decisions enters when the experimenter has a desire 
to prove that a chemical is carcinogenic. The more bioassays that 
are carried out, the greater becomes the probability that one will 
produce a significantly positive outcome, merely due to chance. 
It is our contention that biases in yes/no concordance studies can 
be large in either direction, and that the best way of studying these 
biases is by looking at the quantitative potency relationships. 
 
Biases can also appear in attempts to find qualitative correla- 
tions between genotoxicity and carcinogenicity. In a study of 73 
chemicals tested in recent NCI/NTP rodent bioassays, Tennant 
et al. found that there was no complementarity between four 
commonly used in vitro tests for genotoxicity (23). The Salmo- 
nella mutagenesis test had the highest specificity (negative 
response to nominal noncarcinogens) and the lowest sensitivity 
(positive response to carcinogens). They concluded that no bat- 
tery of tests constructed from these four tests offered an improve- 
ment over the Salmonella assay. Sensitivity could be improved, 
but then specificity was sacrificed. Furthermore, the three most 
potent carcinogens examined were not positive in any of the in 
vitro tests. As others have realized, if a chemical is negative in a 
series of short-term tests having distinct genotoxic end points, 
further testing sometimes amounts to the experimenters' re- 
lentless pursuit ofjust one positive genotoxic response. If enough 
tests are attempted, the laws of probability, applied to the tests' 
false-positive rate, make it likely that a positive result will be 
found in some test. 
 
That there is a good correlation between the carcinogenic 
potency at the most sensitive site in rats with that in mice is now 
firmly established, as has been elaborated in this review. But the 
basis and relevance of this correlation has been the subject of 
heated discussion. In particular, a paper by Bernstein et al. (41 ) 
has been misinterpreted frequently as providing an argument 
against the validity of the interspecies correlation. Here we shall 
endeavor to explain the results of that paper (quoting the authors 
directly) and the argument it engendered. Most of the following 
points have been made previously by Zeise et al. (148-150) and 
Crouch et al. (42). We hope that our expository efforts here will 
 
211 
 
GOODMAN AND WILSON 
 
be successful at clarifying once and for all our position on what 
we believe has been proven and what has not. 
 
Bernstein et al. found that the best estimate of b of the car- 
cinogenic potency ((3) of a chemical tested in a rodent bioassay 
can be approximated as a simple function of the maximum dose 
tested (MaxD). This may be written as 
 
b =ln(qolq) (5) 
 
MaxD 
 
where qo is the fraction of tumor-free animals in the zero-dose 
group, and q is the fraction of tumor-free animals in the MaxD 
group. If for rats and mice inclusive the possible range of values 
of ln(qolq) is much smaller than the range of MaxD values, and 
if there is an interspecies correlation between the MaxD values, 
then Eq. (5) implies that there would have to be an incidental in- 
terspecies correlation between the carcinogenic potencies as 
well. 
 
Bernstein et al. did indeed find a good same-sex correlation for 
MaxD values between rats and mice in 186 NCI bioassays (41). 
As stated above, the MaxD is usually just the MTD or is close to 
it in value, while the MTD is a measure of a chemical's chronic 
toxicity. The existence of an interspecies (rat/mouse) correlation 
for acute toxicities (LD50 values) had already been described 
(148,151). 
 
Bernstein et al. then attempted to quantify the expected varia- 
tion in ln(qolq) for an ideal two-group experiment in order to 
predict the possible outcomes of the carcinogenic potency (41). 
In their hypothetical scheme, there are 50 animals in each of 2 
dose groups; the control group receives dose = 0, the treament 
group receives dose = d. They further assumed a 10% incidence 
of tumors in the control group (qo = 0.9) and reasoned that there 
must be at least a 20% incidence of tumors in the treatment group 
(q ? 0.8) in order that there be a statistically significant increase 
in tumors. Initially, they allowed for the possibility of 100% 
tumors (q =0). With these entirely reasonable simplifications, 
Bernstein et al. concluded that "the range of possible statistically 
significant estimates of [(31 spans 0.118/d to infinity." This means 
that the range of possible values of ln(qolq) is not small compared 
to the range of MaxD values. 
 
But we know that only for a few chemicals (of which ethylene 
dibromide is an example) does the fraction with tumors approach 
100% at any site. This is a fact of nature; it has nothing to do with 
experimental design. There is no reason why there should not ex- 
ist a carcinogen with low toxicity (high MTD), like saccharin, 
and high carcinogenic potency, like TCDD. Such carcinogens 
may exist, but none has been found! We emphasize that a car- 
cinogen having these properties could readily be detected in a 
standard rodent bioassay; at the MTD it should yield tumors in 
100% of the animals under test at the most sensitive site. 
 
The opposite situation, in which a chemical has high toxicity 
relative to its carcinogenic potency, may very well exist but would 
not be detected in a standard bioassay; at the MTD there would 
not be a significant increase in tumors. Of chemicals tested in 
animal bioassays, approximately half are not found to be car- 
cinogenic (6-8,31,136). These produce either no increase or 
some nonsignificant increase in tumors at the MTD. The failure 
of the bioassay to detect this latter type of carcinogen is implicit 
in Bernstein et al.'s analysis of the hypothetical ideal experiment: 
the requirement that q be less than 0.8 specifically excludes them. 
 
Bernstein et al., after noting the experimental absence of 
 
chemicals which produce 100% tumors, then go on to exclude the 
possibility that such chemicals could appear (if they existed) 
within the context of their ideal two-group experiment. By ar- 
bitrarily setting an upper limit of 98% (q 2 0.02) on the fraction 
of animals that could possibly get tumors, the upper limit on their 
estimate of carcinogenic potency then becomes 3.807/d. Taking 
the ratio of upper (3.807kd) and lower (1.118/d) limits, they find 
that the statistically significant values of b can vary only over a 
32-fold range. But by placing an artificial upper limit (98 %) on 
the possible fraction with tumors (and hence, on b), they have 
biased the outcome. 
 
Rieth and Starr examined the arithmetic relationship between 
1/MaxD and the maximum finite value of carcinogenic potency, 
O.,,U, for 83 carcinogens chosen from the CPDB (43). How these 
particular chemicals were selected was not revealed. They found 
that the mean of the difference [(,,.- (1/MaxD)] was 9.5 ? 2.2, 
and that this difference is closely tied to the range of doses tested 
in the bioassay. For vinyl chloride and TCDD, which were tested 
over200-fold and 50-fold dose ranges, respectively, the difference 
between (l3 and 1/MaxD was more than an order of magnitude 
larger than the mean. The authors concluded that "the doses tested 
severely and artifactually constrain the estimates ofcarcinogenic 
potency that can be derived from the multistage model." 
 
We agree with Rieth and Starr (43) and Bernstein et al. (41 ) that 
finite values of fl are constrained by both the MaxD and the dose 
range. But these workers did not take a careful look at whether the 
relationship between the measured value of (3 and MaxD is 
stronger than what would be predicted based on these constraints 
alone. We address this question elsewhere (50), and report that for 
chemicals with TD30 values significant atp < 0.01, the relation- 
ship between 1/TD50 and l/MaxD is weaker (has larger variance) 
for mutagens than for nonmutagens. The fact that there exists a 
significantdifference depending upon mutagenicity, which is an 
unrelated variable, suggests thatthe relationship is indeed stronger 
than what is implied by the constraints alone. Therefore at least a 
portion ofthe correlation is nonspurious. Furthermore, we found 
that the so-called two-dose (zero and MaxD) model of Bernstein 
et al. does not approximate the actual distribution of (3 versus 
V/MaxD closely enough to be useful for examining artifacts in the 
apparent relationship between these two variables. But we did not 
rule out the possibility, especially for mutagens, that there is lit- 
tle more (or no more) quantitative information to be gained from 
the relationship between carcinogenic potency and MTD than is 
already contained in a) the statistical significance level at which 
the potency is chosen, and b) the fact that chemicals producing 
100% tumors atthe MTD are rare (SO). Figure 5, aplotof l/TD50 
versus I/MaxD for chemicals tested by the NCI/NTP and which 
produced a statistically significant increase in tumors at any site 
in mice, is reproduced from Goodmanetal. (SO); theoverlapbet- 
ween mutagens and nonmutagens is self-evident. 
 
There is a similar potential bias in the direct comparison ofcar- 
cinogenicity in humans and rodents as performed by Allen et al. 
(89). This arises due to the fact that, for most of the chemicals 
which they analyzed, people were also exposed at high doses. In 
occupational settings, exposure limits used to be set just below 
the level at which toxic effects were immediately obvious; to 
reduce the levels further was considered an unnecessary expense. 
Chemotherapeutic doses are also close to the maximum tolerated 
level; lower doses are usually correspondingly less effective. 
 
212 
 
PREDICTING THE CARCINOGENICITY OF CHEMICALS IN HUMANS 
 
4 
2 
 
e004 
0 
co 
LC) 
 
I 
 
to 
 
D 2 
0 
m 
 
-2 
 
in I 
 
-5 
 
-4 
 
-3 
 
-2 
 
- 1 
 
0 
 
1 
 
2 
 
log 1/MaxD Mouse (mg/kg-day) 
 
FIGURE 5. Log-log plot of I/TD50 versus I/MaxD for NCI/NTP chemicals tested in mice. (X) mutagens; (O) nonmutagens. TD50 values significant atp < 0.01. 
 
From Goodman et al. (50). 
 
Therefore, any argument that the correlation of carcinogenic 
potencies for mice and rats is a spurious consequence of the cor- 
relation of toxic doses would likewise apply to the correlation of 
carcinogenic potencies for rodents and humans. 
 
Another bias relates to the choice of chemicals for testing in 
rodent bioassays. The relative ease of in vitro testing for 
mutagenic and other genotoxic activity makes it unlikely that any 
new chemical will be considered for mass production if it turns 
out to be genotoxic. Consequently, fewer new carcinogenicity 
bioassays are performed on chemicals that are genotoxic in any 
of the standard in vitro tests. 
 
Undoubtedly, there are other biases that have not been iden- 
tified. However, we believe that it is already clear that a study of 
the interspecies correlation factor K cannot be separated from a 
study of the relationship between toxicity and carcinogenic 
potency, or of the relationship between carcinogenic potency and 
activities at the cellular level (including cytotoxicity and genotox- 
icity). We agree with Clayson (152,153) and others who declare 
the necessity to improve the carcinogen risk assessment process 
by increasing and utilizing our understanding of the biological 
mechanisms of carcinogenesis. 
 
Genotoxic Versus Nongenotoxic 
Agents and the Rodent Bioassay 
 
Recently, Ashby and Tennant, expanding upon and corrobor 
ating the work of Tennant et al. (154), found that the distribution 
of tumor sites for agents mutagenic to Salmonella is different 
from those which are not (76). They examined 222 carcinogens 
which had been tested by the NCI/NTP in both mice and rats. If 
a chemical was found to be mutagenic in Salmonella and also had 
certain structural attributes which have been associated with 
mutagenicity (155), it was classified by these authors as genotoxic 
(+/+). If negative in both, it was classified as nongenotoxic 
(-I-). The +/+ chemicals produced all tabulated tumors ex- 
cept for seminal vesicle, cholangioma, urinary tract, and lym- 
phatic system. The -/- carcinogens were more restricted in 
their range, producing tumors at only 15 of the 31 tabulated tumor 
sites. Benzene, which is a potent genotoxin in most in vitro and 
in vivo short-term tests, nevertheless fails to induce point muta- 
tions in the Salmonella assay and does not have any of the struc- 
tural features identified by Ashby (155) as predictive of mutagen- 
icity. Thus, benzene is -/- by the above criteria, but Ashby and 
 
x 
 
x X 
 
x 
 
X oX o 
 
o* OKf x 
x 
 
- x~~~~~ 
 
11I1I11 | 1 1 131 1 1 l 1ii, 1. 1 | 1_1111 1_131 1I I I 
 
213 
 
GOODMAN AND WILSON 
 
Tennant do not include it in the analysis of tumor site distribu- 
tion because to do so would mask the site differences between 
truly nongenotoxic carcinogens and genotoxic carcinogens. The 
liver was the most common target site for both +/+ and -/- 
carcinogens, but a -/- carcinogen was approximately twice as 
likely as a +/+ carcinogen to cause liver tumors. Of those 
chemicals which caused tumors only in the mouse liver, 70% 
were not mutagenic in Salmonella. These findings concerning 
mouse liver tumors were in general agreement with those of 
Ward et al. (156). 
 
The Science Advisory Board of the U.S. Environmental Pro- 
tection Agency (EPA) spent a day in August 1987 discussing 
whether or not induction of mouse liver tumors (and for another 
reason, rat kidney tumors) provides sufficient evidence that a 
chemical is a complete carcinogen. One widely held view was 
that chemicals which produce only mouse liver tumors, par- 
ticularly in the male B6C3F, mouse (which has a high natural in- 
cidence of liver tumors and elevated peroxisome levels compared 
to females and to other strains), may be acting as tumor pro- 
moters rather than as complete carcinogens. That hepatic perox- 
isome proliferators also induce hepatocellular carcinoma is well 
known (157). The paper by Ashby and Tennant indirectly cor- 
 
roborates the view that most carcinogens whi-ch are specific for- 
mouse liver are not primary carcinogens, and that they may act 
instead to promote the development of neoplasms in pre-initiated 
cells (76). Gold et al. also found such a distinction: for the. 91 
mouse liver carcinogens which had been tested for mutagenici- 
ty in Salmonella, 32 % (8/25) of the single-site carcinogens are 
mutagenic, compared to 56 % (37/66) of the multiple-site car- 
cinogens. But a contradictory note is struck by the observation 
that for the 20 NCI/NTP chemicals which are single-site B6C3F, 
mouse liver carcinogens, tumorigenicity is not strongly cor- 
related with sex: 13 produce tumors in both sexes, 5 in the male 
only, and 2 in the female only (136). An even weaker correlation 
with sex was previously found for 26 single-site B6C3F, mouse 
liver carcinogens by a group of NTP scientists (158). 
 
The most important conclusions of Ashby and Tennant (76) 
were that "screening chemicals for genotoxicity using structural 
analysis and a minimum number of genotoxicity assays, and use 
of a reduced cancer bioassay protocol, would enable the detec- 
tion of trans-species/multiple-site rodent carcinogens. The detec- 
tion of tissue/sex/species-specific carcinogens can only be 
achieved by conducting life-time carcinogenicity bioassays ac- 
cording to the present NTP protocol." 
 
Regulatory Demands and Paradoxes 
 
The fact that about half of the chemicals tested in rodents pro- 
duce statistically significant tumor increases has important 
regulatory consequences. It is no longer possible to have a "ban 
them all" approach. Many synthetic and naturlly occuring 
chemicals which have some measurable carcinogenic activity are 
important in everyday life. Chloroform is formed in drinking 
water from the reaction of chlorine (added to curb bacterial 
growth) with organic contminants present in most public water 
supplies. The EPA faces the paradox that it is forced to accept a 
maximum contaminant level (MCL) for chloroform in public 
water systems of 100 ppb (159), yet the MCL goal for tri- 
chloroethylene is set at zero (160), even though the latter 
chemical is an order of magnitude less potent a carcinogen than 
 
chloroform. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and 
the EPA together promulgate inconsistencies in their attempts to 
limit human exposure to carcinogens; the FDA accepts peanut but- 
ter with 20 ppb total aflatoxins (including B1) and have proposed 
thatthetolerancebeloweredto 15 ppb (16I), even though aflatoxin 
B1 is at least 10' times more potent than trichloroethylene. 
 
The EPA justifies its use of the surface area correction factor 
(which the FDA does not use) on the ground that it is more "con- 
servative." We do not contest this desire to be conservative, but 
suggest that the factors be explicitly included. We have argued 
that K should be unity within an uncertainty factor of 20 either 
way (52). If it is desired to be conservative, one may take 20, so 
long as it is clearly recognized that there are many chemicals for 
which this is high. It should also be recognized that for many 
chemicals Kwould be 1, for some K would be 1/20, and for any 
untested chemical K may approach zero. 
 
The interspecies potency factors discussed here are intended 
to be used in numerical risk estimates. It must be recognized that 
many distinguished scientists do not accept the use by ourselves 
and by government agencies of numerical values for interspecies 
factors in calculating a risk. For example, Ames et al. use the 
term "possible hazard" for estimates of human carcinogenicity 
based on rodent bioassays and do not write the word "risk" 
unless data is available from human exposures (4). They pro- 
duced a human exposure dose/rodent potency dose (HERP) in- 
dex, in which the human lifetime daily dose is expressed as a 
percentage of the rodent TD50, where both are in units of mg/kg- 
day. For K = 1, the HERP divided by 100/ln(2) becomes what 
we would call the risk, and the order of chemicals listed by HERP 
value is the same as if they were listed by risk. In the text, Ames 
et al. use their list to suggest that exposures associated with a small 
HERP value can be ignored compared to substances with a larger 
one. This use can only be valid if it is assumed that the HERP in- 
dex is related to risk. Thus all the assumptions, restrictions, and 
qualifications appropriate to the interspecies comparison of car- 
cinogenic potencies also apply whenever the HERP is used. 
 
Doll and Peto emphasized the uncertainty in quantitative 
estimation of human risk from animal data and suggested that 
" priority setting" should replace "risk assessment" (84). 
Specifically, they recommended that a chemical's potency in 
each test (including long-term carcinogenicity bioassays and 
short-term in vitro tests) be multiplied by an estimate of human 
exposure to yield an index of human hazard according to that one 
test. Chemicals that appeared high on any index would be con- 
sidered prime candidates for regulatory action. One appealing 
aspect of this recommendation is that it insures that no chemical 
which is potent by any criterion is overlooked. We note that the 
above-mentioned index of Ames et al. is an example of the pro- 
cedure suggested by Doll and Peto when the test under considera- 
tion is the rodent bioassay. 
 
Suggestions for Future Work 
 
An important issue concerning high-dose/low-dose extra- 
polationmightberesolvedbycarefuldocumentationofthedose- 
response for cell proliferation. If it is true that cell proliferation is 
responsible for carcinogenicity at toxic doses, as is now widely 
believed, thenacorollary hypothesis is immediately apparent: that 
chemicals which are not genotoxic in a given target organ and 
which do not cause local cell proliferation will not cause cancer 
 
214 
 
PREDICTING THE CARCINOGENIC17Y OF CHEMICALS IN HUMANS 215 
 
in that organ. This is a powerful notion; one with unprecedented 
power to change the face of carcinogen risk assessment. 
 
We wish to emphasize the need for adequate rodent bioassays, 
in which the route of administration is matched to the human ex- 
posure route, for chemicals already known to be carcinogenic to 
humans. In the absence of good animal data for all known human 
carcinogens, refinement of the methodology for predicting 
potency in humans from potency in animals is seriously hin- 
dered. Likewise, there is a dearth of knowledge as to the poten- 
cies of known human carcinogens. For some chemicals, the 
necessary quantitative information could be derived from com- 
pleted or ongoing epidemiological studies. If epidemiologists 
could be persuaded of the importance of obtaining potency 
estimates, then more studies would be designed so as to reveal 
the effects at different exposure levels. In those epidemiological 
studies in which no statistically significant increase in neoplasms 
are found, we encourage the determination of upper limits to car- 
cinogenic potency. 
 
WethankK.S. Crump, D.W. Gaylor, L.S. Gold, andmanyotherswhohavesent 
ustheirlatestviews, data, andpreprints. Weareespeciallygrateful toJ.K. Haseman 
for commenting extensively on an earlier version of the manuscript. R. Wilson 
was supported by an intergovernmental exchange agreement with the FDA. G. 
Goodman was supported by gifts to Harvard University from Bristol-Myers, 
Gillette, and Monsanto Corporations, and by cooperative agreement CR812699 
from the EPA to the Programs in Environmental Health and Public Pblicy at the 
Harvard School of Public Health. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. Innes, J. R. M., Ulland, B. M., Valerio, M. G., Petrucelli, L., Fishbein, L., 
 
Hart, E. R., Pallota, A. J., Bates, R. R., Falk, H. L., Gart, J. J., Klein, M., 
Mitchell, I., and Peters, J. Bioassay of pesticides and industrial chemicals 
for tumorigenicity in mice: a preliminary note. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 42: 
1101-1114 (1969). 
 
2. Epstein, S. S., and Swartz, J. B. Carcinogenic risk assessment. Science 240: 
 
1043-1045 (1988). 
 
3. Ames, B. N., Magaw, R., and Gold, L. S. Ranking possible caarcinogenic 
 
hazards. Science 236: 271-280 (1987). 
 
4. Ames, B. N., and Gold, L. S. Response to 'Carcinogenic risk assessment'. 
 
Science 240: 1045-1047 (1988). 
 
5. Office of Science and Technology Policy. Chemical carcinogens: a review 
 
of the science and its associated principles. Fed. Reg. 50: 10371-10442 (1985). 
6. Haseman, J. K., and Huff, J. E. Species correlation in long-term car- 
 
cinogenicity studies. Cancer Lett. 37: 125-132 (1987). 
 
7. Haseman, J. K., Huff, J. E., Zeiger, E., and McConnell, E. E. Comparative 
 
results of 327 chemical carcinogenicity studies. Environ. Health Perspect. 
74: 229-235 (1987). 
 
8. Byrd, D. M., Crouch, E. A. C., and Wilson, R. Do mouse liver tumors 
 
predict rat tumors? A study of concordance between tumors induced at dif- 
ferent sites in rats and mice. In: Mouse Liver Carcinogenesis: Mechanisms 
and Species Comparisons (D. E. Stevenson, Ed.), Alan R. Liss, New York, 
1990, pp. 19-41. 
 
9. Fears, T. R., Throne, R. E., and Chu, K. C. False-positive and false negative 
 
rates for carcinogenicity screens. Cancer Res. 37: 1941-1945 (1977). 
 
10. Gart, J. J., Chu, K. C., and Tarone, R. E. Statistical issues in interpretation 
 
of chronic bioassays for carcinogenicity. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 62: 957-974 
(1979). 
 
11. Haseman, J. K. A reexamination of false positive rates for carcinogenicity 
 
studies. Fundam. Appl. Tbxicol. 12: 793-804 (1983). 
 
12. Hutt, P. B. Use of quantitative risk assessment in regulatory decision mak- 
 
ing under Federal health and safety statutes. In: Risk Quantitation and 
Regulatory Policy. Banbury Report 19 (D. G. Hoel, R. A. Merrill, and F. P. 
Perera, Eds.), Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York, 1985, pp. 15-29. 
13. Scientific Committee of the Food Safety Council. Quantitative risk assess- 
 
ment. Fd. Cosmet. Toxicol. 18: 711-734 (1980). 
 
14. Gregory, A. R. Species comparisons in evaluating carcinogenicity from 
 
animal studies. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 8: 160-190 (1988). 
 
15. Dybing, E. Predictability of human carcinogenicity from animal studies. 
 
Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 6: 399-415 (1986). 
 
16. Ramel, C. Short-term testing-are we looking at wrong endpoints? Mutat. 
 
Res. 205: 13-24 (1988). 
 
17. Weinstein, I. B. The origins of human cancer: molecular mechanisms of car- 
 
cinogenesis and their implications for cancer prevention and treatment- 
twenty-seventh G.H.A. Clowes Memorial Lecture. Cancer Res. 48: 
4135-4143 (1988). 
 
18. Weinstein, I. B. The relevance of tumor promotion and multistage car- 
 
cinogenesis to risk assessment. In: Risk Quantitation and Regulatory Pblicy. 
Banbury Report 19 (D.G. Hoel, R.A. Merrill, and F. P. Perera, Eds.), Cold 
Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 1985, pp. 231-238. 
 
19. International Commission for Protection against Environmental Mutagens 
 
and Carcinogens (ICPEMC). Publication No. 16, Testing for mutagens and 
carcinogens; the roleof short-termgenotoxicity assays. Mutat. Res. 205: 3-12 
(1988). 
 
20. Shelby, M. D. The genetic toxicity of human carcinogens and its implications. 
 
Mutat. Res. 204: 3-15 (1988). 
 
21. McCann, J., Choi, E., Yamasaki, E., and Ames, B. N. Detection of car- 
 
cinogens as mutagens in the Salmonella/microsome test: assay of 300 
chemicals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 72: 5135-5139 (1975). 
 
22. Purchase, I. F. H., Longstaff, E., Ashby, J., Styles, J. A., Anderson, D., 
 
Lefevre, P. A., and Westwood, F. R. Evaluation of six short term tests for 
detecting organic chemical carcinogens and recommendations for their use. 
Nature 264: 624-627 (1976). 
 
23. Tennant, R. W., Margolin, B. H., Shelby, M. D., Zeiger, E., Haseman, J. 
 
K., Spalding, J., Caspary, W., Resnick, M., Stasiewicz, S., Anderson, B., 
and Minor, R. Prediction of chemical carcinogenicity in rodents from in vitro 
genetic toxicity assays. Science 236: 933-941 (1987). 
 
24. Zeiger, E. Carcinogenicity of mutagens: predictive capability of the Sal- 
 
monella mutagenesis assay for rodent carcinogenicity. Cancer Res. 47: 
1287-1296 (1987). 
 
25. Nesnow, S., and Bergman, H. An analysis of the Gene-Tox Carcinogen Data 
 
Base. Mutat. Res. 205: 237-253 (1988). 
 
26. Meselson, M., and Russell, K. Comparisons of carcinogenic and mutagenic 
 
potency. In: Origins of Human Cancer (H.H. Hiatt, J.D. Watson, and J.A. 
Winstein, Eds.), Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 
1977, pp. 1473-1481. 
 
27. Jones, C. A., Marlino, P. J., Lijinsky, W., and Huberman, E. The relation- 
 
ship between the carcinogenicity and mutagenicity of nitrosamines in a 
hepatocyte-mediated mutagenicity assay. Carcinogenesis 2: 1075-1077 (1981). 
28. Bartsch, H., Tomatis, L. and Malaveille, C. Qualitative and quantitative com- 
 
parisons between mutagenic and carcinogenic activities of chemicals. In: 
Mutagenicity: New Horizons in Genetic Toxicology (J.A. Heddle, Ed.), 
Academic Press, New York, 1982, pp. 35-72. 
 
29. McCann, J., Gold, L. S., Horn, L., McGill, R., Graedel, T. E., and Kaldor, 
 
J. Statistical analysis of Salmonella test data and comparison to results of 
animal cancer tests. Mutat. Res. 205: 183-195 (1988). 
 
30. Parodi, S., Taningher, M., and Santi, L. Utilization of the quantitative com- 
 
ponent of positive and negative results of short-term tests. Mutat. Res. 205: 
283-294 (1988). 
 
31. Shelby, M. D., and Stasiewicz, S. Chemicals showing no evidence of car- 
 
cinogenicity in long-term, two-species rodent studies: the need for short-term 
test data. Environ. Mutagen. 6: 871-878 (1984). 
 
32. Waters, M. D., Bergman, H. B., and Nesnow, S. The genetic toxicology of 
 
Gene-Tox non-carcinogens. Mutat. Res. 205: 139-182 (1988). 
 
33. Calabrese, E. J. Comparative biology of test species. Environ. Health 
 
Perspect. 77: 55-62 (1988). 
 
34. Freireich, E. J., Gehan, E. A., Rall, D. P., Schmidt, L. H., and Skipper, H. 
 
E. Quantitative comparison of toxicity of anticancer agents in mouse, rat, 
hamster, dog, monkey and man. Cancer Chemother. Rep. 50: 219-244 
(1966). 
 
35. Rall, D. P. Difficulties in extrapolating the results of toxicity studies in 
 
laboratory animals to man. Environ. Res. 2: 360-367 (1969). 
 
36. Krasovskij, G. N. Species and sex differences in sensitivity to toxic 
 
substances. In: Methods Used in the USSR for Establishing Biologically Safe 
Levels of Toxic Substances. World Health Organization, Geneva, 1975, pp. 
109-125. 
 
37. Crouch, E. A. C. Uncertainties in interspecies extrapolations of car- 
 
cinogenicity. Environ. Health Perspect. 50: 321-327 (1983). 
 
216 GOODMAN AND WILSON 
 
38. Travis, C. C., White, R. K., and Ward, R. C. Interspecies extrapolation of 
 
pharmacokinetics. J. Theor. Biol. 142(3): 285-304 (1990). 
 
39. Crouch, E., and Wilson, R. Interspecies comparisonof carcinogenic potency. 
 
J. Toxicol. Environ. Health 5: 1095-1118 (1979). 
 
40. Peto, R., Pike, M. C., Bernstein, L., Gold, L. S., and Ames, B. N. The 
 
TD5o: a proposed general convention for the numerical description of the car- 
cinogenic potency of chemicals in chronic-exposure animal experiments. En- 
viron. Health Perspect. 58: 1-8 (1984). 
 
41. Bernstein, L., Gold, L. S., Ames, B. N., Pike, M. C., and Hoel, D. G. Some 
 
tautologous aspects of the comparison of carcinogenic potency in rats and 
mice. Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 5: 79-86 (1985). 
 
42. Crouch, E., Wilson, R., and Zeise, L. Tautology or not tautology? J. Tox- 
 
icol. Environ. Health 20: 1-10 (1987). 
 
43. Rieth, J. P., and Starr, T. B. Experimental design constraints on carcinogenic 
 
potency estimates. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health 27: 287-296 (1989). 
 
44. Staffa, J. A., and Mehlman, M. A. Innovations in Cancer Risk Assessment 
 
(EDOI Study). Pathotox Publishers, Park Forest South, IL, 1979. 
 
45. Carlborg, F. W. 2-Acetylaminofluorene and the Weibull model. Fd. Cosmet. 
 
Toxicol. 19: 367-371 (1981). 
 
46. Peto, R., Gray, R., Brantom, P., and Grasso, P. Nitrosamine carcinogenesis 
 
in 5120 rodents: chronic administration of sixteen different concentrations 
of NDEA, NDMA, NPYR and NPIP in the water of 4400 inbred rats with 
parallel studies on NDEA alone of the effect of age of starting (3, 6, or 20 
weeks) and of species (rats, mice or hamsters). In: N-Nitroso Compounds: 
Occurrence, Biological Effects and Relevance to Human Cancer (I. K. 
O'Neill, R. C. von Borstel, C. T. Miller, J. Long, and H. Bartsch, Eds.), 
IARC Scientific Publications No. 57, International Agency for Research on 
Cancer, Lyon, 1984, pp. 627-665. 
 
47. Ito, N., Shirai, T., Fukushima, S., and Hirose, M. Dose-response study of 
 
urinary bladder carcinogenesis in rats by N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl)nitro- 
samine. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 108: 169-173 (1984). 
 
48. Swenberg, J. A. Chemically-induced cell proliferation as a criterion in selec- 
 
ting doses for long-term bioassays. In: Chemically Induced Cell Prolifera- 
tion: Implications for Risk Assessment (B. E. Butterworth, T. J. Slaga, W. 
Farland, and M. McClain, Eds.), Wiley-Liss, New York, 1991, pp. 245-251. 
49. Cohen, S. M. Cell proliferation and bladder tumor promotion. In: Chemical- 
 
ly Induced Cell Proliferation: Implications for Risk Assessment (B. E. But- 
terworth, T. J. Slaga, W. Farland, and M. McClain, Eds.), Wiley-Liss, New 
York, 1991, pp. 347-355. 
 
50. Goodman, G., Shlyakhter, A., and Wilson, T. The relationship between car- 
 
cinogenic potency and maximum tolerated dose is similar for mutagens and 
non-mutagens. In: Chemically Induced Cell Proliferation: Implications for 
Risk Assessment (B. E. Butterworth, T. J. Slaga, W. Farland, and M. 
McClain, Eds.), Wiley-Liss, New York, 1991, pp. 501-516. 
 
51. Zeise, L., Wilson, R., and Crouch, E. A. C. Dose-response relationships 
 
for carcinogens: a review. Environ. Health Perspect. 73: 259-308 (1987). 
52. Crouch, E., and Wilson, R. Regulation of carcinogens. Risk Anal. 1: 47-57 
 
(1981). 
 
53. Crouch, E. A. C. Carcinogenic risk assessment-the consequences of believ- 
 
ing models. In: Organ and Species Specificity in Chemical Carcinogenesis 
(R. Langenbach, S. Newnow, and J. M. Rice, Eds.), Plenum Press, New 
York, 1983, pp. 653-665. 
 
54. Peto, R. Detection of risk of cancer to man. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B. 205: 
 
111-120 (1979). 
 
55. Armitage, P., and Doll, R. The age distribution of cancer and a multi-stage 
 
theory of carcinogenesis. Br. J. Cancer 8: 1-12 (1954). 
 
56. Armitage, P., and Doll, R. A two-stage theory of carcinogenesis in relation 
 
to the age distribution of human cancer. Br. J. Cancer 11: 161-169 (1957). 
 
57. Cook, P. J., Doll, R., and Fellingham, S. A. A mathematical model for the 
 
age distribution of cancer in man. Int. J. Cancer 4: 93-112 (1969). 
 
58. Cohen, B. L. The cancer risk from low-level radiation. Health Phys. 39: 
 
659-678 (1980). 
 
59. Rall, D. P. Species differences in carcinogenesis testing. In: Origins of 
 
Human Cancer (H. H. Hiatt, J. D. Watson, and J. A. Winstein, Eds.), Cold 
Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 1977, pp. 1383-1390. 
60. Travis, C. C. Interspecies extrapolations in risk analysis. Toxicology 47: 3-13 
 
(1987). 
 
61. Anderson, M. W., Hoel, D. G., and Kaplan, N. L. A general scheme for the 
 
incorporation of pharmacokinetics in low-dose risk estimation fbr chemical 
carcinogenesis: example-vinyl chloride. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 55: 
154-161 (1980). 
 
62. Yamasaki, E., and Ames, B. N. Concentration of mutagens from urine by 
 
adsorption with the nonpolar resin XAD-2: cigarette smokers have mutagenic 
urine. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S. 74: 3555-3559 (1977). 
 
63. Hoel, D. G., Haseman, J. K., Hogan, M. D., Huff, J., and McConnell, E. 
 
E. The impact of toxicity on carcinogenicity studies: implications for risk 
assessment. Carcinogenesis 9: 2045-2052 (1988). 
 
64. Moolgavkar, S. H., and Knudson, A. G., Jr. Mutation and cancer: a model 
 
for human carcinogenesis. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 66: 1037-1052 (1981). 
 
65. Moolgavkar, S. H. Carcinogenesis modeling: from molecular biology to 
 
epidemiology. Ann. Rev. Public Health 7: 151-169 (1986). 
 
66. Greenfield, R. E., Ellwein, L. B., and Cohen, S. M. A general probabilistic 
 
model of carcinogenesis: analysis of experimental urinary bladder cancer. 
Carcinogenesis 5: 437-445 (1984). 
 
67. Arnold, D. L., Moodie, C. A., Grice, H. C., Charbonneau, S., Stavric, B., 
 
Collins, B. F., McGuire, P. F., Zawidzka, Z. Z., and Munro, I. C. Long term 
toxicity of ortho-toluenesulfonamide and sodium saccharin in the rat. Tox- 
icol. Appl. Pharmacol. 52: 113-152 (1980). 
 
68. Ellwein, L. B., and Cohen, S. M. Acellulardynamics model of experimental 
 
bladder cancer: analysis of the effect of sodium saccharin in the rat. Risk 
Anal. 8: 215-221 (1988). 
 
69. Weisburger, J. H., and Williams, G. M. The distinct health risk analyses re- 
 
quired for genotoxic carcinogens and promoting agents. Environ. Health 
Perspect. 50: 233-245 (1983). 
 
70. Potter, V. R. A new protocol and its rationale for the study of initiation and 
 
promotion of carcinogenesis in rat liver. Carcinogenesis 2: 1375-1379 (1981). 
71. Potter, V. R. Alternative hypotheses for the role of promotion in chemical 
 
carcinogenesis. Environ. Health Perspect. 50: 139-148 (1983). 
 
72. Kunz, H. W., Tennekes, H. A., Port, R. E., Schwartz, M., Lorke, D., and 
 
Schaude, G. Quantitative aspects of chemical carcinogenesis and tumor pro- 
motion in liver. Environ. Health Perspect. 50: 113-122 (1983). 
 
73. Barbacid, M. ras genes. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 56: 779-827 (1987). 
 
74. Farr, C. J., Saiki, R. K., Erlich, H. A., McCormick, F., and Marshall, C. J. 
 
Analysis of ras gene mutations in acute myeloid leukemia by polymerase 
chain reaction and oligonucleotide probes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
85: 1629-1633 (1988). 
 
75. Ashby, J. Screening chemicals for mutagenicity: practices and pitfalls. In: 
 
Mutagenicity: New Horizons in Genetic Toxicology (J. A. Heddle, Ed.), 
Academic Press, New York, 1982, pp. 1-33. 
 
76. Ashby, J., and Tennant, R. W. Chemical structure, Salmonella mutagenicity 
 
and extent of carcinogenicity as indicators of genotoxic carcinogenesis among 
222 chemicals tested in rodents by the U.S. NCI/NTP. Mutat. Res. 204: 
17-115 (1988). 
 
77. Farber, E. The multistep nature of cancer development. Cancer Res. 44: 
 
5463-5474 (1984). 
 
78. Fischer, S. M., Floyd, R. A., and Copeland, E. S. Oxy radicals in car- 
 
cinogenesis - a chemical pathology study section workshop. Cancer Res. 48: 
3882-3887 (1988). 
 
79. Higginson, J. Cancer and environment. Science 205: 1363-1366 (1979). 
 
80. Haenszel, W., and Kurihara, M. Studies of Japanese migrants, I. Mortali- 
 
ty from cancer and other diseases among Japanese in the United States. J. 
Natl. Cancer Inst. 40: 43-68 (1968). 
 
81. Cairns, J. The origin of human cancers. Nature 289: 353-357 (1981). 
 
82. German, J. Bloom, D., and Passarge, E. Bloom's syndrome XI. Progress 
 
report for 1983. Clin. Genet. 25: 166-174 (1984). 
 
83. Cairns, J. In: The Causes of Cancer. Oxford University Press, New York, 
 
1981, p. 1216. 
 
84. Doll, R. and Peto, R. The Causes of Cancer. Oxford University Press, New 
 
York, 1981. 
 
85. Knudson, A. G., Jr. Hereditary cancer, oncogenes, and antioncogenes. 
 
Cancer Res. 45: 1437-1443 (1985). 
 
86. Higginson, J. Population studies in cancer. Acta. Un. Cancer 16: 1667-1670 
 
(1960). 
 
87. Wynder, E. L., and Gori, G. B. Contribution of the environment to cancer 
 
incidence: an epidemiologic exercise. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 58: 825-832 
(1977). 
 
88. Calabrese, E. J. Principles of Animal Extrapolation. John Wiley and Sons, 
 
New York, 1983, pp. 499-527. 
 
89. Allen, B. C., Crump, K. S., and Shipp, A. M. Correlation between car- 
 
cinogenic potency of chemicals in animals and humans. Risk Anal. 8: 
531-544 (1988). 
 
90. Silverberg, S. G. The autopsy and cancer. Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. 108: 
 
476-478 (1984). 
 
PREDICTING THE CARCINOGENICITYOF CHEMICALS IN HUMANS 217 
 
91. Roe, F. J. C. Opinions on animal selection for the assessment of car- 
 
cinogenicity. In: Human Risk Assessment-The Role of Animal Selection 
and Extrapolation (M. V. Roloff, Ed.), Taylor and Francis, Philadelphia, 
1987, pp. 31-44. 
 
92. Roe, F. J. C. Testing for carcinogenicity and the problem of pseudocar- 
 
cinogenicity. Nature 303: 657-658 (1983). 
 
93. Conybeare, G. Effect of quality and quantity of diet on survival and tumour 
 
incidence in outbred Swiss mice. Fd. Cosmet. Toxicol. 18: 65-72 (1980). 
94. Newberne, P. M., and Conner, M. W. The role of dietand nutrition in safety 
 
evaluation of drugs and other chemicals. In: Human Risk Assessment- 
The Role of Animal Selection and Extrapolation (M. V. Roloff, Ed.), Taylor 
and Francis, Philadelphia, 1987, pp. 65-79. 
 
95. Byrd, D. M., Crouch, E. A. C., and Wilson, R. Organ specificity of rodent 
 
tumor induction. Presented at the Society for Risk Analysis Annual 
Meeting, November, 1988, Washington, DC. 
 
96. Busby, W. F., and pgan, G. N. Aflatoxin;s. In: Chemical Carcinogens, Vol. 
 
2 (C. S. Searle, Ed.), ACS Monograph 182, American Chemical Society, 
Washington, DC, 1984, pp. 945-1136. 
 
97. IARC. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to 
 
Humans, Supplement 7: Overall Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Up- 
dating of IARC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42. International Agency for 
Research on Cancer, Lyon, 1987. 
 
98. Yeh, F. -S., Yu, M. C., Mo, C. -C., Luo, S., Tong, M. S., and Henderson, 
 
B. E. Hepatitis B virus, aflatoxins, and hepatocellularcarcinoma in southern 
Guangxi, China. Cancer Res. 49: 2506-2509 (1989). 
 
99. Maltoni, C., and Lefimine, G. Carcinogenicity bioassays of vinyl chloride. 
 
I. Research plan and early results. Environ. Res. 7: 387-405 (1974). 
 
100. Maltoni, C., and Lefemine, G. Carcinogenicity bioassays of vinyl chloride: 
 
current results. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 246: 195-218 (1975). 
 
101. Creech, J. L., and Johnson, M. N. Angiosarcoma of liver in the manufac- 
 
ture of polyvinyl chloride. J. Occup. Med. 16: 150-151 (1974). 
 
102. Hammond, E. C. and Horn, D. Smoking and death rates - report on forty- 
 
four months of follow-up of 187,783 men. Ca-A CancerJ. Clin. 38: 28-58 
(1988). 
 
103. Nicholson, W. J., Henneberger, P. K., and Seidman, H. Occupational hazards 
 
in the VC-PC industry. Prog. Clin. Biol. Res. 141: 155-175 (1984). 
 
104. Tabershaw,I. R., andGaffey, W. R. Mortality studyofworkers inthemanu- 
 
factureofvinylchlorideanditspolymers. J. Occup. Med. 16: 509-518(1974). 
105. Pirastu, R., Comba, P., Reggiani, A., Foa, V., Masina, A., and Maltoni, 
 
C. Mortality from liver disease among Italian vinyl chloride monomer/poly- 
vinyl chloride manufacturers Am. J. Ind. Med. 17: 155-161 (1990). 
 
106. Tomatis, L., Partensky, C., and Montesano, R. The predictive value of 
 
mouse liver tumour induction in carcinogenicity testing-a literature survey. 
Int. J. Cancer 12: 1-20 (1973). 
 
107. Tomatis, L., Agthe, C., Bartsch, H., Huff, J., Montesano, R., Saracci, R., 
 
Walker, E., and Wilbourn, J. Evaluation of the carcinogencity of chemicals: 
a review of the Monograph Program of the International Agency for 
Research on Cancer (1971 to 1977). Cancer Res. 38: 877-885 (1978). 
 
108. Maltoni, C., Ciliberti, A., Cotti, G., Conti, B., and Belpoggi, F. Benzene, 
 
an experimental multipotential carcinogen: results of the long-term 
bioassays performed at the Bologna Institute of Oncology. Environ. Health 
Perspect. 82: 109-124 (1989). 
 
109. Huff, J. E., Haseman, J. K., DeMarini, D. M., Eustis, S., Maronpot, R. 
 
R., Peters, A. C., Persing, R. L., Chrisp, C. E., and Jacobs, A. C. Multiple- 
site carcinogenicity of benzene in Fischer 344 rats and B6C3Fj mice. En- 
viron. Health Perspect. 82: 125-163 (1989). 
 
110. Rinsky, R. A., Smith, A. B., Hornung, R., Filloon, T. G., Young, R. J., 
 
Okun, A. H., and Landrigan, P. J. Benzene and leukemia: an epidemiologic 
risk assessment. N. EngI. J. Med. 316: 1044-1050 (1987). 
 
111. Anderson, E. L., and the Carcinogen Assessment Group of the U.S. En- 
 
vironmental Protection Agency. Quantitative approaches in use to assess 
cancer risk. Risk Anal. 3: 277-295 (1983). 
 
112. Bannasch, P. Sequential cellular changes during chemical carcinogenesis. 
 
J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 108: 11-22 (1984). 
 
113. Bannasch, P., Griesemer, R. A., Anders, F, Becker, R., Cabral, J. R., Della 
 
Porta, G., Feron, V. J., Henschler, D., Ito, N., Kroes, R., Magee, P. N., 
Montesano, R., Napalkov, N. P., Nesnow, S., Rao, G. N., and Wilbourn, 
J. Early preneoplastic lesions. In: Long-Term and Short-Term Assays for 
Carcinogens: A Critical Appraisal, IARC Scientific Publications No. 83, 
International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, 1986, pp. 85-101. 
 
114. Huff, J. E., Eustis, S. L., and Haseman, J. K. Occurrence and relevance 
 
of chemically induced benign neoplasms in long-term carcinogenicity 
studies. Cancer Metastas. Rev. 8: 1-21 (1989). 
 
115. Wilbourn, J., Haroun, L., Heseltine, E., Kaldor, J., Partensky, C., and 
 
Vainio, H. Response of experimental animals to human carcinogens: an 
analysis based upon the IARC Monographs prgramme. Carcinogenesis 7: 
1853-1863 (1986). 
 
116. Ishinishi, N., Yamaoto, A., Hisanaga, A., and Inamasu, T. Tumorigenici- 
 
ty of arsenic trioxide to the lung in Syrian golden hamsters by intermittent 
instillations. Cancer Lett. 21: 141-147 (1983). 
 
117. Pershagen, G., Nordberg, G., and Bjorklund, N. -E. Carcinomas of the 
 
respiratory tract in hamsters given arsenic trioxide and/or benzo[a]pyrene 
by the pulmonary route. Environ. Res. 34: 227-241 (1984). 
 
118. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Assessment of Health Effects of 
 
Benzene Germane to Low-Level Exposure. EPA-600/1-78-061, EPA, 
Washington, DC, 1978. 
 
119. Snyder, C. A., Goldstein, B. D., Sellakumar, A. R., Bromberg, I., Laski, 
 
S., and Albert, R. E. The inhalation toxicology of benzene: incidence of 
hematopoietic neoplasms and hematotoxicity in AKR/J and C57BL16J mice. 
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 54: 323-331 (1980). 
 
120. National Toxicology Program. Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of 
 
Benzene in F344/N Rats and B6C3F, Mice (Gavage Studies). Technical 
Report 289, U.S. Departmentof Health and Human Services, Public Health 
Service, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 1986. 
 
121. Freedman, D. A., and Zeisel, H. From mouse to man: the quantitative 
 
assessment of cancer risks. Stat. Sci. 3: 3-56 (1988). 
 
122. MacMahon, B., Monson, R. R., Wang, H. H., and Zheng, T. A second 
 
follow-up of mortality in a cohort of pesticide applicators. J. Occup. Med. 
30: 429-432 (1988). 
 
123. Enterline, P. E.,and Viren,J. Epidemiologicevidenceforanassociationbe- 
 
tween gasoline and kidney cancer. Environ. Health Perspect. 62: 303-312 
(1985). 
 
124. Wen, C. P. Tsai, S. P., Moffit, K. B., Bondy, M., and Gibson, R. L. 
 
Epidemiological studies of the role of gasoline (hydrocarbon) exposure in 
kidney cancer risk. In: Renal Effects of Petroleum Hydrocarbons (M. A. 
Mehlman, G. P. Hemstreet, J. J. Thorpe, and N. K. Weaver, Eds.), Princeton 
Scientific, Princeton, NJ, 1984, pp. 245-257. 
 
125. Thomas, T. L., Decoufle, P., and Moure-Eraso, R. Mortality among 
 
workers employed in petroleum refining and petrochemical plants. J. Oc- 
cup. Med. 22: 97-103 (1980). 
 
126. MacFarland, H. N., Ulrich, C. E., Holdsworth, C. E., Kitchen, D. N., 
 
Halliwell, W H., and Blum, S. C. A chronic inhalation study with unleaded 
gasoline vapor. J. Am. Coll. Toxicol. 3: 231-248 (1984). 
 
127. Ennever, F. K., Noonan, T. J., and Rosenkranz, H. S. The predictivity of 
 
animal bioassays and short-term genotoxicity tests for carcinogenicity and 
non-carcinogenicity to humans. Mutagenesis 2: 73-78 (1987). 
 
128. Goodman, G., and Wilson, R. W. Quantitative prediction of human cancer 
 
risk from rodent carcinogenic potencies: a closer look at the epidemiological 
evidence for some chemicals not definitively carcinogenic in humans. Regul. 
Toxicol. Pharmacol., in press. 
 
129. Gold, L. S., Sawyer, C. B., Magaw, R., Backman, G. M., de Veciana, M., 
 
Levinson, R., Hooper, N. K., Havender, W. R., Bernstein, L., Peto, R., 
Pike, M. C., and Ames, B. N. A carcinogenic potency database of the stan- 
dardized results of animal bioassays. Environ. Health Perspect. 58: 9-319 
(1984). 
 
130. Gold, L. S., de Veciana, M., Backman, G. M., Magaw, R., Lopipero, P., 
 
Smith, M., Blumenthal, M., Levinson, R., Bernstein, L., and Ames, B. 
N. Chronological supplement to the carcinogenic potency database: stan- 
dardized results of animal bioassays published through December 1982. En- 
viron. Health Perspect. 67: 161-200 (1986). 
 
131. Gold, L. S., Slone, T. H., Backman, G. M., Magaw, R., Da Costa, M., 
 
Lopipero, P., Blumenthal, M., and Ames, B. N. Second chronological sup- 
plement to the carcinogenic potency database: standardized results of animal 
bioassays published though December 1984 and by the National Toxicology 
Program through May 1986. Environ. Health Perspect. 74: 237-329 (1987). 
132. Hottendorf, G. H. Species differences in toxic lesions. In: Human Risk 
 
Assessment-The Role of Animal Selection and Extrapolation (M. V. 
Roloff, Ed.), Taylor and Francis, Philadelphia, 1987, pp. 87-95. 
 
133. Sontag, J. M. Aspects in carcinogen bioassay. In: Origins of Human Cancer 
 
(H. H. Hiatt, J. D. Watson, and J. A. Winstein, Eds.), Cold Spring Harbor 
Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 1977, pp. 1327-1338. 
 
134. Sontag, J. M., Page, N., and Saffioti, U. Guidelines for Carcinogen Bioassay 
 
in Small Rodents. DHEW Publication No. (NIH) 76-801, U.S. Dept. of 
Health, Education and Welfare, Washington, DC, 1976. 
 
135. Purchase, I. F. H. Inter-species comparisons of carcinogenicity. Br. J. 
 
Cancer 41: 454-468 (1980). 
 
218 GOODAMN AND WILSON 
 
136. Gold, L. S., Bernstein, L., Magaw, R., and Slone, T. H. Interspecies ex- 
 
trapolation in carcinogenesis: prediction between rats and mice. Environ. 
Health Perspect. 81: 211-219 (1989). 
 
137. Young, S. S. A blind reanalysis of a random subset of NCI bioassay studies: 
 
agreement between rats and mice. Introduction to Symposium. Fundam. 
Appl. Toxicol. 12: 189-190 (1989). 
 
138. Young, S. S. A blind ranalysis of a random subset of NCI bioassay studies: 
 
agreement between rats and mice. Discussion. Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 12: 
232-241 (1989). 
 
139. Sanathanan, L. P., Lin, C. T., and Carr, R. N. A blind reanalysis of a ran- 
 
dom subset of NCI bioassay studies: do rats predict mice? Fundam. Appl. 
Toxicol. 12: 191-201(1989). 
 
140. Louis, T. A. Analysis of a random sample of 2-year carcinogen bioassays 
 
from the NCI data base. Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 12: 222-231 (1989). 
 
141. Bickis, M., and Krewski, D. Statistical issues in the analysis of the long- 
 
term carcinogenicity bioassay in small rodents: an empirical evaluation of 
statistical decision rules. Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 12: 202-221 (1989). 
 
142. Haseman, J. K. Use of statistical decision rules for evaluating laboratory 
 
animalcarcinogenicity studies. Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 14: 637-648(1990). 
143. Metzger, B., Crouch, E., and Wllson, R. Onthe relationshipbetween car- 
 
cinogenicity and acute toxicity. Risk Anal. 9: 169-177 (1989). 
 
144. Rieth, J. P., and Starr, T. B. Chronicbioassays: relevancetoquantitativerisk 
 
assessmentofcarcinogens. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 10: 160-173 (1989). 
145. Gaylor, D. W., and Chen, J. J. Relative potency of chemical carcinogens in 
 
rodents. Risk Anal. 6: 283-290 (1986). 
 
146. Chen, J. J., and Gaylor, D. W. Carcinogenic risk assessment: comparison 
 
of estimated safe doses for rats and mice. Environ. Health Perspect. 72: 
305-309 (1987). 
 
147. Clayson, D. B., and Krewski, D. International Commission for Protection 
 
against Environmental Mutagens and Carcinogens (ICPEMC) Publication 
No. 3, The concept of negativity in experimental carcinogenesis. Mutat. 
Res. 167: 233-240 (1986). 
 
148. Zeise, L., Wilson, R., and Crouch, E. Use of acute toxicity toestimate car- 
 
cinogenic risk. Risk Anal. 4: 187-199 (1984). 
 
149. Zeise, L., Crouch, E. A. C., and Wilson, R. Reply to comments: on the 
 
relationship of toxicity and carcinogenicity. Risk Anal. 5: 265-270 (1985). 
 
150. Zeise, L., Crouch, E. A. C., and Wilson, R. A possible relationship be- 
 
tween toxicity and carcinogenicity. J. Am. Coil. Toxicol. 5: 137-151 (1986). 
151. Parodi, S., Taningher, M., Boero, P., and Santi, L. Quantitative correla- 
 
tions amongst alkaline DNA fragmentation, DNA cWalent binding, muta- 
genicity inthe Ames testand carcinogenicity. Mutat. Res. 93: 1-24 (1982). 
152. Clayson, D. B. International Commission for Protection against 
 
Environmental Mutagens and Carcinogens (ICPEMC) Publication No. 13, 
The need for biological risk assessment in reaching decisions about 
carcinogens. Mutat. Res. 185: 243-269 (1987). 
 
153. Clayson, D. B. Needs for biological risk assessment in interspecies 
 
extrapolation. Environ. Health Perspect. 77: 93-97 (1988). 
 
154. Tennant, R. W., Stasiewicz, S., and Spalding, J. W Comparison of multiple 
 
parameters of rodent carcinogenicity and in vitro genetic toxicity. Environ. 
Mutagen. 8: 205-227 (1986). 
 
155. Ashby, J. Fundamental structural alerts to potential carcinogenicity or non- 
 
carcinogenicity.,Environ. Mutagen. 7: 919-921(1985). 
 
156. Ward, J. M., Griesemer, R. A., and Weisburger, E. K. The mouse liver 
 
tumor as an endpoint in carcinogenesis tests. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
51: 389-397 (1979). 
 
157. Reddy, J. K., and Azamoff, D. L. Hypolipidaemic hepatic peroxisome pro- 
 
liferators form a novel class of chemical carcinogens. Nature 283: 397-398 
(1980). 
 
158. Maronpot, R. R., Haseman, J. K., Boorman, G. A., Eustis, S. E., Rao, 
 
G. N., and Huff, J. E. Liver lesions in B6C3Fj mice: the National Tox- 
icology Program, experience and position. Arch. Toxicol. (suppl.) 10: 
10-26 (1987). 
 
159. National Primary Drinking Water Regulations. Fed. Reg. 44: 68641 (1979). 
160. National Primary Drinking Wter Regulations. Fed. Reg. 52: 20674 (1987). 
161. Proposed Rule. Fed. Reg. 39: 42748 (1974). 
 
162. National Academy of Sciences. Health Effects of Chemical Pesticides. 
 
Report of the Consultative Panel on Health Hazards of Chemical Pesticides, 
Vol. 1. National Academy of Sciences Press, Washington, DC, 1975, pp. 
67-87. 
 
163. Lyon, J. L., Gardner, J. W., and West, D. W Cancer incidence in Mormons 
 
and non-Mormons in Utah during 1967-75. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 65: 
1055-1061 (1980).