253envhperEnvironmental Health PerspectivesEnviron Health PerspectAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC1131857211318572113185723913309410.1289/EHP14055Effects of Naphtho[2,1-a]pyrene Exposure on CYP1A1 Expression: An in Vivo and in Vitro Mechanistic Study Exploring the Role of Posttranscriptional Modification
ShenJiemiao WangLi ZhangWen GongXing LiSheng ZouXuyan ChenChao XiaRong ZhangDi XuShuyu XuJiayi WangShaozhuo JiangYinyue SunHong WangChao WangShou-Lin 
1Key Lab of Modern Toxicology of Ministry of Education, Center for Global Health, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
2State Key Lab of Reproductive Medicine and Offspring Health, Institute of Toxicology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
3Institute of Environment and Health, Jiangsu Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China✉Address correspondence to Shou-Lin Wang. Email: wangshl@njmu.edu.cn. And Chao Wang. Email: wangchao@njmu.edu.cn
✉Corresponding author.
128202413280870030870031282024EHP is an open-access journal published with support from the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health. All content is public domain unless otherwise noted.

## Abstract

## Background:
Currently, many emerging polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) have been found to be widely present in the environment. However, little has been reported about their toxicity, particularly in relation to CYP1A1.

## Objectives:
This study aimed to explore the toxicity of naphtho[2,1-a]pyrene (N21aP) and elucidate the mechanism underlying N21aP-induced expression of CYP1A1.

## Methods:
The concentration and sources of N21aP were detected and analyzed by gas chromatography–triple quadrupole mass spectrometry (GC-MS/MS) and diagnostic ratio analysis. Then the effects of CYP1A1 on the toxicity of N21aP were conducted in male wild-type (WT) and Cyp1a1 knockout mice exposed to N21aP (0.02, 0.2, and ) through intratracheal instillation. Further, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) pathway was examined through luciferase and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. -methyladenosine ( ) modification levels were measured on global RNA and specifically on CYP1A1 mRNA using dot blotting and methylated RNA immunoprecipitation-quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (MeRIP qRT-PCR), with validation by inhibitors, DAA and SAH. sites on CYP1A1 were identified by bioinformatics and luciferase assays, and CYP1A1 mRNA’s interaction with IGF2BP3 was confirmed by RNA pull-down, luciferase, and RNA binding protein immunoprecipitation (RIP) assays.

## Results:
N21aP was of the same environmental origin as benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) but was more stably present in the environment. N21aP could be metabolically activated by CYP1A1 to produce epoxides, causing DNA damage and further leading to lung inflammation. Importantly, in addition to the classical AhR pathway (i.e., BaP), N21aP also induced CYP1A1 expression with a posttranscriptional modification of in CYP1A1 mRNA via the METTL14–IGF2BP3–CYP1A1 axis. Specifically, in the two recognition sites of METTL14 on the CYP1A1 mRNA transcript (position at 2700 and 5218), a methylation site (position at 5218) in the 3′-untranslated region (UTR) was recognized by IGF2BP3, enhanced the stability of CYP1A1 mRNA, and finally resulted in an increase in CYP1A1 expression.

## Discussion:
This study systematically demonstrated that in addition to AhR-mediated transcriptional regulation, N21aP, had a new additional mechanism of -mediated posttranscriptional modification, jointly contributing to CYP1A1 expression. Given that PAHs are the metabolic substrates of CYP1A1, this study not only helps to understand the significance of environment–genetic interactions for the toxicity of PAHs but also helps to better understand the health risks of the emerging PAHs at environmental exposure levels. https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP14055

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoSupplemental Material is available online (https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP14055).
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Note to readers with disabilities:
EHP strives to ensure that all journal content is accessible to all readers. However, some figures and Supplemental Material published in EHP articles may not conform to 508 standards due to the complexity of the information being presented. If you need assistance accessing journal content, please contact ehpsubmissions@niehs.nih.gov. Our staff will work with you to assess and meet your accessibility needs within 3 working days.

Received 2023 Sep 25; Revised 2024 Jun 28; Accepted 2024 Jul 23; Collection date 2024 Aug.

## Introduction
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are organic compounds primarily derived from natural processes, such as forest and brush fires, as well as anthropogenic activities, including outdoor industrial and vehicular emissions and indoor cigarette smoke. , Cooking methods, such as grilling, roasting, and frying, are also significant sources of PAHs, particularly in indoor settings, such as restaurants and kitchens. , Human exposure to PAHs can occur through various routes, including inhalation, dermal contact, and dietary intake, with respiratory inhalation and dietary intake being the main pathways. Often, these exposure routes overlap, leading to widespread adverse health effects. , 
Generally, PAHs can be divided into three groups according to the number of aromatic rings: low molecular weight (LMW, 2–3 rings), medium molecular weight (MMW, 4 rings), and high molecular weight (HMW, 5–6 rings). A study on PAHs exposure in the Beijing population revealed that of LMW-PAHs were acquired through dietary intake, whereas the majority of HMW-PAHs were absorbed through inhalation, constituting 57%. LMW-PAHs, being less lipophilic, are easily excreted from the body. In contrast, HMW-PAHs exhibit high lipophilicity, increasing the probability of retention in the terminal bronchioles and alveoli, thereby posing significant health risks. Of the 16 US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) priority-controlled PAHs, all HMW-PAHs [benzo[b]fluoranthene (BbF), benzo[k]fluoranthene (BkF), benzo[a]pyrene (BaP), dibenzo[a,h]anthracene (DBahA), and indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene (IcdP)], except benzo[ghi]perylene (BghiP), are considered probable carcinogens. Recently, HMW-PAHs with a molecular weight of 302 (MW302) have been studied. They contained chemicals with more mutagenic structures from different sources, such as exhaust gas and gasoline vehicle combustion. , The mutagenic activity of PAHs with MW302 in urban airborne particles accounted for 33% of the total mutagenic activity of PAHs in human lymphoblast cells. In fact, some MW302-PAHs were more mutagenic or carcinogenic than priority PAHs, such as dibenzo[a,l]pyrene (DBalP). DBalP is a particularly strong mutagen with a 30-fold relative potency factor (RPF) of BaP and is classified by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) as probably carcinogenic to humans (Group 2A). Other isomers of DBalP, such as dibenzo[a,i]pyrene (DBaiP) and dibenzo[a,h]pyrene (DBahP), are classified as possibly carcinogenic to humans (Group 2B) (https://monographs.iarc.who.int/list-of-classifications). However, to date, toxicity research on MW302-PAH is limited primarily to several dibenzopyrenes. Therefore, a considerable number of PAHs have unknown toxicity, and the 16 priority-controlled PAHs are far from sufficient to assess the health risks of PAHs in the environment.
PAHs are widely recognized for their carcinogenic, teratogenic, and mutagenic properties and have been established as a risk factor for various respiratory diseases, including inflammation, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and lung cancer. – Research indicates that the majority of PAHs undergo metabolic activation by the cytochrome P450 enzyme (CYP450) to produce epoxide and quinone metabolites, which are the primary contributors to their toxicity and carcinogenic effects. CYP1A1 is typically considered the principal and predominant metabolizing enzyme for PAHs and has abundant expression in the lungs. , Noteworthily, PAHs are known inducers of CYP1A1, which is in turn responsible for the metabolism and activation of PAHs. Thus, there are fascinating interactions between CYP1A1 and PAHs. On one hand, CYP1A1 can metabolically activate PAHs, leading to enhanced toxicity and even carcinogenicity. Animal models revealed that CYP1A1 was essential for the metabolism of BaP to benzo[a]pyrenediolepoxide (BPDE), which binds to DNA to form DNA adducts, leading to DNA damage. , BPDE-DNA adducts have also been detected in the serum of children diagnosed with pulmonary diseases and showing a significant positive correlation with DNA strand breaks. DBalP, one of the MW302 PAHs, can be metabolically activated by CYP1A1 to produce DNA adducts with times the genotoxicity of BaP. Alternatively, PAHs can induce the expression of CYP1A1, which may be another vital reason for the enhanced toxicity. At low concentrations, BaP induces CYP1A1 expression, which in turn enhances the metabolic activation of BaP by increasing the formation of B[a]PDE-N2-dG adducts, and often leads to an increase in cell toxicity and DNA damage in BEAS-2B cells. Therefore, higher CYP1A1 expression may be a key factor in the toxic effects of PAHs.
In our previous study, we investigated the relationship between nearly 100 PAHs and CYP1A1, including 16 priority-controlled PAHs, and found that the molecular weight and ring arrangement largely influenced the metabolic activity of CYP1A1 and the toxicity of PAHs. Among them, naphtho[2,1-a]pyrene (N21aP), a 6-ring HMW-PAH with MW302, showed strong CYP1A1 metabolic and mutagenic activity. N21aP has one more aromatic ring than BaP and is mainly derived from the high-temperature combustion of coal or wood. A previous study of particulate matter in aerodynamic diameter ( ) concentration in Beijing preliminarily showed that the N21aP was measured in the urban air samples at a level of one-third that of BaP. Simultaneously, a study also showed that N21aP was highly mutagenic, and its mutagenicity was comparable to that of BaP using an h1A1v2 cell line, a line of human B-lymphoblastoid. The mutagenicity risk of PAHs, depending on the angle-condensation of the “bay region” (phenanthrene structure) and the “fjord region” (pyrene structure), were also identified in our previous study, and PAHs with these structures are more easily metabolized by CYP1A1 to form epoxide products, resulting in mutagenic effects. Therefore, the strong mutagenicity of N21aP is most likely caused by CYP1A1 metabolism. Meanwhile, a study found the induction of CYP1A1 by BaP was critical to the toxicity of BaP in BEAS-2B cells. Based on the structural similarity of BaP, N21aP probably also plays a role in the induction of CYP1A1; however, to date, no relevant studies have been reported.
Among the various regulatory pathways involved in the expression of CYP1A1 by PAHs, the AhR pathway stands out as the most well established, given that the majority of PAHs such as BaP, BkF, benzo[a]anthracene (BaA), BbF, functioned as AhR ligands to activate the AhR in HepG2 cells. The CYP1A1 promoter contains eight exogenous response elements (XREs) that are used by AhR activation, thereby underscoring the crucial role played by AhR in the regulation of the CYP1A gene. A previous study using BEAS-2B cells showed that BaP induces the expression of CYP1A1 through the AhR pathway. As a PAH, it needs to be investigated whether N21aP can also regulate CYP1A1 expression through the AhR pathway.
Transcriptional regulation and posttranscriptional regulation are two fundamental mechanisms implicated in the regulation of gene expression. Although transcriptional regulation primarily governs gene regulation, posttranscriptional regulation acts as an additional and consequential layer of regulation. Gene expression can be posttranscriptionally regulated through dynamic and reversible RNA modifications. Similar to posttranslational modifications of proteins, RNA posttranscriptional modifications play a crucial role in regulating significant aspects of RNA function. Recently, RNA methylation, particularly the -methyladenosine ( ) modification, has emerged as a prominent area of research within the realm of posttranscriptional modifications. Among the numerous RNA modifications identified, stands out as the most prevalent internal mRNA modification, with an average occurrence of 1–2 methylation sites per 2,000 nucleotides in mammalian cells, such as HepG2 cells (a human liver cancer cell line). , 
 -mediated mRNA stabilization is a vital part of the posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression. However, despite the identification of the involvement of modification in regulating the expression of CYP enzymes, such as CYP1B1, the specific role of modification in the regulation of CYP1A1 expression by PAHs remains unexplored. The presence of numerous modification sites on CYP1A1 mRNA implies that modification may serve as an additional significant mechanism through which PAHs regulate CYP1A1 expression. Consequently, it is imperative to conduct further investigations to elucidate the role of modification in PAH-induced CYP1A1 expression.
This study aimed to provide a more comprehensive understanding of CYP1A1 in the metabolic activation of N21aP as a kind of HMW-PAH, which is of particular interest owing to their enhanced stability and greater affinity for adsorption in and subsequent likelihood of higher accumulation in lung tissue. In particular, apart from the well-known AhR pathway, a novel mechanism of modification underlying CYP1A1 expression regulated by N21aP was further explored. This study not only contributes to a novel comprehension of the toxicity of HMW-PAHs but also offers a better understanding of the significant role of CYP1A1 induction in the health risks of PAHs, even at exposure levels in realistic environments.

## Materials and Methods

## Chemicals, Reagents, and the Synthesis of N21aP
The chemicals and reagents used in the present study are listed in Table S1. N21aP was synthesized according to our previous study. The specific synthesis diagram of N21aP is detailed in Figure S1. Briefly, to a solution of pyrene ( ) and bis(pinacolato)diboron ( ; ) in hexane ( ), a mixture of (1,5-cyclooctadiene)(methoxy)iridium(I) dimer ([{Ir(m-OMe)cod}2]; ), 4,4′-di-tert-butyl-2,2′-bipyridine (dtbpy; ), ( ), and hexane ( ) was added and stirred at 80°C for 5 h under a nitrogen atmosphere, which afford 4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-2-pyren-2-yl-[1,3,2]dioxaborolane[2-(Bpin) pyrene] (P1-1). Then tetrahydrofuran (THF; ) and water ( ) containing sodium carbonate ( ; ) was added to 2-bromobenzaldehyde ( ) and P1-1 ( ), and the mixture was purged with nitrogen gas. The resulting solution was combined with palladium [tetrakis(triphenylphosphine)palladium ; ], refluxed at 90°C for 11 h, and kept still overnight to afford 2-(pyren-2-yl) benzaldehyde (P1-2). After these steps, to a solution of methoxymethyltriphenyl-phosphonium chloride ( ) in dry THF ( ), a solution of potassium tert-butoxide (t-BuOK; ) in THF, was added at 0°C. After stirring for 30 min, a solution of P1-2 ( ) in THF ( ) was added dropwise and stirred at 20°C for 2 h to afford 2-(2-(2-methoxyvinyl) phenyl) pyrene (P1-3). Finally, to a solution of P1-3 ( ) in dichloromethane ( ; ), 5 drops of methanesulfonic acid ( ) were added. Then, the reaction mixture was stirred at 20°C overnight, which was then purified by chromatography on a silica gel column (200–300 mesh silica gel, Synthware) to afford N21aP.
The purity of synthesized N21aP was identified by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, Ultimate 3000) and is presented in Figure S2. Briefly, kromasil 100-5-C18 column ( , , AkzoNobel) protected by a C18-guard column ( , , ThermoFisher) was chosen for the separation at 35°C and detected via ultraviolet (UV) detection at 290 nm. The acetonitrile (A) and water containing 0.2% (vol/vol) of acetic acid (B) were respectively used as the mobile phases. The mobile phase was pumped at a flow rate of with an isogradient elution of 88% A– B for 28 min.

## PAH Detection and Source Analysis

## Preparation of the atmospheric samples.
 samples were collected from December 2018 to November 2019 in 13 cities in Jiangsu, a province located in east China, a choice which was derived from one of the annual routine programs of air quality monitoring by Jiangsu Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention (Jiangsu CDC), China. Atmospheric sampling was conducted for consecutive days at each monitoring site of each month, with a sampling time of not less than 20 h per day. The height the sampler was placed from the ground was set at the height range of the normal activities of the crowd, and the prescribed requirement was . A glass fiber membrane suitable for the detection of organic matter was used in sampling. The samples were stored in a freezer at for subsequent analysis.

## Preparation of the particulate matter of fuel oil, biomass, and coal.
The samples of fuel oil (93 octane petrol, 97 octane petrol, and light diesel oil) and biomass (wheat straw, rice straw, and soybean straw) combustion were provided by Jianmin Chen (Department of Environmental Science & Engineering, Fudan University, China). Briefly, the particles of fuel oil were collected using a wick burner positioned under a semi-enclosed cylindrical glass cover that provided an ample particle-free air supply. Each combustion experiment of the different fuels was conducted for 10 min and repeated at least three times. For the analysis of organic carbon and PAHs, particles emitted from the combustion of fuel oils were captured using a quartz fiber filter (Whatman). For the biomass fuel samples, the combustion chamber consisted of a steel cube and a conical platform. The air inlet incorporated filters to remove particles from incoming ambient air. A square combustion platform was set at the center of the chamber’s bottom and was slightly elevated above the top of the filter to ensure ample exposure of biomass straw to fresh air during combustion. An exhaust tube was situated at the top of the combustion unit, featuring a port near its end for monitoring and sampling purposes. The biomass straws (rice, wheat, and soybean) were collected from suburban regions in Jiangsu Province, totaling of biomass residue placed horizontally on the square platform to facilitate ignition. During combustion, biomass undergoes 5–10 min of flaming and smoldering phases. samples were collected by using quartz filters (Tissuquartz, Pall Corp.) at a flow rate of . 
 samples from coal combustion, including bituminous coal and anthracite coal, were prepared by our laboratory. Briefly, the sampler (TH-150 F, Wuhan Tianhong Environmental Protection Industry Co., Ltd.) was placed at a distance of from the combustion point at a sampling height of . After ignition of bituminous and anthracite coal (from Taiyuan, China) for 30 min via charcoal stove (XINAISHI), was collected by prebaked glass fiber film ( diameter, Membrane Solutions) and frozen at for subsequent analysis.

## PAH Extraction, Detection, and Analysis
The samples were extracted and analyzed according to a previous method. One-sixteenth of the sampled membranes were extracted in an ultrasonic bath with dichloromethane (DCM):acetonitrile (ACN) (90:10, vol/vol) three times. The extracts were filtered through syringe filters ( , Biosharp) to remove insoluble particles and were dried by nitrogen sweeping and reconstituted in DCM. Subsequently, the extracts were submitted to commercial solid phase extraction (SPE) cartridges SupelMIP SPE-PAHs (Bellefonte) for clean-up, and finally of DCM was added for resolution.
Gas chromatography–triple quadrupole mass spectrometry (GC-MS/MS, TSQ 8000, ThermoFisher) was performed to detect PAHs, including MW302-PAHs, BaP, fluorene (Flu), pyrene (Pyr), and BghiP. The redissolved extracts were separated by a DB-EUPAH capillary column ( length inner diameter film thickness, Agilent Technologies) with helium carrier gas at . The temperature was initially held at 135°C for 1 min, raised to 280°C at 20 min, maintained for 30 min, raised to 290°C at 5 min, and maintained for 13 min, raised to 300°C at 15 min, and maintained for 9.5 min. The injector temperature was set at 300°C. A sample was injected using the splitless injection mode. The MS was operated in electron ionization with electron energy of 70 eV. The ion source and transmission line temperatures were all set at 300°C. Argon (99.999%) was used as the collision gas. For multiple reaction monitoring optimization, the precursor ion was dissociated to produce the quantifier ion and qualifier ion. The quantitative ion pairs for LMW-PAHs and HMW-PAHs were to with 27 eV and to with 30 eV, respectively. The qualitative ion pairs for LMW-PAHs and HMW-PAHs were to with 30 eV and to with 35 eV, respectively. The recovery and detection limits of PAHs are listed in Table S2. The solvent blank was analyzed to assess potential carryover and system contamination. All peaks in the solvent blanks were required to be below the detection limits of all analyses.
Several methodologies, including principal component analysis (PCA), UNMIX, and positive matrix factorization, have been developed to enhance the source attribution of PAHs owing to their unique emission signatures. In this study, we employed PCA to explore the potential sources of MW302-PAHs in , leveraging the distinct compositions of these compounds. To conduct the analysis, we used the Xcalibur software and targeted ion pairs at to for the chromatographic profiling of the 34 MW302-PAHs in laboratory-combusted fuel oil, biomass, coal, and samples. To ensure comparability, we normalized the peak area of each MW302-PAH by dividing it by the total peak area of all 34 PAHs, reflecting the relative abundance of each compound within the samples. The processed data was then subjected to PCA using Simca software (version 14.1; Umetrics), with a focus on the MW302-PAH content in samples to differentiate between characteristic source profiles.
The diagnostic ratio (DR) of PAHs is a widely recognized and versatile tool for source identification across various environments. This method offers numerous advantages, with its ease of interpretation being paramount compared with other available methods. DRs related to PAHs from various sources have been well established and widely applied. For instance, the Flu/ ratio discriminates between combustion and petroleum sources, with a petroleum limit at 0.40; ratios between 0.40 and 0.50 indicate fossil fuel combustion, whereas those suggest grass, wood, or coal combustion. Similarly, the BaP/BghiP ratio separates traffic from nontraffic sources, with a nontraffic threshold at 0.60, and ratios greater than this value denote traffic-related emissions. However, insufficient attention has been given to HMW-PAHs in current environmental studies, resulting in a lack of reference values for DRs based on HMW-PAHs. To address this gap and improve specificity, the present study aimed to establish key DRs for MW302-PAHs by analyzing laboratory-combusted fuel oil, biomass, and coal to trace the origin of HMW-PAHs in . The analysis focused on the peak areas of MW302-PAHs (peaks 1–34), selecting a peak area ratio that effectively distinguished between the three combustion sources, which was then adopted as the DR value. This screened DR was subsequently employed for tracing the samples.

## In Vivo Mouse Model Assay
For the animal experiments, 8-wk-old male wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 mice (22–25 g) were purchased from Nanjing Medical University. Male mice were selected for the present study to mitigate the impact of the estrous cycle’s stage on female mice and the effect of estrogen on the experimental outcomes. 
Cyp1a1 knockout (KO; Cyp1a1−/−) mice with a C57BL/6 background were entrusted to Bangyao Bio for construction using CRISPR-Cas9 technology in our previous study. Briefly, the mouse Cyp1a1 gene comprises seven exons, with protein translation initiated from exon 2 and concluding at exon 7. Thus, exon 2 was selected as the target region. Two guide RNAs (gRNAs) were designed near exon 2, and the one with superior prediction scores for minimal off-target effects was chosen. The sequences of the selected gRNAs were as follows: Cyp1a1−/−–single guide RNA1 (sgRNA1): GCTGTCACCGTATTCTGCCTTGG; Cyp1a1−/−–sgRNA2: CCAACGTTATGACCATGATGACC. Cas9 mRNA and sgRNAs were mixed and injected into the cytoplasm of fertilized mouse eggs to generate specific mouse embryonic cells. Surviving fertilized eggs were subsequently transferred into the fallopian tubes of pseudopregnant mice to produce offspring. All animals were housed in the Animal Core Facility of Nanjing Medical University (Nanjing, China). The animal procedures were approved by the institutional review board of Nanjing Medical University (No. 2003001). The animals were allowed to ingest water and food ad libitum and were housed in a 12 h:12 h light/dark cycle with a relative humidity of and a temperature of . The feeding and the experimental operations on animals were in accordance with the animal welfare requirements. At the end of the N21aP exposure, the mice were euthanized with carbon dioxide to collect serum, bronchoalveolar lavage fluids (BALFs), and tissues. The samples were stored at for subsequent analysis.
This study included three independent animal experiments. In experiment 1, WT mice ( per group) were administered three concentrations of N21aP (0.02, 0.2, ) through intratracheal instillation to evaluate a dose-dependent induction of lung CYP1A1. Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) was used as a control at an equivalent volume. The lower exposure of N21aP was considered based on the environmental levels of N21aP from the previous studies in Beijing, as well as the reference to the standards of BaP (GB3095-2012). Twenty-four hours after exposure, the mice were euthanized and the lung tissues were collected. In experiment 2, a subacute animal experiment was performed to evaluate the toxicity of N21aP. WT and Cyp1a1–/– mice ( per group) were treated with N21aP through intratracheal instillation twice a week for 4 wk, and the same volume of PBS was used as a control. After 24 h of the final whole-body plethysmography (WBP) measurement, the mice were euthanized and the serum, BALFs, and lung tissues were collected. In experiment 3, three concentrations of N21aP (0.02, 0.2, ) were used to investigate whether inflammatory outcomes were dose dependent. WT mice ( per group) were exposed to N21aP by continuous 6-d intratracheal instillation, and the same volume of PBS was used as a control. Twenty-four hours after the last treatment of N21aP, the mice were euthanized and the serum, BALFs, and lung tissues were collected.

## Assessment of Lung Function in Mice
The respiratory function in awake and freely moving mice was analyzed using WBP (Buxco Electronics Inc.) as described previously. One measurement of mice lung function was performed 24 h after the last treatment of N21aP. Briefly, WT or Cyp1a1–/– mice (with or without N21aP treatment, /group) were acclimated for 20 min in the cavity. Then, unrestrained mice were monitored for 10 min. Respiratory frequency (fR), enhanced pause (Penh), pause (PAU), and expiratory time (Te) were evaluated.

## Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay of Inflammatory Cytokines
The BALFs and serum of mice were collected for enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Whole blood taken by eyeball removal were collected from mice ( /group) and allowed to stand at room temperature for 2 h before being centrifuged at for 30 min. The supernatant was stored at for subsequent analysis. BALF of mice was collected according to our previous study. In brief, the left bronchus was ligated, and the right lung was infused with of ice-cold PBS three consecutive times ( /group). Subsequently, the collected BALF was centrifuged at for 10 min, and the supernatant was stored at for further use.
The levels of the inflammatory cytokine interleukin-1 (IL-1 ) or IL-6 ( /group) were measured using a mouse IL-1 ELISA kit (HS1069-Mu, Hengyuan Biotech Co. Ltd.) or a mouse IL-6 ELISA kit (HS1057-Mu, Hengyuan Biotech Co. Ltd.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The absorbance was measured at 450 nm using a microplate reader (Infinite M200 PRO, TECAN). The sample concentration was calculated based on the standard curve.

## Hematoxylin–Eosin Staining of Lung Tissue from Mice
Consistent with prior intratracheal instillation experiments on mice, , the right caudal lobe was excised for Western blotting and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis. The left lung lobe was fixed by perfusion with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA, BL539A, Biosharp), and -thick paraffin-embedded sections of mouse lung tissues were stained with a hematoxylin–eosin (H&E) Staining Kit (C0105S, Beyotime) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. H&E sections were examined using slide scans (Pannoramic Scan and Viewer, 3D Histech) to view the images.

## RNA Extraction and qRT-PCR
Mouse lung tissues were isolated using RNA Isolater Total RNA Extraction Reagent (R401-01, Vazyme) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The concentration and quality of RNA were assessed using NanoDrop (ThermoFisher), with an optical density (OD)260/OD280 ratio falling within the range of 1.8–2.0 deemed acceptable. Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized using HiScript II Q RT Supermix for qPCR (R222-01, Vazyme). To analyze the relative mRNA expression levels, qRT-PCR was performed using ChamQ Universal SYBR qPCR Master Mix (Q711-02, Vazyme) with a LightCycler 96 (Roche, Switzerland). The PCR program is presented in Table S3. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) expression was used as the internal control; subsequently, relative mRNA expression levels were calculated using the 2–△△Ct method. The primer sequences in this article were commissioned to be synthesized by Generay and are presented in Table S4.

## Western Blotting
Mouse lung tissues were homogenized in lysis buffer (P0013, Beyotime) to extract total protein. The protein concentrations were detected by a Bicinchoninic Acid Protein Quantification Kit (E112-01, Vazyme). Proteins ( ) were subsequently transferred to a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane (ISEQ00010, , Millipore) after separation on 10%/12.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Nonspecific binding sites were blocked for 1 h with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA, ST023, Beyotime) at room temperature. The membranes were then incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C, followed by incubation with peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch) for 1 h at room temperature. After a 2-h wash with tris-buffered saline (ST663, Beyotime) containing 0.1% Tween-20 (TBST), the bands were imaged using the Enhanced Chemiluminescence Kit (E411-05, Vazyme) and detected with a Chemiluminescent Imaging System (Tanon). Finally, the relative quantification of the detected protein was analyzed using Image J software (version 2.1.0), with GAPDH expression serving as the internal reference. Detailed information on the antibodies used in this study is listed in Table S5.

## S9 Preparation and CYP1A1 Activity Assays
WT and Cyp1a1–/– mice ( per genotype) were employed for the study, with their liver S9 fractions isolated following a 3-d treatment regimen. Mice were administered 
 -naphthoflavone ( -NF, N3633, Sigma-Aldrich), a known inducer of CYP1A1 enzyme activity, via continuous gavage. The livers of the mice were used for extraction. Initially, the livers were continually rinsed with a precooled potassium chloride (KCl) solution to eliminate hemoglobin-mediated inhibition of microsomal enzyme activity. Liver homogenates were then prepared by adding of a KCl solution per gram of liver using the Tissuelyser (Grinder-48, GallopTech). Subsequently, the homogenates were centrifuged at for 15 min at 4°C to obtain the S9 fraction in the supernatant. A portion of this fraction was analyzed for CYP1A1 activity, and the remainder was partitioned and stored at for further use.
CYP1A1 activity was evaluated using the ethoxyresorufin- -deethylase (EROD) assay kit (GMS18017.1, Genmed Scientifics Inc.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In a black 96-well plate, of buffer, of reaction solution, and of substrate solution were mixed. Subsequently, of either the standard solution or S9 samples were added to each well, followed by a 10-min incubation at 37°C in the dark. Fluorescence intensity was measured with a microplate reader (Infinite M200 PRO, TECAN) at an excitation wavelength of 530 nm and an emission wavelength of 590 nm. The activity values of the S9 samples were then determined based on the standard curve.

## Ames Test
The Ames test was performed according to our previous study. Briefly, the frozen Salmonella typhimurium strain TA98 strain (BeNa Culture Collection) was inoculated into nutrient broth medium and incubated at 37°C on a shaker at 180 revolutions per minute (rpm) for 10 h to reach logarithmic growth. Subsequently, of TA98 bacterial solution, of N21aP (0.5-, 1-, 2.5-, 5-, /plate) and of 10% S-9 mixture of WT or Cyp1a1–/– mice were added to the top agar. Then, the top agar was quickly mixed and poured into the bottom petri dish, and was incubated aseptically at 37°C for 48 h. The results of mutagenesis were judged according to the frequency of revertant colonies.

## Reduced Glutathione Conjugate of Epoxides of N21aP
The epoxide was reported to conjugate with reduced glutathione (GSH), form adducts with sulfhydryl groups in cellular proteins or be further converted to reactive quinones, diepoxides, and diol epoxides. The conjugation of GSH was performed as previously described. Briefly, GSH capture was prepared in a reaction mixture ( ) with GSH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) regenerating system (011700.02, IPHASE), and 2% liver S9 of WT or Cyp1a1–/– mice (the same S9 used as above) and N21aP. Then, the reaction was incubated at 37°C for 1 h and was terminated by adding of ice-cold ACN. Subsequently, the incubated mixture was centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was analyzed by HPLC-MS/MS (Q Exactive HF, ThermoFisher). The redissolved extracts were separated by a Hypersil GOLD C18 column ( , , ThermoFisher) at 20°C. Methanol was increased from 5% to 95% in 16 min by using methanol and water as mobile phases. Positive electrospray ionization mode was used for mass spectrometry, and the spray voltage was .

## In Vitro Cellular Assay

## Cell culture and treatment.
Human bronchial epithelial cells (HBEs), human embryonic kidney (HEK)‐293 cells, and HepG2 cells were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). HBE cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM, BC-M-005, Biochannel). HEK-293 cells and HepG2 cells were cultured in Eagle’s Minimum Essential Medium (EMEM, 320-006, WISENT). All media were supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; BC-SE-FBS01, Biochannel), penicillin, and streptomycin (C0222, Beyotime). Cells were cultured at 37°C and 5% and no mycoplasma contamination was detected (Figure S3) using the Myco-Lumi Luminescent Mycoplasma Detection Kit for High Sensitivity Instrument (C0298S, Beyotime) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The chemiluminescence meter (BERTHOLD, Centro LB 960) was used for the detection. Notably, the ratio B/A indicates the contamination of mycoplasma, and the ratio B/A indicates no mycoplasma contamination.
N21aP or BaP was added to the culture medium according to the concentration of treatment. To inhibit methylation, HBE cells were pretreated with 3-deazaadenosine (DAA, a methylation inhibitor, ) for 6 h or -adenosylhomocysteine (SAH, an inhibitor of the METTL3–METTL14 heterodimer complex, ) for 24 h. Then, the experiments were conducted after 24 h of cell culture.

## Immunofluorescence analysis.
Treated cells were fixed with 4% PFA for 30 min. Nonspecific binding sites were blocked for 1 h by 2% BSA at room temperature. Subsequently, primary antibodies were applied to cells overnight at 4°C. Samples were incubated with fluorophore-labeled secondary antibody for 1 h at 37°C. Nuclei were stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; C1005, Beyotime) for 10 min. The images were detected using a laser confocal microscope (Zeiss, LSM700B). Detailed information on the antibodies is listed in Table S5.

## Nuclear and cytoplasmic protein extraction.
A nuclear and cytoplasmic protein extraction kit (P0027, Beyotime) was employed to separate the nuclear and cytosolic fractions in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. HBE cells ( cells) were treated with N21aP for 0, 12, and 24 h, then rinsed with PBS and harvested by centrifugation. The cytoplasmic fraction was isolated by adding Cytoplasmic Extraction Reagent A with phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), followed by a 15-min incubation on ice. Subsequently, Cytoplasmic Extraction Reagent B was added, and the mixture was centrifuged at for 5 min to obtain the cytoplasmic proteins. For the nuclear fraction, Nuclear Protein Extraction Reagent with PMSF was added to the pellet, incubated on ice for 30 min, and then centrifuged at for 10 min to collect the nuclear proteins. Tubulin and Lamin B1 were used as internal references for the cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins, respectively, as previously reported. – 

## Cell transfection.
Small interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting METTL14 (si-METTL14) and IGF2BP3 (si-IGF2BP3) and negative control (NC) siRNA (si-NC) were designed and synthesized by Hanbio. The detailed sequences are presented in Table S6. The METTL14 overexpression plasmid (METTL14-OE) was synthesized by Generay. The detailed sequences are presented in Table S7. Briefly, HBE cells were seeded into 6-well plates, cultured to 60% confluence, and then transfected with siRNA ( ) or plasmids ( /well) using Lipofectamine 3000 (L3000015, Invitrogen) transfection reagent. The transfected cells were incubated at 37°C for 48 h, and the transfection efficacy was validated using qRT-PCR and Western blotting analysis.

## Dual-luciferase reporter assay.
The KH domain–truncated IGF2BP3 plasmid (IGF2BP3 KH) and CYP1A1 WT or mutant plasmids were synthesized by NanJing XinJia Medical Technology Co. Ltd. The detailed DNA sequences used for construction are presented in Table S7. HEK 293 cells were cultured in 96-well plates at 6,000 cells/well for 24 h. Subsequently, the cells were cotransfected with plasmids containing WT or mutant CYP1A1 and si-METTL14 or KH domain–truncated IGF2BP3 plasmids according to the transfection protocol mentioned above. The relative luciferase activity was measured by a dual-luciferase reporter assay according to the manufacturer’s protocol (RG027, Beyotime). Briefly, cells were fully lysed and centrifuged, and the supernatant was taken for further testing. Then, of the supernatant was added to a black 96-well plate, and the firefly luciferase activity and Renilla luciferase activity were measured by using a chemiluminescence meter (BERTHOLD, Centro LB 960) and expressed in respective relative light units.

## AhR-dependent luciferase reporter assay.
A luciferase reporter gene plasmid containing the AhR-specific XRE was purchased from Yeasen (No. 11537ES03) to detect human AhR activity in HepG2 cells owing to the presence of a sufficient amount of endogenously occurring AhR. Briefly, HepG2 cells were seeded into 6-well plates, cultured to 60% confluence, and then transfected with plasmids ( /well) using Lipofectamine 3000 (L3000015, Invitrogen) transfection reagent. Forty-eight hours posttransfection, HepG2 cells were seeded into a 24-well plate at a density of cells/well and exposed to varying concentrations of N21aP (0, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 5, and ) or BaP (0, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 5, 10, and ) for 24 h. Luciferase activity was measured using a Dual-Luciferase Reporter Gene Assay Kit (RG027, Beyotime), and renal luciferase activity was standardized. To investigate the effect of METTL14 on AhR activity, after transfection of the AhR plasmid in HepG2 cells for 24 h, a portion was further transfected with si-METTL14 ( ) or METTL14-OE plasmid ( /well) for 48 h, and another portion was treated with N21aP ( ) for 24 h as a positive control, and luciferase activity was measured. The transfection efficacy of METTL14 was validated using Western blotting analysis.

## ChIP.
The ChIP assay was conducted using the Magna ChIP A/G kit (Magna0017, Millipore), adhering to the protocols provided by the manufacturer. HBE cells, at a density of cells, were treated with N21aP for 24 h and subsequently cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde at room temperature for 10 min. The cross-linking reaction was halted by the addition of glycine for 5 min. Cells were harvested from each dish using a sterile cell scraper, and the collected cells were centrifuged at for 5 min at 4°C to pellet them. Subsequently, the cell pellet was resuspended in nuclear lysis buffer. To shear the chromatin into fragments of optimal size, the lysate underwent sonication, with a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode SA) employed for 15 cycles of 30-s on and 30-s off periods. This process resulted in DNA fragments ranging from 250 to 1,000 bp. For immunoprecipitation, an anti-AhR antibody (1:50, #83200, Cell Signaling Technology) was used and incubated overnight at 4°C, with immunoglobulin G (IgG) serving as the negative control. The DNA was then purified by using spin columns. Then, the promoter regions of CYP1A1 were quantified by qRT-PCR, as detailed in Table S3. Primer sequences, sourced from a previous study, were synthesized by Generay, with detailed information provided in Table S8.

## RNA dot blotting assay.
Total RNA was isolated by using RNA Isolater Total RNA Extraction Reagent (R401-01, Vazyme), the RNA was diluted by using RNase-free double-distilled water ( ) to , , and . Then, the diluted RNA was subjected to heat shock at 95°C for 3 min and quickly placed on ice. Dot samples were loaded onto a nitrocellulose membrane (RPN303B, , GE Amersham), UV crosslinker (CX-2000, UVP) cross-linked at for 1 min and dyed with 0.05% methylene blue (MB) solution for 5 min. After being blocked with 5% nonfat milk for 1 h, the membrane was incubated with antibody (1:1,000, Thermofisher) at 4°C overnight and incubated with horseradish peroxidase–conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (1:2,000, Jackson ImmunoResearch) at room temperature for 1 h. Finally, the membrane was imaged using the Enhanced Chemiluminescence Kit (E411-05, Vazyme) and visualized by a Chemiluminescent Imaging System (Tanon). MB staining was performed as an internal reference control.

## Methylated RNA Immunoprecipitation–qPCR.
 modification in CYP1A1 was predicted using the sequence-based RNA adenosine methylation site predictor (SRAMP) online tool. Subsequently, specific primer targeting the predicted high-confidence sites were designed for methylated RNA immunoprecipitation (MeRIP)-qPCR. MeRIP-qPCR was performed using the EpiQuik RNA Enrichment (MeRIP) Kit (P-9018-24, Epigentek). Briefly, total RNA was isolated from N21aP-treated HBE cells or mouse lung tissues by using RNA Isolater Total RNA Extraction Reagent (R401-01, Vazyme). Then, RNA ( ) was subjected to or IgG beads ( ) at 4°C with rotation for 1.5 h. The enriched modifications were then measured by qRT-PCR (Table S3), and the corresponding enrichment in each sample was calculated using normalized input. The primer sequences were commissioned to be synthesized by Generay and are presented in Table S8.

## Determination of RNA stability.
HBE cells transfected with METTL14 or IGF2BP3 siRNA were seeded in a 6-well plate ( cells/well). Then, the cells were treated with actinomycin D (Act D) to inhibit mRNA transcription. Cellular RNA was extracted at 0 h, 2 h, and 4 h after Act D intervention by using RNA Isolater Total RNA Extraction Reagent (R401-01, Vazyme). The mRNA level of CYP1A1 was measured by qRT-PCR.

## RNA-binding protein pull-down assay.
Biotin-labeled in vitro transcription CYP1A1 was synthesized by GenePharma. RNA pull-down assays were performed using an RNA–Protein Pull-Down Kit (P0201, Geneseed Biotech). Briefly, the proteins were extracted from HBE cells using immunoprecipitation (IP) lysis buffer. Then, biotinylated CYP1A1 (50 pmol) was captured with streptavidin magnetic beads at 4°C for 30 min and incubated with the cell lysates at 4°C with rotation overnight. Then, the enriched protein was eluted and obtained, and the enriched proteins were analyzed by Western blotting.

## RNA-binding protein immunoprecipitation.
The RIP assay was carried out in HBE cells transfected with si-METTL14 or si-NC by using the Magna RIP RNA-Binding Protein Immunoprecipitation (RIP) Kit (17-700, Millipore Corporation) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, transfected cells ( cells) were collected and lysed in RIP lysis buffer with protease and RNase inhibitors. IGF2BP3 or IgG antibody ( ) was added to the cleared lysates and incubated with magnetic beads at 4°C with rotation overnight. Then, proteinase K buffer was used to digest and purify the precipitate. Finally, coimmunoprecipitated RNAs were extracted and measured by qRT-PCR (Table S3) and normalized to input. The primer sequences are commissioned to be synthesized by Generay and are presented in Table S8.

## Statistical Analysis
All data are presented as the (SD). Student -test and one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnett’s or Tukey’s multiple comparison post hoc test were used to analyze differences between two or multiple groups by SPSS (version 26.0; IBM Inc.). indicated that the results were statistically significant. GraphPad Prism software (version 9; GraphPad Software Inc.) was used to visualize the related chart results.

## Results

## Source and Characteristics of N21aP in 
Similar to the profile of in China, , the concentration of N21aP showed obvious seasonal variation, with the highest in winter and the lowest in summer in 13 cities in Jiangsu Province ( ), and the annual average concentration of N21aP was approximately one-third to one-half that of BaP ( ; Table S9 and Excel Table S1). Notably, as an HMW-PAH, N21aP exhibited a stronger correlation with in winter during the winter months (December–February) compared with BaP ( ; Excel Table S2). To explore the source of N21aP in , MW302-PAHs from laboratory-combusted fuel oil, biomass, and coal were detected, normalized according to the peak area of 34 MW302-PAHs, and processed for PCA, which could basically divide these sources into three major categories ( ; Excel Table S3), suggesting the MW302-PAHs composition of the same pollutant source exhibited high similarity and PCA effectively distinguished between these different sources. Taking winter (December–February) as the representative, peak areas related to MW302-PAHs in winter samples were measured and PCA was used to compare the composition of MW302-PAHs with those generated in-lab combustion of fuel oil, biomass, and coal. These winter samples were distinctly separate from the three combustion sources, forming their own cluster, suggesting that MW302-PAHs in originated from mixed sources ( ; Excel Table S4).
 Furthermore, different in-lab–combusted fuel oil, biomass, and coal were distinguished by DR analysis. The DR method is highly favored for determining PAH sources. However, many of the existing DRs are derived from LMW-PAHs. Current environmental studies have not adequately addressed HMW-PAHs, leading to a lack of reference values for DRs based on HMW-PAHs. Thus, considering that the conventional DR method is not commonly employed for MW302-PAH tracing, to address this gap and improve specificity, the present study identified key ratios for the MW302-PAHs by analyzing in-lab–combusted fuel oil, biomass, and coal to identify the origin of N21aP. Two groups of MW302-PAHs (peak 29/peak 28, peak 23/peak 22, corresponding to the peaks of MW302 in and Figure S4, and peak 29 represented the N21aP) were selected to identify the different feature sources by ratio analysis. showed that the two sets of MW302-PAH ratios can basically distinguish three major types of feature sources, where peak 29/peak 28 and peak 23/peak 22 ratios were assigned into three groups: peak 29/peak or peak 23/peak , indicating a biomass combustion source; peak 29/peak 28 between 0.7 and 1.0 or peak 23/peak 22 between 1.2 and 1.5, indicating a fuel oil combustion source; and peak 29/peak or peak 23/peak , implying a coal combustion source. Subsequently, given the two sets of DRs (peak 29/peak 28 and peak 23/peak 22 ratios) effectively distinguished between different combustion sources, they were applied for traceability analysis of HMW-PAHs in the samples. A comparison of peak ratios suggested diverse sources with more samples similar to the profile of fuel oil combustion and coal combustion sources ( ; Excel Table S5). Meanwhile, the results of the DR method for LMW-PAHs suggested that the sources of LMW-PAHs were a mixture of fossil fuel and coal, which was manifested in the Flu/( ) values mostly between 0.4 and 0.7, whereas the BaP/BghiP values were in a more scattered distribution ( ; Excel Table S6).

## CYP1A1, Respiratory Function, and Lung Inflammation in Mice Exposed to N21aP
Here, Cyp1a1 KO mice (i.e., Cyp1a1–/–) were first constructed and verified in either CYP1A1 protein ( ) or mRNA ( ). Then, the mice were given N21aP twice a week for 4 wk through intratracheal instillation, as described in experiment 2. As shown in , WT mice exposed to N21aP exhibited greater respiratory frequency, Penh, PAU, and expiratory time than control mice; by contrast, there were no significant differences in these outcomes between exposed and control Cyp1a1–/– mice. H&E staining revealed damaged alveolar structures, thickened alveolar walls, and numerous infiltrated inflammatory cells in WT mice, which was also mostly alleviated in Cyp1a1–/– mice ( ). In addition, N21aP-exposed WT mice exhibited lung inflammation, as indicated by the higher levels of IL- in BALF and serum and the higher expression of IL-6 and TNF- , as well as the histone variant -H2AX (a DNA damage marker), in the lung tissues. These inflammation-related outcomes were not evident in N21aP-exposed Cyp1a1–/– mice ( ). Furthermore, the inflammation-related outcomes appeared to be N21aP dose dependent, based on the expression levels of IL-1 and IL-6 in BALF and serum (Figure S5A–D) and mRNA and the protein expression of IL-1 , IL-6, and TNF- in the lung tissues of mice (Figure S5E,F).
 

## Effects of CYP1A1 on Activation of N21aP in Vitro
To further explore the critical role of CYP1A1 in metabolic activation of N21aP in vitro, first, EROD activity of the mouse S9 fraction was used as a proxy for CYP1A1 activity. We found EROD activity to be much higher in WT mice than in Cyp1a1–/– mice (Figure S6A). Subsequently, the Ames test revealed a significant mutagenicity of N21aP in the S9 fraction from WT livers, whereas no effect in mutagenic activity was found in the 0.5–10 µM/plate of N21aP in Cyp1a1–/– mice (Figure S6B). Moreover, the formation of N21aP-epoxide was detected by HPLC-MS/MS, and the chromatogram showed that liver microsomal enzymes of WT mice had a characteristic peak after coincubation with GSH and N21aP, whereas no peak was found in Cyp1a1–/– mice. To further verify the structure, the fragmented structure of minus one molecule of water was examined, and the position of the peak was consistent with the position of the parent ion (Figure S6C).

## Effects of AhR on N21aP-Induced CYP1A1 Expression
In addition, N21aP-exposed mice ( ) and HBE cells ( ) exhibited significantly higher expression of CYP1A1 at both the mRNA and protein levels; expression appeared to be dose dependent. Immunofluorescence results also appeared to show higher CYP1A1 expression in HBE cells treated with N21aP ( ).
 Although N21aP-exposed mice and cells did not have significantly different levels of total AhR protein compared with relevant controls ( ), the AhR protein was lower in the cytoplasm and higher in the nucleus in HBE cells at 12 h and 24 h after N21aP exposure ( ). Furthermore, a ChIP assay was conducted to ascertain the impact of N21aP on the binding affinity of the AhR to the xenobiotic response elements (XREs) within the CYP1A1 promoter regions. The findings revealed a notable enrichment of AhR at the CYP1A1 promoter in cells treated with N21aP, as depicted in . Moreover, luciferase reporter gene results revealed higher luciferase activity in N21aP-exposed cells, which appeared to be concentration dependent. These results suggest that N21aP activated AhR signaling in a concentration-dependent manner ( ), similar to BaP (Figure S7).

## Effects of Posttranscriptional Modification on N21aP-Induced CYP1A1 Expression
In addition to AhR transcriptional regulation, the overall modification level and enrichment of CYP1A1 mRNA in vitro and in vivo were evaluated. We found total levels and the level of on CYP1A1 mRNA were significantly higher in N21aP-treated mice ( ) and HBE cells ( ). In addition, BaP, a classic PAH that induces AhR activation, also elevated the expression level of on CYP1A1 ( ). Subsequently, dot blotting with DAA, an inhibitor of methylation that inhibits -adenosyl methionine (SAM) synthesis, , was performed to verify the above effects, and the results showed that DAA-exposed HBE cells had lower levels ( ) and lower CYPIA1 mRNA expression ( ). N21aP treatment alone significantly up-regulated CYP1A1 expression, whereas DAA reversed the highly expression of CYP1A1 caused by N21aP ( ), which was also observed on BaP ( ).
 

## Effects of METTL14 on N21aP-Induced CYP1A1 Expression
The expression of proteins related to modification, including methyltransferases (METTL3, METTL14, and WTAP) and demethyltransferases (FTO and ALKBH5), was detected in vivo and in vitro. N21aP-exposed mice ( ) and cells ( ) demonstrated higher expression of methyltransferase proteins, especially METTL14, rather than those of demethylases ALKBH5 and FTO. This finding was also observed in BaP-treated HBE cells (Figure S8A). Immunofluorescence further confirmed greater METTL14 expression in the cells ( ). Moreover, knockdown of METTL14 significantly down-regulated the mRNA and protein expression of both METTL14 and CYP1A1 in HBE cells ( ) and obviously down-regulated N21aP or BaP-induced expression of CYP1A1 ( ; Figure S8B). Nevertheless, neither HepG2 cells with overexpression of METTL14 nor with knockdown of METTL14 exhibited any significant differences on AhR activity compared with controls (Figure S9A–D). Considering that METTL14 and METTL3 can form methylase complexes and play a major catalytic role in the modification process of , SAH, an inhibitor of the METTL3–METTL14 heterodimer complex, was selected for intervention. SAH showed similar effects on the down-regulation of CYP1A1 expression in the presence of N21aP or BaP in HBE cells ( ; Figure S8C).
 

## Identification of Modification Sites in CYP1A1 mRNA in the Presence of N21aP
To identify the modification site of CYP1A1 mRNA targeted by METTL14, the online prediction tool SRAMP ( ) was used to predict the CYP1A1
 site [mainly enriched in the coding sequences (CDS) and the 3′-UTR]. As shown in , the four top predicted scores were selected: positions at 2700, 2808, and 3796 in the CDS region and position at 5218 in the 3′-UTR, namely, CYP1A1-2700, CYP1A1-2808, CYP1A1-3796, and CYP1A1-5218, respectively. Among the four sites, the modification levels of CYP1A1-2700 and CYP1A1-5218 were significantly greater compared with the corresponding control ( ). Similar results were obtained for BaP, with significantly higher levels of modification at the CYP1A1-2700 and CYP1A1-5218 loci (Figure S8D). Furthermore, luciferase reporters containing either WT or mutant CYP1A1 (CYP1A1-2700 and CYP1A1-5218) were used to address the effects of modification on CYP1A1 expression. For the mutant construction of CYP1A1, the adenosine bases (A) in consensus sequences (RRACH) were replaced with cytosine (C) to abolish modification ( ), and the results showed that the WT CYP1A1 (either CYP1A1-2700 or CYP1A1-5218), but not the mutation, had lower luciferase activity in the absence of METTL14, suggesting that METTL14 was actually involved in the methylation of these two sites ( ). Notably, HBE cells with METTL14 knockdown had lower stability of CYP1A1 mRNA compared with the control ( ).

## Recognition of IGF2BP3 to CYP1A1-5218 loci on the Stability of CYP1A1 mRNA in the Presence of N21aP
Among the readers related to CYP1A1 mRNA stability, IGF2BP3 mRNA levels were significantly higher after N21aP treatment in either mouse lung tissue ( ) or HBE cells ( ), which was confirmed by the expression of IGF2BP3 by immunoblotting assay ( ) and the localization of IGF2BP3 in the HBE cellular cytoplasm by immunofluorescence assay ( ). Silencing IGF2BP3 significantly down-regulated the expression level of CYP1A1 at both the protein and mRNA levels ( ) and obviously reversed the elevation of CYP1A1 expression in HBE cells treated with N21aP ( ). Furthermore, HBE cells with IGF2BP3 knockdown had lower stability of CYP1A1 mRNA compared with the control ( ).
 Afterward, a direct interaction between IGF2BP3 and CYP1A1 was observed using a biotin-labeled CYP1A1 probe ( ). To confirm the identified loci of IGF2BP3 on CYP1A1 mRNA, four possible “UGGAC” sequences on the CYP1A1 gene were chosen ( ). Following the results in , the two modification sites, CYP1A1-2700 in the CDS region and CYP1A1-5218 in the 3′-UTR, were selected for further verification, and IGF2BP3 mutants with truncation of the KH domains ( ) were constructed as previously reported ( ). As shown in , overexpression of IGF2BP3 significantly enhanced luciferase activity at CYP1A1-5218 loci rather than CYP1A1-2700 loci, and this enhancement was largely impaired by the mutation in KH1–2, KH3–4, and KH1–4. Moreover, IGF2BP3 was significantly enriched in CYP1A1 mRNA, and the binding between CYP1A1 mRNA and IGF2BP3 was significantly impaired by METTL14 knockdown ( ).

## Discussion
Previous in vivo and in vitro studies have reported that most of the known PAHs are both inducers of CYP1A1 via the classic AhR pathway and substrates of CYP1A1 that result in respiratory damage through metabolic activation. , In addition to the known PAHs, our present study first identified N21aP as a novel substrate of CYP1A1 and suggested a role for N21aP in respiratory inflammation outcomes in male mice. In addition to the AhR pathway, our study also suggests that N21aP regulated CYP1A1 expression by enhancing CYP1A1 mRNA stability via METTL14–IGF2BP3–mediated modification. Our research provides novel insights, supporting our hypothesis that N21aP is capable of up-regulating CYP1A1 expression via a dual-regulatory scheme: It not only activates the AhR-mediated transcriptional pathway but also enhances posttranscriptional modifications. We further propose that this synergistic approach facilitated the increased expression of CYP1A1, a phenomenon that may represent a shared regulatory mechanism among various PAHs, as preliminarily suggested by our observations with BaP.
N21aP is one of the HMW-PAHs of 6-ring PAH with MW302 ; these PAHs are structurally stable and might be widely present in the environment, especially susceptible to adsorption in and persistently harmful to humans. Studies have found that HMW-PAHs extracted from environmental and combustion samples exhibit positive mutagenesis reactions and significant cancer risks. In fact, some dibenzopyrenes with MW302 have been of concern to the European Union and are listed in priority control, such as DBalP, DBaiP, DBahP, and dibenzo[a,e]pyrene (DBaeP). N21aP is structurally similar to BaP, with one more aromatic ring. Our results demonstrated that the concentration of N21aP was approximately one-third to one-half of that of BaP in , but it had a better correlation with and more stability than BaP. Therefore, we propose that N21aP was more prone to adsorption on and deposition in the alveoli and bronchi, which we predict would be extremely harmful to respiratory tissues. Furthermore, our study suggested that both N21aP and BaP may have a common source, supporting N21aP as a new important pollutant in the ambient airborne environment.
Given the structural similarity and likely common source to BaP, we argue that the toxicity of N21aP and its association with CYP1A1 should not be ignored. The results in this study revealed that N21aP could be metabolized by CYP1A1 to generate epoxide metabolites that further lead to DNA damage, which should provide a reasonable explanation for the respiratory toxicity of the inhalation of N21aP in WT male mice in which CYP1A1 was originally expressed in lung tissues. Thus, we recognized N21aP as a new toxic PAH given that our study suggested it as a new metabolic substrate of CYP1A1 and could be metabolically activated by CYP1A1 to produce toxic effects. Meanwhile, we found that N21aP could up-regulate the expression of CYP1A1 in vivo and in vitro. Thus, this study suggests N21aP is also both a metabolic substrate and a stabilizing inducer of CYP1A1, similar to BaP. The significance of N21aP as an inducer may be greater because the generally lower environmental level of PAH precisely favors its role in inducing expression. CYP1A1 is the dominant metabolic enzyme of most PAHs, and its induced expression can greatly affect the intensity of the effect of mixed PAH exposure. Thus, the induction of CYP1A1 is vital for the metabolic activation of PAH, which must be helpful to fully understand the toxicity and health risk of environmental PAHs.
AhR is the classical and critical pathway for PAHs, such as BaP, to regulate CYP1A1 expression. Upon binding to the PAH, AhR is activated to translocate into the nucleus and form an AhR:ARNT heterodimer, thereby initiating CYP1A1 transcription through binding to XRE sequences. The results of this study suggest that N21aP induced CYP1A1 expression by activating AhR, influencing the AhR binding to the genomic XRE sequence in the CYP1A1 promoter. This finding suggests that the AhR pathway may represent a prevalent transcriptional mechanism for PAH-induced CYP1A1 expression. In addition to regulation at the transcriptional level, posttranscriptional regulation plays a crucial role in gene expression. Among the hundreds of posttranscriptional chemical modifications, modification is the most abundant and prevalent internal modification in mammalian mRNAs. Interestingly, we first found that N21aP and BaP not only affected AhR activation but also affected the level of CYP1A1 in HBE cells, indicating that modification might also be an additional common regulation in PAH-induced CYP1A1 expression. Although has been reported to regulate gene expression through various mechanisms, including mRNA stability, splicing, translation, and histone modification, the specific mechanism by which environmental pollutants regulate the expression of metabolic enzymes remains unclear.
The dynamic and reversible modification, regulated by methyltransferases and demethylases, participates in biological processes, such as cell differentiation, development, and immunity, as well as in the pathological processes of cancers. Generally, -methylated mRNA can be synthesized via the methyltransferase complex writer, which mainly comprises METTL3, METTL14, and WTAP. METTL3 is the sole catalytic subunit of the complex, whereas METTL14 plays noncatalytic roles in complex stabilization and substrate RNA recruitment. METTL14 is involved in various physiological and pathological processes, which are prone to the development of diabetic nephropathy, atherosclerosis, and various tumors. In addition, METTL14 is critical to the stability of mRNA. Cigarette smoke had the higher mRNA stability and expression of DIXDC1 through the up-regulation of METTL14, which in turn accelerated the degeneration and senescence of nucleus pulposus cells by activating the Wnt pathway. METTL14 is highly expressed in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and regulates the myeloid differentiation of AML cells by affecting the stability and translation of MYB and MYC mRNA, thereby enhancing the self-renewal and proliferation of AML cells and leading to AML progression. Interestingly, we found that METTL14 expression but not METTL3 expression was significantly up-regulated in N21aP-assoctiated CYP1A1 expression, suggesting that although METTL3 and METTL14 have synergistic effects, they play different regulatory roles in modification. Furthermore, the present study discovered that METTL14 enhanced the level of CYP1A1 mRNA and the enrichment region located around the CYP1A1-2700 loci in the CDS region and the CYP1A1-5218 loci in the 3′-UTR. In general, modification is a methylated adenosine occurring at the position, which was enriched in the stop codon, 3′-UTR, and inner long exon regions of RNA and occurred in the specific motif “RRACH” ( , ), consistent with our results. In summary, METTL14 improves the stability of CYP1A1 mRNA and may be an important mechanism by which N21aP induces CYP1A1 expression. CYP1A1-2700 loci at the CDS region and CYP1A1-5218 loci at the 3′-UTR might be the functional sites associated with METTL14-mediated modification of CYP1A1 mRNA.
Notably, the effects on targeted mRNAs resulting from predominantly depend on the functions of different reader proteins, including the YT521-B homology (YTH) domain family of proteins (YTHDFs and YTHDCs), heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (HNRNPs), and insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA-binding proteins (IGF2BPs). Similar to writers, most reader proteins exhibit abnormal expression after exposure to various environmental pollutants. For example, studies found that arsenic exposure exhibited greater METTL3 expression, thereby increasing the modification level of PRDM2 and down-regulating P53 expression by promoting PRDM2 mRNA degradation through YTHDF2, ultimately leading to the malignant transformation of human keratinocytes. Studies have also shown that modification may be a new mechanism for regulating cytochrome P450 expression, and the reader protein YTHDC2 promotes CYP2C8 mRNA degradation by recognizing modification sites. Recently, IGF2BP1, IGF2BP2, and IGF2BP3 have been confirmed to be able to bind and stabilize -modified mRNA and that IGF2BPs can work with cofactors such as human antigen R (HuR) and Matrin 3 (MATR3) to maintain the stability of mRNA. Here, we found that IGF2BP3 was highly expressed in N21aP-treated cells and that the knockdown of IGF2BP3 was associated with lower CYP1A1 expression in N21aP-treated cells. It has been reported that -induced modification regulates the stability of BIRC5 mRNA through IGF2BP3 and promotes the progression of bladder cancer, highlighting the role of IGF2BP3 in health damage caused by environmental pollutants. Our results also showed that IGF2BP3 deficiency exhibited less stability of CYP1A1 mRNA. In addition, direct binding of IGF2BPs to -modified RNAs through its KH domain has been demonstrated in vitro, and the KH domain in IGF2BPs, particularly the KH3–4 dual domain, has been proven to play a crucial role in the recognition and binding of specific mRNAs, which should support our results that the KH1–2, KH3–4, and KH1–4 domains in IGF2BP3 were responsible for recognizing the CYP1A1-5218 loci in the 3′-UTR of CYP1A1 mRNA. Collectively, these results further revealed that IGF2BP3 could recognize the modification site of CYP1A1 mRNA mediated by METTL14 at the CYP1A1-5218 loci, subsequently enhancing the stability of CYP1A1 mRNA and finally increasing CYP1A1 protein expression.
In summary, the present study elucidated the critical roles of AhR-mediated transcriptional regulation and modification–mediated posttranscriptional regulation in N21aP-induced CYP1A1 expression, which in turn resulted in respiratory inflammation via metabolic activation of N21aP by CYP1A1. Our findings suggest that N21aP induced CYP1A1 expression by promoting CYP1A1 transcription through the AhR activation pathway and by enhancing CYP1A1 mRNA stability in a METTL14–IGF2BP3–dependent manner through posttranscriptional modification ( ), which may be a common regulatory pathway that can be applied to other PAHs, especially HMW-PAHs. This study contributes to a high level of interest and comprehensive understanding of the significance of environment–genetic interactions for the toxicity of PAHs and provides an important basis for understanding the health risks of HMW-PAHs at environmental exposure levels.
 

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgments
S.W. and C.W. conceived, designed, and supervised the study. J.S., L.W. and W.Z. conducted the experiment, analyzed the data, and prepared the draft manuscript. C.C. was responsible for the N21aP synthesis. S.W., J.X. and S.L. were responsible for the PAH extraction, detection, and analysis. X.G., R.X., and X.Z. were responsible for cell experiments and analysis. Y.J., D.Z. and S.X. contributed to animal experiments and data analysis. H.S. provided reliable and qualified samples. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China [82173562 (to S.-L.W.), 81973091 (to S.-L.W.), 82273584 (to C.W.), and 81903353 (to C.W.), and 91743205 (to S.-L.W.)], the Jiangsu Provincial College Students’ Innovation and Entrepreneurship Training Program [202210312045Z (to C.W.)], the Technology Development Fund of Nanjing Medical University [NMUB2018001 (to C.W.) and NMUB2020007 (to L.W.)], the project funded by the Collegiate Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province [19KJB330003 (to C.W.)], and the research Fund for Large-scale Scientific Instrument Sharing of Nanjing Medical University [ZC2021DY10 (to L.W.)].

Conclusions and opinions are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the policies or views of EHP Publishing or the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials