pmcBioact MaterBioact Mater3413bioactmatBioactive Materials2452-199XKeAi PublishingPMC11558551PMC11558551.111558551115585513953951810.1016/j.bioactmat.2024.10.025S2452-199X(24)00470-51Review ArticleRecent advances in surface functionalization of cardiovascular stents
WangChuanzhe LvJie YangMengyi FuYan WangWenxuan LiXinlixin@swjtu.edu.cn YangZhiluzhiluyang1029@smu.edu.cn LuJinglujingmz@med.uestc.edu.cn aDongguan Key Laboratory of Smart Biomaterials and Regenerative Medicine, The Tenth Affiliated Hospital of Southern Medical University, 523059, Dongguan, Guangdong, ChinabDepartment of Anesthesiology, Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 610072, Chengdu, Sichuan, ChinacSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Key Lab of Advanced Technology for Materials of Education Ministry, Southwest Jiaotong University, 610031, Chengdu, ChinadDepartment of Cardiology, Third People's Hospital of Chengdu Affiliated to Southwest Jiaotong University, 610072, Chengdu, Sichuan, China⁎Corresponding author. zhiluyang1029@smu.edu.cn⁎⁎Corresponding author. lujingmz@med.uestc.edu.cn⁎⁎⁎Corresponding author. lixin@swjtu.edu.cn22025281020244447373938941015920242110202422102024281020241311202425022026© 2024 The Authors2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are the leading global threat to human health. The clinical application of vascular stents improved the survival rates and quality of life for patients with cardiovascular diseases. However, despite the benefits stents bring to patients, there are still notable complications such as thrombosis and in-stent restenosis (ISR). Surface modification techniques represent an effective strategy to enhance the clinical efficacy of vascular stents and reduce complications. This paper reviews the development strategies of vascular stents based on surface functional coating technologies aimed at addressing the limitations in clinical application, including the inhibition of intimal hyperplasia, promotion of re-endothelialization. These strategies have improved endothelial repair and inhibited vascular remodeling, thereby promoting vascular healing post-stent implantation. However, the pathological microenvironment of target vessels and the lipid plaques are key pathological factors in the development of atherosclerosis (AS) and impaired vascular repair after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Therefore, restoring normal physiological environment and removing the plaques are also treatment focuses after PCI for promoting vascular repair. Unfortunately, research in this area is limited. This paper reviews the advancements in vascular stents based on surface engineering technologies over the past decade, providing guidance for the development of stents.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Core topic: Study on coating of cardiovascular stent.
•Innovation: Provides a comprehensive review of cardiovascular stent coatings, covering the latest research advances.
•Reader Benefit: A new classification framework is proposed, offering better understanding of the current research situation.

## Keywords
Cardiovascular stentSurface modificationFunctional coatingEndothelializationVascular repairpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1

## Introduction
CVD is the primary cause of mortality worldwide. Despite the progress in healthcare, CVD is remains accountable for almost a third of global fatalities and is regarded as leading cause of mortality [ ]. The development of coronary vascular stents stands as a significant medical advancement in modern times [ ]. One of the primary methods for treating CVD involves percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) using vascular stents. At present, the most commonly used stents in clinical practice are drug-eluting stents. The development of drug-eluting stent (DES) is described in detail in 2.1.2. Although clinically used vascular stents have substantially reduced the risk of various complications, they are still far from the perfect ideal stent.
The main function of DES used clinically is to inhibit the proliferation of smooth mucle cells (SMCs) by nonspecific medications, thereby tackling the issue of inhibiting intimal hyperplasia. Nonetheless, these coatings target multiple cell types, including endothelial cells (ECs), and lack the biological activity needed for precise selection. In late or very late stages, this non-selective DES leads to a high rate of ISR.
So, is there a way to change cardiovascular stents into bioactive stents with biological functions? Perhaps the functionalization of material surfaces is a viable path. Surface functionalization of materials can control the interfacial properties of solid materials [ ]. By introducing a series of biologically active substances to the surface of inorganic materials, the physiological behavior of cells can be influenced to achieve tissue repair and regeneration [ ]. Instances encompass alkanethiol layers forming on noble metal surfaces, commonly referred to as self-assembled monolayers (SAM) [ ], bioorthogonal functionalization of material surfaces [ ], and the recently very trendy polydopamine coatings that can be functionalized on almost any surface [ ]. These surface modification methods make it possible for inorganic materials to be biologically active.
In nearly half a century of exploration, the function of vascular stents has been continuously improved in one attempt after another. The initial cognition is to provide radial support for blood vessels. DES and a coating containing nucleic acids that specifically inhibit SMCs proliferation were used to inhibit intimal proliferation after it was found that BMS was prone to cause intimal hyperplasia and thrombosis [ , ]. However, ECs in diseased vessels are dysfunctional and unable to form a fully functional endothelial layer [ ]. Therefore, research has turned to endothelial-promoting coatings, including nucleic acid and protein coatings. It is disappointing that although endothelialization is accelerated, intimal hyperplasia still exists [ , ], promoting the creation of vascular stent coatings that simultaneously control endothelial and SMCs. This kind of coating is a significant improvement over previous coatings [ , , ]. In the development of basic medicine, targeting the pathological environment of strong inflammation and oxidative stress at the lesion has become a new generation of treatment ideas. Under the guidance of the treatment concept, the use of material surface functionalization technology to give the appropriate function of vascular stents may be one of the feasible means to completely solve coronary heart disease [ , ]. This article reviews the latest progress of vascular stent research in the past decade, guided by the functional coating of vascular stent and the repair concept of vascular stent. It should be noted that this review primarily focuses on the coatings for permanent stents, while the other type of coating for biodegradable stents [ , , , ], which aims to improve the degradation rate of the stent itself, falls outside the scope and will not be elaborated on in this review.

2

## Surface functional coating design of cardiovascular stents
Cardiovascular stents inevitably damage the endotheliar layer after implantation and stimulates abnormal proliferation of SMCs, resulting in intimal hyperplasia and ISR events [ ]. In BMS, the incidence of clinically relevant ISR can reach 20–30 %, typically manifesting within 6–9 months post-stent placement [ ]. In addition, studies have shown that angiodynamics can affect the proximal, middle and distal end of the stent after stent implantation, resulting in different degrees of ISR [ ]. To address this challenge, researchers tried to enhance the biocompatibility of vascular stents through surface functionalization methods that impart biological properties to the stent's surface, as summarized in . As BMS tends to cause intimal hyperplasia, DES carrying drugs such as cell proliferation inhibitors were introduced [ ]. However, the inhibitory effect of such nonspecific drugs on ECs led to a delay in the endothelialization process [ ]. Meanwhile, the persistent inflammatory response triggered by the drug-eluting carrier also leads to the development of neoatherosclerosis [ ]. To date, DES remain the preferred choice for patients with coronary artery disease, even though they may be accompanied by potential late complications [ ]. The latest research showed that in some patients, new yellow plaques appeared in the arteries 12 months after the implantation of DES in the coronary arteries [ ]. In order to further repair the endothelial layer of the diseased blood vessel, ECs proliferation-promoting stents were created. This class of stents immobilized EC-promoting substances, such as proteins and antibodies, on the surface of the stent through covalent or noncovalent binding forces [ , , ]. Despite encouraging the proliferation of ECs, the concurrent growth of SMCs continued to produce unfavorable outcomes [ , ]. Consequently, a novel idea emerged to encourage ECs growth while suppressing SMCs, and the initial implementation involved combining the first two generations of techniques, i.e., incorporating endothelial-promoting agents into DES to potentially reduce endothelial injury. However, simply superimposing the two techniques did not achieve the desired results [ ]. The inhibitory effect of nonspecific drugs on ECs has always been the culprit of undesirable vascular stenting results. Therefore, the development of substances with multiple biological functions, i.e., with the function of both preventing SMCs proliferation and encouraging ECs proliferation, became a top priority [ , ]. Subsequently, vascular stents with multiple physiologic functions, represented by the release of NO, emerged. Although the effect of this type of stent was significantly better than that of its predecessor, the biological function of a single molecule might not be able to cope with the requirements of the complex pathological environment, thus giving rise to vascular stents with multi-molecular synergistic multiple biological functions to counteract the complex pathological environment [ , ]. As research into the causes of coronary artery disease advances, the idea of addressing the pathological environment has gained prominence [ ], which is embodied in the elimination of strong oxidative stress and inflammatory stimuli at the lesion, guiding the development of the new generation of surface-functionalized vascular stents [ , ]. 
2.1

## Coatings for inhibition of neointimal hyperplasia
Conventional bare-metal stents did not have any active modulation to intimal hyperplasia caused by mechanical damage in the vessel's inner wall. Therefore, the primary task of vascular stents at this stage was to prevent intimal hyperplasia to avert the late-stage failures seen with BMS. Depending on the means of modulation, they could be broadly categorized into non-specific drug coatings and specific nucleic acid-based coatings.
2.1.1

## Non-specific coatings
To inhibit the abnormal proliferation of SMCs, researchers conceptualized DES, which involve coating the stent with anti-proliferative medications and delivering the drugs at high local concentrations to inhibit ISR, but slowly enough to avoid systemic toxicity [ ]. The DES exemplifies the prevention of neointimal hyperplasia. By the current position, DES have been developed to the third generation. lists several representative DESs. Representative of the first-generation DES are Cypher (Cordis Corporation, USA, 2003) and Taxus (Boston Scientific Corporation, USA, 2004) [ ], the Cypher stent releases sirolimus (also known as rapamycin), which inhibits SMCs proliferation and migration by reducing serine/threonine-specific protein kinase mTOR activity [ ], and the Taxus stent releases the anti-mitotic drug paclitaxel to inhibit SMCs proliferation and migration [ ]. Although the first-generation DES reduces the incidence of ISR on the one hand, it leads to vascular dysfunction, persistent inflammation, platelet activation and adverse immune response due to indiscriminate attack on ECs by nonspecific drugs. On the other hand, the excessively thick stent struts are more likely to cause blood flow disturbances in first-generation DES [ ]. At the same time, the prolonged presence of first-generation DES permanent drug carriers in the body is more likely to cause a chronic inflammatory response. All these problems are possible reasons for the poor results of DES in late or very late stages. 
As a result, researchers have made improvements to second-generation DES in these three aspects. The typical second-generation DES includes Xience® (Abbott Vascular, 2009), Endeavor® (Medtronic, 2012) [ ]. The second-generation DES offers enhancements in three areas over the first-generation DES. First, more lipophilic everolimus and zotarolimus were used as drugs to reduce the dissolution loss in the blood [ ]. Secondly, a thinner, more ductile and fracture-resistant cobalt-chromium alloy was chosen as the metal framework [ ]. Finally, a more biocompatible polymer was chosen to load the drug and the effect of the polymer on inflammation was considered [ ]. Unfortunately, the clinical performance of DES did not meet expectations. The incidence of ISR in second-generation DES remains at 5–10 % [ ], which is still a threat to life safety. A "late catch-up" phenomenon has been observed clinically, where DES suppresses neointimal thickness in the first year after implantation, but then exhibits a sustained thickening that exceeds BMS in the late stages [ ].
While improving the biocompatibility of second-generation DES polymers, concerns about the potential for chronic inflammation and late adverse events associated with permanent polymers prompted the creation of a third-generation DES featuring a biodegradable polymer coating. The drug coating degrades, leaving just a bare metal stent remaining inside the artery, and will not cause a long-term inflammatory response. Some of the third-generation DES are described below, including the Orsiro and SYNERGY. The Orsiro stent uses a biodegradable polymer which may lessen the persistent inflammatory in the arterial wall, promote reendothelialization, and minimize the risk of thrombosis and late restenosis [ ]. The coating of Orsiro consists of a biodegradable PLLA polymer that elutes sirolimus, with 50 % of the drug dispensed in the first 30 days and 80 % within 3 months, and the coating fully degrades in 1–2 years, showing encouraging pre-clinical results [ ]. SYNERGY is a CE-approved DES that releases everolimus from a 4-micron-thick biodegradable polylactic acid-glycolic acid (PLGA) coating, which is fully absorbed within 4 months. To minimize the amount of polymer used, the coating is applied only to the luminal side of the stent [ ].Although the third-generation DES performed relatively well in early follow-up experiments, its performance in the late or very late stages remains doubtful [ ] because of the use of nonspecific anti-proliferative drugs in third-generation DES. The main purpose of these drugs is to inhibit SMCs proliferation and migration, but they also attack ECs indiscriminately, resulting in delayed endothelialization of the stents, as well as increasing the occurrence of late or very late ISR.
Based on the undesirable performance of DES on reendothelialization, coatings that inhibit neointimal hyperplasia have been questioned by researchers. Inhibition of neointimal hyperplasia without considering the promotion of ECs proliferation and repair may not achieve the desired effect. For this reason, researchers set out to investigate coatings that specifically inhibit SMCs without affecting ECs.

2.1.2

## Specific coatings
The drug chosen for DES caused damage to the ECs, thus delaying endothelialization. The researchers therefore envisioned that replacing the non-specific drugs in the stent coating with certain molecules that specifically inhibit SMCs without damaging ECs, which may have a positive effect on inhibition of neointimal hyperplasia. A variety of drugs have been used to specifically inhibit neointima proliferation, including nucleic acids [ ], cytorelaxins [ ], and kinase inhibitors [ ].
At the laboratory level, many nucleic acids have been shown to have inhibitory effects on SMCs, such as miR-22-3p [ ], miR-1/miR-133a [ ], miR-92a [ ], and Apt14 [ ]. Based on the important role of nucleic acids in the cardiovascular system, loading relevant nucleic acids that inhibit SMCs proliferation might be a feasible approach. Muthiah et al. [ ] immobilized PSOAT/miR145 nanoparticles on the surface of heparin-coated stents, and successfully inhibited the proliferation of SMCs by releasing miR145 gene. Zhang et al. [ ] developed a surface-based gene delivery mechanism by sequentially layering protamine sulfate (PrS) and a functional plasmid DNA (pDNA) that encodes short hairpin RNA to suppress the expression of transforming growth factor-b1 (TGF-b1), with the goal of preventing cell growth and minimizing excessive extracellular matrix (ECM) production. Animal results showed that transfection of arterial tissues significantly downregulated TGF-b1 and inhibited intimal hyperplasia.
Cytorelaxin and kinase inhibitors are also used to inhibit neointimal hyperplasia. Koen et al. [ ]loaded a dose of cytorelaxin D on the surface of the stent and implanted it into the coronary arteries of pigs. Compared with paclitaxel eluting stent, cytorelaxin D eluting stent not only had similar neointima inhibitory effect, but also did not inhibit ECs recovery. Shmuel et al. [ ]loaded Tyrphostin AGL-2043, a potent, synthetic, tricyclic quinoline PTKs inhibitor, onto a stent and implanted it into Sinclair mini-pigs. The results showed that Tyrphostin AGL-2043 inhibited neointimal hyperplasia [ ]. The study by Zhao et al. [ ] recently involved loading a drug, arsenic trioxide (As2O3), onto the surface of vascular stents and implanting them into the carotid arteries of rabbits. The experimental results demonstrated that the neointimal formation in the As2O3-eluting stent group was lower compared to BMS and polymer-coated stents, with no progressive increase observed within 3 months, indicating a sustained inhibition of neointimal hyperplasia. Recently, retinoic acid (RA) has been found to influence the proliferation, migration, and polarization of SMCs, while also regulating macrophage activation [ ]. Samara et al. [ ] developed a novel RA-eluting stent and compared it with BMS and Xience®. The results showed that the RA-eluting stent had a smaller neointimal hyperplasia area. Teng et al. [ ] coated glycyrrhizic acid (GA) on the surface of stents and compared the effects of GA-eluting stents with BMS and DES in vivo. The results showed that the GA-eluting stents exhibited superior performance in inhibiting neointimal hyperplasia, outperforming BMS and even DES.
This class of vascular stents with non-specific or specific inhibition of SMCs did achieve a certain degree of inhibition of neointimal hyperplasia compared with BMS but did not achieve the expected purpose. The possible reason is that these kind of coatings only considered the inhibitory effect on SMCs, while neglecting the specific regulation to ECs. In particular, it should be noted that the ECs at the lesion were in a dysfunctional state, and it seems difficult to form an intact endothelial layer with normal physiological functions if not induced, which is not meeting clinical needs. Therefore, researchers have gradually shifted their goal to coatings that promote endothelialization.

2.2

## Coatings for promotion of endothelialization
Non-specific drugs loaded on DES inhibit neointimal hyperplasia but also impair the normal physiological function of ECs. Although there have been subsequent studies to reduce endothelial proliferation by loading drugs that specifically inhibit SMCs, there has been no modulation on ECs.
Since ECs under pathological conditions are dysfunctional and unable to perform their normal physiological functions, the endothelialization process remains delayed. Therefore, the scientists hypothesized that encouraging endothelial growth on the stent surface could benefit the healing of damaged blood vessels, leading to numerous investigations around the perspective of promoting endothelialization. This paragraph cuts across the perspectives of proteins (including adhesion peptides, growth factors and specific antibodies) and nucleic acids, and describes work on the coating of these molecules in the promotion of endothelialization (pro-endothelialization). briefly describes these types of coatings. A schematic illustration of the role of the pro-endothelial coating in blood vessels is shown in A. 
2.2.1

## Protein
In the cardiovascular field, a large number of proteins control the signaling and behavior of cells. For example, GATA5 is a key protein in hypertension, arrhythmia, and congenital heart disease [ ], and Rho kinase plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of heart failure [ ]. Meanwhile, A significant number of proteins have been reported to be relevant to promote ECs proliferation and migration. Depending on the mode of action, these proteins are divided into three main groups: (1) adhesion peptides that promote ECs [ ], (2) growth factors that that direct cell migration, infiltration, proliferation and differentiation and (3) specific antibodies for the capture of endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs).
2.2.1.1

## Adhesion peptides
Adhesion peptides used to specifically enhance ECs adhesion include RGD, REDV, YISGR and some sequence-specific peptides, etc. Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) is a peptide that can be recognized by integrins to enhance cell adhesion and proliferation [ ]. Blindt et al. [ ] constructed an RGD stent for enhancing re-endothelialization. In a porcine model, more CD34 positive cells were observed on the stent surface of RGD stents. Nevertheless, the neointimal area of RGD stents showed no notable variation when compared to BMS. Regrettably, RGD peptides attach to a wide range of integrins, hindering specific cell attachment. Surfaces altered with RGD peptide seem to draw various cell types, including platelets, through the platelet integrin glycoprotein IIb/IIIa [ ].
Arg-Glu-Asp-Val (REDV) is a unique peptide sequence that promotes ECs adhesion and growth. Kakinoki et al. [ ] immobilized REDV onto stents by means of single-step tyrosine oxidation with copper chloride (II) and hydrogen peroxide and implanted into the abdominal aorta of rabbits. The experimental results showed that the endothelialization of REDV stents was better than that of BMS, and the cells that appeared on the surface of REDV stents resembled the natural endothelial layer. Gabriel et al. [ ] constructed a coating on titanium surface with a combination of REDV and PEG to further enhance the blood compatibility of the coating while promoting ECs proliferation.
Ve-cadherin is an important protein that affects cell adhesion and contributes to the junction barrier function of ECs [ ]. Yang et al. [ ] constructed an endothelium-promoting coating of the fusion of mussel adhesion protein and VE-cadherin extracellular domain (VE-M) on the surface of BMS. The results of animal experiments showed that the coating significantly promoted the proliferation and concentration of ECs, improved the tightness of ECs, and the endothelialization level and endothelial cell morphology were significantly better than BMS.
YIGSR is a kind of polypeptide related to cell activity. Many studies have involved the relationship between YIGSR and ECs proliferation activity [ ]. Kushwaha et al. [ ] and Castellanos et al. [ ] applied YIGSR polypeptide coating to the metal surface, greatly enhancing the proliferation of ECs. Building on this, Zhang et al. [ ] developed a nanomatrix coating containing YIGSR. Results from animal experiments showed that, compared to commercial stents, this coating significantly improved endothelialization and endothelial function on the stent surface.
In addition, some specific sequence peptide chains that promote endothelial repair have also been utilized in the field of vascular stents. For example, Chen et al. [ ] constructed a dopamine-affinity surface on titanium surface and introduced the peptide chain (TPSLEQRTVYAK-GGGC-K-Biotin) into the surface of inorganic materials by grafting the biotinylated peptide chain using the highly efficient and specific binding of affinity to biotin. Cellular experiments revealed that the coating greatly enhanced EPCs capture.

2.2.1.2

## Growth factors
During the healing of wounds in humans, numerous crucial growth factors guide cell migration, infiltration, proliferation and differentiation, which ultimately lead to wound closure [ ]. Upon injury to the endothelium, the body instinctively triggers a healing process involving crucial growth factors like vascular endothelial growth factor(VEGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), etc. VEGF is one of the components of extracellular growth factor and has important functions in regulating ECs behavior [ ]. Takabatake et al. [ ] bound VEGF to the stent surface and implanted it into domestic female swine. SEM showed that the VEGF stent was covered by an intact endothelial layer with cobblestone-shaped ECs and tightly connected to the natural endothelium, while the surface of the anti-CD34 antibody stent was coated with a disordered arrangement of multicellular-disorganized tissue and endothelium-like tissue after 14 days. Microscopic images of cross‐sectional specimens of coronary arteries demonstrated lower intimal thickness with VEGF stents. PDGF influences numerous of cell types and is crucial in developmental, physiological and pathological conditions of the organism. The genes for PDGF-C and PDGF-D are highly similar to VEGF, making them prime candidates for targeted enhancement of ECs [ ]. Cao et al. [ ] developed a bilayer coating of CuII and PDGF onto the stent exterior. The results of cellular experiments showed that the CuII and PDGF bilayer coating exhibited promoting ECs proliferation and migration under planar conditions and a more intact endothelial layer structure in a three-dimensional environment.

2.2.1.3

## Specific antibodies
EPCs are precursor cells of ECs that can be mobilized from bone marrow to peripheral blood to aid in the healing of damaged vessels when triggered by various physiological or pathological stimuli [ ]. In 1997, Asahara et al. [ ] first demonstrated the presence of bloodstream capable of transforming into vascular ECs, and termed them vascular endothelial progenitor cells. Because of their unique differentiation ability, researchers have attempted to achieve endothelialization by capturing EPCs in peripheral blood and allowing them to differentiate into ECs on the stent surface. The surface of EPCs has multiple binding sites, such as CD34, CD133, and CD146, and antibodies corresponding to each of these sites can be used to specifically capture EPCs.
Anti-CD34 antibody has been applied in the commercial stent Genous Bio-engineered R stent, (Orbus Medical Technologies), and was tested in a coronary implantation study in pigs, showing that the R stent obtained more than 70 % EPCs coverage within 1 h, while BMS had almost no EPCs coverage [ ]. However, the first human clinical study showed no significant reduction in neointimal thickness for the R stent versus BMS after a six-month period [ ]. Furthermore, Liu et al. [ ] continued to add VEGF and heparin to enhance the pro-endothelial properties and blood compatibility on the basis of anti-CD34 antibody. Heparin, VEGF, and anti-CD34 antibody were affixed to the titanium metal surface through sequential self-assembly layers utilizing electrostatic adsorption forces. Cellular experiments revealed a marked enhancement in the EPC capture capability and a great improvement in hemocompatibility. Similarly, Lin et al. [ ] developed a multilayer of heparin and collagen functionalized with an anti-CD34 antibody to improve endothelialization through layer-by-layer self-assembly. Cellular experiments revealed that the coating greatly boosted ECs growth while not hindering SMCs proliferation. In vivo experiments demonstrated that the coating greatly improved the endothelialization process. When anti-CD34 antibody was applied, the neointima layer became notably thinner, probably because of the synergistic effect of anti-CD34 antibody and heparin/collagen.
Wu et al. [ ] constructed gelatin-coated coatings, anti-CD34 antibody coatings and anti-CD133 antibody coatings on the surface of BMS, respectively. Cellular experiments showed that the antibody coating significantly increased vessel formation, and the length of tubes on the anti-CD133 antibody coating was much longer than that on the anti-CD34 antibody coating. In vivo experiments in rabbits showed that the antibody-coated stents accelerated the endothelialization process more than BMS and gelatin-coated stents, and the endothelialization process of the anti-CD133 antibody-coated stents was faster than that of the anti-CD34 antibody-coated stents. However, in vivo results in pigs do not support the role of anti-CD133 antibody coating in promoting endothelialization process. Sedaghat et al. [ ] constructed stents that captured CD133-positive cells by covalently binding anti-CD133 antibodies to the stent surface. The schematic construction of the coating is shown in B. The results of the stent in vitro experiments showed that the anti-CD133 antibody stent surface was covered with 100 % CD133-positive cells after 12 h. However, in a porcine model, the endothelial coverage of the anti-CD133 antibody stents was comparable to the level of BMS and did not appear to promote reendothelialization as expected, probably because of the extremely low number and high heterogeneity of EPCs, and the antibodies on the stents may also increase the non-specific binding of monocytes.
CD146 serves as a viable alternative to current biomarkers like CD34 and VE-calmodulin, effectivly promoting endothelialization by limiting its capture of cells to late EPCs only. Park et al. [ ] designed a stent coated with silica nanofilaments containing anti-CD146 antibodies silica nanofilaments to capture late EPCs. C shows the coating structure after functionalization of the stent surface. The cobalt-chromium (CoCr) coronary stent surface was altered with silicone nanofilaments (SiNf), and amine groups were added using 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) treatment. Finally, anti-CD146 antibodies (anti-CD146 Ab) were linked to the amine groups on SiNf using carbodiimide chemistry. Anti CD146 antibody stents exhibit superior endothelial coverage and stenosis rates in a porcine coronary artery model.

2.2.2

## Nucleic acid
Nucleic acid and proteins play a vital role in normal human metabolism for cardiovascular health [ ]. The introduction of nucleic acids has been expanded in 2.1.2 and will not be repeated here. In the field of using nucleic acids to promote endothelialization, the major strategy is to deliver relevant DNA or aptamers to the target cells to enhance the expression of ECs proliferation-promoting correlates. Little work has been done on RNA and will not be summarized here.
Loading genes that promote endothelial repair on the surface of vascular stent may be one of the effective ways to repair diseased blood vessels. VEGF, a highly specialized pro-vascular endothelial growth factor, enhances vascular permeability, extracellular matrix breakdown, ECs migration, proliferation, and the formation of new blood vessels [ ]. Paul et al. [ ] stored the DNA for VEGF and Ang1 in a fibrin matrix loaded onto the stent surface. The hydrogel consisted of fibrin matrices, constructed layer-by-layer (LbL) on the stent surface, with alternating layers containing endosomolytic Tat peptide/DNA nanoparticles (NPs) or NPs combined with polyacrylic acid (PAA) coated single-walled carbon nanotubes (NPeCNT). The hydrogel functioned as a storage system to transport, shield, and concurrently release pro-angiogenic factors, including VEGF and Angiopoietin-1(Ang1), along with gene-carrying NPs to the designated location. D describes the preparation process for surface functionalization of vascular stents. In vitro transfection experiments showed sustained expression of VEGF and Ang1 proteins over 15 days. In a dog model of iliac arteries, genomic stents showed lower restenosis rates.
Aptamers are synthetic single-stranded oligonucleotides (DNA or RNA) that can bind to non-nucleotide target substances with high affinity and specificity. It functions like antibodies, but has more advantages than antibodies [ ]. Many aptamers that promote ECs are synthesized and loaded on the surface of vascular stents to perform physiological functions. For example, Qi et al. [ ] constructed a two-step aptamer coating.The first step of the process is the deposition of plasma polymeric allylamine (PPAam) on the substrate to introduce amine groups, and the second step is the electrostatic adsorption of aptamers that specifically capture EPCs to the surface of PPAam. The results of cell experiments showed that aptamer coated surfaces could capture more EPCs and provide a cell-friendly surface for EPCs and ECs proliferation, but had no effect on SMCs proliferation. Deng et al. [ ] further improved the anticoagulant property of the coating by utilizing the positively charged property of the polydopamine(pda) with PEI (polyethylenimine) coating under neutral conditions, and introducing the negatively charged DNA aptamer and heparin to the coating surface through electrostatic interaction force. The coating was able to effectively capture EPCs under dynamic conditions with improved hemocompatibility. Meanwhile, ex vivo experiments showed that the coating could regulate the distribution of CD34/vWF-positive cells on the surface of the stent, which is more conducive to the endothelialization of vascular stents. However, due to the presence of DNA hydrolase, the stability of aptamers in vivo is insufficient, which limits their long-term use.
The gene delivery strategy facilitated the regeneration and functional recovery of ECs to a certain extent, and seems to be one of the workable options. However, there are many limitations, oversized particles may be phagocytosed by macrophages rather than the target cells, the selection of gene types still needs to be optimized and safety issues related to viral vectors, which limit the widespread use of gene delivery strategies [ ].
The mentioned adhesion peptides, growth factors, antibodies, and nucleic acids help enhance endothelialization, which is exactly the direction researchers have started to focus on. However, using these molecules has its challenges. The complex structures of proteins can easily become inactive during extended preparation, storage, and use, which can prevent them from achieving the desired effect [ ]. The efficiency of nucleic acids crossing the cell membrane remains a major challenge [ ]. In addition, SMCs are always in a synthetic phenotype due to mechanical injury and continuous stimulation by the pathological environment, in which case the envisioned endothelialization of the vascular stent surface is actually a process in which ECs compete with SMCs for growth. The endothelial layer formed by unilateral emphasis on promoting ECs and neglecting inhibition of SMCs can hardly perform the multiple functions of normal ECs, and most studies seem to have no significant effect on ISR although better endothelialization can be obtained.

2.3

## DES coating with pro-endothelialization function
Although coated stents that inhibit the neointimal hyperplasia and promote re-endothelialization both aim to reduce stent failure and have made some progress in their respective directions, they target only one aspect of biocompatibility and usually at the cost of exacerbating the other [ ]. After the frustration of coatings that solely inhibit the neointimal hyperplasia or promote ECs, a considerable number of studies have focused on combining the two methods, aiming to achieve inhibition of neointimal hyperplasia while promoting ECs proliferation and migration to overcome the damage of ECs by nonspecific antiproliferative drugs [ ]. briefly describes these types of coatings. A schematic illustration of the role of the DES coating with pro-endothelialization in blood vessels is shown in A. 
For example, Jang et al. [ ] coated WKYMVm peptide and hyaluronic acid with sirolimus DES and observed better endothelial continuity in rabbits in vivo. However, the stent coated with WKYMVm peptide and hyaluronic acid had comparable restenosis rates to commercial DES (Xience PrimeTM). Yu et al. [ ] constructed a polymer coating to load rapamycin and further introduced REDV on top to promote ECs proliferation. The experimental results showed that the coated stent performed superior to BMS, but no significant difference from DES. Wang et al. [ ] constructed a stent surface with VEGF and rapamycin hierarchically. The schematic construction of the coating is shown in B. Results from experiments in a porcine model showed no difference from DES in reducing neointimal hyperplasia, although the VEGF rapamycin stent showed better endothelialization. Chen et al. [ ] coated activated protein C (APC) and rapamycin simultaneously on the surface of vascular stents to mitigate the adverse effects of rapamycin on healthy endothelial function. Animal experiment results showed that the APC/rapamycin coating was more effective at promoting re-endothelialization and preventing thrombosis compared to rapamycin coating alone. Hu [ ] et al. designed a layered drug-eluting coating. A platelet membrane glycoprotein IIIa monoclonal antibody (SZ-21) and a vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF121) was loaded on the innermost layer, while rapamycin was loaded on the third layer. The second and outermost layer, poly-l-lactic acid coating, is used for the slow and sustained release of the three drugs. There was no sudden release of the three drugs. Rapamycin has the fastest release rate and is used to inhibit SMCs. SZ-21 and VEGF121 are used for lasting repair of ECs. Mayer et al. [ ] designed a REDV-functionalized recombinant spider silk material eADF4(C16)-REDV as a drug delivery system. This coating not only facilitated the formation of a nearly complete endothelial layer but also exhibited slow enzymatic degradation. When loaded with everolimus, the drug release rate was comparable to that of commercial DES, supporting its potential as a novel drug delivery platform.
Kim et al. [ ] fabricated a dual-functionalized stent with two different surfaces. The schematic construction of the coating is shown in C. Dopamine and hyaluronic acid were first applied to the cobalt chromium stent surface, followed by the preparation ablumenal coating of sirolimus-eluting design. In an in vivo experimental study in pigs, the bifunctionalized stent exhibited lower intimal area and inflammation scores compared to BMS, but no comparison was made with DES. Shen et al. [ ] similarly designed an asymmetrically coated vascular stent. Biodegradable poly-L-lactic acid (PLLA) carrying sirolimus was coated on the abluminal surface of the stent, a layer-by-layer self-assembled chitosan/heparin membrane (C/H LBL) was applied on the stent luminal surface. The schematic construction of the coating is shown in D. In vivo studies in pigs showed that the asymmetrically designed vascular stent successfully inhibited intimal hyperplasia. The asymmetric design of the vascular stent alleviated the effect of sirolimus on the endothelial layer compared with conventional DES. Wang et al. [ ] also used ultrasonic atomization technology to design an asymmetric double coating on the surface of the stent, which could prevent thrombosis and inhibit SMCs.
In 2013, OrbusNeich introduced the Combo® Dual Therapy Stent, a stent that loads sirolimus on the side that abuts the vessel wall to inhibit SMCs proliferation and migration, while grafting anti-CD34 antibodies on the other surfaces to promote ECs proliferation and migration [ ]. A REMEDEE trial comparing the Combo stent with DES showed that the Combo stent had lower in-stent lumen loss than DES at 9 months, and the incidence of major adverse cardiac events was 8.9 % and 10.2 % for the Combo stent and DES, respectively, at 12 months [ ]. The Combo stent appears to be more superior to DES [ ]. However, an OCT study showed that at 1 year after stent implantation, the neointima thickness of the Combo stent was much higher than that of the DES, showing inferior performance to the DES [ ]. In summary, it is debatable whether the Combo bracket is superior to DES. Even though the Combo stent performed better, it did not address the root cause of ISR.
Although DES coatings with endothelialization function are designed with both inhibition of neointimal hyperplasia and promotion of re-endothelialization to a certain extent, it seems that such a mechanical simple splicing of the two approaches cannot achieve the desired effect. Ultimately, factors that specifically promote ECs can only alleviate rather than reversing the negative effects of antiproliferative drugs on ECs. Therefore, this DES coating with endothelialization function is not adequate for use. To further improve the biological performance of vascular stents, researchers have started to search for factors with multiple functions which both promote ECs and inhibit SMCs as the coating content of the stent surface.

2.4

## Multi-biological functional coatings with single molecular modifications
The strategy of adding endothelial-promoting components to DES did not lead to desirable results, suggesting that repairing diseased vessels from an endothelial-only perspective may not be sufficient. Researchers are beginning to realize that the ideal vascular stent surface should have both endothelial-promoting and SMCs-inhibiting properties. To achieve specific modulation of ECs and SMCs, the researchers discarded the non-specific anti-proliferative drugs in DES and tried many different specific molecules as alternatives. As a preliminary attempt, a number of single molecules with multiple specific functions have been introduced on the surface of vascular stents, including some gas signaling molecules such as NO, H2S, CO which are shown in , and some biomimetic bioactive molecules such as mimicing glycocalyx components and biomimetic polypeptides. A schematic illustration of the role of multi-biological function coatings with single molecular modification in blood vessels is shown in A. 
2.4.1

## Gas signal molecules
2.4.1.1

## NO
In the cardiovascular system, small molecule signaling gases, especially NO, have maintained considerable heat. Researchers have tried various approaches to confer NO release from the surface of stents. The important role of NO is its ability to activate guanylate cyclase (GC) in platelets and SMCs, which cyclizes guanosine triphosphate (GTP) into guanosine cyclic phosphate (cGMP). Through this pathway, NO can inhibit platelet adhesion and activation and suppress SMCs proliferation [ ]. However, NO has a limited diffusion distance and half-life under physical conditions, spreading only around 100 μm and degrading in the blood within a few seconds. Therefore, NO must be generated at the diseased area to achieve the desired effect. It is a very promising idea to combine the NO-producing part with a stent coating and use it as a functional platform. Researchers have tried to develop a variety of NO-producing coatings in the last decade to achieve rapid endothelialization and prevent ISR, which can be divided into (1) NO-releasing coatings [ , , ], (2) NO genotype coatings [ , , ], (3) NO-catalytic coatings [ , ] according to the NO production mode.
The initial concept of NO coating was to add exogenous NO storage materials to the surface of the stent, commonly referred to as NO donors, such as N-diazeniumdiolates (NONOates) [ , ], S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine (SNAP) [ ], and nitric oxide donating residues [ ]. Elnaggar et al. [ ] developed NO-releasing stents with liposomes encapsulated with NONOates by a layer-by-layer method. The coating released NO continuously over 5 days and exhibited a facilitative effect on ECs. Experimental results in a porcine model of coronary artery injury showed that the endothelial coverage and stenosis rates of the NO donor stent were superior to those of BMS. Chen et al. [ ] introduced SNAP into rapamycin coating and co-cultured ECs and SMCs. SMCs proliferation was further inhibited on rapamycin-SNAP coating compared to rapamycin coating, while ECs was alleviated to some extent. However, the limited storage, early abrupt release, and late insufficient release of NO have greatly limited the clinical application of NO-releasing coatings [ ].
Owing to the limitations of NO-releasing coatings in practical use, researchers have refocused on NO genotypic coatings. Nitric oxide synthase (NOS) plays a very important role in the cardiovascular system. Both endothelial NOS (eNOS) and inducible NOS (iNOS) can produce NO in the vasculature [ ]. Given the active role played by NOS in NO production, researchers have created a series of therapeutic approaches around NOS [ ]. NO genotype coating is a strategy to load NOS-promoting genes into a coating on the stent surface. Sharif et al. [ ] constructed a plasmid DNA complexed with liposome-based carriers for the stent surface. Experimental results in the New Zealand rabbit model showed that the endothelial coverage of NO genotype-coated stents was significantly higher than that of BMS. Transgene expression was found to be maximal at 28 days post-stenting. However, the restenosis rate of NO genotype-coated stents was not statistically different from that of BMS. Fishbein et al. [ ] developed an innovative stent-based system for gene delivery, enabling localized arterial gene transfer using adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors to enhance iNOS expression. in vitro experiments showed that NO production from iNOS stents was 16-fold higher than that of BMS after 72 h. The stent was implanted into rat carotid arteries, and iNOS expression associated with the iNOS stent was 23-fold higher in rat tissues implanted with the iNOS stent than in BMS after 8 days, showing excellent performance in promoting NOS expression. Although NO genotypic coating is a promising innovative strategy, genetic instability, off-target transduction that is difficult to control, complex experimental steps and high costs limit clinical use [ ].
Although NO release-type coatings and NO genotype coatings can achieve NO release, they have shortcomings in design or practicality. To ensure a steady and regulated release of NO, researchers have developed NO catalytic coatings. S-nitrosothiol (RSNO) is an endogenous NO donor with great potential for sustained local supply of NO [ ]. It has been shown that Se and Cu with similar catalytic activity to glutathione peroxidase (GPx) can continuously catalyze RSNO to generate endogenous NO. Such NO catalytically active molecules as catalysts are not consumed during the catalytic reaction itself [ , ] and are a potential element for long-term catalytic RSNO. Yang et al. [ ] developed a "one-pot" method inspired by mussel adhesion proteins for the copolymerization of selenocysteine (SeCA) and dopamine (Dopa) to form NO catalytic coatings on 316L SS stents. The schematic construction of the coating is shown in B. In vivo animal study showed that SeCA-coated stents exhibited superior reendothelialization and reduced levels of intimal hyperplasia compared to BMS. Jin et al. [ ]constructed a NO catalytic coating by adjusting the coordination levels of silk fibroin/chitosan with copper ions, which demonstrated good biocompatibility, adjustable NO release, and a simple fabrication process. Zhao et al. [ ] deposited CuSURMOFs on alkali-activated titanium surfaces by the LBL method to obtain CuBTC coatings, which was easy to control surface chemistry and NO release by changing the number of LBL deposition cycles. The schematic construction of the coating is shown in C. However, the limited amount of RSNO in the body limits the application of this coating to a certain extent. Li et al. [ ] developed a selenium-functionalized polymer, PCU-SeSe, and applied it as a coating on the surface of BMS, which were then implanted into the iliac arteries of rabbits. The experimental results showed that this coating could continuously and controllably catalyze the release of NO, exhibiting excellent antithrombotic properties and effectiveness in preventing ISR. Du et al. [ ] developed a universal coating, Pseudo-Mefp-5, which mimics Mytilus edulis foot protein 5(Mefp-5). The “reinforced concrete-like” structure of this coating imparts exceptional mechanochemical robustness. By grafting SeCA onto the surface of the universal coating, the stents can continuously generate NO in vivo. Animal experiments showed that these coated stents exhibit excellent antithrombotic properties and promote endothelialization. In conclusion, the NO catalytic coating achieves a continuous, stable and effective release of NO.

2.4.1.2

## CO
In addition to NO mentioned previously, CO is another gas signaling molecule that plays an important role in the human body at trace concentrations. In the last twenty years, CO has shifted from being known solely as a poisonous gas to gaining recognition among researchers for its potential therapeutic benefits, including anti-inflammatory and cell-protective properties. Its vasoprotective effects have garnered significant interest, especially due to its capacity to prevent intimal hyperplasia [ ]. It has been recognized as one of the gas messengers that regulate metabolism [ ]. In the cardiovascular system, CO can inhibit thrombosis and enhance endothelial function through the cGMP pathway [ ], and has a series of desirable functions such as inhibition of monocyte aggregation, SMCs migration, and enhancement of EPCs adhesion [ , ]. In addition, CO seems to be more stable in a physiological environment compared to the short half-life and instability of NO. However, due to the high affinity of CO to hemoglobin, modulation of the lesion by direct inhalation of CO is not recommended. Currently, CO is released mainly through coordination with transition metal elements such as Mn and Ru to form CO-releasing molecules (CORM) [ ]. CORM can be decomposed by H2O2 in the environment of oxidative stress to release CO [ ]. Using and consuming free radicals at the lesion while generating the therapeutic gas CO, the use of CORM for the treatment of lesions seems to be one of the highly promising modalities.
Inspired by the "self-healing" of organisms, Wang et al. [ ] proposed a novel bioactive zinc metal-organic frameworks (Zn-MOFs)-based carbon monoxide (CO) delivery nanoparticles coated with hyaluronic acid (HA)-CAG peptide (denoted as HA-CAG@ZIF8@CO), which can simultaneously target and regulate ECs and macrophages and enhance their interactions, with a view to amplify the synergistic cooperation in vascular remodeling. It also provides a new method for loading CO onto the stent surface, Ma et al. [ ] prepared a biological surface for CO release by immobilizing sodium alginate/carboxymethyl chitosan (SA/CS) complexes on titanium dioxide nanotube arrays and grafting COMR-401. The CO was stably released under the condition of cysteine addition. In vitro experiments showed that the coating not only reduced platelet adhesion and activation, but also enhanced endothelial function and elevated the expression of VEGF and NO, which may open new avenues for enhancing the biocompatibility of blood contact materials.

2.4.1.3

## H2S
In addition to NO and CO, H2S also has a powerful role in the cardiovascular system. In 1989, scientists first detected H2S in the human brain [ ] and subsequently identified H2S as a potential neural and vasodilatory signaling molecule [ ]. And like NO, H2S is toxic at high concentrations but exhibits extremely important functions at physiological concentrations [ ]. Numerous research studies have demonstrated that H2S significantly influences vascular cell activities, including inflammation, apoptosis, the cell cycle, cytoprotection, as well as mitochondrial metabolic function [ ]. Within the vascular system, H2S plays a role in regulating vascular tone, suppressing proliferation, and influencing apoptosis and autophagy in SMCs through bidirectional effects. Moreover, the onset of various diseases linked to vascular remodeling, including hypertension, atherosclerosis, has been proved to be associated with reduced H2S synthesis [ ]. Increasing evidence indicates that H2S helps resist atherosclerosis, primarily through mechanisms such as reducing oxidative stress, exerting anti-inflammatory actions, and regulating ion channels to safeguard the vascular endothelium. Interestingly, vascular H2S has been identified as a target of estrogen and plays a role in the mechanism through which estrogen protects the vascular endothelium from atherosclerosis [ ].
Lu et al. [ ] attempted to use a polydopamine surface to load the H2S donor ACS14 in layers of self-assembled pH-responsive coatings. The schematic construction of the coating is shown in D. ACS14 was released within 60 days without early abrupt release. In vitro cellular experiments showed that ACS14 promoted ECs proliferation and inhibited SMCs. In the rabbit iliac artery model, the neointimal area of the ACS14 stent was much lower than that of the BMS, demonstrating the strong inhibition of ISR by H2S. Han et al. [ ]used catechol hyaluronic acid (C-HA) and cystamine (Cys) to construct hydrogel coatings. An intelligent biomimetic coating was created by incorporating the H2S-releasing compound allicin into the hydrogel. The disulfide linkage in Cys rendered the crosslinked network sensitive to redox changes in the inflammatory and oxidative microenvironment, intelligently releasing the drug and H2S to counteract the adverse effects of stent placement. In vivo studies in rats have shown lower stenosis rates and inflammation scores with H2S stents. However, studies on immobilizing H2S donors on the surface of stents are scanty and greater efforts are still needed.

2.4.2

## Biomimetic bioactive molecules
2.4.2.1

## Mimicing glycocalyx components
In addition to endogenous gas signaling molecules, many of the constituents that maintain the stability of the cardiovascular system are present in cell membranes in the body. The presence of a large number of glycocalyx structures in the cell membrane of ECs has been noted, of which glycosaminoglycans are key components. Glycosaminoglycans include acetyl heparan sulfate, chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate, keratan sulfate, and hyaluronan. These structures can modulate the vascular microenvironment at short distances, inhibit fibrinogen adhesion, inhibit SMCs proliferation migration [ ]. In the case of heparin, for example, numerous studies have demonstrated that endogenous heparin has the ability to repair damaged vascular endothelium. In addition to accelerating the inactivation of thrombin by increasing the affinity of antithrombin3 for thrombin, the presence of heparin results in the enhancement of the normal negative charge of the vascular endothelium as a means to further inhibit thrombus formation [ ]. Bae et al. [ ] sought to evaluate the anti-thrombotic and EC-promoting properties of a dopamine-induced heparin coating on the surface of stent. The results of in vitro experiments showed thromboresistance and stability of heparin on the surface. Also, the stent exhibited proliferation of ECs and inhibition of SMCs. In the rabbit iliac artery model, heparin stents showed better reendothelialization and lower stenosis rates. Wu et al. [ ] immobilized hyaluronic acid on the surface of polydopamine coating by chemical coupling (Michael addition, Schiff base reaction and electrostatic adsorption). The optimal concentration of hyaluronic acid was screened by adjusting the concentration of hyaluronic acid, which showed multifunctional properties such as ECs promotion and SMCs inhibition at this optimal concentration. In a porcine femoral artery model, the hyaluronic acid stent exhibited a higher degree of endothelialization and SMCs contractile phenotype expression.

2.4.2.2

## Biomimetic polypeptides
In addition, some peptides with specific sequences have been used to echance the endothelial state. Zhou et al. [ ]synthesized a β-peptide polymer named as NM40CH60, coated with 316 SS wire, and implanted into the SD rats. E illustrates the design of the coating. The rat model of the abdominal aorta showed the NM40CH60-functionalized wire had a more intact and mature ECs. Chen et al. [ ] designed a dual mimic coating based on extracellular matrix. The structure-mimic was created by forming a nanofiber (NF) framework through the polymerization of polysiloxane, followed by the addition of amine groups to serve as a 3D reservoir for loading recombinant humanized collagen type III (rhCOL III). Mild inflammatory response, antithrombotic properties, promotion of ECs growth, and inhibition of excessive neointimal hyperplasia in an in vivo trial in rabbits proved that ECM mimetic coatings provide a promising way for vascular implant modification. Similarly, Wu et al. [ ]covalently grafted rhCOL III onto an amine-rich surface prepared from dopamine and polyethyleneimine, creating an rhCOL III coating. Cell experiments showed that this coating promoted endothelialization and induced SMCs to shift toward a contractile phenotype. Animal experiments demonstrated that the coated stents improved vascular healing in rabbits and pigs. Li et al. [ ] constructed a passivation protein-adhesion platform with polyphenols. The polyphenols not only enhanced the adsorption capacity of the passivating proteins but also conferred biological properties associated with polyphenols. Results from animal experiments demonstrated that the coating facilitated improved endothelialization of the stent and increased the synthesis of eNOS. Suryalakshmi et al. [ ] attempted to graft placental anticoagulant protein (Annexin V) onto a mussel-inspired surface, creating a genetically engineered protein coating. This coating demonstrated inhibitory effects on SMCs proliferation and platelet adhesion, while promoting rapid endothelialization. After numerous explorations, researchers have initially achieved the immobilization of a single factor on the stent surface, giving the surface multiple biological properties. Although this type of stent outperforms single-function stents, it still appears to be inadequate in dealing with complex physiological environments.

2.5

## Multi-biological functional coatings with multiple molecular modifications
The human vasculature is a complex physiological environment in which various factors govern and influence each other. Although a single specific molecule can be effective, its influence may be difficult to achieve rapid modulation of diseased vessels. Therefore, a more potent specific regulation of various cells by introducing multiple specific molecules to the surface of the stent may be one of the ways to strengthen the function of the stent. For example, synergistic reinforcement is achieved by immobilizing two different cell membrane components, or by taking one gas signaling molecule with one cell membrane component. presents the preparation methods of two multi-biological functional coatings with multiple molecular modifications. briefly describes these types of coatings. A schematic illustration of the role of multi-biological function coatings with multiple molecular modification in blood vessels is shown in A. 
By simulating both the function (NO release) and structure (glycocalyx composition) of ECs, Lyu et al. [ ] successfully constructed an endothelial bionic coating by capacitive plasma deposition of allylamine (Aa) to aminate the metal surface, and then grafted Cu-DOTA, poly(allylamine) (PAa) and hyaluronic acid sequentially using carbodiimide chemistry. The iliac artery model in rabbits revealed that the endothelial bionic stent was much more endothelialized than BMS and showed an advantage in reducing ISR. Similarly, Rao et al. [ ] developed a dopamine-copper (DA-Cu) surface, onto which they grafted the nitric oxide precursor L-arginine (Arg) and heparin(Hep), creating a DA-Cu-Arg-Hep surface coating. The DA-Cu network continuously catalyzes NO production. Arg generates NO via eNOS, while Hep increases eNOS levels, forming a positive feedback loop. Yang et al. [ ] developed a vascular stent capable of releasing NO and recruiting EPCs using a two-step method. The schematic construction of the coating is shown in B. By DBCO modification of the active molecules TPS and SeCA, the two active molecules could be firmly anchored to the Mfp adhesion structure coated with N3 groups. By screening the polarity of the active molecules in different ratios, the optimized coating exhibited the desired vascular cell-specific regulatory function. A rabbit iliac artery model showed that the coating induced better endothelialization with lower in-stent stenosis rates. Chen et al. [ ] developed a tough hydrogel coating that can release NO by mimicking the extracellular matrix. The schematic construction of the coating is shown in C. The hydrogel consisted mainly of alginate and gelatin, which were resemble the hyaluronic acid and collagen found in the ECM. The mechanical strength of the hydrogel could be changed by adjusting the ratio of biopolymerization. Due to the chemical binding of organoselenium species to alginate, the hydrogels were able to catalyze the production of NO continuously. In vivo model experiments and genetic analysis in rabbits and pigs have shown that this hydrogel coating, which mimics the extracellular matrix with catalytic NO production, had specific functions such as ECs promotion, thrombus and SMCs inhibition, and sufficiently tough mechanical properties to prevent coating deformation upon stent propagation, ultimately enabling rapid recovery of the natural endothelium. Kural et al. [ ] provided an interesting strategy where NO donor DetaNONOate and Fas ligand were loaded into the coating. The schematic construction of the coating is shown in D. The NO released by the NO donor transferred the intracellular Fas receptor of SMCs to the cell membrane. The apoptotic mechanism was initiated when the Fas ligand bound to the Fas receptor, while the ECs was resistant to this pathway. In porcine coronary artery experiments, the coating significantly inhibited SMCs proliferation but preserved endothelial viability, making it a highly promising coating strategy.
Chen et al. [ ] applied heparin and collagen coatings on titanium surfaces to enhance the compatibility of vascular stents with EPCs. In vitro experiments demonstrated the favorable effects of the coating on ECs and platelets. Similarly, Lin et al. [ ] prepared a multi-biological functional coating by simultaneously immobilizing heparin and collagen on the 316L SS surface with the LBL approach. This coating exhibited desirable functions of antithrombotic and EC-preferred properties. Li et al. [ ] developed a multifunctional coating based on phospholipids, incorporating phospholipid-based polymers, type I collagen (Col-I), and Arg-Glu-Asp-Val (REDV) peptide with LBL technique. The results of multiple cell cultures showed that through the interaction of the three molecules, the coating inhibited platelet activation and adhesion, and also inhibited SMCs and promoted ECs. The coating is expected to be used in blood contact devices such as cardiovascular stents in the future. Wei et al. [ ] developed a versatile polymer layer by depositing random copolymers of poly(ethylene glycol) methacrylate (PEGMA) and glycidyl methacrylate (GMA) to inhibit nonspecific binding and facilitate the covalent attachment of REDV peptide for selective interaction with ECs. The coating exhibited the desirable properties of inhibiting SMCs and promoting ECs adhesion and proliferation through the synergistic effect of the anti-fouling effect of PEG and the selective enhancement of ECs adhesion and proliferation by REDV. Ye et al. [ ] developed an innovative multifunctional layer by co-immobilizing the sulfated polysaccharide fucoidan from brown algae and laminin to replicate vascular intimal conditions, aiming to enhance rapid endothelialization, reduce ISR, and improve hemocompatibility. E illustrates the design of the coating. Biocompatibility assessments revealed that the fucoidan/laminin multilayer coating exhibited reduced platelet attachment and beneficial anticoagulant characteristics. Moreover, the fucoidan/laminin combination exhibited the ability to specifically control the growth patterns of vascular cells, indicating its potential use in enhancing the surfaces of vascular stents or grafts.
Introducing a variety of beneficial biological factors onto the surface of vascular stents has become an effective strategy. The diverse types of biological factors and their synergistic effects bring significant flexibility and freedom to this approach. However, this strategy still does not target the core pathology underlying atherosclerosis, which leads to cellular dysfunction. Therefore, addressing the pathological environment of lesions to maintain the normal physiological function of newly formed vascular cells becomes particularly important.

2.6

## Coatings for repairing pathological environments
As clinical research on cardiovascular disease continues, researchers are gradually realizing that the atherosclerotic site is always in an environment of strong inflammatory stimulation and strong oxidative stress [ ]. Although the existing stent coating technology can achieve specific modulation of ECs, SMCs and other cells, the nascent healthy endothelium is quickly damaged again by the long-existing pathological environment, resulting in the inability of the nascent endothelial layer to perform its normal physiological functions. In other words, ECs coverage on the stent surface does not imply complete recovery of endothelial function. Therefore, how to use the stent surface coating to improve or even heal the pathological environment at the lesion is another challenge that needs to be broken.
Atherosclerosis is essentially a chronic inflammatory response and is a very complex process. Inflammation plays an important role in all stages of atherosclerosis and is the common basis for physiological and pathological changes during the development and progression of atherosclerosis [ ]. Oxidative stress is defined as an imbalance between pro-oxidant reactive oxygen species (ROS) and their antioxidants. Abnormally high levels of ROS-induced oxidative stress have been reported to be closely associated with the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis [ ]. ROS are typically generated by NADPH oxidase, xanthine oxidase, the mitochondrial electron transport chain, and uncoupled eNOS [ ]. An abundance of reactive ROS creates an oxidative setting that transforms low-density lipoprotein(LDL) into oxidized low-density lipoprotein(ox-LDL) [ ]. At the same time, excess ROS inactivates NO and generates peroxynitrite, which causes uncoupling of eNOS and further reduces the efficiency of NO production [ ]. If not properly regulated, excessive ROS can even cause oxidative damage to DNA, lipids and proteins [ ].
Since inflammation, oxidative stress and atherosclerosis are closely linked, strategies to develop anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative stress coatings to modulate the pathological microenvironment may have great therapeutic potential. The main strategies currently focus on exogenous and endogenous substances. The main exogenous ones are natural polyphenols including flavonoids such as resveratrol quercetin and rutin, while endogenous substances include itaconic acid, exosomes, hormones and enzymes. A schematic illustration of the role of coatings for repairing pathological environments in blood vessels is shown in A. 
2.6.1

## Flavonoids
A large body of literature confirms that flavonoids have a potent protective effect on the cardiovascular system [ , , , ]. Flavonoids are widely found in the plant kingdom [ ]. The powerful anti-inflammatory and antioxidant capacities of flavonoids have been well documented [ , , ]. Long-term consumption of flavonoid-rich foods significantly increases blood antioxidant enzyme activity [ ] and lowers total and LDL cholesterol, while having no effect on HDL [ ]. Based on the long-term inflammation and oxidative stress state at the atherosclerotic plaque, the selection of flavonoids as loading drugs or covalent grafting of flavonoids is a promising design.
Various flavonoids have been attempted to be loaded on the surface of the stent. Lenzuni et al. [ ] loaded rutin in zein (the active layer) and cross-linked alginate (the sacrificial layer) by a simple impregnation and spraying method. The schematic construction of the coating is shown in B. The novel drug carriers discarded traditional polymers such as PLLA and chose the natural material zein to further enhance the anti-inflammatory inflammation level. The rutin-releasing stent exhibited a stable release for 21 days as well as a pro-proliferative effect on ECs. In addition to loading single flavonoids, researchers have also experimented with the synergistic effects of multiple flavonoid compounds. Kleinedler et al. [ ] explored the optimal combination of resveratrol and quercetin concentrations. Under an optimized process, this release coating containing multiple flavonoids released flavonoids in a controlled manner over 28 days and exhibited significant inhibition of macrophage activation, SMCs proliferation and platelet activation. In addition to drug-eluting-like loading method, covalent grafting is also one of the ways in which flavonoids are immobilized on the stent surface. Bedair et al. [ ] explored the effects of covalent immobilization of gallic acid and rutin on lesions. Gallic acid and rutin were grafted onto the cobalt-chromium alloy surface via carbodiimide chemistry and Mannich reaction, respectively, and exhibited modulatory effects promoting ECs and inhibiting SMCs. Meanwhile, gallic acid exhibited inhibition of IL-6 factor, which was superior to that of rutin in a covalently immobilized manner. However, this method of immobilizing flavonoid compounds required tedious preparation steps and had limited effect on the repair of inflammatory pre-oxidative stress at the lesion due to insufficient reactive sites on the metal surface, resulting in a low density of flavonoids. To address this challenge, Liu et al. [ ] used a polydopamine coating technique to provide more reactive sites for flavonoids to increase density. To counteract the detrimental effects of the pathological microenvironment, they enhanced stents with baicalin(BCL), a natural and versatile flavonoid, by employing poly-dopamine (PDA) coating techniques. The stent with an optimal BCL immobilization density (around 2.03 μg/cm2) effectively promoted ECs growth and prevented SMCs proliferation. At the same time, the coating also modulated a series of risk factors such as inflammation, oxidative stress, and high lipids to inhibit endothelial dysfunction and oxidized low-density lipoprotein (ox-LDL)-induced macrophage foam cell formation. In a rat abdominal aorta model, the BCL stent exhibited significant anti-ISR, anti-inflammatory, and endothelial regeneration promoting functions.
The above studies have shown that flavonoids have satisfactory repairing effects on inflammation and oxidative stress, whether by loading or covalent immobilization, and are a highly promising natural compound.

2.6.2

## Itaconic acid
Numerous recent studies have indicated that itaconic acid is crucial for maintaining cardiovascular equilibrium, particularly within the inflammatory system [ , ]. Itaconic acid, a byproduct of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, is closely linked to the polarization activity of macrophages [ , ]. Overproduction of itaconic acid inhibits the TCA cycle and promotes anti-inflammatory behavior [ , , ]. Therefore, itaconic acid is a very promising drug that may enable the modulation of inflammation. However, due to the very active double bond structure in itaconic acid, it is prone to inactivation [ ]. Therefore, how to protect the structure of itaconic acid has also become a major challenge.
Qian et al. [ ] first proposed the “spongy skin” based 4-octyl itaconate(OI) eluting system, which utilized the capillary-driven wicking mechanism to allow for a controlled, swift, and protective incorporation of functional agents, facilitating the on-demand delivery of therapeutic molecules in line with the “precision medicine” concept [ ]. C explains in detail the strategy of delivery and the mechanism of drug action. They suggested a porous cardiovascular stent utilizing a “spongy skin” technique for the controlled release of 4-octyl itaconate, demonstrating its dual-regulatory impact on enhancing vascular remodeling. When activated by LPS, macrophages on OI coatings demonstrated reduced ROS generation, decreased release of inflammatory cytokines like IL-6 and TNF-α, and a transition in phenotype from M1 to M2. Furthermore, in addition to exhibiting significant anti-inflammatory effects, the coating also demonstrated specific inhibition of SMCs. In a porcine model, the OI stent exhibited a stronger inhibitory effect on ISR.

2.6.3

## Exosomes
Exosomes and the cardiovascular system have a very complex relationship which is an important factor for the stability of the cardiovascular system [ , , ]. Exosomes, typically measuring around 100 nm in diameter, are a type of extracellular vesicle [ ]. The mechanisms of action of exosomes are still being explored, but it has been established that exosomes play a very important role in intercellular information interaction, maintenance of homeostasis, and repair of case function [ , ]. The important role of exosomes on the cardiovascular system, including the regulation of the inflammatory system, and endothelial function, has been shown [ , ]. Engineered exosomes, created by modifying natural membrane vesicles, offer benefits such as targeted delivery, prolonged action, and detectability, making them a promising alternative for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases [ ]. Therefore, it may be a more effective strategy to load exosomes onto the surface of stents and release them at the lesion for specific regulation of various cells.
Hu et al. [ ] constructed a ROS-responsive exosome coating where mesenchymal stem cell exosomes (MSC-XOs) were immobilized on 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (DSPE), which is a diacyl lipid and has been widely used for exosome membrane insertion. The schematic construction of the coating is shown in D. Under the influence of H2O2, MSC-XOs detached from the stent surface and repaired the pathological environment. This MSC-XOs coating exhibits characteristic functions of pro-EC and SMCs inhibition. In the Apoe−/− atherosclerotic rat model, the MSC-XOs stent not only reduced neointimal hyperplasia but also reduced ROS levels and gene expression of various inflammatory chemokines. In addition, the increase in MRC1 and CD163, markers of M2 macrophages, further established the anti-inflammatory effect of the MSC-XOs stent. Zou et al. [ ] similarly used MSC exosomes to confer anti-inflammatory properties on the stent surface. Pro-efferocytotic agents were enclosed within liposome-based multivesicular compartments and attached to vascular stents. This multivesicular pro-efferocytic integration could deliver exosomes to plaques under the Lp-PLA2 environment for macrophage efferocytosis recovery and clear apoptotic cells to resolve the chronic inflammation. In addition to exhibiting EC-promoting and SMC-inhibiting functions, the coating also inhibited the inflammatory activation out of the diseased vessels. A rat model of abdominal aorta showed superior endothelialization and ISR of the exosome stent and a significant decrease in the concentration of Lp-PLA2 at the lesion, suggesting further repair of the lesion environment. Hou et al. [ ] isolated exosomes from whole blood of volunteers and immobilized them onto the surface of a polydopamine (PDA) coating by electrostatic adsorption. This coated surface not only exhibited elevated endothelial function, but also promoted the transition of SMCs to a contractile phenotype. At the same time, the coating exhibited a modulatory effect on macrophages from M1 to M2 phenotype, showing the anti-inflammatory properties of the coating and further promoting the endothelialization process. The SD rat carotid artery model confirmed the good antiproliferative properties of the PDA/Exosome coating.
The role of exosomes in cardiovascular disease is still in the stage of extensive research, and the mechanisms involved still need to be explored in depth. Although the strategy of stent surface loading of exosomes is just in its infancy, it has shown promising prospects.

2.6.4

## Hormones
Epidemiological studies have shown that premenopausal women have a lower prevalence of CVD compared to men of the same age. However, the incidence and severity of CVD in women increases after menopause [ ]. It has been noted that estrogens have a natural protective effect on the cardiovascular system [ ], particularly through estrogen receptor (ER)-mediated signaling pathways and/or direct effects on cellular oxidative processes to protect cells from oxidative stress [ , ]. The use of natural estrogens as drugs loaded on the surface of stents to intervene in the pathological environment seems to be one of the promising approaches.
Oh et al. [ ] prepared a nanofiber coating loaded with β-estradiol, one of the most abundant and biologically active estrogens. Stimulated by H2O2 (600 μM), β-estradiol (0.5 mM) significantly increased cell survival and induced NO production. β-estradiol achieved a stable release for 4 weeks under simulated physiological conditions and had a significant scavenging effect on ROS residues in the ECs, greatly improving endothelial survival and recovery of endothelial function.

2.6.5

## Enzymes
A variety of enzymes also play an integral role in maintaining the stability of the cardiovascular system, such as cyclooxygenase, nitric oxide synthase and catalase [ ]. The most important of the cyclooxygenases are COX-1 and COX-2, which control the delicate balance between promoting and resisting thrombosis. Nitric oxide synthase, on the other hand, is responsible for the release of NO, which regulates the physiological behavior of SMCs and platelets through the cGMP pathway. In an atherosclerotic environment, due to the imbalance between oxidation and reduction, catalase is unable to break down the excess oxygen free radicals that are constantly damaging the cardiovascular system. H2O2 is an important component of ROS. The healthy body can achieve a delicate balance between its own production and scavenging of H2O2, for example through the enzyme catalase, which removes excess H2O2. However, when this balance is disturbed, oxidative stress can continue to damage the entire cardiovascular system [ , ]. It has been shown that in pathological settings, the amount of catalase tends to be lower than normal [ ]. Therefore, introducing bioactive enzymes capable of decomposing oxygen radicals to the surface of vascular stents may also be a feasible strategy to repair the pathological environment.
Cui et al. [ ] developed a titanium dioxide(TiO2) vascular stent with biological stealth and anti-oxidative stress properties through the sequential integration of functional proteins. Through the activation of TiO2 by UV light, peroxidase can maintain its activity during immobilization and eventually co-cover the TiO2 surface with autologous proteins. This TiO2-UV-CAT stent not only achieved the functions of anticoagulation, ECs promotion and SMCs inhibition, but also exhibited the inhibition of inflammation and oxidative stress. Furthermore, the in vivo inflammatory reaction to bovine catalase, a foreign protein on the TiO2-UV-CAT, was eradicated. This could be attributed to the minimal unfolding of the secondary structure in immobilized catalase and the masking effect of rat self-derived albumin.
Currently, although vascular stent coatings targeting the pathological environment at atherosclerotic plaques are in their infancy, they are showing a blossoming trend. This type of stent focuses on the modulation of the pathological environment while specifically regulating vascular cells, and shows better results than traditional multifunctional stents, which is expected to be a reference for next-generation vascular stents.

3

## Conclusions and future perspectives
In the past few decades, there have been breakthroughs in the design of functional surface coatings for vascular stents. This article summarizes the various developmental directions of vascular stent surface functionalization since the introduction of DES. Stents aimed at inhibiting neointimal hyperplasia have shown effectiveness in suppressing SMCs proliferation but have damaged or failed to repair ECs. Stents designed to repair the endothelial layer and promote ECs proliferation but overlook the competitive proliferation of SMCs and the abnormal phenotype of ECs. To achieve a balance between promoting endothelial repair and inhibiting neointimal hyperplasia, pro-endothelial repair factors were added to DES. However, this simple combination did not seem to produce better results. Other stents have introduced molecules on their surface that specifically inhibit SMCs proliferation while promoting ECs, showing excellent results. Building on this, the approach was improved by using multiple molecules to work synergistically. Currently, an emerging branch of stent surface engineering focuses on repairing the pathological site by addressing inflammation and oxidative stress at the diseased vessel, and these types of stents have shown a promising trend in development. The development of stent surface coatings is moving in a more promising direction.
However, the current research is far from the end of the line for the development of vascular stents. Stents at this stage are still focused on how to achieve rapid endothelialization and inhibition of neointimal hyperplasia. No progress has been made in the treatment of the necrotic core at the lesion. The design of vascular stents to treat the physiological environment and fully regenerate pathological vessels remains a major challenge to be solved. Despite significant advancements in the development of functional surface coatings for vascular stents over the past 10 years, achieving an ideal stent capable of managing the regenerative repair of damaged vessels remains a distant goal.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Chuanzhe Wang: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Conceptualization. Jie Lv: Writing – review & editing. Mengyi Yang: Writing – original draft. Yan Fu: Writing – review & editing. Wenxuan Wang: Writing – review & editing. Xin Li: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Conceptualization. Zhilu Yang: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Resources, Conceptualization. Jing Lu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Conceptualization.

## Declaration of competing interest
Prof. Zhilu Yang is an editorial board member for Bioactive Materials and was not involved in the editorial review or the decision to publish this article. All authors declare that there are no competing interests.

 

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project 32171326, 82072072, 32261160372, 32371377, 82470532), the Leading Talent Project of Guangzhou Development District (2020-L013), the Guang Dong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2022B1515130010, 2021A1515111035), 10.13039/501100003453Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (2022A1515011442), Dongguan Science and Technology of Social Development Program (20231800906311, 20221800906322).
Peer review under responsibility of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd.