3810mtbioMaterials Today BioMater Today BioElsevierPMC1239886212398862123988624089335110.1016/j.mtbio.2025.102238Advancements in nanomedicine for modulating ischemic cardiomyopathy therapy
RenXiangyi WangYan YangJian ZhuMengli ZhangLing LiLin aCore Facilities of West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, ChinabMed-X Center for Materials, College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, ChinacInstitute of Systems Epidemiology, West China School of Public Health and West China Fourth Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, China⁎Corresponding author. author. renxy@wchscu.cn
⁎⁎Corresponding author. lilin93@scu.edu.cn
238202534102238102238192025© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Ischemic cardiomyopathy receives significant attention due to its high mortality and morbidity worldwide. Numerous research has revealed that blood supply, ROS, inflammation, and thrombus play pivotal roles in the progression of myocardial damage and remodeling. The central approach for managing ischemic cardiomyopathy is the administration of therapeutic drugs against the pathological mechanism. Despite the development of abundant agents with therapeutic benefits, current therapeutic efficiency is insufficient for further clinical application due to its intrinsic limitations, including poor delivery efficiency and low retention capability. It is urged to seek alternative strategies to improve drug bioavailability and therapeutic index with high biocompatibility. With the emergence of nanotechnology, nanomedicine offer significant improvements to effectively deliver therapeutic molecules for treating ischemic cardiomyopathy. Recently, many biomaterials have been developed to enhance the efficiency of therapeutic drugs for the treatment of myocardial ischemic-related disease. This review summarizes the recent advances of nanomedicine in the treatment of ischemic cardiomyopathy, focusing on antithrombotic therapy, ROS-scavenging therapy, anti-inflammatory therapy, revascularization, and improving electrical conduction. We also discuss the potential limitations and further development of these therapeutic approaches to treat ischemic cardiomyopathy.
Keywords: Myocardial ischemic injury, Nanomedicine, ROS scavenger, Inflammation, Angiogenesis

## Graphical abstract
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Jun 9; Revised 2025 Aug 21; Accepted 2025 Aug 23; Collection date 2025 Oct.

1.

## Introduction
Coronary heart disease triggered by coronary artery infarction presents serious public health threat with high morbidity and mortality worldwide [ , ]. Ischemic cardiomyopathy is the major cause of fatal coronary artery disease, accounting for one-third of all deaths annually [ , , ]. Oxygen and energy supply are limited in the ischemic region due to myocardial coronary artery infarction (Myocardial infarction, MI), leading to rapid metabolic compensatory and even cardiomyocyte death [ , ]. In a clinical setting, gold-standard therapy for ischemic cardiomyopathy is timely restoration of blood supply by pharmacological therapy and surgical intervention [ , , ]. While these therapeutic strategies have shown clinical benefits in improving cardiomyocyte survival and myocardial function, effective treatment of ischemic injury still remained challenging. For example, thrombolytic therapy by recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) has been approved for clinical acute myocardial ischemia, but the adverse effect of hemorrhage constrains its clinical applications [ , ]. Notably, restored reperfusion of the myocardium will trigger further cardiac damage (Myocardial ischemic/reperfusion injury, IR) by mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) [ , ]. Antioxidants with ROS scavenging capability have been developed to treat myocardial reperfusion injury in preclinical models [ , , ]. However, many non-enzymatic antioxidants did not provide tangible therapeutic effects in clinical studies. Moreover, the application prospect of natural enzymes with ROS scavenging capability, such as superoxide dismutase (SOD), is limited by the enzymatic stability and bioavailability [ , ]. Therefore, it is urgently needed to develop alternative approaches for achieving meaningful ischemic cardiomyopathy therapy.
The emerging fields of nanomedicine and nanotechnology hold the promise of the rational design of strategies to facilitate ischemic cardiomyopathy therapy with high biocompatibility [ , , ]. Advances have been observed in the area of nanomedicine for the treatment of diverse ischemic-related diseases, including ischemic stroke, myocardial ischemic injury, and renal ischemic injury [ , , , ]. Taking advantage of the physicochemical properties of nanomedicine, including surface modification, intrinsic structure-property, and high-specifical delivery efficiency, the therapeutic efficacy of these modalities in ischemic cardiomyopathy management can be improved [ , , , ]. For example, nanoparticles with multiple enzymatic-like activities have been utilized as artificial enzymes to effectively treat myocardial ischemia [ ]. Specifically, substantial studies have shown that nanotechnology significantly improves the targeting ability and reduces systemic adverse effects of loaded therapeutics, such as enzymes, RNA drugs, and small molecular drugs [ , , ]. Moreover, the microenvironment characteristic of myocardial ischemia (ischemic microenvironment, IME) is revealed by recent research, which provided a new opportunity for targeting therapeutic drug delivery [ , , ].
Considering the great efforts and extensive advances of nanomedicine in ischemic cardiomyopathy, it is necessary to provide a timely summary of state-of-the-art research in this field. This review aims to provide an overview of the recent development of nanomedicines for modulating ischemic cardiomyopathy therapy. We highlight the various therapeutic strategies for treating ischemic-related diseases (myocardial IR and acute MI), including thrombolytic therapy, ROS-scavenging therapy, anti-inflammatory therapy, and angiogenesis ( ). We also discuss the perspectives on how biomaterials can deliver therapeutic payloads to ischemic sites by ischemic microenvironment (IME) response. Finally, the perspectives and challenges of nanomedicine are described for myocardial ischemic therapy. We hope that this review will benefit ischemic cardiomyopathy therapy and provide insightful ideas for further development of this field.
 
2.

## Antithrombotic therapy
The thrombus formation was a complicated process that involved lipid accumulation, endothelial dysfunction, and hemodynamic changes [ , , ]. Platelet adhesion and aggregation were sensitive to the blood hemodynamics. With the platelet aggregation, platelets-fibrin complexes gradually accumulated in the thrombus site that evenly occluded the artery [ ]. The underlying mechanism of platelets-fibrin complexes was gradual revealed by preclinical and clinical studies. The platelet receptors, such as glycoprotein Ib, glycoprotein IIb/IIIa, and glycoprotein VI, are critical in regulating formation of platelets-fibrin complexes [ , , ]. The glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor on the platelet recognized and absorbed fibrinogen leading to formation of platelet-fibrin complexes that contributed to thrombus progression in blood vessels. Moreover, semaphorin 7A has been revealed to involve in thrombus formation and MI [ ]. Fibrinolytic agents, antiplatelet drugs, and anticoagulants have been developed to treat myocardial ischemia, including streptokinase, urokinase, aspirin, P2Y12 inhibitor, and tPA [ , , ]. Despite significant improvements in the treatment of myocardial ischemia, the adverse effect of these drugs limits further clinical application, such as bleeding complications, short half-side, and narrow therapeutic window [ , , ]. For instance, the therapeutic effect of tPA is a clinically available thrombolytic drug that catalyzes the plasminogen into plasmin, thereby dissolving the thrombus and restoring blood supply. However, the therapeutic window of tPA is < 4.5 h for myocardial ischemic therapy, which noteworthy restricts the clinical application [ , ]. In the previous report, only extremely low rate of patients (<10 %) could benefit from the tPA therapy [ ]. Therefore, developing more effective and safe antithrombotic drugs for prevention and dissolution of thrombus is in particular importance.
To address this challenge, drug delivery with nanoparticles is a feasible strategy for myocardial thrombolytic therapy, which not only improves the pharmacokinetic profiles but also facilitates the biosafety of thrombolytic drugs. A tPA-conjugated plant viral nanoparticles have been successfully used as a nanocarrier to deliver tPA for thrombolytic therapy [ ]. The therapeutic profile of the nanoparticle is similar compared with the free tPA, but the bleeding time is significantly decreased. Besides, nanomaterials with precise drug delivery have been designed and developed for achieving satisfactory thrombolytic benefits. The targeted nanoparticles have been applied in MI using a fibrin-specific antibody. Mihalko et al. reported that poly(N-isopropyl-acrylamide) nanogels loaded with tPA and contractility inhibitor (Y-27632) allowed nanogels to localize to the myocardial thrombus site by anti-fibrin antibody, thereby releasing the tPA specifically [ ]. Thrombus formation is accompanied by altering microenvironment, including hypoxia, increasing H2O2, protein, acidification, and platelet aggregation, which could be utilized to dissolve thrombus for the treatment of ischemic-related disease [ , ]. Jung et al. described a promising approach using H2O2-targeting prodrug nanoparticles (Fu-sBR) as an injectable agent, which can rapidly target the thrombus site in an H2O2-activated manner [ ]. In another study, fucoidan was employed to construct a thrombus-targeting intelligent system for eliminating thrombus occlusion and modulating the thrombus microenvironment [ ]. Additionally, pH-responsive nanoplatforms were deployed to enhance thrombus ablation [ ]. Tannic acid-based nanoplatform have attracted increasing attention owing to their strong affinity for the cardiac extracellular matrix. Shit et al. fabricated a manganese oxide/nattokinase (MnOx@NK) with tannic acid modification for myocardial ischemic therapy. In a MI model, MnOx@NK-TA can effectively improve the NK accumulation in cardiac tissues, thereby improving thrombolytic efficacy and reducing infarcted size [ ].
Furthermore, the delivery efficiency of thrombolytic drugs could be further promoted by external stimuli, such as light, ultrasound, and magnetic fields [ , , ]. It is important that magnetic fields also provide a guide for remote drug release. For example, the magnetic field was utilized as a guide to improve drug accumulation in thrombolytic areas. Wang et al. designed a tPA-containing magnetic microbubble nanoplatform that can effectively locate thrombus sites by a magnetic guide [ ]. Especially, after nanoplatform accumulation at the site, tPA penetration can be improved by low-intensity ultrasound stimulation. Compared with free tPA and free stimuli groups, nanoplatform with magnetic guided and ultrasound activation can significantly decrease thrombus areas. The above studies illustrated that nanomedicine and nanotechnology are highly promising to increase the therapeutic effect and reduce the adverse effects of tPA therapy.
Platelet-derived targeted strategy presents an important approach to delivering therapeutic drugs to the injured myocardium [ , , ]. Using a platelet membrane coating, various molecules can enhance remarkable therapeutic benefits against the ischemic cardiac tissue compared with free drug control [ , , ]. Recently, Tang et al. reported that stem cell nanovesicles with platelet modification can effectively target the ischemic myocardium by taking the heart-homing ability of platelets [ ].
They investigated the initial targeted effects of nanovesicles and cell retention rate by fluorescent microscopic images after intravenous administration in the rat IR model. The stem cell retention rate of nanovesicles was considerably improved (∼3-fold increase) in the heart than free stem cells, demonstrating the great potential for drug delivery to ischemic tissues. Meanwhile, IR rats with nanovesicle treatment significantly attenuated cardiac functional worsening and reduced the scar area from ∼20 % in free stem cells treatment to ∼10 %. Furthermore, the therapeutic advantage of nanovesicles was further demonstrated by preclinical pig IR model. The therapeutic effect of nanovesicles was consistent between the rat IR model and the pig model. This study provides a meaningful insight into the development of target strategy-based platelet for myocardial ischemic therapy. A similar strategy was performed by Xu et al. who used platelet membrane to specifically deliver tPA to the thrombotic site [ ]. These results verified that the platelet-coating nanoparticle can bind to thrombus derived from patient with ST-segment elevation MI. In addition, Guo et al. constructed a thrombus targeted nanoparticle (PTPN NPs) containing platelet-membrane modification ( ), thrombolytic ability of tPA, protocatechualdehyde, and pH-responsive phenylboronic acid [ ]. After in vivo administration, PTPN NPs could accumulated at the thrombus site through platelet-membrane, thus resulting in an increased therapeutic effect of tPA.
 
3.

## ROS scavenging therapy
Accumulating evidence reveals that cardiomyocytes are impaired by excessive ROS during reperfusion [ ]. Increased production of ROS leads to lipid peroxidation, damaging intracellular molecules, altering cellular function, and inducing cardiac inflammation [ , , ]. The underlying mechanism of ROS generation in ischemic cardiomyopathy involves the mitochondrial electron chain, iron overload, and intracellular enzymes [ , ]. The mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) is composed of complexes I-IV that convert oxygen into water and couple with energy generation. Meanwhile, the ETC is also the key mediator of ROS generation [ ]. In the ischemic phase, the metabolic activity of ETC is hampered by defective oxygen. To cope with the metabolic stress, succinate is accumulated in cardiomyocytes by complex I. After restoring myocardial blood supply, the accumulating succinate is reoxidation by complex I, thereby generating superoxide anions (·O2−) [ ]. Iron overload is another imperative source of ROS [ , ]. Heme degradation by upregulating heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) is the major cause of iron overload. Heme is a cytoprotective substance that can be converted into antioxidative bilirubin and carbon monoxide (CO) [ ]. Conversely, the released iron from heme improved further the hydroxyl radical generation by the Fenton reaction, which caused cardiomyocyte death (ferroptosis) and impaired cardiac function [ ].
ROS-scavenging therapy in preclinical models has demonstrated effectiveness to reduce myocardial injury and improve cardiac function [ , ]. Certain antioxidants, including SOD and CAT, are frequently reported for ischemic cardiomyopathy therapy [ , , ]. However, the clinical benefits of antioxidants remain limited owing to the intrinsic drawbacks of these agents, including poor stability and low solubility [ ]. [ ] For example, although SOD and CAT have demonstrated therapeutic potential in ischemic cardiomyopathy, their instability significantly hampers clinical translation [ ]. In addition, the solubility of therapeutic enzymes further restricts their efficacy. Therefore, it is critical to develop an alternative system to enhance enzymatic bioavailability. Nanoparticles with SOD-mimetic and CAT-mimetic abilities have shown promise in ROS scavenging therapy for ischemic cardiomyopathy due to their high enzymatic activity, stability, and low costs [ , , ]. Currently, ROS-scavenging nanomedicine has been designed to treat ischemic cardiomyopathy [ , , ]. Mo et al. developed engineered allomelanin nanoparticles that self-assembled from 1,8-dihydroxynaphthalene (1,8-DHN) derivatives. After administration in the IR mice model, the nanoparticle could detoxify the generation of ROS, which significantly reduced cardiac damage and myocardial size [ ]. Moreover, Ding et al. developed an injectable hydrogel with ROS-scavenging and oxygen-producing abilities for MI therapy [ ]. The hydrogel can effectively scavenge the generation of ROS, protect catalase from degradation, and relieve myocardial hypoxia, resulting in improved cardiac function in a rat MI model. Besides these natural antioxidants, nanomaterials inherently possess SOD- or CAT-like capabilities that can serve as ROS scavengers for the treatment of ROS-related diseases [ , ]. Many nanomaterials with antioxidative properties, including metal-based nanoparticles and carbon-based nanomaterials, have been used to relieve ischemic injury by eliminating ROS [ ]. Xue et al. reported bimetallic carbon dots (CuZn-CDs) with ultrasmall size that could protect myocardial IR injury by scavenging ROS ( ) [ ]. The SOD-like and CAT-like catalytic activities of CuZn-CDs were similar to natural SOD and CAT under mild conditions (25 °C, pH 7.0). However, when exposed to harsh environments, such as extreme pH and temperature, the enzymatic-like abilities of CuZn-CDs are significantly higher than natural enzymes. The biosafety and toxicity of CuZn-CDs were systemically explored in mice. The results demonstrated that the CuZn-CDs was high biocompatibility. Furthermore, the therapeutic effect of CuZn-CDs was evaluated on myocardial IR mice. After in vivo administration, CuZn-CDs can efficiently eliminate ROS, improve cardiac function, and reduce scar formation. In particular, nanoparticles with mitochondria-targeting ability have been reported to further enhance the therapeutic efficiency of artificial enzymes. Zhang et al. synthesized MnO2 nanoparticles (Mito-Fenozyme) with triphenylphosphonium modification for treating myocardial ischemic injury [ ]. In their design, MnO2 not only exhibits SOD- and CAT-mimetic activities to inhibit ROS-induced cardiac injury but also enables target mitochondria via triphenylphosphonium. As compared to primitive MnO2, Mito-Fenozyme possessed higher therapeutic benefits in myocardial IR mice, as evidenced by significantly restoring heart function and reducing scar area. These studies demonstrated the potential and advantages of nanomedicine in myocardial ischemia applications. Although great progress has been made toward nanoparticles with enzyme-like performance for ischemic cardiomyopathy therapy, these disadvantages need to be addressed, including catalytic selectivity, specificity, and biocompatibility. Moreover, further mechanistic research is necessary to establish the biological effects of nanoparticles, which contributed to revealing the cardioprotective benefits and adverse effects.
 Fe overload by hemorrhage is the potential mechanism of myocardial reperfusion injury and can lead to ferroptosis and macrophage activation. Previous studies have demonstrated that the cardiomyocyte ferroptosis contributes to myocardial ischemic injury, and the pathway was the major associated with Fe overload. Hypoxia increased expression of heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1), thereby enhanced heme degradation and released free Fe [ ]. More recently, researchers have demonstrated that the iron levels at ischemic tissues post infarction 90 min was notably higher (0.108 ± 0.068 mg/g) than control group (0.0354 ± 0.003 mg/g), as evidenced by gadolinium enhanced magnetic resonance imaging and inductively coupled plasma detection [ ]. It effectively alleviated the cell death of ischemic myocardia by iron chelator (dexrazoxane) or ferroptosis inhibition (ferrostatin-1), which significantly reduced cardiac infarction size from ∼50 % (IR) to ∼40 % (dexrazoxane) and to ∼30 % (ferrostatin-1) [ ]. Meanwhile, Gpx4 reduction in cardiomyocytes also provoked cardiac ferroptosis, while systemic Gpx4 overexpression reduced cardiac remodeling and infarction size [ ]. Another study of targeted ferroptosis is the chitosan-desferrioxamine hydrogels with deferoxamine loading [ ]. The hydrogels is prepared by co-crosslinking chitosan and deferoxamine with Fe chelation ability. In vivo MI models confirmed that the hydrogels can inhibit cardiomyocyte's ferroptosis by sustainable deferoxamine, thereby protecting cardiac function and decreasing ischemic-induced adverse remodeling. In addition to Fe, Copper (Cu) plays a vital role in maintaining normal physiological functions, such as oxidative stress, mitochondrial metabolism, and neurotransmitter metabolism [ , , ]. Preclinical studies have established that Cu deficiency impairs antioxidant capacity, reduces angiogenesis, and disrupts mitochondrial TCA cycle [ , ]. Notably, intracellular Cu overload also triggers cuproptosis by inducing Cu-dependent oligomerization of dihydrolipoamide acetyltransferase. Evidence by Hong et al. has proven the therapeutic effect of Cu supplement in MI mice [ ]. In their design, Cu-loading microgel (CuCMGs) was constructed using casein and Cu2+. In vitro experiments showed that H9C2 cell treated with CuCMGs (Cu2+ < 20 μm) exhibited high cytocompatibility, and CuCMGs co-incubation effectively rescued mitochondrial dysfunction induced by OGD injury. Furthermore, in an IR mouse model, intramyocardial injection of CuCMGs significantly improved cardiac function and enhanced oxidative phosphorylation. Collectively, this study offers important insights into the application of Cu-based biomaterials for the treatment of ischemic cardiomyopathy.
Growing evidence indicated that ROS was also the pathology factor of myocardial pyroptosis during ischemic injury. A previous preclinical study discovered that ROS generation during reperfusion can induce cardiomyocyte-programmed pyroptosis by activating the caspase 11/GSDMD signal pathway [ ]. However, inactivation of GSDMD by gene deletion could prevent IR injury, as demonstrated by decreased infarct size. Similar studies have also found that the caspase 1/GSDMD pathway was upregulated in MI. Lie et al. observed that the MI heart exhibits time-dependent increased caspase 1 level and GSDMD level after MI 6 h compared with a sham heart [ ]. As expected, GSDMD inhibition by VX-765 in the MI model caused a restoration in cardiac function and a reduction in infarction volume. Moreover, Zhou et al. have revealed that pyroptosis-induced cell death could be effective enhanced by free Fe [ ]. The authors suggested that the therapeutic effect of CCCP against various tumor cells can be notably improved by Fe2+ supplement as compared with only CCCP treatment group. Further mechanistic studies found that this increasing therapeutic outcome was attributed to oxidate mitochondrial TOM protein through Fe-induced ROS generation. Moreover, recent finding suggest that cardiolipin is directly involved in the progression of cardiomyocyte pyroptosis. Tang et al. reported that mitochondrial ROS oxidize cardiolipin, thereby promoting GSDMD-N pore formation and the release of mitochondrial proteins [ ]. Conversely, genetic knockout of cardiolipin synthase 1 can attenuate GSDMD-mediated pyroptosis [ ]. Modulation of pyroptosis in myocardial ischemic therapy as a therapeutic target has been investigated in preclinical study. Recently, strontium hexacyanoferrate (SrHF) have been applied for preventing IR injury by regulating pyroptosis and promoting angiogenesis [ ]. The underlying therapeutic mechanism of SrHF is associated with the ROS-scavenging property. In vivo injection of SrHF into IR mice can markedly prevent cardiac function deterioration and improve IR mice's survival rate. Moreover, the myocardial scar formation after injection of SrHF was significantly decreased than IR groups, as demonstrated by Masson's trichrome staining. This research provides the paradigm that targeted ROS by nanoparticles could have better protection against myocardial IR injury.
Given the characteristic overexpression of ROS, ROS-responsive nanomedicine has been extensively explored for precise drug delivery. Lu et al. designed ROS-responsive CTP-PBA-ISN nanoparticles via the self-assembly of CSTSMLKAC cyclo-peptide, phenyl boronic acid esters, and isosorbide mononitrate [ ]. Upon administration, CTP-PBA-ISN selectively accumulated in the ischemic myocardium owing to elevated ROS levels. Subsequently, isosorbide mononitrate was released from CTP-PBA-ISN and generated NO, which effectively reduced cardiomyocyte apoptosis, improved cardiac function, and post-ischemic angiogenesis. Collectively, these findings validate that ROS-responsive nanomedicine has shown great potential for the treatment of ischemic cardiomyopathy.

4.

## Anti-inflammatory therapy
The inflammatory response after ischemia is closely related to ischemic cardiomyopathy [ , ]. During ischemic phase, inflammatory signals were upregulated though damage-associated molecular patterns [ , ]. Subsequently, various types of inflammatory cells were moving and adhering to the infarction site, resulting in inflammatory activation and subsequent tissues damaged [ , , ]. Neutrophils are the circulating innate immune responder to the ischemic heart that involved in enhanced cardiac function and decreased heart remodeling by improving the activation of reparative phase [ , ]. The monocyte can be activated to two kinds of different phenotypes macrophage, classical M1 and alternate M2 [ ]. The M1 macrophage secretes pro-inflammatory cytokines that cause further myocardial injury [ , ]. However, M2 macrophage secretes anti-inflammatory cytokines that improve cardiac repair post myocardial ischemia injury [ , ]. Multiple evidence suggests that timely mediation of this inflammatory process may aid in the prevention of cardiac dysfunction and adverse remodeling post-reperfusion [ , ]. In the ischemic tissues, activated macrophages and recruited leukocytes contribute to inflammatory activation by further secreting pro-inflammatory cytokines.
Since cell recruitment plays an important role in the progressive process of ischemic injury, aiming at targeting this aberrant cell recruitment and improving the manifestations in ischemic cardiomyopathy is a promising strategy. Different anti-inflammatory drugs and immunomodulatory interventions have been studied in ischemic cardiomyopathy that convert reversibly pro-inflammatory M1 to anti-inflammatory M2 by various drugs including RNA and small molecules [ , , ]. Considering the different functions of macrophage phenotypes, inflammatory interventions focusing on macrophage phenotype are promising strategies to promote cardiac healing [ , ]. Although the clinical success of such interventions, there are still obstacles that need to be overcome. For example, RNA drugs have drawn extensive attention for anti-inflammatory treatment [ , ]. Using miR-21 to reprogram macrophage types has been demonstrated to achieve myocardial IR therapy [ ]. However, the direct administration of RNA has limited therapeutic role because of its quick degradation by in vivo enzymes. To address this challenge, nanomedicine has demonstrated great effort for RNA delivery. For instance, nanoparticles containing RNA interference were designed to interrupt inflammatory cell recruitment for combating myocardial ischemic injury [ ]. Hou et al. developed endothelial-cell targeting and ROS-responsive nanocomposites loaded with vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM1) siRNA and dexamethasone by cRGD-PEG and ditellurium-crosslinked PEI for the treatment of myocardial IR injury [ ]. First, the nanocomposites accumulated in vascular endothelial cells due to the cRGD. As the nanocomposites were exposed to ROS ROS-rich environment, the ditellurium bond in PEI was broken, thus releasing VCAM1 siRNA and dexamethasone. They further confirmed that the nanocomposites can inhibit neutrophil activation and migration by VCAM1 siRNA and dexamethasone in IR mice, therefore mitigating the inflammatory response in ischemic areas and reducing cardiac injury.
Another effective strategy to facilitate the reparative phase is the application of damaged cells. Lee et al. reported a apoptotic bodies-mimetic nanovesicles (ApoNV-DCs) composed of dextran, apoptotic fibroblast, and cardiac homing peptide for mediating IR injured therapy [ ]. In the rat IR model, intravenously application of ApoNV-DCs (50 μg/per) effectively targeted the ischemic site via cardiac homing peptide and enhanced internalized by macrophages due to dextran modification. Thus, ApoNV-DCs facilitated macrophages polarization from the inflammatory M1 to reparative M2 phenotype. After in vivo 4 weeks of administration, IR rats treatment with ApoNV-DCs alleviated cardiac inflammation, improved cardiac function, and reduced fibrosis areas (∼20 %) than control group (∼35 %). Additionally, containing 3-sulfonic acid Janus hydrogel has been proved as an anti-inflammation agent for myocardial IR treatment by reprogramming M1 to M2 macrophage [ ]. Noteworthy, the regulation of M1 macrophage differentiation by antioxidants is another effective for reducing inflammatory activation in the treatment of myocardial ischemic injury. Han et al. reported that graphene oxide functionalized with interleukin-4 plasmid DNA (MGC/IL-4 pDNA) can effectively polarize M1 to M2 macrophages [ ]. They found that the graphene oxide was able to scavenge ROS by its intrinsic antioxidant ability, thus reducing the ROS-induced M1 macrophages polarization. On the contrary, IL-4 pDNA could enhance M1 toward M2 macrophages. Therefore, IR mice injected with the MGC/IL-4 pDNA significantly suppressed inflammation, improved cardiac function, and mitigated heart remodeling. In addition, Liu et al. reported a myocardial targeted Fe-Cur@TA nanoparticle for MI therapy using tannic acid (TA), Fe 3+, and curcumin (Cur) [ ]. In mouse and dog MI model, their demonstrated that the Fe-Cur@TA administration have protective effect against ischemic induced myocardial injury. Further mechanistic study revealed that the Fe-Cur@TA is able to inhibit inflammatory cascade and promote M2 macrophages production ( ). These works provided new insight into the regulation of M1 polarization for the treatment of the myocardial ischemic injury.
 Regulatory T cells (Tregs) have been proved to promote tissue recovery and regeneration in inflammatory-related diseases due to that they shorten the pro-inflammatory phase by paracrine factors [ ]. The mechanism of paracrine factors is attributed to altering macrophage phenotype from M1 to M2 [ ]. Modulation of inflammation response by Tregs showed promising therapeutic effects in different diseases, such as Alzheimer, Parkinson, and ischemic stroke [ ]. Recently, Kwon et al. constructed liposomes encapsulated antigen and rapamycin (L-Ag/R) for MI therapy [ ]. In their design, L-Ag/R could induce antigen-specific tolerogenic dendritic cells and antigen-specific Tregs. Both in vitro and in vivo results demonstrated that these L-Ag/R nanoparticles can effectively reduce inflammation and protect the heart from MI injury. This study provides an available strategy for controlling Tregs for ischemic cardiomyopathy treatment. In another study, Tregs biomimetic nanoparticles (Cs A@PPTK) were fabricated by poly-5,5-dimethyl-4,6-dithio-propylene glycol azelate (PTK) and cyclosporine A (Cs A), followed by decorating with platelet membrane [ ]. Platelet membrane modification enhanced Cs A@PPTK accumulation in the ischemic heart. Afterward, PTK and Cs A were released from nanoparticles to scavenge ROS and exert an anti-apoptosis effect, respectively. Furthermore, in a myocardial IR model, these nanoparticles were demonstrated to increase the ratio of M2/M1 macrophages and the generation of Tregs in cardiac tissues.
Based on the mechanism of inflammation, cell recruitment-associated processes are another imperative strategy for novel therapies for targeted ischemic cardiomyopathy therapy. Convincing evidence supports that various cells, such as monocyte, macrophage, and neutrophils, can serve as effective approaches to achieve drug transport [ , ]. For instance, Che et al. synthesized an anti-inflammatory methotrexate-liposome with the inflammatory targeted ability for ischemic cardiomyopathy treatment [ ]. They demonstrated that liposomes encapsulated with neutrophils can localize specifically to ischemic tissues. Wang et al. constructed a macrophage-targeted nanoparticle with loaded siRNA and microRNA-21 and carboxylated mannan modification for the treatment of IR injury [ ]. After in vivo administration, nanoparticles can be effectively internalized by macrophages, thus releasing siRNA and microRNA-21 for gene silencing. As a result, liposomes remarkably decreased inflammatory levels and facilitated cardiac function. Tan et al. reported a platelet-derived liposome loaded containing miR-21 mesoporous silica nanospheres enhanced M2 macrophage ( ) [ ]. Results indicated that the liposome with high monocyte targeting ability could be internalized directly by monocytes, thus protecting miR-21 from degradation by RNase. After entering the monocyte, miR-21 released from the liposome reprograms macrophages derived from the monocyte. Consequently, recovered cardiac function and reduced infarction zones were achieved in myocardial IR mice by inflammatory interventions. Following this similar strategy, macrophage-modification nanoparticles are able to transport drug-loaded into myocardial tissue by exploiting the intrinsic ability of neutrophils to recruit to inflammatory tissue. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are cell-derived nanoparticles that are secreted by various cells. These endogenous vesicles have different functions that allow them to deliver biological components to recipient cells. Because of the versatility of extracellular vesicles, the biomedical administration of EVs has emerged as a feasible strategy for various disease interventions. In cardiac ischemic disease, EVs are involved in different physiological processes, including angiogenesis, intracellular communication, inflammatory response, and cardiac fibrosis. In another study, Zhang et al. reported that monocyte-mimic extracellular vesicles (Mon-EVs) specially targeted the ischemic myocardium for alleviating myocardial IR injury [ ]. The EVs with monocyte membrane modification have significantly improved EVs accumulation in the ischemic tissues as well as enhanced the anti-inflammatory effect. Furthermore, macrophage-targeted nanomedicine has been shown to effectively home to ischemic cardiac tissues. A mannan-functionalized metal-organic framework (Que@MOF/Man) was developed to improve the therapeutic efficacy of quercetin [ ]. After intravenous injection, Que@MOF/Man specifically accumulated at the site of ischemic injury. In a mouse model of MI, treatment with Que@MOF/Man resulted in a significantly reduced fibrotic area compared with free quercetin. In addition to the biomimetic membrane strategy, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs)-responsive strategy has been confirmed significant improvement in therapeutic benefits of anti-inflammation therapy. A matrix MMPs-responsive hydrogel (MPGC4) was developed through carbon dots containing interleukin-4 plasmid DNA (CTL4 nanoparticle), tetra-PEG, and MMPs-degradable peptide ( ) [ ]. In MMPs-overexpression of ischemic microenvironment, intramyocardial injection of MPGC4 improved specifically the CTL4 released because of the degradation of MMPs-degradable peptide by MMPs. Subsequently, the interleukin-4 plasmid DNA released form CTL4 facilitated the polarization of M1 macrophage into M2 that remarkably enhanced cardiomyocyte survival and reduced infarct volume compared with other control groups.
 
5.

## Angiogenesis
Revascularization is accomplished by percutaneous coronary intervention and pharmacological therapy [ , , ]. The therapeutic goal of revascularization is to build new blood vessels in the ischemic site and restore normal intracellular metabolism. For pharmacological therapy, growth factors, including vascular endothelial growth factor and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), have been widely used to create new blood vessels in the ischemic myocardial tissues [ , ]. However, the quick inactivation and low retention rate of the growth factor fail to achieve a sufficient therapeutic outcome [ , ]. Besides, intramyocardial injection of the growth factor may induce vascular leakage and edema, which will worsen myocardial function [ , ]. Therefore, improving drug retention and extending drug functional time is important for effectively rebuilding of myocardial blood vessels. Many biomaterials, hydrogels, organic nanofibers, and nanoparticles, have been developed to control-release growth factors for myocardial ischemia therapy [ ]. Sustainable-released VEFG hydrogel has been applied for revascularization of infarction regions. Zhang et al. synthesized hydrogel to encapsulate artificial apoptotic cells (AACs) and VEGF for regulating inflammation response and enhancing angiogenesis [ ]. When intramyocardial injection into ischemic sites, AACs of hydrogel could be released quickly and inhibit inflammation activation by depolarizing M1 macrophage to M2 macrophage. Meanwhile, sustainable VEGF release can facilitate angiogenesis and reduce cardiac remodeling. Consequently, the hydrogel exhibits increasing cardiac function and decreasing infarction area, demonstrating the advantages of hydrogel for growth factor delivery. In addition, Zhu et al. constructed a macrophage membrane-modification nanoparticles for MI therapy by sustained-release VEGF [ ].
Recently, strontium ions (Sr) have been proven to protect against cardiac IR injury by promoting angiogenesis [ , ]. Mice with IR that were administered containing Sr hydrogels exhibited increased angiogenesis-related gene expression alongside the reduction of other apoptotic-related markers cleaved caspase-3. It is noted that containing Sr drug (Strontium ranelate) has been approved for clinical treatment of osteoporosis. Besides, given their functional characteristics, EVs with revascularized ability have been applied in the treatment of ischemic cardiomyopathy. EVs derived from Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) coated with platelet membranes were shown to target the ability to ischemic heart tissues [ ]. When administration in mice models with myocardial IR injury. The nanoparticle shows better accumulating efficacy in ischemic myocardium, promoting angiogenesis, and preventing deterioration of cardiac function. Collectively, these studies highlight the important role of EVs in promoting cardiac angiogenesis for myocardial ischemic therapy.
Smart nanoparticles have been developed as a feasible strategy for enhanced growth factor-mediated ischemic cardiomyopathy therapy [ , ]. Tannic acid, a plants polyphenol, has received widespread attention in biomedical applications, including tumor theragnostic, atherosclerosis, and bacterial infection [ , ]. In particular, the heart-targeting delivery of bFGF by tannic acid has been investigated in the rat myocardial IR model ( ) [ ]. Compared with free bFGF, bFGF with tannic acid modification can significantly increase the bFGF accumulation in ischemic myocardia. The mechanism of tannic acid targeted is attributed to the affinity ability of phenolic hydroxyl to the myocardial extracellular matrix. This research provides innovative insight into the targeted delivery of therapeutic drugs in the treatment of ischemic cardiomyopathy. In another approach, overexpression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMPs) in ischemic myocardium have been explored for intelligence growth factor delivery. Fan et al. excogitated IME-responsive smart hydrogels via conjugating bFGF with MMPs cleavable peptide [ ]. As expected, in vivo experiments suggested that the MMPs-responsive hydrogels are able to on-demand released bFGF during myocardial ischemic process. Moreover, results demonstrated that such IME-responsive hydrogels alleviated significantly the deterioration of cardiac function and heart remodeling compared to only bFGF hydrogels.
 Therapeutic gases, such as nitric oxide (NO) and hydrogen sulfide (H2S), have been revealed the function of improving myocardial revascularization by activation of the angiogenesis-related signal [ , , ]. The key issues of gas therapy are low delivery efficiency and poor solubility [ , ]. The direct inhalation of these gases may lead to insufficient therapeutic effects and cause serious systemic toxicity [ , ]. These gases can be beneficial or detrimental depending on the concentration in the disease site. These gas molecules were beneficial at appropriate concentrations, but exhibit obvious cytotoxicity against cells at high concentrations [ , ]. Therefore, how to accurately achieve gas delivery is important for highly effective gas therapy. To address these limitations, biomaterials with gas delivery abilities, such as hydrogels, nanoparticles, and cardiac patches, are being developed for managing ischemic cardiomyopathy. Different studies have employed therapeutic gas for treating of myocardial ischemic disease by promoting myocardial angiogenesis. For instance, Hao et al. reported an injectable hydrogel based on chitosan and boronate-protected diazeniumdiolate, which could release NO by ROS-trigger at the myocardial ischemic site [ ]. Treating these mice with hydrogel attenuates oxidative stress, stimulates angiogenesis, and reduces cardiac remodeling. The research progress of NO delivery hydrogel shows their promising applications in targeted gas delivery. In addition, biomimetic copper-containing nanoparticles have also garnered great interest as a catalyst to facilitate NO generated. Zhang et al. reported an artificial Hynocell composite of secreted factors derive from stem cell, Cu-containing ferritin nanocages, and cell membrane ( ) [ ]. They demonstrated that the Hynocell significantly promoted NO generation by catalyzing S-nitrosothiols (endogenous NO donor), resulting in vascular regeneration in ischemic myocardial tissues. This innovated study provides an important inspiration for NO generation to achieve cardiac angiogenesis. Furthermore, recent researches suggest that H2S delivery by hydrogels exhibits promising results against myocardial ischemic injury [ ]. For example, diallyl trisulfide (H2S donor) was loaded with mesoporous iron oxide for the treatment of myocardial IR injury [ ]. Moreover, Zhang et al. constructed NO-generating nanoparticles with ferritin nanocages and Ru. After in vivo injection, NO was continuously generated by catalyzing the intrinsic L-Arg in damaged myocardial tissues, which inhibited ROS-induced mitochondrial injury [ ]. In addition, Li et al fabricated a controllable H2S release cardiac patch by 2-aminopyridine-5-thiocarboxamide (H2S donor) and black phosphorous nanosheets for MI therapy [ ]. Above studies demonstrated the great potential of nanomedicine for therapeutic gases delivery for ischemic cardiomyopathy therapy.
 
6.

## Improving electrical conduction of ischemic myocardium
Myocardial injury following infarction can interrupt the electrical conduction of physiological circuits that cannot be restoration after blood recovery [ , ]. Scar formation after injury compromises normal cardiac rhythm and function and can lead to progressively heart failure [ , ]. Data from mouse suggested that cardiac macrophage maintain the cardiac electrical conduction by upregulation of gap junctions formation [ , ]. Gap junctions between cardiomyocyte with macrophage interaction by connexin 43 protein (Cx43). Reverse remodeling of reduced Cx43 expression can restore electrical stability [ ]. Despite numerous endeavors have been made to promote cardiovascular health, current surgical and drug treatment approaches have limited role in restoring cardiac conduction [ ]. A biomaterial that could restore the electric connection between natural myocardium and scar tissues may be a feasible approach for treating myocardial ischemic disease.
Different conductive materials, such as electroactive polymers, carbon-based materials, and metal-based materials, have been applied to improve cardiac electric transmission and contractility [ , , , ]. Among these electroactive biomaterials, ploypyrrole-based biomaterials have been demonstrated as an approximate candidate for improved myocardial electrical conduction due to its excellent bioelectrical transmission and biocompatibility [ , ]. Conductive polypyrrole hydrogels were fabricated by dopamine and pyrrole for restoring ischemic myocardium conduction [ ]. The polypyrrole hydrogels displayed sufficient adhesiveness within 4 weeks in physiological conditions without liquid leakage. Upon in vivo administration, the hydrogels contribute to enhance the electrical conduction between normal myocardium with infarction areas. Consequently, the hydrogels improved remarkably cardiac contractility and revascularization in a mouse MI model, as evidenced by increasing Cx-43 and neovessels. Moreover, Yin et al. developed an engineered cardiac patch (SP50 ECP) loaded with silk fibroin and polypyrrole for MI therapy [ ]. After transplanted into the scar tissues, the SP50 ECP not only can improve electrical integration and cardiac contraction of infarction tissues, but also attenuate adverse heart remodeling and repair damaged myocardial. Polyaniline-based polymers have also been widely explored for restoring cardiac electrical conductivity because of its electrical activity, excellent stability, and biodegradation [ , ]. While several pre-clinical experiments have demonstrated the effectiveness in restoration of electrophysiology of infarct scars, the flexible and fatigue-resistant behavior of polyaniline was mismatch with soft cardiac tissue. To overcome this limitation, various biomaterials have been utilized and designed to achieve further clinical translation. For example, a mechanical-electrical coupling hydrogel patch (MEHP) composed of polyaniline, gelatin, poly(vinyl alcohol), and adipose-derived stem cells was developed via electrostatic interaction and copolymerizing borate ester bonds [ ]. The resulting MEHP after injection into ischemic site was not only able to match normal cardiac electrical conduction, but also improve neovascularization and prevent cardiac remodeling. Metal-based conductive materials have also been investigated to enhance the electrophysiological activity of infarct myocardium. Furthermore, an Au@Pt/Alg hydrogel was synthesized by encapsulating stem cells and Au@Pt nanoparticles to alginate hydrogel ( ) [ ]. In this design, Au@Pt nanoparticles endow the hydrogel with conductive ability and ROS-eliminating properties. Due to the hydrogel encapsulation, the cell survival rate and retention rate were improved which contributed to increased angiogenesis and electrical conduction velocity. In a rat MI model, the Au@Pt/Alg hydrogel treatment exhibited significant improvement of heart electrical integration, angiogenesis, and ROS homeostasis.
 
7.

## Conclusions and perspectives
Ischemic cardiomyopathy has become a serious threat to human health. Although there is already an abundance of available strategies on ischemic cardiomyopathy therapy, many questions remain unanswered. Therefore, novel therapeutic strategies for the treatment of ischemic cardiomyopathy are urgently needed for the current limitations of therapeutic modalities. With the development of nanotechnologies, increasing advances in nanomedicine have enabled their application to innovative strategies in ischemic-related diseases. Nanomaterials can significantly improve the targetability of drug delivery, at the same time minimizing the side effects and maximizing the therapeutic outcomes. In this review, we have comprehensively summarized the various strategies for the treatment of ischemic cardiomyopathy ( ). We believe that this review will provide meaningful opinion for the future development of new nanotherapies for the management of ischemic cardiomyopathy.
 Despite the tremendous advantages of nanomedicine in the treatment of ischemic cardiomyopathy, some critical challenges are still needed to be considered. (1) Although the benefit of various biomaterials on ischemic cardiomyopathy have been reported and established in small animal's model, the therapeutic efficacy is disconnected between the basic research mode and the human disease characteristic. Thus, standard in vitro and in vivo evaluation schemes should be applied to reduce this gap. Moreover, the utility of human models of myocardium is constrained and in vitro cell monolayers was simplicity that fail to consider the cardiac physiology. Recently, human cardiac organoids have been utilized to screen therapeutic drugs and explore the potential mechanism. (2) The preparation technology of these biomaterials is complicated. Despite many biomaterials being well documented in the laboratory or small-scale manufacturing, large-scale production is not fully achieved. Biomaterials with simple fabrication methods may contribute to their successful industrial production. (3) The biosafety of the administration of these biomaterials is not fully understood. Moreover, in vivo effects of nanoplatforms are not fully revealed, which may compromise the desired benefit and hinder the further clinical translation of nanotherapeutics. Although therapeutic benefits are evident in preclinical disease models, their biosafety and biological effects should be evaluated in the clinically relevant animal model, such as a pig or monkey. (4) The responsiveness of the intelligence drug delivery nanocarrier was altered due to the progress of various phases in ischemic injury. For example, ROS-responsive or pH-responsive nanoparticles have been designed for therapeutic agent delivery in ischemic cardiomyopathy. However, the ROS or pH levels were varying in various stages, such as ischemic phase and reperfusion phase. This difference from the actual situation may cause unanticipated in vivo pharmacokinetics of bio-responsive nanoplatform. To address the dilemma, it is essential to further reveal the fluctuating pathological microenvironment and optimize the structure design and sensitivity of nanoplatform.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Xiangyi Ren: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Yan Wang: Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Jian Yang: Methodology. Mengli Zhu: Resources. Ling Zhang: Supervision, Resources, Project administration. Lin Li: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

## Conflict of interest statement
The authors declare no competing interests.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgement
The authors greatly acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82304402 (Lin Li).

## Footnotes
This article is part of a special issue entitled: Low-dimensional biomaterials published in Materials Today Bio.

## Contributor Information
Xiangyi Ren, Email: renxy@wchscu.cn.
Lin Li, Email: lilin93@scu.edu.cn.

## Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
No data was used for the research described in the article.