822acssdACS Applied Materials & InterfacesACS Appl Mater InterfacesPMC1099687810996878109968783851837510.1021/acsami.3c18830Harnessing RNA Technology
to Advance Therapeutic Vaccine
Antigens against Chagas Disease
MancinoChiara PolletJeroen ZingerAssaf JonesKathryn M VillarMaria José LeaoAna Carolina AdhikariRakesh VersteegLeroy Tyagi KunduRakhi StrychUlrich GiordanoFederica HotezPeter J BottazziMaria Elena TaraballiFrancesca PovedaCristina †Center
for Musculoskeletal Regeneration, Houston
Methodist Academic Institute, Houston, Texas 77030, United States‡Orthopedics
and Sports Medicine, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, Texas 77030, United States§Department
of Pediatrics, Division of Tropical Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, United States∥Texas
Children’s Hospital Center for Vaccine Development, Houston, Texas 77030, United States⊥Department
of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, United States#Cell Biology
and Immunology Group, Wageningen University
& Research, Wageningen 6708 PB, The Netherlands¶Department
of Biology, Baylor University, Waco, Texas 76798, United States∇Laboratory
for Bioinspired Nano Engineering and Translational Therapeutics, Department
of Chemical Engineering, Technion−Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel○Cardiovascular
Sciences Department, Houston Methodist Academic
Institute, Houston, Texas 77030, United States⧫Neurosurgery
Department, Houston Methodist Academic Institute, Houston, Texas 77030, United States*Email: assafzinger@technion.ac.il.
*Email: ftaraballi2@houstonmethodist.org.
*Email: cristina.poveda@bcm.edu.
223202416131583215832–158462232025© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Chagas disease (CD) (American trypanosomiasis caused
by Trypanosoma cruzi) is a parasitic
disease endemic
in 21 countries in South America, with increasing global spread. When
administered late in the infection, the current antiparasitic drugs
do not prevent the onset of cardiac illness leading to chronic Chagasic
cardiomyopathy. Therefore, new therapeutic vaccines or immunotherapies
are under development using multiple platforms. In this study, we
assessed the feasibility of developing an mRNA-based therapeutic CD
vaccine targeting two known T. cruzi vaccine antigens (Tc24—a flagellar antigen and ASP-2—an
amastigote antigen). We present the mRNA engineering steps, preparation,
and stability of the lipid nanoparticles and evaluation of their uptake
by dendritic cells, as well as their biodistribution in c57BL/J mice.
Furthermore, we assessed the immunogenicity and efficacy of two mRNA-based
candidates as monovalent and bivalent vaccine strategies using an
in vivo chronic mouse model of CD. Our results show several therapeutic
benefits, including reductions in parasite burdens and cardiac inflammation,
with each mRNA antigen, especially with the mRNA encoding Tc24, and
Tc24 in combination with ASP-2. Therefore, our findings demonstrate
the potential of mRNA-based vaccines as a therapeutic option for CD
and highlight the opportunities for developing multivalent vaccines
using this approach.
Keywords: Chagas disease, mRNA vaccine, lipid nanoparticles, biodistribution, immunogenicity

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Dec 15; Accepted 2024 Mar 1; Revised 2024 Feb 29; Collection date 2024 Apr 3.

## Introduction
The neglected tropical disease known as
Chagas disease (CD) arises
after infection with the flagellated protozoan parasite Trypanosoma cruzi (T. cruzi). Now endemic in 21 countries in the
Americas, CD accounts for ∼56,000 new infections yearly, a
total of nearly 6–7 million infected individuals. − It is now spreading to nonendemic countries due to globalization. Worldwide estimates show how CD accounts for
about 10,000 deaths and 800,000 “Disability Adjusted Life Years”
(DALYs) annually. 
T. cruzi is transmitted principally
via a triatomine vector, although it can also spread via oral transmission,
as well as through organ transplants, contaminated food sources, blood
transfusions, and congenitally. CD starts
with a short acute phase characterized by high proliferation of T. cruzi. , Following this acute
phase, parasitemia subsides during the chronic phase, leaving most
patients asymptomatic even though patients remain seropositive to T. cruzi antigens and T. cruzi DNA can be detected in their blood by polymerase chain reaction.
Such patients are presumed to maintain the infection, and they are
clinically recognized as having what is commonly referred to as an
“indeterminate status”. Unfortunately, 30–40%
of infected and indeterminate patients will progress to cardiac and
gastrointestinal complications (determinate CD) between 10 to 30 years
postacute phase, with the worst cases leading to death. , Available treatment strategies rely on two main drugs, nifurtimox
and benznidazole, whose benefits are significant only when intervention
occurs during the early stages of infection. Moreover, their efficacy is tied to a lengthy treatment regimen
(up to 60 days), during which patients experience many side effects
that often lead to patients dropping the treatment regimen. Therefore,
there is currently little to offer to determine patients who are diagnosed
late in their illness, especially individuals showing signs and symptoms
of chronic Chagasic cardiomyopathy (CCC). CCC is characterized by
the presence of arrythmias, cardiac aneurysms, and heart failure as
well as strokes and other complications. Through these mechanisms,
CCC is an important cause of mortality in disease-endemic regions.
For such chronically infected CD patients, efforts to develop a
therapeutic vaccine are ongoing, with the potential of use as an immunotherapy
to delay or prevent cardiac complications in patients with chronic T. cruzi infection. Different
vaccine strategies have been evaluated through animal models of CD,
ranging from traditional approaches using live attenuated parasites,
recombinant proteins formulated with adjuvants and immunostimulants,
genetic vaccinations, and the delivery of DNA via different vectors. , However, one of the main challenges for a successful CD vaccine
development strategy is the selection of the target antigen, which
ideally should demonstrate immunogenicity and efficacy across different
parasite strains or developmental life-history stages. , For example, targeting the infective metacyclic trypomastigote,
transferred from vector to host, could potentially prevent parasitemia
development, causing sterile immunity. However, this parasite stage
is highly specialized in its immune system evasion thanks to the ability
of antigen diversification as the mechanism used by the parasite for
host cell invasion. , Therefore, targeting the later
stages of T. cruzi, such as the intracellular
amastigote and extracellular trypomastigote forms, could also help
control parasitemia in later stages of infection, leading to improved
patient outcome.
In this context, two well-explored antigens,
the amastigote surface
antigen 2 (ASP-2) and the flagellar calcium-binding flagellar protein
Tc24 (highly expressed in the trypomastigote stage), present a unique
opportunity to evaluate them alone or in combination by utilizing
mRNA-based vaccine technology. Both antigens have been evaluated as
DNA or recombinant protein antigens in a variety of preclinical animal
models, including mice, dogs, and even nonhuman primates. , , , They
were shown to stimulate the CD4+-mediated production of
Interferon-γ (IFN-γ), as well as activation of cytotoxic
T cells (CD8+). Specifically, it has been shown that recombinant
ASP-2 associated with CpG oligodeoxynucleotides or alum elicited a
strong CD8+ T cell response, subsequently leading to protective
immunity in mice. In addition, recombinant
Tc24 used in association with MPLA (monophosphoryl-lipid A) or other
Toll-like receptor 4 adjuvants, including glucopyranosyl lipid A or
E6020, resulted in a balanced Th1/Th2 response with increased levels
of IFN-γ in mice. , Accordingly, a recombinant Tc24-based
therapeutic CD vaccine is under development and advancing to human
trials. As an alternative or as a complementary
approach to administering recombinant protein-based CD vaccines, DNA
for these antigens was also explored, being delivered to the cell’s
nuclei either naked, via plasmids, or using a wide variety of viral
vectors. − With the global successes in administering mRNA (mRNA) vaccines
for COVID-19, new opportunities are available to accelerate product
and clinical development for other infectious diseases. Researchers
have already recognized the potential of mRNA-based vaccines in addressing
challenges associated with traditional vaccine development for CD. , 
In this study, we assessed the feasibility of developing an
mRNA-based
therapeutic CD vaccine targeting two T. cruzi vaccine antigens (Tc24 and ASP-2). The most widespread approach
for mRNA delivery relies on nanomedicine: lipid nanoparticles (LNPs)
are lipid-based vesicles that can be loaded with mRNA payloads. LNPs are usually administered intramuscularly,
where they are taken up by antigen-presenting cells (APCs) [primarily
dendritic cells (DCs)]: LNPs release the mRNA cargo in the cytoplasm
and trigger protein translation, leading to the production of functional
antigens that resemble those presented by pathogens during a natural
infection to the immune system, thus mimicking the mechanism of natural
infection. Here, we outlined the mRNA
synthesis process and the preparation and stability assessment of
the LNPs, and examined their uptake by DCs, as well as their biodistribution
in C57BL/J mice. Furthermore, we comprehensively assessed the mRNA-based
monovalent and bivalent vaccines by measuring their impact on early
cardiac damage caused by T. cruzi infection,
effects on parasite burden, and vaccine-specific immune response (as
summarized in a,b). With this work, we evaluated the concept of delivering multiple
mRNA antigens within the same LNP delivery system for CD. Bivalent
vaccination can offer several advantages by enhancing protection against
different stages of pathogens, potentially providing more robust responses.
 

## Results and Discussion

## LNPs Loaded with Tc24, ASP-2, and Tc24 + ASP-2 mRNA Are Homogeneous
and Stable
LNPs containing the mRNA encoding Tc24, ASP-2,
and Tc24 in combination with ASP-2 were synthesized using the microfluidic
system benchtop NanoAssemblr, which exploits a microfluidic cartridge
that mixes an organic phase, usually containing lipids dissolved in
ethanol, and an aqueous phase, containing the synthesis buffer alongside
the cargo. , LNPs were synthesized with the
ionizable lipid known as DLin-MC3-DMA, previously approved by the
FDA to deliver siRNA. Briefly, an N/P ratio (quaternary nitrogen of
DLin-MC3-DMA/phosphate of mRNA) of 5.6 allowed for successful complexation
of the ionizable lipid with the following mRNA constructs: (i) Tc24
mRNA, (ii) ASP-2 mRNA, and (iii) a combination of Tc24 and ASP-2 mRNA
(1:1 w/w ratio). Empty LNPs were used as the control. The stability
of the physio-chemical properties of LNPs was evaluated with dynamic
light scattering (DLS) for up to 28 days upon storage at 4 °C.
The average LNP size was around ∼100 nm independently of
the construct used (80.13 ± 8.12 nm for empty LNPs, 91.27 ±
0.51 nm for Tc24 LNPs, 86.96 ± 3.84 nm for ASP-2 LNPs, and 81.6
± 9.45 nm for Tc24 + ASP-2 LNPs, as shown in a), and it was maintained stable
for up to a month after synthesis. Size distribution was homogeneous
and consistent over time, as indicated by the low polydispersity indexes
(PDIs <0.2, b). Finally, the surface charge of LNPs was always negative, with
a slight decrease of zeta potential (ZP) over time for loaded LNPs
(from −3.34 ± 1.91 mV to −8.43 ± 1.83 mV for
Tc24 LNPs, from −2.73 ± 1.3 mV to −9.52 ±
0.54 mV for ASP-2 LNPs, and from −4.27 ± 0.89 mV to −8.87
± 0.62 mV for Tc24 + ASP-2 LNPs, as shown in c), which is hypothesized to
be related to a rearrangement of the contents of the solid core of
the LNPs, with the mRNA constructs moving closer to the surface of
the LNPs. The encapsulation efficiency (EE %), evaluated with Ribogreen,
revealed that over 75% of the genetic cargo was successfully encapsulated
by our LNPs ( d). In detail, LNPs prepared with the Tc24 construct had the highest
EE % (116.89 ± 12.80%), while only 86.88% ± 1.27% of the
ASP-2 mRNA was successfully encapsulated. Consistently with these
results, LNPs with the combination of the two constructs had an average
EE %, accounting for the lower efficiency present for the ASP-2 construct
(108.23 ± 8.27%). The size and presence or absence of the genetic
cargo were confirmed by CryoTEM, as indicated by the electron-dense
areas in the LNPs loaded with genetic cargo compared with empty LNPs
( e).
 Notably, results show that all the LNPs were stable
for up to 28
days postsynthesis when stored at 4 °C, indicating that the LNPs
are a very robust system for storing genetic cargo. The stringent
storage conditions, requiring ultralow temperatures (−20/-80
°C) for certain COVID-19 vaccines, pose significant logistical
challenges, particularly in tropical countries. − Maintaining
the cold chain demands specialized infrastructure, reliable transportation,
and constant monitoring, which may be limited in regions with warmer
climates. This difficulty in maintaining the required storage conditions
can lead to delays and complexities in vaccine distribution, especially
in remote or underserved areas. Moreover, the economic burden associated
with establishing and sustaining the necessary cold chain infrastructure
raises concerns about equity in vaccine access. To address these challenges,
some countries have opted for vaccines with flexible storage requirements.
Ongoing efforts are focused on innovations in storage technology,
potentially leading to the development of vaccines that are not as
reliant on ultralow temperatures. These advancements aim to enhance
the accessibility and distribution of COVID-19 vaccines, ensuring
that vaccination campaigns can effectively reach diverse populations
worldwide. Hence, we evaluated the feasibility of maintaining our
proposed mRNA vaccine under 4 °C storage, providing evidence
of stability of physiochemical properties and mRNA integrity, despite
some possible rearrangement of the cargo within the LNP structure
indicated by the decrease in ZP. In fact, our observations are supported
by the readouts over construct integrity obtained via Bioanalyzer
( f): both LNPs
loaded with single constructs (either Tc24 or ASP-2) or their combination,
successfully protected the mRNAs from degradation, as shown by the
absence of bands at lower molecular weights than the ones corresponding
to the constructs. Moreover, these agarose gels confirmed the presence
of both constructs when LNPs were loaded with a combination of Tc24
and ASP-2, while fainter bands were observed for the ASP-2 construct,
supporting our hypothesis for the lower EE % of this specific construct.

## In Vitro Toxicity and Uptake
Prior to advancing to
in vivo preclinical studies, it is essential to assess the safety
and effectiveness of a formulation through in vitro evaluations. These tests allowed us to identify any potential
toxicity related to the formulation itself. In addition, it allows
for a more cost-effective and rapid way to test for formulation efficacy
preliminarily. Hence, given that the target cell type for mRNA-based
vaccines is represented by DCs, we assessed the cytotoxicity of our
delivery system (empty LNPs) in DCs at different lipidic concentrations
(0, 12.5, 25, 50, and 100 μM) using a murine DC line. Results
revealed a threshold of 50 μM (lipidic concentration) over which
a significant drop in cell viability was observed only 40% of the
cells survived at a 50 μM concentration, as shown in a. Therefore, the
50 μM concentration was selected to evaluate the uptake of the
LNPs by DCs after treatment with rhodamine labeled LNPs. Results revealed
a 6-fold increase in uptake signal after 24 h of treatment ( b,c), confirming
the ideal formulation to advance to in vivo studies. While the exact
mechanisms of DC uptake of LNPs are still under investigation, our
in vitro experiment with the DC2.4 cell line shows that this target
cell type can successfully uptake the LNPs. This is of utmost importance
for vaccine applications, where uptake of LNPs by APCs is the first
step toward achieving immunity. Once internalized in endosomes, LNPs
can be released in the cytoplasm thanks to the intrinsic physio-chemical
properties of the ionizable lipid. The acidic pH of the endosome triggers
the protonation of the ionizable lipid (DLin-MC3-DMA), which, in turn,
interacts with the negatively charged lipids of the endosomal membrane,
disrupting the LNP structure and causing the release of the genetic
cargo in the cytoplasm, where it is available for protein translation. Validation of the successful translation of
the Tc24 antigen has been provided in our previous publication by
Poveda et al., 2023, where Western Blotting has been used to measure
Tc24 protein expression upon delivery of 1 μg of Tc24 mRNA to
DCs through the same LNP formulation characterized here. 
 

## In Vivo Toxicity and Biodistribution
Drug delivery
systems for mRNA delivery aim at protecting the genetic cargo while
ensuring lower construct immunogenicity and successful delivery of
the cargo to target cells and tissues for protein expression. Therefore, evaluating the LNP performance in
vivo is essential, since different applications might require different
administration routes. With this in mind, LNPs’ toxicity and
biodistribution were assessed in vivo in C57BL/6J mice using four
different administration routes: (i) intravenous (IV), (ii) subcutaneous
(SC), (iii) intramuscular (IM), and (iv) intraperitoneal (IP). In
detail, mice were administered Luciferase mRNA loaded LNPs, so that two readouts could be gathered from the experiment:
fluorescently labeled LNPs allowed us to appreciate the biodistribution
of nanoparticles in different organs (representative images in a), while a luminescence
signal was used to confirm the success of mRNA translation upon administration
of the luciferase substrate (representative images in b). Results from the fluorescence
reading at 18 h postinjection showed significant differences in LNPs
biodistribution for the four administration routes ( c). As expected for vesicles
of ∼100 nm size, (i) IV administration revealed the highest
accumulation in the liver (1.12 × 109 ± 3.19
× 108 p/s/cm2/sr), spleen (5.33 ×
108 ± 1.91 × 108 p/s/cm2/sr), and lungs (1.22 × 108 ± 2.43 × 107 p/s/cm2/sr), respectively. The highest protein expression (obtained from the luminescence
signal arising from luciferase expression) was found in the same organs
(5.02 × 106 ± 1.53 × 106 p/s/cm2/sr for liver, 1.31 × 105 ± 6.48 ×
104 p/s/cm2/sr for spleen, and 2.54 × 104 ± 8.44 × 103 p/s/cm2/sr for
lungs, d). (ii) SC administration gave a minimal signal for fluorescence
(the highest signal was present in the liver: 3.37 × 107 ± 4.98 × 106 p/s/cm2/sr) and bioluminescence
(the liver signal being 2.65 × 104 ± 4.43 ×
104 p/s/cm2/sr), suggesting that this administration
route might not be suitable for targeting a broader range of organs.
Nevertheless, the SC route has been widely explored in literature
for vaccination purposes, and we have shown that SC-administered LNPs
loaded with Tc24 are capable of eliciting robust immune responses. (iii) IP administration showed how LNPs mainly
accumulated within the organs that populate the peritoneum, with the
liver, spleen, lungs, and kidneys having the highest signal (3.64
× 106 ± 1.71 × 106 p/s/cm2/sr, 4.14 × 105 ± 2.53 × 105 p/s/cm2/sr, 9.71 × 104 ±
8.21 × 104 p/s/cm2/sr, and 7.79 ×
104 ± 4.73 × 104 p/s/cm2/sr, respectively). The protein expression signal followed the same
trend (3.64 × 106 ± 1.71 × 106 p/s/cm2/sr, 4.14 × 105 ± 2.53 ×
105 p/s/cm2/sr, 9.71 × 104 ±
8.21 × 104 p/s/cm2/sr, and 7.79 ×
104 ± 4.73 × 104 p/s/cm2/sr, respectively). Finally, (iv) IM administration gave a high signal
in the injection site, followed by the one in the left lymph node
proximal to the injection site (6.15 × 108 ±
4.98 × 108 p/s/cm2/sr for fluorescence
and 1.09 × 106 ± 9.79 × 105 p/s/cm2/sr for luminescence). Despite the absence of evident fluorescence
in the liver, some protein expression was detected in the liver: this
could be related to the local uptake of the LNPs within the bloodstream
upon IM administration. LNPs that enter the bloodstream are quickly
brought to the liver (as seen for IV administration), where hepatocytes
can take up the vesicles and trigger protein translation. Histological
sections of organs from these animals did not show any evidence of
inflammation or acute toxicity (Figure S1a,b).
 While IV administration could lead to the highest
protein production,
as shown by our biodistribution study, vaccines usually exploit parenteral
administration for a variety of reasons that go beyond reduced training
needed to perform these injections and decreased risks for infections. In fact, SC and IM routes are preferred because
those areas are rich in APCs and lymphatic vessels, which could potentially
trigger stronger immune responses compared to IV or IP routes. Additionally,
we previously demonstrated that the SC route could elicit a strong
response for a monovalent Tc24 mRNA vaccine, giving us compelling
evidence to support the choice of the SC route. 

## Vaccine Efficacy: Bivalent ASP-2 + Tc24 mRNA Vaccine Reduces
Parasite Burden in a Chronic CD Mouse Model
In order to assess
the efficacy of our drug delivery systems for vaccine purposes, we
evaluated the immunogenicity and efficacy of our mRNA-based therapeutic
vaccine targets in T. cruzi-infected
chronic mouse model of CD. Female C57BL/6J mice were infected with T. cruzi and, 70 days postinfection (DPI), were divided
into six groups (n = 15 per group) as described in . Adopting a therapeutic
vaccine strategy, animals were administered three doses, once a week,
starting at 70 DPI, during the early chronic phase of infection, following
the treatment regimen represented in a and comparing therapeutic vaccination strategies
described in b. In detail, we wanted to compare the efficacy of a therapeutic
vaccination strategy involving LNPs loaded with a single antigen or
with both antigens. Hence, we collected blood, heart, and muscle tissues
at 14- and 126 DPB after all animals had completed the three-dose
treatment regimen. We also measured the parasite burden in the heart
and skeletal muscle and parasitemia in the blood. While no change
was observed for the parasite load in the heart ( a,b), a reduction in the parasite
burden was observed in the skeletal muscle of the mice infected and
vaccinated therapeutically with the vaccine antigens ASP-2 and Tc24
as a monovalent and bivalent vaccine at 14 DPB ( c), with significant reduction for mice vaccinated
with the Tc24 antigen. At 126 DPB ( f), there was no reduction of parasite burdens
in the heart or skeletal muscle. However, an overall reduction in
the parasitemia was found in the animals vaccinated with the monovalent
vaccine Tc24 and ASP-2, as well as the bivalent formulation Tc24 +
ASP-2 at 126 DPB.
 

## Vaccine Efficacy: Therapeutic Mono- or Bivalent Vaccination
with ASP-2 and Tc24 mRNA Protects against Early Chronic Cardiac Inflammation
Clinical outcomes of CD involve cardiac complications related to
parasite burden in the tissue, which triggers chronic cardiac inflammation. , Concurrently, inflammation and fibrosis can arise in the skeletal
muscle. Here, a measurement of the heart and skeletal muscle cellular
infiltrate at 14- and 126-DPB allowed us to evaluate whether therapeutic
vaccination with the ASP-2 and Tc24 mRNAs as monovalent or bivalent
vaccines protected the tissues in the mice infected with T. cruzi. At 14 DPB, the group immunized with the
bivalent vaccine ASP-2 + Tc24 showed a lower amount of cell infiltration
compared with the unvaccinated animals (control) and the mice treated
with empty LNPs (Figure S2a). However,
the groups vaccinated with the Tc24 mRNA or ASP-2 vaccine had no significant
reduction. Additionally, the fibrosis detected in the tissues remained
consistent across treatment strategies. Interestingly, both the cardiac
cellular infiltration and fibrosis increased at 126 DPB (Figure S2b), suggesting that vaccination with
a bivalent vaccine could have a short-term protective effect on the
cardiac damage caused by infection with T. cruzi. No significant differences were detected in the levels of cardiac
fibrosis (Figure S2c,d). Interestingly,
vaccination had no effect on inflammation and fibrosis in skeletal
muscle (Figure S3).

## Vaccine Immunogenicity: Evaluation of Cytokines Secreted by
Splenocytes
The rationale behind the use of a bivalent vaccine
was to utilize surface proteins expressed in multiple stages of the
parasite, specifically the trypomastigote
and the amastigote stages, to generate a more robust immune response
capable of recognizing T. cruzi throughout
its life cycle. Previous evaluations of these antigens as individual
vaccine candidates had already yielded promising results. , − In this study, we assessed the efficacy of our therapeutic vaccination
strategy in vivo, which involved administering three doses of either
the monovalent or the bivalent mRNA vaccines at 70, 77, and 84 DPI.
The spleen, characterized by the presence of various leukocyte populations,
including T cells, B cells, DCs, and macrophages, plays a crucial
role in immune response regulation, encompassing innate and adaptive
immune system responses. Therefore, we
conducted a cytokine release assay using splenocytes from vaccinated
mice to determine the cytokines secreted upon restimulation with the
vaccine antigen in a monovalent or bivalent mRNA vaccine. We evaluated seven cytokines, categorized as
proinflammatory (IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-2, IL-22, and IL-6)
and anti-inflammatory (IL-4 and IL-10). IL-13 and IL-17A were also measured, albeit at levels below the
assay’s sensitivity. A successful vaccine profile is expected
to yield a T-helper 1 cell (Th1-type) response, characterized by the
production of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IFN-γ, TNF-α,
and IL-2, which are crucial for controlling T. cruzi infection, involved in activating immune cells, promoting inflammation,
and enhancing the generation of a specific immune response. , In detail, IFN-γ and TNF-α promote the activation of
macrophages and other immune cells.
Meanwhile, IL-2 plays a
role in the activation and proliferation of T cells and in maintaining
the T cell memory. Finally, IL-6 is involved in B-cell activation
and antibody production. Conversely, a Th2-type response characterized
by the production of IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10 is associated with susceptibility
to T. cruzi infection and the development
of chronic CD. However, anti-inflammatory
cytokines such as IL-4, IL-10, and proinflammatory cytokine IL-22
regulate and control the immune response to vaccines, with IL-4 promoting
antibody production by B cells and IL-10 suppressing excessive inflammation
and preventing damage to healthy tissue. Maintaining a balance between
Th1 and Th2 immune responses is essential for an effective immune
response while mitigating the risks of excessive inflammation. Our
results demonstrated specific immune responses in mice vaccinated
with Tc24 and ASP-2 individually at 14 DPB ( a,c), with a subsequent decline in the response
between 14- and 126-DPB ( b,d). Splenocytes from mice treated with monovalent
vaccines restimulated with the corresponding antigens yielded high
levels of proinflammatory cytokines (IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-2,
IL-22, and IL-6) and of and anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-4 and
IL-10) 14 DPB (Figures S4 and S6), only
for those levels to decrease 126 DPB (Figures S5 and S7).
 In contrast, mice immunized with the bivalent vaccine
Tc24 and
ASP-2 exhibited a specific response at 126 DPB; splenocytes restimulated
with both antigens showed an increase of both proinflammatory and
anti-inflammatory cytokines from 14 to 126 DPB ( e,f, S8, and S9), demonstrating the potential of a bivalent vaccination strategy
in providing a more robust response. We hypothesize that the antigens
Tc24 and ASP-2 became less prevalent, evading the immune response
over time and posing challenges for recognition by the immune system
in animals vaccinated with monovalent but not bivalent vaccines, which
contain antigens for both forms of the parasite. Alternatively, the induced immune response may have waned
over time due to a decline in the number or quality of memory cells
or a general decrease in the immune response quality.
Understanding
the dynamics of mRNA vaccine-induced immune responses
and their durability is crucial for optimizing vaccination strategies
against CD. The immune response to the Tc24 and ASP-2 monovalent mRNA
vaccines exhibited a specific cytokine secretion pattern 2 weeks after
the last immunization. However, over time, the immune system’s
response to the vaccine may have weakened or declined, leading to
a loss of protection. The duration of vaccine-induced protection varies
depending on factors such as the pathogen, the individual’s
immune system, and vaccine type. This decline in the level of protection
can be attributed to a series of factors. For instance, a decrease
in the number of memory cells or changes in the quality and specificity
of the immune response could contribute to that outcome. In the case
of the monovalent vaccine, the loss of a specific immune response
at 126 DPB, 16 weeks after last immunization, could be attributed
to antigenic drift or shift, which can reduce the vaccine’s
effectiveness, especially if the antigens no longer match the circulating
strains of the parasite. 

## Conclusions
While vaccines have successfully prevented
and controlled many
infectious diseases caused by bacteria and viruses, developing effective
vaccines against eukaryotic parasites poses unique challenges. Parasites often have large genomes and complex
life cycles involving multiple developmental stages, which sometimes
alternate between different hosts. Each stage may express unique antigens,
making it challenging to identify suitable vaccine targets that provide
broad protection across all life cycle stages. Moreover, many parasites,
including Trypanosoma, employ antigenic
variation. They can rapidly change the surface antigens they express,
evading the host’s immune response. This requires identifying conserved antigens as vaccine targets
that can trigger an immune response with the ability to overcome antigenic
variation. However, there is a limited
understanding of the specific immune responses that are required to
confer protection in many parasitic infections. Without clear correlates
of protection, it is challenging to determine the efficacy of vaccine
candidates during preclinical and clinical trials. Finally, logistical
challenges further complicate the design of immunization campaigns,
particularly when targeting remote or resource-limited areas where
parasitic infections are widespread. , The delivery
of vaccines to such locations presents significant obstacles and hurdles.
Despite the promise of global access and affordability, the mRNA-based
vaccine technology faces significant hurdles before the ecosystem
of global manufacturers can learn to adopt it: such technology is
important to be assessed to build preclinical regulatory-enabling
evidence of its value toward the use for preventing or treating neglected
and infectious diseases of importance in the low- and middle-income
countries.
Overall mRNA-based vaccines do offer many advantages,
including
the feasibility of manufacturing speed, scalability, long-term storage,
regulatory flexibility, safety, efficacy. However, their successes have mostly been restricted to preventing
viral illness. One approach to expand the mRNA vaccine platform to
nonviral or more complex pathogens, including eukaryotic parasites,
is to consider bivalent or multivalent approaches. Multivalent vaccination
approaches have also shown to have many benefits, including the possibility
of increasing protection against the same or different pathogens by
elucidating immune response to two or multiple antigens. Moreover, when compared to the traditional therapeutic
approach to CD (which involves drugs with significant side effects,
Benznidazole and Nifurtimox, that prompt ∼40% of the patients
to discontinue treatment), global vaccination efforts dedicated to
the Covid-19 pandemic with mRNA-based technology have saved tens of
millions of lives, while the spectrum of their side effects, spanning
from mild reactogenicity to exceptionally rare severe illnesses, was
much lower in incidence. 
In this
work, we explored combining the use of mRNA-technology
with a bivalent vaccine target approach. For the first time we assessed
the production and proof-of-concept immunogenicity and efficacy study
of a bivalent mRNA-based vaccine for T. cruzi. We assessed the homogeneity and stability of the LNP formulations,
as they play a crucial role in successfully translating the platform
and subsequent production and storage processes. Additionally, the
toxicity, uptake, and biodistribution studies offered valuable insights
into potential variations in target organs resulting from different
routes of administration. These findings are particularly significant
for determining the potential therapeutic effectiveness of the vaccine.
The route choice depends on the vaccine’s characteristics,
the desired immune response, the target population, and the availability
of appropriate administration methods. Each route has its considerations
regarding stability, delivery efficiency, and potential side effects.
It was further noted that a higher distribution of LNPs does not always
correlate with a better expression of the mRNA. This can be observed
from , where
the LNPs reaching the spleen did not produce a Luciferase signal as
strong as in other organs (i.e., liver). Efficient spleen targeting
in vaccines can improve immune responses, including increased antibody
production, enhanced cellular immunity, and prolonged antigen presentation. , 
Our results show promising outcomes not only in reducing the
parasite
burden in the chronic phase of CD but also in reducing the early cardiac
damage caused by T. cruzi infection.
We evaluated the immunogenicity and effectiveness of Tc24 and ASP-2
mRNA-based candidates, as both monovalent and bivalent vaccine strategies,
employing an in vivo chronic mouse model of CD. The reduction in the
cardiac parasite burdens in the mice vaccinated with bivalent vaccine
Tc24 + ASP-2 suggests a synergist effect, where the presence of one
antigen enhances the immune response triggered by the other, as well
as an increase in the recognition of the parasite stages, boosting
its elimination (ASP-2 amastigotes and Tc24—trypomastigotes
and amastigotes). Finally, our results show a long-lasting effect
in the bivalent group at 126 DPB but not in the monovalent groups
of Tc24 mRNA or ASP-2 mRNAs alone. An added challenge in CD management
is the therapeutic effect on cardiac tissue. The therapeutic goals
include reductions of parasite load (amastigotes and trypomastigotes)
in the heart cardiac, with simultaneous decreases in host inflammatory
responses and collagen deposition leading to cardiac fibrosis. An
ideal target product profile for a CD therapeutic vaccine includes
all three performance features, or at the very least no exacerbation
of either inflammation or fibrosis that could worsen therapeutic outcomes.
While the present study represents the first proof of concept of the
feasibility of using multivalent mRNA vaccination strategies for CD,
there is room for improvement in different areas. For example, improving
the LNP formulation and the purity of the mRNA could significantly
boost the effectiveness of the treatment. Additionally, exploring
different antigen dosages, as well as adding a third booster to the
schedule, would provide a better picture of the potential of our mRNA-based
therapeutic vaccine. Nevertheless, this is the first study demonstrating
partial efficacy of a multivalent mRNA based therapeutic vaccine against
CD, which induced a desirable immune response and reduced cardiac
pathology. This is the first study demonstrating partial efficacy
of a multivalent mRNA based therapeutic vaccine against CD, which
induced a desirable immune response and reduced cardiac pathology.
This shows promise for developing next generation therapeutic vaccines
to improve cardiac health for CD patients, using mRNA or potentially
mRNA-protein prime-boost approaches. However, we need further optimization
in terms of vaccine dose, delivery, and formulation in order to achieve
maximal protection and minimal cardiotoxicity.

## Methods

## mRNA Production
ASP-2 and Tc24 mRNA production was
assess as previously described. Tc24
and ASP-2 sequences were cloned into pTNT (Promega) to facilitate
mRNA transcription. To improve the ribosome binding and expression
efficacy, the codon usage was optimized. A KOZAK sequence (GCCRCCAUGG)
was added ahead of Tc24 and ASP-2 ORF to assist in the initiation
of the translation process. The plasmid was cloned in Escherichia coli. Linearization is required to avoid
infinite transcription around the circle. Hence, the plasmid is digested
with restriction-endonuclease BAMHI. Then, the linearized plasmids
were purified on MaXtract High-Density columns (Qiagen) and by precipitation
in ethanol. The integrity, yield, concentration, and purity of the
linearized plasmids were measured by the absorbance at 260 nm on a
Nanodrop spectrophotometer. In vitro transcription of Tc24 and ASP2-encoding
mRNA was executed with T7 RNA polymerase (RiboMAX Large Scale RNA
Production Systems, Promega) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions; we replace the uridine for modified N1-methylpseudouridine-5′-triphosphate.
These RNAs were purified by precipitation in ammonium acetate and
capped using a ScriptCap m7G Capping System (CellScript) to enhance
cell RNA stability and translation. Before use, the mRNA quality was
assessed by agarose gel electrophoresis. All RNAs were stored at −80
°C until use.

## LNPs Synthesis
LNPs were synthesized with the NanoAssemblr
Benchtop system, which exploits a microfluidic cartridge equipped
with a staggered herringbone geometry to efficiently mix organic and
aqueous phases efficiently. The choice of the lipidic composition
described here is rooted in the nature of LNPs: extensive literature
has demonstrated that successful genetic cargo encapsulation occurs
when at least 50% of the molar percentage of the lipidic composition
is represented by an ionizable cationic lipid, that is, a lipid that
displays a positive charge at the acidic pH of synthesis, therefore
triggering complexation with the negatively charged mRNA, while losing
that charge after purification (https://www.mdpi.com/2076-393X/11/3/658). Discovery of ionizable lipids has allowed great flexibility in
terms of genetic cargo delivery, while maintaining a good safety profile
of the formulation, thanks to the neutral charge displayed by the
final drug delivery system (10.1016/j.addr.2023.115175). Addition of other “helper lipids” in the formulation
(DSPC, Cholesterol, and DMG-PEG2000) is necessary to achieve proper
packaging of the genetic cargo during the nanoprecipitation process
(in the case of DSPC and Cholesterol) as well as proper colloidal
stability (in the case of DMG-PEG2000). Here, DLin-MC3-DMA, DSPC,
cholesterol, and DMG-PEG2000 (50:10.5:38:1.5 molar ratios, respectively)
were dissolved in ethanol for a final lipidic concentration of 10
mM to make the organic phase. In contrast, the aqueous phase consisted
of sodium acetate buffer (50 mM) at pH 4 used alone (for empty LNPs)
or combined with the mRNA of interest. In detail, an N/P ratio of
5.6 was used for the following formulations (according to the construct
size of 624 bases for Tc24 and 723 bases for ASP-2): (i) 300 μg
of Tc24 mRNA, (ii) 300 μg of ASP-2 mRNA, or (iii) a combination
of 150 μg of Tc24 and 150 μg of ASP-2 mRNAs. The following
synthesis parameters were selected: the TFR was set at 9 mL/min, the
FRR was 1:3 (organic: aqueous), and the initial and final waste was
100 μL. After synthesis, LNPs were dialyzed against 1×
PBS overnight and then filtered with 0.22 μm syringe filters
to ensure sterility and remove potential aggregates.

## LNPs Characterization
Size (nm), PDI (au), and ZP (mV)
were measured via DLS using Malvern Zetasizer for 28 days postsynthesis.
Samples for size and PDI measurements were prepared by adding 10 μL
of NPs and 990 μL 1× PBS to a semimicrovolume disposable
cuvette. In comparison, samples for ZP were prepared by adding 10
μL of sample to 90 μL of 1× PBS and 900 μL
of double distilled water (ddH2O, salt concentration was
lower to avoid damage to the electrodes of the ZP cuvette used for
the measurement). For both size and ZP, three measures of 15 runs
each were acquired and then averaged to obtain the final value for
each formulation.
mRNA encapsulation efficiency (EE %) was evaluated
by using the Ribogreen RNA assay. When the dye binds to nucleic acids,
its fluorescence increases proportionally and can be used to detect
the concentration of mRNA encapsulated in the LNPs. Due to the nature
of LNPs, it is possible to see some mRNA grafted on the outer part
of the vesicles: of course, this mRNA will not be functional due to
exposure to the outer side of the vesicles. To remove unencapsulated
mRNA (both the one released after dialysis and the one grafted outside
the LNPs) from the quantification, the signal from intact LNPs was
subtracted from the signal obtained from burst LNPs. LNP samples were
first diluted 1:100 in 1× TE buffer, followed by 50 μL
of each diluted sample added to either 50 μL of 1× TE buffer
or 100 μL of 2% Triton-X in 1× TE buffer (this step ensures
bursting of LNPs). RNA standard curve, ranging from 0.1 to 2.5 μg/mL,
was prepared using a combination of 2% Triton-X 100 in 1× TE
buffer and 1× TE buffer as the diluent. All samples were run
in duplicate and incubated at 37 °C for 10 min. Ribogreen reagent
was diluted 1:100 in 1× TE buffer with 100 μL added to
each well. Following a 10 min incubation at room temperature, the
plate was read at Ex/Em of 480 nm/520 nm.
The stability of the encapsulated
mRNA was assessed for 28 days
postsynthesis. First, the RNA was extracted from LNPs by using a lithium
chloride precipitation method to evaluate mRNA integrity. Briefly,
100 μL of empty or loaded LNPs were mixed with 300 μL
of lithium chloride in pure ethanol (34 mg/mL solution). The solution
was centrifuged at 12,000g for 10 min (4 °C).
After the supernatant was removed, the pellet was dissolved in 500
μL of 70% ethanol in RNase-free water, and another centrifugation
(12,000g, 10 min, 4 °C) step followed. Finally,
the supernatant was removed, and the pellet was dissolved in 30 μL
of RNase-free water. After measuring the RNA concentration with Nanodrop,
samples were diluted to a concentration of 50 ng/μL and processed
through a Bioanalyzer. Samples corresponding to RNA controls (mRNA
constructs loaded within LNPs) and RNA extracted at 0, 7, 14, 21,
and 28 days from LNPs were submitted to assess RNA integrity.

## Cell Viability Assay and Uptake
DCs were purchased
from Millipore and maintained in complete media (DMEM, 10% FBS, and
1% Pen/Strep). For cytotoxicity experiments, DCs have seeded a 96-well
plate at a seeding density of 8000 cells/well. After 24 h, LNPs were
resuspended in media and added to the cells at the following lipidic
concentrations: 0, 12.5, 25, 50, and 100 μM (n = 8 wells for each concentration). The toxicity of NP treatment
was evaluated using an MTT [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5- diphenyltetrazolium]
assay at 24 h according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Briefly, media was aspirated and replaced with MTT resuspended in
complete media at 0.5 mg/mL concentration. After 2 h, the MTT reagent
was aspirated and replaced with equal volume DMSO. Following 30 min
of gentle agitation at room temperature, absorbance was measured at
570 nm with an excitation wavelength of 630 nm. Cell viability (%)
was calculated as follows: (absorbancesample)/(absorbancecontrol) × 100. The optical density of each well was measured
using a Spark multimode microplate reader (Tecan). For the uptake
evaluation, DCs were seeded in 4-well chamber slides at a concentration
of 35,000 cells/well. The following day, cells were treated with rhodamine-labeled
empty LNPs (50 μM lipidic concentration): after overnight incubation,
cells were washed with PBS, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10
min, and washed twice with HBSS (Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution).
Next, cells were stained first with 5 μg/ml WGA S-10 Alexa Fluor
488 Conjugate (Invitrogen) for 10 min at 37 °C, washed twice
in HBSS, and then stained with 1 μg/mL DAPI (Abcam) for 3 min
at room temperature. Images were acquired with a Keyence BZ-X800 All-in-one
Fluorescence Microscope and processed using Fiji Is Just ImageJ (FIJI,
version 1.53c) software.
Values for cellular uptake of LNPs
were calculated as follows: uptake = number of “Rhod+” pixels, numbers of “WFA+” pixels, where the nominator represents the signal from LNPs
that have been uptaken by DCs. In contrast, the denominator represents
the area occupied by the cells.

## Ethics Statement
Animal experiments related to the
biodistribution of LNPs were approved by the Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee (IACUC), assurance number A4555–01,
at the Houston Methodist Research Institute. Animal experiments related
to vaccine efficacy were performed in full compliance with the Guide
for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, eighth edition, under a protocol approved by Baylor College
of Medicine’s IACUC, assurance number D16-00475.

## In Vivo Biodistribution and Optimization of Administration Route
Two months old female C57BL/6J were purchased from Charles River
and allowed a 72 h acclimation period in the dedicated comparative
medicine program facility. Mice were administered DID-stained Luciferase-loaded
LNPs (Trilink, 40 μg per mouse) using four different administration
routes: (i) intravenous (IV, n = 5), (ii) subcutaneous
(SC, n = 5), (iii) intraperitoneal (IP, n = 5), and (iv) intramuscular (IM, n = 5). Upon
administration, mice were briefly anesthetized using 2.5% isoflurane
inhalation: for (i) intravenous injection, the bloodstream was accessed
via retro-orbital sinus (RO); (ii) subcutaneous injection was performed
using the back of the mice; (iii) IP injection was performed accessing
the lower-right quadrant of the peritoneum; (iv) IM injection was
delivered in the quadriceps of the left leg. 18 h postinjection, mice
were euthanized, and their organs were imaged ex vivo using the IVIS
Spectrum CT equipment. The formulation composition made an immediate
readout of the LNPs biodistribution and protein translation available.
Organs were imaged with a sequence including a fluorescence reading
(Ex/Em = 644/663
nm) and a bioluminescence reading, able to detect the luciferase protein
expression if present. If the Luciferase mRNA is successfully delivered
to the cytosol by the LNPs, then mice will express the protein Luciferase
(mainly in the tissues where higher LNP accumulation occurs). Luciferase’s
substrate, Luciferin, can be injected intraperitoneally (200 μL,
solution concentration of 15 mg/mL) to cause the bioluminescence reaction
to occur within 10 min from the Luciferin injection.

## Toxicity Evaluation: Histology
Organs extracted from
mice that were administered LNPs for biodistribution studies were
harvested for histology. Following IVIS imaging, organs (heart, lungs,
liver, spleen, and kidneys) were immediately transferred in 10% buffered
formalin and fixed overnight at 4 °C under stirring conditions.
Once fixed, organs were rinsed in ddH2O and stored in 70% ethanol
until further processing. Tissues were then processed in a Shandon
Excelsior ES Tissue Processor and embedded in paraffin on a Shandon
HistoCenter Embedding System, using the manufacturer’s standard
processing and embedding protocols. Organ slides were sectioned at
20 μm thickness and stained with hematoxylin, eosin (H&E),
and Masson trichrome (MTC). Toxicity was evaluated by visual inspection
of the histology slides.

## Parasite and Mice
Ninety female C57BL/6J mice (Jackson
Laboratories), aged 5–8 weeks, were used for the vaccine efficacy
studies. For infection experiments, T. cruzi strain H1 clone K68 was used. Trypomastigotes were obtained from
the blood of infected immunodeficient male ICR-SCID mice (Taconic
Biosciences), animals were injected intraperitoneally with the parasite,
and trypomastigotes were isolated from blood at day 35 postinfection.

## Infection and Therapeutic Vaccination Strategy
All
mice were infected with 5000 blood-form trypomastigotes of T. cruzi H1 clone K68 by intraperitoneal injection.
At 70 days postinfection (DPI), animals were randomly divided into
six groups of 15 mice each ( ). Therapeutic vaccination started in the early chronic
phase of the disease. All the mice received three immunizations subcutaneously
once weekly (70, 77, and 84 DPI). The initial evaluation was 2 weeks
after the final vaccination at 14 DPB (5 mice per group), and the
final evaluation was at 126 DPB (10 mice per group). The mice were
humanely euthanized, and their blood, heart, and skeletal muscle were
collected for parasitological evaluation, and spleens were collected
to measure antigen-specific immune response.

## DNA Isolation
DNA was obtained using the kit PDQeX
Nucleic Acid Extractor (Microgem) following the manufacturer’s
directions for DNA purification, “Tissues or Blood”
programs. DNA was purified from 5 μL of blood and 5 mg of cardiac
tissue. DNA was quantified in a Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific) and stored
at −80 °C.

## Parasite Burden Determination by Quantitative Real-Time PCR
qPCR was conducted with DNA from blood, skeletal muscle, and cardiac
tissue, following the method described by Piron et al., 2007. Briefly, qPCR Master Mix TaqMan Fast Advanced
Master Mix (Life Technologies, CA, USA) was used in qPCR reactions
with oligonucleotides derived from T. cruzi satellite DNA using the following primers and probe: primers 5′
ASTCGGCTGATCGTTTTCGA 3′ and 5′ AATTCCTCCAAGCAGCGGATA
3′, probe 5′ 6-FAM CACACACTGGACACCAA MGB 3′;
Life Technologies, CA, USA. Data were normalized to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) (primers 5′ CAATGTGTCCGTCGTGGATCT 3′
and 5′ GTCCTCAGTGTAGCCCAAGATG 3′, probe 5′ 6-FAM
CGTGCCGCCTGGAGAAACCTGCC MGB 3′; Life Technologies, CA, USA).
qPCR was performed by using a Quant Studio 3 thermocycler (Applied
Biosciences). Parasite equivalents were calculated from a standard
curve of known parasite numbers.

## Inflammation and Fibrosis in Heart and Skeletal Muscle
Hearts and skeletal muscles harvested from mice dedicated to vaccination
experiments were processed as described above. The histopathology
slides images were collected with AmScope United Scope LLC, CA, USA
ME580 brightfield microscope equipped with LMPLAN40-065 × 40
objective using an 18-megapixel camera at fixed upper and lower light
levels. Images were analyzed using the ImageJ software (available
at https://www.nih.gov/). To
determine the total area of the tissue being examined, the white background
was selected and then subtracted from the total pixel count in each
image. For each image, a specific area of interest was selected based
on the color of the staining technique used. For example, Hematoxylin
& Eosin (H&E) stains cell nuclei deep blue-purple, while Masson’s
Trichrome (MTC) stains collagen in blue. The selected area was then
divided by the total tissue area, resulting in a ratio indicating
the degree of inflammation or fibrosis in the tissue.

## Splenocyte Preparation
Spleens were transferred to
a gentle MACS C Tube containing 3 mL of sterile PBS and homogenized
on a gentle MACS Dissociator (Miltenyi Biotech). Red blood cells from
the spleen homogenates were lysed with ACK lysis buffer (Lonza, 10-548E).
The lysis solution was diluted 5-fold with RPMI medium supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum FBS, 1× penicillin–streptomycin
(Pen–Strep), and l-glutamine (cRPMI medium). Splenocytes
were then pelleted by centrifugation for 5 min at 300g. Next, splenocytes were resuspended in 5 mL of cRPMI medium and
passed through 40 μm strainers (BD Biosciences, 352,340). Next,
cells were counted using acridine orange-propidium iodide live/dead
dye and a Cellometer Auto 2000 (Nexcelom Bioscience) automated cell
counter. Then, for each sample, 1 × 106 live splenocytes
were incubated in a 96-well nontissue culture plate with either 10
μg/mL recombinant Tc24-C4 protein, 20 ng/mL, ASP-2 Peptide 20
ng/mL, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)–1 μg/mL
ionomycin, or cRPMI only for 48 h at 37 °C in 5% CO2 .

## Antigen-Specific Cytokines Luminex
After 48 h, the
cell-free supernatant of restimulated splenocytes was collected and
stored at −80 °C until use. Using a Luminex-based assay,
the secreted cytokines levels of IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IL-13, IL-17A,
IL-22, IFN-γ, and TNF-α from supernatants were quantified,
as previously described. The levels of
IL-13 and IL-17A concentrations were below the detection limit. The
values of the splenocytes restimulated from the medium-stimulated
cells served as the background. They were then divided by the measurement
of the same mouse’s antigen-stimulated cells to obtain the
fold change.

## Statistical Analysis
For each parameter measured, data
were plotted using GraphPad Prism 9.4.1 software (GraphPad). Treatments
were compared to infected untreated controls using a Kruskal–Wallis
one-way ANOVA. P values ≤0.05 were considered
significant.

## Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Robert J. Kleberg Jr.
and Helen C. Kleberg Foundation (P.J.H.). In addition, this project
was supported by the Human Tissue Acquisition and Pathology Core at
Baylor College of Medicine with funding from the NIH (P30 CA125123),
the Pathology and Histology Core at Baylor College of Medicine with
funding from the NIH (P30 CA125123), and the Cytometry and Cell Sorting
Core at Baylor College of Medicine with funding from the NIH (NIAID
P30AI036211, NCI P30CA125123, and NCRR S10RR024574) and the assistance
of Joel M. Sederstrom. Illustrations were created with Biorender.com. CryoEM data
was collected at the Baylor College of Medicine CryoEM ATC, which
includes equipment purchased under support of CPRIT Core Facility
Award RP190602. This work was done in collaboration with the Encapsulation
and Validation Core of the Houston Methodist Academic Institute, which
provided the LNP encapsulation services.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsami.3c18830.
Results of histology and raw data from the Luminex assay
(PDF)

## Author Contributions
CP, KMJ, JP,
PJH, US, CM, AZ, FT, and MEB conceived and designed the study. CP,
CM, ACL, RA, DMN, MJV, AZ, FG, and LV conducted the experiments. RK
carried out plasmid linearization and mRNA production. CM and AZ carried
out LNPs formulation. CP, ACL, CM, and RA collected data. CP, KMJ,
CM, AZ, and JP analyzed the data. JP and MEB provided reagents. CM,
CP, ACL, KMJ, JP, US, PJH, and MEB wrote the manuscript. F.T. and
C.P. senior authors contributed equally to this manuscript.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
am3c18830_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
am3c18830_si_001.pdf