pmcCancer Commun (Lond)Cancer Commun (Lond)3437canccomms101723675CAC2Cancer Communications2523-3548AAAS Science Partner Journal ProgramPMC12629863PMC12629863.112629863126298634108419110.1002/cac2.70068CAC2700681Original ArticleOriginal ArticleCD24 is a promising immunotherapeutic target for enhancing efficacy of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs on EGFR‐mutated lung cancer
LIANG et al
LiangJiaqi BiGuoshu HuangXiaolong XuZhijie HuangYiwei BianYunyi ShanGuangyao GuoWei YanYuanliang SuiQihai YangXiaodong ChenZhencong LuTao ZhangHuan WangQun JiangWei jiang.wei1@zs-hospital.sh.cnZhanChenghttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-8745-9276 czhan10@fudan.edu.cn

1

Department of Thoracic Surgery
Zhongshan Hospital
Fudan University
Shanghai
P. R. China

2

Cancer Center
Zhongshan Hospital
Fudan University
Shanghai
P. R. China

3

Department of Pathology
Xiangya Hospital
Central South University
Changsha
Hunan
P. R. China

4

Department of Thoracic Surgery
National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College
Beijing
P. R. China

5

Department of Pharmacy
Xiangya Hospital
Central South University
Changsha
Hunan
P. R. China

6

Department of Thoracic Surgery
Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital
Tongji University
Shanghai
P. R. China

7

Department of Thoracic Surgery
Shanxi Province Cancer Hospital/Shanxi Hospital Affiliated to Cancer Hospital
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences/Cancer Hospital Affiliated to Shanxi Medical University
Taiyuan
Shanxi
P. R. China

8

Department of Thoracic Surgery
Sichuan Clinical Research Center for Cancer
Sichuan Cancer Hospital & Institute
Sichuan Cancer Center
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Chengdu
Sichuan
P. R. China

9

Department of Thoracic Surgery
Shanghai Geriatric Medicine Center
Shanghai
P. R. China

*
Correspondence
Cheng Zhan (lead contact); No. 180 Feng Lin Road, Shanghai, 200032, P. R. China.; 86‐021‐64041990. Email: czhan10@fudan.edu.cn
Wei Jiang; No. 180 Feng Lin Road, Shanghai, 200032, P. R. China.; 86‐021‐64041990. Email: jiang.wei1@zs-hospital.sh.cn

13102025112025451150090310.1002/cac2.v45.1115471578
2172025
1432025
2992025
131020252111202521112025© 2025 The Author(s). Cancer Communications published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Sun Yat‐sen University Cancer Center.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## Abstract

## Background
Third‐generation epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) show initial efficacy in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer, but residual disease persists. This study aimed to investigate cluster of differentiation 24 (CD24) as a translational immunotherapeutic target for enhancing third‐generation EGFR‐TKI efficacy.

## Methods
We conducted RNA‐sequencing (RNA‐seq) on drug‐responsive, drug‐tolerant persister, and drug‐resistant cells to identify therapeutic targets to pair with EGFR‐TKIs. For validation, we integrated single‐cell RNA‐seq data from 29 lung cancer specimens and used single‐nucleus RNA‐seq and immunohistochemistry on clinical residual tumor samples following TKI therapy (TKI‐residual). With CRISPR/Cas9, we studied the effect of CD24 on proliferation and phagocytic clearance during EGFR‐TKI treatment. We tested CD24 knockout or ATG‐031 (a first‐in‐class CD24 antibody) with EGFR‐TKIs in vitro, xenografts, and spontaneous lung cancer models. To explore mechanisms, we used DNA affinity precipitation, chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing, and luciferase assays to identify transcription factors regulating CD24. Co‐immunoprecipitation combined with mass spectrometry and phosphoproteomics were used to study YIN‐YANG‐1 (YY1) S247 phosphorylation's expression and function, while kinase inhibitors assessed upstream phosphorylation of YY1 S247 and its regulation of CD24.

## Results
CD24 expression rose in drug‐responsive, ‐resistant, and ‐tolerant lung cancer cells and post‐EGFR‐TKI treatment clinical specimens. This elevation promoted cell proliferation and shielded tumor cells from macrophage‐mediated phagocytosis. Genetic depletion of CD24 or treatment with ATG‐031 significantly enhanced phagocytosis and tumor eradication in vitro, in xenografts, and in mice harboring EGFRL858R·T790M‐driven spontaneous lung tumors. Furthermore, we revealed that YY1 S247 phosphorylation was responsible for the upregulation of CD24 upon EGFR‐TKI treatment, facilitating YY1 dimerization and the formation of promoter‐enhancer loops that regulate CD24 expression.

## Conclusions
CD24 is a promising target in EGFR‐mutated lung cancers, potentially enhancing efficacy of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs.

ATG‐031CD24drug‐tolerant persister cellEGFR‐TKIlung cancerosimertinibphagocytosisYY1JNK
National Natural Science Foundation of China10.13039/501100001809
8247318482403100
Shanghai Sailing Program
24YF2704100
Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai Municipality10.13039/100007219
24ZR1409900
Beijing Xisike Clinical Oncology Research Foundation10.13039/100018904
Y‐2024AZ(EGFR)MS‐0048 To identify potential targets for antibody‐based therapy combined with third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs, we performed RNA‐seq on osimertinib‐responsive cells, resistant cells, and their respective parental cells. We filtered the gene expression data to include only genes encoding proteins localized to the cell surface or secreted into the extracellular matrix. Eleven genes, including Calcium Channel Voltage‐Dependent Beta 3 Subunit (CACNB3), CD24, Laminin Beta 2 (LAMB2), Post‐GPI Attachment to Proteins Factor 3 (PGAP3), Prosaposin (PSAP), Rhomboid 5 Homolog 1 (RHBDF1), Solute Carrier Family 44 Member 2 (SLC44A2), Thrombospondin 3 (THBS3), Transmembrane Protein 8B (TMEM8B), Tuftelin 1 (TUFT1), and V‐Set Domain Containing T Cell Activation Inhibitor 1 (VTCN1), were consistently upregulated in drug‐responsive and ‐resistant cells (Figure  ).
To avoid potential off‐target effects of antibody‐based therapy, we further integrated our previously published single‐cell data from 204,157 cells across 29 lung cancer specimens to identify protein molecules specifically expressed on the surface of tumor cells within lung cancer tissues [ ]. The expression of the eleven candidates were assessed across 9 single‐cell subsets (cancer, alveolar, T, B, myeloid, mast, fibroblast, epithelial, and endothelial cells) [ ]. We found that 7 of the 11 genes (CACNB3, CD24, PGAP3, RHBDF1, SLC44A2, TMEM8B, and TUFT1) were specifically expressed on cancer cells and almost absent on hematopoietic cells, and CD24 was the one with the highest expression in tumor cells (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Further validations using qPCR assays revealed consistent upregulation of CD24 mRNA expression but not the other five potential targets across all drug‐responsive models when treated with osimertinib, almonertinib, furmonertinib, and befotertinib, (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Consequently, CD24 was selected as the top candidate protein target for further study.
CD24 expression levels were next assessed at protein level. Using western blot assays, we observed a marked and consistent increase of CD24 protein expression in drug‐responsive as well as resistant EGFR‐mutated cells to the third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Flow cytometry analysis also demonstrated a consistent and significant elevation of cell surface CD24 in drug‐responsive as well as OR cells (Figure  ‐ , Supplementary Figure ). To determine the role of CD24 upregulation in the evolution of EGFR‐TKI resistance, EGFR‐mutated cells were treated with third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs for 10 days to generate a drug‐tolerant persister (DTP) states that survives and rapidly adapts to therapy with an important role in the emergence of resistance to targeted therapies [ ]. We found that DTP PC‐9, HCC827, and H1975 cells displayed significantly increased expression of CD24 at both mRNA and protein levels (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ).
To elucidate the role of CD24 as a dynamic and an actionable biomarker for adaptive resistance, longitudinal time‐course studies of CD24 expression across PC‐9 and H1975 cell variants, including parental, responsive, DTP, and resistant phases were conducted by western blot assays. Our results demonstrated that CD24 protein expression commenced to increase within 12‐24 h of third‐generation EGFR‐TKI treatment and remained consistent until the resistant phase (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Together, these findings indicate CD24 expression rises during the evolution of drug resistance the third‐generation of EGFR‐TKIs in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells.

3.2

## CD24 was elevated in clinical TKI‐residual samples and served as an adverse prognostic factor for treatment efficacy
To investigate whether CD24 expression is upregulated in clinical cases following EGFR‐TKI treatments, we analyzed specimens from six patients with advanced EGFR‐mutated tumors (Figure  ). These included baseline tumors collected prior to any treatment (TKI‐naïve, n = 3, labeled N7, N8, and N9), and residual tumors from patients after osimertinib treatment (TKI‐residual, n = 3, labeled R7, R8, and R9). Residual tumor patients had mediastinal lymph nodes or blood vessel or bronchi invasion, making surgery unfeasible at the initial diagnosis. Their preoperative EGFR‐TKI therapy had lasted 2 to 7 months to minimize tumor burden and local metastatic stage so it could be surgically removed. All tumors had resulted in a notable trend of shrinkage, signifying as the DTP state, which has been reported to be plastic, allowing cells to transition between dormant, senescent, stem‐like, and epithelial‐to‐mesenchymal transition (EMT) cells, which may have adaptive resistance to therapy [ ].
 The 6 clinical tumor specimens were sequenced using snRNA‐seq and a total of 74,232 cell nuclei was processed following rigorous quality control measures (Supplementary Table ). Next, cells were categorized into 8 distinct single‐cell populations based on the expression of characteristic genes and the status of CNVs (Supplementary Figure ): cancer cells, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, stromal cells, T cells, myeloid cells, epithelial cells, and B cells (Figure  ‐ ). The results demonstrated that CD24 were greatly upregulated in TKI‐residual samples (Figure  ).
In the single lung cancer cell clusters, we observed a notable CD24 mRNA increase in the TKI‐residual tumors compared to the TKI‐naïve tumors (Figure  ). Considering CD24 has been reported to serve as plausible biomarker for cancer stem cells (CSCs) [ , , , ], we further quantified the stemness characteristics of individual tumor cells via calculating stemness indices based on the known CSC‐related gene set (Supplementary Figure ). Our results revealed no significant correlation between the stemness index and CD24 expression (Pearson correlation coefficient R = ‐0.105) (Supplementary Figure ). Together, our results indicate that CD24 is elevated in TKI‐residual tumor cells and the potential selection of CSCs by TKI treatment is not responsible for this elevation.
We next sought to investigate the CD24 protein expression in clinical lung tumor specimens. Consistent with the findings in snRNA‐Seq at the mRNA level, TKI‐residual tumor specimens demonstrated a significant increase in CD24 expression positivity as compared to TKI‐naïve tumors (Figure  ‐ ). To evaluate the association between CD24 expression and clinical outcomes of patients, we tentatively selected a cohort of 40 patients with advanced lung cancer who had undergone surgery at our institution and received adjuvant third‐generation EGFR‐TKI therapy afterward (clinical baseline information is available in Supplementary Table ). Our results indicated that high CD24 protein expression in the resected tumors prior to EGFR‐TKI therapies was significantly associated with worse RFS compared to those with low CD24 protein expression, with a 2.58‐fold risk (95% CI, 1.18‐5.66, P = 0.018) (Figure  ). Together, our findings indicate that CD24 expression elevates in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer and its expression serves as an adverse prognostic factor for the efficacy of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs.

3.3

## CD24 elevation in residual tumor cells was responsible for enhanced cell proliferation and macrophage‐mediated immune escape
To examine effects of CD24 expression in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells on EGFR‐TKI efficacy, we employed CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing technology to knockout the CD24 gene (ΔCD24) in the EGFR‐mutated cell lines (Supplementary Figure ). Cell viability results revealed that knockout of CD24 significantly attenuated baseline cell proliferative capabilities and reduced the relative cell viability in PC‐9, HCC827, and H1975 cells treated with third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs (Figure  ‐ , Supplementary Figure ). Given that knockout of CD24 reduced the cell growth and the initial cell responsiveness to EGFR‐TKIs, we hypothesized that CD24 might also be necessary for the formation and survival of DTP cells. We next treated PC‐9 and H1975 cells expressing ΔCD24 or wild‐type (WT) CD24 as control cells with EGFR‐TKIs over a period of 10 days and measured the proportion of surviving cells as well as the rate of outgrowth of resistant clones. We observed that knockout of CD24 led to a consistently stronger initial reduction in tumor cell proliferation sustaining for 60 days upon different third‐generation EGFR‐TKI treatments. In contrast, CD24 re‐expression in CD24‐knockout cells (ΔCD24 + CD24) diminished these above effects (Figure  ‐ , Supplementary Figure , Supplementary Figure ).
 To further determine the effect of CD24 expression in OR cells, we also knocked down CD24 expressing in drug‐resistant cells using siRNAs (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Cell viability results revealed that knockdown of CD24 resulted in a decrease in the proliferation rate of the resistant PC‐9‐OR, HCC827‐OR, and H1975‐OR cells (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). These results indicate that elevated CD24 has an important role in maintaining the outgrowth of surviving tumor cells during the formation of drug resistance.
In the light of the fact that several studies have shown that CD24 regulates the EGFR downstream survival pathways, such as AKT serine/threonine kinase (AKT) and extracellular signal‐regulated kinase (ERK) [ , , ], we next sought to assess whether EGFR downstream pathways were involved in the mechanisms of CD24‐mediated cell survival. Using western blot assays, we observed that knockout of CD24 further decreased both activity of the AKT and ERK pathways that had been inhibited by third‐generation EGFR‐TKI in all EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells. In contrast, restoring CD24 expression in the CD24‐knockout cells reversed this effect. Consistently, knockdown of CD24 in the OR cells markedly diminished the activity of the AKT and ERK signaling pathways (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Together, these observations indicate that the proliferative reduction in surviving cells induced by CD24 expression may be explained by its capacity to work in concert with EGFR‐TKI to prevent the activation of EGFR downstream signaling pathways.
Given that CD24 also functions as an anti‐phagocytic checkpoint molecule, or so‐called a don't eat me signal [ ], we next sought to investigate whether CD24 upregulation plays a role in the tumor immune escape during third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs treatment. Several studies have consistently demonstrated that the association between CD24 on host cells and sialic acid binding Ig‐like (SIGLEC) family proteins on antigen‐presenting cells regulates innate immune responses [ , , ]. Barkal et al. [ ] expanded this association to tumor immunity, revealing that CD24 on the surface of diverse tumor cells can interact with sialic acid binding Ig‐like lectin 10 (SIGLEC10) on tumor‐associated macrophages (TAMs).
Given the previous studies, we hypothesized that CD24 upregulation in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells might poses effects on TAMs in the tumor microenvironment treated with third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs. To test this, we re‐analyzed the snRNA‐Seq data of clinical lung tumors. We observed a higher proportion of myeloid cells in TKI‐residual samples compared to TKI‐naïve samples (Figure  ). Next, we calculated the M1 and M2 polarization scores using the previously reported marker gene sets [ ]. Notably, the proportion of M2‐polarized macrophages, considered as pro‐tumoral TAMs, was significantly increased in TKI‐residual samples compared to TKI‐naïve samples, while there was no significant change in the proportion of M1‐polarized macrophages, considered as anti‐tumoral macrophages (Figure  ).
 We next sought to investigate the macrophage infiltration and polarization in clinical lung tumor specimens and PC‐9 cell line‐derived murine xenografts. Consistent with results from the snRNA‐seq, multiplex immunohistochemistry analysis on TKI‐residual and TKI‐naïve clinical tumor specimens and PC‐9 cell line‐derived murine xenografts revealed a significant increase in CD24 protein expression on tumor cells as well as an increased proportion of macrophages and, specifically, M2‐polarized macrophages within the tumor tissue following third‐generation EGFR‐TKI treatment (Figure  ). Together, these results indicate increased proportion of M2‐polarized macrophages in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer specimens after TKI treatment. Considering the connection between macrophages and CD24, it is plausible to hypothesize that macrophages may contribute to the CD24‐mediated tumor resistance.

3.4

## CD24 genetic depletion or ATG‐031 exhibited in vitro synergy with third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs by enhancing the phagocytosis of lung cancer cells
We next sought to evaluate the effect of CD24 expression in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells on their antiphagocytic ability. Using our snRNA‐Seq data, we observed that SIGLEC10, which encodes the primary ligand to CD24, is predominantly expressed in M2‐polarized macrophages (Figure  ), which was consistent with the previous study [ ]. To measure phagocytic clearance in vitro, EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells were labeled with CFSE and co‐cultured with M2‐like macrophages derived from human leukemia THP‐1 cell line or PBMCs. Before the experiment, we observed that stimulation with the M2‐polarizing cytokines IL‐4 and IL‐13 was sufficient to induce SIGLEC10 expression in THP‐1 cells (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Moreover, THP‐1 derived M2‐like macrophages possessed similar baseline phagocytic capacity to the unstimulated THP‐1 cells, which was suitable for our phagocytosis evaluation (Figure  ).
 In our study, phagocytosis was measured by fluorescence reduction brought by the inactivate the CFSE due to protein degradation in phagocytosed CFSE‐labeled lung cancer cells (Figure  ). We first compared the effects of CD24 expression in parental EGFR‐mutated cells on phagocytosis by macrophages. Our results revealed that M2‐like macrophages exhibited heightened phagocytic capacity to PC‐9, HCC827, and H1975 cells knocked‐out with CD24 (ΔCD24) (Supplementary Figure ). Notably, when CD24 expression was restored in these knockout cells through targeted mutagenesis of the sgRNA‐binding site (ΔCD24 + CD24), the phagocytic capacity of M2‐like macrophages also reverted (Supplementary Figure ). Subsequently, we assessed the antiphagocytic ability of parental and OR EGFR‐mutated cells. Results revealed that OR cells were less readily engulfed into M2‐like macrophages derived from the THP‐1 cell line than their parental cells (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). However, this effect could be abolished by knocking down CD24 with siRNAs or the blockade of CD24 using monoclonal antibody, ATG‐031 (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Similar results were obtained using M2‐like macrophages derived from human PBMCs (Supplementary Figure ). Together, our findings indicate the CD24 induction in drug‐responsive and OR EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells inhibit their phagocytosis by macrophages.
To further investigate the effect of CD24 expression on phagocytosis during the evolution of EGFR‐TKI resistance, we examined whether knockout of CD24 or using ATG‐031 could synergize with EGFR‐TKIs on initial clearance of EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells. As demonstrated by an attenuated green signal over time, CD24‐knockout PC‐9 and H1975 cells or treating them with ATG‐031 in combination with third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs exhibited significantly heightened phagocytic ability by macrophages (Supplementary Figure ). These results indicate that targeting CD24 may be efficacious in lung cancer that show resistance to third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs.

3.5

## ΔCD24 and ATG‐031 synergized with third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs to enhance cancer clearance in CDXs and spontaneous lung cancer, and PDX murine models
To extend our findings in models in vivo, we established CDXs by injecting PC‐9 cells expressing WT CD24 or ΔCD24 and luciferase subcutaneously onto the left flanks of nude mice. To determine the role of macrophages in CDX models, TAM had been depleted in certain groups of mice bearing PC‐9 xenografts expressing WT CD24 using liposomal clodronate by intravenous injection via the retro‐orbital sinus 2 days prior to tumor engraftment and throughout the duration of the experiment every 3 days. Tumors had become detectable after 2 weeks of formation and we treated with osimertinib, ATG‐031 antibody, IgG1 antibody, or vehicle as control. Tumor growth in was monitored and analyzed by bioluminescence (Figure  ).
 Results showed that tumors in mice injected with CD24‐knockout PC‐9 cells grew significantly slower than the control group in the absence of any treatments (Group C vs. Group A, P = 0.002). CD24‐knockout PC‐9 xenografts shrank significantly faster than the WT group in response to osimertinib treatment (Group D vs. Group B, P = 0.004). We further compared tumor responses to osimertinib mono‐therapy and therapy in combination with the ATG‐031, an anti‐CD24 antibody. We found that the anti‐CD24 therapy with ATG‐031 resulted in significant reduction of CD24 WT tumor growth compared to the IgG1‐treated control (Group F vs. Group E, P = 0.007). Notably, depletion of TAMs largely abrogated this reduction that was observed in the combination therapy with osimertinib and ATG‐031 therapy (Group G vs. Group F, P = 0.004), indicating that TAM‐mediated tumor clearance was responsible for the synergy (Figure  ). Together, these findings indicate that knockout of CD24 or CD24 blockade with antibody synergize with osimertinib in EGFR‐mutated CDX models.
However, nude mice lack adaptive immunity which could bias the function of macrophages. To better recapitulate the clinical tumor microenvironment, we utilized a genetically engineered immunocompetent mouse model expressing human CD24 and harboring EGFRL858R/T790M
 mutations (hCD24/hEGFRL858R/T790M
) (Figure  ). Spontaneous lung tumors were successfully formed after being induced by AAV expressing lung‐epithelial‐specific Cre recombinase (Scgb1a1‐Cre) in 8 weeks. Mice were then treated with osimertinib mono‐therapy or therapy in combination with the ATG‐031 or IgG1 control antibody following the tumor formation.
In our results, we found that the combination therapy of osimertinib and ATG‐031 antibody exhibited a significantly greater anti‐tumor effect than osimertinib monotherapy as well as a significant survival advantage (Figure  ). Furthermore, using multiplex immunohistochemistry, osimertinib‐treated tumors exhibited significantly decreased tumor proliferative capability but increased CD24 expression and M2 polarization compared to tumors without osimertinib treatment, which was consistent with the results observed in clinical tumor specimens described above (Supplementary Figure ). Together, these findings indicate that CD24 blockade using ATG‐031 antibody synergizes with osimertinib in murine models bearing spontaneous lung tumors.
We next sought to determine the clinical potential of ATG‐031 in residual lung tumors after osimertinib treatment to mimic tumor heterogeneity. We established 3 PDX models (PDX #1, PDX #2, and PDX #3) in nude mice to maintain the functions of myeloid immune cells and the synergistic effect of ATG‐031 and osimertinib was evaluated (Figure  ). Consistent with observation in CDXs and spontaneous lung tumors, the combination therapy of osimertinib and ATG‐031 antibody exhibited synergistic effect on tumor reduction and TAM depletion abrogated the reduction (Figure  ). Together, these findings suggest that anti‐CD24 therapy could be a viable combination strategy to promote tumor responses to third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer.

3.6

## Third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs promoted CD24 expression via phosphorylating YY1 at serine 247
Given that CD24 commenced to elevate at both the mRNA and protein levels under the treatment of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs in 24 h and maintained to resistant phase, we hypothesized that transcription factors (TFs) may be responsible for the rise of CD24 expression following the treatment. To determine potential TFs that regulates CD24 expression, probes containing CD24 gene promoter sequences were generated for DNA affinity precipitation assay combined with mass spectrometry. Twenty‐three candidates were identified with significant binding to CD24 gene promoter (Figure  , Supplementary Table ). We further integrated ChIP‐sequencing data from the ENCODE database [ ], and finally found that MAX, YY1, and ZNF143 were the only 3 TFs with binding peaks among the 23 candidates (top peak count ≥ 10) (Figure  , Supplementary Table ). To test if MAX, YY1, or ZNF143 has a regulatory function on CD24 gene expression, they were silenced using siRNAs in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells, respectively, and CD24 expression was assessed by qPCR and western blot assays. Results demonstrated that knockdown of YY1, but not MAX or ZNF143, led to a significant decrease in both CD24 mRNA and protein expression in lung cancer cells. Given that YY1 exhibited a most pronounced impact on CD24 expression among the three TFs, we selected YY1 for further evaluation (Supplementary Figure ).
 We next sought to examine whether YY1 binding to the CD24 promoter had an impact on CD24 gene expression in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells. Using the ChIP‐sequencing data from the ENCODE database, CD24 promoter regions were analyzed and the YY1 binding sites were shown in Figure  . ChIP‐qPCR assays in PC‐9, HCC827, and H1975 cell lines revealed similarly significant recruitment of YY1 to the CD24 promoter region (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). To determine the regulatory elements responsible for YY1 targeting in the CD24 gene promoter, 2 probes containing WT and mutant YY1 targeting sites were designed for DNA‐affinity precipitation assay. Results demonstrated that YY1 bound to the oligonucleotides spanning the WT but not the mutant CD24 promoter region (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ; sequences available in the Supplementary Information S1). Dual‐luciferase reporter assay further revealed that YY1 significantly activated the transcriptional activity of the CD24 promoter (Figure  ). Together, these results indicate that YY1 specifically binds and transactivates CD24 gene expression in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells.
Given that YY1 plays a role in regulating CD24 expression in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells, we next sought to decipher the mechanisms through which YY1 mediates CD24 expression during EGFR‐TKI treatments in lung cancer cell. We first re‐analyzed our RNA‐seq data on EGFR‐mutated drug‐responsive cells, resistant cells, and their respective parental cells described above and validated with experiments to determine its expression upon third‐generation EGFR‐TKI treatments. Results revealed that no significant change was occurred in YY1 after treatment of the EGFR‐TKIs (Supplementary Figure ).
Since PTMs of proteins play a key role in DNA‐based processes and contribute to gene function by adding an extra layer of regulation [ , ], we next assessed whether PTMs of YY1 altered in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells upon EGFR‐TKI treatments. We utilized anti‐YY1 antibodies to precipitate the YY1 protein in PC‐9‐OR and PC‐9 parental cells, followed by LC‐MS and label‐free quantification analysis. Phosphorylation analysis of Ser/Thr kinases on YY1 protein revealed that the S247 site of YY1 (YY1S247) was the most dramatically upregulated in OR cells subjected to parental cell (Figure  , Supplementary Tables ), which has also been reported to be present in a variety of human tumor cells and other species but has not been explored [ , ]. The elevation of phospho‐YY1S247 in OR cells was further validated in HCC827 and H1975 cell lines using a customized phospho‐YY1S247 antibody and an antibody specific for the phospho‐Ser‐Pro‐Pro motif, which is unique to YY1 around the S247 residue (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Together, our findings indicate that third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs induce YY1 phosphorylation at S247 but not alterations on YY1 gene expression.
We next sought to decipher whether phospho‐YY1S247 was responsible for the CD24 elevation. YY1S247A was knocked in the YY1 gene using CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing technology in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cell lines to abrogate the phosphorylation of YY1S247 (Supplementary Figure ). Using qPCR and western blot assays, we observed that the S247A mutation in YY1 greatly decreased CD24 expression in PC‐9, HCC827, and H1975 cells as well as abrogated the TKI‐induced CD24 upregulation upon EGFR‐TKI treatments (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Together, our findings identify YY1 phosphorylation at S247 as a key driver of CD24 upregulation during EGFR‐TKI therapy, highlighting a novel regulatory axis contributing to drug resistance.

3.7

## EGFR‐TKI‐induced phospho‐YY1S247 was involved in YY1 dimerization
We next sought to investigate how YY1 phosphorylation at S247 regulates CD24 expression. Prior study has been reported that YY1 binds to the consensus sites in gene promoters and specific DNA structures to regulate gene transcription [ ]. To assess whether the YY1S247 is involved in the regulatory function of YY1, we performed dual‐luciferase assay to compare the CD24 promoter activation status in cells expressing S247A mutation and WT S427 expression. We found that YY1 S247A mutation did not significant diminish the activation of the CD24 promoter brought by WT YY1 (Supplementary Figure ).
Given that YY1 S247A mutation could inhibit the CD24 gene expression, but not via suppressing the transactivation of the promoter directly, we next sought to figure out if the S247A mutation has any indirect effects, such as whether it changes binding capability to DNA strands or the nuclear translocation of YY1. We used EMSA to detect the DNA‐binding capability of WT and YY1S247A proteins in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cell. Results revealed no significant difference between the WT YY1 and YY1S247A in their ability to bind DNA (Supplementary Figure ). Additionally, immunofluorescence assays demonstrated that both YY1WT and YY1S247A proteins were exclusively present in the nucleus without significant difference and regardless of the treatment of EGFR‐TKIs (Supplementary Figure . Together, our findings indicate that the S247A mutation inhibits the expression of CD24 but was not attributed to regulation of gene promoter, DNA binding capability, or nuclear distribution.
Apart from the direct transcriptional regulation, recent studies provided strong evidence to reveal a pivotal role of YY1 in contributing to the enhancer‐promoter loop formation brought by the YY1 dimerization [ , , ]. To test whether YY1 has a similar effect on CD24 gene, we re‐explored the binding profiles of YY1 on the CD24 gene locus utilizing ChIP‐Seq data sourced from the ENCODE database. An additional YY1‐specific binding peak positioned 4.1 kilobases upstream of the CD24 transcriptional start site was identified (Figure  ), where enriched with gene enhancer elements [ ]. We next validated this finding using ChIP‐qPCR and DNA affinity assays in EGFR‐mutated cell lines (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). These dual interactions suggest an important role for YY1 in bridging the promoter and enhancer, consistent with its established function in chromatin looping.
 Importantly, we found that the S247 residue is remarkably conserved when we perform a homology analysis of YY1 genes across diverse species, indicating that YY1 S247 is a functional site in the YY1 protein sequence (Supplementary Figure ). Therefore, we next sought to investigate whether the S247A mutation in YY1 affects the function on chromatin looping. For this purpose, we used the AlphaFold 2 prediction model to predict the structure of YY1 [ , ]. AlphaFold2 modeling predicted that S247 laid within a helical interface critical for homodimer stabilization, which strongly supports a structural role in dimerization (Figure  ).
To further decipher the molecular basis of the dimerization of YY1, WT, S247A mutant, and ΔI242‐S252 truncated YY1 proteins were constructed and tagged with Flag or HA, as depicted in the schematic diagram of the YY1 protein domains (Figure  ). Given the fact that the EGFR signaling pathway in cells expressing WT EGFR could not be inhibited by EGFR‐TKIs, we proceeded to treat the cells with AKT and ERK inhibitors, two major downstream signaling molecules of EGFR, to see if they could induce phosphorylation of the YY1 S247 region in the same way that EGFR‐TKI did. The results showed that an ERK inhibitor, SCH772984, replicated the effect of EGFR‐TKIs on YY1 in cells, while an AKT inhibitor, MK‐2206, exerted minimal impact on YY1 phosphorylation at serine 247 (S247) (Supplementary Figure ). Therefore, 293T cells were transfected with plasmids containing WT or truncated YY1 sequences before treated with SCH772984, to recapitulate the changes in YY1 phosphorylation at the S247 site in lung cancer cells treated with EGFR‐TKIs. Subsequently, dimerization between YY1 monomers was assessed by CoIP assays. As shown in Figure  showed precipitated bands with high intensity but was impaired by S247A mutation or ΔI242‐S252 in the presence of ERK inhibitor. In addition, compared to the WT YY1, YY1S247A and YY1ΔI242‐S252 both showed a weaker binding affinity to the proteins themselves. Together, our findings indicate that the YY1 S247 site plays an essential role in the YY1 dimerization which is necessary for the enhancer‐promoter looping of CD24 gene.

3.8

## Phospho‐YY1S247 contributed to formation of the enhancer‐promoter loop of CD24 and was regulated by the JNK pathway
We next sought to determine whether the phospho‐YY1S247 promotes the expression of CD24 by forming the enhancer‐promoter loop mediated by the YY1 dimer. To test this, we performed 3C assay to evaluate the chromatin‐looping events in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells treated with third‐generation EGFR‐TKI (Figure  ). We observed increased interaction frequency between the enhancer and the promoter regions in PC‐9, HCC827, and H1975 cells treated with osimertinib compared with cells treated with DMSO control. However, these increased interactions were significantly abolished by the YY1 S247A mutation in EGFR‐mutated cells (Figure  ‐ , Supplementary Figure ). These results indicate that third‐generation EGFR‐TKI promotes enhancer‐promoter looping of CD24 gene in a YY1‐dependent manner.
To explore the potential upstream kinase of phospho‐YY1S247 under the treatment of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs, a substrate atlas of human serine or threonine kinases previously published was used to identify candidates that can phosphorylate YY1 at the S247 site as substrates [ ]. A total of 22 kinases serving as regulators of phospho‐YY1S247 with significant phosphorylation changes in PC‐9‐OR cells compare to the parental cells. To verify whether these molecules play a similar role in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells, we integrated our above‐described phosphoproteomic data in the PC‐9‐OR cells (Supplementary Table ). The integration analysis revealed that five kinases, including adaptor‐associated kinase 1 (AAK1), cyclin‐dependent kinase 7 (CDK7), CDK12, CDK13, and mitogen‐activated protein kinase 8 (MAPK8, also known as c‐Jun n‐terminal kinase 1 or JNK1), were activated in the resistant cells and were selected as upstream candidate kinases to activate phospho‐YY1S247 (Figure  , Supplementary Tables ).
 To evaluated whether these 5 kinases could phosphorylate YY1 S247 in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells and promote CD24 expression, we treated cells with different inhibitors (BMS‐986176 and LP‐935509 targeting AAK1; SY‐5609 and YKL‐5‐124 targeting CDK7; SR‐4835 and THZ531 targeting CDK12 and CDK13; JNK‐IN‐8 and JNK‐IN‐11 targeting JNK) and the CD24 expression at mRNA level was assessed using qPCR. We observed that JNK inhibition nearly completely abolished the osimertinib‐induced increase in CD24 mRNA levels among the 5 pathways (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Western blot assays further revealed that the phospho‐YY1S247 was activated simultaneously with phosphorylation of JNK in EGFR‐TKI‐ residual lung tumor specimens and OR lung cancer cells compared to their counterparts (Figure  ). Together, our findings indicate that JNK could activate the phosphorylation of YY1S247 and thus the CD24 expression in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells.

3.9

## EGFR‐JNK‐YY1‐CD24 regulation axis mediated resistance to third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs
We next sought to test whether suppression of JNK‐YY1 axis reverses CD24 induction or restores EGFR‐TKI sensitivity in resistant cells. We knocked down YY1 or treated cells with osimertinib in combination with JNK inhibitors. Western blot assays demonstrated that knockdown of YY1 or JNK inhibition similarly reversed CD24 induction by osimertinib treatment (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Cell viability assays revealed that JNK inhibition or knockdown of YY1 significantly restored osimertinib sensitivity in resistant PC‐9‐OR, HCC827‐OR, and H1975‐OR cells (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Together, these results indicate that JNK pathway is responsible for promoting phospho‐YY1S247 and CD24 expression in EGFR‐mutated lung tumors, driving the evolution of drug resistance to the third‐generation of EGFR‐TKIs.
To extend our findings, we further used first‐ and second‐generation EGFR‐TKI agents as well as siRNAs to suppress the EGFR pathway in order to assess whether suppression of EGFR signaling similarly induces the JNK‐YY1 phosphorylation and CD24 elevation. We observed that the phospho‐JNK and YY1S247 as well as CD24 protein expression were all heightened in PC‐9 and HCC827 cells treated with first‐ or second‐generation EGFR‐ TKIs (Supplementary Figure ). Similarly, Knockdown of EGFR resulted in heightened phospho‐JNK and YY1S247 and CD24 protein expression in PC‐9, HCC827, and H1975 cells (Supplementary Figure ). These results supported the link between CD24 induction and EGFR signaling in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells.
Moreover, given the known role of epigenetic mechanisms in regulating DTP cells and the rapid upregulation of CD24 induced by third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs in 12‐24 h, we further explored whether levels of histone H3 methyl and acetyl marks associated with chromatin remodeling were changed following EGFR‐TKI treatments. We selected 2 repressive histone marks, H3K27me3 and H3K27me3, along with the permissive marks, H3K4me3 and H3K27ac, to represent the histone modifications and chromatin state of the CD24 gene. ChIP‐qPCR results demonstrated that there were no significant changes in the epigenetic modifications of the CD24 gene promoter in cells across different cell states following EGFR‐TKI treatments, including responsive, DTP, and resistant phases (Supplementary Figures ). These results indicate that the CD24 induction by EGFR‐TKIs is not mediated by chromatin remodeling or histone modifications.
Furthermore, to evaluate the potential applicability of anti‐CD24 therapy in lung cancer, we utilized available publicly data [ , , , ] to investigate whether lung cancer undergoes changes in response to chemotherapy and other targeted therapies. We showed that platinum‐based chemotherapy dramatically downregulated CD24 expression in lung cancer cells 48 h after treatment; however, this effect was not significant in lung cancer cells resistant to platinum‐based chemotherapy (Supplementary Figure ). In contrast, under the effect of Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK)‐targeted inhibitor (alectinib) or Kirsten Rats Arcomaviral Oncogene Homolog (KRAS)‐targeted inhibitors (fulzerasib, garsorasib, and sotorasib), CD24 expression showed a significant increase in almost all cases, extending from the initial response phase through to the DTP and resistant phases, except alectinib‐resistant cells (Supplementary Figure ). These findings indicate that the combination of anti‐CD24 therapy may also have potential roles in ALK or KRAS targeted therapies in lung cancer, warranting additional investigation.
To summarize, in our investigation on EGFR‐mutated lung cancer, we discovered a marked increase in CD24 expression following the third‐generation EGFR‐TKI treatments, which was facilitated by the JNK/phospho‐YY1S247 signaling pathway. We found that the CD24 elevation conspicuously impeded macrophage phagocytosis, thus reducing the therapeutic advantages of these EGFR‐TKI treatments. Importantly, the combination uses of the ATG‐031, an anti‐CD24 monoclonal antibody under testing in clinical trials, significantly enhanced the phagocytic ability of macrophages towards tumor cells both in vitro and in vivo. This synergistic effect greatly improved the therapeutic efficacy of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs in the treatment of lung cancer harboring EGFR mutations (Figure  ).

4

## Discussion
The combination use of immunotherapy with EGFR‐TKIs in the treatment of lung cancer has garnered considerable attention and potential. The current immunotherapy strategies, such as ICIs that target programmed cell death protein 1 (PD‐1) or programmed death‐ligand 1 (PD‐L1), has not, however, shown a satisfactory synergistic benefit with EGFR‐TKIs. In significant clinical trials like CAURAL [ ] and TATTON [ ], the combination of osimertinib with ICIs shown a reduced response rate and an elevated toxicity profile, especially regarding side events linked to interstitial lung disease, in contrast to osimertinib alone. Multiple studies have demonstrated that EGFR‐TKI therapy significantly downregulates PD‐L1 expression in tumor cells, aligning with the transcriptome sequencing results obtained in this research [ , , ]. These findings may account for the suboptimal efficacy observed when ICIs were combined with the EGFR‐TKIs. Therefore, identifying new immunotherapy targets beyond PD‐1/PD‐L1 is crucial for enhancing the therapeutic efficacy of EGFR‐TKIs in patients with EGFR‐mutated lung tumors.
Using our snRNA‐seq and transcriptome sequencing, we delved into the alterations in membrane‐bound and secretory protein expression in EGFR‐mutated lung tumor cell lines and clinical tissues after administering third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs, aiming to uncover potential immunotherapy targets. In our study, we observed that CD24 commenced to increase 12‐24 h after EGFR‐TKI treatment and kept increasing in drug‐responsive, DTP, and resistant phases. Furthermore, decreasing its expression re‐challenged the remaining cells that have developed resistance to EGFR‐TKI to regain sensitivity. CD24 has been implicated in modulating EGFR downstream signaling across cancer types, including ERK activation via ADP‐ribosylation factor 6 (Arf6)‐guanosine triphosphate (GTP) stabilization [ ], concurrent PI3K/AKT/ERK pathway activation driving cisplatin resistance [ ], and EGFR surface persistence through ras homolog gene family member A (RhoA) inhibition [ ]. Therefore, our results indicate that CD24 serves an adaptive feedback regulatory function in the resistance of lung cancer to EGFR‐TKIs. In addition, CD24 has also been reported to act as a “don't eat me” signal, interacting with SIGLEC10 to inhibit macrophage phagocytosis and facilitate tumor immune evasion [ , , , , , ]. Our findings also revealed that knocking out CD24 significantly enhances the efficacy of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs by promoting macrophage‐mediated phagocytosis both in vitro and in vivo.
In this study, we comprehensively demonstrated the synergistic enhancement effect of ATG‐031, a first‐in‐class and novel CD24 antibody, on the efficacy of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs, not only through in vitro experimentation and xenograft models, but also in mice bearing human EGFRL858R·T790M‐driven spontaneous lung tumors expressing humanized CD24. ATG‐031 has exhibited robust preclinical antitumor efficacy and is currently being evaluated in patients with advanced solid tumors or B‐cell non‐Hodgkin's lymphoma in the ongoing phase I PERFORM trial [ ]. Our research provides a theoretical basis for the combination use of ATG‐031 or other CD24‐targeted immunotherapies with EGFR‐TKIs, and we eagerly anticipate further validation in future clinical trials.
Consistent with our results, Shiiya et al. [ ] previously reported an increase in CD24 expression in tumor cells and patient tissues following EGFR inhibition, and combining anti‐CD24 antibodies with EGFR‐TKIs in vitro significantly enhanced macrophage phagocytosis. However, according to another report, the combination of anti‐CD24 with osimertinib does not enhance the phagocytosis of PC‐9 cells by macrophage, which may be related to the specific CD24 antibody used in that study [ ]. Additionally, blocking various other immune targets, such as Cluster of Differentiation 44 (CD44), Cluster of Differentiation 47 (CD47), Cluster of Differentiation 55 (CD55), Cluster of Differentiation 59 (CD59), Cluster of Differentiation 70 (CD70), Cluster of Differentiation 73 (CD73), and Cytotoxic T‐lymphocyte‐associated Antigen 4 (CTLA‐4), has been also shown to enhance the efficacy of EGFR‐TKIs, offering a promising perspective for the integration of immunotherapy with EGFR‐TKI treatments [ , , , , , , ].
Through several phosphoproteomic analyses, we discovered that third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs enhance CD24 expression through phospho‐YY1S247, which facilitates the enhancer‐promoter loop of CD24. When analyzing the phosphoproteomic data from the The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database [ ], we observed that phospho‐YY1S247 is prevalent in tumors, yet its functional implications remain largely unexplored. Consistent with our results, Agarwal et al. [ ] reported that YY1 interacts with the androgen receptor to drive CD24 expression, and Rizkallah et al. [ ] reported that phospho‐YY1S247 had only minor effects on the DNA‐binding activity or subcellular localization of YY1. However, our findings elaborate, for the first time, the crucial role of phospho‐YY1S247 in facilitating YY1 dimerization and YY1‐mediated enhancer‐promoter loop of CD24, while the mutation at YY1S247 significantly abrogated the third‐generation of EGFR‐TKI‐induced CD24 expression. YY1 is characterized by its dualistic functionality in gene transcription, either suppressing or activating a range of downstream genes, hence its nomenclature as YING‐YANG‐1 [ , , ]. Our research indicates that PTMs of YY1, such as phospho‐YY1S247A, may underlie its dualistic behavior [ , ]. Notably, despite the profound homology between human YY2 and YY1, the S247 residue is absent in YY2, potentially offering crucial insights into the functional divergence between these two genes [ ]. However, we did not explore the spatial localization of CD24 or YY1 activity in this study and we believe that further integration of data, such as spatial transcriptomics, could help to assess the tumor CD24 co‐localization with activated macrophages or phospho‐YY1 expression.
Based on the results of phosphoproteomics and inhibitory experiments, we identified JNK as the upstream kinase of phospho‐YY1S247 under the treatment of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs. JNK, activated by various cellular stimuli, including EGFR inhibition, differs from other MAPK family members in that its primary targets for phosphorylation are nuclear transcription factors, such as YY1 in this study, thereby mediating numerous gene expressions in response to cellular stimuli [ , , , , ]. However, its precise role in the resistance to EGFR‐TKIs remains a matter of ongoing debate [ , , , , ]. Meanwhile, we also observed a marked phosphorylation of AAK1, CDK7, CDK12, and CDK13 in OR cells. Although there have been only a few reports regarding their function in EGFR‐TKI resistance, their potential contribution deserves further in‐depth examination [ , , , ].
There are some limitations in our study. Firstly, our study did not provide pre‐ and post‐treatment specimens from patients for analysis. The reason for this was that the tissue collected during the initial diagnosis through percutaneous or bronchoscopic puncture biopsy was typically small. To prioritize the clinical diagnosis of the patients, it was difficult to obtain sufficient paired TKI‐naïve tumors for experimental studies. In addition, the current post‐TKI‐treated surgical tumor samples we obtained began in January 2023, resulting in the median survival time has not yet been reached for survival analysis. As a compensation, we tentatively selected a cohort who had undergone surgery at our institution and received adjuvant TKI therapy afterward. The results served as an alternative foundation for the expression level of CD24 in the tumor prior to TKI therapy and the efficacy of TKI therapy. Therefore, we believe that retrospective and prospective studies assessing CD24 expression in pre‐ and post‐treatment tumor biopsies should be expanded to help determine the prognostic and predictive value of CD24.
Secondly, we primarily focused on third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs due to their widespread applications and superior clinical efficacy compared to previous generations [ , ]. We revealed a strong applicability of anti‐CD24 therapy in combination with third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs. However, the synergistic effect of anti‐CD24 observed in this study with other generations of EGFR‐TKIs and EGFR antibodies awaits further confirmation. Additionally, other common targets in lung cancer, including ALK, Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2), and KRAS, are located within the same signaling pathways as EGFR [ ]. In our study, we preliminarily revealed that lung cancer cells exhibit increased CD24 expression following treatment against some of these targets. Therefore, it is worth exploring whether the synergistic effect of anti‐CD24 also applies to these targeted therapies [ ].
Thirdly, the functional role of SIGLEC10 molecule in the CD24‐SIGLEC10‐EGFR regulatory axis was not elaborated in our work. The CD24 and SIGLEC protein family signaling axis has been extensively demonstrated to be an innate immune checkpoint regulating host response to tissue injuries [ , , ]. Barkal et al. [ ] expanded the contact between the CD24‐SIGLEC to tumor immunity, revealing that CD24 on the surface of diverse tumor cells can interact with SIGLEC10 on TAMs. Following this, an increasing number of research have demonstrated the significance of the interaction between CD24 and SIGLEC10 in tumor immune microenvironment [ , , ]. Since previous studies have already sufficiently demonstrated the role of the interaction between CD24 and SIGLEC10 in macrophage phagocytic capacity, we did not further validate the role of SIGLEC10. However, further research in this area could help to fill in the conceptual leap on our study.
Last but not least, in our nude mouse xenograft models, the lack of adaptive immunity, especially T cell‐macrophage crosstalk, such as the M1 skewing induced by T‐helper 1 cells, could bias the macrophage polarization toward an M2‐like phenotype and underrepresent M1 responses to some extent [ , ]. In addition, in murine models bearing spontaneous lung tumors, we did not humanize the SIGLEC10 expression, the receptor for CD24 on macrophages. These factors could potentially introduce bias in assessing the blocking capability of CD24 antibodies, despite previous studies suggesting that human CD24 can bind to mouse Siglec10 to inhibit macrophage phagocytosis [ , ]. Therefore, further studies using models mimicking immune interactions is warranted to validate the anti‐CD24 therapeutic efficacy in lung cancer.

5

## Conclusions
Overall, CD24 is a promising target in EGFR‐mutated lung cancers, potentially enhancing third‐generation EGFR‐TKI efficacy.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Jiaqi Liang, Guoshu Bi, and Xiaolong Huang contributed equally to the study. Qun Wang, Wei Jiang, and Cheng Zhan contributed the conception of the work. Zhijie Xu, Wei Guo, Yuanliang Yan, Wei Jiang, and Cheng Zhan contributed to the design of the work. Jiaqi Liang, Guoshu Bi, Xiaolong Huang, Yiwei Huang, Yunyi Bian, Guangyao Shan, and Qihai Sui contributed to the acquisition of data. Jiaqi Liang, Guoshu Bi, Qihai Sui, Xiaodong Yang, Zhencong Chen, and Tao Lu contributed to the analyses of data. Jiaqi Liang, Guoshu Bi, Xiaolong Huang, Yiwei Huang, Guangyao Shan, Wei Guo, Tao Lu, and Huan Zhang contributed to the interpretation of data. Jiaqi Liang, Guoshu Bi, Xiaolong Huang, Zhijie Xu, Wei Guo, Yuanliang Yan, and Qun Wang drafted the work. All authors revised the manuscript critically and approved the final version.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

## ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE
All tumor samples analyzed were collected in accordance with protocols approved by the institutional review board under the guidance of Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University (Approval No. B2023‐258). Full compliance with all relevant ethical guidelines was ensured. Written informed consent to participate and to publish was obtained from participants before inclusion in the study. The Animal Ethics Committee of Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University (Approval No.: 2023‐451) approved the experimental design. All procedures involving animals were pre‐approved and aligned with the institutional guidelines for animal welfare, and the experiments were carefully designed to reduce the number of animals utilized.

## Supporting information
Supporting information
Supporting information

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank OE Biotech Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China) and MobiDrop Co., Ltd (Huzhou, Zhejiang, China) for helping us with the single‐nucleus and bulk RNA sequencing, Shanghai Luming Biological Technology (Shanghai, China) for their support in proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses, BioMed World (Shanghai, China) for their assistance in multiplex immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence staining assays, as well as Abclonal Technology (Wuhan, Hubei, China) for their aid in customizing the phospho‐YY1S247 antibody. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82473184), the Shanghai Sailing Program (24YF2704100), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82403100), the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (24ZR1409900), and the Beijing Xisike Clinical Oncology Research Foundation (No, Y‐2024AZ(EGFR)MS‐0048).

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The datasets generated and analyzed during the current study are available in the Figshare repository (https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.29561897). Other data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.